SUPPORT GROUPS AID IN THE TRIALS OF ADOPTION; 
PARENTING: COUPLES CONFRONTING THE PROCESS OR ITS CONSEQUENCES GATHER TO 
DISCUSS THE STRESSES THAT SUCH FAMILIES FACE. 
Last August, Larry and Nancy Green were all set to adopt a newborn baby. The 
couple spent the night at the hospital with the baby and in the morning planned 
to go home as a brand-new family. 
But it was not to be. 
The birth parents had a change of heart and decided to keep the child. 
"It's just like losing a biological baby," Larry Green said. "We grieved for 
our lost child." 
Within a week, the Greens joined the Tarzana-based Adoption Assistance Group, a 
support organization founded in November, 1988, for adoptive and prospective 
adoptive parents. 
For Steve and Suzi Blonder, who had joined the same group well before their 
birth mother was due, the adoption failed for a different reason: The baby died 
shortly after birth. 
"We felt none of our friends or family could understand what an adoption was 
like," said Suzi Blonder, 35. "And we wanted to be around other couples who had 
gone through it." 
The support groups are for people like the Blonders and adoptive mothers and 
fathers who feel they have no other place to go to learn parenting skills, 
infant care or even what is needed to bring the baby home from the hospital. 
The Greens and the Blonders are among hundreds of Southern California couples 
who have joined AAG and similar groups for help, security and support in what 
many adoptive parents find is a very uncertain process. For security reasons -- 
primarily a fear that a mother who gave up her child might try to make contact 
again -- adoptive parents asked that their home communities not be mentioned. 
There are all kinds of legal adoptions, including those arranged by public 
agencies, religious groups and attorneys. The process, AAG members say, can 
take as little as a few weeks to as much as a few years, with costs varying 
from almost nothing to more than $20,000. And still there is no guarantee of a 
family. The Blonders' attempt to adopt was successful -- they are now the proud 
parents of Allison. 
Many people turn to adoption after they find they cannot have children of their 
own, said Denice Baum, 39, one of the founders of AAG. Like all parents, they 
also need instruction in infant care, Baum said. But, she added, "The thought 
of many of them sitting in a room of pregnant women in a Lamaze class is not 
appealing. And we found most hospitals didn't even have a program for adoptive 
parents to learn newborn infant care." 
Just as importantly, said Baum, adoptive parents wanted to be with people who 
have had similar parental experiences. 
"We got a lot of help here," Larry Green said of AAG. "Unless a couple has 
experienced it, nobody else can really understand what you've gone through." 
The Greens, hoping to adopt another child, are in contact with a second 
expectant mother, whose child is due in early June. 
Unlike many support groups, AAG is not directly connected with an adoption 
agency. The groups are open to people who are waiting to adopt, who have 
already adopted or who want to see if adoption is a suitable alternative for 
them. 
"There's a lot of information you can share with other couples who are thinking 
about adoption or are going through it," Baum said. "Plus there's a lot of 
anxiety you can go through with another couple who understands. If you need a 
hug, you can get one from this group." 
Others have had similar experiences with Adoptaides, a support group affiliated 
with the Los Angeles County Department of Children's Services. 
"When we first got our daughter, Kacey, she was 11 days old, and we knew no one 
who had adopted children," said Joan Akkerman, 39. "It was a very traumatic 
time. We knew Kacey existed on a Monday, and we picked her up that Friday. I 
was a wreck." 
Joan and Michael Akkerman turned to Adoptaides for help in 1982. They have 
since adopted a second child, David, in 1985. 
Bruce Faulk, 37, and his wife, Sheryl Scarborough, 38, turned to AAG after an 
initial bad experience with the adoption process. 
An agency matched them with an out-of-state pregnant woman two weeks after they 
had signed up, Faulk said. She had about six months to go before her delivery 
date. 
They traveled a lot to see her, "and she needed help," said Faulk, explaining 
that they paid for most of the woman's medical bills, which amounted to about 
$15,000. "A week before she gave birth, she had false labor. It was 
instrumental in changing her mind." The woman kept her baby and the adoptive 
couple lost their money. Faulk and Scarborough turned to the support group soon 
afterward. 
"The whole purpose of an open adoption," Faulk said, "is it has to be a win-win 
situation where both the birth mother and the adoptive parents are happy. If 
not, it's not good for either party." Three months later, they successfully 
adopted a child, Mason, now 1 year old. 
Luis and Lily Macias of AAG had two similar experiences in which the birth 
mothers decided to keep the children they had initially planned to put up for 
adoption. 
"So we started the process all over again," said Lily Macias, 42, who is hoping 
a third attempt will be successful. "We've been advertising, networking, 
praying, doing anything we could. We have a few things in the fire." 
Four years ago, Shauna and Jim Lewis adopted Terra, now 9, and joined 
Adoptaides soon afterward. 
At the time of the adoption, "We felt very alone," said Shauna Lewis, 34. "My 
brothers and sisters were having children the 'normal' way and it was very 
comforting to become part of a group that became families the same way we did." 
"The group can become a crying towel," said Jim Lewis, 39, who explained that 
Terra had been made fun of in school when some of her classmates found out she 
was adopted. "But when she came to the support group and saw other adopted 
kids, she said, 'They're OK, and they're adopted.' It's great to know that 
someone is there when you're really down and wondering what you're doing 
wrong." 
Though not all adoptions are a struggle, even the ones that go smoothly can be 
a little unnerving. Two years ago, soon after making contact with the birth 
mother, Leslie and Tom Milwicz became adoptive parents. 
"We had no preparation time," said Leslie Milwicz, 36, who said she became 
aware of Adoptaides through a social worker. She said she and her husband were 
concerned about how to tell their child that she was adopted, so they started 
referring to the adoption in the course of normal conversation. "We don't hide 
things from her, we speak about the adoption. It gives you a comfortable 
sense." 
For most members, there are many anxious moments connected with the adoption 
process. 
"There is a period of time afterward when you are waiting for the adoption to 
be finalized as well as waiting for the birth mother to do everything properly 
and not change her mind," said AAG member Paul Teplitz, 32. "That gets 
addressed within this group as well." 
Denice Baum's husband, David, 36, added: "We have a qualified person teach 
infant CPR, have guest medical speakers and guest lecturers who speak on 
everything from children's books to behavioral issues. Groups like ours try and 
give constructive solutions, share what worked and what didn't work, and we're 
available to people." 
Besides support groups that generally appeal to couples adopting infants, other 
organizations, such as the Open Door Society, specialize in helping parents who 
want to adopt so-called "hard-to-place" children. 
The Los Angeles chapter of the countywide Open Door Society, said member Marsha 
Spector, 48, meets monthly at various locations in the Southland. It is aimed 
at people who want to adopt a child 18 months or older who might have been in 
foster care, been born drug-addicted and who might have emotional problems or 
learning disabilities. 
The society also sponsors the Adoption Warm Line, a telephone referral service 
for adoptive parents that addresses the needs and concerns of families before 
and after adoptions. 
"It's really reassuring for me to know that what you're doing is right," said 
Adoptaides member Sharon Wright, 46, "and that other people have gone through 
the same thing." 
