U.S.-SOVIET STUMBLING BLOCKS REMAIN, BUSH CAUTIONS; 
DIPLOMACY: FUTURE OF GERMANY EMERGES AS THE TOP UNRESOLVED ISSUE FOR THE 
UPCOMING SUMMIT. 
Declaring himself "somewhat encouraged" by progress toward a new nuclear arms 
treaty with the Soviet Union, President Bush cautioned Sunday that "other 
problems" in U.S.-Soviet relations remain. 
"We've had differences with the Soviets for a long, long time on a wide array 
of subjects," Bush said, citing particularly the future of Germany. He made his 
remarks to reporters on Air Force One shortly before taking off from Houston en 
route here. 
Bush's comments, his most extensive since Secretary of State James A. Baker III 
completed four days of negotiations with Soviet leaders in Moscow, underlined 
the degree to which German unification and its implications for the balance of 
power in Europe is emerging as the major unresolved issue for the Bush-Mikhail 
S. Gorbachev summit that begins May 30. 
"I think in the arms control area, there's clearly been some progress" and 
"we'll have a good summit," Bush said. But on other parts of the summit agenda, 
particularly Germany, "we're just plugging away." 
"Nobody thought it would be easy," Bush added. 
Baker, who spoke with Bush by telephone Sunday morning, resolved most major 
issues blocking progress on a new nuclear weapons treaty and an agreement 
drastically reducing chemical weapons. 
But Baker was unable to break a deadlock over Germany and a resulting stall in 
talks on reducing non-nuclear weapons and armies in Europe. Those unresolved 
issues will be major topics for the two presidents when they meet. 
Talks on reducing non-nuclear forces -- the so-called CFE, or conventional 
forces in Europe, negotiations -- had been moving quickly earlier in the year. 
The talks are aimed at reducing Soviet and American forces in Europe to a level 
of 195,000 for the Soviets and 225,000 for the United States. The Soviets 
currently have several times that many troops in Eastern Europe, most of them 
in East Germany. 
Since the East German elections in April, movement in the talks has slowed. The 
elections made clear that a united Germany will essentially be ruled by the 
current leadership of West Germany, eliminating the Soviets' most powerful 
European ally, East Germany, and grafting it onto the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization. 
That prospect has deeply disturbed many Soviet leaders, U.S. analysts say. 
German forces have invaded Russian territory twice this century in wars that 
cost millions of lives, and fears of a possible future German threat remain 
among Soviet citizens. 
On Saturday, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze declared that the 
talks aimed at reducing U.S. and Soviet armies in Europe cannot be completed 
until some new way is found to guarantee Soviet security. 
Bush and his aides have been anxious to see the talks wrapped up this year to 
"lock in" the Soviet withdrawal from Eastern Europe before any unforeseen event 
might cause a change in current Soviet policies. 
Asked if he still believes a treaty on conventional forces can be completed 
before the end of the year, Bush replied, "Oh sure, sure." But he declined to 
say what steps he thought were needed to reach an agreement. 
"We'll leave the negotiating to the negotiators," he said. "But we've got to 
get that done." 
Finishing the CFE treaty "is very important, not just to us but to all of 
Europe," he said. 
Bush was also guarded in response to questions about Lithuania, refusing to say 
whether Baker had urged Lithuanian leaders he met in Moscow to suspend their 
republic's declaration of independence from Moscow. 
"I'm not going to discuss what he talks about in private," Bush said. "If you 
negotiate all these things in public, you don't make any progress." 
Asked if the Administration believes Lithuania should suspend the declaration, 
which the Lithuanian leadership so far has balked at doing, Bush again declined 
to answer. 
"We want to see talks going, and we want to see self-determination of the 
people of Lithuania determined. We want to have them get the freedom that a lot 
of other people have. So there's talks going on on that," he said. 
With Gorbachev due to arrive in Washington in 10 days for three days of summit 
talks with Bush, the White House has been anxious to avoid any sudden flare-up 
over the three Baltic republics. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia each have voted 
to secede from the Soviet Union and have been locked in a tense confrontation 
with Moscow. 
Bush traveled to Portland to speak at the dedication of a memorial to slain 
police officers where he delivered a by-now-standard call for tougher 
anti-crime legislation. 
