INNOVATION: CENSUS IS REGARDED AS JUST MORE JUNK MAIL 
Hey you! 
Yes, you. 
Did you mail in your census form? You didn't? You naughty, naughty citizen. 
Where's your sense of civic pride and public responsibility? Don't you know 
that the census is an integral part of tracking this great country we call 
America? 
Actually, I'm getting fed up with the hectoring we citizens are being subjected 
to because of our comparatively lackluster census response rates. The Census 
Bureau reports that only 76% of us have mailed in our forms -- a full 13 
percentage points behind the 1980 census levels. The return rate for the longer 
form lags yet another six percentage points behind 1980. 
Census Bureau Director Barbara Everitt Bryant blames citizen "apathy" as a key 
reason for the decline. She points out that the shortfall is consistent 
throughout the 50 states and that there's a high correlation between census 
return rates and voter turnout levels -- and we all know that voter turnout has 
been dropping like a stone. The director also notes that many people fear, 
incorrectly, that their responses may somehow become public and that their 
privacy will be violated. 
The real possibility of an undercount, of course, scares the dickens out of 
money-hungry big-city mayors with the visions of subsidies dancing in their 
heads as well as megalomaniacal politicos just aching to gerrymander 
congressional districts. 
With all due respect to the director and other census scolds, I don't think 
that the American people are as apathetic or as dim as their public servants 
think they are. (In fact, I have to admire the bipartisan gall of a do-nothing 
Congress and President watching the savings and loans bleed hundreds of 
billions of dollars while we are the ones who get called apathetic). Americans 
have perfectly good reasons to treat the census as cavalierly as they have. 
Let's look at some numbers: 
In 1980, the total estimated U.S. population was 221.7 million. That year, the 
total number of pieces of regular, third-class bulk a.k.a. junk mail was 
roughly 22 billion. In 1989, the U.S. population was roughly 247.1 million and 
the total volume of junk mail, according to the U.S. Postal Service, was more 
than 50.7 billion pieces -- and that doesn't even include mailings from 
not-for-profit organizations. 
In other words, while the population of the United States grew about 10% in the 
last decade, the total annual volume of junk mail increased almost 150%. For 
all intents and purposes, the census form has become just another piece of junk 
mail; an ugly little gray envelope that is as intrinsic and inviting as yet 
another financial services circular from Merrill Lynch. It's a nuisance and 
Americans don't like nuisances. 
"What we see and a trend that's being seen all through the survey response 
field is where a decade ago you'd get telephone survey response rates of more 
than 80%, today, 65% to 66% is regarded as a good participation rate," says 
Andrew R. McGill, a group vice president with Sandy Corp., a Troy, Mich., 
company that does customer research for such giants as Nissan, Ford and General 
Motors. 
People are "just tired of getting called," says McGill. Is it really irrational 
for Americans to get fed up with a high-volume diet of surveys, inquiries and 
questionnaires? Let's not forget that in virtually every story you read about 
the census, it's being described as a treasure trough of data just waiting for 
the direct-mail marketeers to snuffle through. Reality dictates that the 
results of the 1990 census will launch yet another deluge of junk mail and 
micromarketing appeals. Is it any surprise that this prospect generates 
something less than enthusiasm? What the Census Bureau is seeing isn't apathy, 
it's a population that is past the point of diminishing returns when it comes 
to cooperating with yet another poll taker. 
"I don't think the census has to be another piece of junk mail," says Vincent 
P. Barabba, who ran the 1980 census and is now General Motors' executive 
director of market research and planning. "But there is a lot of clutter out 
there." Barabba mentions that Bryant was relatively new to the job and didn't 
have the time to form a team to promote census participation in the way he was 
able to a decade ago. 
But let's also remember a few other points: The census remains a tasty and 
expensive morsel of political pork that provides hundreds of thousands of 
temporary jobs for people who just happen to know somebody. That always 
inspires citizen cooperation. What's more, any professional demographer and 
statistician will tell you that we don't really need to tap every single 
residence of the United States to paint a statistically accurate portrait of 
what the population looks like. Besides, if the census were really all that 
important, it wouldn't have been too difficult for the President, Barbara Bush 
and Millie the Dog to tape a couple of public service announcements. 
The truth is that, while times have changed, the census hasn't. With the feeble 
exception of a toll-free hot line number, there has been little creativity or 
innovation in the way this census was handled versus a decade ago. Whose fault 
is that? The only surprise here is that people are surprised. Better luck next 
time. 
