OUT OF AFRICA -- KENYA'S OWN WINE 
There is a place in the heart of Africa's Great Rift Valley where wine grapes 
grow. The Masai named this place E-Nai-Posha, "that which is heaving; that 
which flows to and fro." 
It is perhaps an old ancestral way of describing Lake Naivasha, a remarkably 
beautiful spot and the home of Kenya's first commercial winery, Lake Naivasha 
Vineyards. 
My sister-in-law, Elli, a native of Los Angeles, and her husband, John D'Olier, 
a Kenyan farmer, started the vineyard in 1982, planting vines from California 
on the shores of the lake. 
Elli's letters were full of stories about her new life and the progress and 
perils of the young vineyard. She wrote about the giraffe that wandered through 
the vineyard, dining on the tops of thorn trees, and about the hippopotamus 
that chased her from the lake to the steps of her veranda. Her letters 
contained as much real-life drama as any that Karen Blixen sent out of Africa. 
Lake Naivasha Vineyard, 60 miles northwest of Nairobi, may be one of the 
world's strangest locations for a winery. But the reasons that make Lake 
Naivasha such a special place also explain why a vineyard 50 miles south of the 
Equator can thrive here. 
As you approach Naivasha, riding over the crest of the escarpment, you have a 
breathtaking view of the Great Rift Valley and Mt. Longonot rising 9,000 feet 
above sea level. But the immensity of mountains is diminished within the vast, 
endless plains of the Rift Valley. This enormous seismic fault in the earth's 
crust provides the sandy volcanic soil that nurtures the vines. 
With the exception of two rainy seasons, most days in the valley are hot and 
dry. Naivasha has cool evening temperatures because of its high altitude, 6,200 
feet, and moist breezes off Naivasha, the highest of Kenya's Rift Valley lakes. 
It is also the Rift Valley's only freshwater lake, and its waters are used to 
irrigate the vineyard. 
It was harvest time at the vineyard, John and Elli's busiest season, when my 
husband and I arrived. We had come to Kenya to go on safari, but for a few 
weeks we ended up harvesting wine grapes. 
"Habarai asubuhi." The melodious Swahili greeting rang out from the workers 
gathered outside the winery ready to begin the day's tasks. 
"Jambo sana," I answered, enjoying the opportunity to use the Swahili phrases I 
was learning. 
The harvests take place in the early spring and fall. The grapes are picked in 
the cool morning hours between 6 and 10 when they are freshest. In the weeks 
before I arrived, the crop of Sauvignon Blanc grapes had been harvested and 
were fermenting in 1,000-gallon fiberglass vats inside the winery. But there 
were rows and rows of vines (13 acres in all) burdened with clusters of 
green-gold Colombard grapes waiting to be picked. "Kazi mengi," the workers 
said, and I knew that had to mean "lots of work." 
As the sun rose over the vineyard, there was singing and laughter. The men sang 
comical songs about women and love, often raising their voices in falsetto, 
mimicking the women they were singing about. 
I looked forward to my mornings with the harvest because it was a chance for me 
to become acquainted with the people who live and work in the surrounding 
villages. With the exception of a few women who took time off from their 
domestic and gardening chores around the farmhouse, the harvest was done by 
men, the majority of whom are from the Luo, Kikuyu and Kamba tribes. 
They were curious about the cost of things in the United States, everything 
from T-shirts and blue jeans to a plane ticket to Kenya. I told them the 
kikapus (straw bags) we were filling with grapes sold for as much as $25 in 
many stores. For these men who earn a small wage as grape pickers and farm 
laborers, America seemed like a place where only millionaires could live. But 
they couldn't believe anyone with much money could be happy. 
During the harvest, the winery was a hub of activity. Every piece of equipment 
was in use, from the mechanical crusher that destemmed and crushed the grapes 
as they were brought in from the vineyard, to the wine presses that strained 
every last drop of free-run juice from the grapes. 
Except for the crusher, imported from Italy, all the equipment, including the 
fiberglass vats, was manufactured locally following D'Olier designs. Even a 
refrigerated stainless dairy tank was converted for use in the winery. A local 
artist was asked to design the labels for the wine bottle, and Alfred, a young 
Kikuyu from a nearby village, was hired and trained to manage all aspects of 
the winery. 
According to the Nairobi-based Kenya Wine Agencies Ltd., which handles all 
bottling and distribution for Lake Naivasha Vineyards, production is up from 
3,000 bottles in 1985 to a record yield of 300,000 bottles this year. 
News of the vineyard and winery has traveled quickly through the, uh, 
grapevine. John and Elli are hosts to many guests who stop by on their way to 
or from safaris, balloon rides over the Rift Valley or camping trips in the 
Aberdare Mountains. During my stay, a crew from CNN came to report on the 
winery. Later, a family who own a small winery in Bonny Doon, California, spent 
a few evenings talking shop with the D'Oliers. 
During a recent visit to Kenya, Robert Mondavi and his wife discovered Lake 
Naivasha wine at the Mt. Kenya Safari Club and later paid the vineyard a visit. 
After sampling Kenya's alternative to the domestic papaya wine, it's no wonder 
visitors find a bottle of Lake Naivasha Sauvignon Blanc, Colombard or Carnelian 
(a nouveau style red wine) a coveted souvenir among the kikapus, copper 
bracelets and brightly colored kanga cloths that they bring home from Kenya. 
My own adventures in Naivasha often began as part of the day's work. One of the 
chores around the homestead was to collect firewood and straight branches that 
could be used to stake the vines. This job took a couple of men away from the 
harvest for the day. We rode in a trailer hitched to a tractor to Kedong Ranch, 
a communal Masai farm that spreads for many miles below the slopes of Mt. 
Longonot. Hudson, a Kamba, was our driver and unofficial guide. 
Over the tractor's loud engine, Hudson would shout, "Twiga!" and point to a 
giraffe. He would frequently stop so that I would take pictures of zebra herds 
galloping across the brown grassy plains or catch a glimpse of a gazelle 
darting into the bush. When we stopped for the men to clear away the bush for 
wood, Hudson warned I should look out for simba mkubwa, big lion. But his 
smiles told me he was only teasing. 
The ride on the tractor pulling a trailer full of wood was slow and rough 
across the unpaved trails. At the end of the day, every muscle ached. Safaris 
no doubt were more comfortable cruising in a Land Rover. 
At Naivasha, I was surrounded by the beauty that people come to Kenya to see. 
On Sundays, the family made excursions to nearby game reserves. For example. we 
occasionally had picnics at Lake Nakuru, 40 miles from Lake Naivasha, where we 
watched flocks of pink flamingoes feeding and bathing on the lake. 
Naivasha is also famous for its exotic bird life. Blue herons were a familiar 
sight along the shore, and it was thrilling to watch fish eagles swoop down out 
of the sky. Just a few miles from the vineyard is Hell's Gate, a national game 
park and Masai reserve. Its name suggests the ominous rugged cliffs that open 
to Lake Naivasha and the mists of steam that rise from fractures in the Rift 
Valley floor. 
A short rowboat ride took us across Lake Naivasha to Elsamere, the memorial 
home of Joy Adamson, the author of "Born Free." If you arrived in time for 
lunch, a cast of black and white colobus monkeys welcome you and usually hang 
around until you share some of your lunch with them. On neighboring Crescent 
Island, I wandered through abandoned thatched huts and walked among kongoni, 
gazelle, zebra and giraffe, all roaming wild and free on this tranquil 
sanctuary. 
My walks along the lake were always enjoyable, although I managed to cut them 
short whenever I spotted a dark gray hump in the shallow waters. I couldn't 
help remembering Elli's encounter with a hippo and her warnings that despite 
their size hippos are very fast. 
On the morning before our departure, we took one long last look at Lake 
Naivasha from the top of Mt. Longonot. It was a spectacular view. High upon her 
peaks, we walked along a narrow path that circled dual craters and discovered a 
densely wooded forest in one, a sprawling green pasture in the other. 
My husband carved his impressions of Naivasha onto a sign that stands at the 
gates of Lake Naivasha Vineyards. Etched in the wood normally used to support 
the trailing grapevines is a jagged outline of Mt. Longonot, leading into a 
cluster of grapes chiseled into the shape of Africa. 
Our Kenya trip is just a series of memories now -- the faraway roars that haunt 
the night, giraffes striding with their long-necked gait, roadside markets 
crowded with barefoot women, their babies slung in kangas across their backs. 
But how easily the memories come over a glass of Lake Naivasha wine. 
