4-VEHICLE CRASH TURNS FREEWAY INTO INFERNO 
Two men were burned by hot roofing tar Monday in a traffic accident on 
California 94 during the morning rush hour that caused most of the busy freeway 
to close for several hours. 
The chain-reaction accident occurred at about 8:45 a.m. near the Euclid Avenue 
off-ramp and involved four vehicles in the westbound lanes of the highway when 
a load of heating and air-conditioning equipment fell out of a flatbed truck, 
said California Highway Patrol officer Ron Boggeln. 
A van following the truck tried to avoid the debris and slowed suddenly, 
Boggeln said. The van was hit from behind by an El Cajon Roofing company truck 
towing a trailer carrying a tank of hot roofing tar. That truck swerved to the 
left and was hit by an 18-wheel dump truck, Boggeln said. The dump truck then 
hit the center divider. 
"The contact between the two vehicles caused the truck carrying the tar to spin 
around," Boggeln said. 
The two men who were riding in the bed of the tar truck -- George Vazquez, 38, 
and Billy Ray Snow, 34 -- were thrown out. Hot tar flew out of the pot and onto 
them, Boggeln said. 
Vazquez, of El Cajon, and Snow, of Lakeside, were taken to UCSD Medical Center. 
Vazquez was listed in serious condition with second- and third-degree burns 
over 25% to 30% of his body. Snow had second- and third-degree burns over 10% 
of his body and was listed in fair condition. 
Tar also fell onto the bed of the truck and ignited materials. The driver, 
Everardo Muniz, and another passenger, Jerry D'Aoust, who was riding in the 
cab, escaped without injury. 
"All I saw (were) things flying," said Muniz. "The guy in front of us slammed 
on his brakes, we slammed on ours. I bumped the guy in front of me and got 
pushed into the other lane." 
Muniz said the dump truck was behind him but "tried to swerve to the left as we 
went to the left. He hit us and knocked us around. He (the dump truck) kept 
going left and hit the center divider. He ended up right against the guard 
rail." 
Vazquez's clothes caught fire, Muniz said. "People were pulling over and 
offering blankets," Muniz said. 
D'Aoust, who is also a volunteer firefighter for the Crest Fire Department in 
El Cajon, said, "George caught fire and we had to get him away from the truck. 
We patted him down and had him (lie) down and roll to smother the fire." 
The truck was destroyed when a propane line leading from the truck bed to a 
pilot light below the tar tank broke, said Capt. Jeff Carle of the Metro Arson 
Strike Team. The hot tar and burning materials ignited the propane gas, he 
said. 
It took firefighters about 15 minutes to quell the fire, Carle said, adding 
that firefighters remained on the scene for about two hours to cool off the tar 
and clean up the debris on the roadway. 
Vazquez and Snow are employed by El Cajon Roofing, said Kathy Clark, an owner 
of the firm. Both Vazquez and Snow have been employed there for about 10 years, 
Clark said. 
"They're both real family men," she said. "They're great employees, they always 
take pride in their work. We're a small business and we think of them as 
family." 
Only the men's wives were permitted to visit them, Muniz said. "They've got 
some pretty bad burns. They're going to be OK, it's just going to take a 
while." 
All of the westbound lanes and four of the eastbound lanes were closed to 
traffic, but most were reopened by noon, a CHP dispatcher said. 
At that time, the only lanes remaining closed were the fast lanes on both sides 
of the highway. Caltrans repaired the guard rail by 3 p.m., and all the lanes 
were open to traffic by the afternoon rush hour, said CHP officer Joe Wolf. 
