MORNING BRIEFING: HE COULDN'T EAT WORDS, SO THIS WAS NEXT BEST 
Times columnist Mike Downey will be eating tortillas for the rest of his life 
if fans of the Phoenix Suns have their way. Wednesday, after the Suns beat the 
Lakers to win their Western Conference semifinal series, Downey received a box 
of 300 tortillas from Beth McDonald and Perry Damone, morning hosts of Phoenix 
radio station KEZ. 
The accompanying letter stated, in part: "Please accept this gift as a token of 
our appreciation. The newspaper article in which you predicted that the Suns 
would 'fold like a tortilla' was just what we needed. . . . We're not sure what 
you'll do with 300 tortillas. . . . Our listeners have suggested that perhaps 
you could put them where 'the SUNS don't shine.' " 
A moment of silence: Here's part of what Downey wrote May 9, after Phoenix beat 
the Lakers in Game 1: 
"Of the eight clubs remaining in the running for the NBA championship, seven 
can win it. Phoenix can't. Sorry. Never happen. Phoerget it. 
"So, don't sweat Tuesday night's 104-102 Laker loss at the Forum: These are the 
playoffs. Phoenix will fold like a tortilla." 
Just the fax: Downey said he has received at least 100 derogatory and somewhat 
humorous faxes from Phoenix fans, and they are still coming. "I must have 
refried beans for brains," he says. 
Hot item: The St. Petersburg Times reported that while there is talk of housing 
an NHL expansion team at the Florida Suncoast Dome, management at the Bayfront 
Center can't even keep the ice frozen for an old-timers' tournament. 
After the completion of four games, the ice had melted down to the cement in 
several spots and was thin in the middle of the rink. One player injured his 
knee when he slipped and fell. Needless to say, 24 scheduled games were 
canceled. 
Trivia time: Which was the last Western Conference team, besides the Lakers, to 
win the NBA championship? 
The Forbidden City: Beijing will be closed to people from the Chinese provinces 
during the Asian Games in September. Officials say the measures are to avoid 
traffic jams, but observers believe it is to prevent trouble from dissidents 
after last spring's protests in the city. 
Beijing vice mayor Zhang Baifa said passes will be issued to selected people 
from the provinces to allow them to watch the games. 
Trivia answer: The Seattle SuperSonics, in 1978-79. 
Quotebook: Dave Winfield, as he steered his car into the Yankee Stadium parking 
lot Tuesday: "Welcome to the zoo." MARYANN HUDSON 
