DOCUMENTARY; 
LIMA'S STREETS ARE BOTH MEAN AND VIBRANT; 
SIGHTS, SOUNDS, SMELLS -- A WALK DOWNTOWN, WHERE WELL-TO-DO PERUVIANS SELDOM 
GO, IS AN UNFORGETTABLE ASSAULT ON THE SENSES. JUST WATCH YOUR WALLET. 
At the first stoplight, Lima engulfs you: Dozens of vendors sprint to the car, 
proffering plastic bags of drinkable water, toilet paper, electrical plugs and 
Band-Aids, sold one by one. Aromas from chicken grilling on the sidewalks and 
pungently sauteed raw fish compete with the hawkers' chants and honking horns 
for the attention of your nose and ears. 
A stroll through downtown Lima is a riotous assault on the senses, and not 
least the eyes: a rainbow of faces, garments and wares that add up to pure 
capitalism run amok, but with its own zany order and a vibrance that often 
seems missing from the other, aristocratic Peru. 
Many well-to-do Peruvians avoid the trip these days, and increasingly 
foreigners spend their time in the five-star suburban hotels, venturing into 
Lima only on tour buses. The reputation of the mean streets of Lima is 
sometimes justified. But if you leave your passport, wallet, watches, rings and 
necklaces behind, you can still breathe and feel late-20th-Century Peru. 
The Via Expresa, a sunken four-mile-long highway that is one of Peru's few 
decent roads, is the concrete canal between the two lives that coexist in Lima. 
The road carries you inland from the new American-style suburbs of Miraflores 
and San Isidro, with their shopping malls and walled-in modern houses, and 
dumps you into a throbbing square in front of the Sheraton Hotel, right into 
the convulsed heart of the Third World. 
The City of Kings, conquistador Francisco Pizarro called it when he founded 
Lima in 1535. You have to scratch hard now to find remnants of that imperial 
heritage. 
On both sides of the square, money-changers flashing pocket calculators trot 
alongside the cars, shouting the latest exchange rate and waving wads of 
dollars and the shrunken Peruvian currency, the inti. Some drivers stop; other 
customers, wary of being robbed, make their deals on the move. 
Food stalls line the edge of the square, selling ceviche, the traditional dish 
of raw seafood steeped in lemon juice, and chicha, a rich purple beverage made 
from corn. Ice-cream sellers toot kazoo-style horns, Lima's ubiquitous, profane 
equivalent of the muezzins of the Muslim world. 
Hundreds of people line up and wait stoically on street corners for either 
government buses or colectivos, the private buses that have largely supplanted 
the abject state transport system. 
As the state has disintegrated in Peru in recent years, people have been left 
to their own ingenuity. The city, grown from just over 1 million in 1950 to 
more than 6 million today, is a testament to its people's capacity to survive. 
Especially in and around the regal Plaza de Armas and the elegant Plaza San 
Martin, the city's two finest squares, the new Lima washes over you. 
The smells are as powerful as the visual assault of the tumult. Chunks of 
broiled chicken and beef send up a barbecue aroma on some blocks, a welcome 
change from the garbage stench pervading many of Lima's poorer areas on the 
city's outskirts. The sounds, too: An ancient man and his wife, wearing Andean 
fedoras and ponchos, play melancholy mountain folk tunes on reed pipes. A 
hawker enchants with his sung praises for the medicinal qualities of a gooey 
resin from a cactus plant. 
The descendants of the white colonial settlers have fled to the coast, 
abandoning downtown to the millions of brown-skinned highlanders who have 
spilled down from the villages of the Andes Mountains, victims of guerrilla war 
and decades of neglect. The fine old mansions are coated with soot from the 
traffic. Many now are crowded tenements, home to a dozen families. 
But this new life is found not so much within Lima's still-handsome buildings 
as on its streets and sidewalks. 
Since it never rains on this desert coast, the climate suits a streetside 
lifestyle. With a bureaucracy still rooted in Peru's Spanish past, the new 
Limenos have little chance anyway to move off the streets and into the 
mainstream economy. 
So the main avenues have evolved into color-splashed bazaars of hawkers 
offering all of life's necessities, tax free, and many of its pleasures. The 
government occasionally tries to sweep the streets clean of vendors, but 
strength of numbers prevails. Nowhere else in Latin America has there emerged 
such a sophisticated parallel economy, with its own chaotic hierarchy. 
On the bottom rung are those ambulantes, as the peddlers are called, who sell 
only what they can carry. One vendor, bedecked with dozens of leather handbags, 
resembles a movable Christmas tree. Others tote a few shirts or cans of shoe 
polish. They sidle away if the police get testy (or seek a "fee"). 
Higher up the ladder of ambulante well-being are those with bicycle carts, 
enormous flatbed contraptions that can convey an entire fruit stand or magazine 
rack to a chosen site, and later to an informal parking lot when the day is 
done. 
Then there are the full-fledged stores-on-the-sidewalk that have taken over 
every major avenue in the traffic-choked, square-mile heart of the old city. 
Block after block, these table stands pack both edges of the sidewalks, leaving 
only a narrow path for jostling pedestrians and browsers. 
The forced intimacy makes for ideal conditions for pickpockets in Lima. Packs 
of "piranhas," groups of street children as young as 7 or 8, roam and set upon 
strollers in some sections. 
Like any sensible person venturing into downtown Lima, you will leave wallet, 
watch, passport and dollars in your hotel, carrying nothing you cannot afford 
to lose. Lima's reputation has grown so bad that gringos rarely meander the 
streets any more. A pity. This walk lets you experience what Lima has become. 
Jiron Lampa, one of the major avenues, reveals the sophistication of the 
vibrant "informal" world. This is the hardware district. You can buy all you 
need to build and outfit a house. 
Stall owners offering seemingly identical stock sit idly on stools awaiting 
buyers. Electric plugs, wire, circuit breakers, copper tubing, locks, window 
frames, toilets and, yes, kitchen sinks. 
In another section, whole streets are filled with stalls selling watches, with 
watchsmiths installing new batteries and making repairs on the sidewalk. 
Elsewhere the specialty is sneakers; further on, it's used books. 
Near the government buildings, men sit behind ancient manual typewriters on 
impromptu desks, ready to type out a bureaucratically correct document for any 
formality. They are more than mere outdoor typists, since they know the 
intricacies of the moribund state and the demands of its clerks. 
The merchants in the established shops along the streets ought to be furious at 
this invasion of vendors selling goods at far below the retail cost, paying no 
taxes or rent (beyond protection money to the informal organizations that 
maintain a modicum of order). 
In fact, the street merchants often are hawking the same stuff as that being 
sold legally indoors across the sidewalk. Some merchants have consigned stock 
to the vendors for street sale in return for a cut, expanding their retail 
reach and avoiding taxes in the process. 
The street life is one reason why Peru's tax intake has plummeted from 20% or 
so of the gross domestic product a few years ago to about 4% now, further 
weakening the state. Of course, hyperinflation of 30% to 40% per month hasn't 
helped either. The informal sector accounts for nearly half of all economic 
activity. 
The police do try to maintain some order, and when on foot patrol in the 
capital they travel at least in pairs and often in larger groups. One recent 
day, they had reconquered a portion of Jiron de la Union near the Plaza de 
Armas, site of the presidential palace and therefore a security concern. 
Armored water cannon vehicles stood poised at the edge of the square. Police 
wearing riot helmets and bulletproof vests barred all pedestrians from the 
square itself. 
Peru's guerrilla war may be largely in the mountains, but it sometimes feels 
very close to downtown Lima. A few dozen blocks away, halftrack vehicles stood 
guard outside a court where a suspected guerrilla chief was being tried. Army 
and police vans filled with men holding AK-47 assault rifles cruised the 
streets. 
The ambulantes had re-established their foothold higher up the Jiron de la 
Union as police looked on. People had set out scales on the sidewalk (the 
street economy has progressed into services as well as goods) and were offering 
to weigh passers-by for 1,000 intis, now worth about 3 U.S. cents. Three 
policemen weighed themselves. They did not pay, but neither did they shoo the 
scalers away. 
Some narrow, heavily trafficked streets have signs with a cross through the 
letter A, and the words No Ambulantes. 
The government once attempted to restore order by shifting all the ambulantes 
to a single open-air market a couple of blocks from the Plaza de Armas, called 
Polvos Azules (Blue Dusts). 
The block-square market is thriving, but the flood of newcomers has retaken the 
streets. The market's suddenly respectable tenants, meanwhile, have hired 
security guards -- to keep out newer ambulantes who try to wander into the 
alleys selling goods from their hands. 
A fair portion of the street life serves others in the street business. Beach 
umbrellas are a big seller, for example -- not for the beach but to provide 
shade for sidewalk stands from the midday sun. 
A man sidles up: "You want nice slender young girl?" Getting bumped and jostled 
is also part of the experience; when it happens, check your pockets. 
The financial district is informal Lima at its most advanced. It is known as 
Ocona Street (Peruvians use the English "street" rather than calle for this 
one, since it's their Wall Street). 
Along a road where exchange houses once flourished indoors, money traders with 
shoulder bags packed with currency make sometimes huge transactions, no doubt 
laundering thousands of dollars of Peru's coca dollars in the process. Some 
money dealers sit on stools under signs saying, "I Buy Damaged Dollars and 
European Currencies." An estimated $5 million changes hands here daily. 
Young men use walkie-talkies to stay in touch with the moguls who follow the 
volatile trends of the inti against the dollar. Guards hover around their 
masters, eyes scaling the crowds. This money market is not only for foreign 
exchange but for financing, since loans from banks are vanishing under the 
weight of inflation and impossible interest rates. 
Ocona Street is closed to traffic, a pedestrian mall of money dealing. 
You can still escape, slipping into the splendid, faded Hotel Bolivar on the 
Plaza San Martin, cool and often darkened by Lima's constant blackouts. 
From the glassed-in terrace restaurant over a $10 fixed-price lunch, you can 
watch the swirl of Lima from a safe distance. But it's not the same as becoming 
part of the chaos, even if just for a while. 
