MUSIC AND DANCE REVIEWS ; 
KEITH CLARK MAKES HIS PACIFIC SYMPHONY FAREWELL 
Keith Clark's tenure as music director of the Pacific Symphony -- the orchestra 
he founded in 1979 -- came to a bitter, poignant, perhaps humiliating end this 
week at the Orange County Performing Arts Center in Costa Mesa. 
Clark returned to the stage after conducting Beethoven's Symphony No. 9 on 
Wednesday, and in response to audience applause led the orchestra and the 
Pacific Chorale in a hushed account of Mozart's "Ave, verum corpus" as an 
encore. 
He took a solo bow acknowledging many in the audience who were standing, then 
turned and applauded the orchestra. 
The orchestra did not applaud back. 
The issue of retaining Clark may at one time have divided the orchestra's board 
of directors. Some long-term subscribers may have been ruffled. Critics may 
have disagreed. Some orchestra members early on may have protested. But at the 
close the musicians spoke with unanimous voice and it was not a favorable one. 
Under such circumstances, discussion of the actual music-making might be a bit 
extraneous were it not for the superb, songful playing of cellist Lynn Harrell. 
Harrell was soloist in Joan Tower's attractive, post-modern impressionistic 
"Music for Cello and Orchestra" and Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo Theme. 
Harrell negotiated Tower's many demanding double- and triple-stops with 
apparent ease. He traversed Tchaikovsky's variations with delicacy, warmth and 
poise. He was a master of evenness in dynamics and color throughout the compass 
of the instrument -- the 1673 Jacqueline Du Pre Stradivarius, according to the 
program. 
Clark accompanied with care and attention, and the orchestra responded 
supportively. 
But when it came to Beethoven's Ninth, Clark gave a typically unfocused, 
dispiriting interpretation, workmanlike at best and pedantic and insensitive at 
worst. 
The orchestra followed gamely. The Pacific Chorale sang with strength if not 
much clarity. 
The solo quartet, harried by Clark's hurried tempos, consisted of soprano 
Janice Yoes, mezzo-soprano Jacalyn Bower, tenor William Lewis and bass James 
Patterson (who came to grief in his opening statement). 
The program was scheduled for a repeat on Thursday. CHRIS PASLES 
