LATEST WAVE OF CAMPAIGN REFORM HOMES IN ON MEDIA 
Amid mounting disgust with what many consider the distorted and trivial nature 
of recent political campaigns, a new wave of reform is building to clean up 
politics. 
But while previous reform efforts were aimed largely at campaign financing, the 
new ones focus on the media, both on how the candidates use television and on 
how the press covers -- or fails to cover -- the political process. 
Implicit in these ideas is recognition of the increasing importance of the 
media in politics, and of the 30-second TV spot as a focal point of American 
political discourse. 
But there is no firm consensus that this current spate of ideas actually will 
make campaigns more relevant. Some consider the proposals illegal, impractical 
or just plain inadequate. 
Others question the basic premise behind the reforms, contending that the 
deplorable state of campaigning today is not the cause of bad government, but 
only the symptom. 
These analysts believe the country is in a period of political drift, with 
governing institutions and leaders in both parties gridlocked. Under these 
circumstances, they argue, the proposed reforms would help clean up politics 
only at the margins. 
"I think before campaigns can change, the political environment has to change," 
pollster Andrew Kohut said in an interview at a conference on media and 
politics at UC Davis -- one of several such recent meetings. "There has to be a 
clear picture of differences between the parties and the candidates on the 
issues." 
One of the new wave of proposals calls for requiring political candidates to 
make their television commercials longer in an effort to break the grip of the 
30-second spot. Another would require candidates to appear in their own 
commercials -- at least at the end, where the sponsor of the ad is supposed to 
be identified. Still another suggests that the news media become more 
aggressive in policing campaigns -- even to the point where they deliberately 
shape candidates' agendas. 
Whatever the solutions, dissatisfaction with the present system is widespread 
-- and intense. "Political campaigns turn the stomach of the average voter," 
complained Sen. John C. Danforth (R-Mo.), in a sentiment echoed by other 
political leaders in both parties. 
Examples abound: 
 -- In the Texas Democratic gubernatorial primary last March, State Treasurer 
Ann Richards was accused of using illegal drugs. She countered by charging her 
chief rival, Mark White, a former governor, with using taxpayers' money to 
"line his pockets." She won the nomination hands down. 
 -- Last autumn's New Jersey gubernatorial contest became known as the 
"Pinocchio campaign" after Republican and Democratic candidates spent 85% of 
their advertising budgets calling each other liars. 
 -- In a Wyoming special election for Congress this past spring, the normally 
conventional Casper Star-Tribune got so fed up with "the acid of negativism" 
that was being spread by the major Republican and Democratic candidates that it 
endorsed a Libertarian. 
To be sure, nasty and distorted campaigning is nothing new to American 
politics. As far back as 1800, presidential candidate Thomas Jefferson was 
attacked as a threat to private property, female chastity and the sanctity of 
religious worship. 
But concern over such tactics has increased recently, in part because of 
growing worry about declining voter turnout, which critics blame partly on 
voter turnoff as a result of negative ads. The proportion of Americans who vote 
in presidential elections plunged to 50% in recent years, from 63% in 1960, 
while the turnout in congressional races now is only 37%, compared to 48% three 
decades ago. "Television in general and demagogic advertising in particular" 
are "substantial" factors in that decline, suggests Curtis Gans, head of the 
nonpartisan Committee for the Study of the American Electorate. 
Reformers argue that the cleanup also is important because changes such as 
declining U.S. economic clout and the emerging democracies in Eastern Europe 
make it more important than ever that the American electoral process produce 
effective leaders. "Eastern Europeans would be well-advised not to import . . . 
the increasingly shallow nature of electoral campaigns," said Massachusetts 
Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, whose failed 1988 presidential campaign seemed 
incapable of responding to criticisms from George Bush. 
Of course, politicians contend that criticizing an opponent over issues is a 
legitimate way of campaigning. But critics worry that today's negativism goes 
far beyond that. "Instead of being issue-driven, they focus on what is wrong 
with the character of a candidate," Thomas C. Griscom, a former White House 
communications director, said. 
The difference is significant. Analysts say the attacks on a candidate's 
character are more emotional and more prone to distortion, treating issues 
mainly as symbols rather than as the substance of the campaign message. 
And most agree that a major reason for this shift is the increasing dominance 
of television in political communication -- particularly through campaign 
advertising. With its propensity for drama, emotion and personalization of 
issues, TV has accentuated the focus on character. 
But negative campaigning is on the rise for one simple reason: It works. 
One factor is what communications experts call the "information overload" -- 
the plethora of interests competing for public attention, support and money in 
the United States today. "There is a sensory bombardment, and the mind has the 
tendency to get numb," said Mary Matalin, chief of staff of the Republican 
National Committee. As a result, politicians "have to scream louder. And the 
screaming tends to get personal or negative." 
At the same time, political consultants say the rapid increase in TV 
advertising rates -- which have doubled during the past six years -- 
intensifies the pressure on them to invest campaign funds where they will have 
the most impact. That means greater use of attack ads, whose simple message 
hits home more quickly -- and less expensively -- than so-called "positive" 
advertising. 
Part of the blame, too, may rest with the way the news media cover campaigns, 
critics say, particularly in the case of presidential elections. Network news 
stories average about one minute and 30 seconds -- too short to allow even 
well-meaning candidates to provide much depth. 
To make things worse, the time being alloted to the candidates' own words in 
political commercials is shrinking steadily. A study by Daniel Hallin, a 
University of San Diego professor, found that the average "sound bite" -- or 
quotation from a candidate -- has been cut over the past six presidential 
elections, from 43.1 seconds in 1968 to 8.9 seconds in 1988. 
Nor is television the sole culprit. A study to be released this week by the 
Markle Foundation on how major newspapers and magazines covered the 1988 
presidential election found that only 10% of stories actually dealt with 
issues. Almost 40% focused on who was winning, another 20% highlighted 
conflicts or attacks between candidates, and another 20% highlighted 
qualifications or character. 
When the campaign for Texas governor turned nasty this spring, "the press down 
here in Texas just fed on it," State Democratic Chairman Robert Slagle said. 
The new ideas for upgrading the campaign process center on four 
major factors -- forcing candidates to appear in person in their ads, making 
the commercials longer, offering candidates free or cheaper air time and 
prodding the press into becoming a more forceful referee. 
One modest proposal backed in the Senate by Danforth would alter the 
regulations on disclosure of campaign financing to require that candidates show 
their faces in part of their commercials, thus making it plain who is 
responsible for the ads. Current rules require only that the commercial contain 
a statement showing who paid for it. Often these disclosure lines are so small, 
they are all but unreadable. 
A more far-reaching approach would impose stringent restrictions on the content 
of ads in exchange for free time for candidates, either donated by the TV 
stations or paid for with federal funds. The government currently can order TV 
stations to give up some air time as part of the requirement for obtaining a 
broadcast license. 
Robert Squier, a Democratic media consultant who produced Ann Richards' 
personal attack ads in the Texas campaign, suggests that any new rules forbid 
candidates from even mentioning their opponents in their ads. He also wants to 
see candidates agree not to air 30-second spots -- the shortest, and the 
most-suited-to-attack advertising -- in the final two weeks of a campaign. 
With the idea of providing free or federally financed TV time (possibly through 
the use of income-tax checkoffs) gaining momentum on Capitol Hill, some 
reformers also are calling for regulations that would require any candidates 
who accept such free time to appear on camera -- talking -- in their 
commercials. 
The hope is that having to appear on camera would give candidates pause about 
attacking their opponents too harshly, and ultimately would prod them into 
using the time to focus on issues. "We should do everything we can that will 
get candidates to articulate their views, or for them to be embarrassed if they 
can't," said Democratic National Chairman Ron Brown. 
But there is no guarantee that the new proposals to control the content of 
campaign ads would work -- or even would be legal. Skeptics point out that the 
courts still might declare that such restrictions violate constitutional 
guarantees of free speech. 
And some worry that such efforts could backfire. "If you have a system that 
mandates candidates to look into the camera and give the answer," said former 
Republican political consultant Douglas Bailey, "you are mandating that 
candidates must be good at this medium or they will lose the election." 
TV executives and political professionals also suspect that the media companies 
that own TV stations will lobby hard against any proposal that might force them 
to lose lucrative advertising time. And some analysts doubt whether taxpayers 
would want to foot the bill for political advertising. 
Critics also see problems with the third group of proposals -- those that would 
offer new incentives such as free TV time to encourage the production of ads 
longer than 30 seconds. If Congress adopted one plan, designed to make free ads 
five minutes long, the result (in some crowded primaries) might require 20 to 
40 minutes of free air time each night. And some analysts question whether the 
free time alone would be sufficient to drown out the heavier volume of paid 
ads, many of them negative. 
And not all consultants agree that 30-second spots discourage meaningful 
discourse. "I think 30 seconds is fine . . . depending on what your message 
is," said Roger Ailes, President Bush's media adviser, whose negative ads in 
the 1988 presidential campaign have helped fuel some of the debate. 
Perhaps the simplest idea for reform is one championed by Washington Post 
political columnist David Broder: That the press should do a more vigorous job 
of covering politics. In a sense, Broder argues that reporters should no longer 
use the pretense of "objectivity" to remain passive recorders of a campaign; 
instead, they should immediately debunk a candidate's statements on their own 
-- without waiting for the candidate's opponent to do it for them. (The idea of 
reporters pointing out candidates' inaccuracies is not without precedent. It 
has been most recently apparent in the campaign for the California Democratic 
gubernatorial nomination, where some reporters have cited misleading statements 
in TV commercials.) 
"The press should be just as willing to set the agenda on issues as it is on 
candidates' private lives," agreed Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the 
Annenberg School of Communications, recalling the coverage of former Colorado 
Sen. Gary Hart's extramarital affairs, which drove him out of the race for the 
1988 Democratic presidential nomination. 
But politicians worry that excessive zeal by some reporters could lead to a 
form of journalistic vigilantism. "With all due respect, (increased press 
monitoring) is sort of analogous to judges without juries," the GOP's Matalin 
said. "Who are journalists to set the moral standards for politics?" 
But to many analysts, the real weakness with the reform proposals is that they 
fail to address the root of what is wrong with American politics -- a deepening 
malaise that has its roots in the failure of Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society, 
the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal of the Richard M. Nixon 
Administration. 
San Diego's Hallin argues that these events brought on a "weakening of 
political consensus and authority" and produced a new political era in which 
neither Democrats nor Republicans have been able to establish an effective 
majority. "The real problem is that the whole process is stalemated," said 
Cornell University political scientist Ben Ginsberg. 
Hallin agrees. "There is confusion about what the country stands for and what 
the political process ought to be," he said. "Television is shaped by the 
politics of the country, and so we have the kind of television news we have 
because of the politics we have." 
