DEFENDANT SAYS HE QUIT GANG A YEAR BEFORE FATAL SHOOTING 
Murder defendant Arnel Salagubang denied in court Monday that he shot and 
killed a gang member in November in Oxnard or that he belongs to a rival 
Filipino gang called the Satanas. 
Salagubang, 20, testified that he drove away from Channel Islands High School 
alone before Manuel (Deadeye) Rodriguez was shot to death Nov. 22. 
Salagubang admitted that he joined the Satanas, or Devils, in January, 1988, 
but said he "stopped hanging around with them" a full year before Rodriguez's 
death. 
His elbows on the witness stand, Salagubang testified in a clear, unhesitating 
voice, addressing lawyers as "sir." He was the first of several defense 
witnesses Monday who contradicted state witnesses' testimony that he shot 
Rodriguez to death. 
Salagubang is charged with first-degree murder, inflicting great bodily harm 
and using a weapon in the death of Rodriguez, who died of a .22-caliber gunshot 
wound to the head. 
Witnesses have testified that Salagubang killed Rodriguez because he was 
voicing racial slurs at members of the Satanas and yelling the name of his 
gang, Lemonwood Chiques, to provoke them. 
Salagubang said he dropped off Satanas member Jesse Cortinas at the school, 
then drove away because his Datsun 280ZX wouldn't restart if he turned off the 
engine. 
Witness Jamie Johnson, 17, supported his version. She testified that she saw 
Salagubang drive away before she heard the shot. 
"Deadeye stopped and said, 'What's up? Lemonwood Chiques all the way,' " 
Johnson said. She said she saw Cortinas and another Satanas member standing by 
Rodriguez's car before the shooting. 
"I heard Arnel's car starting to drive away, and I heard a pop, and I saw Jesse 
had something by the side of his leg, but I couldn't see what it was," Johnson 
said. She testified that a few moments later Cortinas was holding a gun as she 
rode away with them in a pickup truck with several other friends. 
Johnson testified that she had lied to police officers after the shooting. She 
said she implicated Salagubang because Oxnard detectives threatened to charge 
her as an accessory to the crime. 
"That's all they wanted to hear, that Arnel did it," she told the jury. 
Cortinas testified against Salagubang last week in exchange for the district 
attorney's offer to let him plead guilty to a murder charge in Juvenile Court, 
which would put him under authorities' control only until he reaches age 25. 
Detective Greg Asbell admitted during rebuttal testimony Monday that he had 
lied to Salagubang, telling him during interrogation that witnesses had 
identified his license plate at the scene and picked him out of a photo lineup. 
Jurors heard a tape recording on which Asbell told Salagubang, "You'd better 
cooperate. . . . Why would somebody positively ID you?" 
And Salagubang admitted under cross-examination that he lied when he told 
investigators he had driven by the school without stopping because he saw 
members of the Colonia Chiques gang who had threatened him earlier. 
