RECORD $4-BILLION RJR BOND OFFERING A SELLOUT; 
DREXEL PRICES ISSUE FOR QUICK SALE, ALLAYING FEARS IT WOULD SWAMP MARKET 
Drexel Burnham Lambert said Thursday that it has found buyers for all of its 
record $4-billion offering of RJR Nabisco bonds, allaying fears that the issue 
would swamp the shaky market for "junk bonds." 
Portfolio managers and bond analysts said Drexel made the yields attractive 
enough to leave little doubt that they would find buyers. Drexel "priced it 
aggressively to get it done," said Tom Razukas, a high-yield bond analyst at 
McCarthy, Crisanti &amp; Maffei, a New York bond research firm. 
Some analysts contended also that the sale, to be completed today after 
approval from the Securities and Exchange Commission, bodes well for the market 
in high-risk, high-yield junk bonds. Investors have recently sought safer 
havens after growing disillusioned with these relatively risky investments 
because of concerns about rising interest rates and fears of a recession. 
A source close to the transaction said the offering was oversubscribed. 
The bond offering "was a $4-billion gorilla doing a cannonball into the 
swimming pool," said Raymond Minella, co-head of merchant banking at Merrill 
Lynch Capital Markets, a co-manager of the deal. 
Minella added that the successful sellout of the RJR offering should free up 
money for other junk bond offerings "that was waiting on the sidelines." 
The junk bonds are key to the financing of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co.'s 
recent record $25-billion buyout of RJR Nabisco. KKR has also said it plans to 
sell substantial assets to help fund the deal, as is typical in such leveraged 
buyouts. 
Some investment bankers and executives of portfolio management companies 
praised the bonds as attractively priced and well backed by RJR Nabisco's 
assets and cash flow. 
"We're buying it in pretty good size for our clients," said Gerald B. Unterman, 
president of Solomon Asset Management in New York. "In terms of fundamentals, 
it's one of the better credits in the high-yield market." 
When companies price bonds, the goal generally is to come up with the lowest 
possible interest rate to keep down the costs of paying off debt holders. 
Drexel set the senior bonds in the RJR offering at 13.125%, while subordinated 
portions were set at 13.5% and 15%. 
Michael Tennenbaum, Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.'s Los Angeles-based vice chairman 
of investment banking, said the deal will raise the overall standards for 
funding big buyouts. The RJR debt, he said, "was structured conservatively 
because people were worried about" successfully placing the bonds. 
"This will clear out the pipeline now to get business back into a steady-flow 
state," Tennenbaum added. 
Times staff writer Scot J. Paltrow contributed to this story. 
