FOR TEACHERS IN TIJUANA, LIFE HAS BECOME A HARD LESSON IN POVERTY 
Public school instructors in the United States say they have been historically 
underpaid, as demonstrated most recently by the teachers strike in Los Angeles. 
But most can generally expect to have achieved a measure of financial 
stability, albeit not complete independence, after two decades in the 
classroom. 
Not so Jaime Chollet Silva, an elementary school teacher here for 23 years, who 
was among the hundreds of thousands of instructors throughout Mexico who walked 
off their jobs en masse last month. 
To supplement his salary, Chollet works a double shift as an elementary school 
teacher here and, on weekends, puts in time as an exterminator. Three years 
ago, things got so bad that he crossed the border and headed for Los Angeles, 
where he worked for a year as an undocumented laborer, cleaning bathrooms and 
performing other menial tasks before returing to his family here. 
"It was a difficult decision for me, as a professional person, to go to the 
north and do that kind of work, but I felt that I had little choice," Chollet 
recalled last week as he gathered with other instructors at a largely deserted 
elementary school. "Hardly anyone can make a living just as a teacher in 
Mexico." 
Although Mexico's seemingly interminable economic crisis has clearly hit the 
poor hardest, the nation's middle classes have also been devastated, and 
perhaps no professionals have seen their standards of living decline as 
precipitously as teachers. Instructors say their real earnings have dropped by 
more than half since 1982, when the Mexican economy began to nose-dive and 
inflation began to surge. 
One former university professor recalled how his salary dipped from more than 
$400 a week in 1981, before the great peso devaluations, to less than $100 a 
week in 1983. 
Indeed, although no one ever got rich as a public-school teacher north of the 
border, the profession has been making a lot of people poor in Mexico in recent 
years. 
In Tijuana, elementary and junior high school teachers earn about $50 a week. 
Striking Los Angeles teachers earn about $450 a week, spread over a full year, 
a beginning salary that amounts to about $23,400 annually. 
Mexican instructors, once able to afford cars, houses and a modicum of a 
middle-class life style, now must scramble just to meet rent and mortgage 
payments and put food on the table. Most work double shifts to supplement their 
income. Often, they do triple time, filling in at universities and private 
schools. Many work weekends in assorted jobs, vending tacos, driving taxis, 
painting houses, whatever. 
A good number, particularly along the border, have given up the profession 
altogether and have taken menial jobs in the United States, while others use 
their summer vacations to find work in the north, supplementing their meager 
earnings. 
"Since I've been teaching, I would say half of my colleagues have left the 
profession," said Rafael Navarro, who has been an elementary school teacher for 
12 years. "They just couldn't afford it anymore." 
Added Ignacion Montes, a 22-year-veteran, "It's an honorable profession, but we 
haven't been treated honorably." 
Teachers' rapidly declining standard of living prompted almost 1 million 
instructors nationwide to stage a wildcat walkout a month ago. The work 
stoppage was not approved by the teachers union leadership, whom many 
grass-roots instructors accuse of corruption and failure to look out for 
members' interests. Along with a 100% pay raise, school workers have demanded 
greater democratization of the Mexico City-based teachers union. 
Another Increase Sought 
Most of the nation's instructors returned to the classrooms in recent weeks, 
after the government authorized a 25% raise, but in Tijuana and other areas, 
the work stoppage continued through much of last week. Tijuana's 11,000 or so 
preschool, elementary and junior high teachers are demanding a "preferential" 
border salary -- perhaps another 25% increase -- to compensate for the high 
cost of living along the international frontier. 
Most Tijuana teachers are expected to return to the classrooms this week, but 
they say their fight for higher wages will continue. There are threats of 
another walkout and even more severe actions -- possibly occupation of 
buildings -- after May 31. The school year ends June 30. 
"The lucha (battle) goes on," said Jorge Ojeda, a 23-year veteran of the 
Tijuana school system and a spokesman for the rebel instructors. "We have yet 
to receive a response that deals adequately with the needs of the teachers. We 
are looking for nothing more than to live with a certain dignity." 
That dignity is often not present in the classrooms, teachers say. Because of 
budget constraints, educators say it is not unusual for schools to be short on 
basic supplies, such as chalk and blackboards. Classrooms are sometimes packed 
with as many as 50 students. Some schools have had to operate without running 
water or electricity, occasionally prompting authorities to suspend classes. 
Parents and teachers have traditionally chipped in to improve the physical 
plants, but educators say the need to work so many hours has inevitably cut 
into their commitment to individual schools. 
What has ultimately suffered, teachers here say, is the quality of schooling. 
"Unfortunately, all of this has repercussions in education," said Ojeda. "If a 
professor has problems, if he's unable to buy food for his family, or pay his 
bills, how can his work be excellent?" 
The work stoppage has played havoc with the lives of parents here, many of whom 
work while their children are in the classroom. Although voicing worry about 
their children's missed time in school, most parents, themselves well-versed in 
economic hardship, appear supportive of the teachers. Many marched alongside 
them during several recent large-scale protests here. 
A Just Fight 
"The teachers' fight is a just one," said Antonio Cureses, whose daughter has 
missed school during the work stoppage. "Not all teachers are saints, but 
mostly they try to do a good job. We all lose out if the good ones cannot 
afford to go on teaching and must find other work." 
During the past month, there has been little teaching but much spirited 
discussion on the grounds of most public schools here and in much of Mexico. 
Just last week, the teachers of the elementary school Defensores de Baja 
California, in a poor neighborhood called Colonia Obrera, gathered in an office 
in the otherwise largely deserted campus and spoke of their problems. 
Jaime Chollet Silva spoke of his weekend job as an exterminator, and of his 
time in Los Angeles cleaning bathrooms. 
Oscar Sanchez, a teacher for a dozen years and one of the leaders of the 
work-stoppage movement, said he is considering working in San Diego during the 
summer to enable him to make some additions to his home. His wife is also a 
teacher. 
"Our salaries are hardly enough to meet our basic needs," said Sanchez. Later, 
he drove off in a 1977 Volkswagen bug. He said he had saved 1 1/2 years to 
purchase it, although he bought it used and battered. "Ten years ago," he said, 
"in a month's work, you earned enough to put down a car payment. All that's 
changed." 
Another teacher, Maria Angelina Diaz Ortega, said she would like to retire, but 
retirement benefits -- 80% of pay -- would hardly leave her enough to pay her 
bills. "I've reached a point in life where I'd like to relax and enjoy my 
family, but I can't do it," said Diaz, who has taught here almost 30 years. She 
spoke of other colleagues with 40 years of experience who also cannot afford to 
retire. 
The principal, Juan Manuel Colado, said salaries are so low that school 
administrators like himself only earned a few dollars more a day than his 
teaching colleagues. "It doesn't pay anymore to seek extra training, extra 
education," said Colado, an educator here for 15 years. "You can imagine that 
effect that has on the schools." 
On the school grounds, a hand-written sign hung on a classroom building alerts 
readers of a charity group's reduced-cost sales of staples, including cooking 
oil, bread, flour and pasta. Designed for poor neighborhood residents, the 
weekly sales are also attracting some of Tijuana's less traditional 
impoverished. 
"The sales help me keep down costs," explained Jose Calderon de la Barca, an 
elementary school teacher for 15 years in Tijuana. "I always go." 
