LIZ SMITH: CAN 'SUPERLEE' SAVE A SELF-DESTRUCTING DONALD? 
FLASH! (Oh well, maybe it's only a blip or a zip.) Winging in from the West 
Coast, which is now his domain, has been the mighty public relations flack of 
flacks, Lee Solters, who has been in New York talking to Donald Trump! 
Lee is affiliated with the NYC / LA firm of Solters, Roskin, Friedman. They 
usually handle theater, movies, actors like Barbra Streisand, and an occasional 
producer, such as Marvin Davis. Lee is also the force who spoke up for years in 
defense of Frank Sinatra. Now, anybody who can handle Streisand and Sinatra 
might also be able to polish the tarnished Trump. 
Question: Where would this leave the big Howard Rubenstein PR firm, long in 
Trump's corner? I'm not sure, but perhaps they wouldn't cry too much coming 
home from the bank over losing a client who doesn't seem to listen to their 
advice as a rule and often makes them the goat for his own misadventures with 
the media. 
I can just see Lee Solters -- happy and relaxed, enjoying the good life in 
California. (He has just about forgotten those gritty, good old, bad old days 
in New York.) Suddenly, Lee gets a call at the Beverly Hills Hotel pool. He has 
to rush off and then spring out of a telephone booth wearing his blue union 
suit with the big yellow and red "S" on the chest. 
One thing is for sure: Donald Trump's bad PR these days sounds like a job for 
-- SuperLee! 
FOR INSTANCE, did you see The Donald with Sam Donaldson on ABC's "Primetime?" 
For the first few minutes, I thought Trump had the advantage. He seemed calm, 
cool, collected, intelligent and about to dominate the discussion of his 
financial empire (sent up by Forbes magazine.) Then, right before the viewer's 
eyes, Trump lost it. He suddenly turned into Macho Man, as if determined to be 
tougher, rougher, ruder than his inquisitor. (Sam, however, was being an 
absolute doll on this occasion.) I guess Trump is under a lot of unpleasant 
pressure. 
DIRECTOR Penny Marshall is sweating things out, cutting her movie "Awakenings" 
in Los Angeles and very much under the gun. This difficult effort, starring 
Robin Williams and Robert De Niro, took four months to make in New York City. 
It has a "first cut" that runs an amazing and daunting four hours and 20 
minutes long. 
By the by, the popularity contest from cast and crew goes like this. For Robin 
-- 100-plus percent as a nice guy; for Robert -- 100-minus percent as a grumpy, 
unfriendly, difficult actor. 
