PERSPECTIVE ON 'THE VISION THING'; 
STAY THE BENIGN, UNRUFFLED COURSE; 
RHETORIC AND GRAND POSTURING HAVE THEIR MOMENTS. BUT DEMOCRACY'S FINEST HOUR IS 
NOT ONE OF THEM. 
There are times in the course of international affairs when resounding rhetoric 
and grand ideas are called for. This isn't one of them. 
George Bush is constantly being criticized because he has greeted recent 
momentous changes in Europe and elsewhere with bland rhetoric, and because he 
projects no exalted sense of "vision" in international policy. Indeed, if 
Winston Churchill had met the German challenge during the Battle of Britain 
with Bush's oratorical flair, England might well have toppled gratefully into 
ignominious surrender. But rhetoric and grand posturing could make a difference 
in that case. Today, during democratic capitalism's finest hour, the best 
policy is one of benign, unruffled watchfulness. 
Overall, the trends in foreign affairs are highly favorable: The enemy is 
evaporating; the Cold War is becoming history; war is declining in likelihood; 
democracy and capitalism are all the rage, and the American portion of the 
international economy moves along, on the whole, in quite tolerable shape. It 
may make sense to cheer these congenial trends on, and it might be useful to 
give some thought about what one might do if any of them began to show serious 
signs of reversing. But when history is so clearly on one's side, substantial 
efforts to influence or direct might only prove mischievous and 
counterproductive. 
This would not be true if we really knew what caused these trends or if we had 
a good idea about how they could be shaped. But for the most part, we don't. 
Despite some occasional setbacks, democracy has been on the upswing for 200 
years now. The United States has been able to accelerate this trend in a few 
peculiar cases -- as when it forcefully demanded that the defeated states of 
World War II adopt democratic procedures. But America has mainly encouraged the 
trend by example, not by artificial manipulation. It once spent decades on end 
running around Latin America preaching the democratic gospel, only to see 
country after country revert to dictatorship. Democracy seems now to have 
become an idea whose time has come in Latin America. But manipulation by 
Washington deserves little credit for the fashion. 
Something similar could be said for the increasing attractiveness of capitalism 
around the world -- the North American, Japanese and West European example has 
been much more impres sive than tangible efforts to make the idea catch on. 
Bush is most often urged to come up with a new, dynamic vision to replace the 
policy of containment that is now becoming obviated by success. But there never 
was anything terribly dynamic about containment. Mostly, it involved patiently 
holding the line until communism reached a state of self-destruction. This has 
now come about -- not because we have been particularly good at holding the 
line but because the containment theorists were essentially correct in their 
conclusion that communism was inherently unstable and irrational. 
That is, communism is collapsing not so much because of anything we did but 
because the theologians in Moscow were building on fundamentally unsound ideas 
when they decided to adopt a vicious and unproductive economic and social 
system, to vastly over-build on defense and to grasp to their bosom a set of 
colonies that became draining economic and political liabilities. Western 
policy was not designed to force them to make those profound errors -- indeed, 
if the Communists had taken our advice, they never would have done such stupid 
things. When containing did become dynamic and manipulative, it led us into the 
Korean and Vietnam wars. It does not seem that either venture speeded 
communism's inevitable collapse very much (though the earlier war did save 
South Korea from communism). Thus, it makes more sense to argue that the Cold 
War was lost by the misguided policies of the East, not that it was won by the 
ingenious policies of the West. 
In the 1980s the United States tried to come up with dramatic and dynamic 
strategies to deal with terrorism. Presidential candidates vied about who could 
best "put an end" to the problem. The importance of the terrorist threat may 
well have been exaggerated (in the last decade more Americans have been killed 
by lightning than by terrorism) but the most effective policies have been ones 
that relied on quiet, routine police work, rather than on grand schemes or 
dramatic gestures. 
In particular, the hostage-taking fad seems now to be winding down. In large 
measure this is happening because, after years of hysteria that fed the egos of 
the kidnapers (while ruining the presidency of Jimmy Carter and almost ruining 
that of Ronald Reagan), we have finally decided that the best approach is to 
wait patiently for the petty international criminals holding the hostages to 
grow tired of their childish games. 
And, as many people have pointed out, the drug problem is more likely to be 
eased (it will never be reduced to "zero" as Bush pointlessly implied in one of 
his rare lapses into rhetoric) by mundane policies of education and treatment 
than by mobilizing aircraft carriers or interdicting commerce in South American 
jungles. 
In general, grand schemes and cosmic tinkering can be harmful because they tend 
to distract attention from the dull, mundane policies that are most likely to 
help -- and which can easily be reversed if they are found not to work. 
If a boulder is cascading down a hill, little needs to be done to enhance its 
progress. It is a sensible policy, if a rather unexciting one, to stand back 
and let gravity take its course. Similarly, American foreign policy should be 
principally devoted to avoiding zealous devices that merely complicate, and 
could potentially divert, history's remarkably congenial progress. 
