ALASKA CLAIMS EXXON IS NOT PAYING FOR LOST TOURISM, DESPITE PROMISES 
Despite assurances by Exxon executives, the oil company has not been paying 
tourism-related losses attributed to the nation's worst oil spill, state 
officials and business operators say. 
Ron Clarke, a special assistant to Gov. Steve Cowper, said there are wide 
disparities between what top Exxon officials are saying publicly and what is 
happening to the claims of tourism operators. 
"Depending on who you talk to, you get different answers," Clarke said 
Thursday. 
Bill Tribble, manager of Exxon's Valdez claims office, said the company gives 
priority to "on-the-water" claims, and that claims covering tourism losses on 
shore will be handled later. 
Tourism is a billion-dollar-a-year industry in Alaska. Many segments already 
are taking a beating from the spill, which fouled hundreds of miles of beaches 
along Prince William Sound and the southern Alaska coast. 
Sport fishing guides, tour boat and bus tour operators are reporting a run of 
cancellations, and a sharp decrease in the number of bookings they normally 
would be taking this time of year. 
Exxon agreed this week to finance a $4-million media blitz aimed at key markets 
across the country that contribute about one-third of the state's visitors each 
year. 
But that general assistance apparently isn't being translated to individual 
situations. 
Glenn Williams, who runs bus tours out of Eagle River to Homer, Seward and 
Prince William Sound, said he submitted two claims, totaling more than $30,000, 
for tours canceled as a direct result of the spill. 
He said his claims were rejected by Exxon, and he was told by a claims adjuster 
that "nobody in tourist-related businesses falls under the (reimbursement) 
guidelines at this time." 
"I know there's a lot of people losing a lot of bookings," Williams said. "Our 
phones just stopped ringing about three weeks ago." 
Exxon spokesman Tribble insisted no such claims have been denied, but 
acknowledged they haven't been paid either. He said the company's emphasis at 
this point is to take care of commercial fishermen and tour boat operators. 
"We haven't addressed any type of off-water claims yet," said Tribble. "I'm not 
saying we're not going to." 
"Tourism in Alaska is much bigger than me or you or this man with his 21-day 
tour," Tribble said. "I don't have the authority to make that decision." 
Asked who did have the authority, Tribble replied: "I don't know." 
Clarke said he couldn't see any difference between a commercial fisherman's 
claim and one from a bus tour operator like Williams or a sport fishing guide 
who lost clients because of the spill. 
Clarke said the problem has been particularly severe in Cordova, a community 
almost entirely dependent on commercial fishing. 
He said Exxon had announced earlier Thursday that it would pay claims only to 
fishermen and processors, and not to "Main Street businesses" like restaurants, 
grocery stores and hardware stores, even though they are totally dependent on 
fishermen. 
"After considerable haranguing from a lot of quarters," Exxon reversed itself, 
and said it would pay claims for those businesses in Cordova, Clarke said. 
He said the state has a written agreement with Exxon promising to pay the 
secondary claims in Cordova. 
Clarke said the governor's office will continue to try to make claims officers 
follow the policies enunciated publicly by Exxon executives. 
"When it gets right down to filing claims, it is something very different," 
Clarke said of Exxon's actions. "There's a little fancy footwork going on." 
Clarke said the spill chill has stretched as far south as Ketchikan where sport 
fishing guides have reported cancellations, even though the oil is 700 miles to 
the northwest. 
"The lack of knowledge of Alaska geography is working against us," Clarke said. 
