ELECTIONS; 
RIVALS IN 36TH DISTRICT RACE ADDRESS ISSUES; 
OVERVIEW 
Following are answers to questions posed by The Times to the candidates in the 
June 5 Republican primary in the 36th Assembly District. 
Contenders 
Assemblyman Tom McClintock, 33, (R-Thousand Oaks) was first elected in 1982 at 
age 26. He is the lead Republican on the Judiciary Committee. He has been a 
newspaper columnist and administrative assistant to state Sen. Ed Davis 
(R-Santa Clarita). An outspoken conservative, he criticizes his own party 
leaders for not pushing alternatives to Democratic proposals in Sacramento. 
Earlier this year, he was stripped of his position as Republican whip after he 
failed in a bid to oust Republican leader Ross Johnson of La Habra. 
Kevin Staker, 35, of Camarillo is the first Republican since 1982 to challenge 
McClintock in the heavily Republican district. A political newcomer, Staker is 
a tax lawyer who manages a small law firm in Camarillo. He was chairman of a 
defunct Camarillo citizens group that investigated the $26-million financial 
loss of the city government. He is a bishop in the Mormon Church. Staker says 
McClintock's "negative" political style has alienated officials in Ventura 
County and state leaders in Sacramento and made him less effective. McClintock 
denies it and says his record shows many accomplishments. 
Questionnaire 
Questionnaires were distributed to candidates earlier this month. Answers have 
been edited for length. 
Question: Do you support the California State University system's locating a 
Ventura County campus on the Taylor Ranch? Briefly, why? 
McClintock: Yes. After five years and a half-million dollars evaluating 27 
sites, Taylor Ranch is our last opportunity for a university for Ventura 
County. 
Staker: No. Taylor Ranch is on the far edge of the county, inconvenient for 
students of the county and too close to UC Santa Barbara. It would increase 
traffic congestion in Ventura and air pollution in the county in general. 
Trustees selected Taylor Ranch for its ocean view. The campus should be more 
near the population center of the county, near Oxnard or Camarillo, just off 
the Ventura Freeway. 
Q: Under recently introduced legislation, state sales taxes would be raised 
0.25% for 10 years to help finance school construction. Do you favor an 
increase in sales taxes to underwrite new school construction? 
McClintock: No. Local bond measures should finance school construction where 
needed. 
Staker: No. As a tax lawyer, I do not see that we need any more sales taxes 
unless it is to make up for abolishing the state income tax for all but the 
most wealthy. The state has plenty of revenue. It simply needs to make 
education a higher priority. 
Q: An initiative measure on the June ballot would raise taxes on gasoline sales 
by 9 cents a gallon to finance highway building projects. Do you support the 
concept of higher gas taxes to underwrite road construction? 
McClintock: No. Proposition 111 will cost the average family of four $9,160 
over 10 years -- with only $1,450 going for roads. 
Staker: Absolutely yes. It is simply an increase in a user fee to try to keep 
up with inflation. Construction costs have increased 326% since the current tax 
was fixed; this increase is only 100% over a number of years. 
Q: A ballot initiative now in circulation would prohibit the spraying of 
pesticides on private property without the written consent of the owner. Do you 
support this measure? 
McClintock: No. The Medfly turned Hawaii from a net agricultural exporter into 
an importer. We can't let this happen to California. 
Staker: No. Aerial spraying of pesticides to fight the Medfly is for our own 
good. I am concerned about the rights of property owners but do not believe in 
creating a right to sue every time a small amount of pesticide blows onto the 
property of a disgruntled person. 
Q: Under current law, the Legislature is responsible for redrawing state 
legislative and congressional district boundaries. Do you believe this system 
should be changed? 
McClintock: Yes. State-of-the-art gerrymanders by politicians rob the people of 
their votes. 
Staker: Yes. Our present system thwarts the will of the people. It particularly 
favors incumbents of both parties. I support the idea of a nonpartisan 
commission to redraw the boundaries to make districts that really do belong 
together. 
Q: Earlier this year, Assemblyman McClintock tried unsuccessfully to oust 
Assembly leader Ross Johnson from his leadership post. Do you support keeping 
Ross Johnson as Republican leader? 
McClintock: No. Ross Johnson was a character witness for convicted Sen. Joseph 
Montoya and has led Assembly Republicans to support the two biggest tax 
increases in California history. Our party needs new leadership. 
Staker: Yes. I see no need to rock the boat over who is the leader. All that 
Assemblyman McClintock's attempt to unseat Ross Johnson has done is to get 
himself fired as minority whip, an important position, and to be literally 
relegated to a back seat in the Assembly. McClintock is now politically dead 
and has no prospect of getting anything done for the district. 
Q: Do you support putting limits on the number of terms state legislators can 
serve? If yes, how long should they be? 
McClintock: Yes. I support the proposed 12-year limit. 
Staker: Surprisingly, no. The voters have the good judgment to know when to 
throw out a worthless politician. 
Q: Do you support a woman's right to unrestricted abortions within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
McClintock: No. I am opposed to government's financing and promotion of the 
practice and insist on parental consent for minors. 
Staker: No. I firmly oppose almost all legalized abortions; the exceptions are 
when pregnancy has resulted from incest or rape, the life or health of the 
mother is in jeopardy in the opinion of competent medical authority or the 
fetus is determined, by competent medical authority, to have severe defects 
that will not allow the baby to survive beyond birth. It is reprehensible for 
government to make anyone opposed to abortion pay, through our tax dollars, for 
something we believe to be so wrong. 
Q: Do you support the death penalty for any crimes? If so, which ones? 
McClintock: Yes, for first-degree murder and treason. I am carrying legislation 
this year to impose the death penalty for the murder of a child. 
Staker: Yes. I support the current death penalty statute. I would add killing a 
police officer as a special circumstance that justifies the death penalty. 
Q: Do you support the state ban on semiautomatic assault rifles? 
McClintock: No. This measure enacts an infinitely expanding list of firearms 
and severely threatens the right of the decent population to defend itself from 
criminals. 
Staker: Yes. I believe strongly in the right to bear arms and that government 
should interfere as little as possible in people's affairs. However, I see the 
ban as simply drawing the line in relation to machine guns. These weapons can 
be fairly easily converted into automatic weapons. Our law enforcement 
officials have asked for this ban, and I support them. 
Q: Do you support the so-called "Big Green" ballot initiative, which would seek 
to eliminate ozone-depleting chemicals by the year 2000, phase out pesticides 
known to cause cancer and require that trees be planted in all new 
developments? 
McClintock: No. This proposal would be an economic catastrophe for the people 
of California. 
Staker: No. I believe that our present governmental environmental regulations, 
if properly enforced, are adequate to do the job. 
Q: Do you think the state should require private employers to subsidize 
day-care services for employees who request them? 
McClintock: No. Employment benefits should be freely negotiated between the 
parties involved. 
Staker: No. Government overregulates business already. In addition, I have 
really not heard a hue and cry for such a requirement. By and large, people are 
making their own arrangements for day care quite well. 
Q: Proposition 112 on the June ballot would ban speaking fees and limit gifts 
to state legislators while creating a commission that could pave the way for 
higher legislative salaries. Do you support it? 
McClintock: No. I am disgusted with the Legislature's response to recent 
scandals, which says, "Double our salaries, and we'll try to behave ourselves." 
Staker: No. Although I would ban speaking fees and limit gifts to legislators, 
assemblymen are paid enough already. The framers of the state Constitution 
intended that the assemblymen be part-time citizen legislators, not full-time 
politicians who have no idea of what it is like to hold an honest job. 
Q: Do you support Gov. George Deukmejian's proposed constitutional changes that 
would require state prison inmates to work in privately sponsored industries to 
pay for their incarceration? 
McClintock: Yes. I carried a portion of the proposal last year, and carried the 
original legislation in 1985, long before the governor proposed it. 
Staker: Yes. They should earn their own keep, and this is a great way to do it. 
Q: Do you believe our present strategy of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies and imprisonment of users and dealers will ever significantly reduce 
the level of drug use in the United States? If no, what should be done? 
McClintock: No. It doesn't do any good to arrest a drug dealer if he's back out 
on the streets before the officer's paper work is finished. We need Proposition 
115. (Prop. 115 is an anti-crime initiative on the June ballot that would 
toughen penalties for murder and torture and speed up criminal trial 
procedures.) 
Staker: No. The only way to really make a dent in the drug problem is to 
educate the public, especially the children, about the evils of drugs, and 
then, if that fails, to impose heavy prison sentences for drug use. If demand 
stops, so will the crimes of the suppliers. 
Q: Would you consider the possibility of decriminalizing the use of drugs? 
McClintock: No. It has been tried in other countries with disastrous results. 
Staker: Absolutely not. The opposite should be done: Severely punish drug 
users. 
Q: Do you support raising sales or other taxes to finance anti-drug law 
enforcement efforts and/or anti-drug education programs? If yes, by how much? 
McClintock: No. Californians already bear among the heaviest tax burdens in the 
country. We need to change our current spending priorities. 
Staker: No. Our taxes are already high enough. We simply need to get our 
spending priorities straight. 
Q: Do you support full or partial public funding of political campaigns? 
McClintock: No. Thomas Jefferson said it best, "To compel a man to furnish 
contributions of money for the propagation of opinions which he disbelieves and 
abhors in sinful and tyrannical." 
Staker: No. Our new campaign finance laws, with their spending limits, should 
do the job. However, they should be combined with a ban on speaking fees. 
Q: A ballot initiative now in circulation would prohibit foreign individuals 
and corporations from owning land in California. Do you support this? 
McClintock: No. Our foreign trade problems have nothing to do with foreign land 
investment. 
Staker: No. America stands as a beacon of freedom to the world. We should not 
discriminate against an individual simply because he or she comes from abroad. 
Q: Rising property values in the Santa Monica Mountains have made it more 
difficult for state and federal parks agencies to buy land for public use. Land 
prices have escalated in part because local officials have allowed developers 
to build more houses than provided for under zoning laws. To keep property 
prices more affordable to parks agencies, should governments in Los Angeles and 
Ventura counties refuse such so-called "upzoning"? 
McClintock: No. Local land use decisions should stay with local elected 
officials, who are accountable to the voters for their actions. 
Staker: Yes. We have plenty of developable land away from the Santa Monica 
Mountains. The control of growth in our area is very important, especially in 
wilderness areas. 
Q: Are you willing to publicly release your tax returns and those of your 
spouse prior to the election? 
McClintock: No. 
Staker: Yes, if McClintock will do the same. However, all our return shows is 
our income from my legal practice and the usual sort of deductions. It shows no 
speaking fees, as I assume Assemblyman McClintock's should show. 
