PAPERS PROLIFERATE; 
THE RIGHT PRESSES CASE ON CAMPUS 
After a quarter-century of protest rallies on campus, a very unusual thing 
happened a few weeks ago at UC Berkeley. A student-run newspaper printed an 
editorial in praise of campus police and their handling of demonstrations and 
crime. 
"Thank you for not protesting your perpetual mistreatment," editors of the 
California Review declared to the pleasantly surprised police force. "You 
deserve better!" 
The monthly paper was making its debut as a conservative voice at a school 
usually considered a center of liberal thought. In the process, it was also 
joining a growing number of journals nationwide that are challenging the notion 
that campus publications are almost by their nature left of center. 
Shift in Views 
In part, the publications reflect a shift among college students: As a group, 
they are more diverse politically than a generation ago, and young 
conservatives are much more vocal in opposing what they say is the 
overwhelmingly liberal influence of college professors and administrators. 
But the recent growth in the numbers of such papers also reflects a concerted 
effort by a group of leading conservatives with headquarters in Washington. 
"These are alternatives to the mainstream campus press, which is typically left 
of center," says Leslie Lenkowsky, president of the Institute for Educational 
Affairs (IEA), which offers money, advertising and encouragement to a loose 
network of publications at 43 American colleges and universities. 
Nationally, the best-known paper is the pugnacious Dartmouth Review, which has 
been battling the administration of that New Hampshire college in an ugly 
dispute involving charges of racism, anti-Semitism and censorship. In 
California, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Cruz, UC San Diego, Occidental 
College and San Jose State all have such papers. 
Liberal Counterattack 
The IEA -- founded by such conservatives as writer Irving Kristol and former 
Treasury Secretary William E. Simon -- has been successful enough to prompt 
concerns of undue influence as well as a liberal counterattack. Some colleges 
complain that the publications, egged on by the older conservatives to promote 
their own ends, are purposefully disruptive and promote intolerance. 
For their part, some of the conservative student editors say they themselves 
are the victims of intolerance and censorship. Such a charge carries special 
sting at institutions that pride themselves as centers of free intellectual 
discourse. 
"Supposedly what they were fighting for in the '60s was the free speech 
movement," said Marc Thiessen, editor in chief of the Vassar Spectator. "Today 
free speech exists on college campuses for everyone but conservatives." 
At Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., the student government cut off funds 
last semester to the Spectator for its ridiculing of a black student who 
allegedly made anti-Semitic remarks. At the University of Virginia, the 
conservative magazine recently won a fight to retain its grant from the student 
council over charges that the monthly is too political. Elsewhere, bundles of 
the conservative papers are sometimes dumped into trash bins and shouts of 
"fascist" sometimes tail their writers. 
The Dartmouth Review, a 9-year-old weekly, is fighting the college over the 
suspension of two student editors for their alleged harassment of a black 
professor. Adding to the dispute were an article and cartoon last semester 
likening Dartmouth's president, who is Jewish, to Hitler. 
Most of the other conservative papers are milder and some even criticize the 
Dartmouth Review's abrasive tactics as needlessly offensive. But as proud 
children of the Reagan era, most of the editors take on provocative issues, 
attacking ethnic studies, affirmative action in college admissions, school 
funding for gay groups and any changes in curricula viewed as moving away from 
classic texts of Western culture. 
"If people ignore us, or just disagree with us, that will be fine," said 
Phaedra Fisher, a senior from Michigan who is editor in chief of the new UC 
Berkeley monthly. "As long as they let us state our piece." 
IEA Aid Expanded 
The IEA cites the importance of making such views known as reason for its aid, 
which began on a small scale in 1980 and was greatly expanded in 1987. Through 
the group's Collegiate Network, campus papers received a total of about 
$100,000 in grants last year, plus about $30,000 in shared advertising from 
companies known for supporting conservative causes. The network now holds 
seminars about newspaper production, offers editorial cartoons and columns and 
has a toll-free hot line for advice. 
Alarmed liberal activists began a counter program two years ago. The Center for 
National Policy, a Washington think tank chaired by former Secretary of State 
Edmund Muskie, helps about 20 liberal and progressive publications at campuses 
such as Harvard, Columbia and the University of Texas. 
"The conservatives are so very well funded, it was becoming a one-sided 
debate," said Amy Weiss, who coordinates the liberal aid to college papers. 
Last year, that aid totaled about $10,000 -- a tenth of the IEA donations. 
Tom Rolnicki, executive director of the Associated Collegiate Press, a 
nonpolitical organization that monitors student newspapers and runs contests 
for them, said he too is troubled by the amount of conservative donations. "It 
gives those papers an unfair advantage. But on the other hand, many of the 
other campus papers are strongly supported by the institutions and are 
perceived as liberal," he said. 
Some college administrators and liberals were further alarmed when Simon, in an 
article published last summer in the Wall Street Journal, called on alumni to 
give money to conservative student papers instead of to their colleges. There 
is no clear evidence that Simon's advice had any effect on the schools' fund 
raising, but it certainly gave the publications a boost. 
At Dartmouth, the Review has garnered so much financial support from alumni and 
prominent conservatives, including author William F. Buckley Jr., that it 
doesn't need money from IEA anymore, though the paper is active in the network. 
"You don't have to read between the lines to see where they are getting their 
money and their ideas -- from right-wing organizations," said Alex Huppe, a 
spokesman for Dartmouth President James Freedman. 
Support From Institute 
Lenkowsky, who is a former U.S. Information Agency official, and conservative 
student journalists insist that IEA does not dictate editorial contents. In 
most cases, the network's funds constitute less than half of the journals' 
budgets, they stress. 
The only daily paper in the conservative network, the Badger Herald at the 
University of Wisconsin, even endorsed Democrat Michael S. Dukakis in last 
year's presidential election as more likely to trim the national deficit. 
"Most people on campus were impressed we weren't just little Republican 
robots," said Editor John Zipperer. His paper, he said, gets a few hundred 
dollars a year in advertising from the network and, unlike many of the other 
conservative papers, tries to restrict opinion to the editorial pages. 
"We are doing this because we want to do it, not because conservative adults 
are compelling us to be conservatives," explained Rob Kelner of the 2-year-old 
Princeton Sentinel, a biweekly. "They are helping to provide the means to help 
us produce a newspaper. I don't see anything wrong with that." 
Competition of Ideas 
At Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., where there is a network paper, 
journalism professor George Harmon said he sees the spread of conservative 
publications as healthy. "I think the competition is good on the campus," 
explained Harmon, chairman of the nonprofit corporation that runs the 
mainstream daily. He predicted that more alternative papers of all stripes will 
start up throughout the country as computer technology lowers the costs of 
production. 
Kenneth C. Green, associate director of UCLA's Higher Education Research 
Institute, which surveys student attitudes nationally, said the conservative 
publications are "a very interesting phenomenon and reflective of national 
politics." 
He stressed that the biggest shift in students' self-described political views 
over the last 20 years has been from liberal to middle of the road, not to 
conservative. But conservatives are clearly "making a concerted effort to be 
much more vocal, much more influential," he said, and there is evidence that 
professors are more liberal than their students now. 
Some of the journals show up at surprising places. At UC Santa Cruz, regarded 
by some as a hippie holdout, the Redwood Review considers itself "the only 
alternative voice in entire Santa Cruz County" and closely covers municipal 
elections, Editor-in-Chief Allison Turner said. The conservative Review prints 
ads for Army officer training programs, which are banned by the regular campus 
newspaper. 
According to UC Santa Cruz student body President Kyle Arndt, the Review 
"reflects an increasing diversity on the campus as the kind of students 
attracted to Santa Cruz may change. That's not to say we are going to support 
Reagan 95.5% in an election, but you really get the feeling the place has 
changed. There is a diversity of opinion and that is real interesting." 
A reading of several issues of 20 of the network papers shows a range in tone 
from moderate Republicanism to pure libertarianism, sometimes in the same 
issue. Some come out regularly; some when study schedules and monies permit. 
Some are slick, well-written journals; some are the haphazard products of 
undergraduate enthusiasm and dormitory word processors. 
Most of the publications carry articles supporting the Contras in Nicaragua and 
advertisements asking for donations to the Oliver North Defense Fund. William 
J. Bennett, former U.S. secretary of education and now the anti-drug czar, is 
clearly a hero to the conservative student editors. So is Allan Bloom, whose 
best-selling book, "The Closing of the American Mind," criticized colleges for 
abandoning classics and traditional values. 
Other role models are R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., editor in chief of the American 
Spectator, and Buckley, editor in chief of National Review. Thus, many of the 
campus papers are called Review or Spectator and resemble one of those two 
conservative publications; the young writers aspire to jobs there. 
Yet their main focus now is on campus and local issues. 
The Stanford Review, for example, helped sponsor a campus visit last year by 
Bennett, who sharply attacked Stanford's faculty for changing the required 
freshman course on Western culture so it reflected achievements of minorities 
and women. 
Variety of Issues 
The new UC Berkeley paper supported the university's controversial plan to 
build dormitories at Peoples Park, a landmark of radical protests. The UC San 
Diego journal, also called the California Review, ridiculed the modernist 
architecture on campus. The Cornell Review passionately defended fraternities. 
The Northwestern Review devoted much of a recent issue to arts in the Chicago 
area. 
In its March issue, the Princeton Tory, one of two conservative publications at 
Princeton, examined 1960s radicalism. "It's one thing to like the music and 
clothing of a generation. . . . It's quite another to adopt a generation's 
ideals and tactics, especially when those ideals and tactics have proven empty 
and ineffective," wrote Tory Editor Kim Redlinger. 
A few, following Dartmouth's Review, have sharply criticized individual 
teachers' methods and ideology. But according to Anne Francke, an official of 
the American Assn. of University Professors, the conservative publications as a 
whole "haven't caused a ruckus in the faculty world." 
At Occidental College, a conservative quarterly called the Right Side was 
founded last year and, in an attempt to attract more writers and readers, the 
name was changed last semester to the Free Thinker. The paper has applied for 
an IEA grant and, meanwhile, has received and printed some network advertising, 
including Coors beer spreads. 
However, Occidental forbids advertisements for alcoholic beverages in any 
campus publication and school officials say the Free Thinker could face trouble 
if the beer advertisements appear again. Andrew Bywaters, the student editor of 
the Free Thinker, said he is going to fight that policy. 
"They say there are no ideological reasons behind that rule. I tend to doubt 
that," said Bywaters, a sophomore. 
Heated Disputes 
At a few other colleges, disputes involving conservative papers have been more 
bitter. 
In January, 1988, the Northwestern Review printed an editorial against 
celebrating the birthday of assassinated civil rights leader Martin Luther King 
Jr. According to the editorial, King's legacy brought "immense harm to American 
society, especially blacks, for it has left the U.S. more racially polarized 
than in 1950." The editorial triggered angry letters and a protest rally. 
The Student Press Law Center in Washington, a nonpartisan organization that 
works on First Amendment court cases, says conservative papers, especially 
those at Vassar and Dartmouth, have faced censorship. "Fighting racism is being 
used as a motivation for censoring college newspapers," said Mark Goodman, 
center executive director. "We certainly appreciate the serious problem racism 
poses. We feel censorship is not the proper response to that." 
And alumni, usually oblivious of many undergraduate concerns and journalism, 
have been drawn into and divided over the situations at Vassar and Dartmouth. 
The Vassar Spectator used to get a campus office and about $10,000 a year from 
the student government but lost that last fall after refusing to kill a 
controversial issue. That issue carried a feature called "Hypocrite of the 
Month," which sarcastically lambasted a black student who had made obscene and 
anti-Semitic comments to a Spectator writer at a reception for the journal, 
although the black student later privately apologized to college officials. The 
black student's face was shown in a mug shot that reminded some readers of a 
criminal wanted poster. 
Harassment Seen 
"It seemed to some that the Spectator was harassing him as if he was a 
criminal," said Dixie Sheridan, the college's vice president for college 
relations. Student leaders said the item was libelous. 
Editor-in-Chief Thiessen said the Spectator, which had been a monthly, was not 
able to put out another issue until December. But now, he said, the paper is 
back on track, with the help of a $3,000 IEA grant and alumni donations. 
The Dartmouth Review has had a reputation for offending people since its brutal 
parody of black ghetto English caused an uproar in 1982. The current imbroglio 
began in February, 1988, when the paper printed what it said was a transcript 
of a secretly taped lecture of music professor William Cole, whom the Review 
had criticized in the past. In that article, Cole, who is black, was quoted as 
using obscene, rambling language and calling whites "honkies." Soon afterward, 
four Review staffers came to Cole's classroom in what they said was an attempt 
to interview Cole. The classroom visit became an ugly confrontation. 
The college suspended two of the students from school for 18 months and gave 
the other two lesser punishments. Big name conservatives rushed to the 
students' help. In January, a New Hampshire judge ordered the two most severely 
disciplined students reinstated until the matter can go to a full trial. 
Censorship Denied 
Huppe, the campus spokesman, said Dartmouth is not trying to censor the Review. 
"The problem Dartmouth had with the students at the Review is their anti-social 
behavior and vitriolic ad hominem attacks on members of our community," he 
said. 
Most editors at other conservative college papers defend the Dartmouth Review's 
right to print whatever it pleases. But some worry that the Collegiate Network 
might be hurt by the furor. 
Eric Lidicker, managing editor of the Texas Review at the University of Texas 
in Austin, said the Dartmouth Review is sometimes "needlessly inflammatory and 
not thought out." And, in what might be considered the ultimate put-down among 
conservative collegians, he accused the Dartmouth paper of "using tactics of 
the left." 
