LACK OF COMMUNICATION OVER MEDICATION FUELS PROBLEMS FOR ELDERLY 
Dorothy Buth, 80, was taking six medications when she entered Burbank's St. 
Joseph Medical Center last month. When she went home a few days later, her 
family physician replaced two medications with new prescriptions. 
Unfortunately, no one mentioned the changes to Buth's daughter, Bonnie, who 
monitors her mother's prescriptions. And no one told the Adult Day Health Care 
Center of St. Joseph, which cares for Buth five days a week and administers 
most of her medications. 
"I was on the phone going back and forth to the doctors," Bonnie Buth said. "I 
had a little of all her medications left. I didn't know what to give her. I was 
going crazy." 
"She's a heart patient and the situation could have been very dangerous," said 
Susan Myers, the program nurse for the Adult Day Health Care Center. "If she 
had been on her own, the potential for taking all the drugs, or too many of 
them, would have been there." 
Recent studies suggest that Buth's case is symptomatic of a disturbing problem 
among older adults taking prescription or over-the-counter medications. 
Federal, state and private studies say that an alarming number of Americans 60 
and older take medications that cause harm by themselves or through adverse 
reactions with other prescriptions. The problem is exacerbated by physiological 
changes, including a decline in kidney and liver performance, that make elderly 
people more sensitive to drugs. 
Myers said the problem develops from inadequate communication between doctors 
and patients about prescriptions and their possible side effects. 
Bonnie Buth averted trouble by aggressively pursuing doctors to learn what 
dosages to give her mother, Myers said. But many other senior citizens have 
been less fortunate. 
A 1989 report by the United States Inspector General, for example, called 
mismedication of seniors "a critical health care issue." 
The report said that in 1987 at least 200,000 elderly Americans were 
hospitalized due to adverse drug reactions or experienced drug reactions while 
hospitalized. It also found that each year prescription drugs cause 32,000 
older adults to fall and fracture their hips. In addition, it reported that 
61,000 senior citizens who take medications develop tremors, rigid muscles or 
other side effects resembling Parkinson's disease. The problem is also 
extensive -- and costly -- in California. A state Assembly study found that in 
1986, patients 60 or older accounted for "62% of reported adverse drug 
reactions associated with legally administered drug therapies." The cost of 
hospitalizing these 31,326 senior citizens was $289 million. 
The problem is significant in the San Fernando Valley, said Dr. Roland Jacobs 
of the Valley Hospital Medical Center in Van Nuys. 
Jacobs, the medical director of the hospital's special care unit for geriatric 
psychiatry, recalls a woman who was brought to the emergency room babbling and 
delirious. She had no sense of herself or the time of day. She was extremely 
agitated and restless and had no control of her bowels or bladder. 
Jacobs learned that when the elderly woman had become agitated during early 
symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, a family doctor had prescribed tranquilizers 
and anti-psychotic drugs while she continued to take medications for high blood 
pressure. 
Within weeks the woman became increasingly agitated and psychotic. Instead of 
re-evaluating her medications, the doctor increased them. This cycle continued 
for several months until the woman came to the hospital. 
"We basically stopped her medications and observed her," Jacobs said. "Within 
three days she made significant improvement by just detoxifying and washing out 
all these medicines. In about seven days she had come back to her normal 
status. 
"We re-evaluated her. All she needed were light tranquilizers along with her 
medication for high blood pressure. We also made recommendations for improving 
her home life and lowering her stress so that she did not require as many 
medications." 
Jacobs also recalls treating an 88-year-old widow who had difficulty walking 
and had fallen, requiring stitches on her ear, the day she was brought to the 
hospital. She was talking incessantly and was delirious. 
A doctor had prescribed Haldol, an anti-psychotic, to treat a slight case of 
nervousness. For five days, the medication seemed to work well. But on the 
sixth day her agitation returned and she became confused. The next day she 
experienced difficulty walking, became delirious and went to the hospital. 
Jacobs took her off Haldol. Four days later she could walk. Although still 
suffering from severe memory loss, she became less confused and needed only a 
mild sedative. 
"It was clearly a case of Haldol toxicity," Jacobs said. "Her family doctor 
needed to know that it accumulates in the elderly and what may not be toxic 
initially can become so after six or seven days." 
The inspector general's report said a predominant reason that elderly people 
are more likely than other groups to be mismedicated is that they suffer more 
chronic illnesses and use more medications. 
Although Americans 65 and over "constitute only 12% of the population, they use 
over 30% of the prescription drugs and 40% of the non-prescription drugs," 
according to the report. 
The report added that because elderly Americans take a greater variety of 
drugs, the risk is higher that the medications will interact adversely. 
The report said the elderly also suffer because many physicians are poorly 
trained in geriatrics. It cited a 1988 study that said less than 2% of students 
in medical school were required to take courses in geriatric medicine. 
Mike Mangano, a deputy inspector general in Washington, said physicians get 
some information on drugs from scientific publications but get more of their 
information from drug company representatives who are trying to sell a product. 
"In 1988, drug companies spent $2.5 billion on promoting their products to 
physicians," he said. "They say that they get scientific literature all the 
time. But I think if they are honest, they will tell you that they are heavily 
influenced by promotional people from the drug companies." 
Dr. David Chernof, a Northridge internist who is president-elect of the Los 
Angeles County Medical Assn., said the assertion that physicians receive 
insufficient training in geriatric medicine is "not backed by any data that I'm 
aware of." 
"I think the inspector general would be well advised to have a doctor help him 
with these evaluations in the future," he said." 
"It does not reach the heart of the matter to say that only 2% of medical 
students take courses in geriatric medicine because that is not necessarily 
where they get the information on pharmacology for elderly people. 
"They get it in courses in pharmacology and in internal medicine and in bedside 
teaching on the hospital wards. Much of traditional pharmacology courses . . . 
in medical school have to do with issues of fine tuning dosage according to age 
and coexistence of other medical conditions. 
"Doctors are required . . . to have a substantial number of hours of formal 
education each year. Much of that is provided in lectures in hospitals and 
those lectures often have to do with exactly these issues. They are not given 
by drug companies but by skilled physicians experienced in these matters." 
The recent studies of over-medication sparked interest among politicians. State 
Sen. David Roberti, a Democrat representing Burbank and part of North 
Hollywood, introduced one of several bills on the subject now before the state 
legislature. 
"It's a vast problem and getting worse," Roberti said. "The problem is that 
there has to be some way of keeping a list of what medications a senior citizen 
is taking because of the adverse reactions that can occur." 
Roberti's bill (SB 2815) would require the state to develop a brochure to teach 
patients what to ask about medications. Doctors and pharmacists would be 
obligated to give older patients a copy of the brochure. 
The bill would also compel doctors and pharmacists to take complete information 
about patient's medications and to advise them about possible "effects or 
contraindications." 
Chernof said doctors are taught in medical schools and urged by professional 
canon to counsel patients about adverse reactions and drug interactions. 
Brad Williams, an associate professor of clinical pharmacy and clinical 
gerontology at USC, said the American Pharmaceutical Assn. includes counseling 
patients as one of its standards of practice. 
But Williams said pharmacists in high-volume stores often are too busy to 
counsel patients, and that Roberti's bill would make a good law because "it 
raises the issue of drug medication counseling and will encourage people to ask 
for it." 
Medical groups might have a different opinion once they have time to study the 
legislation. 
Dr. Alex Pruchnicki, geriatrics fellow at the Sepulveda Veterans Administration 
Medical Center, said good physicians already take histories of their patients' 
prescriptions and discuss possible side effects. He said physicians might 
oppose legislative intrusion into the doctor-patient relationship. 
Chernof questioned the data that fueled the proposal. "Who decided what an 
adverse drug reaction was?" he asked. "What were the criteria? In an elderly 
person with multiple system illness such as diabetes and heart disease, for 
example, it's difficult to call an incident an adverse drug reaction because 
sometimes it's difficult to distinguish a manifestation of the illness from the 
purported adverse reaction." 
Chernof said other causes frequently contribute to adverse reactions, including 
failure to follow directions, misunderstandings of directions, the patient's 
forgetfulness, difficulty opening bottles, difficulty reading labels and 
self-advised changes in dosages of medication. 
Chernof said physicians and pharmacists need to educate patients, but he 
wondered if a booklet was the best way. 
"Will elderly patients read it? Will they pay any more attention to it than to 
what the doctor said? . . . If a pharmacist raises an issue about possible drug 
interaction, the net effect may be to scare the patient away from taking the 
drug at all." 
