AWARD-WINNING TEACHER GETS A LESSON IN IRONY 
Social studies teacher Alan Haskvitz is on a winning streak -- at least outside 
his own school district in the San Gabriel Valley. 
Last month, Reader's Digest named Haskvitz one of its 10 national "Heroes in 
Education," an award that carries a $15,000 prize, $10,000 of which goes to the 
school and $5,000 to the teacher. Now, Learning magazine has named the 
48-year-old teacher the recipient of its "Professional Best" leadership award. 
The honor comes with a new Oldsmobile worth $19,000. 
Haskvitz, an intense, bearded man with a knack for promoting himself and 
jousting with administrators, is gratified by his recent fame. But despite the 
recognition he has brought to Suzanne Middle School, the Walnut school district 
has repeatedly turned down his application to become a mentor teacher, a 
program through which outstanding teachers share their techniques with other 
teachers. 
The irony of this isn't lost on Haskvitz, who sometimes feels like a prophet 
unrecognized in his own land. "It upsets me," said the eighth-grade teacher, 
sitting during a class break with his hands neatly folded on his desk. "I sure 
would like to share." 
District officials say the mentor teacher projects submitted by Haskvitz were 
turned down because they weren't competitive. "The committee based its decision 
on the needs of the district and the needs of teachers and . . . Al's project 
fell into the cracks," said Yvonne Sevilla, Walnut's coordinator of staff 
development. 
Conversely, the committee turned down Haskvitz's proposal to teach teachers the 
new social studies guidelines set forth by the state. Another rejected proposal 
was to evaluate the California Assessment Program social studies tests and lead 
teacher workshops on how to help students earn higher scores. 
One way Haskvitz raises his own student test scores is by making abstract ideas 
tangible to 13- and 14-year-olds. 
"As a teacher, you get paid the same amount of money if you give kids handouts 
and textbooks," Haskvitz said. "But I try to have kids solve problems that are 
real." 
Earlier this year, for instance, he assigned students to write to Manuel 
Noriega as the deposed Panamanian dictator sat in a maximum-security Florida 
prison cell awaiting trial on drug trafficking and conspiracy charges. The 
object, Haskvitz said, was to get "both sides of the story" regarding the U.S. 
invasion of Panama. 
To everyone's surprise, Noriega responded, sending back a one-page, handwritten 
letter in Spanish that sent the press swooping down on the campus. Haskvitz 
said school administrators responded by chiding him for disturbing the peace 
and failing to keep them informed of his actions. 
Haskvitz and his pupils had better luck with a proposed anti-litter law, which 
they wrote and then persuaded a local legislator to sponsor in the California 
Legislature. Last week, the measure passed the Assembly Ways and Means 
Committee. 
The eighth-graders also distributed 5,000 water conservation kits in Walnut, 
which should save 23 million gallons of water this year, he said. 
In his five years at Suzanne Middle School, Haskvitz has also assigned students 
to simplify arcane polling instructions so that voters can understand them and 
to construct board games that can be played alongside history lessons. 
