ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
It was perhaps the closest that Malibu's Chamber of Commerce has come to 
apocalypse now. 
Actor Martin Sheen, the town's new honorary mayor, has proclaimed that Malibu 
will be "a sanctuary for aliens and the homeless" in addition to sheltering 
such celebrities as Johnny Carson, Sylvester Stallone and Larry Hagman. 
Sheen, who has been arrested several times during anti-nuclear demonstrations, 
also declared Malibu a "nuclear-free zone" and "a protected environment for all 
life, wild and tame." 
All this at a time when the beach colony can't even unite on whether it should 
become an incorporated city. 
Inasmuch as the sole responsibility of the town's honorary mayor is to preside 
over the annual Kiwanis Chili Cook-Off, the Chamber of Commerce was sizzling 
over Sheen's written inauguration speech. 
"He's purely a figurehead," said Anne King, the chamber manager. "We are 
attempting to set up a meeting with him so that unauthorized statements are not 
given by him. He should have cleared it with us." 
Would the chamber have approved Sheen's declaration? 
"We certainly would not have," she said. 
No doubt cognizant of the title of "People's Republic of Santa Monica" hung by 
critics on the beach city to the south, King added that the chamber does "not 
take any kind of political position." 
The honorary mayor's offer of sanctuary to Malibu's homeless comes nine months 
after the beating death of the town's most famous transient. Malibu Joe, as he 
was known, hasn't been forgotten. 
"People still leave flowers at his plaque," said Anne Soble, publisher of the 
Malibu Surfside News. "I even got a call from a newspaper in London a while 
back, asking if the case had been solved." 
Joe Castello or Costello (he gave both versions), an Italian immigrant, lived 
outdoors in Malibu for more than 30 years before his death last September at 
the age of 96 following a robbery. The Sheriff's Department is still searching 
for the killer. 
After the incident, saddened neighbors contributed more than $3,000 to a fund 
that paid for a bas-relief plaque for Joe at his last camping spot, a mini-mall 
parking lot near Pacific Coast Highway. Leftover funds went to the Artifac 
Tree, a private agency that gives to the needy. 
In the meantime, an anonymous individual has taken up the cause of the homeless 
in a series of letters to the Surfside News, calling for such reforms as the 
opening of public beach restrooms around the clock for the homeless. 
He signs his letters, "Malibu Joe, Too." 
Long Beach is no Malibu. But gone are the days when it had a reputation chiefly 
as a wild Navy town, when "a chic haunt . . . was a place where the bartender 
didn't wear a tattoo," as author John Gregory Dunne put it. 
Now Long Beach has a new slogan ("Most on the Coast"), a just-unveiled world 
trade center and a huge development planned for the former site of the Pike 
amusement park. 
One more sign of its upward mobility: Wall Street Realty of Long Beach squires 
its clients around in limousines. 
