METRO LINES; 
IN FALL READY-TO-WEAR L. A. DESIGNERS OFFER THE SMOOTH, THE SOFT THE SLEEK AND 
THE SIMPLE 
In Los Angeles, there are always a few fashion designers who go about their 
business quietly. They seldom stage fashion shows, they sell to a small 
selection of stores, and their strong independent spirit is always apparent. 
Despite their unorthodox approach to business, their names are among the best 
known of Southern California ready-to-wear designers. 
Right now, the names include several long-time Los Angeles talents -- Harriet 
Selwyn, Rick Beach and Patti Cappalli, Holly Harp and Nancy Heller -- along 
with some newer names -- James Tarantino, Peter Cohen, Bryan Emerson and Tere 
Tereba, Richard Tyler and Jennifer Joanou. For all the diversity in their 
styles, they all draw from the basic building blocks: stretch fabrics, sleek, 
soft shapes and interchangeable pieces that make even a small wardrobe 
versatile. 
Since she began designing her "Fragments" collection of modular components in 
the early '70s, Selwyn's design concept hasn't changed. Most of her designs are 
still one size and all of the pieces work interchangeably. 
Her evening wear best shows off her unique way of blending beauty and comfort. 
For fall she is styling wrap tops of Chantilly lace, and matching full skirts, 
in earth tones mixed with gold. Her outer wear includes a silk velvet jacket 
with a cascade of jet fringe beading, to wear with Fortuny pleated satin and 
iridescent chiffon fabric evening outfits. Her collection is sold locally at 
Raffles. 
The design team of Rick Beach and Patti Cappalli gives jackets center stage for 
fall. "I think it's great to have basic pants, skirts and dresses to wear with 
all kinds of different jackets that can take you anywhere you need to go," 
Cappalli says of the collection, which will be at Modasport and Bullock's. 
Matte jersey or lace T-shirts in solid and glittery colors are shown under the 
jackets in mohair tweeds with gold buttons or gray flannel with jet-beaded 
fringe. Blanket pattern coats are Beach-Cappalli's show-stopping finish. 
James Tarantino works his signature wool crepe fabric into sheathes with 
necklines made of gold chain jewelry by Deanna Hamro. In black, charcoal gray 
or bright shades of red and chrome yellow, Tarantino's silhouettes are the 
modern update of dresses that Audrey Hepburn wore as Holly Golightly in 
"Breakfast at Tiffany's" in 1961. The clothes are carried at Ron Ross in 
Tarzana and at Nordstrom. 
Peter Cohen takes a Zen-like approach to fashion, starting with the small, gold 
star he puts in his clothes instead of a label. His designs are pared to gently 
tailored silhouettes. Luxury fabric T-shirts with necklines that graze the 
collarbone, blouses with collars and single buttons, slim pants and short 
skirts are the foundation of his simple statement. 
Cohen's novelty shapes and details are clever: a vest creates a V-neck by 
looping the fabric, a charmeuse skirt takes on texture and body with crushed 
pleating, and layers of Indian-inspired silk and chiffon combine East and West. 
His collections are carried at Ecru. 
Nancy Heller's philosophy has been based on ease. Some of her best work this 
season is in cashmere, suede and knit, and oversize, buffalo plaids. A group of 
crisp white shirts are her alternative to basic T-shirts. 
Jennifer Joanou's name first attracted attention when she opened her nouvelle 
couture shop on La Brea Avenue about a year ago. Now, she also wholesales her 
clean-lined styles nationwide. Her wool knit separates range from long-sleeved 
tops to long and short skirts and narrow pants. Other narrow silhouettes 
include vests, jackets and chiffon blouses creating layers of texture. 
Richard Tyler also began his L.A. career with the opening of his retail store 
for men's and women's wear, Tyler-Trafficante, on Beverly Boulevard. He is 
known for strong shapes, unexpected choice of colors and custom-quality 
workmanship. For fall, he is adding his first, limited collection of women's 
evening wear. A quilted satin suit with motorcycle-style jacket is one example 
of his blend of British tailoring with cutting-edge style. 
Bryan Emerson and Tere Tereba are partners, and each is a designer in her own 
right. Their collections are sold at Shauna Stein in Los Angeles. Emerson 
describes her collection as modern and romantic. For fall, she shows fluid 
velvets that loosely glide over the body. But there's always a twist. Emerson's 
signature is loops and buttons that bring hemlines up to hip-line with 
asymmetrical draping. Her velvets can be dressy or casual. 
Tere Tereba has a more tailored style. She uses antique trims and closings on 
silhouettes that are classically oriented. A linen suit with crewel embroidery 
is one of her first fall '90 offerings. Other styles are trimmed with 
tobacco-colored Battenberg lace. 
