MOTHER'S DAY: NO BUNDLE OF JOY FOR STEPMOTHERS 
When her stepson Christopher handed her the purple construction paper Mother's 
Day card he'd made in kindergarten Friday, Kathleen Matheson had to brace 
herself. "He said, 'I did it for Vickie. But you can read it.' 
"I had to get a hold of myself and be an adult and think, 'It's really true, 
he's really right. She is his mom,' " said Matheson of Irvine, who for two 
years has helped raise Christopher. Her husband, Mark, has custody; the boy's 
birth mother, Vickie, lives in Utah. 
Mothers like Matheson deal with runny noses, PTAs, discipline and bedtime 
stories. But on Mother's Day, hardly anyone knows how or whether to recognize 
an increasingly common member of the family -- the stepmother. 
For the nation's estimated 4.3 million step-families -- in particular, those in 
which fathers have joint or sole custody -- Mother's Day serves only to 
highlight the strains, resentments and already divided loyalties between the 
"real" mother and the acting mother who isn't related. Many of them in fact 
wish Mother's Day would go away. 
"People don't want to have to deal with it," said David Juroe, a family 
counselor and former president of the Orange County Chapter of the Stepfamily 
Assn. of America, the only national support organization for step-families. 
"Kids just don't want to talk about it. It's too painful. They don't want to 
reveal what their true feelings are." 
Ignored stepmothers are hurt to the point of tears, or worse. Last year, one 
Orange County woman didn't speak to her stepson for a week after he spent 
Mother's Day with his biological mother and didn't even remember her with a 
card, Juroe said. This year, she decided to leave town. 
At one point in custody negotiations with his ex-wife, Heidi, Jonathan Kramer 
of Lake Forest proposed that their daughter spend alternate Mother's Days with 
her father and mother. He has since married a woman with a child and they have 
a child of their own. 
But Heidi Kramer of Oceanside said, "I would have a problem sharing our 
daughter on Mother's Day." Besides, Jonathan Kramer's attorney told them his 
legal chances of getting the girl on Mother's Day resembled those of a 
"snowball in hell," she said. 
Whereas the fabled, evil stepmothers of fairy tales always stepped into a 
family after the good husband's wife had died, modern stepmothers are almost 
always the result of divorce. 
Rampant divorce and a 75% remarriage rate have created a step-family boom since 
the 1960s. Stepmothers have played an increasingly significant role in families 
in California, which pioneered the concept of joint custody after divorce. 
Using 1987 data, sociology researcher Paul C. Glick of Arizona State University 
at Tempe estimates that slightly more than 19% of all children under age 18 
live in step-families. But others believe the statistics are higher because the 
census counts children only once, and while they may be living with a single 
parent, they may also be included in the other parent's remarriage. In 
addition, the children may belong to two or more step-families as a result of 
repeated divorce and remarriage. 
Demographers expect the trend to continue and predict as many as 45% of all 
children born in the 1980s will experience divorce or separation before they 
reach 18. 
The Stepfamily Assn., headquartered in Lincoln, Neb., claims there will be more 
step-families than any other type of family -- such as first-married or 
single-parent -- in the United States by the year 2000. 
"It didn't take a whole lot of market research to see the population was 
shifting," said Barbara Miller, product spokesperson for the Kansas City-based 
Hallmark Cards. Since the early 1980s, the company has been producing Mother's 
Day cards appropriate for stepmothers. "People look for them. They're now aware 
we make them specifically," she said. 
"Some people don't like the term stepmother, so we do some that say: 'to 
someone who's been like a mother to me,' " she said. 
One for younger children asks, "How did a kid like me wind up with a step mom 
like you?" and answers inside: "Just lucky, I guess." 
Unlike Father's Day card buyers, Mother's Day card customers don't like even 
mild joking, she said. A typical stepmother message is serious: "Thank you for 
being there and for giving me so many reasons to care about you too." 
The difficulty with most step-families stems from unrealistic images of fantasy 
"Brady Bunch" families, happily walking on beaches all holding hands, according 
to family therapists. 
Parents and step-parents have completely different feelings about a child whom 
one has known from birth and the other has just met, said Emily Visher, a 
Lafayette-based therapist and author who co-founded the Stepfamily Assn. with 
her husband John, a psychiatrist. 
In general, step-families have more problems when the children are over 9 or 
10, when the stepmother hasn't had children before, if she is substantially 
younger than the children's birth parents, if the ex-spouses are still fighting 
or if the ex-wife hasn't remarried. 
Stepmothers have particular difficulties with stepdaughters, Visher said, 
possibly because of competition for their father's attention or loyalty 
conflicts with their own mothers. 
"The difficulty in our society comes because, for so long, we've had this ideal 
in our head of first-marriage families," Visher said. "We think of just two 
parents. We think there's not enough love to go around for more than two." 
Mother's Days, and other days, will go more smoothly if parents recognize and 
teach their children that "love is not a finite amount," she said. 
Many older stepchildren, looking back on their childhood, say: " 'I was really 
lucky. I had four adults to love me,' " said Visher. 
Lacking that, the next best thing, most agree, is a special day set aside for 
stepmothers themselves. 
That's why Juroe proposed Stepparents Day, which Gov. George Deukmejian signed 
into law in 1984. Held on the first Sunday of October, it has been slow to 
catch on, even for children of the experts. 
"Some of my children are beginning to get the word about Stepparents Day," said 
Visher, who raised eight children, four of them from her husband's previous 
marriage. "It took a number of years, but eventually I got acknowledged by my 
stepchildren as well as my biological children." 
