THE WRONG OF WRIGHT'S CLOSE AIDE 
One evening in 1973, when she was a 20-year-old college student still living 
with her parents, Pamela Small entered a discount import store in suburban 
Annandale, Va., to buy some furnishings for her first apartment. It was just 
before closing time. The manager, a freckle-faced 19-year-old she had never 
seen before, was the only person in the store. 
Small took $31 worth of purchases to the cash register, but discovered a flaw 
in the window blinds she had selected. The manager said he had more in the 
storeroom and suggested she come and pick out the ones she wanted. 
But once inside, he blocked the door and ordered her to lie face down on the 
floor. When she refused -- when, with growing panic, she tried to talk her way 
to freedom -- he grabbed a hammer and slammed it into her skull. She 
immediately lost consciousness but he continued pounding, exposing the skull in 
five places. Then he grabbed a steak knife, stabbed her five times in the left 
breast and shoulder near her heart, and slashed her repeatedly across the 
throat. 
Bundling her limp body into the car she had left parked out front, he drove 
around for a while, then left the vehicle in an alley behind the store, keys in 
the ignition. Then he went to the movies. 
'He Thought I Was Dead' 
"He told the police he thought I was dead," remembers Small, who, to the 
astonishment of the doctors who later treated her, was not. Regaining 
consciousness about eight hours later, she managed to start the car and drive a 
mile to an all-night Exxon station, where an attendant, wide-eyed at the sight 
of the gory figure in the blood-soaked seat, summoned help. 
It took a general surgeon, a plastic surgeon, a neurosurgeon and a thoracic 
surgeon seven hours in the operating room to repair the damage. Her left lung 
had collapsed and her head was a mass of lacerations and exposed bone. She 
spent 24 hours in intensive care with a tube in her lung, five more days in the 
hospital, weeks convalescing at home with her own nurse and more than a year 
undergoing plastic surgery and hair transplants. 
Her assailant was arrested the following day, pleaded guilty to malicious 
wounding ("that he did . . . stab, cut and wound one Pamela Small with the 
intent to maim, disfigure, disable and kill") and was sentenced to 15 years 
(seven suspended) in the Virginia State Penitentiary. 
But in what Fairfax County, Va., Commonwealth's Attorney Robert F. Horan 
remembers as "highly unusual" treatment, the assailant never did time in the 
penitentiary. Instead, he spent less than 27 months in the more civilized 
confines of the Fairfax County Jail. He then was paroled to a job as staff 
assistant in the congressional office of Rep. Jim Wright (D-Tex.). 
Offered Him a Job 
Wright, in fact, had offered him a job even before he was sentenced, a fact 
pointed out repeatedly to the sentencing judge. Wright's daughter then was 
married to the assailant's brother. 
Today, at age 35, that man, John Paul Mack, is executive director of the 
congressional Democratic Steering and Policy Committee. He is Wright's 
right-hand man and, since Wright became Speaker of the House, has been arguably 
the most powerful staff member on Capitol Hill. 
As a convicted felon, Mack is barred by law from voting or obtaining a security 
clearance. But as the Speaker's closest aide he helps enact the nation's laws. 
Salaried at roughly $89,500, he earns approximately as much as a federal 
district judge or the director of the CIA. 
Crime Known by Many 
The crime in Mack's past -- if not the details of it -- is known to many on 
Capitol Hill. Two years ago, a number of anonymous letters calling attention to 
Mack's conviction circulated on the Hill, purportedly written by an indignant 
former law enforcement officer. The ultraconservative Liberty Lobby magazine 
published a sketchy article headlined "Mack the Knife." 
Most legislators, however, appear to accept his and Wright's word that Mack's 
was a single mistake committed under stress a long time ago, for which he paid 
his debt to society. "I have never tried to hide it," Mack said in a brief 
phone conversation in which he declined to be interviewed further for this 
article. "This has been public record for 16 years." 
While Mack has progressed without interruption to his position of influence, an 
apparent model of rehabilitation and an example of society's ability to 
forgive, what of his victim? 
The Victim 
Cosmetic surgery long ago erased most marks of the attack, but Small favors 
high-neck blouses to hide a faint horizontal scar on her neck and still has 
days "when I feel like nothing but a mass of scars." She has watched with 
mounting alarm and anger the growing power of the man who tried to kill her. 
Now an executive with the Washington office of a major corporation, she finds 
herself increasingly pushed by her job toward the receptions and committee 
rooms of Capitol Hill. She finds excuses not to go, having no wish to find 
herself suddenly face-to-face with the man she last saw in court. 
Though Mack said in a statement, "I will always regret deeply my actions that 
day," Small says she has never heard that from him, either directly or 
indirectly. She has received no restitution. 
"Rightly or wrongly," says House Majority Whip Tony Coelho (D-Calif.), who 
describes himself as "very close" to Mack, "under our system of law John Mack 
owed his debt to society, not to this young woman." 
Small has never before talked about the attack for the record. She feels the 
system has rewarded her assailant and says that he was offered the post in 
Wright's office only because he needed a job for his parole. 
"He had no direction toward Congress," she says. "He never even went to 
college. But he's got a very powerful, very important job now and he wouldn't 
have it if he hadn't tried to kill me. I find that more than a little bizarre. 
And I can't believe the people of this country, if they knew about it, wouldn't 
think that's outrageous." 
Though it has surfaced in Wright's current rash of problems on Capitol Hill, 
the story of the assault on Small encompasses a larger societal issue. It 
strikes to the heart of the much-debated issues of crime and punishment and 
rehabilitation and redemption that have roused increasing passions nationwide. 
And it comes at the end of a decade of multiplying state and federal 
legislation designed to guarantee rights and restitution to victims of crime. 
Pamela Small remains unconvinced by John Mack's clean record and steady rise 
within the corridors of government. She cannot shake her conviction -- 
reinforced by the detective who investigated her case -- that "people who do 
something like that once will do it again." 
To Wright and Mack, however, the story is rehabilitation. 
"When I was 19, I made a terrible, tragic mistake," Mack said. "I regret it 
every day. I accepted the judgment of society then and I accept it now. I have 
to put that behind me. All I ask is that I be judged by what I've done since in 
terms of trustworthiness, loyalty to my country, my family and those who depend 
on me." 
He was married in 1979 to his second wife, Kim, who is an executive assistant 
and appointments secretary to Rep. Nicholas Mavroules (D-Mass.). They live with 
their two young sons in suburban Virginia. He golfs on those rare days when he 
is not spending 12 or 13 hours on Capitol Hill. 
Wright's Right-Hand Man 
He is Wright's major traffic cop in the House. Mack decides which legislation 
to put on the agenda and which to keep off, handling major responsibilities 
under considerable pressure. By almost all accounts, he is good at his job, 
dedicated and hard working, liked and respected by both Democrats and many 
Republicans normally at odds with the Speaker. 
"There are very few staffers that are treated as colleagues by the members," 
Coelho says. "John Mack is one we've grown to know and trust. He knows the 
legislative process and he's mastered it with long years and lots of effort. If 
you had to pick the top five staffers on the Hill in terms of competence, John 
would be on everybody's list." 
In the unlikely event Wright were to let him go, Coelho says, "members would be 
lined up to hire him." 
"This society believes in forgiveness," Coelho adds. Mack has not only paid his 
debt to society by his time in prison, he says, but "by working conscientiously 
since then to be a good husband and a good citizen. That's supposed to be what 
rehabilitation is all about." 
Wright declines to be interviewed for this story or to answer specific 
questions about any role in Mack's sentencing, imprisonment or parole. The 
letters he wrote on Mack's behalf, in accord with Virginia law, remain sealed 
from public view as part of the pre-sentencing report considered by the judge 
who presided in his case. But two years ago he told the Fort Worth 
Star-Telegram, "I have never regretted giving John an opportunity all these 
years. I don't suppose anybody is immune from mistakes." 
When you meet Pamela Small, if you know her story, the most remarkable thing 
about her is how unaffected by the attack she appears today. She has striking 
looks and the trim, athletic body of a dancer. She skis, swims and has an 
active social life. Associates describe her as "gutsy," "uppity" and "a breath 
of fresh air." An old boyfriend, still close, calls her "no less open or 
trusting than any other woman I know . . . maybe more so." 
Small shrugs off the descriptions. "You just can't live in fear," she says. "I 
decided long ago I wasn't going to let John Mack ruin the rest of my life." 
She never lost her impish sense of humor and remembers "all this joking and 
giggling" with doctors and nurses in the emergency room, even as they were 
putting her back together. 
"She was amazingly calm for someone who had been through what she had," recalls 
Dr. Eugene Stevenson, who was part of the surgical team that worked on her. "I 
remember being shocked at both the unusual brutality of the attack and the fact 
that she lived through it. . . . Any one of those hammer blows alone could have 
killed her." 
Today, few people who know her know about the attack. "It's not exactly 
something you brag about," she says. "I don't want people treating me 
differently because of what happened." 
For this article she agreed to tell her story only on condition that where she 
lives and whom she works for be left vague, that her parents' names and 
addresses not be given and that pictures not make her identifiable. She allowed 
her name to be used only because "reporters have been calling (she's since 
unlisted her phone) and it's on the public record. They'll find it anyway." 
She remains troubled by the many questions still unanswered nearly 16 years 
after the crime. 
There never has been, for example, any satisfactory explanation for why Mack 
attacked her. There was no evidence of drug use and none of sexual assault. 
During his sentencing hearing, Mack testified that he "just blew my cool for a 
second" under what his attorney portrayed as intense psychological pressure 
from 72-hour work weeks and a failing three-week-old marriage. 
Court-appointed psychiatrists judged him sane at the time of the crime, saying 
he clearly knew right from wrong and understood the gravity of his act. A 
psychiatrist who examined him almost a year after the attack said Mack still 
felt he had "reacted in a way in which any man would perhaps react under 
similar circumstances" of pressure. 
Small says Mack never exhibited any agitation, uncertainty or impatience before 
he struck her: "If he had, I never would have gone to the storeroom with him. 
He just looked and acted like a clean-cut kid." 
"In a way," she says, "I wish he had acted crazy. Then I could at least 
understand it. . . . I kept asking him (during the attack), 'Why are you doing 
this? You can't be serious.' And he just kept looking at me and put his fingers 
to his lips and said calmly 'Shhh! Shhhhh! Be quiet!' I can see that face and 
those eyes now. He was totally in control. He knew exactly what he was doing." 
