10,000 ANGRY CREDIT CARD HOLDERS DELUGE EXXON WITH PLASTIC 
Customers have sent back about 10,000 service station credit cards to Exxon 
Corp. as part of an apparently widening nationwide protest of the company's 
handling of the huge oil spill in Alaska's Prince William Sound. 
The returned cards represent only one-seventh of 1% of Exxon's 7 million credit 
cards, but the oil company issued statements expressing concern. A number of 
environmental groups, claiming that Exxon's cleanup efforts have been 
lackluster, have asked consumers to boycott the company's products in the wake 
of the massive March 24 spill, when the Exxon Valdez went aground and more than 
10 million gallons of crude oozed into the water. 
Meanwhile, 16 Democratic California lawmakers Monday joined legislators in at 
least six other states in urging a boycott of Exxon products. 
Among the other groups organizing boycotts is Citizens for Environmental 
Responsibility, a non-profit group that has placed a newspaper ad asking 
consumers to cut their Exxon cards in two and mail them to an office in Los 
Gatos. For those who do not own Exxon cards, the ad carries a checkoff box that 
can be used to pledge support for the boycott. 
The organization has received 500 cards thus far, said Stephen Nissen, a Los 
Angeles-based spokesman for the group. Nissen said the cards would be forwarded 
to Exxon when more are gathered. 
The boycott effort "is one of many brush fires that will grow into a forest 
fire," Nissen said. "It's going to take awhile for the impact to be felt -- but 
it will be felt." 
Exxon officials have said there have been some "localized effects" on business 
at their service stations. 
In Southern California, several Exxon station managers say they have not 
experienced a falloff in business. But they expressed concern about the 
possibility of a growing boycott movement. 
Chuck Yee, owner of an Exxon station at the corner of Colorado and Eagle Rock 
boulevards in Eagle Rock, said many of his customers have questioned him about 
the spill and Exxon's clean-up efforts. 
"It's not our fault," he said. "I tell them we don't have anything to do with 
the spill." 
Yee said he has tried to keep his customers by offering lower prices. 
Likewise, Eytan Rosenberg, who operates an Exxon station at 307 N. La Brea in 
Los Angeles, said many of his customers have talked about mailing back their 
credit cards. But Rosenberg also said he hasn't felt much of the impact of the 
protest yet. 
"Our business hasn't slowed down much because we're in a busy area," he said. 
For its part, Exxon has taken out newspaper ads across the country to plead its 
case. The ads said a boycott would not clean up the spilled oil, and added: 
"But it is going to hurt a lot of small businessmen in your community -- and 
their families and employees. They have nothing to do with the accident in 
Alaska, but they're taking the brunt of the anger. And they stand to lose 
income at the same time." 
Of the 12,000 Exxon stations nationwide, only 5% are owned by the company. The 
rest are individually owned, or operated by independent dealers who own a group 
of stations, Exxon said. 
In Sacramento, the group of 16 state lawmakers announced support for a 
nationwide consumer boycott of Exxon oil products. The Democratic legislators 
would join state legislators from New York, Massachusetts, Oregon, Rhode 
Island, Wisconsin and Connecticut in calling for the boycott, planned for 
today. 
"All Californians are outraged by the oil spill in Alaska," Berkeley 
Assemblyman Tom Bates, an organizer of the boycott, said in a prepared 
statement. "We want to show Exxon that corporations who harm the environment 
will pay a price in the marketplace." 
Bates urged Exxon to roll back recent gas price increases, pay all cleanup 
costs, establish a $1-billion environmental trust fund and pay for safe tankers 
and spill contingency programs. 
United Press International contributed to this report. 
