A NEW WAY TO HELP THOSE HYPER KIDS 
Mark Thompson is an appealing, freckle-faced boy who loves to play and draws 
pictures of startling insight for an 11-year-old. 
But Mark has been neither a joy to raise nor a pleasure to teach. His parents 
paint a grim picture of Mark's elementary school years and note that his 
first-grade teacher still shudders when she hears his name. 
Mark is one of those "hyper" kids, the one in a room of 30 students who won't 
stay in his seat, refuses to follow directions and picks a fight over the most 
trivial of issues. Everyone seems to know a kid like Mark, but the reality is 
that more misinformation and misunderstanding swirl around the label 
"hyperactive" than thoughtful treatment of the disorder. 
Sue and Dave Thompson were luckier than many parents of hyperactive children in 
that they found their way early to doctors who accurately diagnosed Mark's 
problem. But a treatment that produced adequate results eluded them until last 
fall, when Mark entered an unusual program combining special educational 
services for hyperactive youngsters with the medical and psychiatric treatment 
many of them need. 
The program is a joint venture between the child development center of UC 
Irvine and Newport Harbor, a private adolescent psychiatric hospital in Newport 
Beach. 
Expected by its proponents to be a model for such efforts nationally, the 
9-month-old program seeks to combine in one setting every form of education and 
therapy known to work with hyperactive children. The goal is to intervene early 
and comprehensively to save them from often crippling school and social 
failures. 
It will be several years, however, before long-term results of the program's 
intensive, five-day-a-week curriculum are known. The Thompsons, nevertheless, 
are enthusiastic, having seen dramatic improvement in Mark's self-esteem and in 
his willingness to take responsibility for schoolwork and behavior. 
Says Dave Thompson: "The people at UCI are so caring and concerned about him 
that they don't make mistakes and with a wrong word knock the legs out from 
under him." 
Hyperactivity is believed to result from a brain condition, present at birth, 
that makes afflicted children unable to control their impulses or focus on a 
school lesson or other task. 
The condition has been called many things, but the proper medical term today is 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder or ADHD. Various estimates suggest 
that from 3% to 10% of elementary school-age children are afflicted. They face 
a gloomy future, with extremely high school dropout rates, as well as problems 
with alcoholism, drug abuse, even criminal behavior later in life. 
Treatment in recent years has depended greatly on the drug Ritalin 
(methylphenidate), a powerful stimulant that in some ADHD sufferers 
paradoxically has a calming effect, helping the children follow through on 
tasks and respond to direction. But Ritalin became controversial a decade ago 
when there emerged evidence of excessive and indiscriminate use on children who 
may have acted up in school but lacked the medical history or supervision to 
justify medication. 
The drug has also been criticized for masking the underlying problems of ADHD, 
and few specialists today would recommend its use without accompanying therapy 
for behavioral and emotional problems. 
"ADHD has enormous emotional implications," says Dr. Paul Hoernig, a child 
psychiatrist at Newport Harbor who treats Mark and meets regularly with his 
parents. "These children have a higher degree of learning disorders, fine motor 
and coordination problems, dyslexia (a neurological reading handicap). All of 
these problems, unfortunately, feed on one another. Sending a child home with 
2,000 Ritalin tablets just doesn't make it." 
Mark is the youngest of the seven children brought together when the Thompsons 
married six years ago. He is Dave Thompson's fourth child; Sue has two grown 
sons and a teen-age daughter. Until Dave and Sue married, Mark and his brother, 
Matt, now 13, lived primarily with their paternal grandparents. But Sue 
Thompson says she often had the boys over to her house on weekends during those 
early years and felt she got to know them well even before she became their 
stepmother. 
"Mark was always what I thought of as the perfect baby -- happy, loving, 
contented," Sue Thompson recalls. "Then he started preschool." 
There he began to show the behavior that labeled him a problem student 
throughout his elementary years. He was fine when left alone to play as he 
wished. He was uncooperative whenever someone tried to get him to do something 
else. And, he did not respond to discipline. 
In kindergarten, his behavior worsened, but the Thompsons attributed that to 
their recent marriage and the upheaval it produced in young Mark's life. He and 
Matt moved from their grandparents' house to the Thompsons' home in Huntington 
Beach and started a new school. But while Matt seemed to adjust, Mark held 
himself apart, defiant. He refused to call Sue Thompson "Mom" as his brother 
did, and neither punishment nor reward influenced his behavior. 
By the end of kindergarten, he had become so disruptive at home and in school 
that the Thompsons decided to consult a child psychologist. The psychologist 
immediately suspected ADHD, and testing confirmed his hunch. Mark was put on 
Ritalin. 
It helped his concentration somewhat, but his behavior continued to worsen 
through first grade. He refused to do homework. His standard responses to most 
requests or suggestions at home were "I don't care," "I can't do it" or "I 
won't." When things didn't go his way, the reproach he hurled at every family 
member was "You don't love me." 
"As time went on, it was 'I don't care and I'm going to kill myself and you 
wouldn't care,' " Sue Thompson recalls. 
Because Mark scored high on intelligence tests administered at school, it was 
very difficult to get remedial help, counseling or behavioral training through 
the school, the Thompsons say. 
Dave Thompson, who, as an administrator at Marina High School in Huntington 
Beach, is better equipped than most for such bureaucratic battles, described 
the effort as "extremely frustrating." 
The problem was Mark's label: He was classified as a behavior problem, not 
learning disabled, and most of the services outside the classroom were for the 
children in the latter group. 
As he got older and bigger, Mark became less manageable. His uncooperativeness 
in school turned menacingly aggressive. He would tip over a desk rather than 
sit down and do a reading lesson. With other children, he mostly engaged in 
fistfights. 
"You could tell him his shirt was ugly and that would be enough for him to tear 
into you," Dave Thompson says. 
The second through fourth grades were marked by repeated calls from school 
officials reporting Mark's latest misbehavior. His grades deteriorated. He 
could barely read. 
At home, the battles were constant. He became withdrawn and unable to 
articulate any feelings, even when his adored grandfather died, then his 
grandmother, slowly, of cancer. 
In desperation, the Thompsons had Mark admitted for 10 weeks to the children's 
psychiatric unit of UCI Medical Center, hoping someone there could unravel the 
mystery of him. They took special classes at the hospital to learn how to 
better manage Mark's outbursts at home. His Ritalin dose was adjusted, but 
fundamentally, Mark remained unchanged. 
A consultation with an expert in ADHD led the Thompsons last fall to the 
UCI-Newport Harbor program, at the university's Child Development Center, 19262 
Jamboree Road, Irvine. Mark entered fifth grade there. 
The school part of the program is run by the university. It covers kindergarten 
through fifth grade, with space for 45 children. Eight of these places are 
reserved for children who also need psychiatric treatment, which is provided at 
the school by Newport Harbor staff. 
Mark, who was found to be suffering from severe depression in addition to ADHD, 
is among the eight. 
Both the educational and therapeutic program provide the individual attention 
that children with ADHD desperately need. Instruction is in small groups. 
Emphasis is on building the children's self-esteem and teaching them social 
skills. Eventually, the children learn how to monitor their own behavior to 
ensure its appropriateness. 
"Just about everything that's been identified in the literature as helpful with 
this population is being done in one place," says Ronald Kotkin, a UCI 
psychologist at the school. In the afternoon, Lauralee Flaherty, a Newport 
Harbor nurse-therapist, works with Mark and other children on art, cooking, 
gamesmanship and projects aimed at helping them express their feelings and 
develop interpersonal skills. 
"They are constantly learning how to monitor their behavior and interactions 
with others and how to ignore distractions going on around them," explains 
Frances Baumgarten, a Newport Harbor psychologist who supervises the 
therapeutic program. 
All of this effort does not come cheap. 
The cost for the school and afternoon therapy is $418 a day, according to 
Edward C. Morton Jr., administrator of Newport Harbor. Although the Orange 
County Department of Education supplies the teachers, all other staff and 
program costs are paid through fees. Morton says coverage depends upon the 
family's health insurance plan, but some private insurers will cover as much as 
90 percent of the costs under mental-health benefits. Medi-Cal does not cover 
any, Morton says. 
Mark Thompson has thrived in the program. This term, he has consistently earned 
top points for school behavior and is getting along much better at home, his 
parents report. He smiles and laughs and even sings when he gets up in the 
morning. 
"I mean, this is a happy kid now!" Sue Thompson exults. 
Next fall, Mark will return to a regular sixth grade, bolstered by a 
therapeutic dosage of Ritalin and a structure at home that mirrors the behavior 
modifying techniques of the UCI-Newport Harbor program. The Thompsons have 
their fingers crossed that re-entry into a crowded public school classroom 
won't undo Mark's accomplishments of the past year. 
Those behind the UCI-Newport Harbor program will be watching Mark just as 
closely in their effort to address the dilemma of ADHD. With so many children 
afflicted, the benefits of helping them get through school and manage their 
behavior could be as high as the costs to society of their failures. 
Views Into Young Minds 
Mark and the rest of the ADHD children were asked last November to draw one 
picture of themselves before they entered the UC Irvine/Newport Harbor Hospital 
program and another picture of how they hoped to look at the end of the school 
year. 
The exercise is art therapy, used to help them express feelings without having 
to verbalize them, which is especially difficult for children with 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Mark drew his future self to look like Albert Einstein. He included a light 
bulb to represent the creative ideas he expected to emerge from his newly 
disciplined brain. 
In his self-portrait before therapy, Mark drew what he described as a "wild 
brain" that "can't settle down." He sketched a gun at the base with bullets 
flying toward the main part of the brain. He told his therapist that someone 
should "just shoot it. It's retarded." 
