NEWS ANALYSIS; 
ISRAEL TRIES TO REMOVE 7 KILLINGS, REACTION FROM CONTEXT OF HATRED; 
UNREST: IT WAS WORK OF A MADMAN, OFFICIALS SAY. THE POISONED ATMOSPHERE FEEDS 
MADNESS, CRITICS SAY. 
The colonel gave his press conference at an isolated intersection flanked by an 
orange grove and an empty warehouse. The nearest residences stood 300 yards 
away and over a hill. 
On a busy day, there probably wouldn't be much traffic anyway, but the colonel 
chose the spot to illustrate the success of Israeli efforts to quiet three days 
of Palestinian disturbances in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank. 
"As you can see," he said to the television cameras as he turned to point at 
the empty expanse of road, "everything here is completely normal." 
It was a message undermined by the fact that a few moments earlier, a convoy of 
reporters was forced to change course in downtown Gaza because rampaging youths 
had blocked the way with burning tires and stones at the ready. During the day, 
two youths were shot to death by Israeli troops in Gaza and more than 20 were 
wounded. 
But in its own way, the colonel's performance was the epitome of a subtly 
contradictory official reaction to the week's violence. An impression was 
created that, while shocking, the bloodshed was not to be seen as out of the 
ordinary. Neither the unprovoked shooting deaths of seven day-laborers at 
Rishon le Zion nor the subsequent deaths of 11 enraged Palestinian protesters 
at the hands of Israeli troops indicated a wider social condition. 
The Rishon le Zion killings were officially designated the act of a madman, the 
kind of thing that can happen anywhere. Palestinian protests were just the 
response of a justifiably angry population. The message: Everything here is 
completely normal. 
This seeming attempt to isolate the events from any context alarmed some 
Israeli observers who view it as a poison for the political culture. Was Israel 
being told to ignore an intensifying climate of hate? 
"We seem to be saying that when such things happen, it is not us, we Israelis 
-- it is just madness," said Yaron Ezrahi, a political theorist at Hebrew 
University. 
Government critics directly charged right-wing politicians with creating, 
through word and action, a climate in which anti-Arab feelings can be -- and 
are -- translated into action. 
"The potential for violence is always there. It's a question of human nature," 
said Jewish philosopher David Hartman. "But once people are degraded and 
demonized, the madman in us is set in motion. An environment is created that 
inspires brutality." 
During the past few days, officials in the rightist government of Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Shamir have worked to deflect accusations that it is somehow 
responsible for the violence both because it has resisted peace talks and 
because it is viewed as anti-Arab. 
Top officials are especially sensitive on these points. Shamir is trying to 
build a new coalition government and extend its hold on power. Opponents 
predict that a renewed Shamir term will bring on new waves of conflict with the 
Palestinians. 
Almost from the moment that the news of the Rishon le Zion shootings became 
public, officials insisted that the gunman who shot the Palestinian laborers 
was "deranged," "unbalanced" and "crazy." The army has been releasing details 
of a history of suicide attempts and desertions from his truncated military 
service, from which he was discharged as unsuitable. 
The government was quick to point out that all countries harbor demented people 
who at any moment may commit an atrocity; in this, Israel is like any other 
nation. 
"A man simply went berserk," Foreign Minister Moshe Arens said Tuesday. "We've 
seen this happen in other places around the world, but I fear we will see some 
people try to use this to incite additional violence." 
Meanwhile, Palestinian rage over the Rishon le Zion incident was dismissed as 
having no other context but the despair of the moment. Leaders of the uprising 
were trying to "exploit" it, Israeli officials said. The colonel at the Gaza 
intersection said he understood that the Arabs were upset, but he declined to 
link the protests to continuing anti-Israeli violence or the Palestinian quest 
for independence. 
Even as Palestinian casualties mounted, Shamir took the approach that Israel is 
the main victim of violence. 
"In the Arab-Israeli conflict, it is always the Jews who have had to defend 
themselves from attacks by Arabs," he said. 
In contrast, critics focused on the public atmosphere building up to the Rishon 
le Zion killings. Violence against Arabs was being legitimized by official 
action, they charge. 
Not long ago, the Shamir government sponsored the opening of a new settlement 
in the West Bank city of Nablus in which militant settlement leader Moshe 
Levinger was a guest of honor, hoisted aloft on the shoulders of revelers. 
Levinger had just been convicted of negligence in the shooting death of a 
Palestinian in Hebron. 
Last year, early pardons were granted to soldiers who beat a Palestinian man to 
death near the beginning of the Arab uprising, now almost 2 1/2 years old. 
Amnesty International and the U.S. State Department have criticized Israel for 
treating the military abuse of Palestinians lightly. 
Amnesty, the London-based human rights group, Tuesday renewed its criticism of 
the force used by Israelis to quell the Palestinian uprising, and in 
Washington, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler repeated comments 
made Monday that "in the absence of a peace process, continuing violence is 
inevitable." 
"(There is) no doubt that (the Rishon le Zion gunman) acted within a society in 
which the norm exists that Arab life is cheap. Light punishments, treating 
Levinger like a hero, have created this norm," said Ephraim Sneh, a former 
general and administrator in the West Bank. "The process whereby Arabs have 
been dehumanized has to be brought to an end." 
Susan Hattis Rolef, editor of a magazine for the left-center Labor Party, 
accused Israel's right wing of inspiring acts of madness through nationalist 
ideology. She included in her list the desecration of a Jewish cemetery in 
Haifa last week by two Jews who wanted to "unite the Jewish people around 
hatred of the Arabs." 
"What is unacceptable is the spreading of ideologies which mock universal 
values while turning the national rights of the Jews into a supreme value," she 
wrote in the Jerusalem Post. "Unacceptable are statements that can be 
interpreted as permission to harm Arabs because they are Arabs and (criticism 
of) Jews who are perceived as being 'too partial' to Arabs. 
"This is the food on which 'eccentrics' and madmen thrive." 
It is unusual for these issues to be raised by Israelis against Israelis. 
Demonization, for instance, is usually a complaint lodged against the Arab 
world, where the foundation of anti-Israeli hatred is set by Arab governments 
that caricature Jews as bloodthirsty and compare Israel to Nazi Germany. 
Not long ago, when a Palestinian shot up a bus of Israeli tourists, Israeli 
officials protested to Cairo about inflammatory anti-Israel rhetoric that often 
fills the Egyptian press. 
Palestinians, while rarely attributing their own anti-Israeli violence to pure 
madness, sometimes defend terror by pointing out that Palestinians are 
suffering too and cannot be expected to control themselves. Last July, a 
Palestinian steered an Israeli passenger bus off a highway and killed 16 
passengers. Palestinian leaders said that such acts are understandable because 
the toll of Arab dead in the uprising is mounting. 
On Tuesday, Palestinian protests over the Rishon le Zion shooting wound down, 
but incidents persisted not only in Gaza but also Jerusalem, where police used 
tear gas to break up a demonstration by Palestinians who were trying to reach 
the U.S. Consulate in the Arab-dominated half of the city. The protesters were 
led by three Arab members of Parliament plus Lutfi Laham, Greek Catholic 
archbishop of Jerusalem, and Sheik Hamad Jamal, a Muslim leader. 
Youths threw stones at police near the walls of the Old City, provoking more 
tear gas. 
A curfew over the West Bank held for a third day. 
In Jordan, for the second day in a row, Palestinians erupted in protest over 
the killings in Israel. Police killed two demonstrators, including a 
14-year-old boy, according to reports from Amman. 
