NATIONAL LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
REDS WALK DAWSON INTENTIONALLY FIVE TIMES IN 2-1 LOSS 
The Cincinnati Reds paid the ultimate compliment to hot-hitting Andre Dawson 
Tuesday at Chicago, but in the end, it cost them. 
The Cubs' slugging right fielder, who leads the National League in home runs 
and runs batted in, was given a major league record five intentional walks. 
The record-breaking fifth walk loaded the bases in the 16th inning, and Dave 
Clark followed with a single to give the Cubs a 2-1 victory. 
The previous record of four was set by Roger Maris of the New York Yankees 
against the Angels May 22, 1962 and tied by Garry Templeton of San Diego 
against Pittsburgh July 5, 1985. 
In the 12th inning the Reds gave an intentional walk to Dawson with runners on 
first and second and two out. With the potential winning run on third, Lloyd 
McClendon grounded out. 
In the 14th Dawson was walked and Clark, as a pinch-hitter, struck out. 
"How many times did we do it?" asked Red Manager Lou Piniella. "Five? Oh, my 
God. But the situations warranted it." 
Chris Sabo homered in the 13th, but Randy Myers was tagged for a home run by 
Luis Salazar to start the bottom of the 13th. 
Philadelphia 4, San Francisco 2 -- Len Dykstra hit a pair of doubles and drove 
in a run at San Francisco to help Ken Howell (5-3) hand the Giants their fourth 
loss in a row. The Giants are 6-15 at home. 
Howell and three relievers held the faltering Giants to four hits. The only 
damage was Will Clark's two-run home run off Howell in the sixth. 
Dykstra leads the majors with a .405 average. The fleet center fielder is a big 
reason the Phillies, with a 22-16 record, have reversed last season's start. 
St. Louis 4, Atlanta 3 -- With the Cardinals having trouble scoring runs, a 
pitcher who can hit is a valuable asset. 
Jose DeLeon pitched eight strong innings, giving up four hits and striking out 
10 at Atlanta to improve his record to 4-2. 
DeLeon also drove in two runs with a two-out bases-loaded single in the fourth 
inning. 
They turned out to be real important when Lee Smith, picking up his third save 
since joining the Cardinals, gave up a run in the ninth. 
Montreal 6, San Diego 1 -- Tim Wallach continues to wield the big bat for the 
Expos. Wallach hit his ninth home run and drove in four runs at Montreal. 
Wallach has seven home runs and 15 runs batted in in the last 15 games. 
On May 13 at San Diego, Wallach hit two three-run home runs and had eight RBIs. 
Pittsburgh 8, Houston 4 -- Barry Bonds put an end to the Pirates' mild slump 
when he hit his first grand slam in the third inning at Houston. 
The Pirates had lost three in a row and were suddenly in a tight race in the 
East. 
In the fourth inning, Jay Bell hit a triple with the bases loaded to send Neal 
Heaton on his way to his seventh victory. 
The Astros' slugging Eric Anthony hit a two-run homer in the seventh to chase 
Heaton. It was his fourth home run. All have come in the last six games. DAN 
HAFNER 
