RETALIATE AGAINST TERROR, FLIGHT 103 PANEL ADVISES 
A presidential commission that investigated the bombing of Pan American Airways 
Flight 103 urged the United States on Tuesday to retaliate for acts of 
terrorism by launching military strikes or other punitive steps against 
terrorists and the nations that support them. 
While the panel sidestepped the question of whether such action ought to be 
directed at Iran and Syria, the suspected sponsors of the 1988 attack, 
commission Chairman Ann Dore McLaughlin declared: "When the perpetrators are 
found, they should be punished." 
The commission also concluded that a deeply flawed aviation security system 
leaves the nation vulnerable to terrorist attack. It blamed Pan Am and the 
Federal Aviation Administration for failing to enforce requirements that it 
said could have prevented the catastrophic bombing. 
And in a blow to what had been touted as a promising new safeguard, the panel 
urged the government to halt deployment of hundreds of bomb detectors in 
airports around the world. It concluded that the costly devices are incapable 
of detecting sophisticated plastic explosives in the small quantity that blew 
the London-to-New York jetliner and its 259 crew members and passengers from 
the sky. 
The 182-page document, drafted by a highly respected team that included four 
members of Congress, offered a sweeping menu of reforms that it said could help 
the nation better fend off such terrorist attacks in the future. 
But in a grim conclusion certain to reopen a national debate, the commission 
warned that such attacks will end only if the United States takes aggressive 
new steps to strike back against terrorists and their sponsors -- even if 
available evidence falls short of criminal standards of proof. 
To that end, it recommended that the Bush Administration prepare to launch 
direct military strikes against terrorist hideouts abroad. When such action 
appears inappropriate, it urged that the government authorize covert operations 
against the targets. 
"State-sponsored terrorism must be faced and must be deterred -- with methods 
that are consistent with the nature of the threat and the U.S. system," said 
the commission report, presented to President Bush by McLaughlin, a former 
secretary of labor. 
McLaughlin disclosed that the commission delivered to the President a separate 
memorandum outlining more specific recommendations about an appropriate U.S. 
response for the Pan Am attack. But the chairman declined further comment, 
saying that the panel's advice would remain confidential. 
The public call for retaliation won praise from most American family members of 
those killed in the Pan Am 103 attack, but it was criticized by some British 
relatives of those who perished when the jetliner crashed in Lockerbie, 
Scotland, on Dec. 21, 1988, killing 11 on the ground in addition to those on 
the plane. 
At the White House, spokesman Marlin Fitzwater declined to comment on specific 
recommendations, but he said: "We certainly agree that we need to be as 
aggressive as necessary to fight terrorism." 
U.S. intelligence officials believe that the Pan Am 103 bombing was carried out 
by a Palestinian guerrilla leader with the support of Iran and, to a lesser 
extent, Syria. But the seven-member President's Commission on Aviation Security 
and Terrorism drew no public conclusions about responsibility for the attack. 
Instead, with a focus on how the bombing occurred, it found fault at nearly 
every level with the system designed to protect American air passengers from 
terror in the sky. Among other conclusions, the panel found that: 
Pan Am, in violation of FAA regulations, routinely neglected at its high-risk 
airport in Frankfurt, Germany, to hand-search luggage not accompanied by a 
passenger on the plane. 
The FAA appeared to have condoned the security violations and never disciplined 
Pan Am, even though its investigators warned before the Pan Am attack that the 
airline's security system in Frankfurt was "held together only by . . . the 
tenuous threads of bad luck." 
Luggage from Pan Am 103 was left unguarded on a Heathrow Airport tarmac for 
more than half an hour before being loaded aboard a Boeing 747 for the 
London-to-New York leg of the flight, which originated with another plane in 
Frankfurt. 
In contending that the disaster could have been prevented, the McLaughlin 
commission said that more aggressive measures might have intercepted the bomb, 
secreted inside a Toshiba radio-cassette player, before it was loaded onto the 
plane. 
The commission found that at least one piece of unaccompanied luggage was 
loaded onto the flight in Frankfurt after only an X-ray search -- a technique 
incapable of detecting the deadly Semtex plastic explosive hidden inside the 
radio. 
The commission reported that the Pan Am security breach in Frankfurt 
"incredibly" persisted for nearly nine months after the bombing. 
But the panel aimed most of its criticism more broadly. 
"Terrorists were able to place a bomb on Pan Am 103 not because some one thing 
failed, but because the aviation security system failed," McLaughlin said. "The 
system was flawed and did not provide an effective defense against sabotage." 
FAA Administrator James Busey said that he welcomed the report, although he 
objected to some of the adjectives used to describe the agency. 
"The system was flawed," said Busey, who took over the FAA several months after 
the bombing. "Mistakes were made. I want to own up to those mistakes." 
Pan Am Chairman Thomas Plaskett noted that he disagreed with some of the 
commission's criticisms of the airline but said that the report made several 
positive recommendations. 
In recommending that the FAA halt its $175-million program to supply Thermal 
Neutron Analysis bomb-detection machines to 150 airports around the world, the 
commission said that it believes the devices cannot detect small but deadly 
quantities of plastic explosive without an unacceptably high rate of false 
alarms. 
But Busey, the FAA administrator, said that the agency plans to persist with 
the program. 
