KISSINGER ON EUROPE 
In his column "Untangling Alliances" (Opinion, April 16) Henry Kissinger 
rightly focuses on the need to enunciate a vision for a new Europe. But he goes 
too far too fast in proposing that the European Community be transformed into a 
common European House absent the U.S. and the Soviet Union. And he is wrong in 
suggesting a security framework which would lower the nuclear threshold. 
In fact, U.S. policy aims at ending the artificial division of Europe and not 
"unifying" it. This is more than a semantic distinction. It is neither possible 
nor desirable to achieve the economic integration of Eastern and Western Europe 
in the short run, given the vast difference in the economic institutions which 
have taken root on both sides of the Iron Curtain. The European Community is 
hardly able to accommodate the differences among its own members as it moves 
towards 1992, and admitting Turkey is a daunting task. Imagine the dislocations 
which would result from taking on the structural problems of Poland or Romania! 
From the political point of view, the concept of a unified Europe must 
necessarily be based on the reunification of Germany, which is exactly what 
Kissinger wants to avoid. In fact, the continued division of Germany is in the 
interest of both East and West, and the FRG's economic support for the GDR is 
designed, in part, to help preserve that division, elevating the East German 
standard of living without the kind of structural reform which could bring 
reunification closer. A confidential dialogue with the Russians would probably 
establish the fact that German reunification should be the last problem on the 
East-West agenda. 
"Reuniting" Europe is not essential to end its artificial division. Freedom of 
movement of people and ideas, increased autonomy for the region's governments, 
democratization and the restoration of Western cultural values will produce a 
freer, more stable and diverse Eastern Europe, whether or not Soviet troops 
remain there. 
The goal of a more secure Europe, free of artificially-imposed division, should 
not be pursued through a confidential dialogue between the U.S. and the 
Soviets. Neither East nor West Europeans want these issues discussed over their 
heads. 
ROBERT L. BARRY 
Washington, D.C. 
 Barry is a U.S. Foreign Service officer and former deputy director of Voice of 
America and ambassador to Bulgaria. 
