VIACOM SUES TIME FOR $2.4 BILLION OVER ITS PAY-TV PRACTICES 
Viacom Inc. today charged Time Inc. and its Home Box Office and other cable 
television subsidiaries with monopolizing the pay-TV airwaves and filed a 
lawsuit seeking as much as $2.4 billion in damages. 
The antitrust lawsuit was filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan by Viacom 
International Inc. and Showtime Networks Inc., two units of the New York-based 
entertainment and communications company. 
Viacom said in a statement that the suit against Time, one of the world's 
largest entertainment and publishing conglomerates, had been more than a year 
in preparation. 
In the suit, Viacom alleges that Time and its Home Box Office Inc., American 
Television and Communications Corp. and Manhattan Cable Television Inc. units 
are violating federal antitrust laws. 
'Predatory . . . Acts' 
Viacom charged that Time and its TV holdings are monopolizing, conspiring to 
monopolize and attempting to restrain trade, practices prohibited by the 
Sherman and Clayton acts. 
Time, HBO, ATC and MCTV are breaking the laws by "engaging in an integrated 
series of predatory and exclusionary acts and strategies designed to increase 
the costs of their rivals, raise barriers to entry and expansion and otherwise 
entrench themselves as monopolists by anti-competitive conduct, injuring the 
competitive process and, ultimately, consumers," the suit said. 
Viacom alleged that Time and its cable subsidiaries have tied up the limited 
number of cable outlets available in many markets and also tied up the most 
desirable films for pay-television programming services. 
Time's American Television &amp; Communications Corp. subsidiary owns or 
manages cable systems reaching at least 7.2 million viewers in the United 
States. In each of its local markets, including much of Manhattan and such 
cities as Memphis and Denver, ATT possesses a nearly 100% market share, the 
suit said. 
Even in markets where Showtime and The Movie Channel are offered through a 
Time-controlled cable system, Viacom alleges that its channels are treated in a 
discriminatory manner with regard to channel position and in promotion and 
marketing. 
The suit contends that the violations entitle Viacom to recover three times the 
actual amount of monetary damage done to Viacom, which was placed at no less 
than $800 million. After trebling, the amount sought in damages is $2.4 
billion. 
Viacom also asked the court to permanently bar Time and its pay-TV units from 
further anti-competitive behavior. 
Time Inc. called Viacom's complaint "totally baseless" and "a rehashing of 
issues that have been periodically raised for more than a decade." 
"On several occasions, the Justice Department has reviewed many if not all of 
these allegations and repeatedly concluded that no action was warranted," it 
said. 
