MAN GETS 26-YEAR TERM IN TEEN-AGE SEX CASE 
An Anaheim man who was facing up to 113 years in prison on sex charges pleaded 
guilty Friday to all 107 counts in exchange for a 26-year prison sentence. 
Dennis S. Hirt, 34, was accused of having sex with two teen-age girls he 
promised to make rich in pornographic movies, a cult follower who was convinced 
he was a channel for dead spirits, and his stepdaughter. 
The stepdaughter was 13 when the first of the acts occurred, the cult follower 
was 15, and the other two were 16 and 17. 
The 107 counts included sodomy, oral copulation, forced sex, fraud and 
conspiracy. A co-defendant, 19-year-old Timothy Byrd of Anaheim, had already 
pleaded guilty to helping procure the oldest girl for Hirt and having sex with 
her. He was placed on probation. 
Police searched Hirt's house last year after the stepdaughter's mother filed a 
complaint. Police said they found videotaped evidence of him engaged in sex 
with other young girls. 
Hirt, who lived on a disability pension because of a bad back, allegedly spent 
much of his time at the beach trying to persuade young women to have sex with 
him. 
"He told (the two girls seen in the videotape) that he could make them millions 
as porno queens, but first they had to give him a private screen test," 
prosecutor Harper said. "These are poor girls; they fell for it." 
With the 15-year-old cult follower, Harper said, it was a matter of playing on 
her weakness. 
"He convinced her that the dead spirits wanted her to have sex with him," 
Harper said. 
Tandy Jackson of San Francisco, the father of the girl whose mother married 
Hirt, said he is not happy with the plea agreement because it won't keep Hirt 
behind bars long enough. 
"If he's ever free, I tell you, I'll just waste him; that's how angry I am," 
Jackson said. "My daughter is just destroyed by this. She will never trust 
anyone again." 
Prosecutor Harper said she could understand the father's concern, but that if a 
sentence is reasonable -- 26 years is a stronger sentence than the standard for 
first-degree murder, which is 25 to life -- it's better to accept a guilty plea 
so the victims will not have to go through a trial. 
The sentence was formally issued Friday by Superior Court Judge Donald A. 
McCartin. 
