GILL-NET BAN ON BALLOT LIKELY TO MAKE WAVES 
Flanked by photos of mangled sea lions, a state assemblywoman said she and her 
grass-roots forces have gathered enough signatures to qualify a November ballot 
measure that would ban the use of controversial gill nets along the shores of 
Southern California. 
The initiative would establish a "marine protection zone" by banning the use of 
the nearly invisible monofilament nets by 1994 anywhere within three miles of 
the coast from the Mexican border north to Point Conception, as well as within 
a mile of the Channel Islands off Ventura County. It would also make permanent 
similar prohibitions already enacted along most of the coast in central and 
Northern California. 
Assemblywoman Doris Allen (R-Cypress) said a volunteer army of mostly 
recreational fishing groups and environmentalists helped her gather more than 1 
million signatures. The Orange County legislator convened news conferences in 
Sacramento, Los Angeles and San Diego on Monday to announce that she and her 
troops were handing in the signatures, at least 595,500 of which must be found 
valid for a spot on the November ballot. 
If it qualifies, the initiative is sure to touch off a hotly contested and 
emotional campaign pitting Allen and her recreational fishing allies against 
the politically powerful commercial fishing industry, which owns more than 480 
gill-net permits for Southern California. 
Already, the commercial fishing industry is marshaling its forces to raise 
money and run a campaign to counter charges by Allen that the gill nets are 
"indiscriminate killers" that "strip-mine" the ocean and kill hundreds of 
marine mammals such as sea lions, otters, gray whales and harbor porpoises. 
On Monday, Allen made no bones about the fact that her successful initiative 
drive depended heavily on emotional pictures and descriptions of how the gill 
nets can mangle and kill marine mammals. One anti-gill net brochure shows a 
woeful-looking sea lion sporting deep, red scars caused by a net. 
"Yes, they are an emotional issue," Allen said about the pictures used as props 
at her news conference. "Yes, they are the most visible. Yes, they are what 
people will react to, and that's why we put it out." 
As further proof, Allen cited the recent example of 52 dead sea lions, harbor 
seals and elephant seals that washed up on Coronado beaches in San Diego County 
late last month. Experts believed that the animals were killed in gill nets, as 
were the 50 sea lions that floated to Orange County beaches more than a year 
ago. 
But commercial fishermen say those assertions are an exaggerated, emotional 
smoke screen for the fact that Allen's initiative would be a boon to 
recreational fishermen, who would love nothing better than to drive the 
competing commercial boats from coastal waters so that they can keep halibut 
and other delicacies for themselves. The losers, they say, would be California 
consumers, who would have to pay higher prices for seafood in restaurants and 
stores. 
"It's just a fish grab," said Craig Ghio, chairman of the California Fisheries 
and Seafood Institutes, as well as president of San Diego-based Ghio Seafoods. 
Ghio estimated that it would take at least $1 million to defeat the Allen 
measure. 
The nets in question are monofilament nylon mesh that, used in coastal waters, 
are strung together in panels and weighted on the bottom so they unfurl up to 
6,000 feet. The nets trap and suffocate fish. 
But they also have killed several other kinds of marine life, including the 
endangered or threatened species of gray whales, marine birds, harbor porpoises 
and sea otters. Reported deaths of those animals have led to piecemeal closures 
of central and Northern California waters to gill-net fishermen over the years. 
Yet Southern California remains open to gill nets, and area fishermen 
inadvertently kill up to 3,400 sea lions and 600 harbor seals annually, 
according to the Department of Fish and Game. Because those animals are not 
listed as endangered, state fishing officials have declined to institute 
similar gill-net bans south of Point Conception. 
Despite that distinction, Allen has been a longtime advocate of closing 
Southern California waters to gill nets. She has not only denounced the killing 
of mammals but also contends that the nets are wasteful because commercial 
fishermen throw back, dead or alive, more than 70% of what they catch -- a 
figure disputed by state fishing officials, who say only 20% of the catch is 
thrown back into the ocean. 
Allen's earlier attempts to get a gill-net ban enacted by the Legislature have 
been unsuccessful. Frustrated by what she calls the political power of the 
commercial fishing lobby, she plugged into the network of recreational fishing 
groups and launched a grass-roots campaign. 
Although Allen said Monday that the campaign has received donations of as 
little as $2 at a time, she did acknowledge that it received a crucial boost of 
$100,000 from an anonymous donor who is a recreational fisherman. 
If passed, the measure would also raise $3.4 million in special sport-fishing 
fees to reimburse the 400 commercial fishermen who have paid for permits to use 
the gill nets. The money is intended to help gill-netters, most of whom work 
Southern California waters, find a new line of work or invest in a less 
efficient kind of fishing gear, Allen said. 
