THE LONE RANGER; 
HIS JOB IS TO RIDE HERD ON VAST MISSION TRAILS PARK 
San Diego's first park ranger has a formidable task. 
Unarmed and still without a radio to summon backup help, the man police have 
nicknamed "The Lone Ranger" is trying to protect and enhance 5,700-acre Mission 
Trails Regional Park, which historically has been little more than a dumping 
ground and as much an off-roaders' haven as a naturalist's preserve. 
Mission Trails can be a rough-and-tumble place. For instance, state Department 
of Fish and Game officials respond year-round to reports of hunters in the park 
"spotlighting" deer, or shining powerful lights into the animals' eyes to stun 
them so they can be more easily shot. 
Police continue to cite drivers of off-road vehicles, which often scar the 
terrain and erode the hillsides irreparably. And, in remote areas of the park, 
target shooting and beer drinking are a regular, volatile mix. 
The city's response to these problems? Ranger Randy Hawley. 
Hawley, a 36-year-old with a degree in recreation administration and park 
management from San Diego State University, has one of the largest beats of any 
peacekeeper in the city. Officials believe Mission Trails, which lies on the 
city's eastern edge between Tierrasanta, Santee and San Carlos, is the largest 
urban park in the country. It is more than six times the size of Central Park 
in New York and five times the size of San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. 
Rife with rabbits, rattlesnakes and rodents, the city's last sizable chunk of 
wild land includes the Fortuna Mountain area, Cowles Mountain and Lake Murray. 
Councilwoman Judy McCarty, whose 7th District includes the Mission Trails, 
successfully argued last July during budget negotiations that the city should 
fund a ranger to police the park and lead education programs. 
Hawley began to patrol the dry expanses nearly three months ago. For now, the 
enthusiastic and affable ranger spends less time hounding the lawless amid the 
chaparral than he does shuffling paper work in his City Heights office. 
But Hawley intends to spend more time -- he now spends three or four hours a 
day -- combing the hills and canyons in his four-wheel-drive truck, as soon as 
he gets a handle on his administrative duties. Besides defining the jobs of 
five future rangers who will patrol city parks, he is coordinating a growing 
posse of volunteers who want to help clean up Mission Trails. 
"Most of the people I've met up with in the area are disgusted with the way the 
park has been used in the past, and want to do anything they can to make sure 
this remains a real park," Hawley said. 
Sections of the park's northern edge that abut Tierrasanta are littered with 
household rubbish and the remnants of nearby housing construction, including 
tons of torn-up concrete curbing. 
Meanwhile, officers from the Police Department are training Hawley, who has 
jurisdiction over misdemeanors in the park, to handle the common offenses: 
off-road vehicle use, dumping, poaching, shooting and narcotics use. 
Police Officer Dennis Sadler heads the department's Mission Trails Regional 
Park enforcement team and is in charge of training Hawley. 
Sadler, whose enforcement team has operated on weekends from April through 
September since 1985, thinks it's "ludicrous" for Hawley to police the park 
unarmed. 
He said the discovery of mutilated animals atop Cowles Mountain in early April 
led police to believe that satanic cult activity may have returned to the park. 
A pentagram was found burned into the top of Fortuna Mountain in September 
after many reports of bonfires were received, he said. 
In explaining the kind of characters Hawley can expect to meet in the park, 
Sadler offered a personal story of a close call last June. 
During an afternoon patrol in the Fortuna Mountain area, Sadler and his partner 
-- police always patrol the park in pairs -- came across a man with a World War 
II-type submachine gun who "was having a good time (shooting) and was a little 
bit high." While the officers were arresting him for possession of narcotics 
and an automatic weapon, the man "indicated he would have got us if we hadn't 
got to him first," Sadler said. 
"Those are the kinds of nuts we have out there," he said, adding that the man 
killed himself the day before his preliminary hearing. 
Police statistics show that 44 guns were impounded in the park on weekends 
during the springs and summers of 1986 and 1987. (Statistics for 1988 were not 
available.) 
"We've told the parks department that it's ludicrous to have (Hawley) out there 
with no gun and no radio," Sadler said, adding that police "never go out alone 
in high-risk areas . . . and we always take automatic weapons." 
But Hawley, knowing well that the park is frequented by an ornery lot 
associated with off-road vehicles, alcohol, drugs and guns, said he doesn't 
miss the .38-caliber Smith &amp; Wesson he carried for eight years as a state 
park ranger elsewhere in the county. He is, however, looking forward to getting 
a radio in his truck to summon police backup. The radio is due anytime. 
"I'm more concerned with getting bit by a rattlesnake or twisting my ankle and 
not being able to get help out there," he said. 
"I hope to be able to justify that guns (for city park rangers) are not 
necessary. If the police are going to be able to respond to the serious 
situations, then I'm going to have to rely on my good judgment to keep myself 
out of those situations." 
The city would prefer that its rangers act as educators and practice 
"interpretive law enforcement" rather than be track-'em-down lawmen, Hawley 
said, adding that he is more interested in persuading people that the park is 
worth preserving than in writing citations. 
Convincing park abusers of the need for preservation is one of the most 
challenging aspects of his job, he said. The park's plant life -- which 
includes chaparral, wild artichokes and, along the streams, sycamores, coastal 
live oaks and willows -- is a far cry from the verdant, wooded preserves that 
many people associate with parkland. 
But Hawley believes that his friendly attitude with offenders, coupled with 
weekend police patrols and his own weekday presence in the park, are already 
paying off. Shooting, dumping and off-road vehicle use has waned since he began 
his patrols in February, he said. 
Police say that, as the number of park-goers explodes in the summer months -- a 
couple of thousand visit on weekends -- they will continue to clamp down on 
illicit activity. 
Still, Sadler says he is uneasy. Although weekend patrols have so far buffered 
the effects of the lawless on families, he recommends that park visitors "have 
fun but keep your eyes open." 
A "Baja buggy" being pursued by Sadler and his partner one weekend last year 
nearly ran over two children playing in the water near the San Diego River, 
which runs below the winding, two-lane Padre Junipero Serra Trail. 
"There's a good potential for a serious accident out there," he said. 
Dan Leonard, an electrical engineer who lives in San Carlos, frequently jogs in 
neighboring Mission Trails. 
"The town is getting overcrowded," said Leonard, a member of Friends of the 
Mission Trails Regional Park and a resident of the county for 55 years. 
"County and city (officials) intend to try to restrict growth rather than 
trying to accommodate it, but you can't restrict the people coming here," he 
said. "A place like this gives you somewhere to get away from all the people 
and traffic for a little bit." 
