AMID THE GLITTER, HELP FOR CHILDREN 
The fourth annual Bruin Classic Gala had all the glitzy trappings of any 
black-tie party. But among the sequined dresses and satin bow ties was a subtle 
reminder of why everyone was there: Around the room had been placed large color 
photos of smiling children. 
This was a benefit for the UCLA Intervention Program for Handicapped Children, 
a program that works with handicapped kids from birth, teaching them and their 
families to live with their disabilities, eventually "mainstreaming" them into 
regular schools. 
"We wanted to get the flavor of the family," said Dr. Judy Howard, medical 
director of the intervention program, as she pointed to the pictures. 
At 6:30 p.m., guests were filtering into MGM's Filmland Center, an office 
building in Culver City with an enormous atrium lobby where a pre-dinner silent 
auction was being held. They strolled the aisles of clothes, jewelry, health 
club memberships, cruises, restaurant packages, autographed footballs and more, 
looking for bargains and a convenient way to make a donation to the 
intervention program. 
Entertainment Auctioned 
The evening, emceed by former Olympic athlete Bob Seagren, also included a live 
auction (conducted by actor Henry Polic II) of vacations, evenings at the 
Hollywood Bowl and a performance of "Phantom of the Opera." Gala chairman Kathy 
Hampar said the gala would net at least $120,000, which will be used for 
medical care, education and therapy for the children in the program. 
Awards were given to Glendale Federal Savings and Loan for its support of the 
program, as well as the Ritter family, singled out, according to the award, for 
"their special example of family unity and love." 
The family was represented by Tom Ritter, a documentary film producer and the 
brother of actor John. 
"Tom is one of my good friends," Howard said. "We've known each other for about 
five or six years through United Cerebral Palsy." Tom Ritter, who has cerebral 
palsy, has been actively involved in this group. 
"I was really struck by the family," she added. "Seeing how their family works, 
what happens -- from that I try to see what we're all about, how we can better 
prepare children to fit into their families. Tom has taught me that." 
Fond of Program 
Ritter said he was "really fond of the work (the program) does. The concept of 
mainstreaming is new, within the last decade or so. They use computers, which 
is so fantastic. Socialization is so important -- along with the physical, they 
also assist in the social and emotional aspects. 
"For a handicapped child to go to regular schools," he added, "their peers grow 
up with that, so there's no alienation, no fear." 
Also present at the dinner were Hampar's husband, Gary; auction chairs Geri 
Gross and husband Herb, Ruth Lebowitz and husband Leonard; dinner chairs Lucia 
Jacobson and Virginia Lee Troesch; and Susan and Bruce Burmester, Sandy and 
Robert Papazian, and Arleen and John Saffro. 
