HIGH COURT WON'T PERMIT SUITS OVER SMOKING DEATHS 
The state Supreme Court on Thursday refused to permit product liability suits 
against tobacco manufacturers for death or personal injury that allegedly 
result from smoking. 
The justices, over two dissents, let stand a ruling last February by a state 
Court of Appeal holding that a 1987 state law, the Civil Liability Reform Act, 
protects tobacco and other products that are found "inherently unsafe" and are 
recognized as unsafe by customers. 
The justices' action came as a setback to plaintiffs in more than two dozen 
lawsuits pending against tobacco companies in California, as well as litigants 
in an undetermined number of other liability actions against manufacturers of 
other products. 
In recent years, widespread legal attacks have been made against tobacco 
manufacturers in suits brought across the nation. But only one case thus far 
has resulted in money damages for a plaintiff. Last year a federal court jury 
awarded $400,000 to the husband of a New Jersey woman who died of cancer at age 
58 after smoking cigarettes for 40 years. 
George W. Kilbourne of Martinez, an attorney representing plaintiffs in several 
cases charging death or injury from tobacco, asbestos and other toxic 
substances, expressed disappointment with Thursday's action. 
But Kilbourne said pending lawsuits still may be able to proceed on alternative 
legal grounds -- such as alleged fraud, negligence or conspiracy by 
manufacturers. "The failure to warn that some ingredients in a cigarette were 
not fully tested to see if they are carcinogenic would be considered as 
negligent," he said. 
George A. Sears of San Francisco, an attorney representing the American Tobacco 
Co., one of the defendants in the case before the court, called Thursday's 
action "obviously the correct result." Sears declined further comment. 
The California law was approved by the Legislature over the objections of 
consumer groups after a last-minute compromise on tort liability issues reached 
in a closed-door meeting among insurance, business, medical and trial lawyer 
organizations. 
The measure established new legal protections for design defects in products 
whose users would be presumed to know that they presented health risks. Listed 
as specific examples in the law were sugar, castor oil, alcohol, butter and 
tobacco. 
A state Court of Appeal here, in the first appellate review of the law, ordered 
the dismissal of 10 wrongful-death lawsuits brought against a group of tobacco 
manufacturers. 
The three-member panel ruled unanimously that while the 1987 statute was 
"poorly drafted," the Legislature intended to create automatic immunity for the 
makers and sellers of inherently unsafe products. 
In their appeal to the state Supreme Court, lawyers for the plaintiffs in the 
cases argued that the Legislature did not intend to bar liability for products 
that, while unsafe, could be made safer. Nor, said the attorneys, should the 
new law bar suits where consumers did not realize the added risk of smoking 
while being exposed to other health hazards, such as asbestos dust or welding 
fumes. 
In response, attorneys for the tobacco companies contended that the Legislature 
clearly intended to eliminate liability suits over tobacco, alcohol and other 
products "involving life-style choices." 
The legislators had determined that such products posed "inherent and 
well-known risks," and thus were to be protected from liability suits, the 
lawyers said. 
Thursday's action came in a brief order issued by the court, with only Justices 
Stanley Mosk and David N. Eagleson voting to hear the plaintiffs' appeal. Votes 
from four of the seven justices are required to grant review. 
