JAMES FLANIGAN: U.S. FIRMS CAN MAKE IT IN GLOBAL MARKETS 
Sadly, just as world markets are opening up, self-doubt has replaced 
self-confidence in America. 
Openly and loudly Americans fear foreign investment, while secretly worrying 
whether U.S. companies can hack it anymore. 
But both fear and worry are overdone as the example of a Midwestern family 
business will make clear. 
This is the story of how Hobart Bros., a medium-sized welding company in Troy, 
Ohio, (population, 20,000) learned to stop worrying and love the global market. 
Hobart does roughly $300 million a year in sales of welding equipment and 
passenger-loading systems for airports -- one-third of the sales overseas where 
it has joint ventures in Europe and Japan. 
At home, Hobart plays the world citizen, too. It was responsible in 1987 for 
persuading Matsushita (Panasonic) to set up a picture tube plant in Troy, which 
is near Dayton in southwestern Ohio. 
"It's one world market today," says Chairman William Hobart, 65, the third 
generation of his family to run the 73-year-old company. 
That seems easy for him to say because Hobart is enjoying rising sales and 
record profits and looking forward confidently to a united European market in 
1992 and to new business in Japan, where it has an order to supply passenger 
bridges for Osaka Airport. 
But like most companies in the industrial Midwest, Hobart is more a story of 
survival than simple success. It's a company that has come through bad times 
and learned some lessons, and so it sees the world differently today than 
yesterday. 
Until the recession of 1982, Hobart was almost solely a welding company -- 
meaning it sold electrodes and power equipment for fusing steel at temperatures 
of 6,000 degrees. 
Welding was a secure business, with all of U.S. manufacturing as its customers, 
from the automobile industry to farm equipment and machine tools. Welding 
almost never had a downturn. 
Yet in the 1980s, the U.S. welding business went into reverse; total industry 
sales of $1.9 billion are no higher now than in 1981, according to Welding 
Design magazine -- which means that counting inflation they're lower. 
What happened, says Hobart, is that "the whole U.S. economy, maybe the world 
economy, has gone through turmoil and change. Competition is greater." The 
United States got a rude awakening, he says. "As a nation we were living as if 
we had No. 1 status all to ourselves." 
That all changed with the 1982 recession and the pressure of foreign 
competition. "The 80,000 rail cars built each year fell to 6,000," says Hobart. 
"Many of the companies have never recovered, they're smaller." 
Why smaller? Some shrinkage resulted from broad industrial change. Cars and 
other products contain less metal, more plastic these days; big companies 
farmed out metalworking to smaller job shops. 
But some wounds were self-inflicted. "The big capital investors in our business 
-- Dana, Foster Wheeler, Babcock &amp; Wilcox -- stopped investing in 
productivity-increasing equipment," says Hobart. 
"Nonproductive capital movements hurt U.S. industry -- you tell me how highly 
leveraged buyouts helped U.S. companies invest in themselves," adds Kim 
Packard, 51, Hobart's president since 1985 and the first non-family member to 
run the company. 
As customers shrank, so did Hobart's business. Some U.S. welding companies gave 
up. Union Carbide and Air Reduction, two companies harried by takeover battles 
in the 1980s, dropped out of welding equipment. A Swedish company named Esab 
bought their operations and may now be the world's largest welder. 
Only Hobart -- and family-owned Miller Electric of Appleton, Wis., and 
employee-owned Lincoln Electric of Cleveland -- remain U.S.-owned. 
But Hobart didn't wait around for U.S. customers to come back. It acquired some 
airport equipment makers -- adding to one of its own product lines -- and 
sought business overseas. 
In welding, it formed a joint venture with Yaskawa of Japan to make welding 
robots and other automation products. In Europe, it has formed ventures with 
Swedish, Italian and Swiss companies. 
Increasingly, the Ohio company is finding international markets more congenial 
than domestic. For instance, it is having great success overseas with a new 
welding technology that cuts power usage by 25% to 30% -- although it finds 
U.S. customers resisting the innovation, preferring to use old equipment rather 
than make a cost-saving investment. 
And Hobart says one of its best breaks in the '80s was a sale of welding wire 
to Matsushita, which fostered the relationship that resulted in the Osaka 
company setting up in Troy. "They're bringing good industry, and they're in for 
the long-term," says Hobart. "I'd trust them a lot more than some U.S. 
investors I know of." 
The lesson, of course, is that the world has changed. And either you see that 
as cause for worry about U.S. power and influence, or as fresh opportunity. 
Hobart, seizing the opportunity, has adopted the healthier attitude. Which 
happens to be the traditional American attitude. So why isn't it still? 
