PANEL OKS BILLS ON USE OF PROP. 99 FUNDS 
With Republican support, lawmakers on the Senate Health and Human Services 
Committee on Wednesday passed three key bills opposed by Gov. George Deukmejian 
that are aimed at dividing up much of the money raised by Proposition 99, the 
tobacco tax initiative. 
With each of the bills getting a unanimous vote, legislators moved a step 
closer to an open clash with the Republican governor over how to spend the 
estimated $625 million that is expected from Proposition 99 during the upcoming 
budget year. 
The three bills acted upon Wednesday are part of a legislative package put 
together by Coalition for a Healthy California, sponsors of the initiative 
measure approved by voters last November. In all, about 40 different bills have 
been introduced aimed at implementing various parts of Proposition 99. 
Proposition 99 raised the tax on cigarettes 25 cents a pack and imposed 
comparable tax increases on pipe tobacco, cigars and other tobacco products. 
During the first three months of the year, $142.2 million in Proposition 99 tax 
revenues was collected, according to the State Board of Equalization. 
None of the money can be spent until the governor and Legislature reach 
agreement on how the funds will be distributed. 
Deukmejian in January proposed spending the bulk of the money to finance 
ongoing state health, recreation and other programs. 
Critics, including a number of Republican legislators, attacked the governor's 
plan as possibly illegal and argued that it violated the spirit of Proposition 
99. The initiative specifically called for the money to be spent on 
smoking-related health and education programs. There was a provision saying 
that the money was not to be used to replace state budget dollars already being 
spent on programs. 
One of the measures approved Wednesday, by Sen. Diane Watson (D-Los Angeles), 
chairwoman of the committee, calls tobacco use "the single most important 
source of preventable disease and premature death in California." The bill 
would appropriate between $120 million and $150 million annually to 
anti-smoking education campaigns. It passed on a 6-0 vote. 
Hospital Funds 
Another bill, by Sen. Barry Keene (D-Benecia), would appropriate $324 million 
over the current and upcoming budget years to hospitals to help defray the 
costs of providing care to indigent patients. It was approved 7 to 0, with two 
Republicans joining five Democrats in voting for the measure. 
Proposition 99, supported by the California Medical Assn. and other health 
organizations, provided that a share of the tobacco tax receipts go to doctors 
and hospitals to help defray health costs. 
The third bill to receive approval, appropriating $65 million annually to 
reimburse physicians who treat indigent patients, is being carried by Sen. John 
Seymour (R-Anaheim), one of the GOP lawmakers who believes that the governor's 
proposal violates the spirit of Proposition 99. 
Seymour said the bill, which passed 7 to 0, "just codifies in statute what was 
intended by Proposition 99." 
Sen. William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights), one of two Republican members of 
the committee who voted for the bills, said Deukmejian still has not entered 
the negotiations on Proposition 99. 
"We are just kind of treading water right now," Campbell said. "The governor 
always has the ability to veto anything we do, so obviously he holds the blue 
chip down there." 
The other Republican voting for the bills was Sen. Edward R. Royce of Anaheim. 
So far, state officials are uncertain over just how much money will be 
available as a result of the tobacco tax increase. 
Originally, budget writers expected Proposition 99 to generate about $300 
million during the last six months of the current fiscal year, which ends June 
30. But word filtering out of the Board of Equalization is that the estimate 
was too optimistic, and state officials now expect to receive less than $300 
million. 
