GETTING POLITICS OUT OF POLITICS? 
The results of the 1990 census still are more than two years away and that 
loathsome creature, the gerrymander, already has reared its ugly head and is 
peering around at the political landscape. The gerrymander is the symbol of 
legislative reapportionment, the redrawing of legislative district lines to 
reflect population changes, or more to the point, malapportionment, the 
creation of contorted election districts designed to assure control by one 
party or the other. 
A curious coalition that includes self-annointed populist Paul Gann, former 
Legislative Analyst A. Alan Post and the League of Women Voters already has 
begun to circulate an initiative petition that would take reapportionment out 
of the hands of the state Legislature and give it to a 12-member bipartisan 
commission. 
The plan sounds simple enough and fair enough. To many, it will seem to solve 
the eternal good-government riddle of getting politics out of reapportionment. 
The commission would review plans submitted by anyone and choose the one that 
best satisfies the requirements of the proposed initiative. Ah, therein lies 
the catch. 
The Gann-Post-League plan contains a complex, detailed set of criteria designed 
to create compact and highly competitive legislative and congressional 
districts. This is a noble goal, and the process dictated to the commission by 
the initiative might create perfect legislative districts geographically. But 
they may not be the best districts politically. Reapportionment, after all, is 
a political process and it is impossible -- and not necessarily desirable -- to 
remove politics from it altogether. 
First, the process stipulates the usual general criteria of a legally 
acceptable reapportionment plan: geographical compactness, maintenance of 
community of interest and fair representation for minority groups. But the 
initiative then goes to much greater lengths in an attempt to achieve seemingly 
perfect districts. No district can cross certain common boundaries, like the 
Santa Barbara-Kern and Ventura-Kern county lines. No district may cross a 
county boundary more than once. Cities cannot be fragmented. District lines 
cannot be drawn around a population center to get at another population center, 
according to this formula: "Each Assembly and congressional district shall 
contain no less than 60% of the population which would be contained in a 
polygon with the shortest possible perimeter drawn around that Assembly or 
congressonal district." 
After all that, the initiative then requires that, to the extent possible, 
districts shall not deviate in voter registration by more than 2% from the 
statewide proportion of registered Democrats to Republicans. Present districts 
vary wildly from that formula now, in part because Democratic legislators drew 
the lines to maintain control in a maximum number of districts and minimize the 
impact of Republican votes by lumping as many GOP voters into safe GOP seats as 
possible. 
The idea purports to wring partisan politics from reapportionment. Perhaps. But 
the result still will be partisan, and will not necessarily represent the best 
common sense. Geographic compactness does not always reflect communal 
interests. Sections of some cities often have more in common with areas beyond 
their borders than they do with other areas in their own town. Neat lines do 
not guarantee equity. The geographic criteria of the initiative could isolate 
minority groups into enclaves that deny them their share of representation. 
California voters have rejected reapportionment commission proposals twice 
before in this decade. They would do well to maintain a healthy skepticism of 
anyone who offers a plan to get politics out of reapportionment. 
