PARENTS WILL STAND TRIAL IN ATTEMPT TO DEPROGRAM 
In a criminal case that attorneys say is unique in California for its 
prosecution of parents, a Santa Cruz couple was ordered Monday to stand trial 
in Vista Superior Court on felony charges that they kidnaped, falsely 
imprisoned and beat their adult daughter, who they believed was in the grips of 
a religious cult. 
The pending trial is expected to pit the principles of religious freedom 
against parental concern for the well-being of their children. The defense 
expects to produce a parade of former members of the religious group, who are 
expected to testify that they were brainwashed by the group's leader and were 
under his control until being rescued. 
The case centers on 23-year-old Ginger Brown, a member of Great Among the 
Nations who was abducted in Encinitas last May and held for five days in an 
Escondido house while her parents, sisters and others tried to deprogram her. 
On the fifth day, Brown was released and returned to the organization, a 
16-member fundamental Christian Bible study and evangelism ministry based in 
Coronado that critics claim is a cult. 
Sole Witness 
Brown was the sole prosecution witness against the five defendants in the case: 
her parents, Earle and Dorothy Rae Brown, both 57; her sister, Holly Rae Brown, 
24; Clifford Daniels, 34, of Los Angeles, a self-proclaimed deprogrammer, and 
Hank Erler, 22, in whose Escondido home the deprogramming effort occurred. 
Defense attorneys tried to show during the preliminary hearing before Vista 
Municipal Judge Michael Burley that the Browns and the other defendants 
believed that Ginger Brown had been brainwashed and that she was rescued for 
her own good. 
But Brown testified that she is a dedicated member of Great Among the Nations 
by her own free will and had begged her parents to let her live her own life, 
no matter how religiously fanatic it might seem to them. 
On Monday, Benjamin Altschul, who leads the organization, testified that he 
held no control over members' actions, and that his only requirement of them is 
that "they believe in our Lord Jesus Christ." 
One of the defense attorneys, John Patterson, said he might appeal Burley's 
decision because the judge stifled interrogation into the group's behavior on 
the grounds that a person's religious practices and beliefs cannot be put on 
trial. That area of questioning was important to the defense, however, in its 
effort to show that members of Great Among the Nations were brainwashed into 
following Altschul and financing what critics say is his lavish life style. 
Another defense attorney, Saul Wright, said afterward, "Previous cult members 
will testify 100% to the contrary" on Altschul's benign characterization of the 
organization. 
Answered Deputy Dist. Atty Gary Rempel: "This is just a bunch of fundamental 
Christians being persecuted by well-financed deprogrammers who are themselves 
what they condemn. They (the defense) won't be able to provide a single witness 
who hasn't himself been brainwashed by a deprogrammer." 
The five defendants are scheduled to be arraigned in Superior Court on June 5, 
although Earle Brown notified the court on Monday that he faces hospitalization 
for cancer treatment. 
