PAY ISSUE PULLS VASQUEZ AIDE INTO D.A. FRAY; 
ELECTION: CANDIDATE ED FREEMAN SAYS A FORMER PROSECUTOR IMPROPERLY RECEIVED 
$5,679, AND IS ACCUSED OF PLAYING POLITICS WITH THE ISSUE. 
A district attorney candidate has asked the state attorney general to 
investigate whether an Orange County prosecutor-turned-aide to Supervisor Gaddi 
H. Vasquez improperly received $5,679 in county funds by collecting an 
attorney's salary while working in a lower-paying position. 
Assistant Dist. Atty. Ed Freeman, who is in charge of felony trials in Orange 
County Superior Court, wrote the attorney general's office a month ago saying 
he was concerned that former Deputy Dist. Atty. Ravinder Mehta drew about $10 
an hour more than he was supposed to. 
Mehta, 30, who was paid as a prosecutor for about four months although he 
worked full-time as an executive assistant for Vasquez, denied any impropriety 
and said his reputation is being sullied to give Freeman and others a campaign 
issue. 
According to the county auditor-controller, Mehta returned the $5,769 in pay to 
the county in March from a deferred compensation account after the discrepancy 
was discovered by the district attorney's office a few months earlier. Mehta 
said he knew he would have to pay back the money after he went to work for 
Vasquez and, in preparation for that day, saved his extra earnings. 
"I am a prosecutor, and I don't do this kind of stuff," said Mehta, who 
formerly worked in Freeman's unit. "It is a campaign issue and nothing more. 
Freeman is just muddying up the waters to get some publicity, which is lacking 
for him. . . . I don't want to be a casualty in their war." 
Mehta's salary as an executive assistant for Vasquez is about $43,000 a year. 
His pay as a prosecutor was $60,000 to $70,000 a year. 
Freeman wrote to Deputy Atty. Gen. Harley Mayfield, a supervisor in the 
attorney general's San Diego unit, on April 9 and requested an investigation 
into a possible theft of county funds. He said the district attorney's office 
should not look into one of its own because it represents a conflict of 
interest. 
"I don't like the whole affair and how it occurred," Freeman said. "It's 
tragically unfortunate that this scenario surfaces during an election year. 
This is not some sort of political maneuver. This transcends any notion of 
that." 
Deputy Atty. Gen. Rudolf Corona acknowledged receipt of Freeman's letter and 
said he has begun a routine preliminary review to determine whether a criminal 
investigation should be opened. 
"We get requests like this regularly," Corona said. "There is no indication at 
this time that there is anything criminal. The county appears to have dealt 
with the situation, but it is really far too early to say what happened." 
In January, Deputy Dist. Atty. Tom Avdeef, a candidate for district attorney, 
tried to make an issue of Mehta's salary during a news conference when he 
charged that Vasquez should not vote to appoint Chief Assistant Dist. Atty. 
Michael Capizzi as district attorney. Avdeef said Vasquez had a conflict of 
interest because one of his staff was on the district attorney's payroll. Mehta 
called the charge groundless and Vasquez voted to appoint Capizzi. 
Capizzi, who is running against Freeman, Avdeef and Chief Deputy Dist. Atty. 
James Enright in the June election, called Freeman's complaint part of "the 
silly season" and "politics as usual." He said Freeman requested the attorney 
general's help to protect himself from his own mistake. 
The events in question began in April, 1989, when Mehta took a leave from his 
job in Vasquez's office, which he had accepted a few months before, to handle 
the trial of Jose Luis Razo Jr., a former Harvard University student charged 
with 10 armed robbery counts. 
Razo, whose case gained national media attention, was convicted of six robbery 
counts on June 9, and he received 10 years in prison on Aug. 25. Between Razo's 
conviction and sentencing, Mehta returned to work for Vasquez and kept his hand 
in the case. 
After Razo was convicted, Mehta said he went to the district attorney's 
administrative office and was assured the paper work for his return to the 
Board of Supervisors, including the salary adjustment, would be taken care of. 
He said he told them he would handle the case through sentencing only. 
But information supplied to the attorney general's office suggests that Mehta 
told an administrative staff member he would handle the case through appeal -- 
something normally handled by the state attorney general's office. 
Mehta's time sheets show that he continued to be paid as a deputy district 
attorney from Aug. 25 to Dec. 8, 1989, although he was working for Vasquez. 
According to the district attorney's office, the situation was discovered in 
December during a review of vacant positions. 
Subsequently, the auditor-controller's office was notified that Mehta's 
transfer to Vasquez's staff was effective on Dec. 8, 1989, but on Jan. 22, the 
district attorney's office told the auditor-controller's office to change his 
official transfer date to Aug. 28, 1989. 
Mehta then notified the county treasurer's office on March 7 to reimburse the 
county with funds from his deferred compensation account. "I'm glad we are 
finally getting this resolved," Mehta wrote in the memorandum. 
"Avdeef couldn't do anything with it, so Freeman is doing something now," Mehta 
said. "It is hogwash. They are running scared and don't have a prayer. I don't 
need to risk my career for something like this. I don't need the money. I never 
benefited personally." 
Mehta blames the situation on an honest error in the district attorney's 
administration and Freeman, who is ultimately responsible for the unit in which 
Mehta worked. He said Freeman knew about the situation and signed every one of 
his time sheets. 
But time sheets obtained by The Times show they were signed by Deputy Dist. 
Atty. Jack Sullens or someone else on behalf of Freeman, who denied ever 
signing the records in question. 
"Freeman is responsible for the time sheets," Capizzi said. "It was pointed out 
that they were signed by him. It was something he knew about but did nothing 
until it took on what he believed were possible criminal implications." 
Freeman said questions about Mehta's pay were handled in December by Capizzi 
and then-Dist. Atty. Cecil Hicks, who, he added, never informed him about the 
situation. 
"I looked into it when they tried to point the finger at me," Freeman said. "I 
am still concerned about what the facts are. There are questions the attorney 
general must look at and answer: How were Mehta's checks being picked up? What 
did he tell the administration? How was this allowed to continue so long?" 
Staff writer Jim Newton contributed to this story. 
