WWII DEBT OF GRATITUDE IS PAID IN KIND; 
JEWISH HOME ADMITS NON-JEW WHOSE WIFE HID REFUGEES 
The penalty for helping Jews escape the German Gestapo during World War II was 
death. 
But that did not stop Polish teen-ager Irene Opdyke from hiding 12 Jewish 
friends in the basement of a German officer's villa, where she worked as a 
housekeeper. She saved countless other Jews by sharing information she 
overheard from Gestapo officers planning roundups in Jewish communities. 
In gratitude to Opdyke, who is 68 and lives in Orange County, administrators at 
the Jewish Home for the Aged in Reseda violated all their admissions policies 
and admitted the heroine's husband into their Alzheimer's disease unit last 
week. William Opdyke, 80, will be one of a handful of non-Jews at the home, 
which provides communal living for senior citizens from throughout Los Angeles 
County. He will also be one of the only people ever admitted directly into an 
intensive nursing care unit there. 
Typically, a requirement for admittance to the 875-bed facility has been that 
the residents be able to care for themselves. 
No Rules 
"We violated all the rules -- he's not from our region, we are sectarian, we 
are so short of beds -- but there are certain times when there are no rules. 
This is one of those times," Executive Director Sheldon Blumenthal said. "In 
caring for Bill, we are repaying a debt to her. We owe her." 
Irene Opdyke's parents had taught her to respect all people, regardless of 
religious or ethnic background, she said in an interview. So the teen-age 
nursing student was horrified when she saw how Jews were treated after Hitler's 
armies invaded Poland in 1939. 
Once, she said, she watched as Nazis rounded up Jews from a residential 
neighborhood and took them to a forest where they were shot. 
"It was a nightmare that changed my life. I witnessed unbelievable things that 
I will never forget. The street was blocked up with barbed wire, and people 
were running all around. I saw a man with a white beard and a little white hat, 
running carrying a Torah. Little ones were screaming 'Mama, Mama!' " she said. 
"I saw a soldier pull a baby out of its mother's arms and throw him to the 
ground. Later, I heard shooting. They were killing innocent people." 
"I vowed then that if the opportunity arrived, I would help." 
Opdyke took her chance while working in a German officers' club. She was a 
waitress, serving meals to German military men and Gestapo agents, and she also 
supervised the laundry crew -- a dozen Jewish people. As a waitress, Opdyke 
overheard Gestapo agents planning roundups in Jewish neighborhoods, and she 
passed the information to her friends in the laundry room. 
"We created a grapevine. I became the ears and eyes for the Jewish people and 
they spread the information around. We were able to save many lives," Opdyke 
said. 
Later in the war, Gestapo chatter turned from roundups to labor camps to the 
"final solution" -- the planned liquidation of all Jews in Europe. "I knew if I 
didn't help, my friends will be dead. I started praying and a miracle 
happened." 
Places to Hide 
A German major asked Opdyke to take a job as a housekeeper in his new villa. 
She accepted the job and her Jewish friends hid there for nearly eight months. 
Sometimes they hid in the attic; sometimes in the basement. They also 
discovered a tunnel that led from the house to a small hiding space underneath 
the gazebo in the back yard, where they hid when the officer held large 
functions in his home. 
But they were not always careful in the huge villa. Halfway through the eight 
months, the German major came home unexpectedly and found four of the Jewish 
women helping Opdyke in the kitchen. Terrified that her friends would lose 
their lives, Opdyke pleaded with him not to turn them in. 
"He put me in his lap and said 'I will keep your secret, but you have to be 
mine. Give an old man his last joy in his life.' I have to do what he said. 
There were too many lives at stake," Opdyke said. 
'Righteous Gentile' 
All 12 of her friends survived the Holocaust and in 1982, the Israeli Holocaust 
Commission honored Opdyke as a "righteous Gentile." She is one of only 5,000 
people to be so honored and the only "righteous Gentile" living in Southern 
California. 
Jewish Home for the Aged administrators said they have a special obligation to 
care for Opdyke's husband, suffering from the advanced stages of Alzheimer's 
disease, because of the sacrifices she made for the Jewish people. 
"She risked her life and this is the return we want to give her," said Dena 
Schulman, spokeswoman for the home. 
Blumenthal said: "We feel very privileged to have an opportunity to help. You 
can never do enough for this woman." 
Opdyke said she has heard many horror stories about nursing homes and was very 
worried about finding good care for her ailing husband, whom she married in 
1956, shortly after arriving in the United States. She is pleased that the 
Jewish Home for the Aged is willing to break their rules to admit him. 
"I love him, and I want him to have the best. Who but the Jewish people, who 
understand suffering so much, would be able to care for him so well," she said. 
