VAN DE KAMP TRIES TO CAPITALIZE ON FEINSTEIN COMMENTS; 
DEBATE: ATTORNEY GENERAL STRESSES DISCUSSION OF ABORTION RIGHTS AND GOVERNMENT 
BENEFITS ON DAY AFTER LITTLE-WATCHED TELEVISED CONFRONTATION. 
John K. Van de Kamp moved quickly Monday to capitalize on what he hopes will 
prove to be major debate blunders by Dianne Feinstein on abortion rights and 
government benefits for the needy, while Feinstein attempted to reduce any 
potential damage to her front-running campaign for the Democratic gubernatorial 
nomination. 
Ironically, many neutral campaign consultants and political scientists 
interviewed by The Times figured that Feinstein at least broke even with Van de 
Kamp in Sunday night's little-watched televised debate, and may even have won 
the confrontation. 
"To the extent somebody's got to win and somebody's got to lose, I gave it to 
her," said veteran Democratic political consultant Joseph Cerrell. "That's 
based on style over substance. I just think she came across better." 
Ratings for the debate were extremely low. In San Francisco, where the one-hour 
program originated and where it was aired on the NBC affiliate, the debate 
received an overnight rating of 5.4 and a 9 share -- meaning about 120,000 
households tuned in. 
In Los Angeles, the debate was carried on public television station KCET and 
received a 0.4 rating and 1 share -- meaning fewer than 20,000 households of 
nearly 5 million in the region tuned in. 
Van de Kamp conceded to reporters that he had been "a little stiff . . . a bit 
more tense in the beginning than I would have liked." But with only three weeks 
remaining before the primary election and trailing in the polls, he wasted 
little time reflecting on his TV presence. The state attorney general tore at a 
couple of wounds he figured the former San Francisco mayor had inflicted on 
herself in the debate. 
One was Feinstein's comment that although she believes in a woman's right to 
choose whether to have an abortion, having an abortion merely for gender 
selection "is a misuse of the right to choose." Later at a press conference, 
Feinstein said she does not consider abortion for gender selection to be "a 
major problem, (but) if it became a major problem, I might very well" sign 
legislation outlawing such abortions. On Monday, she backed away from this 
notion. 
Another Feinstein debate gaffe, in Van de Kamp's view, was her comment that she 
would place on the state budget negotiating table the automatic annual cost of 
living adjustments (COLAs) for welfare recipients and the aged, blind and 
disabled. "I found this to be incredible coming from a person who regards 
herself as a Democrat," Van de Kamp told a press conference in Los Angeles on 
Monday. 
Van de Kamp also said he was "astounded" at Feinstein's position on abortion 
for gender selection, which he first learned about when it was reported in The 
Times Sunday, hours before the debate. 
Noting that Feinstein repeatedly has insisted that a woman governor can best be 
trusted to protect abortion rights, Van de Kamp asserted that "what she would 
do is basically get a state police corps, an inquisitor -- you name it -- 
asking women, interviewing women to determine whether or not their reasons for 
abortion are proper. I think that belongs out of government. It's a private 
decision." 
Van de Kamp clearly relished turning the tables on Feinstein, who for months 
had questioned his commitment to abortion rights because, as a Catholic, he 
personally opposes abortion. 
On Monday, Feinstein was out of public sight. At her San Francisco home, she 
met at length with her campaign staff and then issued a statement trying to 
quell the storm that was building over her remarks on abortion and gender 
selection. 
"I am firmly and unequivocally pro choice," she declared. And contradicting her 
earlier, post-debate comment, Feinstein promised that "as governor I would veto 
any measure designed to whittle away at the availability of abortion or to 
infringe upon a woman's right to choose." 
She said abortion "is an intensely personal decision that every woman must be 
allowed to make with respect to her own personal and moral beliefs. Government 
should not interfere." 
Abortions for gender selection, although believed to be extremely rare in 
California, emerged as a powerful theoretical issue in the gubernatorial race 
as the result of a Times survey of the three major candidates. 
The Times asked all three candidates this question: "Do you see any role for 
government in the regulation of abortion beyond the terms of Roe vs. Wade? What 
about some of the ideas now being proposed by the anti-abortion movement -- 
required counseling before abortions, new rights for fathers to contest 
abortions, a ban on abortions for sex selection, a ban on abortions for birth 
control. Could you support any of these?" 
It was during this survey that Feinstein said for the first time that abortions 
for sex selection would be an "abuse" of abortion rights. Feinstein told The 
Times she believed these kinds of abortions were not prevalent in the United 
States, as they had been in China. But she added, if they did become numerous 
here, "Government could take a look at it" -- meaning consider new, 
groundbreaking restrictions. 
On Monday, Feinstein offered this explanation: "Recently, I was asked my 
personal opinion on whether abortion should be used for sex selection as it is 
in China. The U.S. is not China and I do not believe it is an issue here. I see 
no reason for government intervention. I regret that my opponent is once again 
trying to distort my position." 
Feinstein's comments in The Times, during the debate and at the subsequent 
press conference, caused an uproar among abortion rights activists Monday. 
"I was quite shocked," said Robin Schneider, director of the Southern 
California Abortion Rights Action League, which sent Feinstein a letter urging 
her to reconsider her debate stance. "This position came out of nowhere. That 
troubles me." 
Norma Clevenger, lobbyist for Planned Parenthood of California, said "everybody 
abhors the thought of selecting a child based on gender. Nobody supports sex 
selection. But a law like that would be impossible to enforce. (Feinstein) did 
catch me off guard because she has been making all the right noises lately. I 
was startled." 
One politically neutral academician, Sherry Bebitch Jeffe of the Center for 
Politics and Policy at Claremont Graduate School, described the new abortion 
flap as "a little hairline fracture" for Feinstein. "We don't know how severe 
it is yet. . . . We won't know what impact it has until we see how the media 
plays it, how Van de Kamp's campaign uses it and how she responds." 
She added that "it may be neutralized by the fact she's a woman." 
Jeffe scored the debate overall "a draw." 
Larry L. Berg, director of the Jesse M. Unruh Institute of Politics at USC, 
said Feinstein "won in terms of personality. . . . She didn't come across as 
not knowing anything, as some people thought she would. But Van de Kamp didn't 
lose badly because he wasn't as dull as people thought he would be." 
Berg added that lawyers, such as Van de Kamp and U.S. Sen. Pete Wilson, the 
prospective Republican gubernatorial nominee, "do have difficulty talking in 
plain language. . . . Somehow when lawyers talk, very few of them are able to 
communicate what's on their mind and be informative. It doesn't add to ongoing, 
common-sense dialogue." 
Bruce Cain, assistant director of the Institute of Government Studies at UC 
Berkeley, said he "thought Van de Kamp lost some visual points by glancing down 
at the lectern and looking like a dog being beaten" when Feinstein addressed 
him. "He looked dejected, flustered or embarrassed." 
Several political consultants thought Van de Kamp opened himself to criticism 
as a liberal "tax-and-spender" by advocating higher taxes for high income 
earners. "I kept seeing Walter Mondale up there saying, 'We're going to raise 
your taxes,' " said Ron Smith, a Republican consultant. "My gut reaction was 
she came out a little ahead." 
Times political writers John Balzar and Cathleen Decker and staff writer Daniel 
M. Weintraub contributed to this article. 
CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS: THE DEBATES 
 In their debate Sunday night, former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein and 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp raised questions and made points that were not 
fully explained. Several of these issues are discussed below, with an analysis 
of each by Times staff writer Daniel M. Weintraub. 
Issue: Van de Kamp said Feinstein is "backed by the same legislative leaders 
who have blocked" ethics reform in the past and who have "put on the ballot an 
ethics measure that is cynically tied to a huge legislative pay increase." 
Analysis: Feinstein has been endorsed by Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San 
Francisco) and Senate Leader David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles), who helped draft 
Proposition 112. The measure could lead to a pay raise, but does not guarantee 
one. Among other provisions, the proposal would create a commission to examine 
legislators' $40,816 annual salary and $88-a-day tax-free living allowance and 
grant a raise if the panel determines it is needed. Supporters of the ethics 
package have suggested tying legislative salaries to the income of Superior 
Court judges, who earn $94,344 a year. 
Issue: Feinstein said Van de Kamp "tried not to reveal" the investments of his 
family trust fund and, when the trust's holdings were disclosed, they included 
"14 companies doing business" in the apartheid nation of South Africa. 
Analysis: Van de Kamp in 1988 fought a Fair Political Practices Commission 
order to fully disclose the details of the trust's investments. Van de Kamp 
lost that battle, and, after the investments were disclosed, he asked the 
trust's administrators to divest their holdings in companies doing business in 
South Africa. "I did not know which ones had any business there, but I asked 
the investment counselor to divest of that stock within a reasonable time and . 
. . he has," Van de Kamp said Monday. 
Issue: Van de Kamp said that the average prison time served by female felons 
dropped by more than 30% during Feinstein's four years on the Board of Women's 
Terms and Paroles. 
Analysis: In the 10 years before she was appointed in 1962, the average term 
for female felons dropped from 26 months to 20 months, according to the 
California Department of Corrections. While Feinstein was on the board, the 
average term dropped further to 17 months in 1962, 15 in 1963 and 12 in 1965. 
In her final year on the panel, the average term climbed back to 14 months, and 
it continued to climb steadily after she left the board in 1966. (In a 1964 
memorandum to then-Gov. Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, a prison administrator reported 
that the reduction in terms between 1959 and 1963 had prevented overcrowding 
that would have forced the state to build a new women's prison. The memo said 
the recidivism rate "had not increased" and the rate of new prison commitments 
had dropped during that period.) 
Issue: Van de Kamp, focusing on the financial background of Feinstein's 
husband, asked, "Why no taxes in '85?" 
Analysis: Feinstein and her husband, investment banker Richard Blum, paid no 
taxes in 1985 because their income of $206,000 was offset by a $319,000 loss 
associated with Blum's investment in the Hotel Carlton in San Francisco, 
according to their accountant. In addition, losses from an investment in 
Farrell's Ice Cream parlors offset other income to a partnership of which Blum 
has a share. Although they paid no taxes in 1985, the couple paid combined 
state and federal taxes of $37,000 in 1986; $80,800 in 1987; $569,000 in 1988, 
and $2.5 million in 1989. 
Issue: Feinstein accused Van de Kamp of being lax in investigating and 
prosecuting those who illegally haul and dump toxic waste. She said she told 
Van de Kamp that there were "50 drums of cyanide at loose in the state" but he 
"simply sent that letter to the D.A." 
Analysis: Feinstein was referring to 55-gallon drums of cyanide solution from a 
North Hollywood metal-plating company. The cargo was described in apparently 
phony shipping documents as "new products" destined for Mexicali, Mexico. But 
the address listed turned out to be a wheat field. Van de Kamp has referred the 
matter to Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner for investigation. 
Issue: Van de Kamp said while Feinstein was mayor of San Francisco, the city 
dumped so much sewage into San Francisco Bay that he had to fine her $40,000. 
Analysis: Van de Kamp's office in 1985 negotiated a settlement between the 
Regional Water Quality Control Board and the city of San Francisco. The city 
was fined $40,000 for dumping untreated sewage into the bay. The discharges 
occurred while the city, at Feinstein's urging, was building a new sewage 
treatment plant. 
