ENTREPRENEUR MAGAZINE PLANS NEW PERIODICAL; 
BUSINESSWOMEN PASS MILESTONE 
It's almost 1990, and most of us would agree by now that women and men are, 
well, different. And that's just the point that the publishers of Entrepreneur 
magazine want to make on June 20, when they launch their latest editorial 
effort: Entrepreneurial Woman. 
The 114-page June issue includes articles on the best cars for women's 
entrepreneurial life styles, the outlook for the infant-products industry and a 
woman record executive, as well as a health column. 
The new periodical is planned as an every-other-month companion to the 
successful Entrepreneur, an Irvine-based publication whose audited readership 
is 300,000 and about 25% female. The June issue of Entrepreneurial Woman is a 
prototype, with regular issues to follow in February. 
Rieva Lesonsky, editor of both magazines, concedes that basic issues are the 
same for male and female business owners. But she also talks a lot about 
"women's special needs" and said her latest creation will do the same. 
"Women face some unique problems in starting their own businesses," Lesonsky 
says. "Raising money is harder because of the attitude of bankers. And it's 
only recently that we've given women the approval to work, let alone own their 
own companies." 
Lesonsky is quick to rattle off a raft of horror stories gleaned mostly from 
letters written by Midwestern readers of Choices: For Entrepreneurial Women, a 
short-lived quarterly that Entrepreneur delivered in 1985 then abandoned in 
1986. 
Choices did "fairly well," Lesonsky says, but was discontinued after three 
issues so the staff could concentrate on Entrepreneur. Choices magazine may 
have died, she says, but it left a legacy of letters that motivated editors to 
try another publication for businesswomen. 
"We got a letter from a woman who went to a bank with a very detailed business 
plan," she says. "The banker, in the Midwest, told her they were not in the 
habit of funding 'hobbies.' Another woman wrote that the bank told her they 
wanted her 17-year-old, under-age son to co-sign for her loan." 
So the need, Lesonsky says, is there for a magazine like Entrepreneurial Woman. 
But is there a market for the product? 
"Absolutely," says Rick Boden, an economist with the Small Business 
Administration's Office of Advocacy. Not only is the market there, but it's 
growing. In 1977, the SBA counted 1.9 million woman-owned sole proprietorships 
operating in the United States. By 1986, the latest year for which statistics 
were available, the number had grown to 4.12 million. 
And women business owners are branching out, Boden says. In the early 1970s, 
such entrepreneurs were huddled mostly in the service and retail industries. 
Today, Boden says, their numbers are growing in such non-traditional industries 
as construction and manufacturing. 
But Boden has a caveat for the publishers of Entrepreneurial Woman: This 
working woman's wave may be cresting soon. 
"We see a growth in women-owned business," Boden says. "But we don't know how 
long, however, this fairly rapid growth rate will continue. We think it will 
probably slow down soon after 1990." 
Regardless of the fact that the number of women business owners may peak, it's 
still growing now, says Judy Devin, spokeswoman for the National Assn. of Women 
Business Owners. And those women who help fuel the economy deserve to read 
about themselves and their lives. 
Devin, too, contends that women do business in a fashion far different from 
men. But, like Lesonsky, she is a bit hard pressed to point to specific 
disparities. 
"Women do business differently," she starts. The National Assn. of Women 
Business Owners is "doing studies on how women set up businesses, and we're 
finding that we're much more egalitarian, there's no hierarchy. We look for 
consensus management. We try to be more flexible in our workplace. A lot of 
women are raising families and running businesses." 
But what this different kind of business owner reads, Devin says, comes pretty 
much from the same list that her male counterpart uses. According to an 
association survey, women business owners read Inc., the Wall Street Journal, 
Fortune and Nation's Business. 
