3 DIE AS RUNAWAY TRAIN TUMBLES ONTO HOMES; 
FREIGHT HITS 90 M.P.H. BEFORE LEAVING TRACKS IN SAN BERNARDINO; MAN PULLED 
ALIVE FROM RUBBLE 
A runaway freight train careened down the Cajon Pass, leaped the tracks, 
plunged down a 30-foot embankment and slammed into seven homes Friday morning, 
killing two boys in one of the houses and a trainman. 
One man was missing and 10 were injured, but a man sitting on his couch when 
the train derailed and flattened his home was miraculously discovered alive 
beneath 15 feet of rubble more than 13 hours after the crash. 
Christopher Shaw, 24, was discovered shortly after 9 p.m. by firefighters using 
shovels to pick through the ruins of his house. Rescue workers lifted him to 
safety late Friday night, as onlookers cheered. 
Railroad officials said that minutes before the 7:38 a.m. crash, a crewman 
radioed a "Mayday" call that the heavily laden train was out of control as it 
began to accelerate down the long 2.2% grade. 
All six locomotives and 69 cars of the Southern Pacific freight were hurled 
from the tracks as the train entered a curve at 90 m.p.h., about three times 
the normal speed, Southern Pacific officials said. 
The wreckage piled up in a grotesque heap of twisted metal that literally 
flattened two of the homes, including Shaw's and the one in which the young 
stepbrothers died. 
Hundreds of tons of sand-like sodium carbonate, also known as sal soda, spilled 
from the hopper cars into yards, houses and streets, burying much of the 
rubble. Stuffed toys, furniture and kitchen utensils were scattered amid the 
massive, dune-like heaps of dusty, splintered debris. 
Police, firefighters and neighbors clawed through the wreckage to free the 
injured and take them to nearby hospitals. Paramedics worked with power tools 
for more than three hours before they were able to free the body of the 
trainman from the lead locomotive. He was identified as Everett S. Crown, 35, 
of Bakersfield, the train's conductor and a 17-year employee of the railroad. 
The two dead boys were identified as Jason H. Thompson, 9, and Tyson White, 7. 
One missing man was identified as Alan R. Riess, 42, of Bakersfield, a brakeman 
riding near the front of the train. He was believed still buried in the 
wreckage. 
Presumed Dead 
Throughout the day, Shaw was also missing and presumed dead. His home, which he 
shares with his mother, Maryann, was the most seriously damaged -- totally 
obliterated by several locomotives. 
But persistent efforts by specially trained search-and-rescue dogs and workers 
digging through the rubble paid off. 
"I'm glad my son is out of the house," said a jubilant Maryann Shaw. "It was up 
to God. I thank God he's made it." Despite his ordeal, Christopher Shaw was 
described as lucid and conversing with firefighters. 
Riding with Crown and Riess in the lead locomotives had been the engineer, 
Frank W. Holland, 33, of Bakersfield, who suffered head injuries, cuts, a 
broken shoulder and broken ribs in the crash, according to Southern Pacific 
officials. None of the others injured were identified. 
It was not immediately determined what caused the train -- bound for Long Beach 
from Mojave with the load of sal soda that is used in fabric and water 
softeners -- to burst out of control on the long grade down through the San 
Bernardino Mountains to San Bernardino. 
Some officials said the train's brakes apparently failed, but others said an 
examination of the wheels showed that the brakes had been applied for at least 
part of the long ride down. 
Railroad officials said three event recorders were on board the train and have 
not yet been recovered. The devices record crucial data on the train's 
operation and actions of its crew. 
The train sped for miles down the grade before leaping from the tracks, ripping 
through some power lines and crashing into the tract of modest, single-story 
houses in the largely minority neighborhood near Highland Avenue and Duffy 
Street on the northwest side of San Bernardino. 
"I heard a noise that sounded like an earthquake," said Ruth Green, who has 
lived on Duffy Street since 1972. "I looked out and I saw that train flying." 
"I knew it wasn't going to make that curve," said Walt Greenwood, another Duffy 
Street resident, whose back fence was crumpled by one of the train's huge steel 
wheels. "I grabbed my wife and son and we ran." 
San Bernardino Sheriff's Capt. Ray Harper saw the crash while driving to work 
on Highland Avenue: "There was a bright blue light, a huge flash as the 
transformers blew. It was eerie. I thought the thing was coming toward me." 
Diesel fuel leaked from the shattered locomotives and officials, concerned 
about the threat of fire from the fuel evacuated the neighborhood. 
However, the fuel did not ignite and officials said the train was not carrying 
any toxic material that could have posed a hazard to residents or the 
environment. Pumps were used to empty the remaining fuel from the tanks of the 
locomotives. 
Two towering cranes were brought in to start moving the wreckage. Officials 
waited several hours to make sure of the location of an underground jet fuel 
line before they started using the heavy equipment to dig through the wreckage. 
The railroad said it may be weeks before they can clean up enough of the mess 
to rebuild the torn track and get traffic moving on the heavily traveled line 
again. On Friday, Southern Pacific rail traffic was rerouted on other tracks, 
but officials said they plan to construct a temporary bypass around the damaged 
stretch soon. 
The Red Cross set up an emergency shelter near the crash scene, serving coffee 
and food and providing trauma counseling and cots for victims. School children 
from the neighborhood spent about three hours at the shelter, but most of the 
50 families evacuated were housed by the railroad for the night at hotels in 
San Bernardino. Officials said those whose homes were not destroyed probably 
could return to them today. 
The National Transportation Safety Board sent a field representative from Los 
Angeles and a team of experts from its headquarters in Washington to 
investigate the accident. Railroad officials said they expect the investigation 
to take weeks. 
A team of dogs specially trained to sniff out the dead and injured was flown in 
from the Bay Area to search for additional victims. The dogs, used previously 
to hunt for survivors of the 1985 Mexico City earthquake, were provided by the 
California Rescue Dog Assn. 
The injured were being treated at three hospitals in the area -- St. 
Bernadine's Hospital and the San Bernardino County Medical Center in San 
Bernardino and Loma Linda Medical Center in Loma Linda. 
Police said several of those hospitalized owed a word of thanks to the 
neighbors who helped pull them from the wreckage. 
Lavene Brewster said her husband, Dudley, was one of those who helped. 
"He heard a lady screaming across the street and he ran to rescue her," 
Brewster said. "She passed out in his arms. He carried her over to our house." 
Brewster, visibly shaken as she sat with her two young sons at the Red Cross 
shelter, said the railroad line looming over the homes had always seemed 
menacing. 
"I have worried about those trains for years," she said. "It's a nightmare, a 
nightmare come true." 
As the daylight faded, the devastated block took on a surreal look, as mangled 
barbecues, automobiles and patio furniture were bathed in a pink light. 
Occasionally, a bewildered cat or pet rabbit scampered through the streets, 
which were thick with the smell of diesel and periodically swirling with clouds 
of ash. 
Times staff writers John Hurst and John Kendall contributed to this story. 
Related Stories: Page 32 
