REP. COELHO ADVISER IS TARGET OF LAWSUITS 
A key financial adviser to U.S. Rep. Tony Coelho (D-Merced) is enmeshed in a 
tangle of lawsuits here that accuse him of failing to pay hundreds of thousands 
of dollars in debts and of breaking promises to business associates. 
Merced accountant Donald W. Ozenbaugh Jr. has emerged as a pivotal figure in 
questions surrounding Coelho's personal finances. 
Coelho, who said through a spokesman on Friday that he was unaware of the 
lawsuits against Ozenbaugh, has identified him as the man who prepared 
financial disclosure forms that failed to list an unusual $50,000 loan Coelho 
received from Columbia Savings &amp; Loan in 1986 to finance part of the 
purchase of a $100,000 high-yield "junk bond." Ozenbaugh also prepared Coelho's 
1986 tax return, which, according to an attorney for the congressman, 
incorrectly reported the $6,882 profit from the sale of the bond, forcing a 
probable liability for back taxes. 
Despite the problems caused by Ozenbaugh, Coelho continued to express 
confidence in him and his handling of the junk bond investment. 
"I hired Don to do this," he said in an interview last week. "He'd done all my 
financial disclosures. It was up to Don to tell me if it was a good investment. 
If he said, 'Yes,' I believe him. I pay for professional advice." 
But a more skeptical portrait of Ozenbaugh emerges in lawsuits on file at the 
Superior Court here and in other courthouses around California. Some 32 
lawsuits ascribe a pattern of broken promises and bad debts to the 42-year-old 
accountant. 
Additionally, some of the accountant's clients had to pay thousands of dollars 
in back taxes after the Internal Revenue Service made adverse rulings on 
investments they made on Ozenbaugh's advice, according to one investor who said 
he had to pay $40,000. 
On Monday, Ozenbaugh is scheduled to testify in Superior Court in Merced in a 
case involving an alleged debt of $142,000 -- at the same time he is supposed 
to appear in Municipal Court in Contra Costa County on an unrelated claim of 
$40,000. 
Ozenbaugh denied any wrongdoing, but declined to talk about his legal problems 
or investment advice, referring specific queries to his attorney, Steven Clair, 
who also would not answer detailed questions. 
The attorney said that many of the lawsuits involving his client have been 
resolved and that Ozenbaugh has filed papers denying others. 
'Not Terribly Unusual' 
"Litigation is not terribly unusual," Clair said in an interview in his 
Stockton office. "It happens when people have disagreements." 
Ozenbaugh has had his share: 
* In the case now on trial in Merced Superior Court, G. R. Clark, a grading 
contractor, accused Ozenbaugh of owing $141,954 for work on the Hillcrest 
subdivision in Merced. Ozenbaugh has filed a cross-complaint alleging that he 
lost $150,000 because Clark did not complete the grading on time. 
* Security Pacific National Bank said Ozenbaugh owes $322,465 plus interest on 
a loan that has been in default since Nov. 11, 1987. 
* A group of seven local investors, some of them former accounting clients, 
accuse Ozenbaugh of violating his fiduciary duty as their financial adviser by 
allegedly failing to inform them when rental units that he built and sold to 
them in 1982 developed "significant structural problems" several years later. 
* Richwood Meat Co. Inc. Profit Sharing Plan Trust -- whose owners, former 
Ozenbaugh clients, are suing in connection with the structural defects -- said 
in a lawsuit filed Sept. 11 that the accountant had guaranteed a $35,000 note 
and then failed to pay when the borrower defaulted. 
* Cal Valley Orchard Services said in a suit filed July 19, 1985, that it had 
harvested a 1984 almond crop on a 622-acre farm operated by an Ozenbaugh 
investment group and that Ozenbaugh and the group still owed $53,068 for the 
harvesting. 
* Bank of America said in a suit filed July 5, 1988, that Ozenbaugh failed to 
repay a $75,000 loan. 
* In March, Texas Commerce Bank, which had obtained an $80,000 judgment against 
Caltex and Ozenbaugh in Texas, filed suit in Merced County to collect the 
award. 
* Wells Fargo Bank said in a suit filed April 28 that Ozenbaugh owed $75,000 on 
two checking accounts. 
* In the case set for trial in Contra Costa on Monday, Ozenbaugh is accused of 
failing to pay the Owens Financial Group a $40,000 commission for a real estate 
transaction. 
* The California Teachers Assn. successfully sued Ozenbaugh in October, 1987, 
alleging that he owed more than $10,000 in rent and county taxes on a 1.6-acre 
parcel and had failed to develop the land as agreed. 
Focus of Legal Actions 
The focus of this legal animosity is a bearded, burly 42-year-old 6-footer who 
lives in a sprawling house on almost two acres in Atwater. In nearby Merced, a 
well-appointed suite of offices houses Ozenbaugh's accounting firm and also 
Caltex Land and Development Co. Inc., a Texas and California corporation of 
which he is president. 
On the wall next to the office door, framed photographs show Ozenbaugh with 
Coelho, House Speaker Jim Wright (D-Tex.), former House Speaker Tip O'Neill and 
Rep. Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.), a former candidate for the Democratic 
presidential nomination. 
In 1983, the congressman invested between $5,001 and $15,000 in Dairy 
Management Associates, a partnership organized by Ozenbaugh that markets 
computer software for dairy farmers. 
Ozenbaugh also persuaded two of the congressman's acquaintances who live in 
Washington to invest in the partnership -- Fred Hatfield, Coelho's chief of 
staff, and John P. Mack, former aide to House Speaker Wright. Mack resigned 
last week after reports that he been convicted of brutally beating a woman, 
stabbing her with a knife and leaving her for dead 16 years ago. 
Called Good Investment 
In 1986, when Thomas Spiegel, president of Columbia Savings &amp; Loan, offered 
Coelho the chance to purchase the $100,000 junk bond, the congressman turned to 
Ozenbaugh, who said it was a good investment. 
Ozenbaugh said he was aware of the $50,000 loan that helped pay for the bond 
but simply forgot to put it on the congressman's disclosure statements. 
Ozenbaugh also prepared Coelho's income tax returns for 1986 and listed the 
congressman's $6,882 profit from selling the bond as a long-term capital gain. 
Coelho attorney Robert Bauer said Coelho probably owed back taxes because the 
congressman had not held the bond for the six-month period that was required to 
take advantage of the lower tax rate at the time on long-term capital gains. 
Coelho spokesman David Dreyer said that Coelho is contemplating no legal action 
against his accountant as a result of the alleged mistake he made on the 
congressman's tax return and financial disclosure report. 
Some other people who relied on Ozenbaugh in Merced and other Central Valley 
cities and who do not share Coelho's reluctance about legal actions against 
Ozenbaugh, are biting in their opinions. 
Tied Up Property 
Attorney Ronald H. Marks, who represented the California Teachers Assn. in its 
successful suit against Ozenbaugh, said the accountant's late payments of rent 
-- some with bad checks -- and failure to pay county taxes allowed Ozenbaugh to 
tie up a valuable piece of property for very little money. 
"A great deal for Ozenbaugh; a terribly inequitable deal for the California 
Teachers Assn.," Marks wrote in a legal motion. 
Arguing that Ozenbaugh should not be allowed to reinstate the lease, Marks said 
he had been a "quarrelsome, troublesome tenant" and that his failure to pay 
county taxes, "suggest either that Mr. Ozenbaugh is playing games with CTA and 
the court or, more likely, Mr. Ozenbaugh is in serious financial trouble 
scrambling to keep his creditors happy." 
Former accounting partner Michael Smith severed his years-long relationship 
with Ozenbaugh in 1986, taking many of the firm's clients with him. Smith 
acknowledged in an interview that he is helping in the suit lodged by the 
former clients of Ozenbaugh in the structural defects case. 
One of these clients is John Schneidmiller, a retired Air Force officer who 
lives in Merced. 
Had Been a Friend 
Schneidmiller said in an interview that he once was a good friend of Ozenbaugh 
and used him as his accountant, but broke with him after following his 
investment advice to buy into a series of limited partnerships that offered 
significant tax write-offs. Eventually, he said, the IRS ruled that he had to 
pay $40,000 in back taxes, interest and penalties. 
"I had to mortgage my house. . . . Uncle Sam says it is nothing but a tax 
dodge," said Schneidmiller, noting that Dairy Management Associates in which he 
had invested was given a clean bill of health by the IRS. 
Schneidmiller and Ozenbaugh's former secretary, who asked not to be named, said 
a number of Merced's most affluent people had made similar investments on 
Ozenbaugh's advice and also had to pay back taxes. 
"There are so many people chasing Don," Schneidmiller said. 
