CENTER HELPS INDIANS ADJUST TO NEW LIVES IN LOS ANGELES 
More than 200 years of painful experiences have engendered a mistrust of 
government agencies among American Indians, who have gravitated to Los Angeles 
more than any other U.S. urban center. 
John Castillo is assistant executive director of the Southern California Indian 
Center, a nonprofit organization that serves as a conduit between the nation's 
largest urban Indian population and government social agencies. 
"Indians won't go to government offices, but they'll come to us," said 
Castillo, whose organization is staffed primarily by Indians. 
With a budget of more than $3 million, provided mainly by federal, state and 
local government grants, the organization's 40-member staff provides 
educational counseling, job training and housing assistance to about 10,000 
American Indians and ethnic Alaskans and Hawaiians each year. 
Much Poverty and Unemployment 
According to the 1980 U.S. Census, about 100,000 American Indians live in Los 
Angeles and Orange counties. The Los Angeles County Community Development 
Department estimates that 75% of the Indian population is below the poverty 
level. More than 40% are unemployed. 
Castillo said more than 300 tribes are represented in the area and predicted 
that the 1990 census will show that the overall population has grown 
substantially as more young Indians have moved from rural areas and 
reservations. 
For the most part, this group is not emotionally or economically prepared for 
the rigorous competition of urban residency, organization officials said. 
To meet the growing need, the SCIC, which Castillo said was founded in 1968 "by 
a group of people who used a garage for meetings," opened its fifth regional 
office last month. 
Help in Mastering Skills 
The North Hollywood office is designed to meet the needs of the 10,000-plus 
American Indians in the San Fernando Valley. The organization's other offices 
are in Carson, Commerce, Garden Grove and Los Angeles. 
"Our primary responsibility is to assist the unemployed and underemployed," 
Castillo said. 
"If they have marketable skills, we develop them. If they don't, we provide 
referrals for classroom training or work experience." 
The center also provides a variety of programs for senior citizens, including 
counseling, transportation and arts and crafts activities. Emergency housing 
and food are also made available. 
Much Food Disbursed 
"We give out about 5,000 tons of food a month, and about 600 food baskets 
during Christmas season," Castillo said. 
The average age of American Indians is less than 18, Castillo said. The goal of 
his organization, he said, is to "foster an atmosphere in which we can help 
American Indians work toward economic and social self-sufficiency." 
