SENTENCED IN MURDER OF EX-GIRLFRIEND; 
KILLER FACES 25-YEAR-TO-LIFE TERM 
A spurned lover convicted of killing his girlfriend and burying her body twice 
in the Mojave Desert was sentenced Friday to 25 years to life in state prison, 
the maximum allowed by law. 
Gerald Lee Bishop Jr., 24, of Westminister was sentenced by Orange County 
Superior Court Judge Jean M. Rheinheimer in Santa Ana. Bishop was convicted of 
strangling, then drowning his ex-girlfriend, Marina Garcia, 23, of Huntington 
Beach, nearly a year ago. 
"It is a particularly deplorable crime, and we're pleased that (Bishop) was 
sentenced to the maximum allowable punishment," said Deputy Dist. Atty. Richard 
Toohey. 
Bishop's attorney, public defender David C. Biggs, said he felt the sentence 
was too harsh. Biggs contended that Bishop killed Garcia in a fit of passion, 
and was only guilty of manslaughter, punishable by a maximum of 11 years in 
prison. 
Bishop was convicted of the June 3, 1988, murder of Garcia. A former girlfriend 
of Bishop's testified during the trial that she heard him mention the idea of 
killing Garcia the day before the murder. According to testimony, Garcia was 
attempting to end a long relationship with Bishop shortly before the crime. 
The next day, Bishop choked and then drowned Garcia in the bathtub of her 
Huntington Beach home. After cleaning up the house, Bishop took her body and 
buried it in the desert near Victorville. He returned later with his brother to 
dig a deeper hole for fear that the body would be discovered. 
Biggs maintained his client killed Garcia in the heat of passion during a 
vicious argument and should have received a lighter sentence. 
"He will be punished like everyone else," Biggs said Friday. "But he is not 
like everyone else." 
He described Bishop as having learning difficulties. 
Bishop "understands very little of what is going on," Biggs said. "He only gets 
about a third of what he is hearing." 
But prosecutor Toohey disagreed. 
"He certainly knew what he was doing that day" when the murder was committed, 
Toohey said. Bishop tried to feign ignorance about the crime by going to 
Garcia's father's house to ask where the victim was after her murder, Toohey 
said. He also cashed a paycheck that Garcia had just received, according to 
Toohey. 
