GENETICS INSTITUTE OKS LANDMARK VENTURE IN JAPAN; 
PHARMACEUTICALS: IT'S APPARENTLY THE FIRST TIME THAT A U.S. BIOTECHNOLOGY 
COMPANY HAS BEEN ABLE TO SELL PRODUCTS DIRECTLY IN JAPAN RATHER THAN THROUGH A 
LICENSING AGREEMENT. 
Genetics Institute Inc. said Monday that it has agreed to a joint venture with 
a Japanese pharmaceuticals company to develop and market in Japan new 
genetically engineered proteins designed to promote bone growth. 
The venture with Tokyo-based Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co. is apparently the 
first time that a U.S.-based biotechnology concern will have an opportunity to 
market products directly in Japan rather than selling through a licensing 
agreement. The companies will share equally in profits from the sale of 
products in Japan, Genetics Institute said. The companies also will form a 
partnership to develop and market the products worldwide. 
Genetics Institute is considered one of the nation's leading biotechnology 
concerns. 
The agreement is important in that it provides financial resources for 
Cambridge, Mass.-based Genetics Institute to further develop drugs that are not 
yet commercial products, said David S. Webber, a New York-based analyst with 
Alex. Brown &amp; Sons of Baltimore. 
Webber estimated that Yamanouchi will contribute $30 million to $35 million to 
the venture. "That's help in funding the development that was not there 
before," he said. 
Researchers hope the products that emerge will be able to treat serious 
fractures or repair damage from diseases that cause bone deterioration, 
including osteoporosis and certain dental ailments. They may also be useful in 
cosmetic surgery. 
Osteoporosis, a disease primarily affecting older women that is characterized 
by a reduction in bone density and brittleness, may ultimately be "the greatest 
market," Webber said. 
Genetics Institute cited analysts' estimates that the worldwide market for such 
products could exceed $2 billion a year. 
Other biotechnology companies, including Palo Alto-based Collagen Corp., are 
researching proteins to help the body's natural bone-repair mechanisms, but the 
Genetics Institute proteins, called BMPs, are designed to actually promote new 
bone growth. 
Garen Bohlin, Genetics Institute executive vice president, said its BMPs -- or 
bone morphogenetic proteins -- are in preclinical testing. The first is not 
expected to go into the human trial stage until 1991. The company was granted a 
patent last year for BMP-1 and has filed patent applications on other BMP 
proteins. 
Investors welcomed the news about Genetics Institute, which last week suffered 
a setback. Wellcome PLC withdrew from a deal with Genetics Institute to develop 
TPA -- a blood-clot-dissolving drug -- because of a continuing patent fight 
with Genentech of South San Francisco. Genetics Institute also continues to be 
embroiled in a patent fight with Amgen of Thousand Oaks over U. S. marketing 
rights to erythropoietin, or EPO, a drug that helps fight off anemia in 
patients with problems such as kidney disease. 
In over-the-counter trading Monday, Genetics Institute closed at $38, up 
$1.875. 
"This relationship provides a tremendous opportunity for us to accelerate our 
development of bone-growth-factor products and to participate significantly in 
profits from potential future sales of such products on a worldwide basis," 
Gabriel Schmergel, Genetics Institute's president and chief executive, said in 
a prepared statement. The agreement allows the company to keep exclusive 
worldwide manufacturing rights and exclusive North American marketing rights to 
BMP products. 
"Yamanouchi will benefit from participation in the commercialization of one of 
the pharmaceuticals industry's next major growth fields, as well as potential 
future products coming out of Genetics Institute's pipeline," said Shigeo 
Morioka, Yamanouchi chairman. 
Yamanouchi, one of Japan's largest drug companies, has made other deals with 
U.S. companies -- it purchased Shaklee Corp.'s Japanese unit. 
