TREND WATCH 
A roundup of business developments spotted by other publications. 
Anchorage Hub for UPS: United Parcel Service is bidding for a bigger part of 
the Asian and Alaskan cargo handling business by setting up a $3.5-million hub 
at Anchorage International Airport, next door to Federal Express' new sorting 
hub. UPS would also like to wrest the rights to fly into Tokyo from Emery Air 
Freight, despite Emery's backing by Alaska's congressional delegation. 
Anchorage Daily News 
Bottled Water Sales Soar: Sales of bottled drinking water in the United States 
increased 400% during the 1980s, according to the International Bottled Water 
Assn. Consumer fears of pollution and dissatisfaction with the taste of tap 
waters promise continued sales growth of 20% a year, the association predicts. 
Florida Times-Union 
From Nuclear to Gas: After years of costly delays, CMS Energy Corp. decided to 
switch its 85%-completed Midland, Mich., nuclear plant to natural gas, allowing 
it to recoup some of the $4.2 billion spent since groundbreaking in 1967. Three 
years ago, the company began raising $640 million for the conversion; now the 
plant generates enough electricity for a million people and is selling steam to 
a chemical plant. CMS Chairman William T. McCormick Jr. says $20 billion has 
been invested in abandoned nuclear power plants in the United States, all of 
which could be converted to gas. Toronto Globe and Mail 
Future of Fuel Cells: After 32 years of research and testing, Westinghouse is 
beginning to introduce its fuel cell to electric utilities. The company's solid 
oxide fuel cell has already been sold for testing purposes to Japanese natural 
gas companies. Westinghouse soon will build a developmental manufacturing plant 
that will work out the production kinks. The new technology, which squeezes 
oxygen through chemicals and metals to produce electricity and heat, is 60% 
efficient, compared to 50% for gas turbines. However, producing the fuel cells 
at high volume and low cost has yet to be proven. The company expects to begin 
taking commercial orders for the cells in 1992. Pittsburgh Business Times 
