COLD FUSION CLAIM IN ERROR, 2 EXPERTS SAY; 
'CONVENTIONAL CHEMISTRY,' CALTECH RESEARCHER FINDS IN EVALUATING UTAH TESTS 
Caltech and MIT scientists Monday leveled serious new charges at two 
researchers' recent claims of room-temperature fusion in a flask, with the 
Caltech chemist concluding that "there is no evidence for anything other than 
conventional chemistry" in the cold fusion experiments. 
Caltech's Nathan Lewis told physicists here for a meeting of the American 
Physical Society that he had re-evaluated the available data of chemists B. 
Stanley Pons of the University of Utah and Martin Fleischmann of the University 
of Southampton in England and conducted his own experiments as well. His 
results indicate that the nuclear fusion first reported more than a month ago 
is the result of calculation errors made by Pons and Fleischmann and is not a 
real phenomenon, Lewis said. 
Lewis charged that Pons and Fleischmann specifically did not obtain more energy 
from their fusion cell than they put in -- a key component of their claims. 
Instead, he said, they made an assumption about how much heat they should be 
getting out and, when they obtained more, reported that as excess heat. In 
reality, he said, they were recovering only about 20% of the energy they were 
putting into the cell. 
Lewis' presentation was loudly applauded by a crowd of about 3,000 physicists 
who seemed to agree that reports of cold fusion are illusory. His speech had 
such an impact that half of the audience left the auditorium afterward without 
waiting for other presentations. 
Also on Monday, MIT physicist Ronald R. Parker claimed that the Utah 
researchers' measurements of radiation emitted from their fusion cell were in 
error. 
The errors in radiation measurement, Parker said, are "a warning not to accept 
all their (Pons and Fleischmann's) claims at face value and to to expect that 
there's an overnight path to nirvana as far as energy is concerned." 
The Caltech and MIT scientists are among about 15 research groups who were 
expected to report at the society meeting Monday night that they had been 
unable to reproduce Pons' and Fleischmann's results. Several other groups have 
reported in the past two weeks that they have confirmed at least some of the 
cold fusion results, but none of them is scheduled to make presentations at 
this meeting. 
Pons and Fleischmann were invited to attend the meeting, but declined. 
The Utah and Southampton researchers created fusion fever a month ago when they 
reported that they had obtained more energy from a simple fusion cell than they 
had put in and that the excess energy was produced by fusion. Their cell 
involved simple palladium and platinum electrodes immersed in deuterium oxide 
-- so-called heavy water -- in which each hydrogen atom is replaced by a 
deuterium atom, which has an extra neutron. 
The researchers said that the deuterium ions were forced into close contact in 
the palladium electrode by an electric field, and that contact caused them to 
fuse into helium atoms, releasing large amounts of energy in the process. 
Physicists scoffed at the report, however, because they could not conceive of 
any fusion reaction that did not release large amounts of radiation in the form 
of neutrons or gamma rays. 
Pons and Fleischmann reported that they observed only about a billionth as many 
neutrons as would be expected to result if their excess heat had been caused by 
fusion. 
Lewis and his colleagues reported about two weeks ago that they could find no 
evidence of fusion, and they reiterated that Monday. Mimicking the Utah 
apparatus as closely as they could with the limited information available, and 
using a variety of other experimental setups, Lewis said, "we found no evidence 
of neutron detection . . . and no gamma rays." 
They also found no excess heat production. Lewis noted that Fleischmann's 
calculation of the heat output was based upon a hypothetical number, as Pons 
conceded in congressional testimony last week. 
The Caltech researchers also cast doubt on some evidence the Utah researchers 
had cited in support of their conclusions. They had, for example, said that 
they had found both helium and tritium in their cell and claimed that as proof 
that fusion had occurred. 
But Lewis noted that helium is present in the atmosphere of most chemical 
laboratories (because it is used in much scientific apparatus) in the same 
concentrations Pons and Fleischmann observed. In fact, he said, "the 
concentrations they observed were much higher than should have been there if it 
were produced by fusion." He also found that chemical reactions in the cell 
could make it appear that tritium is present when it is not. 
Concluded Lewis: "We have no reason to invoke fusion to explain any of their 
work." 
MIT's Parker did not make many details of his report public before the Monday 
night session. In essence, however, he found that Pons' and Fleischmann's 
report that they had observed neutrons in their experiment contained 
inconsistencies that suggested errors in measurement. 
"We're asserting that their neutron emission was below what they thought it 
was, including the possibility that it could have been none at all," Parker 
said. 
