VITAMINS FIRM MUST TREAD LIGHTLY IN ADS; 
NUTRITION: A CHATSWORTH SUPPLEMENT COMPANY MUST ADHERE TO STRICT FDA RULES IN 
ITS PRODUCT CLAIMS. 
Late-night radio talk show host Larry King is reading an advertisement. "Ester 
C . . . a remarkable development in vitamin C," he exclaims. "Enters the 
bloodstream twice as fast!" 
What King doesn't say in this ad for Natrol Inc.'s "Ester C" vitamin supplement 
is what many people who buy the product are probably thinking: Vitamin C has 
long been said to help stave off the common cold. 
It's left unsaid because Natrol, a Chatsworth-based nutritional supplements 
company, isn't allowed to make any cold-cure claims. 
Like cereal companies peddling oat bran flakes, Natrol and its president, 
Elliott Balbert, do business in a gray area, selling products that the 
government considers to be merely foods with no medicinal value. But consumers 
often buy them, like medicines, for their health. 
Natrol has grown fast lately, marketing about 20 specialty vitamin and 
nutrition concoctions like "Ester C," "Natrol High" ("The country's best picker 
upper!"), and "Oat Bran Fiber Caplets." Balbert predicts the company will do $5 
million in sales in the year ending this June, compared to about $2.5 million 
the previous year. So far this year profits have been running at 8% of sales, 
he says. 
But Natrol is in a tricky business. Vitamin and nutritional supplements 
companies may describe how a product works or say what ingredients it contains, 
but they can't claim it can cure a disease or alleviate a symptom. Only drug 
companies with licensed drugs can claim that. 
Balbert admitted that he learned that lesson the hard way. In 1987, Natrol, 
like many similar companies, was selling an exotic product from Japan that 
contained organic germanium, a metallic element. In Natrol's magazine ads, the 
company repeated claims by a Japanese research institute founded to investigate 
the substance, that organic germanium could inhibit the growth of tumors. 
Balbert said he was satisfied by the research. 
But the federal Food and Drug Administration, he admitted, "took a very dim 
view of the marketing of germanium." Balbert said an agent of the FDA came to 
his plant in Chatsworth to demand that the company stop making those claims 
about organic germanium. Natrol agreed, and it also voluntarily destroyed a few 
cases of the product. 
Now Balbert calls the ordeal a "positive" experience because it taught him an 
important lesson about his business. 
Since then, Natrol has become one of the better-known small companies in the 
health vitamin business. Natrol is a very savvy marketer, according to Tim 
Barringer, the nutrition director for Mrs. Gooch's food stores, which sell some 
Natrol products. "Elliott is a very enterprising fellow. He seems to have 
boundless energy," Barringer said. 
Natrol doesn't manufacture any of the substances it sells. It buys them from 
other companies, then packages and markets them. For instance, Natrol markets 
"Ester C" through an agreement with Inter-Cal, an Arizona company that 
manufactures the vitamin. 
The company also doesn't have the large research and development staff of a 
drug company. Natrol bought the rights to sell "Calms Kids" -- which it markets 
as a "nutritional formula" for unusually active children -- from Billy Jay 
Sahley, who founded and helps run a clinic in San Antonio. 
Sahley said she developed the original formula as an alternative to drugs for 
treating hyperactivity and tested it on 250 children between 1983 and 1985. She 
proposed to Balbert that Natrol market the product. 
Despite the name, Natrol doesn't claim that "Calms Kids" is a hyperactivity 
cure. Instead, the company sells "Calms Kids" as "a nutritional formula for the 
active child," the idea being that busy kids need extra vitamins. But doesn't 
the product's name imply that it's a hyperactivity cure? "We do not want to 
imply that," Balbert said. If parents use "Calms Kids" for more than a vitamin 
supplement, "they and their physician would make that decision," Balbert said. 
Yet even when a vitamin company's advertising claims are in order, it can still 
be a trying experience to market naturally occurring substances as nutritional 
supplements if they haven't been proven safe in government-approved tests. 
Consider Natrol's experience with "Calms Kids." 
Until last year, one of "Calms Kids" main ingredients was L-tryptophan, an 
amino acid found in some foods. For years, people have taken L-tryptophan to 
treat insomnia, depression -- and in children, hyperactivity. 
Then, last November, the FDA recalled L-tryptophan products that would result 
in dosages of more than 100 milligrams per day of L-tryptophan, because they 
had been linked to an outbreak of 30 cases of a rare blood condition that 
causes muscle pain, swelling and sometimes death. 
No one could be certain that L-tryptophan itself was to blame, but, then again, 
the amino acid had never been subject to the safety tests that drugs are put 
through in the United States. When cases of the blood disease continued to 
rise, the recall was expanded in March to include almost all L-tryptophan 
products. By last week the federal Centers for Disease Control said 1,478 cases 
of the blood disease linked to L-tryptophan had been reported, leading to 21 
deaths. 
Balbert said Natrol wasn't linked to any of the cases. The government hasn't 
named specific manufacturers linked to the outbreak. 
