AT THE GALLERIES / DAVID LEWINSON: 2 EXHIBITS GIVE IMPRESSIONS OF THE WORLD 
AROUND ARTISTS 
There are two basic ways that artists convey their responses to the world 
around them. They act as observer/commentators and present their concerns in 
one way or another. Or, they engage the impact of experience upon their own 
lives and try to give expression to this. Two exhibitions in downtown San Diego 
exemplify these modes. 
Aida Mancillas-Doyle's delvings into spiritual and ecological experience are 
intensely personal, resulting in "Exiled Memories," a passionate cycle of 
paintings and "sculptural books" provoked by a visit to Mission San Javier del 
Boc, in Arizona. There, the artist encountered the bizarre blend of American 
Indian attitudes and imported Christian values typical of the area. 
The most distinct representation of the impact of that experience occurs in the 
text of certain of the "sculptural books:" hard bound books stiffened with 
wire, bordered 
with dried weeds, and painted white -- through which some of the original text 
faintly appears. The artist's text, which spans several books, tells a 
mystically tinged story of an old woman, of birds, of death, and, more 
generally, of the transformation of human experience from a nature-centered 
orientation to one marked by alienation between people and their world. 
A different type of sculptural book marked by black paint is expressive in 
purely visual terms similar to bas relief. A page of one of these combines a 
tiny ladder, a nail, and a small photo of a harvest scene. On the opposite page 
is a collage representing a woman imprisoned. A sea shell and a feather share 
her space behind the metallic bars. Another book combines a reed flute, a 
bird's skull, a sheaf of reeds, and a stylized image of two snakes intertwined. 
The collaged books are impressive in both their formal originality and their 
expressive power. This is even more the case in the paintings that complete the 
presentation. Some of these works resonate with Chicano styles. In others, 
however, the references to medieval illuminated manuscripts implicit in the 
collaged books become explicit. The formal structure, in which the frame is 
divided into distinct zones of imagery, readily recalls Romanesque and early 
Gothic pictorial styles. Even the dryness of the pigments and the stone-like 
representation of the figures echo this bygone art. 
With these allusions in the paintings, the entire experience of 
Mancillas-Doyle's presentation expands into broader cultural and spiritual 
concerns, at least as these can pertain to questions of the human place in the 
universe, i.e. the meaning of life. Thus, there abides within the form of the 
work a clash of styles and imagery which mirrors its source: the artist's 
observation of the clash of Native American culture with Christianity. 
It's not surprising that Mancillas-Doyle embraces the Romanesque and Gothic, 
which bear an odd harmony with the "primitivism" of the native American 
cultures that affected her. Those were days in our own past when "we" lived 
quite primitively, both materially and spiritually, and, thus, not much 
differently than "them." That era in our history, which ended with the 
Renaissance, is called the Age of Faith. 
In the more recent, "modern" age, there's hardly any domain of experience more 
tenuously fulfilling than that of faith. With her art, Mancillas-Doyle reveals 
how she has been shaken up in the domain of faith. The result is like a door 
opened onto the deeper qualities of the lives we live, and a challenge to 
assess what we see there. 
The exhibition continues at Sushi, 852 8th Ave., through May 27. Gallery hours 
are limited noon to 4 p.m., Friday and Saturday. 
At the nearby Sonic Arts Gallery, Houston-based artists Michael Galbreath and 
Jack Massing, working together as the Art Guise, have put together a spicy 
summary of their encounters with San Diego. Titled "Talking Pictures," their 
effort reflects the observer/commentator mode of addressing the world outside 
of art and consists of 24 shiny metallic picture frames with junky tape 
recorders attached to them. 
These are commercial products aimed at people who want to send a low fidelity 
"hello" to Aunt Betsy or Cousin Bob. The recorder mechanism is attached to the 
frame and plays its message when tilted forward. 
The Art Guise use this bit of claptrap to produce cliched photographs of 
themselves on a golf course near the Coronado Bridge. They wear clothes 
purchased at a local thrift store and use a disposable camera to make the 
images. The recordings capture their musings on golf. Another group of photos 
portrays street people, accompanied by their verbal musings. 
A third group consists of things found in the street: a beer can, match books, 
and blooms from some flower. Street sounds accompany these. The fourth group of 
image/sounds relates to events in the news at the time of the Art Guise visit 
here. 
These "Talking Pictures" sit on shelves on the gallery walls. Motors drive 
brass rods which run behind the frames, alternately tipping them forward to 
release the recording. The result is a blaring cacophony that, at first, seems 
distracting, then amusing, then appropriately reflective of downtown life here 
or anywhere. 
Like the environment that inspires it, the exhibition exuberantly indulges a 
flair for chaos and presents a real appreciation of the mixed bag of qualities 
of urban life. 
The exhibition continues at Sonic Arts, 612 F St., through May 27. Hours are 
noon to 5 p.m., Thursday through Saturday. 
