IMF PANEL OKS 50% MORE FOR LOANS TO EUROPE, 3RD WORLD 
A 50% increase in money available for loans to Eastern Europe and developing 
countries was approved today by the International Monetary Fund's policy-making 
committee. 
At the insistence of the United States, the IMF's Interim Committee 
linked the $60-billion increase to a plan to force substantial economic reforms 
from 11 poor countries, which are $4 billion behind on their loan payments. 
U.S. officials said Congress had demanded the link before approving the 
increase in the U.S. contribution, or quota. 
In exchange for the link, which many debtor countries opposed, the United 
States agreed to begin consideration of an additional increase in its 
contribution in 1993, two years earlier than originally planned. 
"Despite reservations that a number of members had on certain individual 
elements of the package, we recognize this was a consensus. . . . Everybody had 
to give in order to achieve a compromise," said Canadian Finance Minister 
Michael H. Wilson, chairman of the 22-member Interim Committee. 
The quota change, which must be approved before the end of 1991 by nations 
representing 85% of the fund's voting power, will raise the fund's resources to 
$180 billion from $120 billion. 
"What you see . . . is a package with features that are designed to strengthen 
the role of the International Monetary Fund as the central pillar of the 
international financial system," Wilson said. 
Delinquent countries that agree to adopt economic reforms would be eligible for 
money from a special IMF fund. However, nations in arrears could lose their 
voting rights. Also, the agency could sell 3 million ounces of gold, roughly 
equivalent to the members' original contributions, to meet the obligations of 
defaulting debtors. 
The 11 nations in arrears are the Sudan, Zambia, Peru, Costa Rica, Honduras, 
Guyana, Somalia, Sierra Leone, Cambodia, Vietnam and Panama. 
The Interim Committee also agreed to reorder the voting power within the fund, 
allowing Japan to vault from fifth place to second, behind the United States, 
in recognition of its growing financial power. West Germany will share the 
second position. 
Officials said Britain, which had been No. 2, and France were close to an 
agreement to share the fourth spot, although that was not addressed in the 
Interim Committee's statement. 
The panel reached agreement on the package Monday night after debating it most 
of the day in private sessions. It announced the pact in a communique this 
morning. 
The plan had received an important boost Sunday with the endorsement by the 
Group of Seven major industrial nations: the United States, Japan, West 
Germany, Great Britain, France, Canada and Italy. 
On other subjects, the Interim Committee promised to support reforms in Eastern 
European countries emerging from four decades of communism but not at the 
expense of developing countries. It welcomed applications for fund membership 
from Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. Poland, Hungary, Yugoslavia and Romania are 
already members. 
The panel also pointed to progress under Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady's 
14-month-old program to reduce the crushing $1.3-trillion debt burden on Third 
World countries. 
