HIGH SCHOOL BASEBALL ROUNDUP 
In other Metro Conference games: 
Bonita Vista 8, Castle Park 1 -- Sophomore Craig Costello doubled with the 
bases loaded to give Bonita Vista a 3-0 lead in the first inning. Jimmy 
Ilusorio hit a home run in the third inning and raised his batting average to 
.454. John Solomon hit a two-run home run in the fifth, his fourth of the 
season. Bonita Vista improved to 11-12, 5-4. Castle Park dropped to 21-4, 7-2. 
Marian 5, Southwest 3 -- Marian pitcher Leo Ortiz struck out seven in going the 
distance for his third victory, and he also helped his own cause with a 
first-inning two-run double. Teammate Jose Iniguez had two hits and an RBI. 
Chula Vista 16, Coronado 2 -- Sophomore pitcher Cesar Martinez picked up his 
first victory in going the distance. Chula Vista's leadoff batter, Alex Garcia, 
knocked in four runs on four hits. 
Hilltop 5, Sweetwater 3 -- Hilltop's Chad Boyd went two for three, drove in two 
runs and scored another to lead the Lancers (6-13, 3-6). 
Palomar League 
Torrey Pines 8, Orange Glen 0 -- John Lynch threw 113 pitches, struck out 11 
batters and flirted with a no-hitter until he surrendered a base hit in the 
seventh against host Orange Glen. Lynch (1-1) also hit a two-run home run (his 
second) in the second inning to help Torrey Pines improve to 10-9-1, 3-4. Pete 
DeFrancesca went two for three. Orange Glen fell to 10-12, 3-5. 
Mt. Carmel 2, Poway 1 -- Two runners, one for each side, were thrown out at the 
plate in the sixth inning. Mt. Carmel finally won it in the seventh. After John 
Tejcek opened the inning with a triple, the next two batters were intentionally 
walked to load the bases. A.J. Forlano then hit a sacrifice fly to score Tejcek 
with the winning run. 
Fallbrook 7, Vista 4 -- Fallbrook scored all of its runs in the fourth, three 
of which came in on Erik Larson's double. Mike Gainsborough went three for four 
for Fallbrook, which handed Vista pitcher Reggie DeLeon (6-1) his first loss of 
the season. 
City Central League 
St. Augustine 6, Hoover 5 -- Albert Canedo's grand slam home run in the fifth 
wasn't enough to push Hoover over the top. St. Augustine got two-RBI 
performances from Mike Masudo and Dan McGehee. 
City Western League 
USDHS 19, LaJolla 5 -- Tom Shanner (6-0) remained undefeated at the mound for 
USDHS (16-4, 8-2). At the plate, teammates Steve Walker went two for five with 
four RBIs, Gavin Millay four for five with two RBIs and Jeff Desjardins three 
for six with two RBIs. La Jolla dropped to 4-17, 1-10. 
Avocado League 
Rancho Buena Vista 9, San Marcos 4 -- San Marcos (5-14, 4-5) had back-to-back 
home runs in the fifth inning and a two-run homer in the seventh but was unable 
to hold off RBV (11-10, 4-5). Robert McLeod (6-3) got the victory and went 
three for five with two doubles and two RBIs. 
San Pasqual 15, El Camino 2 -- San Pasqual took advantage of eight El Camino 
errors and collected 14 hits. Mike Escarcega, Kevin Herde, Tony Medina, David 
Goss and Eric Marsh each had two hits for the victors. 
Coastal League 
Francis Parker 12, Santa Fe Christian 11 -- Christian (1-6 in league) gave 
Parker (8-0) a scare by taking a two-run lead into the seventh. In that inning 
Parker came through with three runs, thanks to triples from William Beamer and 
Pietro La Greca, to pull out the victory. Mark Applbaum and Bob Ogle homered 
for Parker. 
