FUNDING CUTS THREATEN AGENCIES THAT TEACH ENGLISH TO IMMIGRANTS 
Several community agencies that offer English classes to federal amnesty 
applicants have begun laying off teachers and some say they may be forced to 
close their doors altogether because of recently announced funding cutbacks by 
the state Department of Education. 
Many community organizations and public schools across the state involved in 
the program began receiving notices two weeks ago announcing cutbacks in 
previously approved funding, state education officials said Monday. The 
officials blamed the cutbacks on insufficient funding from the governor's 
office. 
Linda Mitchell, a spokeswoman for the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of 
Los Angeles, said the notices have created havoc in the program, aimed at 
helping immigrants learn enough English and civics to qualify for the second 
phase of the federal amnesty program. 
"It's anarchy out there," said Mitchell, referring to the state's handling of 
the amnesty education program. "Our fear is that applicants will get 
discouraged and just give up." 
Juan Gutierrez, director of One-Stop Immigration in East Los Angeles, which has 
about 6,000 immigrants enrolled in its English classes, said that "a lot of 
agencies are getting ready to close down because they have not received the 
money they were promised." 
The community agencies have been caught in the middle of a political standoff 
between State Supt. of Public Instruction Bill Honig and Gov. George Deukmejian 
over the release of an additional $50 million for the amnesty education 
program, according to various service providers. 
The Deukmejian Administration argues that the education department is 
overspending by paying for more than the minimum 40 hours of classroom 
instruction required of amnesty applicants by the federal Immigration and 
Naturalization Service. 
Honig, on the other hand, maintains that the governor scrimped on the education 
program when he allocated only $354 million for it out of the state's 
$1.8-billion share of federal funds for immigration programs. And state 
education officials also blame the funding shortfall on a higher than 
anticipated demand for the classes. 
But Mitchell and other community group representatives argue that the 
department shares some of the blame. Mitchell charged that the department has 
mismanaged the program from the start, "changing formulas for reimbursement 
mid-stream, not offering solid contracts with community agencies or statewide 
coordination to make sure enough classes are offered throughout the state." 
She added that the immigrants rights coalition plans to ask Honig to rescind 
the letters sent out over the past two weeks. The group also plans to ask the 
department for "a full accounting" of the money spent by various community 
groups and the number of students they are serving. She said that such 
accounting has been lacking and has led to inconsistencies in funding. 
Gutierrez said that even if more money is released by the state, community 
agencies may not be willing to continue their programs next year, the third in 
the five-year education program. 
"People have become skeptical of Department of Education promises," he said. 
His organization, for instance, was notified that it would receive only 
$900,000 of the original $2.5 million it was promised, he said. 
The state has also been slow in paying the organizations, he said. His 
organization has had to borrow money to keep its program in operation, and it 
started notifying its teachers this week that they may have to wait until the 
state reimbursement comes through to get paid, he said. 
"And we're doing better than most agencies," he added. 
The Labor Immigrant Assistance Program, sponsored by the AFL-CIO labor union, 
began cutting back on teachers and doubling up its classes last week, said 
program director Teresa Sanchez. She expressed concern that some students may 
drop out as schedules are changed to consolidate the classes. 
