MUSIC REVIEW; 
KRONOS MAKES RILEY'S 'SALOME' DANCE, DANCE 
In the beginning about 25 years ago -- there was Terry Riley's "In C." Some 
called it a monumental breakthrough in droning creativity. Others found it the 
musical equivalent of Chinese water torture. 
With-it prophets of the avant-garde related it to the birth of minimalism. 
Fossilized iconoclasts related it to the death of intellectual and/or emotional 
stimulation. 
Riley, born in 1935, did not choose to wear his high-priest robes for long. 
Younger aesthetic Turks usurped the commercially profitable realm of the 
Xeroxed arpeggio, and the grand old man retreated to his home in the Sierra 
Nevada mountains. He soon turned to other concerns, both spiritual and 
expressive. 
Now -- drum roll, please -- comes Riley's "Salome Dances for Peace," a massive 
vehicle concocted for and with the wondrous and, thank goodness, tireless 
Kronos Quartet. At the local premiere of the complete version, Saturday night 
at the Wadsworth Theater, it lasted two hours, not including intermission. That 
is three times as long as Beethoven's most ambitious effort in the same genre. 
Riley's "Salome" -- which owes little to Oscar Wilde and less to Richard 
Strauss -- was intended as a sociopolitical ballet. The necrophiliac princess 
of Judea uses her alluring powers, we are told, to create universal peace. She 
becomes a goddess, a modern sorceress, a shaman, a warrior, and, it says here, 
"an influence on the world leaders' actions." 
The internal sections of the five-part suite, most of which melt quietly into 
each other, bear provocative titles: "Fanfare in the Minimal Kingdom," "At the 
Ancient Aztec Corn Races Salome Meets Wilk Talker," "Half Wolf Dances Made in 
Moonlight," "Breakthrough to the Realm of the War Demons," and so onward and 
sideways. The titles, alas, are more theatrical than the score. 
Riley and his players send their abstracted heroine on a convoluted, ever muted 
odyssey that may be better heard than seen. The music flirts amiably with jazz, 
blues, ragas, Asian modes, repetitive patterns, static rituals, and hoary 
Western traditions. 
Melodies are allowed. Melodic fragments are encouraged. Fogies who do not find 
the exercise too soporific can identify traces of Debussy and Bartok, even a 
nod or two in the direction of late Beethoven. 
It took Riley two years to write "Salome Dances for Peace." It took the Kronos 
virtuosos three years to learn to play it. It took many members of the 
potentially sympathetic audience at UCLA an hour to decide that they had heard 
enough. 
The exodus at intermission, and beyond, was alarming. The defectors could not 
have been disturbed by any bold dissonance or unnerved by any dynamic 
onslaught. Riley's "Salome" music is invariably civil. It abounds in gentle 
gestures. Lyricism emerges the dominant impulses. The counterpoint is never too 
complex to be forbidding. 
There are passages of striking poise and buoyancy in the work. The flow of 
motivic ideas and the exchange of subtle nuances often beguiles the senses. The 
rhythmic pulses, though occasionally stubborn, dictate an intricate inner 
logic. The writing for contrasting strings remains eminently idiomatic. The 
balances are impeccable, the textures transparent. This, clearly, is the work 
of a master. 
If only it were a shorter, tighter, less indulgent work. Riley seems eager to 
crank out music -- much of it undeniably beautiful -- by the yard. One wishes 
he would care more about focusing specific beginnings, middles and ends. One 
wishes he would expend more energy on saying less. As presently constituted, 
his "Salome" lulls and dulls the senses just when a little provocation might be 
most useful. 
Undaunted, the dedicated members of Kronos Quartet -- David Harrington and John 
Sherba (violins), Hank Dutt (viola) and Joan Jeanrenaud -- once again made the 
difficult seem easy and the impossible seem merely difficult. Larry Neff's 
visual designs -- fluid patterns of mottled light projected on a screen behind 
the players -- added the aura of a futuristic juke box. 
