PARALLEL FEATURE AND TV PROJECTS ARRIVE AT ALMOST THE SAME TIME 
On Friday, Orion will release "Lost Angels," a film about a teen-age boy 
wrongly placed in a psychiatric hospital by his fully insured, oblivious 
parents. Nine days later, CBS will broadcast "Out on the Edge," a TV movie 
about another boy who finds himself in exactly the same position. 
Producers of the film and the TV movie say the nearly simultaneous appearance 
of two nearly identical dramas is completely coincidental. They recount 
different starting points and separate development histories of their projects. 
Muckraking zeal motivated the TV producer, Steve Tisch, who set his project in 
motion after seeing a news show segment on the problem. 
Personal identification with troubled teens spurred "Lost Angels" co-producer 
Howard Rosenman, who commissioned a script after reading an article about the 
problem in the L.A. Weekly and seeing a film treatment touching on the issue. 
"I'd been counseling runaways in New York, and that started me thinking," 
Rosenman says. 
Despite the independent development of the two projects, their coincidental 
arrival highlights the increasing competitiveness among film makers and TV 
producers for up-to-the-minute source material. 
Analogs to the "Lost Angels"-"Out on the Edge" synchronism in this decade 
include the Frances Farmer bio-pics that appeared two months apart in 1982 and 
1983, "Frances" in theatres and "Will 
There Really Be a Morning?" on TV. There were also two Dorothy Stratten 
treatments, "Death of a Centerfold" on TV and "Star 80" in theatres, seen less 
than two years apart in 1981 and 1983. 
Another recent example of parallel thinking by TV and film producers was HBO's 
TV movie about minor-league baseball, "Long Gone," which aired in 1987, a few 
months before Orion started shooting "Bull Durham." 
In such instances, accusations of copycattism may be heard, but industry 
decision-makers generally deflect such criticism by saying that similar 
antennae pick up similar signals. 
In this case, the producers were getting signals about parents turning 
teen-agers over to special-care facilities whose financial motivations don't 
necessarily coincide with the child's best interest. 
"We're seeing today a breakdown in society," "Lost Angels" co-producer Thomas 
Baer says, "where the traditional values of parenting are being supplanted by 
economic motives, while our leaders are saying 'everything is terrific; this is 
a great country.' " 
"In 1989," says "Out on the Edge" producer Tisch, "it's naive to think there's 
not a high school in America where students aren't exposed to drugs. Parents 
who can't communicate with their kids can get scared by the TV ads for these 
profit-making institutions that say, 'If you can't deal with your child, we 
can.' " 
In the TV movie, Rick Schroder plays a boy who can't get along with his 
divorced mother's new romantic interest and feels abandoned by his father. 
Schroder's angry rebellion takes fairly mild forms, but his mother, urged on by 
her boyfriend, agrees to commit him. Insurance will cover most of the cost. The 
boy has no real psychiatric problem, but he is detained against his will, his 
only allies being an understanding therapist and another patient who becomes 
his girlfriend. 
In "Lost Angels," Beastie Boy leader Adam Horovitz makes his film debut as a 
boy whose recently remarried mother is too distracted to understand him and 
whose father is too angry to care. Horovitz gets involved with a gang headed by 
his violent half-brother and is jailed while his mother is away on her 
honeymoon. She returns and commits him. She, too, is insured. The boy attempts 
escape but is caught. The only bright spots are an understanding therapist 
(Donald Sutherland) and another patient who becomes his girlfriend. 
Horovitz says of his character: "It's not like he's crazy, he just doesn't know 
what he wants to do. He's looking for something." Schroder says of his 
character: "He's a good kid in bad circumstances. His problems are no worse 
than what I've had in my life, but he doesn't have parents who take time to sit 
and talk and tell him they're behind him." 
Both productions take dead aim at laws and medical practices that are "just as 
likely to solidify anti-social qualities as to improve kids' behavior," as Baer 
puts it. 
Both producers dismiss the suggestion that the films' simultaneous appearances 
will hurt each other. 
"I'm not worried," Rosenman says. "TV is TV." 
Tisch, whose TV credits include "The Burning Bed," says: "I think TV movies can 
be pretty important. The audience is much bigger, and if delivering a message 
is part of your intention, TV is a better way." 
