EPA RETHINKS ITS STRATEGY ON SUPERFUND CLEANUP PROJECT 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which has spent $8.5 million on 
ground-water contamination in the San Gabriel Valley without developing a 
comprehensive plan or cleaning up any water, is reevaluating its approach. 
The reevaluation comes amid growing criticism of EPA by water suppliers, 
community groups and political leaders. 
Conferring on New Strategy 
EPA spokesman Terry Wilson said the agency's regional office in San Francisco, 
which oversees the San Gabriel Valley Superfund project, is conferring with 
officials in Washington on a new strategy for attacking ground-water pollution. 
That strategy will be unveiled, Wilson said, at a congressional hearing that 
Rep. Esteban E. Torres (D-La Puente) has scheduled in Baldwin Park June 5. 
Wilson said EPA officials will not discuss any changes in priorities on the 
project until the hearing by the Small Business Committee's subcommittee on 
environment and labor, headed by Torres. 
Torres has already berated EPA for a lack of progress in dealing with a 
contamination problem that was discovered nearly 10 years ago and has been on 
the Superfund priority list since 1984. Suspected carcinogens have seeped into 
more than one-fourth of the 400 wells in the Main San Gabriel Basin, 
jeopardizing the water supply of 1 million people. 
"From the material presented to me so far by the agency," Torres said, "it 
appears to me that EPA has, at the very least, mismanaged the project. For 10 
years they have been running around in circles trying to decide what to do and 
they still don't know." 
EPA also will face strong criticism at the hearing from the Upper San Gabriel 
Valley Municipal Water District, which imports water to the area; the Main San 
Gabriel Basin Watermaster, which oversees pumping from wells in the basin, and 
the Upper San Gabriel Valley Water Assn., which represents water suppliers. 
Robert G. Berlien, general manager of the water district, has been authorized 
by all three agencies to tell the congressional hearing that EPA is moving much 
too slowly. 
District Manager's Points 
In testimony prepared for the hearing, Berlien has outlined these concerns: 
EPA has not developed an overall plan or cleaned up any water. "Water suppliers 
do not have a clear understanding of where the cleanup project is headed." 
Little progress has been made in finding out how pollutants contaminated ground 
water. The pollutants include trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE) 
and other solvents. The sources must be found to make sure that contamination 
is not continuing and to identify polluters who can be billed for cleanup 
costs. Even though EPA is giving the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control 
Board $1 million a year to find pollution sources, the water board says it will 
take 10 years to complete its initial survey at its present pace. 
EPA's decision to concentrate resources and efforts on preventing contaminated 
ground water from moving southward through the Whittier Narrows to the 
neighboring Central Basin is of little help to the San Gabriel Valley. 
Meanwhile, cleanup of the San Gabriel Valley's most polluted region, the 
Azusa-Baldwin Park area, is being deferred. 
EPA's decision to spend more than $1.5 million to solve the pollution problem 
of a tiny El Monte water company that serves only 200 homes, Berlien said, 
"does not appear to us to be a reasonable decision." The problem could have 
been solved cheaply with a connection to another water supplier. 
EPA's proposed change of engineering contractors "in mid-project can only 
result in significant time delays as one contractor phases out and another 
gears up to take over. Vast amounts of specific site experience will be lost in 
the change and large expenditures will be needed to educate the new engineering 
contractor." 
Berlien said he understands that the current contractor, the environmental 
consulting and engineering firm of CH2M Hill, will be replaced on the San 
Gabriel Valley project by the Bechtel Co. next year. Wilson at EPA said that a 
change might be made, but contracts have not yet been signed. 
Staff Increases 
In his written testimony, Berlien said the water agencies believe that EPA 
should increase its staff on the San Gabriel Valley project, consider opening a 
local office, accelerate the search for pollution sources and immediately begin 
to clean up heavily contaminated ground water in Baldwin Park and Azusa. 
In spite of his harsh criticism of the cleanup effort, Berlien said he hopes 
that EPA will not dwell on past mistakes but move forward. "We certainly do not 
wish to see EPA expending its limited resources on justifying its past 
actions," he said. 
EPA has committed more than $15.3 million to the ground-water cleanup thus far, 
including $8.5 million already spent. 
A new accounting by EPA of funds obligated to the project lists $6.5 million 
for studies of the basinwide problem, $2.3 million for studies in the Whittier 
Narrows area, $1 million for the design of a treatment system for polluted 
wells in Whittier Narrows, nearly $2 million for the study of pollution 
problems of three small El Monte water companies and construction of a 
treatment system for one of them, and more than $1.5 million for a search for 
pollution sources. 
Vast and Complex 
Wilson said that organizing the cleanup project has been difficult because the 
problem is so vast and complex. EPA estimated last year that it might take $800 
million and decades of work to remove the industrial solvents that have seeped 
into ground water. 
Also testifying at the hearing will be representatives of the East Valleys 
Organization, a church-based community action group that has put ground-water 
cleanup at the top of its agenda. 
John L. Korey, chairman of a task force studying the ground-water issue for the 
group, said EPA has not given the San Gabriel Valley the attention it deserves. 
"We see this as a key issue in the valley," Korey said. "People are becoming 
concerned." Korey said his group's goal is to create so much awareness of the 
problem that EPA's top administrator in Washington "will wake up in the morning 
worrying about the quality of water in the San Gabriel Valley." 
Carol Montano, a task force member, said that although EPA has put "an 
incredible amount of research and investigation" into the San Gabriel Valley 
project, it has failed to pursue polluters aggressively and make them pay for 
the cleanup. "There's definitely been foot-dragging," she said. 
GROUND-WATER PROBLEMS IN THE SAN GABRIEL VALLEY 
Here is an overview of the task facing the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
in cleaning up ground water in the San Gabriel Valley. 
Water basin: Forty-six city water departments, private water companies and 
public water districts draw water out of the Main San Gabriel Basin through 
wells and pipe it to homes, businesses, schools and factories. Basin serves 
more than 1 million people in an area that covers nearly all of the San Gabriel 
Valley outside of Pasadena and Pomona. 
Discovery: Tests in December, 1979, showed high amounts of trichloroethylene 
(TCE), an industrial solvent, in an Irwindale well. 
Superfund: EPA added the Main San Gabriel Basin to its list of Superfund 
cleanup sites in 1984 and has spent more than $8.5 million on the problem. 
Contaminants: Primarily TCE and tetrachloroethylene, also known as 
perchloroethylene (PCE), both used in dry cleaning and as industrial solvents. 
Lesser amounts of carbon tetrachloride, another solvent. These compounds are 
classified as volatile organics -- volatile because they evaporate easily and 
organic because they contain carbon. 
Current status: More than one-fourth of the basin's 400 wells are contaminated 
with volatile organics. About 65 wells are shut down: 35 because of volatile 
organics and 30 because of unrelated contamination from nitrates, stemming from 
fertilizer or failed septic systems. Wells that have not been closed have such 
small amounts of contamination that the water meets state and federal standards 
or the water is treated or mixed with purer water. 
Health risk: Some of the compounds have caused cancer in animal experiments. 
But by closing wells and treating or blending water, all water suppliers in the 
San Gabriel Valley are delivering water that meets federal and state drinking 
water standards. 
Sources: Suspected causes of polluted wells include leaks from chemical storage 
tanks, spills while storage tanks are being filled or chemicals are being used, 
illegal dumping by companies or individuals, and leaks from scores of dumps 
that have been closed or from the few landfills that are still open. 
Cleanup Cost: Estimated by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency at 
hundreds of millions of dollars over several decades. 
Sources: Environmental Protection Agency reports and studies by water agencies. 
