B OF A ADS IRK DAUGHTER OF BANK'S FOUNDER; 
USE OF A. P. GIANNINI'S PICTURE CALLED 'CONTEMPTIBLE' 
Bank of America promotes itself as "doing a job for more Californians." But to 
Claire Giannini Hoffman, the bank her father founded 85 years ago is doing an 
unflattering job on his memory. 
Hoffman, a frequent critic of Bank of America in recent years, is fighting mad 
over a series of recent B of A advertisements that show a picture of her 
father, A. P. Giannini, and invite customers to open checking accounts. She 
spent much of the weekend contacting newspapers and radio stations around the 
state to condemn the ads, calling them "an insult to my father." 
"It is contemptible, what they are doing," the 84-year-old Hoffman said in a 
telephone interview. "They are using my father's name and picture to promote 
their bank." 
B of A said it didn't mean to offend Hoffman. "We're sorry she feels that way," 
bank spokeswoman Shirley Norton said. 
The advertisements invited new B of A customers to open free checking accounts 
on "Founder's Day," officially celebrated each year on May 6, Giannini's 
birthday. The ads declared, "This Saturday Is Our Founder's Birthday and You 
Get the Present," and ran in many newspapers around the state last week. 
In B of A's view, Norton said, the ads capture the spirit of A. P. Giannini. 
"He was very aggressive," she said. "He went out and rang on doorbells to get 
customers. He didn't sit in the branch office, waiting for customers to come to 
him." 
But Hoffman disagrees. She said the modern Bank of America does not represent 
the business philosophy espoused by her father, who died in 1949. "My father's 
policy was to help people," Hoffman said. "He believed that, if you helped 
people, eventually you would have people for friends as well as customers." 
Today's B of A, she said, "is just another bank. If it didn't have the same 
name, there would be no similarity at all." 
Hoffman, who delivered a blow to the bank's image when she resigned from her 
honorary seat on its board in 1985 over what she called the "unpardonable" act 
of selling its San Francisco headquarters, said she has contacted a public 
relations firm and her lawyer "to see what I can do" about the ads. 
She said she is also considering closing her account at B of A's San Mateo, 
Calif., branch, known on the bank's roster as the A. P. Giannini branch. 
