BLACKHAWKS SNAP OILER WIN STREAK 
Doug Wilson's tiebreaking goal with 1:59 remaining led the Chicago Blackhawks 
to a 4-3 victory over the Edmonton Oilers Friday night, tying their NHL playoff 
series at a game apiece. 
Wilson scored on a wrist shot from the top of the left circle only moments 
after Edmonton goaltender Bill Ranford had robbed Steve Larmer on a shot from 
15 feet out. 
Esa Tikkanen attempted to clear the puck after Larmer's shot and it wound up on 
Wilson's stick. The Blackhawks' defenseman wristed a 35-footer past a screened 
Ranford, sending the Campbell Conference series back to Chicago for the third 
and fourth games Sunday and Tuesday. 
The loss broke an eight-game playoff winning streak for the Oilers, who had won 
the opener of this series at the Northlands Coliseum, 5-2, Wednesday night. 
Greg Millen, who had a 4-18-4 career record against the Oilers, had never 
played against them in a playoff game before. It was his first appearance in 
the playoffs since losing in the Norris Division finals to St. Louis. Ed 
Belfour had played the last five games for the Blackhawks. 
Millen preserved the victory with 20 seconds remaining when he dove backwards 
to cover Tikkanen's shot in the crease after the puck deflected off Wilson's 
skate and was rolling toward the goal line. 
It was the first time the Blackhawks had ever beaten the Oilers in playoff game 
at the Northlands Coliseum, where they are now 1-6. 
The Blackhawks took a 1-0 lead when Troy Murray banged in a centering pass from 
Jeremy Roenick on a breakaway at 17:50 of the first period. The play was set up 
on a nice feed from Greg Gilbert. 
Denis Savard made it 2-0 with a 25-foot slapshot from the slot at 2:02 of the 
second period after the Oilers failed to clear the puck. 
The Oilers came back with a goal by Glenn Anderson, who scored from the lower 
left circle at 9:49 after taking a pass across the slot from Mark Messier. The 
goal capped a three-on-two break. 
Steve Thomas restored Chicago's two-goal lead when he scored from in front on a 
breakaway with Wayne Presley at 17:36. Oiler defenseman Charlie Huddy fell down 
on the play, allowing Thomas a clear shot at Ranford. 
A power-play goal by Jari Kurri at 19:01 cut Chicago's lead to 3-2 before the 
end of the second period. Kurri scored from the right circle on the rebound of 
a shot by Esa Tikkanen for his 88th playoff goal, one behind the all-time 
leader, Wayne Gretzky. 
The Oilers tied it 3-3 on a goal at 2:10 of the third period by Tikkanen, who 
knocked in the rebound of a shot from the right point by Kurri. 
