POP WEEKEND; 
JERRY GARCIA-BOB WEIR SHOW LACKLUSTER 
Some of the most exciting moments in Friday's Jerry Garcia Band-Bob Weir show 
at Irvine Meadows Amphitheatre came early in the evening, indeed, well before 
either performer took to the stage. 
The pre-show tail-gate party/new-age swap meet common to Grateful Dead-related 
events was particularly enlivened this night by a bearded, be-turbaned fellow 
rolling around on high-tech skates, a portable amplifier strapped to his back. 
With a look of fried glee on his face, he sailed about, playing manic riffs on 
a battered Les Paul, singing something on the order of: "Computerized cocktail 
time, Computerized cocktail time, Midnight box opens, Arrgh! . . . ah, ha 
haaa!" 
Maybe it wouldn't have taken him far on "Star Search" but it was a sight more 
energetic than most of what Weir or Garcia had to offer in their Dead-Lite 
sets. Largely, these two front men only served to show, by the absence of the 
band they front, what a fragile magic it is that makes the Grateful Dead work. 
With the Dead and his own bands over the years, opener Weir has gained a 
reputation as one of the finest rhythm guitarists in rock, raising that 
oft-neglected role to a fine art. But, as such, he is at his finest as a 
support player, sparking and coloring other's solo flights. Supplemented only 
by acoustic bassist Rob Wasserman, Weir and his acoustic guitar -- on which he 
isn't nearly as nimble -- found little to underscore. 
While he did gather some momentum on Lowell George's "Easy to Slip" and the 
Dead's "Throwing Stones," oldies selections such as "Fever," "Twilight Time" 
and "Blackbird" stranded Weir's negligible voice without the Dead's 
unpredictable backings to spur him. Weir took only a few instrumental solos, 
leaving most of that to Wasserman. While the latter offered some flashy 
technique -- including beating his strings with his bow on some mock-flamenco 
passages -- he lacked the common jazzman's ability to really dig into the 
depths of his instrument. 
Garcia's set, meanwhile, cried out for some of the support Weir's guitar could 
have provided. Though his band -- which he never identified or even 
acknowledged -- was competent enough, they lacked the empathy and drive often 
needed to push Garcia's skills and corral his excesses. His guitar work 
displayed plenty of both in a set loaded with comfortable oldies. Garcia's 
croaked singing, by the way, has pretty much waned from endearing to 
abominable. 
Of course, nothing happening on stage damped the party which had begun long 
before the show, with happy folks dancing and spilling all over the place. 
Whether Garcia's playing was crystalline and probing, as on Dylan's "I Shall Be 
Released," or meandering out to pasture on the Roy Hamilton classic "Don't Let 
Go," it was received with relaxed approbation by a crowd bent on such criminal 
acts as seat-hopping. 
Seeing Garcia -- gray enough to be Santa, and cumbersome enough to be Idaho's 
answer to the California Raisins -- distribute his six-stringed sedatives to 
the crowd, one had to wonder: "This is what Irvine city officials view as a 
threat?" The amphitheater's yellow-jacketed security staff certainly seemed to 
be taking it all seriously, struggling to impose order on the milling Dead 
crowd, which has only been coping with itself for, what, two decades now? 
