ART / ZAN DUBIN; 
ARTISTS POP OFF ABOUT '60S SHOW IN NEWPORT 
If an exhibition must be controversial to be good, as some would argue, then 
"L.A. Pop in the Sixties," at the Newport Harbor Art Museum, seems to have 
succeeded. 
"It's an exhibition which creates a fuss, which is what an exhibition is all 
about," said Henry Hopkins, moderator at a panel discussion Saturday, during 
which the show's basic premise -- that there was a distinct Pop art movement 
here in the 1960s -- was roundly though cordially denounced during the panel by 
three of the show's nine artists. 
The issue had already surfaced in local newspapers -- in which both writers and 
some of the show's artists questioned the existence of an L.A. Pop art 
movement. "I never considered myself a Pop artist," Billy Al Bengston told The 
Times recently. 
Taking part in the discussion were the exhibit's curator, Anne Ayres, and 
artists Llyn Foulkes, Robert Dowd and Joe Goode, all of whom closely echoed the 
proclamation of Bengston, who did not attend the panel. The other Los 
Angeles-based artists in the 80-piece exhibit, which runs through July 9, are 
John Baldessari, Wallace Berman, Vija Celmins, Phillip Hefferton and Edward 
Ruscha. 
"Nobody was thinking about the fact that they were Pop artists, because nobody 
knew it was Pop," Foulkes said to about 80 art enthusiasts gathered at the 
museum. 
"None of us had ever heard of Pop art because there was no such thing," Goode 
said. ". . . We were not aware of (Andy) Warhol and (Roy) Lichtenstein," two 
Pop art giants based in New York, because their work had not yet been shown in 
California. 
"We didn't have any definition (of what sort of art we were creating) at that 
time," Dowd said, adding later: "I strongly object to the concept that L.A. art 
is regional; so is New York art. That concept is always used to make L.A take a 
back seat to New York art." 
Even the widely respected Hopkins, director of Los Angeles' renowned Frederick 
R. Weisman Collection, said an inner voice told him, "This is not Pop art" when 
he saw the exhibit. 
Ayres, director of the art gallery at Otis/Parsons Art Institute, defended and 
repeated her curatorial reasoning, though quickly remarking that the show's 
title is misleading. "I admit right now that the title is unfortunate," she 
said. 
But Ayres' premise has a lot to do with the absence of the word art from the 
title of the exhibit -- which does not specifically refer to Pop as a movement 
or style of art. 
Though Ayres insisted that all the show's artists were at one time associated 
with Pop art during the '60s and that she intends to compare their works to to 
New York Pop art, the exhibit is "not about defining an L.A. Pop art movement." 
Instead, it is about art that reflected the impact of Pop culture and the 1960s 
as the birth of mass media, she said: "It was about how some artists seemed to 
be responding to mass culture and mass media." 
Like Warhol's iconic silk-screen of Marilyn Monroe and his Campbell soup cans, 
the paintings on view have to do with how words, images and common everyday 
objects are seen repeatedly in the media. By including the word paintings of 
Ruscha -- where words such as Spam, Flash and Honk stand alone -- and 
Baldessari's compilations of photography and text, "I was arguing for a kind of 
conceptual undercurrent in L.A. art of the time," Ayres said. 
Also, unifying the works was a kind of "strangeness," the curator said. 
"There's an odd, quirky strangeness. Almost a surreal quality." Many exude a 
melancholy, a sense of loss, she said, "of needing to keep one's integrity to 
avoid being used up by the media. That feeling is like nothing we see in the 
New York work." 
Despite the clarification, Ayres seemed less confident when asked by Hopkins 
whether she would change her concept were she to curate the exhibit over again. 
While she would probably have chosen other works had they been available and 
doubted whether she would have included any different artists, she responded: 
"I'm too close to (the exhibit) to comment on that. I don't know." "L.A. Pop in 
the Sixties" -- an exhibition of work by Ed Ruscha, Joe Goode, Billy Al 
Bengston, Llyn Foulkes, Robert Dowd, John Baldessari, Wallace Berman, Vija 
Celmins and Phillip Hefferton -- remains on view through July 9 at the Newport 
Harbor Art Museum, 850 San Clemente Drive, Newport Beach. Hours: 10 a.m. to 5 
p.m. Tuesdays through Sundays. Admission: $2 to $3. Information: (714) 
759-1122. 
