PRO FOOTBALL PLAYERS TESTIFY AGAINST STEROID USE; 
PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL DANGERS OF DRUGS EXPLAINED TO SENATE COMMITTEE 
All-pro lineman Bill Fralic of the Atlanta Falcons said here Tuesday that 
"steroid madness" pervades most locker rooms and weight rooms in professional 
football, and estimated that 75% of today's linemen use the body-building 
drugs. 
Steve Courson, who played with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Tampa Bay 
Buccaneers until he retired in 1985, called himself "a man possessed" when he 
used anabolic steroids and said that they might have caused permanent damage to 
his heart. He said that doctors have given him five years to live. 
"Every athlete pursues a dream and sometimes that dream can become distorted," 
he said. "Winning is what I was concerned with. (Taking steroids) is the 
biggest regret of my life." 
Testifying before a Senate committee, members of football's elite -- including 
Fralic, Courson, Coach Chuck Noll of the Pittsburgh Steelers, Coach Bo 
Schembechler of the University of Michigan and Coach Joe Paterno of Penn State 
-- testified as to the physical and psychological dangers of using steroids. 
Sen. Joseph R. Biden (D-Del.), who has authored a bill making it illegal to 
transport steroids through the mail, called steroid use widespread and said 
that action must be taken soon to prevent their abuse. 
"We did not focus enough attention on the cocaine problem in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, with disastrous results," he said. "We cannot afford to repeat 
that mistake" with steroids. 
In addition to the side effects, however, Biden said that use of steroids by 
football players teaches youths that "it's OK to take short cuts to achieve 
success -- whether it's using drugs, or cheating, or anything else." 
Fralic and Courson agreed. 
"Steroid use is rampant among the NFL, and that includes my own team," Fralic 
told senators on the Judiciary Committee. "It is rampant in colleges and it is 
rampant in high schools. Everybody is blind to it because they choose to ignore 
what is happening." 
It is, he said, an epidemic that is spreading because of the "win-at-all-cost" 
attitude prevalent at all levels of football. Citing his own brief experience 
with steroids, Fralic recalled how all he wanted was "to be the best." 
Courson remembered the pressure, too. In college, he said, steroids helped him 
develop speed, size, intensity and strength. In the NFL, Courson said, the 
drugs helped him compete in NFL strong-man contests and gave him the "mind-set 
of a mercenary." 
His heart permanently weakened by the drugs, Courson testified, he lost his 
starting position and eventually retired. 
"Steroids were hard to quit until the point where, mentally, I didn't care 
about being competitive," he said. 
There is little agreement, however, about what should be done to stop steroid 
use by athletes. 
Seven weeks ago, Pete Rozelle, retiring commissioner of the National Football 
League, wrote new rules that imposed tough sanctions on players who tested 
positive for steroid use. 
Rozelle told the Senate panel Tuesday that he advocates "periodic, unscheduled 
testing" as the best way to detect the drug and deter athletes from using it. 
But the football players' union long has been opposed to random testing, 
successfully challenging the provision in a 1986 NFL anti-drug proposal. The 
NFL tests players only once a year, before summer camp, or if there is reason 
to suspect steroid use. 
"Until the players say they are in favor of random testing, we are opposed to 
it," Gene Upshaw, executive director for the NFL Players Assn., told the 
committee. 
Paterno and Schembechler both testified that some players probably use steroids 
at their schools and said that a combination of testing, education and 
discipline is needed to combat the trend. 
"Steroids do give players an advantage," Paterno said. "That's basically the 
problem." 
