HOPES OUTWEIGH DOUBTS; 
SCIENTIFIC DEBATE PLAYS TO FRIENDLIER CROWD IN L.A. 
The mail and phone calls for B. Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann keep 
flowing in like so much heavy water. A Florida nudist colony has volunteered 
itself as a guinea pig. A letter signed by The Gatekeeper of Andromeda urges 
them to keep up the good work. 
Now, rocker-philosopher Frank Zappa, who once led a band called the Mothers of 
Invention, has invited the scientists to a back-yard barbecue Wednesday. He 
didn't mention whether it was bring-your-own-fuel. 
The quest for the cold fire of fusion has moved to Los Angeles, to a meeting of 
the Electrochemical Society, which in all of its 87 years has surely seen 
nothing like this. 
On the racks in the news shop at the Westin Bonaventure Hotel sits Time 
magazine, and two of the society's own look back from the cover: Pons and 
Fleischmann, discoverers, maybe or maybe not, of cold fusion. 
From Switzerland, Spain, Italy and beyond, about 1,600 members of the society 
have come for its 175th meeting. Like people worldwide, they are curious 
whether cold fusion is folly or whether colleagues Stan and Marty have stirred 
up a Promethean miracle inside a jar that looks something like a milkshake 
blender. 
As researchers, many members of the Electrochemical Society have doubts. But, 
as chemists they have hopes. If Pons and Fleischmann are right, not only would 
peace and plenty ensue in a world of limitless clean energy, but it would 
provide an earthier satisfaction for chemists: twitting what one called the 
"supreme arrogance" of physicists, who rank above chemists in the pecking order 
of science and consider fusion research their preserve. 
Physical chemist Fritz Will of Schenectady, N.Y., is a past president of the 
Electrochemical Society. Last week, a Nobel laureate put a hand on Will's 
shoulder and told him, "Fritz, if cold fusion were ever to be discovered, it 
wouldn't be discovered by a chemist." 
Few minds, if any, were changed Monday night. Six uniformed Pinkerton guards 
hired by the society stood watch as most of the 1,600 participants surged into 
the ballroom to hear what Pons, Fleischmann and others had to say. 
Later, J.L. Davidson, of Auburn University, declared, "Definitely maybe," then 
added seriously, "I didn't hear any new data" to refute criticism. 
Said physicist John Houlihan of Penn State University, "I think it's going to 
be a fair amount of time before you want to sell your gas stove." If cold 
fusion "is true, it'll come," but "I don't think they produced the nuclear 
fusion process. I think we're all disappointed as well." 
On Sunday, Will was at the hotel's front desk when his friend Fleischmann 
checked in, about two hours after Pons arrived -- wearily waving off a 
reporter's questions. Fleischmann was just back from Italy, wearing a safari 
jacket, and lugging a huge black case strapped across with a strip of tape 
labeled "Security." 
Perhaps he would like to join them for dinner, Will asked. "Casual, not to 
discuss fusion," he assured Fleischmann. 
It would probably be the only time this week that the subject would not be 
broached. 
Pons and Fleischmann were not in Baltimore last week when physicists and even 
some chemists rained contempt on their claim announced March 23, attributing 
the findings to "incompetence," even "delusion," in the sometimes spiteful 
politics of science. Pons' and Fleischmann's supporters in turn dismissed the 
critics as the "Eastern elite." 
Friendlier Crowd 
Even if it looks like "put up or shut up" time for cold fusion claims, Pons and 
Fleischmann will face a rather friendlier crowd here. "I hope we have a good 
discussion," Fleischmann said Sunday, "without hysteria." 
Fusion dominated small talk as the weeklong meeting began. Some here have tried 
the experiment themselves, often forced to rely on the popular-press stories 
for the recipe. "It'll be nice to get it straight from the research," says 
Robert B. Dopp of Rayovac, "and not from the New York Times." 
Lay people may not understand the science, but cold fusion is chic. Even in Los 
Angeles, where heavy water commonly means two cases of Perrier, people at 
parties are talking fusion. The public likes doughty underdogs weighing in 
against any Establishment. That, and the prospect of cheap, clean energy, 
especially after Chernobyl and Valdez, has engrossed the world. International 
news teams showed up at the Bonaventure in Academy Award-sized packs, paying 
the $205 registration fee for Monday night's technical session. 
Pons and Fleischmann are trying to lie low. In Texas recently, Pons had to 
change hotels and register under a pseudonym to get some peace. At the 
Bonaventure, he asked Roberto the desk clerk to put through only callers who 
know his room number. 
And scientists here bristle at hearing them called "obscure chemists." 
"They're certainly not Carl Sagan," but they have admirable research records, 
says Galen Hansen, who works at the Naval Research Lab in Washington. He met 
Pons at school in Utah, where Hansen's father is on the board that will 
dispense the state's $5 million in research money. 
Hansen was talking with Claudio Gutierrez from Spain, where even obscure rural 
newspapers have carried the news of fusion. Gutierrez knows Fleischmann as an 
able scientist and a man of culture, who buys his wine by the case with 
flawless taste. "A first-class scientist, a pioneer." 
As they stood talking in the lobby, Pons went by, wearing a candy-striped shirt 
and a look of fatigue. A few men nudged one another and nodded in his 
direction, but no one approached him. "Any self-respecting electrochemist," 
said Hansen, "would leave them alone right now." 
