ARAB LEADERS REBUKE ISRAEL OVER EMIGRATION; 
MIDEAST: U.S. IS BLAMED FOR PROVIDING THE MEANS TO RESETTLE SOVIET JEWS. THE 
COMMUNIQUE IS LONG ON HARD-LINE RHETORIC. 
Arab leaders on Wednesday condemned the emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel and 
the suppression of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, 
declaring the United States "primarily responsible" by giving the Israeli 
government the means to carry out its policies. 
Winding up a three-day emergency meeting of the Arab League, host Iraq and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization drove the delegates to produce a communique 
long on hard-line rhetoric but lacking in firm plans for action. 
The document accused the Israeli leadership of promoting policies of 
"aggression, terrorism and expansionism" in the West Bank and Gaza, and it 
declared that Jewish settlements in the territories constitute "a great danger 
to the Arab nation and an impudent violation of human rights." 
"The conference holds the United States primarily responsible for this, as it 
provides Israel with the military means, financial help and political cover 
without which it could not pursue these policies and defy so arrogantly the 
will of the international community," the communique said. 
Singling out the prospect of Soviet Jewish immigrants settling in the occupied 
territories, the 20-page communique -- hammered out in five closed-door 
sessions since Monday -- said that Arab nations will review their relations 
with countries that support the immigration program. 
The rebuke to the United States marked a reversal for moderates, led by Egypt 
and Saudi Arabia, who came to Baghdad determined to avoid confrontational 
language in the communique. 
Egypt's sponsorship of a proposal to make the Middle East free from nuclear, 
chemical and biological weapons was rejected, while Iraqi President Saddam 
Hussein won support for his insistence that Arab nations have the right to 
state-of-the-art weapons "to protect their security and sovereignty." 
Hussein, who corralled the summit as a platform for his pan-Arab political 
ambitions, set the tone with a tough address to the opening session Monday 
night. He denounced U.S. support of the Israeli government, referring at one 
point to "imperialist America" and declaring, "As Arabs, we are the targets of 
these American policies, in the core of our security and interests." 
He repeated his vow to retaliate with "whatever weapons of total destruction we 
have" if Israel attacks Iraqi targets with nuclear or chemical weapons. Western 
diplomats here say Hussein appears convinced such an attack is possible. 
But the focus of the final document centered on the issue of Soviet emigration 
and the intifada, or Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories. The Arab 
leaders pledged to support the uprising financially and politically, and they 
responded to a call from Jordan's King Hussein for aid as a front-line state 
against Israel. 
No specific figures were announced, and pledges at past Arab summits have 
failed to be sustained, PLO and Jordanian officials have said. 
The moderate camp was successful in tempering language proposed by Arab League 
foreign ministers that suggested some sort of economic sanctions against 
countries aiding or supporting the immigration of Soviet Jews to Israel, which 
an Israeli official said last week could increase to 20,000 a month later this 
year. 
Despite the wrangling between hard-liners and moderates, including the Egyptian 
attempts to persuade the conference to go easy on the Americans and talk peace 
instead of confrontation, there was unity in the criticism of Israel. 
"The real problem of this summit is not differences between Arabs," a member of 
the Egyptian delegation said during a break in the working sessions. "The real 
prob lem is the intransigence of Israel." 
In other resolutions, the communique called for: 
Political and economic sanctions against any country that recognizes Jerusalem 
as the capital of Israel. It sharply criticized resolutions adopted by the U.S. 
Senate and House of Representatives supporting recognition. 
Middle East peace efforts to be carried out in the forum of an international 
conference, as opposed to the stalled step-by-step negotiations favored by the 
Israelis and supported by Washington. The communique, in discussing the peace 
process, made no mention of U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338, which support trading 
land for peace and implicitly recognize the Israeli state. 
NEXT STEP 
Arab nations attending the Arab League summit in Baghdad are committed, by the 
final communique, to reviewing their relations with countries that support the 
settling of Soviet Jews in Israel. Those attending also pledged to provide both 
financial and political support for the Palestinian uprising in the 
Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, as well as aid to Jordan. But no 
figures were announced. 
