IN SEARCH OF BALANCED EXPORT PLAN 
The strong showing of American industrial exports in March affirms the nation's 
new competitiveness in world markets and serves as a useful reminder of the 
importance of moving ahead with the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) to make world commerce even freer. 
President Bush's Economic Policy Council has, at the same time, made a positive 
contribution to trade negotiations with its proposals for dealing with 
allegedly unfair practices on the part of America's trading partners. That 
report proposes strict limitations on retaliation in handling complaints under 
the omnibus trade legislation adopted last year, avoiding provocative responses 
that could touch off a trade war just when there is the promise of substantial 
progress in the GATT talks. 
The record exports of March helped reduce, but not eliminate, the trade 
deficit, continuing for the second year a trend of significant improvement. If 
this trend continues, the year will end with a deficit of $110 billion compared 
with $120 billion last year and $152 billion in 1987. 
There are two evident problems that need attention: oil and the value of the 
dollar. Increased oil imports at a time of rising petroleum prices were a major 
factor in offsetting some of the positive impact of the exports. The nation's 
oil conservation efforts are weakening. And the rise of the dollar to the 
highest level in more than a year could brake the export surge, making American 
goods costlier on foreign markets while making foreign goods cheaper on the 
U.S. market. 
It remains to be seen whether central bank interventions will succeed in 
stabilizing the dollar and returning it to a more competitive lower level. 
Robert Mosbacher, the secretary of commerce, tempered his enthusiasm about the 
March trade figures with some common sense. "These numbers support our 
contention that a favorable movement in exports and imports is under way," he 
said. "Nonetheless, monthly trade figures are too volatile, and it would be 
unwise to put too much weight on any one or two months' data." 
That volatility may account for the hesitancy of export industries to 
demonstrate confidence in the export trend by enlarging their plants. Many of 
them are operating close to plant capacity, which could translate into stagnant 
exports. 
