TRANSITION / LIFE AFTER COMMUNISM; 
POLITICAL ECHOES OF A SHATTERED PAST HAUNT E. GERMANY'S NEW DEMOCRACY 
Students at Humboldt University pass the plaque reminding them that Friedrich 
Engels, co-author of the Communist Manifesto, studied here, and then they face 
another reminder of East Germany's Communist past -- the words of Karl Marx, 
etched in gold on the landing of the ornate marble staircase. The inscription 
reads: 
"Philosophers only interpreted the world differently; what is important is to 
change it." 
Communism may have officially collapsed months ago in East Germany, but its 
totems remain everywhere -- evidence of a kind of ideological life after death 
that haunts East Germany's fledgling democracy as it journeys toward unity with 
West Germany. 
This lingering afterlife reflects a political void, so far filled only by a 
vague German nationalism that powers the drive toward unification. 
West Germans may debate unity in dry terms of added value tax and deutschemark 
inflation, but for their East German cousins it means "We are one people." 
"The real question is how to pick up the pieces without losing your pride," 
said Juergen Kocka, a professor of history at the Free University in West 
Berlin. "It makes (East Germans) unpredictable." 
As East Germans attempt to pick up the pieces, the extent of what remains from 
the past ranges from the startling to the invisible, from the ludicrous to the 
sinister. 
The Communist national flag with its hammer and compass insignia still flies 
throughout the country, in plazas and over factories bearing the names of 
countless Communist heroes. 
The same insignia was emblazoned on the parliamentary chamber earlier this 
month as East Germany's first non-Communist government was sworn in, a move 
that formally completed the revolution. 
Or did it? 
The new prime minister, Lothar de Maiziere, didn't think so. He forced an 
embarrassing delay by refusing to swear loyalty to the East German constitution 
-- the Communist constitution. 
After 30 minutes of confusion, a compromise was reached, under which he and his 
government swore allegiance instead to the East German people. 
That the Communist constitution remains in force underscores the benign nature 
of East Germany's political transformation from dictatorship to democracy. 
"It's the disadvantage of a peaceful revolution," noted Bonn University 
historian Karl-Dieter Bracher. "Not everything gets swept away." 
Such collisions of past and present permeate everyday life. 
A new exhibit at the prestigious Museum for German History in East Berlin, for 
example, displays a large section of the Berlin Wall as if it were some 
artifact from a bygone era, yet most of the 100-mile-long wall is still very 
much in place. 
The infamous State Security apparatus, known as the Stasi, may have been 
officially dismantled, but small groups remain active. At the anti-fascist 
memorial on the city's main thoroughfare, Unter den Linden, the honor guard 
still goose-steps to and fro. 
Only the crowd reaction has changed. Youngsters often laugh spontaneously -- a 
response showing that without the backing of raw state power, the goose-step 
becomes ridiculously ungainly. 
Only gradually have the symbolic props of Communist rule begun to fall away. 
The people of Karl-Marx-Stadt, East Germany's fourth-largest city, decided in a 
referendum last week to restore the city's old name, Chemnitz. The plaque 
outside the country's main trade union headquarters here commemorating the 
"hero workers" who built the Berlin Wall in 1961 has quietly disappeared. 
The first tentative reviews have begun of the four decades of Communist rule 
and the 12-year Third Reich. 
Earlier this month, East Germans were told for the first time that they share 
responsibility for the Holocaust. Then they learned that Soviet occupation 
forces probably killed thousands of German internees in the first years after 
World War II. 
Other potential disclosures lurk in the central archives in Potsdam. 
And as change begins, even the smallest of life's once-solid reference points 
blur. 
Readers of the Communist Party newspaper Neues Deutschland had barely adjusted 
to advertisements promoting such heresies as private entrepreneurship when they 
got another shock. After being teased for four days by clever but ambiguous 
ads, they learned the identity of the sponsor -- American evangelist Billy 
Graham. 
