MEXICAN ENVOY ASKS PROBE OF SLAYING 
The death of a young Mexican man at the hands of a San Diego police officer has 
prompted the Mexican government to call for a state investigation into the 
shooting, consul officials said Wednesday. 
Documents found on the dead man helped to identify the victim as Jose Eleazar 
Lopez Ballardo. Consul officials said he was from a small town near Culiacan in 
the Mexican state of Sinaloa. Lopez's family told authorities in Sinaloa that 
the 24-year-old man had emigrated to the United States several years ago, and 
that he was a construction worker, said Lisette Atala, a spokeswoman for the 
Mexican consul in San Diego. 
"The family said he was a good son who sent money home to his family," Atala 
said. 
A deputy county coroner said late Wednesday that the coroner's office had not 
received any information from the Mexican Consulate and that the victim was 
still being listed as a "John Doe." 
Lopez was shot and killed by Police Officer Thomas K. O'Connell in the 
southbound lanes of Interstate 5, reportedly after he swung a cementing trowel 
at O'Connell. O'Connell had gone to the aid of two California Highway Patrol 
officers as they tried to remove the man from the freeway. The shooting 
occurred just south of the on-ramp to California 52 during the morning rush 
hour. A deputy county coroner said Lopez died of multiple gunshot wounds. 
Police said Lopez ignored repeated orders to drop the trowel and suddenly 
lunged at the officer with the tool in his hand. O'Connell fired a few shots 
from his 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, but police said the man kept coming 
at the officer, so he fired more rounds. Lopez was pronounced dead at the 
scene. 
Nicolas Escalante Barrett, the Mexican consul in Sacramento said he was 
preparing letters to present to the U. S. attorney general and Gov. George 
Deukmejian. 
Escalante said the numerous violent incidents involving Mexican citizens in San 
Diego and the border area are cause for concern by the Mexican government. "We 
hope there will be a thorough investigation. . . . We are asking them to look 
at the cause to see if there was any violation of rights," Escalante said. 
Dave Cohen, a spokesman for the San Diego Police Department, said he had not 
received any communication from the Mexican Consulate. 
"We will be presenting the case without any recommendation to the district 
attorney and the district attorney will make the determination. Just because 
this is a Mexican citizen . . . our standard of investigation will not change. 
We are sensitive to the concerns of everyone in the community." 
In 1989 the district attorney's office reviewed 24 cases involving use of force 
by the San Diego Police Department. 
