HIGH SCHOOL ROUNDUP; 
WESTLAKE FINISHES 3RD IN GOLF 
The way Westlake High golf Coach Lorin Maygren looks at things, some days a 
team puts the heat on opponents and sometimes it gets smoked. 
After Costa Mesa Estancia fired a sizzling 371 at Canyon Country Club in Palm 
Springs on Monday to win its second consecutive Southern Section team title, 
Maygren shrugged and waxed philosophical about getting waxed. 
"We didn't get nipped, that's for sure," Maygren said. "But that's the way it 
goes. Some days, a team shoots rounds like that." 
Westlake didn't exactly fall over, however, finishing third with a 394. The 
Warriors, in fact, recorded their fourth top-three finish in five seasons, 
which includes section titles in 1986 and '87. 
By finishing in the top four, Westlake advances to the California 
Interscholastic Federation-Southern California Golf Assn. championships June 11 
at El Caballero Country Club in Tarzana. Teams from the Los Angeles City, San 
Diego and Central sections also will participate. 
Dana Hills, second at 389, and Palm Desert, fourth at 396, also advance to the 
CIF-SCGA event. Even though Westlake did not win the team tournament, it marked 
a turnaround: last season the Warriors failed to advance beyond the team 
regional. 
"We needed to come back," Maygren said. "And I don't think we're through yet." 
Hart, which tied Servite at 376 in the Central Regional last Monday at 
Montebello Country Club, finished fifth at 399, but missed qualifying for the 
CIF-SCGA tournament. Hart was led by sophomore Jason Gore's one-over 73 and 
junior Mike Miller's 74. 
Juniors Shane O'Brien (83), Chad Butler (86) and Jason Black (83) completed 
Hart's scoring. 
Newbury Park, third in the Northern Regional last week, fired a 407 and 
finished seventh. 
Westlake's Charlie Wi, the two-time defending Marmonte League individual 
champion, fired the day's low round with a three-under 69. Wi's round included 
four birdies and a lone bogey. 
"He played close to perfectly," Maygren said of Wi, a senior who will attend 
Nevada Reno next year. Jerry Chang (75), John Talifer (81), Mark Buntz (84) and 
Aaron Brady (85) rounded out the Westlake scoring. 
Estancia blew away the field with a depth charge. Using the standard format in 
which the best five of six individual scores count toward the team total, each 
Estancia player broke 80 and a round of 78 was tossed out. 
For Marmonte League champion Newbury Park, which finished second to Estancia in 
the team tournament last season, sophomore Keith Ealy fired the low round of 
79, followed by Darren Humphrey (80), Genio Borghi (82), Steve Holmes (83) and 
Brad Bronk (83). 
Westlake, which finished second to Newbury Park in the Marmonte team finals two 
weeks ago, tied Sunny Hills for first in the Northern Regional last week at 
Olivas Park Golf Course in Ventura with a 371. 
BOYS' TENNIS 
Kennedy 28 1/2, Washington 1 -- David Schwartz, Bobby Butler and Tony Yen all 
were unbeaten in singles play to lead top-seeded Kennedy in a first-round City 
Section 3-A Division playoff match at Cal State Northridge. 
The No. 1 doubles team of Josh Etting and Che Naveja did not lose a game for 
defending champion Kennedy, which plays the winner of the Marshall-Franklin 
match at CSUN on Friday. 
Cleveland 21, Venice 4 -- Chul Uh and Khoi Doan led Cleveland with three wins 
apiece in singles play in a first-round 3-A match at Cleveland. 
Chatsworth 18 1/2, Grant 11 -- Fueled by its doubles teams, Chatsworth recorded 
a first-round 4-A upset of second-seeded Grant at the Racquet Centre in Studio 
City. 
The doubles teams of Philip Tietjen and Tony Joseph, John Butiu and Mike 
Carone, Fred Wiener and Aron Haaz all were 3-0 to lead Chatsworth. 
Taft 22 1/2, North Hollywood 7 -- John Rom, David Alderman, Mikail Rudolfsen, 
David Goldman all went 3-1 in singles play to lead fourth-seeded Taft in a 
first-round 4-A match at Pierce College. 
Derek Halpern and Dvir Levy were 3-0 in doubles for Taft. 
