SOVIETS PLAN TO WITHDRAW 500 WARHEADS; 
GORBACHEV ALSO CALLS FOR MUTUAL CUTBACKS OF FORCES IN EUROPE 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in the kind of surprise move that has 
become his trademark, told Secretary of State James A. Baker III on Thursday 
that he will withdraw 500 nuclear warheads from Europe and will seek cuts of 
more than 2 million troops from the NATO and Soviet Bloc armies, U.S. officials 
said. 
Gorbachev's announcement, made during a Kremlin meeting on the second day of 
Baker's two-day visit to the Soviet Union, came as part of a concerted effort 
by the Soviet leader to pressure the United States toward negotiations over 
short-range nuclear weapons -- an issue that has increasingly divided the 
Atlantic Alliance. 
Gorbachev challenged Baker directly to bring the United States into talks on 
battlefield nuclear weapons, but the secretary of state, repeating the Bush 
Administration's position, refused. 
"We aren't negotiating," said a senior Baker aide who attended the meeting. 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze called the U.S. position "very 
negative" and told reporters, "This is of grave concern to us." 
The continued deadlock over short-range nuclear forces had been expected, but 
Gorbachev's promise to withdraw 500 warheads unilaterally was clearly intended 
to dramatize the issue. Baker aides noted ruefully that the move would almost 
surely sharpen the already worrisome division within the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization between the United States and West Germany, which has called for 
early negotiations on battlefield nuclear weapons. 
Baker sought to play down the significance of Gorbachev's gesture. "It's a good 
step, but a small step -- a modest move toward a more equal balance in Europe," 
he told reporters on his plane leaving Moscow on Thursday evening. "I'd like to 
also point out . . . that NATO has unilaterally reduced nuclear weapons in 
Europe by more than 2,400 weapons since 1979." 
Other U.S. officials noted that the Soviet Union is believed to have as many as 
10,000 short-range nuclear warheads in Europe, so that a cut of 500 may 
represent only 5%. But they acknowledged that the Soviet leader appeared to 
have scored another coup in the continuing East-West battle for public opinion 
in Europe. 
"Vintage Gorbachev," said one. "He's extraordinary," sighed another. 
U.S. officials had half expected such a move, they said, but the specific form 
came as a surprise. 
Despite the continuing disagreement over short-range weapons, both Soviet and 
American officials said they are pleased with their talks -- Baker's first 
full-scale meeting with Soviet officials since President Bush was inaugurated. 
"I'm very satisfied," Baker said after his talks in the Kremlin, which included 
3 1/2 hours with Gorbachev. Asked whether the talks had helped end the Cold 
War, he replied, "We're certainly moving in that direction." 
"We made a good start on a long road," Shevardnadze said. But he added that the 
Soviet government is still impatient with the Bush Administration's slow start 
in arms control, which he called "the center of gravity for U.S.-Soviet 
relations." 
"The secretary of state told us that the United States has not yet prepared 
specific negotiating positions, but stressed in these new positions we would be 
able to see a substantial degree of continuity (from the Reagan 
Administration)," Shevardnadze said. 
The two did agree to resume the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) on 
long-range nuclear weapons, along with negotiations on nuclear testing and 
other issues, in mid-June, they said. 
But they postponed any talk of a first summit meeting between Gorbachev and 
Bush until the fall, making a summit unlikely before December. Meanwhile, the 
issue of short-range nuclear weapons will clearly remain a major point of 
contention, not only between Washington and Moscow but between the Bush 
Administration and several of its European allies as well. 
U.S. officials say NATO's forces need the weapons -- nuclear missiles, 
artillery shells and bombs carried by tactical aircraft with ranges under 300 
miles -- to counterbalance the Warsaw Pact's larger numbers of troops and 
tanks. 
But both the Soviet Union and West Germany have called for early negotiations 
to reduce the number of such weapons, most of which would explode on German 
soil if they were ever used. 
Baker is scheduled to meet today with West German Foreign Minister 
Hans-Dietrich Genscher to discuss the issue -- only hours before Genscher is to 
welcome Shevardnadze on a well-timed visit to Bonn. 
Shevardnadze described Gorbachev's decision to withdraw the 500 warheads only 
vaguely as "some unilateral measures covering the reduction of tactical nuclear 
arsenals in Europe." 
But a U.S. official aboard Baker's plane described it as "a very small 
reduction for them." 
He said Gorbachev told the Americans that the weapons would include 284 
short-range missiles, 166 nuclear bombs carried aboard short-range airplanes 
and 50 nuclear artillery shells, for a total of 500. 
He noted that the withdrawal would still leave the Soviet Bloc with more 
tactical nuclear weapons and larger conventional armed forces than the Atlantic 
Alliance, and thus would not affect the U.S. position of rejecting negotiations 
on short-range weapons. 
Gorbachev's announcement that he will propose massive cuts in military manpower 
on both sides came as part of a new, more detailed Soviet proposal for the 
current Vienna talks on conventional forces in Europe, U.S. officials said. 
Gorbachev told Baker that he will soon propose a troop ceiling of 1,350,000 for 
each military alliance in Europe, they said. NATO estimates its forces at 2.2 
million and Warsaw Pact forces at 3.1 million; Gorbachev's proposal could mean 
a cut of 850,000 NATO troops and more than 1.7 million Soviet Bloc troops. 
Using NATO estimates, that would be a reduction of about 38% in NATO forces, 
and about 54% for Soviet Bloc forces. The Soviet Bloc estimates that NATO and 
its own forces have roughly equal numbers of troops, and with those figures, 
Gorbachev's proposed cutback would mean cuts by a similar percentage on both 
sides. 
Gorbachev also said he plans to call for a 55% reduction in NATO strike 
aircraft and helicopters; scrapping 40,000 Warsaw Pact tanks, to bring both 
sides down to an equal ceiling of 20,000; and similar cuts in other combat 
vehicles and artillery, to be implemented by 1997. 
Those proposed cuts in conventional armed forces had already been suggested -- 
without the details -- by Shevardnadze at the opening of the Vienna conference 
in March. But Gorbachev's announcement appeared likely to increase pressure on 
the West to be more flexible in the talks. NATO has proposed more modest cuts 
of up to 10% in conventional weapons but has not included aircraft or troops in 
its proposals. 
U.S. officials noted that Moscow could unilaterally carry out the withdrawal of 
500 nuclear warheads, but that the proposals for troop reductions and other 
cuts would have to be negotiated at the Vienna talks. The Soviet proposal is 
expected to be formally presented in Vienna today. 
Gorbachev unveiled his proposals in the middle of an unusually long meeting 
with Baker in the Kremlin's ornate St. Catherine's Hall, U.S. officials said. 
First, Baker met alone for an hour with Gorbachev and Shevardnadze, handing 
them a letter from President Bush expressing U.S. support for Soviet economic 
and political reforms. Then, after another hour of talks at a long table with 
half a dozen senior aides on each side, Gorbachev said, "I want to give you an 
advance look at some proposals I'm going to make," and outlined his plan 
animatedly -- without notes. 
Baker did not respond specifically to either proposal, they said, although he 
engaged Gorbachev in a lengthy debate over the imbalance of both conventional 
and tactical nuclear forces. 
On other issues, both Baker and Shevardnadze said they made progress on finding 
points of agreement on Central America, although the Soviets did not accede to 
a U.S. request to halt aid to the Marxist regime in Nicaragua. 
"We agreed to work toward a political and diplomatic solution to the problem of 
Nicaragua," Baker said, without providing any details. 
And in the Middle East, he said, "We think there may be a fair amount of common 
ground." U.S. officials said they are heartened by the Soviets' willingness to 
discuss seriously Israel's current proposal for elections among the 
Palestinians of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
Both foreign ministers said they had established a new personal rapport, in 
part during a private dinner which Shevardnadze and his wife held for Baker and 
his wife, Susan, in their Moscow apartment. 
"I feel good personal relations are being established between the foreign 
ministers of the two superpowers," Shevardnadze said. 
Times staff writer Robert C. Toth, in Washington, contributed to this article. 
