MAN GIVEN MAXIMUM OF 10 YEARS IN KILLELEA DEATH 
A young man who drove into a Newport Beach mother of three, killing her in an 
alley on Balboa Peninsula last Sept. 1, was sentenced to 10 years in prison 
Tuesday. 
Orange County Superior Court Judge Luis A. Cardenas pronounced the sentence 
after hearing 2 hours of emotional testimony that included tearful courtroom 
statements from both the victim's husband and the driver, 19-year-old Danny 
David Ornelas. 
"It is with a heavy heart that I do this, Mr. Ornelas, but I must do what I 
must do," Cardenas said. 
The victim, Debbie Killelea, 37, had been involved in local community efforts 
to slow speeding traffic on the crowded Balboa Peninsula, and her violent death 
just before 
Labor Day weekend in an accident involving a drunken young man caused an 
uproar. 
The case later took a bizarre twist when it was learned that a passenger in 
Ornelas' car had recorded the accident on a video camera. The eerie tape showed 
Killelea trying to run out of the car's way as it bore down on her. Her two 
young sons are seen in the videotape watching in horror as the car nears their 
mother. They escaped injury. 
Ornelas, who was found to be legally drunk at the time of the accident, has 
been in Orange County Jail since his March 20 jury conviction for gross 
vehicular manslaughter. 
Brian Killelea, 40, the victim's husband, took the witness stand Tuesday 
morning to tell the judge how the tragedy had affected him and his three 
children. 
Killelea did not testify during the 3-week trial in March. But the father said 
Tuesday that he wanted to be a witness to how drunk-driving, such as in 
Ornelas' case, can devastate the family of a victim. 
"I am not a vindictive person; however, I represent the American family, and 
all I want is justice served," Killelea said. He broke into tears on the 
witness stand as he spoke about his wife's death. 
Ornelas, of Huntington Park, who did not testify at the trial, also spoke for 
the first time in court Tuesday. The boyish-looking teen-ager, who was wearing 
an orange-colored County Jail jumpsuit, said that he was sorry for what 
happened, calling the death "tragic." Ornelas, who appeared to be weeping, said 
he would do everything he could to try to make up for the offense. 
Judge Rejects Study 
Cardenas rejected a defense motion to have the matter studied by the state 
Department of Corrections before sentencing. The judge said he already had 
ample information. He had the option of giving Ornelas a 4-year, 6-year or 
10-year sentence. 
Ornelas appeared pale but stoic when the sentence was announced, but members of 
his family broke into tears and loud sobs. 
The prosecutor, Deputy Dist. Atty. Thomas Goethals, later told reporters that 
he thought the sentence was fair. He said Ornelas must serve at least 5 years 
in state prison before being eligible for parole. 
Ornelas' attorney, Ralph Bencangey of Beverly Hills, said he will appeal the 
sentence, the conviction, or possibly both. "I haven't decided, but I'll 
probably appeal the sentence rather than the conviction," Bencangey said in an 
interview. "It was an unfair sentence, but I think it's what the community 
wanted. After all, this is Orange County." 
In court, Bencangey argued that wide media coverage of the Ornelas case had 
unfairly prompted community pressure for a tough sentence. Had it not been for 
the unusual videotape, Bencangey said, the fatal accident would not have drawn 
such widespread attention and "never would have resulted in a murder charge 
against my client." 
Ornelas was charged with second-degree murder in Killelea's death, based on the 
allegation that he did not brake the speeding car, despite seeing Debbie 
Killelea and her two sons walking in the narrow alley. 
After 5 days of deliberation, the jury rejected murder and convicted Ornelas of 
gross vehicular manslaughter while intoxicated. The jury at one point declared 
itself hopelessly deadlocked before finally reaching its verdict. Had Ornelas 
been convicted of second-degree murder, he could have been sentenced to up to 
life in prison. 
In court Tuesday, Bencangey pleaded with the judge for either probation or the 
minimum sentence for Ornelas. Goethals argued for the maximum penalty. 
"This case is an all-American nightmare," Goethals said. "A mother, a pillar in 
the community, leaves her house and is killed as she walks near her home. . . . 
This case strikes a broad nerve in everybody." 
Bencangey noted that Ornelas had no prior criminal record. The defense lawyer 
said the strong alcoholic beverages that Ornelas and two young companions were 
drinking at the beach on Sept. 1 were the root of the tragedy. The three men, 
according to testimony, had been drinking 151-proof rum and strong malt liquor 
during the day. Ornelas was found to have a 0.18 blood-alcohol level, which is 
almost twice the 0.10 level that state law mandates as proof of intoxication. 
"The evidence in this case was that a very decent person did a very horrible 
thing in a few minutes that day," Bencangey said. Bencangey also claimed 
repeatedly that intense media coverage blew the case out of proportion. 
Cardenas said he was not influenced by media coverage. "Whether the media takes 
an interest in a case is not a factor," he said. "The court sentences according 
to law and to the facts." 
The judge said the severity of the crime was something that he could not 
overlook. 
"Once a life is extinguished, it is irretrievable," Cardenas said. "I think 
that is the factor in this case which highlights the catastrophic nature of 
what happened." 
The judge ordered Ornelas to stand as he pronounced sentence. A female relative 
of the young man broke into hysterical sobs in the courtroom as the judge gave 
the maximum sentence. Ornelas' father and mother clasped each other and bowed 
their heads. 
Says Sentence Was Just 
Outside the courtroom, Brian Killelea told reporters that he thought the 
judge's sentence was a just one. 
"I feel what the judge said truly hit home," Killelea said. "It doesn't need to 
be your second crime to be able to be punished to the maximum. A definite 
statement has to be sent to these young people." 
Manuel Ornelas, the father of the convicted man, said outside of court that he 
was sad and disheartened. 
"I have a good work record, and my son has a good record," Ornelas said. 
"Something like this has never happened before to my family. Danny is not a 
criminal. He does not deserve jail." 
