LATINO ASPIRATIONS ON RISE IN COMPTON; 
DEMOGRAPHICS: LATINOS STREAM INTO THE AREA. SOME SAY THE BLACK-RUN CITY IS 
HOSTILE TO THEIR NEEDS. 
Compton, which likes to call itself the largest "black-run" city west of the 
Mississippi, is as synonymous locally with black people as rap music and soul 
food. 
Black History Month -- February -- is a community-wide celebration. Children go 
to schools named after black heroes -- the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., George 
Washington Carver, Marian Anderson and Ronald E. McNair, the astronaut who died 
in the Challenger disaster. 
It might not be long, however, before somebody suggests naming a school after 
Benito Juarez or Cesar Chavez because black Compton is changing colors. 
For a decade, Latinos have been quietly streaming into every neighborhood in 
the city, replacing middle-class blacks who gave up on Compton -- its violent 
crime, its drug trafficking, its economic failures -- and moved on in search of 
safer streets and better schools. 
Latino children are now the majority in the Compton Unified School District -- 
50.93% compared to 33% just five years ago. 
City-wide, the percentage of the population that is black is dropping -- from 
an all-time high of 73% in the 1980 census to an estimated 66% this year. 
During the same period, the Latino population has jumped from 21% to at least 
30%, making this community of about 100,000 in southeast Los Angeles County 
probably the most nonwhite city in the Southland. 
It is, nonetheless, a community with racial conflicts, a troubling example of 
how Latino aspirations and black resentment can collide. 
Blacks control every public and quasi-public institution in Compton -- the 
schools, City Hall, the Compton Chamber of Commerce, the Democratic Party 
machine -- and show no sign they intend to share their power. 
City and school officials have refused to come up with affirmative action plans 
for Latino hiring, a continuing source of tension between the two groups. 
"Here we are, a truly minority community," said bakery owner Pedro Pallan, "and 
the blacks are not giving us an affirmative action committee in either the city 
(government) or the school district. There cannot be equal employment 
opportunity without an affirmative action committee." 
In the Compton Unified School District, for example, more than 73% of the 
teachers are black; less than 4% are Latino. 
A council-ordered study last year found that only 9.7% of city jobs were held 
by Latinos, compared to 78% held by blacks. Latinos have been pressing for more 
Spanish-speaking employees in both places. 
"The thing was that here we have a bona fide occupational qualification," said 
Martin D. Chavez, a lifelong Compton resident who served on the city's Latino 
advisory committee. "We have a city where 30% to 40% during this census may 
turn out to be Hispanic." 
Latinos believe that affirmative action policies should benefit them as well as 
anyone else. Some blacks disagree. Affirmative action, says school trustee John 
Steward, is reparation to black Americans for slavery and for being torn from 
their African homeland. 
"It is not based on going back and forth across the border 10 or 15 times a 
year," he said, aiming a barb at the city's mushrooming immigrant population. 
Latino parents complain that black teachers are culturally insensitive to 
Latino children. 
"They see all Latinos as dropouts and gang bangers," said Margarita Cornejo, 
who has five children in the Compton schools. "It's the way they project us," 
she said. 
Blacks, meanwhile, complain about having to spend an increasing share of the 
school budget on bilingual education. 
"I have no respect for the language issue. This is America," Steward said. 
"Because a person does not speak English is not a reason to provide exceptional 
resources at public expense." 
There are more then 8,000 youngsters in the Compton school system who speak 
little, if any, English and only 46 teachers with bilingual credentials, though 
the situation is not unique to Compton. Bilingual teachers are in short supply 
across the state, educators say. 
In Compton, Latino parents complain that their children are often taught by 
Spanish-speaking classroom aides instead of full-fledged teachers. 
When blacks and Latinos in Compton are asked to talk about one another and what 
divides them, old memories surface in the conversations like stray leaves in a 
bitter cup of tea. 
Maxcy D. Filer, a city councilman and veteran civil rights leader, said he was 
president of the Compton NAACP when blacks could not get jobs with the city's 
major employers. 
"I have walked many picket lines in Compton," Filer said. "I have yet to have 
one Latino walk the picket line with me, not one. . . . They crossed it many 
times. . . . They called me some names even the whites didn't call me." 
Martin D. Chavez, who attended the city's black-run school system, recalled a 
time when he was chosen to give Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. Chavez said the 
speech was ultimately reassigned to a black student after complaints had come 
from black students and teachers who said a Latino should not give a speech by 
Lincoln because that president is a hero to blacks, not Latinos. 
"There's a group out there that's black, "(that) has a belief that there's 
blacks and everybody else," said Chavez, an affirmative action analyst for the 
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. ". . . And, regardless of what your 
race is, you're not doing anything for them, so you're an enemy of theirs." 
Blacks waged a bitter battle to get a foothold in Compton, where property deeds 
once forbade the sale of homes to anyone "not of the Caucasian race." 
They began migrating from South Los Angeles to 127th Street on Compton's 
northern edge in the early 1950s and spent the next 15 years spreading 
southward across the city -- block by block. It was called block busting -- 
having white liberals buy houses from whites for resale to black families. 
"We only lived up to Rosecrans (Avenue) at that time," Filer said, explaining 
how the thoroughfare on the north side of the city formed an east-west boundary 
line over which blacks were not supposed to cross to buy homes. The barrier was 
broken, he says, in the late 1950s, when blacks supported by white liberals 
moved a black family named Pickens south of Rosecrans. 
"We moved Mr. Pickens (onto) School Street. I think it was the 300 or 400 block 
and they put a water hose in his mailbox, ruined his floors. Then, we had to 
sit and guard it at night while he slept." 
If Latinos are not represented in Compton's corridors of power, Filer contends, 
they have themselves to blame. 
"When I moved to Compton," he said, falling back on a line he uses often, 
"(Latinos) were running faster than the whites were running." 
If Latinos had stayed in the city, he said, they would be sharing power now. 
"But they decided to leave" he said, "and then all at once an influx of them 
came back, and now they're saying, 'give me,' and I think it's something you 
have to work for." 
Blacks gained control of the city when the white majority fled the riots that 
erupted a mile away in Watts in 1965. The first few years of black power may 
have been heady ones, but they soured as white America turned away from black 
concerns and hope turned to despair in black neighborhoods. 
Ten years ago, according to census data, the annual per capita income in 
Compton was just half that of Los Angeles County. Today, according to census 
estimates, Compton's per capita income -- an estimated $7,800 annually -- is 
still at half. 
Chavez says part of the problem between blacks and Latinos is that blacks do 
not recognize that Latinos also have a history of struggle. 
"They fail to remember that in Texas and New Mexico there were civil rights 
movements that were predominantly led by Hispanics," Chavez said. And the farm 
worker movement in Northern California, he said, was led by Latinos. "They 
fought for basic working rights (for) unskilled labor and unskilled labor means 
minorities." 
In Compton, Chavez said: "We have a chance to really pull ourselves together 
and show how struggling groups can struggle together and not with each other." 
