A TOKYO TALE: $2 MILLION FOUND IN BAMBOO GROVE 
The $2-million mystery of the bamboo forest, after playing through the Japanese 
psyche like a dark subplot to Tokyo's ongoing political scandal, finally has 
been solved. 
But as so often in Japan, the solution seemed only to deepen the mystery. 
It began April 11, when a humble seller of grilled chicken, rooting through an 
urban bamboo thicket for some tasty shoots, stumbled across a wad of rotting, 
abandoned yen. 
Like any good Japanese, he took the money to the police. 
Counting the crumbling bills with some difficulty, they calculated that the 
39-year-old restaurateur had picked up the equivalent of $1 million. 
The gorudo rashu came next -- a gold-rush fever that brought hundreds of 
money-seekers swarming to the grove in Kawasaki, hoping lightning might strike 
twice. 
And five days later, a humble part-time laborer, 21, who was actually hunting 
for wild cress, tripped across another $700,000 in yen. 
Political Parallel 
The frenzy grew, as hundreds more searched for a "third installment." And the 
mystery of who would abandon nearly $2 million without even burying it, and 
then fail to claim the cash when it was found, seemed to obsess the nation, 
even more than the news of the political scandal shaking the government. 
Indeed, many observers saw a connection between easy money flowing through the 
political world and the mysterious cash of the bamboo forest. It helped 
headline writers, although not the embattled prime minister, that the first 
character of Noboru Takeshita's name means "bamboo" -- and that he had received 
about $2 million from Recruit Co., the conglomerate at the center of the 
scandal that has forced him to announce his resignation. 
But as Japan's press rushed forward with theory after theory -- each more lurid 
than the last -- to explain the unclaimed cache, the dark side of politics was 
but one rich lode. Mystery writers were interviewed, past murders rehashed, 
fantastic scenarios constructed around drugs and gangsters, blackmail and tax 
evasions. 
In many ways, the speculation reflected modern Japanese anxieties -- fear that 
unaccustomed prosperity is corrupting morals and dividing rich from poor, old 
from young. 
"The average Japanese cannot play the money game, and when these worlds 
collide, as they did in the bamboo thicket, public interest is immense," the 
newspaper Yomiuri said in an editorial. "It seems that recently the gap between 
the average citizen and the ultrarich has vastly widened . . . that our 
society's view toward money has become very distorted, and this causes great 
frustration for many Japanese." 
Many experts -- and nearly all Japanese depicted themselves as experts on the 
subject -- said the money was somehow connected to soaring land or stock prices 
that seem to be disrupting Japan's stable, middle-class society. 
Gangster Involvement? 
Mystery writer Kyuzo Kobayashi, for example, speculated that someone trying to 
extricate himself from the shady side of the land business flung the cash away, 
only to be caught and murdered by gangsters also involved in land profiteering. 
Joji Abe, himself a gangster turned mystery writer, speculated that an old man 
hid the money to cheat his children of their inheritance and then died before 
he could enjoy it. 
While the press speculated and philosophized, police methodically investigated. 
Paper wrappers around the cash carried dates and the names of several credit 
unions in the Kawasaki area, outside Tokyo. 
Comparing the wrappers with bank records, police eventually focused on the 
president of a mail-order business, Kasuyasu Noguchi, 46, who had made sizable 
withdrawals two and three years ago. 
Owner Fesses Up 
Noguchi recently held a press conference and said, yes, the money belonged to 
him. Bowing deeply, he apologized to the people of the world for the trouble he 
had caused. 
But Noguchi's explanation, as provided to reporters and more fully to police, 
was "beyond comprehension," Yomiuri said. 
Noguchi said he actually had earned the cash in the early 1970s, speculating in 
stamps and other things. A thief had been stalking his office, he told police, 
so for years he carried the money in the trunk of his car. 
When Japan began printing a new type of cash, Noguchi exchanged the money for 
new bills -- thus the wrappers indicating withdrawals two and three years ago. 
But, he said, his desire for the money lessened as friends were murdered or 
committed suicide in business-related matters. 
"My view of life changed," Noguchi told police. 
Feared Tax Audit 
He resolved to give the money away, he said, but -- acknowledging that he had 
failed to pay taxes on the income -- he feared a tax audit if he donated the 
money in his own name. So, he said, in October, 1987, he left $2 million in the 
bamboo grove, hoping someone worthy would find it. 
He was "relieved" when someone recovered the money, he said. If he gets it 
back, he said he will donate it for research into children's diseases. 
Police said they found the explanation puzzling but that they saw no basis for 
further criminal investigation. Tax authorities said they would investigate, 
but income earned so long ago would be beyond their reach. 
Seiei Sato, the grilled-chicken seller who found the first chunk of cash, said 
he, too, remained mystified by Noguchi's account, but might be willing to 
settle for a 20% finder's fee and go back to serving yakitori. "It's 
troublesome," he said. "My head is already in a chaotic condition." 
The elderly owner of the bamboo grove said he did not care about the money but 
he was unhappy that people were taking his bamboo shoots. 
And the press and public seemed to be waiting for a sequel to the mystery, or 
at least another chapter. 
"We feel," the Yomiuri editorial said, "the disappointment we experience when 
reading a very bad end to a detective story." 
