CLANDESTINE TOXIC WASTE EXPORTS TO MEXICO ON RISE 
A growing number of Southern California businesses are clandestinely trucking 
their hazardous wastes to Mexico to dodge increasingly stringent and costly 
environmental laws here, according to law enforcement investigators. 
Although there are few hard statistics to chronicle the illicit trafficking -- 
in large part because of spotty enforcement -- government officials as well as 
haulers and generators of the waste said they believe that the practice is on 
the upswing. 
William Carter, a Los Angeles County deputy district attorney who prosecutes 
environmental crimes, cites a "big hole in enforcement." Reports of illegal 
waste shipments to Mexico come into his office about twice a week, indicating a 
"steady stream" of such shipments, he said. 
"To some of the people who are involved, Mexico is one big trash can and it 
doesn't really matter what goes down there," Carter said. "It's not realistic 
to think what we send down there won't come back in foods, water pollution, air 
pollution or pottery we buy from Mexico." 
Authorities predict the problem is only going to worsen. On Tuesday, a new 
federal rule was announced by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that is 
expected to make legal dumping even more costly. 
The rule, which was attacked by environmental groups as too weak, will require 
more kinds of hazardous wastes to be treated before they can be dumped in a 
landfill. A substance is considered hazardous if it poses a threat to humans or 
to the environment. 
By May, 1992, most waste deemed hazardous under the rule will have to be 
treated to reduce its toxicity before the residues can be taken to a landfill. 
The restrictions could become significantly tighter if expected challenges by 
environmental groups succeed. 
Sgt. Lance Erickson, an investigator in the California Highway Patrol's 
environmental crimes unit, joined other law enforcement officials in predicting 
even more illegal trafficking of hazardous wastes because of the new 
restrictions. 
"I think (the trafficking) is going to increase because the prices are going to 
go up again," Erickson said. "The bottom line is greed and money." 
In one of the few cases now under investigation, drums that has contained 
hazardous waste from the United States eventually were sold in a working-class 
Mexican neighborhood for water storage. "In most cases, the barrel is the 
commodity of value down there," Carter said. 
In another instance, drums of cyanide solution from a North Hollywood 
metal-plating business that were destined for Mexico were listed as new 
products in the shipment manifest prepared by the trucker. The Mexicali address 
given as the destination turned out to be a wheat field. 
"We are noticing this problem with increasing frequency," said Cesar Catalan of 
the Secretariat of Urban Development and Ecology (SEDUE), the Mexican version 
of the EPA. Catalan said the materials are dumped "any place that isn't 
populated" and in places "that are easy to reach," such as spots along the 
border. 
The smuggling cases are difficult to prove, say California prosecutors, who 
often must rely on informants and witnesses. Any material that is considered 
waste under federal or state law cannot be taken across the border without the 
permission of Mexican environmental authorities. A one-two punch of 
increasingly strict environmental regulations and fewer legal landfills willing 
to take hazardous wastes hits hardest against such firms as metal platers, 
aerospace parts makers and radiator repair shops, which generate large amounts 
of toxic garbage. 
To dispose of hazardous wastes legally in this country, a generator must have 
his waste transported, treated and disposed of by a licensed firm. The process 
is increasingly costly and California landfills that will accept hazardous 
wastes are dwindling in number. 
A drum of hazardous waste that may have cost $140 to dispose of six years ago 
now costs $300, according to a waste management company. One prosecutor said 
the costs can go as high as $1,000 a barrel. 
Small- and medium-sized toxic waste generators -- often hard pressed to make 
ends meet -- are responsible for much of the illicit trafficking, investigators 
say. 
Larry Bishop, a hazardous materials specialist in Santa Barbara County, said if 
he was "in the business and had a choice of spending $500,000 to get rid of 
chromic acid or to give someone $5,000 to get rid of it, the economic incentive 
is so great. . . . 
"People are under a lot of pressure to do something with it and, unfortunately 
with small business people, it hits them particularly hard." 
Barry Roeser, general partner in a Baldwin Park hazardous waste consulting and 
referral service, told The Times he approached a financially troubled lumber 
company in the San Gabriel Valley a month ago to arrange for legal disposal of 
the firm's hazardous wastes. At the last minute, Roeser said, the businessman 
decided not to use his services. 
" 'I don't need you any more,' " Roeser quoted the businessman as saying. " 
'I'm sending it to Mexico.' 
"If you can get away with it," Roeser said in an interview, "what can I say? I 
know he took it to Mexico. What he did with it I don't know. . . . I imagine it 
just got dumped somewhere." 
The likelihood of being apprehended is remote, authorities say. Typically, U.S. 
customs inspectors watch only traffic headed north from Mexico. Southbound 
traffic entering Mexico gets little notice on the U.S. side, and there are 
reports that bribery occurs among Mexican border authorities. 
The CHP has only five investigators from Fresno to the Mexican border probing 
illegal waste shipments. The EPA, which is in charge of policing waste 
shipments across the border, has only one agent and two investigators to 
enforce several federal environmental statutes in California as well as three 
other Western states and U.S. islands in the Pacific. 
"I don't really have the staff to pursue this export thing," said EPA resident 
agent-in-charge David Wilma, who is based in San Francisco. 
Although some officials have pleaded for years for strict border controls on 
hazardous waste, a San Diego County Hazardous Waste Task Force is only now 
formulating a plan to crack down. 
Anastacio Medina, a Los Angeles County hazardous materials investigator, said 
he urged participants at a San Diego hazardous waste workshop called by the EPA 
in late 1984 to take more action. 
"We were told to mind our own business and let the feds do what they are 
supposed to be doing -- even though we know they are not doing it," Medina 
said. 
"We thought it was inhuman the way (waste) was being handled in the hills and 
ravines of Tijuana," he said. "Eventually these materials -- when the rains 
come -- are carried by the water down to the Tijuana River bed and contaminate 
some of the (well) water that Tijuana depends on. It also runs across the 
border into San Ysidro, so we do have a mutual interest." 
Los Angeles County environmental prosecutors say most of their time is spent on 
illegal dumping within the county, not on tracking substances across the 
border. The district attorney's office, which has one of the nation's toughest 
environmental crime units, has prosecuted at least 100 cases involving illegal 
disposal within the region -- in vacant lots, the Santa Monica Mountains and 
even back yards. In contrast, the office is now investigating about six cases 
of trafficking to Mexico. Charges in one case may be filed this week. 
Just as in local dumping, the smuggling of wastes into Mexico often is done by 
individuals who make a living in such trafficking. 
Describing the usual arrangements for exporting wastes, prosecutors say 
transporters and brokers typically collect a fee from waste generators to pick 
up the waste and provide the generator with the name of a facility and address 
in Mexico where the waste purportedly will be used as a new product -- possibly 
in a manufacturing process. The waste often is put into clean drums and labeled 
as new before it reaches the border. Shipping papers are filled out listing the 
cargo as unused. 
Sometimes the transporter both hauls and arranges a contact on the Mexican 
border and sometimes he uses a broker to act as the middleman to arrange the 
Mexican connection. 
In any case, the fee paid by the generator is substantially less than the cost 
of dumping the toxics legally. Customs officials rarely, if ever, open up such 
drums. 
"The generator relies on these brokers or these transporters and is naive," 
said Carter of the Los Angeles County district attorney's office. "They want to 
believe that this stuff is (a new) product in Mexico, and that they are going 
to save money and do it legally. 
"That is what they want to believe. Whether they do believe it is a different 
story." 
By labeling the waste as an unused material, transporters and generators try to 
take advantage of some ambiguities in the laws, investigators say. 
"It's really kind of an honor system," Carter said. "We get stuck in this 
quandary of what is waste and what is (a new) product." 
Legally, the generator is responsible for the waste and can be held liable if 
it is improperly dumped. But tracing waste once it gets past the Mexican border 
is difficult. Although some waste, such as old paint, may be used again in 
Mexico, other toxic materials may simply be dumped in fields or streams, 
authorities say. 
"It's a big scam," said Bill Jones, chief of investigators for the Los Angeles 
County Health Department's hazardous materials control program. "And it's the 
old story: Once you get to the border, the horses stop. We can't go any 
further." 
As serious as it is, the trafficking of hazardous waste from California to 
Mexico is but one facet of the growing problem of toxic exports. Hundreds of 
businesses owned by Americans and other foreigners operating on the Mexican 
side of the border are required by agreements reached between the various 
nations to return their hazardous waste to "the country of origin" for proper 
disposal. 
But state health authorities said they had no idea how much, if any, of the 
waste is being returned to California. Some authorities fear that waste 
produced by the Mexican border firms is being illegally dumped in Mexico. 
"We don't have as good a handle on it as we would like to," state Health 
Department spokesman Allan Hirsch said Tuesday. "We certainly hope it's not 
being dumped clandestinely in Mexico." An EPA enforcement agent said the agency 
has gotten reports of wastes from the border firms being returned to California 
for treatment, but he could not say how much. 
While several authorities estimated that perhaps only 10% of toxic waste 
generated in California is shipped out-of-state illegally, that still adds up 
to a formidable amount. California ranks 15th in the nation in legal toxic 
waste exports -- about 15.8 million pounds in 1987 -- according to an 
accounting made public this week by Inform, a New York City-based environmental 
research organization. 
Authorities say there are at least 50,000 generators of hazardous waste in the 
state, about 17,500 in Los Angeles County. According to the California 
Department of Health Services, only about 15 California firms have legally 
transported hazardous materials to foreign countries, primarily to Mexico, 
since reporting began in 1984. 
To be exported legally into Mexico, the hazardous substance must be usable or 
recyclable and officially acceptable to the Mexican government. But many firms 
can't or won't meet that test. 
Francis Odell, president of a large, modern metal-plating firm in Bell Gardens, 
said some metal-plating businesses are in such financial disarray that they are 
going out of business. 
Although most firms that remain comply with environmental regulations, Odell 
said, "a minority" look for the easy way out. 
"They've got an economic problem of what to do," he said, "and if they are 
given an offer to truck it off to Mexico, what do you do? It's tough to be 
moral when you're broke." 
Contributing to this story were Times staff writers Patrick McDonnell from 
Tijuana and Hector Tobar in Los Angeles. 
