PLAY BALL! CITY SECTION REINSTATES 4-A PLAYOFFS 
As a result of the settlement of the Los Angeles schoolteachers' strike, the 
City Section has reinstated the 4-A Division baseball playoffs. 
City Section Commissioner Hal Harkness and a group representing the 4-A coaches 
hammered out a plan Thursday morning that calls for first-round games today and 
the next three rounds to be played Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. The final 
is scheduled for Thursday at Dodger Stadium. 
Teams that survive the first round of the 16-team tournament will be allowed to 
practice either Saturday or Monday, a school holiday. In addition, the City has 
instituted a pitching limit for next week, limiting a player to 14 innings over 
three games. 
Harkness had canceled the playoffs Tuesday because of a coaches' boycott 
stemming from the strike against Los Angeles Unified School District. The 
11-day-old strike was settled Thursday and teachers are expected back in school 
today. 
A group of 18 4-A coaches had voted last week to boycott the playoffs as part 
of the strike. Harkness announced the cancellation after a poll of the schools 
whose teams had qualified for the playoffs revealed that only a handful were 
willing to field teams without the coach of record. District rules state that 
the school official coaching a team must be a credentialed employee. 
Harkness, who had insisted that the playoffs could not be postponed because of 
conflicts with academics, reinstated the postseason tournament because the new 
format calls for no extension of the season. 
"From the first day the coaches talked about the boycott, an extension beyond 
June 1 was not acceptable," he said. "I've got no problem going back on my 
decision because this agreement is the best thing for kids who want to finish 
the season." 
The 4-A baseball coaches had been criticized by parents and district officials 
because they rejected the recommendation of the Los Angeles City Coaches Assn. 
that allowed coaches who honored picket lines to continue to direct their teams 
after school. The strike did not disrupt playoffs in 3-A baseball, golf, 
gymnastics, softball, swimming, track and volleyball. 
"I feel like we fought World War III," San Fernando Coach Steve Marden said. 
"This is like a governor's reprieve. We were eating our last meal and we were 
down to the dessert. Today feels like a doubleheader victory. We got a contract 
with the union that we like, and the commitment we had for our teams will be 
able to be realized." 
Marden played an instrumental role in the reinstatement of the games. When he 
sensed an end to the strike Wednesday night, he devised a plan for a 
rescheduled tournament and then gained approval from the boycotting coaches to 
present the plan to Harkness at a meeting Thursday. 
In order to accommodate two wild-card games that were canceled last week, 
Marden called for games Friday and Saturday in addition to the 
Tuesday-Wednesday-Thursday games. Harkness had ruled that El Camino Real and 
Gardena would join the 16-team tournament based on better conference records, 
knocking Birmingham and Cleveland from the tournament. 
Harkness ruled against any Saturday games in deference to administrators, who 
he said have been overworked during the strike. 
"There's been a lot of stress at the schools and administrators have done 
enough," he said. "With no advance warning to set up these games, they didn't 
need Saturday baseball, especially on a three-day weekend." 
Birmingham Coach Wayne Sink said if put in the same position, he would boycott 
again. 
"My position was simple: If we have to strike, you cannot come back and coach. 
I haven't really had any negative feedback from the players," he said. 
Thursday was not a day for negatives for those involved in City baseball. After 
nearly two weeks of strife, coaches, players, parents and school officials 
joined to commend the reinstatement. 
"We probably had our best practice of the year today," Kennedy shortstop Gino 
Tagliaferri said. "We worked out for about 3 1/2 hours and everyone was there. 
This is our second season. I'm not so happy about going back to school, but 
this makes it OK." 
Although some teams assembled in time for practice Thursday, word traveled 
slowly to others. Tim Costic led Monroe to a City championship last year and 
was named The Times' Valley Player of the Year. He didn't learn of the 
announcement until 4 p.m. and wondered whether players would be prepared for 
today's games. 
"I've been running, taking swings and throwing with my dad, but we haven't 
worked out as a team," he said. "That's going to hurt us. Some guys maybe 
haven't picked up a ball because they thought the high school season was over. 
I wish the playoffs had started on schedule, but at least we're playing." 
Others expressed concern about the emotional damage the strike had caused 
between players and coaches. Some players have said that they are bitter and 
disappointed because they feel abandoned by their coaches. 
"I don't feel we'll be together as a team and there is bitterness from 
players," Costic said. "Strikes do funny things. Friends before the strike may 
not be friends now." 
Chatsworth Coach Bob Lofrano planned a meeting with his players before today's 
game against Gardena and conceded that the session could turn ugly. Players 
have criticized him for the leadership role he played in the boycott and he 
received a venomous letter from an anonymous parent accusing him of disloyalty 
to the team. 
Rick Evans, father of Chatsworth shortstop Jason, has supported Lofrano and is 
relieved that the strike is over. He said nothing would keep him from attending 
today's game but he issued a warning: 
"The coaches have to re-convince the players that they're on their side again," 
Evans said. "The coaches have to win the kids over with some kind of Knute 
Rockne motivational speech." 
Lofrano is not the fire-and-brimstone type but he realizes that special steps 
are needed to mend fences. 
"We need to clear the air, but I expect hard feelings from the players," he 
said. "But the bottom line is that we're back playing tomorrow. You can't let 
those things bother you when you cross the lines." 
LET THE GAMES BEGIN 
Top-seeded Chatsworth and defending-champion Monroe are among the 16 teams that 
will play today. Steve Elling's story, Page 14. 
