CITY WINS OK FOR USE OF SEWAGE SLUDGE AS FERTILIZER 
The city of Los Angeles has won permission from a state water board to begin 
trucking tons of sewage sludge to the Antelope Valley for use as farmland 
fertilizer, an environmentally controversial ruling that could open the door to 
more such uses in the county. 
The 7-1 decision by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board was a 
major victory for the city, which is seeking a cheaper and closer-to-home 
alternative for some of the sludge it has been trucking to farm fields in 
Riverside County and Yuma, Ariz. The decision is final unless there is an 
appeal within 30 days. 
The ruling marks the first time land application of wet sewage sludge has been 
permitted in the fast-growing Antelope Valley, and one of only a few times it 
has been permitted anywhere in Los Angeles County, although the practice is 
more common elsewhere in the country. 
Foes of the project called the board's ruling precedent-setting and said it 
could encourage more such efforts. 
Ron Kettle, a county sanitation official, said the decision might encourage the 
county to try the same approach with Lancaster and Palmdale sludge that is now 
piling up in those cities. 
Under the permit, Bio Gro Systems Inc. -- a private company that has the 
contract to transport the city's sludge -- will truck an average of 80 to 100 
tons a day of the city's concentrated sewage to the Antelope Valley. It will be 
spread and tilled into the soil of a 640-acre ranch Bio Gro purchased about 10 
miles west of Lancaster. 
The daily Antelope Valley haul represents about 7% of the 1,350 tons of the 
mud-like waste produced by the city each day. Los Angeles dumped it all into 
Santa Monica Bay until the federal government halted the practice on 
environmental grounds in late 1987. Since then, the sludge has gone either to 
landfills or remote farms. 
The state board's decision came late Thursday night after a more than 
three-hour public hearing in Lancaster. The water board staff, Los Angeles 
officials and farmers insisted the practice is safe, but local environmental 
and water agency officials remained unconvinced. 
"The city of Los Angeles feels this is not only an environmentally sound 
program, but can be an environmentally beneficial program," said Sheila 
Molyneux, a city sanitation official. She said sludge will improve crop yields 
and reduce the need for scarce water, harmful pesticides and commercial 
fertilizer. 
Under the water board's action, the city and Bio Gro will be required to 
conduct extensive water and soil sampling, and crops grown with the sludge 
cannot be used for human consumption. A Bio Gro spokeswoman said the sludge 
spreading could begin within several months. 
Local activists argued that the sludge could contaminate ground water and pose 
a health hazard. They also accused Los Angeles of trying to export its 
problems. "If they produce it in L.A., it should be gotten rid of in L.A.," 
said Marty Koppel, director of a local water agency. 
Local environmentalists also said the board's decision will pave the way for 
the Antelope Valley to become a sludge dumping ground for Los Angeles. City and 
Bio Gro officials acknowledged they are interested in expanding the program, 
but have yet to seek permission to use additional sites. 
Bio Gro originally proposed a much larger program involving five Antelope 
Valley sites totaling 3,500 acres and as much as 400 to 500 tons a day of 
sludge. But after that plan was disclosed in March, the four private farm 
owners dropped out, leaving only Bio Gro. 
The Antelope Valley became even more important to Los Angeles as an outlet 
recently when health officials in Riverside County imposed a temporary halt to 
sludge spreading in Blythe, where Bio Gro had been trucking much of Los 
Angeles' output after some Blythe area residents voiced water contamination 
concerns. 
Los Angeles County has had only two similar projects, officials said. The 
county sanitation districts until recently spread sludge on fields at the jail 
farm on the Peter J. Pitchess Honor Ranch near Saugus, and the Las Virgenes 
Municipal Water District has an ongoing project in Calabasas. 
