REFLECTIONS 
'I seem to photograph birds more than anything else. They are the most 
challenging. . . . A flower just sits there.' 
 The walls of Anthony Mercieca's Chula Vista home are covered with vivid color 
photographs of hawks, bison, bull elk and kit foxes. One picture -- of an elf 
owl swooping down on a field mouse -- took Mercieca over a week to capture just 
the way he wanted. But spending hours, even days, waiting for the right shot is 
nothing upsetting to the 51-year-old nature photographer who has traveled the 
world and snapped for such publications as National Geographic and Audubon. 
Mercieca retired early from National Steel &amp; Shipbuilding Co. so he would 
have more time to pursue his passion. Most recently, he spends his days 
observing the peregrine falcons' nest in the steelwork beneath the Coronado Bay 
Bridge. It was Mercieca who rescued one of the baby falcons after it left its 
nest for the first time and crashed into the side of the San Diego Trolley. 
Times staff writer Caroline Lemke interviewed Mercieca and Stan Honda 
photographed him. 
I started in photography when I was about 16 years old. I was born and raised 
in Malta, and I did a lot of diving when I was growing up. I took pictures of 
only natural things. Very seldom would I do anything else. 
I immigrated to the United States in 1959. I came to San Diego in 1960 and 
worked with National Steel &amp; Shipbuilding for 27 years before retiring in 
1987. When I first came here I didn't know anybody, and Dave Fitch from 
Nelson's Photo suggested I take a nature photography class at night school. He 
said I could meet people interested in the same things as me. 
So my photography happened all along the way. I do a lot of work for National 
Wildlife and their publication for children, "Ranger Rick." My stuff has been 
used by all the major publications -- National Geographic, National Wildlife, 
Audubon. 
I think my love of nature goes back to when I was a little kid. My father 
bought me a little bird, a yellow wagtail. They sold for three pennies in those 
days. I was interested in nature ever since then. I used to go out and trap 
birds and study them. 
I've been to Alaska and Africa, and I've done a lot of photography in Arizona 
and Texas and North Dakota. Now I'm getting ready to go off to the Sierras. I 
will probably be there all summer. 
I've done all these trips on vacations and weekends and evenings. You can 
accomplish a lot with just two days on the weekend, if you get everything 
organized. Getting organized means finding a bird's nest, remembering where it 
is, and knowing when the young hatch. 
I seem to photograph birds more than anything else. They are the most 
challenging. I mean, a flower just sits there, and some people do great work 
with that, but a bird . . . first you've got to find it, then you've got to get 
close enough. That's a challenge. 
Sometimes I work all night. Like, at Otay Lake there is a pair of night hawks 
that nest there every year. I wanted to get a picture of them feeding, so I 
spent several nights there. It took me three different years to finally get the 
picture. 
I belong to the Peregrine Falcon Society, and our group decided when the birds 
below the Coronado Bridge fledge, somebody should be down there to help them. 
They aren't very capable birds. They think -- like when we were young and we 
thought we could do everything -- that they can fly like their parents. And, as 
soon as they try to fly, they find out how little they can do. And they get 
tired very easily. 
The first day, one of the birds flew out of the nest and ran into the side of 
the trolley. I saw this, went and picked it up, and took it to the zoo. We got 
that bird back from the zoo, and the very same day another bird got in trouble 
and broke its wing. 
I've been to the nest every day twice a day since the birds fledged. In the 
first days, I spent all day there. It's never boring. 
It sure helps to have a lot of knowledge about the animals and birds you 
photograph. About all I read about is stuff about nature. I don't call it an 
obsession. It's not going to kill me if I don't do it, but it sure would make 
my life a little harder. 
