SENATE APPROVES BILL ALLOWING RANDOM CAR SEARCHES FOR WEAPONS 
Anti-gang legislation permitting law enforcement officers to stop motorists at 
random and search their vehicles for illegal firearms during a local emergency 
was overwhelmingly passed by the Senate on Thursday. 
The bill by Sen. Ed Davis (R-Valencia), a former Los Angeles police chief, was 
sent to the Assembly on a lopsided 29-4 vote despite some reservations that the 
measure might run afoul of constitutional protections against unreasonable 
search and seizure. 
But Davis insisted that the bill, aimed at the perpetrators of gang-related 
drive-by shootings, provided for "reasonable search and seizure." He noted that 
"even some of our nicest suburbs are getting gang shootings and gang violence." 
Sen. Bill Lockyer (D-Hayward), chairman of the Judiciary Committee, told the 
Senate that the far-reaching bill probably is unconstitutional and likely will 
be killed in the Assembly. Nevertheless, Lockyer had voted in favor of the 
measure in his committee and decided to sit out the vote on the Senate floor 
rather than publicly side against it during the current anti-crime climate that 
prevails among citizens. 
"When you start in a free society searching people's cars without cause -- just 
doing it because you know there is a general safety problem -- we should all as 
free Americans worry about that," Lockyer cautioned his colleagues. 
Skeptics noted that under the bill, police would not have to demonstrate the 
usually required probable cause or reasonable suspicion before stopping and 
searching a vehicle and seizing weapons. 
One such skeptic, Sen. Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara), voiced concern that 
police and sheriff's deputies could single out minority drivers for 
"discrimination." But Hart wound up voting for the measure. 
But Davis said such conduct would be both improper and illegal. "I think police 
agencies are very sensitive to that," he said. 
The bill is intended to give cities and counties an additional tool to combat 
street gang shootings, particularly in some Los Angeles neighborhoods where gun 
fights between rival groups seem part of the life style. 
The bill would allow a city council or county board of supervisors to declare 
that public safety is so "gravely imperiled" by illegal use of firearms that 
law enforcement officers should conduct emergency searches of vehicles at 
random. 
The searches would be conducted only at night because, a Davis aide said, most 
drive-by shooting occur under cover of darkness. He also said daylight searches 
would unnecessarily disrupt people's lives 
The bill, in addition, would allow officers on a non-emergency basis to stop 
motorists at roadside checkpoints, similar to stops aimed at catching drunk 
drivers. At these stops, officers could not search the vehicle except to 
visually inspect the driver and passenger compartment for stolen, smuggled or 
other illegal weapons. 
