PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: EASE POCKETBOOK PAIN FOR PATIENTS TESTING NEW DRUGS 
Question: My next-door neighbor is retired and very frugal. She was given a 
prescription for Ceclor for an infection. The price was astronomical. 
To make matters worse, she only took it for a short time before developing 
diarrhea and a rash. 
Her doctor gave her a new prescription, but she was out the money for the 
Ceclor. Why can't doctors prescribe just two or three days' worth to start 
with? If the patient can handle it they can get the medicine refilled. 
Answer: Physicians should provide patients with a few days' worth of free 
samples whenever they prescribe a new medicine. This will allow patients to 
tell if they can tolerate the drug before spending a bundle. 
If that is not possible, the next best thing would be to have the pharmacist 
dispense only a small amount of the medicine and get it refilled if there are 
no serious side effects. 
Q: I am looking for a natural diet aid. The health food herbalist recommended 
spirulina. Can you tell me how effective it is for losing weight? 
A: Spirulina is blue-green algae -- sort of like pond scum. Some promoters 
claim it will boost energy and help people lose weight. 
In 1981 the Food and Drug Administration concluded that there is no evidence 
that blue-green algae is effective for weight loss. Although this stuff is high 
in protein and minerals, it is an expensive way to supplement the diet. Until 
we see a well-controlled study we would not recommend any kind of algae for 
quick weight loss. 
Q: Can you tell me about Ansaid? My mother has just started taking it for 
arthritis, and now she says she is free of pain. Is this pain reliever 
addicting? 
A: Ansaid (flurbiprofen) is a relatively new arthritis medication. Like most 
other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) this type of medicine 
reduces inflammation and swelling in the joints as well as relieving pain. 
NSAIDs are not addicting, but they do have side effects, including stomach 
irritation, ulceration, diarrhea, headache, skin rash, and kidney problems. 
