OPENING VOLLEYS IN CAMARENA CASE; 
TRIAL: PROSECUTORS SAY THEY WILL SHOW AGENT'S MURDER WAS PART OF A CAMPAIGN TO 
'INTIMIDATE THE DEA.' 
Leaders of a Mexican narcotics cartel tortured and murdered U.S. drug agent 
Enrique Camarena in retaliation for raids that had cost the traffickers $5 
billion, a federal prosecutor said Tuesday as a trial began for four men 
accused in the 1985 slaying. 
In opening arguments before a federal jury in Los Angeles, Assistant U.S. Atty. 
John L. Carlton said he would prove that the narcotics cartel, which involved 
high-placed officials of the Mexican government, had been stung by two 
successful raids by the Drug Enforcement Administration in 1984, and began a 
campaign "to intimidate the DEA." 
"The cartel's anger and frustration," Carlton said, "increasingly focused on 
one DEA agent," and that agent was Camarena, a veteran based in Guadalajara at 
the time. 
His murder has become a rallying point for U.S. law enforcement engaged in the 
self-described war against drugs, and the DEA's dogged crusade to avenge the 
death of one of its own has brought additional controversy to the case, 
heightening tensions between the U.S. and Mexican governments. 
Carlton said much of the prosecution's case against the four defendants would 
depend on the testimony of confidential informants, some of whom he 
acknowledged had committed crimes. He attacked Mexican law enforcement, saying 
that members of the federal security directorate, that country's equivalent of 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, were on the payroll of drug traffickers. 
The four defendants claim they are wrongly accused, and in opening statements 
their individual attorneys attacked the credibility of paid prosecution 
witnesses. 
Throughout Carlton's 75-minute presentation, Jose Antonio Ortiz, an assistant 
to Mexico's Los Angeles consul general, sat in the audience on the second floor 
of the federal courthouse downtown, busily taking notes, evidence of the 
Mexican government's concern about the U.S. handling of the case. 
The four defendants are Juan Ramon Matta Ballesteros, a convicted Honduran drug 
kingpin; Ruben Zuno Arce, the brother-in-law of former Mexican President Luis 
Echeverria Alvarez; Juan Bernabe Ramirez, a former Mexican policeman; and 
Javier Vasquez Velasco. 
Carlton said that Matta and Zuno were among the plotters of Camarena's 
kidnaping and murder, and that Bernabe acted as a guard at the house while the 
agent was interrogated and tortured. Matta is accused of murder, although the 
prosecution has not alleged that he did the killing. All three of these men are 
charged with conspiring to kidnap Camarena. 
Vasquez is alleged to have killed John Walker and Alberto Radelat, two U.S. 
tourists who were mistaken for DEA agents after they stumbled into a restaurant 
meeting of Guadalajara drug traffickers one week before Camarena was slain. 
Vasquez has been charged with committing a violent crime in aid of 
racketeering. 
All four defendants face life imprisonment if convicted. 
Much of the first day of the long-awaited trial was devoted to opening 
statements before the jury of six men and six women. The first witness, a 
former DEA agent, took the stand in mid-afternoon. The courtroom was filled for 
the trial, which is expected to last two months. 
Among accusations leveled by Carlton in his opening statement was that Zuno 
acted as a link between the drug cartel and the highest levels of the Mexican 
government. 
In a new assertion, he said that Zuno gave specific instructions on how 
Camarena should be interrogated at a Guadalajara house after he was kidnaped on 
Feb. 7, 1985, outside the U.S. Consulate there. 
More than two dozen persons have been convicted of crimes related to the 
slaying in Mexico and several are serving long prison sentences. Last year, 
after two of Mexico's leading drug kingpins -- Rafael Caro Quintero and Ernesto 
Fonseca Carrillo -- were convicted of the murder there, Mexico's attorney 
general declared that all the killers had been brought to justice and that the 
case was closed. 
None of the four men on trial now has been charged in Mexico. As the trial 
opened, however, the Mexican attorney general announced in Mexico City that he 
was reopening his country's investigation of the case. 
Defense lawyers attempted to persuade the jury to consider their clients 
individually, not as part of a group. One of Matta's lawyers, Michael Burns, 
stressed that the defendants were sitting at separate tables. 
"The prosecution will attempt to fool you into convicting an innocent man," 
said Burns. Last year, Matta was convicted in U.S. court on separate charges of 
moving cocaine worth $73 million through Los Angeles. He was given a life 
sentence. Burns acknowledged in court that Matta, 45, currently faces other 
drug trafficking charges in Los Angeles. 
"But that's in another court. . . . that's for another day," Burns said. "This 
is not a drug trial. This is a murder trial . . . What I want you to understand 
is that you should give a man who may or not be a drug dealer a fair trial on 
other charges." 
The trial's first fireworks erupted before Carlton had finished his remarks. 
Another of Matta's defense team, Martin R. Stolar, objected vociferously to 
Carlton's statement that two strands of Matta's hair were found at the 
Guadalajara house where Camarena was tortured and murdered. 
Last week, Stolar asked Judge Edward Rafeedie to allow him to call an expert 
witness to examine the hairs with an electron microscope, which he said is more 
sophisticated than the method used by the FBI in determining that the hair was 
Matta's. Rafeedie has not ruled on that motion. Outside the presence of the 
jury, he denied Stolar's request to declare a mistrial because of Carlton's 
reference to the hairs. 
Several of the jurors took notes as they tried to absorb a blizzard of names -- 
many of them long Spanish names -- involved in the tangled case. 
According to Carlton, on the day Camarena disappeared he had made arrangements 
to meet his wife for lunch. 
"He never made that appointment," Carlton said. 
Instead, he was kidnaped outside the U.S. Consulate in Guadalajara. A month 
later, Camarena's mutilated body was found at a ranch 65 miles from 
Guadalajara, along with that of Alfredo Zavala Avelar, a pilot for the Mexican 
agriculture department who had served as a DEA informant, scouting for 
marijuana fields. 
In 1984, Zavala had led Camarena and other agents to two major marijuana fields 
operated by the Guadalajara cartel. 
Carlton said Camarena and Zavala "were kidnaped, tortured and murdered because 
they did their work too well." 
Zuno's attorney, Edward Medvene, a federal prosecutor some years ago, made the 
lengthiest opening statement of the defense lawyers. He called Camarena's 
killers "animals" who were not connected to his client. 
Medvene emphatically denied that Zuno had any involvement in the Camarena 
killing and said that it took the government four years and nine months to come 
up with a witness against his client -- a man who is now a government-paid 
informant, Hector Cervantes Santos. 
The attorney said Cervantes had been found by a DEA operative named Antonio 
Garate Bustamante, a figure of controversy in the case. The government does not 
plan to call the L.A.-based Garate as a witness. He is the self-proclaimed 
architect of the kidnaping of a Mexican doctor who also has been indicted in 
the case and is facing charges. 
Medvene stressed that Cervantes had been relocated to the United States by the 
DEA. He told the jurors that Cervantes and three other prospective witnesses 
against his client had been paid $188,000 for information and expenses by the 
government. 
The attorney added that a group of confidential informants expected to testify 
in the case had been paid a total of more than $800,000 by the government. 
Medvene utilized a large chart to illustrate the payments for the jurors. 
Medvene accused the government of having a convicted drug dealer put into 
solitary confinement at a federal prison after he refused to testify against 
Zuno and told the jurors that one of the witnesses against his client would be 
a man who had committed 35 murders. 
Finally, he said that Zuno, 59, would take the stand in his own defense. 
Gregory Nicolaysen, Vasquez's lawyer, and Mary Kelly, Bernabe's lawyer, made 
only brief statements proclaiming their clients innocent. 
The government's first witness was James Kuykendall, who retired from the DEA 
last June after 16 years with the agency. He headed the DEA's Guadalajara 
office from 1982 to 1985, and worked extensively with Camarena. 
Kuykendall, who will return to the witness stand today, gave a detailed 
presentation of DEA operations in Mexico. Carlton asked him several questions 
about Mexican law enforcement agencies, including the federal security 
directorate. 
"I'm not sure what their function was," he said. "Many of the ones we met acted 
as henchmen for major narcotics traffickers." 
This is the second Los Angeles trial stemming from Camarena's murder. Three men 
were convicted in a 1988 trial and given long prison sentences. Sixteen other 
persons have been indicted, including the four currently on trial. 
