'BOILER ROOMS' PREY ON STAFF OF DISTANT FIRMS 
The thieves took more than $600,000 from the Greeneville Sun before the 
Tennessee newspaper's publishers even noticed that it was gone. 
They were both sophisticated and greedy, and they got the newspaper's money 
without leaving the San Fernando Valley -- by using the telephone. 
The Sun was the victim of United Business Exchange, based in North Hollywood, a 
"boiler room" that authorities believe took more than $2 million a year from 
out-of-state businesses in a long-running telemarketing scam involving office 
supplies. 
And United Business Exchange's take is only a drop in the bucket. In Southern 
California, which authorities call the boiler room capital of the United 
States, the Valley has become home base of the office-supply scam. 
More than 100 Valley boiler rooms bilk hundreds of millions of dollars each 
year from businesses across the country, authorities estimate. 
These boiler rooms use slick, high-pressure sales tactics to persuade unwitting 
purchasing agents to buy supplies ranging from yellow legal pads to generic 
copy-machine toner at prices inflated as much as 1,000%. Often the products are 
never even delivered. 
'Unlimited Opportunity' 
"It is the valley of unlimited opportunity," said Assistant U.S. Atty. David 
Katz. 
Katz coordinates the San Fernando Valley Task Force, a team of investigators 
from several federal agencies who are attacking the boiler room problem. 
Established earlier this year, the task force has had some success -- its 
agents arrested the chief operators of United Business Exchange. 
But investigators concede that the task force is overwhelmed by the number of 
boiler rooms in the Valley. 
Authorities said they do not know why Valley boiler rooms specialize in the 
office-supply scam, as opposed to other telemarketing frauds. But, they 
speculate, the area has lots of relatively inexpensive warehouse space, which 
those operating the scams need to store supplies. 
The average boiler room, authorities said, employs about 20 sales agents, but 
some have as many as 50. It is common for the salespeople to establish their 
own operations after they learn the ropes of the scam and develop their 
contacts, investigators said. 
Boiler room operators -- called "scammers" by authorities -- prey on the 
naivete of their victims and count on the odds. Business directories from 
cities all over the country provide a supply of potential marks, and the sales 
agents, cold-calling hundreds of businesses each day, regularly connect with 
victims, authorities said. 
'Get Foot in Door' 
"They are going for the 2% of the calls where they can get their foot in the 
door," Katz said. "If they get in and can tap into a large pool of money, then 
they are off to the races." Using carefully prepared scripts, the salespeople 
initially attempt to sell a small quantity of marked-up supplies and usually 
try to turn the purchasing agents into willing collaborators by sending them 
small gifts or "premiums," investigators said. 
Scammers, authorities said, hope that the purchasing agents will order larger 
and larger quantities of the exorbitantly overpriced copy toner, pens, papers 
and other supplies to continue receiving the premiums -- thinly disguised 
bribes that can range from TVs to trips to Hawaii. 
It is a process that investigators call "hooking the mooch." Once company 
insiders, or mooches, have accepted gifts, the scammers play on their greed to 
continue the scheme. Some mooches may even receive direct cash kickbacks. If 
the mooches hesitate after receiving initial gifts, they are threatened with 
exposure, authorities said. 
"If the buyer wants to balk, . . . the operator will say, 'Look here, how would 
you like your boss to know about the gifts that you are getting at home?' " 
said Larry Johnson, a federal postal inspector in Los Angeles who is assigned 
to the task force. 
Rewarding Trade-Off 
It is a lucrative trade-off for the boiler rooms. If a sales agent finds highly 
cooperative mooches, investigators said, the boiler room may not even send the 
office supplies. Checks to the boiler room from the victimized company and 
phony receipts and kickback checks to the mooch may be the only items going 
through the mail, they said. 
Such was the case with Edith Malone, a 28-year-old bookkeeper for the 
Greeneville Sun. Authorities said she enabled United Business Exchange to 
siphon more than $600,000 from the newspaper in 1985 and 1986. 
According to authorities, she received $40,000 and numerous gifts from United 
Business Exchange while sending back company checks, sometimes for more than 
$100,000 a month. Few of the supplies that she purchased were delivered, 
investigators said. 
Malone was caught when her superiors noticed the large cash shortages during an 
internal audit. Malone cooperated with an FBI investigation and later pleaded 
guilty to forgery. She was sentenced to five years in federal prison. 
"We were hit quite a lick," said Gregg K. Jones, co-publisher of the newspaper. 
Although insurance covered most of the loss, he said, "it really set us back." 
Malone was described as a naive woman who left Greeneville County for the first 
time when she was sentenced to prison. She was a trusted employee who 
authorities believe was initially tricked into her initial order of supplies by 
high-pressure sales tactics. 
Received VCR, TV 
Later, authorities said, she willingly joined the scheme, receiving a 
telephone, a food processor, a VCR, two stereos and a television in addition to 
the $40,000 as kickbacks. 
"After three or four gifts, she was hooked," said Tom Dugan, another Los 
Angeles postal inspector on the task force. 
Last month, the main operators of United Business Exchange, Laszlo Grabecz and 
Peter Tripp, both 41, were indicted in Greeneville on fraud charges, along with 
two sales managers, Richard Fonseca, 54, and his son, Christopher Fonseca, 25. 
When the suspects were arrested, they were operating a boiler room under a new 
name, Business Systems Exchange, in Sherman Oaks. They are scheduled to be 
arraigned this week in U.S. District Court in Greeneville. 
Authorities said the case shows how lucrative the boiler room business can be 
for its operators, particularly if a sales agent can develop a "mega-mooch." 
On the day the operators of United Business Exchange were arrested, Grabecz was 
driving a Bentley and Tripp was driving a Rolls-Royce, authorities said. Both 
lived in homes in the Mulholland Drive area. After their arrests, they put up 
$1 million in bail each and were released. 
A Valuable Resource 
Since "mega-mooches" are so valuable to boiler rooms, the operators may sell 
the information about cooperative mooches to other operations, Dugan said. 
An office manager at a Denver-based business management consulting firm became 
a mooch for National Industries of America, a boiler room based in Sherman 
Oaks. After she helped it filch $10,000 from her employer, she was contacted by 
seven other Valley-based office-supply boiler rooms, which either bought or 
were told information about her, Dugan said. 
The woman wound up helping the eight boiler rooms steal $100,000 from her 
employer before she disappeared in February, after being told that the office 
was scheduled for an internal audit. Presumably, she received about a 10% 
kickback on the orders she placed, said authorities, who are still 
investigating the eight boiler rooms. 
In past years, boiler rooms rarely hooked "big-money mooches," authorities 
said. But, Katz said, his investigators believe that the office-supply scammers 
are becoming more sophisticated. 
"Six months ago, I would have said $100,000 was a mega-mooch case," he said. 
"Now I have two cases where there are $1-million mooches." 
But whereas cases involving mega-mooches draw the most attention, authorities 
said boiler room operations do not require inside operators to make a profit. 
'Toner Phoner' Scam 
Jonathan Levin-Epstein, office manager of a New York law firm, has become an 
expert in the small scam known as the "toner phoner." 
In July, just two months after he began work as the firm's office manager, he 
said he became a victim when he was called by a boiler room now under 
investigation by the Valley task force. 
Levin-Epstein said the caller told him that the price of toner for the firm's 
copy machine was about to increase and asked if he would like to place a final 
order at the old price. Levin-Epstein said he had never before ordered toner 
and ordered two cases, thinking that he was getting a deal. 
When the bill arrived, he was charged $916.55. If he had purchased the same 
toner from Xerox, the firm's legitimate supplier, the cost would have been 
$306, he said. 
"They represented themselves as the authorized Xerox supplier, and me being new 
in the office and naive, I said, 'Fine,' " Levin-Epstein said. 
Second Part 
About a month after the first shipment, the telemarketing firm called 
Levin-Epstein again, and he was told that the second part of his order was 
being shipped, along with a color television he had won in a lottery of 
customers' names. 
"I thought maybe the second part of the order explained the inflated prices," 
he said. But shortly after the second shipment of four cases of toner arrived, 
so did a second bill -- this time for $1,785 -- and the TV. 
Despite the gift, Levin-Epstein wasn't hooked. He said he contacted Xerox and 
discovered that the company he had dealt with had misrepresented itself. He 
refused to pay the bill and contacted authorities. 
Like Levin-Epstein, many purchasing agents realize after several deliveries 
that they are being cheated and cease doing business with the boiler rooms. But 
the victims usually feel it is not worth their effort to try to recover their 
losses of $500 to $1,000 from boiler rooms hundreds or thousands of miles away 
in California. 
Authorities say there are victims of Valley-based boiler rooms in every state 
but one -- California. Local telemarketing scammers scrupulously avoid calling 
businesses here because they know that a lack of in-state victims makes 
prosecution more difficult. 
Since in-state victims are a rarity, Johnson said, state and local authorities 
have difficulty investigating boiler room operators -- which leaves the task to 
federal authorities such as the FBI, IRS and Postal Service. Those agencies 
have agents assigned to the Valley task force. 
The task force is involved in multiple investigations of boiler rooms. In 
addition to arresting the suspects in the Greeneville Sun case, its agents 
raided three other boiler rooms last month. Six other boiler rooms shut down 
this year after investigators confronted the operators with complaints. 
To help stem the tide of boiler rooms in the Valley, the task force routinely 
cooperates with local authorities in the victims' regions. The Greeneville Sun 
case is being handled by prosecutors in Tennessee, and another case, involving 
a North Hollywood man, is being prosecuted in Oklahoma County, Okla. 
Authorities there say John Hagey, an experienced boiler room sales agent trying 
to launch his own operation, offered 10-ounce silver bars to purchasing agents 
who ordered office supplies priced at about three times their market value. 
Charles Rogers, an assistant district attorney in Oklahoma County, said one of 
the people Hagey called with that offer was Gene Kelly, the county purchasing 
agent. With Rogers' permission, Kelly ordered supplies, received four bars of 
silver and tape-recorded his conversations with Hagey. 
Hagey is being prosecuted on charges of bribery and racketeering. He has 
pleaded not guilty. 
