JUDGE ACQUITS TAYLOR IN DRUNK DRIVING CASE 
New York Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor was acquitted today of drunk driving 
charges stemming from a March arrest. 
"The justice system works, and I'm happy for myself," the eight-time All-Pro 
said as he emerged from the courtroom of Municipal Judge John Conte. 
Conte found Taylor innocent based on testimony from two doctors, who said they 
found that the NFL star suffered from food poisoning the night he was arrested. 
Authorities alleged that Taylor was found sleeping at 3:30 a.m. March 24 behind 
the wheel of his Jeep, which was parked on the shoulder of the Garden State 
Parkway. He was charged with drunk driving despite his blood alcohol level 
reading being .09%, below the .10% level considered legally drunk in New 
Jersey. 
Dr. Alan Lupinacci of West Paterson, one of two internists called as expert 
witnesses by Taylor's attorney, said the NFL star suffered from acute food 
poisoning, which caused him to vomit. 
He theorized that Taylor became sick from an organism contained in poorly 
prepared fettuccine Alfredo eaten on a flight from Atlanta to Newark the day 
before his arrest. 
"It is medically known that this type of organism is found in cream sauces and 
can make a person present those symptoms," Lupinacci said. 
Earlier, Taylor's attorney attempted to show that the arresting officer took 
the football star into custody based on assumptions made from previous arrests 
and not from the evidence obtained from Breathalyzer tests. 
Trooper Robert Pohida, who arrested Taylor, said he was surprised that the 
football star's breath test showed Taylor's blood alcohol level to be only 
.09%. 
"You expected the reading to be a lot higher?" asked James Acheson, Taylor's 
attorney. 
"That is correct," Pohida replied. 
The trooper said Taylor could not perform simple coordination tasks that are 
routinely administered to motorists who are suspected of driving while 
intoxicated. Some of the tests included reciting the alphabet and touching his 
index finger to his nose. 
Based upon the alcohol reading and the dexterity problems, the trooper 
suspected that Taylor may have been abusing drugs and ordered a urinalysis, 
Pohida said. 
Taylor has undergone drug rehabilitation twice in the last three years. 
If convicted on the drunk driving charge, Taylor could have faced a fine and a 
loss of his driving privileges. 
