MILLS EYES UCLA AS KENTUCKY IS SANCTIONED; 
HE IS INELIGIBLE TO PLAY FOR WILDCATS, WHO ARE PUT ON 3 YEARS' PROBATION 
Claud Mills, the father of one of the two University of Kentucky basketball 
players declared ineligible Friday when the National Collegiate Athletic Assn. 
announced sanctions against the school's basketball program, said his son is 
considering transferring to UCLA, with hopes of playing this fall. 
Chris Mills, the Wildcats' second-leading scorer from Los Angeles Fairfax High 
School, was ruled ineligible to play again at Kentucky as a result of the 
sanctions, which also prohibit Eric Manuel from playing at any NCAA school. 
Although the NCAA found Mills to have been involved in the violations, there is 
a chance that he could begin playing at another school in the fall, instead of 
having to sit out a year. 
"We're going to sit down and talk about it next week," Claud Mills said. 
"(Chris) is definitely going to look at UCLA real long. That's definitely his 
No. 1 choice. I'm pretty sure he's going to stay here at home." 
UCLA basketball Coach Jim Harrick would not say whether he wanted Mills. 
"It's the first time in my life I'm saying, 'No comment,' " Harrick said. "I'm 
just worried about getting to Palm Springs for vacation. Really, though, I need 
to talk to my administrators first. But no one has talked to me about this." 
The NCAA put the Wildcats on probation for three years, banned them from 
postseason play for two years and from television appearances for one season, 
and cut six scholarships in the next two years as a result of its lengthy 
investigation into the basketball program. That investigation led to the 
resignations of Coach Eddie Sutton and his staff, as well as Athletic Director 
Cliff Hagan. 
It is estimated that the sanctions will cost the university's athletic program 
about $2 million in lost revenue. 
Although neither Mills nor Manuel was named in the NCAA report, they figured 
prominently in the investigation, and several specific infractions were cited 
in the report. 
Among them, former Kentucky assistant coach Dwane Casey was found to have sent 
$1,000 in cash to Claud Mills when Chris Mills was being recruited in April 
1988. The money was found in an opened air express package, first mentioned in 
a story by the Los Angeles Daily News. 
According to the NCAA report, Casey, who has maintained his innocence in the 
matter, "demonstrated a knowing and willing effort to violate NCAA 
regulations." Casey also provided false information to investigators about his 
role in the violations, the report said. 
Claud Mills has maintained that he was unaware that any money was being sent to 
him and that he would take a lie detector test to prove it. He said Friday that 
he and his son were victims of a setup to discredit Kentucky. 
"We know that for a fact," Mills said. "(But) we can't prove it or nothing." 
When the money was found, Chris Mills was the object of a vigorous recruiting 
battle among Kentucky, Nevada Las Vegas, Louisville, Syracuse and UCLA, 
although the Bruins of then-coach Walt Hazzard were quick to drop out. Even so, 
Hazzard feels sorry for Mills now. 
"I'm real sorry for that kid," Hazzard said. "It's just a shame. He's been a 
real nice boy for most of his life." 
Claud Mills said that he and his son had only been interested in attending 
schools at which the basketball programs were above reproach -- and NCAA 
investigation. They chose Sutton and Kentucky. 
"We asked every school if they were under investigation, and at Kentucky, they 
all said no, that they ran a clean program," Claud Mills said. "We went there 
because Eddie Sutton could teach guys the big guard spot. He had (Sidney) 
Moncrief and (Alvin) Robertson (both at Arkansas) before, so Chris could learn 
that position. 
"I don't regret one minute he went to school under Coach Sutton," Mills said. 
"I just regret what happened to Coach Sutton and his family. Coach Sutton, he 
was like a brother to me and a father to Chris." 
Besides UCLA, the elder Mills mentioned Loyola Marymount as a potential school 
for Chris Mills. Other speculation mentions Arizona. 
Mills, a 6-foot-7 swing man with three years of eligibility, may not be the 
only Kentucky player with the option of enrolling in a new school. LeRon Ellis, 
a 6-11 center who has two years of eligibility left, is already being mentioned 
as a likely transfer under a complicated NCAA waiver provision that could be 
used because of the sanctions. 
Ellis, from Mater Dei High School in Santa Ana, was recruited by USC and 
Syracuse, but he visited only Lexington, Ky., before signing with Kentucky. 
"We would still be very interested in talking to him -- and Mills," USC Coach 
George Raveling said. 
Chuck Smrt of the NCAA's enforcement office said that Ellis would fall under 
the postseason competition waiver. That becomes effective when the length of a 
postseason penalty matches the eligibility remaining. In that case, the player 
can transfer and play without fulfilling the one-year residency requirement. 
Since Ellis' remaining eligibility and Kentucky's postseason penalty are both 
two years, Ellis could transfer and begin playing this fall. 
Mike Gilleran, commissioner of the West Coast Athletic Conference and a former 
assistant director of enforcement for the NCAA, said that if Ellis leaves 
Kentucky, it could be the start of a trend in Lexington. 
"You may see a complete bailout," Gilleran said. 
Mills' situation is different. Since he has three years of eligibility left, 
the postseason competition waiver does not apply. For Mills to transfer to 
another school and play this fall, his new school must apply to the 44-man NCAA 
Council under other waiver provisions. 
Smrt said the NCAA Council would consider the university's petition for waiver 
on behalf of the athlete. The council's principal interest in such a procedure 
is the athlete's role in any recruiting violations. 
Peter Dalis, UCLA athletic director, had no comment on whether UCLA would be 
inclined to write a petition for a waiver in Mills' behalf, saying that there 
is no indication where Mills is going to go to school if he leaves Kentucky. 
"There has been conjecture the past six or seven months as to where he's 
going," Dalis said. "Other than that, I have nothing to say." 
Claud Mills said that the next step is to come up with a plan after consulting 
with Ron Hecker, his attorney. Mills said that even though the Kentucky 
basketball program may have been dealt a setback, his son is going to turn out 
all right after all. 
"It may have been bad news for Kentucky, but it isn't bad news for Chris," 
Mills said. "We expect to appeal and we expect him to play next fall." 
Manuel, who sat out last season because of questions about his college entrance 
exam, is not as fortunate. 
According to the NCAA report, Manuel "committed academic fraud by cheating" on 
the exam. The report also said that Kentucky allowed him to compete during the 
1987-88 season, even though the school should have known he was ineligible. 
In addition to the other penalties, Kentucky must forfeit the more than 
$400,000 it earned in the 1988 NCAA tournament and will have its name removed 
from records of 1988 postseason play because Manuel was in the lineup. The 
Southeastern Conference also may order Kentucky to forfeit 1988 regular-season 
games. 
Kentucky is limited to three scholarships in each of the next two years and 
cannot replace with a scholarship player any other player who transfers because 
of the sanctions. 
The NCAA said that it could have justified shutting down Kentucky's regular 
season as a result of the 15 violations but did not do so because of the 
university's cooperation in the investigation. 
University President David P. Roselle said the school would not appeal any of 
the sanctions. 
In addition to the violations involving Mills, Casey and Manuel, the NCAA 
Committee on Infractions listed a number of minor violations such as providing 
improper trips, housing and inducements such as free T-shirts for recruits. 
The violations proved costly in many ways: 
 -- The university spent more than $350,000 conducting its own investigation, 
which was spearheaded by James Park Jr., a former Kentucky appeals court judge. 
 -- Casey, the assistant coach, was suspended from coaching for five years. 
 -- Hagan, a Kentucky basketball star in the 1950s, resigned in November. 
 -- The four-year stay of Sutton and his staff ended in March as a result of 
the inquiry, although the NCAA cited the coaches' departure as a reason the 
penalties were kept to a minimum. 
Sutton said he found it hard to believe that those penalties could have been 
harsher. "I wonder how," he said, according to the Associated Press. 
Even though he was never mentioned in the NCAA findings, Sutton said he 
accepted some of the blame. 
"I still have to take part of the responsibility because I was the head 
basketball coach," Sutton said. 
"I think I have learned from this." 
