ARTS AGENCY PLAN OKD BY SUPERVISORS; FUNDING IS DELAYED; 
PARTNERSHIP: AN AD HOC COMMITTEE WILL SERVE AS AN INTERIM STATE-LOCAL CHANNEL 
FOR SUPPORT OF PROGRAMS IN THE COUNTY. 
The Orange County Board of Supervisors voted 4 to 1 Tuesday to develop a 
countywide arts agency to serve as "state-local partner" with the California 
Arts Council. But the board left open the question of how the agency would be 
funded. 
Meanwhile, the board named the ad hoc Committee to Form an Orange County Arts 
Council, a group of local arts leaders, to serve as interim state-local partner 
to the CAC. 
Creation of a state-local partnership makes the county eligible for up to 
$80,000 a year in state and federal funds for arts programs, according to a 
local arts official. Orange County is one of only six in the state with no 
state-local partner, unable to receive any state and federal grants for 
redistribution to local arts groups. 
The board rejected a proposal to consider funding the agency with $50,000 
normally used for county parks. 
Supervisor Roger R. Stanton said that he supports development of the agency but 
thought that approval of the funding proposal would imply a commitment to 
support the agency with county money. 
Supervisor Harriett M. Wieder agreed. "We've got so many (funding) challenges 
this year and in the coming year," she said. "It's really scary. Let's take 
this one step at a time. . . . Funding (for the arts agency) can be addressed 
in the future." A recent county financial forecast indicated that the county 
may be facing a budget deficit of up to $63 million in two years. 
Ironically, the one vote against developing the agency came from Supervisor 
Thomas F. Riley, who had recommended the development in the first place but 
believed that the measure should include the funding proposal. 
County funding of the arts historically has been minimal. Riley, after reading 
a report he had requested on the subject from the county administrative office, 
had said he wanted to reasses the county's role. 
The ad hoc committee has asked the CAC for $12,500, a request to be considered 
in Sacramento on Thursday. Committee Chairman Charles Desmarais, director of 
the Laguna Art Museum, said the county should take advantage of current 
availability of arts funds instead of waiting for a permanent agency to be 
formed. He said the money, if granted, would be deposited until a permanent 
agency is in place. 
According to the supervisors' vote Tuesday, a structural plan for the agency 
will be developed by the county administrative office and the Environmental 
Management Agency in conjunction with the Department of Education, the Orange 
County Public Library and the League of Cities. 
