FDA APPROVES IRRADIATION TO KILL BACTERIA IN POULTRY 
The federal government Tuesday approved irradiation, a controversial food 
processing technique, for use on poultry as a way of controlling bacterial 
contamination. 
The Food and Drug Administration announced Monday that poultry producers now 
can employ gamma rays, X-rays or electron radiation as weapons against 
salmonella and other bacteria. Federal officials believe that as much as 36.9% 
of the nation's processed chicken harbors the harmful salmonella bacteria. 
Reaction to the announcement was divided. Some industry groups welcomed the 
development, although a few were lukewarm. Elsewhere, a consumer group 
condemned the FDA's action. 
Irradiation was first approved by the agency in 1963 for use on flour. Later 
its use was extended to several other types of food for problems as diverse as 
infestation, spoilage or parasites. At present, however, spices are the only 
foods irradiated with any regularity. 
"Irradiation is totally safe," said Bill Grigg, an FDA spokesman, who said 
Tuesday's authorization is the first major use of irradiation to control a 
human bacterial disease. "There is no way that the food can become radioactive 
and at these levels (approved for use on chicken) there is not even any great 
change in flavor." 
The maximum dose allowed to process poultry will be 300,000 rads. (A rad is a 
dosage of absorbed radiation.) Food treated with irradiation is exposed for 
short times, depending on the processor's objective. 
"Adequate scientific studies have not been conducted on food irradiation," said 
Michael Colby, director of Food &amp; Water Inc., a New York-based advocacy 
group. "For instance, there are small toxic properties -- unique radiolytic 
products -- remaining in irradiated food after processing. The FDA is asking 
American consumers to accept these small toxins in an attempt to control the 
salmonella problem. Well, consumers want real solutions to the salmonella 
problem and they don't want another toxic technology." 
A representative of Radiation Sterilizers Inc. of Tustin, which operates one of 
Southern California's few irradiation plants, said he is delighted with the 
FDA's approval. 
"I'm enthusiastic not because it may mean new business but because the approval 
shows another place where irradiation can fit (in food processing)," said Wally 
Hall, the firm's general manager. 
One meat industry trade group supports the FDA's decision. 
"In general, I'm in favor of irradiation," said Rosemary Mucklow, executive 
director for the Western States Meat Assn. in Oakland. "Irradiation is a 
technology that has been very misrepresented by consumer groups. It is a 
technology that should be judged only on the science. And as long as the FDA 
has used good scientific support and investigation in order to find it safe, 
then I'm very encouraged." 
