OCTAVIO SOLIS HAS CREATED A NEW 'JUAN'; 
HIS 'MAN OF THE FLESH' IS NO PRIVILEGED GRANDEE 
Although South Coast Repertory is touting Octavio Solis' "Man of the Flesh" as 
a Chicano satire of the Don Juan myth, the playwright is not sure he likes the 
description. 
"I have problems with the word Chicano," said Solis, whose play opens tonight 
on the SCR Second Stage. "It sounds like a dated term that reflects a very 
active political movement of the '60s and '70s. That's what produced the word 
Chicano. I just think of myself as a Mexican-American." 
Besides, it's not as though his writing has been devoted to ethnic material or, 
for that matter, even touched on it before. "Man of the Flesh," developed at 
SCR's Hispanic Playwrights Project, marks the first time. 
"None of my plays really dealt with any Hispanic themes at all up to this one," 
the 32-year-old El Paso, Tex., native said in a recent interview. 
In fact, while Solis can speak and read Spanish, he adds that he is not 
literate in the language. Though he grew up speaking it at home, he not only 
has a scant Spanish vocabulary but he thinks in English now. After watching 
U.S. television throughout his childhood and being educated in public schools, 
he said, he can't help considering English his mother tongue. 
Why then the sudden burst of interest in the ethnic culture he seems to have 
left behind? In practical terms, "Man of the Flesh" was originally commissioned 
for Teatro Dallas in Texas, which was not exactly looking for an Anglo-style 
play. More philosophically, Solis said, "I had perhaps been ignoring things 
about myself and my background that I needed to give a second look." 
The Don Juan myth appealed to him in particular, he noted, because it persists 
in the Hispanic ethos as something that is both embraced and rejected. "We 
don't like to think of the Latin lover or the Don Juanism or the machismo as 
being a prevalent force in our cultural makeup," Solis asserted. "But it is a 
very strong force . . . it is an archetype." 
In doing his research for "Man of the Flesh," Solis said, he discovered that 
virtually "every culture has its own manifestations of the Don Juan myth," 
which is why artists as different from each other as Mozart, Shaw and Moliere 
have been able to make compelling use of it on the stage. 
Solis decided to satirize the myth by deflating the traditional image of the 
rakish Don Juan figure as a privileged grandee. Thus, "Man of the Flesh" 
revolves around young Juan Tenorio, whose hard-working father operates the 
Pronto Lawn &amp; Garden Service. And from a reading of the script, it would 
seem that Juan has hardly any redeeming virtues. 
"A lot of the work I'm doing is parody," Solis said. "I wanted to cast Don Juan 
as one of us, one of those Hispanics who has either recently arrived in this 
country or not been here past a generation. I thought it would be fun to have 
the noble, poetic cad in a position where he has to work his way up from the 
bottom of the ladder." 
If the power that Juan possesses over women in "Man of the Flesh" does not 
derive from position or personality, where does it come from? 
"His passion," the playwright says. "He claims he would rather be like everyone 
else. But when he sees women and they see him, there's an uncontrollable urge" 
to devour each other. Juan also has a nasty tendency to threaten anyone who 
gets in his way -- including his lovers -- with exposure to immigration 
officials ("Why don't I give INS a buzz? They might like to see who's got their 
papers."). 
When not writing plays, Solis makes his living as a writer of video scenarios 
for an educational project in San Francisco, where he has lived since September 
after spending 10 years in Dallas. "We're working on a teaching tool that uses 
interactive computer videos," he explained. "The scenario has plot points that 
revolve around the player." 
In the meantime, he is also at work on a new play commissioned by SCR. As yet 
untitled, it deals with "chaos theory, which is a mathematical-scientific term 
for dynamical systems," Solis said. "I've been interested in the subject for 
the last two or three years." 
Though the subject sounds rather obscure for the stage -- not to mention dry 
and arcane -- Solis is confident it can be dramatized by cradling it in a 
20th-Century version of the Faustian myth, another archetypal story that runs 
through many Western cultures. 
"There's a bargain with the devil, but the devil is not a character or someone 
who is visible," he pointed out. "In this case, the devil would be a 
radioactive isotope." 
 "Man of the Flesh" opens today at 8:30 p.m. on South Coast Repertory's Second 
Stage and runs through May 20. The theater is at 655 Town Center Drive, Costa 
Mesa. Tickets: $18 to $25. Information: (714) 957-4033. 
