ALCOHOL, DRUG USE CITED IN ROSS FIRING 
Fired sheriff's investigator Rickey Ross, freed from jail earlier this week 
when murder charges against him were dropped, was terminated because of several 
violations -- including the use of alcohol and drugs and misappropriation of 
narcotics evidence, according to a letter released Wednesday by the county 
Civil Service Commission. 
The allegations, contained in a four-page April 27 letter to Ross from Sheriff 
Sherman Block, represent the first public explanation of why the deputy was 
fired. 
The letter was released in response to reporters' questions to the Sheriff's 
Department about whether Ross would be rehired in the light of Monday's 
decision by the district attorney's office to dismiss three first-degree murder 
counts against him. Ross had been held in County Jail since his arrest Feb. 23. 
"By your actions, you have brought discredit and embarrassment to yourself and 
the department," Block wrote. 
Decision Appealed 
Ross, 40, an 18-year veteran of the department, appealed Block's decision last 
week. The commission is to decide Wednesday whether to hold a hearing on the 
appeal. 
None of Block's allegations were linked to the accusation made by the sheriff 
and Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates in February that Ross had slain 
three South-Central area prostitutes with his service handgun. 
Reached at his Rialto residence Wednesday evening, Ross said, "On the advice of 
my attorney, I have no comment" on Block's allegations. 
His lawyer, Jay Jaffee, said he, too, could not comment because he had not 
analyzed the allegations. 
The Ross case, in the words of a ranking LAPD official, served to "tarnish" the 
image of the department, because it was the LAPD's crime lab which -- 
apparently mistakenly -- linked Ross to the three slayings after forensic tests 
on his 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol. 
Outside Evaluation 
The official said Tuesday he would propose to Gates that outside experts, such 
as those from the FBI, be brought in to find out whether the lab's operations 
are flawed. Gates was not available to meet with staff on Wednesday, said the 
source, who asked for anonymity. 
The Ross case developed the morning of Feb. 23, when the off-duty deputy was 
stopped in South-Central Los Angeles by police officers on what was described 
as a routine traffic check. He was seated next to a prostitute and he drove 
erratically away from the curb as officers approached the car, police said at 
the time. 
At the time of his arrest, Gates said there was evidence that Ross and the 
woman had been smoking crack cocaine. No drugs, however, were found in the 
deputy's system. 
Block and Gates subsequently told a news conference announcing Ross' arrest 
that he was a suspect in the murders of three prostitutes, based on the LAPD's 
ballistics tests of a handgun found in the trunk of the deputy's county-owned 
car. 
Block, in his letter to Ross, alleged that the woman with Ross told 
investigators "she was a prostitute who exchanged sexual favors for drugs. She 
said that you provided a small piece of cocaine and at the time the officers 
approached your vehicle, you and she were smoking cocaine together. She said 
you were using a Pepsi can as a pipe, and she was about to perform an act of 
oral copulation upon you." Additionally, Block said that after the alleged 
incident with the prostitute, "an audit was conducted" of narcotics evidence 
Ross handled during his recent assignment as part of a federal drug task force 
at Los Angeles International Airport. It revealed, Block said, "that you had 
failed to follow proper Sheriff's Department procedure in handling narcotics 
evidence under your control." 
Handling of Evidence 
For example, Block alleged, Ross had indicated in a ledger he "had sent 
narcotics evidence to the state for disposal. However, the transmittal document 
for that transaction as well as the narcotics evidence has not been located." 
The controversy over the LAPD's testing of Ross' handgun was similar to an 
error in another high-profile case three years ago. 
When murder suspect James Hawkins Jr. was arrested in 1986, police found two 
guns they believed might have been used by Hawkins to kill two alleged drug 
dealers. 
Police firearms examiners had already determined that both men were killed by 
bullets fired by the same gun. After examining bullets test-fired from one of 
the recovered guns, they concluded that that gun was the murder weapon. 
However an independent examination sought by defense lawyers found the gun was 
not a conclusive match. Harvey Giss, a deputy district attorney in the county 
prosecutor's special trials section, said he did not learn about the flaw in 
the LAPD lab until confronted with it by the defense attorney during opening 
arguments. 
Second Examination 
Subsequently, Giss said, he sought a second independent examination of the gun, 
which confirmed that no conclusive matching of the weapon to the fatal bullets 
was possible. 
Unlike the Ross case, prosecutors were able to introduce other evidence which 
resulted in the conviction of Hawkins. 
Assistant Dist. Atty. Curt Livesay said Wednesday that after the district 
attorney's office "communicated our concerns," the LAPD began requiring all 
ballistics examiners' findings to be confirmed by a second examiner. 
In the Ross case, a second examiner confirmed the errant finding by the lead 
examiner, Detective Jimmy L. Trahin. 
