SAN DIEGO SPORTS ET CETERA: AZTECS USE HOME RUNS TO SWEEP BYU 
The knock against San Diego State's baseball team this season has been its lack 
of power. Tell that to Brigham Young. 
The Aztecs swept a Western Athletic Conference doubleheader Friday from BYU, 
6-2 and 7-6, by hitting four home runs in the first game and three in the 
second, including Brian Lutes' game-winning three-run homer in the top of 
seventh and final inning. 
Heading into another doubleheader against BYU today in Provo, SDSU is 33-20, 
14-6. BYU fell to 40-14, 18-7. The Aztecs, BYU and Hawaii (35-19, 17-5) are 
battling for first place in the WAC with six games remaining for each. 
SDSU trailed, 6-2, entering the seventh of the second game. After Brian Dunn 
reached base on an error, and Jeff Barry singled with one out, Harry Henderson 
singled in Dunn. One out later, Lutes homered to center to give the Aztecs a 
7-6 lead. 
John Marshall (3-3) was the winner in relief. 
In the first game, Henderson, Billy Miller (three for three), Anthony Johnson 
(three for three) and Barry hit home runs, accounting for all six runs. Rob 
Brown (9-4) pitched a four-hitter, struck out seven and yielded just one earned 
run. 
The University of San Diego scored four runs in the bottom of the eighth to 
escape with a 9-8 victory. Chris Stout (three hits) and Parris Sarianell (two 
doubles) led USD (22-30-1). Riverside scored five runs in the ninth. James 
Ferguson came in with one out in the ninth to pick up his third save. 
Cal State San Bernardino defeated Point Loma Nazarene, 6-2, in a nonconference 
game. Senior Tony Nobinsky had an RBI and scored a run for PLNC, which finished 
the year 20-28 overall. 
U.S. International University swept a nonconference doubleheader from Southern 
Utah State, 13-3 and 14-1, at USIU. The Gulls' Kevin Tahan was five for eight 
with a home run, his 15th, and nine RBIs in the two games. 
Beto Rodriguez was four for four with three doubles and a triple in the first 
game, which was won by starter Mike Whisonant (6-5) with a four-hitter. 
Bruce Moutaw was four for six, and Jeff Oswalt (6-7) the winner in the second 
game. USIU improved to 20-32. Southern Utah State is 21-29. 
TENNIS 
The University of San Diego will send two players into the NCAA Division I 
individual tennis tournament to be held at the University of Florida in 
Gainesville beginning May 15. Jennifer Larking (17-7), ranked 30th in the 
nation, will play in both the singles and doubles. Aby Brayton will be 
Larking's partner in doubles. The two have compiled a 14-6 record this year. 
The Point Loma Nazarene women head into today's final day of the NAIA District 
3 Championship Tournament tied for first place with Westmont College. Both have 
12 points. 
In doubles, Kim Wright and Shannon Anderson will play Carolyn Clayton and 
Lelisa Wolters of Westmont, which is hosting the tournament on its Santa 
Barbara campus. 
Robert McDonald of San Diego advanced to the semifinal round in the Men's 70s 
division of the National Hardcourt Tennis Championships at the La Jolla Beach 
and Tennis Club. McDonald defeated Bernie Terrell of El Cajon, 6-4, 7-5. 
In the women's 60s, Liz Harper of La Jolla topped her quarterfinal opponent, 
Dot Hogan of Encinitas, 6-1, 6-0. 
MEN'S GOLF 
San Diego State's men's golf team fell from first to third in the second round 
of the Western Athletic Conference's golf championships in Albuquerque. The 
Aztecs shot a 295 in the second round for a 585 total. With two rounds to go, 
they trail host New Mexico (575) and Texas El Paso (577). 
