GORBACHEV, S. KOREA'S ROH TO CONFER IN SAN FRANCISCO 
In an unprecedented event that will dramatize the far-reaching changes taking 
place among the nations of East Asia, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev 
will meet with South Korean President Roh Tae Woo in San Francisco, U.S. 
officials and other sources said Wednesday. 
Ever since the division of the Korean Peninsula after World War II, the Soviet 
Union has served as a military supplier and patron of the North Korean regime 
of Kim Il Sung, while South Korea has remained a close ally of the United 
States. 
"This is an extraordinary event," observed one exultant U.S. official 
Wednesday. "Can you see the poor guy in Pyongyang who draws the short straw and 
has to tell the old man (North Korean leader Kim) about this?" 
Kim met with Gorbachev in Moscow in 1986. The Soviets have no diplomatic 
relations with South Korea, and the heads of state of the two nations have 
never met. 
Although the session has not yet been officially announced by the two 
countries, the U.S. officials and other sources Wednesday confirmed it. Both 
leaders are scheduled to arrive in the Bay Area on Sunday. South Korean 
officials had been suggesting since April that Roh might come to the United 
States to see Gorbachev either before or after the Soviet leader's summit 
meeting with President Bush. 
Gorbachev's meeting with Roh would be the culmination of a series of steps that 
the Soviet Union has taken over the last year to improve relations with South 
Korea. The two countries opened trade and consular offices last year, and in 
March, Gorbachev met in Moscow with Kim Young Sam, one of the leaders of South 
Korea's ruling Democratic Liberal Party. 
North Korea has reacted furiously to the unfolding development of ties. 
"The Soviet Union, a friend of our people, must not go to the length of 
becoming a friend of the enemy of our people," warned the official North Korean 
news agency after Gorbachev met with Kim Young Sam. 
The Soviet Union's primary motivation is economic -- to attract the capital, 
technology, labor and other help that South Korea might provide. 
"The South Koreans could be important to the development of Siberia," said 
Ralph N. Clough of Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International 
Studies. "For example, the South Koreans are strong in construction. Their 
workers have been all over the Middle East and they could work on construction 
projects for the Soviets. The South Koreans have less expensive consumer goods 
than the Japanese, too." 
Further, other experts say, Gorbachev may be seeking to develop ties with Seoul 
as a way of goading Japan into moving faster in upgrading its own ties with the 
Soviet Union. 
"Gorbachev's willingness to do this says that while the Soviets still attach 
some importance to the relationship with North Korea, they have other interests 
to pursue in South Korea, and may even be applying some pressure on other 
nations in the region, such as Japan, which may be lagging in the development 
of Soviet ties," said Alan D. Romberg, a Korea specialist at the Council on 
Foreign Relations. 
For Roh, the meeting with Gorbachev would represent a major step forward in 
what is often called his foreign policy of nordpolitik -- of improving ties 
with countries to the north and west, including the Soviet Union, China and 
Eastern Europe. 
Over the last four decades, Kim Il Sung's Communist regime in Pyongyang has 
sought to maintain close ties with both the Soviet Union and China, apparently 
in an effort to avoid too great a dependence on either one of its huge 
neighbors. Over the last year, North Korea has drawn much closer to China, and 
Gorbachev's meeting with the South Korean president could further this process. 
Experts say that the two leaders will meet in the United States because ties 
between Moscow and Seoul have not yet advanced to the point where Gorbachev 
could stop to see Roh in Seoul. "I don't think they're quite at the stage yet 
where they could have presidential visits back and forth. They don't have 
diplomatic ties yet," Clough said. But he said it is possible that South Korea 
and the Soviet Union could establish diplomatic relations by the end of this 
year. 
