COLUMBIA'S SLUMS ARE BREEDING GROUND FOR SICARIOS -- DRUG LORDS' PAID ASSASSINS 
On the hillsides surrounding the cocaine capital of Medellin lie the slums that 
supply Colombia's drug lords with a labor force for their dirty work. 
The cramped settlements are breeding grounds for the dreaded sicarios or hired 
assassins, who for a small price will kill anybody -- policeman, judge, 
journalist or politician. 
Frequently contracted by the drug traffickers to kill anyone who stands in 
their way, the sicarios are on the front line of Colombia's drug war, which has 
claimed more than 300 lives since last August. 
"A generation lives here which doesn't know what it is to die of old age," said 
an army major in charge of a nighttime crime sweep in Aranjuez, one of the most 
notorious neighborhoods for sicarios. 
Usually between the ages of 15 and 20, the sicarios will do anything to escape 
grinding poverty, often killing for as little as $40. 
Their trademark is to shoot at their victims from a motorbike and then speed 
off. Few of their crimes are solved. 
The murderer of leftist presidential candidate Bernardo Jaramillo, gunned down 
at Bogota's main airport in March, was a 15-year-old youth who grew up in a 
lower class suburb of Medellin. 
Police blamed sicarios hired by drug barons for the murder of 18 policemen 
during a single week last month in Medellin, home of the famous cartel that 
supplies much of the cocaine used in the United States. 
Aranjuez, to the northeast of Medellin, is no-man's-land for strangers after 5 
p.m., except for the soldiers who periodically sweep the neighborhood in search 
of assassins. 
The most feared of the hundreds of gangs of assassins, Los Priscos, came from 
Aranjuez. 
Until recently, Pablo Escobar, accused head of the Medellin cocaine cartel, was 
often seen in Aranjuez. Now hunted by the authorities, Escobar is referred to 
here by the title, Don Pablo. 
The violence in Aranjuez can be felt in the harsh stares of the 14- and 
15-year-old youths lounging in the streets. They carry guns and are ready to 
use them. 
Army trucks roll into the neighborhood and cordon off a street. Soldiers storm 
the bars, separate the men from the women and ask for documents. A few are 
arrested. 
The soldiers systematically search houses for drugs or weapons. They are 
watched impassively by their owners who have grown used to these operations 
since the Colombian government cracked down on the illegal drug trade last 
August. 
