LOOKS: INSTEAD OF A FACE LIFT; 
PEELS CAN STRIP YEARS FROM YOUR FACE -- BUT YOU MAY GET BURNED 
SEDUCTIVE ads describe the chemical peel, a scalpel-free form of cosmetic 
surgery, as a quick fix for aging faces. In fact, the promise of unwrinkled 
skin lured more than 50,000 Americans into having the surface layers of their 
skin stripped last year. For most, the results were dramatic; the "new" skin 
looks years younger. 
Unfortunately, others learned that peels can be painful, unpredictable and 
disappointing. Most effective on crow's-feet, vertical lines around the mouth 
and crosshatches on the cheeks, a peel is no substitute for a face lift, which 
removes deep wrinkles and sags. 
The peel is a medical procedure, usually performed under general anesthesia, 
using the chemical phenol to strip away the outer layers of skin. As with a 
severe burn, the skin blisters and forms a crust. A few days later, when the 
crust falls off, smoother, ultra-sensitive skin is exposed. In more aggressive 
peels, the face is taped, forcing the phenol to work deeper. An alternative is 
a lighter peel, using trichloroacetic acid. Usually an office procedure, this 
peel requires a painkiller rather than anesthesia and is typically effective 
only on fine wrinkles. 
After a peel, the skin may remain red for months. It is camouflaged with 
opaque, sun-block makeup. Because most men won't wear makeup, they generally 
are discouraged from undergoing the procedure altogether. 
Dr. Melvin Spira, professor and head of the Division of Plastic Surgery at 
Baylor College of Medicine in Texas, says that many people are not aware that 
chemical peels result in enlarged pores and that skin is permanently lightened. 
Thus, peels are most successful on pale complexions. Individuals with olive to 
black skin often are left with permanent lines of demarcation between face and 
neck. 
Peels are commonly performed around the lips successfully. But Spira cautions 
that sometimes the result is "excessive scarring, particularly around the 
mouth, an increase in fine broken blood vessels on the face and problems of 
extreme sensitivity." 
Many surgeons combine a peel with a face lift to improve skin texture while 
eliminating sags. But Spira advises against simultaneous procedures. "The peel 
should not be performed where the skin is lifted away from its underlying 
structure: the cheeks, the forehead, the jowls. The results are not consistent. 
A peel around the mouth is fine with a lift because that skin isn't being 
lifted." 
In some cases, the absorption of phenol can cause heart irregularities. Dr. 
Robert Kotler, an instructor at the UCLA School of Medicine, says that because 
the bloodstream absorbs phenol, the procedure is not recommended for pregnant 
women or those with kidney problems (healthy kidneys help clear phenol from the 
system). 
Is a chemical peel worth the risks? "Every surgery has inherent dangers," Spira 
says. "So does a peel. But so far, it is the most effective method for reducing 
fine lines on the face." 
Model: Heather Hewitt/Cunningham Models; hair and makeup: Shelli 
Davies/Zenobia; stylist: Margaret Hurley 
