MEDICINE / AIDS TREATMENT; 
DRUG FIGHTS ANEMIA IN PATIENTS ON AZT 
A genetically engineered drug decreases the blood transfusion requirements of 
some AIDS patients taking the widely used AIDS drug AZT, according to a small 
study published in today's New England Journal of Medicine. 
The drug, recombinant human erythropoietin, stimulates the production of 
oxygen-carrying red blood cells. It is already available to AIDS patients under 
a U.S. Food and Drug Administration expanded-access program and may be approved 
for prescription sales later this year. 
AZT therapy is increasingly recommended for AIDS patients and those with 
pre-AIDS conditions as a means of controlling the human immunodeficiency virus, 
which causes the disease. 
But many patients need to receive blood transfusions or modify their use of the 
drug because they develop low red blood cell counts, or anemia. A drug that 
decreases the frequency of AZT-related anemia by stimulating the bone marrow to 
produce more red blood cells would ease the demand for blood transfusions and 
allow more patients to benefit from AZT. 
Erythropoietin is cloned from a hormone of the same name that is normally 
present in the body. The researchers found that the AIDS patients with small 
amounts of erythropoietin in their blood were likely to respond to 
thrice-weekly injections of the drug while patients with higher concentrations 
were not. About three-quarters of AIDS patients have low erythropoietin levels, 
according to Dr. Steven Miles, a senior AIDS investigator at the UCLA Medical 
Center and one of the authors of the study. 
"The drug works," Miles said. "It is very effective as an adjunct to specific 
therapy for AIDS. Patients may still have the virus and all the complications 
related to that but this is one less problem they have to deal with." 
Miles said ongoing research suggests that advances in AIDS care have increased 
the potential effectiveness of erythropoietin. Patients are typically treated 
with lower doses of AZT, or zidovudine, than were used in the study. As a 
result, anemia is less likely to occur and is easier to reverse. In addition, 
some AIDS patients can be switched to other drugs that do not cause anemia, 
such as the experimental drug DDI. 
Erythropoietin, marketed under the brand name Epogen by Amgen Inc. in Thousand 
Oaks, has been successfully used to treat the anemia associated with chronic 
kidney disease. But the drug is also used by athletes to enhance performance, a 
practice that researchers believe can be dangerous, even fatal. An excessive 
number of red blood cells can cause the blood of otherwise healthy people to 
thicken, creating a risk of strokes and heart attacks. 
The study was funded by the Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp. of Raritan, N.J., which 
has approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to develop 
erythropoietin as an AIDS-related therapy. 
Ortho has not yet said how much its erythropoietin will cost. But if Ortho's 
charges for a vial of medication are similar to Amgen's, a year's supply for an 
AIDS patient will cost about $4,000, Miles said. 
For reasons that are not well understood, AIDS patients taking AZT have widely 
varying concentrations of erythropoietin in their bloodstreams. 
During the three-month study, 29 patients received erythropoietin injections 
and 34 received placebo injections. 
At the beginning of the study, the AIDS patients with low erythropoietin levels 
required an average of about 1.5 units of blood a month. At the end of the 
study, those receiving erythropoietin required an average of 0.84 units of 
blood a month, while those receiving the placebo required an average of 2.74 
units of blood a month. 
By comparison, at the beginning of the study the AIDS patients with high 
erythropoietin levels required an average of about 3.2 units of blood a month. 
At the end of the study, those receiving erythropoietin required an average of 
3.5 units of blood a month, while those receiving the placebo required 2.78 
units of blood a month. These differences were not statistically significant. 
