POLICE PATROL INDIAN RESERVATION AFTER SLAYINGS; 
MOHAWKS: CUOMO REFUSES TO SEND IN TROOPS. A KEY AIDE WILL MEET WITH TRIBAL 
LEADERS AND CANADIAN OFFICIALS. 
The New York State Police Wednesday patrolled a Mohawk Indian reservation which 
officers had sealed off Tuesday night after a weeklong spree of intra-tribal 
violence claimed two lives and left untold thousands of dollars in property 
damage. 
New York Gov. Mario M. Cuomo also dispatched a top-level aide to meet with 
Canadian authorities and tribal leaders at the St. Regis-Akwesasne Indian 
Reservation, which straddles the U.S.-Canadian border about 60 miles southwest 
of Montreal. 
But Cuomo declined to send National Guard troops to the reservation, where 
armed Mohawks have clashed over the operation of half a dozen illegal gambling 
casinos on tribal land. 
"We will not send military force because of the risk of bloodshed, because of 
what it would provoke," Cuomo told reporters at the state Capitol in Albany. 
However, prompted by the slaying of two Indians on Tuesday, hundreds of New 
York state police entered the reservation. They permitted residents to leave 
but not to re-enter. 
Both U.S. and Canadian authorities described the scene Wednesday as quiet, in 
sharp contrast to the picture in recent days. 
Last week, Indians opposed to gambling set up roadblocks to turn back an 
estimated 15,000 weekly casino patrons, bringing to a head a dispute that has 
raged for months on the 28,000-acre reservation. 
The casinos employ more than 600 workers and reap millions of dollars in 
profits for the casino owners and investors, but anti-gambling factions contend 
that they encourage drugs and prostitution and corrupt the traditional Mohawk 
way of life. 
In erecting the roadblocks, the anti-gambling forces demanded that leaders of 
the 14,000-member reservation deal squarely with the gambling issue and with 
the so-called Mohawk Sovereignty Security Force, or Warriors Society as the 
group is more commonly known. 
The Warriors Society is a self-appointed band of about 500-600 heavily armed 
Mohawks who see themselves as protectors of what they call the reservation's 
sovereign rights. Gambling opponents, however, describe them as a "goon squad" 
employed by casino owners to protect pro-gambling interests. 
The day after the roadblocks went up, pro-gambling forces, many armed with 
AK-47 assault rifles, tore the road barricades down in a hail of gunfire. 
Fighting continued for days between the feuding factions, with thousands of 
rounds of ammunition fired, cars and homes burned and, in one instance, a hand 
grenade lobbed at a Mohawk police station, injuring three people. 
The two men killed Tuesday were the first fatalities in the dispute. The dead 
were identified as Matthew Pyke, 22, a gambling opponent who reportedly was 
shot in the back by sniper fire, and Howard J. Evans, 33, a pro-gambling 
advocate. Both were slain on the Quebec side of the reservation. 
Quebec authorities said Wednesday they were investigating the deaths, but had 
made no arrests and had no suspects. 
As shotgun-carrying state police took up positions, police spokesman Sgt. 
Michael Downs said: "It seems like both factions are totally exhausted" by the 
fighting. He characterized the police presence as "like a relief valve. At 
least now there's a third party they can turn to and maintain stability." 
Barbara Barnes, spokeswoman for the anti-gambling faction, welcomed the police. 
"People here have no peace of mind. As soon as the police leave, the shots will 
start again," she said. 
But Diane Lazores, a spokeswoman for the Warrior Society said: "We've got an 
armed invasion. If they want an international incident, they're going to get 
one," she said. 
Young Mohawk children waited for their school bus beside armed state troopers, 
while many other Mohawks of all ages stayed at home. 
"I'm not venturing out," reservation resident Jack Hubert, a recent retiree, 
told the Associated Press. "I don't want to spend my golden years being shot 
at." 
Cuomo's emissary to the reservation was Henrik N. Dullea, the governor's chief 
adviser on state operations and policy. Dullea "will be prepared to initiate 
formal negotiations next week" with Mohawk tribal leaders in an effort to 
resolve the longstanding gambling controversy, Cuomo said. 
More than 600 Mohawks, mostly women, children and elderly people from the 
Canadian side of the reservation -- the stronghold of anti-gambling sentiment 
-- had been evacuated earlier to the Transport Canada Training Centre in 
Cornwall, a small town north of the reservation across the St. Lawrence River. 
The gaming houses, which are stretched out along a 2 1/2-mile strip on the 
American side of the reservation, are illegal under federal laws because they 
do not have the sanction of the state. Pro-gambling forces ignore the law, 
however, contending that the reservation is sovereign Indian territory subject 
only to tribal law. 
FBI agents and New York state police have staged several raids on the casinos, 
confiscating gaming machines, records and money. Casino operators also have 
been arrested and tried in court, but have stayed out of prison pending appeal 
of their convictions, authorities said. 
"They contend they're immune from New York state and other laws because they're 
a sovereign nation," said state police spokesman Downs. "So they just go back 
and reopen the casinos." 
Jurisdiction over the reservation presents a vexing problem for authorities 
because it covers territory in two different countries -- the United States and 
Canada -- and three different states and provinces -- New York, Quebec and 
Ontario. 
Government on the reservation itself is just as vexing because the American 
side and the Canadian side each has its own elected council, headed by a grand 
chief. There also is a hereditary council that seeks to govern in traditional 
Mohawk fashion. 
Treadwell reported from Cornwall and Phillips from New York. 
