BEHIND THE WHEEL: HYBRID TURBOCHARGES ITS WAY TO CALIFORNIA 
The galloping Callaway Twin Turbo -- barred from California since creation 
because its builder chose not to chase state emission standards -- has cleaned 
up its act and has been cleared to sell locally. 
Watch out. 
Here's a 190-m.p.h. pacemaker to the heartbeat of America, a private-sector 
mutagenesis of a Chevrolet Corvette that accelerates faster than a Lamborghini 
Countach or a Porsche 911 Turbo. 
With twin turbochargers building almost 400 horsepower, the Callaway can outrun 
a Ferrari Testarossa -- and the terminal velocity of that particular Italian 
redhead just happens to be faster than liftoff speed of an F-16. 
The Callaway Twin Turbo is also relatively affordable, undisputedly exclusive 
and a hot rod in sheep's cladding that may be ordered alongside Luminas and 
Corsicas at your neighborhood Chevrolet dealer. 
This assigning of an RPO (Regular Production Option) designation to the 
Callaway says a lot for GM's tolerance and acceptance of an after-market hybrid 
clearly competing in price, performance and enthusiast appeal with Chevrolet's 
super fast (but still slower) Corvette ZR-1. 
And by tacit endorsement of the Twin Turbo, Chevrolet obviously is putting its 
reputation (also its 12-month and 12,000-mile powertrain warranty) behind a 
product that meets cherished standards of reliability for sports cars that -- 
like the thirtysomething Corvette and the yearling ZR-1 -- are docile enough 
for the 'burbs yet become absolute thrashers on interstates. 
The Callaway Twin Turbo rose from a 1985 misfit -- a turbocharged, experimental 
Corvette built for Chevrolet by an outside contractor. 
Chevrolet wasn't much thrilled by the prototype. But Connecticut engineer Ely 
Reeves Callaway III, former Formula Vee racer, descendant of Georgia Baptist 
preachers and Callaway Vineyards, saw it as the greatest potential for blinding 
motion since the $25 firecracker. 
A year later, with Chevrolet's blessing, Callaway was in limited production. 
Today there are some 400 Twin Turbos blowing off doors throughout 49 states. 
But not until last month's certification and satisfaction of California's 
bulletproof smog standards has the brute that purrs been available here. 
"Frankly, there's a limited market in the rest of the country for a high 
performance car such as this, and selling in California was the next logical 
step," said Roger Smith, managing director of Callaway Cars of Old Lyme, Conn. 
"Also, we are seeing the rest of the country moving towards adopting 
California's (emission) standards. So we thought we might as well do it 
(comply) and get it over with." 
Every Twin Turbo starts life as a stock Corvette equipped with the venerable 
but trusted small block Chevy V-8. The car is shipped to Callaway's Connecticut 
skunk works where moving parts are magnafluxed and balanced. Main bearings are 
worked over. Stainless steel valves, a forged crank and pistons and a new cam 
with hydraulic lifters are added. 
Then comes the heart transplant -- the addition of twin, intercooled 
turbochargers that boost the Corvette's standard 245 horsepower to 390 
horsepower, which actually is more like a stampede. 
The ultimate proof of power, however, is this thing called torque -- the engine 
force that produces wheel rotation and vehicle motion. Torque is measured in 
terms of maximum oomph produced to move poundage over footage. 
The torque-feet of a Toyota Celica GT, for example, is 140 pounds-feet. The 
5.0-liter Ford Mustang puts out a very respectable 300-pounds-feet. But the 
Callaway Twin Turbo transmits a thumping 562-pounds-feet to its rear wheels and 
that's enough to leave divots in your driveway. 
For the discreet who do not wish to advertise, the Callaway Twin Turbo may be 
purchased as a coupe or convertible that externally is only a badge and a 
plaque removed from a stock Corvette. 
But the brash might choose an $8,500 Aerobody option that gives the car a row 
of flared nostrils and straked body ducts. It includes a new, slick, rounded, 
aerodynamic nose and a sculptured rear end that looks for all the world like a 
grown-up Miata with a ducktail. The whole is awfully handsome. Especially with 
the Dymag magnesium wheels. 
The interior of the car is pure 1990 Corvette. 
It also is an abomination. 
In their semicircular, Pac-Man setting, essential instruments are a mix-up of 
needles and digital readouts. Warning gauges, numbered to show only the 
extremes of their operating range, confuse before they inform. 
And then there is dash lettering that's a squint even for those with vision 
only one diopter removed from 20/20. Is this a radio we see before us? Or the 
climate control panel? Either way, the display is a litter of toy knobs and 
pitiful symbology. And the radio doesn't scan. 
On a happier note, the cockpit cuddles nicely, the seats feel rugged and hold 
well during spirited cornering, and like all Corvettes, the car comes with an 
air bag. 
Yet there is no doubting that this is a Callaway. It says so on a dash plaque 
(and in the true spirit of adventure and high-speed risk, the production number 
of the test car was 007) and a boost gauge for monitoring the twin 
turbochargers. 
The suspension remains untouched and stock Corvette. So does the car's 
six-speed manual transmission. Together, they give a surplus of performance 
management that does not diminish as speed builds but actually seems to improve 
with pace. 
But then the Corvette always has been a flat, determined, obedient ride. It has 
brakes (13-inch discs) to spare for late dives into interesting corners. More 
important, there's power aplenty to boot through and out of the turns. 
Today's Corvettes come with selective ride control (Tour-Sport-Performance) and 
at no time -- even if fishtailing, overcorrecting or losing some other portion 
of the car's geometry -- is there a shadow of suspension floats or steering 
dithers. 
To all of this, add a power plant designed and tuned to do little else but 
convert a two-place car into a drill boring 190-m.p.h. holes through the air. 
But forget that speed. It isn't important. It would also be fair to state that 
nobody who owns a Callaway has ever driven it at that speed. Or will. Then why 
have it? 
Because an inordinately quick top end is simply the byproduct of searching for 
a stupendous mid-range where most mortals live. And it is here -- entering 
freeways, pulling clear of tailgaters, moving around the blind idiot cutting 
across our bows -- where the Callaway is simply astounding. 
It takes five seconds to accelerate from 60 m.p.h. to 100 m.p.h. It rockets 
from rest to 100 m.p.h. in a sniff over 10 seconds. And it is raw speed in a 
gentle hurtle where the power seems endless. 
Indeed, smoothness is the pleasant surprise of the Twin Turbo. In town, in 
traffic, it's an easy drive. Shifting is a click and the clutch no heavier than 
a Honda. On the open road it's an enormous dose of docile power where the 
rear-view mirror can be forgotten because no other car will be fast enough to 
sneak up. 
That's not a Chevy. 
That's a Callaway. 
1990 CALLAWAY TWIN TURBO 
COST: 
Base: $62,834 for coupe. 
As tested: $76,619 for convertible (with Aerobody). 
ENGINE: 
Twin turbo, 5.7 liter, V-8 developing 390 horsepower. 
TYPE: 
Limited production, rear-wheel-drive sports car. 
PERFORMANCE: 
0-60 m.p.h. (as tested) 5.2 seconds. 
Top speed (manufacturer's estimate, coupe) 190 m.p.h. 
Fuel economy (EPA city-highway average) 17.2 m.p.g. 
CURB WEIGHT: 
3,403 pounds. 
THE GOOD: 
Astounding performance with decorum of daily driver. 
Best-handling American car. 
Full-blooded competition for Ferrari and Lamborghini at half the price. 
THE BAD: 
Exhaust note tuned to extinction. 
Disappointing interior styling. 
THE UGLY: 
Instrument display by Nintendo. 
