PHARMACEUTICAL FIRM BANKS ON REPUTATIONS; 
ISIS FOUNDER HAD NO TROUBLE LURING BACKERS TO AN UNEXPLORED FRONTIER OF 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 
As ISIS Pharmaceuticals President Stanley Crooke walked through his company's 
newly leased Carlsbad facility, he took pains to point out that, despite the 
mostly vacant office and laboratory space, his new biotechnology firm is hard 
at work developing products at a temporary lab in Sorrento Valley. 
But the nearly empty building in the Carlsbad Research Center symbolizes 
Crooke's formidable task of building a company from scratch, of being a pioneer 
in an unexplored frontier of biotechnology and of having to translate the 
as-yet-undeveloped technology into marketable products. 
Crooke, 44, formed ISIS two months ago after an illustrious career heading up 
product research operations at two major pharmaceutical firms, SmithKline 
Beckman and Bristol-Myers. Crooke, who holds a medical degree as well as a 
doctorate in pharmacology, oversaw the introduction of 17 new drugs during his 
14 years at the two firms. 
Cheaper Than Boston 
He selected San Diego County for ISIS headquarters so it could be near the 
growing biotechnology community clustered around UC San Diego and Scripps 
Clinic and Research Foundation. Although housing is expensive in San Diego, 
Crooke said it's cheaper than in Boston and the San Francisco Bay area, two 
other headquarters sites he considered. Carlsbad was chosen over other county 
locations because of favorable lease rates, he said. 
"Crooke is one of the three or four best drug developers in the world, based on 
his success at SmithKline and Bristol-Myers," said Christopher Gabrieli, 
general partner of Bessemer Venture Partners, a Menlo Park-based venture 
capital firm with investments in eight biotechnology companies, including ISIS. 
He described drug development as an enormously complex, drawn-out and expensive 
process. 
Before resigning last summer, Crooke was vice president in charge of 
SmithKline's research and development operation, where he had a $300-million 
budget. At Bristol-Myers, which he left in 1980 to join SmithKline, Crooke 
helped develop an array of chemotherapy drugs for cancer patients that put 
Bristol at the forefront of cancer treatment. 
Trading on his visibility in the pharmaceutical industry, Crooke has moved fast 
since starting up ISIS in March. He has raised $5.2 million in venture capital 
and hired 20 employees, many of them research "stars" with strong track records 
in pharmaceuticals and academia. 
Crooke was able to raise the money from five venture capital firms, including 
Bessemer, plus obtain commitments for up to $10 million next year, even though 
ISIS may be years away from successful technology, much less U. S. Food and 
Drug Administration approval of products. The company's payroll will grow from 
20 to 30 employees by year's end and to as many as 90 in 1990, he said. 
"It's been a long, long time since I've seen an initial venture funding for 
$5.2 million," said Ray Dittamore, managing partner of Arthur Young &amp; Co., 
a firm whose clients include more than a quarter of San Diego's 70 
biotechnology companies, including ISIS. "That by itself tells a lot about what 
the investors and the biotech community think of (Crooke) and the team he's put 
together." 
Apart from Crooke, the venture capitalists' interest revolves around the 
technology ISIS is trying to develop called anti-sense oligonucleotides. The 
"oligos" are bits of DNA that bind to "messenger molecules" sent out by DNA 
that cause the production of disease-bearing proteins. 
By binding to disease messengers, which are called messenger-RNA, the oligos 
theoretically prevent the disease "message" from being passed on and thus from 
ever being produced, Crooke said. 
"Anti-sense oligonucleotides is a method that lots of (drug) companies think is 
going to work, and ISIS is one of those companies," said Ignacio Tinoco, a 
professor of chemistry at University of California, Berkeley, who is on ISIS' 
scientific advisory board. "The idea is that, instead of attacking the diseased 
proteins, you target the RNA that causes them to be synthesized." 
Crooke said the potential for anti-sense drugs is enormous because they could 
be manufactured as therapeutic agents for virtually any disease since virtually 
all diseases start as aberrant proteins set in motion by messenger-RNA 
molecules. ISIS plans to develop its anti-sense drugs using so-called "rational 
drug design," or the computer-aided process of designing drugs "by force of 
thought," Crooke said. 
$2-Billion Market 
Citing competitive concerns, Crooke refused to disclose which diseases ISIS has 
targeted for its first set of products. He did say, however, that the company 
is pursuing "four markets with aggregate sales potential of $2 billion." He 
declined to say whether AIDS is one of the diseases targeted. 
ISIS' competition so far includes San Diego-based Genta, a company that was 
spun off recently by Gen-Probe, a publicly held manufacturer of DNA-probe 
diagnostic products. (Genta President Thomas Adams was unavailable for comment 
Friday.) Crooke said he expects major pharmaceutical firms to join the field in 
coming years as well. 
Although Crooke had studied anti-sense oligonucleotides for the better part of 
two decades, he said he became convinced they could be used as therapeutic 
drugs three years ago. That conviction sprang from advances in molecular 
biology research that have enabled scientists to clone or synthesize DNA 
molecules. 
Crooke was also encouraged by scientists' increasing ability to modify or 
manipulate those molecules through a process called hybridization, or the 
binding of one molecule to another. It's that binding process by which ISIS' 
anti-sense nucleotides will someday "kill" the disease-causing RNA molecules, 
he said. 
But Crooke said he was unable to generate much enthusiasm among his SmithKline 
colleagues for pursuing the technology, perhaps because the approach was so 
revolutionary. That, combined with SmithKline's financial problems last year 
and the resulting impact on the 3,000-scientist research program in Upper 
Merion, Pa., he directed prompted Crooke to resign. 
Return to Academia 
At first, Crooke's plan after leaving the drug company was to return to 
academia, specifically to Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, where he has 
been a faculty member on and off for the past 15 years. 
But Crooke soon realized that he was too enamored of the high-stakes game of 
producing new drugs and the social benefits that successful drugs represent. A 
turning point in his medical career came when, as a young doctor in Houston, he 
watched a 24-year-old man die of testicular cancer, a disease that is now 
largely curable with drugs developed at Bristol-Myers during Crooke's tenure 
there. 
In March, ISIS signed an agreement with Applied Biosystems, a publicly held 
biotech company in Foster City that is a leading manufacturer of instruments 
that produce DNA. The deal calls for the two companies to share rights to 
products developed. ISIS expects Applied Biosystems to help it surmount a 
formidable problem: how to produce anti-sense drugs in adequate quantities. 
Producing DNA and its derivatives is exceedingly difficult in anything but 
trace amounts, he said. 
"It's almost like going to the moon to consider making clinical kilograms of 
DNA," said Timothy Geiser, senior scientist at Applied Biosystems. Because of 
the difficulty, the products that will be developed by ISIS and Applied 
Biosystems instead will be derived from substitutes called DNA analogs. 
Geiser said his company expects to sign similar agreements with other 
anti-sense manufacturers. 
Anti-sense drugs are "a brand-new field with no clear leader yet,"' Geiser 
said. "But we are impressed with ISIS because Crooke and several of his people 
have experience in drug development. I wouldn't say they have technology that 
gives them an exclusive edge, but in terms of smarts, they are way ahead of the 
pack." 
