MARIN FOUNDATION CUTS FUNDS FOR SAN QUENTIN INMATE SERVICES 
Trustees of a massive trust that was established to aid the needy residents of 
wealthy Marin County have sharply cut funds that provide legal services to 
3,000 San Quentin prison inmates who have no other representation. 
Cuts in the legal service program and three other San Quentin programs were 
announced as the new Marin Community Foundation, which oversees the $400 
million-plus trust bequeathed by Beryl H. Buck, made the first annual gifts 
since the conclusion of a bitter and draining legal battle for control of the 
fund. 
The projects at San Quentin "became a lower priority compared to the other 
areas that we needed to fund. . . . We needed to make choices," said Douglas X. 
Patino, president of the foundation. The fund had $19 million to give in this 
round, $10 million a year less than it did before the litigation. 
Now 'in Bad Shape' 
"This is the bedrock of our support. Without that stable funding source we are 
really in bad shape," said Donald Specter, director of the five-lawyer Prison 
Law Office, which received $181,000 this year to handle legal problems of the 
San Quentin inmates. Another $50,000 a year comes from the Legal Services Trust 
Fund money and about $70,000 yearly comes from fees from its court fights. 
The law office, housed in a bungalow next to the prison, hoped for $290,000 in 
1990. But Specter learned last Thursday it will receive $90,000 in "phase-out" 
money from the Marin Community Foundation, enough to last six months. 
The office has received $1.8 million in Buck money over the past 10 years. 
The Marin Community Foundation also cut smaller grants to an arts project for 
Death Row inmates, a group that matches inmates with visitors and a center next 
to the prison where out-of-town visitors can stay while waiting to see inmates. 
At more than $400 million, the fund remains one of the nation's largest 
community-based foundations. But its trouble began in 1984, when lawyers for 
the San Francisco Foundation, which ran the trust in its early years, and 
charities outside Marin sued to break a provision of Buck's will that limited 
the largess to Marin County causes. 
Money for Other Projects 
A 1986 settlement of the suit required that the trust, now administered by the 
Marin Community Foundation, spend more than $6 million a year on three 
long-term projects to study aging, drug abuse and education in Marin. 
Court costs and lawyers' fees cut the Buck principal by $12 million. Lower 
interests rates took another bite out of the fund, Buck spokeswoman Sallyanne 
Wilson said. 
As a result, there was roughly $19 million -- the interest on the endowment -- 
to divvy up for next year, down from the $29 million it had before the suit. 
The Marin Community Foundation earmarked $6.8 million for human needs. 
Requests from groups seeking $23 million poured in. In all, 54 groups got 
funding, and 90 were refused. The groups that won funding will seek to end the 
"isolation of the frail elderly," help abused children, and assist AIDS 
sufferers. 
"This (decision to cut the prison projects) is a demonstration of the insular 
nature of the trustees," charged Robert Gnaizda, director of Public Advocates 
Inc., the San Francisco law firm that led the attack on the Marin County-only 
clause of Buck's will. 
Gnaizda said the prison cuts at a time of growing prison crowding were made 
because "prisoners have no political power by definition. They cannot vote." 
Patino scoffed at the suggestion that prisoners' lack of political pull played 
a part in the decision. "We do not fund -- nor would we be the type of 
organization that would fund -- based on political support," he said. "We fund 
based on the need." 
Handled Various Cases 
The Prison Law Office handles up to 2,000 cases a year, ranging from the child 
custody problems of individual prisoners to inmate disputes with prison 
administrators. 
It also is involved in class-action suits, including litigation over conditions 
at San Quentin that forced the state to spend $35 million to renovate the 
turn-of-the-century prison. 
