INSTANT MOVIE RENTAL ON TV GETS TRYOUT IN NEWPORT 
Consider: No more driving to your video store on Friday or Saturday afternoon, 
only to find that all the copies of the latest releases are already rented; no 
more return trips to take back the tapes that are available. 
For the first time in Orange County, thousands of cable television subscribers 
will soon be able to rent popular movies on the spur-of-the-moment, with just a 
flick of two buttons on their remote control unit. 
Not surprisingly for an entertainment service whose major advertised selling 
point is "instant gratification," Comcast Cablevision has chosen tony Newport 
Beach as the test market for its "impulse pay-per-view" system. Comcast, which 
began installation in April, claims 85,000 subscribers in Orange County, 
including Seal Beach, Santa Ana, Fullerton, Placentia and Buena Park. "We hope 
to expand (impulse pay-per-view) to Fullerton and Placentia later this year, 
based upon viewer response," said Dave Barford, vice president of Comcast's 
Orange County operation. 
Ranging in price from $1.99 to $3.99 for one-time viewing, the movies will be 
available within weeks of their arrival at video stores but several months 
before they are shown on premium movie channels such as HBO. Subscribers 
purchasing the movies, shown on two of Comcast's channels, will be able to tape 
them for additional home use, Barford said, because the signals are not 
currently being scrambled or coded to prevent taping. 
Several other cable systems in the county offer pay-per-view movies and special 
events, such as the upcoming Sugar Ray Leonard-Thomas Hearns title fight, but 
they require the subscriber to call the cable company to place an order. 
Industry research cited by Comcast has determined that subscribers on the 
impulse system are between two and five times as likely to order a movie than 
those on systems requiring a telephone call. 
The slogan of Cable Video Store, the Philadelphia-based company that has 
pioneered impulse pay-per-view, is "Push a button. Rent a movie." This month's 
offerings include "Crocodile Dundee II," "Crossing Delancy," "Gorillas in the 
Mist," "Cocktail" and "Stealing Home." 
"We're a video store," said Ken Nimmer, Cable Video Store's vice president for 
programming, at a Newport Beach press conference Tuesday called to announce the 
new service. "Only we're on cable." 
Nimmer explained that the impulse system requires pressing two buttons to rent 
a movie to avoid an accidental purchase. An optional feature of the system is a 
security code to prevent unauthorized use. The system's technology was 
developed by the Jerrold Division of General Instrument Corp., Cable Video 
Store's parent company. 
In addition to the Cable Video Store, Comcast is offering two other national 
pay-per-view services -- Viewer's Choice and Rendezvous -- on a second channel. 
Rendezvous, an adult service that this month offers such films as 
"Twenty-something" and "Talk Dirty to Me," takes over the second channel from 
11 p.m. to 5 a.m. A third channel on the Comcast system previews movies 
available on the other two. 
Of Comcast's 16,000 subscribers in Newport Beach, the 9,000 who currently 
purchase only the basic package will be charged $2 a month if they want impulse 
pay-per-view capability. The remaining 7,000 who already buy at least one 
"premium" service will pay nothing for the hookup. Comcast officials said they 
expect to complete installing the technology throughout the Newport Beach 
system within 6 months. 
Similar impulse pay-per-view systems featuring the Cable Video Store and the 
Playboy Channel are operating in the San Fernando Valley and San Diego, company 
officials said. 
At the Western Cable Show in Anaheim last December, one of the hottest panel 
discussions at the annual industry gathering was entitled "Pay-Per-View and 
Home Video: Can They Live in Peace?" Panel members also questioned whether 
pay-per-view would cannibalize the market for movie services like HBO, with 
viewers renting only the movies they want to see, rather than buying monthly 
packages. 
Supporters of pay-per-view, such as Hal Krisbergh, a vice president of General 
Instrument, a Philadelphia-based electronic component and equipment 
manufacturer, insist that pay-per-view "does not cannibalize existing pay 
channels. For example," Krisbergh wrote in an industry magazine, "once a 
subscriber realizes that he can get 40 or more films a month on a premium 
channel for the same price as two or three pay-per-view films, the perceived 
value of the pay service is strongly enhanced." 
"We're hoping a lot of people will upgrade to the pay channels," said Comcast's 
Barford. 
Tom Adams, an analyst with Paul Kagan Associates of Carmel, said Tuesday that 
he thinks that video rental stores will probably give up more of a market share 
to impulse pay-per-view than would the movie-package channels. A critical 
factor, he said, is how soon after films arrive in video stores will they 
become available through pay-per-view, since convenience and availability are 
pay-per-view's primary selling points. 
