HOW JURY DUTY ALTERS VIEW OF LEGAL SYSTEM 
Allow me to suggest a powerful deterrent to would-be violators of the law in 
Orange County. Let them spend one day -- just one -- in the Jury Assembly Room 
and/or the jury box of the Superior Court of the County of Orange. The problem, 
as I see it, lies not at the bench, nor with the attorneys, but with the 
hazardous lottery that is known as "a jury of our peers." 
I arrived at Superior Courthouse, naive as a college freshman, eager to perform 
my jury service in the most thoughtful, unbiased manner possible. Armed with 
civic pride and a MacArthurian sense of duty, I approached the Jury Assembly 
Room, eager to serve a month's jury duty with what I presumed would be 
perceptive citizens, also eager to hand up valid and measured decisions. Wrong. 
Instead, one encounters a room filled with many prospective jurors who have 
arrived, knowing that they, too, will perhaps spend interminable hours waiting 
to be called. Do they bring books or magazines? Correspondence or projects to 
be completed? Crossword puzzles, even? No. Instead, multiples of the citizenry 
assembled are content to sit for hours, staring witlessly into the middle 
distance. There is clearly nobody home. 
Then, if one is fortunate enough to be selected as a potential juror, it is 
still tough to make the final cut. Possession of an operable brain, all (well, 
most) of one's faculties, quickly renders a candidate suspect. With keen 
insight, I soon discerned that these qualities, along with basic honesty, were 
deemed unnecessary in some jury boxes. I was excused from a claims case because 
I had failed to file suit for damages in a personal injury case, even though I 
was the guilty party. So much for integrity. But, ladies and gentlemen of the 
populace, who was left on the powerful 12? One old man who was deaf in one ear, 
an elderly lady with nary a tooth in her head, a Vietnamese-American who 
neither spoke nor understood much English and a Mexican-American whose pants 
were held up by a rope. Judgment by a jury of my peers? I quail at the thought. 
JUDY PERRY 
Laguna Beach 
