VANDALS BLAMED FOR GASOLINE SPILL INTO L.A. RIVER 
An apparent act of vandalism caused hundreds of gallons of diesel gasoline to 
be washed down a storm drain and into the Los Angeles River on Sunday, sending 
local and state officials scurrying to prevent the spill from flowing into the 
ocean. 
As much as 1,100 gallons of gasoline may have poured into the river after a 
fuel pump in a downtown city sanitation yard leaked for an unknown amount of 
time, said county flood control maintenance worker Bobby Arnwine. 
"We believe that up to 1,100 gallons got away from us," he said. Arnwine added 
that about 1,600 gallons of the pump's gasoline apparently had leaked out, but 
500 gallons were contained in the yard with sand. 
In an attempt to trap the rest of the gasoline before it reached the ocean, 
officials set up floating booms in the river at three locations in the Long 
Beach area. As the gasoline was being trapped, workmen in rowboats were laying 
out cotton pads on the water's surface to absorb it. 
After letting the pads soak in the river, Gabriel Martinez and Alfonso Serrano 
guided their tiny boat through about two feet of algae-covered water and 
deposited the industrial sponges in large plastic bags on the shore. 
"We're mostly just picking up green slime," said Martinez, one of eight workers 
dispatched by Crosby and Overton Inc., a Long Beach-based firm that specializes 
in such cleanups. 
A member of the county's hazardous materials team said that a small quantity of 
fuel appeared to have formed a light sheen around some of the booms. 
"I couldn't say exactly how much, but it wasn't any great quantity," said Irwin 
Biederman, a hazardous materials specialist for the Department of Health 
Services. "This is a pretty minor event." 
As of Sunday evening, none of the fuel had entered the sewer system, officials 
said. Storm drains had been flushed out, and county health officials said a 
contractor had been called to finish cleaning up the spill at its source. 
The gasoline leak apparently began Saturday night or early Sunday morning in a 
city sanitation yard on Mission Road, just east of the river. Officials 
speculated that vandals may have sneaked into the yard and broken the nozzle on 
a gasoline pump, leaving it leaking. 
A city sanitation worker discovered the leak shortly before 8 a.m. and called 
the Fire Department, Staheli said. 
The spill's discovery came only a day after two neighborhoods in Long Beach had 
to be evacuated after four illegally dumped 55-gallon drums were discovered to 
be leaking a highly toxic and combustible chemical. Residents were allowed to 
return home after the cleanup was completed. 
Times Staff Writer Jesse Katz contributed to this story. 
