ART REVIEWS; 
A GAROUSTE SPECTACLE IN SANTA MONICA 
The French are fabled for being good at a lot of things, from gastronomy to 
romance, but we don't always think of them excelling at spectacle. 
Actually, one need search memory no further than the musical "Les Miserables" 
to recall that in fact they do the spectacular with particular panache. The 
first thing that strikes home about about Gerard Garouste's exhibition at the 
Santa Monica Museum of Art is that it looks like a stage set in search of 
script. 
Actually, there is a script. Never mind that the ensemble of paintings, 
watercolors and sculpture is titled "Les Indiennes" -- that's a reference to 
the way Garouste makes his painting, by staining color directly into 
burlap-colored canvas, rather the way they do madras or tie-dye in India. The 
real inspiration is Dante's "The Human Comedy." 
Truth to tell, you could look at the work forever and not figure that out. It 
is its sense of theatrical spectacle that comes across most assertively. The 
largest piece is a huge horizontal canvas draped like Gulliver's pup-tent. It 
must be 50 feet long, but its size is more impressive than what's on it. 
Then there is a three-sided enclosure made of hanging banners that goes up 
nearly 30 feet to the ceiling. Here we begin to get a sense of what's on 
Garouste's mind. The whole feels architectural. Enigmatic imagery suggests a 
baroque building with painted lunettes surrounded by whipped-cream plaster 
reliefs. 
Oh, so that's it. Garouste's real subject is history and the way it haunts the 
modern European mind. Fairly familiar. Remember back in the '50s when the 
Abstract Expressionist Georges Mathieu painted wearing greaves while page boys 
recited from books of ancestral lineage? 
Garouste's imagery looks like a surreal nightmare visiting itself on one of the 
three Musketeers. Root-like figures prance through scenes that remind you of 
Picasso or Wilfredo Lamm and run into a lumpy shape that could be the severed 
head of Rene Descartes. Garouste's abstract swirls bear a suspicious 
resemblance to elaborate Renaissance furniture carving. Every time he tries to 
make it into the modern world, his basic talent as a set designer asserts 
itself, he gets a bit too graphic and everything winds up as an entertainment. 
Spectacular though. (Santa Monica Museum of Art, 2437 Main St.; to June 3.) 
A Cultural Stew: History is also on the mind of David Salle, one of New York's 
leading paint stars. Anyway, he was last year. Generically described, his 
latest batch of pictures all have backgrounds that resemble mythical Baroque or 
lyric Rococo compositions of the particularly schlocky sort one finds 
translated onto swap-meet tapestries. 
Into these, he inserts his usual motifs: sketchy furniture, comic-strip 
figures, empty talk-balloons and rectangles containing approximately realistic 
images. A woman drinking from a glass shows up a couple of times and somehow 
you know she is taking something for a headache this big -- almost certainly an 
overdose. Another recurrent actor is a contemporary guy in a commedia dell'arte 
jester's costume seen clutching his genitals. 
Some themes are familiar to Salle's art: urban alienation and sexual obsession. 
These works play up life's present cacophonous cultural stew by throwing in 
images of primitive art along with the rest. Salle's work seems disconsolate 
with its look of having accidentally been tossed into a Laundromat washer. 
Older examples blended a certain romanticism with callow postures of cynicism. 
This group -- and some works on paper -- seem to want to say that Old Master 
art at least had some energy, but that would seem nostalgic, so it's made fun 
of too, winding up more firmly calloused than ever. (Fred Hoffman Gallery, 912 
Colorado Ave., Santa Monica; to May 14.) 
Back to Basics: Mike Todd's studio blew up in a gas explosion back in the '70s, 
destroying both his current work and the tools to make more. Needing something 
to do, the sculptor took to fashioning simple works from bits of wire and then 
doing drawings from the results. 
A large gaggle of these on view in a big 75-work show give giggling insight 
into the creative process. Few suggest subject matter, but the animal's head 
fashioned from a cloud of steel wool and two copper scouring pads is a charming 
variant on Picasso's horned bicycle seat. Most are whimsical doodles that show 
how much mileage an inventive artist can get from bits of screening, bamboo 
sticks, rubber tubing and whatever else is in the rubble heap. 
Todd's full-dress abstract sculpture used to be rather Zen-solemn with its big 
universal circles, but it keeps getting crazier -- to its profit. Here "Shift" 
rises from a writhing lizard-skin form supporting a metal grille, takes off 
again with an upright blob of bronze and ends with an open occult triangle. 
From one angle, the triangle seems to float on air. 
Nowadays, the work is metaphorically about the alternating insanity and 
rationality needed to make the creative process work. It's a technical and 
spiritual balancing act that comes clear in "Pirumania" -- a hoop-juggle 
without the juggler. 
The show caps off with a group of drawings of flowers, some of which are 
dedicated to Todd's art-world friends who have died, such as Nick Wilder and 
Eva Hesse. (Tortue Gallery, 2917 Santa Monica Blvd., Santa Monica; to May 26.) 
'Round and 'Round: Over the years, even some of Billy Al Bengston's staunchest 
admirers have wished he'd take his own gifts a little more seriously. Now he 
has and they are liable to wish he'd stayed flip. 
Eight large new paintings depict circles that appear to be planets and bear 
titles like "Osorkon" and "Smenkarka." These galactic basketballs are firmly 
seen through interlaced bands of pure color that are too wide to be laser beams 
and too angled to be window mullions. They do give Bengston a chance to show 
off his flawless sense of decorative color and remind us that these are, after 
all, abstract compositions. 
Yet he can't duck the suggestions of his imagery, all of which are serious, 
from their intimations of space travel to ecological blight to metaphysical 
breakdown of the system. There is both ancient religion and millennial fear in 
"Cheops." 
The paintings are brought off with accustomed brio but beneath it lurks turgid 
indecision. The circles are painted with thick textures that approximate 
planetary surface features, but the forms hang like inert bowling balls. 
Bengston has found maturity but he doesn't quite know what to do with it. Not 
yet. 
(James Corcoran Gallery, 1327 5th St., Santa Monoca; to May 27.) 
