REGIONAL REPORT / TIMBER TUSSLE; 
OPPONENTS FIND COMMON GROUND ON LOG EXPORT BAN; 
BOTH SIDES IN PACIFIC NORTHWEST'S SPOTTED OWL FIGHT AGREE MEASURE HAS MERIT. 
In a move that jumped onto the front pages in the Pacific Northwest, Sen. Bob 
Packwood (R-Ore.) recently won overwhelming Senate approval of a measure to 
give states the power to ban log exports from state-owned land. 
It has turned out to be a masterstroke of politics. Tensions in the region are 
rising over an anticipated decision next month by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service declaring the rare spotted owl a threatened or endangered species. 
Timber interests say that could reduce logging on federal lands in the 
Northwest by 50%, resulting in a loss of 13,000 jobs. 
But environmentalists, including a large number of city dwellers in the region, 
believe the owl should be saved and that clear-cutting practices have gone too 
far. 
Packwood's measure has united both sides, at least for a while. 
An estimated one in four trees felled in the Northwest is loaded onto ships for 
export. Two-thirds of those unmilled logs go to Japan. The commonly held belief 
is that because of trade barriers in Japan, relatively small amounts of 
finished lumber products produced in Northwest mills are exported. 
Both sides see a gain in the legislation. Millworkers believe a log export ban 
would pressure Japan into increasing its imports of finished lumber, thus 
increasing employment in the mills. While lumber exports are increasing, the 
volume of logs sent overseas last year -- 4.33 billion board feet -- dwarfed 
the 2.33 billion board feet of exported lumber. 
For millworkers in the Northwest, "the squeeze is really starting," said Julia 
Brim-Edwards, spokeswoman for Packwood. " . . . They want some type of action 
now in anticipation that things are going to get worse." 
At the same time, environmentalists and the increasingly urban populations of 
the Northwest see the potential in the measure for less logging of old-growth 
forest where the spotted owl lives. 
A Seattle Times poll showed that by a margin of 52% to 38%, people in 
Washington want the spotted owl saved, even if it means job losses. 
Washington Lands Commissioner Brian Boyle, who is responsible for managing 
state timberland, said "our environment can't keep up" with clear-cutting 
practices. "The industry has brought down the wrath of the public," he said. 
The move to ban log exports redirects some of the wrath. Virtually everyone in 
Oregon wants to ban log exports. Last June, more than 90% of the voters cast 
ballots favoring an end to exports of logs cut on state land. 
Packwood's measure wouldn't affect Washington state, at least not immediately. 
Washington's constitution requires that the state sell its logs to the highest 
bidders, all of which happen to be countries in Asia. There is, however, a move 
to repeal that provision from the state constitution. Washington is the 
nation's largest log exporter. The payoff for the state is big. Several hundred 
million dollars annually from state timber sales help fund public schools in 
Washington. 
Packwood's measure is expected to go to a conference committee this week. At 
the same time, Rep. John Miller (R-Wash.) is pushing a measure that seeks to 
limit exports from Washington state land, allow complete bans on exports from 
state land in California and Oregon and reduce by half the amount of federal 
timber that could be sold to exporters. 
One catch: Will a log export ban really put the squeeze on the Japanese? 
The day after the Senate passed the measure by an 81-17 vote, U.S. and Japanese 
trade negotiators announced a pact that proponents say could increase the sale 
of finished U.S. wood products by $1 billion a year. 
But that could be the extent of the U.S. leverage. John E. Keatley, land and 
timber manager for the Weyerhaeuser Co. in Longview, Wash., pointed out that 
there are plenty of other suppliers for Japan's 18,000 sawmills, including the 
Soviet Union. 
"Do you think they're going to let us put the skids on 18,000 sawmills?" 
Keatley asked. "Come on." 
Times staff writer Art Pine contributed to this story. 
