ART BUCHWALD: SLICK VALDEZ CULPRIT SLIPS OFF THE HOOK 
According to Time magazine, White House Chief of Staff John Sununu has 
complained that news coverage of the Exxon oil spill was slanted. Instead of 
concentrating on the 240,000 barrels of crude that escaped the tanker, the real 
story was how Exxon and the government saved another 1 million barrels from 
escaping into the sea. Sununu is quoted in Time as saying, "Three-quarters of 
it was contained within the ship. There's been very little reporting on that." 
It so happens that Sununu is right. I wrote that story soon after the Exxon 
Valdez hit the rocks but nobody would print it. 
So here it is again: 
There was a miracle in Prince William Sound yesterday when one of the largest 
oil tankers in the world went aground and ruptured on the rocks near the Port 
of Valdez. Only 240,000 barrels of crude oil escaped from its tanks before 
valiant Exxon damage-control people managed to pump oil into another tanker. 
An oil-spill expert said that barely 800 miles of shoreline would be affected 
by the spill, as opposed to the entire West Coast of the United States, if 
everyone had not been so on the ball. 
He told reporters, "You have here an example of how the combination of 
seamanship and teamwork was able to turn what could have been a major disaster 
into a piddling incident. All credit goes to the captain of the Exxon Valdez. 
Even though he had been in his cabin, he decided to go out on deck after the 
accident and save his ship. A grateful nation owes him a debt for salvaging 1 
million barrels of much-needed fuel." 
When asked if anyone was to blame for the spill, the expert replied, "Only if 
the press insists on writing stories about the oil lost to the sea instead of 
what is now safely inside the tanker. If the media want to be fair they should 
focus on how many birds and otters are still alive because 1 million barrels of 
oil were not spilled. As long as the TV cameras keep filming oil-soaked geese, 
the true story of the heroic Valdez will never be told." 
One TV reporter said, "What about the oil on the beaches? Is it all right to 
concentrate on that?" 
"Why don't you show pictures of the black gold that was pumped off the Exxon 
Valdez? You don't help people feel any better by always illustrating the 
downside of what happens when a tanker runs aground. Everybody makes mistakes, 
but there is absolutely no reason to draw attention to them with pictures of 
workers wiping off rocks with damp towels." 
According to the expert, no one is sure how long it will take for the oil spill 
carnage to be cleaned up. However, everyone is pleased with the smoothness of 
the operation, especially when compared with how long it would have taken if 
all the oil on board had leaked. 
The expert continued, "It's true that it looks bad from the air, but that's 
just because oil and water don't mix. All of us would have preferred not to 
have had an accident, but if there is one and only 25% of your cargo is lost, 
anyone can live with that." 
He was then asked, "Knowing what you know now, is there anything we can do to 
make this a kinder, gentler Alaska?" 
"It's no good dwelling on incidents such as oil spills. You have to look at a 
grounded tanker as you do a glass of water, and ask yourself if it's half full 
or half empty. That's what oil spills are all about." 
