COMMENTARY; 
INS MAY NEED ITS OWN REFORMS TO KEEP UP WITH IMMIGRATION ACT 
Three years after Congress enacted the landmark Immigration Reform and Control 
Act of 1986, billing it as the answer to immigration problems that had been 
festering for 30 years, people are calling for new laws to deal with problems 
that the authors of the law did not anticipate. 
The reform act, based on the assumption that jobs are what lure illegal 
immigrants here, made it unlawful for employers to hire them. To balance this 
restrictionist intent, the law included an "amnesty" for illegal aliens, 
allowing them to legalize their status if they had been here since 1982. 
Many critics questioned how well this simple approach to a complex phenomenon 
would work. But the law was enacted because immigration had become a political 
issue, requiring some kind of action. It has not taken long for the shiny new 
law to become tarnished in the real world. 
It is increasingly clear that the new law has not stopped illegal immigration. 
There has been a decrease in the number of people trying to slip into the 
United States since the law went into effect, but hundreds of people continue 
to be arrested daily sneaking across the U.S.-Mexico border. In the first full 
year after the new law went into effect, 940,000 illegal immigrants were 
arrested there, down from 1.6 million in 1986 but still one of the highest 
number of arrests ever recorded. 
So officials of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service are talking 
tough about new measures to keep unwanted people out. One example is the 
agency's decision to publicize a drainage ditch planned for the Otay Mesa south 
of San Diego as its newest weapon against smugglers. In fact, the ditch is a 
routine flood-control project needed by Tijuana as much as by San Diego. 
Mexican officials even cooperated in planning it until the INS made a big deal 
out of the matter, turning it into a political embarrassment for them. 
If the INS wants to improve border enforcement, it doesn't need new 
fortifications. And it doesn't need more Border Patrol agents, since almost 
1,000 were hired under the 1986 immigration law and there is only scant 
evidence that they are being used more efficiently than their predecessors. 
What's needed is a reorganization of the chief agency charged with enforcing 
the law -- the INS. 
Chief among the INS problems, bureaucratically speaking, is the fact that it is 
one of several agencies, along with the Customs Service and Coast Guard, 
charged with keeping our borders secure. It will surprise nobody that there are 
sometimes lapses in coordination among so many agencies. That is why the 
General Accounting Office has several times called for their consolidation into 
a single border management agency. Congress has been reluctant to pursue the 
plan because of pressure from government employee unions that fear a loss of 
jobs. Still, it is a worthwhile idea. 
But beyond better border control, this country needs to put more thought and 
money into absorbing immigrants. At present, this responsibility also falls to 
the INS, but it never gets the financial support and attention that the 
agency's police functions do. That is one reason the reform act's amnesty 
program has been so haphazardly run: nobody's ever tried to legalize so many 
people before on such a large scale, even in the INS. 
I can't help but wonder if naturalization wouldn't be handled better by another 
agency, say a bureau of immigration in the Labor Department. A new immigration 
agency would not add needless bureaucracy, either, for it would have many other 
important responsibilities. 
Although most Americans see immigration as a problem, in the near future the 
problem may be that we don't have enough immigrants. That could happen if our 
birth rate continues to decline while our native-born population continues to 
grow older and live longer. We may then need more young workers -- not fewer -- 
from countries such as Mexico, and that means we'll need an agency to assess 
our labor needs and regulate the entry of people to fill those jobs. 
