TACTIC OF LIGHTING UP BORDER RAISES TENSIONS 
As dusk fell on the U.S.-Mexico border Thursday, hundreds of motorists gathered 
along a roadway here and shined their headlights toward groups of uninterested 
migrants waiting patiently for nightfall at the boundary line. 
Facing directly into the harsh beams of light, counter-protesters chanting No 
mas racismo! (No more racism!) held up mirrors and sheets of dark plastic in an 
attempt to reflect the lights back to the north. 
With the chill of night closing in, the face-off disintegrated into alternating 
volleys of epithets, as shouts of "Nazis!" and "Wetback lovers!" were 
exchanged. 
The dissonant scene was from the latest gathering of the Light Up the Border 
campaign, a burgeoning movement of mostly Anglo citizens that has galvanized 
public attention on the continuing stream of undocumented immigrants from the 
south. The lighting movement, which began with small gatherings last winter, 
has expanded rapidly and grown into huge, highly publicized protests involving 
1,000 or more people, energizing supporters and opponents on both sides of the 
frontier. 
Despite their many disagreements, the participants and counter-protesters agree 
on one thing: U.S. laws, specifically the much-ballyhooed Immigration Reform 
and Control Act of 1986, have failed abysmally in a primary goal -- turning 
back the daily tide of undocumented humanity from Mexico and elsewhere. Visual 
testament is provided by the hundreds of migrants -- men and women, the old and 
the young -- who stage each day along the international line in San Diego, 
waiting to slip into California and its promise of jobs. 
The emotions evident during Thursday's border protests underline what appears 
to be an ever-greater polarization about unauthorized immigration. 
"I feel hatred is brewing on both sides," said Elizabeth Sisco, a photographer 
and professor at Southwestern College in Chula Vista who has been involved in 
border issues for more than a decade. "When people start hurling negative 
statements back and forth at each other, they just get madder and madder. And 
mad people don't act rationally." 
How to deal with the immigration problem remains a fiercely contested 
challenge. The so-called Alliance for Border Control, organizer of the lighting 
protests, hopes the movement will prompt U.S. authorities to bolster 
enforcement by posting additional border guards, building more barriers, 
deploying National Guard troops, and implementing similar stratagems. Opponents 
say such steps will never work without efforts to improve the economies of 
Third World "sending" nations, especially Mexico, and parallel moves to allay 
civil strife in Central America and elsewhere. 
The pro-enforcement theme of the lighting protesters has struck a responsive 
and provocative chord in Southern California, drawing mostly non-Latinos who 
say they are fed up with illegal immigration and what they view as its 
corollary evils -- drug trafficking, the spread of disease, terrorism, traffic 
congestion and environmental degradation, among others. 
"Everything is worsened by these massive numbers of people coming in," 
explained Sonya Jason, a San Fernando Valley resident who made the trip. "Look 
at the traffic. You just can't drive in L.A. anymore. The crisis in hospital 
care. The schools. Some black Americans can't get jobs because they don't speak 
Spanish. . . . The increased crime, the drugs coming in, the terrible effects 
of pollution. What about the water shortage?" 
The pro-enforcement activists have been particularly insistent on linking the 
illegal immigration and drug trafficking problem, implying that many migrants 
finance their trips by ferrying narcotics -- a claim dismissed by critics. In a 
letter published recently in the San Diego Union, Audrey W. Bergner, a La Jolla 
resident who is one of the movement's most vociferous leaders, alluded to "the 
drug dealers, criminals and other 3,000 aliens who pour into our city illegally 
every night." 
The protests have been heavily publicized by former San Diego Mayor Roger 
Hedgecock, who now hosts a popular radio call-in program. On a recent program, 
Hedgecock recounted that he had seen illegal aliens with phony immigration 
documents selling drugs to homeless people on the streets of downtown San 
Diego. 
Critics see such comments as scapegoating and racist, a xenophobic throwback to 
U.S. nativist movements of yesteryear -- and a manifestation of Anglo backlash 
to the "browning" of California, as the state's Latino population continues to 
rise. They also perceive an invitation to vigilantism at a time when violence 
against migrants is on the rise and tensions about their presence are 
escalating throughout Southern California. 
"I think what they're doing is promoting racism and hate," said Roberto 
Martinez, a longtime San Diego-based Latino rights activist who says he 
receives threatening telephone calls regularly on the days following border 
lighting protests. "They're creating a state of hysteria and fear in order to 
draw attention to their anti-immigrant attacks, which are based on 
misinformation." 
In the view of its detractors, the border lighting movement is a modern 
incarnation of classic American nativism -- the dislike of outsiders that has 
been a prevalent theme in U.S. society since Irish "hordes" began arriving on 
the East Coast during the 1840s. The demonization of immigrants has also 
affected Italians, Jews, Eastern Europeans, Chinese -- and now, many believe, 
Latin Americans and other immigrants, including Koreans and Haitians. 
The border lighting activists reject the harshly negative image projected by 
critics, contending that they are only seeking to have U.S. authorities regain 
control of the nation's borders. 
"This racist talk is just not true," said Muriel Watson, a San Diego County 
resident who is the leader of the Light Up the Border protests. "The border and 
its problems have been kept a deep, dark secret, and we're tired of it," said 
Watson, widow of a longtime Border Patrol pilot, and the former spokeswoman for 
the union representing U.S. Border Patrol officers. "Something has to be done. 
We're in a crisis situation." 
Watson, the granddaughter of Italian immigrants, stressed that the movement was 
not anti-immigrant -- just anti-illegal immigrant. 
But counter-protesters say the linkages drawn between undocumented immigrants 
and criminal activity suggest a clear bias. Critics charge that the 
pro-enforcement contingent regularly cites incorrect data to prove various 
points, such as the asserted connection between undocumented immigrants and 
crime, or the alleged link between illegal immigration and loss of jobs by U.S. 
citizens. 
"When you use phrases like war zone, state of siege, Tortilla Curtain -- these 
are the words that they use -- then you're making it impossible to create a 
dialogue," said Aida Mancillas, a language professor at UC San Diego, who was 
among the counter-protesters Thursday. "It tends to become Us vs. Them." 
Participants in the monthly lighting rallies are particularly disturbed by 
changes in California, and, in attempting to explain where things went wrong, 
many point to illegal immigration. Among the many interviewed Thursday evening, 
there was a clear yearning for what they viewed as the less complicated, less 
culturally baffling society of a past era. 
"I just can't see California being turned into Mexico," said Kay McCormick, a 
retired 67-year-old homeowner in northern San Diego County. Tensions are 
increasing there between Anglo residents and migrant workers, many of whom live 
in crude dwellings in area canyons. "It's a cultural thing. It has to do with 
speech, it has to do with bilingual education. I think people who come here 
should speak English." 
She was standing in front of her truck, lights on, along with Gladys Tisue, a 
retiree from El Cajon. "We're not against the Mexican people," Tisue explained. 
"We need them to work in the fields. But we need some kind of a program to 
bring them in. Anybody could come in through this border now. There are 
terrorists." 
As the protests wound down Thursday evening, the people who were its principal 
targets -- undocumented immigrants -- observed the lights with passing interest 
from hillsides to the south. Informed that the lights were meant as a symbolic 
protest against their presence, the border crossers expressed considerable 
bemusement. 
"They want to stop us by putting lights there?" asked a clearly befuddled Juan 
Murguia, a 22-year-old native of the Mexican state of Michoacan, who was among 
those staging on the now-dark hillside. "We're going to go through whether they 
are there or not. Besides, who would work in the fields if we weren't there? Do 
you think Americans would do the kind of work that we do?" 
With that, Murguia and the others continued following movements of the lights 
that most mattered to them -- the lights of U.S. Border Patrol land vehicles 
and aircraft assigned to the border area. 
