FORD FOUNDATION PANEL TO URGE MAJOR CHANGES IN SOCIAL WELFARE SYSTEM 
A prestigious Ford Foundation panel, painting a disturbing picture of problems 
facing the nation, will call for sweeping changes in the social welfare system 
from prenatal through nursing home care in a report to be made public today in 
Washington. 
The study group of 12 leaders in education, law, business and the labor 
movement said broad changes are essential to battle "the divisions in American 
society (which) have increased in ways that threaten quality of life, peace of 
mind and the economic future." 
The panel said its specific recommendations constitute "a fundamental 
restructuring of social policy in America." 
End to Partisanship Sought 
"In 20 years, social welfare policy in America has passed from soaring 
confidence to doubt and retrenchment," the panel concluded. "There also has 
been a lot of partisan bickering and ideological warfare. The time has come to 
rise above this partisanship and to tackle our problems head-on." The 
three-year study concluded that welfare recipients who can work should receive 
benefits for a limited time, but that those who have exhausted their benefits 
and still cannot find employment should be given a public sector job. "This 
approach would dramatically change today's welfare system, which is relatively 
cheap but open-ended," the report said. 
In other major recommendations, the panel advocated providing sufficient 
federal funds so all pregnant women have access to prenatal and well-baby 
clinics, ultimately expanding Head Start so that all poor 3- and 4-year-olds 
who are not in the program can participate, and making drug and alcohol 
treatment on demand a reality for all people who need it. 
The panel also called for a broad menu of programs designed to keep youngsters 
in school and to reduce teen-age pregnancy, all coordinated by an inter-agency 
youth council established in each state and composed of senior officials from 
educational, job training and human service agencies. 
The panel recommended giving the unemployed residing in declining labor markets 
benefits as lump-sum payments so they can move to other areas of the country 
where jobs may be more plentiful. And it called for restructuring unemployment 
benefits so more funds are paid the first few weeks. Benefits would decline 
gradually as people receive job training. 
The 102-page report, titled "The Common Good, Social Welfare and the American 
Future," was designed to spark a national debate on the status of the network 
of key social programs at a time of fiscal austerity. After the report is 
formally introduced at a news conference at the National Press Club in 
Washington today, it will be sent to every member of Congress, all governors, 
big-city mayors and key federal officials. 
"Social welfare policy in the United States must be fundamentally reformed and 
modernized," the study group said. "Economic, demographic and social conditions 
have changed, but our social policies have not adapted to these changes. 
"More than 30 million Americans live in poverty. About one-quarter of young 
Americans fail to finish high school. Children who are at greatest risk of 
failure in school are now the fastest-growing segment of the school population 
and of the future work force," it said. "The related phenomena of drug abuse 
and crime create a dangerous environment in urban America as well as a drain on 
our economy." 
Lack of Health Insurance 
Meanwhile, only about one-third of the unemployed receive unemployment 
insurance benefits at any point. The report estimated that between 31 million 
and 37 million people lack health insurance coverage and many others are 
under-insured. In addition, about half of U.S. workers have jobs that do not 
provide private pensions. 
"As Americans live longer, they are more likely to need protection against the 
costs of long-term care for themselves and their family members; few are 
currently prepared for this eventuality," the report said. 
"Such problems signal a mounting social deficit that is as troubling as 
government budget deficits or the deteriorating physical infrastructure of 
roads and bridges." 
The Ford Foundation study group said bringing the social welfare system in line 
with the needs of modern Americans will require public and private efforts, 
spread over a number of years. "Most of all, it will require a realistic new 
consensus about our responsibilities to each other, now and in the future." 
The panel called for expanding federal nutrition programs, providing child-care 
subsidies for lower-income families through changes in federal tax laws, 
requiring employers to offer a basic package of health insurance coverage to 
all workers or to contribute an amount for each employee to a public fund that 
would finance coverage for uninsured workers, and improving federal 
supplemental security income benefits for the elderly poor. 
Combination of Plans Urged 
The report strongly emphasized a combination of public and private insurance to 
cover long-term health care for the elderly and called for greater public and 
private insurance for home care. 
The panel estimated that the total government cost of implementing all of its 
proposals would be an additional $29 billion a year. It proposed financing this 
increase largely through taxation of Social Security benefits that exceed 
lifetime contributions, which would yield about $97 billion in federal revenues 
over the next five years. 
Thus, if a worker contributed $100,000 to Social Security during employment 
years, any benefits in excess of that amount would be reported as taxable 
income and the resulting taxes would be set aside in a special fund to provide 
federal assistance to needy people of all ages. 
Such a fund, the study group said, "would reinforce the idea that America is 
one society with a variety of unmet needs, a place where each group has a stake 
in what happens to all others." 
"The children and workers of today are also the elderly of tomorrow, and 
elderly Americans have an immense concern for the well-being of their own and 
the nation's children and grandchildren," the panel said. "A fund that gives 
concrete expression to that idea would help counter the divisive 'we' versus 
'they' mentality in social welfare policy." 
Members of Panel Listed 
The chairman of the executive panel was Irving S. Shapiro, former chairman and 
chief executive officer of E. I du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co. Panel members were 
Sol Chaikin, president emeritus of the International Ladies Garment Workers 
Union; James R. Ellis, a former member of the board of the Ford Foundation and 
a Seattle lawyer; Robert F. Erburu, chairman and chief executive officer of 
Times Mirror Co.; John H. Filer, former chairman and chief executive officer of 
Aetna Life &amp; Casualty Co., and Hanna H. Gray, president of the University 
of Chicago. 
Also, Albert O. Hirshman, professor of social sciences at Princeton University; 
Vernon E. Jordan Jr., former president of the National Urban League; Eleanor 
Holmes Norton, former commissioner of the federal Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission; Henry B. Schacht, chairman and chief executive officer of the 
Cummins Engine Co.; Mitchell Sviridoff, former Ford Foundation executive and 
director of the Community Development Research Center in New York, and Charles 
V. Hamilton, professor of government at Columbia University. 
