CRISIS IN NATO; 
THE BRUSSELS SUMMIT; 
NATO'S SUCCESS SPAWNS A NEW CRISIS FOR ALLIANCE 
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which will celebrate its 40th 
anniversary here Monday and Tuesday with a meeting of the heads of government 
of its 16 member nations, is struggling with a major crisis -- how to survive 
its own success. 
NATO's reason for being -- its deep-seated fear of the Soviet Union -- is 
receding in the face of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's bold, rapid 
moves to reduce arms levels. All of a sudden, the Soviet Union is accepting in 
principle NATO's demand to reduce the massive armies that have confronted each 
other across Europe's East-West divide since the end of World War II. 
So intense are the pressures these apparent concessions have generated inside 
NATO that President Bush has seemingly been forced to modify his go-slow, 
wait-and-see posture on arms control. Bush is expected to present his fellow 
NATO leaders with a proposal for removing more than 30,000 U.S. troops from 
Western Europe as part of an eventual U.S.-Soviet agreement on curbing 
conventional forces. 
Such a reduction, far bigger than previous U.S. proposals, reflects the 
pressure on Washington to catch up with dramatic maneuvering by the Soviet 
leader -- at least at the level of public relations. 
"Gorbachev is dancing to our tune, to the principles of the Atlantic Alliance," 
said Paul H. Nitze, veteran U.S. arms negotiator and an expert on European 
issues. 
And NATO's very success has precipitated the fifth major crisis in its 40-year 
history. 
West Germany, demonstrating a new-found independence within the alliance, has 
called on the other members to accept the Soviet offer of quick negotiations to 
reduce short-range nuclear missile forces in Europe. But the United States and 
Britain are not ready to abandon some of the weapons they believe have played 
an essential role in deterring Soviet aggression. 
The West German challenge was long in coming. NATO's first supreme commander, 
Dwight D. Eisenhower, said in 1950 -- as he took over military command of the 
fledgling alliance -- that he bore no resentment toward the defeated Germany 
and hoped it would "line up with the rest of the free world." 
It did, but only now has West Germany begun to speak out in a voice 
commensurate with its political and economic strength, rather than in the muted 
tones of the vanquished aggressor in World War II. And now that it is speaking 
out, it is doing so with considerable force. 
"We are not a great power," President Richard von Weizsaecker said last week in 
an address marking West Germany's 40th anniversary, "but we are also not a 
playing ball for others. . . ." 
The need for NATO to move beyond a purely defensive military alliance was 
forecast from the start. George F. Kennan, in a 1947 article that helped give 
birth to NATO, wrote that the purpose of the West's containment policy toward 
the Soviet Union was not to perpetuate the conditions left in Europe by World 
War II. 
"It was to tide us over a difficult time and bring us to a point where we could 
discuss effectively with the Russians the drawbacks and dangers of the status 
quo and to arrange with them for its peaceful replacement by a sounder one," he 
wrote. 
That "difficult time" lasted far longer than expected. But NATO has now reached 
the point, forecast by Kennan, when a sounder relationship with the Warsaw Pact 
is possible. It is up to the NATO member nations to decide where they want to 
go, and at what pace. 
Seldom has there been a time when NATO has not been described as in disarray. 
The alliance was born in 1949 in response to the Soviet takeover of what became 
its satellites in Eastern Europe, to such threats to the West as the Berlin 
blockade and the first Soviet atomic bomb test. 
It has experienced many challenges, including four major crises, but each time 
the Soviet Union took action that helped draw the alliance back together. 
West Germany's rearmament and its admittance to NATO in 1955 created the first 
NATO crisis. The Soviets responded within days by creating the Warsaw Pact. The 
divided and anxious atmosphere in NATO was greatly deepened a year later when 
the United States publicly chastised France and Britain for their invasion, 
with Israel, of Egypt over Cairo's nationalization of the Suez Canal. But the 
Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 reunited NATO against the common threat. 
The second crisis began in 1958 when French President Charles de Gaulle started 
to pull France out of NATO. But in 1961, Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev 
told the West that "we will bury you," attempted to take over Berlin, erected 
the Berlin Wall and precipitated the Cuban missile crisis. 
The third difficult period came in 1966 when De Gaulle withdrew France from 
NATO's unified military command. But two years later the Soviets reminded NATO 
of its purpose when its forces led a Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia. 
The fourth crisis began in the late 1970s with the massive Soviet military 
buildup in Europe. NATO made the controversial decision in 1979 to reply by 
deploying U.S. Pershing 2 missiles and ground-launched cruise missiles, a 
decision aided by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan that year. The alliance 
began deploying its missiles in 1983, and the Soviets, despite earlier threats, 
returned to the bargaining table and negotiated a treaty that banned such 
weapons on both sides. 
Gorbachev has repeatedly sounded a call for nations of the "common European 
home" to work together to solve their political problems, a formulation that 
would include Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union but exclude the United 
States. 
The U.S. view is that the alliance rests on what Secretary of State James A. 
Baker III calls "shared Western values." President Bush will argue at the 
summit conference, Baker said last week, that NATO was created to promote the 
common defense of these shared common values -- democracy, human rights, the 
rule of law, free enterprise and respect for the individual. 
These values are inspiring peoples in many parts of the world, including 
Eastern Europe and even the Soviet Union, Baker said, and they will be the 
principal basis for ending the division of Europe and drawing Warsaw Pact 
nations and the Soviet Union into a community. 
But at the same time, Baker said, NATO must continue to ensure a strong 
defense, although possibly at lower levels of arms as negotiators make progress 
in Vienna toward agreements to reduce non-nuclear forces on both sides. 
In what appeared to be a diplomatic way of encouraging the separation of East 
European nations from Moscow, Baker said the NATO members should look for ways 
to "further the peaceful decentralization of economic, political and social 
authority in Eastern Europe." Vestiges of the Cold War, such as the Berlin 
Wall, must be removed, he said. 
Some of these points may be reflected in two documents that Manfred Woerner, 
the NATO secretary general, wants the summit conference to produce. 
One is a "comprehensive concept" statement that would spell out force 
requirements for NATO and arms reduction possibilities for the future. The 
other is a statement on broad NATO political policy toward the East Bloc that 
would map out the way ahead. 
On a more personal level, European leaders here will be carefully observing the 
performance of Bush, who is attending his first NATO summit meeting. The 
alliance has instinctively looked to the U.S. President for firm leadership, 
but as Western Europe has grown stronger, it has also grown more independent 
and more critical in its appraisal of U.S. leadership. 
Several European members, particularly West Germany, believe that the Bush 
Administration has been slow to respond to Soviet arms control proposals. For 
this reason, the White House is expected to work hard at this conference for a 
compromise on the knotty issue of short-range nuclear forces. 
That controversy threatens to focus world attention on NATO's differences, with 
West Germany and some other NATO members pitted against the United States and 
Britain. 
Basically, Washington and London favor modernizing the aging Lance missile, 
then deploying a new missile in the mid-1990s. 
But West Germany, where virtually all Western short-range nuclear weapons are 
deployed, fears that if such weapons are ever used, they will almost certainly 
be used on German soil. It wants the decision on modernizing the short-range 
nuclear weapons delayed until at least 1992, and it has called for early 
negotiations on reducing both sides' short-range nuclear forces. 
The United States and Britain have resisted such talks on grounds that Soviet 
pressure to ban all short-range missiles would become all but politically 
irresistible. That, they say, would jeopardize the doctrine of "flexible 
response," which they credit with deterring Soviet aggression for the last two 
decades. 
Short-range nuclear weapons, the Americans and Britons argue, have served as 
the balancing force against the Warsaw Pact's overwhelming superiority in 
conventional arms arrayed along the East-West border. 
The United States and Britain want the conference to produce a statement that 
short-range nuclear weapons will not be totally abolished. The West Germans are 
reluctant to commit themselves to such a policy. 
Some NATO and U.S. officials believe that a compromise can be reached by 
setting up a committee to study linking early short-range nuclear forces 
negotiations with demonstrated progress at the Vienna talks on reducing 
non-nuclear forces. A statement ruling out -- for the present -- a ban on all 
short-range nuclear weapons might have to be part of the bargain. 
In the view of many experts in NATO affairs, the missile issue is only the most 
obvious manifestation of West Germany's new assertiveness. 
Some U.S. government officials put little stock in the West German challenge on 
the missile question. "It's a minor issue," a senior official in Washington 
said. He implied that West German politicians have exaggerated the significance 
of short-range nuclear forces in order to distract attention from domestic 
controversies over taxes and immigration. 
But to Nitze, who was former President Ronald Reagan's arms control adviser, 
"the main problem of NATO is the future of (West) Germany. The alliance must 
recognize that Germany deserves a more important role. The United States has 
had the central role in NATO until now. But now (Germany) is the Continental 
power." 
As President von Weizsaecker put it in his 40th anniversary speech: 
"The alliance, Western Europe and the whole Continent are decisively dependent 
on our contribution. Our political weight derives from our central location, 
the special situation of Berlin, the size of our population, our productivity 
and our stability." 
