VIRGINIA AGENCIES TOLD TO SEVER LINKS TO S. AFRICA 
Gov. L. Douglas Wilder on Saturday urged all state agencies and institutions to 
divest themselves of companies with interests in South Africa. 
Wilder, speaking at commencement ceremonies at Norfolk State University, said 
the freedom sought by blacks in South Africa "is no different from the freedom 
sought in East Germany, Poland and Lithuania. Our support can be no less." 
Wilder, the nation's first elected black governor, chose predominantly black 
Norfolk State to make the divestiture announcement. It followed reports earlier 
in the week that his Administration was quietly urging University of Virginia 
officials to sell the school's holdings in companies with South African 
interests. 
"I am directing all state agencies and institutions to implement a policy of 
divestment in South Africa, to implement a policy that will allow no further 
investments in companies that are not substantially free of interests in South 
Africa," the governor said. 
"In addition, I am directing those state agencies and institutions with present 
interests in such companies to immediately take steps to begin the divestment 
of those interests," he said. 
In addition to the university, the Virginia Supplemental Retirement System has 
between $400 million and $700 million in investments in companies operating in 
South Africa, according to system officials. Overall, the retirement system has 
almost $9 billion in assets. 
Wilder does not have the power to order the university or the retirement system 
to divest, but the governor makes appointments to the trustee boards of both. 
Recent progress in South Africa against apartheid, the policy of keeping whites 
and blacks separated, is a result of international indignation and sanctions, 
the governor said. 
"If we are to participate in the extension to all people freedoms and liberties 
which we hold dear, we must take concrete actions which reflect our support," 
he said. 
The University of Virginia, where students have staged protests in recent weeks 
to push for divestiture, has reduced the South African holdings of its 
endowment from $37 million to $15.5 million. The university's total endowment 
is $460 million. 
The finance committee of the school's board of visitors plans to meet this week 
to decide whether to recommend elimination of the remaining holdings. 
