A WAVE OF CONFIDENCE; 
ALTHOUGH ANXIOUS AT FIRST, PARAPLEGICS ENJOY DAY OF WATER-SKIING 
Gina MacAndrew was watching fancy speedboats and Jet Skis race across a lake in 
San Dimas when a line of vehicles rolling across the beach caught her eye. 
They were wheelchairs that were slowly being maneuvered through the deep sand 
by a half-dozen paraplegics. They pulled to a stop at the water's edge. 
"I thought to myself, 'What are they doing out here?' " said MacAndrew, 20, a 
clerk from Fontana who had stretched out on the beach at Puddingstone Reservoir 
to sunbathe. 
The paralyzed young men had come to water-ski, visitors to the lake at the 
eastern edge of the San Gabriel Valley would soon learn. 
One by one, the men pulled themselves out of their chairs and eased into the 
68-degree water. Then they struggled into canvas seats bolted to a single ski 
the size of a narrow surfboard. 
At the cry of "Hit it!" they clutched a tow rope, and a 20-foot powerboat 
lurched forward for a fast couple of laps around the 250-acre reservoir. 
At first, most of the skiers only made it a few yards before losing their 
balance and toppling into the water. But a championship skier -- himself a 
paraplegic -- was in the boat to shout out instructions and encouragement. 
Lean into turns, yelled Bill Bowness, who holds a world record for handicapped 
water-skiing. Like most of the men he was teaching, Bowness, 31, of Chico, is 
paralyzed from the waist down. His back was broken 13 years ago in a car 
accident. 
There were more than a few false starts. But each skier eventually figured out 
how to balance on the 20-inch-wide board and how to ride it over waves being 
kicked up by other boats and Jet Skis. 
Apprehensive looks gave way to huge grins as each skier glided back toward the 
shore after his turn around the lake. 
"It was a scary feeling at first, but I figured I'd give it a try," said Danny 
Hendrick, 23, of Chino, who often water-skied before a forklift toppled on him 
and broke his back. "This takes a lot of arm strength." 
Ricardo Jimenez, 28, of San Bernardino, hooked the tow rope to the front of the 
82-inch-long ski and held tightly to the sides of the ski seat with his hands. 
"I'm nervous. I'm scared because of the impossibility of moving my legs," 
admitted Jimenez, crippled by a fall from a roof eight months ago. 
Ron Scanlon, a muscular 33-year-old wheelchair kung fu expert, took his turn. 
So did Chad Greenfield, 21, of Riverside and Mark Granger, 33, of La Habra. 
"I'm tuckered out. I used every muscle in the body," said Granger, who 
frequently water-skied before a construction accident paralyzed his legs seven 
years ago. 
There were whoops of joy and applause from the boat when Chad Bowser, 17, of 
Mission Viejo completed his loop around the lake. The cheering was led by Robin 
Butler, 25, a therapist from Pomona's Casa Colina Rehabilitation Centers who is 
helping Bowser recover from head injuries suffered in a car crash last year. 
The boat used during last week's outing was operated by Tee Broussard of Alta 
Loma. He said he volunteered use of his craft after becoming acquainted with 
Casa Colina when his 16-year-old son, Scott, broke his back in an 
all-terrain-vehicle accident a few months ago. 
As they toweled dry, the excited skiers talked about their next visit to the 
lake. Excursion leader Jim Miller said another trip would be planned when the 
use of a boat could be arranged. 
Nearby, beach-goers watched respectfully as the skiers folded their towels and 
then laboriously rolled their wheelchairs off the sandy beach. 
"What they're doing is awesome," said speedboat owner Joe Lovas, a Rancho 
Cucamonga plumber. "Your legs are the most important part of skiing. They are 
shock absorbers. They give you balance. What they're doing is tough. I'm 
impressed." 
Call him next time, Lovas said. 
"I'd be happy to pull them behind my boat if they wanted me to." 
