INTRODUCING BROCCOFLOWER; 
VEGETABLES: CROSS BETWEEN CAULIFLOWER AND BROCCOLI PACKS MORE VITAMIN C THAN 
ORANGES, PLUS FOLIC ACID, TESTS SHOW. 
It looks like cauliflower dyed green. 
It has a pleasing taste, sweeter than cauliflower, milder than broccoli. 
"It's called Broccoflower. It's a cross between cauliflower and broccoli and is 
America's newest vegetable," Joseph Montecalvo explained. 
Montecalvo recently completed several weeks of nutritional tests on the plant. 
He heads up the food science and nutrition department of California Polytechnic 
State University here. 
"It has more Vitamin C than oranges," Montecalvo said. "And it's high in folic 
acid, which is important to the maintenance of red blood cells carrying oxygen 
through the human body." 
Montecalvo conducted the nutritional profile at the request of Rick Antle, 
president of Tanimura and Antle Co., headquartered in Salinas. The produce firm 
has 20,000 acres in lettuce, broccoli and cauliflower in Salinas, the San 
Joaquin Valley, Yuma, and Obregon, Mexico. 
Antle, 33, a fourth-generation California grower and 1979 Cal Poly graduate, is 
a member of the school's crop science advisory board. 
In October 1988 Antle sent a few cases of Broccoflower to his customers on a 
trial basis. Now his company is shipping 20,000 to 25,000 boxes a week (12 to 
16 heads to a box) throughout the country and Canada. Broccoflower sells for 
about the same price as cauliflower. 
"We are a major grower of both cauliflower and broccoli. Wild crosses occur 
between the two crops. About 10 years ago we began breeding the two vegetables 
on an experimental basis," Antle recalled. 
He said he didn't do much with it. Then, on a trip to Europe three years ago he 
discovered seeds for a cauliflower-broccoli cross at a seed company in Holland. 
"I bought some of the seed, planted it in Salinas, liked what I saw and then 
bought as much of the seed as was available from the Holland seed company. I 
learned that the plant was grown commercially on a small scale in Europe, but 
in all my travels I had never seen it in this country," Antle said. 
The seed was expensive -- $1,500-a-pound. "But I knew I was onto something. 
Growers are always looking for a new crop," he said. 
Antle called the vegetable Broccoflower and has taken out a trademark 
application on the name. He sells the product to his regular customers, who are 
located for the most part along the Eastern Seaboard. About 10% of his 
production of Broccoflower is distributed in California. It has been sold in a 
few markets in Southern California the past year. 
"It has really caught on. The demand far exceeds the supply so far. Last year 
we were growing Broccoflower on 300 acres. This year we are increasing the 
acreage considerably," Antle noted. He said many other growers are now doing 
test trials on the crop. 
"Broccoflower is the talk of the vegetable commodity industry. There is an 
obvious niche for it in the market. And everybody's trying to get on the 
bandwagon. We feel fortunate because we've got a head start," he added. 
He said the first big public display of Broccoflower will take place at the 
Food Marketing Institute Trade Show in Chicago the first week in May. 
Some 60,000 Broccoflower plants donated to Cal Poly's crop science department 
were planted on the San Luis Obispo campus April 21 by James Greil, professor 
at the school's crop science department, and four agriculture students. 
"The plantings are part of Cal Poly's enterprise program underwritten by the 
Cal Poly Foundation. Students involved will earn 67% of the profits from the 
crop toward their education, with 33% of the profits returned to the 
foundation," Greil explained. 
Both the grower and the students benefit as students will be doing continuous 
research on the new crop under Greil's direction. 
During the height of President George Bush's broccoli brouhaha, George Gowgani, 
head of Cal Poly's crop science department, shipped a case of Broccoflower to 
the White House. 
"We received a thank you note from a member of the White House staff and were 
informed that Broccoflower was served raw as a dip at two receptions attended 
by President Bush. But, we don't know whether the President tried it. Of 
course, we hope he did and hope he liked it," Gowgani said. 
