CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS BALLOT MEASURES; 
DRIVE FOR HIKE IN GAS TAX RUNS LOW ON FINANCIAL FUEL 
Last-minute money woes Wednesday prompted the campaign to win voter approval of 
a gasoline tax increase to cancel major television advertising planned for key 
markets in the final days before the June 5 primary election. 
Campaign insiders said the money shortage is so serious that some markets would 
be "black," meaning no television advertisements from the Yes on Propositions 
111 and 108 camp would be aired. They said they did not know yet which markets 
these would be. 
Treasurer Thomas W. Hiltachk said fund raising in the last few days has 
steadily fallen short of the goals set by the campaign, which had hoped to 
bring its total collections to $5.9 million before the closing stretch of the 
campaign. 
Gov. George Deukmejian, who is heading the campaign, has put his reputation on 
the line to win the tax increase. Hiltachk said that from the beginning, the 
governor has insisted that the effort not end up with a deficit. 
"It's really tight," one campaign supporter said. "We're getting checks for 
$5,000 and $10,000 when we need them to be $25,000 and $50,000." 
Campaign consultants tried to put the best light on the situation. 
"County registrars around the state tell us they have been receiving record 
numbers of absentee ballot requests. They have also been telling us that there 
could be a record low turnout at the polling places on Election Day. With that 
in mind, we are focusing our messages on the high propensity voters during the 
few remaining days of the campaign and we believe those voters can best be 
reached through an increased emphasis on direct mail and radio," the campaign's 
Burlingame-based consultants, Woodward-McDowell said in a formal statement. 
The phased-in, 9-cent-per-gallon gas tax increase would help finance a 10-year, 
$18.5-billion transportation improvement and congestion relief program. The tax 
increase can go into effect, however, only if voters approve Proposition 111, a 
ballot measure that modifies the state's spending limit. Proposition 108 would 
authorize $1 billion of the new transportation funds in bonds to pay for mass 
transit. 
"The final ads are crucial to our strategy," campaign news director Bob Schmidt 
said. "From day one the strategy has been to localize the campaign and tell, 
'Here's what your dollars will mean to you in your neighborhood.' " 
The campaign has designed five different ads for specific regions of the state 
-- Los Angeles, San Diego, the San Francisco Bay Area, Sacramento and rural 
areas. 
"Some stations were paid through Tuesday," said one official. "Those that 
weren't are going to get calls that we have caneled." 
