OILERS BRUSH ASIDE BLACKHAWKS; 
NHL PLAYOFFS: STEVE SMITH SCORES TWO GOALS AS EDMONTON TAKES 1-0 LEAD IN 
CAMPBELL CONFERENCE FINAL, 5-2. 
Steve Smith scored two goals in a playoff game for the first time in his career 
as the Edmonton Oilers rolled to their eighth consecutive victory by beating 
the Chicago Blackhawks, 5-2, Wednesday night in the opener of the Campbell 
Conference final. 
Smith, who had only seven goals during the regular season and only five career 
playoff goals, scored what proved to be the winning goal at 8:52 of the second 
period on a screened slap shot from the left point. He added the Oilers' fourth 
goal early in the third period when his wrist shot from the right circle hit 
the post and goaltender Ed Belfour's back before trickling into the net. 
The Oilers were sharp despite an eight-day layoff. Chicago was coming off 
Monday night's 8-2 victory over St. Louis in Game 7 of that series. 
"We knew we'd have to be on top of our game," Smith said. "Even though we knew 
they'd be a little tired, they could get into a groove." 
Before Wednesday night, Smith's most notable goal was one he accidentally put 
into his own net in the third period of Game 7 of the 1986 Smythe Division 
final against Calgary, ending the Oilers' two-year reign as Stanley Cup 
champions. 
The Oilers haven't lost since dropping the fourth game of the Smythe Division 
semifinals against Winnipeg on April 10. Game 2 is Friday night at the 
Northlands Coliseum. 
The Oilers dominated the first period, outshooting Chicago, 12-3, and scoring 
the only goal when Mark Messier took Charlie Huddy's pass at center ice, went 
in alone and beat Belfour at 9:32. It was his sixth goal of the playoffs and 
10th in 10 career playoff games against the Blackhawks. 
"We have no excuse for the way we played," Chicago Coach Mike Keenan said. "I'm 
extremely disappointed. You don't have to play great in the playoffs as long as 
you win. The Oilers have a 1-0 advantage on a team and they didn't have to work 
very hard to get it. There were no bright spots." 
