SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
PARAPHILIA SPANS EXTREMES OF SEXUAL DISORDERS; 
MENTAL ILLNESS: UNUSUAL BEHAVIORS RANGE FROM OBSCENE PHONE CALLS TO RAPE AND 
CHILD ABUSE. THEIR CAUSE MAY LIE IN THE BRAIN, NOT IMMORALITY. 
It takes a tragedy like the abrupt end of a successful, decade-long presidency 
at a major university to focus public attention on the problems of unusual 
sexual behaviors that, in the extreme, are considered to be a form of mental 
illness. 
Recently, it was disclosed that Richard E. Berendzen, 51, resigned as president 
of American University because of accusations that he made obscene phone calls 
to women running day-care centers in Northern Virginia. No formal charges have 
been filed against him. 
Berendzen is now undergoing treatment at the sexual disorders clinic at Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore. At his request, the 
hospital has declined to release any information about his treatment or 
condition. 
Society once viewed behavior such as making obscene phone calls in moral terms, 
calling it a sexual deviation or perversion. Mental health experts who study 
sexual disorders now refer to a range of problems from voyeurism to sexual 
violence by the scientific term, paraphilia. 
Broadly defined, paraphilias are sexually arousing behaviors that for most 
people are repulsive and not sexually gratifying. In extreme forms, they 
include having sex with animals, sexual abuse of children and rape. 
Some paraphilias, however, are considered harmless. They may involve wearing a 
certain piece of clothing or a special smell. Although there are no reliable 
statistics about how many people suffer paraphilia, John Money, a clinical 
psychologist who has pioneered the treatment of sexual disorders, said that 
although he believes that serious paraphilias are rare, "the minor ones that 
don't hurt anybody probably are intensely common." 
Obscene phone calls are not uncommon. C&amp;P Telephone Co. reports that 22,000 
complaints about such calls were filed last year in the Washington area; many 
more are never reported to authorities. Most callers, experts say, never take 
any action beyond just making a phone call. 
The majority of paraphilics are men, and much of what is known about 
paraphilias comes from studies of sex offenders identified by the criminal 
justice system. Experts agree that there are female paraphilics as well, but 
little is known about them. 
In the last few years, scientists who study sexual behavior have begun to trace 
the origins of paraphilias to suspected physical changes in the brain and to 
sexual or emotional trauma usually experienced during childhood. 
"I think that we are just learning that people who commit these crimes are not 
necessarily just sex perverts or oversexed or morally degenerate, but they have 
neuropsychiatric problems," said Eli Coleman, a psychologist in the human 
sexuality program at the University of Minnesota School of Medicine in 
Minneapolis. 
The evidence for a brain abnormality is preliminary. Some paraphilias may be 
related to hormone systems within the brain, Money said. 
In a recent study of only one patient, Ronald Langevin at the Clark Institute 
in Toronto used radioactive tracers to show a difference in brain activity 
between a man diagnosed as being a sadist and two normal volunteers. 
Some researchers see a parallel between certain paraphilias and 
obsessive-compulsive disorders. In studies of obsessive-compulsive patients, 
Judith L. Rapoport, a psychiatrist at the National Institute of Mental Health, 
has shown that there are neurological alterations in parts of the brain. Some 
patients respond to drug treatments that alter the biochemistry of the brain 
and relieve the need to repeat obsessive-compulsive behaviors, such as frequent 
hand-washing. 
Paraphilias may be related to obsessive-compulsive disorders in which "reason 
and rationality are lost," said Coleman. "When the behavior is compulsive, it 
is driven by an attempt to reduce stress." 
For some paraphilics, the behavior "may initially be driven by the sexual 
excitement and may still have some of that element. But the primary motivation 
is the reduction of stress and anxiety," he said. "There is usually a 
short-lived feeling of relief, followed by the recurrence of the anxiety. So 
the person is compelled to seek the behavior again and again. It is 
overwhelming." 
Traditionally, scientists have believed that compulsive sexual behavior has 
psychosocial roots that reflect a major problem within the person's emotional 
makeup. 
Studies of people with sexual disorders suggest that problems may arise not 
only from childhood sexual abuse or trauma but in families where sex was either 
never discussed or regarded as evil. In these cases, normal erotic development 
was blocked. 
Paraphilics commonly share certain characteristics. They tend to have low 
self-esteem. Many are extremely angry at women and have great difficulty with 
intimacy, especially when it becomes erotic. 
Individuals with serious sexual disorders may exhibit more than one type of 
paraphilic behavior, according to Judith V. Becker, director of the sexual 
behavior clinic at the New York State Psychiatric Institute in New York City. 
She studied 500 male sex offenders who had been arrested and were at the clinic 
for treatment. The men volunteered to be part of the study that examined all 
aspects of their sexual behavior. 
"When a person engages in one type of paraphilic behavior, there might be some 
other sexual disorders also," she said. 
Becker's research focuses only on the most serious sexual disorders, so it 
cannot be generalized to all paraphilics. Most researchers in this field see 
paraphilias as a continuum of behavior much like addiction to alcohol or drugs. 
Treatments for paraphilics range widely, from traditional psychotherapy and 
group therapy to highly aggressive, confrontational approaches that force the 
paraphilic to face the impact of his activity on others. 
Therapy is also aimed at making sex offenders aware of feelings of their own 
that may be hidden, said William Samek, a sex therapist in private practice in 
Miami. 
"They are trying to escape their anger, their hostility, their insecurity, 
their fear of rejection, their dislike of themselves," Samek said. 
Mental health experts have begun using different kinds of drugs, in addition to 
psychotherapy, to help change paraphilic behavior. 
"We have some promising evidence to indicate that drugs for 
obsessive-compulsive disorders are effective," Coleman said. These include 
fluoxetine (Prozac), a new antidepressant drug that helps reduce obsessive 
behavior. 
