PROFILE ; 
MEET THE KREMLIN'S MR. CONSERVATIVE; 
TO REFORMERS, YEGOR LIGACHEV'S NAME IS ALMOST A CURSE. BUT TALK TO THIS TOUGH 
SIBERIAN PEASANT-TURNED-POLITICIAN, AND HE'LL TELL YOU A FEW THINGS ABOUT 
REVOLUTION AND REALISM. 
He is the foremost conservative within the Soviet Union's ruling Politburo and 
knows that to the country's radical reformers he is a political ogre. 
He is caricatured mercilessly in the unofficial news media, mocked openly on 
the Moscow stage, featured as a horned devil on political badges, called an 
"ignoramus" in Parliament and attacked with such ferocity at opposition rallies 
that his name is almost a curse in today's highly charged vocabulary. 
But Yegor K. Ligachev is unmoved by these passions and undeterred in what he 
regards as his mission -- the forthright assertion of traditional socialist 
values as the Soviet Union proceeds with perestroika, the restructuring of the 
country's whole political, economic and social system. 
"I know what they say about Ligachev, that he's conservative and hidebound, an 
obstacle to everything progressive," he commented, more bemused than outraged 
by the radicals' many allegations. "But I belong to the realists, I stick to 
common sense." 
Ligachev, who now oversees agriculture, nevertheless is deeply concerned that 
the Soviet Union remain socialist even as it goes through a profound 
transformation affecting the daily life of every citizen. 
The goals of the Bolsheviks in the 1917 Russian Revolution have not 
fundamentally changed, Ligachev contended during an extensive interview with 
The Times, but new ways must be found to achieve them. 
"I am far from thinking we are in a crisis of socialism, a crisis of the 
Communist Party," Ligachev said. "We face the result of problems accumulated 
over a long time, problems that stem essentially from the deformation of 
socialism." 
Despite its achievement, he said, "the party is influenced negatively by the 
extremely destructive consequences of Stalinism and its arbitrariness, its mass 
repressions, its lawlessness." Moral and ideological decay undermine its 
authority and influence in society, he said. 
As to his conservatism, Ligachev quickly summed it up with a Russian proverb: 
"Before entering a room, think how you will get out." 
"In politics, before taking a decision, you must think of the consequences," he 
explained. "This we have not always done in perestroika, and we are suffering 
from our errors as a result. That is the extent of my conservatism. I 
wholeheartedly support the socialist transformation of our society through 
perestroika and the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev." 
As the Soviet Union attempts to broaden and accelerate its much-troubled 
reforms, Ligachev's political authority is growing, for his support is sought 
to ensure that the measures win acceptance from like-minded party officials who 
retain considerable influence throughout the country. 
If Ligachev has become the emblematic conservative of perestroika, he is also 
among the most enigmatic of the present Soviet leaders, to many a faceless 
apparatchik with a 45-year career in the party bureaucracy. 
And that Ligachev does regret, for in the Soviet Union's new era of competitive 
politics, those many years as a willing instrument of party policy place him at 
a disadvantage. 
His passionate advocacy of socialism as well as the pungency of his criticism 
of the radicals is lost in the gray pages of Pravda, the party newspaper. Boris 
N. Yeltsin, the radical populist, whom Ligachev originally brought to Moscow 
but who now campaigns for Ligachev's ouster from the Politburo, scores his 
points and escapes unscathed by any rebuttal. And Ligachev is finding it 
difficult to turn the mass support he believes he has among ordinary workers 
and farmers into political leverage at the center. 
The charge, so frequent among radicals, that he became a party official in the 
times of dictator Josef Stalin and remains a Stalinist today rankles more than 
any other accusation. "People in my family were executed under Stalin, people 
in my family were expelled from the party by Stalin and exiled by Stalin," 
Ligachev said. "I know from life, not from books, what Stalinism was and what 
it did to people and why we must never allow it again." 
Trained as an aeronautical engineer during World War II, Ligachev turned to 
political work, first in the Communist Youth League and then in the party and 
government. While still in his 30s, he oversaw the establishment of 
Akademgorodok, the Siberian science city outside Novosibirsk, from which many 
of Gorbachev's advisers have come; he ran the Siberian region of Tomsk, a key 
industrial center, as the party leader there for 18 years, and he was brought 
to Moscow in 1983 by the late Yuri Andropov to oversee the rejuvenation of the 
apparat, the party machine, as a man who was free of the cronyism and 
corruption of the years of Leonid I. Brezhnev. 
As the party secretary for internal organizational matters, Ligachev was in a 
key position at the death in 1985 of Konstantin Chernenko, Andropov's 
successor, and he unhesitatingly swung all the support he could to Gorbachev 
and a program of reform. "We could have made quite different decisions," he 
reflected several years later, "and sometimes I think what would have happened 
to the country." 
Born into a Siberian peasant family, Ligachev proudly remains a Siberian. He 
speaks with the deep, rounded vowels of Siberia, he remains direct, frank and 
undevious and he values the freedom characteristic of Siberia. 
"My motherland is Siberia," he said. "People there are special -- open, 
friendly, courageous, resourceful, self-reliant, honest, morally upright and 
just. They have been shaped by life on the frontier, by the need to develop 
huge resources, by a very rigorous climate, by being very far from the center 
and its political intrigue." 
Ligachev's chief pleasures are his family -- his wife, Zinaida, a retired 
foreign language teacher; his mathematician son, Alexander; his 
daughter-in-law, Yelena, who is also a scientist, and a grandson, Alexei, a 
student at a military institute. 
Ligachev is a reader -- virtually all the Russian classics, which are re-read 
over and over, and most of the contemporary Soviet writers -- and a music lover 
who is seen frequently at symphony concerts and operas in Moscow. He is a skier 
and a bicycle rider. His intellectual and physical vigor are those of a much 
younger man. 
Amid all the controversy around him, Ligachev has remained primarily a party 
man, and Gorbachev's defense of him against radical critics more than two years 
ago still stands. 
"He would lay down his life for it," Gorbachev said of Ligachev's devotion to 
the party. "He wears his heart on his sleeve. He's an open, militant, emotional 
man -- but with great political experience." 
Biography 
Name: Yegor K. Ligachev 
Title: One of 13 full members of the Soviet Politburo 
Age: 69 
Nationality: Russian (born in Siberia) 
Education: Graduated in 1943 from the Ordzhonikidze Institute for Aircraft 
Construction in Moscow with a technical engineering degree. 
Family: Wife, Zinaida, plus son and grandson. 
Quote: "In politics, before taking a decision, you must think of the 
consequences. This we have not always done in perestroika, and we are suffering 
from our errors as a result." 
