IRVINE PLANS LAW TO RESTRICT MATERIALS THAT DESTROY OZONE 
Trying to do their small part to save Earth's protective ozone layer, Irvine 
city officials today will propose a model ordinance that bans or severely 
restricts the use of chlorofluorocarbons in packaging, air conditioning, home 
insulation and solvents. 
Irvine Mayor Larry Agran said the draft ordinance appears to be more 
comprehensive than any in the United States that aims to limit the use of 
chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs -- synthetic chemicals that destroy ozone. 
"I think we can make a dent in the problem and also set an example and inspire 
other localities -- state and national governments to move more quickly" on 
this environmental issue, he said Monday. 
Recycling CFCs 
The proposed ordinance would require any business that repairs refrigerators or 
air-conditioning units containing CFCs to capture them for recycling. 
It also would require builders to find a substitute for insulating materials 
made with CFCs and to dispose of any CFC-laden materials "properly." And it 
would forbid supermarkets and fast-food restaurants from using any packaging 
material made with CFCs, such as plastic foam containers and cups. 
Violators would face fines of $50 for the first offense, $100 for the next 
offense and possible civil litigation, according to draft language in the 
proposed ordinance. 
Several cities, including Berkeley, already have imposed a ban on packaging 
materials made with CFCs. In early May, the Vermont legislature passed a bill 
banning automobile air conditioners that use CFCs. That legislation becomes 
effective for cars registered or sold in 1993. 
Meanwhile, Irvine's proposed ordinance includes provisions similar to the other 
laws but goes beyond them, Agran said. 
June 29 Public Hearing 
Although the proposal may be unprecedented, Agran said he doubted that it would 
be controversial. Business leaders may have questions about it, he said, but 
every business in Irvine will get a copy of the proposed ordinance before June 
29 when a public hearing on the issue is scheduled. 
If approved, the ordinance would become effective July 1, 1990, giving 
businesses time to adjust to the new restrictions, he said. 
Still, a "Dear Irvine Business Owner" letter accompanying the proposal 
suggested that some businessmen might at least have reason to be concerned. 
"Some limitations will occur for businesses that use CFCs or products 
containing CFCs," the letter said. But, it added, "By participating 
enthusiastically, all residents of Irvine will garner the satisfaction 
that comes from doing the right thing." 
In recent years, alarmed scientists have discovered a gaping hole in ozone over 
the antarctic as well as increasing losses of ozone around the world. Ozone 
shields the Earth from ultraviolet rays that can cause skin cancer. 
As a result of measurable ozone losses and proof that CFCs were to blame, 31 
nations including the United States, pledged in 1987 to reduce consumption of 
CFCs by 50% by the end of the century. Last year, American CFC manufacturers, 
including the Du Pont Co. of Wilmington, Del., promised to phase out production 
of the compound. 
Agran said a newly created city of Irvine Science Advisory Task Force spent 4 
months studying ways to regulate CFCs. 
"In most cases there are suitable substitutes" to materials made with CFCs, he 
said. "I think we've been careful not to require the impossible." 
Interested in Irvine's approach was UC Irvine chemistry professor F. Sherwood 
Rowland, who, with researcher Mario Molina, discovered in 1974 that CFCs were 
destroying ozone. 
That research was accepted by the National Academy of Sciences, and in 1978 it 
led to a ban on nearly all aerosol sprays containing CFCs. 
Until recently, however, CFC manufacturers disparaged Rowland and Molina's 
findings, claiming that they were theoretical and that there was no proof that 
CFCs were destroying atmospheric ozone. However, with the discovery of the 
growing hole in ozone above the antarctic and other ozone losses, even CFC 
manufacturers now concede there is a problem. 
