ASTRO'S 4 TELESCOPES MAY FILL IN GAPS ABOUT SPACE 
Imagine seeing the full complexity of a movie like "Lawrence of Arabia" when 
all you had previously seen was a 60-second trailer, or the vibrant detail to 
be gained from studying a Matisse painting when all you had previously seen was 
a black-and-white print. 
Roughly speaking, that is the kind of improvement astronomers hope to gain this 
Wednesday at 12:40 a.m. when the space shuttle Columbia carries the 
$150-million Astro observatory into orbit. The three ultraviolet telescopes and 
one X-ray telescope aboard the shuttle will afford astronomers an unprecedented 
view of the universe in a broad range of wavelengths that hitherto have been 
largely inaccessible, blocked from ground-based telescopes by the absorbing 
power of the atmosphere. 
In a mission of unusual ambition and complexity, and the first ever to be 
devoted to a single scientific discipline, the seven-man crew of Columbia -- 
which includes five astrophysicists -- and their counterparts on Earth will 
work around the clock for 10 days, taking as many as 300 pictures with each 
instrument before packing them up and bringing them home. 
The mission is a sharp contrast to the recent flight of the shuttle Discovery, 
which five weeks ago launched the Hubble Space Telescope. Hubble will view the 
stars in great detail for the next 15 years, and the differences between it and 
Astro have sparked a strong rivalry between the crews of the two shuttles. 
"We get to be astronomers," said Astro mission specialist Jeffrey A. Hoffman. 
"All they (the Discovery crew) do is throw out a telescope. Anybody can do 
that." Added mission specialist Robert A. R. Parker: "We'll be sending down 
science data while (the) space telescope is still doing engineering checkout." 
The Hubble and Astro telescopes differ from each other in much the same manner 
as a spyglass does from binoculars. Hubble is designed to look at very narrow 
regions of space at very high resolution. Astro is meant to study much broader 
regions, but with less resolution. The Astro telescopes also observe at a 
variety of wavelengths to which Hubble is blind. 
During the 10-day mission, astronomers will study a variety of celestial 
objects ranging from planets and moons in the outer solar system to Supernova 
1987a -- an exploding star, located about 160,000 light-years from Earth, that 
was first detected in January 1987; from nearby "starburst" galaxies that have 
an unusually high rate of star formation, to distant quasars that are the 
oldest and brightest objects known. 
They will also get their first look at large portions of the sky that have 
never been viewed in either ultraviolet or X-ray wavelengths because of the 
atmosphere, and they may even see the first direct evidence for the existence 
of black holes -- those mysterious and elusive collapsed stars that are so 
heavy and dense that not even light can escape their intense gravitational 
pull. 
"Each of the instruments is designed to do something that no other existing 
telescope or spacecraft can do," said astronomer Stephen P. Maran of NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. "It's going to provide an 
important source of knowledge about what goes on in space." 
In their leftover time, the Columbia crew will teach a science lesson from 
space that will be beamed by satellite to high schools around the country. And 
payload specialist Ronald A. Parise will attempt to make ham radio contact with 
Soviet cosmonauts aboard the space station Mir -- perhaps to commiserate with 
the cosmonauts on their need to repair some insulation before returning to 
Earth. 
Each of the four telescopes, to be mounted on pallets in the payload bay of 
Columbia, has its own mission to perform, although their roles are 
complementary. In fact, the three ultraviolet telescopes will be operated in 
unison to provide different pictures of the same celestial objects. The X-ray 
telescope will be operated independently of the other three; sometimes it will 
photograph the same stars as the ultraviolet telescopes, other times it will 
photograph other objects. 
The largest of the telescopes is the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope or HUT, 
designed by astronomer Arthur F. Davidsen and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore. It has a 36-inch mirror coated with the rare metal 
iridium to allow it to reflect an unusually broad spectrum of ultraviolet 
frequencies. 
HUT also has an exceptionally sensitive electronic detector coated with cesium 
iodide, which allows it to "see" incoming ultraviolet photons. This detector 
must never come in contact with normal air -- especially water vapor -- because 
that would destroy its ultraviolet sensitivity. High-efficiency vacuum pumps 
must be used to keep it in a near-vacuum continuously, except for brief 
transition periods in a dry nitrogen atmosphere. 
"One of the most challenging and significant projects" for HUT will be the 
search for helium in the intergalactic medium, Davidsen said. When the universe 
was formed in the Big Bang, astrophysicists believe, its principal components 
were hydrogen and helium. "It's that primordial hydrogen and helium, out of 
which everything else came, that we would like to detect directly," he said. 
Helium absorbs light at ultraviolet wavelengths detectable only by HUT. "Either 
we will detect it, or we will set a very stringent limit" on the amount of 
matter that can be present in intergalactic space, Davidsen said. The question 
of how much invisible matter is present in the "vacuum" of space is a crucial 
one because it determines whether the universe will eventually collapse in on 
itself or expand forever. 
The next largest telescope, with a 15-inch mirror, is the Ultraviolet Imaging 
Telescope or UIT, designed and built by astronomer Theodore P. Stecher and his 
colleagues at Goddard. It is the only one of the four instruments that will not 
produce data during the Columbia flight. Instead, it carries enough film to 
make 2,000 exposures during the flight. The photos will be developed after 
Astro is returned to Earth. 
UIT has the largest field of view of any ultraviolet telescope ever built. It 
"covers a vastly larger piece of the sky" than Hubble, Maran said, and thus can 
be used to discover new objects that will be studied in detail by Hubble. 
Unlike Hubble, which responds to both visible and ultraviolet light, UIT 
responds only to ultraviolet light. "When you look at a globular star cluster 
in visible light, it is dominated by the red giant stars," Maran said. "But 
they all drop away in the ultraviolet, so you can look and discover large 
numbers of white dwarfs, which are shrunken down and quite hot." 
UIT will also be used to search for an "ultraviolet light echo" of the 
explosion that created Supernova 1987a. According to conventional theory, the 
ultraviolet light output of the supernova should have peaked just hours after 
the original explosion, while the output of visible light peaked 85 days later. 
Both light peaks should cause "echoes" when the bright light is reflected by 
interstellar dust and bounced back to Earth, appearing in telescopes as faint 
and ever-enlarging circles surrounding the supernova. One astronomer, Arlen 
Crotts, has already discovered the visible light echoes, and researchers hope 
to observe the ultraviolet light echoes with UIT. By comparing the intensities 
of the light in the two wavelengths, researchers should be able to determine 
the microscopic composition of the dust grains and their arrangement in the 
clouds. 
The properties of interstellar dust are also the focus of the third ultraviolet 
telescope, the Wisconsin Ultraviolet Photo-Polarimeter Experiment, also known 
as WUPPE, which has a 20-inch mirror. It was designed and built by astronomer 
Arthur D. Code and his colleagues at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. It 
will observe polarized ultraviolet light, which has been virtually unstudied. 
Normally, the electromagnetic radiation that is light vibrates uniformly in all 
directions, like the pistons on an old-fashioned radial airplane engine. 
Polarized light, in contrast, vibrates preferentially in one direction like the 
pistons in a four-cylinder automobile. 
Although ultraviolet light is not normally polarized, it can be polarized by 
passing through strong electric fields or by interaction with interstellar 
dust. Studying its polarity will thus reveal a great deal about the magnetic 
fields of other stars and about the composition of interstellar gases. 
The fourth and final telescope is the Broad Band X-Ray Telescope or BBXRT, 
designed and built by Peter J. Serlemitsos and his colleagues at Goddard. It 
has an unusual new design. 
X-rays are not reflected by mirrors in the same way as normal light. Instead, 
they are reflected only when they strike the mirror at a very shallow angle. 
Hence, conventional X-ray telescopes use very large, highly polished metal 
mirrors that, in fact, have only a very small effective X-ray collecting area. 
Serlemitsos developed a design in which literally hundreds of very thin sheets 
of gold-coated aluminum foil can be nestled close together to reflect an 
unusually large proportion of the X-rays entering the telescope, making 
possible unusual X-ray gathering power. 
One prime target of BBXRT will be Supernova 1987a. Researchers hope it will 
provide the first firm evidence of the existence of the neutron star that most 
astronomers are sure must be at its center. Visible and ultraviolet light from 
the neutron star are scattered by the large amount of debris around it, but 
X-rays should easily pass through. 
"All the heavy elements in the universe have been formed in such explosions," 
Serlemitsos said. "If we can trace the amounts and distribution of the heavy 
elements (in the supernova), we can start putting together good models of how 
heavy elements are built." 
To maximize their viewing time in orbit, the astronauts will be divided into 
two teams, Red and Blue, which will work 12-hour shifts each. When the Red team 
is on duty, Columbia pilot Guy S. Gardner, 42, will fly the shuttle to point 
the payload bay in the direction from which observations will be made, mission 
specialist Parker, 53, will operate the aiming system for the ultraviolet 
telescopes and payload specialist Parise, 38, will operate the telescopes 
themselves. 
When the Blue team is on duty, mission specialist John M. Lounge, 43, will fly 
Columbia, mission specialist Hoffman, 45, will operate the aiming system and 
payload specialist Samuel T. Durrance, 46, will operate the telescopes. Shuttle 
commander Vance D. Brand, 58 and on his fourth flight, will work a staggered 
shift that overlaps with both teams. 
The BBXRT will be operated remotely from Goddard. 
