GORBACHEV'S WOES TO SHAPE SUMMIT; 
DIPLOMACY: PRESIDENT BUSH MAY WANT TO CONCENTRATE ON OLDER ARMS CONTROL ISSUES, 
BUT THE TROUBLED SOVIET LEADER'S INTERNAL AGENDA COULD BE MORE PRESSING. 
Marking a watershed between the Cold War and post-Cold War eras, this week's 
U.S.-Soviet summit will have a two-part agenda: It will cover "old" business, 
especially arms control, and "new" business, particularly the shape of a more 
unified Europe. 
President Bush's first priority will be to focus on the old issues. "We want to 
get these deals finalized," he said of agreements made in the strategic arms 
reduction talks (START) and other arms negotiations. "I don't want to have two 
ships pass in the night." 
Bush's priorities may be overshadowed, however, by internal developments in the 
Soviet Union -- Lithuania's drive for independence and President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev's reluctance to undertake radical economic reforms in the face of 
increasing social unrest. 
"Serious instability in the Soviet Union is much more thinkable than it was six 
months ago," when Bush and Gorbachev last met, a senior Administration official 
said. Specifically, summer strikes could ex acerbate the increasing ethnic 
battles, hoarding and struggles for independence, he added. 
"To a degree that we have never seen before, this summit and U.S.-Soviet 
relations are affected by preoccupations by Soviet domestic affairs," the 
official argued. 
Even the personal rapport between Bush and Gorbachev may have changed since 
their Malta meeting in December. Asked whether their relationship had cooled, 
Bush said last week: "I'll have to wait and see." 
The new circumspection reflects both uncertainty about Gorbachev's true 
situation and a division within the Administration over a fundamental question 
of strategy: While all agree that Bush is heading into this summit holding the 
best hand of cards of any recent U.S. President in a meeting of this kind, some 
U.S. officials think he should now distance himself from the Kremlin leader and 
begin embracing some of Gorbachev's opponents, who favor faster democratization 
and economic reform. 
For this summit, at least, the President's answer is "not yet." Bush will 
continue to link U.S. interests with the success of Gorbachev's perestroika 
program of political and economic restructuring, U.S. officials said. 
According to Secretary of State James A. Baker III, the single most important 
priority of this week's summit will be to break the impasse over slashing 
conventional forces in Europe (referred to as CFE) -- the armed forces of the 
Warsaw Pact and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization -- that have faced each 
other across the Iron Curtain for 45 years. 
The Soviets appear to be having second thoughts about the CFE reductions, which 
call for roughly four times as many cuts by the Warsaw Pact as by the NATO 
alliance. They also are beginning to balk at a proposed requirement that any 
discarded equipment -- more than 100,000 tanks and other weapons on the Soviet 
side -- be destroyed rather than just withdrawn. 
"Those CFE negotiations were begun two years ago, a vastly different time -- on 
a different planet, almost -- before the Warsaw Pact and the entire Soviet 
position in East Europe collapsed," one Administration analyst said. "The 
Soviets have to convince themselves, or be convinced, that they will be better 
off with a treaty than without it. It will be a close call whether they buy it 
(the CFE treaty) now." 
Difficult as it may be for him to accept, Gorbachev's willingness to go ahead 
with the CFE treaty is seen by Washington as the "litmus test of Soviet 
intentions" for the new Europe. If Moscow refuses to go forward with the deal, 
it will "send a bad signal," Bush told a news conference here last week. 
But the bargaining is not going easily. Earlier this month, Baker took Moscow a 
package of ideas for resolving outstanding CFE issues and offered to present 
them to NATO to use as the basis for alliance-wide proposals for the talks. The 
Soviets showed no interest. 
According to one official, Bush will tell Gorbachev that completion of a CFE 
accord is the "fundamental precondition" for moving ahead on proposals that the 
Soviets want, ranging from an all-European summit and a push toward a 
European-wide security system to cuts in NATO short-range nuclear weapons in 
Europe. 
"He won't expect Gorbachev to compromise on the spot on aircraft, tanks and the 
other categories," the official said. "And he'll say we understand Soviet 
concerns and are prepared to seek reasonable compromises. But what he wants is 
a new impetus given to the negotiations." 
Closely linked to conventional force cuts is the question of where a newly 
united Germany will fit. Bush hopes to persuade Gorbachev that a reunified 
Germany should remain a member of NATO, within its integrated command 
structure, as the best way to control the powerful new state emerging in the 
center of Europe. 
But Gorbachev opposes participation by a unified Germany in NATO's military 
structure and wants to place a ceiling on German military strength before 
unification takes place. He also wants a breathing space of several years 
before the Soviets must withdraw their forces from East Germany. And the 
Soviets want major economic help from West Germany as part of the price for 
accepting East Germany's absorption by the West. 
A second set of summit issues will deal with completion of the bilateral arms 
agreements that have been under negotiation for so long. Although some key 
issues remain outstanding, the two leaders are expected to announce agreement 
on the fundamental principles of the START nuclear treaty. The accord, which 
calls for cutting the offensive nuclear arsenals of the two nations by 
one-third to one-half over the next seven years, should be ready for signing 
before year's end. 
Bush and Gorbachev also will initial an agreement to begin dismantling their 
chemical weapon arsenals -- although details on verification must still be 
worked out. They also will sign protocols that should bring into force two old 
treaties limiting the power of underground nuclear weapon tests. 
Third on the agenda will be regional or Third World issues, such as ending the 
conflict in Afghanistan. 
Finally, Baker said, will be "the area of human rights and democratization" -- 
a much-broadened category that enables the United States to bring up not just 
emigration and the plight of political prisoners but also Baltic independence 
and demands for greater autonomy by Soviet republics. These are issues that 
Moscow could otherwise contend are strictly internal affairs. 
Baker predicted that Bush will spend "a good bit of time" discussing Lithuania, 
Latvia and Estonia, "emphasizing that their right to self-determination cannot 
be denied." 
Bush also will seek to go over the economic situation in the Soviet Union, 
which U.S. experts believe is on the brink of serious decline -- certain to get 
worse before it gets better. 
Ed A. Hewett, a Brookings Institution expert who briefed Bush on the Soviet 
economy last week, blames Gorbachev for five wasted years of inadequate 
reforms. The Soviet leader is finally facing up to the need for a coherent 
program, he said, but meanwhile "the population has lost faith in the 
leadership's ability to do anything well." 
Beyond the formal agenda items, what is being called "the flavor of the summit" 
will be affected primarily by Lithuania and the growing political and economic 
turmoil inside the Soviet Union. Lithuania's March 11 declaration of 
independence is fast replacing Jewish emigration as perhaps the most rancorous 
issue in U.S.-Soviet relations. Under pressure from Baltic supporters here, key 
members of Congress have told the White House that most-favored-nation (MFN) 
trading status for Moscow would be "a hard sell" as long as Gorbachev bullies 
Lithuania. 
However, Gorbachev's retrenchment on domestic reforms may be an even more 
significant factor in deciding whether U.S.-Soviet relations will deteriorate 
in the future. With the outlook worsening daily, the Administration is coming 
under increasing pressure to begin distancing itself from Gorbachev on other 
issues as well. Hard-liners argue that Gorbachev's train has run out of steam 
and that more democratic forces among Gorbachev's critics in the Soviet Union 
deserve added American support. 
The question now is not whether Gorbachev will last, one senior Administration 
analyst said, but "can he stay relevant?" And, he added, "Can he manage what 
he's unleashed?" 
The debate within the Administration has surfaced publicly in comments by 
non-government experts on Soviet affairs. 
"We have too many eggs in one basket," complained Dmitri Simes, a Soviet 
specialist at the Carnegie Endowment. He compared the Administration's 
"friendly obsession" with Gorbachev just as the Soviet leader is losing ground 
at home to U.S. support for Egypt's late President Anwar Sadat a decade ago 
just before Sadat, who made peace with Israel, was assassinated. 
Simes said the United States, by identifying closely with Gorbachev, is losing 
credibility with Soviet political forces that are demanding more democracy and 
free-market reforms than Gorbachev is proposing. And, Simes added, it is also 
losing credibility with the Lithuanians and other ethnic groups seeking 
independence. 
But others point out that, if the United States switched support to national 
independence movements and more radical democratic forces in the Soviet Union, 
American policy could become hostage to a long, bitter and possibly bloody 
process now under way there -- one that is far more important to the Kremlin 
than the dissidents and refuseniks of the 1970s ever were. 
Fairway PRESIDENCY: Rest and relaxation top Bush's pre-summit agenda. A11 
