BOOMERANG PROPOSITION; 
THE SO-CALLED SPEEDY TRIAL INITIATIVE WOULD BACKFIRE ON CALIFORNIA 
The presence of Proposition 115 on the June ballot raises two disturbing 
questions: Has political exploitation of the public's justifiable anxiety over 
crime created a climate in which rational discussion of the criminal justice 
system is impossible? Has manipulation of the initiative process transformed 
that great reform from an instrument of direct democracy into a tool of 
misrule? 
Unfortunately, in this case the answer to both questions is yes. And, for that 
reason, Californians confront the possibility that their courts will be 
severely burdened and that many important individual liberties will be put at 
risk, including perhaps the right of women to obtain safe, legal abortions. 
Despite its title -- the Crime Victims Justice Reform Act -- Proposition 115 is 
not the product of a grass-roots movement, nor even of one of our several 
victims' support groups. It actually was drafted in the early 1980s by a group 
of career prosecutors, whose most far-reaching proposals for changes in the 
criminal justice system had been rejected by the California Legislature. In 
effect, the prosecutors resolved to obtain by politics what they could not gain 
through legislative deliberation. The result was a measure they called The 
Speedy Trial Initiative, which failed to qualify for the ballot. 
There the matter languished until Republican gubernatorial candidate Pete 
Wilson decided to make Proposition 115 the tactical centerpiece of his 
campaign. In essence, Wilson purchased the right to call the measure his own by 
giving its proponents the money they needed to hire enough professional 
signature-gatherers to put the initiative on the ballot. The advantages of this 
approach are clear: Not only do candidates gain identification with a popular 
issue -- in this case crime fighting -- but they also give their supporters a 
way to circumvent the legal limits on campaign contributions. The amount an 
individual may contribute to a candidate is strictly limited; there is no 
restriction on contributions to initiatives. 
The major donors to Proposition 115 are not victims of crime, but 13 insurance 
companies, two of which have contributed more than $100,000 each. Why? Perhaps 
because they suspect that passage will trigger a dramatic increase in the 
number of felony trials each year, thereby impeding California's ability to 
handle civil litigation, even at its current plodding pace. Weary plaintiffs 
will have an extra incentive to settle their claims against insurance 
companies; firms will earn millions in interest on the delayed settlements. 
The changes Proposition 115 proposes to make would eliminate the state 
Constitution as an independent source of rights for individuals accused of 
crimes. The federal courts would become the arbiters of such questions. The 
California Constitution also would be amended to create rights for the 
prosecution that do not exist in the federal system -- among them the right to 
obtain discovery of the accused person's proposed defense. The death penalty 
would be dramatically expanded, judges rather than lawyers would select juries 
and attorneys appointed to represent the poor would be compelled to prepare 
their cases more rapidly than lawyers retained by wealthy clients. 
Proponents of the initiative say the measure will ensure swifter punishment of 
criminals by conforming this state's criminal justice system to that of federal 
courts. But as legal scholar Gerald F. Uelmen has pointed out, "California 
currently disposes of 10 times as many felony cases per year as the federal 
courts, with only 1 1/2 times as many judges. In federal courts, only 75% of 
felony cases are disposed of by a guilty plea. In California, the rate is 95%." 
The most contentious issue raised by this initiative is the question of whether 
eliminating defendants' right to protection under our constitution's explicit 
right to privacy -- and replacing it with federal standards based on the U.S. 
Constitution's implied right to privacy -- opens the door to a 
re-criminalization of abortion. Opponents of the measure say that if the 
Supreme Court overturns Roe vs. Wade, there no longer would be a constitutional 
obstacle to passage of restrictive abortion laws. Proponents deny this, saying 
that, whatever the literal language of their proposal, they never intended that 
it apply to abortion. 
Who's right? An analysis prepared by the joint staff of the state Senate 
Committee on the Judiciary and the Assembly Public Safety Committee put it this 
way: "It is impossible to state, with any certainty, how the California Supreme 
Court will rule as to this issue, if Roe vs. Wade is overturned. It can be 
concluded, however, that the right to an abortion in California is more secure 
now than it would be if the proposed initiative were enacted. For if the 
initiative is enacted, there will be a new provision in our (state) 
Constitution which arguably could be used to restrict or overturn a woman's 
right to an abortion." 
Even if Proposition 115 were otherwise worthy, that is too great a risk to run. 
