SINO-SOVIET SUMMIT TO TURN PAGE TO NEW ERA; 
GORBACHEV'S MEETINGS THIS WEEK IN BEIJING WILL END INTENSE RIVALRY, HAVE GLOBAL 
IMPACT 
Thirty years of intense rivalry between the world's two great Communist powers, 
China and the Soviet Union, will come to an end when Soviet President Mikhail 
S. Gorbachev meets with Deng Xiaoping and China's other top leaders here this 
week for a historic summit whose impact will be felt worldwide. 
Gorbachev, who arrives here Monday for the first Sino-Soviet summit meeting 
since 1959, is coming to open a new relationship between China and the Soviet 
Union -- one that ends the hostility that nearly led to war between the two 
countries in the late 1960s but also one that does not re-create the old 
Communist alliance that so frightened the West in the 1950s. 
Virtual War Footing 
The four-day summit, both Chinese and Soviet officials say, will bring to an 
end the long, acrimonious quarrel over who has been truer to Marxist-Leninist 
ideals and move the two neighbors away from the confrontation that had both 
virtually on a war footing for many years. 
The angry denunciations of each other as the main threat to world peace have 
already given way to cooperation on a growing number of international issues, 
to rapidly expanding trade and development projects and to warmer bilateral 
relations than have been seen in a generation. 
Although the summit agenda includes several difficult issues, notably their 
disputed 4,500-mile border through Central Asia and the Far East and the 
continuing conflict in Cambodia, both sides have said that they expect the 
talks to place their relationship on what they call "a good neighborly" basis 
as well as to open the way for extensive economic cooperation. 
As Deng, China's senior leader, put it earlier this year, the summit will "look 
toward the future without arguing over the issues of the past." 
And Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign minister, commented in Moscow 
last week that the Soviet Union expected that "normal, good neighborly 
relations will develop with China and will be beneficial not just to our two 
countries but also to the entire international community." 
So great a factor has the Sino-Soviet rivalry been over the past three decades 
that the summit meeting, the result of more than six years of difficult 
negotiations between Beijing and Moscow, seems certain to rank in international 
impact with President Richard M. Nixon's trip to China in 1972. 
"This trip goes beyond its immediate, practical consequences, and it goes 
beyond symbolism as well," Prof. Vladimir S. Myasnikov, deputy director of the 
Soviet Institute of Far Eastern Studies and one of his country's leading 
specialists on China, said in a Moscow interview. "Given the hostility that has 
existed between us, this trip is historic, truly world-historic in character." 
The Sino-Soviet rivalry, rooted deeply in ideological disputes of a bygone era 
as well as in problems that have festered between the two countries for 
centuries, became a major element in the relations between the Soviet Union and 
the United States, between East and West, in the Asian-Pacific region and in 
the Third World, even as far away as southern Africa. 
Triangular Geopolitics 
The two countries' rapprochement will bring an end to the triangular 
geopolitics through which the United States for more than a decade balanced its 
confrontational and often tense relationship with the Soviet Union through the 
counterweight of closer ties with China, placing Beijing under the protective 
U.S. nuclear umbrella and making it a virtual ally of the West for a time. 
The Beijing-Moscow rivalry, once so sharp that it divided the whole Communist 
movement and much of the Third World, will be removed from the continuing 
strife in Cambodia and Afghanistan and from other international disputes where 
it had long been a complicating factor. 
Improved relations, moreover, will allow China, the world's most populous 
nation, and the Soviet Union, the largest, to shift more of their resources to 
economic development, their overriding priority today. 
Both countries are already reducing the costly defenses they built in the 1960s 
and 1970s out of fear of a calamitous war along their border, and they are 
discussing the possibility of a step-by-step demilitarization of that long 
frontier. 
"What is happening is of extraordinary importance for us and for China," Roy A. 
Medvedev, a prominent Soviet historian who was recently rehabilitated by the 
Communist Party after 20 years as a dissident, said of the improvement in 
Sino-Soviet relations. "It is certainly a new era in Soviet development and a 
new era in socialism, and it will have a worldwide impact because of the impact 
that the conflict had worldwide. . . . 
"This conflict has cost us both greatly," Medvedev continued. "We interrupted 
economic relations, though they were complementary and quite beneficial to both 
of us. In the Soviet Union, we had this huge army -- more than 100 divisions, 
if you included reserve and support troops -- along the border, and in China 
they had even more. And through our ideological rigidity, upholding the 
rectitude of our position, we heavily distorted our political and economic 
development." 
The two countries' rapprochement, based on a degree of mutual respect that was 
not present before, should also greatly strengthen reformist trends in 
socialist countries, which are now closely watching the Soviet Union's 
determined push for greater democracy and China's experiments with market 
socialism. 
Pacific Influence 
"This summit is important not only to our two countries, but it will influence 
the Pacific region and the whole world," Zhao Dalun, deputy director of the 
Institute for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe at the Chinese People's 
University, commented in an interview here. "And not only will relations of the 
two countries be normalized, but also, it goes without saying, the relations 
between the two (Communist) parties." 
Already, both Chinese and Soviet officials see political changes under way in 
Asia as a result of their improved relations. The Cambodian conflict is being 
pushed toward a solution, China and India are on friendlier terms, as are India 
and Pakistan, and South Korea is winning recognition from socialist countries. 
The Soviet Union, which is determined to play a major role in Asia in coming 
decades, sees better relations with China as a basic requirement for its 
acceptance in the region, and it plans to make its next diplomatic push on 
improving relations with Japan, with which it has a serious territorial 
dispute. 
Foreign Policy Diversity 
These shifts, particularly those by Moscow, are "a very important historical 
change from a bipolar world to a multipolar one," Wang Yizhou, an associate 
professor at China's Institute of Marxism, Leninism and Mao Tse-tung Thought, 
said in an interview here, arguing that with the end of their long 
confrontation, both will now be able to have greater diversity in their foreign 
policies. 
Alexander I. Bovin, one of the Soviet Union's top political commentators, said 
that the importance of the summit -- Gorbachev will meet not only with Deng, 
China's senior leader, but also with Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party's general 
secretary, Premier Li Peng and President Yang Shangkun -- will lie in "simply 
talking civilly, candidly and in a comradely way to each other . . . after 30 
years of cursing back and forth." 
"We don't need anything concrete, no agreements, no pieces of paper," Bovin 
said in a Moscow interview. "We have to learn how to talk, how to talk with 
each other as comrades, how to come and go without a big deal, how to live as 
good neighbors, helping each other. We need to develop a feel for one another 
as neighbors, as socialist countries, as great powers. 
'Not Frighten Others' 
"But we have to do all this in a way that we do not frighten others, 
particularly in the United States, Japan or Europe, and make them think we are 
plotting a campaign to spread world revolution. . . . That we no longer are 
treating each other as enemies does not make us allies like we were in the 
1950s." 
The enormity of the political, economic and ideological shifts that lie behind 
the summit amaze even specialists on Sino-Soviet relations who have seen the 
rapprochement slowly growing for almost a decade. 
"Huge, dramatic changes are occurring now in both countries, and these domestic 
developments virtually dictated the normalization of relations," Lev Delyusin, 
a leading China scholar at the Soviet Institute of Oriental Studies, said in an 
interview in Moscow. "Both of us now are more pragmatic, both of us have 
stopped thinking that we are going to reach communism tomorrow, both of us 
realize that Marx and Lenin did not leave us a blueprint for building socialism 
and both of us are trying to work out down-to-earth policies that produce 
results and that make people's lives better." 
Such a realization, first in China and more recently in the Soviet Union, 
removed the ideological basis for the dispute, which began in 1956 when Nikita 
S. Khrushchev, then the Soviet leader, denounced the crimes and personality 
cult of his predecessor, dictator Josef Stalin. 
Chairman Mao, who shared many of Stalin's ideas and who was beginning to 
develop his own personality cult, objected to Khrushchev's assessment, arguing 
that Stalin's achievements far outweighed any political errors. 
'Very Hostile Move' 
"Mao took the dethroning of Stalin as a very hostile move," Medvedev, who as a 
historian has specialized in Stalinism and in the politics of Soviet 
leadership, said in an interview in Moscow. "Mao also saw himself, not 
Khrushchev, as Stalin's true heir and the leader of the world Communist 
movement. For him, Khrushchev was not an authority at all." 
Mao and Khrushchev also quarreled in 1959 over Moscow's policy of "peaceful 
coexistence" with the West. Mao feared that this would prevent Beijing's 
recovering of Taiwan, which was held, then as now, by the Chinese Nationalists. 
Moscow had already rejected a 1958 plan, disclosed recently by retired Soviet 
President Andrei A. Gromyko, the country's longtime foreign minister, to lure 
the United States into an attack on the Chinese mainland so that Soviet nuclear 
weapons could be used against the American troops. Khrushchev then abrogated a 
Soviet commitment to provide China with the technology and expertise needed to 
develop its own nuclear weapons. 
"The dispute over nuclear weapons brought all the political and ideological 
differences into the open," Medvedev recalled. "The distrust intensified. We 
saw the Chinese as very dangerous and likely to get us into a nuclear conflict. 
They saw us as renegades to the revolution and people who did not honor 
commitments. The stage was set for a conflict that continued for 30 years." 
Khrushchev and Mao also feuded personally. "Khrushchev, who had both a temper 
and a loose tongue, called Mao things like 'old galoshes' and other things that 
are too earthy to repeat, and Mao told people he found Khrushchev stupid and 
half-literate," Medvedev said. "Each knew that the other would hear." 
Chinese specialists, however, trace the conflict back even further to relations 
between Czarist Russia and the Chinese empire in the 17th, 18th and 19th 
centuries when, in Beijing's view, large tracts of territory, hundreds of 
thousands of square miles in Siberia, Central Asia and the Soviet Far East, 
were taken from it and incorporated into what is now the Soviet Union. 
The refusal of Soviet leaders to acknowledge what China regards as a theft of 
territory that might have been used for its huge population has meant, 
according to Chinese specialists, that Sino-Soviet relations were never on a 
firm basis, even during the 1950s when Moscow was providing billions of dollars 
worth of economic and military assistance to Beijing. 
"They should recognize that Czarist Russia invaded China and imposed unequal 
treaties," Zhao said, stressing that Beijing is not demanding the return of the 
territory but wants Moscow to admit the czarist sins. "This is history. It 
should be acknowledged." 
We are not seeking to make the present Soviet leaders take responsibility for 
this. The historical question should not be an obstacle to good relations." 
Although some progress has been made in recent negotiations on resolving 
disputed points along the border, Moscow remains unwilling to acknowledge that 
much of what today is the Soviet Union was stolen from China. "They say they 
don't want it back today," a Soviet Foreign Ministry official commented in 
Moscow. "But what about tomorrow? What will their sons or grandsons say, 
particularly as the need for land becomes more acute with their growing 
population?" 
Subsurface Tensions 
Relations appeared good during the 1950s, but there were still tensions beneath 
the surface, according to Zhao. The Soviet Union provided a vast amount of 
economic and technical assistance, building 250 major factories and other 
projects, at a time when China was isolated by an American-led Western boycott 
and Moscow itself was still engaged in postwar reconstruction. "We spoke of 
'elder brother and younger brother,' " Zhao recalled, "but actually it was 
father and son." 
Many Injustices 
Delyusin, a former Soviet party official with 40 years' experience in 
Sino-Soviet relations, said that Stalin "committed a lot of injustices in 
relations with China, and Khrushchev tried to rectify them," but Mao and 
Khrushchev clashed so often and so angrily that "we could not resolve a single 
problem." 
China made two serious mistakes in its relations with the Soviet Union at that 
time, Zhao said, reflecting current thinking here. The first was allying itself 
too closely with Moscow in the Cold War struggle between communism and 
capitalism; the second was rejecting Khrushchev's reformist approach and 
perpetuating the Stalinist errors in Maoist doctrine. 
'Leaning to One Side' 
"Chinese leaders carried out a policy of leaning to one side," Zhao said. "At 
the time, we felt we had no choice. But my own view is that this 
'lean-to-one-side' policy had many weak points and caused China to lose 
opportunities with other parts of the world." 
Zhao, as do today's Soviet leaders, sees Khrushchev as "a great reformer," not 
the ideological and political opponent that Mao took him for. Had his famous 
"secret speech" to the Soviet Communist Party in 1956 denouncing Stalin been 
assessed properly, Zhao contended, China and the Soviet Union might have 
avoided the hostility of the past 30 years -- and China might have been spared 
the upheaval of its 1966-76 Cultural Revolution. 
Relations Became Worse 
After Khrushchev was ousted in 1964, Sino-Soviet relations became even worse, 
Zhao said, and for 20 years "we were in a state of total confrontation." 
However complex its origins, the Sino-Soviet conflict grew "to the point where 
we were on the edge of war," Zhao said, recalling the military buildup along 
the long frontier and the increasingly fierce border clashes. 
Leonid I. Brezhnev, from the time he assumed the Soviet leadership, was afraid 
of a war with China, according to Medvedev, who noted that the Chinese 
hostility, in addition to the West's arms buildup, increased Soviet fears of 
isolation, containment and even "a two-front war." "For him, China was the 
'yellow peril,' " Zhao said, "and he even told Nixon, 'We white people need to 
unite against the Chinese.' " 
China, for its part, engaged in small military actions along the border, 
including the bloody clash on Damansky Island on the Manchurian-Siberian border 
in 1969, that kept tensions high. 
'Totally Unpredictable' 
"Under Mao in the 1960s and early 1970s, China was totally unpredictable," 
recalled a senior Asian diplomat who alternated between Beijing and Moscow most 
of those years. "He would put millions and millions of people into the street, 
all of them in a screaming rage, and his lieutenants in the provinces would do 
the same. He was also building shelters and storing grain and making physical 
preparations for war. . . . 
"Many times, there were hundreds of thousands, maybe even several million, Red 
Guards, all whipped into ideological fanaticism, very close to the (Soviet) 
border. And, seriously, what was Moscow supposed to do if they started to pour 
across? How do you contain 2 or 3 million people? That thought contributed a 
lot to the Soviet hysteria of the era." 
In his famous "Letter to the Soviet Leaders," dissident Russian novelist 
Alexander I. Solzhenitsyn, who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1970 and 
was exiled in 1974, warned that a war with China would last 10 to 15 years, 
that it would cost the Soviet Union at least 60 million dead and that afterward 
the Soviet people would virtually cease to exist as a nation. 
Preemptive Strike Studied 
In the late 1960s, the Soviet general staff drew up plans, although more as a 
feasibility study than a proposal, according to accounts of both former 
government officials still in Moscow and some defectors now in the West, for a 
preemptive nuclear strike against China's own nuclear forces, missile bases, 
weapons facilities, laboratories and test ranges. 
Soviet diplomats in Washington sounded out the Nixon Administration in 1969, 
former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger recalls in his memoirs, and they 
were told emphatically of U.S. opposition to such an action. 
"A preemptive strike was a military option, and apparently it was discussed," 
Medvedev said. "Even aside from political morality, it was a bad option. This 
was not the ultimate solution to the so-called 'Chinese threat,' for it would 
not have defeated China. The Chinese would simply have gone underground. War 
with China was too dangerous because of its colossal size." 
The Soviet Union, seeking a way out of this "two-front" confrontation, made its 
first rapprochement overtures to China in the late 1970s, following Mao's 
death, and renewed them more strongly after Brezhnev's death in 1982. 
"We always thought, through the darkest days, that China would have to correct 
the Maoist line and normalize relations," China expert Myasnikov said. "By the 
end of 1978, when China adopted its modernization program under Deng Xiaoping, 
it was clear that they could not think about China becoming a modern economic 
power while remaining on a war footing. . . . 
"About five years later, the Chinese leadership acknowledged as incorrect the 
concept of the 'inevitability of war.' . . . That was the basis for the 
progress we now see in Sino-Soviet relations." 
Until then, they held to the position that war with the Soviet Union, or 
'social imperialism,' as they referred to us, was inevitable and had to be 
fought and won." 
When Gorbachev assumed the Soviet leadership four years ago, he made the 
improvement of relations with China a foreign policy priority, and Deng 
responded with an encouraging letter that he sent to Gorbachev with Romanian 
President Nicolae Ceaucescu. Progress had been slow, Deng told Ceaucescu in 
October, "but it is happening." 
China had set tough conditions for the "normalization" of relations, including 
the restoration of party-to-party ties. Moscow had to reduce the military 
forces deployed along their border and in Mongolia, a Soviet ally between the 
two countries; it had to end its support for the Vietnamese occupation of 
Cambodia, and it had to withdraw its own troops from Afghanistan, which also 
borders on China. 
Beijing's conditions have largely been met during the prolonged negotiations 
that led to the summit. 
Withdrew From Afghanistan 
Soviet troops completed their withdrawal from Afghanistan in February. Of the 
unilateral 10%, 500,000-member reduction in the Soviet armed forces that 
Gorbachev announced in December, 200,000 are being cut from the deployments 
along the Chinese border, and on Monday, the first units of Soviet troops based 
in Mongolia will leave as part of troop withdrawal there. 
Cambodia remains the most difficult question, both sides acknowledge, but 
Vietnam has now promised to pull its remaining 50,000 troops out of the country 
by the end of September. China and the Cambodian resistance, however, have 
expressed skepticism whether Vietnam will really fulfill this pledge. 
"We are pushing hard for a fair resolution of the issue," a senior Soviet 
diplomat remarked in Moscow, asking not to be quoted by name, "but as the 
Chinese should know better than us, the Vietnamese can be very, very difficult 
people, particularly when they do not see themselves gaining much from the 
deal. . . . But this problem, too, will be resolved." 
For both Beijing and Moscow, the negotiations themselves have been an important 
part of the healing process. 
"They started with the 'three obstacles,' but gradually they became the 'three 
difficulties,' then the 'three conditions,' and now they are the 'three 
questions,' " China scholar Delyusin said. "And all the time that we talked 
about and around these, we have proceeded with expanding trade, resuming 
exchanges and contacts of all sorts and engaging in the broadest range of 
political dialogue . . . 
"We had a lot of stupid things in our propaganda that blinded us," he 
continued. "We started from the basis that hostility was inevitable and 
eternal, and we were even concerned about the possibility of a Chinese military 
attack. There was some matching stupidity in China, as well, and although the 
negotiations were long and often quite difficult, it was good to move carefully 
and not rush ahead or paper over differences." 
Parks reported from Moscow and Holley from Beijing. 
