SECOND RECENT VICTIM; 
BODY FOUND IN SURF NEAR CRYSTAL COVE 
The body of an unidentified man, described as 45 to 55 years of age and bearing 
a USMC tattoo, was discovered washed ashore near Crystal Cove State Park on 
Tuesday. 
The body was found by a jogger around 5:45 a.m. in the surf about midway 
between Crystal Cove and Scotchman's Cove, said Sheriff's Lt. Robert Rivas. 
Authorities determined that the body had been in the water for several days. 
Officials are investigating the death as a possible drowning but are awaiting 
the results of an autopsy. Rivas described the man as Caucasian, about 6 feet 
in height, weighing more than 200 pounds, and with short black to grayish hair 
and a dark mustache. He was wearing tennis shoes, blue jeans and a blue 
T-shirt. The tattoo was on the man's upper left arm. 
Rivas said that no local drownings have been reported, but strong currents 
could have washed the body ashore from a wide area of Southern California. 
It was the second body discovered in the area in several weeks. 
Sheriff's officials also are requesting the public's help in identifying a 
woman whose body was discovered just north of Crystal Cove State Park on May 
14. Preliminary autopsy results indicate that the woman died of strangulation, 
and authorities are investigating the death as a homicide, Rivas said. 
The body was found alongside Coast Highway, just off the shoulder about 6 a.m., 
and Sheriff's Department officials said the body may have been thrown from a 
passing car. 
The woman is described as Caucasian, 25 to 35 years old, 5-foot-2, weighing 148 
pounds, with shoulder-length, bleached-blond hair with darker roots. She was 
wearing a white tank top, a short, red skirt and white tennis shoes. 
Four of her top front teeth were missing. Her body also bore indications of 
dental work and extractions, Rivas said. Additionally, the autopsy revealed 
that the woman had a curvature of the spine. 
Anyone with information is asked to contact the Sheriff's Department at (714) 
647-7000. 
