OILERS MAKE SHORT WORK OF BLACKHAWKS; 
NHL PLAYOFFS: THEY CLINCH SERIES IN GAME 6, 8-4, AND WILL PLAY BRUINS IN THE 
STANLEY CUP FINALS. 
When Esa Tikkanen scored a short-handed goal early in the first period, it 
seemed as though it was going to be the Edmonton Oilers' night. 
Tikkanen's goal at 2:01 of the first period, and a four-goal burst in the 
second, led the Oilers to an 8-4 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks Saturday 
night and into the Stanley Cup finals. 
"We had a feeling we needed a great start or we might be in trouble," Tikkanen 
said. "A 1-0 lead is important in this building." 
The best-of-seven championship round will start Tuesday night in Boston. 
"Our goal from the start has been to win the Stanley Cup," said captain Mark 
Messier, one of eight Oilers to score. "We had to get here to get to the 
Stanley Cup. We're going to relax for a day and then worry about Boston." 
Despite the score and the fact the Oilers won the series in six games, Coach 
John Muckler said: "It wasn't easy. The short-handed goal certainly helped us. 
Naturally, the second period decided the game. We started playing too easy in 
the third period." 
When the Blackhawks pulled to 8-4 midway in the final period, Muckler called a 
20-second timeout. 
"I told them to keep their composure and that we were playing too easy," 
Muckler said. "We couldn't sit back and let Chicago come to us. In the end, 
speed and physical play took over." 
Muckler and Messier both said the pivotal game in the series was when the 
Oilers won Game 4, 4-2, last Tuesday to even the series. 
"I think the series turned around when we won at Chicago and then won back at 
Edmonton," Muckler said. 
Blackhawk Coach Mike Keenan said fatigue was a factor for his team. 
"We knew that at the beginning," said Keenan, whose team played seven-game 
series against both Minnesota and St. Louis while Edmonton had an eight-day 
rest after sweeping Los Angeles. 
The Oilers will be seeking a fifth Stanley Cup. They won it in 1984, 1985, 1987 
and 1988. Against Boston this year, the Oilers were 0-2-1. They had a 3-3 tie 
at Edmonton but lost 3-0 and 6-2 at Boston. 
