U.S. SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS BAN ON PRAYERS AT SCHOOL FOOTBALL GAMES 
The Supreme Court today let stand a decision banning organized prayers at the 
start of high school football games. 
The court, without comment, refused to review a ruling in a Georgia case that 
such pregame invocations impermissibly promote religion. 
The U.S. 11th Circuit Court of Appeals, by a 2-1 vote Jan. 3, said prayers 
carried over the public address system before Douglas County, Ga., High School 
home football games had to stop. 
Separation of Church, State 
In a ruling affecting all public schools in Georgia, Alabama and Florida, the 
appeals court said the organized prayers violated the separation of church and 
state required by past Supreme Court decisions. 
But lawyers for the Douglas County school board told the justices that pregame 
prayers have become "as much a part of the tradition of high school football as 
the national anthem, marching bands, cheerleaders and baton twirlers." 
The school board's lawyers noted that the Rev. Billy Graham delivered a prayer 
and benediction at President Bush's inauguration in January and that each 
Supreme Court session begins with an invocation for divine assistance: "God 
save the United States and this honorable court." 
The appeal acted on today argued that the Douglas County football invocations 
should be reinstated on the same "traditional" grounds used by the justices 
when in 1983 they upheld the practice of opening state legislative sessions 
with prayers. 
Argument Rejected 
The 11th Circuit court rejected that argument. Noting that although state 
legislatures have conducted prayer sessions for more than 200 years, the 
appeals court said, "Invocations at school-sponsored football games were 
nonexistent when the Constitution was adopted." 
In another case today, the justices barred divorced spouses of military 
veterans from sharing in retirement pay the veterans have converted into 
disability benefits. 
In a 7-2 ruling in a California case, the justices said a 1982 federal law does 
not permit state court divorce decrees to divide the disability benefits. 
Justice Thurgood Marshall, writing for the court, said, "We realize that 
reading the statute literally may inflict economic harm on many former spouses. 
But we decline to misread the statute in order to reach a sympathetic result 
when such a reading requires us to do violence to the plain language of the 
statute and ignore much of the legislative history." 
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in a dissenting opinion, said, "The harsh reality 
of this holding is that former spouses . . . can, without their consent, be 
denied a fair share of their ex-spouse's military pension simply because he 
elects to increase his after-tax income by converting a portion of that pension 
into disability benefits." 
In other action today, the Supreme Court: 
 -- Refused to lift strict advertising limits imposed on a Texas counseling 
center that authorities called a "fake abortion clinic" run by anti-abortion 
activists. The justices, without comment, let stand rulings that ads run by the 
Problem Pregnancy Center in Ft. Worth violated a state law banning deceptive 
trade practices. 
 -- Set aside a $157,500 award won by the mother of a Los Angeles County man 
who committed suicide in jail. 
The justices, by a 7-2 vote, told a federal appeals court to restudy its ruling 
that the inmate's rights were violated because he was not given adequate 
psychiatric care. 
 -- Refused to reinstate the conviction of a California man, Stephen Edward 
Leichty, who admitted he tried to illegally ship a drug via air freight. 
Without comment, the court left intact a ruling that police unlawfully searched 
the shipment without a court-issued search warrant. 
