JUDGE REJECTS CLAIMS OF THE SEX CHURCH 
A religious group that claimed to absolve the sins of male worshipers by sexual 
intercourse with a female priestess is nothing more than a scam intended to 
hide the operation of a brothel, a federal judge said Thursday. 
U.S. District Judge William M. Byrne Jr. rejected arguments by Will and Mary 
Ellen Tracy of Canyon Country, who filed a civil suit to prevent the Los 
Angeles Police Department and city attorney's office from investigating or 
prosecuting their Church of the Most High Goddess. 
The Tracys, convicted of prostitution charges last September, said U.S. 
constitutional guarantees protect the practice of what they claimed were 
ancient religious rites. 
During six days of testimony, Will Tracy, 52, said he received a revelation 
from God in 1984 to re-establish a religion he says was practiced in ancient 
Egypt. According to the revelation, his wife was required to have sex with 
1,000 men to achieve her status as high priestess of the church. 
"I find that their testimony is incredible," Byrne said in his ruling. "The 
religion had really no basis to it other than sexual conduct." 
Male worshipers were required to make donations of cash or services to the 
church to participate in the rituals. The Tracys, who acted as their own 
attorneys, called the donations religious sacrifices. They said they received 
about $50,000 in donations in three years while operating the church in houses 
in West Los Angeles and Silver Lake. 
The issue before the court, Byrne said, was not whether the religion exists. 
But he could rule, the judge said, on whether the Tracys exhibited a sincere 
belief in the doctrine they preached. 
"I find that each of the plaintiffs does not have a sincere belief," he said, 
calling the church "nothing but a shield" to protect the couple from 
prosecution. 
Byrne noted that Mary Ellen Tracy, 47, ran ads in sexually explicit newspapers 
saying, "I love sex," and soliciting men for "hedonistic" rites. The couple 
said the ads merely expressed Mary Ellen Tracy's open attitude toward sex. 
"We find nothing wrong with sex," Will Tracy said. "Sex is a gift from God." 
Byrne also said that even if the Tracys were sincere in their beliefs -- and he 
conceded that was a possibility -- there is a compelling public interest to 
control such activities, regardless of the religious intent. 
He cited a recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling against two Indian drug counselors 
who were fired from their jobs after admitting they had taken peyote in what 
they said were ancient religious rituals. The court held that the Constitution 
does not permit people to break the law in the name of religious freedom. 
Outside the courtroom, Will Tracy said: "This means there is no religious 
defense in federal court." He called the judge's ruling "appalling" and 
promised to appeal. 
