FOES OF MIRALESTE CLOSURE HAIL RULING; 
APPEALS COURT SAYS DISTRICT MUST WEIGH ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS 
An appeals court has ruled that the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School 
District must consider the potential environmental effects before it can close 
Miraleste High School. 
The decision, issued Tuesday by the 2nd District Court of Appeal in Los 
Angeles, upholds a May, 1988, ruling by Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Miriam 
Vogel. The appellate ruling was hailed by a parents group as an important 
victory in their efforts to prevent the school board from closing the 
under-enrolled campus on the east side of the peninsula. 
'Detrimental Effect' 
"We are elated that the appeal court understood and agreed . . . that closing 
Miraleste would have a highly detrimental effect on the safety and education of 
the children involved," Donna Perrin, president of the East Peninsula Education 
Council, said Wednesday. 
However, the parents group, which has been fighting for more than two years to 
preserve the neighborhood high school, faces another hurdle. While waiting for 
the results of the appeal, the school board has been preparing an environmental 
impact report that could meet the requirements set by Vogel's order. 
Supt. Jack Price said Wednesday that "it is unlikely but possible" that 
Miraleste will be closed this fall. He said "a lot depends" on when the 
environmental review process is completed. 
Vogel ruled that despite a 1983 law that generally exempts school districts 
from filing environmental reports when they close schools, the peninsula 
district must consider the potential cumulative effect of multiple school 
closings on the east side. 
Her ruling barred the school board from carrying out its November, 1987, 
decision to close Miraleste as part of a money-saving plan to consolidate the 
district's 9,800 students on campuses in the central and west side of the 
peninsula. Five other campuses on the east side have been closed in recent 
years. 
Nancy Mahr, a spokeswoman for the peninsula school system, said the district 
based its appeal on the 1983 legislation that exempted school districts from 
requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. She said it appeared 
unlikely that the peninsula board would carry its appeal to the state Supreme 
Court. 
The clear purpose of the 1983 law, she said, was to allow districts with 
declining enrollments to close surplus schools without going through the 
lengthy and costly process of preparing environmental reports. 
However, in a unanimous decision, the three-member panel of appellate judges 
focused on a related law that deals with the environmental consequences of 
transferring substantial numbers of students within a school district. 
Safety Issue Cited 
About a thousand intermediate and high school students would be reassigned to 
campuses in the central and western parts of the peninsula if Miraleste closes. 
The parents group has contended that the safety and quality of education of 
east-side students would be endangered by daily commuting over the peninsula's 
rough terrain on winding roads. 
The group has rejected several compromise proposals by the school board, 
including a plan to preserve the Miraleste campus by converting it to a middle 
school. 
"Now that the appeal process is over, we're hopeful that the school board will 
work with us in maintaining a quality, K-12 education program on the east 
side," said Ted Gibbs, a spokesman for the Miraleste parents group. "If they 
are not, then we will continue our efforts to form our own school district." 
Those efforts are stalled in Sacramento until the State Board of Education 
rules on the group's petition to secede. The agency was scheduled to take up 
the issue earlier this year but decided to wait until Gov. George Deukmejian 
fills four vacancies on the 11-member board. 
Mahr said a consultant is expected to present an environmental impact report to 
the peninsula school board at its June 5 meeting. That will be followed by a 
45-day period for public hearings, then two weeks more for the consultant to 
prepare the final report, she said. 
The school board could then declare that it has met the requirements set by 
Vogel and proceed with its plans to close Miraleste. 
