GETTING RID OF NORIEGA NOW A PANAMA PROJECT 
For 2 1/2 years the Reagan Administration has been trying to get rid of 
Panama's strongman, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, using threats, tricks, legal 
maneuvers, bribes and incantations. None of them worked; U.S. policy-makers 
stumbled into a political swamp while Noriega laughed. 
Today President George Bush is looking for a better way and Noriega is fighting 
to stay on top. The May 7 election, rigged and annulled, has changed the 
picture. Getting rid of the general is no longer Washington's assumed 
responsibility. That has been accepted, as it should be, by the Panamanian 
opposition. Other Latin American democracies understand; they know what has 
happened. While Noriega's swift downfall is by no means assured, neither is his 
political survival as certain as it has been. 
Rigged or flagrantly stolen elections have not been rare in Latin America but 
in this one Noriega revealed that he had lost touch with reality, a most 
dangerous lapse for a dictator. He thought he could win -- or come close enough 
to adjust the result easily. Confidently, he held his election in a gold fish 
bowl with the world watching. Hundreds of observers from dozens of countries 
moved around freely. Among them was former President Jimmy Carter, who spoke to 
Noriega the day before the election and heard no hint about the possibility of 
defeat. 
Election day was a festive occasion. Families flocked to the polls, uninhibited 
in cheering opposition candidates, waiting for hours to vote. There were 
irregularities -- polling places late in opening, shortages of opposition 
ballots and multiple voting by soldiers and government supporters. But 
essentially small stuff. From the observers' accounts, only after the ballots 
were counted in the local polling places, and the results showed Noriega's 
crushing defeat, did the climax come. 
At that point, Carter reported later, the local tally sheets were seized and 
replaced with counterfeits. Carter went to the top electoral tribunal the next 
day to watch the national vote count and was coldly turned away. Forbidden to 
hold a press conference, he met reporters in a crowded hotel corridor to voice 
disgust. Noriega had affronted Panama's best friend in the United States. The 
general clearly intends to stay in power, whatever the cost, and he must think 
that he can. 
Noriega's power base is the military -- 15,000 soldiers and police of the 
Panama Defense Forces, the PDF, plus 10,000 irregulars of the so-called Dignity 
Battalions. He treats them well. Not only is the treasury in his hands, he also 
cuts the military in on profitable deals -- down to the PDF sergeants, who have 
the food concession at a popular beach resort. Having dealt with several 
rebellions in recent years, Noriega has meanwhile weeded out dissident 
officers, down to the rank of major. 
Yet outsiders widely assume that if Noriega is to be forced out, it must be by 
-- or with the help of -- the military. Bush has openly appealed to the army to 
overthrow the general. The Panamanian opposition offers an arrangement with the 
PDF, preserving its proper role in a democratic society. To move down that 
road, however, the soldiers must first conclude that Noriega's future is not, 
after all, their future. 
The failed election may be a first push in that direction. The general, who has 
out-maneuvered the Yanquis and who held his ground against massive protest 
demonstrations, including the general strike of 1988, has lost his touch. 
Caught red-handed before the world, he has inevitably also lost face. The 
Socialist International had already withdrawn observer status from Noriega's 
Revolutionary Democratic Party. The Group of Eight Latin American states 
dealing with the Central America problem has excluded Panama. Not that 
isolation is, in itself, so damaging. Paraguay's dictator Alfredo Stroessner 
spent most of his 35 years in power as an international pariah. He was thrown 
out by a general only this year. 
Panama is in serious economic trouble and now has nowhere to turn for effective 
help. The regime is incompetent as well as corrupt, unable to command popular 
support. A thinking soldier may well begin to wonder about his future. 
The United States shares responsibility for Noriega's rise. Seven 
administrations dealt with him, welcoming his intelligence information and 
praising him for cooperating in drug enforcements. They helped him build the 
PDF as a stabilizing element in turbulent Central America and, ultimately, to 
defend the Panama Canal. Then the Reagan Administration turned him into a 
powerful adversary, shaking Teddy Roosevelt's big stick while demanding his 
departure. 
Reagan proclaimed a national emergency to impose selective economic sanctions 
on Panama. Meanwhile, leaving the Panamanian opposition in the dark and 
undercutting Latin American efforts, Washington negotiated privately with 
Noriega for months, even offering to quash narcotics and money-laundering 
indictments against him if he would retire with dignity. The general cast 
himself in the role of dauntless patriot, defying and outwitting Yanqui 
imperialism. 
Bush has clearly dropped the quick victory, go-it-alone approach. The level of 
rhetoric is down -- no threats of further sanctions, intervention or abrogating 
the treaties to turn the Canal over to Panama at noon, Dec. 31, 1999. Bush has 
called for solidarity with Latin American democracies, all equally appalled by 
May 7 and the brutality that followed. The Organization of American States 
meeting in Washington last week expressed indignation against Noriega but 
divided on taking a strong stand, let alone action. Action is too much to 
expect so soon. Washington must regain the confidence it has squandered. 
The United States has a leading part to play, having historical ties with the 
people of Panama stronger than those with any other Latin American country. And 
it has an abiding interest in an open Canal. But so does Japan, now Panama's 
second-largest trading partner. Japan, so far so quiet, must be persuaded to 
join in showing active disapproval, disabusing Noriega's expectation that he 
will surmount this crisis too. 
Inevitably, the main burden falls on the Panamanian opposition. For them, May 7 
was a watershed. Solid evidence that they have enthusiastic national supportt 
gives them fresh standing in their own eyes and in the aroused community. They 
have stood up under bloody attack and have refused invitations since May 7 to 
compromise and form a "unity government" with the Noriega camp. The Catholic 
Church has expressed support for them -- and condemnation of the general -- 
more clearly than ever before. Church political influence should not be 
overestimated in Panama but its moral verdict carries weight. 
Noriega will now, of course, use talent and stick to hold his operation 
together, playing for time, trying to blur the issues. In this new phase, U.S. 
policy should be carefully modulated -- firm, consistent, unprovocative, taking 
its cue from the Panamanian opposition. At the same time, it should encourage 
the men and women who have just beaten the machine to formulate a clear social 
and political program, helping them without trying to steer. 
The goal must be an independent, democratic nation promising a stability that 
ensures the world's free use of the Panama Canal into the 21st Century. 
