CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS / INSURANCE COMMISSIONER; 
PRESS HIT FOR SEEKING ATTORNEY DONATIONS 
Bill Press, one of the apparent front-runners in the race for the Democratic 
nomination for insurance commissioner, came under attack Tuesday for soliciting 
thousands of dollars of campaign contributions from attorneys who advertise 
heavily for clients with accident claims against insurance companies. 
Ray Bourhis, another Democrat in the race and an attorney himself, raised 
questions about a fund-raising reception Press will hold next Tuesday at the 
San Francisco home of Arnold Laub, one of the biggest advertisers of litigation 
services. The invitation lists 65 trial lawyers, some of them important 
advertisers in lucrative auto accident litigation, as supporting Press. 
Bourhis also said he has been told that the Los Angeles telephone solicitation 
firm of Gordon &amp; Schwenkmeyer, which he said has traditionally been a big 
fund raiser for the California Trial Lawyers Assn., has in recent days assisted 
trial lawyers active in the auto accident litigation business in raising 
$100,000 for Press. 
Bourhis said that such big advertising attorneys as Laub, Larry H. Parker of 
Long Beach and Michael Scranton of Pleasant Hill are "famous for profiting from 
this business" and have "vested interests in the state Insurance Department." 
It is not right for Press, he said, to take contributions from them or use them 
to raise money for him if he hopes to be an independent commissioner. 
Press' campaign manager, Michael J. Ganley, said, "It's sheer hypocrisy for 
Bourhis to accuse Press of taking money from people he's begging from himself." 
He suggested that Bourhis "is just upset he's raised so little support from his 
peers." 
"I hope we're raising hundreds of thousands of dollars from all of our donors," 
Ganley added. "We're up against a millionaire politician (Democratic state Sen. 
John Garamendi) who's received a half-a-million-dollar bank loan, and we're 
receiving donations from our friends." 
Attorney Scranton said he was surprised by Bourhis' statements because he had 
also given Bourhis a contribution. 
"Yes, I am a lawyer, and yes, I advertise, and yes, I contribute to Bill 
Press," Scranton said. "I think these accusations are insane and sour grapes 
for Ray Bourhis." 
Bourhis, however, insisted that he is not seeking to raise money from the big 
advertising attorneys and said he will return Scranton's $1,000 contribution. 
"I try to distinguish between people who are part of the problem and people who 
are part of the solution," Bourhis said. "Those attorneys pursuing product 
liability cases, consumer complaints against unfair insurer practices, 
representing women and minorities, these are attorneys trying to do a good job 
representing people. 
"But to the advertisers, it's a business, and some of these firms are nothing 
more than accident claims mills, closely associated with teams of doctors and 
chiropractors." 
Laub, host of next week's fund-raising reception for Press, joined Scranton in 
accusing Bourhis of "sour grapes." 
"If he says personal injury attorneys should not get involved in the 
commissioner's race, then why is he running?" he asked of Bourhis. "He should 
withdraw himself. We obviously have a right to be involved in behalf of a 
candidate we like." 
Parker, credited in a recent Press contribution report with raising money for 
him, was not available for comment. Mike Gordon, president of the Gordon &amp; 
Schwenkmeyer firm, declined to comment on the firm's role. 
