PERSPECTIVE ON DEFENSE; 
WHAT WILL THE TROOPS DO NOW?; 
A RESTRUCTURING OF SOVIET MILITARY FORCES IS CERTAIN. WE SHOULD DROP OUR OWN 
EMPTY DEBATE AND JOIN THE PARADE 
How does a giant military power go about dismantling a vast military machine, 
constructed over a half century at great cost and sacrifice, at a time when 
that great power's economy is beset by a multitude of problems? This question 
is not directed to the United States, although in many respects it might well 
be, but rather at the Soviet Union. And, of his many migraines, this might turn 
out to be one of Mikhail Gorbachev's most long-lasting. 
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze recently told me that sweeping 
reorganization and reduction of the Soviet military -- based on a new, peaceful 
relationship with the West -- has been a central premise of the perestroika 
syllogism from the beginning. But the reformers knew from the outset that they 
could not undertake sweeping reforms of the political and economic structures 
of the Soviet Union while the Cold War, the arms race and a policy of military 
confrontation depleted so much of their restricted resources. 
Senior Soviet military officials insist that their institutions have always 
been scrupulously non-political. And history bears them out. By and large, the 
Soviet military does what it is told. But it is not so simple. 
The Communist Party, as defined by the Bolsheviks, has consistently sought to 
indoctrinate Soviet military forces. Although one wonders what the ordinary 
recruit from Uzbekistan knows (or cares) about Marxism-Leninism, there have to 
be ties of some strength between senior military commanders and the party 
apparatus. 
This must be true, since the party is increasingly becoming the conservative 
bulwark against perestroika. In virtually all of the discussions I have had 
with Soviet officials and observers, the military is placed on the right, 
conservative, anti-perestroika end of the political spectrum. 
Still, presuming the policies of perestroika prevail, the size of the Soviet 
military will diminish overall by as many as 1 million or 2 million men by the 
end of the century. Where do these people go? What are their jobs? Where will 
they be housed? How can large numbers of weapons plants be converted to 
domestic production? These are daunting questions. Soviet negotiators in 
Hungary and Czechoslovakia have admitted that they cannot speed the withdrawal 
of Soviet forces from these countries because they don't have answers for these 
questions -- the Soviets don't know what to do with these troops when they 
bring them home. 
Perestroika leaders are also military reformers. They want to use this new era 
to undertake categorical reorganization of their military forces, including 
their military systems, doctrines and strategies. The best thinkers envision a 
Soviet military that is much smaller, more elite, better trained, better 
educated, better disciplined and more professional -- a military whose mission 
is to protect and defend Soviet frontiers against all threats. In short, a 
defensive military. 
This is not the Soviet military we have come to know and fear since 1945. But 
the military always reflects the society that creates it. And today's Soviet 
Union is not the same one we have known for half a century. The real question 
is whether we also have something to learn from all this. 
1990 is a historic moment. Now is the time to reform our own military. Even the 
secretary of defense has reluctantly accepted the fact that our world has 
changed. But instead of having a hollow, unproductive debate about how much to 
cut, let's discuss what kind of defense structures we now need, what the threat 
is and, maybe, what our new strategies should be, how we should structure our 
forces to achieve our goals, how to make those forces truly effective, what 
kinds of weapons are needed and -- only then -- how much this should cost. 
In the meantime we'd better also begin to debate what to do with the excess. We 
need a policy of economic conversion. Otherwise unneeded weapons production 
plants simply will be shut down, skilled workers laid off, communities 
disrupted and economies decimated. 
Most assuredly, these questions are being hotly discussed in Moscow. For on the 
resolution of these issues could rest the future of Gorbachev, perestroika, the 
Soviet Union and perhaps world peace. 
