PROPAGANDA BLITZ UNLEASHED; 
IN CHINA'S MEDIA, OFFICIAL VIEW IS THE ONLY MESSAGE 
Day after day, hour after hour, Chinese government television shows waves of 
mostly youthful protesters attacking army trucks, tanks or armored cars. 
The only dead seen in the broadcast videotapes have been three charred corpses 
identified as soldiers. Every one of the injured shown so far has been a 
military man recovering in the hospital. 
In all the broadcasts, no shot fired by troops has been heard on the sound 
tracks, although witnesses heard and saw plenty of shooting June 4, when 
soldiers moved in force into the center of Beijing. 
China's media are in the midst of a propaganda campaign of a kind not 
experienced here for more than a decade -- and perhaps not matched since the 
1950s campaign against what the government called rightist critics. 
Television especially is saturated with stories supporting the government 
version of events two weekends ago, when the army stormed into downtown Beijing 
and used live ammunition to roust pro-democracy demonstrators from Tian An Men 
Square. It has also emphasized the protesters' "criminal" nature with long 
reports on arrests of "thugs" throughout the country. 
The campaign is a textbook example of the official view here of mass 
communication more as a tool of unification and pacification than as an 
approach to the truth. 
In this time of crisis, persuasion appears to be secondary to another goal: 
letting everyone know what it is permissible to think. As a farmer in Tailing, 
a village outside Beijing, told a reporter: "Television says that the attacks 
were made by thugs. That is all I want to know." 
That is not a general attitude, at least here in the capital. Interviews with 
Beijing residents over the past nine days indicate that the effects of the 
propaganda deluge are more unpredictable than the government might like. 
One wild card is the role of the Voice of America and the British Broadcasting 
Corp., both of which beam news in the Mandarin dialect to China. Foreign radio 
has proven a formidable competitor to the official broadcasts. In random 
conversations, many citizens of the capital say they listen to one or both of 
the foreign outlets. 
In the case of the Voice of America, China has launched a large-scale effort to 
discredit its broadcasts by accusing it of deliberate misreporting. 
The People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party, said Monday 
that the VOA could "hardly hide its excitement" over news of the protests at 
Tian An Men. It accused the radio of "spreading rumors," including exaggerated 
casualty tolls and stories about splits in the military. 
"VOA spread too many rumors," the People's Daily said. "They played their part 
in helping counterrevolutionary revolt in Beijing. . . . It is time for the VOA 
to take a rest." 
The government is also trying to head off the foreigners' practice of sending 
in news clippings and leaflets by telephone fax machine. In radio broadcasts, 
the authorities said that they have stationed police by fax machines in China 
to intercept the messages and that any printed material "containing distorted 
propaganda" must be turned over to Beijing's Public Security Bureau. 
Intercepted Material 
In another example of state control of all communication, Chinese authorities 
have intercepted unedited ABC News material that was being transmitted to the 
United States by satellite and used it to arrest a man who spoke to an American 
news crew shortly after the martial-law crackdown. 
The intercepted videotape was broadcast on state-run television Saturday 
evening, showing a middle-aged man speaking vehemently about the killings of 
protesters. The man admitted under questioning by a foreign journalist that he 
had not seen the killings himself. He then attributed his information to the 
Voice of America and added inaccurately that the American broadcast had 
reported 20,000 deaths. The Saturday night broadcast concluded with a plea for 
citizens to turn in the "rumormonger" to authorities. 
The man appeared again on the Sunday night news, this time in police custody. 
Identified as Xiao Bin, 42, the man declared before police officials and a 
television camera: "I confess that I was guilty of making up rumors. If you 
call me a counterrevolutionary, I admit it." 
A spokesman for ABC News in New York objected strenuously to the interception 
of its material and the use of it "for political purposes." 
In response, U.S. television networks say they have begun to obscure the faces 
of dissidents interviewed here to prevent identification and retribution by 
authorities. 
"We began to electronically disguise all people interviewed in Beijing on our 
Sunday evening news programs," an ABC spokesman said from New York. CBS started 
to "blank out" faces in interviews, and NBC said it is showing only silhouettes 
of those who feared reprisal. 
Chinese have reacted to the propaganda onslaught in a variety of ways. Some 
simply dismiss the information -- at least in the privacy of their homes. 
During one news broadcast, residents of a small courtyard home in the capital's 
Qian Men district yelled "False! False!" in response to every official account 
of the events at Tian An Men Square. 
Even Communist Party members, in private, may be heard to reject the official 
line. "The party should not lie to the people," said a four-year member who 
told a reporter that he was sickened by the army violence. 
Other Beijing residents have been merely skeptical, especially if they have 
heard foreign reports. Sometimes, when interviewed by a foreigner, Chinese are 
much more interested in finding out what a reporter knows than telling him what 
they think. 
There are those who are wary of expressing themselves, such as the farmer in 
Tailing, who viewed the state account as a guideline for staying out of 
trouble. 
Some would prefer not to hear any version. "I don't go outside to see or ask, 
and I don't watch television," said a proprietor of a small, private dumpling 
restaurant just a block off Tian An Men Square. "The way I look at it, the less 
you know, the better." 
Firsthand Accounts 
It has not yet been possible to independently locate anyone in Beijing who is 
convinced by the official reports. This is due in part to the number of 
firsthand accounts of heavy shooting that have spread through the city. 
On government news programs, however, there have been numerous interviews with 
disgusted citizens who blame the students and other "counterrevolutionary 
rebels" for unprovoked attacks on soldiers and the state. 
One woman, interviewed in Shanghai, told state television that she watched news 
broadcasts of the mayhem in Beijing "four or five times a day." 
"It made me extremely angry, the burning of those buses and military vehicles," 
she said. "On top of that, people are spreading rumors, like it was the 
People's Liberation Army that burned the vehicles. Our army would never do that 
kind of thing! 
"Watching television . . . isn't it clear that it's the thugs who did this kind 
of destruction?" she asked. She began to cry as she added, "Yesterday, I saw 
that soldier who was burned up that way, and I felt terrible inside." 
Interspersed among such interviews were scenes of affection between common 
citizens and the army. In one, soldiers paid visits to a school and helped 
children wash windows. 
"Thank you, uncle," the children said. 
A peasant delivered three live pigs as a gift for one encampment of troops 
deployed in the capital. The perhaps obligatory scene of soldiers helping an 
old lady cross a street has been aired several times. 
The testimonies and tributes followed days of repetitive broadcasts of selected 
events from the June 4 weekend in and around Tian An Men Square that appear to 
throw full guilt on protesters. 
For instance, along a stretch of Changan Avenue in front of the Military 
Museum, a remote-control, black-and-white video camera recorded what appeared 
to be wave after wave of mob attacks on army tanks, armored cars and trucks. 
The date and time of the action was shown at the bottom of the screen. 
Sometimes, from segment to segment, the clock would jump forward two hours, 
then backward five and then forward to the next day. No explanation was given 
for the unsequential editing, and only mob violence was shown. 
Youths identified as eyewitnesses in Tian An Men Square said all student 
demonstrators escaped unharmed. No mention is made of the violence on Changan 
or other thoroughfares or of the flatbed carts that were seen bearing bodies 
away. 
The one-sided slant is but an extreme example out of modern China's long 
history of communication at the service of the state. 
Officialdom's view of the media as mainly a propaganda tool predates Communist 
rule. As early as the first decades of the century, pioneer journalist Liang 
Qichao considered public opinion and its manipulation as a contributor to a 
stable state, not as a means of expressing contending views. 
The Nationalist government, which ruled China for a time after the fall of the 
Qing Dynasty, routinely censored books and newspapers critical of the 
government. 
The late Communist leader Mao Tse-tung argued that the role of the press was 
"to bring the party program, the party line, the party's general and specific 
policies . . . before the masses in the quickest and most extensive way." 
When in the late 1970s and early 1980s the Chinese press entered an uneven era 
of revealing public wrongs, a Communist Party leader in Canton warned editors 
and reporters: "Exposure of our dark side should not be too frequent nor too 
highly colored. Otherwise, people might get the wrong impression, weakening the 
party's prestige among the masses and affecting stability and unity in ways 
that are not beneficial to socialist construction." 
Since the Tian An Men incident, at least, the "dark side" of government has 
received no exposure at all. 
