THE ECONOMY; 
PRODUCTIVITY SLIPS AS COST OF LABOR RISES 
The productivity of American workers slipped in the first quarter while unit 
labor costs shot up more than 6% on an annual basis, the government said 
Thursday in a report analysts cited as proof of both a slowing economy and 
stubborn inflation. 
The Labor Department's revised figures for the first three months of the year 
showed a 1.1% decline on an annual rate in non-farm business productivity, 
rather than the 0.5% gain projected in preliminary first-quarter data issued 
last month. 
Unit labor costs -- a key determinant of overall inflation -- rose a revised 
6.6% on an annual basis in the quarter, said the government, which in the 
earlier report had pegged the increase at 5.2%. 
The report was in line with other data indicating a significant slowing of 
economic expansion in the first quarter, followed by somewhat improved growth 
in the first two months of the second quarter. Analysts expect the unemployment 
report for May, due today, to put a more definitive stamp on second-quarter 
trends. 
More Hours Worked 
"The economy is slowing down, but it's certainly not stopping," David Wyss, 
chief economist of DRI-McGraw-Hill of Lexington, Mass., said. 
The 1.1% decline in productivity followed an annualized 1% gain in the fourth 
quarter of 1988 and an overall gain of 1.5% for that year. It was the first 
decline in productivity since a sharp drop of 2.4% on an annual basis in the 
second quarter of last year. The revised data showed the 1.1% drop resulted 
from a 2.2% larger output being produced via 3.4% more hours of work. 
The jump in unit labor costs was the biggest since the second quarter of last 
year as well; the government at that time reported a 6.8% increase on an annual 
basis. For all of 1988, unit labor costs rose 3.1%. 
The revised numbers were not entirely unexpected. 
Last week's downward revision of the gross national product for the first 
quarter brought predictions that the productivity gain reported in May's 
preliminary data was erroneous. 
Still, the rate of decline surprised some analysts. Of greater concern was the 
inflationary pressure demonstrated by the big jump in labor costs. 
"The results are distinctly inflationary," said Allen Sinai, chief economist 
for Boston Co. Economic Advisers. "The true core of inflation in the United 
States is really unit labor costs. . . . This is indeed a dismal statement and 
makes the outlook for a quick and accelerated reduction in inflation very, very 
poor." 
