GORBACHEV SEES CLOSER RELATIONS AS SUMMIT ENDS; 
SUPERPOWERS: LEADERS TAKE MODERATE APPROACHES TO THE EXPLOSIVE ISSUES OF 
LITHUANIA AND GERMANY. 
President Bush and Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev ended four days of 
meetings on a trumpet note of conciliation and cooperation Sunday, resolved to 
increase the pace of summitry and to conclude a treaty before the year is out 
cutting conventional arms in Europe. 
And, seemingly determined not just to avoid confrontation but to help each 
other with mutual problems, Bush and Gorbachev in a joint news conference 
Sunday took notably moderate approaches to the two most explosive issues now 
dividing the superpowers -- freedom for Lithuania and the future of Germany. 
Both leaders emphasized what they described as an increasingly trusting and 
effective personal relationship. 
"The atmosphere and the results of this meeting make it possible for us to 
speak really of a new phase of cooperation," Gorbachev said. "I believe that 
this transition is both the result and a factor for further changes that affect 
all countries." 
The Soviet president said that his relationship with Bush is rooted in personal 
impressions he formed of the then-vice president during the Reagan 
Administration. "Mr. Bush and I met each other a bit earlier, before finding 
ourselves in this position together," Gorbachev said. "And during my contacts 
with him I felt -- and it was during my first visit here, in 1987 -- that this 
is the kind of person to do business with, to build our relations with." 
For his part, Bush said: "We've moved a long, long way from the depths of the 
Cold War" to achieve a "dramatic" improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations. "The 
more this reform and openness takes place, the more compatible the relationship 
becomes," he said. 
On the issue of reducing non-nuclear arms in Europe, Gorbachev said: "We have 
agreed to make sure that we will complete the Vienna talks this year and sign 
an agreement on conventional arms at a European summit by the end of this year. 
. . . Not everything depends on us, but this is our position. We want to 
achieve that." 
Earlier a stalemate had developed in the negotiations, but on Saturday, U.S. 
and Soviet officials said in interviews that negotiators had broken the 
deadlock even though serious unresolved issues remain. 
The treaty to slash the level of troops and weapons in Europe is being 
negotiated in Vienna by representatives of the 16 North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization members and seven Warsaw Pact nations. While much work remains to 
be done on the treaty, and those nations -- as well as 12 other members of the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe -- must approve the final 
document, Gorbachev expressed optimism that the pact will be achieved in 1990. 
Seemingly determined not just to avoid confrontation but to help each other 
with mutual problems, Bush and Gorbachev in their news conference took notably 
moderate approaches to the two most explosive issues now dividing the 
superpowers -- freedom for Lithuania and the future of Germany. 
Bush said that while the United States remains concerned about Soviet sanctions 
against the break-away republic, the question of trade concessions for Moscow 
-- a politically critical issue for Gorbachev -- is formally linked only to 
liberalization of Soviet emigration policy, not to Lithuanian independence. 
Conservatives had pressed the Administration to take a tough line on the issue 
with Gorbachev at the summit. 
But on Sunday, when a reporter pointed out that six weeks ago Bush had 
suggested that his patience with the Soviets' handling of Lithuania was nearing 
an end, the President said he did not recall putting it that way and added that 
he and Gorbachev had had "some good discussions on the issue." 
Gorbachev pledged to resolve the Lithuanian issue. "We are going to do it 
ourselves," he declared. "With full responsibility, I wish to declare here 
(and) now for all of you to know that we are anxious to see this issue resolved 
in such a way as everybody's interests would be taken into account and within 
the constitution's framework." 
The Soviet constitution guarantees the right of secession but only after a 
lengthy legal process. 
If Bush sidestepped confrontation on trade and Lithuania, Gorbachev returned 
the favor on a reunified Germany. Without minimizing Soviet concern about a 
resurgent Germany, he refrained from repeating the relatively strident 
statements he has sometimes made on the question of German membership in NATO. 
He expressed willingness to work toward a "mutually acceptable solution" to the 
issue. 
Further, Bush, who insists that a united Germany should be in NATO, said 
Gorbachev is "in full agreement" with him that the issue is a matter for the 
Germans themselves to decide under the Helsinki Final Act negotiated in 1975. 
The Helsinki Final Act declared that Europe's postwar borders are permanent, 
called for more East-West cooperation on security and committed each signatory 
nation to guaranteeing a broad range of human rights. 
Administration officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that Bush 
and his advisers viewed Gorbachev's statement that Germany could determine to 
which alliance it would belong as a significant development. However, hearing 
such a commitment from the Soviet leader and seeing it translated into action, 
they said, are two different things. 
"We're hopeful this reflects some movement in the Soviet position," a senior 
Administration official said. "But we'll have to wait to see." 
At Sunday's press conference, Gorbachev suggested that a transition period 
would be necessary before a united Germany gains full independence. And he 
offered a low-key reminder that if Moscow's concerns are ignored, it may 
reassess its commitment to arms reductions in Europe. 
It was in the second closed-door meeting between Bush and Gorbachev on Thursday 
afternoon, during a discussion of a united Germany's role in Europe, that the 
suggestion arose to deal with the issue in terms of the Helsinki Final Act, the 
official said. 
Bush brought up the subject, saying that the 35-nation Helsinki agreement 
commits the signatories, which include the United States and the Soviet Union, 
to a declaration that nations could choose their own alliance memberships. 
Gorbachev, the Administration official said, told Bush that he agreed with that 
statement. 
But while officials took heart in this approach, they said that a more 
important indication of Gorbachev's position will be the approach the Soviets 
take in the so-called two-plus-four talks on German unification by the major 
World War II Allies -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France, 
along with East and West Germany. 
"We'll have to see if the Soviet position is evolving," the official said. 
The Administration's reading of Gorbachev's apparent acceptance of this view 
prompted what one official described as "a big debate" among Bush's advisers 
during the summit. In the end, they decided that "the important thing here is 
(that) this is the first time we've heard it from Gorbachev." 
Gorbachev, who declared the Cold War over at the end of their first superpower 
summit in Malta last December, called the Washington summit "an event of 
enormous importance, both for our bilateral relations and in the context of 
world politics." 
Bush said that "the constructive spirit of these days, the spirit of 
responsibility in which we discussed all questions, has made our success 
possible, and that's really important because that has a stabilizing effect on 
the entire international situation. . . ." 
In that optimistic spirit, the two leaders disclosed at the wrap-up press 
conference that they have agreed to schedule summits on a regular, perhaps 
annual, basis. 
While flying aboard the Marine One helicopter to Camp David, Md., for their 
Saturday meetings, the two men looked down at the Virginia suburbs just beyond 
the nation's capital. Bush talked to Gorbachev about private ownership of 
homes, bank loans "and how the system works," said Marlin Fitzwater, the White 
House press secretary. 
Later, at a dinner at Laurel Lodge, the dining hall at Camp David, "Gorbachev 
got quite emotional" in delivering a toast to Bush, Fitzwater said. 
The Soviet president earlier in the day tried his hand at horseshoes, a sport 
he was said to have played in the Soviet Union, and scored a ringer on his 
first toss. Later the horseshoe was mounted and was presented to him at the 
dinner. 
Gorbachev responded, according to Fitzwater, by saying: "I hope this means good 
luck on your house. I hope it brings good luck to your people and good luck to 
my people." 
"They had a very good interaction," Fitzwater said. "The two guys are very much 
alike. When they debate across a table they see a mirror image," he said, 
describing them both as "very aggressive" in their styles of discussion, ready 
to challenge each other about the basis of their arguments. 
"They even have a similar sense of humor," Fitzwater said. "They make fun of 
things. They tease each other." 
In a small concluding sign of their closer tactical relationship, when 
Gorbachev finished his lengthy answer on Lithuania, he held up his arm and -- 
like a press conference veteran -- looked at his watch to indicate the press 
conference had lasted the scheduled hour. 
Gorbachev then glanced at Bush. The President picked up the cue instantly and 
ended the session. Turning to Gorbachev, Bush said, "Well done, well done." 
From Washington, Gorbachev flew to Minneapolis, where he appealed, as he had 
several times over the past few days, for global support of his embattled 
internal reform programs. 
He sketched his view of the alternatives for an audience of Minneapolis 
business leaders: "Does America want to see a Soviet Union that lacks 
confidence, that is unstable, that is in turmoil," he asked, or "one full of 
life, working with the entire global civilization, integrated into that 
civilization." 
The agreements that Bush struck with Gorbachev during the summit were not the 
final word. The trade agreement, in particular, must go before Congress, where 
there is significant resistance to lowering tariffs while the Soviet Union 
continues its embargo of Lithuania. 
Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, told 
NBC News that congressional sentiment against Bush's negotiating strategy "has 
been stirred up even more with this decision by President Bush to unlink or 
de-link the trade agreement from the Lithuanian situation." 
"The question is, is Congress going to vote for the trade agreement without 
Lithuania?" he said, noting that the terms agreed to by Bush and Gorbachev are 
executive agreements, not treaties, and so would require only a majority vote 
in both houses of Congress. 
Sen. Richard G. Lugar (R-Ind.), ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee, said that Gorbachev appeared to have "improvised a good 
bit" in his closing remarks. 
More on the Summit 
MEETING THE PRESS -- A Russian reporter asks Gorbachev a zinger at a first-ever 
White House news conference pairing the two superpower presidents. A10 
MERCY MISSION -- Soviet aircraft will bring U.S. food to Ethiopia in a joint 
gesture of superpower commitment to the Third World. A11 
SEEING THE LIGHT -- Gorbachev hints he is coming to accept that German 
membership in NATO is inevitable. A12 
SEPARATE ISSUES -- Bush dodged a diplomatic bullet by keeping trade ties 
separate from Gorbachev's actions in the restive Soviet republics. A13 
