RECOVERY FROM TRYPTOPHAN POISONING IS A PAINFUL FIGHT 
Last summer, Debra Baxter often could be found on the beaches ofSan Diego, 
sunning herself as she watched her son play. 
But the summer of 1990 won't find her back at the beach with 5-year-old Ian The 
36-year-old woman is sure that just getting in or out of a sand chair would be 
impossible for her weakened muscles. Besides, when one spends 20 hours a day in 
bed there isn't much time left for a trip to the beach. 
Baxter is one of 32 San Diego County residents, 275 Californians and 1,517 
Americans who health officials have confirmed were somehow poisoned by 
tryptophan pills. 
Like Baxter, the most seriously affected live a day-to-day existence of 
constant pain, overwhelming fatigue, disabling muscle weakness or paralysis, 
and distressing memory loss. 
Touted as a "natural" remedy, tryptophan was supposed to make these people 
sleep better. Instead, today they wonder if they'll ever awaken from a medical 
nightmare. 
"The worst thing is not knowing if I'll get better," Baxter said. "It's to just 
keep looking at your doctor saying, 'When is this hell going to end? When is 
this pain going to end?' 
"I have pain all the time. I take pills and I sleep -- the sleeping is the only 
part that takes the pain away." 
Baxter's nightmare has a name, eosinophilia myalgia syndrome (EMS). It is a 
previously rare disorder in which the body makes too many eosinophils, a type 
of white blood cell that usually fights off bacteria or worms. A normal 
eosinophil count is 50 to 350 cells per cubic millimeter of blood. EMS patients 
have counts of several thousand or more. 
Since last summer, 24 Americans have died, four of them in California, because 
of complications of EMS. 
Federal officials confirmed last week that still-unidentified contaminants 
appear to be responsible for the nationwide EMS outbreak. The Food and Drug 
Administration has ordered nearly all tryptophan-containing products removed 
from store shelves. 
In November, the Food and Drug Administration recalled all dietary supplements 
that would result in a daily intake of more than 100 milligrams of the amino 
acid. In March, the recall was expanded to products that contain smaller 
amounts of tryptophan. 
The November action came after public health officials in New Mexico discovered 
an EMS outbreak there associated with tryptophan use. The U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control then began collecting case reports from other states, and the 
EMS total mounted quickly. 
Tryptophan is an amino acid necessary to the human body and found in a wide 
variety of foods. Before the recalls, it had grown by word of mouth into a 
widely recommended "natural" remedy for everything from insomnia to stress and 
premenstrual syndrome. Even physicians were suggesting it to their patients. 
They did so based on a few studies indicating that tryptophan elevates the 
level of the sleep-inducing chemical serotonin in the brain. 
Studies done since the recall in Oregon and Minnesota appear to point primarily 
to tryptophan made by one amino acid manufacturer as linked to EMS cases. This 
idea is not universally embraced, however, because some EMS cases are not 
linked to that manufacturer at all. 
"I think it's going to turn out that there is a contaminant that somehow 
interacts in certain susceptible individuals to set their metabolism of 
tryptophan off in an altered direction," said Dr. Phillip Hertzman, a New 
Mexico physician who helped identify the tryptophan connection to EMS last 
year. "Which would be why not everybody who takes it gets sick." 
As a federal investigation continues, an international conference on the 
problem is being planned for June 12 and 13 in New Mexico. 
Meanwhile, not knowing what toxin is causing the illness has made EMS difficult 
to treat, and impossible for patients to know if their damaged bodies will 
recover. 
Baxter had been regularly taking tryptophan for insomnia for about two years 
before she began having early symptoms of EMS last August. By Sept. 11, muscle 
pain was so bad that she went on disability from her job as a materials buyer 
at General Dynamics. 
Baxter's count of eosinophils has returned to normal, but the condition's 
crushing symptoms remain. 
She began a conversation recently by stumbling over her own age: "37. No, wait. 
I just had a birthday. 1954. I'm 36." 
It's the kind of memory lapse that's common among EMS-ers, as victims call 
themselves. 
"Sometimes I can't remember my address," Baxter said, beginning a litany of her 
problems. 
Periodically her voice gets muddy, as muscle spasms in her jaw overtake her 
words: 
"I can't put on my socks. I can't put on my underwear. I can't put on my shoes. 
I can bend at the waist, but if I bend at the knees I immediately fall to the 
floor. I have fallen so many times I am black and blue. I can't lift my child. 
I can't do anything around the house. 
"I can't do the laundry because I fell in the laundry room. I'm scared to be 
alone sometimes. That's why I don't do anything, because I'm afraid if I fall 
I'll just lie there. 
"I liked to do art things, but now my hands go arthritic and so it's very 
difficult. I can hardly write. I forget things. I don't even get the mail 
anymore because I forget where I put it." 
To get up from the couch, where she rests when not in bed at her Pacific Beach 
home, Baxter has to push off with both arms. 
Like Baxter, Escondido resident Charleen Brown, 61, is still struggling with 
the aftereffects of tryptophan, which she used to help her sleep after getting 
off work as a registered nurse at 12:30 a.m. 
"I never wanted to take, like, a sleeping pill or any kind of tranquilizer 
because I know how addicting they are," Brown recalled. "As it turned out, I 
probably would have been better off if I had taken a drug." 
Her first symptoms last October were shoulder and leg pain so severe that she 
had to quit her job. In December, she spent three weeks in a hospital intensive 
care unit because of circulatory problems in her left arm; her left hand has 
since frozen into a useless claw. 
Brown's right leg is paralyzed from the knee down. Although she spends most of 
her time in bed, she can walk short distances by dragging the leg along. 
"If I stay up for two hours I consider that a real bonus," Brown said. "This 
has literally destroyed my life." 
One of Brown's few outings is a monthly meeting of a support group that Baxter 
put together by calling all the rheumatologists in the Yellow Pages and asking 
them to refer patients to her. About 40 people are in it now. 
(This is more than the official tally of 32 EMS cases in San Diego County, but 
public health officials say they are certain many cases have gone unreported.) 
Support groups have sprung up all over the country, and they exchange 
information regularly via newsletters and phone calls. 
Diana Bullock, a Spring Valley woman who took over leadership of the support 
group when Baxter's energy flagged, said the group is especially important to 
its members because most spent months going from doctor to doctor trying to 
find an explanation for their problems. 
It wasn't until the FDA's recall of tryptophan last November that doctors 
recognized EMS as a disorder connected to dietary supplements of the amino 
acid. Bullock had begun seeing doctors a year before that. 
Her main symptoms were muscle weakness -- "I couldn't get a glass of water to 
my mouth" -- and intense pain that seemed to come in layers. 
"I swore I could feel the bone, the tissue around it and the skin all hurting 
separately," she said. 
Members of the support group also exchange information about lawsuits that some 
of them have filed against stores where they bought tryptophan, and about 
medical treatments. 
Steroids are the primary treatment used against EMS, but in some people they 
provide little relief, patients and doctors say. 
Cleansing the blood with a procedure similar to kidney dialysis also has been 
tried, and at least one San Diego patient underwent chelation -- a chemical 
cleansing of the blood usually used to treat lead or mercury poisoning. Baxter 
had several treatments with an anti-cancer drug to bring her eosinophil count 
down. 
But the victims with the most serious symptoms confirm what the doctors 
studying EMS say: No single treatment works for everyone, and recovery, if it 
will come at all, is very slow. 
In many ways, the problems EMS victims are experiencing resemble "toxic oil 
syndrome" seen in Spain in 1981, when people bought contaminated olive oil, 
doctors say. About a quarter of those people sustained long-term nerve damage, 
and there is concern that this might also prove the case with EMS, said Dr. 
Edwin Kilbourne, chief of the health studies branch at the U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control. 
"In particular, the nerve damage did not seem to get better very quickly," 
Kilbourne said. "There are a substantial number of people in Spain who still 
have residual paralysis or limitations of movement." 
That's the kind of outlook that EMS victims hope is proven wrong. 
Bullock, who stopped taking tryptophan 18 months ago, so she is farther along 
in her recovery than most, says she has seen slow improvement. 
But she still doesn't feel strong enough to re-enroll at Cuyamaca Community 
College: "It's a long walk up to campus from the parking lot. I don't know if I 
could do that and have any energy left for class. Every morning I get up and I 
have to plan my day as to how much energy I will use." 
Baxter longs to be able to do simple things like pick up her son, or straighten 
her arm. One characteristic of EMS is broad patches of thick, tough, shiny skin 
that doesn't stretch. 
"I just pray that it's not permanent damage -- that I'm going to be able to 
straighten my arms out like normal people, completely straight, without feeling 
that stretching, that tightness of the skin. That the pain is going to go away 
someday," Baxter said. 
"I sit here and look at this wheelchair in my living room and think, God, I 
want that damned thing out of here so bad," she said. "I hate to think the rest 
of my life is going to be without being able to walk the dog. Or run. 
"I know I'm not going to die. But I also don't want to live like this." 
