DRUG CZAR ASSAILS STATE'S NARCOTICS LAWS AS TOO WEAK 
Federal drug czar William J. Bennett lectured California legislators Monday, 
criticizing their anti-drug legislation as too weak and deserving of no better 
than a C-minus on the narcotics-fighting grade scale. 
"When is the Legislature going to act for the people and govern in a sensible 
way?" Bennett asked at a Capitol press conference during a one-day visit to 
Sacramento. "The Legislature has failed its responsibility for passing tough 
laws. Republicans and some Democrats want to get tough laws through, but 
they've been blocked." 
Earlier, in a speech to the Senate, the director of the federal Office of Drug 
Control Policy said that the most important thing the state can do is to 
increase the penalties for drug offenders. 
"State sentences for drug crimes are much more lenient than federal sentences," 
Bennett said. "California has not met its responsibility to enact tough 
sentencing laws. Thirty-five states have tougher sentencing laws -- and no 
state has more reason for a tough law than California." 
Bennett said California ought to get tougher on users as well as traffickers. 
He said the state should revoke the professional and driver's licenses of 
convicted drug users and encourage private companies contracting with the state 
to begin drug-testing their employees. 
He suggested also that the Legislature recriminalize the possession of small 
amounts of marijuana. "The law is far too lenient. Most people get started on 
hard drugs through marijuana," he said. 
Democrats reacted with skepticism. "There have been a number of laws already 
passed to increase the penalties on drug traffickers," said Sen. Bill Lockyer 
(D-Hayward), chairman of the Judiciary Committee. "But I'm not willing to 
assume that whatever the federal law is we should adopt it. 
"I would estimate that Bennett's recommendations would cost about $5 billion," 
Lockyer said. "I want to ask which tax he wants to raise to pay for that." 
Reporters also asked Bennett how the state could afford to implement his 
program at a time when California prisons are filled to 175% of capacity and 
the state faces a $3.6-billion budget deficit. 
He replied that the federal government, which has more than doubled its 
spending on anti-drug programs in California, would help pay for the increased 
law enforcement costs. He also suggested that the state could pay for some of 
the programs by stepping up efforts to seize the assets of convicted drug 
dealers. But he added that the Legislature would have to "readjust your 
spending" to construct more prisons. 
During his speech, Bennett praised some California anti-drug programs, such as 
a recent law that regulates the sale of chemicals that could be used to 
manufacture drugs. He also singled out for praise Los Angeles' DARE program, 
which sends police officers into schools to warn students about the dangers of 
drug use. 
But Bennett said California was not doing enough to combat drugs. He blamed 
this failure on "the obvious resistance from a number of legislators" and such 
liberal lobbying groups as the American Civil Liberties Union. 
