HE'S MANAGER, PRISONER OF WORLD CUP; 
SOCCER: ITALY'S LUCA CORDERO DI MONTEZEMOLO IS CONSUMED BY DETAILS IN A LAND OF 
PROCRASTINATION. 
Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, a man waiting for a whistle, is unabashed 
embodiment of Italy future and Italy past. 
"I'm a full-of-contradictions kind of guy," di Montezemolo mused one recent 
morning in the frazzling countdown for the 1990 World Cup. He directs 
preparations with a blend of high-tech drive and old-world patience, wheedling 
harmony from a nation of brilliant but obstinate soloists. 
"I laugh when somebody thinks that a soccer ball can change tradition, 
mentality, procedure, bureaucracy," he said. "We will be ready, as usual, but 
my opinion is that in the work up in Italy, a miracle happened." 
Getting a nation of 57 million individualist soccer fanatics and their 
bickering politicians to play together has been a four-year crusade for di 
Montezemolo. He's a polyglot, resolutely modern and worldly wise executive who 
is on the one hand all international big business, and on the other assertively 
close to his roots. 
"I like the world, but I feel very, very Italian," he said. "I love the small 
parts of my country: Tuscany, Capri in the winter. I don't like big towns." 
Di Montezemolo brought newfangled managerial initiatives to this biggest of 
World Cups, and he brought down-home tradition of the sort that tells him it 
would be inviting bad luck to plan a post-tournament vacation. 
"I am very superstitious. I don't want to make plans in advance," he said. "We 
hope things are done -- at least medium rare -- not well done, because in Italy 
it's impossible to make everybody happy. . . . My feelings have changed often, 
like day and night, but I'm . . . optimistic." 
All the planning gets its acid test later this week when the whistle blows for 
an inaugural game between defending champion Argentina and Cameroon in Milan. 
Di Montezemolo will remain at razor's edge until the surviving two of 24 
competing national teams meet in the final July 8 in Rome. 
"There's still a lot to do," he said. "It's a big mosaic and every aspect of it 
must go well. We keep our fingers crossed because there are still a lot of 
delicate aspects to cover. Believe me, to organize this event of 52 matches in 
12 towns in one month in our country is not very easy." 
At 42, sandy-haired, wiry Luca di Montezemolo is a natural for Italy's most 
visible encounter with the world since the 1960 Olympics: a home-loving Italian 
and a slick international operator whose expertise is management, 
communications and sports. 
The combination was, di Montezemolo concedes, barely enough in a country where 
Latin temperament and 2,000 years of tradition decree that all truly important 
things are left until the last minute. Italy knew for eight years that it would 
be the host country but, in a welter of changing national and local 
governments, the enabling legislation funding preparations was not passed until 
1989. Di Montezemolo's arms rise skyward in that palms up gesture meaning, 
"That's the way it is," that all Italians learn in the womb. 
Born in Bologna, scion of an ancient and noble, cardinals-in-the-blood northern 
Italian family, di Montezemolo is a Rome-trained lawyer who did an additional 
two years of international commercial law at Columbia University in New York. 
"The best two years of my life," he calls them. 
He is, by almost all accounts, a favorite of industrialist mogul Gianni 
Agnelli, the Mr. Italy president of the giant Fiat automotive empire. Much of 
di Montezemolo's career has been spent under Agnelli's wing. Di Montezemolo 
went to Fiat in 1975 in public relations after a stint as assistant to Enzo 
Ferrari and director of auto racing for Ferrari. 
In 1981, at 36, di Montezemolo became director of an Agnelli holding company 
that controls the Fiat group's huge publishing ventures. Three years later, he 
moved to Switzerland as director of Cinzano International, a company best known 
to Europeans for its white and red aperitif vermouths. By 1985, he was shopping 
for a challenging job in Rome, where his parents live. 
"I wanted a serious job in Rome, and this was theoretically a serious job -- so 
I came," he said. "For me it was interesting to put together my background 
experience in such a big event. I wanted a job outside a private company, and 
for me it is useful to understand the big problems we face in Italy, 
translating projects into reality. This is the biggest problem in our country." 
His salary as manager of Italia 90 pays 400 million lire a year -- about 
$340,000. 
To finance Italia 90, di Montezemolo persuaded eight Italian corporate giants 
to pay big up front as sponsors and also got their know-how and the loan of 
bright young executives to form his brain trust. He vigorously licensed the 
stick figure World Cup logo to other companies, sold tickets to games even 
before anybody knew who would play in them -- and the money came rolling in. 
"We didn't borrow a single lire," he said. "We didn't buy one line of 
advertising. We have sold more tickets than we have anticipated -- and we will 
finish in the black." 
Di Montezemolo, a divorced father of two whose current companion is Edwige 
Fenech, a raven-haired Italian actress and television personality, is a 
born-to-it pillar of the Italian entrepreneurial aristocracy: a member of the 
board of Ferrari, the Fiat-owned Turin newspaper La Stampa; and vice president 
of Juventus, Fiat's major league soccer team in Turin. 
If the Italia 90 job has been challenging, di Montezemolo has also found it 
constraining. 
"This is a very provincial job; it is not international," he said. "I have been 
in this office 12 hours a day for four years, focusing on the problems of Bari, 
Turin, Naples. . . . I'm a curious guy and this is a fantastic moment in the 
world, not only in the East, but all over; and here I was working in the 
stadiums, working with problems like lights, discussing with city and 
government officials. I couldn't go on a holiday anywhere -- the States, 
Russia. Believe me, it was a prison." 
The sentence is up July 9. After that, di Montezemolo has no next job, but 
bright prospects if the cup comes off successfully. He's thinking about a book, 
and he's thinking about a vacation -- just thinking. 
There are stray quiet moments when Luca di Montezemolo imagines that it's all 
over: He sees himself, in mid-July, zooming through the American heartland, 
where soccer is still a kids' game, letting it all hang out astride a big 
motorcycle. A dream, but no plans; not until after the final whistle blows in 
Rome. 
