OFFICER'S TALENTS DISTINGUISHED HIM AND PUT HIM IN DANGER 
Tommy De La Rosa, the Fullerton police officer killed Thursday during an 
undercover operation, was a model narcotics officer, according to those who 
knew him. 
He was friendly, outgoing, experienced and cautious. 
But the talents that set De La Rosa apart also placed him in danger. 
As a bilingual officer able to easily assume the identities of drug dealers of 
many nationalities, De La Rosa was usually the one who made contacts with drug 
suspects, Fullerton Police Lt. Bud Lathrop said. 
And he was the one who led the way in Thursday's drug bust, during which he was 
fatally wounded in an ambush. 
De La Rosa, 43, a 10-year veteran of the Fullerton Police Department, had 
worked undercover narcotics for the past four or five years and was 
well-respected by his peers, Lathrop said. 
Married with four children, De La Rosa was the recipient of several awards, one 
of them as Officer of the Year, bestowed by the Orange County Latino Peace 
Officers Assn. in 1989. 
"Ironically, I ran into the guy who's the president of the Latino Peace 
Officers Assn. today (Thursday, prior to the ambush)," Lathrop said. "Rudy 
(Sanchez) told me there was going to be another awards banquet in August, and I 
said, 'Are you going to give Tommy another award?' and we kind of laughed about 
it." 
Sanchez said he was shocked when he learned of De La Rosa's death at the 
association's board meeting Thursday night. 
"It was a real shocker," Sanchez said. "We kidded around, but we didn't think 
this would ever happen." 
Sanchez said those who knew De La Rosa called him "the man with two hats." 
"He could be a Puerto Rican one day, a Columbian the next, a Mexican the next. 
He was extremely talented," Sanchez said. "And he was always there to joke. If 
somebody was down, he was always there to help out. He fit the part of 
undercover work, like what you see in the movies." 
The Fullerton undercover narcotics squad De La Rosa belonged to is a 
five-member team that has won numerous awards for its aggressive work. The team 
has taken investigations as far north as San Francisco and as far south as the 
Mexican border. 
