A BREAK FOR O.C. HOMELESS 
A missing element in coping with problems of the homeless in Orange County has 
been community commitment, especially by the private sector. Why? Perhaps too 
many people doubt that homelessness can be a serious problem in so prosperous a 
county. 
But homelessness is a serious problem, and it does need a community effort. A 
beginning impetus may have come last week when the county's Building Industry 
Assn. started its HomeAid program. 
What makes the program so noteworthy is not so much its scope -- which is 
rather small -- but that it marks the developers' first major effort to direct 
resources from the private building industry to the homeless. HomeAid involves 
about $1 million and will add about 35 "transitional housing" beds throughout 
the county. 
Modest as that may seem in contrast with the need to shelter 8,000 to 10,000 
homeless people -- half of them children -- the developers' program involves 
about four times as much money as homeless advocates get each year from the 
state. 
To meet current needs, the county should have about 4,500 transitional beds -- 
places for people and families to stay while they get on their feet. There are 
only about 200. 
Emergency shelters are the first step away from homeless status. Transitional 
beds are the second, places to stay while accumulating advances and deposits 
needed to become renters. The last step is an adequate supply of affordable 
housing. 
We welcome developers to the fight to get homeless people off the streets and 
back into permanent housing. We hope that the move will encourage other 
businesses and industries to help. 
According to surveys, about 30% of the county's homeless population come from 
the middle class; most have lived in the county for about 10 years and have 
high school educations or better. Illness, a lost job, divorce or other 
setbacks have made them homeless. Some work but cannot save the money for an 
apartment. 
The BIA program will help some of those residents. It would help more if it 
touched off a public-private partnership to produce enough lower-cost housing 
to provide that third step away from homelessness: a permanent residence. 
