BURGREEN VOWS POLICE BEEF-UP ALONG BORDER; 
CRIME: VIOLENCE AGAINST ILLEGAL CROSSERS PROMPTS PROMISE OF MORE PATROLS, BUT 
SOME ACTIVISTS WORRY THAT THE MOVE MAY AGGRAVATE THE PERILS. 
Alarmed by rising violence against undocumented immigrants, San Diego Police 
Chief Bob Burgreen said Wednesday that patrols will be stepped up in the 
dangerous border strip, and that officers may once again be posted to hazardous 
night duty in the rugged terrain favored by clandestine border crossers. 
Burgreen, in comments made before a group of Tijuana journalists and during a 
telephone interview, also said that police hope to coordinate border operations 
with Mexican authorities. He said police are also contemplating the revival of 
a controversial anti-crime squad consisting of San Diego officers and U.S. 
Border Patrol agents. 
"That area is increasingly becoming violent, and I feel that steps must be 
taken to make the area safe," said Burgreen. He gave no timetable for the 
police beef-up, although he indicated it will be soon. 
"That's going to involve putting more officers in the canyons, having more 
activities at night and having more officers involved in dangerous shooting 
situations," he said. 
Crime against clandestine border crossers has long been a thorny issue for San 
Diego police, who say the problem, with its international ramifications, 
represents a law enforcement dilemma unique in the nation. The people being 
victimized -- among the thousands who enter San Diego each day from Tijuana 
without visas -- are themselves lawbreakers. 
In recent months, Burgreen said, the lawlessness of the canyon-riddled border 
strip has reached a new high, as criminals emboldened by the lack of police 
presence have 
had almost free reign to terrorize migrants. 
A six-person special police unit now patrols the area, but Burgreen said the 
squad is a high-profile outfit that mostly attempts to deter crime by being 
visible and to investigate wrongdoing in the aftermath of specific criminal 
activity. Police are contemplating a more "pro-active" squad that would 
actively seek out lawbreakers and conduct more night patrols. 
"When our cops are in the canyons, the crooks go away," Burgreen asserted. 
He acknowledged that there is a "high likelihood" that more police officers 
deployed in the border zone will get into shoot-outs with suspected thieves, 
and that rights activists and others will criticize the department's actions. 
But the chief said it is necessary to increase patrols. 
"People are going to get get shot, maybe even killed," Burgreen said, 
explaining that the only question is who the victims will be. "Should it be 
border bandits getting shot and killed, or innocent people getting shot and 
killed by border bandits?" 
Burgreen did rule out as too dangerous the reintroduction of an undercover 
anti-crime squad, similar to the San Diego police outfit whose exploits from 
1976 to 1978 were chronicled by Joseph Wambaugh in his book Lines and Shadows. 
Such undercover work, in which officers pose as border crossers, is too 
hazardous, Burgreen said. 
In 1990, statistics show, seven undocumented people have been slain in the 
border zone, all killed in the heavily trafficked rugged area to the west of 
the giant port of entry at San Ysidro. There were only five such killings in 
all of 1989, police say. 
In the most recent cases, the bodies of two men, both shooting victims, were 
found June 6 in an open area to the southwest of the intersection of Monument 
and Dairy Mart roads in San Diego. 
Thieves are blamed for most of the crime. 
In recent weeks, smugglers, vendors and undocumented border crossers who 
regularly work in the border strip have stated in interviews that they would 
favor a greater San Diego police presence in the zone. Fear of assaults by 
bajadores, as the thieves are widely known, is a prevalent emotion these days 
among undocumented border crossers. 
However, immigrant rights activists have expressed wariness of a beefed-up 
police presence along the border. They fear that officers may shoot more 
innocent people than thieves will. 
"There has to be more protection for the migrants, but having the police there 
shooting people may only exacerbate the situation," said Roberto Martinez, a 
San Diego activist affiliated with a Quaker rights group. He said his group and 
others are seeking alternatives, though none have emerged. 
The idea of a revived joint effort involving the police and Border Patrol is 
particularly troubling to Martinez and other critics. The former squad, known 
as the Border Crime Prevention Unit, shot 44 suspects during its five-year 
existence, killing 18. The outfit was disbanded in January, 1989, after 
shooting and killing four suspects during a two-week period. All of those 
killed were thieves who attempted to rob officers, mistaking them in the 
darkness for undocumented border crossers, according to police accounts. 
Chief Burgreen said he will discuss the idea of a new joint squad with Gustavo 
de la Vina, the new chief Border Patrol agent in San Diego, who is scheduled to 
take office Monday. 
Burgreen also said that he favors more joint efforts with Mexican police. Such 
operations have been employed before in the border zone, but the tactics have 
raised considerable opposition in Mexico, where cooperation was widely viewed 
as abetting the perceived anti-immigrant agenda of U.S. authorities. 
