GIBSON REPORTED TO REQUEST TRADE; 
DODGERS: OUTFIELDER WANTS TO LIVE CLOSER TO HIS HOME AND BUSINESS IN DETROIT, 
SOURCES SAY. 
Kirk Gibson has requested that the Dodgers trade him because he wishes to play 
closer to his Detroit home. Gibson probably won't sign with the Dodgers when 
his contract expires at the end of the season, two sources close to the team 
have confirmed. 
The sources, who declined to be identified, say that the Dodgers' recent 
discussions with the Detroit Tigers about a trade are a response to that 
request. A deal with the Tigers, where Gibson played for parts of nine seasons 
before joining the Dodgers in 1988, could be completed as soon as Gibson 
returns to the lineup after recovering from a groin injury, possibly next week. 
The sources said that the Tigers have offered veteran pitcher Frank Tanana, but 
that the Dodgers are holding out for an additional pitching prospect, perhaps 
minor leaguer Steve Searcy. 
Dodger Vice President Fred Claire would neither confirm nor deny the report. 
"I have spoken to Kirk and I have spoken to his agent, Doug Baldwin," Claire 
confirmed. "Beyond that, I'm really not going to talk about those 
conversations. I consider those conversations to be in confidence." 
Baldwin said any such trade talk is premature. 
Said Baldwin: "Any talk about Kirk being traded is meaningless until he is 
healthy. Anything before that is pure speculation." 
Said Gibson: "That's crazy, I am not going to say anything about that. It's 
wrong to be talking about something like that now." 
Tanana, who will be 37 July 3, is 5-4 with a 5.01 earned-run average in 14 
starts. He has pitched in parts of 18 major league seasons, all in the American 
League, and could reject a trade because of his veteran status. Dodger scout 
Gary Sutherland has been recently following his progress. 
Gibson has a lucrative real estate development business near Detroit, where he 
spends his winters and some days off during the season. 
When the Dodgers flew to Cincinnati from Los Angeles for Thursday's day off in 
preparation for a weekend series here, Gibson flew to Detroit. He joined the 
team here Friday. 
Gibson, the National League's most valuable player in 1988, has struggled in 
Los Angeles since leading the Dodgers to the world championship that year with 
his game-winning home run off Oakland's Dennis Eckersley in Game 1 of the World 
Series. 
Gibson has played in only 85 games since then, batting 300 times, with a .210 
average and 12 home runs and 36 runs batted in. He has been plagued by injuries 
to his legs. 
There also has been trouble off the field. Last year, he and his family were 
robbed at gunpoint outside their Santa Monica home. He has since moved. 
Claire said he would not trade Gibson, or any player, simply because they 
requested a trade. But he said he always considers a players' feelings. 
"My main intention is always to do what is best for the Dodgers," Claire said. 
"At the same time, I listen to what a player has to say. And I listen to what a 
player's agent says. I consider that very important." 
Claire said if Gibson were traded, it should not be construed as the Dodgers 
giving up on the season. With Gibson's replacement in center field, Stan 
Javier, on a 12-game hitting streak, many say a fifth starting pitcher could 
make the Dodgers a contender. 
"Right now my only interest is continuing in the direction we are headed, to 
get back in serious contention," Claire said. "We are on that road, and I want 
us to stay on that road." 
