CONDO Q &amp; A: MOTIVATING OWNERS TO BE ACTIVE IN ASSOCIATION 
Editor's note: The Community Associations Institute, a national nonprofit 
research and educational organization, estimates that one of every eight 
homeowners lives in some form of community association or common-interest real 
estate development. 
 With the introduction this week of "Condo Q&amp;A," The Times offers 
reader-oriented advice on the operation, financing and maintenance of condos, 
homeowner associations, cooperatives and other forms of community associations. 
QUESTION: Most of the owners in our condominium complex do not want to 
participate in the operation of the association, and we have a tough time 
finding people who are willing to serve on the board of directors. At a recent 
annual meeting, we didn't have a quorum present, so the meeting had to be 
postponed. What can we do? 
ANSWER: Let's start by analyzing some of the reasons for apathy. First, most 
people have heavy work schedules, so they are very protective of their leisure 
time. Second, most people move into a condominium thinking that they don't need 
to participate in the management or decision-making of the association. In 
fact, some people don't really understand what they've purchased at all. 
Third, as long as the association is running smoothly, most people will not be 
motivated to participate. It's a fact that if the board starts making unpopular 
decisions, more people will be inclined to speak up and act. Fourth, perhaps 
your current board is stifling interest by discouraging owner input or having 
"secret" meetings (always a mistake). 
In this situation, those who might be interested simply give up in frustration 
or disgust. Sometimes the board members enjoy their power or martyrdom and 
continually exclaim to all how demanding and unfulfilling it is to serve on the 
board. 
Here are some suggestions that may encourage owner involvement: 
1. The board should communicate with owners using a brief newsletter to inform 
owners of board meeting dates, board action, current issues and concerns facing 
the association. Invite owners to participate. Ask for help. 
2. Set up committees, such as budget and finance, landscape, building 
maintenance, social, etc., to give input to the board. Committee members will 
often become future board members. 
3. Several weeks before the next annual meeting and board election, schedule a 
social event, a Neighborhood Watch meeting or a program with interesting 
speakers that will draw the owners. During the event, promote the approaching 
annual meeting, encourage owners to nominate potential board members and urge 
attendance at the meeting or sending a proxy if attendance isn't possible. 
Remind them of the added expense and effort that results from failing to get a 
quorum. Be creative; maybe offer a door prize. 
4. After all that, you may still have to go door-to-door to collect proxies so 
that the annual meeting can be conducted. 
Another Association Has Much Lower Dues 
Q: How do we know whether our association's budget is accurate and realistic? A 
similar association in our area has a much lower budget and its owners pay $50 
a month less than we pay. 
A: Don't assume that your board is a bunch of spendthrifts. Even though the 
other association seems similar, there may be many reasons that your 
association's expenses are greater, such as type of amenities, size of staff, 
type of management, amount of landscaping and, here's the big one, the amount 
of reserve funds that are being set aside for major repair and replacement, or 
capital expense. 
Usually, a great deal of time and effort goes into the budgeting process, so 
don't start criticizing until you have gained some solid information. Talk with 
your association president, treasurer or management company representative. 
Don't be surprised if you are asked to serve on the next budget committee. 
Some Dog Owners Let Their Pets Roam 
Q: A few owners in our association allow their dogs to run loose occasionally. 
I don't dislike dogs, but I dislike owners who allow their dogs to roam. We 
have an association rule about controlling pets but the board seems unable to 
enforce it. 
A: This is probably an instance where the association's rule is duplicated by 
city or county code. Contact your local authorities to seek help if the dogs 
are a nuisance or a safety hazard. Then, work with your board to put some teeth 
into your rule enforcement. If your Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions 
(CC&amp;Rs) allow you to impose fines on rule violators, that may be an 
effective enforcement tool. 
Board Thinks Heating Pool Is Unnecessary 
Q: Our board thinks that our gas bills for heating the swimming pool are an 
unnecessary expense. Can they just arbitrarily decide to stop heating the pool? 
One of our members has threatened to sue the board if they do this. 
A: First, board members should make sure that they have adequately researched 
the gas expense records. Then, check the capacity and efficiency of the pool 
heater. An inadequate size or inefficient heater can greatly increase gas 
usage. You may need a new heater. 
Find out how much you could save by simply lowering the temperature setting or 
limiting the amount of time or the months of the year that the pool is heated. 
Look at alternate methods of heating, such as solar heating systems or solar 
blankets. Analyze the pay-back of the cost of converting to solar heat. 
Communication with the owners is necessary. Survey the owners and residents to 
find out about the number of people that use the pool and the peak periods of 
use and explain the current costs and the alternate solutions which are being 
considered. 
You may find that a majority of the members want the pool heated regardless of 
the cost. All of these factors should contribute to the board's decision. The 
board might want to put this matter to a vote of the members. 
Bear in mind that the decision may result in some resentment and, in the 
extreme, even a lawsuit. The board should carefully document the contributing 
factors to show that they used good business judgment, and, most important, 
they should communicate openly and honestly with the owners throughout the 
decision-making process. 
