VAN DE KAMP SUES FIRM OVER CLAIMS IN 'HEFTY' BAG ADS 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp and attorneys general in six other states filed 
consumer protection lawsuits Tuesday against the maker of Hefty brand plastic 
trash bags alleging that Mobil Chemical Co. used false advertising to sell its 
so-called degradable bags. 
Van de Kamp's lawsuit, filed in San Diego Superior Court, alleges that Mobil 
has misled the public with claims that its plastic bags are good for the 
environment and break down when exposed to the elements. 
In fact, the suit claims, the bags will not degrade when used in the usual 
manner. 
"Such advertising seizes upon the public's desire to do what is best for the 
environment and then preys on that desire to sell products," Van de Kamp said 
in a statement. "We cannot let such advertising fool customers. . . ." 
The suit asks for an injunction to halt the use of the allegedly misleading 
claims and for civil penalties of at least $500,000. Van de Kamp was joined in 
his action by the attorneys general of Massachusetts, Minnesota, New York, 
Texas, Washington and Wisconsin -- who filed similar suits against Mobil 
Tuesday. 
Allen H. Gray, a spokesman for the Virginia-based company, denied that the 
labeling is misleading. But he said that, because many consumers are confused, 
Mobil already has agreed to remove claims of degradability from its packaging 
until guidelines can be established. 
"Right now, it's a morass out there," Gray said, adding that Mobil has 
volunteered to lead a joint industry-government effort to standardize 
specifications for degradable products. "But you don't achieve anything with 
litigation," he said. "We've got a strong case. We'll fight if we have to. But 
the other alternative is much more productive." 
Doug Blanke, Minnesota's assistant attorney general for consumer protection, 
agreed that the definitions of terms like degradable, recyclable or 
environmentally safe are too vague. But like California's suit, Minnesota's 
accuses Mobil of intentionally deceiving buyers of Hefty bags. 
Van de Kamp's suit concurs. It claims that Mobil fails to tell consumers that 
its theories about degradability are unproved; and that even if they were true, 
consumers would have to expose their trash bags to the sun, wind and rain for 
weeks or months until the bags began to degrade. If used in the customary way 
-- shipped to local landfills -- the bags are not exposed to the elements long 
enough to trigger the degrading process, the suit claims. 
