SCOTT OSTLER: AS LONG AS GIBSON CAN RUN, DODGER SPIRIT WILL BURN BRIGHT 
Showtime lives in Los Angeles, and as long as it stays alive, the Dodgers will 
not be out of the pennant race. 
Kirk (Showtime) Gibson, dropped from his leadoff spot in the batting order 
Sunday when second baseman Willie Randolph took the day off to nurse an injury, 
continued to intimidate, unnerve, outrun and out-think the opposition. 
On Old-Timers Day at Dodger Stadium, Gibson inspired memories of one Dodger 
old-timer who was in attendance in spirit only. 
"Gibson is a manufacturer of runs," Manager Tom Lasorda said after the Dodgers' 
5-3 win over the Braves. "He is as good at manufacturing runs as anyone I've 
seen since Jackie." 
That's Jackie Robinson, for you youngsters. The late Mr. Robinson is best known 
for integrating baseball, of course. But the men he played with and against 
speak reverently of his fire on the bases. 
Nobody in the stadium ever rested when Jackie Robinson got on base. He was 
daring, arrogant, alert and defiant. He wanted to bother the opposition, rattle 
them, anger them. 
Gibson comes at you with the same basic pain-in-the-fanny style. Sunday he 
walked twice, bunted for a hit, stole a base, stretched a straight single into 
a double and caused a Dodger run to score when it shouldn't have. 
With Jose Gonzalez on first base in the fifth, Gibson drew a walk, but ball 
four was inside and got past catcher Jody Davis, a wild pitch. Gibson sprinted 
to first, Gonzalez rounded second and broke hard for third, Gibson rounded 
first and broke hard for second, drawing a long throw from the backstop that 
allowed Gonzalez to score. 
That's what baseball people mean by manufacturing a run. It's a dull term for 
an exciting play. They make it sound like the run was created in a factory in 
the City of Commerce and shipped via UPS to Dodger Stadium, signed for by 
clubhouse man Nobe Kawano. 
In reality, "manufacturing" is the kind of action that makes a day at the 
ballpark worthwhile. As Lasorda said, "I would pay to see Kirk Gibson play 
baseball." 
Gibson has simply been wearing out the opposition. In six games batting 
leadoff, he manufactured seven hits, seven walks and scored six runs. 
Sunday, still in a leadoff frame of mind despite batting third, he was four for 
four in getting on base, and boy, were the Braves tired of seeing Gibson's 
scraggly face out there on the bases. 
When Gibson gets on base, even by a walk, all bets are off, all rules of 
civility are suspended. It's Showtime. 
It's roller-derby baseball, although Gibson wishes to stress that what he does 
should not be construed as mindless abandon, but calculated risk-taking. 
"The key to baserunning," he said, "is to give yourself the opportunity. If I 
don't run hard to first (on the wild-pitch ball four), I can't try for second. 
"You don't run yourself into outs, but you gotta force the issue sometimes. I'm 
running to second (on the wild pitch) because I know Jose Gonzalez is running 
to third, that S.O.B." 
S.O.B., of course, is a compliment in this context. 
Although he has been here a season and a half, Gibson has never embraced the 
SoCal jogging mentality. He has two speeds: Painful Limp, and Damn the 
Torpedoes. 
Lasorda's insertion of Gibson into the leadoff spot seven games ago may have 
been a move borne of desperation, and it certainly violated the baseball rule 
of never putting your most productive power hitter at the top of the order. But 
it was a masterful move. 
As Mike Tyson will tell you, you should come with your most powerful punch 
right from the bell. If I was Dodger manager, I would want to expose the 
opposition to Gibson as quickly as possible. I would not only bat him leadoff, 
I would have him take the lineup card up to home plate, preferably going into 
the dish spikes-high. 
Will Lasorda put Gibson back at leadoff in the future? 
"It's a possibility, yeah," said Tofu Tommy. 
If you've paid any attention to Gibson, you probably know what he had to say 
Sunday about his preference of spots in the batting order. 
"I could care less," he said. "With my speed, my job is to get on base, move 
the defensive alignments. It changes the game when I get on base." 
When Gibson gets on base, you can almost hear the opposition moan and grumble, 
you can almost see them twitch and lean forward just a bit. 
Baseball is a peaceful, predictable game until Gibson enters the fray. If 
you're on the other team, he ticks you off, wears you out. Who the hell does he 
think he is, sliding into second on an obvious single? Damn hotdog. 
If the opposition can't rest, neither can Gibson's teammates. How would you 
like to be the kid, Gonzalez, had Jose sauntered into second base on that wild 
pitch that Gibson turned into a two-baser? 
It would have been the last sauntering the young man would have done on this 
team. Gibson would have pulled Jose aside and explained the facts of life, 
i.e.: Know the situation. Give yourself the opportunity. Run, don't saunter. 
With Mike Marshall out of the lineup with a bad back and Eddie Murray slumping, 
the only way the Dodgers can stay in the race is through the marvel of 
manufacturing. 
Sunday they gave a clinic on that facet of baseball, and wherever he was, 
Jackie, the Master Manufacturer, must have been smiling. 
