SIDNEY SOLOMON DIES; FOUNDER OF LONG BEACH ACTIVIST GROUP 
Sidney S. Solomon, a widely respected community activist who founded Long Beach 
Area Citizens Involved, died Sunday at the age of 71. 
Solomon, known as Sid, died of a heart attack at a Bellflower hospital hours 
after he was admitted complaining of shortness of breath. 
A retired manager for Radio Shack, Solomon became actively involved in local 
politics not long after moving to Long Beach in 1971. Five years later he 
founded the liberal political watchdog organization known as LBACI, and through 
it, influenced a number of key city decisions over the years. 
"He didn't care how unpopular an issue was. If he thought it was morally right, 
he got in there and pushed for it," said public safety commissioner Larry 
Davis, who worked with Solomon this year to gain voter approval of a 
long-sought Citizen Police Complaint Commission to review police brutality 
complaints. 
"He was trained in another generation," observed Alan Lowenthal, who recently 
succeeded Solomon as president of LBACI. "He was just so committed and he 
believed people could make a difference." 
Solomon was a fixture at City Council meetings, quietly keeping tabs on the 
council and only occasionally speaking. "He had a remarkable ability to sit in 
the back and not have all the adulation," said Councilman Ray Grabinski, who 
also remembered Solomon's "uncanny sense for what was going on in the city. 
Sometimes I'd challenge him and he'd laugh and wave his hands and say, 'You'll 
see, you'll see.' " 
Among his successful crusades was a 1976 campaign against the installation of 
an oil pipeline to Long Beach Harbor, the switch from citywide balloting to 
district elections for both the City Council and the school board, and the 
adoption of local ordinances barring discrimination against gays and people 
with AIDS. 
Born in Lowell, Mass., Solomon worked as a labor organizer before World War II, 
served in the U.S. Army during the war and afterward earned a degree in 
electrical engineering from George Washington University. He got a job in the 
electronics industry and moved to Chicago, where he met his wife Phyllis, whom 
he married in 1954. 
He is survived by his wife, their two sons, and two stepchildren from his 
wife's previous marriage. 
A memorial service will be held at 2 p.m. Sunday at the Unitarian Universalist 
Church, 5450 Atherton St. 
