AILING WOMAN USES DOCTOR'S SUICIDE DEVICE 
An Alzheimer's patient traveled 2,000 miles to commit suicide with the help of 
a doctor who built a device that gave her a lethal dose of chemicals. 
The last thing Janet Adkins told Dr. Jack Kevorkian on Monday was, "You just 
make my case known." Then, he said, she pressed a button on the contraption 
that released the lethal mixture. 
Some medical ethicists Tuesday called the doctor's actions immoral and perhaps 
illegal. A prosecutor said he would wait for autopsy results before deciding 
whether to charge Kevorkian, and will seek an injunction to prevent the doctor 
from using the device again. 
Kevorkian told the Associated Press in a telephone interview late Tuesday that 
it was the first time he had used the device to assist a suicide. 
The Portland, Ore., woman's husband defended his wife's right to die. 
"It's not a matter of how long you live, but the quality of life you live, and 
it was her life and her decision and she chose," Ron Adkins told Portland's 
KATU-TV. "She made that decision based upon the fact that the things she loved 
most -- reading, literature, music -- and all that she couldn't do any more." 
One of the couple's three sons, Neil, said: "She was in a very good state of 
mind, that's the amazing thing. 
"It was not a desperate thing or a depressed situation. She was the one that 
helped us all through it," Neil Adkins told KGW-TV in Portland. 
Kevorkian said Mrs. Adkins traveled to Michigan during the weekend to use his 
suicide device. He drove the 54-year-old woman in his van to a park in northern 
Oakland County on Monday afternoon. 
According to Kevorkian, he and one of his relatives attached Adkins to a heart 
monitor, then put an intravenous tube in her arm. 
The tube first delivered a saline solution. Kevorkian said Adkins then pressed 
a button that injected thiopental, a coma-inducing drug, followed moments later 
by potassium chloride, which stops the heart within minutes. 
He said she was unconscious in 25 seconds, and died in five or six minutes. 
"It simulates exactly the judicial executions that we do now with legal 
executions, except with this device the person does it himself by pushing a 
button," Kevorkian told the Detroit News on Monday. 
The doctor is a retired pathologist and an outspoken advocate of what he calls 
doctor-assisted suicide. 
"Physicians should not be killers, even in cases where the patient requests it 
and there is a compassionate reason behind the act," said Susan Wolf of the 
Hastings Center for biomedical research in Briarcliff, N.Y. "They take an oath 
to do no harm, and taking a life is doing harm." 
Kevorkian said in March that he expected to be prosecuted after the first use 
of the drug-injecting device. He also said he would not charge patients and 
that he might use it to take his own life some day. 
After Adkins died, Kevorkian notified police. Oakland County prosecutor Richard 
Thompson said he won't decide if he will bring charges against the doctor until 
he gets an autopsy report and state police finish their investigation. The 
police have the device, Thompson added. 
Kevorkian said Adkins came to Michigan with her husband and a friend, both of 
whom stayed at a motel while she died and caught a flight back to Oregon later 
Monday night. In Oregon, providing the means to commit suicide is a felony, but 
Michigan has no law against suicide assisted by a physician. 
Kevorkian said the Adkinses contacted him in October after learning about his 
device, and he recommended treatment with an experimental drug at a Seattle 
hospital. 
"It didn't work," Ron Adkins said. "It was hard on us, all of us, because we've 
been mourning for an entire year knowing that this was what she had in mind." 
The device itself -- an aluminum frame with three suspended bottles and a small 
electric motor -- is not illegal, said Gerald Poisson, assistant Oakland County 
prosecutor. But in certain cases, the person who made it available to the 
suicide victim could be charged with homicide, he said. 
Jim Baughman of the Wayne County Prosecutor's Office in Detroit said last year 
that helping someone die would not be a crime if the patient injected the 
drugs. 
But two lawyers specializing in medical ethics, after hearing details of the 
Kevorkian case, said his actions were improper. 
"What this physician did was way over the line," Wolf said. "It was unethical 
and may well have been illegal." 
According to the American Medical Assn., passive euthanasia is ethical, said 
Reinhard Priester of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of 
Minnesota. 
Passive euthanasia might, for example, involve withholding food from a comatose 
patient believed to have no chance of recovery, he said. 
But Priester said Kevorkian, by arranging a suicide ostensibly with the 
patient's consent, appeared to have participated in active euthanasia -- which 
the AMA has deemed morally inappropriate. 
