ALICE KAHN: IT'S ALL A KROC: YOU STILL CAN'T GO HOME AGAIN 
When you're back near home-sweet-home Chicago for an Elvis Presley 
impersonators' convention but stuck at an airport hotel without a car, what do 
you do? 
You walk out a little and reach the kind of neighborhood you thought had 
stopped existing when you left the Midwest in 1961 and vowed: I'll never live 
in this boring place again. 
Only now, it looks beautiful to you. Every detail seems precious. The neat 
lawns. The picket fences. The polite children lined up for the school bus. The 
proud little hand-carved mailbox in front of the clean brick bungalow that 
reads, "The Home of Fred Fredrickson." 
The thick air, the catalpa trees, the subtle smells seem so oddly familiar. The 
lush summer greenery feels like a hothouse to you after spending the past 25 
years in dry, dry California. You ask yourself why you ever left. 
You must see more of this place that you once called home. So, you look in the 
front of the phone book for nearby sights to see. Nuts! The Leaning Tower of 
Pisa YMCA is too far away. But you're in luck -- the McDonald's Museum is just 
three miles down the road. 
It would be no fun alone, so you pick up some fellow conventioneers. In this 
case, you seek out two state-of-the-art New Yorkers who caught your eye -- 
Kerry and Claire. He: a Manhattan PR man by day and a country singer by night. 
She: a director at a leading ad agency by day and, by night, a Jell-O mold 
artist and a singer with the group the Earnest Borgnines. 
Kerry is at the convention trying to sell his song "Back From the Dead and 
Ready to Rock." Claire is there taping and "shooting" -- photographing -- 
things. 
You have noticed them because they are the kind of people who would stand out 
anywhere -- by virtue of their clever comments and their sharp clothes. Claire 
tells you about the time her agency lost the Oreos account and the boss said, 
"Let's not hang on the cross if we're going down the toilet." 
Kerry is wearing a bright yellow tuxedo adorned with drawings of records 
bearing the names of Elvis' greatest hits. His mother sewed it for him from 
material he purchased at Jimmy Velvet's Elvis Museum in Miami. Claire wears a 
'70s polyester mini dress and black platform boots with fishnet stockings. 
Of course, Kerry and Claire want to go to the McDonald's Museum, which is 
housed in the original, primal Des Plaines, Ill., McDonald's. The Midwest is 
like a David Lynch movie to them. 
We take a taxi and find everything at McDonald's frozen as it was on opening 
day -- April 15, 1955. In the parking lot, under the neon golden arch, is 
Speedee, the smiley-faced, running hamburger, wearing a chef's hat and holding 
up a sign reading "15 cents." 
Somewhere a sound system plays "Rock Around the Clock." Claire shoots Kerry 
leaning against a '55 Olds Super 88. There is also a yellow Chrysler St. Regis 
with a dashboard Madonna (the original Madonna), a Chevy Bel Air with a 
coonskin cap in the back seat and a Ford Fairlane with the April 15, 1955, 
Chicago Tribune on the front seat. The headline reads, "Stratton Asks Polio 
Aid." 
Kerry was a year old when this happened. Claire wasn't born. I was 11, and I 
find myself feeling oddly close to tears. It was all once actually real to me. 
And again I ask myself: What was I running away from here? 
I slowly rub my hand along the achingly clean red-and-white tile structure. 
Whoever imagined that a preserved McDonald's would someday seem beautiful and 
quaint? 
We enter the building and are greeted by Lorraine Peterson and Virginia Cooper, 
two senior citizens employed as docents. "Oh, get a shot of this," says Kerry. 
Claire shoots him next to the potato peeler, touching the DO NOT TOUCH sign. 
Lorraine points out that we are in the "first Ray Kroc franchised McDonald's," 
not the first McDonald's drive-in. That one is in San Bernardino, Calif., and 
it was there that Kroc, a Multimixer salesman, went on a trip, liked what he 
saw and decided that we needed another 11,162 of them. 
We follow a class of international graduates from Hamburger University into the 
drive-in's basement, which is loaded with early photographs and Krocobilia. 
Claire shoots Kerry with the Hamburger U grads, with the museum janitor and 
next to the sign telling employees how to scrub the machines with Bab-o. You 
just know all this is going to be terribly amusing to Claire's friends in the 
Manhattan ad world. Every bit of Middle America is a collectible to people who 
live in New York City. 
Moved as I am by this monument to innocence, nevertheless I ask Lorraine, "I 
hope this doesn't offend you, but can you recommend a good place to eat around 
here?" 
That is how we ended up at the Sugar Bowl, in downtown Des Plaines since 1921, 
with long-forgotten foods at low prices. As Kerry climbs on a counter stool to 
photograph my egg salad sandwich and lime rickey, three white-haired ladies in 
the booth next to ours, their snap-on shades in the flaps-up position, gaze 
sternly our way. We are laughing. We look different. We are not sitting in our 
place. Clearly, they disapprove. I start to recollect why I left. 
As we walk back to the hotel, I realize sadly that I just love being with Kerry 
and Claire on this perfect, hot, lush, green Midwestern afternoon. We start 
harmonizing to "I Don't Care If the Sun Don't Shine." 
It happens all the time. You have a one-day life with people and never see them 
again. And sometimes you're born, raised and live in a place for 18 years and 
will never belong there again. 
