A WORTHY TRANSPORTATION PLAN 
The state of California can never build enough freeways to get 30 million 
Californians wherever they want to go at the beginning of the 21st Century. But 
with enough money, brains, technology, planning and creativity, the state can 
develop a modern transportation system that will keep the state's economic 
engine running strongly and maintain the basic life style that makes California 
the Golden State. 
The foundation of such a program is on the table in Sacramento, close to final 
agreement between Gov. George Deukmejian and state legislative leaders. They 
must settle the remaining loose ends soon and seal the deal. Then, they must 
work with the business community to persuade California voters that the 
$18.5-billion transportation finance plan is essential if the state is to 
control its own destiny. The option is increasing, paralyzing gridlock, leading 
to a certain undermining of the state's economy. 
Representatives of the governor and legislative leaders reached tentative 
agreement Tuesday on the program to be financed by a 9-cent-per-gallon increase 
in the gasoline tax over five years and significant increases in truck fees. 
The money would go toward a mix of new highway construction and maintenance, 
mass transit facilities, local roads, congestion relief, modern traffic 
management techniques and environmental enhancement projects like sound 
barriers and tree-planting. 
Significantly, the plan also would include a growth-management segment 
patterned after one approved by voters in Contra Costa County last year. This 
would require local regions to develop plans for accommodating growth as a 
condition of receiving new state aid. Growth management is an essential element 
in the package since transportation routing has such a dramatic effect on 
growth, and unplanned development can quickly clog existing streets and roads. 
The next step is for negotiators to approve a modest liberalization of the Gann 
spending limits so that the new transportation money can be allocated. It also 
would give California a more realistic cap on overall spending. The Gann change 
would require a vote of the people either at a special election this fall or at 
the primary next June and would, in effect, serve as a referendum on the 
gasoline tax increase. 
Both the governor, who previously opposed gas tax increases, and legislators 
deserve credit for developing the program, which incorporates most of the 
elements of a forward-looking plan sponsored by Assemblyman Richard Katz 
(D-Sylmar), chairman of the Assembly Transportation Committee. The energy of 
state Transportation Director Robert K. Best also was essential to the process. 
This transportation finance program is critical to California's future. It 
cannot be allowed to fail. 
