BOY, 14, CHARGED WITH MURDER OF HIS SISTER, 12 
Murder charges were filed Monday against a 14-year-old Anaheim boy after his 
12-year-old sister died earlier in the day from a gunshot wound to the head. 
Gema Marie Hubler, who had been comatose since the shooting last Thursday in 
the upstairs bedroom of their Anaheim Shores home, died at 1:30 p.m. at UCI 
Medical Center in Orange after members of her family decided to remove her from 
a hospital life support system. 
The brother, Richard Hubler, who had been arrested after the shooting, remained 
in custody in the Orange County Juvenile Hall. Deputy Dist. Atty. Brent Romney 
said the youth will be tried as a juvenile. A detention hearing is scheduled 
for this morning in Orange County Juvenile Court to determine if he should be 
released to his parents pending trial. 
Anaheim Police Lt. Marc Hedgpeth declined Monday to elaborate on why police 
sought the murder charges other than to say: "We have enough cause to file the 
charges, from physical evidence and statements." Hedgpeth said Friday that 
detectives have discredited the brother's original story that his sister had 
been shot during a break-in Thursday by "three masked men." 
Police arrested the youth when they discovered inconsistencies in his statement 
about the break-in and noted that he did not call for help promptly. Paramedics 
found the unconscious girl covered by a blanket, her head wrapped with white 
bandages. 
Neither child had been at school the day of the shooting. Police said the boy 
was alone with his sister and had been firing the weapon earlier in the back 
yard. 
Hedgpeth said gunshot residue tests of the youth's hands were taken after the 
shooting and that the results should be available in several days. 
According to school records and interviews with classmates of both children, 
Gema was a bright sixth-grader who excelled in science, while her brother, an 
eighth-grader, ran with rougher youths and was on the brink of dropping out. 
