TENNIS / SAM FARMER; 
TANNER RELISHING ROLE AS HEAD PRO AT SHERWOOD COUNTRY CLUB 
In his salad days, Roscoe Tanner could wilt any green foe with his blistering 
serve. The string-scorching projectiles left the knees of opponents on the 
professional tennis tour knocking. One Roscoe rocket reportedly was clocked at 
164 m.p.h. 
A decade later, Tanner still is recognized for his service ace. 
Make that ace service. 
A Westlake Village resident, Tanner is the head pro at the exclusive Sherwood 
Country Club in Lake Sherwood. The club, which is ringed by million-dollar 
homes, still is in its developmental stage. 
Five courts and a tennis stadium are scheduled to open by the end of June. 
Ultimately, the club will offer members clay and grass courts as well as hard 
courts. 
"The stadium is probably the prettiest I've ever seen," Tanner said. "I think 
it's the best facility for tennis members that's ever been designed. Tennis 
players are going to be treated like golfers." 
Predictably, they are going to pay like sultans. 
"We are breaking ground that has never been broken for tennis," Tanner said, 
adding that the club is finalizing its rates. "As a result, we are charging a 
price that has never been charged for tennis." 
In addition to the luxurious facilities, members will have access to tutorials 
on the finer points of the game and to the latest cross-training techniques. 
Roscoe might even snap a few strings. 
Friendlier folk: After Tanner accepted the position at Sherwood last August, he 
and his family moved from Santa Barbara. He found the neighborhoods of Westlake 
Village surprisingly friendly. 
"In Santa Barbara, I didn't know the neighbors that well," he said, "I just 
knew their guard dogs." 
Civil war: Natasha Pospich of Woodland Hills was one of five girls who competed 
for the Maze Cup last week at the Courtside Racquet Club in Los Gatos. A 
10-member team composed of boy and girl all-stars from Southern California 
played a similar team from Northern California. Players from the 16- and 
18-year-old age divisions competed. 
Pospich, 17, ranked No. 2 in the 18s in Southern California, won both of her 
sets and helped pace her team to a 14-6 victory. 
Sectional fever: Pospich has her sights set on the U.S Tennis Assn. national 
championships in August but first will play in the Southern California Junior 
sectional championships later this month. 
Along with 1,887 others. 
This year's sectional field easily is the largest in the tournament's 88-year 
history. Last year, 1,596 competed. The event, which includes players from San 
Luis Obispo to San Diego, will be played in the Orange County area. 
A newcomer to watch is Jessica Kessler of Studio City, ranked No. 1 in the 
girls' 12s. 
Add tournament: The Racquet Centre of Universal City will hold its annual 
spring junior singles tournament Saturday and Sunday and June 23-24. Boys and 
girls aged 10 to 18 will compete. 
Information: 818-760-2303. 
Be my guest: Jack Darrah, owner of the Westlake Tennis and Swim Club, is 
cordial but his hospitality has its limits. 
Darrah and partner Chuck Nelson of Santa Monica defeated Tom Springer of Canoga 
Park and Gary Russell of Rancho Palos Verdes, 3-6, 7-6 (7-0), 6-2, in the 
55-and-over division doubles finals of the Westlake Tennis and Swim Senior 
tennis championships. 
"I lost in the singles, that was enough," Darrah quipped. "You've got to carry 
that graciousness only so far." 
Springer and Russell, the top-ranked 55s team in Southern California last year, 
won the first set and led, 5-4, in the second before collapsing. 
Other winners included: men's 35 -- Gabriel Harmat (Woodland Hills) d. Tom Wire 
(Encino), 6-2, 6-4; men's 35 doubles -- Andrew Stanley (Malibu Lake)-Jim Pardee 
(Camarillo) d. Fritz Sproul (Ventura)-Eric Mann (North Hollywood), 6-2, 7-6 
(7-3); men's 45 -- Tom Muench (Idyllwild) d. Andrew Watson (Calabasas), 6-3, 
6-3; men's 45 doubles -- Ed Rosa (Calabasas)-Allan Drazen (Woodland Hills) d. 
Muench and Whitney Reed (West L.A.), 6-1, ret.; men's 55 -- Reed d. Springer, 
7-6 (7-2), 6-2. 
Women's 30 -- Patricia Kreutz (Tehachapi) d. Nasrin Alizadeh, 6-2, 6-1; women's 
40 -- Alice Middleton (Santa Monica) d. Linda Stude (North Hollywood), 6-2, 
6-2; women's 40 doubles -- Stude and Susie Patterson (Rancho Santa Fe) d. 
Barbara Oldfield (Bakersfield)-Bonnie Oliver, 3-6, 6-2, 6-4; women's 50 -- 
Sinclair Wooten-Bill (Santa Barbara) d. Audrey Folden (Claremont), 6-3, 6-2; 
women's 50 doubles -- Barbara Dunn (Calabasas)-Barbara Cassebarth (Calabasas) 
d. Patricia Coles (Santa Barbara)-Gennelle Linuille (Santa Barbara) 3-6, 6-4, 
6-1. 
