BRITISH GIVE UP, BRAND COLD FUSION A 'MAD IDEA' 
In a move that virtually buries hopes for cold fusion, the British Atomic 
Energy Authority said Thursday it has abandoned efforts to replicate a 
controversial Utah experiment and branded claims of achieving fusion-in-a-flask 
"a mad idea." 
The decision by Britain's Harwell Laboratory is particularly significant 
because one of the scientists who made the startling announcement in Salt Lake 
City last March is a consultant to the lab and made materials he had used in 
the Utah research available to his British colleagues. In addition, the 
scientist, Milton Fleischmann, worked with the Harwell team in an effort to 
repeat the results he claimed to have achieved with fellow electrochemist B. 
Stanley Pons of the University of Utah. 
Ten scientists worked full time at the lab, located near Oxford, and more than 
100 others participated from time to time, according to David Williams, who 
headed the effort. In all, they tried 125 variations of the experiment over a 
three-month period and spent more than $486,000. 
But in the end, their highly sophisticated instruments detected no excess heat, 
which would have demonstrated the energy-producing potential of the experiment, 
and they found no neutrons, which would have proved that fusion was taking 
place. 
It all added up to a devastating blow to cold fusion enthusiasts, because it 
was widely believed that Harwell, with Fleischmann's full cooperation, had the 
best chance of confirming the Utah experiment, which had held the promise of 
ending the planet's energy woes. 
"We simply have to stop because we can't think of anything else to do at the 
moment," Williams told reporters Thursday. 
But he added that the experiments "clearly documented" that cold fusion was not 
taking place. 
In a reference to Fleischmann, he added: "When brilliant people have mad ideas 
it can come down on them like a ton of bricks. What's happened here is that a 
brilliant man has had a mad idea." 
Fleischmann was "out of town" for a couple of days and could not be reached, 
according to a man who answered the phone at his London residence. Pons could 
not be reached in Salt Lake City, either. The University of Utah said he is in 
London. 
But James J. Brophy, vice president for research at the University of Utah, 
said the university continued to support the claims of Pons and Fleischmann. 
Brophy said he was "at a loss to explain" why Fleischmann's colleagues in 
England could not repeat the experiment even though they had a palladium 
electrode supplied by Fleischmann. The electrode was part of a simple table-top 
experiment that the University of Utah had claimed offered a "clean, virtually 
inexhaustible source of energy." 
Disappointment in Utah 
"It is disappointing that they have not been able to do the experiment 
properly," Brophy said in a telephone interview. 
The startling announcement last March sent shock waves through the scientific 
world. Thousands of experts around the globe dropped whatever they were doing 
and turned their attention to the experiment, although most scientists were 
skeptical from the beginning. 
Oddly, a number of laboratories and institutions worldwide reported partial 
confirmation of the Utah experiment, although no one was able to duplicate all 
the results claimed by Pons and Fleischmann. 
Why some have claimed partial success while many others have failed remains a 
mystery. 
Some, such as the Georgia Institute of Technology, reported confirmation of the 
experiment, only to have to back off days later and admit failure. 
But others, including scientists and engineers at Texas A&amp;M and Stanford 
University, have reported results that so far have defied explanation. 
"We are getting positive results," said A. John Appleby, director of the 
electrochemical center at Texas A&amp;M. But the results are not always the 
same, adding more mystery to what will surely rank as one of the most unusual 
chapters in the history of science. 
Sometimes, Appleby said in a telephone interview Thursday, the electrodes 
produce tritium -- a byproduct of fusion -- but other scientists with identical 
electrodes on other parts of the College Station campus are unable to get the 
same results. Some experiments at Texas A&amp;M have also produced excess heat, 
but other experiments on the same campus have not. 
"Something seems to be happening" that does not conform to conventional 
understanding of either chemistry or physics, he added. 
"I'm not saying I believe in cold fusion," he said, "but we have heating we 
can't explain by normal means." 
Other research institutions, including the Los Alamos National Laboratory, have 
reported some evidence of fusion in electrodes like those used by Pons and 
Fleischmann, but not nearly on a scale that would suggest that the process has 
any application in the production of energy. Instead, the Los Alamos results 
tend to support the far less extravagant claims of another Utah scientist, 
Steven E. Jones of Brigham Young University. 
Jones claims that he has caused atoms of deuterium -- a heavy form of hydrogen 
-- to fuse in a palladium electrode, but the reaction is very weak and does not 
produce excess heat. There is growing support for Jones' work, although most 
physicists are still mystified over how fusion could occur unless it is heated 
to temperatures equivalent to the core of the sun. Jones, as well as Pons and 
Fleischmann, have claimed that fusion occurred at room temperature when an 
electric current was passed through an electrode immersed in water that had 
been enriched with deuterium. 
But unlike Pons and Fleischmann, Jones does not claim that his experiment can 
ever be used to produce energy. 
The March announcement by Pons and Fleischmann during a Salt Lake City press 
conference sent scientists scurrying to their laboratories, since both men had 
solid reputations in electrochemistry even if they were a bit out of their 
field in claiming to have achieved a historic breakthrough in physics. What 
followed was a bizarre series of events. 
Because Pons and Fleischmann used a magic word -- fusion -- to explain a 
process they admitted they did not fully understand, it set off a chain 
reaction among scientists who have long dreamed of harnessing the energy that 
powers the sun. 
Had they not claimed that the heat they were seeing was produced by fusion, 
noted UCLA nuclear engineer Robert Conn, "none of this brouhaha would have 
occurred." 
Missing Signature 
The problem for physicists from the beginning was that none of the signatures 
of fusion were present. Had fusion been taking place, for example, it should 
have produced a lethal dose of neutrons. 
When other scientists pointed that out, Pons and Fleischmann responded that the 
fusion was mysteriously benign -- creating four times as much energy as it 
consumed, but not producing the dangerous byproducts associated with fusion. 
That meant that other scientists had to search for a mysterious nuclear 
reaction that did not carry the normal signature of fusion. 
By Thursday, men such as UCLA's Conn were saying that the chase had ended. 
Pons and Fleischmann may have seen something that convinced them that they were 
producing energy from fusion, he said, but it was not fusion. 
"The fundamental signature isn't there," Conn added. 
Meanwhile, halfway around the world, the scientist who directed the Harwell 
lab's effort and has worked with Fleischmann for years spoke of the burden that 
will have to be carried by a friend who came up with a "mad idea." 
"Martin Fleischmann is a very, very clever man and he has these ideas all the 
time," David Williams told reporters. 
But "not every mad idea works out. Maybe this one has, and maybe it hasn't. It 
certainly hasn't worked out for us. 
"I think the sad thing is that there has been this amazing, hysterical 
overreaction, certainly in America." 
