THE GROWING DEBATE OVER MINIMALISM; 
FOUR COMPOSERS' VIEWS ON MINIMAL MUSIC -- WHERE IT'S BEEN, WHERE IT'S GOING AND 
WHAT'S THE BROUHAHA? 
Ever since minimalism appeared on the music scene 25 years ago, academic 
composers have decried the trashing of their complex music language and the 
acceptance, in its place, of a highly simplified -- some say simplistic -- one. 
Their charge: a sellout to commercialism. 
The minimalists say the scholars adhere to an "old-boy network" whose in-bred, 
practically impenetrable scores alienate everyone except each other. 
With growing alarm and resentment, the old guard watched while these upstarts 
basked in the spotlight and took the prizes: audiences, publicity, career 
opportunities. They festered. They stewed. For every article on standard-bearer 
George Perle, for instance, there are 500 profiles of the ever-popular Philip 
Glass. For every $10,000 commission given Charles Wuorinen, a $1-million one 
turns up for Steve Reich. 
A whole generation has grown up listening to mimimalism's repetitive, 
bare-bones thumping -- in the movies ("The Thin Blue Line"), in dance and opera 
("In the Upper Room" and "Nixon in China"), even in the sanctified museum of 
the concert hall ("Harmonium"). 
Critics and commentators have debated the issues but composers tend to be 
closed-mouthed about their peers. Not so Perle and Wuorinen, Pulitzer Prize 
winners, recipients of MacArthur Fellowships and articulate debunkers of 
minimalism. 
In fairness, minimalist John Adams and neo-romantic David del Tredici were 
given opportunities to defend their striking successes. That said, here they 
are in full cry. 
Charles Wuorinen: Thanks to Short-Sighted Critics, the 'Quick Fix' Winds Up as 
Most Popular 
Charles Wuorinen treads the same path of rigorously difficult composition as an 
Elliott Carter or Pierre Boulez and talks about his "passion" for music as High 
Art. At 51, he is a fierce polemicist, waging verbal wars against what he sees 
as the rising tide of Philistinism. 
Unhappy with the status quo, he does not equivocate in laying blame; his finger 
points first to music journalists. 
"It's the fault of the critical press," he says, "that people lose sight of the 
difference between the real nature of a thing and how it is promoted." Citing 
an example, Wuorinen quotes Harold Schonberg, former music critic of the New 
York Times, who remarked 10 years ago: "I am going to protect the public from 
new music." 
"That statement outraged me," Wuorinen says, explaining how such a prejudice 
fuels public intolerance "to anything but the familiar. Critics are not 
supposed to be indistinguishable from audiences. They're supposed to know more, 
to stretch the limits of listeners' experience. Instead they try to gauge only 
the immediate appeal of a piece," he charges. 
What the New York composer is complaining about is the same thing political 
pundits decried in the last presidential campaign: that after televised debates 
between the candidates, TV anchors waited to see the polls before declaring 
winners or losers, thereby relinquishing their own critical evaluation. Yet it 
would seem that arts critics bow less to popular opinion than television's news 
entertainers. 
"Pandering to the least worthy effort just because of its easy appeal serves 
neither the public nor the cause of music," Wuorinen continues. 
"Familiarity breeds love, but if audiences never get a chance to become 
familiar with something new, it cannot have an impact. Look at Brahms and 
Tchaikovsky, for instance. It's only because some critics defended their music 
that it is now a concert hall staple." 
So have orchestra managements been less than valiant, according to the academic 
proselytizer. He mentions a San Francisco Symphony study, designed to explain 
subscriber dropouts. One woman who let her subscription expire protested being 
duped, he recalls: 
"She saw a brochure flagging Isaac Stern and Tchaikovsky and she came expecting 
him to play that composer. As it turned out he performed a new concerto, its 
name buried in fine print, and the orchestra played a Tchaikovsky symphony. Why 
set up that kind of disappointment? Why treat patrons as though they were 
merely customers you're trying to sell toothpaste to? Why not be forthright and 
honorable?" 
With this in mind, Wuorinen doffs his hat to Ernest Fleischmann and the Los 
Angeles Philharmonic for championing Boulez, the stellar composer/conductor, 
himself a stern tribune of all that's cerebral in music: 
"Is he charismatic? No. Is his music anything but complex? No. There is nothing 
half-hearted or apologetic in the way the Philharmonic presents him. And the 
public responds to the endorsement, the year-in, year-out commitment to what 
Boulez offers." 
Apart from such a rarely seen attitude, Wuorinen says, "people have stopped 
trying to be civilized. At one time there was a striving for prestige. 
Compositions had stature because they invoked higher values. 
"Now, hardly anyone takes such a stand. What we have is the quick fix, the need 
for instant self-gratification. And that accounts for this utterly 
unchallenging, unprovocative kind of music. In fact, it accounts for the 
general ills of our society -- all the way up to our government leaders. 
"These days it's a question of how many clap the longest and loudest. Nothing 
is being asked of the creator or the recipient." 
Lest his comments be seen as sour grapes, the composer points out that he "has 
as much work, and more, as I can handle." 
Certainly Wuorinen practices the fire and brimstone that he preaches. In order 
to uphold his lofty standards, he founded a chamber orchestra, the Group for 
Contemporary Music. Without absolutely compelling performances, he argues, 
there can be no persuasion of a difficult work's excellence. Too often, he 
believes, unconvincing accounts of new music give it a bad name. And too often 
symphony orchestra musicians show the same skepticism as audiences. 
If anything, players do not embrace the typically simplistic examples of 
minimalism. For example, when the Los Angeles Philharmonic played an excerpt of 
Philip Glass' "the CIVIL warS" several years ago, the musicians deliberately 
turned pages noisily to express their contempt of its incessant arpeggio 
repetitions and limited harmonic interest. 
Wuorinen, apparently unmollified by this response, fears that "the distinction 
between art and entertainment no longer exists. . . . We've succeeded in 
cheapening art and ruining entertainment. By making popularity the touchstone, 
we rationalize that we're being democratic and realistic." 
His favorite anecdote on the subject of music's lowered standards involves a 
composing student who naively told a professor that he wanted to be famous and 
loved and popular. 
"How popular?" asked the professor. "As popular as Schoenberg? But Stravinsky 
is more popular than Schoenberg. As popular as Stravinsky?But Beethoven is more 
popular than Stravinsky. As popular as Beethoven?But Tchaikovsky is more 
popular than Beethoven. As popular as Tchaikovsky?But Lawrence Welk is more 
popular than Tchaikovsky." 
So much for goals and definitions of popularity. 
"Our refusal to be serious," Wuorinen says, "can be seen in this surge of 
anti-intellectualism and yahooism. It's been going on for 25 years. If things 
don't change -- and I don't think they will -- serious music will disappear." 
John Adams: Dividing Art Between 'Serious' and Unworthy Is Far Too Simplistic 
John Adams, a Grammy laureate of different flora altogether, stays happily out 
of academic gardens. Right now, he's fielding phone calls from maverick 
director Peter Sellars, among others, in his hotel room, having just finished 
rehearsing the St. Paul Chamber Orchestra for a concert of 20th-Century music. 
He says this is a convenient time to talk, "if you don't mind interruptions. I 
have about 15 minutes before rushing out to a dinner engagement." 
Adams has barely said this before another call comes in -- this one from Lisa 
Klinghoffer, daughter of Leon Klinghoffer, the wheelchair-bound American 
murdered aboard the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro by an Arab terrorist in 
1985. 
What the 42-year-old composer of "Nixon in China" and "Harmonium" is doing is 
another opera based on current affairs -- this one recounting the above 
incident. It too will enlist Sellars as collaborator. Commissioned by six opera 
companies, the work will have its world premiere in Brussels in 1991. 
Adams has already pondered the debate over minimalism. Creators in a given 
field always seem to know who their detractors are and what they're saying. 
"In fact, I couldn't be happier to answer Charles and his criticisms," says 
Adams. "It's something I've never had the chance to do before. Frankly, (pause) 
I think he's a square. 
"To make arbitrary divisions between what is serious and what is outside the 
worthwhile realm is just too simplistic. Has he ever considered that 
Shakespeare and Goethe drew on the vernacular? That they were hardly averse to 
referring to their own contemporary culture? This is what Sellars does so 
brilliantly. It's essential to utilize the environment we are part of, rather 
than cut ourselves off from it." 
The argument that art and entertainment run along clear-cut and separate paths 
is one that Adams doesn't buy. While he concedes that Lawrence Welk and 
Liberace are "strictly entertainers," too many others defy such easy 
categorization. 
He hastens to add that his own music was intended to have entertainment value 
-- "so did Mozart and Ravel acknowledge it, as well as all the great composers 
did, until these self-appointed guardians of theory came into existence." But 
he finds "the dour, grim attitude behind art for art's sake to be phony." 
As for minimalism, per se, he does not object categorically to the term. 
"I don't know if there's any more antipathy to it than to catch-all labels in 
the past. Picasso probably didn't like being called a Cubist, simply because it 
unfairly limited his identity. 
"But the word minimalism is eminently mockable. How many times do we hear the 
standard snipe: 'Minimal music for minimal minds?' " 
What Adams is eager to talk about is the genesis of the much-debased form. He 
explains it as a pendulum swing away from the forbidding 12-tone music of the 
Second Viennese School -- a revolt against Schoenberg and his disciples, who 
dominated compositional thought from the 1920s. 
He sees music composition as having gone through cycles of complexity -- 
"inbreeding to extinction" -- followed by radical reappraisals of language. 
"Look at Mozart," says the defender of populism. "His music was immensely 
simple compared to the Baroque style, which immediately preceded it, almost a 
contradiction to the kind of involved counterpoint Bach put forth. 
"But I still say that our critics, Wuorinen and his elite brotherhood, are 
torchbearers of High Art out of defensiveness. What's getting these guys so 
apoplectically mad is how loved our music is. Whether it, or any other music, 
has value though, no one can be sure of. 
"There will always be an academic music, a theory music. We (minimalists) exist 
outside of it. Our important feedback comes from the people -- the ones who 
write letters expressing how profoundly affected they are by a piece. As for 
the future, we must hope that the swing does not go too far, that the love 
affair with popular culture does not become an end in itself." 
George Perle: Minimalism's Numbers 'Mean Nothing to Me . . . I'm Not Counting' 
George Perle, now at UC Berkeley to deliver the prestigious Ernest Bloch 
lectures, takes a morning phone call. The nocturnal composer did not spend most 
of the night working as he often does. So he has the patience to explain that 
his music is accessible without being simplistic, that he is not guilty as 
charged of being an eat-your-peas academic. 
An invitation to jump into the fray is less than compelling, however. 
"I have little concern with telling people what to listen to and why. Do they 
like it?" asks the 74-year-old detester of minimalism. "Then let them go ahead. 
I won't sit in judgment." Perle takes the opposite stand of Wuorinen. Society 
will find its way, he believes. He need not be a standard-bearer for anyone but 
himself. Indeed, it is only with much cajoling that he addresses the 
minimalists and others who, he says, "have nothing new to say." 
Philip Glass, for instance. 
"What he writes is childish babble. It uses the most superficial aspect of an 
old musical language. People do not come out of the hall humming it because 
it's applied to visual events and doesn't stand alone. It's music for people 
who hate music and can only be looked at historically, as a reaction to the 
misunderstood 12-tone system, which created problems both for audiences and 
composers. 
"But surely those old harmonic relationships (Brahms and Beethoven) can find 
better means of preservation than the bare-bones formulas devised by the 
minimalists." 
Perle -- who, in his early research into the first 12-tone music, found his 
compositional niche -- has brought that 20th-Century language to a comfortably 
integrated place, one placing him in what he calls the mainstream. Whether that 
mainstream has 1,000 or 1,000,000 listeners swimming in it, though, is 
immaterial. 
"My approach is not concerned with popularity," he says, conceding minimalism's 
fascination for the masses. Numbers mean nothing to me. I'm not counting." 
He goes on to describe his pleasure over the world premiere of his "Windows of 
Order," presented by the Juilliard String Quartet in April in Washington's 
Library of Congress. 
"It was a Beethoven crowd that filled the hall, people with a sincere and 
developed love for music. But if someone told me I could exchange this for a 
stadium mob of 10,000, I wouldn't make the trade off. 
"I'm not an elitist, though," says the esteemed author of contemporary music 
theory. "I come from a working-class background. My favorite novelist is Henry 
James." 
But, "I'm also inclined to go to a movie or turn on TV. I don't have to be 
serious about everything." 
The scholarly composer points to the enormous growth of music today -- 
including the recording industry, expanded numbers of live concerts, etc. -- 
that comes as a result of greater leisure time. Yet he sees an erosion of 
standards. And worse, "certain colleagues manipulating the public." 
"There are those in the business of feeding that public, who don't care about 
it or music -- only their own success. They appeal to trend-seekers and set 
themselves up as arbiters of trendiness. Who is truly on the side of the 
public? I think I am. Not because I'm a nice guy or want to be popular but 
because my music has integrated the 12-tone language into something accessible. 
"There's a difference between the complex and the complicated. Mozart was 
complex and so is our spoken language, with its elaborate grammar. But some 
serial music is only complicated. By that I mean artificial, not relevant. 
People think I'm more humane than Boulez, for example, which is hardly the 
point. My music is simply more coherent than his. 
"Minimalism is not the only thing I dislike, although some of its practitioners 
-- like Adams -- are more palatable than others. Quoting hundreds of bars of 
Mozart -- George Rochberg does this -- hardly counts as new music. And 
borrowing a dead language, the way (David) Del Tredici does, is no better. I 
don't want to get personal, but these composers gain no more of my sympathy 
than the Glasses of the world. 
"As for minimalism, I think it will grind itself out of existence. But 
something just as bad will take its place." 
David del Tredici: Good Minimalist Music Will Bring Audiences Back 
David del Tredici, at 52, remembers having John Adams as a student in his music 
theory class at Harvard. He's also good friends with minimalist Steve Reich. 
But even this mild-mannered middleman among composers has a satiric epithet for 
Philip Glass: "He's Rossini without melody. I think his music is awful." 
Nevertheless, Del Tredici has considerable empathy for the minimal movement -- 
for he too belongs to a generation that defected from the hard-core atonality 
that was fashionable until the mid-'60s. 
"I remember being thrilled by very dissonant music," he says. "Everything I 
wrote at first was in the voguish Schoenbergian mold. So my first attempt at 
tonal music was terrifying. But when I heard the wild roar of approval from the 
audience -- a far different thing from the respectful neutrality that typically 
greeted new works -- I knew it was a turning point." 
He's referring to his "Final Alice," an enormously popular piece jointly 
commissioned by the Big Six orchestras -- Los Angeles, New York, Cleveland, 
Chicago, Boston and Philadelphia -- for the 1976 Bicentennial celebrations. It 
earned him a Pulitzer. 
It also earned him an adjective that he is not fond of: accessible. 
"It's a synonym for cheap," he says. "The word has a bad connotation. We all 
grew up with the attitude that immortality comes to those who write 'ahead of 
their time.' To be accessible is to lack the wherewithal for immortality. We 
consoled ourselves that no one in Beethoven's day could understand his late 
works. Therefore our music should be inaccessible. Hogwash!Everyone knew back 
then that even his difficult pieces were extraordinary. We've overdone the idea 
of 'ahead of his time.' 
"And now the reaction to it -- minimalism -- is also excessive." 
But if Del Tredici trembles at the thought of being called accessible, why does 
a somewhat forbidding George Perle crave such a label? 
"One man's accessible is another man's forbidding," says the easygoing 
neo-Romantic, who is accustomed to his current outside-the-academy rank as 
composer in residence at the N.Y. Philharmonic. 
"If you want to be a bad boy today, that is, an anti-scholar, you take up 
minimalism or what I embrace, neotonality. Neither of these has any place in 
the academic hierarchy. That, in itself, attests to their vitality! 
"Twelve-tone music has lost its thrill. It's a waning reality, an historical 
fact that doesn't mean anything now. Neither a Boulez nor a Stockhausen has any 
relevance today. But it still takes courage to walk away. Less courage for 
minimalists who are regarded as 'new.' The fact that they're boring is only a 
secondary consideration. 
"Adams is trying to extend the horizons of minimalism. Steve Reich, acting like 
a spider under a rock, wants to hold onto its static subtleties. However, no 
honest person could deny the powerful influence of minimalism. It begets 
audiences and, in that, gives contemporary music a good name. Where 12-tone 
dissonance sent people fleeing, the best forms of minimalism are bringing them 
back." 
