ASK THE VET: IT MAY TAKE CATS MONTHS TO GET USED TO DOG 
Q: We have two adorable cats, neither of which particularly cares for the other 
and no doubt would dislike a dog even more. Nevertheless, we eventually would 
like to add a puppy to our family. Any suggestions on which breed is most 
kindly disposed to cats? At this time we are thinking about a large dog (such 
as a husky or collie), but are worried that our two de-clawed felines would be 
miserable and defenseless. 
K. McDonald, Irvine 
A: Introducing any puppy to your two cats will probably upset their day, yet 
will be the best way to add a dog to your household. A puppy will generally be 
non-threatening although it could be annoying from their point of view. Since 
your cats are de-clawed, the risk of injury to the pup is greatly reduced. You 
need to be present during the initial introductions in order to keep the pup 
from being too bold and possibly getting hurt if he should corner one of the 
cats while trying to play. Allow the cats some "high ground" to retreat toward 
while they are adjusting to the pup. It may take them several months to feel 
comfortable around the pup. It's possible they may never completely accept the 
dog in spite of what you do. Since you are planning on getting a large dog, it 
will probably spend most of its time outdoors and not be in competition with 
the cats for house space. Some cats may start to spray in the house until they 
finally accept the dog, so be prepared for some behavioral modifications. 
Q: I have a 3-year-old cat that is an indoor/outdoor pet. Lately he has several 
areas where he is losing his hair. My roommate says he may have mange and that 
I may have to get rid of him or put him to sleep. Is this necessary? Can't I 
use one of the dips in the store to treat the mange? 
Kathy Tolmasov, Orange 
A: Hair loss on a cat or dog does not always mean that they have mange. There 
is more than one type of mange, each caused by a different kind of mite and 
each treated differently. Hair loss can be due to a fungus, a wound, scratching 
at fleas, metabolic diseases and hormonal changes. It would be worth the peace 
of mind to take your cat to your veterinarian and have it examined and treated. 
Don't assume that dipping your cat will help the problem. 
Got a question about your pet? Write to: Dr. Glenn Ericson, Ask the Vet, Orange 
County Life, The Times, 1375 Sunflower Ave., Costa Mesa, Calif. 92626. Ericson, 
a practicing Orange County veterinarian, is immediate past president of the 
Southern California Veterinary Medical Assn. 
