AMERICAN LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
PUCKETT TOO MUCH FOR A'S IN TWINS' 4-3 VICTORY 
It seems as if Kirby Puckett didn't feel much like losing Monday night. 
After driving in two runs with a triple and a single to give Minnesota an early 
lead, Puckett hit a solo home run with two out in the 10th inning to propel the 
Twins past the Oakland Athletics, 4-3, at Minneapolis. 
Oakland tied the game with a run in the ninth, but left the bases loaded later 
in the inning. Minnesota, 7 1/2 games behind first-place Oakland, won for the 
12th time in 17 games. 
Puckett hit his fifth homer of the season off Todd Burns (4-2), who had not 
allowed a home run in 56 innings this season. 
Jeff Reardon (2-2) gave up the Athletics' tying run in the ninth but pitched a 
perfect 10th. 
Oakland is 0-6 in extra-inning games this season. 
Shane Rawley limited Oakland to two hits over the first six innings, but left 
after Mark McGwire's run-scoring single in the seventh made it 3-2. 
The Athletics took a 1-0 lead in the third when Mike Gallego walked with two 
out and scored on Rickey Henderson's double. 
Puckett and Randy Bush had RBI singles in the bottom of the third. Wally 
Backman singled in the sixth and scored on Puckett's triple for a 3-1 lead. 
Minnesota's Kent Hrbek made his first appearance since dislocating his left 
shoulder on May 15 and went one for three. 
Cleveland 4, Texas 3 -- John Farrell won for only the second time in nine 
decisions and Doug Jones earned his 17th save as the Indians beat the Rangers 
at Arlington, Tex. 
Farrell (4-8) gave up three runs on six hits in 6 2/3 innings. 
Cleveland scored twice in the first inning as Bobby Witt (5-8) retired only two 
batters. It was the shortest start of Witt's four-year career in the major 
leagues. 
In the first, Jerry Browne drew a leadoff walk and, with two out, the Indians 
hit three consecutive singles. Pete O'Brien and Cory Snyder singled home runs. 
Texas scored in the second inning on an RBI grounder by Rick Leach. Joel 
Skinner's run-scoring single and a squeeze bunt by Felix Fermin put Cleveland 
ahead, 4-1, in the fourth. 
Leach doubled in the fifth and Steve Buechele and Rafael Palmeiro hit RBI 
singles to get Texas to within a run. 
Ranger catcher Geno Petralli was injured in a collision with Skinner at home 
plate in the fourth inning and was carried off the field on a stretcher. 
Petralli sustained a torn ligament in his left knee and the Rangers estimate he 
will be out of action for six to eight weeks. 
