TIMELESS GRAINS; 
AFTER CENTURIES AS FEED FOR BIRDS AND ANIMALS, SEEDS SUCH AS QUINOA AND 
AMARANTH ARE FINDING AN INCREASINGLY SIGNIFICANT PLACE IN A HEALTHIER AMERICAN 
DIET. 
The so-called "new grains" are not really new at all; neither is oat bran. But 
in the American quest for better health, oat bran was delivered from the 
barnyard to the breakfast table. And, likewise, the new grains may be liberated 
from the bird cage. 
Although vegetarians and health-food enthusiasts long have known of the virtues 
of whole grains -- experimenting with them as a means of achieving an 
alternative source of complete protein -- most others considered them best 
suited for horse and bird feed. 
That may be changing. 
Ethnic cuisines have paved the way for widespread interest in whole-grain 
cookery -- familiarizing partakers with couscous, arborio rice, polenta and 
bulgur. And today, as more and more Americans proceed from good taste to good 
health, a fascination with ancient forms of fiber -- including such "new 
grains" as amaranth, quinoa and triticale -- has begun to develop. 
According to Food Marketing Institute's annual nationwide shopper survey, 
"Trends/Consumer Attitude and the Supermarket -- 1989," Americans have grown 
increasingly aware of the correlation between good nutrition and good health 
and have undertaken a variety of behaviors to ensure that their diets are 
healthful. This includes eating more fruits and vegetables and more fiber, the 
report states. 
The survey reported that 76% of the American shoppers queried indicated that 
nutrition was a very important factor when they purchased food -- up 4% from 
last year's data. 
The American Cancer Society, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in its 
"Dietary Guidelines for Americans," and the National Cancer Institute all have 
emphasized a high-fiber diet. They point to a low incidence of cancer and other 
degenerative diseases in populations where this type of diet is maintained. 
One of the most widely emphasized ways to increase intake of dietary fiber from 
what specialists in the field say is the current average adult intake of 11 
grams per day to the recommended 25 to 30 grams is to add whole grains -- 
products that contain the entire grain or as much of it as is edible -- to the 
diet. That's where the new grains come in. 
Although there is an assortment of familiar whole grains available in 
supermarkets -- whole wheat, cracked wheat, bulgur, oats, whole cornmeal, 
popcorn, brown rice, whole rye and barley -- some health watchers are turning 
to the local health-food store or the health-food section of the supermarket 
for supplies of unusual whole grains. 
Triticale, quinoa (pronounced keen-wah), millet and amaranth are just a few of 
the equally versatile and delicious whole grains that have begun appearing on 
shelves next to the barley, bulgur and buckwheat as well as in recipe books. 
Triticale is a hybrid grain, the offspring of wheat and rye. Its kernels are 
larger than those of either parent and they retain their crunch even after 
soaking and cooking. Triticale can be purchased flaked, a form very similar to 
oats or wheat flakes, or as flour. 
Quinoa, a tan-colored, birdseed-like grain is popular for its high protein and 
calcium content. It is high in the amino acid lysine, which most other whole 
grains lack, making it a complete source of protein. Quinoa seeds have a 
distinctive flavor upon cooking, and the grain is excellent in savory dishes. 
Because of a natural coating called saponin, quinoa requires thorough rinsing 
before cooking. 
Millet is probably the most familiar of the new grains. In this country it is 
used as the basis of birdseed mixtures. In Ethiopia, however, millet flour is 
made into a spongy, crepelike meal accompaniment -- injera. This fine-textured 
grain has a long shelf life and an endless array of uses from pilaf to stuffing 
to salads. Use millet anywhere rice can be used as an ingredient. It may even 
be toasted before adding to recipes. 
The only real newcomer of the group is a commercial product, Kashi, a 
combination of seven whole grains and sesame. It is found in supermarkets where 
cereals and grains are sold. It is available in puffed form for eating out of 
hand or as a cold cereal, or in its original state as a pilaf that can be 
cooked and eaten as cereal or mixed with other ingredients in savory dishes. 
These and the other whole grains are basically seeds that are eaten whole or 
are sprouted, cooked, milled, cracked, rolled or ground into flakes. They are 
highly nutritious, excellent sources of protein, carbohydrates, some B 
vitamins, Vitamin E, magnesium and zinc. 
In their whole form, these grains have three major portions, although most 
contain a dry, rough outer covering -- the husk or hull. Located just under the 
husk is the bran, a darker outer layer that serves as a protective coating. The 
region toward one end of the kernel is the germ, which contains most of the 
oil, vitamins and minerals needed for growth of the new plant. The lighter, 
larger, starchy inner portion of the kernel is called the endosperm. This is 
the region used for making flour. 
In health-food stores, whole grains can be purchased in just about all forms. 
As whole berries, kernels or groats, the grains have been husked only and take 
longer to cook than processed grains -- about twice as long. They should be 
soaked before cooking. After cooking, they can be added to savory ingredients 
or sprinkled over salads. They don't cook into a soft cereal and are best 
reserved for other uses. 
Bran is the ground husk of a berry and is usually available either from wheat 
or oats. Its primary feature is its high fiber content, although some protein, 
vitamins and minerals may be present. While wheat bran is too tough to cook 
into a cereal, it is ideal for baking into muffins, breads or bagels. Oat bran, 
however, cooks quite nicely into a hot breakfast cereal. 
Whole grains that are labeled "cracked" have undergone a grinding with steel 
blades or millstones that cuts them into several small, rough pieces. Unlike 
bulgur, they have not been precooked. But cracking the kernels makes them cook 
more quickly than they would as berries. The bran and germ may, occasionally, 
be left intact. Cracked rye and wheat are made from whole grains. Others such 
as barley grits and hominy grits are polished first, then cracked. 
Meals and milled or ground whole grains are commercially known as ground flour. 
Since the bran and germ layers do not break down as readily as the endosperm 
during processing, they are easily separated from the powdered endosperm -- a 
process known as refinement. The remaining powdered endosperm is sold as flour. 
Though whole grains, vegetables and fruits provide different kinds of fiber -- 
each with a different protective function -- they do have one thing in common. 
They contain materials that are either not digestible or only partially 
digestible by the human body and, therefore, help move other foods and 
byproducts of digestion out of the body. This is believed to help reduce risk 
for colon cancer, heart disease, diabetes, diverticulosis and constipation. 
Fiber fits into the category of carbohydrates that are important for providing 
bulk to the intestinal contents. Adequate amounts of insoluble fiber in the 
diet teamed with sufficient water intake make the feces bulkier and forces the 
muscles of the colon to exercise more. This makes them stronger and able to 
function better, thus relieving constipation and its related maladies. 
Increased fecal bulk and decreased transit time also reduce risk for 
gastrointestinal tract complications such as diverticulosis (an out-pocketing 
of the intestinal wall) and colon cancer. 
But the importance of reducing risk for these diseases appears to pale compared 
to the value placed on water-soluble fiber and its role in lowering blood 
cholesterol and risk for cardiovascular disease. 
"I don't think it's talked about enough," said Evelyn Tribole, a dietitian and 
spokesperson for the American Dietetic Assn., who explained the value of a 
fiber-rich diet in reducing risk for inflammatory diseases. 
"The importance of whole grains has to do with increasing the fiber in the 
American diet, so we're really looking at the importance of fiber (not 
necessarily whole grains) in the diet. And there's been a real problem with 
Americans not getting enough fiber in the diet." 
She complained that there's been "an explosion of information" on the effects 
of soluble fiber and its cholesterol-lowering properties but that we may be 
solving one problem and creating another. "We need to look at the whole 
picture, not just what the craze is at one time," she said. 
Many Sources 
Tribole emphasized that the recommended intake of 25 to 30 grams of fiber each 
day be derived from a variety of sources, adding, however, that too much fiber 
has been associated with other complications. 
"Too much fiber," she said, may promote "decreased availability of minerals -- 
especially iron" and may create a syndrome known as "bran block" in which 
intestines become clogged and form a "dam." She recommends a minimum intake of 
8 cups of liquid -- preferably water, although juice and milk also will 
eliminate the problem. 
A way to meet the requirement is to consume two to three servings of whole 
grains per day, choosing from the grains mentioned above as well as other 
varieties such as corn and rice -- each with its own broad category of 
byproducts. 
An easy way to use whole berries, Kashi and firm-textured whole grains such as 
bulgur and buckwheat is to let them steep overnight in hot water then use them 
in tabbouleh or other salads, Tribole said. 
"Fiber does keep you full and satisfied; it tends to absorb liquids and form 
gels . . . which really add bulk to the intestines," Tribole said. 
"There's another theory that if the intestines are moving slowly, there's more 
opportunity for contact with carcinogens in the body. But if everything is 
going out rapidly, there's less opportunity." 
KASHI-STUFFED CORNISH HENS 
1 cup Kashi (commercial combination of grains, not kasha) 
1 pound Italian turkey sausage, casings removed 
1 medium onion, chopped 
1 1/2 cups chopped celery 
1 (10-ounce) package frozen chopped spinach, thawed and drained 
Salt, pepper 
1/4 teaspoon dried marjoram 
1/4 teaspoon dried thyme 
1/8 teaspoon dried sage 
4 Cornish hens 
Heat nonstick skillet or saucepan over medium heat and cook and stir Kashi 
until dry, about 3 minutes. Add 1 1/2 cups water and cook over medium heat, 20 
minutes. 
Meanwhile, in separate skillet, brown sausage over medium heat. Add onion and 
cook until onion is transparent. Add celery and cook 3 minutes. Add cooked 
Kashi, spinach, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 1/4 teaspoon pepper, marjoram, thyme and 
sage. Stir to mix well. Season hen cavities with salt and pepper. Stuff with 
Kashi mixture, reserving leftover Kashi for serving time, then season outside 
of hens to taste with salt and pepper. Bake at 350 degrees 1 hour and 10 
minutes or until hens are done. Heat reserved Kashi and serve with hens. Makes 
4 servings. 
Note: May use Kashi to stuff 8 hens instead, if desired. 
MUESLI 
3/4 cup oats 
1/2 cup wheat flakes 
1/2 cup rye flakes 
1/2 cup whole bran flakes 
2 tablespoons raisins 
1/4 cup sliced almonds 
1/4 cup puffed rice cereal 
2 tablespoons diced dried peaches 
Combine oats, wheat, rye and bran flakes, raisins and almonds. Store in tightly 
covered container. Makes about 2 cups. 
YOGURT PIE 
1 cup whole steel-cut wheat flakes 
1/2 cup flake coconut 
3 tablespoons melted margarine 
1 (8-ounce) carton frozen whipped topping, thawed 
2 (8-ounce) cartons raspberry or pina colada yogurt 
Raspberries 
Combine wheat flakes, coconut and margarine in bowl and mix until flakes are 
moistened. Pat into 9-inch pie plate and bake at 350 degrees 10 to 15 minutes. 
Cool completely. 
Meanwhile, combine yogurt and whipped topping. Spoon into cooled crust and 
refrigerate until thoroughly chilled. Garnish with fresh raspberries. Makes 8 
servings. 
QUINOA PUDDING 
1/3 cup quinoa 
3/4 cup water 
2 cups low-fat milk 
2 eggs 
1/3 cup plus 1 teaspoon sugar 
Dash ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon vanilla 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
Wash quinoa well and drain. Wash and drain again. Place in saucepan with water. 
Bring to boil, then reduce heat and simmer, covered, until quinoa is tender and 
water is absorbed, about 15 minutes. Cool slightly. 
Heat low-fat milk to warm. Beat eggs in bowl, then add warm milk, 1/3 cup 
sugar, nutmeg, vanilla and salt. Stir in quinoa. Turn into 9-inch round baking 
dish, then place in baking pan and add hot water to come halfway up sides. Bake 
at 325 degrees 50 to 60 minutes. Stir at end of baking time. Sprinkle with 
remaining 1 teaspoon sugar and place under broiler to brown lightly, if 
desired. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
ORANGE-TRITICALE COOKIES 
1/2 cup whole-wheat flour 
1/2 cup unbleached all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 cup margarine 
2/3 cup brown sugar, packed 
1 egg 
1/3 cup frozen orange juice concentrate, thawed 
1 1/2 cups triticale flakes 
3/4 cup raisins 
Sift together flours, soda, salt and cinnamon. Cream margarine until smooth. 
Gradually beat in sugar until fluffy. Add egg and beat well. Add orange juice 
concentrate 1 tablespoon at time, alternating with dry ingredients, beating 
well after each addition. Fold in triticale and raisins. Drop by teaspoons onto 
nonstick baking sheet. Bake at 350 degrees 10 to 12 minutes. Makes about 3 1/2 
dozen. 
MILLET PAELLA 
2 cups millet 
1 tablespoon oil 
1 medium onion, chopped 
2 cloves garlic 
6 cups chicken broth 
3 tomatoes, chopped 
1 cup frozen peas, thawed 
1/2 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined 
1/2 pound turkey smoked sausage, sliced 
2 cups julienned cooked turkey or chicken breast 
Salt 
1 cup chopped cilantro 
2 tablespoons lemon juice 
Sliced green onions Heat large nonstick Dutch oven and add millet. Cook and 
stir over medium heat until millet is lightly browned. 
In separate pan, heat oil and saute onion and garlic until tender. Add to 
millet along with broth and cook, covered, 30 minutes. Add tomatoes, peas, 
shrimp, sausage, turkey and salt to taste. Cook until heated through and shrimp 
are done. Sprinkle with cilantro, lemon juice and green onions before serving. 
Makes 10 to 12 servings. 
Food Styling by Minnie Bernardino and Donna Deane 
