COUNTY TO FILE CHARGES OVER CONSTRUCTION OF POLO FIELD 
Los Angeles County prosecutors will file criminal charges against officials of 
a Sherman Oaks development company that constructed a polo field in a rugged 
Calabasas canyon without county approval, the district attorney's office said 
Friday. 
Misdemeanor complaints will be sought against executives of the Lycon Group who 
were responsible for bulldozing the canyon and building a regulation-sized polo 
field, corrals, a barn and a small grandstand, said Mike Noyes, a deputy 
district attorney. 
The equestrian facility -- dubbed the "Calabasas Polo Club" by Lycon officials 
-- is a few hundred yards north of the Ventura Freeway, midway between Parkway 
Calabasas and Las Virgenes Road. 
County building inspectors contend that the polo complex was constructed 
without building or grading permits, which are required by law. County 
officials say the project was discovered by accident in March when a building 
inspector checking on a nearby residential project noticed the construction. 
Wrongdoing Denied 
Lycon Group officials have denied wrongdoing, blaming an unnamed county 
employee they say told them that no permit was needed. 
The county's Department of Public Works, which oversees building inspectors, 
called for criminal action when Lycon officials applied for permits after the 
polo complex was built. 
Officials said about 35,000 cubic yards of earth were bulldozed from a hillside 
and piled in the canyon to make room for the facility, decorated with fancy 
"Calabasas Polo Club" signs. 
"The D.A. will proceed to file criminal complaints," said Jean Granucci, a 
public works spokeswoman. "We will continue to review the plans the developer 
has now submitted. That will probably take about a month or more, particularly 
because of this situation." 
Misdemeanor Offense 
County officials say it is a misdemeanor to build or grade without proper 
permits. Such offenses are punishable by a $1,000 fine or a six-month jail 
term. 
Granucci said Friday that building inspectors plan to pay close attention to a 
grading plan that Lycon submitted this week to the county's building and safety 
office in Calabasas. 
A representative of the civil engineering company that prepared the plan 
acknowledged that it was drawn up after the bulldozing took place. 
According to Granucci, county officials will demand that the site be re-graded 
if Lycon cannot prove that a licensed soils engineer was present during every 
step of the earthmoving process. Re-grading would require demolition of the 
complex. 
In any event, she said, normal grading and building permit fees will be doubled 
for Lycon as a penalty for the company's retroactive permit applications. The 
building permit fee has not been calculated, but the doubled grading fee will 
come to $2,456. 
The decision to file criminal complaints came after Noyes met privately 
Wednesday with building and safety officials and a Lycon representative. 
Noyes was unavailable for comment Friday, and Lycon officials refused to 
discuss the case. 
Earlier, however, Lycon Group partner Rob Franciscan blamed the illegal 
construction on bad advice received from an unknown building inspector. He said 
his firm was naive about the permit process because "we're home builders," not 
developers of horse facilities. 
'Permit Not Required' 
"We were told a permit was not required," Franciscan said. "We were told that 
we didn't need a permit because we weren't building a habitable structure. 
"All of a sudden, some building inspector said we need a permit. At that point, 
we did some additional checking and found that, in fact, we did receive some 
incorrect information." 
