LAWSUIT SAYS HOSPITAL WAS NEGLIGENT IN PATIENT DEATH 
A 63-year-old Torrance man died of injuries after he was left unattended and 
fell out of a hospital bed after brain surgery at South Bay Hospital last 
February, his family has charged in connection with a lawsuit filed Wednesday. 
The suit in Torrance Superior Court charges Dr. Melvin Snyder, South Bay 
Hospital and its parent company, American Medical International Inc., with 
negligence in the death of Donald Tomkinson. 
Snyder could not be reached for comment. The hospital declined to comment. 
Was Left Sitting Up 
Tomkinson underwent surgery to remove a benign brain tumor Feb. 2 at the 
hospital in Redondo Beach, his daughter, Jacqueline Tomkinson, said in an 
interview Wednesday. He was recovering in South Bay Hospital's intensive care 
unit two days later when he asked to be left alone to use a bedpan, she said. 
A nurse told family members later that she left Tomkinson sitting up, with his 
legs hanging over the edge of the bed, and returned to find that he had fallen 
to the floor and hit his head, Jacqueline Tomkinson said. 
"The nurse never should have let him sit there alone, unguarded," Tomkinson 
said. "I said to them, 'Who is running the show: the patient or the nurse who 
is on duty?' " 
Tomkinson never regained consciousness and died Feb. 7 after life-support 
systems were removed, his daughter said. 
Ruled an Accident 
The family's lawyer, Bruce Fagel, said the lawsuit will be amended to charge 
that hospital personnel tried to cover up their negligence by claiming that 
Tomkinson fell out of bed because he suffered a stroke. 
Tomkinson's death was ruled an accident after treatment for a tumor, said Bob 
Dambacher, a spokesman for the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office. 
Jacqueline Tomkinson said her mother, who is visiting relatives in England, had 
visited her father 10 minutes before the accident. 
'Anxious to Get Home' 
"He was doing very well," she said. "He was glad the surgery was over and he 
was anxious to get home and rest and recover at home." 
She said her father planned to return to work as an engineer after he recovered 
from surgery. 
