BLUE CROSS TO HIKE SOME RATES 25%, CUT BENEFITS 
Blue Cross on July 1 will increase health insurance rates an average of 25% for 
its 550,000 individual California policyholders under the age of 65, while at 
the same time announcing broad benefit cutbacks that will take effect at the 
end of the summer, a spokeswoman for the insurer said Wednesday. 
These changes do not apply to Blue Cross group plans, many of which have also 
been subject to rate increases in the last year. 
At the same time, Medicare supplement policies carried by thousands of people 
over the age of 65 will be increased by an average of 17%, spokeswoman 
Jeannette Hartman said. 
Blue Cross confirmed the rate increases, which are similar in size to those the 
company implemented last year, after an inquiry from The Times, which was 
prompted by a letter from an Orange County policyholder complaining that his 
rates were going up 32% while his benefits were being reduced. 
Hartman said Blue Cross, like other health insurers throughout the country, is 
caught in a bind between increases in medical fees and a greater demand for 
ever more complex and costly services, and as a result must charge higher 
premiums while restricting benefits. 
"Our premiums are based on two factors -- the cost of health care services and 
the usage of health services by subscribers," she explained. "New technology, 
new drugs, new diagnostic tests, new surgical techniques are all driving costs 
up. Many services offered now never existed before. Heart bypasses and other 
advanced procedures are becoming more common. 
"At the same time, the population on the average is aging, requiring more 
health care services. People are going to doctors more and getting more 
treatments. . . . It is not only doctors' fees that are increasing." 
Hartman said that among 19 different medical plans covering the 550,000 
policyholders under 65, only one plan, covering a scant 2,000 subscribers, saw 
a decrease in premiums. 
But the spokeswoman said that despite the broad increases, Blue Cross still 
feels that if the matter is put in perspective, its health insurance premiums 
are reasonable. 
The average cost of Blue Cross coverage, after the latest increases, will be 
$144 per month per household, or $1,728 a year, which is equal to the average 
cost to a patient of $1,800 for just one day in a hospital per year, Hartman 
said. 
As for benefit restrictions, she said Blue Cross is reducing the amount it will 
pay the minority of its individual policy holders who are still at the 90% 
reimbursement level to 80%. 
Also, she said, it has added an incentive for subscribers not required to have 
the approval of Blue Cross before entering a hospital to voluntarily seek such 
approval. In these cases, there will be a $250 additional deductible charged 
when approval is not obtained. 
Pychiatric care benefits are also being further restricted. Blue Cross will 
henceforth be paying only $25 per visit for a maximum 20 visits a year. 
Previously it had paid a maximum of $50 a visit for up to 50 visits a year. 
For ambulance service, Hartman said Blue Cross is slightly increasing benefits. 
Hartman said Blue Cross has lost some customers in the last year. Last year, it 
said it had approximately 600,000 subscribers under 65. 
The man who wrote The Times, John Meyer of Mission Viejo, said that in his 
case, "They have finally priced me and my family out of health care" and he was 
leaving the plan. He said his family's premiums had gone up 90% in the last 2 
1/2 years. 
