VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: CAMARILLO; 
2 VETERAN COUNCIL MEMBERS TO RETIRE 
Two longtime Camarillo City Council members who have a combined 20 years of 
government experience have announced they will retire. Councilman Thomas 
Martin, who served on the council from 1970 to 1974 and from 1982 to the 
present, and Councilwoman Sandi Bush, who has served since she was elected in 
1982, have announced they will not seek reelection in November. 
Both members said they wanted to spend more time with their families. 
"They have both been excellent council people," said City Manager J. William 
Little, who was hired by the council in 1988 to pull the city out of a deep 
financial crisis. 
As a result of that crisis, in which the city lost $25 million in public funds 
because of high-risk investments in 1987, the entire council received a crash 
course in financial management, Mayor Charlotte Craven said. 
"Somehow, we have got to make sure that knowledge is passed on to the new 
members," said Craven, who will seek a second term in November. "All of us feel 
that finance is the most important consideration." 
Little predicted that this year's hot campaign issue would be growth. 
Chris de Sales, an insurance company executive who publicly opposed a proposed 
development in eastern Camarillo, said he will support two potential candidates 
who plan to run on an anti-growth or slow-growth platform. De Sales declined to 
give names of the candidates. He said he would not run. 
Gregory Gose, a tax attorney serving on the Camarillo Planning Commission, said 
he is considering running. Gose and his law partner, Kevin Staker, became 
active in city issues during the financial crisis. They worked to help elect 
Councilman David Smith in 1988. 
Harvey Eisenburg, a retired executive for a defense contractor, is the only 
declared candidate so far, city officials said. He unsuccessfully ran for one 
of two open seats on the council in 1988. 
The first day to file candidacy papers is July 16. Filing closes Aug. 10, 
except in cases when an incumbent is not running for reelection. In that case, 
the deadline will be extended to Aug. 15. JOANNA M. MILLER 
