FOCUS / THE FCC IN THE '90; 
REGULATORY AGENCY SHOWS A TENDENCY FOR ACTIVISMIT MAY HAVE TO ACT ON A 
REVOLUTION IN PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS, INCLUDING POCKET TELEPHONES AND 
HIGH-DEFINITION TV. 
The decade of the 1990s may see a revolution in personal communications that 
will rival the computer revolution of the 1980s, as those familiar devices -- 
the telephone and the television -- undergo sweeping changes. 
By the mid-1990s, the trendy consumer is likely to tote a tiny, inexpensive 
telephone in his pocket as he walks down the street or flies across the 
country. At home, his television could display a picture as sharp as the finest 
color photograph. And, if he is irked by the local cable company, he may be 
able to pay to get his television signals bounced off a satellite or relayed 
over telephone lines. 
The expected rush of change has focused new attention on the Federal 
Communications Commission, the agency that will help shape these new 
technologies. 
"With personal computers, we could all stand back and let the market evolve. 
But, with the personal communication revolution, the government has to be 
involved because you are dealing with the airwaves," said Thomas Stanley, the 
FCC's chief engineer. 
Because available broadcast frequencies are scarce, Congress long ago gave the 
FCC the job of deciding who gets to use them. And, with the spread of cellular 
transmission, the advent of pocket-sized phones and the potential for new 
satellite broadcasting, demand for available airwaves matches that for 
Manhattan real estate, Stanley said. 
Recently, the FCC has shown a new activism, in contrast with the Ronald Reagan 
era, when the word regulation became nearly as taboo as taxes. 
George Bush, in his first year as President, appointed a new FCC chairman, 
Alfred C. Sikes, and filled three of the other four commission seats. Sikes has 
wasted no time in making his mark. 
 -- In March, Sikes took the first step toward defining "high-definition TV" by 
announcing that he favors setting aside new channels for the sophisticated 
signals, rather than trying to upgrade existing channels. The decision has the 
advantage of allowing consumers to keep their existing television sets while 
the new system is phased in. In early 1993, the FCC will issue specific 
technical standards for the new type of television signal, which will be in 
American households a year or two afterward. 
 -- Last month, the FCC licensed the first large-scale experiments with 
pocket-sized phones in Orlando, Fla., and Houston. Next week, the commission 
will undertake a broad study of the emerging field to answer some basic 
questions: Should a local phone company sell the "poor man's cellular," or 
should the new wireless systems compete with existing phone and cellular 
companies? Should the FCC set aside special space on the airwaves to encourage 
the new industry, as the British government did last year? 
 -- Two weeks ago, Sikes spoke at the convention of the National Cable 
Television Assn. and said the nation will "not tolerate an unregulated monopoly 
indefinitely." In late July, the FCC will advise Congress as to what it can do 
about the cable industry, the target of widespread complaints about poor 
service and steadily rising rates. 
Sikes already has made clear that he favors creating more competition, rather 
than returning to rate regulation by city officials. One possibility would be 
to let telephone companies enter the business of delivering broadcast signals. 
A second possibility is a technology called Sky Cable, in which a broadcast 
signal is bounced off a satellite to a small dish-shaped antenna at a user's 
residence. In February, four companies announced plans to develop such a 
service and make it available to consumers by 1993. 
As a fall-back approach, the FCC could change its regulations and allow local 
rate regulation again. In 1984, Congress said cable rate regulation should end 
in any market in which there is "effective competition." The 
deregulation-minded FCC of the Reagan Administration decreed in 1985 that such 
competition exists anywhere residents can receive three over-the-air signals. 
"You don't have to have an advanced degree in economics" to realize the flaw in 
this approach, said Sen. John C. Danforth (R-Mo.). Virtually every American 
home can get three broadcast signals but still have only one choice for cable 
service. Sikes said the FCC is now "reexamining" its 1985 decree. 
To many observers of the FCC, these moves by Sikes signal a new willingness to 
regulate in the public interest. 
"There has been a total transformation of that commission," said Andrew J. 
Schwartzman, executive director of the Media Access Project. "It's not as 
ideological. They're willing at least to enforce the law." 
No one has accused Sikes, a former radio broadcaster from Missouri, of being a 
heavy-handed regulator. Instead, he stresses that the FCC must be "friendly to 
innovation and technology." 
But, sometimes, setting standards "can stimulate competition and move the 
technology forward," Sikes said. 
