TWO WHO WANT TO LIMIT OFFICE TENURE DIFFER ON HOW TO DO IT 
Proponents of initiatives to limit City Council terms in two Palos Verdes 
Peninsula cities are reacting differently to a state Court of Appeal ruling 
that such local regulations are invalid because eligibility to hold office is 
controlled by state law. 
Rolling Hills Estates City Councilwoman Jacki McGuire, though not retreating 
from her view that it is "absolutely essential" to limit council service to two 
terms, said she has shelved plans to circulate initiative petitions. 
Avoiding Lawsuits 
"I do not wish to engage in any type of litigation," said McGuire, who 
advocated limiting terms when she successfully campaigned for office in a March 
special election. 
McGuire said she will try to drum up interest in a statewide measure to put 
limitation of terms into state election law. 
In neighboring Rancho Palos Verdes, on the other hand, resident Joel Justin 
King said he plans to proceed with a petition drive for a November initiative 
limiting council service to two terms. He called the court ruling a "denial of 
the constitutional right to limit tenure in office." 
City Clerk Jo Purcell, however, said that even if King obtains enough voters' 
signatures to qualify his initiative, it will not be put on the ballot. "The 
city attorney would issue an opinion saying it could not be put on the ballot 
because it is unconstitutional," she said. 
Rolling Hills Estates and Rancho Palos Verdes are general-law cities. Such 
cities operate under the general laws of the state rather than their own 
municipal charters. 
In a ruling affecting the general-law city of South San Francisco, the 1st 
Appellate District court in San Francisco ruled on whether South San Francisco 
City Councilwoman Roberta Cerri Teglia should hold office. 
Teglia, who is serving a third term on the South San Francisco council, was 
reelected in 1987 despite an ordinance limiting council members to two 
consecutive terms, according to Jim Parrinello, her attorney. 
t The appellate court decided that numerous state code provisions governing 
eligibility to hold office in general-law cities indicate that the state 
governs such matters. 
Parrinello said the South San Francisco city attorney believed the local law 
was invalid, but it had not been repealed by the City Council. Warren 
Steinkamp, a former councilman, challenged Teglia's reelection in a lawsuit, 
Parrinello said. 
The April 12 appellate court opinion became law when it was published and was 
not appealed to the state Supreme Court within the specified time limit. 
"The whole area of term and scope and nature of election has been preempted, 
certainly in general-law cities," said Richard R. Terzian, Rolling Hills 
Estates city attorney. 
Legal Opinion Differs 
But because the Teglia case involved a general-law city, legal opinion is 
divided over its application to charter cities such as Redondo Beach and 
Cerritos, which have ordinances limiting time in office to two terms. 
The Redondo Beach law, enacted in a charter election in 1975, prevented former 
Mayor Barbara Doerr and Councilman Archie Snow from running for their offices 
again this year. The two then ran for other offices: Doerr won election to a 
council seat in the March General Election and Snow was defeated in a bid for 
mayor. 
City Atty. Gordon Phillips was firm in his belief that the Teglia case is 
limited to general-law cities and does not apply to Redondo Beach. 
"We would certainly contend that the number of terms a person can serve is a 
municipal affair within the purview of a charter city," he said. "The charter 
regulates municipal affairs." 
Phillips said this view is strengthened by the fact that the term limit was 
voted in "by the people as a charter initiative. . . . My thinking is, the 
courts would give great deference to this." 
For her part, Doerr said, she supports the two-term limit and would not favor a 
legal challenge. "It's good," she said. "You need new blood, new ideas." 
Snow could not be reached for comment. 
The Cerritos two-term limit was approved by voters in 1986 as a means of 
preventing long-term incumbents from seeking office again. But confusing 
wording led City Atty. Ken Brown to issue an opinion that the limit applied 
only to terms beginning after the ordinance took effect. It has yet to prevent 
anyone from running again. 
'Statewide Interest' 
Brown, like Phillips, said he does not believe the Teglia ruling applies to 
Cerritos as a charter city. But, he said, a court might decide that the issue 
of term limitation is "a matter of statewide interest" and apply it to both 
general-law and charter cities. 
Teglia's attorney Parrinello said he thinks the ruling applies to both 
categories of cities because one of the cases cited by the Court of Appeal 
related to eligibility of elected officers in a chartered county. 
"We used this case as precedent in the Teglia matter," he said, adding that the 
other side attempted to distinguish between the two. But the court held that 
"the distinction is not pertinent in this case." 
Parrinello said there may be a distinction when it comes to executive officers, 
such as a mayor, because although there are no limits on consecutive terms in 
Congress, there is a constitutional limit on presidential terms. 
Terzian also said he believes charter cities as well as general-law cities are 
affected by the ruling, adding that the reason cities have adopted term 
limitations is that "no one has said 'no' before." 
Although they have decided to take different roads on term limitations, 
McGuire, in Rolling Hills Estates, and King, in Rancho Palos Verdes, are united 
in a belief that the limitations are needed. 
"When individuals hold office for long periods of time, they lose their 
perspective, and they stop listening to the residents," said McGuire. 
King said: "If we can't limit tenure in office, we might as well have a king." 
