BRIEFING PAPER; 
YUGOSLAVIA: A CENTER THAT ISN'T HOLDING 
The News: 
Yugoslavian President Borislav Jovic has called for a new federal constitution 
and negotiations among the six member republics to prevent a breakup of the 
multinational state. Its future is threatened by an epidemic of nationalism, a 
power struggle between Communists and pro-democracy forces, secession movements 
in Slovenia and Croatia and looming economic threats including a rise in 
unemployment already at 17%. For many, the question is no longer whether the 
fragile federation will collapse, but when. 
The Background: 
National rivalries among the Balkan nations have never been resolved. Eight 
fractious kingdoms and provinces were merged in 1918 after the collapse of the 
Austro-Hungarian and Turkish Ottoman empires after World War I. Political and 
ethnic conflicts escalated into civil war by the 1940s. 
Communist partisan Josip Broz Tito emerged to lead the federation after World 
War II and managed through personal influence and political repression to keep 
nationalist outbreaks in check. The constitution drafted six years before his 
death in 1980 bequeathed a rotating system of leadership designed to prevent 
any of the six republics or two autonomous provinces from dominating. But 
Serbian-orchestrated changes to the constitution in March, 1989, stripped the 
province of Kosovo of its autonomy, triggering riots by majority Albanians and 
a crackdown by Serbs who are less than 10% of Kosovo's 2 million population. 
Adding to the nationalist tensions is the uneven development of democracy in 
Yugoslavia. Slovenia and Croatia, the two most prosperous and westernized 
republics, held multi-party elections this spring that brought in 
anti-Communist governments. Three of the other four republics -- 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro and Macedonia -- have scheduled free elections 
later this year. Serbia, however, remains a hard-line Communist state and has 
resisted calls for pluralism. A democratic vote would unquestionably restore 
Kosovo to ethnic Albanian control. 
At Issue: 
While most of the republics have shifted toward Western-style democracy, the 
federal government retains a Communist monopoly on political power even though 
it has undertaken market-oriented economic reforms. Prime Minister Ante 
Markovic has called for nationwide free elections by the end of the year and 
has said he may form a new party to challenge his fellow Communists. But 
federal elections cannot be held before all republics have legalized opposition 
parties and begun the transition to multi-party democracies. The Markovic 
appeal has put new pressure on Serbia to relax its one-party rule. 
Personalities: 
Serbian Communist Party chief Slobodan Milosevic rose to power by engineering 
the constitutional changes last year that imposed Serbian authority on Kosovo, 
the historic heartland of the medieval kingdom of Serbia. The move bolstered 
national pride among Serbs, who account for 9 million of Yugoslavia's 23 
million citizens, but touched off recurring ethnic clashes with Albanians who 
want their own republic in Kosovo. 
Federal President Jovic is a hard-line Communist Serb allied with Milosevic and 
likewise opposed to multi-party democracy. He has warned that rising 
nationalism threatens to escalate into civil war. 
Prime Minister Markovic, a Croat, is the first strong federal figure to emerge 
in Yugoslavia since Tito. He is popular for taming hyper-inflation and 
introducing market-oriented reforms that have eased Yugoslavia's economic 
crisis. 
While Markovic struggles to keep the federation together, strong nationalist 
figures have emerged in the largest republics. Franjo Tudjman, a Croatian 
nationalist and former dissident, was elected republic president last month. 
Vuk Draskovic of the unsanctioned and strongly nationalist Serbian Renewal 
Party is providing a magnet for Serbs disillusioned with communism. 
Scenarios: 
Serbia clears the federal reform roadblock by scheduling multi-party elections, 
but only after rewriting the republic's constitution to prevent Kosovo's ever 
gaining republic status; the most likely move, but one expected to trigger a 
bloody uprising by ethnic Albanians. 
* Serbia legalizes opposition parties but outlaws the Democratic League 
supported by Kosovo Albanians; also likely to set off rioting. 
* Serbia is forced in negotiations with the other republics to agree to free 
elections without restricting Kosovo's status; considered unlikely due to the 
Serbs' strong national identification with Kosovo. 
* No elections are set in Serbia, delaying federal pluralism and further 
fueling the secessionist movements in Croatia and Slovenia and leading to the 
breakup of Yugoslavia. 
* One of the newly democratized republics declares independence from the 
federation, and the army under the control of the Serbian-dominated presidency 
is brought in to prevent secession, unleashing civil war. 
