OSHA ORDERED TO REVIEW FORMALDEHYDE CANCER RISK 
A federal appeals court Friday ordered the Labor Department to reconsider the 
cancer risk from exposure to formaldehyde and its decision not to guarantee 
full wages to workers disabled by the gas. 
The U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington said the department's Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration "has failed adequately to explain" its finding 
that the risk of getting cancer from exposure to formaldehyde was not 
significant if employers complied with OSHA's exposure limits. 
The three-judge panel also concluded that OSHA offered a "feeble" explanation 
of its decision not to include in its standard for formaldehyde exposure 
provisions guaranteeing that workers will be paid full wages and retain 
seniority rights during rehabilitation from any illness linked to the 
substance. 
Annual Exams Not Required 
The court, ruling in a suit filed by three unions, upheld OSHA's decision not 
to require employers to provide annual medical examinations to workers exposed 
to formaldehyde, a colorless gas that, when mixed with other materials, has a 
number of applications in industry and is found in many construction and 
consumer products. 
Also upheld was the OSHA-set exposure "action level" at which employers are 
required to provide workers with training, protective clothing and other 
protective measures. The unions failed to show that lowering that level would 
significantly enhance worker safety, the court said. 
An OSHA spokesman said agency officials had not reviewed the decision and had 
no immediate comment. 
OSHA, revising a 1972 standard, in 1987 set a maximum permissible exposure 
level of 1 part per million of formaldehyde during an eight-hour workday and 
set the action level at 0.5 p.p.m. 
The United Auto Workers, the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers and the 
International Molders and Allied Workers unions challenged the standard, saying 
OSHA should have set a far more stringent exposure limit. 
The court, in remanding to the Labor Department the question of cancer risk, 
questioned the formula used by the department to extrapolate the cancer risk to 
humans from the risk found in animal studies. 
