PICKENS DUCKS GREENMAIL QUESTION; 
JAPAN: THE AMERICAN INVESTOR COUNTERCHARGES THAT KOITO MANUFACTURING IS 
CONSPIRING WITH TOYOTA TO DENY HIM A SEAT ON THE AUTO PARTS MAKER'S BOARD. 
American investor T. Boone Pickens Jr. said Tuesday that he will continue his 
fight against Japanese "cartels" but declined to answer a charge that he is 
acting as an agent for a Japanese greenmailer. 
Talking with foreign reporters, Pickens said Koito Manufacturing Co. -- an auto 
parts maker in which he owns the largest block of shares, 26% -- is colluding 
with Toyota, its second-largest shareholder, to deny him representation on 
Koito's board. 
However, Pickens refused to respond to Koito's charge that he is collaborating 
with a Japanese who has been accused of trying to harass Koito into buying back 
Pickens' shares at an inflated price -- a practice known as greenmail. 
Asked whether he could say he had no continuing relationship with Kitaro 
Watanabe, an auto dealer from whom Pickens acquired the shares, he replied: 
"We bought the stock from Mr. Watanabe, and we paid for the stock. That is 
really as far as I will go on answering those questions because, again, we get 
back into a private company that I just somehow don't think it would be to my 
advantage to talk about. 
"We've made all the disclosures under Japanese law that are required. So I 
don't see any reason to expand beyond what we've been required to do." 
Koito has charged that Watanabe twice tried to greenmail Koito before passing 
his shares to Pickens. In April, Watanabe was fined for failing to report to 
the Finance Ministry his accumulation of more than 10% of Koito's stock, as 
required by law. 
Pickens, who with 52 other Americans plans to attend a Koito stockholders 
meeting Thursday, charged that Toyota was manipulating the price of auto parts 
bought from Koito to inflate Toyota's profits at Koito's expense. Although 
Koito's revenue has increased every year for the past three years, he said, its 
profit has fallen, while Toyota's has continued to rise. 
"A keiretsu (business group) is a cartel," Pickens said. "Whatever you call it 
-- a cartel, a trust, a monopoly, a keiretsu or a zaibatsu -- it's wrong. Any 
economic system that benefits a few at the expense of many is wrong and will 
ultimately fail." 
He disclosed that he had received proxies from Japanese who hold nearly 2.3 
million shares of Koito stock. The proxies, he said, represent only 1.4% of the 
shares outstanding but 57% of the estimated number of small Japanese 
shareholders in Koito. 
"This is clear evidence that the average Japanese investor is dissatisfied with 
the keiretsu system in Japan," Pickens said. "Many of the proxy cards we have 
received say that 'Toyota's piracy has to stop.' " 
He said he is "not deterred by the stonewalling tactics of Koito and Toyota" 
and added that he intends to come back for the Koito stockholders meeting "next 
year and again the following year." 
Pickens also said he intends to raise his holdings in Koito soon -- to at least 
a third of the total. 
He said top executives of Koito and Toyota, as well as leaders of the powerful 
Federation of Economic Organizations, have refused to meet with him. However, 
he said, Koito has agreed to let him tour its plant Friday. 
