SAVING THE ANIMALS MIGHT PUT WARDENS ON ENDANGERED LIST; 
WILDLIFE: OFFICIALS FEAR THAT PROPOSITION 117 COULD DRAIN THE DEPARTMENT OF 
FISH AND GAME BUDGET AND FORCE SCORES OF LAYOFFS. 
More mountain lions may roam Ventura County backcountry as a result of the new 
Wildlife Protection Act passed last week, but there may be fewer game wardens 
to protect them and other wildlife, state officials fear. 
The act, passed as Proposition 117 on the June 5 ballot, specifically prohibits 
hunting mountain lions for sport and also requires that the state spend $30 
million a year for 30 years to acquire habitat for mountain lions and other 
wildlife. 
But the new law says some of that money must come from existing wildlife 
programs and could force reductions in the state Fish and Game budget, said 
Capt. Roger Reese, who heads the force of state game wardens that patrols all 
of Ventura and Santa Barbara counties and two-thirds of Los Angeles County. 
The department's budget for wardens to enforce state environmental regulations 
could be cut by 25%, causing the layoff of up to 95 wardens statewide, 
according to a state Department of Fish and Game internal memo. 
That could mean a cut of up to five people from what Reese calls a skeleton 
crew of 23 wardens now assigned to his region. 
"We already need more people here," Reese said. Losing wardens or money for 
programs in the area "could mean the difference in the continuation of a 
species," he said. 
Reese said one species that could be most threatened by a cutback in wardens is 
the least Bell's vireo, a bird that lives along stream beds. He said wardens 
regularly patrol stream beds and other habitat areas, looking for people 
destroying habitats and routinely filing reports against them with the district 
attorney's office. 
Two cases involving alleged destruction of stream bed areas along the Santa 
Clara River are now pending with the district attorney's office, Reese said. 
Without routine patrols, he said that such cases would go undetected and the 
endangered least Bell's vireo could die out. 
To a lesser degree, Reese said, a reduction in the number of wardens would 
jeopardize the peregrine falcon that nests in cliff areas of the county and the 
least tern and the clapper rail that nest at Point Mugu. 
But Allan Lind, staff consultant to the Assembly Ways and Means Committee, said 
program and staff cuts can be avoided if a plan now being hashed out by his 
committee is successful. 
"We can prevent that from happening by redirecting funds from Proposition 70," 
Lind said, referring to a 1988 initiative. "It will save us from making more 
cuts to Fish and Game." 
The plan, which must be approved by both houses of the Legislature as well as 
Gov. George Deukmejian, faces opposition from Proposition 117 author Gerald 
Meral, executive director of the Planning and Conservation League, a wildlife 
preservation group based in Sacramento. 
Meral contends that Proposition 117 money should not come from bond money 
already set aside for wildlife habitat. Instead, it should come from sources 
such as the environmental license plate fund, which helps pay for Fish and Game 
programs. 
"If Jerry Meral wants me to cut more biologists and wardens to protect the 
integrity of his Proposition 117, he's got another thing coming," Lind said. 
"It's narrow-minded and selfish and greedy, and the Legislature won't stand for 
it." 
Proposition 117, which became effective immediately after it passed June 5, 
declared the mountain lion to be a specially protected animal, although the 
species is not considered endangered. 
The proposition also places a permanent prohibition on sport hunting of the big 
cats, replacing a temporary moratorium that had been in effect more than 10 
years, Reese said. 
The new law requires the state to spend $30 million each year for 30 years to 
acquire and restore wildlife habitat. A third of the funds must be devoted 
specifically to mountain lions. 
About $16 million of the money will come from the tobacco tax fund created by 
Proposition 99, money that is now earmarked for health programs, Lind said. 
The other $14 million per year will come from existing environmental programs 
and future state bond issues. 
Fish and Game officials, who already face a $12.5-million budget cut this year 
because revenues fall short of projected expenditures, fear that their programs 
will become a prime target regardless of the effects of Proposition 117. 
"Fiscal impact on the Department of Fish and Game could range up to $12 million 
in the first year," department Director Pete Bontadelli said in a press release 
Friday. The figure represents about 10% of the department's annual budget. 
If an Assembly bill to provide $800 million for parks and wildlife sponsored by 
Assemblyman Jim Costa (D-Fresno) is approved by the Legislature, and is passed 
by voters in November, the funding problem for Proposition 117 in future years 
could be solved, Lind said. 
Proposition 117 also changes the way mountain lions who kill livestock may be 
trapped and caught, he said. 
Mountain lions in California now number about 5,000, and the animals range over 
about 80,000 square miles of backcountry, said Tom Paulek, assistant wildlife 
biologist at the Long Beach office of the Department of Fish and Game. 
The backcountry of Ventura and Santa Barbara counties in the Los Padres 
National Forest could support about 60 mountain lions, although no one knows 
the exact population of the secretive cats. 
A mountain lion tends to kill a deer about once every 10 days, hiding the 
carcass after eating its fill and returning to eat for the next few days, 
Paulek said. Other lions do not try to eat the kill of another cat, he said. 
But when a lion becomes too old or sick to catch a wild animal, or if the deer 
population is not sufficient to support the lion population in the area, the 
cat looks to easier prey in cattle yards or pig farms. 
"They have got to make a living," Reese said. When a cat is caught killing 
livestock, a so-called depredation kill, Fish and Game issues a permit to hunt 
and kill the offending lion, Reese said. Up until now, traps were set with 
snares near the carcass to help ensure the right lion was caught, Reese said. 
But Proposition 117 outlaws the practice of snaring and leg trapping, a ban 
Meral defends. 
"Snaring is efficient, all right," the author of Proposition 117 said. "But a 
snare doesn't know what it catches. Anything that strolls along and says 'Oh, 
here's a dead cow, I think I'll have lunch,' like a fox or a pet dog, could be 
left hanging in the air in the hot sun and die." 
Lions now must be hunted with dogs, which can be distracted with a fresher 
scent that could lead to the kill of an innocent animal, Reese said. That would 
leave the offending cat to kill again. 
So far in 1990, seven mountain lions have attacked and killed livestock in 
Ventura and Santa Barbara counties, said Capt. Chris Patin, of the Long Beach 
Fish and Game office. The department has issued permits to trap and destroy 
those lions, he said. 
Wardens expect the numbers of livestock kills to increase during the summer 
months, and in future years as the number of mountain lions increases with the 
success of Proposition 117. 
