METHANOL FOR ALL?; 
'CLEANER' FUEL MAY BE COMING INTO ITS OWN TO HELP BANISH SMOG 
Meredith Lanz says he nearly "jumped for joy" two weeks ago when he saw 
President Bush on television promoting the use of methanol to fuel cars as one 
way to clean up the nation's air. 
Lanz drives an unexceptional-looking 1983 Ford Escort that runs only on 
methanol, an odorless, colorless liquid made from natural gas or coal. 
Widespread use of this "cleaner" fuel, state and federal officials say, could 
reduce smog levels in Southern California by up to 15%. 
"Maybe now I'll be able to find more fuel pumps," Lanz said. 
The unusual fuel has boosted acceleration and posed no mechanical problems, 
said Lanz, who works for Anaheim's municipal electric utility. But methanol is 
scarce, and at 11 miles per gallon, Lanz needs a lot of it. 
On Monday, one of the county's first commercial methanol pumps will open for 
business at a Chevron station at the corner of Harbor Boulevard and Katella 
Avenue in Anaheim. Although the station is already supplying methanol under 
contract to Anaheim for its Escorts, the Bush Administration's interest in 
methanol has caused the California Energy Commission to choose the station as 
the site for a press conference to be attended by the chief of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Sen. Pete Wilson (R-Calif.) and other 
dignitaries. 
The county's only other methanol pump is at an Arco station used by the cities 
of Orange and Santa Ana, at the corner of Main Street and MacArthur Boulevard 
in Santa Ana. 
Still, Lanz is a strong advocate of using methanol to help reduce air 
pollution. 
But John Heeks, a city of Orange building inspector, won't go near the stuff. 
Heeks' city-owned, 1983 Ford Escort had stalled on State College Boulevard last 
Aug. 1, and he had just radioed his dispatcher for help when the car burst into 
flames. Methanol had eaten through a rubber fuel line and spilled onto the 
Escort's hot engine. 
"I was lucky to get out alive," Heeks said of the fire. "I will never drive a 
methanol car ever again, if I can help it." 
The methanol-powered, 1983 Escorts driven by Lanz and Heeks are two out of a 
total of a dozen used experimentally as fleet vehicles by the cities of Orange, 
Anaheim and Santa Ana. So far, experts say, the cars, which cannot run on 
anything but methanol, have performed well mechanically and are no more 
dangerous than gasoline-powered vehicles. 
Although the fuel costs less than gasoline -- usually 69 to 93 cents per gallon 
-- the low mileage for methanol means that fuel costs are actually higher. The 
reason for the low mileage is that methanol burns cooler than gasoline, 
reducing the fuel's efficiency as a heat source in the combustion process. One 
result, however, is about a 7% improvement in horsepower. 
Reliability is about the same as for a gasoline-powered car, although stainless 
steel parts have had to be substituted in the carburetors and other fuel-system 
components to prevent corrosion. 
And now, the next generation of methanol-fueled vehicles, which can also run on 
gasoline, is about to arrive, each costing $200 to $500 more than a 
gasoline-only vehicle. 
At the urging of Supervisor Harriett M. Wieder, who sits on the board of the 
South Coast Air Quality Management District, Orange County government is 
negotiating for two of these new variable-fuel Ford Crown Victoria sedans under 
a state-run program, and Santa Ana is attempting to get three. Other local 
government agencies are expected to share in a fleet of more than 2,000 
variable-fuel Chevy Luminas, Corsicas and Ford Crown Victorias that are to 
arrive in California during the next few months as part of the state's effort 
to promote increased production of the vehicles by automakers. 
Officials said there were 300 requests for the first batch of 200 new 
variable-fuel cars delivered to the state. 
Despite the sudden influx of new vehicles, methanol cars will be experimental 
for the next few years -- sold to government agencies and not to the public. 
The Orange County Transit District will soon have three buses testing a variety 
of alternate fuels -- methanol, compressed natural gas and propane. Until 
recently, propane has been dominant as a cleaner alternative to gasoline. 
OCTD, for example, already operates its 135 dial-a-ride vans on propane, and 
some private companies, such as The Times, have long used propane in delivery 
trucks. But state officials say propane is a "dirtier" fuel than methanol and 
thus enthusiasm for it is not as high. 
Methanol can be made from coal or natural gas and produces engine exhaust that 
creates 50% less ozone -- a key ingredient in smog -- than gasoline, according 
to state officials. 
"The biggest negative -- and it's a big one -- is the lack of pumps," says Lanz 
of Anaheim's electric utility. 
Once after he ran out of fuel, towed the car to the pump and refilled it, Lanz 
recalls, he couldn't restart the engine until "a young kid came by and said, 
'Hey, is that methanol? You have to prime the carburetor.' We might still be 
standing there if that guy hadn't said anything. I don't know who he was, or 
how he knew. 
"I don't dare take it very far away," Lanz says. "I don't even like to take it 
into Los Angeles, because if you start out without a full tank and hit any kind 
of traffic jam, you could be in a lot of trouble." 
The fuel-availability problem may be nearing a partial solution. Under recent 
agreements with the state, several oil companies plan to open methanol pumps in 
the next year or two. 
"I like the idea of using methanol," Lanz says, "because I'm interested in 
anything that will help make the air more breathable. I grew up in this area, 
and I can see the way it's gotten worse. I can see the difference from 30 or 40 
years ago." 
WHAT IS METHANOL? 
* It's a colorless, odorless, volatile and flammable liquid that is pumped like 
gasoline. 
* Can be made from natural gas, coal, wood or any decomposing biological mass. 
It also can be synthesized from carbon monoxide and hydrogen. 
* It produces about 50% less ozone -- a key component of smog -- than gasoline. 
* It already is used in antifreeze, solvents and in the manufacture of 
formaldehyde, powders and paint. 
