EFFORTS TO GET CEASE-FIRE IN LOGGING BATTLE BREAK DOWN 
Efforts by Oregon legislators to set up a temporary cease-fire in the 
controversy over cutting old-growth timber collapsed Wednesday when both sides 
said they could not reach an agreement in time to pass the necessary 
legislation. 
However, environmentalists and Oregon's congressional delegation continued to 
offer hope that some accommodation might yet be developed in time for them to 
add it to legislation to accompany the federal budget for the fiscal year 
starting in October. 
California's congressional delegation also joined the old-growth fight, but on 
the side of less logging. All but two people in the 45-member delegation have 
signed a letter pleading for an immediate moratorium on the logging of virgin 
coastal redwood forests. 
For now, however, the future of the nation's dwindling old-growth forests is 
left with the federal courts, which have issued injunctions restricting logging 
on large tracts in Oregon, California and Washington, the top timber states. 
Deal Called Dead 
"Basically, the deal we offered on Saturday is dead," said Lee Weinstein, a 
spokesman for Oregon Gov. Neil Goldschmidt. 
The governor, along with the state's seven-member congressional delegation, 
last Saturday had developed a short-term compromise in a bitter battle between 
environmentalists and loggers over how best to manage the virgin timberland of 
the Pacific Northwest. In order to make saw logs available to mills, 
environmentalists were being asked to withdraw their successful lawsuits and 
timber industry groups were being asked to significantly improve their logging 
methods. 
Industry leaders accepted the proposal by the original Tuesday deadline but 
environmentalists balked at several points, especially at a provision 
prohibiting them from appealing or suing on any of the timber sales included in 
the compromise. 
A House of Representatives appropriations subcommittee meeting was postponed a 
day to give negotiators more time to find some middle ground, but by day's end 
Wednesday an agreement had not been made. 
"Everybody still is going to search for a short-term solution, but nobody is 
able to say what that short-term solution might look like," said Gregg Kantor, 
a Goldschmidt aide. 
"Is the deal dead? I don't know, to be honest," said Rachel Gorlin, a member of 
the staff of Rep. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.). "They (environmentalists) have been 
making positive mumblings, but we missed the deadline to go into (the 1990 
budget)." 
The 1990 fiscal year budgets for the U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land 
Management are being prepared this week by the House. Short deadlines were set 
to reach a compromise so that it could be included in the budget. 
Sydney J. Butler of the Wilderness Society in Washington -- echoing remarks 
made by U.S. Sen. Mark O. Hatfield in a speech in Grants Pass, Ore. -- said the 
deal offered Saturday still can serve as a framework for some future agreement. 
Any such agreement would have to be added to the budget in the Senate, then go 
back to the House for concurrence -- a process that one Senate staff member 
said will significantly reduce its chance of passage. 
"We're taking this compromise very, very seriously," Butler said. "But we could 
not work out all of the details in the short time available. We have agreed in 
concept, but we couldn't agree in detail." 
However, there appears to be substantial difference in concept and detail. 
For example, a key element of the congressional compromise is a prohibition 
against legal action by environmentalists for the life of the agreement, which 
would run through September, 1990. 
Industry leaders insist on this provision, which they say is needed to help 
them plan budgets, hire workers and obtain bank loans for operating capital. 
But environmentalists seem unwilling to accept such a restriction. 
'Bad Precedent' 
"When you get into waiving judicial review, you're setting all kinds of bad 
precedent," Butler said Wednesday, after talks broke down. "If you can't sue on 
a sale that violates the Clean Air Act or the Clean Water Act, you have 
essentially amended those very important laws." 
Unlike their Oregon colleagues, California legislators are seeking stricter 
enforcement of environmental laws. 
In a letter circulated by Rep. Pete Stark (D-Oakland) and Rep. Tom Lantos 
(D-San Mateo), 43 members of the California's House delegation asked the state 
Board of Forestry to immediately cease the cutting of all private stands of 
virgin coastal redwoods. 
The plea was aimed directly at the Pacific Lumber Co. of Scotia, Calif., which 
owns 70% of the estimated 20,000 acres of old-growth redwoods not already 
protected in state or federal parks. Palco, as the firm is known, recently was 
bought by Maxxam Corp. of Los Angeles in a leveraged buyout, or LBO. 
"Congressman Stark and Congressman Lantos were just frustrated at watching in 
effect the slaughtering of redwoods to pay the huge debt of an LBO," said Perry 
Plumart, a spokesman for Stark. "They (Maxxam) are so starved for cash they are 
not even waiting to mill many of the logs themselves; they're selling raw logs 
directly to the export market to Japan as fast as they can cut them." 
