SUMMERTIME, AND THE SWIMMING IS EASY . . . UNLESS IT'S FOR WATER POLO 
Early Thursday morning -- the 5:45 a.m. type of early -- Sunny Hills High 
School water polo players were toe-testing the temperature of the pool at 
Independence Park of Fullerton. 
The 25 players, who were there by choice, play for the Trojan water polo club, 
which is Sunny Hills' summer team. 
In addition to two-hour morning workouts five days a week, the players also 
lift weights three times a week, play league games at night twice a week and 
participate in tournaments on weekends. 
Kids all over the county are getting their feet wet the same way, and they are 
each paying from $50 to $300 for the privilege. 
The reason: Every successful water polo team is dependent on a strong summer 
program. 
"Summer water polo is a tremendously important part of the school program," 
Sunny Hills Coach Keith Nighswonger said. 
"Look at basketball or any sport -- they go year-round as well. A kid that 
plays in the summertime can pick up a world of experience. 
"We'll play 55 to 60 games (over a six-week schedule). In a successful high 
school season, which includes playoffs, you play 25 to 30 games. You pick up 
almost two years' experience in the summer. You can't teach that." 
Work in the summer is geared toward winning in the fall. 
"The teams that play in the summer are the ones that are the most successful 
(in the fall)," Villa Park Coach Jeff Ehrlich said. 
"I think in the summer they learn to get tough," he said. "They learn the 
tricks that go on under water. They learn survival." 
A good example is El Toro, which lost most of the starters from its 1988 
Southern Section 3-A Division championship team. Thanks in part to their summer 
schedule, the Chargers won the title again in 1989. 
El Toro operates its summer program with a twist. The Charger varsity plays 
against community college teams and junior varsity squads from four-year 
universities. El Toro's JV team plays in varsity summer leagues. 
"We like to play each squad a notch above what they're supposed to," El Toro 
Coach Don Stoll said. "It can be hard, and sometimes we lose players who don't 
like getting beat 15-4 in the summer. But around here, we like to say the boys 
of summer make the men of September." 
Still, summer water polo is not just hard work. Coaches, players, officials and 
parents say they love and enjoy it. 
"I really believe most of the people out there in the summertime have a general 
love for the sport," Nighswonger said. "I enjoy the people. It's almost kind of 
a social thing -- you get to see them (parents, coaches and referees) every 
summer." 
Nighswonger makes no apologies for getting the kids up early in the summer. 
"Most of the time I keep these kids busy," he said. "I find that the more you 
ask and expect, the more you get. In the summer you can measure what the 
commitment is going to be for the following season." 
Club play provides an opportunity for members of a high school team to play 
together in the summer. Though any player may play for any club, most join for 
the club led by their high school coach. 
Each player pays a participation fee, which includes a $25 registration fee to 
U.S. Water Polo for insurance and to help pay officials. 
U.S. Water Polo, which selects the Olympic and National teams, divides the 
country into seven zones for governing purposes. Orange County is in Zone 7, 
where there are two districts -- Southern Pacific and Pacifica Southwest. 
The county is in the Southern Pacific District, which stretches north to San 
Luis Obispo, east to Indio and south to San Clemente. It contains approximately 
3,500 athletes and 100 registered teams. 
"U.S. Water Polo sanctions every tournament at all different age groups," said 
George Ratkovic, Zone 7 chairman. "U.S. Water Polo provides liability insurance 
for the club, accident insurance for the players and officials for the games. 
If a team or player plays outside U.S. Water Polo (in a nonsanctioned event), 
they are not covered." 
U.S. Water Polo also puts on clinics for coaches and athletes. 
Though most summer leagues are sanctioned by U.S. Water Polo, not all are. 
Leagues are generally organized by coaches, who establish the participation fee 
that goes toward pool rental and payment of officials. 
The leagues are competitive, but the goal is experience, not winning. 
"The summer is more low-key," Nighswonger said. "That's the nice thing about 
the summer -- that everyone out there is out there to improve their game. In 
the fall it's a much more competitive situation. There's a different tone." 
Tournaments, however, tend to bring out the competitive spirit in the summer. 
Up to 16 teams gather over the weekend for four or five games, and two 
officials are used. League games generally employ only one official. 
In addition to summer leagues, summer camps are being started for water polo 
players. 
The Orange County Water Polo Academy at Villa Park High School will be the 
county's first camp. Its initial session runs next week, Monday through Friday, 
and its second session is scheduled June 25-29. Cost is $175 for the day camp, 
which is open to players between the ages of 12 and 18. 
Perhaps water polo's most prestigious summer camp is at Stanford, where 
participants stay overnight in the dorms for $425 a week. Day campers pay $325. 
Pepperdine and Cal State Long Beach also have camps. 
Don Cholodenko, Capistrano Valley water polo coach, said college camps have 
helped his players. 
Five years ago, Capistrano Valley "was the worst team in the county," 
Cholodenko said. After his second year at the school, he had about 12 players 
attend a camp at Pepperdine. 
This past season, Capistrano Valley finished 27-2, losing to South Coast League 
rival El Toro in the 3-A final. 
But camps are generally designed for young players who need to work on 
improving their technique. 
"Traditionally, your better players don't come to camps; it's usually the 
younger kids," Ehrlich said. "Your 17- to 18-year-olds are working during the 
day and then they play at night in leagues, so it can be tough." 
Cholodenko doubts the helpfulness of camp for an older player because "most of 
the stuff you hear at the camps -- they've heard it before. It becomes a 
question of how much you are going to pick up for the money you pay." 
Generally, money is not a major concern when it comes to water polo. Some 
schools have booster clubs that hold fund-raisers for trips to such places as 
Hawaii and Australia for games. Other schools leave money matters up to the 
individual. 
"(Dealing with water polo) financially -- that's minimal," said Shelley 
Woolery, whose son, Josh, was a senior on the Villa Park team this season. 
"It's mostly just buying a small piece of cloth (bathing suit). It's not like 
going out and buying new cleats every time they wear out." 
And the time commitment doesn't appear to be a problem for anyone -- even 
parents. 
"(Summer water polo) takes up a lot of our time," Shelley Woolery said. "But 
it's better that than visiting your kid in jail." 
"I enjoy the time," said Stoll, who has some concern about being consumed by 
the sport. "I told the kids yesterday that practice was going to be from 2:30 
to 4:30 and two kids raised their hands and asked, 'Can it go to five?' I said, 
'I'll be here.' " 
