LANDSCAPING CONTRACT VOTED FOR FIRM TIED TO COUNCILMAN 
The City Council has approved a $409,000-a-year landscaping contract with a 
firm owned by a friend and political supporter of Councilman Mike Mendez. 
The council also voted 4 to 1 Tuesday to increase its overall spending on 
landscaping from $291,000 a year to $713,800. 
Mendez said the city needs to spend more money on landscaping to instill pride 
in the community. Council members have long complained of barren road medians 
and shabby parks. 
"We're going to set the example for our residents to follow," Mendez said. 
But Councilwoman Grace F. Napolitano blasted the decision, saying the money 
could be used for increased police protection and child care. 
"I would rather increase the level of services to people rather than to 
plants," Napolitano said. 
Residents offered varied opinions Tuesday night on whether the city should 
increase its landscaping budget. 
But scores of constituents have complained about the council's previous 
decision to negotiate the five-year contract with Murray's Landscape Inc. of 
Santa Fe Springs without seeking bids from competing firms. 
Murray's owner, Tom Murray, is a friend of Mendez and donated $1,000 in 
services to the councilman's 1988 campaign, according to campaign disclosures. 
Mendez said he also hired Murray's to do landscaping at his home and paid the 
firm $3,500. Murray also donated $200 to Councilman Robert E. White's 1988 
campaign. 
Napolitano criticized her colleagues for not seeking bids. 
"We have gone out to bid on many a contract," Napolitano said. "We have saved 
the city money by doing so." 
Mendez has said that more spending on landscape maintenance had been his idea 
and that he pressed to have the contract awarded to Murray's. But he said his 
actions were influenced by the quality of Murray's work, rather than friendship 
or political debt. White also denied that the campaign donation affected his 
vote. 
"Norwalk deserves nothing but the best," Mendez said. 
The quality of Murray's work is not being disputed by Napolitano or by city 
staff. But there was no staff recommendation on the matter. 
City Manager Richard R. Powers declined to criticize the council's decision 
directly, but he said his staff would have handled the matter differently if 
the effort had not been headed by a councilman. 
Powers said he would have preferred that the council wait until budget 
deliberations begin later this month before making a major spending decision. 
The city manager estimated that the city will have about $1.2 million in 
additional revenue next year. 
"We would have gone through the budget process with it," Powers said. "We 
probably would have gone through at least a competitive analysis" of the 
contract costs, he added. 
State law does not require cities to seek bids on such service contracts. Nor 
does state law bar a councilman from voting on a contract involving a campaign 
contributor. 
The city has been contracting with Landscape West Inc. of Los Angeles to 
maintain landscaping on road medians and in municipal parks and with Terrain 
Inc. of Glendale for mowing. The city pays those firms about $213,000 a year. 
In addition, city workers perform some maintenance at an annual cost of 
$78,000, according to a report by Daniel E. Keen, director of urban planning. 
On Tuesday, the council approved spending $304,800 a year for landscaping 
services performed by city workers and $409,000 a year for Murray's services. 
The new landscaping services will include more extensive seeding and 
fertilizing, among other things. Grass clippings would be picked up at parks 
and facilities, rather than just at City Hall. 
The contacts with Landscape West and Terrain will be terminated within 45 days, 
Keen said. 
On Tuesday, Landscape West owner Barry L. Konier renewed his offer to the City 
Council to perform the services in the Murray's contract for about $90,000 a 
year less. He urged the council to shop for the best price. 
But Councilman White said he was willing to pay for good service. "I'm glad to 
get Murray back in," White said. "I know the cost is high." 
