TURMOIL IN CHINA; 
PROTESTS FOR DEMOCRACY; 
TROOPS FIRE ON BEIJING CROWDS; 
AT LEAST 100 DEAD, 400 HURT; SQUARE IS RECAPTURED; 
A TURNING POINT SEEN FOR CHINA 
Chinese troops of the People's Liberation Army opened fire with automatic 
weapons early today on huge crowds of civilians in Beijing, killing at least 
100 of them and perhaps many more, according to medical and diplomatic reports, 
in a successful effort to recapture Tian An Men Square from pro-democracy 
demonstrators. 
At least 400 people were reported wounded. 
For China, it was a fundamental turning point. The Communist Party leadership 
headed by the aging Deng Xiaoping made the decision that no matter how high the 
costs to its image at home or abroad, it had to overwhelm with a force the 
students and other demonstrators who had challenged the power and legitimacy of 
the regime. 
The gunfire began shortly after midnight and continued until well after dawn. 
There was gunfire all over Beijing, from the central Tian An Men Square area to 
the areas outside the main tourist hotels to the outskirts of the city. 
At times, the firing was indiscriminate. At about 5:30 a.m. today, for example, 
a military convoy of about 100 vehicles -- including tanks, armored personnel 
carriers, trucks and jeeps -- swept past the Beijing Hotel toward Tian An Men 
Square, firing at bystanders. 
After they reached the square, at about 5:45 a.m., heavy automatic rifle fire 
could be heard from the area, which had already been subjected to several other 
lengthy volleys earlier in the morning. 
Crowds Won't Disperse 
At noon today, the troops had cordoned off Tian An Men Square, but crowds of 
Chinese refused to disperse. And the shooting in the square had still not 
subsidied. 
Every hour or so through this morning, troops fired volleys of gunfire in an 
apparent attempt to intimidate the crowds. Each time they did so, at least 
1,000 people or more fled from the area of Tian An Men Square. Yet other 
Chinese kept pouring into the square, many of them to resist the troops and 
some of them merely to see what was happening. 
There had been more than 100,000 Chinese civilians in the square to look at or 
join the demonstrators for democracy on a balmy Saturday evening. When the 
troops arrived and the firing began, many of them rushed out in panic. 
"Duo si le, duo si le," several of them shouted. "Many have died, many have 
died." 
It was impossible to say exactly how many were killed, but by all indications, 
the death toll was huge. 
When one line of troops crouched and opened fire on a crowd at Tian An Men 
Square shortly after 3 a.m., an American reporter saw about 50 people go down. 
Even after the shooting began, hundreds, perhaps a few thousand Chinese were 
said to have remained in the downtown area, saying they were prepared to die 
for the cause of democracy, the cause for which they began their series of 
demonstrations at Tian An Men seven weeks ago. 
Guns Heard Near Newspaper 
The deaths occurred not only in the center of the city, but in outlying areas. 
One foreign eyewitness heard firing shortly after dawn outside the compound of 
the Communist Party newspaper, People's Daily, in northeastern Beijing. He was 
told that four people had been killed. 
Hospitals in the area were so full of casualties that they scarcely had time 
for those who were not severely wounded. 
A U.S. Embassy official said that there were about 70 dead and 300 wounded at 
People's Hospital in western Beijing. Another eight dead and 80 wounded were 
reported at Beijing University Hospital, and there were at least seven dead at 
the Second Hospital of Beijing. 
Casualty Estimates Vary 
One American news agency, United Press International, quoting officials and 
staff at 10 Beijing hospitals, reported that at least 156 people had been 
killed and 464 others were treated for injuries. The Associated Press said one 
hospital doctor estimated that at least 500 people had died. 
Hospital floors and downtown streets were covered with blood. In this land of 
makeshift transportation, the dead and wounded were carried off to ambulances 
and hospitals on tricycles, bicycle carts and pedicabs. 
Beijing -- a once-graceful capital covered over in recent years with new pastel 
high-rise buildings -- looked this morning something like an East Asian version 
of Beirut, a city in the aftermath of a civil war. 
Buses, trucks, jeeps, and armored personnel carriers lay burning or in ruins 
along major thoroughfares. Some were People's Liberation Army vehicles 
destroyed by the residents of Beijing. Others had originally been used as 
barricades against the troops' advance and were overrun and destroyed by tanks. 
Residents Shocked, Terrified 
As they saw the wreckage, residents of the city appeared shocked and terrified. 
The "Goddess of Democracy," the 30-foot sculpture built by Chinese art students 
and modeled on the Statue of Liberty, was ruined by Chinese tanks. An American 
reporter said he had been told by a Chinese eyewitness that a tank ran over and 
killed students trying to guard the statue in Tian An Men Square. The report 
could not be independently confirmed. 
Shortly after 6 a.m. today, a small group of bicyclists rode down Changan 
Avenue towards Tian An Men Square, on their way to work or some morning 
recreation, apparently unaware of the shooting that had gone on for hours. 
When they approached Tian An Men and witnessed the destruction, the bicyclists 
turned and fled. 
Bloody Ending to Struggle 
It was a bloody ending to the long-running battle between the Chinese regime 
and the pro-democracy demonstrators -- a battle that the leadership found it 
could not win without use of lethal force. 
For weeks, the regime had sought to get the demonstrators off the square but 
had been unable to do so. Two weeks ago, troops on the outskirts of Beijing 
were forced to pull back when they were blocked by massive crowds of 
demonstrators. 
In the pre-dawn hours Saturday, People's Liberation Army forces tried to move 
into the center of Beijing, but once again were stymied by resistance from the 
city's population. 
Several violent skirmishes erupted through the day Saturday as the armed forces 
sought without success to regain control of the streets of the Chinese capital. 
Warned of Use of Force 
By Saturday night, martial-law authorities termed the situation in Beijing 
"very serious" and warned that troops and police would use force against anyone 
resisting them. The Chinese regime said the military was engaged in "a serious 
political struggle that concerns the future and destiny of the state and the 
nation." 
The situation on the streets turned increasingly ugly through the day Saturday. 
Pro-democracy students were joined by workers wielding metal pipes and sticks. 
Some Beijing residents overturned buses and jeeps and smashed them. Saturday 
night, demonstrators at Tian An Men Square set fire to an army tank. 
In one bloody fracas, several hundred green-uniformed PLA troops clashed 
Saturday night with young men wielding metal pipes and sticks just off Tian An 
Men Square in front of the Beijing Hotel. In another incident, about 5,000 PLA 
troops were surrounded and pelted with bricks, stones and bottles outside the 
Great Hall of the People, on the western side of the square. 
The government-controlled New China News Agency said that Beijing residents 
besieged a military vehicle and began carting off arms from inside it. PLA 
troops used tear gas to recover the vehicle, the report said. 
Seized Bars, Bricks 
A spokesman for Beijing's Public Security Bureau said that a crowd of about 
1,000 people had seized steel bars and bricks from a local construction site. 
By early today, hundreds of thousands of Beijing residents were on the streets, 
seeking wherever possible to block, pin down and frustrate the troops. PLA 
units were surrounded and halted at several points, both on the outskirts of 
the city and inside the city. 
"This is not the People's Army. This is the traitors' army," one group of young 
men shouted to one bewildered contingent of young soldiers seeking to enforce 
martial law in Beijing. 
No Sign of Political Moves 
There was no sign of any new effort to bring about a political settlement that 
might end the pro-democracy demonstrations and the intense power struggle 
within the Chinese Communist Party. 
In an "urgent public notice" issued Saturday night, the martial-law authorities 
appeared to acknowledge for the first time that some of the PLA troops have 
been resisting orders to move against the population of Beijing. 
"PLA troops must carry out the martial-law tasks as planned, and none should 
prevent them," said an announcement by the authorities. "Should they be 
prevented, the martial-law enforcement troops will take various self-defensive 
measures and all means to remove the resistance." 
The martial-law announcement also asserted that some Beijing residents had 
seized arms and weapons and had beaten or kidnaped Chinese soldiers. 
Despite the growing chaos, there was virtually no sign of any political 
leadership in Beijing. For all intents and purposes, the ruling Communist Party 
was without a spokesman. 
Deng, the country's paramount leader, remained out of sight, making at least 
plausible the unconfirmed reports that he has been hospitalized with a heart 
attack. Communist Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang also has not been seen 
since May 19, when he refused to go along with the decision to impose martial 
law here. 
On Saturday night, China's state-controlled television network opened its 
nightly news show by showing Premier Li Peng reading a speech on the 
environment. 
Li Looks Tense, Grim 
Li, the unpopular hard-line leader who announced the imposition of martial law, 
looked tense and grim. He was also astonishingly isolated. In a manner 
virtually unprecedented for Chinese television, Li was shown reading his speech 
alone, with no Chinese leaders alongside him and no audience listening to him. 
Throughout the day Saturday, the situation in the central Beijing area around 
Tian An Men Square grew increasingly chaotic as Chinese troops engaged in 
several brief, rough confrontations with the demonstrators surrounding them. 
Early Saturday morning, when several thousand unarmed troops first sought to 
march from the outskirts of Beijing into the Square, they retreated when their 
path was blocked by thousands of demonstrators. 
At mid-morning Saturday, a second effort by a smaller PLA contingent was 
similarly unsuccessful. 
Troops Became Divided 
According to eyewitnesses, the troops emerged from a subway stop at Jianguomen, 
less than a mile east of the square, and headed downtown. But they became 
divided on the way downtown and failed to arrive there with force strong enough 
to move against the pro-democracy demonstrators. 
The seeming inability of the troops to gain control of Tian An Men Square on 
Saturday left the impression of an army with little leadership and low morale. 
The Chinese soldiers were mostly young men from the countryside. Some of them 
were unable to speak Mandarin, the government-mandated national language. Some 
carried food rations whose dates showed that they were at least one or two 
years old. 
In several instances, there were no squad or unit leaders in sight for the 
troops during their retreat Saturday morning. 
Young Soldiers in Tears 
Several witnesses saw young Chinese soldiers breaking into tears as they were 
confronted and berated by residents of Beijing. 
"There are really only two explanations," said one Western European diplomat. 
"Either the army was ordered to clear the square and was unable to do it. Or 
this was a deliberate attempt to undermine the leadership which declared 
martial law." 
By Saturday afternoon, however, the PLA troops stopped retreating and began to 
show a willingness to move forward against the pro-democracy demonstrators. 
One contingent of about 5,000 troops emerged from the west side of the Great 
Hall of the People, the entrance on the opposite side of the building from Tian 
An Men Square. 
Engaged in Tense Standoff 
They were soon engaged in a tense standoff with thousands of demonstrators, who 
eventually surrounded the troops. 
In the worst outbreak of violence up to that moment in the seven-week-long 
crisis, young people threw stones, bricks and bottles at the troops. In at 
least a few cases, an eyewitness said, troops picked up the stones and threw 
them back. Several demonstrators were injured. 
Meanwhile, a short distance away at the entrance to Zhongnanhai, the compound 
where the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party live, a crowd of several 
thousand demonstrators gathered and stood face-to-face with steel-helmeted PLA 
troops standing three-deep in front of the entrance. 
First Use of Tear Gas 
It was outside Zhongnanhai that the troops for the first time began using tear 
gas. But this tactic failed to disperse the crowd, which by late Saturday 
afternoon extended out into the main thoroughfare. 
It was a sunny, hot afternoon, and tens of thousands of Beijing residents 
getting out of work for the weekend pedaled their bikes through Tian An Men 
Square to see or take part in the pro-democracy demonstrations. 
By early Saturday night, some of the confrontations began to ease. Shortly 
after 8:30 p.m., the troops that had earlier been surrounded behind the Great 
Hall of the People quietedly retreated inside the building. 
According to an eyewitness, some of these troops expressed open sympathy for 
the demonstrators. At one point, some of the PLA troops and the Beijing 
residents surrounding them joined in a song, with one of the soldiers serving 
as musical director. 
Urged to Stay Inside 
The announcement by martial-law authorities Saturday night urged the population 
of Beijing to stay inside. 
"From now on, please do not come onto the streets, and do not go to Tian An Men 
Square," said the announcement. " . . . The residents should stay at home, so 
as to secure the safety of your life and to avoid unnecessary losses." 
The army, however, made no effort to set up roadblocks or barricades that would 
keep people from venturing downtown. And throughout the evening, young men and 
women on bicycles streamed towards Tian An Men Square. 
1:45 a.m.: Lights in Tian An Men Square are doused. Tanks and trucks move into 
north end of square. Shots are heard. 
Crowd starts to flee east. Some run into the Forbidden City, the old Imperial 
Palace complex north of square. 
2:30 a.m.: Troops in square fire at demonstrators, who hit the pavement. Within 
an hour, troops open fire again and surround the square. 
3:30 a.m.: Soldiers take control of Tian An Men. 
4 a.m.: Students announce over loudspeaker: "You have to give up all hope." 
Then, moments later: "We can't let any more blood flow . . . We must leave." 
Soon afterward, troops clear center of square around the Monument to the 
People's Heroes. 
2/ 
5:30 a.m.: 100-vehicle military convoy moves west along Changan Avenue past 
Beijing Hotel toward square. As it passes, shots are fired every few seconds at 
bystanders. 
5:45 a.m.: Automatic rifle fire is heard for several minutes from the direction 
of square. 
RELATED STORIES U.S. journalists arrested. Page 8 
Protest in Los Angeles. Page 13 
PHOTO ESSAY, Page 9 
