SANTA CLARITA VALLEY SENIORS ATTEND RELIGIOUS BACCALAUREATE CEREMONY 
Circumventing a court ruling that prohibits public schools from sponsoring 
pre-graduation ceremonies with religious themes, nearly 100 Santa Clarita 
Valley high school seniors attended a baccalaureate ceremony Sunday at a local 
Baptist church. 
Santa Clarita's three high schools canceled their own non-religious 
baccalaureate ceremonies this year because "there was no need to have 
baccalaureate on and off campus," said Clyde Smyth, superintendent of Hart 
Union High School District. 
The service was initiated and planned by Devin Franchino, Saugus High School 
student body president, who said he wanted fellow graduating seniors to have 
religious inspiration. 
Injunction Upheld 
In July, 1987, the state Court of Appeal unanimously upheld an injunction 
issued by an Alameda Superior Court judge in 1983 barring an invocation 
referring to "Almighty God" from ceremonies at a Livermore High School. The 
justices ruled that such an invocation would be an improper state endorsement 
of religion and might offend some members of the audience. 
The state Supreme Court upheld the lower court ruling in October, 1987, when it 
refused to hear an appeal of the case. 
At Sunday afternoon's ceremony, featured speaker David White, a Hart High 
School alumnus and director of the UC Santa Barbara chapter of Campus Crusade 
for Christ, exhorted graduating seniors to "choose God." 
"Make the call -- choose God. You can either be out on your own or safe with 
God. These are your simple options. There is no middle ground," White said. 
The hourlong ceremony also included a Scripture reading and two songs. 
No Prayers 
Last year, to comply with the court ruling, the three high schools in the 
district held baccalaureate ceremonies without prayers or religious figures as 
speakers. Community leaders, instead, gave talks on non-religious values and 
ethics, Smyth said. 
But Franchino said: "I come from a Christian home, so we felt it wasn't enough. 
"I don't understand why they can say 'under God' in our flag salute and 'In God 
We Trust' on our money and then not let us mention God at a once in a lifetime 
event like this," he added. Franchino said he approached school administrators 
and asked permission to organize a baccalaureate ceremony off campus. When they 
approved, he sought assistance from the youth minister of his church and the 
leader of a local Christian youth group, Campus After Dark. 
Off-Campus Sponsor 
Smyth said the school district already had considered the possibility of 
finding an off-campus group to sponsor religious ceremonies for graduating 
seniors. 
"We wanted to do it legally and had been advised that if a non-district 
sponsoring group held it and it was not a school function, it would be fine," 
he said. 
Franchino said no school funds were used to organize the service, held at Grace 
Baptist Church in Newhall. A printer donated the more than 1,600 invitations 
mailed to graduating seniors from all Hart, Saugus and Canyon high schools. The 
service was deliberately nondenominational so that students from any religious 
background would feel comfortable participating, Franchino said. 
Canyon High School Principal Bill White, who attended the ceremony, said he was 
proud of the students who organized the event. 
"It's wonderful. It demonstrates the return of spiritual values to the 
students," he said. 
