IT WAS A DIFFERENCE OF STYLES IN THE PREAKNESS; 
VALENZUELA'S AGGRESSIVE WESTERN RIDING OVERWHELMED DAY'S EASTERN PATIENCE 
A few years ago, near the end of his riding career, Don Pierce talked about the 
difference between riding horses in California and in the East. 
"In California, there is a completely different style of riding," said Pierce, 
who rode more than 180 stakes winners at Santa Anita and Hollywood Park before 
he turned to training. "Out here (California), the tendency is to ride tight. 
There's usually not a whole lot of room between horses. 
"I used to ride back East, when there wasn't year-round racing in California, 
and you could tell the difference. Back there, the style is to spread the 
horses out, with everybody giving everybody else a lot of room. You could drive 
a truck between horses in many of the Eastern races, compared to the tight 
quarters we're used to in California." 
Some Easterners do not like the aggressive Western style. They see tight riding 
as rough riding. When his Alydar won the 1978 Travers because of a foul by 
Affirmed and California jockey Laffit Pincay, trainer John Veitch said: "I 
expected Affirmed's number to come down. Pincay was using that bareback stuff 
that they get away with in California, but it doesn't cut it in New York." 
Similar tactics by Pat Valenzuela two weeks ago at Pimlico won the Preakness 
for Sunday Silence and kept the 3-year-old colt eligible for a Triple Crown 
sweep when the 121st Belmont Stakes is run here Saturday. 
Sunday Silence, who had already won the Kentucky Derby, took the Preakness by 
the bob of a nose over Easy Goer, in what was a classic example of the 
hell-for-leather style against the patient, more relaxed Eastern manner. 
Valenzuela's superb performance in the Preakness was not unlike some other 
memorable rides by West Coast jockeys in recent Triple Crown races. In the 1983 
Belmont, Pincay might have been the country's only rider who would have tried 
to squeeze Caveat through a small hole on the rail at the top of the stretch. 
Caveat bounced off the rail not once but twice, but the move was instrumental 
in the colt's three-and-one-half-length victory. 
In the 1986 Kentucky Derby, it was Bill Shoemaker, with a Derring-Do hardly 
characteristic of his brilliant career, who sent Ferdinand through a 
rapidly-closing hole at the top of the stretch, and the rest was easy. Had 
Rampage been just slightly quicker and been able to reach the same hole, his 
jockey, Pat Day, said that they would have won the Derby. 
If Shoemaker stole a page from Pincay in winning the '86 Derby, Valenzuela did 
another pretty good imitation in this year's Preakness. 
Sunday Silence may be a better horse than Easy Goer, anyway. He was 2 1/2 
lengths better in the mud at Churchill Downs, and though the issue was in doubt 
until the last stride of the Preakness, Sunday Silence nevertheless showed the 
kind of championship gameness that was the calling card of Affirmed when he 
edged out Alydar all three times in 1978 to become the last Triple Crown 
winner. 
Regardless of the abilities of the horses, the Preakness was still a jockeys' 
race, and horseplayers forever will be saying that the outcome turned on 
Valenzuela outriding Day, the more experienced Eastern jockey. 
Valenzuela made two moves to help him win; Day made three mistakes that might 
have cost him the victory. 
Day, who later suggested that he erred, prematurely moved Easy Goer to the 
front on the far turn. Valenzuela, along with just about everybody else 
watching the race, was surprised that Easy Goer would go when he did, but he 
didn't panic. 
"I saw Easy Goer go by me so quick," Valenzuela said. "But I knew I had plenty 
of horse and just waited. He stopped us a little (by forcing Sunday Silence 
dangerously close to the heels of Houston, who had been on the lead), but I had 
plenty of horse and then I moved up outside of him (Easy Goer)." 
That was move No. 2 by Valenzuela, boxing Easy Goer into the rail, which is the 
worst place to be in a knock-down-drag-out stretch duel. 
Valenzuela told friends he had Easy Goer where he wanted him. 
Besides moving too soon, Day also allowed Valenzuela to outmaneuver him for the 
stretch drive. Before the Kentucky Derby, Charlie Whittingham, Sunday Silence's 
trainer, was caught defending his choice of Valenzuela as the colt's jockey. 
Several California jockeys with bigger names were available and Valenzuela had 
had an erratic spring in riding some of Whittingham's other stakes horses. 
But Wittingham kept saying Valenzuela was an excellent position rider. In the 
Preakness, that proved to be true. 
Day's last mistake was made in the final yards when he jerked Easy Goer's head 
in the direction of Sunday Silence. Before Day's explanation, it appeared that 
Easy Goer might have even been trying to bite Sunday Silence. 
Day said that he cocked Easy Goer's head at a 45-degree angle because he wanted 
his mount to see Sunday Silence just outside him. But this was wasted motion in 
a race that was decided by inches. Easy Goer and Sunday Silence were so close 
that they were brushing. Even without having his head cocked, Easy Goer would 
have had to be blind not to notice his rival. 
For a while, though, it still looked as if the Preakness might be a repeat of 
one of Day's most exceptional rides -- in the first Breeders' Cup Classic, at 
Hollywood Park in 1984. That afternoon, Day was trapped on the rail by two 
horses, one of them the undisciplined, Lugging-In Gate Dancer on the far 
outside. But Day persevered, and got Wild Again home in a three-way photo 
finish. 
Saturday's Belmont could be another jockeys' race, with the pressure on Day. 
Sunday Silence figures to be ahead of Easy Goer in the early going, and Day 
can't let Valenzuela's colt get too far ahead. Day also must decide when to 
move on Sunday Silence, and hope that his decision isn't as ill-timed as it was 
at Pimlico. 
Both horses are bred to run 1 1/2 miles, so the jockeys, as they were in the 
Preakness, are likely to be the tell-tale ingredient. 
"I really don't see any way Easy Goer can beat us in the Belmont," Valenzuela 
said. 
There is a way, of course, because Easy Goer is a good horse behind another 
good horse in a light year for 3-year-olds, and even a colt as talented as 
Sunday Silence is not invincible. But because of what has happened in this 
brief, two-race rivalry, the younger rider from the West is suddenly looming 
larger than the more heralded jockey from the East. 
