SCOTT OSTLER: IT'S OK, LAKERS OWN THE DECADE 
Ten years ago they were a new and different team, sneaking up on the rest of 
the league, taking basketball by surprise with a new style of ball. 
"Showtime," they called it, and there were snickers around the league. Or was 
it honest skepticism? 
"Cute concept," the world said, "but show us what you can do. See us in six 
months." 
The Lakers were led by a dazzling rookie and a rejuvenated veteran superstar, 
and they featured a hungry-looking, hyperactive sixth man and a dapper and 
eager assistant coach. 
Magic, Kareem, Cooper and Riley. 
They had a rookie owner, too, who wiped the champagne out of his eyes 10 years 
ago in Philadelphia and said sincerely, "You don't know how long I've waited 
for this." 
The team had sexy dancing girls, Hollywood fans, a beautiful gym, a lot of 
frills and gimmicks. 
A passing fad. 
The fad finally passed Tuesday night, a decade later. The rest of the league 
finally caught up with the Lakers. 
The greatest run in pro athletics in this decade came to an end, not with a 
bang but with a twang, two hamstrings coming unstrung at the wrong time. 
With their starting guards out, the Lakers took the Detroit Pistons into the 
final two minutes of the last three games of the series before losing each. 
"Shrivel" was a word used by one Detroit newspaper headline writer to describe 
what the Lakers did in Game 1 of the series, when Johnson joined Scott on the 
all-one-legged team. 
Bad hamstrings, yes. 
Dishpan heart, no. 
This is no team to send out with faint praise, but what team ever looked better 
being swept? 
Some of the players Coach Pat Riley was sending into the games in this series 
hadn't played before actual live people in months, or years, since Riley closes 
his practices. 
Still, they went to the wire three straight games with the Bad Boys, who are 
pretty good. 
Riley got shut out again this season in the Coach of the Year voting. No big 
deal. When they get around to choosing the All-Decade team, Riley will be the 
coach. Why even bother to vote? 
Any doubters had to be swept away when Riley re-invented his team during the 
last week. Let's see what Riley can do if they strip him of the game's greatest 
player and the team's only real outside shooter, on a team that was already as 
shallow as the female lead in a grade-B movie. 
Instead of crumbling, the Lakers played like Tony Campbell and David Rivers had 
been in their backcourt all season. 
Think it's been easy for Riley? In Detroit the guy sneaks out to the hotel pool 
one afternoon to recharge his solar batteries. That evening he sees himself on 
the 6 o'clock news, his sunbath captured by a spy-cam. Jackie Onassis could've 
told Riley it would get like this. 
After the sweep was completed Tuesday night, the Lakers weren't very poetic. At 
a time like this, it's hard to put a decade into words. Where's Winston 
Churchill when you really need him? 
But think about it -- five world championships in 10 years. Three other trips 
to the finals, and to stretch a point here, if not for injuries like the 
Scott-Johnson double-twang, the Lakers could've been 8 for 10 this decade. 
Forget the speculation and rely on the hard facts and it still comes out this 
way: The Lakers defined the 1980s in sports. Wire to wire, style and substance, 
speed and grace. 
Ten years ago in the visitor's locker room at the Spectrum, Magic cried and 
Kareem smiled and Cooper grinned. 
It would have been dramatic for the Lakers to close out the decade as winners, 
wire to wire champagne, but reality intruded. 
They showered and dressed quietly, and dryly, and left the Forum. Kareem will 
not be back as a player. Cooper, who knows? Driven for a decade by insecurity, 
Cooper will enjoy more of the same over the summer. 
Scott is no sure thing to return. Moves must be made. Jerry West, the general 
manager whose moves kept the Lakers competitive for a decade even though the 
draft was continually stacked against them, will be wheeling and dealing. 
Even Jerry Buss is no sure thing to return next year as Laker owner. He might 
decide to trade himself to a football team, or a baseball team. 
Magic will be back, surely, but what kind of show will he have to lead? 
Jerry West, who knows? This is a man who digs deeper into the game and suffers 
more for his team than any executive I've known. Will he retire, or see what 
kind of rebuilding he can do with second-round draft picks? 
Magic will be back, surely, but what kind of show will he have to lead? 
But that's the future. Right now would be a good time to pause and look back on 
a decade of great basketball. 
Jamaal Wilkes and Norm Nixon passing the torch to James Worthy and Scott. Jim 
Chones and Bob McAdoo passing the torch to Kurt Rambis and Mychal Thompson. 
Too many names to mention, too many great moments to recall. They go by in a 
blur, like the classic Laker fast break, now known as a transition game, and in 
recent days, rarely seen. 
Magic's passing, Kareem's skyhook, Worthy's knifing drives, Cooper's flying 
drawstrings. Riley thinking, West pacing, Buss watching. 
You can't put it all on film, you can't really describe it. It was there and 
now it is gone. It seems like a short decade. Time flies when you're enjoying 
yourself. 
