IF A MORE MODERATE ERA COMES TO POST-KHOMEINI IRAN, IT WILL BE SLOW IN ARRIVING 
The era of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, who died in Tehran on Saturday, 
witnessed a radical reversal in Iran's regional and international role and in 
many of its foreign policies. Khomeini, claiming spiritual leadership of the 
Islamic world, believed that he had a special mission: to reinvigorate the 
Muslim community for confrontation with the two hostile superpowers and an 
exploitative West. 
Under Khomeini, Iran's foreign policy underwent dramatic changes. The shah 
viewed the United States as Iran's closest ally; Khomeini labeled it the "Great 
Satan" and Iran's principal enemy. The shah befriended Israel; Khomeini called 
for Israel's destruction. The shah sought alliances with the moderate states of 
the Middle East such as Egypt; Khomeini, with Arabic radicals such as Syria and 
Libya. 
The shah saw himself as guarantor of Persian Gulf stability; Khomeini sought to 
destabilize gulf regimes. And while under the shah, Iran established a 
reasonable working relationship with Iraq, under Khomeini, Iraq invaded Iran, 
launching a bloody, destructive war that ended only eight years later. 
Khomeini, moreover, came to power believing Muslim states could stand up to the 
West and to the communist world -- each the purveyor of an alien and dangerous 
culture -- by reverting to Islam. He sought to encourage other Muslim states to 
follow the Iranian example, to overthrow regimes he regarded as subservient to 
the West, and to establish Islamic governments on the Iranian model. 
Khomeini won admiration, even adulation, in many parts of the Islamic world for 
standing up to America and humiliating the Great Satan. But the limits of his 
vision and Iran's influence became evident even during his own lifetime. Iran 
did succeed in spreading its version of revolutionary Islam among Lebanon's 
disadvantaged Shiites. But it was unable to export the revolution to other 
Persian Gulf states, and the example of the Iranian revolution has not been 
duplicated elsewhere in the Islamic world. The war with Iraq was enormously 
destructive in human life and in material terms. 
Iran, it is true, helped fuel resistance to Israel in Lebanon but the enmity 
toward Israel has often been a matter of words rather than action. Iran, after 
all, bought arms from the Israelis. During the Iran-Contra affair, Iran dealt 
and negotiated with the United States. Repeatedly the country has reached out 
for normalization of relations with West European states. 
Indeed, these two strains of fierce hostility to the West and a search for 
accommodation often have been pursued, sometimes simultaneously, sometimes in 
bewildering succession, in Khomeini's Iran. The inconsistency is itself a 
reflection of the division in Iran's leadership. If Khomeini had at times 
listened to the advocates of accommodation, his instinct toward confrontation 
and hostility to the West repeatedly asserted itself. 
It is hard to believe any successor to Khomeini would enjoy the powerful 
devotion he could arouse both in Iran and in other parts of the Islamic world. 
A "death sentence," such as that issued by Khomeini against Salman Rushdie, the 
author of "The Satanic Verses," would hardly carry the same weight or arouse 
the same passions issued by any conceivable successor. 
However, it would be wrong to anticipate a sudden shift in Iran's foreign 
policy in the post-Khomeini period. There are powerful constituencies within 
the Iranian leadership opposed to normalization with western Europe, let alone 
with the United States. Over the next two months, Iran's leaders will be 
absorbed in revision of the constitution to ensure stability and viable 
government in the difficult post-Khomeini period. 
Even those who favor more moderate policies abroad will wish to avoid being 
accused by rivals of compromise or of abandoning the Khomeini legacy. The 
regime is limited in its freedom of action by many years of anti-Western 
rhetoric and the fierce assertion of the principle of Iranian independence and 
self-sufficiency. The next few months will not be a time for new initiatives. 
Nevertheless, Iran cannot continue as an international pariah. The repeated, if 
often abortive attempts to normalize relations with Europe and to repair 
relations with the Persian Gulf states, and the more moderate Iranian position 
in the Organizaton of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) reflect a 
realization at least in one faction in the Iranian leadership that Iran needs 
to trade, sell oil, secure international credit and technology, and get on with 
the task of postwar reconstruction. The pragmatists will in due course reassert 
themselves, but they will need time. 
