WOMAN WITH A COUNTRY; 
DISSENT: EXILED STUDENT LEADER CHAI LING RISKS DEATH IF SHE FOLLOWS HER HEART 
BACK TO CHINA. NOW, SHE WANTS TO CARRY THE MESSAGE OF TIAN AN MEN SQUARE TO THE 
WORLD. 
The International House of Pancakes in Alhambra was crowded with breakfasters 
at mid-morning on a weekday. So hardly anyone looked up from their 
silver-dollar pancakes when the small, slim woman trailing a translator, a 
reporter and a photographer walked in. 
But in one corner of the restaurant, a look of shock and then joy registered on 
the faces of a middle-aged Asian couple. They rushed over to the woman, shyly 
shook her hand and asked for her autograph in the same awed way that most 
people would greet a famous politician or film star. 
While Chai Ling may not be a recognizable name or face to most Americans, she 
is a heroine to many for her role as the primary leader and pasionaria of the 
Chinese Students' Democracy Movement -- the student-led protest that riveted 
the world and riled the Chinese government one year ago this month, ending in 
the massacre of hundreds of demonstrators by army troops and riot police. 
It's been a long and painful journey for the 24-year-old Ling from Tian An Men 
Square in Beijing to this coffee shop off the San Bernardino Freeway, a journey 
filled with fear and blood, outrage and exile. 
A one-time model young Communist, she has been No. 4 on the Chinese 
government's "21 most-wanted" list of criminals ever since she gave an 
impassioned speech in the square last May that helped mobilize the support of 
the Chinese public for the student demonstrators, who elected her as their 
commander. After the government crackdown, she spent 10 months in hiding -- 
facing execution at any moment -- until she and her student leader husband, 
Feng Congde, who is also on China's most-wanted list, arrived safely in the 
West in April. 
Now living in France where the couple has received political asylum, Ling is 
winding up a five-city trip to the United States, her first. She has spoken 
with Vice President Dan Quayle, conferred with Brent Scowcroft, President 
Bush's national security adviser, addressed a rally on the steps of the U.S. 
Capitol and added to tension in Sino-American relations by urging that the Bush 
Administration link the granting of trade concessions to improvements in 
China's human-rights record. 
On Thursday while Ling's plane was delayed, Asian students at Cal Tech 
patiently waited two hours past the scheduled start of her speech, which she 
delivered in Chinese. Friday night, she was guest of honor at a reception at 
the home of actors Sarah Jessica Parker and Robert Downey Jr. 
Watching her wolf down a plate of French fries smothered in ketchup, her 
favorite American food, anyone would have a hard time believing Ling has seen 
and done so much. 
But when she talks about the democracy movement, her strong will makes her 
appear ageless. For this woman without a country is also a woman with a 
mission: to make sure the world never forgets those who died for freedom and 
those in her homeland who struggle for it still. 
"I think the Chinese people feel terrible about what your government is doing. 
And the American people, too," says Ling, who reluctantly turns to her 
translator for help when her English fails her. 
"I'd like to tell you a small story. Recently, I went to upstate New York and 
stayed in a small hotel. I was drinking in the bar when an American came over 
and asked if I was Chai Ling. He said he had watched TV day and night and when 
he saw what happened in Tian An Men Square, he cried. And he said he now feels 
ashamed of the American government policy towards China." 
She pauses to consider the plate of fried eggs which the waitress has just 
placed in front of her. "I don't think I can change the policy. Because it's 
not me who has ties with China. I just want to tell the world what happened in 
China that night, and why it happened, and why it continues to happen now." 
The oldest of three children, Ling was born in 1966 in the northeastern 
province of Shandong. Both her parents were members of the Communist Party, and 
she naturally joined the Central Communist Youth League, which singled her out 
as a "model student" while in high school. 
It wasn't until she entered Peking Normal University, where she studied child 
psychology, that Ling became politicized. In early 1987, she joined the first 
massive demonstrations for democratic reforms in nearly 40 years. And though 
her status as a college student would have guaranteed her a position among 
China's elite, she chose to risk it all by speaking out. 
"I was afraid at first," she admits. "Because I know that in China the minimum 
jail sentence for counterrevolutionaries is 17 years. But it wasn't my turning 
point. It was the government's turning point. 
"My generation grew up since the Cultural Revolution. And because of economic 
reform and the open door policy, we saw many things. We saw the inequality of 
the Chinese system, we saw the corruption among Chinese officials, we saw the 
censoring of the Chinese people. We saw all this, and we felt a responsibility. 
For most young people wanted to do something for their country because this 
type of patriotic feeling is a tradition among Chinese intellectuals. But the 
corruption and inequality in the system was so widespread that students felt 
hopeless." 
Like many Chinese students, she says, "I knew I had two choices. One was to 
leave the country and do my graduate work at an American school, which was the 
secure route because I knew I'd have a safe personal future. The other choice 
was to stand up and fight and join the movement. And I knew that if I did that, 
my future would likely be imprisonment." 
In the end, she says she realized there was no choice. "Because I really love 
my homeland. But most people think only of their own future, and not their 
country's." 
At first, she was merely one of many who joined the April sit-in at Tian An Man 
Square, which the students had organized to protest the government's 
indifference and delays in responding to their demand for more freedom. And she 
was among the handful who began a hunger strike. But then, on May 12, she 
decided that "I must do what I believe, which is to stand up for the Chinese 
people, to say what is right and what I believe is right." 
So she delivered an impassioned speech that became the manifesto of the hunger 
strikers, and, later, the last will and testament of the Students' Democracy 
Movement. Her words resounded with some of the same arguments that this 
country's founding fathers uttered in urging rebellion against the British. It 
was as if Betsy Ross had joined the American Revolution not as its seamstress 
but as its spokeswoman. "This nation is our nation, these people are our 
people, this government is our government," Ling told the crowd. "If we do not 
speak, who will? If we do not act, who will?" 
So pivotal was her speech that tape cassettes of it were distributed 
nationwide, and hundreds, followed by thousands, of Chinese students and 
workers began participating in the Tian An Men Square protest. 
Almost overnight, Ling was elected commander-in-chief of the Students' 
Democracy Movement even though Chinese culture traditionally keeps women in 
positions secondary to men. But, Ling recalls, she felt almost no 
discrimination. "Only a feeling of love and equality, because for many people 
this was the first time in their whole life that they shared the same feeling 
about the future of our country. So that's why it didn't matter who was 
talking, a woman or a man. It was totally new." 
And it was as their leader that she stayed in Tian An Men Square during the 
night of June 3 when the army troops and riot police advanced on the 
demonstrators. It was she who told the last 5,000 students remaining a story 
about a clan of a billion ants who had to escape a terrible fire on a mountain 
by holding onto each other and rolling down, even though the ants on the 
outside would burn to death. Then, on the morning of June 4, she led the 
remaining students out of the square and back to the university before she went 
underground. 
She describes her 10 months in hiding in China as "a very, very painful period 
when I agonized over what had happened and what I could have done differently 
to prevent it." She still has nightmares of the bodies of children. She hid in 
the homes and offices of "many strangers and organizations who still helped me 
even though they knew the punishment was immediate execution," she marvels. 
"That, more than anything, I think, shows the depth of feeling in China about 
our revolution." 
Finally, some "really heroic figures" in the French government helped her gain 
asylum in that country. Because she is an "enemy of the state," she cannot get 
word to her family still in China with whom she has not spoken since the early 
days of the student protests. When her name appeared on a list of hunger 
strikers, her father tried to get a message to her, she says, but she was never 
able to answer him. Recently, when a French photographer taking her picture 
told her of the Western custom of Mother's Day, she broke down and wept. 
She is sobbing even now. 
"I love my father and mother very deeply," she explains, haltingly. "I feel 
sorry that at the moment I cannot fulfill my responsibility towards my parents. 
But as a Chinese, I feel I need to do what is right for the Chinese people. 
"It is difficult to be here eating pancakes when my thoughts are back in 
China," she says, glancing around at the breakfasters who, concentrating on 
their food, seem oblivious to her emotion. 
"The demonstrations by the students are still going on. No matter how much 
pressure is put on them by the government, it will continue. Maybe even 
stronger." 
