MOVIES OF THE WEEK 
The Father Clements Story (NBC Sunday at 7 p.m.) is a substantial fact-based 
1987 drama about a black priest, played well by Louis Gossett Jr., who adopts a 
teen-ager. 
You Only Live Twice (ABC Sunday at 8:30 p.m.) is a fast, funny, 1967 no-holds 
barred piece of outrageous nonsense. Sean Connery, as James Bond, goes to Japan 
to find out who's hijacking space craft in order to provoke war between the 
United States and Russia. The villian is Donald Pleasance. 
Although the 1988 TV movie Red River (CBS Sunday at 9 p.m.) doesn't equal the 
1948 Howard Hawks original, it's well made and acted. James Arness has John 
Wayne's role as a trail boss and Bruce Boxleitner has the sensitive Montgomery 
Clift part. 
Appearances (NBC Sunday at 9 p.m.) is a new TV movie about a couple struggling 
to save their family business. Scott Paulin and Wendy Phillips star. 
The 1985 Wallenberg: A Hero's Story (Channel 13 Monday at 8 p.m., completed 
Tuesday at 8 p.m.) is one of the better depictions of relating to the Nazi 
slaughter, with Richard Chamberlain in a good performance as the unlikely 
Swedish diplomat who effected the rescue of more than 120,000 Hungarian Jews as 
the war was drawing to a close. 
Despite the crass way in which The Flamingo Kid (ABC Monday at 9 p.m.) was 
made, this 1984 film is a pretty funny movie about values and choices in which 
Matt Dillon is sweetly bewildered and very effective as a teen-ager. There's a 
spectacularly good performance from Richard Crenna as the smooth-talking, 
fatherly gin-rummy king at a Long Island beach club where Dillon has a summer 
job, circa 1963. 
Stranger in My Bed (NBC Monday at 9 p.m.) is a routine 1986 fact-based drama 
about an amnesiac, played by Lindsay Wagner. 
Prince made his 1984 film debut in the lurid, overwrought Purple Rain (Channel 
13 Wednesday at 8 p.m., again Saturday at 5 p.m.), a semi-autobiographical 
account of a black-Italian Minneapolis rock musician. 
Elia Kazan's memorable 1952 Viva Zapata! (Channel 5 Thursday at 7:30 p.m.) 
stars Marlon Brando as the Mexican revolutionary; also featured are Jean Peters 
and Anthony Quinn. 
Siesta (Channel 13 Thursday at 8 p.m.) is one of those monumentally bad movies, 
a 1987 work of hot, awful artiness in which Ellen Barkin plays a daredevil sky 
diver in the grips of an obsessive love. 
Robert Altman's 1976 Buffalo Bill and the Indians (Channel 5 Friday at 8 p.m.) 
is an alternately pretentious and tedious parable on the condescending, 
exploitative and treacherous treatment of Native Americans by whites, featuring 
a demythologized Buffalo Bill (Paul Newman) and pulp writer Ned Buntline (Burt 
Lancaster, deftly ironic). 
The entertaining 1981 Outland (Channel 13 Friday at 8 p.m.) is quite literally 
"High Noon" in outer space with a splendid Sean Connery as an intergalactic 
marshal. 
The late Michael Powell and the late Emeric Pressburger's 1947 lush color film 
of Rumer Godden's Black Narcissus (Channel 28 Saturday at 10:40 p.m.) verges on 
the outrageous in its evocation of incipient corruption and sexual hysteria as 
a group of nuns, headed by Deborah Kerr, attempts to turn an ancient Indian 
harem, pitched on an incredibly high cliff, into a convent. 
