MEDICINE GENETICS; 
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY ADVANCE REPORTED 
For the second time in three weeks, researchers have reported promising results 
in humans with a proposed new genetic therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
At a Wednesday press conference, a Canadian researcher said that the unusual 
therapy has been found to be both safe and feasible in tests on three young 
boys, but that it is too early to tell if the treatment is effective in 
reversing the course of the disease. 
The new therapy involves injecting healthy muscle cells alongside diseased 
muscles. Experiments in animals suggest that the injected cells will fuse with 
the patient's muscle cells and cause them to produce a protein that is missing 
in victims of the degenerative disease. 
Three weeks ago, neurologist Peter J. Law of the University of Tennessee 
reported that the therapy led to the production of the missing protein in a 
small toe muscle of a 12-year-boy with the disease -- the first time that any 
form of genetic therapy has been shown to work in humans. 
The new findings announced by neurologist George Karpati of the Montreal 
Neurological Institute represent a significant step beyond Law's results, 
experts said, because the muscle he studied -- the biceps of the arm -- is 30 
times as large as the toe muscle and requires the injection of a much larger 
number of cells, as many as 60 million. 
Wednesday's confirmation of the earlier results "gives us cause to be 
optimistic" about the success of the therapy, said pediatric neurologist Leon 
I. Charash, chairman of the Muscular Dystrophy Assn.'s medical advisory 
committee, "but it is still very early in the game." 
But Karpati refused to reveal whether the treated muscles were producing the 
missing protein. "We don't want to make any premature statements about efficacy 
of the therapy because we don't want to raise false hopes," he said. But 
Karpati is optimistic that the treatment will be found to be effective, and he 
is laying the groundwork for studies in which the healthy cells will be fused 
with more vital muscles, such as those that control breathing. 
Meanwhile, researchers in San Francisco plan to begin human trials of the new 
therapy in August or September, and a separate group in Boston will begin by 
the end of the year. Karpati said he hopes that his report of the safety of the 
procedure will stimulate other researchers to try it, thereby increasing the 
likelihood that an effective treatment regimen will be discovered. 
About one in every 3,500 boys born in the United States has the genetic defect 
that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Females can be carriers of the gene, 
but rarely contract the disorder. 
The affected babies appear normal at birth, but develop a progressive weakening 
of the muscles that usually places them in a wheelchair by the age of 11. There 
is no current therapy and most die in their late teens or early 20s when the 
muscles that operate the heart and lungs cease functioning. 
The new results are all the more surprising because it was only 2 1/2 years ago 
that researchers discovered the defective gene that causes Duchenne MD. The 
healthy gene is the blueprint for a protein, called dystrophin, that allows 
muscle cells to function properly. 
The new therapy is possible because each muscle cell, unlike cells elsewhere in 
the body, has hundreds to thousands of nuclei, each with its own genetic 
information. Muscle tissue also contains immature cells, called myoblasts, that 
can fuse with existing muscle cells, insert their own healthy nuclei and cause 
the muscles to regenerate. 
Karpati has so far treated three boys 6 to 8. In each case, he isolated about 
10,000 healthy myoblasts from the boy's father and grew them in the laboratory 
until he had obtained more than 60 million. 
He then made a series of 55 injections along the biceps in one arm of each boy, 
injecting about 1 million cells at each site. An equal number of sham 
injections of salt water were made along the biceps of the opposite arm as a 
control. 
Karpati noted that critics of the procedure argued that there were many 
possible deleterious effects that could be caused by the procedure, including 
rejection, infection, hemorrhage, scarring, prolonged pain and so forth. "None 
of these things happened," he said. 
