FRENCH SOCIALIST TO LEAD CAPITALIST CHARGE INTO EASTERN EUROPE; 
BANKING: JACQUES ATTALI WAS THE ARCHITECT OF FRANCE'S FAILED PROGRAM OF 
NATIONALIZING INDUSTRY. NOW HE'S THE HEAD OF A PRO-PRIVATIZATION BANK. 
Eight years ago, Jacques Attali, in his powerful role as special counselor to 
President Francois Mitterrand, directed the Socialist government's disastrous 
program of nationalizing industry and banking in France. 
The program soon backfired and contributed to the Socialist defeat in the 1986 
parliamentary elections, after which most of the policies were reversed. 
Now more influential than ever at the Elysees Palace -- where he is nicknamed 
"Sherpa to God" -- Attali last week took over as president of the new European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, created to revitalize and privatize 
the economies of Eastern Europe. 
To U.S. officials who served during the controversial early years of 
Mitterrand's first term, when the Socialists ruled alongside Communists and 
instituted many leftist economic reforms, the conversion from Attali the 
militant socialist to Attali the free marketeer could hardly be more amazing. 
"I was in France one day in 1982," former U.S. Assistant Treasury Secretary 
Marc Leland recalled in an interview. "Jacques Attali called me to the Elysees, 
saying, 'I want to explain what we did this morning.' That was the day they 
nationalized the banks of France." 
Leland, who directed international economic policy in the Reagan Adminstration, 
added: "I find it no little irony that the man who nationalized the banks in 
France in 1982 is now the man in charge of showing Eastern Europe how to 
deregulate and privatize." 
However, French political observers, accustomed to Attali's impressive 
intellectual powers -- he is the author of 15 books -- and political 
acrobatics, are not as shocked by the transition. 
"Jacques Attali sees himself as a man of ideas," Figaro editor Franz-Olivier 
Giesbert wrote in a best-selling book severely critical of Mitterrand and his 
staff, "but they are rarely his own. He claims everything as his own, without . 
. . scruples." 
For his part, Attali, 46, a blade of a man with dark, arching eyebrows and 
long, swept-back black hair, denies any political-economic metamorphosis. 
"I'm still the same person," he declared last week at a news conference in 
Paris. "It is just that the conditions in Eastern Europe require massive 
privatization." 
But in typical Attali fashion, he went on to explain that the London-based 
bank, which has assets of $12 billion, would have serious political as well as 
financial dimensions. 
"It will be the first financial institution to impose conditions of democracy 
and human rights on its clients," he said, adding that he plans to run a tight 
ship, assembling a small core staff of Europe's "best and brightest" to scout 
investment opportunities. 
Anyone worried that he might steer the bank away from its free-market course, 
Attali added, can take solace in a statute in the institution's charter 
requiring that at least 60% of its loans go to the private sector. The other 
40% will be used for projects to clean up the environment, rebuild the region's 
infrastructure and restructure state-run companies. 
Indicating that he considers himself solidly among the "best and brightest," 
Attali said in an interview after the news conference that he intends to keep 
his job as senior adviser to Mitterrand -- at least in the months it will take 
until the bank's 40 member-countries, including the United States and the 
Soviet Union, ratify the charter and a permanent home is found for the 
institution in London. 
When asked who might replace him as Mitterrand's chief confidant, Attali 
quipped, "In life, one always likes to think of himself as irreplaceable." 
In light of such comments, some have dismissed Attali, as one senior former 
U.S. diplomat did recently, as a "typical arrogant French intellectual." But 
few people seem to begrudge him his new job, which is described by some as 
representing a Marshall Plan for the other half of Europe. 
For one thing, the bank itself was mainly Attali's inspiration. After 
Mitterrand presented the idea to near-unanimous acclaim at the European 
Community summit in Strasbourg last December, he credited his aide with the 
original concept. 
On other occasions, Mitterrand has described Attali as a brilliant idea man. 
"If only one idea in 10 were a good one," Mitterrand reportedly said, "the 
relationship would still be worthwhile." But from the looks of things, Attali's 
batting average is higher than that. 
Among contemporary historians, there is a debate over whether Attali met 
Mitterrand at a nightclub or a restaurant. But from that moment in 1974, Attali 
has served as the French president's intellectual spark plug. 
Indeed, Attali so jealously guards his relationship with Mitterrand that he 
once refused to tell French Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy about a Mitterrand 
plan to visit Beirut. He is a regular companion for the president on his daily 
strolls through the streets of Paris. 
In his years at the Elysees, Attali has supervised major French initiatives 
ranging from a massive dam project in Bangladesh to a quirky bicentennial 
parade last summer celebrating the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution. 
But despite his powerful influence, Attali is more Day-Glo orange than eminence 
grise in the French government. 
Which other senior official and bank president, for example, would invite a 
clown in pea-green underwear as the honored guest at his own wedding? Attali 
did. And when his clown friend later died, Attali delivered a stirring eulogy. 
"Adieu, my pet," he concluded, calling the clown his best friend. 
How many other international luminaries consider their political role 
subordinate to their craft as a writer? Attali does. A recent book of essays, 
"Skylines," spent 14 weeks on the French best-seller list. Attali rises each 
morning at 4 to work on his essays and novels. Two of his recent projects 
include a children's book and a series of television profiles of great men in 
history. 
In many ways, Attali is the stereotypical model of a French intellectual 
engaged at the same time in the world of politics and art. Few have ever 
succeeded as well or as broadly. 
Still, some of his friends feel he may be stretched too thin. Some critics have 
panned his writing as having more volume than value. Political associates 
complain that he regularly cancels meetings or schedules several at the same 
time. 
Commented one friend of 20 years: "The main problem with Jacques is that there 
is a little too much Walter Mitty in him. He wants to prove himself as the 
proper civil servant, as an international banker and as a talented writer all 
at the same time." 
Times staff writer Art Pine contributed to this story. 
