NEW GENERATION TRACES JUSTICE TRAIL 
More than 20 years ago, Jessie Kupers' father was in the thick of the struggle 
for civil rights in the South as a UCLA medical student looking into health 
problems of poor blacks. Saturday, Jessie, 13, boarded a freedom bus bound for 
Mississippi with a similar mission in mind. 
"I decided to go because racism is still present, and I want people to know 
that there are people who care," said Jessie, a student of the 32nd Street 
Performing Arts Magnet. 
A generation gap was apparent outside the Watts Towers as a contingent of young 
people departed for Philadelphia, Miss., for a special commemoration of the 
brutal slaying of three civil rights workers a quarter century ago. For the 
older generation who came to say their goodbys, Andrew Goodman, James Chaney 
and Henry Schwerner were household names in the turbulent 1960s. For most of 
those who left on the Greyhound, the three were virtually unknown until last 
year's Academy Award-winning movie, "Mississippi Burning." 
Generation gap aside, there was a common bond: they agree that the work the 
three civil rights workers helped pioneer is far from finished. 
The civil rights "caravan" left Watts with 43 people -- mostly college students 
-- who will trace the historic route of the civil rights struggle in the South. 
They will stop at Little Rock, Ark., Selma and Montgomery, Ala., and go on to 
Philadelphia, Miss., before joining hundreds of other freedom riders from 
around the country in Washington to participate in memorial services and 
congressional meetings. The caravan will make its final stop in New York. 
Training of Field Workers 
The commemoration is organized by the Chaney, Goodman, Schwerner Memorial 
Coalition and Human SERVE, a national voting rights organization. The group is 
using the event to train field workers and highlight its campaign for automatic 
voter registration and other electoral reform. 
Chaney, a black Meridian, Miss., resident, and Goodman and Schwerner, two white 
New Yorkers, were conducting a voter registration drive when they were arrested 
on a traffic violation and taken to jail in Philadelphia. After their release 
on June 21, 1964, a gang of police and Ku Klux Klansmen kidnaped them. Their 
bodies were found 44 days later, buried in an earthen dam. Murder charges were 
dropped in state court but a federal court later convicted seven men for 
violating civil rights laws. 
Ben Chaney, president of the James Earl Chaney Foundation, named after his 
slain brother, came from Meridian to send off the Los Angeles contingent. "We 
have to educate the young, rededicate the old, and rekindle the spirit of the 
movement," he said. 
In a brief address to the "freedom riders," Chaney noted that he was arrested 
21 times for civil rights causes before he was 12 years old. The participation 
by the Los Angeles young people, he said, is a "statement of courage." 
Said Chaney: "We've moved ahead, but even though poll taxes and literacy tests 
are things of the past, illiteracy and economic injustice are still in our way. 
We can start to progress only through increased participation and easier voter 
registration." 
The question of economic justice was on the minds of several of the freedom 
riders. 
Kate Sullivan, 18, a freshman drama student at UC Irvine, said she is making 
the trip to contribute to the fight against racism. "All of my life I have seen 
racism and economic oppression," she said. "Why is it when I drive past on Skid 
Row I see that most of the homeless people are black? The black community needs 
to be empowered, and increased voter registration is the first step toward 
this." 
Sullivan's friend, Manami Kano, a 17-year-old Japanese-American, said the 
freedom ride was "not an ordinary outing" for her. "Racism hits me," she said. 
"The status quo shows so little tolerance for other races." 
Ruth Kupers, 48, Jessie's mother, told her friends how Jessie had raised more 
than $200 to pay for his trip and talked his teachers into allowing him to take 
his exams early. As Jessie was about to board the bus, his mother, a marriage 
and family therapist, embraced him and reminded him that he had promised to 
phone her every day. 
The departure was delayed for a few minutes to accommodate the arrival of three 
black South Africans who are making the trip. Charmaine Motjadji, 38, a 
graduate student in film at UCLA, said she had encouraged her 20-year-old son, 
Ouda, and two other black South Africans who attend Santa Monica College to 
make the trip "to see the historical aspect of the struggle." 
Said Motjadji: "The American people always support our struggle . . . we want 
to support theirs. Their struggle is our struggle, too. We are fighting for the 
vote; they have the vote but they don't use it." 
