TV REVIEW; 
KCET'S 'TAKE FIVE' SERIES PLAYS BEAT THE CLOCK 
If a comparison of their half-hour premieres is indicative, KCET's "Take Five: 
Science" (debuting at 7:30 tonight on Channel 28) makes better use of its time 
than its sibling "Take Five: Arts" (which debuted last Monday), even if 
"Science" does take more liberties with the limits on that time. 
The idea behind "Take Five" is to cover a single subject in five minutes, with 
segments airing four days a week from 7:30-7:35 p.m. But occasionally KCET will 
air compilations, where, it seems, the rules aren't quite so strict. There are 
only four segments in tonight's initial "Science" half-hour, and one of these 
-- on UC Santa Barbara anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon -- runs almost nine 
minutes. 
Perhaps it's only coincidence that the Chagnon piece is also the best of the 
four -- a fascinating and even, somehow, reasonably comprehensive look at one 
man's attempt to document and preserve an Amazonian tribe threatened by 
everyone from shaman-degrading Christian missionaries to murderous gold miners. 
Or perhaps it isn't coincidence. Five -- or even six or seven -- minutes is an 
awfully small amount of time to cover something like headaches, the first topic 
"Science" addresses tonight. 
The strain shows: One moment we're being told about migraines, then the subject 
switches to "cluster" headaches, stays there a while, gives way to a short 
statement about "mind over matter" in combatting the pain, and then suddenly 
it's over. 
The other two segments fall somewhere between these extremes. A piece on the 
origins of the moon benefits from some neat computer animation illustrating the 
impact theory. The other segment, examining what makes certain athletes peak 
performers, has a slow-motion shot of Dodger star pitcher Orel Hershiser doing 
his stuff in shorts only, but it still doesn't leave much of an impression. 
Produced and introduced by Roger Bingham (from KCET's defunct "California 
Stories" series), "Take Five: Science" should prove interesting to keep track 
of -- not only for its potpourri of subjects but also for how well it battles 
that ticking clock. 
