SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
GETTING A GRIP ON SCHIZOPHRENIA; 
PSYCHOLOGY: EACH YEAR ABOUT 100,000 AMERICANS ARE DIAGNOSED AS SCHIZOPHRENIC. 
DESPITE THE WIDESPREAD USE OF THE TERM, PSYCHIATRISTS ARE STILL DEBATING ITS 
DEFINITION AND WHETHER IT IS ACTUALLY A DISEASE OR HAS A BIOLOGICAL BASIS. 
At a conference titled "What Is Schizophrenia?" held here earlier this month, 
the first speaker paused at the podium to ask for the next slide, which he said 
would show a list of "established facts" about the disorder. Instead, the 
screen suddenly went blank, prompting wry laughter to ripple through the 
auditorium. 
Just what has been "established" about schizophrenia was the subject of serious 
and sometimes sharp-edged discussions during this two-day gathering, which took 
place nearly 80 years after the term was coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen 
Bleuler. 
Each year about 100,000 Americans are newly diagnosed as schizophrenic, which 
means that they are said to believe things that aren't true, to see or hear 
things that aren't there, to have disorganized thoughts and speech, to exhibit 
various disturbances of emotion and to withdraw from others. Most people we 
think of as "crazy" or "demented" are likely to be diagnosed as schizophrenic. 
But here at Clark University, where Freud gave a famous lecture in 1909, 16 
psychiatrists, psychologists, philosophers and social scientists gathered to 
debate whether schizophrenia is actually a disease and whether it has a 
biological basis. 
Challenging the conventional wisdom in the field, some participants proposed 
that the disorder actually does not meet the criteria for a disease. They also 
charged their colleagues with giving short shrift to environmental factors that 
lead to a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The mavericks in the field of mental 
health even questioned whether the word "schizophrenia" is meaningful or 
useful. 
"What is the 'it' we talk about as schizophrenia?" psychologist Morton Wiener, 
a co-host of the conference, asked his colleagues. "We talk about outcome and 
we talk about effects, but what's the animal itself?" 
The animal may be a unicorn, argued Theodore Sarbin, professor emeritus of 
psychology at UC Santa Cruz. "Schizophrenia is a social construction to deal 
with people whose conduct is unacceptable to" those in positions of power, he 
said. "My recommendation is that we banish the term to the musty historical 
archives." 
"In the 1930s, I might have believed you," retorted psychiatrist Joseph Zubin, 
an influential researcher in the field. "In 1990, what you say is complete 
nonsense." 
Part of the controversy results from the slipperiness of the diagnosis. In a 
paper presented at the start of the conference, Manfred Bleuler, Eugen's son, 
observed that two people who are both classified as schizophrenic may have very 
different sets of symptoms -- and many of these features may be shared by 
people regarded as normal. These are facts, he noted, "which it would be 
pleasant to forget." 
Psychiatrists who define and refine the diagnostic category of schizophrenia 
often have trouble agreeing among themselves about such things as whether a 
given delusion (a false belief) qualifies as "bizarre." This was conceded by 
Thomas McGlashan, who sits on the committee now preparing the fourth version of 
the Diagnostic and Statistic Manual, the practitioner's handbook. 
Later, in an interview, he acknowledged that the list of diagnostic criteria 
for schizophrenia resembles "a Chinese menu and you see that there's something 
arbitrary about it." 
Still, Zubin and others insisted that psychiatrists are making progress in 
establishing a systematic procedure for understanding and diagnosing the 
disorder, which they refer to as a disease. "It's a line of reasoning that will 
eventually lead to something, even if the word schizophrenia doesn't last 
forever," said Paul McHugh, who heads the department of psychiatry at Johns 
Hopkins medical school. 
Yet McHugh admitted that "schizophrenia is difficult to describe and define 
even as a clinical concept" -- partly because no one knows why people act in 
ways that lead to that diagnosis. 
Most psychiatrists now believe that some neuro-biological problem is 
responsible, but several conference participants warned about relying too 
heavily on such theories. "Scientists have been too facile in invoking biology 
to explain schizophrenia," argued Robert Carson, a Duke University psychologist 
who has written widely on the subject. 
The reason, he said, has a lot to do with what kind of research gets funded. 
The National Institute of Mental Health, which hands out about 85% of all money 
used to study mental disorders, tends to pay for people to look at brains 
rather than at families, to emphasize genetic rather than cultural factors. 
"Biological psychiatry is very much in the saddle, particularly with respect to 
funding," Carson said. "The best way to get money from a politician is to say, 
'Give me five more years and we'll lick schizophrenia because it's a genetic 
disease.' But we'll never have a miracle cure because schizophrenia is too 
involved with the whole life of the person." 
Watching schizophrenics whose symptoms come and go, largely in response to what 
is happening around them, has led Yale psychiatrist John Strauss to repudiate 
"metaphors like 'the broken brain.' " Strauss described how a raving paranoid 
schizophrenic used to beat him at chess, proving that he could calm down and 
think clearly when the situation called for it. 
The story is also told of a psychiatrist who had to examine a catatonic 
schizophrenic in order to pass an examination. The patient sat frozen, ignoring 
all questions, until the psychiatrist finally got down on the floor with him 
and shouted, "Look, I'm going to flunk this exam unless you say something" -- 
whereupon the patient began to speak. 
In short, therapists need to see "the patient as a goal-directed being who's 
trying to solve problems" rather than as someone simply "suffering from 
happenings in the brain," Sarbin said. 
Even critics of mainstream psychiatry tend to agree that genetic predisposition 
plays some role in determining who becomes schizophrenic. But the studies of 
twins that led to this conclusion have been severely criticized. "They're so 
full of errors as to be almost worthless," said Carson, who, along with other 
dissident researchers, has identified numerous problems with the best-known 
studies. 
Carson also pointed out that even genetic researchers concede that nearly 90% 
of schizophrenic patients have no close relatives with the disorder. 
Most researchers believe that some genetically vulnerable individuals react 
badly to stress, which means that both biology and environment contribute to 
the appearance of schizophrenia. But some specialists emphasize the role of the 
latter, rejecting the view that schizophrenia is simply a brain disease that 
"happens" to people -- a view that has found favor among organizations made up 
of the families of schizophrenics. 
A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine last March, for 
example, used a new scanning technique to compare the brains of 15 sets of 
identical twins, one of whom in each case was schizophrenic. Differences in the 
brains were noted in almost every case -- even though identical twins have 
identical genes. Clearly, something other than genetic factors must have 
produced those differences. 
When researchers discover a neurological abnormality in people with behavioral 
disorders, it is usually assumed that this feature of the brain is responsible 
for the behavior. In fact, though, it may work the other way around. In the 
schizophrenia study, it might even be that the anatomical difference resulted 
from drugs given to the schizophrenics, Zubin conceded. 
Also cited at the conference was a recent Finnish study that followed 271 
children of schizophrenic mothers, all of whom were put up for adoption. Of the 
children who were placed in families judged as psychologically healthy, not one 
became schizophrenic. 
Contrary to the impression given in many popular articles on the subject, UCLA 
psychologist Michael J. Goldstein concluded in a 1988 review of three major 
studies that "variations in the rates of schizophrenia are predictable" not 
only from genetics but "in part from prior estimates of disturbances in the 
'family' environment." 
Moreover, said McGlashan, director of the Chestnut Lodge Research Institute, 
"the schizophrenia-as-brain-disease theory is taken to mean that all you have 
to do is give them a drug -- you don't have to worry about the patient as a 
person." 
University of Chicago psychiatrist Laura Miller, who was not at the conference, 
agrees that psychotherapy, and not merely medication, "makes sense for some 
schizophrenics even when there does appear to be a biological basis." Therapy 
can address the psychological purposes that some symptoms serve and can help 
patients cope with the day-to-day effects of delusions, impaired communication 
and loneliness. 
Miller has also uncovered other evidence that suggests the schizophrenic is an 
active subject rather than the helpless object of an illness. In an unpublished 
study, Miller found that many schizophrenics value their hallucinations, and 
that as a result these people "find some way to continue hallucinating" despite 
their treatment. 
While Carson and others dismissed the idea that a "cure" will ever be found for 
schizophrenia -- largely because this reflects a misconceived notion of the 
nature of the disorder -- Zubin emphatically rejected the pessimistic idea that 
schizophrenics rarely get better. 
"It is not a permanently chronic condition leading to deterioration," he said. 
In fact, "from 23% to 50% of schizophrenics never relapse after their first 
episode." 
But some of the sterner critics at the conference pointed out that even to talk 
about a "first episode" or about "symptoms" is to assume the existence of an 
ongoing disease -- an assumption not proved to everyone's satisfaction. 
A clever researcher who chose to attribute madness to supernatural causes could 
"prove" that demonic possession runs in families and that its effects were 
mitigated by taking certain medications, according to Carson. This no more 
demonstrates the value of invoking the devil than similar findings justify 
invoking neurobiology. 
According to Daniel Miller of Wesleyan University, some theorists see 
schizophrenia as a "clear-cut, static entity" with a cause that can be pinned 
down -- which reflects 19th-Century scientific thinking. Others see it in terms 
of evolving social arrangements and interactions. Which of these two basic 
models is preferred ultimately comes down to "a matter of faith," he 
maintained. 
