MENTAL HEALTH CLINIC CLOSURES CREATE TURMOIL 
The long-awaited closing Friday of three Los Angeles County mental health 
centers has permanently cut off hundreds of mentally ill people from treatment, 
triggering suicide threats, confusion and frantic calls by frightened mental 
patients to the overcrowded clinics that remain open, officials said. 
Among the clients left stranded by the closings, only the "sickest of the 
sickest of the sick" will remain eligible for county help, said Dr. Milton 
Miller, chairman of the psychiatric department at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
which is accepting 250 patients from one of the shuttered clinics. 
"There has been a brutalization of the system," he asserted. 
Packed Up Records 
Psychiatrists and therapists stopped seeing patients June 2, but the doors 
officially closed Friday when staff packed up records and cleaned up. The three 
clinics -- East San Fernando Valley Mental Health Center in North Hollywood, 
Coastal Community Mental Health Center in Carson and Wilmington Mental Health 
Center -- were slated for closure after the county won a contentious legal 
battle with mental health advocacy groups that wanted to preserve the clinics. 
About 1,175 patients were still on the rolls at the time the three centers 
closed, but supervisors said the total is just a fraction of the caseload the 
centers once handled before the staff started leaving and threats of closures 
started surfacing. 
Meanwhile, mental health providers throughout the county said they were shocked 
when county officials unveiled a new list of deeper cuts Thursday. Programs for 
the aged, children and minorities would be curtailed, and the San Fernando 
Valley would be left with almost no public mental health services. The $10.9 
million in proposed cuts, along with others already in the pipeline, would 
force the closure of six of the remaining 28 clinics. 
"What we are looking at at this point is a complete and utter disaster in the 
mental health system," said Dr. Ian Hunter, executive director of the San 
Fernando Valley Community Mental Health Center. "The mental health system has 
gone insane." 
Among those stranded by the present closings are roughly 350 children, most 
sexually or physically abused, who had received counseling at the Coastal 
Mental Health Center. There was no other program that could absorb the large 
number of children needing help, said Joel Foxman, the center's director and 
chief of the South Bay. 
When asked what would happen to the children, Foxman replied, "I'm really 
afraid to consider the possibilities." 
In the San Fernando Valley, about 300 of the 800 patients from the North 
Hollywood clinic have been referred to two county-funded, privately run clinics 
that have placed them on waiting lists. Administrators at the two clinics said 
there is little hope most of them will ever receive appointments. 
Clinic officials said they have been receiving lots of calls from "bewildered, 
frustrated" patients since the centers closed. They also report a rash of 
suicide attempts and suicide threats since preparation for the closings began, 
although no one could quantify that. 
Begged for Help 
Fernando Escarcega, the head of the Valley's out-patient clinics, encountered 
one of the displaced patients at the closed North Hollywood center Friday 
afternoon. A couple with their mentally ill boy cornered Escarcega in the 
hallway and begged him to help. 
The father cried as the mother pleaded and clung to the stunned official. Their 
son, who needed more medicine, slumped to the floor. Escarcega broke policy 
rules and obtained an appointment for the boy that day at the county clinic in 
San Fernando. 
"It was the most disturbing event I have personally faced since this all 
began," said Escarcega, who presided over three meetings Thursday where many 
North Hollywood clinic staffers cried. 
The bulk of the Valley patients are being transferred to the county's 
understaffed Crisis Mangement Center in Van Nuys, where psychiatric emergencies 
are handled. The center shut its doors several hours early Monday because of an 
overcrowded waiting room -- a phenomenon that started earlier this year, said 
Ron Klein, the district chief of the center. 
Dependent on the state for most of its mental health money, county officials 
said they reluctantly ordered the closures when the mental health budget 
plunged hopelessly in the red after the state failed to provide the county 
enough money to keep the system afloat. 
County officials said further deterioration of the crippled mental health 
network could only be avoided with a large cash infusion. Another $15 million 
would spare all remaining programs. But under the cheeriest scenario, the 
county only expects at this point to receive an additional $5.4 million from 
the state, said Francis Dowling, deputy mental health director. Overall, the 
county spends roughly $300 million a year on mental health programs. 
"This is not what we want to do, but we are forced to because of the failure of 
the state to come through with sufficient funds," Dowling said. 
Jim Carroll, executive director of San Fernando Valley Legal Services, who 
filed the unsuccessful lawsuit against the county, said it is "very likely" he 
will sue again in light of the new cuts that he called "incredible." He 
suggested a state audit to trace where the county's mental health money is 
being spent. 
Meanwhile, the first round of closures has prompted the county to create 
tougher guidelines on who will qualify for help, officials said. It has also 
forced providers to cut back services to the bare bones. 
A person needing individual therapy might only receive group counseling. A 
person who needs therapy and medication may only get drugs. Appointments could 
be spaced further apart. 
One victim of the tougher guidelines is Mary, a 45-year-old woman who has been 
disabled by agoraphobia (an abnormal fear of being in open or public places) 
for 10 years. Unable to leave her house without someone accompanying her, she 
is subject to panic attacks and has never mentally recovered from an assault by 
an intruder in her home years ago. 
Denied Help 
By letter, Mary was referred to the San Fernando Valley Community Mental Health 
Center. But on Monday, a staffer told her she was not sick enough to qualify 
for assistance because she was not on medications and had never been 
hospitalized. 
"I feel my well-being has been very, very severely threatened," Mary said. "I 
am on a thin thread, not to just give up." 
Glenn Comer, a mentally ill plaintiff in the Legal Services lawsuit, said a 
suicidal friend ended up in the hospital after blaming herself for the clinics' 
problems. 
"She started burning herself with cigarettes when she heard voices that she was 
bad and that's why the clinic was closing," Comer said. 
Mental health professionals say the closings have already resulted in more 
hospitalizations and are beginning to overwhelm the county's emergency rooms 
and psychiatric wards. 
That's what Miller of Harbor-UCLA Medical Center said he dreads. Every night, 
physicians must turn away psychiatric patients who are not sick enough for a 
bed. 
"We play a game of 'Sophie's Choice' night after night after night," Miller 
said. "It's a horrible job." 
