DEATH &amp; THE DOCTOR; 
DR. JACK KEVORKIAN HAS LONG TAKEN AN INTEREST IN THE DYING. BUT DID HE GO TOO 
FAR IN ASSISTING A SUICIDE? 
He was a bright young doctor at a time when America was just beginning its 
post-World War II ascent, and Jack Kevorkian, University of Michigan Medical 
School Class of 1952, could have -- should have -- had it all. 
But he had this nagging, inexplicable fascination with the dying and the dead, 
a personal obsession, really, one that was all the more peculiar because it 
first appeared during an optimistic era of limitless possibilities and 
unquestioning faith in the resiliency of American life. 
Perhaps it was reinforced during his brief time as a U.S. Army doctor in Korea; 
certainly it was there during his residency at the University of Michigan 
Medical Center in the mid-1950s. 
"I used to take what I called death rounds," says Kevorkian, 62, his dark eyes 
flashing, remembering. "I would go around to all of the people (in the 
hospital) who were about to die and watch. I wanted to see at what point they 
could no longer be resuscitated. 
"All the other doctors laughed at me." 
Today, however, some leading physicians shudder at the thought of Kevorkian, 
his "death rounds" and his role in a controversial case of what he calls 
medically assisted suicide -- the death of a 54-year-old Alzheimer's sufferer 
from Oregon. 
Of Kevorkian's "death rounds," Dr. Charles McElwee, president of the Los 
Angeles County Medical Assn., observes: "I would never think of doing such a 
thing, that shows a morbid obsession with death." 
To be sure, Kevorkian denies his was obsessive behavior. He sees himself as a 
misunderstood, research pioneer. As a pathologist, after all, his professional 
work involved the study of death. 
"I don't like to watch someone die," he insists. "It is a traumatic, wrenching 
experience." 
Yet through the years, his increasingly macabre, independent research and 
writing have always led him back to death. 
There was his early plan, first proposed during his medical school days and 
shunned by his professors, to "harvest" organs from prison inmates. 
There were his experiments in taking blood transfusions from corpses, a 
practice now unacceptable in American medicine. 
Eventually, he would advocate giving death-row prisoners the right to commit 
suicide -- with their organs then removed while comatose -- rather than face 
execution. 
He even wrote Op-Ed pieces in the Long Beach Press-Telegram supporting his 
ideas in the early 1980s, when he lived in Southern California. 
But the more his colleagues laughed -- or blanched -- at his ideas, the more 
determined he appeared to become. 
He seemed, as a Michigan prosecutor later said, "to revel in the role of 
outcast." 
Over the years, Kevorkian's obsession would cost him dearly. On the fringes of 
medicine, he would become permanently unemployed in his mid-50s -- rejected two 
years ago even for a job as a paramedic. 
His only patients, he says, are acquaintances who stopped him in the street to 
ask his advice on minor ailments. He would complain that American medical 
journals refused to publish his ideas. 
"I'm unemployable because of the controversy surrounding my work," he says. 
"The only thing protecting me right now is my M.D. degree." 
By the onset of the 1990s, Kevorkian had retreated into a private world. 
He took to comparing himself to Dr. Frankenstein -- a misunderstood genius, he 
says. 
"The medical society is stuck in the Dark Ages," he would assert. "I'm sure if 
they could, they would burn me at the stake." 
A lifelong bachelor living off his savings in a tiny, ill-furnished, walk-up 
apartment in Royal Oak, Mich., not far from his boyhood home in Pontiac, he 
spent his solitary days in libraries, reading. His thoughts were increasingly 
dominated by the issue of suicide for the terminally ill. 
And so when Janet Adkins came to him earlier this month, eager to end her life, 
eager to stop the suffering of Alzheimer's disease before she became mentally 
incompetent, Kevorkian was ready. 
He had already traveled the slippery ethical slope that leads from medicine to 
euthanasia. In his own mind, he was no longer a practicing pathologist. 
Instead, he printed up new business cards. On them, he called himself an 
"obitiatrist," with its root in the word "obituary": a doctor of death. "The 
world's first," he says. 
On June 4, Janet Adkins, a 54-year-old mother of three from Portland, Ore., 
climbed into the back of Kevorkian's rusting old Volkswagen van in a rural 
Michigan park not far from here and allowed Kevorkian to connect her to his 
homemade "suicide machine." 
She then pushed a button three times to ensure the machine's death-inducing 
drugs would course through her veins. "Thank you, thank you," were her last 
words, her neck arched as she beamed up at Kevorkian's face. 
The next day, Kevorkian exploded into America's consciousness. 
Overnight, his role in Adkins' "doctor-assisted" suicide had ignited an 
emotionally charged, nationwide debate over the right-to-die issue. 
Again, as throughout his career, Kevorkian has been condemned by the medical 
community since Adkins' death. 
"What he did is like veterinary medicine," insists Dr. John Finn, medical 
director of the Hospice of Southeastern Michigan in suburban Detroit, where 
some terminally ill patients have tried to seek out Kevorkian's services. "When 
you take your pet to the vet, he puts the pet to sleep. I think human beings 
are more complicated than that. 
"I think he should have his license revoked." 
Dr. Melvin Kirschner, co-chairman of the joint committee on medical ethics of 
the Los Angeles County Medical Assn. and the Los Angeles County Bar Assn., 
complains: "Kevorkian did this without any guidelines whatsoever. Physicians 
cannot just, willy-nilly, assist someone in killing themselves." 
Yet this time, Kevorkian has also struck a responsive chord within the growing 
right-to-die movement, which is being fueled by the nation's mounting distaste 
for medical technology that extends lives regardless of the suffering involved. 
"If we are free people at all, then we must be free to choose the manner of our 
death," argues Derek Humphry, executive director of the Hemlock Society, a 
Eugene, Ore.-based group that supports the idea of doctor-assisted suicide. 
But even some of his supporters, such as Humphry, admit that Kevorkian is not 
the right man, not the right doctor, to try to set compassionate and safe 
guidelines for euthanasia in the future. He is too obsessed, too fanatical, in 
his interest in death and suicide, to offer direction for the nation. "He's a 
strange bird," acknowledges Humphry, who has met Kevorkian. "He's a zealot." 
Indeed, after a recent hearing related to Adkins' death, in which he both 
testified and acted as his own lawyer, Kevorkian's angry, arrogant and often 
scatological dialogue with the court on the issues of suicide and euthanasia 
gave credence to those who have insisted the doctor isn't the right man to play 
God. 
At the hearing in Oakland County Circuit Court, in which a judge temporarily 
barred him from assisting in further suicides in Michigan, prosecutors 
suggested that Kevorkian wanted to become the "Domino's of Death," a deliverer 
of a quick, lethal new service to customers. 
They said that Adkins just happened to be an exciting test case for him. That 
was a bit unfair; Kevorkian didn't charge Adkins' family for his work. 
Those who have known Kevorkian professionally in the past, both in Michigan and 
Southern California, where he worked at several hospitals in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, remember a different man, a good doctor who was an accomplished 
organist and painter. 
"He's a very brilliant man," argues Dr. Fred Hodell, the former chief 
pathologist at Pacific Hospital in Long Beach, who hired Kevorkian as his 
assistant in 1981. "He was very friendly with people at the hospital, and I 
don't remember him talking about suicide. At the time he was more interested in 
organ transplants." 
Hodell adds that Kevorkian left Pacific on good terms. 
"He was quite a character, but he was very fair to work for, he kept his word, 
and he backed us up if there was a problem," recalls Vince Hufanda, a medical 
technologist who worked for Kevorkian at Saratoga General Hospital in Detroit, 
where Kevorkian was director of the pathology lab in the early 1970s. 
But those who knew Kevorkian acknowledge that he still always stuck out as 
being a bit odd, a bit of a loner. While working as a staff pathologist at the 
Beverly Hills Medical Center in Los Angeles in the early 1980s, Kevorkian would 
often sleep overnight in the hospital parking lot, in the same 1968 VW van in 
which Adkins later ended her life. 
And his mind would latch onto gruesome tasks. 
"What I remember most is that, in his spare time, he invented a contraption 
that would cut up prostate tissue in the lab, so you wouldn't have to use a 
knife," recalls Trudy Staler, a lab technician at Beverly Hills Medical Center. 
In his work, Kevorkian remained restless, constantly on the move from one job 
to another. 
Finally, he returned to Michigan and stopped working in his profession 
altogether; Pacific Hospital, which he left in 1982, was the last hospital in 
which he is known to have been employed. 
He was thus free to concentrate on his real life's work -- death. 
He remained largely out of sight until 1988, when he emerged in Los Angeles to 
make an outlandish offer to the Hemlock Society, a right-to-die group that was 
then backing a proposed ballot initiative for the legalization of 
physician-assisted suicide in California. 
In a meeting with Humphry, the society's executive director, Kevorkian offered 
to set up an illegal "suicide clinic" for the terminally ill in Los Angeles. It 
would draw public attention to the proposed suicide initiative, which 
ultimately failed to get on the ballot. 
Kevorkian, Humphry says, claimed not to be worried that he might be prosecuted. 
Humphry rejected Kevorkian's offer. "The Hemlock Society is a law-abiding 
group" he says. 
Kevorkian returned home to Michigan. 
A year later, he surfaced again, this time to offer to assist in the suicide of 
David Rivlin, a Michigan quadriplegic who had gone to court in a nationally 
publicized case to win the right to die. 
Again, Kevorkian was rebuffed, at least partly because he could not offer an 
easy means for physician-assisted suicide. 
So after the Rivlin case, Kevorkian began work on his "suicide machine." He put 
his gift for gadgeteering to use, and, from parts he picked up at flea markets 
and garage sales, Kevorkian quickly developed a device that would intravenously 
feed coma- and death-inducing drugs to a patient, after the victim had pushed 
the machine's button. 
Untested machine in hand, it wasn't hard for Kevorkian to garner publicity. 
Newspaper stories about his device last year, and an appearance on the 
"Donahue" television show, were enough to attract willing subjects -- including 
Adkins. 
Now, in the aftermath of her death, law enforcement officials are sifting 
through the evidence and are awaiting a final autopsy report to determine 
whether to bring charges against Kevorkian. 
That may be difficult. As Kevorkian noted in his court hearing, assisting in a 
suicide is not a crime in Michigan. 
Yet Kevorkian remains unrepentant and fully committed to his concept of 
"rational, planned death." If he is cleared of all charges and the court order 
against him is lifted, Kevorkian says he plans to establish an "obitorium," a 
suicide clinic. 
And, above all, he remains convinced that he knows what is best for society, 
and that eventually, his ideas will prevail. 
"All I'm trying to do," says Kevorkian, "is condense the time between the birth 
of this idea, and its wide acceptance." 
