RAIN FORESTS DISAPPEARING 50% QUICKER THAN FEARED 
Destruction of the world's tropical forests is occurring nearly 50% faster than 
the best previous scientific estimates showed, with enough trees being lost 
each year to cover the state of Washington, the World Resources Institute said 
Thursday. 
Between 40 million and 50 million acres are lost annually, according to new 
satellite measurements of vanishing timberland, with the biggest losses 
occurring in Brazil, India, Indonesia, Myanmar (formerly Burma) and Costa Rica. 
Earlier estimates by the United Nations and other organizations placed annual 
losses at 28 million acres. But these estimates were based on data gathered 
before 1980, compared to the latest findings, which are based on 1987 data. The 
earlier figures also were obtained largely through less accurate ground 
observations. 
Thursday's published report marked the first comprehensive picture of worldwide 
deforestation trends based on a compilation of recent studies. 
"We were startled, frankly," institute President James Gustave Speth said in a 
telephone interview from Washington. "We're looking at an environmental tragedy 
unfolding. It's much worse than had been previously suspected." 
The report, published in collaboration with the United Nations, has disturbing 
implications both for global warming and the extinction of plant and animal 
species, he said. 
Tropical forests are believed to not only shelter half of the world's plant and 
animal species -- most of them as yet undiscovered -- but serve as a major 
brake on the buildup of carbon dioxide, a principal contributor to global 
warming. 
Forests, most prominently in the Third World, are cut down at a rapid pace to 
provide wood for export and fuel, and to clear land for development and 
agriculture. When forests are cleared and burned, huge amounts of the carbon is 
returned to the atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide gas. Tree burning 
accounts for an estimated 30% of worldwide total carbon dioxide emissions. 
Burning fossil fuels like coal, oil and gasoline accounts for most of the rest. 
"If you combine increasing deforestation with the increasing use of fossil 
fuels in the industrial countries . . . it's easy to understand why the 
emissions of greenhouse gases have tripled over a 30-year period," Speth said. 
But he also cited reason for optimism, noting that in the last several years 
some nations, notably Brazil and India, have promised to curb the clearing of 
forests. 
A spokesman for the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington said it was 
too early to comment on the new estimates but that the institute's 
deforestation figures were based on "fairly reputable" studies. 
Ellen Tillier, public affairs officer with the World Bank in Washington, 
agreed. She said the higher deforestation rate was "along the lines" of recent 
estimates by the bank, which finances international development projects. 
Allen L. Hammond, editor of the volume, "World Resources, 1990-91," called the 
updated estimate released Thursday conservative. "In countries where we have 
reliable new data, its far worse than 50%. Fifty percent is a world average," 
he said. 
Hammond said most of the estimates were based on data collected by U.S. 
satellites and analyzed by scientists in the countries studied and by outside 
scientists. 
The data covers only half of the world's nations that have tropical forests. 
Additional studies are under way, including an update due in 1992 by the U.N. 
Food and Agriculture Organization, whose study released in 1980 was the basis 
for the lower estimates called into question Thursday. 
Hammond said that when that information is made public, it will, "in fact, show 
even higher rates of deforestation than we're reporting." 
Brazil, which has the world's largest remaining tropical forests, also has the 
largest area of annual deforestation. The new studies indicate that Brazil's 
annual losses are between 10 and 20 million acres within the Amazon and 2.5 
million acres outside the Amazon. 
In 1987, a peak year of deforestation in Brazil, the rate of loss was as much 
as 80% higher than earlier estimates for that country. During that year, Brazil 
caused 1.2 million tons of carbon to be released into the atmosphere, virtually 
the same amount pumped into the air by the much more industrialized United 
States from the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and gasoline. 
Since 1987, however, Brazil has taken steps to dramatically reduce the 
destruction, including stepped-up enforcement and the elimination of tax 
incentives that led to large-scale land clearing. 
Two days ago, President Fernando Collor de Mello announced that Brazil's armed 
forces were ready to help stop the burning and deforestation of the Amazon rain 
forest. 
But progress in Brazil is not expected to change the overall picture because 
deforestation in most other Third World countries appears to be increasing, the 
institute said. 
The World Resources Institute's report Thursday noted dramatic upswings in 
other countries' deforestation rates. 
In Myanmar, for example, 1.7 million acres are lost each year, "an astounding" 
545% increase over 1980 estimates. The 1980 estimate relied on information 
collected in the mid-1970's and a U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization 
computer model of rural population trends. 
The new estimate is based on recent field work, a continuing analysis of aerial 
photographs and satellite data and extrapolations from the U.N. data. 
In India, satellite sensing studies point to a 10-fold increase over previous 
estimates to 3.7 million acres a year. 
The Indonesian deforestation estimate of 2.2 million aces a year is 50% more 
than the 1980 estimate, and Costa Rica's figure rose 90% to 300,000 acres lost 
annually. Only in Thailand are the old and new estimates comparable. 
"The 1980s were a decade of devastation for the global environment. In the 
1990s things could either get much, much worse or we could begin to start a 
healing. It all depends on what our governments are willing to do, more than 
anything else," Speth said. He called developments in Brazil encouraging. 
The report, published in collaboration with the U.N. Environment Program and 
the U.N. Development Program, also for the first time ranked greenhouse gas 
emissions from 146 countries. 
The United States and Soviet Union ranked No. 1 and No. 2, respectively. 
Combined, they accounted for nearly 30% of all greenhouse gas emissions 
worldwide in 1987, followed by Brazil, China, India, Japan, West Germany and 
Great Britain. If the European Community is considered as a single entity, it 
would rank second behind the United States instead of the Soviet Union. 
Worldwide, the equivalent of 6.5 billion tons of carbon in the form of carbon 
dioxide, methane and chlorofluorocarbons were added to the atmosphere in 1987, 
the report said. 
LAST STAND IN PALAWAN -- Loggers and squatter farmers strip Philippine forests. 
A5 
