U.N. PEACEKEEPERS CAN DO MORE; 
SUCCESSES SHOW ABILITY TO TACKLE OTHER HOT SPOTS, WIDER ROLES 
In the broad sweep of international events, no development has been more 
important in the last two years than the considerable progress that has been 
made in resolving conflicts in the developing world. This is the conclusion of 
the Palme Commission, a group of 16 former heads of state, cabinet-level 
ministers and political leaders, chaired by Sweden's late Prime Minister Olof 
Palme, which met sporadically between 1980 and April of this year. 
At its final meeting, the commission noted that as late as 1986, there were 36 
armed conflicts around the globe, virtually all in developing regions. Because 
these wars occurred primarily in areas already debilitated by poverty and 
underdevelopment, the human suffering was extraordinary. An estimated 3 million 
to 5 million people died as a direct result of war; millions more have fled the 
fighting, seeking food, shelter, health care and escape from political 
persecution. Indeed, the U.N. high commissioner for refugees is aiding 13 
million people at present, an appalling figure and an odious index of the 
world's continuing inhumanity. 
Within the last two years, progress has been made toward the relief of this 
suffering. U.N. mediators have made possible a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war, 
although not yet a peace settlement. They have also brought an end to the use 
of Soviet forces in Afghanistan, although not to the civil war in that country. 
U.S. mediation has led to the conclusion of agreements that could help to 
advance the cause of peace in Namibia and Angola. Other efforts by the United 
Nations and by regional leaders to mediate conflicts have met with varying 
degrees of success in Central America, the Western Sahara and Cambodia. 
U.N. forces will play a role in ensuring the peace in many of these situations, 
as they do already in the Middle East and several other regions. There are 
10,000 soldiers from 23 countries now serving in the "blue-helmet" force. They 
carry out two kinds of operations: U.N. peacekeepers impose themselves between 
contending forces to avert incidents that could flare into war, while unarmed 
U.N. observers monitor, report and mediate between local commanders in the 
field. At present, there are eight operations of each type under way, and the 
prospect of several more in the near future. 
The development of a more stable and peaceful international system requires 
greater attention to U.N. peacekeeping. Changes in U.N. procedures -- 
particularly a strengthening of the secretary-general's authority to monitor, 
report on and recommend actions concerning international conflicts -- could 
enable peacekeeping missions to be mounted in a more timely manner and carried 
out more effectively. Moreover, both the roles envisioned for these 
international military forces, and the resources available for them, could 
usefully be expanded. 
Traditionally, U.N. peacekeepers have been used to oversee cease-fires and 
other temporary means of ending armed conflicts. In the more peaceful climate 
that now exists, more wide-ranging functions can be envisioned: 
 -- U.N. forces could be used to oversee elections in situations such as 
Namibia's. 
 -- Maritime peacekeeping forces could be established to ensure free passage 
through vital international waterways, like the Strait of Hormuz, in situations 
such as the recent hostilities in the Persian Gulf, and to maintain security in 
waters troubled by pirates, as in Southeast Asia. 
 -- In certain other types of situations, U.N. peacekeeping forces could be 
used to respond to international terrorists, as well as to protect mini-states 
from mercenaries and other external threats to their security. 
 -- U.N. experts and logistical capabilities could even be used to help contain 
the effects of ecological catastrophes that threaten neighboring states, 
particularly in nations that lack the resources or expertise to deal with such 
problems alone. 
Such an expansion of peacekeeping functions could not take place unless greater 
resources were made available to the U.N. organization. Indeed, resources 
limitations have already curbed peacekeeping operations. Because of fiscal 
constraints, for example, the size of the U.N. Transition Assistance Group in 
Namibia was reduced by nearly half and its start delayed. It does not require 
imagination to understand that problems currently threatening the peace 
arrangements in southern Africa are related to this ragged start. 
Military units in national armed forces, including the armed forces of the 
permanent members of the Security Council, that might be made available for 
peacekeeping should be earmarked now, before they are needed, along with the 
air- and sea-lift units that could move them to trouble spots in a timely 
fashion. Specialized equipment should be stockpiled, particularly seismic and 
acoustic sensors, communications gear and mobile radars, all of which could be 
helpful in monitoring disengagement zones. Industrialized nations might help 
developing states to train and equip their military forces for peacekeeping. 
Financing peacekeeping operations has always been a problem, with various 
states at times refusing to pay their assessed contributions. At its last 
meeting, the Palme Commission proposed that a special peacekeeping fund be 
established and built up to a total of $2 billion over a few years. The fund 
would be financed on the basis of a general formula assessing U.N. members, 
with no one member expected to pay an excessive share. Voluntary contributions 
to the peacekeeping fund also would be encouraged, particularly from those 
states like Japan and West Germany that, as a matter of law or policy, do not 
participate directly in peacekeeping operations. 
The world is in the midst of a warming trend in international relations. Not 
only have East-West relations improved greatly, but there is at least 
diplomatic movement in virtually all troubled regions. Such trends come and go, 
however. The nations of the world must act now to take the concrete steps 
necessary to preserve and expand the progress which has recently been achieved. 
