SOVIET ANTI-SEMITISM SURGES AGAIN 
Long a poison in Soviet life, anti-Semitism has again surged into the public 
eye, but far more blatantly now because of the wider latitude for 
self-expression allowed under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
The response of worried Soviet Jewry has been a massive exodus that by some 
estimates could lead to the departure of 750,000 people -- half the country's 
Jewish population -- in the next five years. 
"We are all apprehensive -- anti-Semitism is very much on the rise," said 
Arkady A. Pevzner, producer at Moscow's Jewish Theater. "Many Jews do not want 
to emigrate, but we call this evacuation -- we are getting out of the danger 
zone." 
In what for many seems a terrifying return to the persecutions suffered by 
their ancestors, there have been recurring threats of pogroms, most recently on 
May 5 -- the birthday of Karl Marx, who was Jewish. According to Soviet 
officials and Jewish groups alike, nothing has happened. 
But many Jews hardly consider that a guarantee for the future. 
"I have denounced Jewish emigrants before, but now I do not, because emigrants 
are people who want to save their lives, to survive physically," a 31-year-old 
Jewish mother from Dnepropetrovsk wrote a Soviet newspaper. "My happy life is 
over for me. I am crying all the time." 
It is a sad irony, but the liberalization of society that Gorbachev has wrought 
has allowed the venting of every sort of extremist view, nationalism and 
xenophobia included. In the past two years, hundreds of people have been killed 
in brutal ethnic clashes between Armenians and Azerbaijanis, Uzbeks and 
Meskhetian Turks, Kazakhs and Caucasus migrants. The Kremlin's more liberal 
ways have lifted the lid off long-suppressed national grudges and allowed them 
to be printed, broadcast and proclaimed out loud. 
That is also the case with anti-Semitism, no stranger in a land where for more 
than a century, Jews were forced by the czars to live within a ghetto known as 
the "Pale of Settlement," and where the word pogrom, meaning "like thunder," 
was coined to describe the often officially sponsored massacre or persecution 
of a minority group. 
On occasion, the government's policy has veered toward anti-Semitism, but the 
recent renaissance of anti-Jewish feeling is quite different. Now, there is a 
"new neo-Nazi type which is not supported by the state," Mikhail Chlenov, 
co-president of Va'ad, an umbrella council for Soviet Jewish organizations, 
said recently. 
Whatever the official intention, the policy of glasnost means those feelings 
can be more freely expressed by ultranationalist Russian groups such as Pamyat, 
or Memory, and its allies. 
For example, Pamyat leader Dmitri Vasiliev, appearing on state-run television, 
recently suggested that "leading Zionists" were somehow implicated in the empty 
store shelves and other aspects of economic chaos that prevail in the sixth 
year of Gorbachev's reforms. 
Under Gorbachev, there has been a palpable rebirth of Jewish religion and 
culture in the Soviet Union, from the opening of a Jewish restaurant in Moscow 
-- Joseph's Place -- to government approval for the creation of the country's 
first rabbinical school in 50 years. 
Despite those positive steps, the widespread concern and fear of Soviet Jews, 
plus the far greater possibilities people here now have been granted for 
foreign travel, are fueling the Jewish exodus. 
According to White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater, Gorbachev agreed 
during his summit talks with President Bush in Washington to speak out against 
anti-Semitism. But whether his words can stem the outflow of Soviet Jews is an 
open question. 
