NORTH PARK THEATRE'S PROTECTORS BELIEVE THE SHOWS MUST GO ON 
In 1987, in one of the last shows performed at the North Park Theatre before 
the city ordered it to close its doors, for fear that it might fall down during 
an earthquake, pop singer Suzanne Vega earned a standing ovation for her hit 
song, "Luka," about a child who's abused. 
At that moment, it was hard to imagine the North Park being "unsafe and unfit" 
for the 1,186 who sat inside, as city officials now say it was. 
At the corner of 29th Street and University Avenue in North Park, once the 
center of a thriving commercial area, the 61-year-old theater sits empty, 
closed off to the public. 
Its demise mirrors that of the neighborhood around it, which is trying to make 
a comeback, much like an aging athlete willing to give it one more go. 
Opportunists hope for stores and shops and chi chi delis catering to yuppies. 
But it hasn't happened yet, and cynics say it won't. 
The area still includes the Salvation Army Thrift Store and the Paras News 
Stand, which has been there since 1925, when Calvin Coolidge was president. 
And, of course, it still includes the theater, which has served as host to 
Dickensian plays, silent and "talkie" movies, stand-up comics, body-building 
forums, opera, rock 'n' roll, fundamentalist faith-healing and sad ballads 
about loving but battered children. 
Opened in 1929, just before the stock market crash and the onset of the Great 
Depression, the North Park Theatre is too old, too musty and too tied to the 
past ever to be confused with a child. 
But its protectors, who long to see it brought up to code and reopened as a 
performing arts center in a community starved for redevelopment, say it has 
been abused. 
Until recently, said Martin Gregg, head of the North Park Theatre Foundation, 
the San Diego Police Department was using the interior of the 1,186-seat 
theater as a training site for its corps of German Shepherd police dogs. And 
again last week, for what Gregg said was the "umpteenth" time, the theater was 
vandalized. 
Gregg, who loves the theater and wants to see it restored the way that some 
people crave the delicate resurrection of "fixer-upper" homes, said the 
building deserves better than going to the dogs. 
"It's in 75% better condition than the Balboa Theatre, which may cost $11 
million to restore," Gregg said. "We at the foundation think we might be able 
to bring it up to code for as little as $300,000 to $500,000. We see it as the 
centerpiece of a revitalized North Park." 
Two months ago, the city purchased the building for $898,600 from its previous 
owner, Horizon Christian Fellowship, which had managed the theater for a 
decade, using it for fundamentalist religious services. 
Gregg and the other two members of the fledgling North Park Theatre Foundation 
hope the theater can be reborn but in an entirely different way from what the 
church had in mind. 
"I see it as the permanent home for a fleet of ethnic-oriented arts 
organizations," Gregg said. "We can be the mecca for Asian, black, Latino, gay 
and senior groups. And, we can have pop music concerts and all sorts of other 
things as well." 
As head of the now-defunct California Performing Arts Center, Gregg had booked 
a panoply of arts events into the North Park -- including the Vega concert, as 
well as dozens of plays, musicals and clown shows -- and had done so under the 
auspices of its Christian owners. 
Now the theater is struggling to stay alive, to prove it belongs. Gregg and its 
backers say the North Park offers terrific freeway access, from Interstates 8 
and 805, and that a thriving, restored arts center would serve as a magnet for 
restaurants and those chi chi shops that might attract young professionals and 
the money they like to spend. 
But the city is always in the shadows, reminding the hopeful of realities. A 
1988 structural engineering report commissioned by the city manager's office 
noted that it would take $1.4 million to bring the building up to code. The 
same report cited another $2.3 million as being necessary to make the former 
vaudeville emporium "usable" as a theater. 
Cindy Kodama, property agent for the city of San Diego, said the theater simply 
fails to adhere to the city's building code. For one, the roof is not 
"appropriately" anchored to the walls, making it dangerous in high winds or 
earthquakes. 
A large crack threatens the second-floor weight-bearing beam, and part of the 
mezzanine, built without a permit, must be removed or reconstructed in 
accordance with the code. 
"The aisles, the stairwells, the restrooms -- none of these conform to 
regulations affecting the handicapped," Kodama said. "So, all will have to be 
improved or completely replaced." 
Despite the drawbacks, Kodama said a financially strapped city government 
supports a private group -- such as Gregg's foundation -- managing the one-time 
showplace and indeed making it the centerpiece of a long-overdue redevelopment. 
She said that's the main reason the city -- using Community Development Block 
Grant funds -- bought the building in the first place. 
Even in the wake of a $60-million budget crisis, Kodama said the city would 
rather see the theater restored as a working arts center than to have it 
demolished and the land converted to commercial use. 
She said Gregg's foundation has the inside track for managing the site, but in 
her words, "We are open to a mixed-use type of project. Really, we're open to 
just about anything that makes sense. We just don't want it to sit there." 
The theater has lain fallow for more than two years, and Kodama said any 
structure allowed to "just sit there and fester" will soon deteriorate even 
more. At the moment, the theater is officially closed, labeled "unsafe and 
unfit," in Kodama's words, by the city that owns it. 
"We're constantly out there removing graffiti," she said. "Periodically, we 
have crews in there removing trash and litter, and, we have a problem with the 
homeless. They've broken into the back of the building once and have tried to 
break in on other occasions, and we know they're in there, because we're always 
finding cups and napkins and trash strewn about. We hope to have an alarm 
system installed soon." 
But at the moment, the theater is an unguarded edifice. Kodama explained the 
police using it as a canine training center by saying, "Whenever we have a 
vacant building like that, the police like to expose the dogs to a new target. 
Dogs that train in the same building over and over know it's not the real 
thing. The dogs are not there anymore, but at the time, we wanted to insure 
that the police had a visible posture in the area." 
City Councilman John Hartley, whose district includes North Park, succeeded 
Gloria McColl, who favored the purchase -- and restoration -- of the theater. 
Hartley said that initially he "felt the resources could be better used 
elsewhere, but the community fought hard for keeping the theater, so I suppose 
we should do that. It fits well in the redevelopment plans for North Park." 
Gregg and Mark Hannon, president of the North Park Business Assn., say the 
first objective is "establishing a dialogue with the city" and making the place 
"workable." Gregg believes no more than $500,000 is needed to bring the 
building to code, a figure based on architectural studies obtained privately. 
Having it reopened would, he said, greatly enhance fund-raising efforts. 
Additional money could restore the place, and, he said, turn it into a 
headquarters for dozens of small theatrical and musical companies, especially 
those with an "ethnic flavor." 
Gregg has enlisted 44 arts organizations to serve as the foundation's advisory 
board. They include the San Diego Chinese Community School of Music, the Black 
Arts Program of the UC San Diego Department of Theatre and the (East Indian) 
Raga Ranjani School of Music. 
The theatrical and art groups listed on the board include Sledgehammer Theatre, 
which is currently producing a 5-hour version of "Hamlet" but lacks a permanent 
home; Diversionary Theatre, a gay organization, and Centro Cultural de la Raza, 
whose focus is Latino. 
Gregg believes such groups are largely disenfranchised but capable of doing 
"wonderful" work. As he puts it, the city's arts scene is hardly limited to the 
Old Globe Theatre and the La Jolla Playhouse, and the city would suffer with 
the demise of smaller groups, many of which are talented but homeless. 
R.F. McCann, who heads a Pasadena architectural firm that specializes in the 
restoration of theaters, said he had been asked by the foundation to study the 
city's engineering report to see if the figures "added up." 
McCann said before a walk-through -- he has yet to tour the theater -- he could 
not render a full analysis but added that $300,000 to $500,000 to bring the 
building up to code was "entirely possible." 
"City (engineering) estimates tend to be much higher than those done by private 
consultants," he said. "It's not that the cities are wrong, it's just that the 
work can usually be done for a lot less." 
David Thompson, an architect who lives in North Park, is working with Gregg's 
foundation to try to determine the exact amount needed to reopen the theater, 
which he said the community desperately needs. 
Thompson conceded the theater has a "relatively brittle structure" and "a roof 
that isn't tied into the walls" but said the thrust of the city report was "too 
negative," focusing more on what could not be done with the theater than with 
honing in on and extrapolating its possibilities. 
"The theater could be the catalyst for completely upgrading the area," Thompson 
said. "And the time is right, because so many young couples who can't afford to 
buy elsewhere in San Diego are moving in here. North Park is changing. 
"The theater could stimulate the value of property so that something thrives in 
the area besides . . . thrift shops. While I like thrift shops, there can only 
be so many. In Hillcrest, the Guild and the Park (movie theaters) have 
contributed to revitalization -- greatly, I would say. We think the North Park 
Theatre can do the same in North Park. But we shouldn't wait too long." 
