SANTA SUSANA-AREA HEALTH STUDY DELAYED 
A proposed health study of neighbors of the Rockwell's Santa Susana Field 
Laboratory west of Chatsworth could remain on hold until next year, while 
officials investigate whether to conduct the study, a state health officer said 
Monday. 
Dr. Robert L. Holtzer, a physician and epidemiologist with the state Department 
of Health Services, said state health officials will go ahead with the health 
investigation only if a preliminary study concludes there have been 
"potentially credible exposures" to the public from the nuclear research and 
rocket test site, owned by Rockwell International's Rocketdyne division. 
A full-scale epidemiological study of Santa Susana's neighbors "might cost in 
the neighborhood of $2 million," Holtzer said. Faced with competing demands for 
health studies elsewhere, Holtzer said, it must be established that people near 
the plant may have been exposed to airborne radioactivity or chemicals. 
"Just being there geographically is not significant," he said. 
Holtzer, who appeared at a meeting in Simi Valley of agencies involved in the 
cleanup of the Santa Susana lab, said state health officials have hired a 
contractor to review the history of the site in eastern Ventura County. But he 
said the work may require extensive analysis of Rockwell operating records, the 
cost of which may exceed the contract's ceiling of $50,000. 
In addition, Holtzer said, health officials have begun to assemble cancer 
incidence and birth defect data from census tracts in Los Angeles and Ventura 
counties within a six-mile radius of the plant. He called such incidence data 
"a crude type of information" that rarely provides clues about causes of 
disease -- particularly in an area full of people who lived most of their lives 
somewhere else. 
A full-blown epidemiological study would require taking detailed health 
histories from individual residents and considering such factors as age and 
time of residence. 
What the state has done so far is but the "first steps of a relatively long 
journey," Holtzer said. 
Funding is uncertain, even to complete the preliminary phase, Holtzer said. He 
said the health department is seeking a grant from the U.S. Department of 
Energy to finish the initial study. A bill by Assemblywoman Cathie Wright 
(R-Simi Valley) to authorize the study is on hold pending negotiations between 
the state and Energy Department. 
With the future of the study uncertain, officials have not considered if it 
should be limited to Santa Susana. Rockwell's Canoga Park plants have been 
involved with nuclear work on a smaller scale than Santa Susana, but in more 
densely populated areas. 
Holtzer said Monday he was unaware of the other plants. His boss, Dr. Lynn 
Goldman, state chief of environmental epidemiology and toxicology, said later 
that she knew of the other plants but that most concern has focused on Santa 
Susana. 
"We don't have the means to go out and look at every site systematically," 
Goldman said. "We're looking" at Santa Susana "because we were asked to look." 
Since the late 1940s when it was established in what was then a remote area of 
the Simi Hills, the Santa Susana lab has been used to test rockets for NASA and 
the Air Force. This has involved heavy use of chemical solvents to clean rocket 
engines, which has caused ground-water pollution. 
Since the 1950s, a 290-acre portion of the site has been devoted to development 
of nuclear and other energy technologies for the Department of Energy and its 
predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission. All nuclear work has ceased at the 
site, except for cleanup of mostly low-level contamination. 
The nuclear activity has generated the most public concern. 
Several accidents occurred in the past, including the partial melting of 
nuclear fuel in a test reactor in 1959. But Rockwell has said there is no 
evidence that air or water pollution has ever spread beyond its boundaries. 
Santa Susana's last big nuclear project involved dismantling and recycling 
clear fuel elements, but that ended in 1986 for lack of government contracts. 
For a while in the 1950s, Rockwell's Canoga plant on Canoga Avenue housed a 
small test reactor. Its DeSoto plant on DeSoto Avenue had a small reactor and 
fabricated nuclear fuel from 1959 until the early 1980s. 
