WHAT'S AHEAD FOR THE PROPOSITIONS 
California voters on Tuesday approved 15 propositions that will shape the state 
for years to come. Among other decisions, they approved a gasoline tax increase 
and voted in favor of issuing $5 billion worth of bonds to benefit 
transportation, schools, prisons and housing. Here is an explanation of each 
proposition and, to the extent now known, what lies ahead as they move toward 
implementation. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 107: This measure authorizes the state to sell $150 
million in general obligation bonds to help low-income first-time home buyers 
($25 million); to finance low-income rental units ($100 million); to restore 
residential hotels ($15 million); and to add beds in homeless shelters ($10 
million). 
NEXT STEP: Although the bonds can be sold almost immediately, the state 
agencies involved must first announce the availability of the money and then 
sort through competing proposals, from mortgage lenders, local governments, and 
nonprofit agencies, for spending it. The process could take months. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 108: This authorizes the state to issue $1 billion in 
general obligation bonds to pay for the construction of rail systems. At least 
15% of the total money raised must be spent for intercity rail construction. 
NEXT STEP: Caltrans said it would be 18 months before any improvements are seen 
because regional transportation agencies must submit proposals to the 
California Transportation Commission, which sets priorities for projects. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 109: This measure will increase from 12 days to 30 days 
the time that the governor has to sign or veto bills after the first year of 
the legislative session. The governor was allowed 30 days only after the entire 
two-year session. 
NEXT STEP: The new law takes effect in 1991. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 110: This measure gives the Legislature authority to 
extend a special break on property taxes to severely disabled homeowners 
regardless of age. When moving to a higher-valued home, they will be allowed 
the tax rate paid on their previous residence. The tax break, which is 
permitted on moves within counties or to a county that allows such transfers, 
already applies to homeowners 55 or older. 
NEXT STEP: The measure cannot take effect until the Legislature agrees on who 
qualifies as disabled and passes enacting legislation. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 111: This measure increases gasoline taxes by 9 cents a 
gallon over the next five years to pay for a variety of transportation-related 
expenses. It also modifies the state spending limit to permit additional 
government spending. 
NEXT STEP: California motorists will begin paying an additional 
5-cents-per-gallon tax on Aug. 1. Gas taxes will also go up 1 cent per gallon a 
year in January 1991-1994. A 40% increase in truck weight fees also becomes 
effective Aug. 1. The state will begin collecting another 10% on Jan. 1, 1991. 
The California Transportation Commission will be asked in July to authorize 
$257 million in backlogged highway projects in anticipation of new revenue. 
Over the next year Caltrans is expected to collect about $635 million from the 
increased gas tax and truck weight fees. The increases in the spending limit 
will amount to about $800 million the first year. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 112: This requires the governor to appoint a 
seven-member salary commission that will decide on the level of compensation to 
be received by legislators, the governor and other elected state officials. In 
addition, it imposes a variety of new ethical standards on state officials. The 
proposition also prohibits legislators and state officials who leave office 
from lobbying their former colleagues for 12 months. 
NEXT STEP: The governor has 30 days to appoint the salary commission and the 
commission has until Dec. 3 to reach its conclusions. A ban on honorariums 
takes effect Dec. 3, and conflict-of-interest penalties take effect on Jan. 1, 
1991. The lobbying provisions take effect for most officials on Jan. 1, 1991. 
And since June 6, the Legislature has been required to hold most of its 
meetings in public. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 113: The measure requires the state to begin the renewal 
of chiropractors' licenses on the last day of their birth month instead of on 
Jan. 1 of each year. It increases penalties for unlicensed practice to $750 and 
six months in jail. 
NEXT STEP: The state board has until July 1, 1991, to implement the new 
licensing plan. The increased penalties went into effect on June 6. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 114: This measure broadens the definition of "peace 
officer" to include a variety of state and local government employees whose 
murder could mean the death penalty for the killers. 
NEXT STEP: This took effect on June 6. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 115: This wide-ranging anti-crime measure amends the 
state Constitution to limit the rights of criminal defendants to those required 
by the U.S. Constitution. It also revises state statutes to try to speed 
criminal proceedings, expands the death penalty, and specifies torture as a 
crime. 
NEXT STEP: The measure took effect on June 6. But opponents contest the 
constitutionality of the proposition. They contend it violates the legal 
requirement that initiatives be limited to a single subject. They also argue it 
is a "revision" of the state Constitution -- rather than an "amendment" -- and 
thus cannot be enacted by initiative. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 116: This measure authorizes the state to sell $1.99 
billion in general obligation bonds to pay for intercity and commuter rail 
systems. The money would go to build various rail systems, including $202 
million for the Los Angeles-San Diego rail corridor, $81 million for the Los 
Angeles-Santa Barbara rail link and at least $80 million for Metro Rail. 
NEXT STEP: The Transportation Commission meets June 13 and 14 and is expected 
to discuss guidelines for the allocation of the funds. A Caltrans spokeswoman 
said the agency is now reorganizing and will soon appoint a coordinator to 
handle the funds. As with Proposition 108, Caltrans does not seem to be geared 
up for quick action. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 117: This prohibits sport hunting of mountain lions and 
sets aside $30 million annually for 30 years for purchase of habitat. 
NEXT STEP: The prohibition took effect on June 6. Habitats will be set aside 
starting July 1. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 118 and Proposition 119 failed. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 120: This measure authorizes the state to sell $450 
million in general obligation bonds to provide money to buy land and construct, 
remodel and maintain state prisons. 
NEXT STEP: No date has been set for the bonds to be sold. Legislators plan to 
ask voters to approve another $450-million prison bond issue in the November 
general election. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 121: This measure authorizes the state to sell $450 
million in general obligation bonds to pay for new construction for University 
of California, Cal State and community college campuses. Of that amount, $386 
million is for the current budget: $130 million for UC, $130 million for CSU, 
and $126 million for community colleges. 
NEXT STEP: No date has been set for the bonds to be sold. Another $450-million 
higher-education bond issue is expected to be on the November ballot. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 122: This authorizes the state to sell $300 million in 
general obligation bonds to pay for the repair, replacement or relocation of 
state and local government buildings that would be unsafe in an earthquake. 
NEXT STEP: It may be several years before the state is geared up to administer 
the program and the bonds are actually sold. 
MEASURE: * Proposition 123: This measure, which passed by a higher margin than 
any other bond issue on Tuesday's ballot, authorizes the state to sell $800 
million in general obligation bonds to pay for the construction, rehabilitation 
and modernization of classrooms. At least $500 million must be spent on 
construction, no more than $260 million for rehabilitation and modernization of 
existing school buildings, and $40 million for air conditioning of year-round 
schools. 
NEXT STEP: No date has been set for the bonds to be sold. Another $800-million 
school-bond measure is expected to be on the November ballot. Even if the 
second measure is approved, however, the state will be well short of the amount 
needed to pay for $6 billion in backlogged projects. Almost $2 billion in 
earlier voter-approved bonds still have not been sold. 
