TRAIN WRECK IS BLAMED ON MANAGEMENT; 
DERAILMENT: THE U.S. SAFETY BOARD FAULTS SOUTHERN PACIFIC OFFICIALS FOR THE 
ACCIDENT THAT KILLED FOUR PEOPLE IN SAN BERNARDINO. A BLAST 13 DAYS LATER THAT 
KILLED TWO OTHERS WAS BLAMED ON OFFICIALS OF PIPELINE COMPANY. 
The National Transportation Safety Board on Tuesday blamed Southern Pacific 
Transportation Co. for a "series of management errors" that resulted in four 
deaths when a runaway freight train derailed in a West San Bernardino 
neighborhood. 
The safety board also found that a pipeline explosion 13 days after the May, 
1989, train wreck occurred because officials of Calnev Pipe Line Co. failed to 
uncover pipeline damage caused by earthmoving equipment used to clear away the 
train wreck. The two accidents killed six people, injured dozens of others and 
destroyed or damaged 29 homes in the working-class neighborhood. 
"This isn't a human performance accident, it's a management accident," Jim 
Burnett, an NTSB board member, charged during a brief board debate over the 
culpability and precise cause of the back-to-back disasters. 
Before the board reached unanimous agreement on the probable cause of the train 
accident, Chairman Jim Kolstadt and Vice Chairman Susan M. Coughlin attempted 
to persuade their two other colleagues, John K. Lauber and Burnett, to place a 
dose of responsibility for the accident on the train's engineers and conductor. 
"You can't leave the crew out," Kolstadt said, his voice rising. "There were so 
many deficiencies in the operation (of the train) by this crew." 
Added Coughlin: "I'm uncomfortable leaving the crew out of the picture." 
Both Kolstadt and Coughlin based their arguments on evidence cited by William 
Pugh, the chief investigator and head of the NTSB's railroad division, who told 
the board that the train's crew could have stopped the train before proceeding 
down the 23-mile grade leading to the crash site. 
However, Pugh said, head engineer Frank Holland, who suffered multiple injuries 
in the crash, was following company procedures and had not been trained in 
special emergency braking methods. In addition, the train's crew was unaware 
that only three of its six locomotives had functioning brakes. 
And, compounding the string of mishaps leading to disaster, a Southern Pacific 
billing clerk failed to indicate the accurate tonnage of the cargo on the 
shipper's bill of lading. Instead of noting the correct weight of 9,000 tons, 
the clerk estimated that the train's 69 hopper cars full of trona -- a 
sand-like, sodium bicarbonate material -- weighed 6,150 tons. 
The train's conductor, Everett Crown, and brakeman Alan R. Reiss were killed in 
the accident. 
From the beginning, the safety board has focused its investigation on the 
weight of the train, which exceeded speeds of 105 m.p.h. before it rushed 
around a curve, left the tracks and slammed into a row of houses at the foot of 
the treacherous Cajon Pass. 
Southern Pacific's operating rules "provided inadequate guidance" to Holland 
regarding the allowable speed and braking requirements, said Pugh. 
"Other engineers probably had done the same thing . . . following SP's 
operating guidelines," he said. The difference this time was that the train 
carried more weight than the crew had been told or for which it could 
compensate in time to make a difference, he said. 
"They were totally misinformed about something that was fundamental to the 
operation of the train," Lauber said. His argument persuaded the other board 
members to place the bulk of the responsibility for the wreck on the railroad 
managers and operating procedures. 
As for the pipeline accident, the board agreed without debate that "Calnev's 
pipeline was mechanically dented and gouged at several locations by earthmoving 
equipment," resulting in a rupture that initially emitted gas fumes into the 
air and later ignited to produce a firestorm over the community. 
They declined to say how the accident occurred or whose piece of equipment was 
directly responsible, noting that they could not be precise. 
"Calnev's and Southern Pacific's surveillance of excavating equipment 
operations was insufficient to prevent damage to Calnev's pipeline," the board 
concluded. 
Andrew Anderson, a vice president at Southern Pacific in San Francisco, said 
that while he had not yet read the NTSB's report, the company long ago accepted 
responsibility for the derailment and thus did not disagree with the safety 
board's primary conclusion. 
"This was one of the worst train wrecks in our company's history . . . and we 
will pay close attention to the (NTSB's) recommendations," Anderson said. "We 
have already spent a good bit of time since (the derailment) trying to make 
sure it doesn't happen again." 
Specifically, Anderson said, many of the recommendations included in the safety 
board's report had been implemented by the company or will be in the near 
future. These include modifications in engineers' emergency training, changes 
in the listing of cargo weights to improve accuracy, and regulations to improve 
communications among crew members. 
A spokeswoman for GATX Terminals Corp., Chicago-based parent of Calnev Pipe 
Line Co., said there would be no immediate comment on the NTSB findings. 
In addition to their specific comments on the twin accidents, the safety board 
faulted San Bernardino's land use planning for failing to address the hazards 
posed by allowing railroads and high-pressure gas pipelines in close proximity 
to residential communities. 
