BUSH CLEARS AIR ON POLLUTION, BUT FOR CALIFORNIA IT'S MAINLY RHETORIC 
Large chunks of the clean-air package President George Bush unveiled with great 
fanfare last week are relevant to California only for the rhetorical tone of 
the press release and White House fact sheet. 
Despite earlier rumors, the Bush Administration has endorsed the basic 
structure of the 1970 Clean Air Act, with its commitment to achieving 
health-based standards within enforceable deadlines and a strong federal 
program to push technological innovation as the means to limit pollution. 
Ambitious plans adopted earlier by the South Coast Air Quality Management 
District and tougher automobile emission standards recently enacted for new 
California cars by the state Air Resources Board are clearly acknowledged and, 
in watered-down form, proposed for the rest of the country. California 
air-quality officials have naturally greeted the Bush proposals with relief and 
even some cautious enthusiasm. 
The Bush plan, although hard to evaluate because it lacks the specifics said to 
be in a coming message to Congress, will certainly allow state and local 
agencies to get on with the business of cleaning up industrial pollution -- 
including smaller and more exotic sources like spray deodorants and back-yard 
barbecues. But the major cause of urban smog is our transportation system -- 
cars, trucks, buses and the fuels they burn as we drive more of them each year 
over longer commuting distances. Taken together, vehicles cause more than 80% 
of Los Angeles smog. Unfortunately, there are some disturbing ideological 
signals in the President's strategy for cleaning up current mobile-source 
pollution, and a total lack of vision for the future growth and direction of 
our transportation-based economy. 
Bush's plan would move the new-car standard for hydrocarbons -- one of the two 
necessary ingredients for photochemical smog formation -- toward the California 
standard within some unstated period of time. Nitrogen oxides, the other smog 
culprit, and carbon monoxide, a poisonous gas, are left at their current 
levels. This reflects the common consensus among automotive engineers that 
little more can be done to improve the emissions of cars with conventional 
engines using current fuels and certification procedures. Instead, Bush 
proposes to mandate, on a phased schedule, the introduction of cars using 
"clean" fuels, such as methanol, ethanol or natural gas, beginning in 1995. 
This clean-fuels initiative, although limited to the nine regions with the 
worst automotive pollution problems in the country, is ambitious enough to 
fulfill a campaign pledge to Midwestern farmers to put "corn in every car." 
Clean fuels are a necessary component of any strategy to meet and maintain 
clean-air goals in Southern California and other major metropolitan areas. 
California air and energy officials have been sponsoring research and 
development activities with alcohol-fueled cars for a decade. The spotty recent 
history of the national clean-fuels program parallels the experience of the 
1960s and '70s with clean engines. Every year or two, some inventor or 
manufacturer comes up with a new design (or revives an old one that was lost or 
suppressed); publicity and public interest follow and legislation is introduced 
to mandate the new technology. 
In the classic American folk legend, Preston Tucker and his clean, efficient 
car are steam-rollered by nasty corporate giants whose profits are threatened. 
Similarly, every so often we enjoy a photo-feature on some farmer whose truck 
operates happily on chicken droppings or corncobs. These stories aren't false, 
they just don't provide a good basis for federal law. We only have to look back 
a few years to find serious efforts to mandate diesel engines as a cleaner 
alternative to gasoline. Remember the Wankel engine, once touted as the 
solution to Detroit's problems? Or Cornelius Dutcher and his steam-powered car? 
Because elected officials lack the time, expertise and long-term focus to make 
wise choices about emerging technologies, Congress chose in 1970 to set 
long-term, tough standards beyond the reach of then-available emissions-control 
technology. Lawmakers then left the choice of method to the private sector, 
with strong guidance from the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
Ironically, Bush's attempt to find a moderate environmental position, so 
clearly evidenced in the acid rain and toxics portions of the plan, appears to 
be a radical shift in philosophy. It directs a transformation of U.S. fuel 
usage, away from oil toward natural gas (the raw material from which methanol 
is produced, or which can be used directly as fuel in liquid or compressed 
form) and grain-derived alcohol. 
The major obstacle to greater use of clean fuels is uncertainty about which 
fuel-engine combination will have the best score on a number of different 
tests, including cost to the ultimate consumer, performance in real-world 
driving conditions and actual -- as opposed to laboratory -- environmental 
benefits. The expense to producers, distributors, retailers and the general 
public of a complete changeover in basic fuel supply dictates caution on the 
part of industry in making major investments until there is a clear signal from 
government about which system will be subsidized through complex tax and 
regulatory incentives. 
The results of the largest fleet- testing program on methanol, a leading 
competitor in the clean-fuel sweepstakes, was conducted by Carnegie-Mellon 
University. It unequivocally showed that air-quality benefits to be derived 
from total conversion are far less than earlier projections. That doesn't rule 
out methanol as a future automotive fuel, but it strongly supports a more 
flexible approach to setting future standards. 
Rather than mandating auto makers to build cars that run on a specified fuel or 
fuels, a strategy more likely to succeed in producing optimum clean-air 
benefits at least cost would be for Congress to set a medium-term 1995 emission 
standard of one-tenth of a gram per mile of hydrocarbons. That is less than 
half the toughest standard currently proposed, but only slightly lower than the 
standard proposed by the natural-gas industry for cars using the equivalent of 
methanol. 
Give EPA some money -- a modest but not unreasonable amount -- to convene task 
fores of technical experts from the automotive and energy industries to reach a 
recommendation, plus some additional development of production-line vehicles. 
And make the standard applicable for the full life of the car, not the 50,000 
miles in current federal law, to eliminate the incentive to make emissions 
controls the least-durable car component. 
An integrated approach to emissions from cars that reflects in-use performance 
and the wide range of possible fuels could lead to an added benefit: 
refineries, currently a major source of stationary source pollution, might 
close down and move out of the Los Angeles area. It might also lead to a 
multilevel auto market: reformulated gasoline used for longer commutes and 
travel; electric cars that could be plugged in at new, off-peak nighttime rates 
used for the second (or in Los Angeles, the third) family car. 
The Clean Air Act technically expired years ago and has been kept alive by 
budgetary appropriations pending some agreement between the President and 
Congress on the future course of efforts to attain healthful air. Now that we 
have a President willing to make some real commitments to that goal, it's time 
to look for a better way to approach the transformation of our transportation 
system as part of the solution. 
