PEOPLE: 2 PRINCIPALS HIRED, 2 OTHERS REASSIGNED 
Two principals are joining the Downey Unified School District and two others, 
already part of the district, have been given new assignments, all effective 
July 1, according to action by the Board of Education. George Blackwell will 
become principal at Carpenter Elementary School. He is currently the assistant 
principal at a kindergarten-to-eighth-grade school in the Inglewood Unified 
School District. Gary Rutherford has been named principal at Gauldin Elementary 
School. Rutherford is a long-time Downey resident who works in the Fullerton 
Elementary School District as a kindergarten-sixth-grade school principal. 
Being reassigned in the district are Principals Denise Takano from Carpenter to 
Imperial Elementary, and Georgia Ananias from Gauldin to Rio San Gabriel 
Elementary. Takano replaces Dick Edwards, who is retiring, and Ananias replaces 
Judy Fisher, who accepted a position with the Santa Ana Unified School 
District. 
Rio Hondo President Given National Award 
Rio Hondo College President Herbert M. Sussman received a national leadership 
award at the 69th annual convention of the American Assn. of Community and 
Junior Colleges held in Washington. The award, praising Sussman for his years 
of service to the community college concept, was presented by First Lady 
Barbara Bush. Sussman, 65, has been superintendent and president of the Rio 
Hondo Community College District near Whittier since 1982. For five years 
before that, he was chancellor of the San Francisco Community College District. 
Sussman will retire from the Rio Hondo presidency at the end of this academic 
year June 30, but plans to return to the classroom in the fall to teach 
anatomy. 
Junior League of Long Beach Installs Officers 
Gina Rushing, a member of the Junior League of Long Beach since 1981, has been 
installed as the league's president for 1989-90. She is communications and 
public relations director for Integrated Health Systems Inc., and is the first 
full-time professional to become president of the volunteer league. She chaired 
the league's Alcohol Awareness for Youth project in 1985, and developed and 
chaired the Long Beach Recovery Home for Youth project the following year. In 
1987-88, Rushing was the league's community vice president, and last year 
chaired its Leadership Development Task Force. She also is one of the founders 
of the Woman to Woman Recovery Center in Long Beach, has served on the board of 
the Long Beach Area National Council on Alcoholism since 1985, and served on a 
steering committee for the New Life Beginnings Mothers' Home in Long Beach. 
Rushing is a graduate of St. Anthony High School and Cal State Long Beach. 
Other new league officers installed with her are Barbara Conn, administrative 
vice president; Cynthia Schoustra, community vice president; Lea Wells, project 
vice president; Debi Garcia, membership vice president; Cora Nichols, 
secretary; Diane Wamba, treasurer, and Pauline Stenberg, sustaining adviser. 
Karen Willer is the outgoing president and Sue Westberg was chairman of the 
nominating committee. 
Downey Attorney Honored for Volunteerism 
Downey resident Dianne Lumsdaine has been honored for volunteerism by the 
Southeast Los Angeles County chapter of the Assn. for Retarded Citizens. She 
received the award at the third annual National Philanthropy Day at the 
Biltmore hotel in Los Angeles. She is a member of the ARC Board of Directors 
and chairman of its fund-development committee. She also is an attorney, a 
member of the Downey Planning Commission and the mother of four children. A 
10-year resident of Downey, Lumsdaine is a graduate of Bellflower High School. 
Her husband, Joseph Lumsdaine, also is an attorney and member of the ARC board. 
Compton Schools Chief Given Doctorate 
Ted D. Kimbrough has received an honorary doctorate from the University of West 
Los Angeles School of Law. Kimbrough, 54, who has been superintendent of the 
Compton Unified School District for seven years, was honored for more than 30 
years of service in public education and contributions to the education of 
minority youths in inner-city schools. Before taking the Compton job, Kimbrough 
was assistant superintendent for school buildings and facility services in the 
Los Angeles Unified School District. 
2 Gahr Students Place in Architecture Event 
Two Gahr High School students from Cerritos won trophies in the architectural 
drafting portion of an invitational competition sponsored by Rio Hondo College. 
They are Kyong Jun Kim, second place, and Jose Medina, fifth place. It was the 
first time Gahr students in teacher Max Lizarraga's drafting classes entered 
the 13th annual competition. More than 500 students from 25 high schools 
participated. 
St. John Bosco Seniors Win Hispanic Awards 
John N. Magana, a graduating senior at St. John Bosco High School in 
Bellflower, has won a $1,500 scholarship from the National Hispanic Scholar 
Awards Program for one year's study at the college of his choice. Honorable 
mention winners of $100 from the same school are seniors Steve R. Martinez and 
Patricio N. Saint Lary. The students were chosen on the basis of academic 
records, grade-point average, test scores, personal qualities and community 
involvement. 
