A RIGHTS EROSION IN MEXICO?; 
PRESIDENT SALINAS HIMSELF NEEDS TO MONITOR THIS SITUATION 
Mexico is a nation not normally associated with official brutality found in 
places like El Salvador. This is why the recent report on rights violations in 
Mexico by the respected human-rights organization Americas Watch is all the 
more noteworthy. The report merits the personal attention of President Carlos 
Salinas de Gortari. 
Americas Watch concludes that, in their zeal to combat drugs and limit 
political dissent, some Mexican police officials have "institutionalized" the 
practice of torturing prisoners. The report also noted that between 1970 and 
1988, 51 Mexican journalists were killed pursuing news stories involving 
official corruption or drug-trafficking. 
In a climate like that, the recent threats against Jorge Castaneda, a professor 
at Mexico's national university and a regular contributor to The Times, must be 
regarded seriously. Castaneda's articles have usually been critical of the 
Salinas government. His view on Mexican politics, while not often shared by 
this editorial page, nonetheless deserve a wide audience. 
It may be that some Mexicans would rather those views weren't widely heard, 
which may have been why four armed men stopped Castaneda's secretary on a 
Mexico City street last week, questioned her about him and his family and told 
her "this is just the first call. If he keeps it up, he'll really get 
(obscenity)." 
It is not surprising that Salinas defended Castaneda when the incident was made 
public, saying such a blatant effort to stifle dissent is "unacceptable." In 
its report, Americas Watch credited Salinas with trying to improve the climate 
in Mexico by resurrecting a human-rights office in the federal government and 
naming a national commission to oversee its work. But the report warns that 
Salinas must not opt for "form over substance in the promotion and protection 
of human rights." 
One way for Salinas to prove he won't is to find, and discipline, the thugs who 
threatened Castaneda. 
