DELEGATES ASSAIL SAKHAROV OVER ATROCITY CHARGE 
Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet nuclear physicist who won the 1975 Nobel Peace 
Prize for his human rights campaigns, was shouted down in the Soviet Union's 
new assembly Friday as he tried to repeat charges that Moscow's troops had 
committed atrocities during the long war in Afghanistan. 
Sakharov, who denounced the nine-year war as a "criminal adventure," was 
attempting to reply to a Soviet veteran of the Afghan war who had angrily 
denied Sakharov's charges. But other members of the Congress of People's 
Deputies began to jeer Sakharov and prevented him from finishing. 
"The essence and aims of the irresponsible accusations by Deputy Sakharov are 
far from clear," veteran Sergei Chervonopissky, who lost both of his legs in 
the war, had told the congress, denouncing Sakharov for comments made to a 
Canadian newspaper earlier this year. "We are outraged by his irresponsible and 
provocative assertions." 
Chervonopissky's speech brought virtually all the 2,250 deputies, including the 
Communist Party's top leadership, to their feet in several minutes of emotional 
and sustained applause. Then Sakharov came to the podium to defend himself. 
As other deputies shouted their disapproval and began clapping their hands and 
stomping their feet in protest, Sakharov recalled how he had been exiled from 
Moscow and forced to live for six years in the industrial city of Gorky. 
"We have to cleanse ourselves of this terrible shame," said Sakharov, who was 
clearly shaken by the angry response he drew. "I spoke out against sending 
Soviet soldiers to Afghanistan, and for this I was exiled to Gorky. I am proud 
of that exile, and I wear it like a medal today." 
Not a single deputy came to Sakharov's defense as the jeers drove him from the 
podium in the Kremlin's Palace of Congresses where the deputies have been 
meeting for the past 10 days. 
"He has opened a very deep wound in our society, a wound that will take a long 
time to heal, and his statements are the same as pouring salt into it," said 
Roy A. Medvedev, a leading Soviet historian who, like Sakharov, was a political 
dissident for many years before his election to the congress. 
"I did not defend him because it was not possible to defend him. His statement 
was irresponsible or perhaps naive," Medvedev said. "He is right about that 
war, but he does not understand the conflicting emotions that people feel about 
it." 
'Crimes of the Soviet Army' 
Sakharov, 68, told reporters later that his "only regret" was that he had not 
mentioned "all the crimes of the Soviet army in Afghanistan -- the napalm, the 
bombing of schools, hospitals and entire regions." 
Sergei Stankevich, a member of the radical "Moscow Group" of deputies, 
commented afterward, "This was the moral lynching of a remarkable man. The war 
was a mistake, it was our national shame." 
The furor arose when Chervonopissky, a deputy elected by the Communist Youth 
League, called for the country to honor the Soviet soldiers who served in 
Afghanistan and denounced Sakharov for allegations he had made while touring 
Canada that Soviet helicopter pilots had orders to kill any soldiers they could 
not rescue from probable capture by the moujahedeen, the Muslim rebels fighting 
Afghanistan's government. 
The Soviet Union sent troops to Afghanistan in December, 1979, to support the 
Marxist government, and did not withdraw until last February. 
"On behalf of the soldiers, I say this is not true," Chervonopissky declared. 
Sakharov, who has spoken several times to the congress but with diminishing 
effect, tried to defend himself, saying that he had been recounting the 
allegations of others as evidence of the brutality of the war and had called 
for an investigation into the accusations. 
"I deeply respect the Soviet army and Soviet soldiers," he told the congress, 
struggling to make himself heard over the shouts of the deputies. "I never 
insulted the heroic Soviet soldiers who served there, but the war itself was a 
criminal adventure and a huge crime by our country that cost the lives of 
almost 1 million Afghans. It was a war of annihilation, a terrible sin." 
Sakharov said that the alleged orders to the pilots to kill soldiers threatened 
with capture was still under investigation -- and that he was gathering 
evidence to support it. 
"Until that investigation is complete," he said, "no one has the right to call 
me a liar." 
But Marshal Sergei F. Akhromeyev, former armed forces chief of staff and now an 
adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, said that the charges were "a 
blatant lie." 
'No Such Instruction' 
"Neither the General Staff nor the Defense Ministry have issued any order of 
the kind alleged by Academician Sakharov," Akhromeyev said. "We have not 
received any such instruction from our country's political leadership. 
"All this is a lie, and Academician Sakharov will not be able to find any 
documents to confirm his lie," Akhromeyev added, using Sakharov's title as a 
member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. 
Half a dozen other deputies also denounced Sakharov in one of the most 
tumultuous moments in a session that has been marked by heated debates and 
strong emotions. 
"With just one step you have canceled all your previous activities," Tursun 
Kazakova from Tashkent in Uzbekistan told Sakharov. "You have insulted our 
entire army, our entire nation, all of our boys who gave their lives. I express 
our common disgust to you." 
