TERMINAL ILLNESS: AMERICANS BELIEVE DOCTORS SHOULD SOMETIMES ALLOW DEATH; 
EUTHANASIA: THE RELEVANCE OF RELIGION TO A PERSON'S LIFE AFFECTS OPINION ON 
RIGHT-TO-DIE ISSUES, RATHER THAN ADHERENCE TO A SPECIFIC SET OF RELIGIOUS 
BELIEFS. 
When a doctor from Michigan helped an Oregon woman with Alzheimer's disease 
commit suicide last week, he knew his decision -- and hers -- would kindle a 
debate on medical ethics and mercy killing. 
While authorities debate the doctor's actions, a new survey shows that although 
some Americans might disagree with the methods used by Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a 
Detroit pathologist, all segments of the public support right-to-die policies. 
There is a widely held belief that physicians should sometimes allow a patient 
to die rather than use the full range of medical procedures and treatments 
available. 
And Americans, regardless of their religious beliefs, overwhelmingly support 
the right of patients to make their own decisions about life-sustaining 
treatment. If a person is unable to make his or her decisions known, people say 
a close family member should be allowed to make the call. 
These are among the findings of a Reflections of the Times poll of 1,213 adults 
nationwide. The poll was conducted for the Times Mirror Center for the People 
and the Press in Washington, and examined public views about dealing with 
terminal illness and disability. 
The poll (with an error margin of 3%), conducted last month, showed: 
More than half of Americans, 59%, would want their doctors to stop 
administering life-sustaining treatment if they had a terminal disease and were 
suffering a great deal of physical pain. 
Those polled made a distinction between the decision to forgo life-sustaining 
treatment for adults and the decision of parents to withhold treatment for 
severely handicapped children. 
The strength of religious views play a key role in determining views about 
ending the life of a suffering person. 
One-third of adults can imagine themselves taking the life of a loved one who 
was suffering terribly from an illness that was terminal. 
Americans have profoundly mixed feelings about growing old. Only four in 10 
adults would like to live to be 100 years old, and half would emphatically not 
want to be that old. Women especially do not look forward to reaching the 
milestone of their 100th birthday. Ironically, this accomplishment is more 
likely for a woman than a man. 
The public's feelings about right-to-die legislation is driven by its belief in 
the need for discretion in administering life-sustaining medical treatment. 
Eight in 10 adults approve of state laws that allow medical treatment for a 
terminally ill patient to be withdrawn or withheld, if that is what the patient 
wishes. 
Most states have some form of right-to-die legislation, and for the first time 
in its history, the U.S. Supreme Court is now considering whether there is a 
constitutional right to discontinue life-sustaining medical treatment in the 
case of Cruzan vs. Harmon. The public's attitude toward right-to-die 
legislation is bolstered by a trend toward greater acceptance of suicide in the 
face of suffering. 
About half of the public thinks a person has a moral right to commit suicide if 
suffering from an incurable disease or from great pain with no hope of 
improvement. Acceptance of suicide in such cases has been increasing gradually 
over the 15-year period since 1975, when these attitudes were first measured by 
the Gallup Poll. More than half, 55%, now think a person suffering great pain 
with no hope of improvement has a moral right to suicide, compared with only 
41% 15 years ago. 
The increasing acceptance of suicide is largely due to the aging of the 
population. The older people who overwhelmingly rejected suicide as a response 
to terminal illness 15 years ago have died and been replaced in the population 
by younger people with more moderate views about the acceptability of suicide 
in these circumstances. 
Attitudes about suicide differ greatly depending on the strength of one's 
religious views. 
Most "born-again" Christians and very religious people reject a right to 
suicide even in the case of a terminal illness. They are fairly evenly divided 
in their attitudes about suicide when the patient is suffering great pain. Yet, 
paradoxically, a majority of "born-again" Christians and the very religious 
think acts of so-called "mercy killing" by spouses are sometimes justified. 
It appears that some Americans, particularly those who are very religious, make 
an important distinction between what is "justified" and what is a "right." 
This implies that the difficult decision to end a person's life is perhaps 
justified, understandable and acceptable, yet not endorsed. 
But the public makes a distinction between how decisions about medical 
treatment should be made for adults and how they should be made for infants. 
Half of the public rejects the notion that parents can refuse life-sustaining 
treatment on behalf of their severely handicapped infant, saying instead that 
such infants should receive as much treatment as possible. 
"It's difficult to agree on what the patient's best interests are in the case 
of a newborn and there's no way to extrapolate what the patient would want from 
knowledge of his or her life," said Susan M. Wolf, a lawyer with the Hastings 
Center, a research institute in New York that studies medical ethics. h Views 
on this issue are also profoundly influenced by religion, with "born-again" 
Christians and those who are very religious most opposed to parental 
decision-making in these cases. 
In fact, majority support for the right of parents to refuse medical treatment 
only occurs among those who say religion is unimportant in their lives 
It is the relevance of religion to a person's day-to-day life that affects 
opinion on right-to-die issues, rather than one's adherence to a specific set 
of religious beliefs. 
The views that Americans express about right-to-die policies reflect their 
personal feelings about how they would want their own medical treatment handled 
in various situations, and what they know or can imagine about the wishes of 
their parents. Not only do most Americans want life-sustaining treatment to 
cease in the event of terminal illness with severe pain, they also want doctors 
to withhold extended treatment if they had an illness that made them totally 
dependent on another family member for daily care. The wish to have 
life-sustaining medical treatment withdrawn decreases as the importance of 
religion increases. However, a majority (52%) of even the very religious would 
want their own treatment stopped if they were suffering a great deal of 
physical pain. 
But fewer people are willing to say they would take part in a mercy killing. 
Only a third of adults can imagine themselves taking the life of a loved one 
who was suffering terribly from an illness that was terminal. The ability to 
imagine the mercy killing of a spouse or other loved one is greater for men. 
But that desire decreases significantly with age, presumably as the possibility 
of actually facing such a choice becomes more likely. 
The Right to Die 
the poll of 1,213 adults last month gauged the views of people about mercy 
killing against the importance of religion in their lives. 
Do you approve or disapprove of laws that let terminally ill patients decide 
about being kept alive through medical treatment? 
In actual number of respondents: 
Approve 
Very Religious: 825 
Somewhat Religious: 452 
Not Religious: 221 
Disapprove 
Very Religious: 148 
Somewhat Religious: 49 
Not Religious: 42 
It depends 
Very Religious: 58 
Somewhat Religious: 20 
Not Religious: 11 
Don't know 
Very Religious: 49 
Somewhat Religious: 10 
Not Religious: 2 
Source: Times Mirror Center for People and the Press 
