MIKE DOWNEY: NOTE TO AMERICA: BEWARE OF HOOLIGANS IN WORLD CUP '94 
Picture yourself living in peaceful Ann Arbor, Mich., in a neighborhood not 
far, perhaps, from the University of Michigan's 104,000-seat stadium, when, one 
otherwise silent night in 1994, your sidewalks and shops and campus corner pubs 
become overrun with drunken, delinquent British soccer fans, in town for a game 
of the World Cup. 
And soon, sirens begin wailing, and Washtenaw County cops begin coming in waves 
to control and collar these mad dogs and Englishmen, and before long some 
night-court judge has every bailiff and deputy in the building busy booking or 
restraining a mob of punks with spiked, purple haircuts and studded, fingerless 
leather gloves. 
Or, picture yourself in the general vicinity of the Yale Bowl one quiet 
weeknight in New Haven, Conn., when a whacked-out party of West Germans goes 
wild and loots its way through the streets, smashing windows, accosting 
townies. 
Or, possibly you see yourself sitting down to a quiet supper in Palo Alto, 
Calif., when, from the general direction of Stanford Stadium, some 85,000 
spectators are caught in a stampede, touched off by hostile Dutch rowdies, 
incensed by a referee's call. 
Hooligans. 
That's what they call them in soccer circles. That's what they call them here 
in Italy, where government and law-enforcement authorities have gone crazy 
attempting to keep the peace. Arrests of rioting, rumbling, misbehaving 
tourists, ostensibly here to watch their national teams play soccer, have been 
multiplying day by day since World Cup play began on June 8, with swift-acting 
justices meting out jail sentences ranging in length from six months to two 
years. 
"I think it's disgusting," said Peter Vermes, 23, a New Jersey native playing 
in this tournament for the United States, but also the first American to play 
first-division soccer in Hungary and Holland. "These people are low-lifes. I've 
been exposed to their kind once too often in Europe, and we don't want them 
contaminating the World Cup when it comes to America. 
"The only way we're ever going to get rid of them is to start disqualifying 
teams from the tournament," Vermes said. "Warn each side that you're going to 
award a forfeit or even throw their country right out of the Cup if they can't 
do something about their fans. That'll get the message across." 
If this is not a concern in America now, perhaps it should become one and soon. 
Anywhere from eight to 12 stadiums will be put to use throughout the United 
States in '94, when the World Cup comes there for the first time -- and with 
the tournament comes its followers. Civic and academic officials who have 
volunteered their facilities -- Michigan, Yale and Stanford among them -- might 
wish to think twice after checking out the police blotters of Milan or 
Cagliari, off Italy's coast on the isle of Sardinia. 
Riot squads were out in full force Saturday night as Cagliari braced for a Cup 
match between England and the Netherlands, whose respective fans have been 
among the most voluble and violent in soccer. Some believe these two particular 
teams were deliberately "exiled" to first-round games on the island to at least 
minimize the destruction on Italy's mainland. 
There has been anxious talk of prearranged rumble sites, complicated by the 
danger of spontaneous, game-related incidents. English fans have been so 
unruly, they are not allowed off the British Isles except for national-team 
competition such as this. The specter of 94 dead after the horrifying Sheffield 
stadium stampede of 1989 is always present, as well as that of the 39 people 
killed at a match between English and Italian teams four years ago in Brussels. 
English hooligans can be particularly cruel and profane. They taunted German 
fans in Dusseldorf with hateful chants that included: "Drink your beer, rape 
your women." 
Another time, at the European championships, the theme of their constant 
baiting of the Germans from the grandstand was their having won "Two World 
Wars, One World Cup." The brawling that ensued after the game was expected and 
almost understandable. 
Hooliganism is hardly an English monopoly. The Irish know a thing or two about 
it; the word hooligan itself is taken from an Irishman's name. 
At a 1989 World Cup qualifying game, a Brazilian spectator flung a Roman 
candle-style firecracker that so frightened Chile's goalie, he dropped to the 
ground, thinking he had been shot. Three years before, at a Cup qualifier in 
China, dozens were trampled after the unexpected defeat of the host team. At 
least 20 died, and soldiers had to be called in to quell the uprising. 
"At a game in Amsterdam that I attended last year, the Ajax team fell behind in 
a shoot-out in overtime, and all hell broke loose," Vermes said. "The fans 
threw objects and stormed the railing. They were warned to stop, and when they 
didn't, a 3-0 forfeit was awarded. That's when things really got bad, and the 
Ajax team ended up being suspended from international play for at least a 
year." 
At one point that day, Dutch fans hurled Molotov cocktails -- bottles filled 
with gasoline or lighter fluid and flaming rags -- at others in the stands. 
"Sickening," Vermes said. 
He happens to be a young American who believes in fighting for freedom, not 
over soccer results. Vermes' father escaped Soviet-occupied Hungary in 
November, 1956, being recaptured several times and shot once before fleeing 
successfully and finally making his way to America. Before he defected, Michael 
Vermes played professional soccer for Hungary. 
"My father would like nothing more than for soccer to become as successful and 
popular in his chosen country as it was in his homeland," Vermes said. 
With popularity, though, comes attention and commotion. Proposed World Cup 
sites for 1994 include the Rose Bowl and Coliseum, four Florida football arenas 
and other sites ranging from Chicago's Soldier Field to Dallas' Cotton Bowl, 
from the new Minnesota Sports Complex to even the 32,000-seat Sam Boyd Silver 
Bowl in Las Vegas. Even the Navy-Marine facility at Annapolis, Md., is ready to 
enlist. 
They had better know what they could be getting their stadiums into -- and who 
could be getting into their stadiums. 
