KQLZ-FM 'PIRATE RADIO' CAPTURES NO. 3 SPOT IN L.A. RATINGS 
KQLZ-FM "Pirate Radio," the aggressive station that swashbuckled its way into 
the Los Angeles marketplace less than three months ago amid a major advertising 
blitz, has rocketed to No. 3 in the ratings, according to an audience 
measurement company. 
The Birch Radio Survey reported that KQLZ-FM (100.3) -- known for playing a 
broad range of rock music and few commercials -- has climbed from No. 14 to No. 
3 since the station debuted March 17, nearly quadrupling its share of the 
listening audience. 
Birch data shows that the station's average quarter-hour share of listeners 12 
and older was 5.9% during April and May, compared to 1.5% during February and 
March -- most of which time the station was operating as easy-listening KIQQ. 
The April-May showing by KQLZ trailed only KPWR-FM (105.9) -- or Power 106 -- 
with 8.3% of the audience, and KIIS-FM (102.7) with 6.6%. 
Birch is one of two radio ratings services. The quarterly figures of the 
better-known service, Arbitron, will not be available until mid-July. The two 
ratings services employ different methods. Birch conducts telephone surveys and 
asks people to recall what stations they have listened to over the last 24 
hours, while Arbitron bases its data on information recorded by listeners in a 
personal diary over a seven-day period. 
KQLZ plays what program director and morning deejay Scott Shannon calls 
"free-form Top 40." Listeners are as likely to hear New Wave fare such as XTC 
or Fine Young Cannibals as they are hard rock bands such as Guns N' Roses or 
Motley Crue. Classic rockers like Led Zeppelin, Peter Gabriel or Bruce 
Springsteen are also on the playlist, as are dance music rapsters like Tone 
Loc. 
"We play oldies, we play newies. . . . It's an off-the-wall concept that tries 
to fit together several different types of music on one radio station and still 
maintain a level of familiarity so the station will be a success in the 
marketplace," said Shannon, who is also a vice president at Westwood One, which 
bought the station from Outlet Communications for $56 million. 
The lack of advertising clutter is what has attracted the most attention to 
"Pirate Radio." For the first 10 days, the station broadcast music free of any 
commercial interruptions, and still features significantly fewer commercials 
than other rock stations. Also kept to a minimum is "deejay yakking," as 
Shannon calls it, with his own morning program probably featuring the most 
banter and humorous segments. 
The arrival of Shannon -- one of the most popular deejays in New York -- has 
intensified the L.A. radio wars. The outspoken deejay has led a very public 
battle against his rivals, Rick Dees of KIIS-FM and Jay Thomas of KPWR, urging 
listeners to call in with the names of the radio stations they "flushed" in 
order to switch to KQLZ. 
For example, when a caller phoned in for tickets being given away for a rock 
concert Thursday morning, Shannon seized the opportunity to thrust a quick jab 
at Dees. 
When the caller said she was from Tarzana, Shannon asked: "Do you see Rick Dees 
driving around out there in his -- what does he drive -- in his fancy sports 
car?" 
The caller responded: "I hope not." 
For that, the caller was given tickets to see Poison in concert and a Pirate 
Radio T-shirt. 
