THE MORES OF MORE; 
THE HUNGER FOR MORE SEARCHING FOR VALUES IN AN AGE OF GREED BY LAURENCE SHAMES 
(TIMES BOOKS: $18.95; 284 PP.; 0-8129-1656-5) 
In the summer of 1979, Jimmy Carter, in the manner of the Hebrew prophets he 
admires, descended from two weeks of seclusion at Camp David and declared to a 
less-than-enthralled nation: "Human identity is no longer defined by what one 
does but by what one owns." Yet, Carter warned, "Owning things and consuming 
things do not satisfy our longing for meaning. We have learned that piling up 
material goods cannot fill the emptiness of lives which have no confidence or 
purpose." 
Laurence Shames, in his second book, "The Hunger for More: Searching for Values 
in an Age of Greed" alludes neither to that speech nor to the merciless 
prophet-stoning that followed. Nor does he quote George Bush, who -- with no 
apparent irony -- eerily echoed his former adversary: " . . . My friends, we 
are not the sum of our possessions." 
But Shames, once the ethics columnist for Esquire, is preaching precisely the 
same message against Mammon as Carter and (dare we believe it?) Bush, targeting 
that inglorious decade bracketed by the two speeches as an "age of greed." A 
feisty Baby Boomer (who notes that he grew up in a 1960s suburb), Shames is 
artfully re-packaging one of the grand old messages in American culture, from 
Jefferson to Thoreau, from Veblen to Schumacher -- a message, in his words, of 
"the high and difficult ideal of a balanced life -- a life that integrates 
labor and leisure, one that reconciles self-interest with an ethic of service, 
one that recognizes peace of mind not only as a desirable thing but as a moral 
achievement in itself." 
For Shames, who joins a host of decade-watchers now looking back in anger, the 
'80s, in fact, self-destructed on Meltdown Monday, Oct. 19, 1987. With the 
stock-market crash, he insists, came a dark night of the national soul, then 
the advent of a new era in which entrenched assumptions about money, success 
and what he calls "the habit of more" no longer went unchallenged. Never mind 
that Shames has, as yet, an empty bag of evidence for this happy turn of 
events; in his admitted optimism, he wants to believe it -- and so, of course, 
will some readers. 
How, after all, short of war, Depression or full-scale environmental disaster, 
could the lights get dimmer for many Americans than they did in the '80s? In 
bracing prose, Shames dissects a litany of the decade's maladies: the 
society-wide worship of a money-based definition of success; the increasingly 
inequitable distribution of wealth; the erosion of the middle class; the sharp 
decline of American productivity and economic clout. It was a time of permanent 
limits, he argues, of a closed frontier on national growth, "but Americans have 
been somewhat backward in adopting values, hopes, ambitions that have to do 
with things other than more. In America, a sense of quality has lagged far 
behind a sense of scale." Or, as he puts it in one of the many aphorisms that 
pepper his chapters: "Measuring more is easy; measuring better is hard." 
Pithy and bolstered with an impressive array of facts and figures, Shames' 
analysis of what went wrong in the '80s is, nevertheless, by now, mostly 
warmed-over porridge: That Americans in the '80s denied the death of what 
economist Kenneth Boulding once called the prosperous, postwar "cowboy economy" 
is not exactly revelatory, nor are the psychological reasons he cites for why 
we shamelessly lionized the values of CEOs, consumed beyond our means, and 
obsessed on wealth in a time of identity crisis for both the middle class and 
the national economy. 
Shames is more engaging when he gives rein to the sort of ethical 
preoccupations that marked his column for Esquire. In "Ghettos of the 
Conscience," a wide-lensed retrospective of business ethics in the '80s, Shames 
argues forcibly that "people found it much less exposing to compartmentalize 
morality, to regard business as a sort of ghetto of the conscience, a bad 
neighborhood for values, but one that could be avoided in the evenings and on 
weekends." This "ghetto view of conscience," he concludes, "creates an 
atmosphere in which the bad guys can prosper. Denatured values, having lost 
their ability to balance money against other things that matter, allow this to 
pass for 'winning.' " 
True enough, but has the atmosphere really changed? It would certainly be 
lovely to think so. But no one really knows -- only Shames, for whom saying is 
believing. "By the spring of 1988," he writes, "eighties social fashions had 
begun to look as bad as last year's suit. The rabid chase after the fast and 
famous dollar had already come to seem a trifle retro, a little out of sync." 
Maybe so. Maybe not. One reason he's not convincing is that -- as he does in 
virtually all his arguments -- Shames either relies on his own instincts, rafts 
of statistics or books, magazines and other media. What about Americans in 
every nook and cranny of the country whose values he thinks are changing? 
Shames doesn't leave New York to enter their lives, to talk over the thorny 
issues of revising their aspirations, so we don't meet them firsthand. 
The two people we do get to know, whose story of shifting values threads 
through the book, are a mid-to-late-'30s West Side couple making a combined 
annual salary of $460,000 in 1987. "They are not typical Americans," he tells 
us. Right, guy. So what do they portend for the rest of us? Compelling as it is 
in many respects, at the heart of this book is an insular view of what's going 
on outside Manhattan. It is that strange phenomenon of Shames' era -- and ours 
-- of media-fed wisdom, of media feeding on itself. 
No prophet, it seems, must go unstoned. Still, for what he lacks in method, 
Shames more than makes up for as provocateur. This is a spirited, often 
trenchant book by a disciplined essayist heralding what may be one of the most 
dramatic stories of the '90s. 
"Success, to an extraordinary degree, was the constant target of will and 
exertion in the 1980s, the glittering but indistinct Oz toward which 
aspirations strained. What, precisely, did the word mean? No one seemed to 
know, but it didn't really matter. Success didn't need to be defined or 
examined; it was enough merely to invoke it, to intone the magic word. Success 
was invoked more often and with far greater assurance than was self-fulfillment 
in the seventies, it was pursued by far greater numbers and with far greater 
heat than were peace and love in the sixties. Those other credos, after all, 
set themselves up, if not in opposition to, then certainly in tension with, 
conventional self-interest: Some part of their vigor was squandered on 
resolving that tension, on trying to wrestle that tension to the mat while 
keeping one's values intact. 
"The credo of success, eighties-style, on the other hand, was the credo of 
self-interest. It was old-fashioned economic Darwinism dressed up in new 
clothes. Success eighties-style was survival-of-the-fiscally-fittest padding 
the jungle in running shoes. It was primal aggressiveness slaking itself not on 
blood but on cold-pressed virgin olive oil. It was the unchastened acquisitive 
impulse, the primal appetite for more, legitimized by social fashion and 
summarized in the deceptively mild war whoop, go for it. 
"But in fact there was nothing at all mild about the eighties quest for 
success. That quest, rather, was feverish and a little hysterical, carried out 
in a kind of trance. The thing was to get there. Getting there was in the 
nature of a personal dare, and once you'd accepted it, you neither rested nor 
asked questions." 
 -- From "The Hunger for More." 
