BUSH SUSPENDS TALKS WITH PLO; 
TERRORISM: PRESIDENT ASSAILS THE ORGANIZATION'S FAILURE TO DENOUNCE A SPLINTER 
GROUP'S RAID ON AN ISRAELI BEACH. 
President Bush on Wednesday suspended the 18-month-old U.S. dialogue with the 
Palestine Liberation Organization in response to the foiled Palestinian 
guerrilla landing on an Israeli beach last month. 
"We've given the PLO ample time to deal with this issue. To date, the PLO has 
not provided a credible accounting," Bush said at a news conference. 
White House officials said that Bush is prepared to resume the talks with the 
PLO once the organization denounces the raid -- which a PLO faction known as 
the Palestine Liberation Front claimed to have carried out -- and disciplines 
the splinter group. 
The low-key dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization began in 
December, 1988, when U.S. Ambassador Robert H. Pelletreau Jr. met with a PLO 
representative in Tunis. 
The path for that meeting was cleared when Yasser Arafat, the PLO chairman, 
acknowledged Is rael's right to exist and renounced the use of terrorism. Until 
he took those steps, U.S. policy forbade official contact with representatives 
of the key organization representing Palestinians in the Middle East. 
But ever since the terrorist raid on a beach near Tel Aviv on May 30, Bush has 
been under increasing pressure from Congress, Israel and Israel's supporters to 
suspend the talks. Israeli forces intercepted the guerrillas on land and in the 
speedboats they used to approach the shore. Four guerrillas were killed and 12 
captured. 
"The size of the force and the geographical target area strongly indicate that 
civilians would have been the target," Bush said. 
A spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Front, claiming responsibility for the 
raid shortly after it occurred, said that it was intended to "avenge" the 
killings of seven Palestinian day laborers in the town of Rishon Le Zion, south 
of Tel Aviv, by an Israeli gunman May 20. 
The front is led by Mohammed Abbas, also known as Abul Abbas, a member of the 
PLO Executive Committee. His organization is one of the more radical wings 
under the PLO umbrella and also one of the smallest. In 1985, it planned and 
executed the hijacking of the Italian cruise liner Achille Lauro, during which 
an American passenger, Leon Klinghoffer, was killed. 
Despite the pressure on Bush, Administration officials had clearly sought to 
avoid the rupture out of concern that it would cut off what had been seen as a 
useful -- if not overtly productive -- contact with some of the most important 
players in the Middle East. 
Pelletreau, the U.S. envoy to Tunisia, had met at least six times in "intense 
discussions" with PLO representatives since the raid, and Bush held off 
suspending the talks "to give them time to do what we want: denounce the act 
and discipline the guy who did it," said a White House official, speaking on 
condition of anonymity. 
According to the White House official, the PLO said that it was unable to 
"dictate" to each of its member factions and that it, too, had to pay heed to 
"domestic pressure" from among its constituent groups and Arab supporters. 
But when the delay in action failed to produce the desired results, the 
Administration believed that it had no options left and it sent word to the 
Palestinians and Israel early Wednesday morning that it was about to act. 
On Capitol Hill, the leaders of both parties were quick to praise Bush's 
decision to suspend the dialogue with the PLO. 
"The President had no choice but to suspend the dialogue," said California Rep. 
Mel Levine (D-Santa Monica), a member of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee 
on Europe and the Middle East. "When the United States blinks at terrorism, it 
just encourages those who engage in terrorism." 
Rep. Larry Smith (D-Fla.), one of the most anti-PLO legislators on Capitol 
Hill, said he will push for passage of a bill that would prevent the President 
from resuming the dialogue unless both the PLO and all of its constituent 
factions renounce terrorism and publicly recognize Israel's right to exist. 
Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, who in recent months has emerged as 
one of the Senate's sternest critics of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's 
government, said: "The ball is in the PLO's court. It must unequivocally 
condemn the recent terrorist attack. It must discipline those responsible, 
starting with Abul Abbas." 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III, on his way to East Berlin for German 
reunification talks, said that suspension of the U.S.-PLO dialogue could be a 
setback for the Arab-Israeli peace process. 
Baker said the PLO, as a result of its contacts with Washington, had given 
tacit approval to peace talks between Israel and a delegation of Palestinians 
from the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
He said "it remains to be seen" whether the PLO will withdraw its approval as a 
result of Bush's decision to terminate the dialogue. 
In private, U.S. officials said they hope the rupture will not last long. 
"We don't want this to be a protracted suspension. We hope it is a temporary 
move," a State Department official said. "The shorter the better for the Middle 
East peace process and all parties concerned." 
Speaking to reporters during a day that included a visit to the George C. 
Marshall Space Flight Center, and two speeches at political fund-raising events 
here and in Charlotte, N.C., Bush said: 
"I have decided to suspend the dialogue between the United States and the PLO, 
pending a satisfactory response from the PLO of steps it is taking to resolve 
problems associated with the recent acts of terrorism." 
He acknowledged that the PLO, an umbrella group made up of often-warring 
factions, has disassociated itself from the attack and has condemned attacks 
against civilians. 
"This alone is not sufficient," the President said. 
He added that "we are prepared to promptly resume the dialogue" once the 
Palestinian organization takes "the necessary steps" -- meaning once the PLO 
denounces the raid and disciplines Abbas. 
The move comes at a particularly bleak period in the effort to revive the 
stalled Middle East peace process. 
Shamir's new Israeli government has taken a hard line against talks with 
Palestinian representatives and has vowed to press ahead with the establishment 
of new settlements in the occupied territories. 
But a week after Baker expressed irritation with the delays in the peace 
process -- an irritation that was taken as a slap at Israel -- Bush's move 
serves to restore a measure of public balance. When the action Wednesday is 
linked with Baker's remarks a week ago, the Administration, in effect, has 
demonstrated dissatisfaction with both sides. 
Even though specific gains from the talks in Tunis were difficult to enumerate, 
Bush said the mere fact that a dialogue about Middle East politics and security 
was taking place represented progress. 
Times staff writers Robin Wright and Michael Ross, in Washington, and Norman 
Kempster, with Baker, contributed to this report. 
REACTION FROM MIDEAST -- Israel hails U.S. move; Arabs call it a blow to peace. 
A24 
