BUSINESS GROUP HITS TAX HIKE IN COMPROMISE HIGHWAY PLAN 
A coalition of business groups threatened to pull its support for a 
9-cent-per-gallon gasoline tax increase Thursday as committees in both 
legislative houses endorsed a transportation compromise that included the tax 
hike. 
The mammoth spending plan to upgrade and expand the state's highway and mass 
transit systems had been hammered out during weeks of negotiations between Gov. 
George Deukmejian and the legislative leadership. It was approved 
overwhelmingly during a quick series of meetings of five Senate and Assembly 
transportation and fiscal committees. 
It is scheduled to go to the floor of both houses today but cannot go into 
effect unless voters approve a proposal for modifying the state's spending 
limit in June, 1990. 
5-Cent Hike Urged 
As the committees were voting on the transportation plan Thursday, a coalition 
of business, labor and medical groups known as Project 90 was continuing to 
press lawmakers to scale back the gasoline tax increase proposal to 5 cents per 
gallon. 
"Our polling indicates that there is some doubt about a 9-cent gasoline tax 
increase," said Duane Dauner, president of the California Assn. of Hospitals 
and Health Systems and a leader of Project 90. 
Until the polling, Dauner said, the group had intended to endorse the 
legislative proposals. 
Dauner said the organization may consider proposing a competing initiative if 
members decide after a meeting next week that the Legislature's plan for 
modifying the spending limit and increasing the gasoline tax is not "salable" 
to the public. 
Project 90 was organized to propose changes in the spending limit after passage 
last November of Proposition 98, a measure which dictates that 40% of the state 
budget and the lion's share of any surplus revenue must be allocated to public 
schools. 
An annoyed Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), chairman of the Assembly Transportation 
Committee and an author of the proposal, predicted that lawmakers would stick 
with the 9-cent proposal, anticipating that a statewide campaign will persuade 
voters of the need for the full tax increase. 
"I just think that (Project 90 members) are wrong," he said. "I think that they 
have no faith in the voters. I think that they have no backbone. I believe that 
if we make the case with the public about what's happening in California, the 
needs of California, the fact that this is written so people will know what the 
benefits are, that people will vote for the program." 
The improvement plan pumps $18.5 billion into the state's transportation system 
over the next decade to relieve congestion and improve deteriorating highways. 
It raises money for the program by a gasoline tax hike, a 54% increase in truck 
weight fees and a $3-billion bond issue to expand rail transit systems. Voters 
would be asked to approve $1 billion of the bond issue in June, 1990, another 
$1 billion in November, 1992, and the final $1 billion in November, 1994. 
The plan calls for an initial 5-cent-per-gallon gasoline tax increase to go 
into effect in August, 1990. It is followed by 1-cent-per-gallon gasoline tax 
increases for each of the next four years. A separate measure tied to the 
compromise and approved by the committees would allow the Department of 
Transportation to authorize the construction of four private toll road projects 
in the state. 
"This is a tender compromise and we've done it . . . because without this plan 
we're going to have more pollution and more congestion," Assemblyman William P. 
Baker (R-Danville) said. 
