CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS CAMPAIGN ROUNDUP; 
A FLURRY OF FLYERS, A TWIST IN OLD FEUD 
Voters will close a hectic spring election season Tuesday when they choose 
local leaders, party nominees for state legislative and congressional seats, 
and vote on referendums dealing with everything from crime to mountain lions. 
Primaries in three Assembly contests in the region have drawn a flock of 
candidates, and three Long Beach runoffs could change the face of city 
leadership. 
A last-minute wave of mailers and knocking on doors is expected this weekend as 
candidates make their final pitches in a number of heated election battles. 
In the predominantly Republican 58th Assembly District, which runs from eastern 
Long Beach to Huntington Beach, five Republicans are scrambling after the GOP 
nomination in the wake of incumbent Dennis Brown's decision to drop out of 
politics. The district's Democratic primary fizzled when one of two contestants 
withdrew, leaving Luanne Pryor to carry the Democratic standard in the November 
election. 
The GOP race has been marked by accusations of special-interest influence and 
heavy spending on the part of the best-financed candidates, Long Beach 
physician Seymour (Sy) Alban and Huntington Beach developer Peter von Elten. 
The contest took a new turn last week when the longstanding feud between the 
California Medical Assn. and the California Chiropractors Assn. spilled over 
into the primary. Apparently concerned that Alban, who is backed by the medical 
association, might win the nomination, a political action committee financed by 
the chiropractors association mounted a $45,000 campaign on behalf of 
conservative candidate Thomas J. Mays, the mayor of Huntington Beach. 
For years, the two associations have been engaged in a battle in Sacramento 
over legislation regulating chiropractic treatments. Mays said he knew nothing 
about efforts by the chiropractors to elect him and has never spoken to 
representatives of their association. He suggested that the chiropractors 
simply want anybody but Alban in the Assembly seat, and they chose to aid him 
because he is considered one of the front-runners, along with Von Elten and 
Alban. 
The two remaining contestants, Long Beach City Council members Jan Hall and 
Jeffrey A. Kellogg, have both suffered from a lack of money, each raising 
slightly less than $50,000 as of mid-May. By comparison, Alban had nearly 
$200,000, Von Elten had spent $161,000, and Mays had nearly $90,000. 
Alban, an abortion rights advocate, has attacked Mays' anti-abortion stand, 
whereas Mays has assailed Alban and Von Elten as the respective puppets of the 
medical association and the development community. Von Elten has responded by 
pointing out all the contributions that Mays has received from developers in 
Huntington Beach during this campaign and his tenure on the Huntington Beach 
City Council. 
Some of the candidates for the Democratic primary in the 59th Assembly District 
will be walking precincts arm-in-arm with their chief supporters, despite 
recent criticism that powerful political patrons have played too great a role 
in the campaign. 
State Sen. Charles M. Calderon (D-Whittier) will be joining his district 
representative, Marta Maestas, who he hopes will win the seat he vacated when 
he was sent to the Senate in a special election. State Sen. Art Torres (D-Los 
Angeles) is expected to be making the rounds with candidate Xavier Becerra, and 
U.S. Rep. Esteban E. Torres (D-La Puente) is out with contestant Bill 
Hernandez. Candidate Diane Martinez said she did not know whether her father, 
U.S. Rep. Matthew G. Martinez (D-Monterey Park), would be joining her. 
Only candidate Larry Salazar is without a powerful political ally. He has 
criticized the others, saying he is the only candidate who does not have to 
worry about "strings . . . being pulled by power groups." 
Los Angeles City Councilman Robert Farrell and three other Democrats are 
seeking the party's nomination in the 48th Assembly District, which cuts across 
South-Central Los Angeles and Watts and includes the cities of Lynwood and 
South Gate. 
Also running are Marguerite Archie-Hudson, a former chief of staff for Assembly 
Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco); Lynwood City Councilwoman Evelyn Wells, 
and Roderick D. Wright, a former aide to Assemblywoman Maxine Waters (D-Los 
Angeles). Waters, who has held the seat for 14 years, is running for Congress. 
Longtime Democratic political power Waters is not expected to have any problems 
winning the Democratic nomination for retiring U.S. Rep. Augustus F. Hawkins' 
29th Congressional District seat, which represents South-Central Los Angeles, 
Huntington Park, Cudahy, Lynwood and South Gate. 
Waters has long been viewed as the likely successor to Hawkins (D-Los Angeles), 
82, who decided to retire after 28 years. Nonetheless, she said she is walking 
precincts and making five to six speaking engagements in a day in her run 
against opponents Lionel Allen, a financial consultant and real estate 
developer; Twain Wilson, an independent filmmaker, and Ted Andromidas, a Lyndon 
H. LaRouche Jr. Democrat. 
Lawrence A. Grigsby is giving Rep. Mervyn M. Dymally (D-Compton) a lively 
challenge in the Democratic primary in the 31st Congressional District, which 
runs south from Watts and Willowbrook through such cities as Compton, Lynwood 
and Carson before ending in North Long Beach. 
Grigsby, an Inglewood attorney and a political newcomer, is backed by a group 
called the New Alliance Party. He and NAP, as the New York-based group is 
known, have been playing up Dymally's dealings with Zairian President Mobutu 
Sese Seko, whose government is described by the U.S. State Department as 
repressive and corrupt. 
Dymally, who is seeking his sixth term, says Grigsby and his NAP backers are 
part of a political cult that is trying to discredit him in an attempt to set 
up shop in the Southland. Voters in the 31st do not care about Mobutu, Dymally 
says, and his dealings with the African head of state have all been aboveboard, 
he insists. Dymally won his most recent primary with 85% of the vote. 
In Long Beach, incumbent Mayor Ernie Kell has worked to beat back Councilman 
Tom Clark's challenge by assailing Clark's integrity. Last week, the Kell 
campaign continued the attack by complaining to the state Fair Political 
Practices Commission that Clark had violated contribution restrictions in three 
instances. In one, Kell noted that Clark had taken $1,000 from the president of 
a company and another $1,000 from the company, apparently exceeding the $1,000 
limit on contributions from firms or individuals. 
"We'll check these out. If there's anything in error, we'll correct it," said 
Clark, adding that if there were violations they were unintentional. "It's been 
filed; it's not something we're trying to hide." 
Clark, an optometrist and veteran councilman, has scorned Kell's leadership, 
saying he has accomplished virtually nothing as the city's first full-time 
mayor. Kell has repeatedly cited what he has called Clark's "ethical problems," 
such as a 1988 episode when Clark lied about his identity when he was caught 
tearing down an opponent's campaign sign. 
In Long Beach City Council races, 1st District incumbent Evan Anderson Braude 
is running against Bill Stovall, a retired deputy police chief, and Planning 
Commissioner Jim Serles is making his third bid for the 3rd District seat, also 
being sought by Doug Drummond, a retired police commander. 
Times staff writers Bettina Boxall, Michele Feutsch, Tina Griego, Lee Harris 
and Dave Lesher contributed to this story. 
