CAPSULE REVIEW; 
MIDNIGHT OIL FIRMLY FILLS WHO'S SHOES 
Meet the new boss, not quite the same as the old boss. 
The rock pinata is stuffed nowadays with bands struggling to evoke the Beatles 
or trying to be the new Stones, but hardly anyone seems interested in being the 
new Who, with all the passion, bravado, bluster and sheer intellect that would 
entail. 
Filling those estimable shoes quite nicely -- and without really trying -- is 
Midnight Oil, the world-class rock 'n' roll band from Australia that headlined 
the first of two nights Tuesday at the Universal Amphitheatre with a 
near-faultless show exceeded in its tugging sense of commitment only by its 
viscerally overwhelming, finely detailed musical drive. 
At last, the answer to who's next. 
"It's good to be among friends," announced singer Peter Garrett -- not your 
average giant bald left-wing Christian environmentalist hard-rock former 
political candidate -- between edgy encore renditions of John Lennon's "Instant 
Karma" and Nick Lowe's "Peace, Love and Understanding." 
He explained, in the same earnest tones used to pitch the whale-saving and 
anti-apartheid tables in the lobby, "We have a common understanding . . . 
mistrust of Milli Vanilli." 
Among the quite rousing songs played Tuesday: "Stars of Warburton," 
"Warakurna," "Kosciusko." Among the themes addressed: aboriginal rights and 
outback strip mining. Clearly, this is not a band obsessed with Stateside 
stardom. 
The relentless punch with which Oil put across its songs in the late '70s and 
early '80s -- when the band was playing the Hollywood Palladium and 
slam-dancing audiences were the norm -- made the Clash the closest point of 
reference. These days, though, they relent now and again, and few of the songs 
from the group's two latest albums -- which accounted for 14 of the 17 original 
selections Tuesday -- mandate a slam response. 
The Who comparison is much more apt now, and not just because Garrett did a 
fleeting windmill motion while miming during a guitar solo. The pace is more 
moderate on most of their newer songs, and nuances of melody and timekeeping 
have become far more important. The three-piece horn section used on a few 
choice numbers -- borrowed from the opening act, fellow Aussies Hunters &amp; 
Collectors -- recalled the heights of the Who's "Quadrophenia" era. 
Garrett, of course, is no Roger Daltrey: He calmly and wittily plugs 
environmental causes during the breaks (not to mention some SDI- and 
Bush-bashing), then erupts in a fury of rigid motion during the songs, like a 
cross between Joe Cocker and Robocop. 
He's both smoothly articulate and unpredictably galvanized; his band is precise 
and musically refined but positively rips. It's rock in an advanced 
evolutionary state that indeed made the Milli Vanillis of the world seem like 
crustaceans. 
A complete review runs in Thursday's Calendar section. 
