ANN CONWAY: DONORS PUT IN A GOOD FRAME OF MIND 
Who framed Juan Cabrillo? 
Bowers Museum, that's who. 
A statue of the explorer holds court in a beloved fountain in the Santa Ana 
museum's tree-studded courtyard. 
But on Saturday night, the fountain had been drained of water (with 700 pounds 
of crushed ice poked with bottles of bubbly taking its place) and Cabrillo was 
surrounded by a gilt-drenched frame. 
The frame-up, one of several on the museum grounds, was all part of the fun at 
"La Fiesta . . . Framing Artistic Fantasies," a $150-per-person benefit that 
attracted 300 guests and brought $60,000 to museum coffers. 
Arriving guests, elegant in black-tie and chic cocktail wear, were directed, 
not into museum portals as in Fiestas gone by, but through a huge gold frame 
that led them directly into the courtyard. Closed since January, the museum is 
undergoing a $9.2-million renovation. It's expected to reopen in 1991. 
"We're on the threshold of exciting development," said Josie De Falla, museum 
director. "But while we're developing, we're also flourishing. We want people 
to continue to come and enjoy our classes." 
During a lengthy cocktail hour (7 to 8:30), guests had several options: pluck 
delectables such as chicken and mushroom strudel from silver trays; throw on a 
smock and create a mini-masterpiece on one of several blank canvases set up 
under a portico; bid on artworks created by such celebs as tennis star Vic 
Braden (who created a "Life Clock" drawing, which depicted his 60 years of 
living -- "It's only seemed like an hour" Braden wrote on the canvas) or state 
Sen. Marian Bergeson (her work showed a flag-waving woman holding a briefcase. 
Its title -- "I Make Better Laws Than Pictures), or just plain hobnob and sip 
champagne under the stars. 
Fashions, frequently conservative at north county locales, were on the cutting 
edge: Judy Fluor Runels, a co-chairwoman, sported the newest of the new looks 
-- billowing black chiffon cocktail trousers topped with a goldenrod jacket 
trimmed in passementerie. Donna Karlen, event chairwoman, wore an ultra-chic 
black cocktail suit by Paris designer Sonia Rykiel and a cluster of fresh 
gardenias in her hair (fresh gardenias -- in the hair, on the gown or on the 
table -- are very in at black-tie affairs). Harriet Harris, outgoing president 
of the Bowers board, carried a magenta-colored sheared beaver coat. "It was an 
anniversary present," she said, beaming a megawatt smile at her husband, Bill. 
Newport Beach lawyer Marlena Fox wore -- what else? -- a fox boa over her silk 
dress. 
As for those masterpieces that were supposed to be created by guests, well, 
while they were simply adorable, Frank Stella has nothing to worry about. 
Karlen used felt pens to create stick figures of her committee members. Dick 
Runels sketched a bigger-than-life wine glass. And Ria Carlson and Katie Beall 
created a scribbly work that combined Big Ben, a grinning jack-o'-lantern and a 
tree that looked like an arrow (or was that the Eiffel Tower?). 
Kevin Consey, director of the Newport Harbor Art Museum, didn't even try. "I 
can't draw," he said. "But my wife, Susan, paints houses!" 
Dinner, catered by Pennington and set up on a parking lot-turned-French 
pavilion, featured cream of asparagus soup, Caesar salad, filet mignon with 
rosemary-cognac sauce and champagne poached pears in ginger Zabaglione 
(presented in a chocolate frame, but of course). 
Also on the scene: Arthur Strock, new president of the Bowers board of 
governors; former heavyweight contender Ken Norton (who contributed an artwork 
to the silent auction); Mike Nason and Vikki Vargas; Judy and Rogue Hemley; 
Marilyn and Tom Nielsen; Paul Apodaca, and Jim Delamore (who designed the white 
tulip and rose centerpieces). Roger Torriero was honorary chairman. Irwin 
Schatzman and Thomas Wilck were co-chairmen with Runels. 
Also on the committee: Nadine O'Connor, Nanuca Benitez, Carol Campbell, Laura 
Fischer, Bradd Linn, Teryl McEfee, Mary Anne Miller, Dori Owen and Duci 
Ziegler. 
