WINE COUNTRY CHEFS; 
THREE YEARS AGO ONLY SIX WINERIES IN NAPA AND SONOMA HAD RESIDENT CHEFS. TODAY 
THE NUMBER HAS TRIPLED. THESE ARE RISING STARS. 
The bounty of Sonoma and the diversity of its products are limitless. We pride 
ourselves on being able to achieve the epitome of the art of living. 
 -- JOY STERLING, 
Iron Horse Vineyards 
A black stretch limo zooms past plush vineyards, then turns up a winding road 
toward a replica of a French chateau: Jordan Winery. The passengers are heading 
to dinner. 
Airport limousines carrying wine trade pilgrims -- wine buyers, distributors, 
visiting winemakers from around the world -- are commonplace in the Napa and 
Sonoma Valleys. So too, these days, is the growing number of winery chefs. 
Barbara Bowman, Jordan's hospitality director and vineyard host, recalls that 
as recently as three years ago only six wineries had resident chefs. Today the 
number has probably tripled. 
"It makes business sense," says Bowman. "The table is the best environment to 
appreciate wine, whether you do it at home for your own enjoyment or at a 
winery for business." 
Beringer Vineyards was among the first large wineries to see the business 
sense. It started a professional chef's program in 1979 (Robert Mondavi Winery 
had installed a culinary program in 1976) which later showcased nationally and 
internationally renowned chefs. Beringer public relations director Antonia 
Allegra points out that as wineries merge with large corporations (Sterling 
Vineyards and Domaine Mumm have joined Seagram's, for instance; Inglenook, 
Beaulieu and Christian Brothers have been purchased by Heublein), the job of 
entertaining winery guests has become more of a business than a home 
entertainment event. 
Dolores Cakebread still performs the cooking duties at Cakebread Cellars, with 
the help of professionals, but she is an exception. Today the wife of the owner 
is less likely to play cook than co-host. "Most see their role as a business 
partners rather than cooks," says Allegra. When it comes to cooking, wineries 
will look around for a chef to match their style. 
Iron Horse Vineyards snapped up Mark Malicki right after he sold Truffles, a 
trend-setting restaurant in Sonoma County. His creativity, Culinary Institute 
of America (CIA) training and experience at New York's River Cafe where what 
owners Barry and Audrey Sterling were looking for. They like to entertain 
artists and writers as well as people in the wine trade. 
For a dinner honoring architect Frank Gehry, he created an entree which was a 
culinary interpretation of the artist's sculpture. When Barry Sterling wanted 
something "thoroughly American" after an austere trip to China, Malicki 
answered the request by drawing a straight line from Nanking to the United 
States, landing in Savannah. It was a regional Savannah menu he served. 
Malicki is an advocate of healthful, low-cholesterol essences, or "infusions," 
as they are sometimes called. His essences are derived from olive oil produced 
on the property for private use, flavored with herbs, seeds and vegetables. 
"The oil-based essences are a great substitute for cream and butter and they 
are very versatile," says Malicki. 
He uses the essences to baste meat, poultry, fish, shrimp or other shellfish, 
salads and vegetables. Fruit essences made with peanut or almond paste and 
fruit juices are used as sauces for desserts. 
The Iron Horse gardens, Jeffersonian in scope and character, are a source for 
Malicki's inspiration. In sawed-off wine barrels perched along the roadside 
leading to the farmhouse grow 32 different species of tomatoes, hybrid 
lettuces, squashes, artichokes, sun dried tomatoes, fava beans and leeks, as 
well as countless herbs. 
The Sterlings, Malicki and co-owner Forrest Tancer function as a team of wine 
and food tasters. They have discovered that eggs, especially omelets, go well 
with sparkling wines. "Avocado, as in guacamole, is also terrific with 
sparkling wine," says marketing director Joy Sterling, who adds that coconut 
cream with sparkling wine is another knockout combo. 
Other successes with sparkling wine are oily fish, ginger, shellfish and 
chicken. Thumbs down foods? Fruit, cheese and chocolate. 
Jordan Vineyard and Winery, founded in 1972, not only looks like a traditional 
French chateau but is unmistakably organized like one. The 32-seat oak dining 
table is laid with French royal blue china and decorated with masses of 
magnificent pastel hybrid roses grown on the property. (Roses are traditionally 
planted along fences of vineyards to color-code wine grapes; red for red wines, 
yellow and white for white wines). 
Guests of the winery sit down to a meal cooked by Brooklyn-born, French-trained 
John Caputo, and his assistant, Jean Reynolds, who also apprenticed in top 
restaurants in France. A typical lunch menu might include seafood salad with 
couscous and mint, served with a smooth 1987 Jordan Chardonnay. Grilled chicken 
served on a bed of corn and asparagus would be accompanied by a 1986 Cabernet 
Sauvignon. 
Jordan's guidelines to wine and food pairing emphasize the simple idea of 
harmony between the food eaten and the wines served. The soft, rich elegant 
Jordan wines are meant to complement rather than overpower the food. "Our 
philosophy of matching food and wine is one of creating a partnership of 
flavors between the two," says Caputo. 
Some general rules followed at Jordan include serving "white wine before red, 
young before old, lesser before greater, and dry before sweet." However, Caputo 
warns against over-analyzing food and wine. 
"It takes the romance out of it. We're not scientists, we're cooks and chefs. 
The part we enjoy is the unscientific aspect." 
Gary Danko is the resident chef at Chateau Souverain and executive chef of its 
restaurant. Like several other wine country chefs, he is a protege of author 
and teacher Madeleine Kamman. (See story on Madeleine Kamman, p. 21.) He would 
pair smooth-textured avocado with Chardonnay, oysters with acidic Sauvignon 
Blanc. "It has the same effect you find as when you team port with Stilton," he 
said. 
He has found that Sauvignon Blanc goes well with smoked fish and Fume Blanc 
with roasted peppers. Veal is particularly suited to white wine, and red wines 
become flavorful when teamed with roasted red meats, bacon and even red beets. 
Cottage industries that started with the hippies of the early '70s have helped 
Sonoma come into its own as an important food center, says Danko. "There is a 
thriving oyster industry,and Sonoma has become the poultry capital. The county 
also produces some of the best goat cheese and lamb in the country. 
"People are just beginning to appreciate the land and what it offers. The 
county has the best of everything. Chardonnays in Sonoma are some of the finest 
and the Pinot Noir resembles those of Provence and Normandy." 
With such offerings a chef's scope is unlimited. "We use what we feel will 
balance food with wine," says Danko. "Much of what we do is dictated by the 
land. It's like letting the environment take over the body." 
Health concerns in cooking have also influenced Danko's direction in cooking. 
"We take the fat off everything now," he says. They have also led him to create 
meat essences for flavoring sauces by cooking down beef, veal and lamb, game 
birds without fat. He uses a less fatty and less heavy demiglace, originally 
described by Escoffier and resurrected by Madeleine Kamman. 
CIA graduate Stephen Benson, who perfected his skills at La Costa Hotel and Spa 
in Carlsbad, Mille Fleurs in Rancho Santa Fe and other Napa Valley restaurants, 
prepares meals for Cain Cellars owners Joyce and Jerry Cain and also for winery 
events and private parties. 
The California native brings much of his German heritage into his cooking: 
braised red cabbage, light sauces and reductions. Wine from the 552-acre Cain 
property provides the inspiration when Benson cooks. 
Sauvignon Blanc, for instance, suggests sipping with appetizers. Chardonnays 
are paired with first course dishes such as crab cakes, buttery seafood dishes 
and creamy sauces. Meat or poultry entrees might call for red wine, especially 
when fruit, such as black currants, and pepper are used in the meat sauce. 
"Pepper brings out wine wonderfully," Benson says. 
Benson enjoys using ingredients from local farmers, such as Peter Forni and 
Lynn Brown, who operate a small farm in Napa and specialize in 40 varieties of 
hybrid lettuces supplying many local chefs. Much of their produce is also 
air-shipped to top restaurants around the country. 
So dedicated are some chefs to the art of food and wine pairing, they have 
developed their own principles. Beringer's Patricia Windisch has made a 
scientific study of the art of "pairing" and concluded that acid in food should 
be kept just below the acid level in the wine. 
"When using a Chardonnay that seems acidic and a chicken or seafood dish is 
being served," she wrote in her research paper, "Secrets of a Winery Chef," 
"add an acid to the sauce in the form of lemon, lime, balsamic vinegar or 
reduced wine. That touch of acid in the dish will soften the acidic quality of 
the wine; conversely, when the wine seems low in acid, a creamy sauce that is 
high in lactose (sugar) and more alkaline in character will help raise the 
acidic perception of the wine." 
Conversely, in a meal created for a designer's show house luncheon Windisch 
paired macerated melon and berries with Late Harvest Johannisberg riesling, a 
rather sweet and fruity wine. 
Napa's century-old Inglenook Vineyard, tucked in a "nook" of the Rutherford 
Hills, first installed a resident chef in 1980. After a competition involving 
more than 60 candidates, the job went to Jamie Morningstar, a CCA graduate and, 
by coincidence, a great-granddaughter of Gustave Niebaum, Inglenook's 19th 
century founder. She prepares special meals for guests of the winery, holds 
classes in matching of food and wine, and travels widely to showcase the 
Hueblein-owned Inglenook estate bottled wines (not to be confused with 
Inglenook jug wines). 
"I have found," she says, "that matching acidic wine with acidic foods tends to 
have a neutralizing effect. A Sauvignon Blanc, for instance, which is acidic, 
plays well with bold flavors of salsas and other fiery foods. Chardonnays, 
which are less acidic, find harmony when paired with pastas and rich, creamy 
sauces." 
For a dish of chicken topped with a herb butter, Morningstar selected 1985 
Cabernet Sauvignon from the Inglenook-Napa Valley. With strawberries macerated 
in liqueur she served 1986 Late Harvest Gewurztraminer, to match the sweetness 
of the strawberries and liqueur at harmonious levels with the wine. 
Anita Velardi, a graduate of the California Culinary Academy (CCA) in San 
Francisco, was resident chef for the officers on a Sagafjord-Cunard Lines 
Alaska cruise before joining Gloria Ferrer Champagne Caves four years ago. In 
keeping with Gloria Ferrer's Spanish origins (the parent company is Freixenet, 
a leading producer of methode champenoise sparkling wine in Spain), Velardi 
serves tapas on the winery patios each Sunday. She also prepares meals for 
visitors in the wine trade. The winery is also open to privately catered events 
and weddings. 
The idea of staff winery chefs is becoming so fashionable that neighbors hardly 
can keep up with growing numbers. Few wine country residents, for instance, 
could tell you that the small (20,000 case) Frog's Leap Winery now boasts a 
resident chef. True, Bev Salinger also handles office duties, but the CCA 
graduate is still called upon several times a week to entertain private guests 
of the owners, Larry Turley and John and Julie Williams. 
Frog's Leap sits back from the road in rustic surroundings that suggest the 
romantic countrified rompings of a modern Marie Antoinette, undistinguished but 
for the bright green mail box that identifies the winery to 
"by-appointment-only visitors." A babbling brook behind the main house shimmers 
in the midday sun streaming through lacy oaks. 
The air is filled by the aroma of huge Washington State oysters barbecuing on 
the grill. The oysters, purchased at Johnson's Oyster Farm at Point Reyes in 
nearby Marin County were specifically selected to complement the 1986 Sauvignon 
Blanc being served. 
Salinger, who worked for 10 years at Domaine Chandon before joining Frog's 
Leap, believes that some portion of the wine appearing in the food should be 
the one served with the food. A Cabernet Sauvignon used in a sauce for lamb 
would also appear on the table as the wine of choice. A strawberry coulis 
served with chocolate might contain a touch of Zinfandel, which also 
complements chocolate desserts. 
Here are some of the recipes and menus with wine suggestions derived from the 
Napa-Sonoma chefs. 
GRILLED QUAIL ON IRON HORSE GRAPE CUTTINGS WITH TAMARIND GLAZE 
(Mark Malicki, Iron Horse) 
4 (12- to 16)-inch vine cuttings, about 1/4-inch in diameter or long metal 
skewers 
4 (6-inch) lengths butcher twine 
4 quail 
3 tablespoons olive oil 
Salt, pepper 
Soak branches in water 1 hour. Remove from water, then insert branch through 
cavity of quail lengthwise so quail is centered on branch. Tie legs to branch 
with twine. Trim excess twine. Brush with olive oil. Season to taste with salt 
and pepper. 
Cook on grill over over medium coals or heat, about 15 minutes, turning 
frequently. Baste with Tamarind Glaze during last 5 minutes. Makes 4 servings. 
Tamarind Glaze 
3 tablespoons sugar 
3 tablespoons fish sauce 
6 tablespoons water 
3 tablespoons tamarind juice 
3 tablespoons lime juice 
1 tablespoon minced garlic 
1 tablespoon minced shallot 
1 tablespoon minced ginger root 
1 teaspoon olive oil 
Combine sugar and fish sauce in saucepan and bring to boil. Add water, tamarind 
juice and lime juice. Reduce by 1/3. Saute garlic, shallot and ginger root in 
olive oil until golden. Add to sauce. Makes about 3/4 cup. 
Note: Tamarind juice is available at Mexican or health food stores. 
Chef's Wine Note: Serve with Iron Horse Pinot Noir. 
ARUGULA OIL 
(Mark Malicki, Iron Horse) 
1/4 pound arugula 
1 cup olive oil 
1 tablespoon salt 
Blanch arugula in boiling salted water 30 seconds. Quickly submerge in ice 
water to prevent further cooking or color change. Remove from water and pat 
dry. Squeeze out excess moisture. 
Using mortar and pestle or food processor, turn into fine paste or to 
consistency of prepared mustard. Mix with oil and salt in glass jar and let 
rest 24 hours. Ladle off top without stirring up sediment in bottom of jar. 
Store in cool, dry place 2 or more days to meld flavors. Makes 1 1/2 cups. 
Note: Use oil to brush over pizzas, breads, rolls, foccaccia, or mix oil with 
mashed anchovies and minced Nicoise olives to add to stews or casserole dishes. 
Chef's Wine Note: Serve with Iron Horse 1986 Cabernet Sauvignon or other good 
quality Cabernet. 
CHILE OIL 
(Mark Malicki, Iron Horse) 
1/4 pound dried mild chile peppers 
Warm water 
1 cup peanut or canola oil 
Grind peppers into fine powder using mortar and pestle or food processor. Add 
warm water, teaspoonful at time, until paste is consistency of prepared 
mustard. Add oil. Let stand 24 hours. 
Ladle off top without stirring up sediment in bottom of jar. Store in cool, dry 
place 2 or more days while flavors meld. Makes about 1 1/2 cups. 
Note: Serve with Southwestern or Southeast Asian recipes. Drizzle lightly over 
cold, cut tropical fruit. 
Chef's Wine Note: Serve with Iron Horse 1986 Brut. 
FIVE SPICE OIL 
(Mark Malicki, Iron Horse) 
1/2 cup ground five-spice powder 
1 cup olive oil 
Stir five-spice powder into olive oil until blended. Let stand 24 hours. Store 
in cool, dry place 2 or more days while flavors meld. Makes about 1 cup. 
Note: Drizzle over poached duck breasts and sprinkle with grated grapefruit 
zest. The oil can used as basting sauce for roasted meats. 
Chef's Wine Note: Serve with Iron Horse 1989 Fume Blanc. 
SAUSAGES WITH SWEET AND SOUR FRUITS 
(Anita Velardi, Gloria 
Ferrer) 
1 1/2 cups sugar 
1 cup red wine vinegar 
1 stick cinnamon 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
4 cloves 
1/2 lemon, thinly sliced 
1/2 teaspoon grated orange zest 
1 pound dried figs 
1 pound dried apricots 
1 1/2 pounds Italian mild sausage 
1 tablespoon olive oil 
2 tablespoons Gloria Ferrer Brut or other sparkling wine 
Combine sugar, vinegar, cinnamon stick and powder, cloves, lemon slices and 
orange zest in saucepan. Bring to boil, reduce heat and simmer 5 minutes. Add 
figs and apricots. Simmer 10 minutes. Cool fruit in syrup. Set aside 2 hours. 
Cook sausages in oil and sparkling wine until wine evaporates and sausages are 
cooked. Remove sausages from pan and cool on platter. When cool, slice sausages 
into 1/4-inch to 1/2- inch slices and add to sweet and sour syrup. Let stand 12 
hours. 
To serve, drain fruit and sausages from juice. Spread 1 piece of sausage and 1 
piece of fruit on wood pick and serve as appetizer. Makes 3 or 4 dozen kebabs. 
INGLENOOK LUNCH FOR FOUR 
Scallop salad marinated in lime and dill 
1988 Gravion (Semillon and 
Sauvignon Blanc blend) 
Chicken With Rosemary-Green 
Olive Butter 
1985 Inglenook-Napa Valley 
Cabernet Sauvignon 
Roasted new potatoes tossed 
with caramelized onions 
Broccoli with pine nuts 
Strawberries macerated in Grand Marnier and Frangelico 
1986 Inglenook-Napa Valley Late Harvest Gewurztraminer 
CHICKEN WITH ROSEMARY-OLIVE BUTTER 
(Jamie Morningstar, 
Inglenook-Napa Valley) 
4 large boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
1/4 cup olive oil 
1/4 cup chopped fresh rosemary 
Freshly cracked black pepper 
Rosemary-Green Olive Butter Rosettes 
Rosemary sprigs 
Place chicken breast halves in shallow glass pan and sprinkle with olive oil, 
rosemary and season to taste with pepper. Let stand in refrigerator at least 30 
minutes. 
When ready to cook, shake off excess oil and grill over medium coals or 
mesquite and rosemary branches which have been soaked in water, until chicken 
is done on both sides, basting with marinade. Place 1 Rosemary-Green Olive 
Butter Rosette over each hot chicken breast half. Garnish each breast with 1 
rosemary sprig. Makes 4 servings. 
Rosemary-Green Olive Butter Rosettes 
1 1/2 cups unsalted butter 
1/4 cup chopped green olives 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary or 1 teaspoon dried rosemary 
1 clove garlic, minced 
Salt 
Freshly cracked black pepper 
Place butter, olives, rosemary and garlic in blender and blend until smooth. 
Season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Using pastry bag and rose tube, pipe rosettes 1 1/2-inch in diameter onto wax 
paper-lined baking sheet. Chill until firm. Bring to room temperature before 
using. Makes 6 rosettes. 
CAIN CELLARS LUNCH 
Crab cakes with corn relish and Cajun remoulade sauce 
Cain Cellars Chardonnay 
Morels stuffed with veal mousse and blue cheese 
Noisettes of venison or beef with pepper and Cassis sauce 
1986 Cain 5 or Cabernet Sauvignon 
Valley Greens with Honey-Lemon 
Dressing 
Combination cheese and fruit 
1986 Cain 5 
HONEY-LEMON DRESSING 
(Steve Benson, Cain 
Cellars) 
1 shallot, chopped fine 
2 to 3 tablespoons honey 
Juice of 2 medium lemons 
1 tablespoon olive oil 
Freshly ground black pepper 
Salt 
Combine shallot, honey, lemon juice, olive oil and season to taste with pepper 
and salt. Blend well. If necessary add more lemon or honey until desired 
sweet-sour flavor is obtained. Makes about 2/3 cup. 
Note: Toss greens with dressing until well coated just before serving. Garnish 
with toasted nuts, tomato wedges or cucumber slices, if desired. Makes 4 
servings. 
CRUSH PICNIC AT FROG'S LEAP 
Washington State oysters 
East Meets Oysters Salsa 
Baby new potatoes with chives and pancetta 
Fresh asparagus with Roquefort vinaigrette 
Caramel Nut Torte 
Frog's Leap Zinfandel 
EAST MEETS OYSTERS SALSA 
(Bev Salinger, Frog's Leap) 
1/4 cup fresh peeled, shredded ginger root 
3 sprigs green onions, finely chopped 
1 cup rice wine vinegar 
Dash sesame oil 
Squeeze of lemon juice 
Salt, pepper 
Combine ginger, onions, vinegar, oil, lemon juice and season to taste with salt 
and pepper. Let stand 10 minutes before using. Makes about 1 1/4 cups. 
Note: Use as sauce for barbecued oyster or other shellfish. 
CARAMEL NUT TORTE 
1 cup sliced natural almonds 
1/4 cup sugar 
2 tablespoons butter, softened 
1 egg white 
1 tablespoon flour 
Caramel Nut Filling 
Crust Dough 
Pastry strips 
In food processor or blender blend almonds and sugar until pulverized. Add 
butter and egg white and blend well. Remove from blender and stir in flour by 
hand. Mixture should be creamy paste. Set aside. 
Reserving 1/4 of Crust Dough for lattice strips, roll out remaining dough to 
10-inch circle and fit into 10-inch tart pan with removable sides or 10-inch 
pie plate. (Dough also may be patted into pan). Spread Almond Cream Filing over 
bottom of crust. Bake at 350 degrees 10 minutes. 
Spoon caramel nut mixture into prebaked crust. Lattice top with reserved pastry 
strips from Crust Dough. Bake at 350 degrees 25 to 30 minutes. Cool thoroughly. 
Makes 1 (10-inch) tart. 
Crust Dough 
7 ounces butter, softened 
1/2 cup sugar 
1 egg 
1 egg yolk 
1 teaspoon vanilla 
Dash salt 
2 1/4 cups flour 
Cream butter until smooth and light. Add sugar and mix well. Add egg and yolk 
one at time, beating well after each addition. Add vanilla. Mix salt and flour 
together then add to butter mixture, mixing just until flour is well 
distributed. 
Remove from bowl and form into ball. Wrap in plastic wrap and refrigerate until 
firm, about 1 hour. Caramel Nut Filling 
3 cups whole mixed nuts (walnuts, almonds, hazelnuts, pecans, cashews or 
pistachios) 
1 1/4 cups sugar 
1 cup whipping cream 
Lightly toast nuts at 400 degrees being careful to prevent scorching. Cool, 
then rub between hands to remove any loose skins. 
Place 1/4 cup sugar in medium heavy saucepan over medium high heat. With wooden 
spoon stir sugar until sugar liquefies and begins to caramelize. Add remaining 
sugar, 1/4 cup at time, stirring after each addition, until mixture liquefies 
again. Remove pan from heat and slowly pour cream into caramelized sugar. 
Return to low heat and stir until smooth. Add nuts to caramel and stir to mix 
well. 
CILANTRO CHUTNEY 
(Bev Salinger, Frog's Leap) 
1 cup cilantro 
4 green onions, roughly chopped 
1 tablespoon lemon juice 
2 small serrano or jalapeno chiles 
1/4 teaspoon turmeric 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/4 teaspoon ground cloves 
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin 
Salt, pepper 
Process cilantro, onions, lemon juice, chiles, turmeric, cinnamon, cloves, 
cumin and salt and pepper to taste in food processor or blender until smooth 
paste is formed. If necessary add lemon juice and water for desired 
consistency. Makes about 1 1/3 cups. 
LOW-FAT DESIGNER'S SHOW MENU 
Orange, jicama and endive salad 
1989 White Zinfandel 
Mandarin Grilled Quail 
1988 Gewurztraminer 
1988 Napa Valley Chardonnay 
Gingered snow peas and water chestnuts 
Melons and berries macerated in Late Harvest Johannisberg Riesling 
1986 Late Harvest Johannisberg Riesling 
MANDARIN GRILLED QUAIL 
(Patricia Windisch, 
Beringer Vineyards) 
3/4 cup low-salt soy sauce 
1/4 cup water 
1/4 cup hoisin sauce 
2 tablespoons ground peanuts or peanut butter 
3 tablespoons dark brown sugar 
1 1/2 tablespoons rice wine vinegar 
2 cloves garlic, minced 
1 inch piece ginger root, peeled and minced 
1 shallots, minced 
3 green onions, finely chopped 
1 1/2 teaspoons hot sesame oil 
12 quail, backbone and rib cage removed and butterflied 
Mix soy sauce, water, hoisin, peanuts, brown sugar, vinegar, garlic, ginger, 
shallots, green onions and sesame oil. Stir until sugar dissolves. 
Place quail in non-metallic shallow dish. Cover with marinade. Turn to coat 
well on both sides. Marinate several hours or overnight in refrigerator. Remove 
quail from marinade and pat dry. Grill over hot coals about 2 minutes on each 
side until meat is no longer pink. Makes 6 or 12 servings. 
LUNCH AT JORDAN WINERY 
Seafood Salad With Couscous and Mint 
1987 Jordan Chardonnay 
Grilled chicken with orange cumin sauce on bed of corn and asparagus 
1986 Jordan Cabernet Sauvignon 
Sorbets of guava, blood orange and rosemary honey with Fraises des Bois in 
sparkling wine soup 
Coffee 
SEAFOOD SALAD WITH COUSCOUS AND MINT 
(John Caputo, Jordan Winery) 
1/4 pound rock shrimp 
1 pound crayfish 
2 quarts court bouillon or chicken broth 
Extra virgin olive oil 
2 small cloves garlic, minced 
Salt 
1/2 carrot, peeled and finely diced 
1 stalk celery, finely diced 
1/2 zucchini, finely diced 
1 artichoke 
Lemon juice 
1 (12-ounce) package instant couscous 
1/2 small red onion, finely diced 
2 to 3 tablespoons finely chopped mint 
Crushed black peppercorns 
1/4 pound calamari, cut in circles 
Cayenne 
1 cup flour 
2 cups peanut oil 
2 to 3 tablespoons finely chopped chives 
Cook rock shrimp and crayfish separately in court bouillon until done, about 2 
to 3 minutes. Chill them immediately in ice cold water. Drain and remove 
shells. Marinate in olive oil and garlic. Season to taste with salt. 
Cook carrot, celery and zucchini in boiling salted water few minutes. Rinse in 
cold water and pat dry. Set aside. 
Cook whole artichoke in boiling salted water with small amount lemon juice 
added. Rinse in cold water. Remove artichoke leaves and thistle. Finely dice 
artichoke heart. Set aside. 
Steam couscous according to package directions. Rub couscous between palms of 
hands to separate grains. Cool. Season to taste with salt. Add cooked 
vegetables, artichoke, red onion. Sprinkle with olive oil and lemon juice to 
taste. Marinate overnight in refrigerator. 
Just before serving add chopped mint and crushed peppercorns to couscous. 
Arrange couscous in center of plate and place shrimp on top. Fan crayfish tails 
around shrimp. 
Add salt and small amount of cayenne pepper to flour. Toss calamari circles and 
heads in mixture. Shake off excess flour and fry in hot peanut oil heated to 
425 degrees about 1 minute or until lightly browned. Place hot calamari around 
plate. Sprinkle chives and small amount of lemon juice and olive oil 
vinaigrette over calamari. 
CHEF JOSEPH COSTANZO'S BERINGER LUNCH 
Lobster and Corn Chowder 
1988 Meridian Santa Barbara 
Chardonnay 
Grilled rack of lamb with smoked garlic Cabernet essence 
Seasonal vegetables 
Napa Valley greens with assorted cheeses 
1985 Beringer Private Reserve 
Cabernet Sauvignon 
1985 Beringer Private Reserve 
Cabernet Sauvignon 
Macerated fruit with mascarpone cream 
1983 Nightingale Botrytised Knights Valley Semillon 
LOBSTER AND CORN CHOWDER 
(Joseph Costanzo, Beringer Vineyards) 
3 lobsters 
2 tablespoons olive oil 
2 tablespoons Cognac 
2 cups clam juice 
1 cup chicken stock 
1 leek (white part only), chopped 
1 onion, chopped 
1 carrot, chopped 
1 teaspoon bouquet garni 
1 1/2 pounds fava beans 
2 quarts rich fish stock 
6 ears corn, blanched and cut off the cob 
3 potatoes, cooked, peeled and diced 
2 cups whipping cream 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil 
Blanch lobsters 2 minutes in boiling, salted water. Plunge into ice water 
immediately to prevent further cooking. Remove and cool, then remove meat from 
tail and claws. Reserve bodies (minus poison sacks and shells). Cut tail and 
claw meat into bite-size pieces. 
In saucepan, saute shells in olive oil. Add Cognac, clam juice and chicken 
stock. Add chopped leek, onion, carrot, bouquet garni. Simmer 45 minutes and 
strain. Blanch fava beans and plunge into ice water to prevent further cooking. 
Peel down to green portion of bean. Heat fish stock until reduced by half. Add 
to lobster broth. Add corn, potatoes, fava beans and whipping cream. Saute 
reserved lobster meat and place in bottom of tureen. Ladle hot soup over 
lobster and serve. Garnish with tarragon and basil. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
CHATEAU SOUVERAIN DINNER 
Pan steamed salmon medallion with spring vegetables 
1988 Private Reserve Chardonnay 
Roast Lamb Loin With Pine Nut and Basil Crust 
Fennel Compote 
1987 Cabernet, Alexander Valley 
Savory salad of pears, walnuts and Parmigiano-Reggiano 
1987 Merlot 
Seasonal fruit in pastry shell with pistachio ice cream 
ROAST LAMB LOIN WITH PINE NUT AND BASIL CRUST 
(Gary Danko, Chateau Souverain) 
2 (8 or 9-inch) long loin of lamb 
Basil leaves 
1/4 cup Dijon mustard 
4 cloves garlic, minced 
1/4 cup chopped parsley 
3/4 cup chopped pine nuts 
Salt, pepper 
Cabernet Sauce 
Fennel Compote 
Have loins boned and remove all fat and connective tissue. Chop 24 basil leaves 
and combine with mustard. Rub over loins. Combine garlic, parsley and pine nuts 
and sprinkle over loins to form crust. Refrigerate. 
Place coated loins on rack in roasting pan. Roast at 400 degrees 20 to 25 
minutes or until internal temperature reaches 140 degrees. Remove to cutting 
board and season to taste with salt and pepper. Let stand 5 to 10 minutes 
before slicing. 
Arrange slices on platter and spoon Cabernet Sauce over meat. Chop 9 basil 
leaves and sprinkle over dish. Serve with Fennel Compote. Makes 6 to 8 
servings. 
Cabernet Sauce 
1/4 cup butter 
1/4 cup minced shallots 
2 cloves garlic, minced 
1/4 cup Cabernet Sauvignon 
2 to 3 cups veal or other meat stock 
1 teaspoon fresh or dried thyme 
1 bay leaf 
Salt, pepper 
Melt butter in skillet. Add shallots and garlic and saute until translucent. 
Add wine and reduce to glaze. Add veal stock, thyme and bay leaf. Simmer until 
reduced to 1 cup. Strain. Season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Fennel Compote 
4 (8-ounce) bulbs fennel 
1/4 cup butter or olive oil 
1/2 teaspoon ground fennel seeds 
1/2 teaspoon ground green peppercorns 
1/2 teaspoon ground thyme 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil 
1 tablespoon chopped parsley 
1 anchovy, optional 
Salt 
6 tablespoons whipping cream 
Slice fennel very thin. Melt butter in skillet and add fennel. Cook until 
tender and moisture is absorbed. Add ground fennel seeds, peppercorns, thyme, 
basil, parsley, anchovy and season to taste with salt. Add cream and cook until 
cream coats fennel. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
