FDA APPROVES SALES OF AIDS PNEUMONIA DRUG 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Thursday approved prescription sales 
of aerosol pentamidine, a medication to prevent Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, 
the most common life-threatening infection seen in AIDS patients. 
The medication is already widely used by AIDS patients under a expanded 
distribution scheme announced by the FDA in February, and final marketing 
approval had been expected. 
But the federal action ensures that almost all health insurers will now cover 
the expensive monthly treatments. Previously, many insurers, including the 
federal Medicare program, had refused to do so. 
Dr. Louis W. Sullivan, U.S. Health and Human Services secretary, hailed the 
approval as a key step that may help "an estimated 100,000 or more individuals" 
who are at risk of developing the pneumonia. 
"It should improve the quality of life for those at highest risk from this 
infection," he said in a prepared statement. 
News of the FDA action was greeted with elation at San Francisco General 
Hospital, where much of the key data leading to aerosol pentamidine's approval 
was compiled. 
"Super," said Dr. Paul A. Volberding, director of the hospital's division of 
AIDS activities. 
Volberding said the announcement "shows that advances are being made" against 
AIDS and that the FDA "is listening to the pressure of the epidemic and the 
calls from the (patient) community for a more rapid response." 
Dr. Fred R. Sattler, coordinator of the interdisciplinary AIDS Clinic at 
County-USC Medical Center in Los Angeles, said aerosol pentamidine "was the 
best studied form of pneumocystis prophylaxis that we have right now." 
Sattler said effective use of aerosol pentamidine and other medications, such 
as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, may "reduce the incidence of pneumocystis 
five- to 10-fold." But he cautioned that aerosol pentamidine was "far from 
perfect" and would need to be improved upon. 
The medications work by preventing the pneumocystis germ from multiplying in 
the lungs and creating a serious infection. 
Aerosol pentamidine is manufactured by LyphoMed Inc. of Rosemont, Ill. 
According to the FDA, the drug is recommended for AIDS patients who have had at 
least one episode of pneumocystis pneumonia, as well as individuals who have 
never had pneumocystis but are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus 
and have T-4 lymphocyte counts of 200 per cubic millimeter or less. 
The drug is inhaled into the lungs as an aerosol spray. The FDA said it should 
be administered once every four weeks, using an inexpensive inhalation device 
known as the Respirgard II nebulizer, which is manufactured by Marquest Corp. 
of Englewood, Colo. 
The cost of aerosol pentamidine to pharmacies is $99.45 per 300 milligram dose, 
but the drug's manufacturer estimates that one year of treatment might cost 
patients more than $2,000. 
Primary Goal 
Also on Thursday, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control published 
recommendations for greatly expanded voluntary AIDS antibody testing in the 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. The primary goal of this expanded 
testing is to identify individuals who may benefit from treatments to prevent 
pneumocystis. 
Aerosol pentamidine is the first new drug to be approved based on a clinical 
trial conducted largely by a group of practicing physicians. The group is the 
San Francisco Community Consortium. 
