COMMENTARY; 
HOLLAND, ONE HOPES, QUIT BECAUSE IT WAS TIME FOR A GROWN-UP'S JOB 
Let's hope his health had nothing to do with it. Let's hope Terry Holland 
simply decided to quit coaching college basketball because, at age 47, it was 
time to take a grown-up's job. 
Not that running an athletic department, as Holland will be doing as of next 
May, is any feet-on-the-desk, nine-to-noon snap. And especially at Davidson, 
which has not seemed to know where it was headed since Holland left 15 years 
ago for Virginia. 
Holland and Virginia made an ideal match that proved more successful than 
either surely imagined at the start. The Cavaliers wanted a classy coach who 
would make them consistently competitive in the Atlantic Coast Conference; 
Holland twice took them all the way to the Final Four -- and within a game of 
that grail again last season. 
Holland on the court, during five seasons at Davidson and 15 at Virginia, was 
not as he seemed off it. Away from games, Holland affected the air of a 
personable professor in dignified academia by day. By night, he was in deep 
thought by a fire, drawing on a pipe. 
Tipoffs transformed his personality, from serenity to vein-popping anger. He 
called his dog Dean Smith, because it whined so much, but nobody could pout 
quite like Holland in a huff. 
Holland seemed above the knee-bending swirl that goes with coaxing teen-agers 
to play games for profit. Yet, he was crafty enough to once hire as an 
assistant the coach of a couple of high school hotshots from Kentucky. He was 
lucky enough to have Ralph Sampson born fairly close to the doorstep of 
Virginia's gym. 
The reputation Holland carries around the game is that of not quite getting the 
most from teams with exceptional talent but squeezing more than seems possible 
from teams with ordinary players. On balance, his averaging 20 victories over 
20 seasons at schools that demand serious scholarship is remarkable. 
Last season ran the gamut for Holland. He endured his second intestinal 
operation, which kept him from the team for six games. He came back and took 
the Cavaliers to the final of the NCAA's Mideast Regional. 
The two games in the regional were as satisfying and frustrating as coaching 
gets. In the first, Virginia was smarter, tougher and more patient than an 
Oklahoma team with two all-Americans. In the second, the Cavaliers were 
embarrassed by a Michigan team on a lights-out shooting binge. 
Holland also was close-up witness to a coach whose good fortune was as none 
ever, Michigan's Steve Fisher. Here was Holland, who had paid most of the dues 
possible in an unforgiving profession, who had sacrificed and suffered and 
never quite been fully satisfied, beaten by an assistant with a battlefield 
promotion, whose first six games as a head coach would bring the national 
championship. 
So, yet another coach who has pushed North Carolina's Smith, but not caught 
him, leaves the Atlantic Coast Conference. Holland did scare the league's 
all-time coach a few times, most notably with Sampson in the early 1980s. 
With such as James Worthy, Sam Perkins and Michael Jordan, North Carolina 
usually had the superior team. Because Smith elevated Sampson to such a 
rarefied level -- "his only point of reference will be himself" -- and played 
stallball during the second half of the 1982 ACC title game, Tar Heel success 
at the time seemed greater than it does in retrospect. 
Holland's leaving is the latest coaching change in a league generally stable 
the last several seasons. Bob Staak was replaced by Holland aide Dave Odom at 
Wake Forest. Bob Wade was replaced by Gary Williams at Maryland. Still 
whispered is North Carolina State Coach Jim Valvano beating it to the NBA. 
If leaving had been on Holland's mind for some time, would Odom have gone to 
Wake Forest? Possibly, because a new arena and some fine players were there. 
Before a disastrous experience at Rutgers, assistant Craig Littlepage would 
have been a logical successor to Holland. No longer. 
Under Holland, Virginia has become a job much coveted. Like Smith for nearly 30 
years at North Carolina and Mike Krzyzewski for nearly 10 at Duke, Holland has 
shown that an academically minded school that bends its admissions rules now 
and then -- but not too far -- can succeed in megabucks basketball. 
Davidson slipped, and in a hurry, after Holland left. One of Lefty Driesell's 
early recruits at Davidson, Holland assumed control of the program not long 
after Driesell became coach at Maryland -- and was 92-43 in five years. 
After Holland, Davidson was noted for future-famous coaches (Bobby Knight and 
Larry Brown) declining the job. 
Holland's skills as an administrator of more athletic teams than his own are 
unknown. Still, he brings to his old school and his native state a sense of 
order and promise. Not just any challenge would stop him from chasing Dean. 
