UPDATE / VIETNAMESE REFUGEES; 
NEW CHALLENGE RAISED TO 'BOAT PEOPLE' ACCORD 
The refusal of the United States and Vietnam to agree to the forced 
repatriation of Vietnamese "boat people" has raised a new challenge to the 
decade-old international agreement that has allowed hundreds of thousands of 
Vietnamese to find refuge in the United States, Canada and other Western 
countries, according to refugee officials. 
Britain and six countries of Southeast Asia have warned that unless Washington 
and Hanoi change their minds by Sunday, they will consider themselves free to 
act independently in dealing with the Vietnamese refugee crisis. 
"Everybody's scrambling to find some kind of solution," a Western official who 
works with refugees said. "The fear is that we are going to start seeing boat 
people pushed out to sea in great numbers." 
At stake is a 1979 accord on "first asylum," under which Hong Kong, a British 
colony, agreed along with Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore, Brunei, Malaysia and 
the Philippines to give boat people temporary shelter with the understanding 
that Western nations guaranteed to resettle them later. 
Following a flood of new refugees last year, Western countries and the 
Southeast Asian countries adopted a Comprehensive Plan of Action that provided 
for screening the refugees to weed out so-called economic migrants from genuine 
political refugees. But last year's agreement did not make clear what should be 
done with those who are screened out. 
Britain and the Southeast Asian countries have argued repeatedly that the only 
solution to the problem is to send those who are deemed economic migrants back 
to Vietnam. The United States and Vietnam have opposed this plan. 
The crisis has worsened since last spring, when Malaysia implemented a policy 
of intercepting refugee boats and shoving them off toward Indonesia. Despite 
official denials, refugee officials insist that about 8,500 people have been 
turned away. 
Indonesia has reportedly started offering to repair the boats of refugees 
arriving there and begun giving them fuel and charts for Australia. Earlier in 
June, the Philippine government refused for two weeks to receive 255 Vietnamese 
who had been picked up by U.S. warships. 
Southeast Asian governments have said that if the United States cannot 
countenance forced returns, it should build a holding center on the island of 
Guam. Washington has rejected the proposal. 
Refugee officials say they are concerned that countries such as Thailand and 
Indonesia could begin following the Malaysian example next week if U.S. policy 
is not changed. 
Michael Hanson, refugee coordinator for Hong Kong, which has always granted 
first asylum, said his government would take no new action until after an 
upcoming refugee conference in Geneva. 
