EPA CHEMIST ACCUSES AGENCY OFFICIALS OF COVERING UP DRINKING WATER POLLUTION 
An Environmental Protection Agency chemist alleges that agency officials 
suppressed evidence of dioxin and other poisons at wood-treatment waste sites 
affecting drinking water supplies in the Oroville area and three other rural 
communities. 
The federal agency also softened its regulation of wood preservers in response 
to industry lobbying and political pressure from several members of Congress, 
including Dan Quayle, then an Indiana senator and now vice president, according 
to Cate Jenkins, a chemist at the agency's headquarters who helped draft the 
new industry rules. 
Jenkins has brought those and other charges of criminal violations of 
environmental laws to the attention of several committee leaders in Congress. 
EPA officials denied Jenkins' charges, saying she made them based on inaccurate 
data and that a review by the U.S. inspector general's office cleared the 
agency of criminal misconduct. 
"We're not covering up anything," said Terry Wilson, a spokesman for the EPA 
regional office. "We're being successful at working with a company that, at 
times, has been reluctant. We have made a determination how to clean up the 
site, and I think that's a major accomplishment." 
Details of the allegations were reported in Wednesday editions of the 
Sacramento Bee. 
In investigating drinking water contamination from the Koppers Co. 
wood-preserving plant in Oroville, Jenkins said EPA officials in San Francisco 
played down data supplied by the company showing dangerously high levels of 
pentachlorophenol, or PCP, in one family's well. PCP is an insecticide that is 
used to treat wood products. It contains dioxin as a manufacturing byproduct 
and produces dioxin when burned. 
The Koppers report on samples taken in 1983 from the well used by Norma Prince 
and her family was released in March, 1988, about a year after the EPA received 
it, Jenkins said. John Kemmerer, the EPA official in charge of the Oroville 
investigation, later declared that the data was actually from a culvert in the 
Koppers plant yard, not the Princes' yard. 
Jenkins said Kemmerer changed his story one day after telling her in April, 
1988, that he was "quite definite" about the high level of PCP found in the 
family's well water. She said Kemmerer had told her the data was insignificant. 
William Morris, manager of the Oroville plant, said Kemmerer was right about 
the high PCP levels being incorrectly assigned to the Prince family well. 
EPA spokesman Wilson said Kemmerer told residents at a March, 1988, meeting 
that assigning the high reading to the Prince well was an error. Wilson said 
the EPA staff double-checked the Prince well. 
"We didn't find anything, and so we determined that this must have been a 
glitch," he said. 
The Princes and other nearby residents were receiving bottled drinking water at 
Koppers' expense at the time, but Jenkins said residents still were bathing and 
washing clothes in the PCP-laced water. 
Koppers and the EPA have known since at least 1972 that ground water near and 
below the Koppers plant and Louisiana-Pacific sawmill next door has been 
contaminated with pentachlorophenol. 
The company has been piping clean water to some residents and has proposed 
treating and removing the polluted water and soil. 
