PACBEL FINE TO FUND PROGRAM FOR CONSUMERS 
The California Public Utilities Commission granted 32 nonprofit groups nearly 
$5 million Wednesday under a special consumer program financed by a fine levied 
against Pacific Bell for abusive marketing practices in 1985-86. 
Created at the suggestion of Public Advocates, a San Francisco public-interest 
law firm, the program is intended to help, among others, people with low 
incomes and those who speak little or no English. 
Pacific Bell was fined after the commission determined that the company was 
guilty in many cases of persuading low-income and non-English-speaking 
customers to sign up for special services without making it clear that these 
features were optional and cost extra. The services included speed-dialing and 
call-forwarding. 
As a result of the case, Pacific Bell was forced to make $63 million in refunds 
to 495,000 of its 8.5 million residential customers. In addition, Pacific Bell 
was fined $16.5 million by the PUC. Public Advocates persuaded the PUC to set 
aside that money for consumer education for the groups most hurt by the 
high-pressure marketing practices. 
The money is to be spent over six years, under the administration of the 
California Community Foundation in Los Angeles. The $5 million granted 
Wednesday was the first allocation of the $16.5-million fine. 
"This trust fund will create the best-educated low-income, minority, 
non-English-speaking consumers in the country," predicted Robert Gnaizda, 
founding partner of Public Advocates. The largest single grant went to San 
Francisco-based Consumer Advocates to develop educational materials and work 
with other grantees. California/Nevada Community Action Assn. will get 
$669,000, which will develop training programs for the other participating 
agencies. 
Other groups include the Union of Pan Asian Communities and the Chicano 
Federation of San Diego County, which jointly received $535,000 for programs to 
reach speakers of Spanish, Vietnamese, Hmong, Lao and Khmer. A consortium 
headed by Los Angeles' Korean Youth Center will receive $20,000 to develop a 
telephone referral and information network for Korean, Chinese, Japanese and 
Filipino consumers. 
