EDUCATION SECRETARY CAVAZOS' CRITICISM OF LATINO PARENTS 
Once again, Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos' is making statements that 
Latino parents deserve much of the blame for their children's high dropout rate 
and that they have lost their value for education ("Cavazos Reaffirms Stand in 
Criticism of Latino Parents," Part B, June 5; "Parents' Role Stressed at Latino 
Education Hearing," Part B, June 6). 
How do scholars like Cavazos come to think that Latino culture and its people 
don't value education? Does the scientific data support them? Are there studies 
that would challenge this way of thinking? 
The most recent empirical research on the topic of educational and occupational 
goals reveals that when students of the same social class are compared, Latinos 
have higher educational and occupational aspirations than whites. 
These and other data seem to suggest that Latino parents send, and their 
children come, to school with dreams that they will one day finish college and 
enter a high-status occupation. 
Why haven't these dreams been translated into higher educational and 
occupational attainment? Are we starting from the correct assumption if we 
state that all students attend schools of equal quality? If schools are not 
equal, then should we focus on certain school characteristics and show how they 
affect the achievement of Latino students? 
A focus on schools might allow the researcher to analyze the relative impact of 
segregated, overcrowded, and under-financed schools; school staffing, 
curriculum, and tracking patterns; and teacher expectations and interaction 
patterns. 
The Times' editorial ("Are Latino Parents to Blame?" April 12) stated that, 
"Cavazos' challenge is not just prodding resistant Latino parents, but 
reluctant public officials (like his boss, President Bush) to ante up more 
money for innovative efforts that help the learning process along." If Cavazos 
and others don't take up your challenge and equalize educational opportunities 
and structures, the conclusion is inevitable that they, not Latino parents and 
students, are the ones who do not value education. 
DANIEL G. SOLORZANO 
Assistant Professor in Sociology 
Cal State Bakersfield 
