PATIENCE IS TAXED TO THE LIMIT IN IRS HORROR STORY 
Saundra Williams says she will never forget last Jan. 17, the day a somber IRS 
agent knocked on her front door, questioned her frightened teen-agers about 
their mother's whereabouts and then waited outside in a car for Williams to 
come home from work. 
Williams, a single mother, had run errands after work -- the sort of stuff that 
busy parents are always having to do -- and missed the caller, instead finding 
a curt note telling her to appear before the IRS at 8 a.m. the next day for 
questioning. 
"When I went into the office, they told me I owed thousands of dollars in back 
taxes, plus a 25% penalty for being negligent, and that I was guilty unless I 
could prove I was innocent," Williams said. "Can you imagine that in America?" 
Saundra Faith Williams, mind you, is a well-educated 38-year-old who supports 
two children on her $25,000 salary, drives a Plymouth Reliant and lives a 
law-abiding life in a small apartment in Los Angeles near the Inglewood line. 
But to the IRS, she has been an object of relentless suspicion. 
The IRS visit in January was for her the final straw in a six-year avalanche of 
wrongful accusations, including that she lied about being a head of household 
and her marital status and failed to report income. Since 1983, the IRS has 
ordered her to repay thousands of dollars, threatened to garnish her wages, 
interrogated co-workers about her and called her as late as 10 p.m. with 
questions. Ultimately, the IRS placed a tax lien against her, causing her to be 
denied credit for years, "a humiliation that I just cannot tell you." 
The clincher to this tale is that Williams is utterly innocent. 
The IRS says it has gotten to the bottom of the six-year "misunderstanding." On 
May 9 it issued Williams a letter of apology, formally lifted the federal tax 
lien against her and cleared her of all back taxes it once said she owed. 
"We again apologize for any inconvenience our actions have caused you . . ." 
read the letter. 
Williams estimates she has spent thousands of hours, including one entire 
vacation, going over tax returns, sifting through documents and cooling her 
heels in IRS waiting rooms to prove she has done nothing wrong. 
"Answering letters, replying to questions, returning calls or forms, waiting in 
offices, calling them back again and again -- it's been constant, constant 
stress!" Williams cried to a visitor at her home last week, pounding the 
floral-covered sofa with her fist. 
A respected employee of IBM's international parts distribution center in Los 
Angeles, Williams has lost many days from work, where she processes millions of 
dollars in billings and accounts as a customer service representative. 
According to Shirley Nakagawa, an IRS spokeswoman, the explanation for most of 
Williams' troubles is actually quite simple. 
Problems Traced to Ex-Husband 
The problems appear to stem from Williams' ex-husband, who apparently signed 
her name to a joint 1979 tax return -- unbeknown to her -- after they had 
separated, Nakagawa said. That year, after her husband moved away, Williams and 
her children struggled by on her $10,000 teaching salary, and she filed her 
return as a single head of household. 
But within the IRS, someone concluded that Williams had been naughty. To the 
IRS, it appeared that in 1979 Williams had purposely filed tax returns in both 
the joint category and in the single head of household category, receiving tax 
breaks for both filings. 
For the next six years, none of the modest tax refunds that Williams received 
from the government managed to sail through without setting off alarms, even 
though the IRS contends that each year's return is judged on its own merits, 
not on past problems. 
The IRS concedes that it did not physically examine the 1979 joint return filed 
by Williams' ex-husband until a reporter for The Times began asking questions 
about it this spring. If IRS investigators had read that joint return six years 
ago, they would have noticed that Williams' signature was not her own. And she 
would not have gone through 75 months of what she calls "IRS hell." 
Wrote to President Reagan 
"They had my children thinking I was going to jail," Williams said. "After 
years, I mean years of this, I finally wrote to President Reagan. I even called 
(disc jockey) Rick Dees. When they push you so far, you start thinking in crazy 
ways." 
One day, Williams said, a repossessor showed up to tow away her new car. It had 
been purchased over a weekend, but by Monday the salesman had received a report 
showing a tax lien against her. 
"I begged him in the driveway, I showed him my boxes of IRS letters," Williams 
said. In one of her few victories, she said, the repossessor cursed the IRS and 
drove off. 
The mystery began to unravel after Nakagawa, a public relations specialist for 
the IRS, looked into Williams' case at the request of The Times. 
According to Nakagawa, this is what happened: 
"You are not allowed to have two tax returns, so the information from her 
single return and joint return were put together into one document by the IRS. 
When Saundra began calling us asking about her problems and giving us her own 
Social Security number, we did not show any separate return for her. She didn't 
know it, but it had been filed under her husband's number, because husbands are 
used as the primary number." 
IRS Became More Suspicious 
When Williams was unable to produce a copy of her 1979 tax return, the IRS 
became even more suspicious of her tale that she had properly filed one 
separately from her husband. 
Finally this spring, Nakagawa said, the IRS "found it by locating the joint 
return based on the Social Security number of her husband, which she provided 
us." 
Nakagawa now insists that Williams' days of sparring with the IRS are over. The 
IRS says it is instead looking into Williams' ex-husband's taxes. But Williams, 
who has received other apologies from the IRS regarding the same mess, simply 
does not believe them. 
The IRS wrote her an apology in 1986, flatly stating that no federal tax lien 
existed against her. Williams was given permission to show the letter to 
creditors. But the lien kept cropping up, and the letter did nothing to 
persuade bank credit officers otherwise. 
As if to prove Williams' deep doubts that she is truly free, on May 12 the 
state Franchise Tax Board wrote to her, three days after she was cleared by the 
IRS. 
'Oh Pul-eeeze!' 
Said the state: "Based on information from the IRS," she had been found 
negligent of ducking taxes and owed them $221.75 in taxes and penalties. Not 
surprisingly, they are disputing her 1985 claim that she is the head of a 
household. 
"Oh pul-eeeze!" Williams hollered up at the ceiling of her tidy apartment. 
Nakagawa said Wednesday that Williams should send her various clearance letters 
from the IRS to the state. She said it is not the IRS' responsibility to clear 
up Williams' troubles there. 
In fact, Williams has already showered the state with her IRS clearance 
letters, to no avail. 
Now, as Williams stares at two file boxes and a notebook jammed with her IRS 
correspondence, she says she can't shake a nauseous feeling that the saga will 
never end. She is moving out of state and will remarry this month, and fears 
the IRS will soon follow. 
"It's down to this," she said, now quiet and calm. "I'm not paying them one 
dime. They treated me like somebody's criminal. Let's talk about what they owe 
to me." 
