ERMA BOMBECK: WOMAN'S BEST FRIEND SURELY IS NOT HER CAR 
No matter how close we come to egalitarianism, men will always bring up the 
strained relationship between a woman and her car. The old stereotype of a 
woman putting her hand out of the car window to dry her nails instead of making 
a signal to turn will haunt us to our graves. 
A group of men were talking recently when one told the story about his wife, 
Anna, who duly reported to him that her brakes were "mushy." He drove her car 
around the block and pronounced the brakes to be perfectly normal. Anna still 
was not convinced. She told her friend, Ethel, that her brakes were "mushy," 
and Ethel said she had the same experience with mushy brakes until she put 
high-test ethyl in the gas tank. The men got hernias from laughing. 
I find that story perfectly reasonable. In fact, it all sounds too familiar. I 
had a "ping" in my engine a while back and told my husband about it. He gave me 
that look -- you know the one I mean, like he's standing over a puppy who just 
missed the paper. Then he said, "I'll check it out." 
When he came in, he said: "The ping is not under your hood. It's your seat belt 
flapping against the seat." 
"You weren't listening," I said. "A ping is never in the car. A ping is always 
under the hood! I know a seat belt when I hear one, and it's not a ping. A 
flapping seat belt is a blump." 
"Just drive it around for a while," he said tiredly. 
"Oh sure, and just let the ping turn into a major gekump?" 
"Do I have to remind you," he asked, "what happened when you took the car in 
for a . . . what was it you called the noise in the trunk?" 
"A boompt." 
"Whatever. We paid $102 to find out that a can of creamed corn was banging 
against your spare tire." 
I guess what really ticks me off is the superiority men exude about cars. Don't 
tell me the male species is born knowing about transmissions and brake fluids. 
Anyone who believes a man has an affinity for things mechanical has never 
ridden down a highway in a rental car with a husband who turns on the 
windshield wipers when he has to turn left and releases the hood when he thinks 
he's turning on the lights. 
I'll concede that women may not have the right terminology, but we recognize a 
boompt or a mushy when we hear one. And let's face it, men still come running 
to women when the only way they can get the sticker price off the window is to 
break the glass. 
About the ping under the hood? All I know is it went away right after I had my 
car washed and waxed. 
