BLOCKBUSTER ANEMIA DRUG WINS APPROVAL; 
THOUSAND OAKS FIRM GETS OK ON KIDNEY COMPOUND 
The Food and Drug Administration today approved an anti-anemia drug made by 
Amgen Inc., giving the California firm an edge in the race to market what some 
analysts are calling biotechnology's next blockbuster drug. 
The approval of erythropoietin, or EPO, which would treat anemia linked to 
kidney diseases and other ailments, also should take Amgen out of the red and 
bring it back to profitability, company officials and industry analysts said. 
"Amgen is ready to roll," said Viren Mehta, an analyst at S. G. Warburg. "It 
will probably have a significant number of dialysis centers stocked within a 
number of days." 
Mehta said he expects about a quarter of the nation's kidney dialysis patients 
who depend on transfusions will use the drug. "There will be a dramatic impact 
on the bottom line," he added. 
The FDA said Amgen's EPO will be classified as an orphan drug in a program for 
medicines aimed at rare diseases. It will thus be entitled to special tax 
breaks. EPO is the first Amgen product to be approved by the federal drug 
agency. 
'Will Return to Profitability' 
"We will return to profitability as a result of this action," Amgen Chief 
Executive Gordon Binder told reporters after the FDA announcement. 
Shares in the Thousand Oaks-based firm jumped $1.625 to $41.75 in 
over-the-counter trading as investors agreed the FDA's approval would reverse 
the company's fortunes. 
"This is going to be fabulous," said analyst Stuart Weisbrod at 
Prudential-Bache Securities. He said the drug could lead to an explosion in 
Amgen's sales to as much as $80 million this year, compared with only $2.7 
million in 1988. 
EPO has been described by some analysts as biotechnology's next blockbuster 
drug because it has many potential uses, including the treatment of anemia 
associated with cancer chemotherapy and use of the AIDS drug AZT. 
Researchers say the drug reverses a debilitating form of anemia that is often 
triggered by dependence on an artificial kidney. About 100,000 Americans with 
severe kidney disease, and 300,000 other people around the world, require 
dialysis by an artificial kidney to remain alive. About three-quarters of these 
suffer from anemia and are thought to be candidates for EPO therapy. 
