THE RESIGNATION OF JIM WRIGHT; 
EXCERPTS: I PRAY TO GOD THAT WE WILL RESTORE THE SPIRIT . . . IN THIS HOUSE . . 
. 
Here are excerpts of House Speaker Jim Wright's statement Wednesday: 
For 34 years I have had the great privilege to be a member of this institution, 
the people's House, and I shall forever be grateful for that wondrous 
privilege. . . . 
And I love this institution. 
And I want to assure each of you that under no circumstances, having spent more 
than half of my life here, this House being my home, would I ever knowingly or 
intentionally do or say anything to violate its rules or detract from its 
standards. 
Now all of us are prone to human error. . . . 
Ached to Tell Story 
For over a year, well, just about a year, I have ached to tell my side of the 
story. 
That to which I have to respond keeps changing. 
But today, silence is no longer tolerable; nor for the good of the House is it 
even desirable. 
So without any rancor and without any bitterness or any hard feelings toward 
anybody, I thank you for indulging me as I answer to you and to the American 
people for my honor, my reputation and all the things I've tried to stand for 
all these years. 
The past year, while the committee on standards has had these matters under 
advisement, I have ached for the opportunity to speak. Almost daily I besought 
them to let me come and answer whatever questions they had on their mind. 
Finally, on the 14th of September, they gave me one day in which to do that. 
I gratefully went and spent the whole morning and the whole afternoon answering 
as candidly and freely as possibly I could any questions that anyone would ask 
and I believe when I left everyone was reasonably well satisfied. 
Suffice to say that the five original charges that had been lodged were 
dropped, dismissed. In their place, however, came three additional charges. 
Some said 69. The 69 are merely a matter of multiple counting of the three. . . 
. 
The three questions are these: 
Did my wife Betty's employment, at $18,000 a year for some four years, by a 
small investment corporation which she and I formed with friends of ours, 
George and Marlene Mallick, and the attendant benefits of that employment -- 
use of an apartment when she was in Ft. Worth on company business and the use 
of a company-owned car -- constitute merely a sham and a subterfuge and a gift 
from our friend Mr. Mallick? Was Betty's employment and those things related to 
it a gift? 
You've read in papers the suggestion made by committee counsel that I may have 
received up to $145,000 in gifts from my friend Mr. Mallick. Half of it, 
$72,000, was Betty's income, Betty's salary. The other half involved the use of 
a car and the use of an apartment on a per diem basis. . . . 
First question I should like to, I suppose you might be asking, why was Betty 
working for the corporation? Why did we put her to work at $18,000 a year? 
Wife Did Work 
Betty alone among all of us had the time and the opportunity, and the 
experience and the desire to give effort and energy to exploring and promoting 
investment opportunities. She did indeed perform work, and it paid off for the 
little corporation. . . . 
She advised as to when was a good time to sell, when was a good time to buy and 
the corporation made some money on those regional stocks -- not a lot of money 
by some people's standards. But we made some money. Betty paid for her salary 
several times over. . . . 
I want to include for printing in the record affidavits from several business 
people who know from their personal experience and attest to the work that 
Betty did in this regard. . . . 
And here's the irony. The supreme irony. 
In 1976, when I was elected majority leader, Betty voluntarily left her job as 
a professional staff person on the committee so as to avoid any criticism of 
this institution or of her husband on the ground that we were both on the 
public payroll. . . . 
In addition to her salary as a gift, outside counsel contends in summing up 
$145,000 (inaudible) that Betty had the use of a company car. That is true, she 
did. For the first three years, it was used largely by Mr. and Mrs. Mallick. 
It wasn't Mr. Mallick's car. It was the company car. The company bought and 
paid for it. We owned half of it. The next four years Betty had most of the use 
of it. 
Now I've done what I can to resolve any doubt. . . . I bought and paid for that 
car out of my personal funds. The trustee of my bank trust, at my instruction, 
paid the corporation full book value for the car on the day Betty first started 
driving it on company business, through the whole time she had it in her 
possession, plus interest. The interest amounted to about $9,000. 
What more can I do. Does that make it right? 
Now concerning the apartment, Betty and I . . . didn't think there was anything 
wrong with paying a per diem rate. . . . 
Nevertheless, last year I said to George Mallick, I said, I want to buy the 
apartment, George, I'll pay you for it. I did. I paid the amount suggested and 
appraised by two real estate persons in Ft. Worth, $58,000. Now if anybody 
thinks that's too low a price I'll sell it to you today for $58,000. . . . 
The second alleged violation . . . further assumes that George Mallick, our 
friend and business partner, had a direct interest in influencing legislation, 
which would make it illegal for us to accept gifts from him. 
Now how do they arrive at that suggestion? I've known this man for more than 25 
years. He's been my friend, good, decent, hard-working man of Lebanese 
extraction. 
Never once in all the years that I've known this man has he ever asked me to 
vote for or against any piece of legislation. Not once. . . . 
All people have an interest of some kind in the results of legislation, don't 
they? That's not what we're talking about. We're talking about whether or not 
they have a direct interest in trying to influence the course of legislation. . 
. . 
Well, the people who wrote the rules don't think George Mallick had an interest 
in the legislation. 
David Obey was the chairman of the committee that drafted those rules. He 
asserts clearly, unequivocally, emphatically, unambiguously, both in an 
affidavit that he wrote and the report he wrote for the Washington Post that 
doesn't fit George Mallick's case. . . . Harold Sawyer, former Republican 
member from Michigan, who served on that committee with David Obey, says the 
same thing. . . . 
Sale of a Book 
Now the only other basic question, it's just one that remains, in the statement 
of alleged violations, concerns the sale of a book, a little book now you'll 
recall, "Reflections of a Public Man," which I wrote and which was sold 
sometimes in bulk quantities. . . . 
Now, the contention of the committee as I understand it is that this book 
project to publish that book on which I got $3.25 for every book that sold was 
a kind of a sham and a subterfuge itself and an overall scheme for me to exceed 
and violate the outside earnings limitation of a member of Congress. 
I mean, do you think I'd do something like that? 
Perhaps the book -- $3.25 is what I got out of it, and I didn't get any advance 
-- the purpose of the book was to publish something at a small cost and get 
wide distribution. If monetary gain had been my primary interest, don't you 
think I would have gone to one of the big Madison Avenue publications, the 
houses there that give you a big advance? . . . 
It couldn't have been an overall scheme to avoid outside earning limits because 
the rules are clear. . . . The rules expressly exempt royalty income. . . . 
During that three-year period when the counsel says there are seven instances 
where I made speeches to groups and they bought copies of these books, seven 
groups, seven instances, I made at least 700 speeches, for which I didn't get 
any honorarium. . . . 
All of us, in both political parties, must resolve to bring this period of 
mindless cannibalism to an end. 
There has been enough of it. 
I pray to God that we will do that and restore the spirit that always existed 
in this House. . . . 
Well, I tell you what: I'm going to make you a proposition. Let me give you 
back this job you gave to me as a propitiation for all of this season of bad 
will that has grown up among us; give it back to you. 
I will resign as Speaker of the House effective upon the election of my 
successor and I'll ask that we call a caucus on the Democratic side for next 
Tuesday to choose a successor. 
I don't want to be a party to tearing up the institution. I love it. 
To tell you the truth, this year, it has been very difficult for me to offer 
the kind of moral leadership that the organization needs because every time I 
have tried to talk about the needs of the country, about the needs for 
affordable homes, Jack Kemp's idea or an idea that we are developing here, 
every time I have tried to talk about the need for minimum wage, tried to talk 
about the need for day care centers, embracing ideas on both sides of the 
aisle, the media have not been interested in that. 
They wanted to ask me about petty personal finances. 
You need somebody else. . . . 
We'll have a caucus on Tuesday. And then, I will offer to resign from the House 
sometime before the end of June. . . . 
I am not a bitter man. I am not going to be. I am a lucky man. 
God has given me the privilege of serving in this, the greatest institution on 
Earth, for a great many years, and I am grateful to the people of my district 
in Texas, I am grateful to my colleagues, all of you. 
God bless this institution. God bless the United States. 
