MAYOR URGES USING POTENTIAL ARTS FESTIVAL PROFITS FOR YOUTH PROGRAMS 
Linking two of her pet projects in an optimistic economic scenario, San Diego 
Mayor Maureen O'Connor on Thursday recommended that a potential $1-million 
profit from this fall's Soviet arts festival be used to avoid cutbacks in 
after-school recreation and other youth programs. 
In a two-page memo to her City Council colleagues, O'Connor urged that proceeds 
from the three-week arts festival in San Diego be earmarked for city-funded 
children's programs tentatively scheduled for budget cuts in the fiscal year to 
begin July 1. 
Although the mayor's desire to preserve various youth programs drew a favorable 
response Thursday from several council members, some of them questioned the 
wisdom of depending on still-speculative profits from the arts festival to 
underwrite those key services. 
"I guess my first reaction was, 'What profits?' " City Councilwoman Judy 
McCarty said. "I'd like to have the money in hand before we start making 
promises. And to this point, the thinking has been that we might be lucky to 
not lose money, much less make $1 million on the festival." 
Reservations Cited 
However, mayoral staffers and festival officials, pointing to encouraging 
ticket reservations and projected merchandising revenue, described the $1 
million profit figure as a realistic -- perhaps even conservative -- estimate 
for the Oct. 21-Nov. 11 event. The $6-million cultural affairs festival will 
feature folk art, theater, films, religious icons and more than two dozen of 
the famous bejeweled Faberge Imperial eggs. 
"I believe we can resolve the children's program funding crisis by wedding the 
virtues of art and children to increased tourism and profit (resulting from the 
festival)," O'Connor wrote in the memo. 
Long a staunch advocate of youth programs, the former schoolteacher argued 
that, the city's severe budget constraints notwithstanding, cutbacks in those 
programs would be particularly ill-advised this year, which she declared the 
"Year of the Child" in January's State of the City address. Although O'Connor 
did not mention it in Thursday's memo, such cutbacks also could be politically 
embarrassing. 
"In the 'Year of the Child' we cannot possibly abandon our commitment to the 
after-school recreation program, the summer water safety and portable pool 
program, the bookmobile and other efforts that serve the developmental needs of 
tens of thousands of our children," O'Connor said. 
$577,000 Cut Proposed 
In the proposed $931-million fiscal 1990 budget that he unveiled last month, 
City Manager John Lockwood recommended a $577,000 reduction in after-school 
recreation programs that would eliminate half of the 74 sites and a $205,000 
cut to be achieved by closing eight city-run pools for nine weeks in the fall 
and spring. Under Lockwood's proposal, library hours also would be curtailed in 
several neighborhoods and a city bookmobile would be taken off the streets. 
To find additional money to meet the council's overriding goal of expanding the 
city's police force, Lockwood is expected to outline in another budget memo 
today deeper cuts in youth-oriented programs. 
O'Connor, however, argued vigorously that budget-cutters should look elsewhere 
in their search for scarce dollars to bolster police manpower levels. Those 
"pressing police needs" could be addressed, O'Connor said in the memo, through 
cuts in other unspecified areas, early paybacks on downtown redevelopment 
debts, and state and federal grants. 
Cutbacks in the youth programs could even have the ironically unfortunate 
consequence of increasing crime problems, O'Connor said, noting that the 
programs "provide children with alternatives to the dead end of gang 
membership." 
Endorsed Objective 
Council members interviewed Thursday strongly endorsed O'Connor's objective of 
protecting the youth programs from severe budget cuts. However, while sharing 
the mayor's goal, they questioned her proposed method of accomplishing it -- in 
the process, showing that that they remain skeptical about O'Connor's rosy 
forecast for the festival. 
"Those kids' programs would be one of the things at the top of my list to 
continue," Councilman Ron Roberts said. "My major concern is that there's no 
guarantee this profit from the festival is going to materialize. I'd rather 
find a guaranteed source of funding to keep these programs alive." 
McCarty added: "If there are $1 million in profits, we'll be absolutely 
thrilled, and many programs will be standing in line to spend that money. But 
that still seems optimistic to me. I don't want to take the chance. What 
happens if there are no profits?" 
Confident of Profit 
O'Connor's aides and festival executives, however, insist that they are 
increasingly confident that the festival -- financed in part with $3 million in 
public funds allocated by the council -- will finish in the black. 
Bruce Herring, the festival's executive director, said Thursday that the 
projected $1-million profit is based on revenue from advance ticket sales, 
lower-than-expected costs for expenses such as air fare for the Soviet artists, 
and a percentage of funds from T-shirts and other merchandise to be sold during 
the festival by merchants licensed by the city. 
City officials also anticipate that additional revenue will be realized through 
private evening showings of the Faberge eggs, icons and folk art to be marketed 
to corporations, Herring said. Moreover, festival directors forecast that the 
city will benefit through more than $35 million in so-called "indirect revenue" 
spent by festival visitors for hotels, meals and other purposes. 
"Every early sign indicates that (the festival) will be a resounding success," 
O'Connor said in the memo. "How appropriate, then, that the revenue originally 
generated by a tourist tax will bring San Diego priceless art exhibits and even 
more tourism, and then eventually produce proceeds to underwrite our children's 
needs . . ." 
Council Uneasy 
While acknowledging that O'Connor has monitored the festival's planning more 
closely than they have, council members said they remain to be convinced that 
the mayor's optimism about its economic outlook is merited. Customary budgetary 
caution and their ardent support for the youth programs, they explained, 
combine to leave them somewhat uneasy about relying too heavily on the 
festival's projected profit. 
"The mayor sounds pretty confident that that $1 million is going to be there," 
Roberts said. "If it turns out that's the only money available for the 
children's programs, fine. But I guess I'd just feel more comfortable using 
funds we're certain about. Any revenue or profit from the festival is going to 
be speculative for at least another six months. I don't want to leave these 
kids' programs hanging on the line." 
