LISTEN: INTO THE SILK 
The word is already out that Hugh Hefner won't be wearing silk pajamas for his 
wedding Saturday to Playmate of the Year Kimberley Conrad. But he might wear 
silk boxer shorts under his tuxedo. Sherman Oaks haberdasher Rick Pallack, who 
prepared the bridegroom's formal wedding attire, tells us he hasn't heard 
officially, but he did give Hef a pair of black-and-white, paisley-patterned 
boxers "so he would have on some silk." The king of playboys will call an end 
to his bachelor days -- for the second time -- in a '40s-style black-wool, 
single-breasted tuxedo jacket trimmed with satin lapels, satin vest, white 
pleat-front shirt, black bow tie, satin-trimmed trousers and black patent 
leather shoes. Not bad for a man who has been known to do television interviews 
in his robe and pajamas. "He doesn't even own a tie," Pallack tells us, adding: 
"He looks very handsome in clothes. He should wear them more often." 
Dealt a Full House 
A bash for Sandra Bernhard saw its share of celebrities as well as legal 
authorities. It was to celebrate Bernhard's new album, and it rapidly taxed the 
capacity of Eastside hot spot Enter the Dragon. Around 8:30 p.m. the fire 
marshal began turning away arriving guests, sending such notables as novelist 
Mark Lindquist ("Sad Movies") out into the street. Listen noticed that 
Lindquist has ditched his perennial suit-and-tie look for an ever-present blue 
blazer. The divine Miss Bernhard waited around for gal pal Madonna until the 
marshal finally shut the whole soiree down. Madonna had RSVP'd but the party 
gave up the ghost long before the Material Girl was scheduled to arrive. And we 
heard that Prince avoided the crowds by staying in his limo. 
Watch Out 
What's a $46 Batman watch doing in a place like Arlene Altman in the Rodeo 
Collection? Co-owner Carol Chase tells us the store, normally filled with 
Altman's expensive jewelry designs and pricey vintage timepieces, has a 
"Beverly Hills exclusive" on the watches and was the first shop in the nation 
to receive them. That seems only right, considering the manufacturers, DC 
Comics Inc., studied Chase's '50s Batman watch before proceeding with their 
limited-edition collection. The pieces went on sale two weeks ago, and the 
first customer was Linda Guber, who bought one for husband Peter and one for 
Jon Peters, producers of the "Batman" film, which opened last Friday. 
It's All in the Mix 
The rumor mill's been churning out stories about how Giorgio Armani joined the 
Italian fashion revolt, and will show his next collection in Paris, not Italy. 
(Romeo Gigli made the switch last fall, Gianfranco Ferre will do so this summer 
with his first couture collection for Christian Dior, though he'll still show 
his own ready-to-wear line in Milan.) "That's all wrong," insists Armani v.p. 
Gabriella Forte, about tales of the designer's defection. The mix-up occurred, 
she believes, because Armani will in fact show his fall '89 collection in Paris 
next September at the Musee Rodin, as part of a gala social bash. But, she 
says, he'll show his newer spring '90 collection in Milan next October. It's 
all just a tempest in a tortellini to actor Michael Keaton, who bought himself 
a new tux at Armani's Rodeo Drive boutique in time for the "Batman" premiere. 
We hear from the folks at the shop that Keaton also wears several Armani suits 
in the movie, when he's playing Bruce Wayne, not Batman. 
Scott's Silk Substitute 
Melody Thomas Scott of "The Young and the Restless" made a last-minute costume 
change for the daytime Emmy awards show Thursday. She was planning to wear a 
black chiffon gown, but "on a fluke" found an outfit at Ron Ross of Tarzana. 
"My husband and producer flipped when they saw it," Scott says. "I have my 
orders and that's it." The new outfit is black silk pants and jacket with a 
black-and-gold sequined bustier. About the original outfit, Scott says: "I love 
that dress and eventually I will wear it to the Emmys." As for her co-star and 
co-presenter, Eric Braeden, well, "I just keep telling him, 'wear a tuxedo, 
dear,' " she says. 
Playing the Numbers Game 
As if Giorgio Beverly Hills and former owner Fred Hayman didn't have enough 
confusion over their split, now comes word that Giorgio has picked a spot for a 
new gift and fragrance store to open in early fall. But get a whiff of this. 
The address is 327 N. Rodeo Drive, not to be confused with the old Giorgio 
boutique location at 273 N. Rodeo Drive, now the home of Fred Hayman Beverly 
Hills. Following in his own fragrance footsteps, Hayman is marketing a 273 
women's scent and plans next January to offer 273 Cologne for Men. Meanwhile, 
Giorgio plans in the future to offer a full range of clothing at a second 
store. Michael Gould, chief executive of Giorgio, a unit of Avon Products, 
sniffs at the idea that the address similarity will cause confusion. But a 
Giorgio spokeswoman told Listen with a chuckle: "Somebody has already asked me 
if we're going to come out with a 327 fragrance." 
Teddy Bear Wear 
Roger Daltrey of the Who is wearing a Marithe &amp; Francois Girbaud wardrobe 
for his current role in "The Teddy Bear Habit," shooting in New York. Girbaud's 
Joni Fiore says they've roughed up the striped shirt, band jacket and jeans 
from the new fall collection so Daltrey will look appropriately like the aging 
hippie he plays. The film, directed by John Small and written and produced by 
Rosemary and Kevin Breslin (children of columnist Jimmy Breslin, who has a 
small role in the film) is set for an April, 1990, release. 
Designing Woman 
Track star Florence Griffith Joyner, known for her flamboyant running outfits 
as well as her Olympic medals, has a new assignment. She's redesigning the 
uniform of the Indiana Pacers. She was commissioned by the team to create a new 
uniform that will be used beginning in the 1990-1991 season. She'll submit 13 
or 14 designs, and team officials will select the winner and unveil the new 
wardrobe in about three weeks. When she visited the team offices Thursday, she 
was wearing a golden jacket and matching skirt with a white top, while proudly 
displaying two-inch fingernails (one of them studded with rhinestones). Asked 
about the new NBA uniform, she joked: "It may look funny, but a basketball team 
in pink lace won't be too bad." 
