JOSEPH N. BELL: FILM RAISES QUESTIONS ABOUT IMPORTANCE OF DISCIPLINE IN 
CREATIVITY 
In a summer that promises us ghostbusters, batmobiles and a contest with the 
Nazis for the Holy Grail, "Dead Poets Society" arrives like a breath of cooler 
summer air. 
It requires us to think. And from the size of the line around the theater when 
we saw it last week, a lot of people are ready to be thus challenged. I suppose 
the case could be made that a fair number of them think they are going to see 
Robin Williams' shtick, but if that was true in the audience that attended with 
us, they got caught up totally. They applauded when the film was over, a 
phenomenon almost as rare as an Orange County Democrat winning public office. 
Our little group was rather sharply divided in what we took away from the film, 
and that's OK, too. Any piece of commercial entertainment that can produce such 
a result is -- by my definition -- highly successful. 
If you've seen the film or read the reviews in Calendar, you know that the 
central figure is a highly charismatic teacher in a boy's prep school who turns 
his students on to poetry and beyond that to some rather highly individualistic 
expression with mixed -- and in one instance tragic -- results. Whether the 
teacher was responsible for the resultant behavior -- rather than some 
excessively despotic parents and school authorities -- is the central question 
raised by the movie. 
But I found a corollary question more interesting -- and less easy to answer: 
At what point can we turn young people loose with the heady brew of 
free-wheeling individual expression in the assurance that they have the 
concomitant mental and physical discipline and sense of history to use it 
either wisely or effectively? It's a question that recurs repeatedly to a 
teacher and one I struggled with through two decades of teaching students at UC 
Irvine, hopefully, to become better writers. 
This question was raised pointedly in a brief exchange between the Robin 
Williams character and another, older teacher who is bemused by Williams' 
teaching technique. He warns Williams that "discipline and tradition" must come 
first; Williams answers with a bit of poetry eulogizing the freedom of creative 
thinking. Williams' argument is, of course, more exciting, more exhilarating -- 
and more persuasive. 
But it all reminded me of an incident that took place when my daughter was in 
the sixth grade. She brought home a charming little story she had written in 
English class. The teacher had given her an A+, and although the story was 
delightful, it was full of misspellings, confused syntax and grammatical 
errors. 
I made an appointment with the teacher and said I didn't think my daughter 
should have been given so high a grade on a paper with so many errors. The 
teacher replied that the class was in creative writing, and my daughter's work 
was highly creative. I said that creativity can be muffled and even stifled 
without the proper tools of expression and the students shouldn't be allowed to 
think they weren't needed. 
It was a standoff. I'm sure the teacher felt I was the one stifling my 
daughter's creativity -- and I suspect a few of my students over the years felt 
the same way when I insisted they learn the tools first. 
By an odd coincidence, some of the same questions are raised in a quite 
different context by another current Orange County entertainment: South Coast 
Repertory's "Sunday in the Park With George." The first act devotes itself to 
the single-minded expression of the creative process and how it affects people 
in the artist's life. The second act deals with those who would bastardize, 
commercialize, standardize, and trivialize creative work. But throughout both 
acts, the recurring theme expressed repeatedly by the artist is the importance 
to the creative process of seven qualities: "Order, design, tension, 
composition, balance, light and harmony." 
Even when the artist is told by the woman who loves him: 
 Stop worrying if your vision is new. 
 Let others make that decision -- 
 They usually do. 
 You keep moving on ... 
 He returns to these seven precepts as the qualities that will enable him to 
"move on." 
Most of the boys whose spirits were lifted by the teacher in "Dead Poets 
Society," it seemed to me, still lacked many of these qualities (although this 
isn't necessarily a matter of age) and therefore found total liberation 
dangerous. 
Yet, as it did to my daughter's sixth-grade teacher, such an attitude comes off 
as stifling. I only wish that the parents and school administrators in "Dead 
Poets Society" could be less rigid, less myopic, more compassionate. There is 
something to be said on their behalf, but the characters thus drawn have no 
chance to compete with the persuasiveness of the charismatic teacher. 
But thank God for an occasional work that reaches out to a mass audience and 
causes it to think. Just as "Field of Dreams" offered food for the soul, "Dead 
Poets Society" offers food for the mind. 
