VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: COUNTYWIDE; 
EX-ASSEMBLYMAN TO HEAD U.S. FUEL PANEL 
Former Assemblyman Charles R. Imbrecht of Ventura has been appointed 
co-chairman of the U.S. Alternative Fuels Council, a federal panel charged with 
devising a national policy on alternative automobile fuels that can reduce 
pollution and American dependence on foreign oil. 
"If we are going to clean up the air, it is essential for us to explore 
alternative fuels at the national level," Imbrecht said. For the past decade, 
the California Energy Commission has had the most ambitious alternative fuels 
program in the country, he said. 
The federal council will study a number of alternative fuels, including 
methanol, ethanol, compressed natural gas and electricity. Some of those fuels 
already are in use in California, and the goal of the council will be to expand 
the use here and to cause other states to adopt similar programs. 
Imbrecht said it is important to develop new fuels for cars and trucks to 
reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil. Currently, he said, the nation 
imports 56% of its oil from abroad, 6% more than in 1973, when the country was 
hit by the OPEC oil embargo. 
The council was established by the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988 to 
advise Congress and the President on long-term energy policy. It must make its 
policy suggestions to Congress and the U.S. Department of Energy by September, 
1992. 
Imbrecht, who represented Ventura County in the state Assembly from 1976 to 
1982, will share the chairmanship of the federal panel with Robert Hahn, an 
economics professor at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Other council members include Sens. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa) and John D. (Jay) 
Rockefeller IV (D-W.Va.), Reps. Jerry Lewis (R-Redlands) and Bill Alexander 
(D-Ark.) and a variety of energy experts. 
Imbrecht has been chairman of the state Energy Commission since 1982 when he 
lost a close race for the state Senate to Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara). 
KENNETH R. WEISS 
