BIG MAC'S MYSTERY; 
STALLED INVESTIGATION, RUMORS OF HIDDEN FORTUNE ARE VICTIM'S LEGACY 
"Big Mac" -- burly Horace J. McKenna -- has been dead for three months now. But 
authorities are still wondering who killed him and what happened to the 
millions of dollars in cash they believe he was skimming from hidden ownership 
in several nude and topless bars. 
And McKenna's son, 23-year-old Michael, is still trying to sort out his 
father's legitimate financial affairs amid rumors that there is illegal money 
buried somewhere or stashed in banks out of his reach. 
Big Mac McKenna, 46, was killed gangland-style in the early morning hours of 
March 9 as he slept in the back seat of his limousine. The car was riddled with 
bullets as his driver got out to swing open the iron gates to Tara, the 
$825,000 estate McKenna owned in Brea's Carbon Canyon. 
The Brea police detective who says he interviewed dozens of associates and 
friends of McKenna's, trying to find the killer or killers, recently moved on 
to other cases. Detective Grant Gulickson said he has some suspicions as to who 
might have killed McKenna -- or at least had a motive -- but not enough 
evidence to arrest anyone. 
Gulickson said the investigation has stalled because "many of McKenna's 
associates are also crooks" who fear they would implicate themselves if they 
talked about him. Although many of them openly disliked McKenna, who was 
6-foot-6, nearly 300 pounds and never hesitated to throw his weight around, 
they had a "bigger hate for cops than they had a loathe for Mac," Gulickson 
said. 
McKenna's death has set back a criminal tax fraud investigation that was under 
way at the time of the slaying. McKenna and his partner, Michael Woods, were 
believed to be hidden owners of several nude and topless clubs from which they 
allegedly were reporting only a portion of the income. 
While the investigation into Woods' finances is ongoing, "you can't prosecute a 
dead man," Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Senior Investigator Robert H. Hausken 
said of McKenna. However, a civil tax fraud inquiry focusing on McKenna's 
estate is also continuing. 
McKenna died just one day after crucial search warrants were made public. The 
warrants detailed how McKenna and Woods allegedly pocketed as much as half the 
profits from such clubs as Bare Elegance, the New Jet Strip and the Star Strip 
near Los Angeles International Airport and April's Cabaret and the Odd Ball in 
the San Fernando Valley. 
Investigators estimated that the clubs grossed as much as $2.5 million per 
year. At April's Cabaret, they said, there were two safes: one where employees 
locked up half of the night's receipts and the other a slotted safe -- for 
which the employees had no key -- where they put the rest. 
Gulickson said he believes that the money is now stashed. "I personally believe 
a great deal of it went out of the country," he said. 
The timing of McKenna's slaying has led to speculation that he might have been 
killed by someone who did not want him to be able to negotiate with authorities 
by informing on others involved. However, Gulickson said he had no indication 
after McKenna's death that the victim would have aided in the investigation 
and, in fact, thought McKenna might have been a macho kind of man who would 
remain loyal to his friends. 
Hausken, who had watched McKenna and Woods for months, said he was disappointed 
when McKenna was killed. 
"I'd grown to respect him -- not for the person he was, not like you would 
respect the President or an astronaut. But here was a guy who had built himself 
an empire and he ruled it out of force and fear. . . ." Hausken said. "He was a 
worthy opponent. He really was, and he knew it. He knew we were after him." 
Convicted of Counterfeiting 
McKenna, a former California Highway Patrol officer, was convicted in 1976 of 
counterfeiting and convicted in 1982 of a parole violation after he was 
arrested on suspicion of assaulting an off-duty police officer. Hausken said 
jokingly that McKenna was known as "the most successful graduate" of the CHP 
academy because he went on to make so much money. 
On another legal front, the probate of McKenna's estate is being overseen by 
his son, Michael, who at 6-foot-9 could easily inherit his father's nickname. 
He now is ensconced as the new proprietor of the secluded Tara. The 40-acre 
estate, built with a "Gone With the Wind" theme, has stunning vistas of Orange 
County, a horse stable and the mock Western town his father was building for 
the amusement of friends. 
"I've grown to love it up here. The peace, quiet," Michael said one morning 
recently as he nibbled on stale popcorn and drank Gatorade straight from the 
bottle in the kitchen of the house on top of the knoll at Tara. "I would like 
to keep it." Michael is an only child, and his mother and father were divorced. 
The younger McKenna, whose height leaves him with the friendly, loose-jointed 
gait of a basketball player as opposed to his father's intimidating bulk of a 
prizefighter, has strongly defended his father. Although he did not see much of 
McKenna before his death, the son occasionally spent time with him and his 
friends at Tara. He said that if his father was into illegal activities, he 
never knew it. 
"I wouldn't be interested in those kinds of clubs anyway," he said, although he 
conceded they were "great moneymakers, I guess." 
Lives on Estate 
Michael now occupies the house with a few of his friends. It is an eclectic 
affair whose main decoration is his father's collection of about a dozen bronze 
sculptures of Western scenes. McKenna has moved these into the living room, 
which is incongruently furnished with feminine French provincial furniture 
(apparently left over from McKenna's marriage), a baby grand piano and a 
gigantic python snakeskin that cuts diagonally across the carpet. The elder 
McKenna had just built a pool on the property and had nearly finished the ghost 
town. He kept 15 horses, mostly Arabians, at the stables just below the house. 
Until March 9, Michael considered himself just an average young guy trying to 
make his way in the world. He had just gotten a job as a security guard and 
lived with his father's parents. He surfed. He had a steady girlfriend. His 
only bills were a car payment and car insurance. 
It was not the kind of life style that prepared him to deal with his father's 
far-reaching -- and at best confusing -- business affairs. Besides, most of his 
father's financial records had been seized in the probe of his ownership of the 
clubs. 
"You've heard the expression you're dropped off in a pile of (excrement). Well, 
I was about 8 feet under," said the younger McKenna. "I'm only out to 6 feet, 
I'm just breathing again. 
"I've learned more in three months since this has happened than I think most 
people learn in their lifetimes." 
At first Michael tried to keep track of the income and outflow from his 
father's legitimate businesses -- the 4 Star Gym in El Segundo and two small 
apartment buildings. He became so stressed over this and "all of the stuff that 
was on my mind" that he ended up in the hospital one night with acute stomach 
pains. Since then, he has hired a friend to keep track of the books. In the 
aftermath of the slaying, he also broke up with his girlfriend. 
'I Don't Trust Anybody' 
But Michael also sounded as if he was learning something about how to take care 
of himself. In a recent telephone conversation with his grandmother, the 
younger McKenna told her not to talk to any of his father's pals. Later, he 
said, "a lot of my father's friends, I told them right to their faces that I 
don't trust anybody and I don't trust you." 
Michael said rumors of vast wealth found buried at Tara are untrue. Hausken 
said there was speculation that Big Mac had buried money in a sewer main at 
Tara. Workers recently dug a hole as big as a small bedroom in the front yard, 
but Michael said it was to fix a water pipe. He said some money -- he would not 
say how much -- was found in a safe in the house. He has been using it to keep 
the ranch going while the estate is probated, which could take two years. 
McKenna said he may sell his father's horses -- which he said are worth between 
$2,000 and $30,000 each -- or even get a job to tide himself over until he is 
clear owner of the ranch and his father's other property. As for his father's 
alleged ownership of the nude and topless bars, the young McKenna said he is 
been unable to find any proof of it. And if Big Mac's partner, Woods, has a 
stash of money from the bars, he isn't sharing it, Michael said. 
Even if his father actually owned the nightclubs, he said, any such partnership 
between Woods and his father would necessarily have had to have been by a 
handshake, he said. The elder McKenna, as a convicted felon, could not own the 
clubs outright. 
"There's no proof, there's no evidence, there's no witnesses to the agreement," 
Michael said, describing the hypothetical partnership. "So in a sense it's like 
if . . . two people got hold of a million dollars and they decided to split it, 
but neither one of them have (possession of) it, it's just sitting there. When 
the time comes they'll split it. If one of them died, the other one got all of 
it. And if the other person had a son, let's say like me, and I came in and I 
knew about it but I had no proof, the guy says: 'No, no, no. It's all mine.' 
And what can you say? You can't say anything. You sit there and say, 'Oh, 
well.' " 
The son has his own theories as to what his father would have done had he 
skimmed from the clubs. 
"Assuming there was that much of an income, you've got to think that a man like 
that, if there was that money, he's not going to want to keep it around," 
Michael said. "He's going to want to get rid of it, get rid of it anyway you 
can. In bronze artworks maybe, the pool, the horses, paying out employees. . . 
." 
But Detective Gulickson said that even if there wasn't hidden cash, there are 
enough assets in the estate to take care of McKenna's son. "I do not think the 
kid is going to have a financial worry for the rest of his life," he said. 
