ORANGE COUNTY VOICES; 
IS PIONEERING SPIRIT HISTORY IN IRVINE?; 
ONLY TIME WILL TELL IF SALLY ANNE SHERIDAN WILL CONTINUE THE TRADITION OF 
INNOVATION SET FORTH BY LARRY AGRAN. 
Now what? That seems to be the most frequently asked question in Irvine these 
days. After a hard fought and down to the wire campaign, Irvine Mayor Larry 
Agran narrowly lost his bid for reelection to Councilwoman Sally Anne Sheridan. 
Along with Sheridan's victory comes a new council majority composed of her 
allies, Art Bloomer and Barry Hammond who each won a seat on the City Council. 
Mayor-elect Sheridan, a real estate agent in her sixth year on the Irvine 
council, has said, "It's time for a change." 
Unfortunately, this was not an election based solely on issues. It was about 
partisan politics and personalities. You know how it is in Orange County: The 
Republicans are the good guys and the Democrats are the bad guys. Sheridan's 
campaign talked about being a Republican. I'm a Republican, too, but that 
shouldn't matter in a nonpartisan race. 
Based on the campaign Sheridan waged, it's difficult to know what she intends 
to do as mayor, but her campaign was clear on one point: Vote against Agran 
because he's a liberal Democrat (code words for "he's a bad guy"). The Lincoln 
Club -- an elite group of Republicans based in Fullerton, largely supported by 
money from developers -- spent $25,000 in last-minute mailers, joining Sheridan 
in getting that point across. 
I've lived in Irvine for 23 years, and I know Irvine issues: growth, traffic, 
open space and parks, and public safety. But instead of being exposed to the 
candidates' positions on these issues, voters were exposed to a media feeding 
frenzy of personal attacks, most of them aimed at Agran. The candidates for 
City Council -- I was one of them -- were virtually ignored. 
No wonder there is uncertainty about the direction of this new council 
majority. Partisan politics obscure the issue-oriented and nonpartisan. 
So just what can we expect from this change in leadership in Irvine? Can we 
really expect a change away from the Agran agenda? I don't think so. I have 
served on the council with Agran and Sheridan for the last two years. Under 
Agran's leadership, Irvine was the first city in Orange County to begin a 
curbside recycling program that now involves 70% of Irvine's eligible 
households. Agran established the county's first hazardous materials management 
and emergency cleanup program in Irvine, which has now been transferred to the 
county for broad implementation. 
The council also adopted the first local policy in the nation that mandates 
affordable, quality child care in response to demands created by the two 
wage-earner families that dominate Irvine's population. A volunteer "second 
harvest" is under way, where residents join with Irvine's farmers to glean more 
than 100,000 pounds per year of fresh fruit and vegetables for Orange County 
families who cannot afford to put food on the table. 
All these programs were built with a nonpartisan approach and have stood the 
test of time. 
And then there's the environment. Irvine has become known as America's 
"environmental city" -- an urban community where one-third of the land is 
planned as open space; where the San Joaquin marsh -- 590 acres of the last 
remaining freshwater wetlands in Orange County -- is being saved through city 
leadership coupled with state and private funds. 
Irvine is also addressing water conservation through an environmental approach 
to the landscaping of public areas. The council has adopted a policy of 
doubling the number of trees in the city by the year 2000. We're even meeting 
the challenge of reducing emissions of chlorofluorocarbons. 
Now, under Irvine's newly elected regime, Sheridan says she will, "get back to 
basics" and return city government to the business of "filling potholes." Yet 
the successful programs of recent years have benefited all of us. Programs like 
these would be difficult for any City Council to dismantle. So, what's going to 
change? 
The most obvious shift in direction may be the approach to new development. The 
council under Agran took growth control as a mandate from the voters and 
approved fewer than 3,000 new dwelling units. This may change under Sheridan. 
Repeatedly, she has contended that approval of the pending Irvine Co. projects, 
totaling nearly 12,000 new dwelling units in Irvine, is the most effective way 
to combat a severe shortage of housing. 
Another significant, but more subtle, change can be described as "initiative." 
Larry Agran thrived on taking the initiative. He is a modern-day pioneer with 
the arrows in his back to prove it. Losing the election was the political price 
he paid for being first. Never mind that 95% of the programs he initiated stand 
out as hallmarks in Irvine's history. 
Or that cities throughout Orange County followed in his footsteps. 
The most recent example of Mayor Agran's initiative is his proposed Irvine 
monorail project. Orange County needs a mass transit system that gets commuters 
to and from work quickly, inexpensively and without polluting our air. Agran 
wanted Irvine to be first. So he led the charge to include the Irvine monorail 
project in the statewide Rail Bond issue in Proposition 116. 
As a result of Agran's work and the passage of Proposition 116, Irvine is 
eligible for $125 million in matching funds. 
Irvine's new council is faced with picking up where Agran left off. Only time 
will tell if Sheridan will continue the Agran tradition of initiative and 
innovation. For Irvine's sake, I hope she does. 
