EDUCATION LEADERS ASSAIL PLANNED CUTS 
Education leaders angrily complained Tuesday that they had been misled by Gov. 
George Deukmejian who, they said, won their support for a gasoline tax increase 
with the implicit understanding that he would not push for cuts in education 
funding. 
Less than a month after the voters approved a phased-in 9-cents-per-gallon 
gasoline tax increase, the governor is now proposing to cut education by $800 
million to help bridge a $3.6-billion gap in the state budget. 
"We feel like we've been betrayed," said Ed Foglia, president of the California 
Teachers Assn. 
Michael Frost, Deukmejian's chief of staff, defended the governor's plan, 
saying that the budget crisis this year was so severe that no programs should 
escape austerity. 
Proposition 111, a ballot measure approved by voters June 5, modified the state 
spending limit and triggered the gasoline tax increase as well as certain 
changes in the funding formulas set out for education in Proposition 98. In 
1988, despite the adamant opposition of Deukmejian, voters approved Proposition 
98, which guaranteed schools at least 40% of the state budget and provided 
yearly funding increases tied to enrollments and inflation. 
As part of the negotiations over Proposition 111, education leaders agreed to 
give up some of the money schools would have garnered under Proposition 98 in 
years when there was a budget surplus in return for changes in the formula that 
determines the amount they will get each year to compensate for inflation. 
"The ink's not dry on . . . Proposition 111 and all of a sudden there's a 
recommendation (to) forget it -- it doesn't mean anything," said Supt. of 
Public Instruction Bill Honig. 
Both Honig and Kevin Gordon, director of government relations for the 
California School Boards Assn., said the governor's suggestion for cuts also 
violates the intent of Proposition 98. A clause in the initiative permits 
Proposition 98 to be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the Legislature in an 
"emergency." 
By emergency, they said the measure referred to a natural disaster such as an 
earthquake, not budget shortages that could be solved by other means. 
