COLUMN RIGHT; 
GADGET TO HELP SUICIDE OPENS PANDORA'S BOX; 
WE'RE DEEP INTO A PROCESS THAT'S ALTERING OUR NATION'S CHARACTER. 
Last week, in a Detroit suburb, Dr. Jack Kevorkian climbed into his Volkswagen 
van with 54-year-old Janet Adkins and drove off to a public park. There, he 
hooked up Adkins, who suffered from early Alzheimer's, to his homemade suicide 
machine. A syringe in her arm, Adkins pushed a button that sent two fluids into 
her body. One left her unconscious, the second stopped her heart. Her last act, 
said Kevorkian, was to rise as though to kiss him, and say, "Thank you, thank 
you, thank you." A modern love story. 
Kevorkian's lone regret: The dawdling medical examiner did not rush Adkins' 
body to a hospital. "You could have sliced her liver in half," he said, "and 
saved two babies and her bone marrow could have been taken, her heart, two 
kidneys, two lungs, a pancreas." 
Good old Doc Kevorkian, always thinking of somebody else. 
While commentators are saying that Kevorkian has re-ignited the "debate" over 
the "right to die," there really is no debate. There are just two schools of 
irreconcilable thought, whose adherents talk past one another. The first 
believes that all men are "endowed by their Creator" with "inalienable rights," 
and among these is the "right to life." The second holds that, as there is a 
right to live, so there is a right to die, that some lives are not worth living 
and that rational men and women, in a democratic society, can make these 
choices. 
While it is easy to recoil at the seeming callousness of Kevorkian, it is hard 
to deny he is on the cutting edge of social change. 
Thirty years ago, Americans argued over whether it was moral for a woman whose 
fetus had been deformed by thalidomide to have an abortion. Now abortion is a 
constitutional right -- 25 million have been performed -- and now we argue over 
the morality of denying food and water to deformed infants. Few may acknowledge 
it, but we are far along in a process that is altering the character of our 
nation. 
The first, critical step was to deny that all life is a gift from God, and that 
no man can take it; and to assert, instead, our right to decide when a human 
being is a "person." We did that in Roe vs. Wade. 
The second step was to assert that some persons are better off dead, such as 
comatose accident victims whose agonized loved ones want to stop the feeding. 
The third step is to assert a "right to die," and a concomitant duty to assist 
individuals who seek to exercise it. This is the position of Dr. Kevorkian and 
the Hemlock Society, and it leads logically to step four: 
If it is reasonable for someone to choose death, is it not equally reasonable 
for us to choose it for those who cannot make the decision themselves, i.e., 
the incurably insane and terminally ill who do not enjoy even the quality of 
life of Janet Adkins, who could play tennis right up until she got into that 
van? 
Indeed, if a lethal injection is the dignified way out for Adkins, why is it 
not also a dignified way out for the homeless, who, enfeebled, rummage through 
garbage cans for food? (To quote Dr. Kevorkian, "What kind of life is that?") 
And, if Adkins' decision was rational, why is it not equally rational to ask 
all those with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and terminal cancer to consider the 
same "final option." Perhaps Kevorkian has, in his machine, the final solution 
AIDS. 
We are not far away from entertaining such ideas. 
Some environmentalists applaud China's one-couple, one-child policy, where 
forced abortions and the killing of female infants are common. In California, 
Dianne Feinstein, candidate for governor, was forced by a feminist inquisition 
to recant her view that abortion for sex selection should be restricted. Fetal 
farming -- pregnancies and abortions to give us spare parts for research and 
sick patients -- is openly discussed. 
Once all the other frontiers have been crossed, the final one is the great leap 
forward by the state, when it declares that, just as a mother has the right to 
terminate the life of her unborn, just as loved ones have the right to pull the 
plug, so the state has a right to rid itself of those who threaten the social 
organism. 
Inexorably, we reach the fundamental question: 
Is there a higher law -- call it God's law or natural law -- to which man-made 
law must conform? And if no higher law exists, upon what moral ground did we 
stand to condemn the German doctors whose "crimes against humanity" consisted 
only of doing to the feebleminded exactly what we seek to do today? 
