IRAN AFTER THE IMAM; 
4 WHO MAY RULE STEELED BY STRUGGLE 
The scene at New York's opulent Waldorf-Astoria Hotel was surreal. In a formal 
ballroom, underneath elegant chandeliers, Iranian President Ali Khamenei was 
having breakfast with 15 American journalists. 
Surrounding Khamenei was a squad of formidable, bearded Revolutionary Guards 
from the fearsome military unit made famous by its quest for martyrdom during 
the war with Iraq. And in the hallways just outside, U.S. Secret Service agents 
provided their own protection for a man whose government had officially dubbed 
the United States "the Great Satan." 
The first moments of the meal were awkward. In 1981, Khamenei was nearly killed 
by a bomb hidden inside a tape recorder and placed on the podium as he gave a 
Friday prayer sermon. Since then, he has walked with a cane, and his right arm 
has dangled uselessly at his side. To help the Iranian president eat his 
breakfast, one of the Revolutionary Guards had to bend over him, like a parent 
over a child, and cut his cheese and cold cuts. 
On Sunday, Iran's ruling mullahs, or clerics, named Khamenei to replace the 
revered Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini as the leader of Iran's revolution. 
Whether he will survive in that role in unpredictable Iran is anybody's guess. 
But for now, the 49-year-old Khamenei has emerged as one of four Iranian 
leaders who are expected to play major roles in the struggle to fill the vacuum 
left by Khomeini. 
And in a nation where violence has become an accepted form of political 
expression, Khamenei's close brush with death does not distinguish him. Two of 
the three other contenders for power have also been targets of assassins since 
Khomeini's revolution swept Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi from power in 1979. 
Near-Misses for Rafsanjani 
Hashemi Rafsanjani, 54, the Speaker of Parliament and the man widely predicted 
to become the real power during the revolution's next phase, was injured during 
a 1980 assassination attempt. A year later, he left a building less than three 
minutes before a bomb killed more than 70 people, including 10 Cabinet 
officials and 27 members of Parliament. Unconfirmed reports suggest that he has 
survived a series of further assaults over the past 18 months. 
Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, the interior minister, has no left hand and only the 
thumb remaining on his right hand. He lost his hands and part of his face in 
1984 when a book bomb detonated as he opened it at the Iranian Embassy in 
Syria, where he was then serving as ambassador. 
Only Ahmed Khomeini, the ayatollah's son and chief of staff for 12 years, has 
remained unscathed, at least as far as is known. But his older brother, from 
whom Ahmed inherited the job as his father's right-hand man, died when the 
Khomeini family was in exile in 1977. No official cause of death was announced, 
but followers charged that the shah's secret police were responsible. 
These are the men who, at least at the outset, will shape Iran's political 
future -- whether it militantly pursues the Islamic Revolution or finally seeks 
accommodations with the West, whether it maintains close central control of its 
economy or allows an opening for free enterprise, whether it retains its tight 
grip on social behavior or permits the diversity of Iranian society to 
re-emerge. 
All four, in addition to their familiarity with violence, share several common 
characteristics. 
They are hojatoleslams, a category of mullahs that means "authority on Islam" 
and is the rank just below ayatollah. They are all lifelong Khomeini disciples 
who faced persecution during the shah's reign. 
And now, reflecting the metamorphosis of the clergy from inexperience to 
expertise in running a complex nation of 50 million, they are all masterful 
politicians. 
They differ, however, on the future of the revolution they jointly engineered a 
decade ago. Those differences are likely to provide the framework for Iran's 
political future. 
Together, Khamenei and Rafsanjani constitute the pragmatic leadership of the 
Islamic Republic's complex political spectrum. The Iranian government has 
blamed leftist opposition groups for the attacks on their lives. 
Mohtashemi, by contrast, is Iran's leading hard-liner. He has been linked to 
the devastating bombing of the U.S. Marine compound in Beirut in 1983 and the 
suicide bombings of U.S. embassies in Beirut in 1983 and 1984. U.S. 
intelligence officials speculate that he or his followers may have played a 
role in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which was downed over Scotland 
last December, killing 270 people. 
Ahmed Khomeini is, at the moment, the man in the political middle. At different 
times he has sided with various factions and evolved into the role of power 
broker on behalf of his father. He is almost certain to continue to play a 
major role as rival factions turn to him for interpretations of what his father 
would have said on key points. 
Khamenei and Rafsanjani share the same end of the political spectrum now, but 
Khamenei was not always a pragmatist. At the Waldorf-Astoria breakfast, which 
took place in 1987, he demonstrated the characteristics that have made Iran's 
revolutionary leaders so maddening to Americans. 
He barely noticed that someone was cutting his food for him. The 
highest-ranking mullah ever to set foot on American soil was instead 
preoccupied with fielding tough questions from Mike Wallace of CBS' "60 
Minutes," Garrick Utley of NBC's "Meet the Press" and 13 other journalists. To 
the surprise of the reporters who attended, the Iranians had not invited 
reporters who were sympathetic to their cause. 
Two days earlier, an Iranian ship called the Iran Ajr had been caught 
red-handed by the U.S. Navy laying mines in the Persian Gulf. Americans had 
seized the ship, killed four of its crew members and held the rest. 
Khamenei angrily denied that the Islamic Republic was scheming against the U.S. 
naval forces that had been dispatched to the gulf to protect oil tankers from 
the increasingly bloody war between Iran and Iraq. 
"It was a peaceful merchant ship," the new Iranian president insisted. "This is 
the beginning of a series of events, the bitter consequences of which will not 
be restricted to the Persian Gulf. The U.S. shall receive a proper response for 
this abominable act. 
"Today, it is we who receive the dead bodies of our sons. But if, God forbid, 
the day comes when you will receive the dead bodies of your sons, people will 
say, 'Why didn't you stop it?' " 
Khamenei had gone to New York to make a bold address to the United Nations 
about the respected place that Iran felt it deserved in the international 
community. He was the most senior Iranian revolutionary to have spoken to the 
United Nations. 
Instead, Khamenei found himself forced to defend Iran's mine-laying 
misadventure. Although he was a senior member of Iran's Supreme Defense 
Council, which prosecuted the war against Iraq, insiders said he was unaware of 
the escapade in the gulf -- and deeply embarrassed by it. 
Iran's new leader appears to have mellowed since his U.N. address. Over the 
past two years, Khamenei has increasingly become a conciliator and a 
pragmatist. He and Rafsanjani are widely credited with manipulating hard-liners 
and, ultimately, Khomeini himself, into accepting the 1988 cease-fire that 
ended the devastating eight-year war with Iraq. 
Khamenei personally knew the divisive costs of the war. His son was scarred 
last year in a chemical weapon attack by Iraq. And his sister went into exile 
to join her dissident husband in Iraq. 
Last fall, he even suggested that Iran might be prepared to borrow foreign 
funds for the first time since the revolution and to use Western technology to 
help reconstruct the war-ravaged country. 
"We must make use of the knowledge, expertise and resources of the foreigner," 
he said at the opening of Iran's International Trade Fair. 
While he has in the past advocated reforms to improve the lives of Iran's lower 
classes, his longstanding ties to bazaar merchants have tempered his support 
for radical economic reforms. 
And shortly after Khomeini's death sentence on author Salman Rushdie over his 
novel, "The Satanic Verses," in February, Khamenei publicly suggested that the 
edict might be lifted if Rushdie apologized. An outraged Khomeini quickly 
rebuked the president. 
Even his attitude on social mores has moderated. More than three years ago, he 
refused to attend a state banquet in his honor in Zimbabwe because women were 
to sit at the head table and wine was to be served. But at the Waldorf 
breakfast a year later, two American women were allowed to sit close to him. 
One who had brought Islamic head cover was told that she need not wear it. 
Although Khamenei has at least temporarily inherited the title of Iran's 
revolutionary leader, he is in fact likely to end up taking a back seat to 
Rafsanjani. Indeed, the parliamentary Speaker, who is a member of the selection 
council, may have helped maneuver Khamenei's election, according to Iran 
specialists. 
Roommates as young theologians and later imprisoned in the same jail by the 
shah, the two men are longtime associates. Together, they could form a powerful 
bloc to hold off the hard-liners. 
Rafsanjani's standing is expected to be decided in August presidential 
elections. He is the leading contender to succeed Khamenei in a strengthened 
executive presidency. Under Khamenei, the position was largely ceremonial. 
The speaker is both wily and charismatic. Among the generally stern clergy, he 
is one of the few who frequently smiles in public. His gentle jokes are 
legendary, and he was widely said to be a Khomeini favorite because he could 
make the imam laugh. 
His following outside fundamentalist circles has grown to the point that many 
Iranians openly refer to him as "Akbar shah," implying that he has gained the 
power of an Iranian king. 
His political skills were evident at a parliamentary session last June. 
Although several members made speeches on the floor, the real action was 
clearly taking place elsewhere. One by one, a dozen members made their way to 
Rafsanjani's chair on the elevated dais to whisper in his ear. 
"This is how the bartering is done," said an Iranian official in private. 
"Everyone goes to Rafsanjani with problems or proposals. No idea will get very 
far without him." 
Later that day, Rafsanjani was elected to his ninth term as Iran's 
parliamentary speaker. According to the official tally, only five of the almost 
200 secret ballots did not carry his name. And they were all blank. 
As acting commander in chief, Rafsanjani also enjoys widespread support within 
the fractious military. He was once briefly commander of the Revolutionary 
Guards and still reportedly has a following among several wings. 
His political skills are reflected in a popular story about the time Rafsanjani 
was riding in a car with Iran's president and prime minister. When they came to 
a fork in the road, the driver asked which way to turn. "Right," said the 
president. "Left," said the prime minister. Rafsanjani then instructed, "Signal 
left, but turn right." 
The current positions held by Rafsanjani and Khamenei are most threatened from 
within the theocracy by men such as Mohtashemi, who is often called Khomeini's 
"third son." Mohtashemi was with Khomeini throughout his exile, as a student 
and then as an aide. His longstanding loyalty earned him access and position 
within Khomeini's inner circle. 
Mohtashemi, a diminutive and quiet man with a trim black beard and horn-rimmed 
glasses, symbolizes those clerics who advocate continued isolation from the 
outside world, tight control of the economy and no wavering from the "pure" 
political ideals of the revolution. 
Within the government he serves as interior minister, and he derives power from 
his control over the revolutionary komitehs, or committees, that police 
political and moral conduct in neighborhoods throughout Tehran. 
Iran's Interior Ministry is in charge of state security, not wildlife and 
national parks. Mohtashemi's komiteh network gives him the only national base 
from which to challenge either the military or the Parliament. 
Although the militants appear at the moment to have been outflanked by 
Rafsanjani and Khamenei, Mohtashemi's predilection for unconventional tactics 
makes his future unpredictable. In a hearing last fall to reconfirm members of 
the Cabinet, a fellow government official said of him publicly: 
"He is well known for his hiring and firing. He regards himself as the only 
power. He neither consults the clergy nor does he pay attention to 
(Parliament's) deputies. With regard to the law, he acts wherever he sees fit 
and in accordance with his own will." 
Mohtashemi was only narrowly reconfirmed as interior minister. 
The last of the contenders for power is Ahmed Khomeini, a plump, almost 
cherubic-looking figure in his mid-40s and an unknown factor in the long term. 
Although some pundits have reported his quest to succeed his father, he is 
widely considered in Tehran to be too young and inexperienced in government, 
lacking both religious credentials and scholarship. 
Although Khomeini holds the same religious rank as Rafsanjani, Khamenei and 
Mohtashemi, he has not written extensively except in his father's name. That 
confers disadvantage in Iran, where elevation within religious circles has 
depended on introducing new ideas and on generating prolific scholarship. 
"He is politically shrewd, but he is not an intellectual," an Iranian official 
once said of him. 
By recently establishing a militant clerics' association, Ahmed Khomeini has 
created an inside power base from which to build. And, as "keeper of the 
flame," he is almost certain to have a role as the mullahs sort out their 
political and personal differences. 
How the Iranian leadership shakes out will determine that nation's relations 
with the United States. Even as long as two years ago, at the Waldorf-Astoria 
breakfast for Khamenei, there was a sign that the two nations could cooperate, 
at least on small matters. 
It was no accident that the Revolutionary Guards were inside the ballroom and 
the Secret Service agents were in the hallway outside. The two security 
services had together worked out the arrangements "quite amicably," said one of 
the U.S. agents. 
"One on one," he volunteered about the Iranians, "they're not bad fellows." 
IT'S IRAN'S MOVE -- President Bush calls on Iran to help free U.S. hostages. 
Page 5 
