ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: ANAHEIM; 
DOG, POLICE SEIZE 4 AS ROBBERY SUSPECTS 
A police officer and his dog foiled a suspected robbery attempt at an Anaheim 
convenience store early Sunday and arrested four men, one of whom was bitten as 
he tried to flee. 
Officer Andre Jimenez was on patrol with a department police dog, Falco, when 
he saw several men standing in front of an open Circle K market at 1080 W. La 
Palma Ave. and a car he deemed suspicious parked alongside the store at about 
2:10 a.m., Police Lt. John Cross said. 
Some of the men spotted the police car and began running toward their vehicle, 
he said. 
One suspect, Ignacio Comonfort Ventura, 21, of Anaheim, ran to the back of the 
store and was apprehended, Cross said. Falco was sent after a second suspect, 
Raul Avila Romero, 19, of Anaheim, who ran north across La Palma Avenue, Cross 
said. 
The dog caught up to Romero, bit him on the hip, knocked him to the ground and 
held him until officers could take him into custody. Romero was treated at 
Western Medical Center and then booked into the city jail facility. 
Two other suspects, Leonelo Sanchez, 22, who refused to give an address, and 
Enrique Valencis Valencia, 22, of Anaheim, tried to flee in the car at the side 
of the store, but they were caught by another officer a short distance away, 
Cross said. 
All of the suspects were booked in Anaheim Jail on suspicion of attempted 
robbery. A fifth, unidentified suspect escaped. 
Cross said no weapon was found and no valuables were believed taken from the 
store. He said it was the suspicious behavior of the men at the store's front 
and inside the parked car that caught the officer's attention and their flight 
that led him to believe that a robbery had been in progress. 
Apparently, no weapons were seen and nothing was taken from the store, Cross 
said. 
In all, the Anaheim Police Department's K-9 detail uses two German shepherds 
and two malinois for night and graveyard patrols, Cross said. The dogs, paired 
with an officer/handler, also help police conduct searches for suspects and 
evidence, he said. 
The dogs undergo training sessions with the handler/officer once a week. 
