U.N. AGENCY EXPECTS JUMP IN AIDS CASES 
More than nine times as many adults are expected to come down with AIDS in the 
1990s as have already become ill in the history of the epidemic, according to 
startling figures presented Sunday by the World Health Organization on the 
opening day of the largest-ever international conference on AIDS. 
In addition, three times as many people are expected to become infected with 
the AIDS virus in the 1990s as have become infected in the 1980s, the decade in 
which cases were first identified. Five million people worldwide already carry 
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS, the health 
organization estimates. 
"The HIV/AIDS situation in the decade of the 1990s will be more serious, and 
perhaps much more serious, than that which we have experienced in the 1980s," 
said Dr. Jonathan Mann, director of the organization's AIDS program. Mann cited 
the results of a recent World Health Organization analysis of the direction of 
the epidemic over the next 11 years. 
The organization's researchers, in making their predictions, relied on reports 
on statistics it received from 155 governments as well as individual 
researchers worldwide. It is the most comprehensive effort yet to predict the 
course of the epidemic to the end of the century. 
Bilingual Demonstration 
Mann made his comments during an opening session that was delayed one hour by a 
raucous demonstration by several hundred people with AIDS and AIDS-related 
conditions. The protesters, shouting, stomping and waving banners and signs, 
paraded to the podium of the conference hall and presented, in French and 
English, a "Montreal manifesto." 
The 10-point declaration called, among other things, for an international code 
protecting the rights of infected people to medical care, jobs and civil 
liberties. It also demanded faster access to promising treatments, an end to 
the use of inactive placebos for purposes of comparison in experimental drug 
trials and the elimination of misconceptions about how the disease has spread. 
The protest had been approved in advance by the conference organizers, who say 
they have gone to great lengths to include people with AIDS in the meeting, 
giving them for the first time a significant role in designing the curriculum 
and shaping its emphasis on the social, ethical, economic and legal issues 
raised by AIDS. 
Disease Spreading 
In his address to many of the estimated 11,000 scientists and others expected 
to attend the weeklong Fifth International Conference on AIDS, Mann attributed 
the predicted rise in cases to several factors. These include the fact that HIV 
infection is now spreading beyond countries and regions already infected to 
areas of the world previously spared. 
For example, the infection rate among intravenous drug users in Bangkok, 
Thailand, has leaped from 1% in 1987 to more than 40%, Mann said. 
The virus also appears to be spreading rapidly among female prostitutes in 
southeastern India, and among the general adult population throughout the 
larger cities of West Africa. 
Yet zeal for fighting the disease may be waning, Mann warned. 
"Around the world, there is evidence of growing complacency among some -- and 
growing fatalism among others," he said. Mann predicted that complacency could 
reduce the commitment of resources to fight AIDS, while fatalism could lead to 
"proposals for simplistic and extreme solutions." 
As of June 1, about 157,191 AIDS cases, from 149 countries, had been reported 
to Mann's Geneva-based organization. But the organization estimates the actual 
number at more than three times that figure, or nearly 500,000 cases, because 
of poor reporting. 
Largest Share From U.S. 
The largest share of the reported cases has come from the United States, where 
more than 90,000 people have been reported to have the disease. African 
countries have reported nearly 25,000 cases, and European countries nearly 
22,000. 
Mann predicted that a total of more than 6 million adult cases will have 
occurred by the year 2000. 
Mann also said the number of new AIDS cases are rising sharply -- from 70,000 
between 1980 and 1985 to 300,000 between 1986 and 1988 to a projected 700,000 
new cases between 1989 and 1991. 
Conference delegates from 87 countries poured into Montreal this weekend, 
jamming airport terminals, currency exchange offices and hotels. Nearly 1,000 
scientific papers are to be presented, in addition to 3,546 summaries of 
research to be displayed in a forest of printed posters. 
While the presentations will include more biomedical research than was 
presented at any of the four previous annual international AIDS meetings, 
organizers of the Montreal conference say there is for the first time a special 
emphasis on "the social challenge" posed by the disease. 
Dr. Alastair Clayton, director of Canada's Federal Center for AIDS, said the 
Canadian government had worked with Canadian and U.S. border officials to 
assure that people with AIDS or infected with the virus would not be prevented 
from entering the country to attend the conference. 
Organization Policy 
The World Health Organization, a co-sponsor of the conference, has developed a 
policy under which it will neither co-sponsor nor contribute to any AIDS 
meeting that does not include patient participation. The agency has no similar 
policy for any other disease. 
"While many tragedies and struggles leave no visible trace once they are 
passed, no imprint on the world's spirit, we know that AIDS in the 1980s has 
altered us -- in our world, in our countries, in our communities, and in our 
hearts," Mann concluded in his address. 
