WASTING THE WORLD WITH A PLAGUE OF PLASTIC DEBRIS 
The world of plastics is in a mess these days because it has made a mess. 
Polyethylene, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride and all the other polys pile up 
-- on roadsides, in the ocean and in landfills. They are likely to last several 
hundred years, after serving us sometimes only for a few hours or weeks -- if 
indeed they could be said to serve at all. The primary role of many plastics is 
to catch attention in a store, where they are garishly shaped and colored with, 
among other things, toxic heavy metals. Environmentalists say the dumps fill up 
not with packaging, but with marketing. 
Until we noticed dumps filling, most of us never thought about streams of 
plastics flowing through our lives -- 18 million tons each year, including 6.5 
million tons of packaging and more than $3 billion dollars' worth of plastic 
garbage bags in which to throw the other plastics out. Now we approach panic. 
Pending in state legislatures are 66 proposed bans on non-biodegradable 
packaging; 12 packaging taxes; 74 source separation and recycling mandates, and 
19 requirements that state governments purchase recycled materials. 
It's not fair to blame plastics for our trash problem, says the industry. 
Plastics make up only 4% to 7% of municipal solid waste (by weight; by volume 
it's more like 20% to 30%). But plastics are the focus of most legislation, 
perhaps because they are the fastest growing constituent of trash, or because 
they are used for so many trivial purposes, or because they are so nearly 
immortal. 
Immortality is one quality that makes plastics useful, of course. They are 
impervious to bacteria, acid, salt, rust, breakage, almost any agent except 
heat -- and some of them can even stand up to heat. If they didn't junk up our 
lives so, we would regard them as miracle substances -- long, long hydrocarbon 
chains, crafted to take on almost any properties we want. Plastics can be 
transparent or opaque, hard as steel or pliant as silk, squeezable or rigid, 
moldable into any conceivable shape. 
And, environmentalists would say, they are made from depleting supplies of oil 
and gas, wrested from the ends of the earth, synthesized in energy-consuming, 
hazardous-waste-generating processes and disposed of carelessly. Messy, from 
beginning to end. If we were properly charged for the full human and 
environmental costs of plastics, we would not eliminate them -- they are far 
too useful for that -- but we would treat those specialized molecules with the 
respect they deserve. We would not use them for a few days or hours and throw 
them out. 
The standard environmentalist formula for dealing with precious but polluting 
materials is simple: Reduce, reuse, recycle, in that order, and then, as a last 
resort, dispose with care. Of course the plastics industry makes money in 
inverse order. It is looking for a way to keep us buying millions of tons of 
plastics each year -- and to have them miraculously disappear when we throw 
them away. 
Therefore industry's favorite answers to the plastics problem are two: 
incineration and degradation. 
As a descendant of petroleum, plastic burns beautifully. Like all hydrocarbons, 
it combusts into carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, plus a host of other 
pollutants. Some of them derive from additives such as heavy metals (which end 
up either in air emissions or incinerator ash). Others, like toxic dioxins and 
furans, come from high-temperature reactions between hydrocarbons and chlorine. 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) releases so much hydrochloric acid as it burns that it 
corrodes the incinerator. For that reason one incinerator manufacturer 
recommends keeping PVC out of incinerated trash. 
Incineration can recapture a small fraction of the energy and effort put into 
making plastics. Degradation doesn't even do that. 
Degradable plastics come in two forms: biodegradable and photodegradable. The 
biodegradable kind mixes the long plastic molecules, which nothing in nature 
can digest, with starch; microorganisms will happily munch away on starch. 
On the side of the road a bottle or bag made of biodegradable plastic slowly 
falls apart -- into tiny shards of undegradable plastic. The bottle or bag 
disintegrates, but the plastic is still there. Presumably it is inert and 
harmless, but no one really knows the implications of a world filled with 
plastic sand. 
In a landfill, biodegradation happens very slowly, if at all. Nothing degrades 
well in a landfill. William Rathje, a University of Arizona anthropologist, 
drills core samples from old landfills and finds intact food, paper, cloth -- 
20 years old. He can date the layers exactly, because he can read the 
newspapers. Landfills are not compost heaps. They haven't the proper air 
circulation, moisture content, mixture of nutrients or communities of 
microorganisms to encourage natural breakdown. 
Promoters of photo- and biodegradable plastics admit, when pressed, that 
neither can extend the lives of landfills. They only help with the problem of 
litter. They are designer molecules to do away with the ugly evidence of our 
unwillingness to pick up after ourselves. 
Recycling at least slows the waste stream and lets the plastics serve several 
times before discard. Only about 2% of the plastics we use are now recycled (as 
opposed to 29% of aluminum, 21% of paper), but that's not because it can't be 
done. Plastics are the easiest of all materials to recycle. Basically they just 
need to be shredded, remelted -- usually at low temperatures -- and reformed. 
The industry itself grinds and reuses 5 billion pounds of plastic scrap a year. 
Two things are in the way of serious plastics recycling -- separation and 
purification. Consumers can put paper and cans in separate waste containers 
with relative ease, but they can't tell the difference between polypropylene 
and polystyrene. Bottlers have set up a voluntary coding system, to be phased 
in over the next three years, identifying resin types on containers. But that 
does not help separate myriad other forms of plastics, including squeezable 
bottles with several kinds laminated together. (In a true recycling society 
such unseparable mixed-material containers would be banned.) 
Some separation is easy, though. Recycling centers now collect tons of 
high-density polyethylene (HDPE) milk bottles and polyethylene teraphthalate 
(PET) soda bottles. They are not, unfortunately, made back into milk and soda 
bottles, because of the problem of purification. One person in a thousand might 
have used a bottle to hold roach poison or kerosene before throwing it away, 
and contaminants could have permeated the plastic -- to come out later into the 
milk or soda. 
Therefore recycled plastics are not used to package edibles. Reclaimed HDPE and 
PET are made into carpet fibers, cushion stuffing, car stops and scouring pads. 
Mixed plastics are made into lumber-like poles, posts, stakes and slats, for 
never-rotting barns, docks, fences, road markers, pilings. These processes are 
better than nothing, but they are not real recycling. They will screech to a 
halt when we all have as many immortal cushions and car stops as we need. The 
only recycling processes that can work in the long run are those that return 
materials to their same use -- soda bottles to soda bottles, milk containers to 
milk containers. 
At least one entrepreneur claims to be able to purify recycled PET and to make 
it back into risk-free soda bottles. Wizards in the petrochemical industry are 
clever; they can handle any problem if its solution involves manipulating 
molecules and promises profits. 
Reuse is preferable to recycling, because it takes less energy and causes less 
pollution to wash out a polystyrene coffee cup, say, and refill it, than it 
does to crush it, melt it and reform it. Because of the contamination problem, 
most plastic containers cannot be reused commercially. They can be reused 
domestically, however, since you know whether you've put roach poison in a 
bottle or not. If you haven't, you can reuse it, many times over. A real 
environmentalist would never fill a plastic foam hot cup with coffee only once. 
But then a real environmentalist wouldn't drink from a plastic foam hot cup. He 
or she would remember that the world once worked fairly smoothly with washable 
china. Recycling is better than disposal, reuse is better than recycling, but 
reduction is best of all. It's easier to deal with a flood by turning it off at 
its source than by inventing better mopping technologies. 
Such solutions, reduction solutions that distinguish the plastics we need from 
those we don't, will not come from industry. They will come through the 
political process and through the market, as we finally charge ourselves, one 
way or another, the real cost of producing and disposing of plastics. 
