THE PETE ROSE INVESTIGATION; 
EXCERPTS FROM REPORT SUBMITTED TO COMMISSIONER 
Excerpts from the report on Pete Rose submitted to the commissioner of baseball 
May 9 by investigator John Dowd. The report was made public Monday. 
INTRODUCTION 
. . . Pete Rose has denied under oath ever betting on major league baseball or 
associating with anyone who bet on major league baseball. However, the 
investigation has developed evidence to the contrary. The testimony and the 
documentary evidence gathered in the course of the investigation demonstrates 
that Pete Rose bet on baseball, and in particular, on games of the Cincinnati 
Reds baseball club, during the 1985, 1986, and 1987 seasons. 
The evidence showed that with few exceptions, Rose did not deal directly with 
bookmakers but rather placed his bets through others. 
. . . Although Rose placed his bets with (Ronald) Peters primarily through 
Tommy Gioiosa, on several occasions Rose placed bets on baseball games, 
including Cincinnati Reds games, directly with Peters. Rose's dealings with 
Gioiosa, and ultimately with Peters, are corroborated by the testimony of 
others and by Rose's own financial records as well. Rose admitted placing bets 
with Gioiosa on football and basketball games, but denied placing any bets on 
baseball games. 
. . . During the the 1987 baseball season, Rose utilized Paul Janszen to place 
his baseball bets after Rose and Gioiosa had a falling out in the spring of 
1987. Janszen relayed Rose's baseball bets to an acquaintance of Rose, Steve 
Chevashore, who in turn placed Rose's bets with a bookmaker in Staten Island, 
N.Y., identified only as "Val." Rose's betting on professional baseball, 
including Reds games, was testified to by Janszen and his girlfriend, Danita 
Marcum, and was discussed during a telephone conversation between Janszen and 
Chevashore. Rose's betting on baseball is further corroborated by betting 
records from Rose's home which have been identified by an expert as being in 
Rose's handwriting. Rose has denied placing any such bets with Janszen at any 
time. 
In May 1987, "Val" refused to accept bets on behalf of Rose due to Rose's 
failure to pay gambling debts. Thereafter, Rose's baseball bets were again 
placed with Ron Peters. However, instead of being placed by Gioiosa, Rose's 
bets were placed with Peters and by Paul Janszen. Between May and July 1987, 
Rose bet with Peters $2,000 per game on baseball, including Reds games. Rose's 
betting on baseball was also witnessed by Jim Procter and Dave Bernstein, who 
were acquaintances of Janszen. 
THE ROSE-GIOIOSA-PETERS BETTING: 1985 AND 1986 
The betting records of Janszen and Peters, however, indicate baseball bets of 
$500, $1,500, $2,000 on the Cincinnati Reds and other major league teams. 
According to Janszen and Peters, the $500 baseball bets were Janszen's and the 
$2,000 bets were Rose's. 
. . . Peters testified that he took bets from Gioiosa and Pete Rose during the 
period from late 1984 to late 1986, when he stopped taking Rose's action. He 
stated that Pete Rose bet on professional football, college basketball, and 
major league baseball. He specifically stated that Pete Rose bet on major 
league baseball games in 1985, 1986 and 1987, including games played by the 
Cincinnati Reds while Pete Rose was a player and manager. 
. . . Rose admitted that he has bet on sports events since 1975. The only 
person with whom Rose acknowledged making bets was Tommy Gioiosa, with whom 
Rose said he placed bets on professional football and college and professional 
basketball games, from 1984-1985. Rose stated Gioiosa was not a bookmaker, but 
claimed he did not know with whom Gioiosa placed the bets. Rose stated that 
Gioiosa never called a bookmaker from Rose's house. 
During the deposition, Rose revealed a good deal of personal knowledge of how 
bookmakers operate. For example, Rose stated that he settled up his bets on 
Tuesday after the weekend and Monday night football games were over. Rose 
explained that bookies make their money by charging a 10 percent fee, which he 
volunteered was called "vigorish," a bookmaking term. 
PAUL JANSZEN AND DANITA MARCUM 
Janszen testified he recalled that Pete Rose bet through Gioiosa on the 1986 
National League playoffs between Houston and the New York Mets. 
Danita Marcum (Janszen's girlfriend) confirmed that she and Paul Janszen were 
invited to Pete Rose's home during the period of September through December of 
1986. She recalled witnessing Rose, Gioiosa and Bertolini placing bets. She 
said she saw large amounts of cash in Pete Rose's home. 
In the middle of February 1987, Rose invited Janszen and Marcum to come to his 
home in Florida while he was at spring training. 
Following spring training sessions, Rose and Janszen routinely would go to 
Tampa Bay Downs Racetrack. There, Rose introduced Janszen to Mario Nunez. . . . 
Rose also introduced Janszen to Steve Chevashore, and Chevashore's uncle, Howie 
Bernstein. Janszen watched Rose bet large amounts of money on horse racing. 
According to Janszen, Rose had Chevashore cash his winning tickets to evade his 
tax liability. 
Rose however, denied that Chevashore ever "ran" bets for him at the track. Rose 
also testified that he bet very little money at Tampa Bay Downs and that the 
most he lost there was "seven hundred bucks." 
At Pete Rose's request, Janszen began placing Rose's bets with Steve Chevashore 
on various sports action, including basketball, hockey and later, baseball. 
Rose, Janszen and Chevashore had an understanding that the size of the bets 
Janszen was placing for Rose would always be for $2,000, "no matter what the 
game was, no matter when the game was being played." . . . Rose denied that 
Paul Janszen ever placed bets for him on baseball, football or basketball 
games, or did anything other than possibly place a bet for him at the 
racetrack. 
As the Janszen-Chevashore relationship continued, Janszen learned the identity 
of the bookmaker with whom Chevashore used to place Rose's bets. Janszen never 
knew his last name but his nickname was Val, and he was located in Staten 
Island, N.Y. 
In April, Rose asked Janszen to continue placing the bets with Steve Chevashore 
in Florida. At this time, Rose was betting on baseball, basketball and hockey. 
Rose's betting activity is corroborated not only by the other evidence 
previously described, but also by documentary evidence such as betting sheets 
showing bets on baseball games in Rose's own handwriting; Janszen's betting 
notebook; and the numerous telephone calls to Chevashore from Janszen's home 
and Rose's home. In mid-April 1987, Chevashore directed Janszen to place Rose's 
bets directly with Val in New York. 
In a taped conversation between Paul Janszen and Steve Chevashore on Dec. 27, 
1988, Chevashore confirmed the incident, and that Rose was betting on the 
Cincinnati-Montreal game. 
Janszen continued to place bets on baseball and other sports with Val on behalf 
of Rose until the middle of May 1987 when Val refused to take any more bets 
from Pete Rose because of Rose's unpaid debts. 
From April 7, 1987, until May 13, 1977, Rose lost $67,900 as a result of his 
bets with Val. Rose however, gave Janszen only a small amount of money to cover 
those losses. 
ROSE-JANSZEN-PETERS BETTING 
Since Val refused to take any more action, Rose asked Paul Janszen to contact 
Ron Peters to place his bets. Peters informed Janszen that he was willing to 
take Rose's action, but that Rose still owed him $34,000 from Rose's 1986 
betting. Janszen relayed Peters' message to Rose. Rose explained to Janszen 
that during spring training 1987, he had authorized his attorney, Reuven Katz, 
to issue a check from his account in the amount of $34,000 to Tommy Gioiosa to 
pay off the debt to Peters. Accordingly, Janszen told Peters that if he had not 
been paid, it was only because Gioiosa had not given the $34,000 from Rose's 
check to him. Therefore, to demonstrate Rose's good faith in paying his debt to 
Peters from the 1986 betting, Janszen obtained a copy of the $34,000 check in 
May 1987 from Pete Rose and gave it to Peters. 
When asked how Peters got a copy of the check in May 1987, Rose said: "I 
couldn't tell you." 
Dowd: Did you give it to them? 
Rose: No, I didn't give them the check. 
Rose's testimony that the $34,000 check of March 12, 1987, was to cover 
gambling losses on the 1987 Super Bowl and the 1987 NCAA basketball tournament 
appears to be in conflict with his other testimony that the most he ever bet 
was $2,000 on the Super Bowl and the fact that the 1987 NCAA tournament did not 
begin until March 12, 1987, the date of the $34,000 check. 
After seeing a copy of the $34,000 check, Peters was satisfied that Rose had 
attempted to pay off the debt. Thus on May 17, 1987, Rose began betting with 
Peters again. Peters testified that during the period from May to July 4, 1987, 
Janszen was betting $2,000 to $5,000 for Rose per game on baseball, including 
the Reds. Peters testified that he would not have accepted bets if they were 
Janszen's, and not Rose's, due to Janszen's lack of financial ability. 
Dowd: And, again, were you satisfied that those bets were for Rose? 
Peters: Yes. 
Dowd: Would you have taken those size bets from Janszen? 
Peters: No. 
. . . Peters stated that Rose was his only betting customer for baseball. 
Peters also testified that Rose won $27,000 in the first week of betting in May 
1987 and approximately $40,000 for the month of June 1987. 
. . . Janszen testified that Rose initially won close to $25,000 during the 
first week of the betting with Peters, which Janszen collected and gave to 
Rose. During the second week, Rose lost most of the money he had won the first 
week. Janszen described how Rose took cash out of his kitchen cabinet, counted 
the money he lost, and gave it to him. 
Janszen then took the money to Peters. Janszen testified that during June and 
July 1987, Pete Rose won approximately $40,000 from Peters betting on baseball, 
including the Reds. 
Janszen: Pete started betting with Ron Peters. Pete won his first two weeks. I 
went up there and collected $25,000, $2,000 was mine and $23,000 was Pete's. I 
handed Pete the money. 
Janszen: Week three, he loses back almost all of it. I take the money from 
Pete's house, from Pete's hand, take it up to Franklin, Ohio, and that's week 
three. Weeks four, five, six and seven and maybe eight, Pete won every week, or 
if he didn't win, he might have broke even. . . . At the end of that time, he 
was up 40-some thousand dollars. 
Peters, however, refused to pay the $40,000 to Rose because Rose owed him 
$34,000 from losses in 1986. 
Rose testified that Paul Janszen never placed bets for him on any sports 
activity, nor was he aware that Janszen ever bet at all. This testimony is 
contradicted by Donald Stenger (an associate of Michael Fry). Stenger recalled 
having dinner with Pete and Carol Rose, Janszen, Danita Marcum and Stenger's 
girlfriend at a Chinese restaurant in Philadelphia when the Reds were in town 
to play the Phillies in 1987. While at a restaurant, Janszen pulled out a sheet 
of paper with betting information on it and went to make a phone call. Stenger 
said there was no discussion about betting, or what was on the sheet. Stenger 
believes that the four or five games listed on the sheet were basketball games. 
He concluded this based on his personal opinion that Rose would never bet on 
baseball. 
ROSE AND JOSEPH CAMBRA 
Joseph Cambra, from Somerset, Mass., was charged with being a bookmaker in 
1984, and subsequently pleaded guilty to gambling charges in 1986. Pete Rose 
acknowledged meeting Cambra during spring training in West Palm Beach, Fla., in 
February 1984, while Rose was a player with the Montreal Expos. Rose stated 
that he did now know Cambra was a bookmaker, or that he had been convicted of 
bookmaking, until about two weeks prior to his deposition on April 20, 1989. 
Rose denied ever betting with Cambra or going to the racetrack with him. Rose 
testified that the only financial transaction he had with Cambra involved a 
real estate deal in which Cambra told Rose he could double his money. 
Rose stated that he has seen Cambra five to six days a year from 1984 to 1989, 
during spring training. When Cambra comes to Florida, Rose asks the Reds 
traveling secretary to get Cambra a room. . . . When asked whether Cambra ever 
was in the Reds clubhouse, Rose responded, "Well, it's all according to what 
your definition of the clubhouse is." Rose stated that Cambra has been in his 
office, but not in the part of the clubhouse where the players are. 
SUMMARY OF THE EVIDENCE 
Pete Rose denied under oath placing bets or causing others to place bets on the 
Cincinnati Reds and other ballgames of major league baseball. Indeed, Rose 
denied under oath ever associating with anyone placing bets on his behalf on 
the Cincinnati Reds or the games of major league baseball. He admitted placing 
bets with Tommy Gioiosa on other sports activity, but denied knowing the Ohio 
bookmaker or other bookmakers in New York. He denied being delinquent in paying 
his gambling losses or having borrowed from his associates and friends to pay 
his gambling losses. 
THE KEY EVIDENCE 
The evidence should be viewed as a whole in order to obtain a clear picture. 
Nevertheless, it is important to note the following five distinct pieces of 
evidence pointing to Pete Rose's betting on the Reds and baseball. 
 -- First, the three-page document in Rose's handwriting recording baseball 
games and the results. Pete Rose's explanation that he does not recognize the 
document or the handwriting is perhaps the only answer he can render given his 
posture in this case. 
 -- Second, the notebook of Paul Janszen recording the betting action of Pete 
Rose from April 7, 1987, to May 3, 1987, on Reds games as well as other games. 
To those who might suggest the notebook was fabricated by an unpaid creditor, 
the next piece of evidence should be closely examined. 
 -- Third, the telephone traffic in the collective telephone records bears 
remarkable witness to the betting action before the game time of the Cincinnati 
Reds -- home or away, night or day -- particularly the unexplained calls from 
Rose's home and hotel rooms to Chevashore, Val and Peters during the baseball 
season. Rose offered no explanation for these telephone calls. 
 -- Fourth, the betting records of Ron Peters which show baseball betting 
action on the Reds and other major league baseball games in 1987 by one 
customer. 
 -- Fifth, the unguarded statements of Steve Chevashore on a tape contradicted 
Rose's statement that Janszen, Chevashore and Val were not involved in the 
sports betting action on the Cincinnati Reds or major league baseball for Pete 
Rose. 
 -- Sixth, the Bertolini tape reveals not only questions as to Rose's testimony 
about his gambling habit, but the modus operandi employed by Rose to disguise 
and conceal his enormous gambling indebtedness, the identity of his bookmakers 
and his betting on baseball. The generating of funds through loans to 
Bertolini, the remission of checks to fictitious payees, and the delay in the 
production of bank records from Star Bank and Oak Hills Savings and Loan all 
raise serious question whether Pete Rose is trying to conceal his gambling on 
baseball and the Reds. 
SUMMARIES OF PETERS AND JANSZEN TESTIMONY 
The sworn, voluntary, corroborated testimony of Ron Peters, the bookmaker from 
Franklin, Ohio, establishes that he took bets from Pete Rose, and from Tommy 
Gioiosa, Paul Janszen and Danita Marcum on behalf of Pete Rose. 
Paul Janszen has given voluntary, sworn testimony, without the promise of 
reward, that in April, May, June and July 1987 he placed bets of $2,000 per 
game on the Cincinnati Reds and other major league baseball games for Pete Rose 
with Steve Chevashore, a runner of bets in Florida; with Val, a clerk for a 
bookmaking operation in New York; and with Ron Peters, a bookmaker in Franklin, 
Ohio. 
ANALYSIS OF ROSE'S TESTIMONY 
Pete Rose testified he did not recognize the handwriting on the three betting 
slips found in his home. Yet, according to a handwriting expert, the games of 
the Cincinnati Reds are recorded in Rose's handwriting on the betting sheets. 
Pete Rose testified that he never bet on the Reds or on baseball with Ron 
Peters. Yet, his bets on the Reds and baseball appear in Peters' betting 
records for the 1987 baseball season. 
Pete Rose testified that he never bet on the Reds or on baseball with Paul 
Janszen or Danita Marcum. Yet, the records of Janszen and Marcum show bets on 
the Reds and baseball during the 1987 season. 
Pete Rose did not explain how Ron Peters and Paul Janszen came into possession 
of a copy of the $34,000 check to Gioiosa written by Rose's attorney on March 
12, 1987. 
Pete Rose claimed the $34,000 . . . was to pay for his gambling losses on the 
1987 Super Bowl and the 1987 NCAA basketball championship, not the gambling 
losses to Ron Peters in 1986. But, the NCAA basketball tournament had not begun 
before March 12, 1987. 
Pete Rose denies knowing Ron Peters . . . but the record of the Cincinnati Reds 
show tickets for Peters were ordered by Rose in 1986 and 1987. 
Pete Rose said he entrusted Mike Bertolini with hundreds of thousands of 
dollars because Bertolini was an honest man. However, when Rose heard the 
unguarded statements by Bertolini on the April 4, 1988 tape, describing the 
payment of those funds to a New York bookmaker on behalf of Rose, Pete Rose 
said Bertolini was lying. 
Pete Rose testified that he had never placed bets with a person named Val, had 
never spoken with a person named Val and did not know anyone named Val. . . . 
However, the unguarded statements of Chevashore on the Dec. 27, 1988, tape 
contradict Rose's sworn testimony. 
The evidence revealed that in order to protect his stature as one of the most 
famous baseball players in major league history, Pete Rose employed middlemen 
to place bets for him with bookmakers and at the racetrack and to pay gambling 
losses and collect gambling winnings, thereby concealing his gambling activity. 
Rose befriended, entertained and promoted the businesses of friends and through 
this arrangement protected his betting from public exposure. 
He wrote checks payable to cash, to a close associate and to fictitious persons 
for amounts under $10,000 so as to avoid detection by the authorities. 
Pete Rose testified that he was ignorant of the activities of his companions. 
His ignorance of their criminal activities allows Rose to use these young men 
for his own purposes and if they are caught -- claim they are not credible. 
The testimony of Peters, Janszen and Fry has been voluntary and forthright. 
Each has stood before the bar of justice and engaged in the most painful act of 
integrity -- the admission of guilt to illegal acts. Each is now paying the 
debt society imposed for his acts against society. None of them has anything to 
gain for his voluntary act of cooperation with this investigation. 
