REBEL TAYLOR ASPIRES TO LEAD AFRICAN NATION; 
LIBERIA: HE'S U.S.-EDUCATED, DESCRIBED AS VAIN AND AUTHORITARIAN -- AND FACES 
CHARGES OF EMBEZZLEMENT. 
The Liberian rebellion that threatens to overthrow the 10-year regime of Samuel 
K. Doe is led by Charles McArthur Taylor, a self-described "church-going 
Christian" who wears a magic amulet around his neck to ward off bullets. 
Taylor calls himself a "die-hard capitalist" who wants only to restore 
democracy, honor and Christian values to Liberia after a decade of corruption 
under Doe. But U.S. officials remain profoundly suspicious of the rebel leader, 
whose movement has alleged financial ties to Libya and who says he has no 
intention of sharing power with anyone after ousting his longtime rival. 
The U.S.-educated Taylor, 42, served for three years as a Cabinet minister in 
Doe's government before vanishing in 1983 amid accusations that he embezzled 
nearly $1 million from the Liberian treasury. Interpol, the international 
police agency, tracked him down to the United States and he was picked up by 
U.S. authorities in May, 1984, on a Liberian extradition warrant. 
He escaped from a Massachusetts jail in 1985 to avoid trial on the Liberian 
charges and later appeared in the West African nations of Ghana, Burkina Faso 
and Ivory Coast, where he put together the rebel band now approaching the 
Liberian capital of Monrovia. 
Those who knew him as a student organizer in Massachusetts and a Cabinet 
officer in Liberia describe him as vain, authoritarian and not too bright, 
according to U.S. officials who are compiling biographical data on the figure 
who may soon lead the impoverished African nation founded by former American 
slaves in 1847. 
Taylor was born and raised in Liberia but, like many of the descendants of 
former slaves who refer to themselves as Americo-Liberians, went to the United 
States for his higher education. 
According to school records, Taylor was graduated from Bentley College, a 
little-known business school in Waltham, Mass., with a degree in economics in 
1977. Peter Kent, a college official, said a quick canvass of faculty members 
could find none who remembered the Liberian undergraduate. 
After graduation, Taylor apparently stayed in the Boston area and was active 
with the Union of Liberian Assns. in the Americas, according to a former 
official of the group who testified at Taylor's extradition hearing in 1984. 
Taylor himself said last month that at the time of the Doe-led coup that 
toppled former Liberian President William R. Tolbert Jr., he had been president 
of the U.S.-based National Liberian Liberation Movement. 
At a press conference in the village of Tapeta, Liberia, on May 18, Taylor 
accused Doe of illegally holding power after leading the 1980 rebellion of 
junior army officers. Back then, Doe was a 30-year-old master sergeant. 
"That boy was supposed to return his little self to the barracks and he 
reneged," Taylor said. 
After seizing power, Doe invited Taylor to return to Liberia to serve as 
director general of Liberia's General Services Agency. Taylor served in the 
post from April, 1980, to September, 1983, when he vanished after allegedly 
diverting $922,000 in government funds to a private bank account in New York 
controlled by a fictitious firm called International Earth-Moving Equipment 
Inc. 
The Liberian government, backed by the U.S. Justice Department, sought Taylor 
for extradition to Monrovia to face trial on embezzlement charges. When he was 
traced by Interpol and arrested in Somerville, Mass., Taylor did not ask for 
bail, saying he feared for his life if he were to be released. 
At an extradition hearing that September, Taylor's lawyer, former Atty. Gen. 
Ramsey Clark, said that the charges against Taylor were political and warned 
that the former Liberian official would be murdered if he were returned to his 
native country. 
A U.S. magistrate ordered Taylor extradited in March, 1985, but he escaped from 
prison before he could be transported. When he turned up later that year in 
Ghana, U.S. officials dropped the extradition warrant against him because he 
was already outside of the United States. 
"I skipped from jail to escape Doe's lies," Taylor said at last month's press 
conference. 
"I'm in for peace but the peace I'm in for is the peace that does not involve 
Samuel Doe," Taylor said in a recent interview with the British Broadcasting 
Corp. "Now we can talk all the peace in the world, but Doe is in no position to 
talk to our Liberians about peace." 
Taylor said he felt no need to include other Liberian dissidents in any 
government he might form, and refused to promise elections any time soon. He 
gave no other hints as to the nature of the regime he might establish, except 
that he wanted to maintain friendly ties to the United States. 
LIBERIA 
At-a-Glance 
LAND 
Lying between Ivory Coast, Guinea and Sierra Leone, the West African nation of 
Liberia covers 37,743 square miles. The coastal plain gives way to rocky 
cliffs, and strong tides make access to the Atlantic Ocean difficult. The 
highest elevations are in the northern highlands, which rise up to 4,500 feet. 
THE PEOPLE 
The population is estimated at more than 2.5 million, including 16 principal 
tribal groups and about 50,000 descendants of freed American slaves who founded 
the country. English is the official language. The vast majority of the country 
practices traditional African religions. 
ECONOMY 
Even before a 5-month-old guerrilla war began, the economy was near collapse, 
though the country possesses some of the richest iron ore in the world. Liberia 
has been unable to pay its foreign debt, and it has been suspended by the 
International Monetary Fund. Though the currency is tied to the U.S. dollar, 
little money is in circulation, driving up prices and increasing the value of 
the few dollars available. Though mining earns more than 64 percent of 
Liberia's foreign exchange, agricultural remains the main employer. 
HISTORY 
In 1822, freed American slaves visited Liberia and began settlements. They 
declared Liberia an independent republic in 1847. Descendants of the freed 
slaves, called Americo-Liberians, dominated the country until then-Master Sgt. 
Samuel Doe led a military coup on April 12, 1979. He was popular with the 
majority of Liberians, who resented the dominance of the Americo-Liberians. Doe 
headed a military government until October 1985, when elections were held. He 
claimed a victory, but opposition parties and independent observers said the 
vote was rigged. On Dec. 24, 1989, former Doe aide Charles Taylor invaded with 
a small band of men from Ivory Coast. Taylor said he intended to topple Doe's 
government. 
