HIGH-TECH SALES STRICTURES SHIFT TO THIRD WORLD 
The battle to keep strategically sensitive technology safely in the hands of 
the Western democracies is shifting -- from Eastern Europe to the Third World. 
As the Cold War winds down in Eastern Europe, the United States and its allies 
have begun to relax prohibitions on Western exports of strategically sensitive 
materials to the former Soviet Bloc. The barriers are dropping at a dazzling 
pace. 
Earlier this month, the allies agreed on a sweeping overhaul of longstanding 
restrictions on high-technology goods ranging from computers to machine tools. 
The changes are intended to ease the way for sales of equipment needed to 
modernize Eastern Europe. 
Just last week, the Commerce Department announced that it will end 40-year-old 
requirements that U.S. firms obtain export licenses on high-technology goods 
that they ship to other Western countries -- part of the same export-control 
process. 
But the liberalization has focused the international spotlight on a grim 
reality: With the Soviet threat gradually waning, the big danger that the 
Western powers face is the increasing possibility that strategically sensitive 
technology will leak more freely to the Third World. 
Dennis Kloske, undersecretary of commerce for export administration, warns that 
the Western powers must act together to make certain that Third World countries 
do not exploit the opening up of Eastern Europe to "set up shop in what could 
become a technology bazaar." 
Such fears are not unfounded. During the years of Soviet domination, 
trafficking of chemicals, armaments and munitions to Third World countries was 
a major source of hard currency for Czechoslovakia and other sophisticated East 
European countries. 
The bomb that blew up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, was loaded 
with Semtex -- a plastic explosive made in Czechoslovakia. Vaclav Havel, the 
country's new democratic president, admits that Libya now has a 40-year supply 
in stock. 
And it is not just Eastern Europe that may provide the materials. Taiwan, South 
Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore have the technology and capacity to make 
strategically sensitive equipment, and none of them belongs to any of the 
international conventions that bar sales to the Third World. 
Plainly apprehensive, the major Western governments have begun moving quietly 
to stem sales of strategically sensitive technology to developing countries -- 
particularly Iraq, Iran, Libya and Syria, which so far have been able to 
purchase such equipment almost at will. 
The Paris-based Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls (Cocom) 
-- the 17-country compact that has overseen postwar restrictions on East-West 
trade -- is hammering out new accords with Eastern Europe that contain some 
safeguards on resales to the Third World. 
And the United States and its allies have tightened restrictions -- at least in 
principle -- on North-South sales of technology and equipment that developing 
countries might be able to use in producing missiles and chemical weapons. 
But officials here acknowledge that the effort has been slow and frustrating. 
And experts see little hope that the Western governments will be able to 
strengthen their regulations -- or their enforcement activities -- enough to 
deal with the North-South issue satisfactorily. 
Analysts concede that the existing enforcement machinery is sketchy. Most 
governments are reluctant to transform Cocom -- which was set up to deal solely 
with East-West trade -- into a North-South agency as well. The agency has 
enough dissension as it is. 
And the machinery for controlling exports of missile technology and chemicals 
-- the eight-country Missile Technology Control Regime and the 20-nation 
Australia Group -- are little more than loose compacts, built around vague 
declarations of policy. 
The response by the Missile Technology Control Regime, for example, has been 
simply to draw up a list of products that might be useful to would-be missile 
manufacturers, and to pledge -- somewhat generally -- to try to tighten 
controls on who can buy them. 
The Australia Group has been more specific, hammering out a list of 50 
particularly dangerous chemicals that its members have agreed not to sell to 
Iran, Iraq, Libya and Syria. Nine of these are so sensitive that they can be 
sold only to other members of the group. 
But, as shown by recent disclosures of West German sales of mustard-gas 
manufacturing equipment to Libya, enforcement has not always proven 
satisfactory. The rules "are nowhere near being airtight," said a congressional 
arms sales expert. 
More ominously, George Rehm, a Washington lawyer who specializes in 
export-control issues, said the fundamental problem is that, unlike computers, 
the technologies involved in chemicals, armaments and munitions are so widely 
held that it is almost impossible to organize all producers. 
"The best we could hope for is that the major players who can help developing 
countries take a quantum leap into this new technology will be willing to 
discipline themselves," Rehm said. "We're never going to stop people entirely." 
Meanwhile, the stakes are becoming higher every day: 
* Only last year, Iraq was able to obtain West European and East German help to 
upgrade its Soviet-built Scud-B missiles to a 380-mile range that could easily 
threaten the entire Middle East region. It is now working on a follow-up 
version that is expected to have a range of 550 miles. 
* Iran is seeking help from China and North Korea to build a 200-mile missile. 
And Egypt and Iraq may well acquire missiles with a 500-mile range as a result 
of their participation in the Condor program, an international defense effort. 
* South Korea has successfully converted U.S.-built, two-stage Nike 
surface-to-air missiles into medium-range surface missiles capable of traveling 
110 to 160 miles -- far enough to counter any threat from North Korea. 
* Sven Kraemer, deputy director of the Center for Security Policy, a 
Washington-based research group, notes that about half a dozen other Third 
World countries are developing missiles that will enable them to reach well 
into neighboring countries' territory. "That leads us to worry about the 
blackmail threat," he said. 
* Among the countries now capable of producing their own chemical weapons are 
Iran, Iraq, Libya, Syria, China, North Korea, South Korea, Taiwan and possibly 
Israel and Egypt. 
The picture is not entirely bleak. A new report last week by the Congressional 
Research Service shows that arms sales to the Third World decreased by 24% last 
year to $29.3 billion -- the lowest level since 1983. 
The slowdown, which affected Libya, Syria and Iraq as well as other countries, 
reflects the scaling back of regional conflicts and the heavy debt burdens that 
have left many of these countries unable to afford arms purchases. 
But the report also raised the possibility that the slump in arms sales may be 
simply a lull, attributable to the fact that many Third World governments are 
glutted with weaponry they bought in the 1970s and 1980s. 
With superpower arms-reduction treaties now in the offing, both the United 
States and the Soviet Union are looking to Third World governments as potential 
substitute markets for the weapons churned out by their own defense 
establishments. 
Other big suppliers, such as Brazil and Argentina, have similar expectations. 
And even in Eastern Europe's new democracies, arms sales will continue to be 
big. Czechoslovakia's Havel, for example, has asserted that although his 
country will try to limit new sales, it will honor previous contracts with 
Third World countries. 
Moreover, even a more permanent reduction in Third World arms purchases will 
not reduce the danger that such weapons as chemicals, missile technology and 
nuclear explosives could fall into the hands of irresponsible developing 
countries like Libya. 
"Certain countries are a real concern," acknowledged a U.S. export-control 
specialist. 
The Bush Administration is only beginning to grapple with the problem. U.S. 
negotiators have been pressing U.S. allies more vigorously to tighten 
international restrictions on the sale of chemicals, nuclear weapons and high 
technology to Third World countries. 
U.S. officials said that West Germany and Japan both have stiffened their 
enforcement significantly in recent months, but problems remain. 
But whether there will be enough public concern over the issue worldwide to 
force governments to further tighten their enforcement efforts remains to be 
seen. 
"Intellectually, people realize that the stuff is falling into the hands of the 
craziest people abroad," a congressional expert said, "but there just isn't an 
emotional awareness yet. As a result, not much is being done." 
