AMA URGES ACTION ON SEVERE POLLUTION ALONG U.S.-MEXICAN BORDER 
Pollution is so severe and infectious disease so rampant along the U.S.-Mexico 
border that a binational commission must be created to solve the problems, an 
American Medical Assn. report said Tuesday. 
"Current solutions are inadequate, fragmentary and not coordinated by the two 
nations," said the report, published Tuesday in the Journal of the American 
Medical Assn. The full AMA approved a committee recommendation to create such a 
commission last summer, but the report was not published until Tuesday. 
Conditions are so squalid, the AMA said, that they seriously affect health and 
economics on both sides of the border. Specifically: 
About 12 million gallons of raw sewage flow daily into the Tijuana River before 
it empties into the Pacific Ocean off San Diego County. Another 20 million and 
22 million gallons, respectively, are dumped into the New River at Mexicali and 
the Rio Grande in Texas. 
The fecal count at some points in the Rio Grande is a dangerous 22,000 bacteria 
per milliliter. 
Hepatitis is especially high among people who live along the border. About 35% 
of children under 8 in San Elizario, Tex., near El Paso, have had hepatitis A, 
and 85% to 90% of residents contract it by 35. 
Rabies is a constant threat on both sides of the border. The report notes that 
in Laredo, Tex., across the border from the Mexican town of Nuevo Laredo, stray 
dogs bite more than 500 people a year. 
The report acknowledges that there have been some efforts in recent years to 
solve the problems. 
In October, President Bush and Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari 
reached a historic agreement to build a sewage plant in the United States to 
treat up to 25 million gallons of Tijuana waste daily. 
The plant would end pollution of the Tijuana River, which enters the Pacific 
north of the border and has contaminated beaches there for years. A 2 1/2-mile 
section of beach just north of the border has been closed for more than six 
years. 
A written agreement between the two nations to begin construction could be 
completed as early as next week, said Bob Ybarra, spokesman in El Paso for the 
International Boundary and Water Commission. 
The commission, set up in 1889, is responsible for boundary and water issues 
between the two countries, while air pollution solutions are the responsibility 
of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Mexican Secretariat of Urban 
Development and Ecology. 
The EPA's efforts -- which the AMA notes are coordinated by people who live in 
Mexico City and Washington, not along the border -- and the water commission's 
work are not enough, said William C. Scott, chairman of the AMA's Council on 
Scientific Affairs. 
"Neither one has very effectively attacked the problems of the severe 
environmental deterioration that's happening along the border," Scott said. 
"The water commission does the water stuff and the EPA does the air stuff, and 
neither one of them pay attention to a lot of problems that fall in between." 
Although the AMA said the idea of a binational environmental health commission 
has been endorsed by health officials, cities and public health associations 
along the border, the Bush Administration says such a commission is 
unnecessary. 
