THE 'LUNGS OF THE PLANET' ARE IMPERILED; 
ENVIRONMENT: BUSH'S DESIRE TO OPEN NEW OIL DRILLING OFF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA IS 
DANGEROUS. ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES ARE AVAILABLE AND SHOULD BE TAPPED. 
At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, we were seduced by oil. The 
thick, black substance powered our inventions. It made our economy grow. We had 
no idea that oil was an environmental poison that would one day pollute our air 
and threaten to spoil our oceans. 
In the 1920s, we learned that certain properties of oil are uncontrollable: No 
amount of preparation and care can prevent a well blowout. California's Supreme 
Court enshrined that fact by declaring oil drilling on land and on sea an 
ultra-hazardous activity. 
In the 1950s, we began to see and feel the effects of an oil-based economy. 
Smog began to get our lungs' attention. At the end of the 1960s, we were 
shocked and saddened by the waves of dead marine life caused by the Santa 
Barbara oil spill. Nevertheless, the politics of oil moved out to sea in the 
1980s: President Ronald Reagan, for the first time in history, opened the 
entire coastline of America to the oil industry. 
The oceans are the lungs of the planet, the main source of our oxygen. They 
play a crucial role in shaping our climate. It is in the coastal zones where 
the life force of the ocean germinates and breeds. Spilling oil, a toxin, into 
them is analogous to injecting poison into a person's veins. 
There is no need to put our coastal resources at risk. There are alternatives 
that are technologically feasible and readily available. All that's needed is 
political will. 
But President Bush remains wedded to an offshore oil policy that envisions oil 
fields in Southern California waters. The announcement is expected shortly. His 
perseverance in promoting a 19th-Century energy source is dangerous and 
environmentally reckless. 
At the current rate of consumption, the world's oil supplies will be exhausted 
in about 100 years. Why cling to this dwindling energy source that poisons our 
habitat? California's and the country's continuing energy need does not mean 
that offshore oil development is necessary. 
The 21st Century will be fueled by conservation and by clean, renewable fuels. 
The only question is whether we will sentence our grandchildren to a frantic, 
polluted world that is desperately trying to develop a 
renewable-fuels/conservation economy or begin preparing now to shift away from 
fossil fuels. 
Today, the city and county of Los Angeles use methanol to power their fleets of 
cars. Southern California Edison uses electricity to keep its vans going. The 
Southern California Gas Co. runs trucks on compressed natural gas. We can -- 
and should -- develop vehicles that run on ethanol (made from corn). The sun, 
after all, could supply much of the world's energy. 
We also have the technology to conserve billions of barrels of oil as we move 
to a renewable-fuels economy. We can make automobiles that are capable of 
getting 107 miles per gallon; many cars sold today get 50 m.p.g. Yet President 
Bush, as did his predecessor, continues to embrace the 1985 fleet standard of 
27.5 m.p.g. 
If we raised that fleet average to 40 m.p.g. by the year 2000, we could save 
four times the amount of oil that is estimated to be off the Atlantic and 
Pacific coasts. If the nation's households installed storm windows and 
insulation during the next decade, we could save twice the oil offshore. 
The battle to drill for oil in the ocean must end, for a healthy, living ocean 
is essential to the planet's well-being. If an oil field is developed off 
Southern California, the probability of a major oil spill occurring in the area 
is 94%. It is certain, too, that we would have many more oil tankers in 
Southern California's waters, because the the Coastal Commission, the State 
Lands Commission and the affected municipalities are not going to approve 
pipelines to move the oil 
Californians do not want to go to the beach and see an oil field. What we do 
want is an energy policy that protects our coastal resources. We can have both 
energy and an unpolluted environment. It is time for the government and the oil 
industry to join with the environmental community in developing a 
renewable-fuels/conservation energy policy that guarantees both the integrity 
of the ocean and the well-being of the Earth's environment. 
