ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
HIGH-SPEED TRAIN NEEDS PUBLIC LAND 
A Bechtel Corp. official conceded Wednesday that the company's proposed 
magnetically levitated, 300-m.p.h. train from Anaheim to Las Vegas cannot be 
financed and built privately as planned without the donation of publicly owned 
rights of way along Interstate 15 in the California and Nevada deserts. 
Addressing more than 100 business executives and engineering experts at a 
luncheon meeting of the Industrial League of Orange County in Costa Mesa, 
Bechtel Senior Vice President Erv Koenig also said his firm will not do 
independent ridership feasibility studies -- a key to obtaining financial 
backing -- unless Bechtel is awarded an exclusive franchise from the bistate 
panel studying the project. 
Koenig said Bechtel has already committed more than $3 million of its own money 
to project preparation and won't spend millions more on additional studies 
until it knows the money will be recovered. 
"It's a matter of business economics," he said. 
Until now, the only ridership projections have come from a 1989 Canadian 
Institute of Ground Transport study financed by the city of Las Vegas, which 
originated the high-speed train proposal. The study projected ridership levels 
exceeding 5 million passengers annually by the year 2000. Although some experts 
have strong doubts about the study's estimates, Koenig said he believes they 
are too conservative. 
Referring to the cost of rights of way, Koenig said after the luncheon that 
California, Nevada and federal officials are anxious to donate a 50-foot-wide 
swath of land adjacent to Interstate 15 but that they must await congressional 
action since current law forbids private use of federal highway land. 
The train "simply can't make a profit without that land," Koenig said. "If the 
bill fails to pass for some reason, then this won't be a private project." 
San Francisco-based Bechtel is one of three firms expected to file formal bids 
for the project by the July 16 deadline with the California-Nevada Super Speed 
Ground Transportation Commission, created two years ago to plan and award an 
exclusive franchise. The final award, expected in September, must be ratified 
by the legislatures of both states. 
The other two firms are Montreal-based Bombardier and Boise-based 
Morrison-Knudsen. Both are expected to propose French high-speed train 
technology, which employs steel wheels on steel tracks but at faster speeds 
than conventional trains. 
Bechtel has teamed with the West German Transrapid group, which has developed 
the mag-lev train at a test track near Emsland. JEFFREY A. PERLMAN 
