FOR BETTER OR WORSE, MANY RETIREES SAY BYE, BYE, MISS AMERICAN PIE 
The year was 1981 and, in San Jose, Tom Curran was hearing rumors that the 
savings and loan service department in which he worked was about to be 
transferred to Los Angeles. 
"After having lived there three years, and now being happily settled in San 
Jose for 14 years, I was age 49 and I dreaded the thought of having to face 
that rat race in Southern California again," he recalled. 
So Curran, divorced, took a somewhat unusual tour to the Central American 
country of Costa Rica. It was led by Modesto-based Retirement Explorations, 
which periodically escorts groups of Americans on personal-evaluation tours of 
foreign countries popular as retirement havens. "I liked what I saw in Costa 
Rica, and I spent $12,500 to buy a lot on a hill overlooking another San Jose 
-- the capital city," Curran said. "For another $24,000, I built a 
three-bedroom house on it. 
"By then, the department's move in California had been officially announced. I 
submitted my resignation and cashed out everything I owned -- two pieces of 
property, furniture, car. I added the money from this to my severance pay, and 
put everything into a savings account." 
Curran said he gets by easily in Costa Rica on $600 a month, which covers his 
comprehensive health-care plan, automobile insurance, twice-weekly maid 
service, frequent restaurant meals, cable television service supplying most 
stateside stations, and trips to the United States to visit his daughter and 
son. 
More Heading Abroad 
Expatriating. It is a decision being reached by a lot of Americans at or near 
retirement age: Instead of settling for a reduced standard of living -- 
sometimes substantially so -- on diminished retirement incomes in the United 
States, they head abroad; in many cases to a life more luxurious than the one 
they had when they worked for a living. 
Every silver lining, however, has its cloud. Authorities and experienced 
retirees mention such potential negatives as culture shock over everything from 
the local cuisine to driving habits to the lack of American products, 
loneliness (which may be only partially alleviated by moving to the "Gringo 
Gulch" section of one's adopted country), security problems (barred windows 
aren't uncommon in some parts of Costa Rica, for example) and political 
instability. 
There also may be the necessity of learning a foreign language, 
property-ownership problems (some countries don't allow outsiders to hold title 
or leave property to their heirs), being many miles and expensive airline 
flights away from family and friends, and below-customary standards for such 
services as mail, telephones and health care. 
Advises John Howells, author of the book "Choose Latin America": "Expect the 
unexpected." 
"There are many reasons why retired Americans are relocating aboard," said 
Shirley Waldrum, senior program specialist with the American Assn. of Retired 
Persons, the omnipresent group that claims more than 30 million members. "Not 
the least of the reasons is the fact that in most of the more popular places, 
the pace of living is slower than what they have been used to, particularly if 
the newcomers had been living in an urban area." 
Opting for Earlier Retirement 
Peter A. Dickinson, author of "Travel and Retirement Edens Abroad," said from 
his home in Prescott, Ariz., that the trend to retirement abroad appears to 
have begun in the mid-1970s. 
"Around that time, people began more and more to choose early retirement," he 
said. "Having education, energy, and the desire to travel, they found they 
might be more able to do so from a permanent foreign location, where lower 
living expenses might permit room in the budget for seeing other places. 
"As people began feeling comfortable about living in other nations," Dickinson 
added, "the word spread." 
How many Americans have uprooted? Philip Covington, public affairs officer with 
the Consular Affairs Bureau in Washington, D. C., said an estimated 2 million 
U. S. citizens are living overseas, a figure that doesn't include U. S. 
government workers, either military or non-military. 
"As for how many of that total are retirees, we have no way of knowing," he 
said. "But I would be surprised if the number isn't at least half a million." 
Although no agency or organization specifically tracks numbers of older 
Americans living abroad, there are some clues: 
* According to Frank Battistelli of the Social Security Administration, 163,649 
Social Security retirement checks are being sent monthly to former American 
workers in foreign nations. As of April, the top 10 foreign countries for 
Americans receiving retirement Social Security checks were Canada (32,094), 
Mexico (20,072), Italy (19,520), West Germany (10,108), Greece (7,333), the 
Philippines (6,690), Portugal (4,516), Ireland (3,698), Israel (3,000) and 
Spain (2,917) -- figures up slightly from previous years. 
* However, according to Marty Scutt, a retirement travel consultant, probably 
at least that many people are having their checks deposited in banks in the 
United States while living abroad, and simply draw on them. 
* To that total, of course, must be added those seniors in other lands who 
haven't yet reached age 62, the earliest at which a Social Security retirement 
check is issued. 
Dickinson said that in some cases the above figures represent numbers of older 
Americans who have decided to return to their roots. 
"With many others, however, the moves reflect a sense of adventure, especially 
now that they have the time and usually the money to expand their horizons," 
Dickinson said. 
Canada -- the country requiring perhaps the least dislocation of American 
sensibilities -- is (judging from the number of Social Security recipients) the 
most popular foreign relocation destination. Among the reasons, Dickinson 
noted, are being nearer home, benefiting from relatively low energy costs, 
being eligible for an excellent national health system, living somewhat less 
expensively because of the favorable exchange rate, and living pretty much an 
American life style. 
Why They Move 
Jane Parker, who started Retirement Explorations about 11 years ago, said her 
tour group has just completed a survey of American retirees in Spain, Portugal 
and Costa Rica. She said the reasons they gave for making the moves were, in 
order of importance: 
* Living in a peaceful and relaxed environment. 
* Living inexpensively. 
* Being in comfortable weather (Scutt noted that in many of the more favored 
places -- such as Portugal, Spain and Costa Rica -- a fireplace will do for 
heat, an overhead fan for air conditioning). 
* Having access to good medical facilities. 
On the other side of the coin, when the several hundred American retirees 
surveyed were asked why they had chosen to leave the United States, Parker said 
they gave reasons such as the increase in crime and in drug usage, traffic 
congestion, medical costs -- "and the general attitude of young people toward 
their elders. In their new nations, the retirees like the idea of finding older 
people treated with respect." 
However, roses do have thorns. 
Charles Leining and his wife, Joel, both 67 and living in Los Angeles, had 
heard a lot about Mexico's San Miguel de Allende, also known as Carmel South, a 
cultural vortex for expatriates. 
"In November of last year, we went down to see for ourselves," he said. "We 
liked what we saw and heard. We found a new apartment building that was being 
constructed, and the owner said he would rent us one of the apartments, fully 
furnished, for $300 a month. 
"We gave up our apartment in Los Angeles, and put our furniture in storage. My 
wife had to go to the Northwest on an extended business trip, but, at the end 
of February, I went down with the intention of getting everything set up so 
that we could both settle down there permanently." 
Leining, a former university administrator (at USC and the University of 
Redlands), said the accommodations were first- rate -- "the apartment had a 
beamed ceiling, and outside was a lime tree I just had to shake to get as many 
as I wanted." 
The newcomer said that, in order to assimilate while awaiting the arrival of 
his wife, he plunged into activities: 
"Five days a week, I taught a 90-minute English class for Mexican children at 
the local school, on Tuesday afternoons I played cribbage with other 
expatriates, on Wednesday afternoons I went to the Rotary Club meetings, for 
three hours on Friday afternoons I taught English to the prisoners at the jail. 
I joined a church, I went to art shows, I wrote a column on aging for the 
English-language newspaper." 
Still, he recalled, he found himself with a nebulous sense of loneliness: "I 
was around people, but I somehow felt lonesome, and it wasn't just because of 
the absence of my wife. Eventually, I felt that even when she arrived, we would 
never really fit in. 
"I found there were other expatriates with the same feeling. They sat around 
all day and just brooded." 
Leining said he began increasingly hearing complaints of how much more 
expensive everything is in San Miguel de Allende than it used to be. "A little 
5-ounce can of shaving cream, for instance, costs $6. 
Many Loved the Life 
"Of course, I came across many expatriates who had lived there 10 to 20 years, 
and loved it. Some said they had left their native lands because they had 
become disillusioned. In effect, they were saying the hell with everything." 
By the end of May, however, Leining made a decision, called up his wife, and 
said, "Let's go back to L.A.": "I don't mean to put down Mexico, but it just 
wouldn't have been for us. My wife agreed." 
Leining is staying in Los Angeles with his daughter, his wife is due in town 
soon, and they plan to resume their retirement in the United States. 
As most retirees know before they go, or quickly find out, Social Security 
checks will keep coming no matter how long you stay outside the United States 
-- except if you are in Albania, Cuba, Kampuchea (formerly Cambodia), East 
Berlin, East Germany, North Korea or Vietnam. 
Medicare, on the other hand, usually doesn't follow the retiree. It may cover 
in emergency situations in Mexico and Canada, a spokesman for the program 
noted, but otherwise not if one is living elsewhere abroad. 
And regardless of the country, the American abroad must continue to file U. S. 
income tax returns, according to Internal Revenue Service public affairs 
specialist Shirley Nakagawa. This may be in addition to filing a tax return in 
the new country -- although for some or all of this liability one may receive a 
credit against U. S. income tax. 
Authorities on retirement abroad recommend renting, certainly at the beginning, 
and possibly indefinitely. "If you buy property, and your new country starts 
having economic or political problems," Dickinson said, "you may have trouble 
getting your money out." 
Limits on Property 
And some nations put limits on real property transactions by foreigners. Fred 
Andresen, president of the Harbor Group Ltd., a real estate marketing firm in 
Corona del Mar that specializes in luxury foreign properties, mentioned 
Switzerland -- an expensive but desirable retirement haven. 
"It is illegal for non-Swiss to purchase property unless such a transaction had 
been authorized in advance by the canton (Swiss state). And if a foreigner does 
get permission to purchase, there can be no sale of it to another foreigner 
until the property has been owned for five years. 
"However, a home in Switzerland, once permitted, is well worth the effort." 
If the destination that the retiree has in mind does permit ownership, Andresen 
said, that person shouldn't sign anything before getting trustworthy local 
advice, such as from an attorney or real estate specialist. And tour-group 
founder Parker pointed out that the best bet is to pay cash and forget about 
trying for a mortgage, which can be difficult or impossible. 
As for willing any foreign property to heirs, a matter obviously of importance 
to retirees, Andresen recommended checking in advance with the consulate or 
with a tax lawyer. 
If you are headed abroad with the intention of finding work locally, forget it 
(unless you have sought-after skills). Many places aren't at all interested in 
your permanent presence if you may become a burden on their economies. 
"Most countries you might be interested in have strict regulations on outsiders 
working, unless your field is something like dentistry or electronics 
engineering," Howells said. 
"In Spain, for instance, it is very difficult for a foreigner to be allowed to 
hold a local job. In Costa Rica, you are allowed to stay if you apply for and 
obtain Pensionado status, by proving you will have a steady income from a 
private pension plan, investment income and Social Security." 
Spain a Magnet 
Like Costa Rica, Spain's relatively cheap living is becoming a magnet for many. 
The majority of Americans live in the Costa del Sol facing the Mediterranean, 
where Dickinson said he hears that a couple can live well on $1,400 a month. 
Howells quoted one expatriate: "Come on over and enjoy your retirement, but 
when you see medical problems coming, go home!" 
As Howells relates in "Choose Mexico," a book he co-authored with Don Merwin: 
"$400 a month, judiciously spent, will provide a couple with comfortable and 
attractive housing, meals out when you like, possibly a part-time servant, and 
a reasonable amount of travel." Inflation in terms of the peso has been high, 
Howells said, but if retirees have kept their funds in the United States, the 
currency exchange rate has allowed their buying power to remain relatively 
stable. 
Another pensioners' paradise reportedly is Portugal. Particularly popular is 
the Algarve region along the southern coast. "Compared with other European 
countries, including Spain, Portugal has always been relatively inexpensive," 
Dickinson said. Parker said she and her husband, Joe, have purchased a fully 
furnished house overlooking the Atlantic there for $85,000. 
On the other hand, Argentina, which attracts American retirees, was rocked by 
food rioting last month in the wake of skyrocketing inflation. The political 
climate in Costa Rica has been stable so far, but there is no hiding the fact 
that its neighbors are Nicaragua and Panama. 
For many retirees, however, the advantages outweigh any potential perils. 
"The truth," 76-year-old Walter Vela said from Montevideo, "is that my pension 
would be insufficient in the United States for my wife and I to maintain an 
acceptable standard of living such as we enjoy in Uruguay." 
Vela, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Swarthmore College, had been a Latin 
American economist for General Motors, advising GM on sales and plant 
locations. 
"They treated me well, but as regards the pension, you mustn't confuse General 
Motors with Generous Motors," he quipped. 
Amount Needed for Housing 
In 1975, he and his wife, Betty, 56, decided to make Montevideo their permanent 
retirement headquarters. "It takes from $1,500 to $2,500 a month for an 
American couple to live," Walter Vela noted. "A large house sells for from 
$110,000 to $300,000, a good condo goes from $80,000 to $150,000. For rentals, 
a two-bedroom apartment is from $600 to $1,000." 
Vela said gasoline is expensive -- about $2.50 a gallon -- but because of 
excellent public transportation, a car isn't necessary. 
"Health care is superb," he said. "There are well-qualified physicians, and 
excellent hospitals, which charge around $100 a day for a semi-private room." 
As author Howells points out: "The nation's literacy rate is an incredible 97%. 
Education is both free and compulsory." 
Vela, who has lived in various communities both in the United States, South 
America and Europe, said the towns in Uruguay are the most crime-free he has 
ever known. In the resort of Punta del Este, he said, "my wife and I can go for 
a walk in the woods at night without any worries." 
And in that community, Howells writes: "A dinner is an elegant restaurant will 
cost $3, and a taxi ride just about anywhere in town $1.50." 
The only significant drawback for him and his wife, Vela said, is that it is 
rather a long flight to see their daughter in Connecticut and son in Florida. 
And since English isn't commonly spoken, Vela strongly recommended learning 
Spanish. 
"But we have never considered retirement in the United States," Vela said. 
"Life is too good here." 
From Costa Rica, Curran echoed those sentiments. 
The interest his savings account generates, "plus a small pension I began 
receiving from my former employer when I reached 55, provides more than I need 
to live on." 
What does he do with his time? "As little as possible," he replied. 
"During a day I may work in my garden a little. I have orange and banana trees, 
and vegetables. Occasionally I go on drives around the countryside. I sometimes 
speak before groups of visiting Americans who are considering making the move. 
I watch TV and read, both in English and in Spanish. My two German shepherds 
keep me company. 
"The cost of everything is ridiculously low. My maid works here for five hours 
a day, two days a week, and charges $3 each visit. Lettuce costs 5 cents a 
head. A meal in a first-class restaurant runs about $5. A first-run American 
movie is $1.50. Government-run health insurance is $20 a month. Cable 
television service is $10 a month." 
Do you know the way to San Jose? 
