SCOPE: DIAPERS, A DIPLOMA AND DREAMS 
The crisply pressed, satin-white gown and mortarboard, with the blue and gold 
Class of '89 tassel already attached, hung conspicuously in one corner of 
Gladys Cabibbo's family room last week. 
But the 18-year-old Montebello High School honors student, who will collect her 
diploma with about 500 other graduates tonight, was far too busy changing her 
daughter's diaper and chasing after her young son to make much ado about what 
many consider to be one of life's high points. 
"I don't know, I guess I am ready for it (graduation)," Cabibbo said 
nonchalantly as she held month-old Portia over her shoulder and patted her 
baby's back gently. She is already looking ahead to September, when she will 
begin studying to be an accountant, on a full scholarship, at a local college. 
After almost two years of balancing class work with the challenges that go 
along with being a young parent, Cabibbo has beat the heavy odds against 
staying in school. And she did it with honors. 
Scholarship Worth $19,000 
Earning a 3.57 grade-point average in her senior year, Cabibbo has accepted a 
full scholarship, valued at $19,000, to the DeVry Institute of Technology. She 
was accepted at Cal State Los Angeles, but passed it up to attend DeVry, where 
she plans to earn a bachelor of science degree in three years. 
"It's better for me," said Cabibbo of the Illinois-based institute's various 
academic programs for non-traditional students. "It gives me time to work and 
time to take care of the kids." 
Cabibbo is one of three students awarded full scholarships this school year at 
DeVry's City of Industry campus. She competed against nearly 750 high school 
students who applied for the scholarships, which are awarded yearly by a panel 
of local high school principals, counselors and administrators of the technical 
institute. 
Of the 20 young mothers and mothers-to-be graduating this year from the 
Montebello Unified School District's Pregnant Minor Program, only Cabibbo and 
one other woman plan to go on to a four-year college, said director Mary Lou 
Williams. The program, part of the district's alternative education department, 
is based at Montebello High. 
About 90 girls a year enroll in the four-year-old Pregnant Minor Program, which 
was established by the district to combat a trend by pregnant teen-agers to 
drop out of school, school officials said. 
Last year, more than 18,000 school-age girls in the county became pregnant, and 
an estimated 80% of those did not finish high school, Williams said. The 
Pregnant Minor Program provides the students with a flexible learning 
environment while they prepare to become mothers. 
However, Williams admits, almost one-third of those enrolled in the Pregnant 
Minor Program eventually drop out if they are not close to graduating when they 
have their babies. 
Cabibbo, who had her first child when she was entering her junior year, said 
she remained in school because of the support of her family and the program's 
teachers and administrators, and a longtime desire to go to college. 
Cabibbo's academic accomplishment, however, came amid financial and personal 
troubles that began in the months after the evening in 1986 that she met Tommy 
Cabibbo, now her husband. Gladys Alberto, then 15, and a few of her Catholic 
high school friends decided to try to get into a popular Los Angeles rock 'n' 
roll nightclub. 
They were admitted to the 18-and-over club, she said. "I was with my friends, 
and (Tommy) was with his," she recalled. "He was cute, so we started dancing." 
She ended up hitching a ride home to Montebello with Tommy, who was 18 at the 
time and had recently graduated from Montebello High. "I didn't know him 
before," she said recently. "But he only lived down the street." 
Gladys soon became pregnant, married Tommy and left St. Paul's Catholic High 
School at the end of her sophomore year, she said. Her father, Cleo Alberto, 
who had objected to his daughter's marriage, accompanied her when she enrolled 
in the Pregnant Minor Program. "He was really understanding," Williams said. 
Dari Alberto, Cabibbo's mother, said that her daughter's unexpected pregnancy 
and marriage devastated her. "I didn't know what to do," she said. "I only 
wanted her to finish school, no matter what." 
During her pregnancy with Tommy Jr., Cabibbo's father suffered a massive stroke 
and fell into a coma. He revived and returned home in time to see his grandson, 
now 16 months old, Dari Alberto said. Cleo Alberto died two months later. 
Gladys and Tommy then decided to have a second child. Gladys finished her class 
work in April, and Portia was born about a month ago. 
Evicted From Apartment 
The young couple attempted to "go it alone" until they were evicted from their 
apartment recently for non-payment of rent. Tommy lives with his parents and 
works with his uncle in construction, while Gladys lives with her mother and 
two younger sisters. "It's not like we had a fight or anything like that," 
Gladys Cabibbo said about the separation. "We couldn't afford it." 
Cabibbo said she and her husband have agreed to live apart until she settles 
into the college routine and he earns more money. 
Not all of the past two years, however, has been traumatic, Cabibbo said. She 
laughs when she remembers the time she had to rewrite an assignment that had 
taken hours to complete. 
"I caught him (Tommy Jr.) eating my papers," Cabibbo said. "He always used to 
write on them, too." 
Cabibbo said that she enjoyed high school and never considered dropping out. "I 
always wanted to go to college. I was always interested in math and I wanted to 
make a career out of (that interest)". 
When asked if her husband is supportive of her college plans and ambition to 
become an accountant, she said, "Sure. He told me that he wants me to grow up 
to be a rich CPA (certified public accountant) for a big company so he can stay 
home and cook for me." 
