TIGERGATE; 
ALL-NIGHT COUNSELING SESSION HAS TURNED INTO A NIGHTMARE FOR WOMEN'S TRACK 
COACH, OTHER OFFICIALS IN LSU ATHLETIC PROGRAM 
On the very day that Coach Loren Seagrave and the women's track and field team 
from Louisiana State University were assembled in the rotunda of the city hall 
here to collect keys to the city -- awarded on the occasion of the team's 
having won its second indoor national title -- two parallel events were 
unfolding. 
One of them, though, was coming together too late. As some tell it now, in 
their legal complaints and depositions, even as Seagrave was attending the 
ceremony last April 12, there were individuals in the LSU athletic department 
who were on the phone to Baton Rouge city officials, frantically trying to stop 
the presentation. "Don't give that man the damn key," was the reported gist of 
it. 
The ceremony was not stopped. Seagrave and his team were made honorary 
mayor-presidents by the Metro Council and some individuals across town at LSU 
were made to seethe. 
The other event had unfolded, quite literally, earlier in the day, as sleepy 
residents of this capital city opened their editions of the Morning Advocate to 
see a sensational story at the top of the sports section. 
It told of how Seagrave, who is married, received a call from one of his female 
athletes late one night in July of 1988. According to the story, she said was 
distraught and needed to talk to him. Seagrave picked the athlete up at her 
apartment and drove her to a vacant house that he occasionally rented. 
His wife was out of town. 
Seagrave said that he and the athlete were at the house for several hours and 
left about 6 a.m. He said that during the all-night counseling session, he had 
hugged the athlete, who has never been named, and kissed her on the cheek, but 
that nothing of a sexual nature occurred. 
Almost a year later, the woman's boyfriend threatened Seagrave that he would 
tell "the real story" of that night. Seagrave preempted that threat by telling 
his version of the encounter to Pat Henry, LSU's men's track coach. Henry took 
the story to Athletic Director Joe Dean. 
Within a week, Seagrave, who engineered his team's phenomenal success -- LSU 
has won the women's indoor and outdoor national titles for two consecutive 
years, an unprecedented feat, five national titles overall -- was fired, after 
six years at the school. He has never been given a reason for his termination, 
which university officials say is in accordance with policy. Seagrave, though, 
is suing. 
All in all, that April 12 was a busy day in Baton Rouge. Among other things, it 
was the official opening day of what people here are calling Tigergate. 
In the wake of Seagrave's firing have surfaced allegations of all manner of 
improper behavior -- racial and sex discrimination, recruiting violations, drug 
use, professional indiscretion, out-of-control school administrators, outdated 
state laws and a conspiracy to oust a man who some folks around here consider 
LSU's most successful coach ever. 
To no one's great surprise, the entire mess is scheduled to land in court, 
where, if all the ungodly stories are repeated, there may be some very shocked 
spectators. 
The heat here has been all but unbearable lately. Considering Loren Seagrave's 
recent experiences, that can be taken both ways. On this particular Tuesday in 
June, however, it is simply hot and humid in a way that is energy-sapping. 
This is the day Seagrave and his wife, Kathy Freeman, must move out of Apt. 1 
at the Plantation Town Apartments in southeast Baton Rouge. They must put their 
belongings in storage, go to track practice and finish packing for Houston, 
where some of the athletes Seagrave coaches will compete in the national 
championships. The next day they will all fly to Europe for the first half of 
the summer track season there. 
Included in the group is Dawn Sowell, hailed by many as the world's next great 
sprinter. 
It is not the best day for Seagrave to sit with a reporter and give his first 
lengthy interview since his dismissal. But he is doing it. He is listening to 
the allegations again, the rumor and the innuendo, just as he has for the past 
month. It's not new. It is the sort of gossip that has followed Seagrave from 
job to job. 
Seagrave, as he goes over the events of that night in July a year ago, says he 
would not change a thing. He would not have hung up on the athlete or told her 
to talk to someone else. He would not have taken her to a restaurant or coffee 
shop instead of the house. He would not have refrained from comforting her, 
even kissing her. 
"The whole thing about counseling people is allowing them to be comfortable and 
allowing them to be spontaneous," Seagrave said. "If a person is feeling 
comfortable where they want to sit and talk, then that's the situation you want 
to be in. 
"See, no woman, or man for that matter, is going to break down and spill her 
guts in the middle of a restaurant. It's just not effective. And it takes a 
while. You don't just plop down and they say this or that. Sometimes it's a lot 
of sitting around talking and feeling comfortable." 
He says he can't understand the winks he has seen from people who are unwilling 
or unable to fathom that a non-sexual encounter is possible. 
"It's a soap-opera mentality," he said. "It ain't real life. It seems pretty 
narrow to me. Maybe the people who are deciding my fate, that's their problem. 
Maybe they have super hang-ups." 
In any event, the prevailing opinion is that Joe Dean and Henry, the men's 
track coach, did not approve of Seagrave or his relationship with his athletes. 
Or, for that matter, the manner in which some of the women on LSU's track team 
behaved. 
Henry, who does not smoke or drink and is by all accounts a devout person, is 
said to have been appalled by the rather freewheeling attitudes held by some 
college-age women. 
Add to that what has been described as Seagrave's "hands-on" approach to his 
team and what some see as a cavalier attitude regarding rules, and you get 
disapproval, at the very least. 
"Behind the whole thing, in my opinion, are the basic philosophical 
differences," said Alton Moran, Seagrave's attorney. "That's what is going on." 
Seagrave, 38, began his coaching career at Madison East High School in Madison, 
Wis., then was hired as an assistant to Peter Tegen at the University of 
Wisconsin. From Tegen emerges a portrait of a bright, ambitious coach, one 
whose personal style was already emerging. 
"Loren was always a very concerned, very considerate and involved coach, that 
was apparent early," Tegen said. "There are those of us who are very distant. 
Loren was always involved with the athlete beyond the training session." 
Tegen remembers Seagrave as a ready learner who picked Tegen's brain regarding 
technique and coaching philosophy. He was a hard worker who was not dismayed by 
long hours, even by coaching standards. 
Tegen said, however, that Seagrave had one trait that disturbed him -- a 
tendency to take rules to their very limits. 
"That was one of the things that made me a little nervous," Tegen said. "Loren 
is willing to play out the rules to their fullest. I'm not saying that he broke 
any rules, really. He was just willing to play them to the fullest. That makes 
the person who is ultimately responsible very nervous." 
After Wisconsin, Seagrave took an assistant's job at Tennessee, for nine 
months. Terry Crawford, the 1988 Olympic women's track coach who was then the 
women's head coach at Tennessee and is now at Texas, remembers Seagrave as 
having been close to the athletes, almost too close. 
"His style is to be very personal, very hands-on with his athletes," Crawford 
said. "In terms of appearances, it has the tendency to turn on red lights and 
send up red flags. Because of the margin for rumor, there is probably a need 
for exaggerated professionalism and a need for caution. That's probably an area 
that Loren didn't consider the ramifications." 
Crawford acknowledges that she, too, has heard the rumors about Seagrave, 
especially in regard to recruiting violations. But the only incident she 
offered had to do with something that happened last summer. 
"Loren encouraged an athlete of mine to come up for the summer and train," 
Crawford said. "He did that without consulting me or my staff. I found that to 
be highly unethical. You don't try to come between what we are doing with an 
athlete. I called his immediate supervisor, Pat Henry, and we took care of it. 
I think Loren showed poor judgment, at the very least." 
Seagrave is not unaware of the talk. But he states flat out that there have not 
been any recruiting violations. 
The Southeastern Conference would neither confirm nor deny reports from 
conference coaches that complaints have been filed against Seagrave. 
"There are legal boundaries you can't cross," Seagrave said. "But to say I 
haven't used all of the latitude within the boundaries of the rules would be 
wrong, because I have. You have to set up the situation so that it is legal. 
"I can assure you that there were probably incidents with all of the people you 
talked to who had done the same thing, or were envious because they didn't 
think of it. I pride myself in gamesmanship. Knowing the rules and being able 
to play within the rules and being able to take advantage of situations is all 
part of gamesmanship." 
Regarding allegations that his athletes have tested positive for masking drugs, 
which hide the presence of steroids in the system -- but are not banned by the 
NCAA -- Seagrave responded angrily. 
"The first thing people do when they are getting their butt kicked is try to 
find a defense mechanism to find why they can't do it," he said. "People were 
making the same allegations when I was at Tennessee. But no one's ever 
confronted me and asked me." 
But he has been confronted on another topic -- the graduation rate of his 
athletes. At least one national coach is concerned. Fred Thompson, coach of the 
Atoms Track Club in New York City and the sprint coach for the 1988 U.S. 
women's Olympic team, has this story to tell. 
He said he befriended Seagrave when the coach was still an assistant at 
Tennessee. Thompson introduced Seagrave to coaches and athletes in the New York 
area. 
"I felt this guy was sincere about educating women," Thompson said. 
"Then I started looking at his program. Nobody ever graduated. What the hell 
was going on? I was sending him all kinds of kids and no one was getting a 
degree. Kids were coming in for one year, transferring, ineligible." 
Thompson said that in 1976, he wrote to Benjamin Hooks of the NAACP, drawing 
his attention to the problems of black female athletes at LSU. Thompson said 
Seagrave confronted him about the letter. 
"I told him, 'You stabbed me in the back,' " Thompson said. "I used to help 
him. Now, I've gone the other route. I've warned coaches in this area not to 
send him kids. Everybody in this country knows how I feel about LSU. It's a 
standard joke in the coaching fraternity -- What school do kids not graduate 
from? LSU." 
Thompson is not alone in his concern. The Baton Rouge office of the NAACP 
threatened a boycott of black athletes at the school to protest what it 
considers discriminatory hiring practices at the school. G. Washington Eames, 
president of the Baton Rouge NAACP, said he is now looking into the athletic 
department, which he describes as having a notorious reputation. 
In a state that has a population that is more than 30% black, LSU's student 
population is 97% white. 
 I cannot tolerate my coaches spending all-night sessions with the opposite sex 
hugging and kissing. I just can't. 
 -- Joe Dean, LSU athletic director 
Joe Dean is, of course, a central figure in the controversy. Yet he has been no 
less controversial for his handling of his own affairs as for the Seagrave 
case. Quite apart from his statements made after Seagrave's firing, Dean has 
exhibited an uncanny knack for letting his shoot-from-the-lip style undo him. 
Among his well-publicized gaffes was his opinion, written in the Feb. 15 
edition of Basketball Times, that a forum to discuss a two-year study on 
college athletics financed by the NCAA Presidents Commission was a total waste 
of time. "Never have I heard such a bunch of garbage," he wrote. 
Among the recommendations made at the last NCAA convention in the wake of the 
study were to eliminate spring football and reduce practice time for football 
and basketball, reduce the number of games in some sports and not allow any 
competition during exam periods. 
Wrote Dean: "A major problem with the NCAA is that too many academicians who've 
never been in the trenches are making decisions they aren't qualified to make." 
Then, on June 14, Dean made some remarks at a luncheon of alumni and 
legislators. In the June 15 editions of the Morning Advocate, a group of 
legislators expressed indignation over those remarks. 
Rep. John Travis told his House colleagues of the incident, quoting Dean as 
having said: "If the East Baton Rouge delegation doesn't get off their butts to 
support LSU, I will see that they get beat (for reelection.)" 
Dean said he couldn't understand the problem. 
"I thought I was just giving them a pep talk," he said. "I was just trying to 
motivate them." 
Nevertheless, Dean sent a letter of apology to 22 legislators from the Parish 
of East Baton Rouge. 
"I obviously stuck my foot in my mouth," he said in the letter. 
There have been other embarrassments. On May 14, Mother's Day, Dean was 
involved in a hit-and-run accident in which, according to a police report, Dean 
struck another car from behind in an intersection then left the scene. 
Dean, driving a 1989 Oldsmobile that records show was leased to the state, 
drove away and stopped his car at a traffic light. When the driver of the car 
he had hit approached him, Dean said that he was too busy to stop, according to 
the report. 
The woman whose car had been hit then followed Dean onto the LSU campus where 
he parked at his office. She, along with two campus police officers, entered 
Dean's office where Dean admitted to having hit the woman's car. 
He later was cited for hit and run, failure to maintain control and not having 
a driver's license. 
All of which has led his critics to suggest that Dean was hardly in a position 
to take the moral high ground when it came to firing Seagrave for exercising 
bad judgment. 
By far the most damaging controversy surrounding Dean is the allegation of 
racial discrimination. 
One of the claims in Seagrave's suit is that Dean and others in the athletic 
department discriminated against Seagrave because they did not approve of his 
interracial marriage. Dean is alleged to have made derogatory statements about 
Seagrave and his "nigger wife." 
The suit alleges that Seagrave was not considered for LSU's vacant men's head 
coaching job because of Dean's "discriminating values, views and beliefs." 
Moran admits that this will be difficult to prove, since many people are 
reluctant to testify. 
Dean has denied discrimination on his part. 
"I think Loren is, unfortunately, trying to make it look like a racial issue is 
involved because he is married to a black woman," Dean said. "But nothing could 
be further from the truth. I won't even give that credibility. It's ludicrous. 
We don't get into people's personal lives." 
Alton Moran is the director of the public defender's office for the Parish of 
East Baton Rogue. His office, beyond a courtyard in a charming New 
Orleans-style building downtown, is the usual cluttered affair. 
Moran does not take many private cases. Scores of Baton Rouge trial attorneys 
were eager to handle the sensational case, but Seagrave went straight to Moran, 
who had been the first president of the LSU Track and Field Officials Assn. 
His reading of this case has led to the $2-million lawsuit against Dean, Henry 
and the LSU Board of Supervisors. 
The money breaks down as follows: 
 -- Damages for humiliation, pain, suffering, and emotional distress and loss 
of reputation, $500,000. 
 -- Damages for loss of income, $1 million. 
 -- Punitive damages, $500,000. 
In addition, the suit seeks to have Seagrave reinstated. 
Moran filed in federal court and did not request a jury trial. Because of this, 
unless the case is transferred to another district, it will be heard by one of 
two judges, either of whom may have a conflict. One judge is also employed by 
LSU. The other has a son who works at the law firm that is defending LSU. 
All attorneys involved estimate that even if the case is whisked through the 
system, it will be more than a year before it sees the inside of a courtroom. 
If it ever does. 
Moran says he took the case because it contained some interesting legal 
elements. 
One of his foremost questions concerns the procedure by which Seagrave was 
fired. Louisiana is an "employment at will" state, which means, in part, that 
an employer need not give a reason for firing an employee. This is part of the 
school's case, that Dean didn't have to give a reason for firing Seagrave. 
"We have certain rights as the employer and we have exercised them," said 
Shelby McKenzie, who represents LSU. 
Moran will argue that Page 5 of the LSU Employee Handbook requires that 
dismissals may only be for cause and must be in writing. 
He will put forth that LSU's grievance procedure was not properly followed in 
this case and that it is prejudicial. 
For example, he says, the last person to sign an LSU staff member's termination 
is the chancellor. By doing this, he says, the chancellor is agreeing that the 
employee should be fired. However, in the grievance process, the final arbiter 
is also the chancellor -- who has already rendered a judgment. 
"Do you think it's fair? I don't think it's fair," Moran said. "I think anyone 
who is employed somewhere for six years, and puts so much of himself into his 
work, should at least know why he is being terminated. Or at least have an 
impartial hearing." 
It may not seem like much to ask, but consider that the state's own governor 
admits he's still trying to bring Louisiana "tip-toeing into the 20th Century." 
Consider also that Louisiana is the only state that adheres to the Napoleonic 
Code of civil law, rather then English common of law. One way this manifests 
itself is that the courts are limited in the application of the law to the 
given facts and may not be bound by legal precedents. 
Consider finally that Moran is basing his case almost entirely on Seagrave's 
version of events. He even allowed Seagrave to retrieve his own personnel 
records from the school and pass on only what he thinks is important. 
So, when Moran is asked if Seagrave's file contains any previous reprimands or 
reports of any ethical or professional misconduct, he says no, there have been 
no problems. But he has not personally seen the file. Only Seagrave has. 
And the school is not telling us what it contains. Yet. 
The answering machine at the Seagrave-Freeman apartment this week offers this 
musical advice: "Don't worry, be happy." 
It is a pleasant thought. However, there is not much evidence that anyone here 
may be able to live by the sentiment. LSU officials have threatened to arrest 
Seagrave if he shows up at the track. He has received death threats from people 
who have written to express their opinion of his mixed marriage. 
Seagrave is out of a job and looking at more than a year before he has a shot 
at clearing his name. Even if he wins in court, the likelihood that another 
college will hire him is dim. 
"He's killed his reputation," said one coach. "The innuendo is terrible. There 
are some stories out there about him that are horrendous." 
Seagrave's wife, Kathy Freeman, is taking a 90-day leave of absence from her 
job as a Baton Rouge police officer. She's angry and hurt and a lot else. 
"I hate how they are treating him," she said. 
Freeman, 27, grew up in Baton Rouge and said she has known prejudice. She says 
she won't give in to it. 
"I think, through it all, they wanted Loren and myself to break up," said 
Freeman, a former hurdler at Southern University in Baton Rouge. "They think 
they'll hurt him and in the process his wife will divorce him. They just don't 
know. It's only making our relationship stronger." 
Attorneys for both sides are adamant that they will see this case through to 
court. But . . . 
Whose interest would it serve to train the court's bright lights on the dark 
corners of this case? 
Will LSU remain untainted by showing Seagrave to be of questionable ethical 
fiber? 
Does the athletic department really want any more close scrutiny? 
Can Seagrave afford to run the risk of taking the case to court, only to be 
ambushed by some past indiscretion that may come out? 
Isn't this the kind of of lawsuit that rubs something ugly off onto everyone it 
touches? 
Might the judge's decision not be the kind that finds everyone guilty? 
The women's track progam at LSU has certainly found success. The question now 
is, can it live with it? 
