COUNCIL OKS PROJECT SOUGHT BY FORMER YAROSLAVSKY AIDE 
At the urging of Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky, the Los Angeles City Council on 
Tuesday authorized a nonprofit group represented by the husband of 
Yaroslavsky's longtime top aide to build housing over a city-owned parking lot 
in Sherman Oaks, sidestepping competitive bidding procedures. 
To comply with legal requirements, the council declared that awarding 
construction rights to the Jewish Federation Council was "in the public 
interest and necessity." 
The Jewish federation still must obtain a $6.25-million loan from the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development to fund its 83-unit senior citizen 
housing project next to a bustling Ventura Boulevard retail strip that has 
recently become a favorite haunt of stylish youth, dubbed "the Melrose of the 
Valley." 
Representing the Jewish federation in its negotiations with the city has been 
Westside attorney Howard Katz, husband of Alisa Katz, Yaroslavsky's chief 
deputy. Katz said his maximum fee for developing this project -- as set by HUD 
-- would be $40,000. 
"I get a fraction of what I get paid by my other clients," Katz said. "This is 
not a windfall." 
Yaroslavsky could not be reached Tuesday to comment on Katz's involvement in 
the project. 
Katz -- a former Yaroslavsky aide -- said it was immaterial that he had worked 
for Yaroslavsky and that his wife now works for the lawmaker. 
"This thing has not been ramrodded" by Yaroslavsky, Katz said. "I had to yell 
and scream to get it. . . . I didn't have the cooperation of the city, 
including Zev Yaroslavsky." 
Katz said competitive bidding for the right to build housing over city parking 
lots "takes too long" and "it becomes political." 
The motion to grant the Jewish federation the construction rights was 
introduced by Yaroslavsky on May 25. Yaroslavsky subsequently introduced 
another motion to amend the Sherman Oaks community plan for the project, change 
the site's zoning from parking to residential, and provide a 50% unit density 
bonus. 
