SPORTS SCOPE; 
MUIR COACH SAYS GIRLS CAN WIN STATE TRACK TITLE 
Jim Brownfield, Muir High girls track coach, is not discounting his team's 
chances entering the CIF State Track and Field Championships that start Friday 
at Cerritos College in Norwalk. 
But Brownfield realizes that Muir will need to get the most out of its five 
qualifiers. 
"We've got a chance for the state title, but we have to take two firsts, two 
seconds and an umpth," he said. "The umpth is Taminika Terry." 
The Mustangs are among the favorites along with defending champion Bakersfield 
of the Central Section, Locke of the L.A. City Section and Rio Mesa of the 
Southern Section, although Brownfield sees the race for the title as wide-open. 
"There are going to be nine teams under the head of a dime for the state 
championship," he said. "But it's going to come down to the mile relay. We 
can't dodge the bullet. We've got to win the mile relay." 
If that's the case, Muir has a good chance. The Mustangs have been one of the 
top schools in the state in the 1,600 relay this season and finished a close 
second to Rio Mesa (3:48.93 to 3:48.66) at the CIF Masters Meet last week. 
Muir will also be one of the favorites in the 400-meter relay with a swift time 
of 46.46 seconds at the Masters. 
Both relay teams are anchored by junior Inger Miller. She is also among the 
favorites in both the 100 and 200 meters. 
Miller finished second to Angela Burnham of Rio Mesa in the 100 and 200 in 
times of 11.53 and 23.84 last week. Miller had stayed close to the Rio Mesa 
senior in their previous encounters this season. 
Brownfield is hoping that Terry can come through with another point or two for 
the Mustangs in the 200 meters where she finished third in 24.84 seconds at the 
Masters. 
"We got all the people in who we thought we needed," he said. "We're not the 
favorite. But we're in the hunt." 
Aside from Muir, other San Gabriel Valley athletes will be contending mostly 
for individual honors at the meet. 
Two of the favorites are Juliana Yendork of Walnut in the long and triple jumps 
and Karen Hecox of South Hills in the 1,600 and 3,200. 
Yendork, a sophomore, is the clear-cut favorite in her specialties. She posted 
strong qualifying marks of 19-9 in the long jump and 41-4 in the triple jump. 
Hecox, a junior, posted the top qualifying time of 10:41:23 in the 3,200 last 
week and is defending state champion. She also qualified for the 1,600 in the 
second-best time of 5:01.45 
Among the boys, the valley has a strong title hope in senior high jumper Mark 
Wilson of Charter Oak. In the Masters Wilson posted a winning leap of 7-0 -- 
four inches better than his closest competitor. 
The Cal Poly Pomona women's softball team, which finished fifth in the NCAA 
Division I World Series, has placed three players on the Division I All-West 
Region team. 
Catcher Denise Correa and third baseman Heather DeLuca were selected to the 
first team and outfielder Nikki Busch to the second team. Pomona's Carol Spanks 
was named Coach of the Year in the region. 
Correa, a senior, earned all-region first-team selection for the second 
consecutive season. She led the Broncos with a .279 batting average, 27 runs, 
seven doubles and one home run. 
DeLuca, a junior, shared the team lead in triples with Correa at six and tied 
for the lead in stolen bases with Busch at nine. Busch led the team in runs 
batted in with 25. 
Spanks' selection as top coach capped a surprising season for the Broncos. 
Expected to finish no higher than fourth in the Big West Conference, Pomona 
wound up third and reached the Division I playoffs for the eighth straight 
year. 
The 11th-ranked Broncos, who swept two straight games from fourth-ranked Cal 
State Fullerton to advance to the World Series, finished the season with a 
43-23 record. Spanks' 11-year record is 474-192-8. 
The site of the National Football Foundation and Hall of Fame All-Star Football 
Game on July 21 has been switched from Arroyo High School in El Monte to Citrus 
College in Glendora. 
The game, which matches top graduated seniors from throughout the San Gabriel 
Valley, was played at Arroyo in 1981-88. 
Hugh Von Plater, president of the Pasadena-San Gabriel Valley Chapter of the 
National Football Foundation and Hall of Fame, said the move was made because 
there has been a greater demand for seating and Citrus is in a more centralized 
location than Arroyo. 
Citrus College's stadium has a seating capacity of 10,000 while Arroyo's field 
seats about 5,000. 
"We're very pleased to have the game at Citrus College," said Pat Rasmussen, 
assistant to the president at Citrus and director of development. "It's a great 
opportunity for Citrus College and it gives our local residents a chance to see 
some outstanding high school athletes." 
Cal Poly Pomona, which was already enjoying an excellent recruiting year in 
women's basketball, has signed another top player to a letter of intent, Alison 
Jackson of Los Angeles Crenshaw High. 
Jackson, a 5-7 point guard, was selected to the All-L.A. City Section first 
team and was named Most Valuable Player for the Cougars. She averaged 15.1 
points and five assists as a senior. 
Jackson is the third all-section player that the Broncos have signed for next 
season. Pomona had earlier signed All-Southern Section front-line players 
Danielle Carter of Fontana and Tara Davidson of Palm Desert. 
