AQMD APPROVES LIMITS ON 10 CARCINOGENS IN AIR 
Declaring that toxic substances in the air are threatening public health, the 
South Coast Air Quality Management District on Friday approved controversial 
new limits on industrial emissions of 10 cancer-causing air contaminants. 
The new rule, which takes effect immediately, requires all new and existing 
businesses that expand or relocate within the region to be able to comply with 
the new limits or be denied a permit to operate equipment that produces the 
pollution. The AQMD estimates about 250 businesses a year would be affected in 
the South Coast Air Basin -- Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino 
counties. 
The kinds of businesses most likely to be affected by the new rule include 
gasoline stations, hospitals, dry cleaners and metal-treating and plating 
firms. 
The rule is evidence that the district, which once focused only on fighting 
smog, is beginning to move more forcefully into new areas to improve air 
quality. In the past, many toxic substances in the air that may have posed a 
health threat were not regulated because they did not contribute to the 
formation of smog. 
Under the new standard, the risk to the surrounding community of developing 
cancer from any of the 10 targeted contaminants must not exceed 10 in 1 
million. The health risk is based on constant exposure over a 70-year lifetime. 
Businesses would have to show their ability to comply before any new 
pollution-producing equipment is used. Denials would be based on computer 
projections of anticipated emissions. 
Of the 10 targeted contaminants, benzene -- an ingredient in gasoline -- is the 
most prevalent. The second is hexavalent chromium, a microscopic particle 
produced in chrome plating and other metal-treating operations. 
But in approving the rule on an 11-1 vote, the board gave companies an 
additional five years to comply if needed emission-control equipment has not 
been developed or is otherwise unobtainable. During the grace period, the 
allowable health risk from these businesses could be as high as 100 in a 
million -- 10 times greater than the new standard. 
The time extension was approved over the protests of board member Sabrina 
Schiller, who cast the only dissenting vote. 
"This is a significant weakening of an already-weak regulation," said Schiller, 
who had argued for a much tighter health standard of one in 1 million. "It 
seems to go against everything the state and our federal government has 
attempted to do." 
Jan Chatten-Brown, president of the Coalition for Clean Air, complained that 
even with the new rule, regulation of toxic substances in the air remains "the 
one gaping hole in the program to protect the public health from air pollution. 
"Our air basin is checkered with toxic hot spots," she said. "The district's 
failure to take appropriate action is a complete capitulation to industry and 
an abdication of their duty to the public." 
But board member Larry Berg, who proposed the five-year grace period after 
business representatives complained a stricter time frame would discourage new 
businesses from locating here, rejected the criticism. 
"Eight years ago I was treated for cancer (of the vocal chords) and three of my 
friends have lung cancer. I'm sensitive to this issue," Berg said. "I do not 
think (the extension) substantially weakens this rule. . . . It is painfully 
evident to me that we needed to do something or we won't pass (it)." 
AQMD Executive Officer James M. Lents told the board most companies would be 
able to comply with the stricter standard. He predicted only two to three firms 
a year would apply for the grace period. 
"This is a pressure relief valve," Lents said of the grace period. "Only a few 
sources fall into this category. . . . We think (they) would not represent an 
overwhelming public exposure." 
For the last six years, the AQMD has attempted to limit toxic matter in the 
air, but had no formal regulation to back up enforcement efforts and had little 
success. Most businesses, even when challenged by the AQMD, were able to 
conduct business as usual. 
Los Angeles attorney Robert Wyman, who represents an industry coalition, 
applauded the regulation, noting that the five-year grace period satisfied 
their concerns. 
"We're really not talking about significant risk (differences)," he said. 
When the regulation was first discussed at a meeting two weeks ago, business 
interests and some board members worried that the proposed health risk of 10 in 
1 million was overly strict and would reduce cancer risks only slightly and 
impose unnecessary hardships on business. 
In addition to benzene and hexavalent chromium, other contaminants covered by 
the rule are asbestos, cadmium, carbon tetrachloride, chlorinated dioxins and 
dibenzofurans, ethylene dibromide, ethylene dichloride, ethylene oxide and 
methylene chloride. 
