THE WORLD CUP; 
POLICE, WET WEATHER KEEP FANS IN CHECK AS IRISH TIE ENGLISH 
Scrappy Ireland rallied for a second-half goal and tied favored England, 1-1, 
Monday night in its World Cup debut. 
Massive Italian security precautions, ranging from military helicopters to huge 
police dogs, shut out English soccer hooligans who came early, cheered quickly 
-- and went home wet. 
Short of attacking ideas, slow to find the open man, neither team was 
convincing in playing to the 1990 Cup's first draw. For most of the game, the 
weather -- a stiff wind off the sea, an awesome lightning display and a chilly 
second-half rain -- provided more spectacle than action by England's whites and 
Ireland's greens. 
With frequent passes going astray and the ball constantly floating in the air, 
the quality of play was a notch below what Italy, Brazil and West Germany have 
brought to the Cup, and particularly disappointing for England, one of the 
favorites. 
"We had it won -- and lost it," said England's Coach Bobby Robson. "We made a 
mistake." 
Attacker Gary Lineker of London's Tottenham Hotspurs put England ahead after 
eight minutes on what, after nine games, might have been the tournament's 
ugliest goal. 
Chris Waddle lifted a pass over the Irish center backs, goalkeeper Patrick 
Bonner committed but could not control the ball, and Lineker chased it into the 
back of the net in a tangle with two disconsolate Irish fullbacks. 
"A scrappy, awful goal," Irish Coach Jack Charlton said. 
Kevin Sheedy missed Ireland's best chance in the first half, from six yards 
out, but got the equalizer in the 72nd minute on a field by then slick with 
rain. 
Sheedy, who plays for Everton in the English League First Division, controlled 
a deflected pass after it was mishandled by defender Steve McMahon of 
Liverpool, who had entered as a substitute a few minutes before. 
Making the most of McMahon's miscue, Sheedy drilled it smartly into the extreme 
corner of the net with a thundering left foot that gave venerable English 
goalkeeper Peter Shilton no chance. 
Soon thereafter, Liverpool's McMahon got the game's only yellow card as the 
teams exchanged weak chances, and the pace slackened into a draw rhythm. 
Overall, Ireland had seven shots, and England five. 
Ireland's Charlton, a former English star, made no secret of his delight at the 
result, which gives his team a good second-round shot in its first World Cup 
appearance. 
"We got no less than we deserved," Charlton said in the soggy aftermath. 
Irish fans, excited, exuberant and orderly in cascades of green, white and 
orange, outdid the English in numbers, volume and good humor Monday in a 
Sardinia braced for trouble after weekend disorders stirred by young English 
fans. 
With a reported attendance of 35,238, there were nearly 5,000 empty seats in 
the bright and modern stadium that is Sardinia's joy. 
Everybody who got in to see the game first had to run the gamut of an Italian 
security crunch that was calculated to intimidate. It did. 
Helicopters, troopers from three different forces, dressed for riot -- or war 
-- and cavalry enough to have saved Custer scrutinized spectators at a series 
of checkpoints on their way to the stadium. 
Once inside, they were watched by a high-tech network of television cameras. At 
one point, while they were still winning, English supporters began marching 
through the aisles of one section, but were joined instantly by a stern file of 
large policemen. 
When the game ended, the happy Irish left first. Once they were well on their 
way, the English stands were allowed to empty into wet streets where cabs were 
scarce, but not cops. 
With one point each after Monday's draw, England and Ireland both still must 
play powerhouse Netherlands, and Egypt, the fourth team in Group F. 
And with one point in hand, a victory over weak Egypt would mean three points 
and enough for advancement for both England and Ireland, no matter what happens 
to them against the Netherlands. 
The Dutch, potential finalists, play their opener tonight against Egypt in 
Palermo. 
England plays the Netherlands here Saturday in a game that is most potentially 
troubling to Italian police, since a dangerous minority of Dutch fans are as 
violence prone as their English counterparts. 
