WHY CUT THE TIES THAT BIND IN CHINA? 
President Bush is under growing pressure from Congress to impose tough economic 
sanctions on China in retaliation for the murderous suppression of 
pro-democracy demonstrations and the executions that have followed. The impulse 
is honorable and humane, but the President should hold firm in the long-term 
interests of the United States and the Chinese people themselves. 
The Administration has condemned the Chinese government's "outrageous" 
treatment of the demonstrators, halted U.S. military sales to China, suspended 
all high-level visits between U.S. and Chinese officials and served notice that 
the United States will do all it can to stall action on China's international 
loan applications. Other options will be considered if the brutality continues. 
The President also has expressed his reluctance to see a "total break" in 
relations, because it is important to preserve, if possible, the economic and 
strategic relationships that have been carefully cultivated over the past 15 
years. 
The use of stronger language might have been appropriate. In substantive terms, 
however, Bush's "measured response" is endorsed by most U.S. experts on China 
and, according to the polls, is supported so far by the public. There is 
nevertheless a chorus of demands from Senate Democratic Leader George Mitchell 
and others that stronger actions be taken. 
The calls for tougher measures were inevitable. Whenever one country or another 
breaks the rules of civilized behavior, the instinctive U.S. reaction has long 
been to withhold trade, capital and technology -- unilaterally, if necessary. 
The habit of go-it-alone sanctions began in the postwar era when American 
domination of the world economy was so great, and our trade and investment 
position so strong, that economic action was an attractive and not very costly 
medium for the expression of moral outrage. 
But sanctions didn't work very well even when America was undisputed king of 
the hill. They are even less effective now. 
U.S. economic leverage has failed to bring down Fidel Castro in Cuba or the 
Sandinistas in Nicaragua. American curbs on trade with the two major sources of 
terrorism, Iran and Libya, have proved ineffective. Neither Bush nor Ronald 
Reagan has been able to strangle the nauseous, pipsqueak regime of Gen. Manuel 
A. Noriega in Panama. 
As Bush says, keep in mind also that global U.S. interests are involved in 
China. First, we have long-term commercial interests to protect. Since 1980, 
more than$25 billion in foreign investment has flowed into China. U.S. 
companies have established a good foothold in the potentially huge Chinese 
market. Given the shaky state of this country's world-trade position, that 
stake should not be surrendered except in joint action with Japan and other 
major competitors. And no such collective sanctions are in prospect. 
West Germany, Italy, Britain and most other allied governments have issued 
strong verbal protests against the monstrous behavior of the Beijing regime and 
have put diplomatic relations on hold. There is no visible willingness, 
however, to impose actual economic sanctions. Japan, which provides more than 
half of China's development aid, has bluntly rejected the idea of sanctions and 
urged Washington and others to do the same. The Soviet Union has held back even 
from plain-talk denunciation of the events in Beijing. 
Remember, too, that military and diplomatic cooperation with China serves U.S. 
interests; U.S.-run electronic surveillance stations in northern China provide 
invaluable intelligence on Soviet compliance with arms-control agreements. 
Chinese cooperation is vital to peace and stability in Southeast Asia and to 
U.S. efforts to head off the dangerous spread of long-range missiles to the 
volatile Middle East. 
We will be wiser to play for the revival of the forces for change in China. 
The strongest liberalizing influence in China is the country's decade-old 
economic opening to the West, which has brought large-scale exposure to Western 
businessmen, scholars, journalists and tourists. Within far more generous 
bounds than in the Soviet Union, private enterprise has been legalized. 
A whole generation of educated young Chinese has been exposed to Western ideas 
of democracy and economic development, either in China or in studies abroad. We 
saw them in Tian An Men Square. 
How does it serve U.S. interests or those of pro-democracy Chinese to strangle 
the economic ties that gave birth to the protest movement in the first place? 
It would be far better to continue nurturing, to the extent possible, a 
modernization process that will make the skills of pro-democracy Chinese 
essential -- and ultimately force the regime to make the political reforms 
necessary to harness those skills. 
If the arrests and executions continue, George Bush may be unable to avoid a 
deep and prolonged rupture in relations. But if that happens, the people hurt 
most won't be the hard old men in Beijing but the very Chinese we would like to 
help. 
