PUBLIC DEFENDER SEEKS TO VOID NEWLY PASSED JUSTICE INITIATIVE 
The Los Angeles County public defender on Friday filed the first legal 
challenge to Proposition 115, the sweeping criminal justice initiative passed 
by voters on Tuesday, asking the state Supreme Court to delay implementation of 
the measure and ultimately declare it unconstitutional. 
The writ of mandate, filed at the Los Angeles office of the court, requests 
urgent action to avoid "chaos in the courts of California" as judges, 
prosecutors and defense attorneys grapple with the measure's legal 
applications, reaching varying conclusions that will ultimately have to be 
resolved by the higher court. 
According to Assistant Public Defender David Meyer, that is just what has 
happened this week as courts all over the county tried to cover the same 
ground. "It's extremely confusing," he said. "It takes a long time. It's 
tedious . . . and expensive." 
A stay of the measure could be issued by the court as early as Monday when it 
convenes for other matters in Los Angeles. Or the court could decide not to 
take up Proposition 115 at this time, or chose a variety of other actions. 
Similar challenges were filed after passage of two previous initiatives, the 
insurance reform law, Proposition 103, and an earlier criminal justice measure, 
Proposition 8. 
In the legal documents filed Friday, Public Defender Wilbur Littlefield 
attacked the measure as an illegal change to the state Constitution and a 
violation of the "single-subject rule," which states that initiatives must 
cover a single issue. 
That same argument failed with Proposition 8, but Meyer said in a telephone 
interview that Proposition 115 encompasses 16 separate subjects. "We're arguing 
to the Supreme Court that the line has been crossed." 
Among its provisions, Proposition 115, the Crime Victims Justice Reform Act, 
limits the rights of criminal defendants to those of defendants in federal 
court. It is aimed at ending delays in the justice system. Jury selection is 
speeded up and preliminary hearings after grand jury indictment are eliminated. 
Meyer explained that under state law it is permissible to amend the 
Constitution, but in his view Proposition 115 goes beyond that. 
"It's really not an amendment at all," he contended. "It's a wholesale revision 
of the Constitution" that would require a constitutional convention. 
The defense attorneys also are asking the high court to order judges not to 
apply Proposition 115 retroactively, as one of them purportedly did in a Van 
Nuys preliminary hearing this week. 
