SANCHEZ VICARIO WASTES 4 MATCH POINTS, LOSES TO NAGELSEN 
"What you can do?" Arantxa Sanchez Vicario said when she lost in the second 
round of the French Open three weeks ago. 
She was saying the same thing Tuesday after blowing four match points and 
losing her first-round Wimbledon match, 1-6, 7-6 (10-8), 9-7, to Betsy 
Nagelsen. 
Sanchez, ranked No. 6, wasted two match points in the tiebreaker and two more 
in the 12th game of the third set. Then she led, 40-0, serving at 7-7, only to 
be broken, and Nagelsen, ranked No. 83, served out the match at love. 
The top five women players had no such trouble with their opening matches. No. 
1-seeded Steffi Graf defeated fellow West German Claudia Porwick, 6-1, 6-2; No. 
2 Martina Navratilova defeated Sophie Amiach of France, 6-1, 6-1; No. 3 Monica 
Seles defeated Maria Standlund of Sweden, 6-2, 6-0; No. 4 Gabriela Sabatini 
defeated Elise Burgin, 6-3, 6-3, and No. 5 Zina Garrison defeated Samantha 
Smith of England, 6-2, 6-1. 
Graf's only problem came after the match. Last week, West German police 
arrested a woman and charged her with attempting to extort money from Peter 
Graf, whom she claimed had fathered her child. Peter Graf is Steffi's father. 
"I am concentrating very much on my tennis right now, and I think the tough 
times have been pretty much over, and they have been in the last couple of 
weeks," Graf told reporters after her victory. "So I think I got it pretty much 
out of my mind right now." 
Navratilova, 33, is seeking a record ninth Wimbledon title. She might be the 
sentimental choice to win, but Navratilova said it doesn't matter. 
"There could be two people in the stands, and I'd still want to win it just as 
bad," she said. 
Eighth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez withdrew before her match because of a knee 
injury. 
Jennifer Capriati, 14, seeded No. 12 in her first Wimbledon, made her debut at 
Centre Court and scored a 6-3, 6-1 victory over Helen Kelesi. Capriati said 
Wimbledon's show court is unparalleled. "It's like the court," she said. "When 
I found out I was going to be playing on it, I was so excited. I was jumping up 
and down." 
She will be on Court No. 14 today for her second-round match against Julie 
Halard of France. 
