CHICO MENDES: THE MAN WHO TRIED TO SAVE THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST; 
DEFORESTATION: STRUGGLING TO SAVE HOMES, LIVELIHOODS AND BRAZIL'S VAST RAIN 
FOREST, MENDES MADE A LOT OF TROUBLE FOR A LOT OF POWERFUL PEOPLE. 
In the rain forest of the western Amazon, the threat of violent death hangs in 
the air like mist after a tropical rain. It is simply a part of the ecosystem, 
just like the scorpions and snakes cached in the leafy canopy that floats over 
the forest floor like a seamless green circus tent. 
People from the Amazon say that the trouble always starts during the burning 
season, a period of two months or so between the two natural climatic seasons 
of the region -- the dry and the wet. By then, the equatorial sun has baked the 
last moisture out of the brush, grass and felled trees, and the people of the 
Amazon -- sometimes Indians and rubber tappers, but most often wealthy ranchers 
and small farmers -- set their world on fire. 
The fires clear the clogged fields or freshly deforested land and, in 
disintegrating vegetation, put a few of the nutrients essential for plant 
growth back in the impoverished soil. The burning season is the time before the 
return of the daily downpours that give the rain forest its name. 
The trouble arises when one man's fires threaten another man's livelihood. Most 
often, that happens when one of the hundreds of ranchers or speculators who 
have been drawn to the region's cheap land acquires the title to property that 
already is the home of people who have squatted there legally -- sometimes for 
decades. 
Often the new titles are acquired through fraud or coercion. And because the 
most efficient way to reinforce a claim to land in the Amazon is to cut down 
the forest and burn it, the new landlords do just that. Or they loose their 
cattle, which make quick work of the settlers' crops. If that does not work, 
they send out their pistoleiros to burn the families out of their shacks or, if 
they resist, shoot them down. 
The only thing that has prevented the Amazon river basin and its peoples from 
being totally overrun is its sheer size and daunting character. It is a shallow 
bowl covering 3.6 million square miles, twice the expanse of India. An average 
of eight feet of rain falls here each year, inundating great stretches of 
forest, turning roads into bogs, and providing vast breeding grounds for 
malaria mosquitoes. 
The water drains eastward through a fanlike network of streams and rivers that 
together disgorge 170 billion gallons of water each hour into the Atlantic -- 
eleven times the flow of the Mississippi. Besides producing this riverine sea, 
the deluge also nourishes the largest stretch of rain forest left on Earth. 
One of the tens of thousands of plant species in the forest is a tree with a 
smooth trunk that produces a white fluid in a reticulation of tubules beneath 
its bark. Its local name is seringueira; botanists call it Hevea brasiliensis. 
Its common name is the rubber tree. The fluid is thought to protect the tree 
from invasions of boring pests by gumming up the insects' mouth parts. 
This same fluid, congealed and properly processed, has remarkable qualities of 
resilience, water resistance and insulation to the flow of electricity -- all 
of which made it one of the most sought after raw materials of the Industrial 
Revolution. 
It was this substance, called latex, that lured the grandfather of Chico Mendes 
and tens of thousands of other men to the Amazon rain forest in two waves over 
the past 120 years. Called seringueiros, these men settled in the forests 
around ports like Xapuri and worked in solitude, fighting to make a life from 
the living forest -- and fighting to free themselves from bosses who saw to it 
that they remained enslaved by their debts. 
Recently, as outsiders intent on destroying the forest began to invade the 
Amazon, the seringueiros had to fight once again. This time, they were fighting 
to save their homes, their livelihood and the rain forest around them. 
In leading this struggle to preserve the Amazon, Chico Mendes had made a lot of 
trouble for a lot of powerful people. He was to the ranchers of the Amazon what 
Cesar Chavez was to the citrus kings of California, what Lech Walesa was to the 
shipyard managers of Gdansk. The Xapuri Rural Workers Union, which Mendes 
helped found in 1977, regularly sent swarms of demonstrators to thwart the 
ranchers' chain-saw crews. 
With his aggressive tactics and fable, plain-talking style, Mendes had then 
attracted the attention of American environmentalists, who invited him to 
Washington and Miami to help them convince the international development banks 
to suspend loans that were allowing Brazil to pave the roads leading into the 
Amazon. Mendes made friends abroad, but he made more enemies at home. 
The Amazon was one of the last places where might still made right. In that 
sense, it differed little from the American West of the 19th Century as 
described in 1872 by Mark Twain in "Roughing It": "The very paradise of outlaws 
and desperadoes." 
In the Amazon, when you ask people about justica (justice), they simply chuckle 
in a sad kind of way; most of the men in the prison cells are sleeping off a 
drunk, having had several too many slugs of the blazing, strong sugar-cane rum 
called cachaca, which is sold for pennies a glass. In fact, more than 1,000 
people have been murdered in land disputes in rural Brazil since 1980, and 
Amnesty International estimates that fewer than 10 of the killers have been 
convicted and sent to jail. And not one mandante (mastermind) of a murder has 
ever been tried. 
In this anarchic atmosphere, the pistoleiros often assume the look of their 
imagined Wild West predecessors, strutting through town with a revolver stuck 
in the waist of tight jeans, boot heels raising red dust. 
Thus it was that in the latter half of December, the threats against Mendes had 
been replaced with death pronouncements. "Threat" implies that death is only a 
possibility; in Mendes' case, imminent death was a near inevitability. He was 
shot at close range with a .20 gauge shotgun when he stepped out his backdoor. 
The funeral of Mendes was held on Christmas Day. Through what the tappers call 
radio cipo -- vine radio, the rain forest version of the grapevine -- word of 
the murder spread quickly. Hundreds of rubber tappers hiked for many hours 
through the forest to attend the wake and funeral. 
By Christmas morning, more than a thousand people had crowded around the 
church. The rains had returned in force, drenching the mourners who followed 
the casket to the cemetery on the road leading out of town. Along with the 
hundreds of rubber tappers and small farmers in the procession were dozens of 
Mendes's friends from the other Brazil -- celebrities, politicians and labor 
leaders. Surrounding the crowd were dozens of journalists, many from overseas. 
An international version of vine radio had efficiently disseminated the news of 
the killing. 
The murder of Mendes might well have been an unremarkable event. He was the 
fifth rural union president murdered in Brazil that year, But over the previous 
three years, Mendes' closer relationships with environmentalists, labor 
organizers, and human-rights advocates from Brazil, the United States and 
Europe had focused increased attention on the struggle of the rubber tappers. 
As a result, this murder deep in the Amazon rain forest -- where it once took 
three weeks for news to travel down the river -- instantly became an 
international story, making the front page of newspapers around the world. 
The significance of his murder was further amplified by the disturbing 
environmental anomalies of 1988. The scorching summer in the United States that 
year had motivated politicians and the media for the first time to pay serious 
attention to the greenhouse effect, the theory that billions of tons of gases 
released each year by the burning of fossil fuels and forests are trapping 
solar energy in the atmosphere and disastrously warming the planet. 
And just as the heat was breaking records and fires were ravaging Yellowstone 
National Park, the television networks got detailed satellite photographs of 
the Amazon burning season -- thousands of fires burning simultaneously. It 
almost felt as if the heat and smoke generated in the forests were being 
inhaled on the baking streets of Los Angeles, Washington and New York. 
Then came the slaying of Mendes. In the months that followed, dozens of 
television crews, photographers and reporters from around the world would take 
the six-hour, four-stop flight from Sao Paulo to Rio Branco, the capital of the 
state of Acre, then bounce for four more hours along the rutted, dusty, partly 
paved road to Xapuri, the river town where Mendes lived. Visitors who stayed 
long enough to walk for a time in the surrounding forest discovered the bounty 
of the ecosystem that Mendes had died defending. It was a place of spectacular 
diversity and vitality. Turn over a log and find 50 species of beetle. Survey 
an acre and find 100 species of butterfly. In the Amazon, one type of rubber 
tree has exploding fruit that flings seeds 20 yards; three-toed sloths harbor 
dozens of species of insects and algae in their matted fur; river porpoises are 
cotton-candy pink. 
It was a living pharmacy that scientists had only just begun to explore. A 
fourth of all prescription drugs contain ingredients derived from tropical 
plants -- malaria drugs and anesthetics and antibiotics and more -- and less 
than 1% of the Amazon's plants had been studied. 
It became clear to outsiders that the murder was a microcosm of the larger 
crime: the unbridled destruction of the last great reservoir of biological 
diversity on Earth. Just a few centuries ago, the planet had 15 million square 
miles of rain forest, an area five times that of the contiguous United States. 
Now three Americas' worth of forest were gone, with just 6.2 million square 
miles left. One-third of the remaining rain forest was in the Amazon basin, and 
over the past decade alone, chain saws and fires had consumed about 10% of it, 
an area twice the size of California. 
The aggression against the forest was therefore a many-layered tragedy, causing 
human deaths, killing millions of trees and other organisms and resulting in 
the extinction of several species of plant and animal life each day -- most of 
which had not even been noticed, let alone catalogued or studied. In some ways, 
Mendes and the rubber tappers were simply another endangered species, as much a 
part of the ecosystem as the trees they tapped, the birds in the branches, or 
the ants underfoot. 
But the tappers were a species that was fighting back. 
