UTAH ARCHITECT PURSUES DREAM: A LOW-SALT LAKE 
Don David Johnson, free-lance architect and relentless visionary, may yet 
realize his peculiar dream of turning much of the Great Salt Lake into an 
immense freshwater reservoir. 
"What I see," said Johnson recently, "is the opportunity now to create a life 
style that is enjoyed in California and Florida . . . a water-based life 
style." 
Johnson imagines marina-style housing tracts with a boat dock in every back 
yard, tree-lined causeways for a Sunday driver's scenic loop around the lake's 
islands, water skiing, beaches, hotels and, not least, tourists spending freely 
in the thrall of mighty sunsets. 
No matter the lake's international image as a natural wonder of the world, the 
notion of taming and sweetening it has tempted some Utahans since the first 
settlers arrived. For the inland sea that displays such grandeur on a post card 
has always been hard to live with at close quarters. 
Lake Not Picture-Perfect 
It can smell like a sewer. It can become so choked with translucent brine 
shrimp that it looks like a swarming fish tank. Worse, unpredictable 
fluctuations of the water level over time have flooded out, or left high and 
dry, every structure built on its shores. 
And that shoreline is nothing to write home about, either, being mostly sticky, 
salt-soaked mud flats. 
In recent years, the water has been at a record-high level. And so the golden, 
Oriental turrets of Saltair, its sole resort, now rest atop a wave-blasted 
concrete shell, shielded from further destruction only by a barrier of 
bulldozed rock. Previous Saltairs, beginning with a legendary 19th-Century 
bathhouse and dance pavilion, have met similar fates, as have boat docks, 
built-up sand beaches and various mineral-extraction projects. These days, many 
locals repeat weary jokes about the Not-So-Great Salt Lake and the Great Dead 
Salt Lake when visiting relatives suggest driving out to go for a float. 
Dikes along the inhabited eastern side have always seemed the best way to 
control the water level. A stable water line would give a permanent shore and 
allow for a reasonable return on a developer's investment. 
But every dike scheme has proved too expensive. Meanwhile, for six years, 
Johnson has been talking up his plan, which he contends will cut that cost by 
as much as two-thirds. And now, powerful financial and political allies have 
quietly picked up his cause. 
At the least, the Utah Legislature, the state's second-largest bank and many of 
its biggest industries plan to see that Johnson's proposal gets a good test. 
And Republican Gov. Norman H. Bangerter has just named a panel to oversee 
formal study of the idea. 
Much rests, however, on the approval of the Army Corps of Engineers, which is 
charged with protecting the nation's wetlands. Accommodation also must be 
reached with what Johnson calls those "selfish," even "un-American" 
environmentalists, hunters and others who would preserve those wetlands no 
matter the potential recreational interests of hundreds of thousands of 
sightseers and waterfront homeowners. 
In fact, the Great Salt Lake is an important oasis for migratory birds 
traveling the Pacific and Central flyways. Waterfowl hunters and other 
conservationists fear that Johnson's dikes could eliminate as much as 400,000 
acres of bird-nurturing wetland, and they're beginning to take him seriously as 
well. 
Phil Wagner, regional director of Ducks Unlimited, the nationwide waterfowl 
hunters' organization, has lately made the rounds of government regulatory 
agencies, trying to enlist incredulous bureaucrats in opposition. 
"If you go to these various offices," said Wagner, shaking his head, "they say, 
'They'll never build it.' I say, 'Read their papers.' " 
Affluent private duck clubs already are making uneasy peace with the Sierra 
Club and other environmental groups, as well as government conservationists, 
and they even talk of ties to Utah's conservative tax revolters -- all against 
powerboat owners, developers and politicians bent on pulling Utah out of its 
current economic slump. 
Meanwhile, Johnson faces his formidable opponents and their regulations with 
the stubborn faith of a 19th-Century entrepreneur. If, in some future 
environmental impact report, "they find some bug that they aren't going to have 
anymore," Johnson intoned, "they'll stop it." But he said this with a 
long-suffering, optimistic smile. 
Johnson's plan is cheap enough to be taken seriously because, unlike 
traditional dikes, it would use fill material held in place by precast concrete 
walls. Johnson's other passion is precast concrete. 
"It's the only thing to build, in my mind," he said one afternoon, sitting in 
his round concrete living room in his round concrete house. 
The house is back among trees, on a steep street overlooking the lakeside town 
of Bountiful. Johnson is a tall man with wavy, silver hair. He almost always 
wears a suit and big, black Wellington boots. "My gosh!" and "Good heavens!" 
are the roughest terms he'll use in public. "Oh-ho!" he says cheerfully 
whenever he spots a chink in an environmentalist argument. 
He draped one arm expansively across the back of an overstuffed couch and, in a 
soft voice, told how he put up his house 20 years ago. It was hung together in 
six hours by a crane operator and a few relatives. Each precast concrete 
section came finished, with exterior decorative rock, insulation, window 
casings and inside wall surfaces ready for paint. 
"The roof is strong enough to support a truck," said Johnson. "Actually a dump 
truck. You could drive around on the roof. It's almost, I think, 
indestructible, in that it can't burn or be destroyed by earthquake." 
And it was cheap. If the same mold can be used over and over, as in Johnson's 
round house, precast concrete costs much less than conventional construction 
methods. Johnson paid $4,000 for the wall, ceiling and floor modules for his 
home, about the price of the brick alone for a brick house. Only such features 
as the sparkly ceilings and a chartreuse shag carpet were extra. 
The houses Johnson would like to build now would have additional attractions. 
For one thing, they could be adjusted to changing family size. Lightweight, 
movable inside walls would be key to that. 
"Movable, and not only that, wifeable," Johnson said pleasantly. "Your wife 
could move the partition. You could come home one day and your wife has not 
only moved the furniture, but the entire house." 
Or, he said, expanding the vision, when you have your daughter's wedding, you 
take out the interior walls to make room for the reception, then replace them 
-- minus one bedroom now that she's gone. 
What Johnson has actually built over the years are 30 precast concrete 
commercial buildings -- bank branches, credit-union offices and the like. And 
he has developed his technique. Now he can pour and hang panels that are four 
stories high and 20 feet wide. 
In fact, two parallel rows of his big panels, sunk into the soft lake bed and 
filled in between with sand, constitute the core idea of Johnson's inexpensive 
dike. 
Johnson smiled and opened a thick ring binder to illustrate the next stages of 
his dream. 
Dikes will link two long islands, cutting off a third of the lake. The eastern 
side of the lake will begin to rise, since all the fresh water enters there. 
Conduits will run through the dikes, from the high to low side. In as little as 
a year, in the estimate of some Johnson partisans, gravity will flush the old 
lake water through the conduits into the western, salty side. 
Then comes the water-based life style. 
Johnson flipped to color copies of magazine pages showing houses with boats 
docked out back. Some are of a development in Ft. Lauderdale, Fla. Some are 
from Discovery Bay, near Sacramento. Some are from locales whose names have 
slipped Johnson's mind. 
"This is what we now have," he said with disgust as he flipped to a photo of a 
brown mud flat. 
Then he turned to a new imaginary scene, retouched by felt-tip pen, of dockside 
homes with the mountains of Bountiful in the background. 
"Bountiful-by-the-Sea," he announced with a dead-straight face. 
In Johnson's scheme, tax revenues from the increased value of shorefront 
properties pay for the dikes. Some engineers who have looked at his plans think 
it also might offer an economical solution to Utah's coming shortage of potable 
water. 
Far less enthusiastic is George Wilson of the Utah Division of Wildlife 
Management, who came to the defense of the unlovely mud flats one Sunday 
morning as he walked along the dike at Willard Bay, at the northeast corner of 
the Great Salt Lake. Willard Bay is a freshwater reservoir and recreational 
area built next to the lake years ago. It uses about as much dike as Johnson 
proposes for his plan, though that dike encircles far less water. 
Birds' Feeding Ground 
On the reservoir side, fishermen in one small boat stayed close to the rock 
barrier, angling for walleyed pike. On the lake side, birds worked the mud 
flats, rooting and scratching for small crustaceans and insect larvae. 
"People don't understand what wetlands are," Wilson said with a sigh. "It's not 
just cattails, but secluded mud and water too. And it's the open lake, not just 
the refuges." 
Before the recent years of flooding, ducks, geese, various wading birds, 
endangered bald eagles and peregrine falcons, muskrats, weasels, beaver, 
raccoon and skunks all depended on the wetlands of the lake's eastern shore, 
most of which remain under water. 
No one is sure what the high water has done, but some figures show dramatic 
shifts in migratory patterns. Peak population counts of visiting tundra swans 
-- formerly known as whistling swans -- dropped from 65,000 in 1982 to 400 in 
1987. A million pintail ducks commonly stopped off at the lake each summer in 
the 1960s and early '70s, on their way to Southern California. Now, no more 
than 10,000 drop in to feed. 
The dispute, oddly enough, is not over saline or fresh water, but the height of 
the lake. Johnson's new water line would have to be high enough to border on 
private, not state, land. Otherwise, he cannot get permission to build the 
waterfront life style that would pay for the dikes. 
Permanent Submersion 
But this would leave permanently submerged most of the old wetlands, developed 
and maintained by various conservation groups since the 1920s. 
Johnson and his supporters say a freshwater lake would create new and better 
wetlands, but offer no specifics. Environmentalists ask where this miracle 
would occur, since a high lake would bring the water up against expensive 
agricultural land. 
Environmentalists also question just how fresh Johnson's sweetened lake would 
be. Willard Bay is the state's most popular water-based park and is packed with 
water-skiers in summer. But many of the game fish stocked there have died out. 
And, after 20 years, the water is murky year-round. 
A worse example is freshwater Utah Lake. The summer algae blooms there have 
given rise to "Ski the Scum" T-shirts. Environmentalists contend that Johnson's 
freshwater lake, formed over the residue of a century's worth of raw sewage and 
dumped heavy metals, would be no better. 
"I like to think of it as Lake Wobegon," said George Wilson, "where they think 
everyone will be happy and prosperous -- but it won't be." 
Picking a Study Panel 
Actually, Lake Wasatch (taken from the name of the bordering mountains) is what 
Johnson calls his vision. Undeterred by such carping is the Lake Wasatch 
Coalition, Johnson's loosely knit group of supporters, who include bankers, 
land developers, public-finance attorneys, engineers and politicians. 
Recently, the coalition got together in the paneled boardroom of Zions First 
National Bank. Johnson, in a dark suit, brought up his worries about the 
unexpected resistance he had encountered from the Army Corps of Engineers. 
"This is going to be a very severe problem," he said, frowning. The head of the 
corps' Salt Lake City regulatory office had told him that, so far, he saw "no 
way" under federal law that the old wetlands could be developed for housing. 
David Hemingway, the exuberant vice president for investment at Zions bank and 
president of the Lake Wasatch Coalition, counseled patience. 
Banker's Optimism 
"I don't think that at this point we should be discouraged," Hemingway said 
brightly. "Enough people believed that it was worth proceeding, and 
governmental regulations are not the Ten Commandments." 
In fact, this meeting was to decide whom the group would recommend to Gov. 
Bangerter for the new Great Salt Lake Authority that is to take over further 
study of the project. The men expected their recommendations to be well 
received, since the governor is an unabashed developer himself. Still, they 
wanted to be sure that Bangerter had plenty of "forward-looking" types, as 
Hemingway put it, to choose from. 
"We've got a glaring omission," Brent R. Armstrong, a tax and corporate 
attorney, said as potential appointees were brought up for discussion. "We 
don't have one birds-and-bunnies guy on this whole list." 
Others called for adding a woman or two. Adjustments were made to the list of 
names. 
Pro-Dike Commission 
A month later, as they had hoped, Bangerter picked a panel with a clear 
pro-dike majority, including Hemingway and another coalition member. And 
results of a recent poll published in the Salt Lake Tribune showed voters in 
the four lakeside counties to be roughly split on the issue, with 9% of them 
yet to make up their minds. 
Meanwhile, watching from the sidelines has been Long John Silver, a Great Salt 
Lake visionary in his own right. 
Now 79 and hard of hearing, he still goes out several days a week to keep an 
eye on his investment, the boarded-up Saltair resort. Silver adopted his 
nickname when he was a dealer in TV sets and appliances, and kept the persona 
when he went on to develop Treasure Island resort, Silver Sands Beach and 
finally, Saltair III. In each case, the rising lake ran him out of business. 
On a recent afternoon, Silver, wearing a bolo tie clasped with a gold doubloon, 
spoke of the days when sea monsters were said to live in the lake, when a great 
whirlpool allegedly sucked water into an underground system that emptied into 
the Pacific Ocean, when he and his sons searched the islands for buried 
treasure. 
Pioneer Son's View 
Silver thinks Johnson's dikes would be popular. He cited the fascination people 
have always shown for the irascible body of water, even in the time of his 
great-grandfather, Brigham Young. 
Young, the pioneer Mormon leader, enjoyed taking visitors on lake tours in his 
paddle-wheeled boat, the Timely Gull, which was powered by two horses on 
treadmills. He apparently liked the lake just as it was. 
"I don't think he really had a dream for the lake," said Silver. "He just loved 
it." 
Of course, Young never tried to build a condominium on its undependable shore. 
