POWER SHIFT TALKS OKD IN MYANMAR; 
OPPOSITION: MILITARY JUNTA SAYS IT IS WILLING TO MEET WITH MAY 27 ELECTION 
WINNERS. 
The Myanmar military junta has agreed to hold talks on the transfer of power 
with the pro-democracy party, which swept last month's elections, an official 
spokesman said Friday. 
Replying to a question at a press conference, spokesman Kyaw Sann said the 
ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council is now willing to meet with 
leaders of the National League for Democracy (NLD), the party that won more 
than 80% of the seats in the May 27 elections. 
"I cannot, however, say when this meeting will take place," Kyaw Sann said. 
Earlier, NLD acting leader Kyi Maung said his party wants to open a dialogue 
with the military soon to discuss the transfer of power to a civilian 
government. 
The military called the May election in an effort to improve its image abroad. 
Despite strict controls on campaigning by opposition parties, the military's 
own party won only a handful of seats in the newly created Parliament, which 
has yet to meet. 
Since the election, the military has made little effort to turn over power to 
civilian rule, despite repeated urging by the victors. 
The NLD has moved slowly and carefully to avoid giving the military any excuse 
to overturn the election. 
But it has been under increasing pressure from some of its youthful supporters 
to call for a quick transfer of power and the release of all political 
prisoners. 
Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of political activists have been arrested since 
the military crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in 1988. 
Among those under detention are the two top leaders of the NLD, Aung San Suu 
Kyi and Tin Oo. 
Analysts said the military and NLD need to discuss the release of the political 
prisoners, the drafting of a new constitution, the extent and pace at which the 
military will hand over power, and efforts to end the country's 40-year civil 
war with ethnic minority groups. 
At the press conference, the military showed videotapes of a meeting of the 
Democratic Alliance of Burma (DAB) -- a group of minority insurgents and 
dissident students -- held last week at a jungle base near the border with 
Thailand. 
Military spokesman Lt. Col. Ye Htut, said the alliance was demanding the 
creation of a federal union of Myanmar, with eight autonomous and politically 
equal states for the various ethnic groups. 
Ye Htut said the insurgents also demanded that each state in the new union have 
its own armed forces. 
"What the DAB wants to do is to turn insurgent armies . . . into legal armed 
forces in their respective states," he said. 
He said such an arrangement could lead to bloody internal conflicts. 
