HANDING OVER THE WANTED UNWANTED CHILD; 
AN OPEN ADOPTION BY LINCOLN CAPLAN (FARRAR, STRAUS &amp; GIROUX: $17.95; 137 
PP.; 0-374-10558-8) 
When Peggy Bass, a 20-year-old college student, spotted an ad in her hometown 
paper from a couple seeking to adopt a baby, she was seven months pregnant. 
Lacking steady employment, her boyfriend Tom, a recent college graduate, was 
not yet ready for marriage. 
Peggy called the number listed, which turned out to be a California agency 
specializing in arranging open adoptions. Over the phone, Peggy was read 
thumbnail sketches of three couples seeking to adopt. She selected one -- an 
infertile Boston couple in their late 30s -- who eventually would become her 
baby's adoptive parents. 
Author Lincoln Caplan, himself the adoptive father of a daughter, traces the 
saga of what is doubtless one of the most emotionally fraught of all human 
transactions: the transfer of a newborn from a woman whose life has no room for 
motherhood to a couple for whom a baby is a long-awaited miracle. Caplan uses 
the four-way story of Peggy, Tom and adoptive parents Dan Stone and Lee Duncan 
to elucidate the emerging trend toward open adoption, taking care to identify 
the many emotional pitfalls and legal hazards along the way. 
Caplan, an attorney and author of "The Insanity Defense and the Trial of John 
W. Hinckley Jr." and "The Tenth Justice: The Solicitor General and the Rule of 
Law," defines an open adoption as "one in which the birth parents meet the 
adoptive parents, participate in the separation and placement process, 
relinquish all legal, moral and nurturing rights to the child, but retain the 
right to continuing contact and to knowledge of the child's whereabouts and 
welfare." For many birth parents, who find themselves increasingly in the 
driver's seat vis-a-vis the placement of their progeny, open adoption offers an 
attractive alternative to the traditional, closed, confidential route (in which 
the birth mother surrenders her newborn to an agent or go-between, never to lay 
eyes on, or have any contact with, that child again). 
A diminished pool of infants available for adoption in the United States -- due 
in part to the prevalence of abortion and in part to the social acceptance of 
single parenting -- and a markedly higher incidence of infertility among 
married couples have combined to make the search for the elusive infant a 
poignant, trying and common one. Indeed, for the last 15 years, just 50,000 
babies annually have been put up for adoption, down from a peak of 89,200 in 
1970, according to Caplan. "While the rate of out-of-wedlock birth doubled, the 
percentage of single mothers who gave up their babies dropped sharply," he 
writes, noting that today 24 out of 25 unmarried new mothers choose to keep 
their unplanned babies. 
Bass might have gone that route, too, were she not so headstrong about adoption 
and clever at concealing her condition from her parents. "She didn't want to 
tell her family, with whom she lived . . . (as) she was sure they would insist 
on helping her keep the baby." 
After designating Dan and Lee as the adoptive parents for her child, Peggy 
moved to Boston so that they could offer support and be on hand for the birth 
of the baby she was already calling theirs. Aware of the delicacy of the 
situation, Dan and Lee honored Peggy's wishes, housing her with friends and 
taking her out for dinner every week as if they were "dating" her. On the one 
hand, they wanted to do everything possible to ease her burden. On the other, 
they felt uneasy that Peggy's and Tom's parents had been kept in the dark about 
the pregnancy for fear that, upon discovery, they might contest the adoption. 
Further, Massachusetts law requires that the mother wait four days after giving 
birth before signing adoption papers -- in order that she be able to change her 
mind. Braced for crushing disappointment (a non-factor in the case of closed 
adoption), they had to walk a highwire act around solidity while masking their 
vulnerability. 
For her part, Peggy seemed never to doubt her decision and appeared to relish 
her role of birth mother, jokingly referring to herself as "the adoption 
fairy"; after childbirth, she attached to her daughter's wrist the name Rebecca 
Duncan Stone. Ironically, despite Peggy's magnanimity, it was she who 
eventually pulled away from the triangle. Returning home to Tom, she quickly 
got pregnant again, had an abortion, and before long the pair broke up. Through 
her mother, Peggy asked Dan and Lee to stop sending baby pictures; only then 
did they begin to fathom Peggy's repressed anguish that summer. 
Caplan does an able job of reporting the emotional currents swirling in this 
drama of maternity. However, much of the book fails to transcend a rough-draft 
feel, with its heavy use of blocks of transcript and the concomitant lack of 
authorial interpretive analysis. It is as if Caplan were trying to keep a 
distance from the material, holding his own emotions at bay in an attempt to 
maintain objectivity. 
What's more, he piles on unnecessary detail, such as what the couples ate for 
lunch the day they met, how they dressed, without demonstrating the emotional 
or character significance of these details. Given the slim, 137-page text, one 
cannot help but suspect Caplan of padding to stretch an article -- much of 
which originally appeared in The New Yorker -- into a box. 
Still, for the reader unacquainted with the subject, "An Open Adoption" 
provides a useful introduction. Peggy's story is interwoven with an overview of 
historical attitudes toward, and studies regarding, adoption, as well as the 
case for and against open adoption. 
Perhaps the book's most graphic image is of the rows of unwanted babies laid 
out in 1920s maternity wards; adoptive parents could stroll the aisles until 
one caught their fancy. In that era, unwed mothers were met with contempt. 
Today, unwed mothers willing to give up their infants for adoption have emerged 
as maternity princesses and are occasionally met at airports with limousines. 
This shift in the balance of power is no doubt disconcerting for would-be 
adoptive parents, most of whom are in a higher socio-economic class from the 
birth parents. Given this new landscape, however, despite their small troubles, 
Dan Stone and Lee Duncan appear to be a very lucky couple indeed. 
