DAUGHTER DESCRIBES FINAL DAYS OF AYATOLLAH 
The daughter of Iran's late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini said Sunday that her 
father suffered five heart attacks in the 10 days after surgery May 23 for 
stomach cancer. He died June 3. 
Confirming that her father had cancer, Zahra Mustafavi said Khomeini died in a 
small clinic near his home in north Tehran, where 40 Iranian physicians debated 
every aspect of his care and where every moment in his final days was recorded 
on a hidden videotaping system. 
The clinic was taken over by Khomeini's medical team nine years ago after his 
first serious heart attack and after concerns were raised that he might be the 
target of assassination attempts, for which medical facilities would be needed 
close by, the daughter said. 
Speaking in her Tehran office, Mustafavi, 48, provided the most detailed 
accounting to date of her father's medical problems in recent years during a 
50-minute interview. 
She also said that her brother, Ahmed, 44, has aspired since 1981 to become 
president, but the idea was rejected by her father, whom she quoted as saying, 
"As long as I am alive, I do not wish for him to have a position." 
Mustafavi said her own desire to become a member of Parliament had to be 
deferred by her father's policy of keeping his children out of political posts 
while he was alive. 
In the wake of her father's death, Mustafavi said, her brother has sunk into a 
dejected mental state, from which she attempted to jar him Saturday with a pep 
talk after she had heard that he wanted to withdraw from active participation 
in national affairs. She quoted him as saying, "I am too tired. . . . I am 
finished," but he added that he has not given up on the Islamic revolution. 
Hinting that Iranian-U.S. relations, frozen by bitter grievances on both sides, 
might improve after her father's death, she said Khomeini "always said the 
relationship between America and Iran is like a relationship between a wolf and 
a sheep, but officials change." 
Mustafavi, a university lecturer and women's society organizer, answered 
questions in the presence of a Foreign Ministry official. 
She joined other influential Iranians in praising the selection of Ali Khamenei 
as Iran's new spiritual leader, saying her family is "really happy" about the 
choice. 
