IRELAND APPROVES ICN'S RIBAVIRIN FOR TREATING HIV 
ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. announced Friday that the Irish government has 
approved the sale of the firm's controversial drug ribavirin to people infected 
with the virus that causes AIDS, marking the first time that any nation has 
done so. 
The Costa Mesa-based pharmaceutical company said the Republic of Ireland will 
allow the sale of ribavirin to treat people infected with the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS. People suffering from such HIV 
symptoms as fevers, night sweats and fatigue would be eligible to receive the 
antiviral drug. 
The World Health Organization estimates that 140 people have contracted full 
cases of acquired immune deficiency syndrome in Ireland and that nearly 1,000 
people are infected with HIV. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has refused to approve ribavirin to treat 
HIV-infected patients and has denied ICN's request to distribute the drug 
pending approval. The drug, which has been widely marketed by ICN as a cure for 
several maladies, is viewed with skepticism in some scientific circles as a 
treatment for AIDS-related illnesses. 
ICN announced in March that it had given up trying to win FDA approval for 
ribavirin to treat HIV patients, even though the company considers the drug 
effective for that purpose. Ribavirin's only FDA-approved use is to treat 
severe lower respiratory tract infections in young children. 
ICN spokesman Jack Sholl said the company has no plans "at the present time" to 
reverse its position and seek FDA approval. 
Barbara Jones, Ireland's vice-consulate in San Francisco, said her country's 
minister of health has granted ICN a limited license to sell ribavirin, which 
means that it will be available to doctors with expertise in AIDS treatment but 
not to general practitioners. 
"We are not promoting the drug," Jones said. 
She said Irish doctors generally advocate "early intervention strategies. . . . 
They have not received an unrestricted license. You can't walk into your 
pharmacy and get it willy-nilly." 
Sholl said he anticipates that several more countries will follow Ireland's 
lead. The company has asked Canada and Spain, among others, to review ribavirin 
to treat HIV. 
ICN's stock has shot up 76% since June 7. It closed Friday at $4.625 per share, 
up 50 cents. 
"The stock has traded on rumors and speculation for years on whether this drug 
will ever be approved for an AIDS use," said Ken Bohringer, analyst with the 
New York brokerage of Prudential-Bache Securities. 
Wall Street analysts said ribavirin must still pass many clinical trials before 
it gains greater acceptance in treating HIV. 
"This is a first step, but I wouldn't get wildly enthusiastic," Bohringer said. 
Viren Mehta, a researcher with the New York-based pharmaceutical research firm 
Mehta &amp; Isaly, said, "I don't think many convincing clinical trials have 
been done to show various health officials in major markets of its real 
benefits." 
Ireland based its approval on two controversial studies conducted in 1986. The 
first study showed that 10 of 56 people infected with HIV and given placebos 
advanced to full cases of AIDS within 24 weeks, while just six of 107 HIV 
carriers treated with ribavirin became seriously ill. 
But the methodology was blasted by scientists, including some at the FDA, who 
called the results meaningless because researchers had not determined that 
participating AIDS patients were at the same stage of disease. 
Dr. Peter Heseltine, associate chairman of medicine at USC, was one of the 
investigators in the 1986 studies. He said he now thinks that ribavirin could 
help to delay the onset of AIDS but that new studies are needed to see how it 
compares to the more widely accepted anti-AIDS drug, azidothymidine (AZT). 
