WHEN YOU SEE OUTER BANKS, DUCK 
For generations, vacationers driving from the north to this state's Outer Banks 
crossed Currituck Sound via the Wright Memorial Bridge and then turned right, 
heading due south on Highways 158 and 12. 
Their destinations were Kitty Hawk and Okracoke and points in-between: Kill 
Devil Hills, Nags Head, Rodanthe, Waves, Salvo, Avon, Hatteras. That was where 
everybody went; the rest of the Banks was terra incognita. 
But now streams of cars turn left off the bridge, driving north to Southern 
Shores and Duck and Sanderling and even all the way to Corolla. 
A quarter-century ago, when first I saw the Outer Banks, the paved road -- such 
as it was -- ended at Duck; if you wanted to travel farther you needed a Jeep, 
if not an amphibious tank. Today not merely is the road paved all the way, in 
Southern Shores there are four traffic lights, all erected within the past 
year. And in the heart of beautiful downtown Duck, there's sometimes gridlock 
as motorists fend for parking spaces at Wee Winks and Tommy's Market. 
The 25-mile stretch of barrier reef from Kitty Hawk to Corolla -- the North 
Banks, or Currituck Banks, as it is known -- is the latest hot spot in the 
never-ending story of coastal development in the Tar Heel State. 
With the rest of the Outer Banks either overbuilt or preserved as national 
seashore, and with the famous old beaches to the south -- Atlantic, Emerald 
Isle, Topsail, Wrightsville, Carolina -- long ago transformed into quasi-urban 
outposts, the North Banks were the last piece of unspoiled Atlantic shoreline; 
these days, though, they're wasting little time in getting spoiled. 
Here in Duck the cry is, "The yuppies are coming! The yuppies are coming!' -- 
but it's a cry of pleasure rather than pain. 
This little spot in the road -- you can't call it a crossroads because there's 
only one road -- was a quiet little fishing village as recently as a decade 
ago, not exactly impoverished but not exactly prosperous, either. But now that 
the big spenders are pouring in from Norfolk and Richmond and, yes, Washington, 
merchants and landowners hereabout are cashing in. Overnight, Duck has become a 
growth industry. 
About 2 1/2 years ago, when I first stayed at the inn a few miles north of Duck 
proper, early-rising guests found copies of USA Today and the Norfolk 
Virginian-Pilot next to the coffeepot in the lobby; USA Today still awaits 
them, but now the other newspapers of choice are the Wall Street Journal and 
the Washington Post. 
This is good news for an employee of the latter and a habitual reader of both, 
but as one of innumerable signs of what's happening to the old fishing 
settlement, it sends at best a mixed message. 
The good part, at least to my eyes, is that the companies and individuals who 
are so busily building up the North Banks are doing so with surprising subtlety 
and restraint; there's not much of the ticky-tack so characteristic of American 
seashore resorts, and there's a lot of pleasant shingle architecture. 
But the bad part is that the customs of the city have been brought to the 
coast, and the truth is that those customs aren't always as attractive as we 
city folk like to believe. 
In Duck, where not so long ago the principal business was trawling for mullet 
and menhaden, you can now eat blackened mahi-mahi and sip Amstel Light at a 
little restaurant on Currituck Sound, or buy pasta salad and white wine at a 
deli a few steps down the road. 
The Caffey's Inlet lifesaving station has been turned into a restaurant where 
the waiter tells you his first name and where the food, though certainly good, 
is Georgetown-trendy. At an elaborately quaint shopping center called 
Scarborough Faire -- yes, F-a-i-r-e -- you can buy polo shirts and "gourmet" 
kitchen supplies, not to mention dresses from India and quilts from Indiana. 
It's all just as tasteful as you please, and twice as expensive. My wife and I 
have been here half a dozen times, but always off-season and always at the inn. 
In-season room rates are beyond our means; weekly or monthly house rentals 
rival those at the most exorbitant Delaware and New Jersey resorts. And, as for 
buying a place, well, forget it. 
The beach itself may belong to us all, but the places with a view of it are 
strictly for what passes as the elite in this post-Reaganite era. For that 
matter, even a place with nothing to look at except saw grass would strain the 
financial resources of a venture capitalist. 
This is good for the merchants and real-estate agents of Duck -- and, believe 
it or not, for those of distant Corolla as well -- and it probably isn't really 
bad for anybody else. Yet, like most of life's blessings, it's been gained at 
considerable cost. 
The old North Banks was a distinct, discreet place, with its own culture and 
character; the new one, for all its charm and comfort, is just another 
cookie-cutter playground for the unduly privileged. 
Oh well. In his excellent history, "The Outer Banks of North Carolina," David 
Stick writes: "Already, people were complaining that the resort was changing 
and that it was not like the old Nags Head. They longed for the days when Nags 
Head was 'but another name for happiness; lovers walked on the sea-shore; 
doctors practiced without fees,' and it was 'respectable to be seen in 
homespun.' " 
That was in 1849. Nearly a century and a half has passed, and the Outer Banks 
have changed beyond the most lunatic dreams of any antebellum developer. Yet, 
they're still the Outer Banks. 
Yes, now you can buy a six-pack at Brew-Thru and spandex swimwear at Birthday 
Suit. But you can also watch porpoises play in the Atlantic, swim in a 
thundering surf and wake up to a sunrise that leaves you breathless. So far 
we've somehow managed not to botch that up. 
