FUNDS CRISIS CLOSES DOORS OF HOSPITAL 
Beleaguered Marina Hills Hospital in Ladera Heights closed its doors Friday and 
transferred its 25 patients to other hospitals ending months of financial 
troubles, employee complaints and patient loads that had dipped to only one 
patient at times. 
Hospital Administrator Marvin Herschberg said the final blow to the troubled 
hospital was the failure of the state Medi-Cal system to pay its current bills 
to nursing homes and hospitals. 
However, the hospital had been strapped financially for some time, and had been 
operating under bankruptcy protection. Hospital management at one point had 
pleaded with employees -- who were owed back pay -- to keep working so the 
facility could receive patient referrals from the county. 
Herschberg said the Medi-Cal crunch put the final squeeze on the hospital 
State officials said Wednesday that Medi-Cal had run out of money and that 
there would be a shortfall of funds to meet payments to convalescent homes and 
hospitals until July when the next fiscal year begins. 
"Basically, we had about $1 million owing us from the state for Medi-Cal 
services," Herschberg said. "We found we couldn't collect on them from the 
state until July. We couldn't borrow any more money and we didn't want to 
endanger any patients so we made a decision this morning (Friday) to just close 
down." 
The 103-bed hospital was employing about 100 people when it closed, the 
administrator said. It was not immediately clear what would happen to the 
employees. 
Herschberg said: "The closing is particularly tragic because we felt we could 
have broken even in June. The county Department of Health Services was sending 
us obstetrics cases and we were performing surgery." 
The hospital primarily serves obstetrics cases, most of them funded by Medi-Cal 
or Medicare. During previous troubles in January and February when the facility 
was having problems meeting its payrolls, it was noted that the county 
Department of Health Services expected more than 46,000 babies to be delivered 
at county hospitals this year, severely overtaxing a system designed to deliver 
35,000 babies safely. 
