FLAWED ARGUMENTS IN PARKLAND SWAP 
Siegfrid Othmer's answers in the Point/Counterpoint interview (Times, June 3), 
opposing the so-called land swap to obtain public ownership of 5,700 acres of 
superb parkland now owned by Bob Hope, are well argued. The only difficulty is 
that his arguments, which focus on blocking development of Jordan Ranch by the 
Hope interests, are based on seriously flawed premises. 
I find it curious that The Times chose a representative of the proposed 
developer of Jordan Ranch as the proponent of public acquisition of the 5,700 
acres, rather than a member of one of the well-established environmental 
organizations that support the acquisition, such as the Sierra Club, the Santa 
Monica Mountains Trails Council, the Rancho Simi Parks and Recreation District, 
Equestrian Trails Inc. It is not surprising, on the other hand, that Mr. Othmer 
represented the opposing position, since he is the spokesperson for the primary 
group opposing acquisition, an ad hoc group whose focus is almost exclusively 
on Jordan Ranch rather than on the broader picture. 
The flawed premises in Mr. Othmer's answers include the following: 
Flawed premise No. 1: Parks officials should act to restrict landowners' 
ability to develop property of park value that they are unable to acquire. 
It is a primary function of the National Park Service, the California State 
Parks Department, the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy and other public park 
agencies to acquire high-quality parkland. It is not their function to block 
development. If a representative of one of these agencies was to state that his 
aim was to block development, as Mr. Othmer favors, all hell would break loose, 
and he would soon be out of a job. 
Flawed premise No. 2: Since Palo Comado Canyon (where Jordan Ranch lies) is on 
the acquisition list of the National Park Service's Santa Monica National 
Recreation Area, Jordan Ranch should be given top priority for acquisition, by 
whatever means. 
There is much land of high quality in the national Park Service's Santa Monica 
Mountains zone. That's precisely why the National Recreation Area was 
established. Jordan Ranch rates inclusion, but not priority over all else. As a 
matter of fact, many of those who would like to see the SMMNRA fulfill its 
potential feel that more attention should be paid to acquisitions in the Santa 
Monica Mountains, with less emphasis on the Simi Hills, where Jordan Ranch is 
located. It is predominantly the Santa Monica Mountains for which the National 
Recreation Area was created. 
Flawed premise No. 3: The power of condemnation is a suitable and desirable 
means of acquiring Jordan Ranch from the Hope interests. 
Condemnation is out of the question. The idea was broached once before in a 
case of much less visibility, where the property owner was much less prominent 
and influential than Mr. Hope (the Murphy Dunn property on the high point of 
the ridge between Zuma and Trancas Canyons in the Santa Monica Mountains). That 
effort backfired drastically, bringing down the wrath of important politicians 
and setting back progress in the National Recreation Area. Furthermore, does 
Mr. Othmer really believe that the Hope interests would be willing to enter 
negotiations for Corral Canyon, China Flat and Runkle Ranch with condemnation 
proceedings on Jordan Ranch threatened? Ridiculous! 
Flawed premise No. 4: Trying to decide what is high-quality parkland and what 
is of lesser quality is a "muddy area we have no business touching." 
The matter of deciding on priorities is what this discussion is all about. I 
have no difficulty whatever in deciding that the 59 acres, now in National Park 
ownership, to be given up for the 5,700 acres, is of no great concern. The 59 
acres in contention is completely outside the Cheeseboro Canyon watershed (not 
"in Cheeseboro Canyon" as stated in the Times "background" material), and would 
never have been missed if those acres had not been included in the Cheeseboro 
acquisition. They are included purely by accident of property boundary lines. 
It is precisely the lucky accident that those 59 acres were acquired, in what 
turned out to provide a viable access to Jordan Ranch, that makes them the key 
that, if all goes well, will unlock the acquisition of 5,700 acres of wonderful 
parkland, to the great benefit of us all. 
DANIEL M. POPPER 
Pacific Palisades 
It is a primary function of the National Park Service, the California State 
Parks Department, the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy and other public park 
agencies to acquire high-quality parkland. It is not their function to block 
development. 
