'PUBLIC LAND, PRIVATE PROFIT' 
We applaud your article on the BLM (May 24), which provides an informative, if 
rare, peek at what is often called the "forgotten legacy" in the public lands 
system. The message should be clear to anyone reading about the haphazardness 
of BLM's management, especially here in California; the agency's policy-making 
apparatus is badly adrift. Ultimately, under federal law, Congress must decide 
how to protect the California desert. 
Today the new regime has failed to offer any substantive, much less minor, 
changes in the agency's land management programs or policies. As a result, many 
illogical, discredited and potentially ruinous practices continue unabated. 
Current policies, as contained in the California BLM Desert Plan, would also 
sanction large-scale cyanide gold strip mining. Such practices will dry up 
surrounding wells and streams and destroy wildlife habitat. 
There is a well-documented pattern of mismanagement by BLM in the California 
desert. There is a significant leadership vacuum at the highest levels of the 
Department of Interior and BLM. Congress must act quickly to protect the 
desert. The California Desert Protection Act, introduced by Sen. Alan Cranston 
(D-Calif.) and Rep. Mel Levine (D-Santa Monica), would ensure that 3 million 
acres of the desert will be preserved as national parklands. The National Park 
Service, with its respected record on preservation, can be entrusted to enhance 
the unique natural qualities found throughout areas such as Death Valley, East 
Mojave and Joshua Tree. 
This transfer of land from BLM to the Park Service does not threaten to gut 
BLM's management role in the California desert. Under the Cranston-Levine 
legislation, there would be an additional 4.5 million acres of BLM wilderness 
to manage. Miners, off-road vehicles and other interests would also have 
approximately 4.5 million acres to work with, under BLM jurisdiction, of 
course. 
PATRICIA SCHIFFERLE 
Regional Director 
The Wilderness Society 
San Francisco 
