THE WASHINGTON SUMMIT; 
NEWS ANALYSIS; 
START PACT MAY FOOL CRITICS OF ARMS CONTROL; 
TREATY: THE AGREEMENTS MARK THE BEGINNING OF THE CRITICAL TASK OF DISMANTLING 
'OVER-ARMAMENT' THAT ACCUMULATED DURING FOUR DECADES OF CONFRONTATION. 
Critics of arms control have long complained that "when it's important, it's 
not do-able, and when it's do-able, it's not important." But President Bush and 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev took a significant step Friday toward 
proving the critics wrong. 
The agreements that they signed on strategic nuclear weapons, chemical weapons 
and nuclear testing, along with a joint statement advancing prospects for 
conventional force cuts in Europe, mark the beginning of the critical task of 
dismantling the "over-armament" of both nuclear and conventional weapons that 
accumulated during four decades of confrontation. 
"The START treaty will signal a turning point in U.S.-Soviet arms control 
efforts toward a more rational, open, cooperative, predictable and stable 
relationship," the two leaders said in a statement accompanying the agreement. 
Said Bush: "The world has waited long enough. The Cold War must end." 
The START pact, in particular, will cut in half the number of missile warheads, 
the most dangerous weapons on both sides, and the reductions will be verified 
by 13 different types of on-site inspection. Also, it switches the weight of 
the arsenals from fast-flying ballistic warheads to slow-flying cruise missile 
warheads. 
"No one is going to start a war by using cruise missiles," said former arms 
negotiator Paul C. Warnke. 
Beyond that, START could significantly increase political stability between the 
two countries, according to Harvard Prof. Joseph S. Nye, Jr. 
"The basic objective of arms control," he said, "has been to promote stability, 
with reduced risk of conflict and some money saving. START, as it emerges, does 
advance those goals and thus sets the stage for the next steps in the process, 
including deeper cuts in nuclear weapons." 
"Maybe this disarmament process is a victim of its own success," said Soviet 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov, tacitly acknowledging the 
grumbling of critics over Friday's arms agreements. "We used to talk a lot 
about disarmament, and now when we have disarmament we talk less. 
"It doesn't mean that it has less significance," Gerasimov added, referring to 
the anticipated START pact. "It's extremely significant. It also gives you and 
us a peace dividend." 
Certainly critics can argue that there is room for improvement in the accords: 
The cuts could have been deeper, negotiations less protracted. But they set the 
stage, militarily and politically, for the next steps in slowing down the arms 
race. 
The START agreement will cut offensive nuclear arsenals by one-third overall, 
not by the flat 50% once promised. And it will take seven years to get the 
weapon stockpiles back to roughly their size when the strategic arms reduction 
talks began in 1982. 
But even some who are disappointed at the "modest" size of the cuts, like 
Warnke, a former arms negotiator, see the treaty as a "useful" step. 
The anticipated treaty to cut conventional forces in Europe (CFE) has generally 
drawn less criticism. The Warsaw Pact countries would cut four times more 
weapons from their arsenals than the North Atlantic Treaty Organization: 15% to 
60% of various weapon categories, compared to 7% to 15% for NATO. 
Instead of taking eight years to negotiate, CFE promises to be finished in only 
two. But here, too, critics complain that history has moved faster than arms 
control and that the weapon and troop ceilings set by the agreement could 
become the floors that the Soviets will insist upon retaining in East Europe in 
the future. 
Barring some drastic reversal of the present flow of events, however, there 
seems little realistic prospect that any significant Soviet presence will 
remain in the former Soviet Bloc countries by the end of the treaty's 
seven-year reduction period. 
Hungary and Czechoslovakia will be rid of the Soviets by mid-1991. Poland may 
or may not allow small contingents of Soviet logistic troops to stay to service 
Soviet forces in East Germany. But with German unification imminent, Soviet 
troops can only be marking time on East German territory before they depart. 
The CFE treaty, further, will require the destruction of massive amounts of 
weapons -- over 100,000 tanks, artillery and aircraft by the Warsaw Pact. 
Reconstituting them in order to go to war would be very costly and 
time-consuming, and probably could not be done without alerting the West. 
So the CFE accord should largely blow away the specter of a big conventional 
war in Europe for decades. As such, it will have more immediate impact on the 
Continent than will the START pact. 
But the superpowers will still be overstocked with nuclear weapons whose use, 
while far less likely, can obliterate the world. Hence new negotiations, to 
quickly follow completion of the START treaty, will seek "to enhance stability 
and reduce the risk of war," Bush said at Friday's White House signing 
ceremony. 
Arms control experts have a more specific list than that already prepared. 
A primary goal should be to reduce the weapon totals further, to 3,000 or 4,000 
weapons, according to Harvard's Nye. The START treaty now anticipated will 
permit 6,000 "accountable" weapons, but it will actually permit 9,000 or 
slightly more because of liberal counting rules for cruise missiles. The next 
treaty should set a limit that will have no loopholes, Nye said. 
The new talks are certain to seek strict limits on the number of land-based 
intercontinental missiles with multiple warheads. Both U.S. and Soviet 
officials agree that such missiles are destabilizing: They are the best weapons 
to launch a surprise attack, and also the most attractive targets in a surprise 
attack. 
Another goal will be further cuts in the very large Soviet ICBM missiles, the 
SS-18s, whose power and accuracy are the most threatening to the United States. 
Curbs on nuclear weapons in naval forces will be a topic pushed by the Soviets 
in future talks, because they fear that nuclear weapons on U.S. submarines and 
ships can circumvent the START treaty. 
COUNTING NUCLEAR WARHEADS 
The goal of the START agreement under negotiation is to reduce the nuclear 
arsenal of each superpower below 6,000 warheads. Below are current and 
anticipated levels by 1998, including intercontinental ballistic missiles 
(ICBMs), submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) and nuclear devices 
carried on bombers. 
ICBMs 
Currents levels 
United States: 2,450 
Soviet Union: 6,450 
Post-START levels 
United States: 1,800 
Soviet Union: 3,050 
SLBMs 
Currents levels 
United States: 5,024 
Soviet Union: 3,642 
Post-START levels 
United States: 3,024 
Soviet Union: 1,848 
BOMBERS 
Currents levels 
United States: 4,500 
Soviet Union: 1,228 
Post-START levels 
United States: 1,083 
Soviet Union: 1,085 
TOTAL 
Currents levels 
United States: 11,974 
Soviet Union: 11,320 
Post-START levels 
United States: 5,907 
Soviet Union: 5,983 
Source: Natural Resources Defense Council 
