TANKS CITED IN SALMONELLA SURGE; 
FOOD SAFETY: HARMFUL BACTERIA MIGRATE AMONG CHICKENS POOLED IN HUGE VATS OF 
WATER, STUDY SHOWS. 
A commonly used processing technique is responsible for the elevated Salmonella 
contamination rates in raw chicken, according to a federal study. 
Researchers found that the number of chicken carrying the harmful bacteria 
triples when carcasses are pooled in huge tanks of chilled water in the plant. 
The report, which appeared in a recent issue of the Journal of Food Protection, 
was prepared by H. S. Lillard, a researcher with the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture in Athens, Ga. 
The poultry industry is attempting to solve the problem, but health officials 
say it could be as much as a year before any effective methods are implemented. 
"(The study) is nothing alarming," said Kenneth N. May, scientific adviser for 
the National Broiler Council, a Washington-based trade association. 
The "chiller tank" was identified as the most likely place for 
cross-contamination to take place. Salmonella-free birds are routinely thrown 
together with chicken potentially infected with the bacteria, giving the 
Salmonella the opportunity to migrate from one bird to another. 
As in the past, federal officials involved with the nation's meat inspection 
program said that the bacteria's presence is not cause for concern because 
proper storage, handling and cooking of chicken will destroy the organism and 
prevent illness. 
A top USDA official also said that even though the chiller tank seems to 
increase the Salmonella contamination, it also serves a useful purpose in 
dissipating the bacteria's concentration on some birds. Namely, more chickens 
wind up contaminated but the extent of the bacteria's presence is lessened. 
"Dilution of the total number of organisms per bird is a good development," 
said Lester Crawford, administrator of the USDA's Food Safety and Inspection 
Program. "The fewer (cells) per bird the better off you are because a certain 
number of cells is needed to cause disease . . . " 
May, of the Broiler Council, also emphasized that reducing the number of 
bacteria per bird is a positive processing technique. "The paper shows overall 
that our processing procedures are good because we are reducing the number of 
organisms (per carcass) as we go through the plant " he said. 
Crawford estimated that as many as 500,000 Salmonella cells are required to 
cause illness. That number drops rapidly, however, for those considered at high 
risk such as infants, pregnant women, the elderly and others with impaired 
immune systems such as cancer or AIDS patients. 
Lillard acknowledged that the number of Salmonella cells found in her research 
were small, about one per gram of material tested. Even so, a few cells can 
multiply into a greater health threat in the home or restaurant if the chicken 
is improperly handled or stored. 
Lillard found that in the five poultry processing steps prior to immersion in 
the chiller tank only 11% to 19% of the samples tested positive for Salmonella. 
However, after the birds were pooled in the chiller tank the contamination rate 
jumped to 36.9% of the total, or an increase of anywhere from 94% to 235%. 
She also tested the chiller tank water and found it to be positive for 
Salmonella 53% of the time. 
"Significant cross contamination occurred at only one of six sampling points 
throughout the plant tested," according to Lillard. "A significant increase in 
Salmonella incidence for carcasses occurred only after immersion chilling, 
suggesting that this process is more conducive to cross-contamination than 
other processing points in the plant." 
Federal health officials and industry representatives have long known that the 
chiller tanks were a potential contamination point. However, Lillard's data is 
the best to date on the problem. 
"The Lillard study shows that (the chiller tank) is where substantial 
contamination occurs," said Rod Leonard, executive director of the Community 
Nutrition Institute, a Washington-based consumer group. 
Originally, scientists believed that the addition of chlorine, at a level not 
to exceed 20 parts per million, was sufficient to control the spread of 
Salmonella in the chiller tanks. However, the plants studied by Lillard did not 
add chlorine to the chiller tanks. Even so, researchers have found that 
chlorine's potential sterilization effects are negated by proteins, such as 
chicken meat, fat and skin, present in the chiller tank water. 
Leonard, one of the poultry industry's chief critics, said, "You can't get 
control of bacteria with chlorine because it is frequently neutralized by 
protein. Nor can you pour it into the tank in such heavy doses so it effects 
the flavor of the bird." 
The USDA's Crawford acknowledged that some plants do not even use chlorine in 
the chiller tanks. 
"The water isn't always chlorinated and it should be to the level of drinking 
water," he said. 
May acknowledged that all firms should use chlorine in the chiller tanks to 
kill Salmonella even though the compound's addition is not required by the 
federal government. 
Recognizing that the contamination problem exists, several food firms have 
applied for federal permission to use compounds other than chlorine to kill 
Salmonella that may be present in the chiller tanks. It will be a year before 
any new additive is approved for use, according to a U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration official. 
"The industry has a variety of food additive petitions (filed at FDA) right now 
(that are designed) to knock down Salmonella in the poultry chill tanks," said 
Joe Madden, acting director of the FDA's division of microbiology. "The 
industry is working toward cleaning up (its) act." 
In addition to being ineffective as a Salmonella control, the chlorine used by 
poultry processors has apparently caused headaches in plant workers, Madden 
said. 
Consumers can protect themselves from any Salmonella that may be present by 
heating chicken to an internal temperature of between 175 and 180 degrees. 
All surfaces that come in contact with raw meat should be cleansed immediately 
with hot water and soap including cutting boards, knives, cooking utensils and 
storage containers. Raw chicken stored in the refrigerator should be placed on 
a plate to prevent liquid from dripping onto others foods that are to be eaten 
raw. 
