ENGINEER HELD IN ILLEGAL 'STAR WARS' SALES; 
CRIME: HE IS ARRESTED BY U.S. CUSTOMS AGENTS AND CHARGED WITH TRYING TO SELL 
RESTRICTED DATA. EXPORTS TO FOUR JAPANESE FIRMS ARE ALSO UNDER INVESTIGATION. 
U.S. Customs agents posing as brokers for South African businessmen arrested a 
Los Angeles engineer who has been charged with illegally attempting to sell 
them technical data from a restricted Strategic Defense Initiative missile 
research project, federal authorities said Friday. 
Prosecutors said that the engineer, Ronald J. Hoffman, 51, was also under 
investigation for exporting or agreeing to export similar data to at least four 
Japanese industrial firms over the last four years. Federal authorities said 
they were uncertain whether any of the Japanese firms were aware that the 
technology was being sold illegally. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. William F. Fahey said that documents, computer records and 
facsimile machine files seized Thursday night during a search of Hoffman's 
Beverly Glen home indicated that the engineer's "Star Wars" sales to the 
Japanese may have netted him "hundreds of thousands of dollars." 
In a 52-page affidavit filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, authorities 
said they were also investigating allegations that Hoffman, working through his 
defense contracting firm, Plume Technology, illegally exported or agreed to 
sell missile software systems to firms in West Germany and Italy and also to 
Israel's Ministry of Defense. Fahey said that Hoffman had boasted of being in 
contact with the head of the Israeli government's missile program. 
In Washington, Customs spokesman David Hoover explained that the sting 
operation was part of "Operation Exodus," a continuing federal effort to stem 
the flow of high-technology data and munitions from the United States to 
Eastern Bloc nations, Cuba, North Korea and South Africa. 
Hoffman was arrested Thursday afternoon at a hotel near Los Angeles 
International Airport moments after he accepted a $150,000 check from a Customs 
agent. Several minutes earlier, according to the affidavit, two agents watched 
as Hoffman placed a cardboard box containing SDI computer software into a 
Federal Express mail slot. 
On Friday, U.S. Magistrate Robert M. Stone ordered Hoffman held on $500,000 
bail. Hoffman, a tousled-haired man who wore sandals with his blue prison 
uniform, said little as he stood beside his defense attorney, Roger Rosen. 
Hoffman was expected to post bond and be released later in the day. 
Hoffman was charged with attempting to sell a computer software system known as 
"Contam," that is being developed as part of SDI research. By examining the 
exhaust trail left behind by launched missiles, the software could enable 
weapons tracking stations to "identify what type of rocket or missile was 
launched and how best to counteract it," authorities said in the affidavit. 
"We consider this the illegal export of some of our most precious national 
commodities," Fahey said. 
Fahey declined to say whether authorities had contacted South African officials 
before the agents posed as brokers for that country. Henk Roodt, the South 
African consul in Beverly Hills, also declined to comment. 
But in a federal courtroom, awaiting Hoffman's bail hearing Friday, one federal 
agent laughed: "We took it out of Lethal Weapon (II)." The reference was to a 
1989 action film that portrayed South African diplomats as murderers and 
smugglers. 
In their disguises as brokers for South Africa, authorities said, Customs 
agents Steven J. Bosseler and Jorge Urquijo struck a deal with Hoffman to pay 
him $150,000 in return for his sale of the computer data. To avoid federal laws 
restricting the sale of SDI equipment to South Africa, Hoffman agreed to ship 
the software to Bonn, West Germany, where the agents told him the material 
would then be transferred to South Africa. 
According to the affidavit, authorities were first tipped off about Hoffman's 
activities by a man whose wife worked for the engineer at a Century City firm, 
the Science Application International Corp. Hoffman resigned from that company 
in December, 1989, authorities said, after executives with the firm learned 
about his Japanese dealings. 
Hoffman is charged with violating U.S. export laws by exporting SDI and missile 
research materials without proper authorization. According to the affidavit, 
Hoffman failed to obtain proper State Department clearances before he entered 
into agreements with the Japanese companies. 
Between April 26 and May 29, according to authorities, federal undercover 
agents met with Hoffman five times, persuading him to sell them Contam 
software. Customs agent Bosseler said in the affidavit that he told Hoffman he 
represented a South African client who "was in the aerospace business and was 
attempting to launch a rocket booster and communications satellite into space." 
At one point during the meetings, Hoffman appeared with a second man, whom he 
identified as "Rob Dobbs," a Los Angeles physician. Customs agents are still 
trying to learn his whereabouts, Fahey said. 
During several of the meetings, Hoffman told the undercover agents that he was 
worried they were working for the government. 
"He expressed concerns that I might be a federal . . . agent trying to entrap 
him," Bosseler said. "Hoffman then proceeded to ask if I was a federal agent, 
to which I stated I was not. Hoffman said that he was very relieved." 
Stephen Braun reported from Los Angeles and Robert L. Jackson reported from 
Washington. Also contributing was Times staff writer John Kendall in Los 
Angeles. 
