PIPELINE THAT TOUCHED OFF FATAL FIRE REACTIVATED 
The gasoline pipeline that ruptured and set off a deadly fire in a San 
Bernardino neighborhood May 25 was reactivated Friday after the federal Office 
of Pipeline Safety gave its approval and the latest moves in federal court to 
block recharging of the line failed. 
At a press briefing on the site of the explosion that killed two residents and 
injured 31 while demolishing or damaging 15 homes, officials of the Calnev Pipe 
Line Co. said that shortly before 3:30 p.m., company technicians flicked a 
switch in Colton, where the pipeline originates, sending 2,500 barrels of 
gasoline an hour coursing to Las Vegas. 
San Bernardino Mayor W. R. (Bob) Holcomb, who was present at the briefing, said 
he was reconciled to the reopening of the pipeline. 
"I feel that the company has taken every step that is humanly possible to make 
sure this line, as presently installed, is safe and can be operated safely," he 
declared. 
But the mayor added, and Calnev officials confirmed, that the company and city 
have agreed that the company will eventually relocate the pipeline away from 
homes to the other side of Southern Pacific railroad tracks, if a proposed 
federal study indicates that would be in order. 
Thirteen days before the May 25 pipeline rupture, a runaway Southern Pacific 
train jumped the tracks and struck several homes in the same area, killing four 
people and injuring 11. The National Transportation Safety Board is 
investigating the likely possibility that the two incidents are related. 
Federal inspectors found several large dents in the pipeline after it ruptured. 
Shortly before the pipeline was restarted Friday, District Judge Lawrence 
Lydick, ruling that he did not have jurisdiction in the matter, rejected the 
latest motion by an attorney for homeowners in the affected area to block the 
reopening of the line. 
The attorney, James H. Davis, said he would appeal Lydick's order to the U.S. 
9th Circuit Court of Appeals. Numerous attempts in both state and federal 
courts in the last two weeks to supersede federal regulators and order an 
immediate relocation of the pipeline have been turned down on the grounds 
Lydick stated. 
Before ruling, Lydick told the aggrieved San Bernardino residents in his 
courtroom in Santa Ana that he could not "help but feel a great deal of 
sympathy and concern" for them. 
But, he added, "I don't think your problems are helped very much by the 
special-interest groups and others who seem to think their best interest is to 
keep you excited." 
To this, one of the residents, Paul Evans, responded in an interview: "My 
feeling is, we don't have special-interrest groups. We're acting on our own 
behalf. . . . We want to see the pipeline moved or us relocated." 
In his order, the judge also turned down the residents' bid for a court order 
to force Calnev to continue paying their hotel and food bills. Although the 
city has told residents of homes still standing that they are free to return to 
the neighborhood, some, pleading safety, have refused to do so. 
In Washington, meanwhile, Richard Beam, director of the Office of Pipeline 
Safety, said he gave his approval for restarting the gasoline flow because he 
had determined that Calnev had "complied with the terms of our orders and all 
of the applicable federal regulations tied into the construction" of 1,000 feet 
of replacement pipeline. 
However, asked if he would be willing to give a federal guarantee of the 
neighborhood's safety, Beam, responded tersely, "No." 
Calnev officials have said the new 14-inch line is stronger, buried deeper and 
better-protected than the old one. 
"What took place here May 25 has greatly grieved all of us at Calnev," said 
Anthony Andrukaitis, vice president of GATX Terminals Corp., which owns Calnev, 
on Friday. "It will be in our hearts and minds forever as we make every 
decision (on operating the new line)." 
Andrukaitis said it will take three or four days for the gasoline that flowed 
through the new section of the line to reach Las Vegas, which relies on the 
line for most of its fuel supply. During the two weeks the line was out, the 
Nevada city was supplied mainly by fuel trucks at a somewhat higher price. 
