CHINA TEETERS ON EDGE OF CIVIL WAR AS RIVAL FORCES MOBILIZE; 
BATTLE FOR CONTROL OF BEIJING SEEN 
China teetered this morning on the edge of civil war, with troops presumed 
loyal to hard-line President Yang Shangkun in control of central Beijing but 
positioned defensively at strategic points in apparent anticipation of attack 
by rival forces. 
Troops and armored vehicles were reported moving toward Beijing from the east, 
according to Western diplomats who said they appeared to be opposed to the 
troops of the 27th Army that killed hundreds or perhaps thousands of people 
while taking control of the center of the capital over the weekend. 
A military attache in the British colony of Hong Kong, reached by telephone 
this morning, said the Chinese air force has joined the effort to wrest control 
of Beijing Faxes from the 27th Army. Infantry units of the air force landed at 
the Nanyuan military airport south of the capital Monday night and engaged in 
skirmishes with other military units at or near the airport, the attache said. 
The air force believes that responsibility for the indiscriminate shootings in 
Beijing rests with the army, the attache said. The air force is headed by Wang 
Hai, who canceled a planned trip to Europe last week apparently to remain in 
Beijing during the intra-military feuding. 
Other small-scale duels broke out between rival troops Monday, according to 
Western witnesses, only about one mile west of Tian An Men Square, now 
controlled by thousands of 27th Army soldiers with hundreds of armored 
vehicles. 
Tanks Fan Out 
At about 7 p.m. Monday, tanks accompanied by armored personnel carriers and 
truckloads of troops fanned out to points along the Second Ring Road that loops 
around the main part of the city. This area includes Tian An Men Square, the 
Great Hall of the People and Zhongnanhai, the red-walled compound from which 
China's leaders have traditionally ruled, and the city's older residential and 
commercial districts. 
About 20 tanks continued to stand guard this morning at the Jianguomen bridge 
on the eastern side of the city, about half facing east in defensive positions. 
The others faced north, south and west to control access to the strategically 
important bridge, which crosses the Second Ring Road. 
What was unfolding appeared to be a battle for control of Beijing and, in the 
broader sense, for control of China after the country's 84-year-old paramount 
political and military leader, Deng Xiaoping, passes from the scene. China's 
political leadership appeared to be in a virtual state of collapse, almost 
paralyzed by personal rivalries and differences over the use of force and 
terror against Beijing citizens. 
Deng is generally believed to have ordered the bloody military crackdown, but 
he is also believed to be in rapidly failing health. It is widely believed that 
he suffers from prostate cancer. But there have also been rumors that he has 
suffered a stroke or died since his last appearance in public, which was the 
May 16 summit meeting with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
The troops now in control of central Beijing are more directly associated with 
Yang and high-ranking military members of his family. It appeared that the 
Chinese president, a veteran military leader in better health than Deng, was 
making a bid for supreme power. 
Attempted Coup Seen 
Some observers theorized that either President Yang had attempted to carry out 
a coup and Deng was succeeding in putting it down, or that Deng himself was 
responsible for ordering the carnage but had realized that the situation 
nationwide was getting out of control and was looking for scapegoats. 
But one Chinese military source said that Deng, whose whereabouts are unknown, 
had not been in control of the military when the weekend massacre took place. 
This source said Deng is now believed to be reasserting control. 
Some reports said that the 38th Army, a Beijing-area force that reputedly 
refused orders to suppress the pro-democracy demonstrations that touched off 
the current crisis, was being ordered to retake the city from the troops that 
moved in over the weekend. The 38th Army is believed to have strong ties to the 
reformist general secretary of the Communist Party, Zhao Ziyang. Zhao appears 
to have been stripped of power for his refusal to take a hard line with the 
students. His current fate is unknown but he has been presumed to be under 
house arrest. 
Some Troops Unwilling 
Within Beijing, there were various indications that not all troops were willing 
to participate in the martial-law crackdown ordered by hard-line Premier Li 
Peng on May 20. 
About 100 military vehicles, including armored personnel carriers and troop 
trucks, were abandoned by soldiers on the west side of the city during the 
predawn hours Monday and later set afire by residents. Crowds around the 
charred vehicles reported that the soldiers who had left them and taken refuge 
at a nearby museum compound had said they were unwilling to fire on unarmed 
crowds. 
Closer to the city center, shooting broke out between two groups of troops near 
the Minzu Hotel, only about one mile west of Tian An Men Square. 
Western diplomats who spoke to reporters for the news agency United Press 
International said that later in the day they saw two armored personnel 
carriers engage in a machine-gun duel at the same location, sending bullets 
through fifth-floor windows of the tourist hotel. 
Troops apparently supporting the martial-law crackdown set up cordons across 
two main roads near the city's northwest campus district Monday, UPI reported. 
A Hong Kong newspaper reported today that an officer on guard at Beijing's 
Great Hall of the People fired four shots at Premier Li on Sunday afternoon but 
that the Chinese leader escaped with only a slight wound. 
The Associated Press quoted the daily Ming Pao as saying the young guard fired 
from a distance and Li was hit in the thigh. 
The newspaper, quoting unidentified sources, said the guard was killed 
immediately and about 170 other guards at the Great Hall were quickly disarmed. 
Throughout many parts of the city, citizens erected barricades of buses, 
trucks, metal-and-concrete street dividers and vegetable market stalls. 
Citizens stood guard at intersections, many of which were virtually impassable. 
The lack of transportation and an eerie tension on the streets kept most 
workers at home away from their jobs Monday and today. Most stores remained 
closed and there was worry that food shortages may soon crop up. Relatively few 
Beijing residents keep stores of food on hand because of a lack of 
refrigerators. Panic buying of food supplies began to break out. 
"We have dried noodles, but that is about all. And we're almost out of cooking 
oil," complained a homemaker standing in a long line at a vegetable stand near 
the Temple of the Sun park. 
In the old neighborhoods near Tian An Men Square, soldiers were seen Monday 
running into alleyways and shooting at fleeing residents. One witness said that 
a teen-age girl was shot in the chest near Tian An Men. 
Rifle shots could be heard from the direction of the square in the evening, and 
a building was set afire on Xidan street and Changan Avenue to the west of the 
huge central open space. 
The U.S. Embassy said an American was hospitalized with head injuries received 
Sunday morning when he was beaten by security forces clearing demonstrators 
from Tian An Men Square. He was not identified. 
Confirmed deaths, based on figures provided by hospitals and bodies seen by 
foreign witnesses, number about 400, but it is widely believed that at least 
1,000, and perhaps many more have died. 
A spokesman for the Chinese Red Cross, which had displayed some sympathy for 
the student protesters in the square, said that the death toll "is in the 
thousands." 
"Obviously it's going to be impossible to ever know," he added. 
An unsubstantiated report circulated among students at Beijing University that 
four truckloads of dead were moved over the weekend from Tian An Men Square to 
the main crematorium at Babaoshan Cemetery in western Beijing. 
Reports from other areas of China on Monday indicated that the situation was 
chaotic in many other cities outside Beijing. 
Posters in Shanghai carried the message "The Blood Has Been Shed," referring to 
the weekend violence in Beijing. Protesters blocked traffic virtually 
throughout the city, an official at the U.S. Consulate said. The Shanghai 
municipal government warned that it would take "strong measures" unless the 
streets were cleared. 
Situation in Shanghai 
The situation in Shanghai further deteriorated in the evening, with authorities 
warning that they were about to move against the throngs of residents in the 
streets. 
Charles Sylvester, the U.S. consul general in Shanghai, told The Times in a 
telephone interview this morning that the city government had telephoned all 
consulates Monday night and warned them to keep their citizens away from the 
famous downtown Bund area, People's Square and the universities. 
Throughout the night, rumors spread of the impending imposition of martial law, 
but dawn arrived with no such announcement, he said. 
"We've also had a lot of panic buying here of rice, oil and other food 
staples," he added. 
Cars Overturned in Chengdu 
In Chengdu in Sichuan province, a diplomat reported that cars of Chinese 
officials were being overturned. 
The government continued to insist that the bloody crackdown in Beijing was 
necessary to crush "a counterrevolutionary rebellion." 
A statement issued Monday in the name of the State Council, China's Cabinet, 
and the Communist Party Central Committee, blamed the violence in Beijing on 
"supporters of bourgeois liberalization" -- a code phrase for Western concepts 
of democracy and individual freedoms -- foreign governments, hooligans and 
remnants of radical leftist supporters of the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution. 
SCATTERED SKIRMISHES REPORTED AS CRISIS DEEPENS IN BEIJING 
The situation in China, a country that increasingly seemed to be on the edge of 
civil war Monday: 
Forces presumed loyal to hard-line President Yang Shangkun controlled central 
Beijing but were in defensive positions in apparent anticipation of attack by 
rival units. 
Troops and armored vehicles were reported moving toward Beijing from the east. 
They were described as opposed to the forces that killed hundreds of citizens 
over the weekend. 
Tanks and troops fanned out to secure the downtown area that includes Tian An 
Men Square, the Great Hall of the People and Zhongnanhai, the compound where 
China's rulers live. 
Meanwhile, unrest and disorder were reported in other Chinese cities: 
In Shanghai, protesters blocked traffic virtually throughout the city, and the 
municipal government warned that it would take "strong measures" unless the 
streets were cleared. 
In Chengdu in Sichuan province, a diplomat reported that cars of Chinese 
officials were being overturned. 
In Hangzhou and Wuhan, protesters sat on rail lines, blocking trains to 
Shanghai and a main north-south line. 
Times staff writer Jim Mann also contributed to this article. 
CHAOS AT THE TOP -- Diplomats said China's leadership has collapsed. Page 8 
RELATED STORIES -- World leaders shocked. Page 8 
U.S. employees leaving. Page 8 
Faxes keep lines open. Page 8 
Hong Kong stocks fall. Page 11 
