BIOTECH DETECTIVE SCORES COUP; 
AMGEN SCIENTIST SPENT YEARS SEARCHING FOR THE KEY TO PRODUCING EPO. 
One morning before dawn aboutseven years ago, George Rathmann drove to his 
office in a Thousand Oaks industrial park to catch up on his work. 
Rathmann, chairman of Amgen Inc., noticed that the lights were on in one of the 
biotechnology company's laboratories and concluded that a careless worker had 
forgotten to shut them off. So he strolled over to the building to do it 
himself. 
But inside the laboratory, Rathmann recalled, was Fu-Kuen Lin, a Taiwan-born 
scientist with a Ph.D. in plant pathology who had been hired a year earlier 
after answering a help-wanted ad in a science magazine. Lin, Rathmann 
discovered, had been working through the night on what had become his personal 
obsession -- finding the genetic blueprint for erythropoietin, a protein 
manufactured in the kidney that stimulates the production of red blood cells. 
In the years since then, erythropoietin, or EPO, has emerged as one of the most 
promising drugs developed by the nation's fledging biotechnology industry. On 
Thursday, the Food and Drug Administration gave Amgen the go-ahead to sell EPO, 
making it available to thousands of anemic people suffering from chronic kidney 
disease who otherwise would need frequent blood transfusions. More than any 
single person, Lin, now a top-level Amgen researcher, is responsible for the 
breakthrough. 
"He has an extraordinary energy level and incredible persistence," Rathmann 
said. 
Behind the news of the FDA approval is a story of an often lonely struggle Lin 
endured to solve a genetic Rubik's Cube. The task was so cumbersome and 
frustrating that it has been compared to searching through 90 editions of the 
Encyclopedia Britannica to find a single sentence. 
Set a Deadline 
The fifth of seven children born to a Taiwanese herb doctor, Lin, 47, toiled 
for more than two years to unlock the genetic combination to EPO before making 
a breakthrough in mid-1983. All the time his scientific reputation, as well as 
Amgen's reputation in the young biotechnology industry, was on the line. 
Rumors abounded that competitors had done what Lin failed to do. Rathmann once 
said that if more promising results weren't achieved in 60 days, the project 
would be scrapped, although he now says he mainly said it to motivate people. 
Still, the talk among some people at Amgen was that working with Lin on the EPO 
project was tantamount to career suicide. 
"You could feel the people try to distance themselves from the project," Lin 
said. "Even my assistant was told by the other associates, 'What a dummy you 
are to work with this guy on a project that is going nowhere.' " 
Lin rarely saw his wife, two young sons and infant daughter while trying to 
solve the puzzle. Lonely nights in the laboratory were sometimes filled with 
the gentle sound of hymns coming from a Christian ministry group that shared 
the Thousand Oaks building where he had his laboratory, and Lin often worked 
into the early morning. 
"People were wondering if it was going to kill Lin. They were joking about EPO 
being a graveyard for scientific careers," said Philip J. Whitcome, Amgen's 
former director of strategic planning who now is president and chief executive 
of Neurogen Corp., a start-up biotechnology company in Branford, Conn. 
Born in Keelung, a port city in Taiwan, Lin moved to the United States in the 
late 1960s to earn his doctorate at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
under the late David Gottlieb, an internationally known microbiologist. 
Gottlieb became Lin's mentor, sometimes referring to him affectionately as his 
"grand-student." 
As with those of many young academics, Lin's career was a nomadic one that 
involved moving from university to university and spending valuable time 
digging up funding for projects that instead could have been devoted to 
research. After receiving his doctorate at Illinois in 1971, Lin and his family 
moved to Purdue University, the University of Nebraska, Academia Sinica in 
Taiwan, Louisiana State University and Medical University of South Carolina. In 
August, 1981, Lin joined Amgen to work on the young company's EPO project. 
Looked for Gene 
EPO is a protein produced by the kidney that stimulates immature red blood 
cells. First identified in 1906, scientists tried unsuccessfully for years to 
purify EPO in a laboratory by extracting it from blood, tissue or urine. But 
the amounts contained in those substances are so small that the effort was 
about like trying to mine an ocean for the gold contained in it. 
Lin's task was to identify and isolate the gene that encodes human EPO. An EPO 
molecule can be pictured by imagining a string of more than 160 colorful, 
plastic beads similar to the multicolored ones young children play with that 
snap together end to end. Each of the "beads" represents a building block, 
called an amino acid. By identifying the structure of the molecule, Lin was 
able to get a clue as to the set of instructions, or gene, within a human cell 
that directs the production of the EPO protein. 
Once that was done, Lin made probes composed of building blocks contained in 
the EPO gene. Those probes would enable him to identify and isolate the gene 
for EPO from all of the other genes and genetic information contained in a 
human cell, a feat Whitcome compares to "finding a sugar cube in a lake one 
mile wide, one mile long and one mile deep." 
After two years of painstaking work and unsuccessful experiments, Lin narrowed 
his search to one of 256 possibilities and ultimately solved his puzzle, thus 
"cloning" the EPO gene. Once that was done, the gene was spliced into cells 
that came from Chinese hamster ovaries, turning them into microscopic factories 
that produce EPO. 
All the time pressure on Lin was building, in particular because it was known 
that other companies were working on their own EPO projects. One rumor was that 
biotechnology rival Genentech had succeeded. Another was that rival Biogen had 
done it. Some began to doubt whether Amgen would succeed. 
Self-Esteem Suffered 
"There were many voices that said maybe we can't solve EPO. Maybe it's too 
difficult a problem," Whitcome said. 
Lin said that, as the project plodded along with little to show for it, his 
self-esteem suffered. "People look on you like you are a dummy or a failure. 
They don't know how tough it is. In science, you probably have 90% frustration 
and 10% success," Lin said. 
Lin is described by colleagues as stubborn, which he acknowledges. But, he 
said, he always believed that he was right. 
"A scientist dissolves his career into nothing if he does not succeed," Lin 
said. "All I wanted to do was succeed." 
MAIN STORY: Part I, Page 1 
