CHINA ORDERS 2 U.S. REPORTERS OUT OF COUNTRY 
In action that further escalates tension between Washington and Beijing on 
issues of human rights and national sovereignty, China issued expulsion orders 
Wednesday for two U.S. correspondents on charges that they violated martial-law 
restrictions on press coverage. 
Alan W. Pessin, Beijing bureau chief of the U.S. government-funded Voice of 
America, and Associated Press reporter John Pomfret were summoned to a Beijing 
city office in the afternoon and told they must leave China within 72 hours. 
The action came after several days of blistering attacks in the Chinese media 
against Voice of America, which broadcasts to a huge Chinese audience in both 
English and Chinese. 
In Washington, China's ambassador, Han Xu, was summoned to the State Department 
to receive a "vigorous" protest of the expulsions. However, State Department 
spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said the Bush Administration had no plans to 
retaliate against any of the 38 Chinese journalists working in the United 
States. She said a similar protest would be delivered by the U.S. Embassy in 
Beijing to the Chinese Foreign Ministry this morning. 
She emphasized that both Pomfret and Pessin were fully accredited 
correspondents with Chinese visas authorizing them to work in the country. 
The choice of two U.S. reporters as expulsion targets seemed tied to Chinese 
anger at Washington for granting refuge in the U.S. Embassy to astrophysicist 
Fang Lizhi, China's most prominent pro-democracy activist, and his wife, Li 
Shuxian, a Beijing University physics professor. 
In the wake of a bloody June 3-4 crackdown on student-led pro-democracy 
protests, the Chinese government has issued arrest warrants for Fang and Li, 
and bitterly condemned the U.S. action as interference in China's internal 
affairs. 
Baker Called 'Confident' 
A senior State Department official in Washington was quoted as saying Wednesday 
that Secretary of State James A. Baker III believes "there are reasons to be 
hopeful" that the United States and China can reach an agreement permitting 
Fang and his wife to leave the embassy without risking arrest. The official, 
who spoke to news agency correspondents on the understanding he would not be 
identified by name, did not list the reasons. 
He said that, if necessary, the embassy is prepared to shelter Fang and his 
wife for an extended period. "We went into it with our eyes open," he said. 
Since declaring martial law in Beijing on May 20, Chinese authorities have 
issued a variety of press restrictions intended to limit coverage of the 
violent suppression of a pro-democracy student movement that began in 
mid-April. 
The restrictions were widely ignored, however, when the Chinese army swept into 
central Beijing late on June 3 and early June 4, shooting into crowds of 
citizens seeking to block its way. 
Hundreds, perhaps thousands, died in the assault. The Chinese Red Cross 
initially estimated the death toll at 2,600, a figure that is still given 
considerable credibility in diplomatic circles. 
A few days after the incident, a top government spokesman asserted that only 
about 300 people had died. 
Wednesday, Chinese authorities further reduced the official death figure to 
around 200. 
The official New China News Agency carried a news release from the "Propaganda 
Department" of the Beijing Municipal Committee of the Chinese Communist Party 
that gave a detailed account of widespread destruction of army vehicles and 
said that nearly 100 soldiers and policemen were killed by 
"counterrevolutionary" rioters. "Some 100 civilians" also died, the report 
added. 
The expulsions of Pessin and Pomfret came against this background. 
Pessin, 33, was accused of "conducting illegal press coverage after martial law 
was declared" and "writing news stories to distort facts, spread rumor and 
incite and stir up turmoil and counterrevolutionary rebellion," the New China 
News Agency reported. 
Pessin told reporters in Beijing that he had responded to his accusers with 
this statement: "We report the best, most accurate, the fairest and the 
best-balanced news that we possibly can. The only motive that we have is to 
tell the truth as best we can. Governments do not always like that. To say that 
Voice of America is maliciously creating rumors and has ulterior motives is 
itself a malicious rumor, apparently with ulterior motives." 
VOA Director Richard Carlson told reporters that the expulsions were "a step 
backward for the media in China, which over the past couple of years have 
demonstrated some steps forward." 
He added: "We think it's very unfortunate and sad, in fact, for the Chinese 
people, who in the tens of millions depend on the Voice of America and the BBC 
and some other outside broadcasters for what has been extremely reliable, 
straightforward, factual, unbiased accounts" of the turmoil in their country. 
Pomfret, 30, was accused of "having frequent contacts with illegal organization 
leaders, passing on information to and providing shelter for them" and 
"obtaining state secrets through illegal means," the New China News Agency 
said. 
Pomfret said he also was accused of giving protection to Wuer Kaixi, a key 
leader of the seven-week-long pro-democracy student protests. Chinese 
authorities have charged Wuer with counterrevolutionary activities and issued a 
warrant for his arrest. 
Pomfret, who speaks fluent Chinese, wrote a profile of Wuer before the 
martial-law crackdown and interviewed him several times during the 
demonstrations. 
"I did my job as a journalist and I worked hard," Pomfret said. "It's a shame 
that these are the results I get." 
Louis D. Boccardi, president and general manager of the Associated Press, said 
in New York: "We deplore and have protested in the strongest terms to the 
Chinese government this unwarranted assault on fair and factual reporting." 
At the White House, press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said: "We believe these 
journalists were trying to print the truth of the situation in China. Actions 
such as this, the harassment of journalists trying to do their jobs and 
attempts to jam VOA broadcasts, will not succeed in keeping the truth about 
what is going on in China from being heard in that troubled land or throughout 
the world." 
Vernon Mann, a reporter for London-based Independent Television News, was 
restricted to his hotel Wednesday in the central city of Chengdu after being 
detained Tuesday for recording scenes of burned out buildings and buses, an ITN 
spokesman said. "His passport and papers have been confiscated and he has been 
ordered to stay in his hotel and 'await punishment,' " the spokesman added. 
Last week in Shanghai, another reporter for ITN was expelled from China for 
covering demonstrations in Shanghai while on a tourist visa. 
In Beijing on Wednesday, soldiers detained Denis Hiault, Beijing bureau chief 
of Agence-France Press, for an hour and confiscated his residence card. Hiault 
was accused of photographing troops. 
The Chinese media, meanwhile, reverted further Wednesday to the use of harsh 
jargon reminiscent of Mao Tse-tung's chaotic 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution. 
A front-page commentary in the official Communist Party newspaper, the People's 
Daily, said that the recent disturbances show that "in our country, class 
struggle still exists within certain limits -- a small number of reactionary 
elements who hate the Communist Party and hate the socialist system have never 
given up their political goals." 
Another People's Daily commentary, also published on the front page, sharply 
attacked Fang, his wife and the United States. 
"Some people overseas who are hostile to China have tried hard to flatter such 
people and label them 'democratic fighters,' " the commentary said. "Their aim 
. . . is . . . to plunge China into chaos, to eliminate rule by the Communist 
Party and to overthrow China's socialist system. . . . " 
The commentary noted that "some people in the United States always hate 
communism. They try hard to find ways to use their bourgeois ideology and 
bourgeois political system to influence some Chinese people, with the goal of 
establishing a bourgeois republic in China. . . . 
"We hope that the American side . . . will stop its interference in China's 
internal affairs." 
Beijing's relations with other industrial democracies have also suffered sharp 
deterioration as a result of the June 3-4 carnage. 
Tension is building between China and Australia in the wake of press reports 
that an unidentified Chinese dissident has been granted refuge in the 
Australian Embassy in Beijing. An Australian Embassy spokesman declined to make 
a substantive comment on the reports, but added: "Were the situation to arise, 
we would handle it with the utmost sensitivity. Were such a case to arise, it 
would be considered on its merits." 
The recent violence and ideological rigidity in Beijing have also severely 
damaged public confidence in the British colony of Hong Kong, scheduled to 
revert to Chinese sovereignty in 1997. 
David Wilson, the British-appointed governor of Hong Kong, dispatched two 
personal representatives to London on Wednesday to try to persuade Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher's administration to promise ethnic Chinese born in 
Hong Kong -- who number about 3.25 million out of the colony's total population 
of 5.5 million -- the right to move to Britain before 1997. 
Visa Sections Reopen 
The United States on Wednesday reopened the visa-issuing sections of its 
Beijing embassy and its consulates in other parts of China, which had been 
closed for several days. 
A U.S. State Department spokesman announced Tuesday that it will begin granting 
larger numbers of visas to Chinese citizens for temporary visits to the United 
States. 
In both Beijing and Shanghai, fairly typical crowds of about 200 people 
gathered in the morning hoping to submit visa applications. Most were students 
who had received acceptances from American universities and obtained Chinese 
passports before the current crisis. 
Applicants appeared unwilling to discuss politics. 
"All I really care about is studying and getting exposure to the latest 
technology," said Cai Baoxuan, 30, a pharmacist who wants to study at the 
University of Hawaii. "I don't know anything about politics." 
Times staff writers Karl Schoenberger, in Shanghai, and Norman Kempster, in 
Washington, contributed to this article. 
STUDENTS ON THE RUN -- Once-confident protesters are now fugitives. Page 11 
