TURNOUT FOR L.A. ELECTION HEADING FOR RECORD LOW 
Los Angeles headed for a new low in the turnout of voters Tuesday as only a 
fraction of the electorate trickled to polls to cast ballots in races for the 
City Council, Board of Education and Community Colleges Board. 
As of 5 p.m., with just three hours till poll closing, an estimated 5.4% of the 
city's 1.8 million registered voters had cast their ballots, compared to 12.9% 
by that time in 1985 and 18.2% in 1981. 
The voter turnout varied from precinct to precinct. The only issue on the 
ballot citywide was the election of two new members to the Los Angeles 
Community College District Board of Trustees. 
"I think that's why people are predicting a much lower turnout, because there 
are no major citywide issues like a mayor's race," said Mike Carey, the city 
clerk's executive officer. 
Among other contests to be decided were a runoff in the city's 7th Councilmanic 
District, two seats on the Los Angeles Board of Education, a mayoral race in 
Compton, council and school board seats in Inglewood and school finance issues. 
In Orange County, voters were to decide a cityhood proposal for the community 
of Laguna Hills, about 50 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles. 
Voter turnout was not estimated by election officials in Orange and Los Angeles 
counties, election officials said. 
About 3.6 million voters are registered in Los Angeles County, and about 29,700 
Orange County voters were eligible to vote on the Laguna Hills cityhood issue. 
In Los Angeles' 7th Councilmanic District, officials with challenger Lyle 
Hall's campaign openly worried that voter apathy would derail their 
union-backed get-out-the-vote efforts. 
"We have predicted 12% and prayed that it would not be 8%," said Bobi Johnson, 
a Hall spokeswoman. "We're faced with a 6 p.m. poll closing, in effect, because 
people are going to go home to watch the Lakers' first playoff game." 
Hall, 49, a city fire captain and former firefighters union president, is 
challenging incumbent Ernani Bernardi, 77, an irascible, 28-year council 
veteran, to represent the northeastern San Fernando Valley. 
Hall forced Bernardi into a runoff after Bernardi failed to win a majority in 
the April 11 primary election. Bernardi gathered support from minority leaders, 
while Hall obtained endorsements from several prominent Democrats, including 
former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr., now state Democratic Party chairman. 
In the Los Angeles school board race, challenger Jerry Horowitz, a 56-year-old 
junior high school principal, sought to unseat incumbent Julie Korenstein, 45, 
who had strong backing from the teachers union. 
United Teachers-Los Angeles also supported challenger Mark Slavkin, 27, an aide 
to county Supervisor Ed Edelman, in a bid to unseat incumbent Alan Gershman, 
49. 
In the race for the Community College Board, candidates Rose Ochi and Althea 
Baker received financial and staff support from the American Federation of 
Teachers College Guild and Democratic Party regulars. 
None of the four candidates competing for the two open seats was an incumbent. 
The board oversees operations concerning the district's nine campuses and 
105,000 students. 
Ochi, 54, an aide to Mayor Tom Bradley, was running against Pat Owens, 54, an 
auto shop teacher and student recruiter at Trade-Tech College. 
Baker, 39, a union organizer and Mission College counselor, faced Patricia 
Hollingsworth, 42, a language arts professor at Trade-Tech who nearly beat 
Wallace Knox in a 1987 board runoff. 
A ballot measure before voters in Orange County would create the city of Laguna 
Hills. 
In Compton, incumbent Mayor Walter Tucker, 64, a dentist, was running for 
reelection against challenger Everson Esters, 37, who describes himself as a 
political consultant and entrepreneur. 
Voters in Compton, a city of more than 81,000 about 11 miles south of downtown 
Los Angeles, also cast ballots in the 3rd Councilmanic District. Incumbent 
Robert Adams, 57, a mortician, faced Bernice Woods, a member of the Compton 
Board of Education. Former City Councilman Floyd Jones, 47, was waging a 
write-in campaign. 
In Inglewood, Thomasina Reed was challenging a dead woman -- Caroline Coleman 
-- for a seat on the school board. Incumbent Coleman was forced into a runoff 
in the spring primary but died before the runoff. Her supporters campaigned 
hard for her in hopes of forcing another election. 
Inglewood voters were also to choose two members of the City Council. 
A special tax election, Measure A, was on ballots in South Pasadena. Voters 
were asked to authorize a tax of $98 or less on every parcel of land for each 
of the next five years. Proceeds would by used to improve education in the 
South Pasadena Unified School District. 
In Lancaster, a bond issue, Measure K, was placed on ballots for voters in the 
Westside Union School District. Voters were asked to approve a bonded 
indebtedness of $8.5 million, at a rate not exceeding 12% annually, to raise 
funding for the renovation and construction of new school buildings. 
Both the South Pasadena and the Lancaster measures required a two-thirds 
majority for approval. 
