BUSH CALLS ON IRAN FOR RELEASE OF HOSTAGES; 
SAYS 'THEY KNOW WHAT TO DO'; 8 DIE IN MOURNING CRUSH 
President Bush today called on the new Iranian government to help release 
American hostages if it wants improved relations with the United States. 
At a televised news conference in Washington, Bush was asked about Iran's new 
government following the death of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. 
Bush said it is "hard to predict" if there will be change under the leadership 
of Khomeini's appointed successor, President Ali Khamenei. 
"I would simply repeat what I said on January 20th," Bush said, referring to 
his inaugural address. "There is a way for a relationship with the United 
States to improve -- and that is for a release of the American hostages." 
Nine Americans are believed to be hostages in Lebanon, held by factions 
suspected of close ties with Iran. They include Associated Press correspondent 
Terry Anderson, who has been held the longest, abducted on March 16, 1985. 
The United States broke ties with Iran after Khomeini came to power in 1979 and 
the U.S. Embassy in Tehran was seized, with 52 Americans held hostage for 444 
days. 
Asked if he is going to make any new overtures to Iran, Bush said brusquely, 
"They know what they need to do. They have been a terrorist state. As soon as 
we see some movement away from repression and extremism, we will review our 
relationship." 
Millions in Mourning 
In Tehran, millions of mourners today flooded into a square where Khomeini's 
body lay, causing a stampede the official news agency said killed eight people 
and injured at least 500. 
The Islamic Republic News Agency said in addition to those killed and injured 
in the stampede outside Mosalla Mosque, scores of people were rendered 
unconscious as temperatures soared to 100. 
State television showed victims being carried out of the square as crowds 
scrambled to get closer to the air-conditioned cubicle where Khomeini's 
shrouded body lay on a glass-covered bier. 
Television cameras zoomed in on a bearded young man cooling mourners with a 
water hose. 
Khomeini, 86, died Saturday of a heart attack, 12 days after intestinal 
surgery, leaving the country gripped by its worst political crisis since the 
revolution that catapulted the Muslim cleric to power in 1979. 
Muslims today beat on their breasts and heads in a traditional Shiite sign of 
mourning and screamed "Sorrow, sorrow is this day . . . Khomeini the idol 
smasher is with God today!" 
Khomeini's only son, Ahmad, read over Tehran Radio the first pages of his 
father's political testament, which is believed to contain guidelines on how 
the Islamic Republic should be governed. The section broadcast warned against 
U.S. plots and called for unity, but it made no reference to the problem of 
succession. 
