PRESIDENT OF MILLS COLLEGE RESIGNS; 
EDUCATION: SHE SAYS SHE CANNOT MAKE A LONG-TERM COMMITMENT TO THE SCHOOL WHILE 
IT STRUGGLES TO BOOST ENROLLMENT TO KEEP IT FROM GOING CO-ED. 
Mills College President Mary Metz has resigned, seven weeks after her hesitant 
support for a now-abandoned proposal to admit men to the women's school sparked 
passionate criticism from students. 
Metz said in a written statement that she was leaving because she could not 
commit herself to stay at Mills during a demanding five-year plan to boost 
enrollment by nearly one-third and raise $10 million to keep the college from 
having to go co-ed. 
Metz was unavailable for comment Friday, but a college spokesperson said Metz 
decided to pursue other professional opportunities and permit the college to 
find someone able to make a long-term commitment to lead Mills. 
Students' anger and charges that Metz betrayed them by going along with plans 
to admit undergraduate men in 1991 also took a toll on the nine-year Mills 
president, colleagues said. 
"I can't imagine that it didn't hurt," said Terry Fairman, an alumna who sits 
on the Board of Trustees. "Mary is a very human person. That's the reason the 
students liked her so much, but it also makes her more vulnerable to their 
anger." 
Some students still harbor resentment they first felt when Metz and the 
trustees announced in May the plans to boost enrollment by admitting men, 
student body President Melissa Stevenson-Dile said. Students will have mixed 
emotions when they learn of Metz's departure, she said. 
"Her seeming betrayal was really what sparked our anger," Stevenson-Dile said. 
"There was a great deal of animosity that came out of that. I'm hopeful that 
now we can clear the air." 
Student protests and a campus strike prompted Mills' trustees to reverse their 
decision to make the college, which already accepts male graduate students, 
completely co-ed. The trustees agreed to let Mills remain a women's college 
until 1995, provided cost-cutting and enrollment-boosting measures could help 
erase an annual deficit of $24 million. 
Stevenson-Dile and Metz's colleagues praised the outgoing president for her 
leadership of what has long been considered the premier women's college in the 
West. 
Under Metz's leadership, Mills tripled its endowment, which now totals $72 
million. 
"We have had phenomenal success in fund-raising, and a lot of that is due to 
the tireless work of Dr. Metz," said Donna Howard, Mills vice president for 
institutional advancement. 
Mills trustee and former Vassar College President Virginia Smith will become 
acting Mills College president, pending a search for someone to fill the post 
permanently, a Mills spokesman said. Smith also has a proven track record in 
raising money for colleges, the spokesman said. 
The Oakland school will need all the help it can get to bring in enough money 
to remain an all-woman college, Mills officials said. 
"We all have a ton of work to do," said Warren Hellman, chairman of the Mills 
Board of Trustees. "We've got to translate a lot of enthusiasm into action." 
