POLITICIANS TRY TO DEFUSE NORTHWEST LOGGING FIGHT 
In an effort closely watched in California and Washington, eight top Oregon 
politicians have proposed a temporary cease-fire in the jobs-versus-nature 
fight that has been blamed for crippling the Pacific Northwest logging 
industry. 
The four-point bipartisan proposal attempts to expand timber harvests and cut 
layoffs over the next 15 months by asking environmental groups to exchange 
their court-ordered environmental protections for less-restrictive industry 
pledges to improve its harvesting practices. 
Oregon's seven-member congressional delegation, along with Gov. Neil 
Goldschmidt, unanimously agreed to make the proposal while moderating a daylong 
summit meeting Saturday between loggers and environmentalists. 
Both sides have been told to respond to the proposal by noon Tuesday, in time 
to increase timber harvest levels in a 1990 budget bill scheduled for an 
important committee vote Wednesday in Washington. 
Timber interests were cautiously optimistic about the compromise, but 
environmentalists were skeptical about agreeing to the harvest of specific 
volumes of timber in exchange for vague industry promises to protect vanishing 
old-growth timber and the increasingly rare northern spotted owl. 
However, Democratic Rep. Les AuCoin said the proposal is essential to "get the 
pistol away from the temple of the environmentalists as well as industry" as 
the controversy over the spotted owl ratchets higher with every mill closure. 
Such an agreement is essential, said Republican Sen. Mark O. Hatfield, to give 
Congress enough "breathing room" to draft and enact fundamental reforms of the 
nation's environmental laws to accommodate both loggers and nature. 
Environmentalists and loggers at the hearing here Saturday agreed that changes 
in the law are essential, but Democratic Rep. Peter DeFazio said Congress is 
not likely to act soon. 
"There will not be major changes in the law in the very short order," he said 
during the session in the tightly secured Salem City Council chamber. "There 
may be great willingness among this delegation to tackle this problem, but we 
have to work within a Congress that is not very willing to wade into our 
dispute." 
Federal timber policy traditionally has been left up to legislators from those 
Western states with most of the federal forests, particularly Oregon, 
California and Washington. Those three states, in that order, are the nation's 
top timber producers. 
Pressure has grown on members of Congress from those states to do something 
about timber sales postponed by recent court orders won by environmentalists. 
The environmental groups seek to protect potentially threatened animal species 
living almost exclusively in the region's valuable "old-growth" or virgin 
Douglas fir, redwood and spruce forests. 
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service -- in its most controversial study since 
delaying construction of Tennessee's Tellico Dam to protect the tiny snail 
darter fish in the late 1970s -- said in April that decades of habitat loss at 
the hands of the timber industry may qualify the northern spotted owl for 
protection under the Endangered Species Act. 
Hearings in Three States 
In August, the service is scheduled to conduct the first round of public 
hearings on whether to declare the northern spotted owl to be threatened with 
extinction. Hearings on the owl -- of which 3,000 to 4,500 are thought to exist 
-- will be held in all three affected states. 
Listing the mottled brown, medium-sized bird -- a subspecies related to similar 
raptors in Southern California, the southern Rocky Mountains and northern 
Mexico -- would require large habitat protection zones that could cut by half 
the volume of timber available for harvest from the federal forests in Oregon, 
Northern California and Washington. 
Federal timber is vital to Pacific Northwest loggers for the rest of this 
century. Over-cutting of private timber lands to fuel the housing booms of the 
1950s and '60s has crimped private log supplies until replanted trees reach a 
harvestable size in another 20 years. 
Timber companies had planned to fill this so-called "log gap" with virgin 
publicly owned forests managed by the U.S. Forest Service and the Bureau of 
Land Management. However, government forests are required by law to meet a 
variety of needs in addition to timber production, including recreation and 
wildlife protection. 
Evidence of Threat 
Recent evidence that harvesting the most valuable parts of federal forests 
could threaten the northern spotted owl and other species with extinction has 
led to the current standoff between the industry and environmentalists. 
Industry officials say restrictions on federal timber sales are to blame for a 
rash of sawmill closures and job losses throughout the Northwest -- an unusual 
development at a time of robust home construction and a particularly 
devastating blow to the heavily timber-dependent economies of southwestern 
Oregon and Northern California. 
Environmentalists counter that the closures and layoffs are a natural result of 
past over-harvesting of private forests, as well as the export of raw, unmilled 
logs to Asia and the computer automation of modern sawmills. 
This disagreement has led to bitter debates and rancorous demonstrations by 
both sides in big cities and small mill towns from San Francisco to Sweet Home, 
Ore. 
The extent of disagreement among the players in this drama is indicated by 
their respective projections of layoffs that will result from current legal 
restrictions on logging. The Northwest Forest Council, an industry group, says 
54,000 jobs will be lost in the coming year in Oregon alone; the U.S. Forest 
Service projects 11,000 Oregon layoffs; the state of Oregon itself anticipates 
5,300; environmentalists say that a few small market adjustments could avoid 
layoffs entirely. 
Avoiding Disaster 
The bird must by law be protected from the threat of extinction -- if it 
actually is so threatened, which has been theorized but not yet demonstrated -- 
but politicians on both sides of the issue are trying to find a way to do so 
without disastrous consequences. 
Push too far one way and they could cripple the timber industry as it works to 
compete with cheap Canadian imports and low-cost Southern supplies; push too 
far the other way and they could generate a backlash strong enough to gut the 
endangered species law. 
The Oregon politicians had hoped to find a way out of this dilemma by inviting 
the warring factions to sit down with one another and negotiate directly, 
rather than battle through lawyers in the courts. But an agreement was not 
produced. 
On Saturday, at the end of the eight-hour session, the two sides still could 
not agree on any of the fundamental facts: the number of owls remaining, the 
type of trees needed for them to survive or the reason for the apparent decline 
in their number. There was no agreement on how much old-growth timber exists, 
how quickly it is being cut, how important it is -- or even what constitutes 
"old growth." 
Despite the lack of agreement on those areas, environmentalists and loggers did 
both call for a revamp of federal timber regulations. 
Exports Issue 
Tom Giesen, president of the Oregon Natural Resources Council, suggested 
abandonment of the practice of cutting the oldest trees first on federal land, 
adoption of federal tax incentives to encourage more private timber growers and 
extending a ban on log exports from federal lands to include private lands for 
an emergency five-year period. 
Raw-log exports rose sharply as the Japanese yen grew stronger against the 
dollar. The Japanese prefer to import raw logs rather than finished lumber 
because American mills until recently did not mill boards to metric sizes nor 
to the finish quality needed by Japan's open-beam architecture. The high prices 
paid by Japan have added to the log shortage now hurting Northwest mills. 
"We must stop log exports," Giesen said. "We cannot give Oregon's logs to 
subsidize Japanese jobs." 
Industry spokesman James Geisinger had different priorities for Congress. He 
recommended stripping courts of the ability to enforce strict compliance with 
environmental laws; mandating more production on federal land; setting up 
timber-production zones to make up for wilderness areas where logging is not 
allowed; and stopping federal forest-planning process -- and freezing in old 
high-volume timber cut levels -- until the spotted owl question is resolved. 
"Our industry cannot survive without an adequate land base dedicated to growing 
timber," Geisinger said. "We cannot eliminate the land base (to set aside land 
for wildlife) and assume it will be business as usual in our towns and 
communities and in our economy." 
