GOP AIDE QUITS OVER FOLEY MEMO; 
BUSH 'DISGUSTED,' ATWATER APOLOGIZES AND AUTHOR RESIGNS 
A Republican national party official resigned today under fire, which included 
a condemnation from a "disgusted" President Bush, for writing a biting memo 
comparing new House Speaker Thomas F. Foley's "closet liberal" record with that 
of a homosexual congressman. 
Bush called Lee Atwater, chairman of the Republican National Committee, to 
complain about the incident and Atwater apologized to Foley, said White House 
Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater. 
"We consider the matter closed," he added. 
Within an hour of Atwater's apology, Mark Goodin, the author of the memo that 
equated Foley's voting record with that of Rep. Barney Frank, an acknowledged 
homosexual, resigned as RNC communications director. 
Goodin was a press assistant in Bush's 1988 presidential campaign. 
Fitzwater said Bush, who had a 90-minute lunch today with Foley and House 
Republican leader Robert H. Michel, had no advance knowledge of the Goodin 
memo. 
'A Mistake Obviously' 
"He was disgusted by this entire incident," the spokesman said. He said the 
memo seeking to discredit Foley (D-Wash.) violated the spirit of bipartisan 
cooperation that Bush has advocated since taking office. 
"The issue is closed," Foley said outside the White House. 
Michel (R-Ill.) told reporters: "There wasn't all the kind of oversight there 
probably should have been" at the RNC. "It was a mistake obviously from the 
national committee's point of view." 
Michel said he did not know if Goodin had been asked to resign. Asked what 
advice he gave Atwater, he said: "I just said, 'There's got to be some remedy 
for what took place, and Lee, it's your shot. Do whatever you think is 
appropriate."' 
Fitzwater said the circulation of the GOP memo on Foley was "to be deplored." 
However, he said the President retains confidence in Atwater, his former 
campaign chairman whom he handpicked for the party post. Atwater oversaw a 1988 
presidential campaign against Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. Dukakis that was 
criticized for its negative tone. 
"I deeply regret my decision on the Foley memorandum," Goodin said in a 
resignation letter to Atwater. But he added: "At no time did I ever intend to 
damage anyone's reputation. . . . The purpose of the memorandum has been 
misconstrued. And in that regard, I have no one to blame but myself." 
'Good Cop, Bad Cop' 
Michel, who had expressed dismay over the attack Tuesday, called Bush today to 
voice concern and the President was angry about the document, a Michel aide 
said. 
One Democratic leader, Rep. Tony Coelho of California, said Bush should get 
involved and see that those responsible for the document are fired if 
Republicans want to persuade Democrats of their sincerity. 
"They're playing good cop, bad cop," Coelho said before the resignation was 
announced. "Here's a guy sent in by Bush to do the dirty deeds and he calls and 
apologizes after the fact. If they're really upset about these tactics, all 
they have to do is fire somebody." 
In the statement circulated Monday, the committee said Foley is anything but 
the political moderate some have portrayed him as being. The document was 
headlined "Tom Foley. Out of the Liberal Closet" and said Foley's voting record 
was as liberal as that of Frank (D-Mass.). 
Frank accused the GOP of spreading "extraordinarily scurrilous" rumors about 
Foley. He said Tuesday that the Republicans had smeared the Speaker with "a 
sleazy headline." 
Frank implied to reporters that he thought the RNC's decision to focus on him 
was a not-so-subtle effort to portray Foley as gay. 
"They put my name on it," Frank said. "It was despicable. They could have 
picked other liberals and put someone else in the headline." Frank said he 
might reveal the identity of gay congressional Republicans if the attacks on 
Democrats continue. 
