LATINOS SLOWLY GAINING GROUND WITH CITY HALL; 
OXNARD: LA COLONIA, CUT OFF FROM THE REST OF THE CITY BY RAILROAD TRACKS, HAS 
BECOME THE FOCAL POINT OF A NEW ACTIVISM. 
La Colonia -- a gritty, working-class neighborhood in Oxnard with the city's 
highest concentration of Latinos -- shares the many typical barrio problems of 
gangs, drugs and crime. 
Residents complain of too few police patrols, poorly maintained roads and no 
place but the streets for youngsters to spend their afternoons. These problems, 
they say, are part of a larger issue: the Latino community's difficulty in 
getting the attention of Oxnard City Hall. 
But that appears to be changing in the neighborhood that needs the most 
attention. La Colonia, cut off from the rest of the city by railroad tracks, 
has become the focal point of a new Latino activism that organizers say may 
ultimately change the complexion of city politics. 
Since April, 1989, the number of participants in La Colonia's neighborhood 
council has jumped from about 20 to more than 100. "We are struggling but we 
are coming along little by little," said Ignacio Carmona, former vice chairman 
of La Colonia's neighborhood council. 
Proving that there is power in numbers, La Colonia residents have since started 
to feel that City Hall is paying more attention to their concerns, Carmona 
said. 
For example, he said Police Chief Robert Owens recently met with the council to 
talk about crime in the neighborhood, and Assemblyman Jack O'Connell lobbied 
for and won a $450,000 state grant to build a youth gym in La Colonia. The 
Oxnard Public Works Department recently solved a longtime parking problem that 
caused congestion in the neighborhood. 
"We had issues that needed to be taken care of," Carmona said. "But I guess it 
was just the case of the wheel that squeaks the loudest gets the oil." 
There are about 35 active neighborhood councils in Oxnard, said Eleanor 
Branthoover, chairwoman of the Inter Neighborhood Council Committee. The 
grass-roots organization is designed to give residents a coordinated way to 
express their concerns to City Hall. 
She said she is impressed by the number of residents who now show up at La 
Colonia's neighborhood council meetings. "That's a really good turnout," she 
said. 
The city began encouraging Latino activism after La Colonia residents asked the 
City Council for more representation and better city services. City officials 
assigned the job of encouraging Latino representation to Karl Lawson, a 
community relations specialist who worked for the United Farm Workers Union for 
11 years before he was hired by the city. 
Lawson, who said he learned Spanish on the streets of Oxnard, organized a 
door-to-door campaign to encourage Latino participation and promoted the 
neighborhood council in ads in newspapers and on Spanish-language radio 
stations. 
However, Latino advocates and city officials believe Latino representation in 
Oxnard is still inadequate. 
"This is just a first step," said Marco Antonio Abarca, an attorney for the 
California Rural League Assistance in Oxnard. "It's really a modest step if you 
think about it. But at least it's a step in the right direction." 
Abarca pointed out that more than half of Oxnard's population is Latino, yet 
only one City Council post is occupied by a Latino. Last year, when the council 
appointed 22 citizens to an economic advisory committee it selected only three 
Latinos, he said. 
"We make a pretense of being a democracy, but democracy means the 
representation of every person," he said. 
Mayor Nao Takasugi said he sees the growth of La Colonia's neighborhood council 
as a good sign, but he agrees that much more needs to be done to establish fair 
Latino representation in Oxnard. 
"We don't want any part of the city to feel neglected or cut out," he said. 
Takasugi said La Colonia -- a neighborhood of mostly older, single-family homes 
in the northeast section of Oxnard -- is physically cut off from the rest of 
the city by the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks. 
Takasugi said he believes the tracks not only form a physical barrier for the 
residents, but a psychological one as well. 
During his last campaign effort, Takasugi talked to many residents in La 
Colonia who, he said, "feel they have been cut off from the rest of the city." 
For the most part, he said, residents have complained about deteriorating 
streets, old and leaky pipes and problems with utilities. 
Councilman Manuel Lopez, the third Latino elected to the council since the city 
was incorporated in 1903, said the problem of Latino under-representation is 
not unique to Oxnard. 
"There is a tremendous under-representation in all governments," he said. "A 
lot of strides have been made, but not enough." 
He said part of the problem is getting Latinos to believe their voices can make 
a difference. "I think they feel alienated; they feel there is nothing they can 
do," he said. 
Lopez attributes the feeling of powerlessness partly to racism. For example, 
Lopez said, when he ran for the mayor's seat two years ago, representatives of 
one of his opponents asked voters if they would be ready to have a "Mexican 
mayor." 
"People are always looking for reasons not to grant the people their rights," 
he said. 
Lopez predicts that Latino representation on the City Council will not change 
significantly until the city is required by a court decision to elect council 
members by district. Considering recent court decisions involving redistricting 
in Watsonville and Los Angeles, Lopez said district elections may come sooner 
than most anticipate. 
So far, no such court challenge has been filed. 
But last year, a citizens group tried unsuccessfully to gather enough 
signatures to challenge the city's at-large election system, which is accused 
of diluting minority voting strength. 
Gilbert G. Breezley, an Oxnard paralegal who had headed the Council District 
Initiative Committee, said the group gathered about 3,000 signatures, short of 
the 7,300 needed to put a measure on the ballot that would carve the city into 
six council districts. 
The ballot measure, if approved, would have gradually replaced all of Oxnard's 
four council members, who live in the same predominantly white, upscale 
neighborhood, with six council members from districts of about equal population 
throughout the city. 
Breezley said the signature drive failed partly because of opposition from 
incumbent council members. 
But he has not given up. Breezley is now considering a petition that seeks 
approval of a 15-member city charter commission, which would be asked to draft 
new guidelines for city elections. 
The guidelines could include district elections as well as the election of a 
full-time mayor who would act as the city's top administrator, Breezley said. 
He said he and a committee of 40 residents would begin circulating the petition 
within two months. 
"I feel very good about it," Breezley said. 
