DEBATE OVER PACKAGING HEATING UP; 
SAFETY: THE FDA IS CONCERNED THAT SOME CHEMICALS FROM FOOD CONTAINERS MAY ENTER 
THE FOOD DURING COOKING. 
Some microwave packaging may disintegrate when exposed to high cooking 
temperatures, causing potentially harmful chemicals to enter food, a federal 
report stated. 
Those containers most likely to pose problems are known as heat susceptors 
designed to elevate temperatures -- some to 500 degrees F. -- during 
microwaving. 
The packaging is used on such traditional microwave products as popcorn, pizza, 
French fries, fish sticks and Belgian waffles, according to the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration. 
Typically, the susceptors are marketed as "browning" or "crisping" devices. The 
microwave would be unable to brown food -- as is the case in conventional ovens 
-- without the presence of these items in the packaging. 
The agency's concern also extends to plastic "dual ovenables," or those 
containers prepared for use in either the conventional or microwave oven. 
"The FDA is concerned . . . . that such high-temperature use of these materials 
may cause packaging components such as adhesives, polymers, paper and 
paperboard -- known as indirect food additives -- to migrate into food at 
excessive levels," said a recent report in FDA Consumer magazine. 
The agency identified at least two compounds that have migrated from microwave 
packaging directly into food. In a September, 1989, test of microwave French 
fried potatoes, federal researchers found minute levels of polyethylene 
terephthalate in addition to diethylene glycol dibenzoate. 
Since 1987, the agency has requested that the packaging and food industries 
voluntarily provide research indicating that partial dissolution of these 
materials, and subsequent migration of the chemicals into food, is safe. The 
information has not been forthcoming. 
As a result, FDA has stepped up its efforts and published a notice last year 
that establishes a deadline for manufacturers to submit the data. 
The FDA must approve all additives -- direct or indirect -- that may be 
consumed in processed food. Even unintended results, such as the leaching of 
chemicals from microwave packaging, must receive the agency's approval. 
Yet, in its report on the problem, the FDA made an unusual concession. It 
stated that the agency had not been "ready" for the introduction of these 
packaging innovations and was surprised to learn that the devices could raise 
microwave oven temperatures to 500 degrees. 
Now, the agency admits it is "working to keep up" with the technology and is 
placed in a position where it must retroactively determine the safety of a 
processing technique that has been in use for years. Sales of 
microwaved-packaged foods are expected to reach $3 billion by 1992, according 
to the FDA. 
In preliminary tests, agency researchers found that these heat susceptor pads 
reach such high temperatures that they actually become charred and can cause a 
fire. 
"The food-contact surface of heat susceptor packaging is usually a metalized 
polyethylene terephthalate film laminated to paperboard with adhesive. This 
metalized film absorbs the microwave energy in the oven and, with most of the 
microwave absorbed, the package becomes a little 'frying pan' that actively 
participates in the cooking," according to an FDA account of the problem. 
Although the FDA approved some of these compounds for food packaging as early 
as 1958, the approval was based on oven temperatures of only 300 degrees F., 
not the high levels being created by today's products. In fact, the dual 
ovenables are also a concern because consumers often heat the containers at 350 
degrees to 400 degrees in conventional ovens for long periods of time and thus 
risk some disintegration of the packaging. 
The FDA has stated that research to date does not indicate any public health 
problem with heat susceptors or dual ovenables. The agency also claims that 
this type of packaging represents only a small portion of the total microwave 
packaging category. 
Nonetheless, the federal government has issued a series of guidelines for 
consumer protection. 
They are: 
 -- Do not exceed microwaving times recommended on package instructions. 
 -- If packaging, such as popcorn bags, becomes extremely brown or charred do 
not consume the product. 
 -- Carefully watch the microwave oven when microwaving popcorn because heat 
buildup can cause a fire. Time heating precisely according to label 
instructions. Favor the shorter recommended cooking times (some ovens can 
scorch popcorn in two minutes). 
 -- Do not reuse heat susceptors, and do not use them for a purpose other than 
that originally intended by the manufacturer. Handle these packages very 
carefully because they can be very hot to the touch. 
 -- Avoid letting plastic wrap touch foods during microwaving because the 
plastic can melt, causing compounds known as plasticizers to enter food. 
 -- Never heat foods in brown grocery bags or newspapers because both contain 
recycled materials and metals that could cause a fire. 
