AT WITT'S END, ANGELS BEATEN BY BREWERS, 4-1 
June is supposed to be Mike Witt's month, so at least the calendar is finally 
on his side. April and May wanted nothing to do with Witt, the Angels' 
erstwhile ace, who has spent most of the great California pitching revival of 
1989 with his nose pressed against the glass. 
Witt lost again Wednesday, falling to the Milwaukee Brewers, 4-1, before a 
County Stadium crowd of 14,129. He gave up a three-run homer to Greg Brock on 
Brock's first day off the disabled list, walked five and yielded three doubles, 
including two in as many at-bats to Paul Molitor. 
Witt's record is 3-5, the only losing mark in the Angel rotation. His 
earned-run average is 4.42, highest on the Angel staff. The Angels are 
streaking -- winning 23 of their last 30 games -- but Witt has been left 
behind, managing a 1-3 record during that span. 
He isn't taking it well. 
Trying to put it in layman's terms for those laymen around him carrying note 
pads, Witt said, "Suppose you write 10 bad articles and then you write another. 
Obviously, you're not doing your job. But if you write one bad article out of 
10, you can just call it a bad night. 
"If you're a pitcher and you've had six bad outings and only four good ones, 
that's kind of . . . You're not doing your job." 
Witt pitched eight innings Wednesday after getting blown out of his previous 
start with two out in the third. Someone asked if he considered this progress. 
"I'm looking for results, I'm not looking for progress," he snapped. "I don't 
get paid to make progress. I get paid to get people out." 
Witt, losing pitcher in both Angel defeats during their just-completed 5-2 
swing through New York, Boston and Milwaukee, allowed the Brewers eight hits in 
eight innings. Not great, not awful, but just enough to keep Witt's wheels 
spinning in the mud. 
On this day, Witt had to pitch in the mud, as rain fell steadily from the 
game's first pitch until its last. Witt surrendered three hits in the first two 
innings, but didn't get bogged down until the third, when he walked Robin Yount 
and yielded a single to Gary Sheffield before facing Brock. 
Brock, sidelined since April 2 with a shoulder injury that required 
arthroscopic surgery, returned to the Brewers' active roster only hours before 
the game. His third-inning at-bat against Witt was only his second of the 
season. 
When it was finished, Brock's batting average read .500 and Milwaukee led, 3-0. 
Brock hit that new addition to Witt's repertoire, the forkball, 400 feet, 
nearly to straight-away center field. When the ball landed beyond the outfield 
wall, Brewer starter Don August had all the offense he required to improve his 
record to 4-6. 
"I gave up a three-run home run and that was basically the game," Witt said. 
"Brock hit a pretty good pitch and that was it." 
Bill Schroeder, the Angel catcher who called the pitch, corroborated Witt's 
assessment. 
"If I had to do it over again, I'd go with the same pitch," Schroeder said. "It 
wasn't that bad a pitch. It wasn't, by any means, a hanger." 
Yet, it effectively hung up Witt again. With Wally Joyner's run-scoring ground 
ball in the fourth inning the extent of the Angel attack, Witt could do nothing 
but keep pitching and ride out the rest of the game. 
"As the game progressed, I thought he threw much better," Angel Manager Doug 
Rader said. "The three-run home run got him rolling. It's a shame he had to 
give it up, but I thought he pitched well after that." 
Not well enough for Witt. 
The best thing he could say about Wednesday is that tomorrow's another day -- 
and that means the beginning of June. Historically, June has been to Witt what 
October was to Reggie Jackson -- his peak period. During this month, Witt has 
won 21 games, lost nine and fashioned a 2.93 ERA. 
So, at least he's got that going for him, right? 
"I'm just looking for a good outing," Witt said. "I don't care what time of 
year it is." 
And what is Witt's definition of a good outing? 
"You know what I mean," Witt said. "A good outing, to me, is a win, a complete 
game, giving up about two runs." 
Preferably, in that order. 
There haven't been many of those for Witt in April and May. Remember the days 
when Witt was the pitcher who stopped losing streaks, not winning ones, the 
Angel starter who picked up the rest of the staff time after time? This year, 
the roles have been dramatically reversed, with Kirk McCaskill, Chuck Finley 
&amp; Co. doing the bailing for Witt. 
"I don't think I've picked up anyone this year," Witt said. "That's like 10 
years ago. This is this year. And this is the best team I've ever played on." 
That, Witt claims, has made the waiting all the tougher. Anyone can hitch a 
ride. Witt would at least like to be a part of the car-pool. 
Angel Notes 
In truth, Mike Witt allowed the Brewers nine hits, but because of a misjudged 
fly ball by third-base umpire Ken Kaiser, the box score will forever read 
eight. In the seventh inning, Kaiser ruled a line drive to left field by 
Milwaukee's Terry Francona an out when, in fact, the ball one-hopped the turf 
into the glove of Angel left fielder Dante Bichette. With two out and a runner 
on second base, Bichette came up throwing -- only to find Kaiser with his fist 
in the air to signal the third out. "That was a miraculous catch," Brewer 
Manager Tom Trebelhorn deadpanned later. "That catch right there, I'll tell you 
what -- if you want to call one-hoppers to shortstop line-drive outs, that'll 
be fine with us." Bichette admitted he caught the ball on the bounce, but 
added, "It was a tough call for the umpire. It was raining and it was really 
close. Nobody's perfect." Bichette's reaction when he spotted Kaiser's out 
sign? "I just headed for the dugout," he said. "I wasn't going to hang around 
out there and show the umpire up." 
The Angels scored in the fourth inning after Johnny Ray's single and a deep fly 
ball by Devon White that kicked off the glove of Milwaukee center fielder Robin 
Yount for an error. Ray wound up on third base on the play and came home on a 
grounder to second base by Wally Joyner. The Angels' only other scoring threat 
came in the seventh inning, when they loaded the bases against Don August and 
relief pitcher Jay Aldrich. But with two out, Brian Downing grounded into a 
force play to end the inning. 
Bichette started in left field in place of Chili Davis, who has been bothered 
by a sore hand. Bichette responded with two singles in four at-bats, snapping 
out of a 1-for-16 spell. 
The Angels concluded their Eastern swing with five wins, two losses and two 
rain-outs. The 5-2 mark was the team's best on a trip through the American 
League East since May 18-25, 1982, when the Angels also went 5-2 against 
Milwaukee, Detroit and Boston. 
