STUDENT DRIVE SERVES AS FOOD FOR THOUGHT ON RECYCLING 
When students walk through a school cafeteria line to pick up their sloppy 
Joes, potato rounds and cartons of milk, the food is plopped onto plastic foam 
trays. Every school day, more than 50,000 of these trays are used -- and thrown 
into the trash. 
Students at several schools are mounting a drive to persuade officials to stop 
using trays made of plastic foam, which consists of chemicals that contribute 
to global warming. Some have written letters to the school district. A few have 
talked to their principals. And others have circulated petitions. 
"We're trying to help our earth," explained Tiffany Edmiston, a seventh-grader 
at Will Rogers Junior High School, where 286 students signed a petition to get 
rid of the plastic foam trays. 
Edmiston and other youngsters said they began considering recycling and other 
ecology measures during Earth Day, the recent worldwide celebration to 
encourage environmental reform. 
Students at Buffum Elementary School also are circulating a petition, and 
students at Cubberley and Twain elementary schools have written letters to 
Frank Towers, head of the food services division for the Long Beach Unified 
School District. 
Towers said he shares the students' concerns, but there are no easy answers. 
To recycle the plastic foam, Towers said he would need to hire three workers, 
buy three trucks and establish a central spot where the trays could be taken 
daily. Last summer, Towers experimented for one week with recycling trays in 
the city's seven year-round schools. The district collected $500, but it cost 
twice that much to recycle the trays, he said. 
"It's an expensive proposition," Towers said. 
A switch to paper trays would triple the cost of trays from $350,000 to $1 
million annually, and would consume more trees, Towers said. 
Some students at Rogers told Principal Susan Marumoto they would be willing to 
wash dishes if the district turned to non-disposable plates. But that has its 
problems too, Towers said. 
The district stopped using its school dishwashers about five years ago and many 
are broken. In addition to the repair costs, washing dishes in the district's 
56 elementary schools would require at least 1.7 million more gallons of water 
annually, at a time when many people are trying to conserve water. 
"Using Styrofoam is the least expensive way for the district to go," Towers 
said. "In everything in life, we have alternatives, but they have a cost." 
Towers said he will consider the options, including whether to turn to a 
combination of uses, such as dishwashers in schools where the machines are in 
good working condition and plastic foam trays in others. 
Towers and a representative from the plastic foam industry visited Buffum 
School recently and explained the dilemma to student leaders, who were not 
persuaded by the arguments, Principal Bob Hedges said. 
"Our children listened to them and decided to go to the petition," Hedges said. 
"Their feeling is that there must be some way to do it. They say, 'We may not 
know how, but someone should.' " 
Plastic foam is inflated with chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which make good 
coolants and good insulators. But numerous studies show that they do not break 
down until they are in the upper atmosphere, where chlorine molecules react 
with oxygen molecules and destroy the ozone that protects people from the sun's 
ultraviolet rays. 
Earlier this year, UC San Diego officials agreed to ban plastic foam from their 
campus at the urging of three marine biology students. The city of Berkeley has 
an ordinance banning the use of all CFC-processed polystyrene by restaurants 
and by retail food vendors who serve takeout food. 
Meanwhile, Long Beach students concerned about plastic foam also have started 
recycling efforts. At Buffum, for example, some students are holding newspaper 
drives and recycling plastic and aluminum containers. Students at Rogers and 
other schools have begun similar programs. 
Emily Ensley, 13, one of the Rogers students heading the drive for a plastic 
foam ban, digs through the school's trash cans every Thursday in search of 
pizza boxes, which she crushes for recycling. 
The seventh-grader admits that most of her friends are not eager to join her in 
the effort, but she remains determined. 
"I'd like to see everybody in our neighborhood start to recycle -- just do 
something," Ensley said. "It's not that hard. Take a few minutes to crush a few 
cans or recycle some newspapers. It doesn't take that much effort." 
