HIGH SCHOOL SENIORS GIVEN $100,000 BY TIMES FUND 
The Los Angeles Times Fund has again awarded $100,000 in educational 
grants-in-aid to 200 graduating high school seniors throughout Southern 
California. The grants will enable the students to continue their education 
next fall. 
The $500 awards were presented this month at ceremonies conducted at public and 
private schools in San Diego, Los Angeles and Orange counties. 
The grants-in-aid program, started by the Times Fund in 1967, provides grants 
to students whose high school grade-point average is 2.9 or below, but whom 
teachers or counselors designate as having high potential for academic success. 
Since its inception, the program has awarded more than 6,000 grants totaling 
more than $2.3 million. 
The grants may be used at trade or technical schools, colleges or universities. 
"For years, The Times has quietly supported San Diego's youth with programs 
designed to brighten the present and enrich the future," said Phyllis Pfeiffer, 
general manager of the San Diego County Edition of The Times. "Encouraging 
deserving local seniors to pursue their dreams of higher education is a 
particularly rewarding role." 
"These students have demonstrated a desire to get the schooling necessary to 
become productive, contributing members of their communities. The Times is 
proud to help turn that drive for advancement into reality," said Tom Johnson, 
publisher and chief executive officer of The Times and president of the Times 
Fund. 
The grants-in-aid program is supported by the proceeds of various 
Times-sponsored events, such as the Sundance World Class cycling event last 
month at the velodrome in Balboa Park. 
These students, listed with their high schools, are grant recipients in San 
Diego County this year: 
Libby Marie Allen, Mira Mesa. 
Delina Breeding, Lincoln. 
Carlos Cruz, Garfield. 
Gallegos E. Flora, Mission Bay. 
Patricia Garibay, La Jolla. 
Andrea Lajoie, James Madison. 
Mary Louise Lopez, Mark Twain. 
Maria Moran, La Jolla. 
Diana Payan, Mission Bay. 
Elizabeth Antonia Rocha, Point Loma. 
Andrea Lynne Sampson, Point Loma. 
Shonn D. Williams, Samuel F. B. Morse. 
