PALESTINIAN HUNGER STRIKERS FEAR SETBACK IN PEACE EFFORT; 
UPRISING: THE RAID ON ISRAEL REVEALS ARAB DISUNITY AND COULD LEAD TO NEW 
VIOLENCE, ACTIVISTS SAY. 
News of the stymied beach raid by Palestinian guerrillas blanketed a group of 
local Palestinian leaders on a hunger strike here with despair and no little 
discomfort at having to answer questions about whether they approved of the 
failed assault or not. 
The despair Thursday was not over the outcome of Wednesday's raid, which left 
four attackers dead and 12 others captured; some mused privately that it would 
have been far worse if the attackers had succeeded, especially if they had 
killed innocent bathers. 
Rather, there was a feeling of having lost control of events and of being 
shunted aside by the Palestine Liberation Organization at a critical moment in 
a campaign to convince the Israeli public of their peaceful intentions. 
Unwilling to condemn the seaborne attack, they were left to offer gloomy 
predictions of more violence to come if peace talks do not get under way. 
"If I was the one to take the decision, I would not send such an operation," 
said Faisal Husseini, a top political leader in the West Bank and Gaza Strip 
and a chief contact for the PLO. "I myself believe that nonviolence can 
accomplish more. We are in a cycle in which violence creates more violence." 
Husseini pleaded that the raid not result in a diplomatic setback for 
Palestinians. 
"Don't put the Palestinians in a corner. We need steps to convince Palestinians 
that nonviolence works," he said. 
Husseini and up to 20 other Palestinians have been fasting since May 20, when 
an Israeli gunman shot and killed seven Palestinian day laborers. With the 
hunger strike, the Palestinians hoped to seize the initiative and win 
diplomatic progress toward peace talks. 
With the raid, their effort has been drowned out; the United States has 
indicated that it might break off contact with the PLO unless the organization 
expels Mohammed Abbas, better known as Abul Abbas, who masterminded this attack 
as well as the 1985 hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro. 
"We are working at cross-purposes," a hunger striker said of the PLO. "It would 
be better if they left the struggle inside the occupied territory to us." 
No one was willing to say such a thing and put his name to it, making the group 
vulnerable to charges that everyone fears contradicting the PLO publicly. By 
way of contrast, all were willing to condemn the placing of a bomb in a 
Jerusalem market last week as a terrorist act, even in the face of calls from 
young street activists to praise it as an act of revenge. 
And none of the hunger strikers were willing to support the expulsion of Abul 
Abbas. 
"I don't think everyone in the PLO is savory. But not everyone in the Israeli 
government is savory, either, and no one is making it a condition for contact 
that Israel expel them," said Sari Nusseibeh, another public leader. 
"In every Palestinian, there is burning anger. Every Palestinian is a potential 
Abul Abbas. The only way to stop the anger is to start a peace process." 
It was perhaps not an auspicious day for daring words of moderation: Two 
teen-agers were shot to death in the West Bank on Thursday -- one, a 
14-year-old boy, by a soldier; the other, a 17-year-old, by an Arab who 
collaborates with the Israeli government. 
Leaders like Nusseibeh and Husseini have been under pressure from grass-roots 
leaders of the intifada, or uprising, as well as from Muslim fundamentalists, 
to escalate the Arab uprising to the point of taking up firearms. It is 
generally considered that such an escalation would diminish the role of the 
public leadership, which has been trying to lay the public opinion groundwork 
among Israelis in favor of diplomacy. 
Throughout the 12 days of the hunger strike, Husseini has been debating 
visiting student groups over the wisdom of nonviolence and civil disobedience. 
The Palestinian students proposed a step up in violence as a means of driving 
Israel out of the West Bank and Gaza, a policy Husseini opposes. 
The fast is expected to continue one or two more days. Six strikers have been 
hospitalized for dehydration. 
The Israeli government seized on the beach raid as proof that the PLO is 
irredeemably dedicated to terrorism and an unworthy partner in peace talks. The 
government of caretaker Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir rejects both the PLO and 
demands for an independent Palestinian state. 
In the eyes of government officials, the strong American criticism of the 
assault vindicated Shamir's refusal to accept an invitation from U.S. Secretary 
of State James A. Baker III to open peace talks with a Palestinian delegation 
that would include PLO contacts. "Things are working in our favor," said 
government spokesman Yossi Olmert. 
The State Department informed Israel of its decision to press for the ouster of 
Abul Abbas from the PLO, Israeli officials said. 
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, on a visit to Jordan, also urged the 
PLO to disown the attack and punish any of its factions that might have been 
involved. 
