BAKER: CALL US IF YOU'RE SERIOUS; 
* EXASPERATION UNDERSCORES DETERIORATION 
It's getting to be a habit. Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir speaks his 
mind, has his words quoted in the press, sees them provoke a national and 
international furor. And then he instructs his spokesman to say that it was all 
a misunderstanding. 
It happened in January, when Shamir spoke publicly about the need for a "Big 
Israel" to absorb hundreds of thousands of Soviet Jewish immigrants. That 
description was widely interpreted as emphasizing Shamir's commitment -- which 
he has never tried to hide -- to perpetual Israeli control over the West Bank, 
a position that is the antithesis of good-faith negotiations toward 
accommodation with the Palestinians. 
And it happened again this week. In a newspaper interview, Shamir posed 
unhelpful new terms for Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, specifically demanding 
advance agreement that there could be only limited autonomy for the Arab 
populace of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Shamir's condition provoked an 
exasperated Secretary of State James A. Baker III to use some of the bluntest 
language a U.S. official has directed at Israel since the Suez crisis of 1956. 
The response from Shamir's office, once again, was to deny that the premier had 
spoken the words attributed to him. That denial isn't plausible. The Shamir 
interview appeared in the English-language Jerusalem Post, which under its new 
owners has become a strong and knowing supporter of Shamir's policies. 
Moreover, the gist of Shamir's remarks was fully consistent both with the 
longstanding expansionist ideology of his Likud Party and with the hard-line 
sentiments of his new multi-party coalition. 
The Jerusalem Post comments may have been the last straw for the Bush 
Administration. In testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Baker 
made no effort to hide his frustration. Clearly the Administration feels it has 
been misled by Shamir as it has worked to get Israeli-Palestinian talks 
started. If Shamir's conditional approach to negotiations prevails, "there 
won't be any dialogue and there won't be any peace," Baker said. He told the 
committee that "we got extraordinarily close" to agreement for direct 
Israeli-Palestinian talks earlier this year, only to run into stonewall 
resistance from Shamir. Then came Baker's blunt but unmistakable message to 
Israel: "When you're serious about peace, call us." 
Yesterday the White House and the State Department tried to put the best 
possible face on Baker's comments, suggesting that they were aimed at both 
sides in the controversy. No doubt they were. But there can be no doubt either, 
from the context of Baker's remarks, that Washington holds Israel chiefly to 
blame for the continuing deadlock. 
It's out in the open now, and there's no way to plead misunderstanding about 
what's been said. 
