14 DALLAS COWBOYS CHEERLEADERS QUIT; 
BUT OWNER DENIES HE WANTS THEM TO WEAR BRIEFER COSTUMES, ADVERTISE BEER 
Fourteen members of the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders say they are quitting the 
squad because new owner Jerry Jones wants them to wear skimpier uniforms, 
fraternize with the players and appear in beer commercials. 
Jones denied that he wanted to make such changes. 
"When (quarterback) Roger Staubach went out, he went out on top. They have 
retired. I'm resigning," cheerleader director Debbie Bond, 36, said today. 
In addition to Bond, all 14 veteran cheerleaders have said they will leave the 
team because of the dispute over the uniforms, The Dallas Morning News 
reported. 
The 23 rookie members have until Monday to decide if they will stay with the 
squad, which has been training in summer camp since May 6. 
Bond, who has been with the organization for 10 years, said earlier that she 
talked with Jones on Thursday after hearing that the Arkansas oilman had told 
the players that there would be fraternization between the players and 
cheerleaders. 
'Accept It or Move On' 
"He said, 'You can either accept it or move on,' " Bond said. "Mr. Jones does 
not believe in rules." 
Under former owner H. R. (Bum) Bright, the cheerleaders were not allowed to 
drink or even be photographed with someone holding a drink while they were 
wearing their uniforms. 
Twiggy Isip, 21, a two-year veteran of the squad, said Jones "wanted to change 
the uniform, and do you know what he wanted? Biker shorts and a halter top. He 
wants us to play hostess at parties and fraternize with the team. We've never 
done that." 
"The worst thing is -- he wants us to be in beer commercials," she said. "We've 
never even been able to have a drink in our hand." 
The current cheerleader uniform is shorts, long-sleeved blue shirts tied in the 
front to leave the midriff partially bare, a fringed bolero-type vest, and 
white boots. Biker shorts are made of an elastic material that molds to the 
body, while a halter top leaves the arms and back mostly bare. 
In an early afternoon news conference at the Cowboys' Valley Ranch 
headquarters, Jones said the rule remains in effect calling for cheerleaders 
not to fraternize with players or employees. 
"Those policies are intact. They are a very valuable and time-tested 
procedure," Jones said. 
He said he likes the traditional uniform of the cheerleaders and did not plan 
to change it. "It seems as though a lot of what was said in the meeting was 
speculation," he said. 
The cheerleading squad had its first open auditions in the spring of 1976, and 
cheerleaders now work for $15 a game -- $13.94 after taxes, said Suzanne 
Mitchell, who founded the squad at former President and General Manager Tex 
Schramm's suggestion. 
Mitchell resigned after 15 years with the Cowboys when Jones bought the team in 
February. 
