NORTH SENTENCING DELAYED TO ALLOW HEARING ON JUROR'S CONDUCT 
A federal judge Tuesday postponed the sentencing of former White House aide 
Oliver L. North until July 5 to provide time for a court hearing into defense 
allegations that a juror may have used drugs and lied to hide the fact that 
members of her family had been prosecuted. 
U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell unsealed court papers in which North's 
attorney, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., challenged the conduct of juror Tara Leigh 
King. But independent counsel Lawrence E. Walsh, in filings responding to the 
charges, called the allegations "thin" and "unsubstantiated" and said that 
North's lawyers were trying "to impeach the jury's verdict." 
Gesell, in an act that suggested he does not believe the issue will impair the 
jury's May 4 verdict convicting North of three felonies in the Iran-Contra 
scandal, ordered a 12-day postponement in North's sentencing rather than 
suspending it indefinitely. But he said that he will conduct a full hearing on 
June 28. 
Court sources said that the judge regards the issue as serious enough to 
require "a full airing of the facts" so that the trial record can be protected. 
Sullivan, in a motion dated May 30 that was unsealed Tuesday, contended that 
King, 34, a copy machine operator, "has periodically admitted to the use of 
narcotics (i.e., crack) close to the time of trial." 
"The possibility that a juror might have been under the influence of narcotics 
during the trial calls into question the fairness of the proceeding and 
warrants further inquiry," he added. 
Sullivan questioned King's veracity also, saying that she had "family members 
who were involved in the criminal justice process and . . . this involvement 
was not disclosed on the jury questionnaire" that King and other jurors 
completed before North's trial. 
Sullivan later produced records for the court showing that three of King's 14 
brothers and sisters have arrest records. The records include an armed robbery 
conviction against one brother, and drug cases dropped against two others. 
However, Walsh replied in his filings that the only substantiation for drug use 
occurred in King's post-trial interviews with reporters in which she 
acknowledged having used cocaine and marijuana up to four months before the 
trial but not while she sat on the case. 
Walsh contended that there is no evidence that King was aware of any arrest 
records of family members or that she had them in mind when she was asked to 
disclose whether any relatives ever had been involved in "civil or criminal 
proceedings." 
North was originally scheduled to be sentenced Friday. 
