SUMMER JOBS FOR YOUTH AT DISNEYLAND 
Re Bob Secter's article (June 4) entitled "Summer Work at Disneyland Holds 
Little Magic for Youth of Today": 
I am the mother of two Orange County kids who worked at Disneyland in the past. 
Perhaps Secter should also have interviewed past and present young employees of 
Disneyland. He might have had a more balanced picture of Disneyland's 
employment problems. 
My daughter at age 21 (no spoiled O.C. kid) went to work part time for 
Disneyland in 1984 while she attended college. She still remembers her 
employment by Disneyland in a negative way and states she felt the employees' 
welfare didn't matter to most of the management. "Making money was the bottom 
line in employee relations." 
In the past under the old "Disney" regime, a paternalistic system existed where 
rigid employee rules were enforced to create a pleasant and courteous 
environment for patrons. "Big Brother" looked over the employees' shoulders and 
wrote up the slightest infractions for breaking appearance and behavior codes. 
However, "Big Brother" truly cared about his kids and let them know. 
Paternalism works with young employees if it's a two-way street. 
Today's Disneyland is a one-way street. The chastisements abound, but 
incentives (such as praise) don't seem to exist. Employees are hired as casual 
temporary workers. Why would Orange County kids work for $4.75 per hour base 
rate (plus a small differential) from 9:45 p.m. to 2:45 a.m. per night -- which 
includes driving the freeways alone during early morning hours -- if they can 
get better pay and better hours from another employer? 
The kids smile sweetly in their special costumes as they survive another day at 
Disneyland because, after all, they work for "the happiest place on earth." Are 
they paid enough for the bad hours, customer hassles and little or no praise 
from management? Absolutely not -- neither in dollars nor in humane employee 
relations. 
Rather than aim sarcasm at Orange County's kids who don't want to work at 
Disneyland, perhaps Secter might give the kids credit for choosing to become 
valued employees instead of cogs in a money machine. 
CAROL A. PARKER 
Fullerton 
