OBITUARIES 
* Frank M. Adams; Morris Knudsen President 
Frank M. Adams, 64, president of Morrison Knudsen Co. of Boise, Ida., one of 
the world's largest heavy construction firms. Adams had been president of 
Morrison Knudsen since August after serving as an executive with Bendix Corp. 
His business career came after 26 years in the Navy in which he commanded two 
nuclear submarines and was second in command on the Nautilus when that sub made 
its historic voyage under the North Pole in 1958. After that tour of duty, 
Adams worked for Adm. H. G. Rickover in Washington before retiring as a captain 
in 1969. In a plane crash on May 27 near Naylor, Mo., which also claimed the 
life of his wife, Novella. 
* Beverly Shaw; Singer, Club Owner 
Beverly Shaw, 80, a singer and nightclub owner in Los Angeles and the Bay Area 
for many years. Miss Shaw, who owned Club Laurel in Studio City where she also 
performed regularly, was one of the few finalists on radio's "Major Bowes 
Amateur Hour" to earn a living as a professional entertainer. She also sang 
regularly at the Mona Club in San Francisco, the Flamingo on La Brea Avenue in 
Hollywood and Larry Potter's Supper Club in the San Fernando Valley. Over the 
years Miss Shaw became a favorite of the film colony and recorded on her own 
label. On May 26 of cancer in Burbank. 
* Sally Grosvenor; Duchess of Westminster 
Sally Grosvenor, 80, the Duchess of Westminster and the globe-trotting aunt of 
Britain's wealthiest man. Wife of the fourth Duke of Westminster, who died in 
1967, the duchess was the aunt of Gerald Cavendish Grosvenor, the current duke 
and director of Grosvenor Estate Holdings, which owns substantial property in 
the posh Mayfair District of Central London. Grosvenor sits on the board of 
directors for Claridges Hotel Co., the Cutty Sark Society, Sun Alliance and the 
London Insurance Co., among others. Two years ago, the duchess returned from 
her third trip up the Amazon River, where she spent five months hunting 
crocodiles. Three years ago, she was rescued from the Ba River in Fiji after 
her rubber raft struck a rock, hurling her into the water. In a hospital in 
Bristol on Wednesday after collapsing from a stroke at her home in western 
England. 
* Dimitri de Grunwald; Film Producer 
Dimitri de Grunwald, 76, producer of such films as "The Millionairess" with 
Peter Sellars and Sophia Loren. He was the son of a czarist diplomat and was 
born in St. Petersburg, now Leningrad. His family brought him to England when 
they escaped during the Bolshevik Revolution. De Grunwald became a movie 
producer in his own right after collaborating with his late brother, Anatole, 
in making films, including "The Way to the Stars," "The Winslow Boy" and "The 
Demi-Paradise." After "The Millionairess" in 1960, De Grunwald produced 
"Shalako," "Murphy's War" and other movies. On May 26 of unannounced causes at 
his home in Hove on the English south coast. 
