$108-MILLION EXTENSION COMPLETE; 
SAN DIEGO TROLLEY SET TO START EL CAJON RUNS 
The latest extension of the San Diego Trolley's East Line -- connecting the 
Spring Street station in La Mesa with the El Cajon Transit Center -- will go 
into service Saturday with a Community Ride Day. 
Metropolitan Transit Development Board administrators and local officials plan 
to inaugurate the six-mile segment with a ribbon-cutting ceremony today. The 
new track completes the $108-million, 11.1-mile East Line extension. 
"MTDB is extremely pleased to expand the San Diego Trolley from a 24-mile to a 
30-mile system consisting of lines in two major travel corridors," MTDB 
Chairman James R. Mills said in a news release. "The San Diego community at 
large should take credit for supporting innovative ideas to solve our regional 
transportation problems." 
Work Began in November, 1986 
Work on the latest extension began in November, 1986, and was scheduled to be 
completed by July, 1989. "MTDB is proud that, like the South Line and the first 
two East Line segments, our third project is opening ahead of schedule and 
under budget," MTDB General Manager Thomas F. Larwin said. 
The 11.1-mile extension from Euclid Avenue to the El Cajon Transit Center is 
MTDB's first to be built with federal money. The total budget of $108 million 
-- $58 million in federal funds -- paid for the installation of the tracks, 
electrical lines and eight new stations, as well as 15 air-conditioned cars. 
System Welcomed 
East County public officials welcomed the trolley system's arrival into their 
communities. "The East Line gives our residents an alternative way to get to 
downtown San Diego besides driving on increasingly congested freeways," said El 
Cajon Mayor John Reber. 
East Line trolleys, running at 15- and 30-minute intervals, are expected to 
ferry 15,000 riders a day by the end of 1990. 
Rides on the new segment during the Community Ride Day Saturday are free, and 
entertainment will be provided at the stations. Fare service begins Sunday. 
