MANAGUA'S FAILING ECONOMY 
A secret report prepared for the Sandinista government confirms a widely held 
suspicion that the Nicaraguan economy is in bad shape and getting worse. While 
the Bush Administration may take some satisfaction from that, U.S. officials 
should also seize the opportunity for a more constructive relationship between 
Washington and Managua. 
The confidential study was prepared by an international team of experts for 
President Daniel Ortega, who used the findings on a trip to Europe last month 
seeking foreign assistance for his war-torn nation. A key conclusion is that 
Nicaragua's once-thriving economy has shrunk by one- third since dictator 
Anastasio Somoza was overthrown in 1979. In at least some statistical 
categories, Nicaragua is now the poorest Western Hemisphere nation, below 
poverty-stricken Haiti. 
The report, made public recently by the New York Times, does not try to assess 
blame for Nicaragua's economic devastation. The Sandinistas blame their 
problems on Somoza, who looted the national treasury before fleeing the 
country, and on the United States, which has supported both a war and a trade 
embargo against them. Sandinista opponents claim they created their own mess by 
driving the best of the professional class out of the country and relying, 
instead, on the advice and assistance of Communist allies like Cuba and the 
Soviet Union, economies hardly worth emulating. 
But the report is forthright in setting out the difficult steps that must be 
taken if the downward trend is to be reversed. Among them are a drastic cut in 
military spending and a renewed emphasis on private sector production. Those 
two proposals, in particular, should interest U.S. policy-makers, for they deal 
with Washington's two primary concerns about Nicaragua. A cutback in military 
spending would mean less Sandinista reliance on the Soviet Bloc, which can 
provide weaponry far more efficiently than it can provide food and other 
consumer goods. And a revived private sector would be a political 
counterbalance to the Sandinistas as they stumble about trying to turn 
Nicaragua into a one-party socialist state. 
As the preeminent economic power in the Western Hemisphere, the United States 
has always been the most logical place for Nicaragua to sell its goods and find 
investors. Even a hostile regime there can be swayed more easily by economic 
incentives than by military threats. Now that former President Reagan's 
unshakable hatred of the Sandinistas does not confine U.S. policy in Nicaragua 
to the stick, President Bush should try the carrot, using economic incentives 
like an end to the trade embargo, to improve relations. 
