STATE SPEEDS UP FUNDING OF SOUTHLAND ROAD WORK; 
PROP. 111: TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION ALLOCATES MONEY TO BE RAISED BY HIGHER 
GASOLINE TAXES FOR THE CENTURY FREEWAY AND OTHER PROJECTS. 
The Century Freeway and dozens of other road projects in Southern California 
became the first to benefit Wednesday from the voters' decision June 5 to 
endorse a gasoline tax increase. 
Rushing to get work delayed by funding shortages back on schedule, the 
California Transportation Commission approved $257 million in backlogged 
projects scattered throughout the state. But most of the initial funding went 
to the south, with the biggest chunks -- totaling $118.5 million -- slated for 
construction on two phases of the Century Freeway and on state routes 30 and 
330 in San Bernardino County. 
Lesser amounts went to other road work stretching from Ventura County to San 
Diego County. "We intend to accelerate as fast as we can," said commission 
Chairman William Leonard. " . . . The public didn't support (the gas tax 
increase) in order to put money in the bank." 
Highway officials had been forced to delay funding for a list of projects 
during the last year as the state's 9-cent-per-gallon gasoline tax became 
inadequate to meet the transportation demands of a rapidly expanding 
population. 
"If the voters had not approved the tax increase, the delays would have 
continued and the 105 (Century Freeway) would have come to a screeching halt," 
said Charles J. O'Connell, a Caltrans deputy district director in Los Angeles. 
The California Transportation Commission allocates funds for state 
transportation projects; Caltrans, or the Department of Transportation, 
administers them and makes recommendations to the commission. 
On June 5, the voters approved Proposition 111, a ballot measure that modified 
the state's spending limit and permitted gas tax increases. Motorists will 
begin paying a 5-cent-per-gallon increase on Aug. 1 and then 1-cent-per-gallon 
increases every January for the next four years. 
The tax hikes are designed to help finance a 10-year, $18.5-billion 
transportation program that allows the state to catch up with backlogged 
projects and start new ones to formulate a multifaceted plan for easing traffic 
congestion. 
"I think we are in a very exciting stage here in California," said Assemblyman 
Jim Costa (D-Fresno). "In the next four or five years we are going to be 
designing some innovative transportation strategies . . . that I think may lead 
the nation." 
Voters will begin to see the effects of the tax increase as the commission 
continues to authorize highway construction projects throughout the year. By 
the end of 1990, officials estimate they will have approved $1 billion worth of 
new road projects. 
O'Connell said the commission's decision to make the Century Freeway one of its 
first priorities ensures that "we have a reasonable chance" of completing the 
massive project in time for its scheduled opening in September, 1993. The funds 
approved for the Century Freeway totaled $65.9 million. 
"You might say Caltrans management is aware that all of the pieces of the 105 
(Century) fit together. These projects don't stand alone; they have an impact 
one on the other . . . if one is postponed you're really looking at delaying 
the opening of a $2-billion project," O'Connell said. 
Begun in the spring of 1982, the 17.3 miles of roadway between Norwalk and the 
eastern edge of Los Angeles International Airport will, upon completion, be the 
most expensive stretch of freeway ever built in the United States. The total 
price tag is expected to be more than $2 billion for six lanes of freeway for 
regular traffic, two lanes for buses and car pools, a light rail line in the 
freeway median and replacement housing for those displaced by the highway's 
construction. 
The funds approved Wednesday not only permit the Century Freeway construction 
to continue but allow Caltrans to clean up a toxic waste dump that had 
embroiled the agency in a dispute with the Catholic Church. The expenditures 
authorized by the commission included $22 million to remove and seal a dump in 
the Century Freeway construction zone near St. Frances X. Cabrini Catholic 
Church and parish school in South-Central Los Angeles. 
For months, the church has been pushing for removal of the dump only to hear 
from Caltrans that the costs were so high that the church might have to share 
in them. In recent weeks, however, officials said they found a way to complete 
the project without exceeding their original construction costs estimates for 
the freeway. 
"I think they came up with a good solution," said Father David O'Connell, the 
parish priest. He is not related to the Caltrans official. "I think the public 
put quite a bit of pressure on Caltrans and I think they did respond to the 
people. It proves if you get mad enough sometimes you can get a lot done." 
The remaining $43.9 million authorized for the Century Freeway will finance the 
construction of a transit station and a part of the freeway near Inglewood and 
Lemoli Avenues. 
In San Bernardino County, approval of $52.6 million for construction work on 
routes 330 and 30 gives the go-ahead for a project in the East San 
Bernardino-Highland Valley that would extend the existing Crosstown Freeway 
(California 30) 3.7 miles from its terminus at Arden-Highland Avenue to 5th 
Street. 
The same project also provides for an extension of California 330 from City 
Creek Canyon to its new junction with the Crosstown Freeway in the city of 
Highland, a distance of about 1.7 miles. With the construction of 23 bridges 
and an extensive drainage system, it is the single biggest freeway contract 
ever authorized for that area of the state. 
MAJOR ROAD PROJECTS 
 Here are the major road projects in Southern California approved by the 
California Transportation Commission: 
$43.9 million for the construction of a transit station near the Century 
Freeway in the vicinity of Inglewood and Lemoli avenues and another $22 million 
to remove and dispose of hazardous waste in the Century Freeway corridor near 
Western and Normandie avenues. 
$52.6 million in San Bernardino County to extend the Crosstown Freeway (Route 
30) 3.7 miles from its current terminus at Arden-Highland Avenue to 5th Street. 
The same project would also extend Route 330 1.7 miles from City Creek Canyon 
to its new junction with the Crosstown Freeway in Highland. 
$9.6 million to widen Route 126 in Ventura County from two to four lanes west 
of Castaic Junction from Powell Road to Center Street. 
In San Diego County, $3.8 million to widen Route 78 in Oceanside from four to 
six lanes from the intersection with Route 5 to three miles east of College 
Boulevard. 
Los Angeles' Foothill Freeway (Route 210) to undergo $2.1 million in roadway 
rehabilitation and bridge repairs on a stretch from Paxton Street to just east 
of Wheatland Avenue. 
