GRAPE-SWITCHING SCANDAL ROCKS STATE WINE INDUSTRY 
The California wine industry's worst scandal in two decades has come to light 
in recent weeks as state authorities have accused a number of grape harvesters 
of selling inexpensive varieties as premium wine grapes. 
The latest round of suits was filed Thursday by the state Department of Food 
and Agriculture, the result of a wide-ranging investigation during the 1988 
grape harvest. Shortages of premium wine grapes drove prices up for some 
varieties last year, but prices of non-premium grapes remained moderate. 
In several of the suits, the growers or harvesters are accused of passing off 
cheaper French colombard grapes as Chardonnays, which sell for more than eight 
times as much. In others, inexpensive red grapes were allegedly sold as 
zinfandels. Both Chardonnay and a blush wine made from zinfandels have become 
highly popular moderately priced wines in recent years. 
"There have been suspicions for some time that there were irregularities (with 
grapes) from some growers," said Frank Indelicato, co-owner of Delicato 
Vineyards in Manteca. "But it's gotten real bad in the last two years. Some 
people are trying to take advantage of the high prices for grapes." 
The extent of the problem is not yet known, but both federal and state 
authorities are continuing their investigations. It also is not entirely clear 
why some wineries apparently failed to detect the switch, or how much 
mislabeled wine -- if any -- made it to the marketplace. Industry sources say 
wine made from the grapes under suspicion was not of the expensive type, but 
rather fell among those that typically sell for $5 or less per bottle. 
Winery officials are clearly embarrassed by the situation, and some express 
concern about the effect the scandal could have on the industry's image. 
"There are 6,000 honest, hard-working grape growers in California and a couple 
of cases like this make all of us look bad, and that is causing a lot of 
bitterness in the grape-growing community," said Jim Ledbetter, owner of Vino 
Farms and president of the Sonoma County Grape Growers Assn. 
Six civil cases have been filed so far by state agriculture officials, all in 
the San Joaquin Valley where virtually all of the state's cheaper wine grapes 
are grown. However, some of the allegedly inferior grapes or wine are believed 
to have wound up at wineries in Napa and Sonoma counties -- the state's most 
prestigious wine-producing areas, and federal investigators are known to be 
looking into some suspicious cases at a number of premium wineries. 
Wineries Victimized 
The wineries themselves so far are not under investigation for switching 
grapes, and are considered to have been the victims. However, sources said the 
federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, a division of the Treasury 
Department that regulates the wine industry, is checking to see whether some 
wineries have mislabeled wine made from the suspect grapes. 
It was also learned that federal regulators have demanded that a number of 
California wineries show exactly what they did with any suspected misidentified 
grapes or the juice produced from them. Winery officials said they are 
cooperating. 
Authorities want to determine whether wineries that bought misidentified grapes 
or wine violated the federal "minimum varietal content" regulation. Federal 
rules require that wine bottled with a varietal designation (Chardonnay, for 
example, or white zinfandel) be made from at least 75% of that grape variety. 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has the authority to suspend the 
license of any winery that knowingly bottles wine with a varietal designation 
made from less than 75% of the named variety. 
Private Suits Filed 
At least three private lawsuits also have been filed. In one, brewing giant 
Anheuser-Busch recently won an out-of-court settlement in Northern California 
after it claimed that an Escalon, Calif., grape harvester had sold it 
lesser-quality grapes labeled as premium zinfandels. The defendant agreed to 
pay nearly $1.1 million to settle the case after a government inspection 
determined that less than 23% of the grapes delivered to Anheuser-Busch were 
actually zinfandels. 
Industry officials insist that the situation occurred in only a few instances 
in the San Joaquin Valley and could not happen in the premium wine areas (Napa, 
Sonoma, Mendocino and Lake counties, for example) where wineries and growers 
are closely linked by long-term contracts. "These are smaller communities where 
the growers know the wineries, people know each other, they eat together, 
they're friends," a spokesman for the Sonoma County Wineries Assn. said. 
By contrast, the San Joaquin wineries are typically much larger and process 
huge amounts of grapes from many different growers. 
Ev Delfino, assistant director of inspection services for the state agriculture 
department, said evidence accumulated so far indicates that the problem was 
localized in the San Joaquin Valley. "The great majority of growers, 99 and 
nine-tenths of them, are clean. There is no large-scale misidentification of 
wine grapes." 
Warning Issued 
Since about 1987, when the state's supply of Chardonnay and zinfandel began to 
dry up (in part because of a small harvest) and prices rose dramatically, the 
state has suspected that some grape growers and brokers might take advantage by 
selling cheaper grapes and passing them off as more costly varieties. In fact, 
the state Department of Food and Agriculture issued a public warning to growers 
and wineries early last year. 
State Assistant Atty. Gen. Mark Urban, a prosecutor in the six cases filed so 
far by the agriculture department, said the state is seeking a total of more 
than $1.2 million in damages, including penalties. 
Another six suspicious instances have been referred to the attorney general's 
office for possible prosecution, according to sources familiar with the 
investigation. (There is a one-year statute of limitations on grape-switching; 
all the cases filed so far refer to actions that allegedly occurred last 
summer.) 
In four of the six cases already filed, Bavaro Brothers, an Escalon-based grape 
harvester, and its owners, Nick J. Bavaro and Francisco Bavaro, among others, 
were named as defendants. A secretary said that on the advice of its lawyers 
the company would not comment on the cases. 
Zinfandel Producer 
Buyer of the grapes in three of the Bavaro cases was Delicato Vineyards, 
believed to be the state's largest white zinfandel producer and purchaser of 
80,000 tons of California wine grapes last year. Delicato sells much of its 
production -- 4.2 million gallons last year -- in bulk to other wineries, 
including Sutter Home, the state's largest marketer of white zinfandel under 
its own label. 
In one case, the Bavaro firm is alleged to have sold French colombard grapes, 
which sold at a statewide average price of $138.79 per ton in 1988, as 
Chardonnays, for which the statewide average was $1,122.36 per ton. 
In other cases, the state alleges that lower-priced carignan, valdepenas and 
grenache grapes were sold in different transactions and passed off as 
zinfandels. There was a difference of about $600 per ton in the price paid for 
those types of grapes last year. 
Winery owner Indelicato said vintners cannot always tell the type of grapes 
they are receiving, and therefore must rely on the representations of their 
suppliers. 
"Even when we have suspicions, and we call the county (agricultural) 
commissioner over, some of the grapes are sent to (the viticulture laboratory 
at UC) Davis, and sometimes even professionals can't tell for sure. Just 
looking at the grapes, it's hard to tell. You have to analyze the seeds." 
Bob Steinhauer, viticulturist for Beringer Vineyards in the Napa Valley, 
agreed. "The three of us who buy grapes for Beringer inspect the vineyards to 
make certain that it's what the grower says it is. And we have a map on file of 
every vineyard we buy from, showing the varieties," Steinhauer said. "When the 
grapes are on the vine, it's fairly easy to tell what's zinfandel and what's 
not. But it's harder to tell when the grapes are in the gondola." 
Sebastiani Vineyards in Sonoma and Charles Krug in the Napa Valley, both 
premium wineries that bought grapes from the Bavaro firm, have filed lawsuits 
against it claiming that the grapes were misrepresented; each suit seeks $1 
million in damages. Both wineries said discussions are under way to settle 
those cases. 
'A Small Minority' 
"This does not represent the entire wine industry," said Robert Hartzell, 
president of the California Assn. of Winegrape Growers. "It's a small minority 
of growers. 
"This is an extremely unusual situation. . . . In the 12 years I've been 
president of (the grape growers), I've almost never seen the state need to step 
in." 
Hartzell said some growers do not believe that the state is being tough enough 
on the wrongdoers. "They think the perpetrators' hands aren't being slapped 
hard enough, that the penalties should be more severe. Both growers and 
vintners are deeply concerned that a few greedy people have misrepresented the 
varieties." 
The last time a scandal of this type hit the California wine industry was 
nearly 20 years ago when Almaden Vineyards, then located in San Jose, allegedly 
mislabeled wine that it sold to airlines. That case was settled out of court. 
Some wineries are upset that the authorities were slow to warn them that a 
significant amount of misidentification was occurring. In some cases, the 
warnings came after the wine was already blended with other wine. That means 
large quantities of wine could be suspect if it were labeled as varietal. 
A spokesman for Lost Hills Winery in Acampo said the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco 
and Firearms was slow in telling wineries of its concerns, "and we never knew 
until we had blended our tanks. . . . They should have told us. We could have 
held onto that wine until the percentages were certified. Now it's too late." 
