YACHT RACE HAS LITTLE WIND, PLENTY OF CONFUSION 
The sailors who coped best with the wind and outwitted the race committee moved 
to the front of the fleets on Friday, the first day of the Long Beach Yacht 
Club's Ullman Sails-Washington Insurance Race Week. 
The first race was delayed an hour waiting for wind, which was 6-8 knots for 
the first races, then shifted 45 degrees eastward as it built to 12 knots after 
the the starts of the second races. The unusual shift created a nightmare for 
the race committees and parades of reaches over the windward-leeward courses 
instead of upwind-downwind legs, for the sailors. 
When the shift started, the committees altered the courses to compensate. But, 
on the A course for the larger handicap fleets, that only caused confusion 
because the faster boats -- most notably Peter Tong's ultralight Blondie -- had 
already lapped some slower boats, and most boats didn't notice the new bearing 
to the weather mark indicated by code flags on the committee boat. 
At the end of the day, the committee was considering scrapping the Fifties 
fleet race altogether. 
Dave Ullman, sailing Don Hughes' Reichell-Pugh 42 Quintessence, placed first 
and second in his first two races, opening a bid to win the IOR-A class of the 
event -- formerly Long Beach Race Week -- for the fourth year in a row. 
Robbie Haines won both IOR-B races with Irv Loube's Farr 40 Bravura, and Steve 
Steiner and Alan Adams led the Fifties in their custom Steiner 58 with a first 
and a third. 
Haines, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist in the Soling class, was a full boat 
length over the starting line in the second race but was screened from the 
committee boat by Mike Wooten's Allegiance, which returned to restart as Haines 
kept on sailing. 
Steve and father Barney Flam weren't so lucky aboard their J/35 Flambouyant on 
the B course, where the one-designs competed. The Flams, who won the event in 
1988, sailed second to David Dale-Johnson's Paleface in both races but were 
disqualified in the second for a premature start. 
