COMMENTARY; 
SUMMER WORK AT DISNEYLAND HOLDS LITTLE MAGIC FOR YOUTH OF TODAY 
Remember the first thing that popped out of Orel Hershisher's mouth as he 
stepped off the mound after winning last year's World Series finale? It wasn't 
"We're No.1," or "I love the Dodgers" or "I love my family" or "Lasorda's a 
blimp" or even something as poignant as "Hi Mom." 
No, he walked straight up to a waiting cameraman and proudly announced to the 
universe that he was heading straight to Disney World. 
Cynics, of course, immediately suspected that the charming, boyish pitcher was 
being less than sincere. Some even suggested that he might actually have been 
paid to say such a thing, though the notion seems inconceivable because his 
annual salary surpasses the gross national product of several developing 
nations. 
But I can see how Hershisher, even at the very pinnacle of his baseball career, 
could be moved by such strange desires. Who among us is too old or too young or 
too rich or too poor or too blase to resist the lure of the Magic Kingdom, be 
it the copy in Florida or the real McCoy back here in Anaheim? 
Kids in Orange County, that's who. 
Not too many years ago, the waiting list for a summer job at Disneyland was 
longer than the weekend lines at Space Mountain. Working at the park was 
considered almost a rite of passage for teen-agers around here. 
Now, according to the Disney folk, they're having trouble recruiting enough 
local high school and college talent to fill the 3,000 extra vacation season 
spots on the payroll. They may have to import youngsters from other states. 
Sounds Goofy, right? Here we are in one of the fastest growing, most affluent 
sections of the country, a place tailor-made for those who like to work hard 
and play hard, and local teens shun the chance to make a few bucks at the 
world's most famous amusement park, which also happens to be just down the 
street. 
I don't mean to come off like a shill for the Disney employment service. But 
we're talking about a phenomenon fraught with chilling sociological and 
cultural implications. 
In my neighborhood, back in the prehistoric days before rock videos and 
Nintendo, there was many a hot-blooded adolescent who would have gladly paid 
just to get the opportunity to sell tickets, fry burgers or sweep up in a place 
that had spawned the likes of an Annette or a Darlene. Talk about Fantasyland. 
But times have clearly changed. Youngsters today, already plotting to inherit 
the corporate suites, BMWs and country club memberships now held by their 
parents, are more interested in the bottom line. Disney teens earn only about 
$4.75 to $5 an hour, less than many can make at convenience shops, department 
stores and other challenging occupations. 
Long weekend hours are the norm and there's a strict dress code and grooming 
rules. Spiked hair or earrings on men are a definite no-no. What's more, 
everybody's expected to be polite and pleasant. In other words, as kids might 
so eloquently put it, it sounds like a real bummer, dude. 
"My students can get jobs that pay more money and have better hours," said one 
local high school employment counselor. " . . . A lot of kids don't want to cut 
their hair or get rid of the color they put in it." Laments park spokesman Bob 
Roth: "They want the hours to fit their schedules. There's a little more of an 
attitude that the 'job should be a convenience for me.' " 
Maybe the Disney people need to reach into their bag of creative tricks and 
inject a dose of relevancy into the old theme park to lure local youth back to 
the job. Nothing radical, mind you. Just a few subtle changes. 
For example, Main Street U.S.A. could be revamped into Wall Street U.S.A., 
complete with a replica of the New York Stock Exchange. Lifelike robots of Ivan 
Boesky, Michael Milken and Carl Icahn could explain the mysteries of junk bonds 
and takeovers. 
The Matterhorn roller coaster could be reshaped into something resembling the 
Prudential Rock. Sleeping Beauty's palace could be subdivided, turned into 
condos or luxury sky boxes. And the rifles at the shooting galleries in 
Frontierland would become Uzis and Mac-10s. 
Sleepy, Grumpy and Dopey should be kept on, but they could be joined by a new, 
hipper ensemble of dwarfs with personas teens can identify with: Lazy, Sloppy, 
Shiftless and Prince. 
And that Mouse. Nuke him. If they must have an animal mascot, at least it 
should be one that symbolizes values held dear by today's adolescent crowd. 
Maybe Spuds McKenzie is available. 
