1 DIES, OTHERS HURT AS WIND TOPPLES 2 CHURCH STEEPLES 
Fierce 70-m.p.h. wind tore through central and eastern Massachusetts on Friday, 
tearing roofs off buildings and killing a woman when a church steeple toppled 
onto her car. 
A second church steeple also was felled by the wind, which accompanied a line 
of thunderstorms that uprooted dozens of trees and utility poles, cutting off 
electricity to thousands of customers in many towns. 
"The city's in quite rough shape. We got one fatality, the car that got crushed 
by the church steeple," said Fitchburg Mayor Jeffrey Bean, who declared a state 
of emergency following the brief storm. 
"It's incredible. I've never seen anything like it before. Debris was just 
blowing by the window," said Rick Gulino, a spokesman for the mayor. 
In Fitchburg, the hardest-hit community, steeples fell from the First Parish 
Unitarian Universalist Church, built in 1837, and the Faith United Church, both 
located along the Upper Common on Main Street, which was flooded by the storm. 
The steeple from the Unitarian church landed on the car, killing Sandra R. 
Cressey, 53. 
Officials at Burbank Hospital said at least eight people were treated for 
injuries stemming from the storm. Most of the injuries were caused by the 
toppled Unitarian church steeple, including injuries to a mother and her three 
children. 
Authorities evacuated 200 people from a 14-story senior citizens high-rise 
because part of the roof came off and the wall was cracked. The roof on the 
Sanitoy factory, which makes toys for children, also was blown off. 
Substantial damage also was reported in nearby communities, including Gardner 
and Leominster, and there was widespread damage in the Boston area before the 
storm swept out to sea. 
The National Weather Service in Boston reported that the winds exceeded 70 
m.p.h., but the storm was not classified as a tornado. 
"We have spoken to people there, meteorologists, who say it's more in the 
nature of a micro-burst, a down-burst, than a tornado," said Gene Auciello, a 
meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Boston. 
"There's no funnel cloud on radar, no eyewitness observation of a funnel 
cloud," he said. "The damage reported, to the upper stories of buildings, is 
more characteristic of a down-burst." 
