DOG FINALLY CAPTURES BOMB-SCARE SUSPECT AFTER LONG STANDOFF 
A Newport Beach man who allegedly said he had a bomb held off 30 police 
officers for four hours late Saturday and early Sunday, despite a tear-gas 
barrage. But when a police dog finally captured him, no bomb was found. 
Frank Musser Johnston, 54, was being held on $10,000 bail in the jail ward of 
United Western Medical Center-Santa Ana on suspicion of making a false report 
of planting a bomb, Newport Beach Lt. Don Chandler said. 
Johnston withstood about 24 plastic tear-gas darts, which were fired into his 
car with a 12-gauge shotgun, a police spokesman said. 
The incident began at 9 p.m. Saturday, when Johnston parked his car in the West 
Cliff Plaza parking lot and allegedly told a passer-by that he had a bomb, 
Chandler said. 
When police arrived five minutes later, Johnston reportedly refused to get out 
of his car and continued to maintain that he had a bomb, Chandler said. 
As Costa Mesa police officers and the Orange County Sheriff's Department bomb 
squad arrived, Newport Beach police evacuated a nearby Hughes Market, sealed 
off the parking lot and tried to talk to Johnston over a loudspeaker. 
The standoff continued until just before midnight, when Johnston started his 
car and tried to leave, but a police sharpshooter stationed on the roof of the 
Balboa Savings building immobilized the car, shooting out a tire and shooting a 
bullet into the engine, Chandler said. 
Refused to Surrender 
Newport Beach police then fired tear gas into Johnston's car, but he still 
refused to surrender. 
Finally, Chandler said, at about 1:15 a.m. Sunday, Johnston left his car and a 
Costa Mesa police dog captured him. 
He was treated at the scene for a dog bite and exposure to tear gas and taken 
to Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach for emergency treatment. Johnston was then 
taken to the jail ward at Western Medical Center, Chandler said. 
Bomb technicians examining his car found clothing and other personal belongings 
but no hazardous device, Chandler said. 
