AT THE GALLERIES / LEAH OLLMAN: MORTALITY AND HUMOR COLLIDE IN WICK WORKS 
Kitsch and commentary both get their due in the recent work of Wick Alexander, 
now on view at the Dietrich Jenny Gallery (660 9th Ave.). 
From black velvet parodies to brightly hued tragedies, Alexander's paintings 
charm, tease and lament. Humor collides with mortality on more than one 
occasion and violence -- to the body, spirit and earth -- thrives in beautiful 
locales. 
Alexander, a local artist and graduate of the UC San Diego Master of Fine Arts 
program, paints with a light touch; his clear, accessible forms evoking aspects 
of illustration, cartoons and folk art. 
Whether taking a pointed view of the U.S. border with Mexico, a satiric stab at 
condos on the fairway or a voyeuristic peek into a gringo's tropical island 
fantasy, Alexander approaches his subjects with a naive charm. He grazes over 
sensitive social issues, but never lets a prescribed agenda override his regard 
for the canvas as visual playground. 
In "La Linea," for instance, Alexander tucks references to illegal border 
crossing and economic inequity into an otherwise quaint survey of the border's 
architectural landmarks. Seen from an elevated viewpoint and spanning a broad 
horizontal canvas, the scene appears at once to be of both epic ambition and 
diminutive scale. 
The Centro Cultural's familiar dome, the bullfighting ring and the ubiquitous 
liquor stores, body shops, bars and clubs define Tijuana, while a dusty field 
and half-completed housing development make up the southern edge of this 
country. An Immigration and Naturalization Service helicopter hovers over the 
border, blind to a pair of figures scampering north beyond the border fence, 
toward the cluster of "Robbing Hood Homes." Just as their passage escapes the 
view of the INS, so do they miss the message of a nearby billboard on which the 
familiar Marlboro man stands beside a barbed wire fence. Across the bottom of 
the sign runs the warning: "The Government Has Determined That Border Crossing 
is Dangerous to Health." 
By lacing the painting's folksy naivete with a pungent social message, 
Alexander himself straddles the border between two genres in an amusing, 
poignant manner. In "Bamboo Hut" and a series of paintings on round, pressed 
wood panels, his subjects are more obscure, but his style is just as immediate 
and playful. 
A row of slim bamboo stalks screens the image in "Bamboo Hut," painted in 
garish colors on black velvet. Looking through the bamboo becomes a mildly 
surreptitious act, especially when the painting's subject becomes clear. In the 
hot orange and screaming green typical of black velvet paintings, Alexander 
lays out the essential ingredients of tropical paradise: sunset, lush foliage 
and coarsely built huts on the water's edge. 
As in "La Linea," however, Alexander undermines the familiar or cliche with 
hints of a less seductive social reality. On one of the water's banks, a 
typical tourist relaxes beside his fishing box and portable barbecue. Between 
his legs looms a tall palm tree; a nude woman clings to the top of the trunk, 
just beneath a cluster of coconuts. On the opposite bank a skeleton sits, 
fishing. 
"Bamboo Hut" reads as a comic, sexually suggestive image, but it can also be 
interpreted as an indictment of Western culture's fantasies about primitivism 
and the enticing conquest of "less civilized" peoples. The presence of the 
skeleton signals the inevitable, ominous end of such pursuits. 
Two of Alexander's paintings on round panels also tickle the senses but follow 
up with a slap. In "Retablo for Lupe," a man operating a forklift begins to 
deposit a tree bedecked with butterfly wings into its human-designated spot of 
earth when the chain holding the tree to the vehicle snaps. The tree threatens 
to crush the gardener standing below, equipped only with a shovel and a 
comic-book expression of fright. 
"My Retablo" depicts a related scene. This time a palm tree is being 
mechanically inserted into a neat square plot when the rig collides with 
overhead electrical wires. Workmen scatter as the wires snap and emit a visible 
"Bzzzzzttt POP." The simple renderings, with their crudely drawn figures and 
cartoon sound effects, convey the situation at a glance and even suggest a 
moral: When humans subvert the natural order, they enter the unpredictable 
world of the absurd, crass and potentially dangerous. Two paintings of golfing 
scenes also indict the artificiality of contemporary urban life, especially our 
twisting of the land to suit practical, profitable motives. 
Alexander dips briefly into the celebration of untrammelled nature in the 
pastel "Orchids and Bromeliads." Elsewhere he pays homage to the tragic life of 
artist Frida Kahlo and wallows in the pure kitsch of black velvet painting. 
In "La Guerra de los Mariachis," Alexander stages a mad festival of cliches, 
both good-humored and crude, in the public square of a Mexican village. Lovers 
kiss in the street, children play in the public fountain, men stagger with open 
bottles, dogs sniff at each other and mariachis play throughout the chaos. A 
devil stands in one doorway, and a skeleton in another, reminders that 
Alexander is always keen to the omens, spirits and shadows that darken even the 
most whimsical parade. 
The show continues through July 1. 
