TOWARD CREATIVITY IN JAPAN; 
'STEVE JOBS OF JAPAN' DISPELS OLD MYTHS 
Don't tell Kazuhiko Nishi that Japanese people aren't creative. 
After all, he's the charismatic Wunderkind -- the "Steve Jobs of Japan" -- who 
dropped out of a prestigious university to become the nation's chief evangelist 
of the personal computer revolution. 
At age 21, in 1977, he started a computer magazine publishing firm. Renamed 
ASCII Corp., it is now Japan's largest software publishing firm. 
At 22, he talked Microsoft Corp. into making him its sole agent in Japan. 
At 23, he persuaded NEC Corp. to let him help develop Japan's first personal 
computer. That year, he also marketed the nation's first packaged software. 
At 26, with the assistance of Microsoft, he designed the world's first 
mass-produced portable computer -- the Radio Shack TRS 80 Model 100. 
At 27, he developed the MSX computer standard, persuading Sony, Matsushita and 
other Japanese electronic giants to adopt it. Four million machines using the 
MSX standard have been sold, although it has not swept the market as initially 
envisioned. 
At 33, Nishi made history again by becoming the youngest corporate president to 
take a Japanese company public. He raised $40 million in Tokyo's 
over-the-counter market. 
ASCII's per-share prices have almost quadrupled to $100 from $26. Annual sales 
have doubled since 1986 to $200 million for the fiscal year ending March, 1990. 
Profits have grown 20%. 
Now at the ripe old age of 34, Nishi is a regarded as a brilliant technologist 
and silver-tongued salesman. He is at work on satellites, semiconductors, 
Hollywood films, an aviation school and all manner of new products, including a 
pocket-sized computer with a split keyboard that folds in three. 
Along the way, he has confounded expectations and proven that creative thought 
and deed are hardly the province of the West. Even the way he talks about 
creativity is, well, creative: 
"There are two types of creativity: the creativity of making zero to one and 
the creativity of making one to 1,000," he said over a white custard dessert at 
ASCII's headquarters in Tokyo. "Making zero to one is called originality. 
Making one to 1,000 is called the art of manufacturing. Japan is thinking about 
the art of manufacturing, plus at the same time it is thinking about making 
originality. 
"It's just a matter of time" before Japan breaks out of its creative binds, 
Nishi added. "Everybody has the consensus of the need to move in that 
direction." 
With such flourish, the baby-faced Nishi has managed to command confidence from 
executives twice his age in a nation that stresses seniority. He has managed to 
mesh a dashing lifestyle of chartered jets, a $20-million art collection and a 
country home with Japan's conservative climate. Nishi says his secret is 
simple. 
"What you need to do is maintain compatibility with existing society. In your 
own company you can be as creative as you want. But when you have to talk to 
the bank, you have to behave like an ordinary Japanese." 
To behave like an "ordinary Japanese" means, for starters, that Nishi drives 
around town in a black company car -- not the Bentley that he ordered 
custom-designed to the same specifications developed for Prince Charles. Still, 
he has occasionally provoked grumbles by coming on too strong, sources said. 
In interviews, Nishi can appear soft-spoken, speaking barely above a whisper at 
times. He can seem disheveled, with a rumpled suit and long hair. But 
associates say that when he springs into action before investors or clients, he 
is spellbinding. 
Microsoft executive Ron Hosogi recalled one particularly tough sell with a 
Japanese electronics firm, which was balking at starting a project with 
Microsoft amid the personal computer slump in 1984. Within 30 minutes, Nishi 
"turned a roomful of skeptics into believers," Hosogi said. 
"He can paint pictures and have people say yes. In a Japanese environment, 
where you usually meet with 15 different levels over a period of weeks, doing 
it in 30 minutes is shocking," he said. 
And Nishi generally delivers on his visions, associates say. 
"He's a genius," said Fumio Otsuka, general manager of information processing 
and electronic systems for Mitsui &amp; Co. "His vision is always correct. So 
everybody trusts Nishi." 
Otsuka said every joint project between ASCII and Mitsui has made money. The 
firms have collaborated repeatedly on such projects as the laptop computer, 
semiconductors, graphics systems and facsimile machines. 
That kind of track record has quieted questions about his youth. 
"Those old-age executives are charmed by Nishi, and they're getting something 
new from him," Otsuka said. "In this kind of new industry, where it's difficult 
to catch up with technological changes, age doesn't make any difference. He 
understands the direction of revolutionary trends." 
Married, with two daughters, Nishi credits an unusually enriched childhood for 
his success. His family founded a girls' secondary school in Kobe, raising 
Nishi in an environment of libraries, music, art and newfangled machines called 
computers. 
After his father went to bed, the 9-year-old would sneak into the study, wrench 
off the computer cover with a screwdriver and pound away on early, rudimentary 
Wang and, later, Hewlett-Packard models. 
Why? He pauses in thought. 
"Because they were there," he concludes. 
By the time he entered Waseda University in Tokyo, he was a computer fanatic. 
His room was always littered with vacuum tubes and electrical wires. 
In 1978, as the personal computer age was dawning, Nishi took a fateful step 
toward what would become ASCII's most celebrated linkup. He made a cold call to 
William Gates, chairman of Microsoft, and ended up as the firm's exclusive 
software distributor in Asia. 
Although the association helped Microsoft gain its present 65% market share for 
operating systems in Japan, the two men had a falling out in 1985 over future 
directions. Nishi wanted to branch into semiconductors, but Gates' interest was 
strictly software. 
"The guy's life is a mess," Gates said then, without elaborating. 
"If I stay in Microsoft, I have to work for Bill Gates," Nishi said. "Here, I 
can work for myself." 
Nishi's vindication came last September. When he took ASCII public, it was 
viewed as a decisive rebound from loss of its most important business partner. 
ASCII opened a U.S. operation in San Jose in April to invest in leading-edge 
technologies, including systems and applications software. Another new venture 
is a satellite communications business. In April, the company set up a joint 
venture with Mitsui &amp; Co. and C. Itoh &amp; Co. to offer a rapid data 
transmission service for stock quotations, supermarket prices, teletexts, still 
pictures and the like. 
Along with new investments in Hollywood, which Nishi would not detail, he is 
continually stretching his vision of ASCII -- and himself -- as mass 
communicators. 
He owns 2,000 compact discs and reads "two or three feet of books" a week from 
his 10,000-volume personal library. He writes commentaries for newspapers. He 
gives speeches. He lectures at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. He is 
constantly interviewed, and in the interviews he is philosophical, colorful and 
unabashedly direct. 
"Everybody perceives me as an ordinary businessman," Nishi said. "I think I am 
quite extraordinary." 
