SKID ROW CULTURAL CENTER FACING CLOSURE 
Supporters of Another Planet, a Skid Row cultural center run by and for the 
homeless that is facing closure, launched a campaign Friday to save the 
operation. 
The center, a converted gas station at the corner of Wall and Boyd streets that 
opened last year, is an eccentrically decorated gathering place and the site of 
poetry readings, video screenings, chess games, jam sessions and other 
activities. It also provides homeless people with storage for belongings and 
two portable toilets. It is drug and alcohol free, organizers say. 
Businessman Eddie Tyler had been sub-leasing the site on a monthly basis to 
Clyde Casey, who runs the center and lives there. Tyler told Casey last month 
that Casey must be out by June 27. 
Tyler owns a wholesale Christmas card distributorship across a narrow alley 
from Another Planet. He said Friday that he served the eviction notices chiefly 
because he wants to use the entire lot on which the center stands for parking. 
Tyler now leases out about 30 parking spots on the lot. 
"This area is very limited in parking and we've lost two major nearby parking 
lots to building construction recently and we need the rest of that lot (for 
parking)," said Tyler, who plans to hire an additional 30 employees next month. 
In addition however, the center attracts a "bad-looking element" to the area 
and has hurt business, Tyler said. Other business people have called him to 
complain, he added. 
Objects collected at Another Planet ("I call it trash, they call it art," Tyler 
said) clutter some of the parking spaces Tyler rents on the lot, making parking 
difficult and sometimes impossible, he said. There have been auto break-ins and 
theft, and the increased influx of homeless people has caused sanitary 
problems, he said. 
"The place stinks to high heaven," Tyler said. "I've been on this corner for 40 
years running a fine business and it's just grown into an unbearable 
situation." 
Tyler has repeatedly asked Casey to improve the situation and asked him to buy 
liability insurance, but always to no avail, he said. 
Casey, who has been out of town for about a month, said in a phone interview 
that he "will wait and see" what happens when he returns Monday before 
commenting on what he intends to do about the eviction. 
The Los Angeles Police Department's Central Division had no knowledge of recent 
complaints about Another Planet. 
Meanwhile, Barbara Frost, an organizer of the homeless who also has been living 
at Another Planet, launched a campaign to save the site Friday. She sees the 
place as the start of a major cultural center for the Skid Row area, one that 
fills a critical need, artistically and socially. 
Robin Wartell, a self-described "ex-addict," agreed. He said Another Planet 
helped him kick drugs. "This is the only drug- and alcohol-free place in the 
area. I stopped off here and it turned my head around." 
Frost, who said she plans to legally fight the eviction, has drafted a petition 
for the cause and is asking for donations. She denied Tyler's charges that the 
center caused parking problems and said that it reduced crime, not heightened 
it. Her ultimate goal is to buy the property. 
"I think we could buy this corner," she said, as about 15 homeless people were 
busy around her, some playing the piano, others playing chess. In nearby alley 
ways littered with trash, others loitered about listlessly. "The (homeless) 
situation is so serious that nothing but extraordinary actions will turn it 
around." 
Scott Kellman, owner of the defunct Wallenboyd Theater across the street from 
Another Planet, had been collecting donations from private individuals to pay 
Casey's rent of $350 a month. It would be "terribly discouraging" to see the 
center closed, he said. "It is one of the finest examples of self-determination 
of the homeless people." 
