CAMBRIDGE SCHOOLS TEACH STUDENTS MEDIATION SKILLS 
It's a long way from clapping the erasers after school as a punishment for bad 
behavior. 
Mediation and negotiation have become watchwords for many U.S. educators. With 
school violence on the rise, teachers are turning to these innovative ways to 
maintain classroom harmony. 
The Cambridge school system has been teaching a pilot class in mediation to a 
portion of its freshmen for several years. The class may soon become a 
requirement throughout the school. Its instructor, John Silva, director of 
safety and security in the Cambridge school system, also runs a mediation 
program that uses both teachers and students as mediators. 
Over the past 3 years, Silva's "Just Agreement Through Mediation" program has 
trained 20 students and 15 teachers to act as mediators in classroom and 
schoolyard clashes at the city's 2,600-student Cambridge Rindge and Latin 
School. 
The mediation program helps by "pulling students out of the hallways, where the 
peer pressure is . . . and giving them an opportunity to sit down and think 
maturely," Silva says. 
Only two out of 180 cases mediated were not resolved to the satisfaction of all 
parties. 
All the cases involved students. The other parties have been other students, 
teachers, administrators, and even parents. Given the school's inner-city 
setting and the 70 nationalities in the student body, Silva says, the program's 
success is remarkable. He credits it to the students' perception that the 
process is fair. Participation is voluntary. 
Tough kids, especially, don't respond well to disciplinary actions, the veteran 
administrator says. Ultimatums are seen as a threat and an opportunity to 
rebel. 
Clarence Gaynor, one of the program's two coordinators, explains that the 
mediation efforts began "in a reaction mode" but have become preventive in 
scope. "We need to unload the extra baggage we bring to school sometimes . . . 
and get back to the business of learning and education," Gaynor says. 
The suspension rate at the Cambridge school has decreased since the mediation 
project began. Although several factors may be involved, Silva and his 
mediators can claim at least partial credit for the reduction in problems. For 
one thing, the mediation program works at resolving conflict before it breaks 
out in violence or disruptions that end in suspension. 
About 30 teachers and administrators from across the country who wanted to 
learn how to use and teach conflict-resolution skills attended a workshop last 
summer sponsored by Boston-area Educators for Social Responsibility (ESR). 
The workshop, run by former teachers William Kreidler and Stephen Weimar, shows 
participants how to enlist students -- from kindergarten to 12th grade -- as 
peacemakers in the classroom. 
Kreidler began teaching in the Boston public schools in 1974, "a banner year 
for conflict." That was the year that Boston schools were desegregated, and 
racial tension was at its height. He says, "I had to deal with conflict in 
order to get to the reading and the writing and the math." 
What began as survival skills for himself grew when he realized how eager his 
second-graders were to learn peacemaking skills -- and how easily they applied 
them. Kreidler says peacemaking skills "give kids a framework to look at their 
community and even international conflicts" in an objective way. 
The techniques aim to reduce the number of arguments and fights in school by 
encouraging children to see things from the other kid's point of view, then to 
resolve the disputes that do break out through negotiation or mediation. 
Kreidler uses simple activities that can be taken back to the classroom. At one 
workshop two teachers role-played a dispute between a mother and her 
11-year-old son. 
To hoots and howls from the rest of the group, "Tom" scowled and avoided eye 
contact with his mother, while "Mom" defended her position to the hilt with a 
mother-knows-best attitude. Eventually a compromise was reached, giving "Tom" a 
raise in his allowance if he gave "Mom" some additional help and did all his 
chores regularly. 
"The field of conflict resolution cuts across the political spectrum," 
attracting teachers of all ages and teaching styles, Kreidler says. In the past 
year, the Boston ESR chapter, staffed primarily by full-time teachers, has 
given about 50 teacher workshops in conflict-resolution theory. The feedback 
has been excellent, he says. 
Eva Braz, a sophomore at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, took the school's 
mediation class last year. Then she and her classmates were invited to become 
school mediators. Half a dozen did. She has since mediated four disputes. 
Eva says that when students are given a choice between suspension and 
mediation, "all of them want to go to mediation; no one wants to get 
suspended." 
But disputants also know, she says, that "if we don't get an agreement or if 
they don't want to talk, we send them back to the house masters," where they 
are encouraged to try again to reach a mediated agreement. If they do not, they 
face suspension. 
Eva says role-playing in mediation class was helpful. She learned to explain 
the rules of mediation, ask questions, and find out what the individuals 
involved want to get out of the mediation session: "Do you want to be friends, 
or just say 'hi' in the hallway, or not speak to one another?" she asks 
participants at the beginning of each session. 
Her involvement in the mediation program has paid off in other ways, too. 
"Sometimes when I have problems myself, I think about it. It helps me out, 
too." 
