HIGH COURT LETS RELIGIOUS CLUBS MEET IN SCHOOLS 
The Supreme Court Monday opened the doors of public high schools to prayer and 
Bible reading, ruling that secondary schools that allow extracurricular 
activities on campus must also permit religious students to meet for prayer. 
On an 8-1 vote, the court said that religious clubs may meet as long as the 
groups are student-sponsored. 
Lawyers for Christian evangelicals said that the ruling will stop 
discrimination against religious students in the public schools. But critics 
said that it will open the school doors to everything from the Ku Klux Klan to 
the Young Communists League, because the law that the ruling upheld also 
forbids discrimination against groups based on their political or philosophical 
views. 
Nearly three decades ago, the high court set off a national furor by forbidding 
official prayer and school-sponsored Bible readings. Despite the uproar, 
however, the court has held firm to the view that the Constitution prohibits 
the government from injecting religion into the public schools. Just three 
years ago, the justices knocked down a Louisiana law that required teachers to 
give equal time to the teaching of evolution and "creation science," calling 
the latter a religious doctrine in thin disguise. 
But conservatives and Christian legal activists have complained that the 
doctrine of "separation of church and state" had been extended so far that it 
had turned into hostility toward religion. In fact, many school officials 
interpreted the court's decision against school-sponsored prayer as a ban on 
all religious activities on school grounds. 
Justice Department attorneys under the Ronald Reagan and Bush administrations 
challenged that interpretation, saying that religious students should have the 
same rights as others to meet on campus. 
On Monday, the high court agreed, ruling that the Constitution does not require 
that the schools be off-limits to religion. 
"There is a crucial difference between government speech endorsing religion, 
which the establishment clause (of the First Amendment) forbids, and private 
speech endorsing religion," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said for the court. 
Allowing students to meet on campus and discuss religion is constitutional, 
O'Connor said, because it does not amount to "state sponsorship of religion." 
If a high school allows meetings of groups such as the chess or the stamp club, 
whose activities are "not directly related to" the curriculum, it must also 
allow religious groups to meet there, O'Connor said. 
In Los Angeles, school district attorney Richard Mason said the Los Angeles 
Unified School District -- the nation's second largest school system -- will 
reevaluate its policy of forbidding school religious clubs, which has been 
based on a California appeals court decision that precludes school-sanctioned 
religious activities. 
"Students have requested those kinds of activities in the past, but have been 
discouraged based on our understanding of what the law required us to do," 
Mason said. 
"This decision will cause us to review our policies to determine whether 
greater latitude should be given to religious clubs. I suspect the practice 
will have to be changed." 
Lawyers for the religious students, delighted with the court decision, 
predicted that prayer clubs will spring up on high school campuses nationwide. 
"This decision sends a loud and clear message that religious speech on school 
campuses is protected and that public school officials can't stand in the way," 
said Atlanta lawyer Jay Alan Sekulow, general counsel for Christian Advocates 
Serving Evangelism, who represented the students in this case. 
But an array of religious and civil liberties groups said that the ruling will 
result in students being pressured to join religious groups. 
"Undoubtedly, the evangelicals will try to put one of these clubs into every 
school in the country, and they have made clear the purpose will be to spread 
the good news of the Gospel. I think students will be pressured by their peers 
to join these groups," said Marc Stern, a lawyer for the American Jewish 
Congress, who represented a Nebraska school board in this case. 
"This decision will also allow Louis Farrakan and David Duke to organize groups 
at school," Stern added. 
Justice John Paul Stevens, the lone dissenter, said that the ruling "creates a 
constitutional obligation to allow student members of the Ku Klux Klan or the 
Communist Party to have access to school facilities." 
But O'Connor noted that the federal law allows school authorities to ban 
disruptive groups. 
This case (Board of Education vs. Mergens, 88-1597) arose in 1985, when Bridget 
Mergens and several other students at a high school in Omaha, Neb., told their 
principal that they wanted to form a Christian club to meet after school. 
The year before, Congress had enacted the Equal Access Act, which said that 
public secondary schools that allow extracurricular student clubs may not 
"discriminate" against some clubs because of their members' "religious, 
political (or) philosophical" views. 
Nevertheless, the principal, backed by the school board, rejected the request. 
He said that all the school clubs were "curricular," so the federal law did not 
apply. Secondly, he contended that allowing a religious club to meet on campus 
would violate the First Amendment's ban on the "establishment of religion" by 
the government. 
The Supreme Court rejected both arguments Monday. 
In recent years, the more conservative court has backed away from the view that 
the First Amendment demands a "separation of church and state." As long as the 
government does not "endorse" or "advance" a religion, it does not violate the 
First Amendment, the court has said. 
The ruling on the constitutionality of the Equal Access Act left open the 
question of whether prayer groups could operate in elementary schools, because 
the act applies only to secondary schools. 
In addition to deciding the constitutional question, the court defined one of 
the act's key terms -- "non-curriculum-related student group" -- in a way that 
applies the law to nearly every high school. 
O'Connor's ruling said that if French is taught in a high school, a French club 
would be a curricular club. But, if chess and stamp collecting are not taught 
as subjects, those clubs are "non-curriculum" groups. Once the school allows 
any of those clubs to meet, she said, it must open the door to all clubs 
without regard to their religious, political or philosophical views. 
The ruling leaves high school officials with three choices, said August 
Steinhilber, general counsel for the National School Boards Assn. They may 
eliminate all student clubs. They may allow only clubs that are tied directly 
to the curriculum. Or they must open their doors to all clubs, he said. 
"The first real fight will be over abortion," he said. "Planned Parenthood has 
wanted to have chapters in the schools. If they do, the right-to-life groups 
will want to come in, too." 
Justices Thurgood Marshall and William J. Brennan concurred in the outcome of 
the Westside High School case but expressed serious reservations. 
In another case decided Monday, the court ruled unanimously that nuclear 
"whistle-blowers" who are disciplined by their employers may sue for damages in 
a state court, in addition to filing claims under a 1974 federal law that 
protects whistle-blowers (English vs. General Electric Co., 89-152). 
DECEPTION PERMITTED -- Police may trick a crime suspect into confessing, the 
Supreme Court rules. A21 
