ELECTIONS SCHOOL TAX; 
ABSENTEE BALLOTS WILL DETERMINE FATE OF PARCEL LEVY; 
BEVERLY HILLS: THE MEASURE IS 21 VOTES SHORT OF APPROVAL. ABOUT 100 ABSENTEE 
VOTES ARE UNCOUNTED. 
After months of campaigning and an eleventh-hour, get-out-the-vote push, 
proponents of a schools tax in Beverly Hills found that gratification -- or 
even depression -- doesn't come easily. 
A parcel tax measure on Tuesday's ballot, which would raise $4.5 million for 
the Beverly Hills Unified School District, has so far garnered 66.42% of the 
votes, short of the two-thirds needed for passage. But a number of absentee 
ballots remain to be counted. 
Those ballots will be counted during a canvass, which begins today and will 
likely be finished by June 26, said Henrietta Willis, spokeswoman with the Los 
Angeles County registrar-recorder. It is uncertain when the election results 
will be known because "there's no way of determining if (an absentee ballot) is 
a ballot for Beverly Hills, or Malibu, or whatever." 
County elections officials have told the Beverly Hills city clerk that about 
100 Beverly Hills absentee ballots have not been counted, the city clerk's 
office said Wednesday afternoon. 
Tax proponents were 21 votes shy of the magic number. According to the 
semiofficial returns, 5855 votes for the tax had been counted, with 2959 votes 
against. 
"You can't cry, and you can't celebrate," Peter Tomarken, husband of school 
board member Dana Tomarken, said early Wednesday at the Yes on Schools 
Committee headquarters. The committee has campaigned for the tax since March. 
Around 1 a.m. Wednesday, about 60 weary supporters, including Mayor Allan L. 
Alexander, district administrators, union leaders and a dozen high school 
students, waited at the headquarters, a storefront office that was formerly 
used as a toddlers gymnasium. They had stopped nibbling at the giant "Hooray 
for Volunteers"-inscribed cake and were instead staring blankly at the incoming 
results posted on the wall. 
"It's like expecting a baby," parent Faye Refnick said. 
Bernard Nebenzahl, co-chairman of the Yes on Schools Committee, told the crowd 
at 1:30 a.m. to go home, saying "it's conjecture as to where we'll be" since 
some absentee ballots remained uncounted. In an interview later, he said it is 
unfortunate that with the two-thirds margin needed, "a minority of viewpoint 
can abuse the will of a majority of a community." 
Earlier in the evening, the mood was festive, with people entering a $25 
betting pool and children huddling on the floor doing their homework. Some 
students had risen at 6 a.m., going out before school to hang personalized 
notices on supporters' doors reminding them to vote. Throughout the day, 
volunteers checked the polls, visited and phoned supporters who had not yet 
voted, and offered baby-sitting and rides to polling sites. Some had taken the 
day off from work to devote themselves to the last-minute campaigning. 
"If it should really not pass, I don't think there's anything more we could've 
done," said third-grade teacher Irene Easton, who had come in after school to 
call supporters. 
The tax would be levied on each of the commercial and residential parcels of 
land in the city for the next five years. Parcels would be assessed between 
$250 and $750 annually, depending on their size and use. 
Passage would mean that teachers will get a 3% pay raise for the coming school 
year that was negotiated during the teachers strike last fall but was made 
contingent on the parcel tax's success. Passage would also mean that 48 
teachers, nurses, counselors and librarians, and dozens of teaching assistants 
who have been issued layoff notices will be welcomed back. 
Steve Taylor, a high school history teacher and sports coach who faces layoff, 
said he has been offered a job in another school district but would like to 
stay in Beverly Hills. "The kids are great," he said. Frustrating, however, is 
the fact that since he and most of the other teachers cannot afford to live in 
Beverly Hills, "(we) can't even vote in the (the election)." 
But "I've got to be optimistic," he said late Tuesday. "My wife and daughter 
are at home, waiting to see what daddy will be doing tomorrow." 
Anti-tax leader Sherman Kulick said Wednesday that he had expected the tax to 
definitively lose, and blamed the close race on a relatively low turnout of 
Republicans. "A lot of conservative (voters), which I imagine are on our side, 
didn't go to the polls because there was no excitement in one party. So the 
Democratic Party, which historically is very liberal . . . got (its) turnout," 
he said. About 45% of Beverly Hills' registered voters turned out to vote on 
the measure. 
He also noted that the Yes on Schools Committee vastly outspent his group, the 
Beverly Hills Citizens for Cost-Effective Quality Education. The Yes Committee 
will spend about $157,000 total, according to campaign consultant Kim Karie, 
which amounts to about $27 for each yes vote thus far. The all-out campaign 
included marches, lawn signs, glossy leaflets and mailers sent to tenants, 
alumni and other specific categories of people. 
Kulick said his organization spent about $500, or about 17 cents per no vote. 
"I'm just hoping money doesn't buy this election," he said. "It's disgraceful, 
the amount of money they spent on this campaign." 
Tax opponents ran a low-key campaign, with not even an election-night 
gathering. Photocopies of hand-lettered flyers broadcast their platform of tax 
revolt and back-to-basics in education. Kulick argued that the district simply 
has too many frill courses and spends beyond its means. 
Opponents also pointed out that Beverly Hills spends $6,000 per pupil annually, 
more than any other district in Los Angeles County. School districts in other 
affluent communities such as San Marino and La Canada Flintridge spend less per 
student, yet their students score as well or better than Beverly Hills students 
on standardized tests, they noted. 
Proponents of the tax, however, argued that Beverly Hills has smaller classes 
and more Advanced Placement courses and specialist teachers than other 
districts. The variety and depth of the offerings is what draws many parents to 
the city, they said. 
Their hefty campaign chest, they said, was needed to get their message out and 
to battle the odds against them. Statewide, school parcel tax elections have 
had only a 37% success rate. Beverly Hills has a large contingent of residents 
with no school-age children, while many of the parents -- who would likely 
favor the tax -- are recent immigrants and ineligible to vote. 
Beverly Hills' last parcel tax attempt, in 1987, failed. The proposal for a 
flat-rate tax of $270 per parcel was approved by 59% of the voters, short of 
the two-thirds needed. 
"If the city of Beverly Hills won't pay $300 or $750 for education, it's 
setting a horrible precedent for the state of California," sophomore Gina 
Balian said early Wednesday at the Yes on Schools office. "If Beverly Hills 
can't do it, there's something wrong with our society." 
"I'll be real disappointed in a community that values cars and clothes, and not 
their children and education," parent Maxine Barens said. Rona Leuin, a parent 
and 1967 graduate of Beverly Hills High School, tried to cheer up another 
parent. "It ain't over till it's over," she said. "We remember Truman and 
Dewey, even though we weren't alive then." 
* PRIMARY RESULTS: J8 
