FLUOR CORP. AWARDED $6-BILLION SAUDI PACT 
Fluor Daniel, the engineering and construction arm of Fluor Corp., Wednesday 
landed what appears to be the largest contract in Fluor's 78-year history -- 
estimated by sources to be worth $6 billion -- to oversee expansion of 
petroleum facilities for Saudi Arabia. 
Fluor Chief Executive Les McCraw called the pact "prospectively, the most 
significant project we've had in over a decade." 
The contract, which will run five to nine years, is expected to provide a major 
boost in the continuing revitalization of Fluor, Orange County's largest public 
company. The firm, which was badly hurt early in the 1980s by the collapse of 
the oil industry, has staged an impressive turnaround in the last three years. 
The deal calls Fluor Daniel's hydrocarbon division to oversee expansion of 
Saudi onshore and offshore oil and gas facilities, including natural gas 
plants, pipelines, production facilities and offshore platforms. The work is 
part of a multibillion-dollar drive by Saudi Arabia to boost its oil production 
to replace slackening worldwide output. 
The contract is not expected to create a significant number of new jobs at 
Fluor, which has 20,000 employees worldwide and is one of the largest employers 
in Orange County. But the company, which has about 100 engineers in Saudi 
Arabia, will eventually relocate about 300 other technicians there from other 
locales, McCraw said. 
In landing the huge contract, Fluor beat five major competitors: Bechtel Corp. 
of San Francisco, Parsons Engineering of Pasadena, Dresser Industries of Dallas 
and Foster Wheeler Corp. and Lummis Crest Inc., both based in New Jersey, 
analysts said. 
McCraw would not comment on the value of the contract, saying that the total is 
not known exactly because the work will be released by Saudi Aramco, the Saudi 
government-owned oil company, in several phases. 
But analysts valued the deal at more than $6 billion, making it the largest 
deal Fluor has ever landed in dollar terms and one of the most important since 
the late 1970s. 
Fluor's success was not surprising because of its past ties to Saudi Aramco, 
analysts said. 
While trading in Fluor's common stock was heavy, with 621,700 shares changing 
hands, the price surge was only moderate. The stock closed trading on the New 
York Stock Exchange at $46.625 a share, up 87.5 cents a share. 
Fluor, founded in Santa Ana in 1912, has emerged as one of the nation's major 
international construction and engineering firms in the last three decades. But 
it was hit hard in the oil crash of the early '80s, when oil prices fell from 
near $30 a barrel to less than $10 a barrel. Fluor has been rebuilding and 
refocusing ever since. 
As part of the restructuring, Fluor ditched its dependence on oil-related 
projects -- which accounted for up to 85% of its business in the late 1970s -- 
and began aggressively seeking industrial and government work as well. 
Fluor Daniel's hydrocarbon unit now accounts for only about 30% of the 
company's total revenue, McCraw said. This will increase with the Saudi Aramco 
contract, "but it will have a lesser effect in the current fiscal year and 
become more significant part of our backlog in subsequent years." 
Fluor's backlog of work -- a major measurement of an engineering and 
construction firm's business -- is now about $9 billion, up from $8.4 billion 
at the end of fiscal 1989. The company's backlog peaked at $16.3 billion in 
1981. 
McCraw said that while the percentage of oil-related business at Fluor Daniel 
will grow because of the Saudi Aramco contract, Fluor will not repeat its 
earlier errors. The company's dependence on the oil industry led to a 
$633.3-million loss in fiscal 1985. 
Employment plunged from a high of 44,000 in 1981 to 14,000 in 1987. It 
rebounded to a current level of 20,000 after a 1986 restructuring that led to 
Fluor Daniel's creation. 
In fiscal 1989, which ended Oct. 31, Fluor reported net income of $108.5 
million, nearly double the $56.4 million it reported in fiscal 1988. Its gross 
revenue last year was $6.2 billion, in contrast with $5.1 billion the year 
before. 
In the first six months of its 1990 fiscal year, Fluor said, net income was 
$66.2 million, up 45% from the year-earlier $45.5 million, while revenue of 
$3.7 billion was up 23% from $3 billion in the first half of its fiscal 1989. 
The company's largest previous contract, a management agreement to oversee a 
$5-billion natural gas development program in 1976-82, was also in Saudi 
Arabia. In the 1980s its largest job was building a $1-billion copper mine in 
Chile. 
Fluor, which maintained a major business relationship with Saudi Arabia in the 
1970s and at one time was involved in more that $10 billion in contracts there, 
was one of six U.S. companies asked to bid on the contract, according to 
Herbert E. Hart, an analyst with the San Francisco investment banking firm of 
S.G. Warburg. 
The contract Fluor won is the biggest of three related agreements that together 
could represent $15 billion in work, Hart said. Fluor apparently had a leg up 
on its competitors for the program management pact because of its longstanding 
presence in Saudi Arabia. 
"We stayed there as a company and maintained our presence there, even after the 
big oil work ended" in the early 1980s, said McCraw, noting that Fluor helped 
to build the Saudi state university and did commercial engineering and 
construction jobs all through the 1980s. 
"We were there," he said, "so it was only natural for them to ask us for a 
proposal. They asked others also." 
Hart agreed that Fluor has always had a good relationship with Saudi Aramco and 
had a good reputation for its engineering and construction work in Saudi 
Arabia: "There will be a lot of subcontracts that will be let to non-U.S. 
companies as part of all this, and it is interesting that the Saudis only 
wanted U.S. companies for the three prime contracts." 
Fluor Daniel's contract calls for it to act as overall program manager for 
expansion of onshore and offshore oil and gas facilities and to pull Saudi 
Aramco's northern onshore and offshore oil and gas plants out of mothballs. 
The northern Saudi facilities were shut down in the early 1980s, when 
overproduction caused the price of oil to collapse. At the time, Saudi Arabia 
was producing up to 30 million barrels of crude a day. 
Hart said the Saudi government has made it known in the industry that it would 
like to get back up to 10 million barrels from current production levels of 
about 5.7 million barrels a day. 
Production, meanwhile, continues to fall in the United States and Soviet Union. 
The Saudis have also reported several recent discoveries of light, low-sulfur 
crude oil. If that represents a significant oil field rather than several small 
and undevelopable ones, Hart said, the Saudis will probably want new production 
and refining facilities to be built to handle the high-priced and highly 
sought-after product. 
Work on the Fluor Daniel contract will begin in July, McCraw said, and will be 
handled primarily out of Fluor offices in Al Khobar, Saudi Arabia, and in 
Houston. 
FLUOR CORP. AT A GLANCE 
Location: Irvine. 
Business: Engineering, construction, maintenance and technical services. 
Main subsidiary: Fluor Daniel Inc. 
Top executives: Chairman David S. Tappan Jr., Vice Chairman and Chief Executive 
Les McCraw, President Vincent L. Kontney 
Employees: 20,000. 
1989 revenues: $6.2 billion. 
1989 net income: $108.5 million. 
Stock exchange: New York. 
Stock price: $46.625. 
Recent events: Fluor Daniel on Wednesday won a major contract to oversee what 
analysts say could be a $6-billion expansion and refurbishing of Saudi Arabia's 
major oil production and refining facilities. 
Source: Fluor Corp. 
FLUOR CONTRACTS IN 1990 
Fluor Corp. has announced more than 20 new contracts this year. The largest is 
a $6-billion contract to oversee oil-related plant expansions and projects for 
Saudi Arabia. 
Client: Saudi Aramco 
Service: Manage petroleum-related expansions and projects 
Amount: $6 billion 1 
Client: Arco Alaska Inc. 2 
Service: Engineering, technical services 
Amount: $17 million 
Client: Fort Dodge Laboratories 2 
Service: Veterinary products manufacturing facilities 
Amount: $8 million 
Client: Big Rivers Electric Corp. 2 
Service: Maintenance for coal-fired generating units 
Amount: $5 million 
Client: Navajo Refining Co. 
Service: Gasoline production unit 
Amount: $19 million 
Client: South Carolina Electric &amp; Gas Co. 2 
Service: Nuclear power station services 
Amount: NA 
Client: Union Carbide subsidiaries 2 
Service: Ethylene oxide plant construction 
Amount: NA 
Client: National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Service: Johnson Space Center construction 
Amount: $27 million 
Client: TU Electric 
Service: Maintenance contract renewal 
Amount: NA 
Client: Pillsbury Inc. 2 
Service: Food processing and distribution plant expansion 
Amount: NA 
Client: Cape Industries 
Service: Chemical manufacturing plant improvement 
Amount: $24 million 
Client: Augusta Newsprint Co. 
Service: Recycling plant addition 
Amount: $23 million 
Client: Sun Refining and Marketing 
Service: Contaminant removal system 
Amount: NA 
Client: Government of Thailand 
Service: Natural gas pipeline expansion 
Amount: NA 
Client: Royal Dutch Shell Co. 
Service: Petrochemical plant construction 
Amount: NA 
Client: Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corp. 
Service: Automobile factory addition 
Amount: NA 
Client: Alcan Aluminum Ltd. of Montreal 
Service: Aluminum sheet-rolling plant modernization 
Amount: $120 million 
Client: Amoco Corp. 
Service: Natural gas processing plant construction 
Amount: $80 million 
Client: Intercontinental Energy Corp. 2 
Service: Carbon dioxide production facility 
Amount: $37 million 
Client: Mannesmann Anlagenbau 
Service: Oil pipeline expansion 
Amount: NA 
Client: DuPont Canada 
Service: Hydrogen peroxide manufacturing plant 
Amount: $100 million 
Client: Procter &amp; Gamble Inc. 
Service: Capital improvement and renovation 
Amount: NA 
Client: Stennis Space Center 
Service: Rocket engine component test facility 
Amount: $17 million 
1 Estimated value 
2 Two separate contracts 
Source: Fluor Corp. 
