HOLLYWOOD SIGN HAS ITS MONEY RETURNED 
The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce has restored $46,529 to a trust fund set up 
to maintain the landmark Hollywood Sign, acknowledging that the money was used 
improperly to cover the chamber's own operating expenses. 
"What happened should not have happened, and by taking this action we hope to 
wipe the slate clean," said Larry Kaplan, the chamber's president and chief 
executive officer. 
However, Kaplan said the chamber's executive board had not decided whether to 
repay an estimated $45,000 in interest forfeited by the Hollywood Sign Trust 
during the 10 years that money from the trust was on loan to the chamber. 
"That's something we're having our lawyers and accountants look into, and we 
don't expect to reach a final decision on that for another couple of weeks," he 
said. 
Although he said the chamber borrowed $53,158 from the trust fund in 1979 and 
1981, Kaplan said the $46,529 repayment, made last Friday, "reflects the fact 
that the trust also owed the chamber some money." 
Meanwhile, community activists critical of the chamber's handling of the 
transaction called for the interest to be repaid immediately, and said they 
intend to ask the state attorney general's office to conduct an audit of the 
chamber's finances. 
"I was shocked to read they had used the money from the trust for their own 
purposes, and I find it unbelievable that they would now hesitate to repay the 
interest," said Ed Cohan, a lawyer representing three homeowner groups at odds 
with the chamber over the sign. "I'd like to know who else can borrow money 
interest-free." 
Last month, The Times disclosed that of $122,166 in assets reported by chamber 
officials last year as belonging to the trust fund, $53,158 had been on loan to 
the chamber for at least five years. 
The famous sign atop Mt. Lee is under the jurisdiction of the Los Angeles 
Department of Recreation and Parks. But by agreement with the city, the chamber 
has been responsible for its upkeep since 1978, after raising nearly $300,000 
to save it from demolition. 
The trust fund was established in 1978 as part of the fund-raising effort. 
About $214,000 of the almost $300,000 placed in the fund was spent that year to 
rebuild the sign. The rest was to be held in the trust fund to maintain the 
sign. 
Under terms of the trust's tax-exempt status, chamber officials agreed that the 
funds were to be used exclusively for the maintenance of the sign, and that the 
trust was "not to be affiliated with or controlled by the Hollywood Chamber of 
Commerce or any other organization." 
$600 Spent on Sign 
However, federal and state records showed that as of the most recent filing 
period, ending last June, the trust had spent only about $600 for maintenance 
of the sign since the fund was created, and more than $3,300 on bank and 
accounting fees. 
In the wake of the latest developments, a Recreation and Parks official said 
this week his agency may want to "take another look" at its informal 
arrangement with the chamber over the sign's management. 
"From what's happened, I think a better form of documentation is needed," said 
Assistant General Manager Sheldon Jensen. 
"What we have now should probably be replaced with a binding agreement that 
clearly spells out what our responsibilities are, what theirs are, where the 
revenues come from, where they go and who authorizes them, those kinds of 
things," he said. 
Kaplan confirmed earlier reports that the money borrowed from the fund was used 
to cover the chamber's operating expenses. 
"This is a dynamic, growing organization, but it hasn't always been that way. 
There have been some lean times, and the money was apparently used to get the 
chamber through some of those lean times," he said. 
'Nothing Sinister' 
Saying he was "not going to apologize for things that happened in the past," 
Kaplan -- a former chief of staff to City Councilman Michael Woo who replaced 
Bill Welsh as head of the chamber last month -- insisted there was "nothing 
sinister" about the transactions. 
"It's not a question of malfeasance on anyone's part. It's more a case of 
admittedly, to some extent, sloppy practices," he said. 
Although federal tax records indicated that the trust fund loaned $53,158 to 
the chamber in 1984, an accountant for the chamber said that the money was 
actually borrowed in two increments several years earlier. 
