NEW LEAGUE MAKES HIT WITH PLAYERS 
Bob Anderson and Tim Ammentorp heard the voices at the about the same time last 
winter. 
There were hundreds of high school baseball players in the South Bay area who 
needed a place to play in the summer. 
If you build the league, they will come . . . 
So Anderson and Ammentorp organized a baseball league and called it the South 
Bay Summer League. 
And the players came. In droves. 
"At first it started out as kind of a word-of-mouth thing," said Anderson, the 
coach at Bishop Montgomery High. "We called a few guys up on the phone to see 
if they liked the idea." 
They did. Eight South Bay high school coaches -- including Ammentorp, who 
coaches at Redondo -- responded by entering teams of returning players. No 
graduated seniors would be eligible to play. 
Mira Costa entered. So did North and West Torrance, Westchester and Chadwick 
School. Miraleste entered but withdrew because of conflicts with summer 
football passing leagues. 
It has gotten to the point that Anderson, who secured umpires and insurance for 
the league and drew up schedules, has had to turn down some schools -- 
including Santa Monica. 
"We almost got too big," Anderson said. 
Roughly modeled after a Culver City league that shut down last summer, the 
league gives middle-echelon players -- those who don't receive invitations to 
play for Connie Mack teams in San Pedro and Long Beach -- an opportunity to get 
in some summer action with teammates from the same school. 
"Most of the coaches want to develop next year's teams," Anderson said. "They 
want to know who is going to be able to fill the spots left by the graduating 
seniors." 
As in American Legion baseball, the teams are aligned by school. But many 
schools are turned away by American Legion for lack of space, so the new league 
gives those schools some summer league experience. 
And unlike American Legion, no graduated seniors or college freshmen are 
allowed to play. 
For several years, El Segundo Coach John Stevenson has operated two American 
Legion teams -- one for top-notch competition and one for youth development. 
Torrance, South Torrance, Rolling Hills, Palos Verdes, and St. Bernard also run 
legion teams. 
With the new South Bay Summer League, things are a lot less crowded around 
American Legion. 
"It's a chance for us to get in some games against the teams in the area 
without facing stacked teams," Ammentorp said. "This way we can develop our 
younger guys without having them being overpowered by incredible pitching. Plus 
there are a lot of things that come up in ballgames that you can't anticipate 
on the practice field." 
There is one exception to the no-seniors rule. When Miraleste withdrew from the 
eight-team league, Anderson accepted a free-lance team called the South Bay 
Dodgers to fill the spot. 
The Dodgers, coached by former Bishop Montgomery assistant Pop Ivanovsky, 
appear to be the class of the league with their mix of high school players and 
graduates. 
"They're one of the premier teams in the league, obviously," Anderson said. 
Ivanovsky, a private batting instructor, has conducted baseball camps and 
clinics at his hitting school at Lunada Bay in Palos Verdes for five years. 
"We've got a bunch of kids either in or out of high school who weren't playing 
anywhere else," Ivanovsky said. "It's kind of a Mutt and Jeff team." 
The Dodgers have two members of Anderson's 1990 Bishop Montgomery team: 
outfielder Erik Geierman and All-Angelus League shortstop Curtis Bowman. 
The team doesn't have a home field yet, but it does have Brett Campbell, a 
15-year-old third baseman who hit .767 for Palos Verdes' freshman team this 
season. 
"He's hitting the ball like a man already," Ivanovsky said. 
Ivanovsky's lineup also features Harbor College first baseman Erik Russell, 
former Redondo second baseman Chris Townsend and Inglewood left fielder Kyle 
Jackson, who will attend UC Irvine next year on a partial scholarship. 
"The Dodgers are the only team in the league like that," Anderson said. "You 
can only get better by playing against better players." 
So far the Dodgers are 3-0. They defeated West Torrance, 17-7, knocked off 
Bishop Montgomery, 15-10, and beat Redondo, 7-0, Tuesday on a two-hitter by 
Bowman, who hadn't pitched in a couple of years but struck out 10 batters. 
The league also features Mira Costa right-handed ace Jason Garner, who led the 
Mustangs into the Southern Section playoffs as a junior, West Torrance pitcher 
Stefan Wilson, and Redondo right-handers Frank Bignami and Akash Sehgal. 
The league cost about $450 in set-up funds. Each team will play a 17-game 
schedule, all mid-week games to avoid conflicts with American Legion for fields 
and umpires. 
Anderson also has scheduled an eight-team tournament for the end of the season 
for Redondo and Torrance Park. Each team will be guaranteed at least three 
games in the round-robin tournament. 
Last summer, Anderson was busy coaching an academic all-star team from 
California in the Apeldoorn-European Baseball Series in the Netherlands. 
Anderson's Californians went 9-1 in the tourney en route to the championship. 
This summer, the South Bay Summer League is only one of Anderson's "19 or so 
summer projects." 
He is also busy laying sod, remodeling his Manhattan Beach home and turning his 
office into a baby's bedroom. Anderson and his wife, Melanie, expect their 
first child in September. 
So Anderson doesn't have time to coach Bishop's team. He has left that task to 
his No. 1 assistant, Rudy Garbalosa. 
His involvement with the new league is limited to scheduling and compiling 
scores and standings. 
"Right now, the league basically runs itself, to be honest," Anderson said. "We 
just set it up and let 'em play." 
