SACRAMENTO FILE: ASSEMBLY WILL BROADCAST FLOOR SESSIONS ON CABLE TV 
It probably won't supplant "America's Funniest Home Videos," but the Assembly 
is gearing up to begin statewide television broadcasts of its floor sessions as 
early as August. 
The lower house TV shows will be patterned after congressional coverage 
provided by C-Span, which cable viewers across the country can watch daily. 
"We have essentially isolated ourselves from the general public," said 
Assemblyman Sam Farr (D-Carmel), who spearheaded the plan, now in the dry-run 
stage. "This gives the people more access to state government." 
The television idea has the blessing of Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San 
Francisco). 
Brown envisions televising gavel-to-gavel coverage of floor sessions, important 
committee meetings and press conferences. 
The Senate also is considering televising its sessions but is moving more 
slowly than the lower house. 
GOVERNOR 
Will host a national governor's task force meeting on excellence in the 
workplace in Sacramento on Monday and Tuesday. Will attend a dedication of the 
Pelican Bay state prison in Crescent City on Thursday. 
ASSEMBLY 
Floor Action 
Medflies: Passed and sent to the governor on a 74-0 vote a bill (SB 1754) by 
Sen. Ruben Ayala (D-Chino) to make it a felony instead of a misdemeanor to 
smuggle Medflies into California. 
Gangs: Passed and sent to the Senate on a 58-9 vote a bill (AB 3595) by 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) to extend until Jan. 1, 1994, a 
$1-million-a-year Los Angeles County grant program designed to help inner-city 
youth stay out of gangs. 
Child Poisonings: Passed and sent to the Senate on a 42-17 vote a bill (AB 
4160) by Katz to require highly toxic household products that could 
accidentally poison children to include bittering agents or child-proof caps. 
SENATE 
Floor Action 
X-Rated Magazines: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 29-7 vote a bill (SB 
1962) by Ayala to prohibit the sale of pornographic printed materials from news 
racks that aren't supervised by adults. 
Housing Bonds: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 33-1 vote a bill (SB 2226) 
by President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) to place a $165-million 
housing bond issue on the November general election ballot. 
Bill Introductions 
High School Sports: SCR 18 by Sen. Don Rogers (R-Bakersfield) requests the 
state Department of Education to develop a form for use by high schools to 
report to the Legislature the annual number of sports injuries and insurance 
premiums paid by school districts. 
Miscellany 
New Press Aide: Assembly Speaker Brown has hired William Reese, former Los 
Angeles bureau chief of Newsweek magazine, to be his new director of 
communications. Reese, who also used to work for the Riverside Press 
Enterprise, will be paid $82,000 per year. 
