SURVIVORS TELL HOW REBELS KILLED 100 SRI LANKA POLICE 
He was blindfolded, his arms were tied and he was forced face down in the dirt 
with more than 100 other police officers, but Alm Tahir says he was most 
frightened by the mocking laughter of his would-be executioners. 
"The women and girls were laughing and clapping," Tahir, 21, recalled Monday 
from his hospital bed here. "Then they shot us." 
Police Sub-Inspector Piyeratna Ranaweera remembers another sound when the 
shooting began. 
"Everyone was shouting for their loved ones," he said at another hospital. 
"Then there was silence." 
The two men are the only known survivors of an apparent massacre of Kalmunai 
police a week ago by Tamil separatist guerrillas. Though wounded, both escaped 
into the jungle before the guerrillas burned their colleagues' bodies, they 
said in separate interviews. 
Kalmunai, on Sri Lanka's east coast, was the opening shot in what threatens to 
be a brutal new phase of the civil war in this lush Indian Ocean nation. Citing 
more than 600 dead and two collapsed cease-fires in the last week, the 
government Monday declared total war on the Tamil guerrillas. 
"From now on, it is all-out war," Defense Minister Ranjan Wijeratne told 
Parliament in Colombo, the capital. "We will annihilate the Liberation Tigers 
of Tamil Elam, take over the east and then go for the north." 
The Tigers, as they are called, are demanding a separate Tamil state in the 
north and east. They claim that the nation's Tamils, who are mostly Hindu and 
make up about 18% of Sri Lanka's population of 15 million, are discriminated 
against by the majority, mostly Buddhist Sinhalese. 
More than 10,000 soldiers, rebels and civilians have died since the Tigers 
launched their first attacks in 1983. The beleaguered government turned to New 
Delhi for help in 1987, but the 50,000 Indian peacekeeping troops withdrew last 
March after failing to defeat the insurgent ethnic army. 
Instead, President Ranasinge Premadasa's government began negotiating a 
power-sharing arrangement and let the Tigers assume many military and civilian 
functions, with the hope they would put down their guns and campaign for 
elections. That fragile peace held until the Tigers' surprise offensive last 
week. 
Wijeratne still held out the possibility of peace Monday. 
"I advise the (Tigers) to stop the fighting and come to the negotiating table 
before it is too late," he said. 
But peace was hard to find near Kalmunai, about 200 miles east of Colombo, on 
Monday. The seaside town remained under the control of the Tigers, and the 
steady crump of mortar shells and the chatter of small arms fire filled the air 
at Malwate Junction, five miles away. 
Nearby villages were deserted. Thousands of refugees were reported in makeshift 
shelters at schools, Buddhist temples and government facilities. 
At dusk, a light tank and four armored personnel carriers rushed fresh troops 
to the embattled area, past a tropical tableau of green rice paddies, dense 
jungle and waving coconut palms. 
Soldiers and police at sandbagged checkpoints said they fear that as many as 
750 other police officers also were killed when the Tigers broke the 
13-month-old truce last week and captured 17 police stations, including 
Kalmunai, in the north and east. 
"Not a single policeman from the stations has come out," said police officer 
Yumyu Mustaba, who was guarding the main road outside Amparai, the district 
seat. "All were rounded up. All are gone." 
"The police are all finished," said an army officer, who asked not to be 
identified. "They are dead." 
Fighting was also reported Monday at four army camps in the eastern Batticaloa 
district, and at Trincomalee, in the northeast, which suffered severe damage in 
fighting last week. 
Fierce fighting also reportedly raged at the Kiran military camp, further 
north, where the military used helicopter gunships to repulse a dawn attack, 
according to the Defense Ministry. A ministry communique Monday said the Tigers 
had lobbed "chemical bombs . . . causing severe physical irritation" into the 
camp. No further details were available. 
The week of fighting dashed the tenuous peace that had reigned in Sri Lanka 
since last year, when a government-linked purge crippled a leftist insurgency 
among the majority Sinhalese. More than 30,000 people were reported killed in 
the two-front war last year alone. 
Diplomats in Colombo said they see little hope of an early end to the 
bloodshed, now that the Tigers have gone back to war. 
"The whole phony peace of the last few months was based on the assumption that 
the Tigers would put down their arms," one diplomat said. "Instead, it's clear 
they simply used the last few months to build up their strength." 
Certainly, there are few illusions about the Tigers' intentions in Kalmunai. 
Police Sub-Inspector Ranaweera, interviewed in the Kandy General Hospital, 
about 50 miles west of Kalmunai, said several dozen heavily armed Tigers 
arrived at his police post a week ago and demanded that the officers turn over 
their weapons. 
"They asked us to surrender,' said the 23-year-old officer. "They said if we do 
nothing, they won't hurt us. And that once the government agrees to their 
demands, we will be released. So, we surrendered." 
Ranaweera, who was wounded in an arm and ear, said the Tigers loaded the police 
on three buses. 
"They didn't say anything. They just counted us one by one," he said. "All 115 
were taken away." 
The buses were driven to a Tigers camp deep in the jungle. 
"When they got us to the camp, they took everyone's name and blindfolded us," 
said Tahir, who was hospitalized in Amparai. "Then they tied our hands behind 
our back and dragged us by the ankles on the ground. Then they shot us." 
Tahir, who was wounded in the hip and buttocks, pulled back his tattered shirt 
to show skin rubbed raw by the ground. Deep marks on his wrists indicated that 
he had been tied. 
Both men said they passed out and woke up in the bloody heap of bodies. Tahir 
said he hid all night in the jungle before making his way to government lines. 
As he left, he said, the Tigers returned with tires and fuel to burn the bodies 
and the buses. 
Tahir, still shuddering, said he only had one thought throughout the ordeal. 
"I thought I was going to die," he said softly. 
