REPORT ADDRESSES CHANGING NEEDS OF FAMILIES 
It's all in the family -- wrenching conflicts between responsibilities at home 
and workplace demands, disintegrating support systems and, for the first time, 
the specter of the next generation being downwardly mobile. 
That was the message from the Legislature's year-old Joint Select Task Force on 
the Changing Family, whose first report, "Planning a Family Policy for 
California," was presented by co-chairs, State Sen. Diane E. Watson and 
Assemblyman Thomas H. Bates. 
The California family is in trouble and the report is "an urgent call to 
action," Watson said at a breakfast Friday in Beverly Hills. 
Bates asked for a public "outcry" demanding that outmoded policies be updated 
and that unresponsive institutions act to meet identified challenges. These 
challenges include an increasing minority population, a growing gap between 
rich and poor, and a diversity of families that bear little resemblance to the 
nuclear family of the '50s. 
The report recommends creation of a State Office of Family and Work to assist 
in developing family-friendly work policies, such as flextime and job-protected 
family leave after a birth or adoption. And it suggests that, in the awarding 
of state contracts, preference be given to bidders with pro-family employment 
policies. 
Other recommendations: 
 -- Expansion of subsidized child care for the low-income. 
 -- Creation of adult day-care centers and increased in-home professional 
support for care-givers to the elderly. 
 -- Establishment of a network of state-funded programs to provide 
multicultural and multilingual parenting education and support services. 
 -- Comprehensive state-funded services, including child care, continuing 
education, health care and vocational counseling, for teen-age mothers and 
fathers. 
 -- A study to determine the best way to ensure physical and mental health 
coverage for all families; this should be followed by a statewide program, with 
families paying a manageable share. 
 -- A "Vesper Marriage Act" as an option for those 60 and older, recognizing 
them as married "except for the purpose of taxation, inheritance and the 
receipt of pension benefits." 
 -- Child-support payments tied to the cost of living, with a provision that 
the state make payments if a parent defaults, then seek repayment. 
 -- Expansion of subsidized preschool programs such as Head Start. 
 -- A statewide elder volunteer action corps matching retirees' interests with 
community needs. 
"All of this is going to cost a good deal of money," said task force member 
Leonard Schneiderman, dean of the UCLA School of Social Welfare. But, he 
emphasized, "nothing is more ludicrous" than the belief that cutting back on 
social programs saves money. 
There are "three compelling reasons," he said, to spend the money for 
family-oriented programs: to maintain a competitive economy; to lessen the 
polarization between the haves and have-nots; and to prevent diminishment of 
the society as a whole. 
"We are moving very rapidly toward two tiers in everything we do," including 
education, health care and jobs, Schneiderman said, cautioning that "there is a 
limit to deprivation" before the deprived begin to act out. 
Watson acknowledged that "we don't have the resources" to implement the 
report's recommendations. Both she and Bates said they favored shifting state 
spending and increasing taxes, if necessary. 
Work on Changing Attitudes 
"It's not too late" to turn things around, Watson said. "We just have to work 
on changing attitudes before the problems become problems that we all have to 
face." 
Statistics cited in the report point up how dramatically the California family 
has veered from the "Ozzie and Harriet" model of 30 years ago: 
 -- Fewer than 1 in 10 families consist of the traditional model of breadwinner 
father, homemaker mother and two or more children. Today there are domestic 
partnerships without marriage, either hetero- or homosexual; extended families; 
and single-parent families. One recommendation is to outlaw insurance practices 
that discriminate against unmarried couples. 
 -- 63% of mothers in two-parent families work outside the home. 
 -- Almost one-fourth of California children live in poverty, a rate that has 
almost doubled since 1969. As the economy has shifted from manufacturing to 
services, real wages have declined as well as benefits such as health insurance 
and private pension plans. 
 -- By the year 2000, Latinos will comprise 27% of the state's population, 
Asians will be 12%, blacks, 8%. The white population will decline to 54%. 
 -- "How families fare deeply affects how the state fares," the report states. 
It emphasizes that "paid work and family care-giving are equally important" and 
ways must be found to integrate them -- with policies that enhance, rather than 
replace, family resources. 
Defining Family Functions 
The task force did not attempt to define "the family." Rather, it defined its 
functions: To take care of the emotional and physical needs of its own; provide 
them with love and security; shape their values and social skills; and provide 
a haven from outside stresses. 
The emphasis is not on AIDS or drug abuse or gang violence but on nitty-gritty, 
everyday dilemmas such as finding time to sit down as a family to dinner, help 
with the children's homework and get to know their friends. The report notes 
that time spent with the children in a grocery line or a traffic jam is not 
quality time. 
Help is needed because "conventional support systems are unraveling," the 
report points out. Today's California family may live hundreds of miles from 
relatives, is apt not to know its neighbors and may move frequently. 
Further, it states, "Hard work is no longer necessarily a route out of poverty 
for many families." The immigrant population tends to be segregated into 
low-end jobs, its children into inner-city schools where they are 
"undereducated." 
"The pressures on today's families will not fade away," the report concludes, 
but the family will endure as an institution and needs help to solve the 
problems that threaten its health and stability. It asks: "If the public will 
not lobby for the family, who will?" 
The task force includes educators, members of the religious community, labor, 
family law and business and representatives of social service agencies. The 
task force will hold its first public hearing on its recommendations June 23 in 
Oakland. 
