POTENTIAL L.A. CHALLENGERS ANALYZING FARRELL'S LOSS; 
48TH DISTRICT: HOPEFULS FOR HIS CITY COUNCIL SEAT ARE NOW LOOKING FOR SIGNS OF 
A POLITICAL WOUNDING. 
Just hours after Robert Farrell's stunning loss to Marguerite Archie-Hudson in 
the 48th Assembly District Democratic primary election Tuesday, potential 
challengers for his seat on the Los Angeles City Council were analyzing the 
race, looking for signs of a political wounding. 
With Farrell having to face voters in just 10 months -- he has indicated that 
he will run for a fifth consecutive term representing the 8th Council District 
-- friend and foe alike were eager to know just what the defeat will mean for a 
politician seen by some as already vulnerable on his own turf. Farrell did not 
have to give up his council seat to run for the Assembly. 
Farrell, after his concession speech Tuesday night, brushed off questions about 
how theloss might affect his political future. 
Asked if he would try to retain his council seat, he responded, "Why wouldn't 
I?" 
Others, however, said the outcome of the primary may have hurt him. 
"It may mean the voters showed a lack of confidence in his leadership abilities 
and decided he didn't deserve a promotion to Sacramento," said community 
activist Kerman Maddox, who has already formed a committee to study his chances 
in a run for the 8th District seat. 
The huge size of Farrell's loss to Archie-Hudson -- 15 percentage points -- 
shows, Maddox said, that there may be "a continued erosion" of Farrell's 
support in the 8th, which makes up about a third of the 48th Assembly District. 
On Tuesday, the voters gave Archie-Hudson 9,724 votes (45% of the total) to 
Farrell's 6,563 (30.3%). 
Mark Ridley-Thomas, a Farrell supporter in the primary who was considering 
running in the April, 1991, 8th Council District race had Farrell won Tuesday, 
said he is now presented "with a new set of dynamics." 
"What has to happen now is a serious analysis of the 8th District proper," said 
Ridley-Thomas, executive director of the local chapter of the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference. 
His candidacy, he said, will now "depend on whether the voters were saying we 
prefer (Farrell) being a councilperson rather than an assemblyman" or something 
else. 
Some observers, however, said there was little ambiguity in the voters' 
message. 
Farrell has "been sent a shot across the bow," veteran political analyst Joe 
Cerrell said. "He has a warning: 'You better start working now real hard for 
reelection.' " 
Cerrell said it did not help that questions arose late in the race about 
whether Farrell lives in the 48th District. 
However, Cerrell said he did not view the blow to Farrell as fatal. 
"It's like a person who has a mild heart attack. It's not a good thing, but it 
gives you a warning. I think he (will get) reelected." 
Farrell's campaign manager, Marcella Howell, said: "Lots of people try for 
higher office and lose, but in my experience rarely does that affect their 
incumbency in another office." 
