COMPTON WILL BE URGED TO FORECLOSE ON HOTEL PROJECT 
The developer of the ill-fated Compton Lazben Hotel has failed to meet a 
deadline for paying $6.8 million in construction loans that he owes the city, 
and two council members said they will propose that the city take over the 
project. 
Compton redevelopment officials billed the $35-million hotel and convention 
center complex along the Redondo Beach Freeway as the catalyst for the city's 
economic revitalization, but from its inception about five years ago, the 
project has been plagued with delays and financial difficulties. 
Councilman Maxcy D. Filer said he plans to propose that the council begin 
foreclosure proceedings against developer Naftali Deutsch. Councilwoman 
Patricia A. Moore also said she would support such a move, which would have to 
be approved by a majority of the five-member council. 
"Why shouldn't the city be responsible and take back the hotel and supply 
everything the citizens were promised?" Moore asked. 
Under the terms of their agreement with the city, the developers were to pay 
off the loans by May 31, according to a report that the staff of the city 
Redevelopment Agency sent the council last week. 
Deutsch said, however, that his agreements with the city were written in such a 
way that it was "understood" that he did not have to pay off the loans until 
the hotel generated a sufficient cash flow. 
Deutsch also said he is "days away" from reaching a franchise agreement with 
the Hilton Hotel Corp. A top city administrator said City Manager Howard 
Caldwell is taking part in the talks with Hilton. Caldwell and Hilton 
representatives did not return calls from The Times. 
Filer, however, said he is skeptical about any franchise discussions: "I don't 
want to upset any negotiations, but I just believe this is a ploy." 
The developer has earned the enmity of some people in Compton, who say he has 
not lived up to the terms of his development contract. Deutsch halted 
construction several times, saying he needed more money. The city gave him more 
loans. 
"Here when people are five days late paying their water bills (to the city), 
they get their water turned off," Moore said, "and this man can go on never 
paying a dime to us." 
Filer said: "He has been in default as a contractor for over two years. He has 
been in default of the loan (payments) over 10 months. He is now in default on 
the loan." 
According to Filer and Moore, the developers owe the city more than $400,000 in 
interest payments, in addition to the $6.8 million in principal that was due 
last week. The city and the developers have been arguing for two years about 
whether the project was built to the city's specifications. 
City officials, saying some of the furnishings and construction materials did 
not meet specifications, withheld some payments from the construction firm, 
Tucon Development, until it replaced some of the items. 
The Deutsch family owns Tucon and other construction companies that worked on 
the hotel. Deutsch's son, Benjamin, said his father now has no financial 
interest in any of the construction companies or any of the financial or 
management companies involved in the hotel development. 
Benjamin Deutsch said he and his three brothers own and control all the various 
firms. 
