CONSUMER VIEWS: CUSTOMER GIVES LITTLE CREDIT TO STORE IN CHARGE-CARD FRAUD 
Question: I have enclosed a copy of a letter that I sent to the main office of 
the Broadway department store and which I will summarize: 
I have been a good customer of the Broadway for many years and have always paid 
my bills promptly. In late February, I received my bill showing charges of $959 
for women's clothes and shoes that I did not purchase. I called the credit 
office and was told the mistake would be rectified in a week. 
A few weeks later, I was called on a Sunday and asked if this was the residence 
of So-and-So, a woman. When I told them they were mistaken, they told me that a 
woman of that name had signed two sales checks at Broadway's Del Amo store. My 
charge card was not used in the transaction. At that point I assumed that fraud 
was involved and the amount would be taken off my account until an 
investigation was launched. I was told that the charges would be "frozen" and I 
would not have to pay the monthly charges on the amount of the fraud. 
I was told that if I signed a "release" paper, the charges would be "credited" 
to my account. I don't see how the store can "credit" someone's account for 
something the customer was not responsible for. 
The Broadway people also referred to the bill as the "disputed" amount. I was 
not "disputing" the amount, but denouncing it. After it was determined that I 
was in no way at fault, all references to these charges should have been 
removed from the bill immediately. 
This whole matter has caused me great mental anguish. I have been more than 
willing to cooperate with the Broadway in any investigation of my possible 
personal involvement in this matter. Instead, I have spent two months 
attempting to expunge this from my record. 
After I have heard the Broadway's explanation of how my number came to be used 
without my card, I will then determine whether to close my account with them. 
Is the Broadway compelled to give a customer the details of the outcome of a 
fraud case? -- L.L. 
Answer: You've been through the mill, all right, and the Broadway regrets that 
it took as long as it did to clear these charges. The timing was such, 
apparently, that the clearance missed the first billing cycle, and so it wasn't 
until May 8, Teri Loud, senior manager of account services for the Broadway, 
says, that the thing was completed and that a letter of apology went out to 
you. 
Unfortunately, there is a matter of semantics -- language -- involved here. The 
law requires that this fraudulent charge of $959 has to be referred to as a 
"disputed" amount -- a fine point that keeps it on neutral ground while the 
investigation is ongoing. 
And using the phrase "credit to" your account is, after all, just another way 
of saying "wipe it off" your account. At no time during the investigation, Loud 
adds, were you required to make any payments on the fraudulent purchases, no 
finance charges were imposed and, of course, you were never shown as being 
delinquent. 
How the sales were made without the use of your charge card is one of those 
sticky situations that retailers encounter constantly, because a distressing 
number of shoppers every day walk away from home without their charge cards. 
Should the stores make the customer go home and retrieve it? From an image 
standpoint, this would be a little bit like hiccuping at a wake. 
"So, we have the clerk call the credit office and try to confirm the account by 
asking the customer a couple of questions that will establish some identity," 
Loud adds. "Ask for an address, a telephone number or something like that." 
Obviously, as your case so graphically proves, this is a country mile wide of 
being foolproof. 
"When something like this happens," Loud continues, "we dig out the actual 
sales bills that the person making the purchase signed, ask the customer to 
examine them and then sign an affidavit of forgery. Then we remove the charge 
from the customer's bill, set up a new account number and send the customer a 
letter of apology." 
The issuing of a new account number is fairly standard procedure, based on the 
Broadway's suspicion that if whoever pulled this scam knows enough about you 
(address, telephone number or what-not) to forge the sales slip in the first 
place, that person might also know your account number. So it's a double 
precaution. 
"Credit card frauds like this," Loud says, "are at their highest peak right now 
in about four years -- and that seems to be the cycle, about four years. It's 
unfortunately a normal situation in retailing, and most fraud involves either 
stolen or counterfeit credit cards or a stolen account number." 
And no, neither the Broadway nor any other retailer will tell you what its 
fraud investigation uncovers. And there are two understandable reasons for 
this. 
One, today's scam artists, Loud admits, "have gotten extremely sophisticated," 
and for the department store to explain to you how the swindle worked simply 
spreads information on the store's internal operations, which are, obviously, 
already too well known to too many people. 
The second reason, Loud reluctantly admits, is that occasionally a scam like 
this will involve someone on the inside. And this is a bit of internal 
housecleaning that no retailer wants to bare its soul about. 
I wouldn't blame the Broadway for this. It did take a little longer than it 
should have (the investigation turned out to be more involved than normal, Loud 
says), but by now you've received the store's apology, the charge is off your 
account and you've got a fresh account number. 
