ULTRAFAST TRAIN LIKELY TO STOP WHERE RIDERS WAIT 
If enthusiasm were the determining factor, Anaheim would have no rival in 
becoming the Southern California terminus of a proposed high-speed Las Vegas 
train -- and the north San Fernando Valley wouldn't even be under 
consideration. 
But if the futuristic train is ever built, ridership projections, not local 
fervor, are likely to dictate where it will go. 
And no one seems ready to assay whether Mission Hills or the Magic Kingdom is 
the better bet for the $4-billion railroad to shuttle Southland gamblers to Las 
Vegas casinos. 
On Saturday, a 16-member bistate commission will take the first step toward 
determining which Southern California terminus is more likely to attract the 
private investment needed for the 200 m.p.h. train to become a reality. 
The California-Nevada Super-Speed Ground Transportation Commission was created 
in 1988 by the two states' legislatures to see if the train proposal is 
feasible and, if so, to determine where in California it should begin. 
Ontario Airport 
Las Vegas gambling casino operators, who first suggested the high-speed 
railroad several years ago, initially focused on Ontario Airport as the western 
terminus for the train. 
But the San Bernardino County city gave the proposal a chilly response, saying 
it would worsen congestion on local streets and freeways and would encourage 
local dollars to leave their community for Las Vegas while giving little or 
nothing to the local economy. 
And San Bernardino County officials also made it clear that they viewed a 
railroad built solely to lure gamblers as carrying a stigma. 
Ontario's rebuff left the north Valley and Anaheim as the only contestants. 
Anaheim's proposal is vigorously backed by most local officials, who view it as 
a golden opportunity to link the Southwest's two prime tourist destinations -- 
Las Vegas and Disneyland. 
The north Valley proposal, on the other hand, was the brainchild of Los Angeles 
Department of Airports officials, who say the fast train might be the 
long-sought key to opening city-owned Palmdale Airport to passenger traffic. 
"Between the Valley and Palmdale, the train would carry both Las Vegas-bound 
passengers and those heading for our airport," said Dennis Green, 
administrative assistant to Clifton A. Moore, department general manager. 
With a high-speed train, the Palmdale Airport, which now has no major scheduled 
passenger flights, could lure some Valley residents away from Los Angeles 
International Airport, which is increasingly congested, Green said. 
The north Valley terminus recently was endorsed 10 to 0 by the Los Angeles City 
Council, although several members indicated they had strong misgivings about 
the plan and were only voting to keep it under consideration. 
Indeed, the north Valley proposal faces severe hurdles. 
For one, the airport department's plans for Palmdale Airport have been scaled 
down dramatically in recent years, suggesting that airport-bound traffic might 
not be significant. 
Airport Plans 
For nearly two decades, the department had planned a super-airport for the 
site. That airport would have handled huge volumes of cargo and passenger 
flights bound for overseas as well as cities all over the United States. A 
high-speed rail link with Los Angeles was part of the plan. 
But recent projections indicate that even with Southern California's population 
boom, the demand needed to justify such an airport will not be there for 
decades to come, if ever, Green said. 
Instead, he said, the department wants to open the facility "as a regional 
airport much like Burbank Airport," with most flights destined for California 
and the Pacific Northwest. 
The airport department's proposed terminus is in Mission Hills or possibly 
Sylmar near the confluence of the Golden State, Antelope Valley, San Diego and 
Foothill freeways. 
The hope would be to siphon off passengers generated by the Santa Clarita 
Valley and the north Valley who otherwise would go to LAX. 
No Figures 
Green said he had no figures on how many such passengers there are. 
Another potential roadblock is Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), chairman of 
the Assembly Transportation Committee and chairman of the bistate commission. 
"Before I would support such a train," Katz said, "it would have to offer 
Southern California commuters some relief. In fact, I believe that without such 
relief, no plan could be sold to the California public. 
"The airport proposal is totally an airport concept," he said. "It does nothing 
for commuters." 
Katz said he could suggest no way the airport department plan could be altered 
to provide commuter relief and said he was unfamiliar with how the Anaheim 
proposal might affect rush-hour traffic in Orange County. 
On the other hand, Orange County Supervisor Don R. Roth, a member of the 
bistate commission and a former mayor of Anaheim, envisions an Anaheim-to-Las 
Vegas train patronized chiefly by tourists. 
Chief Booster 
Roth, chief booster of the Orange County proposal, said the high-speed train 
would encourage tourists to combine visits to Orange County, which has 34 
million tourists annually, with a trip to Las Vegas, which has 17 million 
visitors a year. 
Part of the small army of workers who daily commute to Orange County jobs from 
their lower-priced San Bernardino County homes might find the train convenient 
to use, he said, "but I feel the basic economic underpinning would have to be 
tourist business." 
On the other hand, Roth said, he has begun studying the possibility of getting 
"still more use out of an Anaheim-Las Vegas" rail line by converting George Air 
Force Base in Victorville, slated to be closed within three years, to civilian 
use. 
"The possibility is that we might simultaneously be able to relieve John Wayne 
Airport and increase patronage on the train," he said. 
The base is a few miles west of Interstate 15, which planners assume the 
high-speed train would follow for at least half the 230-mile distance between 
Southern California and Las Vegas. 
Selecting Technology 
In addition to determining the proposed train's feasibility and selecting a 
Southern California terminus, the bistate commission is charged with selecting 
a technology. 
Under consideration are Japanese bullet-train, the French TGV high-speed train 
and the German experimental magnetic levitation technologies. 
Katz said that if a route can be selected, the choice of technology might turn 
on which manufacturer is willing to invest in the project. 
He envisions as much as $3.8-billion in private investment in the $4-billion 
project. 
The commission, which meets Saturday in Anaheim, will first commission a series 
of ridership and cost studies, Katz said, adding that he couldn't predict what 
plan, if any, the commission ultimately will take back to the two legislatures. 
Said the airport department's Green: "At this point, Anaheim seems to be ahead. 
But we feel the studies will tell us where we stand." 
