INFORMAL, PRIVATE MEETINGS HELD BY LEGISLATORS DRAW COMPLAINTS 
Public interest advocates complained Wednesday that, despite a voter-approved 
ban on closed meetings by public officials, legislative leaders continue to 
meet informally in secret to discuss -- and influence -- the fate of bills. 
The meetings technically do not violate long-standing laws regulating lawmaker 
gatherings, but opponents charge that they violate the spirit of Proposition 
112. That measure, approved June 5, included a provision to strengthen laws 
prohibiting legislative committees from meeting in private. 
But just one day after Proposition 112 passed, an informal "screening panel" of 
powerful senators convened privately to consider 57 bills, among them one by 
Sen. Quentin L. Kopp (I-San Francisco) that would have extended open-meeting 
guarantees to such advisory committees. 
The Legislature has a long-standing tradition of senior lawmakers meeting in 
private to set priorities for big-ticket spending bills. Lawmakers argue that 
those gatherings do not violate the open-meeting laws because the legislators 
do not constitute a quorum of any committee. 
At the June 6 meeting, five senators, including Senate President Pro Tem David 
A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) and Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Presley 
(D-Riverside), considered bills worth $2 billion, Presley said in a telephone 
interview. He said that they recommended the Appropriations Committee place a 
number of bills in its "suspense file" -- meaning little hope of passage -- 
including Kopp's legislation, with an estimated fiscal impact of about 
$100,000. 
"I was flabbergasted," Kopp said Wednesday. "That bill should not have gone 
into 'suspense.' It was below $150,000, and under committee policy those bills 
are automatically passed out." 
Open-meeting advocates immediately blasted the senators' move. "That should no 
longer be permitted," said Ruth Holton, a lobbyist for California Common Cause. 
"We believe it's a serious problem whenever important decisions are made in 
private and the public has no way of knowing why one bill was chosen over 
another. That decision ought to be taken in regular budget hearings." 
Presley said the screening group rejected Kopp's bill because "it didn't seem 
to be a big priority. We had just passed (Proposition) 112, which enlarges the 
scope of the open-meetings law and that seemed to be sufficient." 
Presley also defended the existence of the screening group. Because the 
Appropriations Committee has to consider hundreds of spending bills, senators 
need a method of setting priorities, he said. "It's the only way we can think 
of to deal with the problem of all these bills. You have to do the screening to 
cut the bills down to a manageable number." 
But Michael Dorais of the California Newspaper Publishers Assn. said: "I think 
it violates the spirit of Proposition 112. The spirit of 112 is that the 
decision-making process ought to be an open one. And this wasn't open to the 
public." 
