CHINA PUT THE HORSE BEFORE THE CART; 
POLITICAL, NOT ECONOMIC, REFORM MUST GO FIRST TO SPREAD AROUND THE BLAME FOR 
TOUGH DECISIONS 
First we had Deng Xiaoping's astonishing economic reforms in China in the early 
1980s, in which Beijing seemed to be leading the Communist world in new 
directions, abandoning the failed tenets of Marxism and the centrally planned 
economy. Then we had Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the mid-1980s beginning his 
remarkable series of political reforms, most strikingly heralded by his policy 
of glasnost, which brought breathtaking change to the character and content of 
the Soviet media and public discourse. 
But many astute observers of Beijing and Moscow wondered whether Gorbachev in 
fact had it right in placing initial emphasis on politics and openness instead 
of on economic reform. After all, it was cogently argued, you can't promote 
divisive political reform without first placating the public by delivering the 
economic goods. Gorbachev has yet to deliver the economic goods to the public 
-- in fact, things are worse than ever -- as he plows ahead with the 
extraordinary spectacle of no-holds-barred debate within the new Soviet 
parliament. But we haven't seen any shootings in Red Square yet, either. 
With last weekend's brutal and ill-conceived assault on the students and 
citizens in Tian An Men Square, the Chinese leadership suddenly set itself back 
years. The viciousness of the military's action and the ideological 
vituperation within the party leadership constitute a convulsion not heard 
since the Cultural Revolution. Suddenly the question arises: Has Gorbachev in 
fact got it right by putting political reform ahead of economic reform? 
The conventional wisdom may have been off the mark; perhaps it is better to 
allow popularly mandated bodies to endorse the hard and painful economic 
decisions lying ahead (Russian-style), rather than to allow the burgeoning of 
economic life to lead to new political demands that the party leadership 
(Chinese-style) is not eady to face. Perhaps it is best to let public opinion 
drive the reforms than to dispense it as largess from on high. 
In fact, there is no sure-fire formula. Russia and China are quite different in 
character and historical experience. But both are struggling to get out of the 
same ideological straitjackets. Both political and economic reform are required 
as dying Communist parties negotiate the shoals towards greater public 
participation in the ruling process and the goal of a more truly powerful, 
effective nation state. Not the least of the virtues of democracy is that 
leaders can spread the blame around when key decisions are approved by 
political bodies mandated by the public. China has yet to learn that. 
But what lessons do we draw from these two diverse spectacles in two cities? 
Does Moscow foreshadow where Beijing must inevitably go -- toward political 
democratization? Or does Beijing foreshadow where Moscow may go -- reversion to 
brutal military repression when the ultimate challenge to the Communist Party's 
power and legitimacy becomes intolerable? Can Gorbachev point to Beijing's 
violence and bloodshed as a warning to Soviet hard-liners of what might happen 
if reform is slowed? Or will the hard-liners point to Beijing's bloodshed as 
the destiny under Gorbachev? 
In the end, our own democratic heritage should lead us to believe that Moscow 
is on the right track -- the only track, however painful -- if it is to enter 
the modern era and develop a strong, healthy state. If the bloated bureaucracy 
is to be turned on its head, better to have it perceived as reflecting a true 
national consensus than the willful act of the nation's top nonelected 
bureaucrat. If restive nationalities are going to pull the Soviet Empire apart, 
it's wiser to have the process legitimated under democratic processes 
representing the popular will, than seen as traitorous concessions by 
authoritarian leaders too weak or fearful to stop the process. Moscow already 
seems to have grasped the centrality of genuine rule of law in a way that the 
Chinese, pursuing their historic Confucian quest for virtuous leadership, have 
not so far done. 
Indeed, democracy is not a panacea, and both China and Russia face overwhelming 
problems daunting to any leadership. We in the West have powerful interests at 
stake in these remarkable transitions in both countries. We have spent nearly 
half a century trying to figure out how to rid the world body politic of the 
metastasizing spread of the unhealthy cells of ideological communist regimes. 
Our preferred chemotherapy is representative institutions, democratic procedure 
and freedom of expression. We shall see whether Moscow or Beijing can in the 
end traverse the dangers and truly dismantle the monstrous edifices of 
totalitarian, ideological, communist rule that seemed so powerful for so long. 
Meanwhile, our own security is involved in the process. We need to watch this 
tale of two cities carefully indeed -- and hope that they are watching and 
learning from each other as well. 
