CHINA TURNS CAMERA-SHY; 
ACTRESS'S NARROW ESCAPE NOT PART OF THE SCRIPT 
Xi'an, China 
Monday, June 5 
I spoke to the directors today and told them I would not work for a government 
who would murder their own people. 
 -- from the diary of actress 
Debbie Gates 
Film actress Debbie Gates went to China two months ago to portray an American 
journalist who was forced to escape from the city of Xi'an in 1937. But before 
the cameras finished rolling on her movie, Gates found herself planning her own 
escape. 
Gates' getaway may not have been as dramatic, or as dangerous, as that of Helen 
Snow, the journalist who escaped from the Chiang Kai-shek government's Xi'an 
prison in 1937. But Gates nonetheless spent two terrifying weeks trying to get 
home from Xi'an, about 800 miles southwest of Beijing -- including several days 
stranded in China after she quit the film to protest the June 4 massacre of 
pro-democracy demonstrators at Tian An Men Square. 
"I was scared to death," said the brown-haired actress, back in her North 
Hollywood home but still keyed-up and breathless from her brush 
with danger. 
Gates said that she virtually became a prisoner in her hotel room in Xi'an, 
when her Chinese producers refused to let her leave or help her get out of the 
country. She says other members of the film crew were barred from speaking with 
her. Her mail was opened, she said, and her phone monitored and her travel 
restricted. 
Gates was in Xi'an to star in "The Adventures of an American Woman: Helen 
Snow," a feature film produced by the Chinese government's August First Film 
Studio as part of the 40th anniversary of the Communist Party's rise to power. 
Snow and her husband, Edgar Snow ("Red Star Over China"), helped chronicle the 
Chinese Civil War and the rise of the Communist Party. 
"Helen Snow was not a Communist," the actress explained. "But the Chinese 
people seem to admire her and Edgar. They think of them as gods because they're 
the people who gave the world information about the Communist Party. That's why 
they wanted to make a movie about them." 
Gates, who has appeared in TV episodes of "V" and "The Judge," auditioned in 
Hollywood for representatives of the Chinese film company. She got the part on 
March 31 and was on her way to China a day later. 
Until June 4, Gates said everything went well. The film was nearly completed 
when she and co-star John Perry heard about the government's decision to order 
its troops to open fire on the protesters in and around Beijing's Tian An Men 
Square. 
"We had heard about the massacre and immediately quit," Gates recalled. "One of 
the things that upset me was listening to the student in Beijing on the phone 
tearfully telling me how they just shot a 7-year-old boy, how they were 
indiscriminately shooting people and hearing the gunfire in the background. 
"I was very angry that anybody would shoot children, and the people were so 
peaceful. They were just sitting there." 
Gates said that she didn't know that her employers were part of the Chinese 
government until just before the assault on the protesters. When she did learn, 
she said she got angry and immediately told the head of the studio that she 
would not work for a "government that kills its own people." 
Her producers were angry and confused by her stand, she said, and instead of 
allowing her and Perry to leave, they were moved to another hotel, away from 
the Chinese members of the cast. 
"I told the other Chinese cast members about the massacre as soon as I found 
out, but they just denied it," Gates said. "Then I began to notice a definite 
break: The Chinese actors couldn't look or smile at me. I was later told that 
no one on the crew was allowed to speak to me. The officials told them nothing 
and didn't want me to tell them what had happened. As far as the crew was 
concerned, no one had been killed and their wives and children in Beijing were 
OK." 
When Gates and Perry tried to relay to their Chinese co-workers what they had 
heard, the government officials labled the Americans liars. 
Eventually, said Perry, the officials told them: " 'You have your news from 
America and we have our news, which is the truth.' " 
Days later, officials told Gates and Perry they could leave, but that the 
Chinese would not help them get out of the country. 
"We were basically stuck," Gates said. "Neither of us spoke the language or had 
a lot of money." 
Finally, help arrived from the China Film Import and Export, a Chinese-owned, 
American-based company that helped them get the roles in the first place. 
"The U.S. State Department called us and told us to get out," Gates said. "But 
it was Charlene Chin, the person from China Film, who personally telephoned the 
general and asked him to let us leave. I had been very vocal, and Charlene told 
me that she could only get me out if I kept quiet." 
At 7:30 a.m. on June 8, Gates and Perry took a cab from their hotel to the 
Xi'an airport, where they waited for more than six hours in a terminal crowded 
with people eager to leave the country. 
Although she wasn't sure they would get a flight, Gates had come prepared with 
negatives of photos she had taken -- including pictures of student 
demonstrators -- hidden underneath her clothes and a diary of her trip buried 
among her curlers. She had been warned by one of her directors about traveling 
with her photos. But Gates, who hopes to turn the pictures and the diary into a 
book about her experience in China, believed the risks were worth taking. 
"I was terrified I might get caught," she said. "So, I got one of those big 
exercise bras and taped my money and the pictures, using surgical tape," she 
said with a laugh, adding "that was the only thing I could find." 
"Then I put on a lot of clothing. I wore a leotard, a shirt, and a sweater. If 
they had done a strip search, I would have been up the creek." When the pair 
was finally booked on a flight to Canton, she said, security guards "only did a 
cursory pat search." 
From Canton, they took a boat to Hong Kong, where they waited for three days, 
sleeping on the airport floor among the throngs of people waiting for a flight 
out. 
"It was so crowded. But Hong Kong was the closest international airport other 
than the ones in Beijing and Shanghai. We just took the first plane we could 
get on out of Hong Kong." 
Four flights, one boat ride and a week later, Gates finally returned to her 
home and worried husband in North Hollywood, her diary and her negatives 
intact. Gates said the film was more than 90% completed when she quit, and she 
expects that the producers will piece the remaining scenes together without 
her. 
"The government is still filming and they're still telling them that nothing 
happened in Tian An Men Square," she said. "They even tried to convince me that 
nothing happened. Before I left, they questioned me about what I told the crew 
and what I thought. 
"When I told them the truth, they denied it. So I just nodded and smiled." 
