INTO THE NIGHT: BIKERS ADD SPICE TO BENEFIT 
The Scene: The Harley, Leather &amp; Lace Affair at the Spice club Tuesday 
night in Hollywood. Chaired by Dan Haggerty ("Grizzly Adams") and Bill Reed, 
1,000 motorcycle riders were expected at this benefit for the World Children's 
Transplant Fund, the Spastic Children's Fund and A Head With Horses, a 
horseback-riding program for handicapped children. 
Who Was There: Traditional Spandex-and-leather club scene types, plus members 
of the Hells Angels, the Tribes and other assorted motorcycle clubs. By 
midnight, perhaps 100 motorcycles were parked outside. The lengthy list of 
promised celeb guests came close to batting a rare, absolute zero until Mickey 
Rourke arrived at 11 p.m. He left 20 minutes later looking angry. (There was 
also a large turnout of press, TV crews and paparazzi grumbling about the lack 
of star presence and ready to lynch the publicist.) 
The Buzz: No buzz, plenty of roar as open-piped motorcycles came and went. "The 
American people love American iron," said Haggerty. 
Dress Code: Everybody had a black leather jacket. Optional equipment included 
Levi's with a heavy-duty padlock hanging from a belt loop, handkerchief 
headbands, scar tissue. The general idea was to look sinister but to have a 
heart of gold. 
Motorcycle Mode: The '50s retro look is big. Two-tone paint jobs on "Fat Bobs" 
(large gas tanks), whitewall tires partially covered by drooping fenders, more 
chrome than Zimbabwe produces in a year. 
Money Matters: Tickets were $20. There appeared to be a few hundred paying 
guests; no one ventured an estimate of the net receipts. 
Chow: Hors d'oeuvres passed on trays included smoked salmon mousse, cantaloupe 
wrapped in prosciutto and puffed pastry with shrimp curry. Pretty much what 
you'd expect at any Hells Angels picnic. 
Quoted: "There are all kinds of people in the world, but no matter what 
concerns them, they care about kids," said LAPD Deputy Chief Mark Kroeker, 
founder of the World Children's Transplant Fund, which helps to pay for organ 
transplants performed in the United States for poor children from Third World 
countries. 
The Story of Many a Biker Relationship in One Sentence: "She's back in 
Beaumont, man, workin' in a bar." 
