CHENEY URGES NATO TO BOOST DEFENSE SPENDING 
A week after President Bush held out the prospect of defusing Soviet power in 
Eastern Europe by negotiation, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney exhorted NATO 
defense ministers Thursday to increase their military spending. 
In a successful bid to maintain the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's 
so-called "3% commitment," Cheney argued that an allied pledge to boost defense 
budgets would keep pressure on the Soviets in negotiations, as well as on the 
U.S. Congress and the European public. 
As the alliance's 16 defense ministers met to discuss common military concerns, 
several budget-wary allies had proposed that it scrap the spending goal, which 
for four years has existed only on paper. 
In a biannual ritual that has lasted more than a decade, the NATO allies have 
vowed to increase their defense budgets by 3% a year, excluding the effects of 
inflation. No country has consistently achieved that goal. 
As of this year, even the U.S. defense budget has shrunk in real terms for four 
years running. Cheney's own proposed budget for next year would shrink by 1%. 
That has led even some of the Pentagon's senior officers to suggest that the 3% 
commitment has lost its credibility and that it should be replaced with more 
realistic goals. 
But senior officials said that in the wake of last week's NATO summit, the 
allies agreed that the spending commitment should not be scrapped. 
"It sends the wrong signal . . . . If anything, we ought to be doing more," 
said a senior defense official. 
At the same time, the United States brought its allies welcome relief from 
another onerous burden. Gen. John R. Galvin, supreme allied commander of 
European forces, outlined a plan to scale back the size and scope of future 
European military exercises. 
The exercises have become a sensitive political issue throughout Western 
Europe, where the maneuvers of U.S. and allied forces regularly wreak havoc 
with civilian life and property. 
Galvin's plan, which officials said was "greeted with considerable enthusiasm" 
by European allies, would increase the use of computer simulation and of 
small-scale exercises in which commanders only engage in mock battles. 
Earlier this year, NATO scaled back Reforger, the largest of its annual 
maneuvers in West Germany. 
Meanwhile, Cheney began what he called "the spade work" of intra-alliance 
negotiations, aimed at drafting a conventional arms control accord that would 
scale back the East-West military face-off in Europe within a year. 
But he warned it is "far too early for us to talk about how to divide up cuts" 
suggested by President Bush's proposal to reduce forces on both the U.S. and 
Soviet sides to 275,000 troops, with accompanying trims in tanks, artillery and 
other conventional weapons, as well as a 15% cut in combat aircraft. 
"It's important for NATO . . . to make certain we don't start suddenly focusing 
on ways to make our reductions, rather than maintain our vigilance," Cheney 
said. 
