U.S. MAY CANCEL UP TO $1 BILLION OF AFRICAN DEBT 
The Bush Administration is considering canceling as much as $1 billion in debt 
owed to the United States by poor sub-Saharan African countries as part of a 
package to be unveiled during the annual seven-nation economic summit in Paris 
on July 15 and 16. 
The plan, still under discussion within the Administration and with 
congressional leaders, would affect the debt that these countries owe under 
various U.S. foreign aid programs. Washington either would forgive the debts 
entirely or allow the countries to repay in local currencies. 
U.S. officials said the ultimate size of total debt forgiveness would depend 
largely on the formula that the White House works out with Congress on how to 
count the writeoffs in the federal budget. Strategists for President Bush want 
an advance agreement to avert any misunderstanding. 
However, Administration planners said the proposal could provide as much as $1 
billion in total debt reduction from the $4.5 billion that these countries owe 
the United States. The bulk of Africa's debt is owed to governments rather than 
to commercial banks. 
The move is designed partly to blunt pressure from the French for the summit 
countries to provide increased debt relief on a wider front, possibly even to 
alter the broad Third World debt strategy unveiled earlier this year by U.S. 
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady. 
Invitation to Paris 
France took a similar step on its own early this year, and French President 
Francois Mitterrand has invited leaders of 30 debtor countries to a dinner in 
Paris on the eve of the economic summit. The conference is intended only for 
leaders of the seven major industrial democracies: Britain, Canada, France, 
Italy, Japan, the United States and West Germany. 
Mitterrand has also proposed creating new lines of credit through the 
International Monetary Fund to help Latin debtors, but the United States and 
other major industrial countries are opposed. Most analysts are dismissing the 
French plan as a political gesture. 
France often makes such gestures for Third World countries. Paris still 
maintains close commercial ties with many of its former West African colonies, 
which still sell raw materials and purchase industrial goods that are made in 
France. 
