LOOKS: GROWING PAINS; 
CAREFUL STYLING CAN HELP EASE THE TRANSITION FROM SHORT HAIR TO LONG 
WHEN HEMLINE fads shift from thigh to knee to ankle, the simple secret to 
looking fashionable is having three black skirts, one in each length. But when 
hair trends drop from ear-skimming crops to longer, softer styles -- which is 
precisely what's happening now -- there's no easy way to stay in fashion. 
The short, little-boy cuts of last year are beginning to look tired -- "last 
decade," as fashion folk put it. And the signs of change are everywhere. 
Although some Paris models wore abbreviated cuts at the spring shows, most 
sported longer, wavier and generally more feminine styles. In the latest issues 
of Vogue and Harper's Bazaar, supermodel Linda Evangelista, who started the 
latest short-sheared craze, is wearing her dark brown hair over her ears and 
longer at the crown and in back. 
In Southern California, women with short hair are talking about slightly longer 
haircuts, too. "Especially the trend-setters," says Blase, a hairdresser at 
Beverly Hills' Juan Juan salon. "When they see that everyone is wearing their 
look, they want something newer." 
But to go from pixie to pageboy takes time. The average head of hair grows half 
an inch per month, Blase points out, and it should be trimmed at least a 
quarter-inch every five to six weeks. "So if you start from very short right 
now, you can have a nice chin-length style by the holidays," he says. 
Hairdresser Allen Edwards, who has six Southern California salons, including 
shops in Beverly Hills, Long Beach and Irvine, agrees that getting a haircut 
every four to five weeks will ease the growing-out process. "There should be a 
new look for each new length," Edwards says. "There is always a hair style that 
will suit a woman's face, no matter how long or short her hair is. She 
shouldn't have to wait for her hair to get longer to look good." 
Achieving a one-length style from a layered cut requires frequent trimming of 
the sides and back while the crown and bangs get longer. But the resulting 
blunt, geometric look is probably too sophisticated for today's casual 
fashions. "Rather than have the perimeter of the hair straight, it's newer to 
keep it uneven -- it's much more casual," says Geri Cusenza of Sebastian 
International in Woodland Hills. Cusenza, who is letting her own dark brown 
locks grow out, wears spit curls and wispy bangs but keeps the rest of her hair 
layered to look its thickest. 
Edwards also recommends a shaggier transition look with a fringe of bangs, 
calling it more feminine and less severe. Blase perms hair to achieve more 
softness around the face while the hair gets longer, but never before it's 
about four inches long at the crown. "Otherwise, the style will look too round 
on top," he cautions. 
But other stylists believe that most clients want their hair to look as long as 
possible as fast as possible. Hairobics Salon owner George Caroll of Toluca 
Lake discourages perms or the use of round styling brushes to curl hair under 
because both tend to make the hair seem shorter. Instead, he teaches clients to 
use a flexible plastic brush he has designed that straightens the hair during 
blow-drying, giving the illusion of longer hair. "But you need to trim the ends 
frequently to keep the hair looking its thickest and neatest," he says. 
For women who refuse to spend the time and money for frequent trims or a perm, 
gels and pomades help to tame the hairs that tend to stick out around the ears. 
Cusenza, whose company manufactures styling products, prefers light aerosol 
gels to mousses, which make the hair stiff. "Everything about the new, longer 
styles is light and feminine, and mousses make the styles look too heavy," she 
says. 
Some women deal with the vagaries of hair fashion the same way European runway 
models do: They wear wigs. New synthetic wigs and falls in short, wavy styles 
cost about $150 and provide an instant hairdo. 
There are, however, times when even a wig can't satisfy the needs of the most 
impatient woman. But enduring the transition, whether it's weeks or months, 
does have its hidden benefit. It allows a woman to determine which length best 
suits her features. 
"I've seen women grow hair to their shoulders," says Edwards, "then turn around 
and cut it all off again because they decide they like the way a short style 
frames their face." 
