AIRPORT PARKING 
Your continuing coverage of the construction at Orange County Airport has 
detailed the difficulties travelers face as a consequence of the inadequate 
"short-term" parking within walking distance of the terminal. 
You accurately reported that the current arrangement is intolerable. It 
contributes to missed flights, indigestion, high blood pressure and 
vituperative exchanges between the traveling public and airport employees. It 
also unnecessarily aggravates the traffic problem faced by those seeking only 
to pick up, or discharge, passengers and those whose business does not require 
parking services. 
The situation is reminiscent of the circumstances that existed in the mid-'80s. 
The only short-term parking was in the lot across from the terminal, and the 
so-called long-term parking was reached through a gate on the access road. The 
problem was that one had to decide whether to use the long-term lot before 
knowing whether any short-term parking was available. Naturally, peak traveling 
periods were often characterized by drivers passing up the long-term parking, 
driving to the terminal, discovering that the short-term lot was full, and 
circling the airport to get back to the long-term lot. 
One day while biding my time waiting for the next plane to San Francisco (I had 
missed my intended flight for reasons I'm sure you've surmised), it occurred to 
me that there was a simple solution to my recurrent traveler's dilemma. If I 
had only known that short-term parking was already full when I sailed by the 
long-term lot, I could have parked and arrived at the gate on time. Moreover, I 
wouldn't have contributed to the traffic jam in front of the terminal as I 
frantically tried to make my way back to long-term parking. 
I wrote to the airport manager suggesting that he place a sign beside the road 
visible to drivers before they got to the long-term lot informing them when 
short-term parking was full. The sign would allow those of us hurrying to catch 
planes to use the available parking immediately rather than having to circle 
the airport. Unfortunately, it took considerable effort and, finally, the 
assistance of the Board of Supervisors to get the job done. But once in place, 
the sign improved the situation. 
ALLAN M. WOLFE 
South Laguna 
