BRIEFING: THE ELDERLY 
SOCIAL SECURITY SEARCH: The Social Security Administration is looking for 
hundreds of thousands of older people with very low incomes who are eligible 
for federal cash payments but don't know it. 
The government plans to spend $3 million on demonstration projects around the 
country to educate people about Supplemental Security Income, a program for 
poor Americans over 65, and blind or disabled persons of all ages with scarce 
funds. Eligible persons generally have incomes below $406 a month, or $718 a 
month in California, which provides an extra benefit to supplement the federal 
payment. 
"I firmly believe that the Social Security Administration has a moral 
responsibility to identify those who are not receiving SSI benefits they are 
entitled to," said Social Security Commissioner Gwendolyn S. King. 
The maximum benefit for a person with no other income is $386 a month for an 
individual, or $579 for a couple. 
EQUAL BENEFITS FOR ALL: Advocates for older Americans are hopeful Congress will 
pass legislation requiring business to give older workers the same fringe 
benefits -- health and life insurance, vacation pay, sick leave -- enjoyed by 
younger employees. The Supreme Court ruled last year that companies could 
discriminate in employee benefits on the basis of age. 
"We fear that employers will offer older people jobs without benefits," said 
Michele Pollak, legislative representative for the American Assn. of Retired 
Persons. Committees in both houses of Congress have passed legislation that 
would override the Supreme Court's ruling, and the prospects on floor action 
look favorable, Pollak said. The proposed legislation says employers must spend 
as much money on benefits for older workers as for younger persons. 
ALZHEIMER'S AID: Alzheimer's disease costs billions of dollars in nursing home 
care for its victims, but the federal budget for research into the cause of the 
deadly disease is a modest $150 million. Four out of five research projects 
reviewed and approved by the National Institute on Aging don't get funded 
because of a lack of federal dollars. 
The Alzheimer's Disease Assn., an organization of family members of victims, 
has enlisted strong congressional backing for its drive to boost the budget. 
"We're fighting for a substantial increase to $300 million," said Judy Riggs, 
director of federal issues. 
The inexorable mental deterioration of victims, who may remain physically 
healthy for years, imposes a terrible emotional and financial burden on 
families. Rep. Edward R. Roybal (D-Los Angeles), chairman of the House Aging 
Committee, is promoting legislation to provide money to states to establish 
local respite care programs for families. The bill would pay for hiring someone 
to come into the home and give the care-givers time off from the grueling chore 
of living with an Alzheimer's victim. 
MEDI-GAP MADE EASY: The Senate Aging Committee has issued a guide to buying 
Medi-gap insurance, the private policies that supplement Medicare benefits. 
The guide also contains advice on health maintenance organizations, the 
Medicaid program for the poor and veterans benefits. Copies are available from 
the Senate Aging Committee, Room G-31 Dirksen Building, Washington, D.C., 
20510. ROBERT A. ROSENBLATT 
