POP MUSIC REVIEWS; 
FEMMES REACH FOR SPIRITUALITY, SETTLE FOR RUCKUS 
Though the recording of the Violent Femmes' most recent album "3" doubtlessly 
did not eat up a "Born in the U.S.A."-size budget, the band might have been 
better off buying a $4 blank cassette and recording its show Sunday at the 
Coach House in San Juan Capistrano. 
Where "3" often comes off as a pale, precious shadow of the band's 1983 debut 
album, its songs were pounded home with life and distinction by singer Gordon 
Gano and Co. before a boisterously adoring capacity crowd. (The Femmes are also 
scheduled to appear Wednesday at San Diego's California Theatre and Friday at 
the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles.) 
Despite the heretical presence of electric guitars, a full drum set and adjunct 
synth and horn players to crank up the trio's formerly spare acoustic sound, 
the ever-precocious Gano was direct and effecting in presenting his spiny 
fables of seeking spirituality in a complex and confounding world. 
Gano has apparently recovered from his side project, the Mercy Seat, a band so 
set in the rightness of Christian conviction that it evidently felt no need to 
support it with even marginally inspired music. Though possessing negligible 
skill on the guitar and a whiny voice that hunters could use to lure ferrets 
from their dens, Gano marshaled those limited attributes into an 
often-arresting performance. 
Alongside the classic violence of such debut-album crowd favorites as "Add It 
Up," "Gone Daddy Gone" and the anarchic "Kiss Off," Gano applied an equal rage 
to the current "Mother of a Girl" and "World We're Living In." On the latter he 
conveyed a true agony over the perplexity of living in a time when "my brother 
is not my lover" and "my neighbor is not my savior," with the band backing his 
troubled voice with a roiling world beat. 
Conversely, the personal devotion of "Outside the Palace" was delivered with a 
delicacy and mood that recalled Dylan's "Love Minus Zero, No Limit." 
While the thicket of sound raised by Gano, antic drummer Victor DeLorenzo and 
bass-solo monster Brian Ritchie reinforced Gano's lyrics, it also proved too 
limited a musical palette to fully sustain the 23-song set. For much of the 
show, they left the emotion-o-meter switch on "rampage," and, along with 
Ritchie's bass sometimes eclipsing Gano's singing, by show's end the 
undifferentiated ruckus ceased to have any effect. 
The other weakness in the show was that, oddly, Gano's least-inspired moments 
came in the set's directly inspirational numbers, his gospel-tinged "Faith" and 
"Jesus Walking on the Water." Despite some competent fiddle sawing from Gano on 
the latter tune, the numbers came off as flat and dogmatic. 
Unlike passion players Van Morrison and Al Green, who most definitely are in 
another class, Gano seems much better at confronting the problems of 
spirituality than its glories. 
While not nearly as original as the headliners, the L.A.-based Show of Hands 
delivered a strong opening set that drew heavily on the sound of the early-'60s 
folk boom. Sporting a Peter, Paul and Mary-type lineup (one woman and two 
guitar-toting guys), the trio avoided comparisons with the Washington Squares, 
similarly aligned East Coast folkie revivalists. Where the Squares' 
otherwise-well-crafted harmonies are blunted by their bereted novelty-nostalgia 
pose, Show of Hands seemed much more concerned with the future than the past. 
Their set ranged from spoken-word, T-Bone Burnett-ish abstracts of L.A. life to 
the Billy Bragg-covered "Think Again," which posits that a Soviet nation that 
lost 20 million people in its last major war may not be so gung ho on starting 
another one. 
The group's strongest original was "Man of Principle," which, rather than the 
finger-pointing schisms common to '60s folk, instead blamed the easy 
compromises made in daily life: "I wouldn't shoot another man/But I'll pay for 
the gun/. . . Another man of principle." 
Coupled with swelling voices -- reminiscent of early Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash 
in their harmonic complexity, only edgier -- the trio's songs make the band 
something to catch. 
