TURNOUT LIGHT AS VOTERS GO TO POLLS IN PRIMARY; 
ELECTION: TRANSPORTATION ISSUES AND THE RACES INVOLVING WOMEN CANDIDATES 
ATTRACT NATIONAL ATTENTION. 
Californians turned out in light numbers Tuesday for a primary election likely 
to decide the future of the state's legendary "tax revolt." Voters also will 
choose nominees for a new governor and for the first-ever state insurance 
commissioner, and determine whether women will be positioned to make history 
and dramatically expand their profile in state government. 
Experts had predicted about 44% of the registered voters would turn out at the 
polls. By late afternoon, state officials said voting in Los Angeles was 
running about the same as in the last gubernatorial primary election, in 1986, 
which produced a record low turnout of 40.45%. 
If eligible but unregistered adults are considered, Tuesday's far-reaching 
decisions on taxes, crime, ethics and the historic bid for power by women were 
left in the hands of about one-third of the voting-age population. 
In the Democratic and Republican parties, women were in contention for 
nomination for half of the statewide constitutional offices. Leading the charge 
was former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein, who sought the Democratic 
nomination for governor against Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp. 
California has never elected a woman governor. Also, California has never 
elected a governor in modern times who was not sized up for presidential 
potential. The combination has made Feinstein's campaign a matter of keen 
national interest. 
The winner of the Democratic primary will face two-term Republican U.S. Sen. 
Pete Wilson, who breezed through Tuesday's primary without serious challenge. 
Women also fielded strong candidates for the offices of lieutenant governor, 
treasurer and secretary of state. Only one woman now holds statewide office, 
Secretary of State March Fong Eu. 
Also of national interest, not to mention local concern, is the fate of a 
proposed doubling of the gasoline tax in the birthplace of the modern tax 
revolt. 
If approved, Proposition 111 would start the state on a $15-billion-plus 
highway and transit building splurge -- and signal the first real slacking of 
the anti-tax mood since the famous property tax rollback of Proposition 13 in 
1978. Conversely, its defeat would spoil the hopes of politicians of both 
parties who face mounting problems of population growth, decaying services and 
budgetary restrictions. 
Two ancillary propositions, 108 and 116, would add money to the transportation 
pot for rail services. 
Crime victims took the public stage in an emotional and often dramatic campaign 
on behalf of Proposition 115, their measure to rework California's criminal 
procedures. Proponents sought a faster dispensing of justice. Scattered but 
vocal opponents worried that the proposition would be counter-productive and 
cost defendants important safeguards. 
Political professionals bit their nails all day Tuesday over a series of 
ethics, pay raise and reapportionment votes. 
Propositions 118 and 119 would reduce the power of the Democratic majority in 
the Legislature to reapportion California's Senate, Assembly and growing 
congressional delegations. Proposition 112 would impose new ethics restrictions 
on state officials and allow an independent commission to raise lawmaker's 
salaries. 
Similarly, Proposition H in the city of Los Angeles would impose new ethics 
restrictions on local officials and raise salaries for the mayor and members of 
the City Council. 
In addition to the governor's race, voters faced a lively lineup of primaries 
for other state offices. 
Two Republican state senators from Orange County battled for the nomination for 
lieutenant governor. Marian Bergeson, of Newport Beach, took an anti-abortion 
position against the abortion rights stand of her opponent, John Seymour of 
Anaheim. The winner is to face incumbent Democrat Leo T. McCarthy. 
Similarly, a Republican man and woman fought for their party's nomination for 
treasurer -- appointed incumbent Tom Hayes against former U.S. Treasurer Angela 
(Bay) Buchanan. On the Democratic side, Kathleen Brown sought her party's 
nomination and the right to carry on her famous family's political legacy: Her 
brother, Edmund G. Brown Jr., and father were elected to statewide offices and 
then elected governor. 
The district attorneys of Los Angeles, Ira Reiner, and of San Francisco, Arlo 
Smith, waged a wild race for the Democratic nomination for attorney general. On 
the Republican side, former congressman Dan Lungren took his party's nomination 
without opposition. 
Secretary of State Eu sought nomination to a fifth term, and Supt. of Public 
Instruction Bill Honig asked for election to a third. 
In Los Angeles County, two seats on the embattled Board of Supervisors were up 
for election. 
For the 1st District seat left vacant by the retirement of veteran Pete 
Schabarum, his former aide Sarah Flores sought to become the first Latino to 
hold the office of supervisor. Other contenders for the San Gabriel Valley seat 
were former congressman Jim Lloyd and Superior Court Judge Greg O'Brien, who 
was Schabarum's hand-picked successor. 
In the other contest, Supervisor Ed Edelman ran for a fifth four-year term in 
the 3rd District, which includes East Los Angeles, Hollywood, West Los Angeles 
and part of the San Fernando Valley. 
The results of both, however, are clouded by a federal judge's ruling Monday 
that supervisorial district boundaries discriminate against Latinos. 
In other county races, Sheriff Sherman Block and Assessor John J. Lynch both 
sought reelection. 
Voters along the mountainous Malibu coast were voting on whether to become Los 
Angeles County's 87th city. 
The incorporation drive was the culmination of a long-running battle between 
area residents and the county Board of Supervisors. Cityhood advocates 
complained that the county has allowed too much development in the chic locale. 
If the 20,000-resident city is approved, voters also chose five new council 
members from among 30 candidates. 
Meanwhile, in a race where the city-hopping hankerings of Los Angeles Raiders 
owner Al Davis became a major issue, Oakland Mayor Lionel Wilson found himself 
fighting for his political survival against a field of younger opponents. 
Leading the attack on the 75-year-old Wilson -- the Bay Area city's first black 
mayor -- were two Democratic "young Turks," Assemblyman Elihu Harris and City 
Councilman Wilson Riles Jr. Both attacked Wilson for his part in a failed, 
$600-million-plus deal to lure the Raiders back to Oakland. 
Times staff writers Cathleen Decker and Jeffrey L. Rabin contributed to this 
story. 
