PROP. 111 IN CLOSE VOTE; ETHICS PLAN WINS EASILY; 
BALLOT MEASURES: GOP-BACKED REDISTRICTING PLANS LOSE. STATE BOND PROPOSALS 
WINNING ACCEPTANCE. 
Torn between dislike of higher taxes and impatience with traffic congestion, 
California voters were narrowly favoring a complex package of proposals that 
would ease government spending restrictions and trigger a 9-cent-per-gallon 
hike in the gasoline tax. 
With solutions to a state budget crisis riding on the outcome, the fate of 
Proposition 111 remained in doubt. Gov. George Deukmejian was banking that 
passage of the measure would allow him to leave office with a solid plan in 
place for revitalizing California's overburdened transportation system. 
As late returns filtered in, Propositions 118 and 119, two Republican-backed 
plans to change the way legislative and congressional districts are drawn every 
10 years, clearly had gone down in defeat, while Proposition 115, a ballot 
measure that would streamline California's criminal justice system was easily 
winning passage. 
And in a triumph for lawmakers, voters approved Proposition 112, a ballot 
measure that would impose new ethical standards on state officials but make it 
easier for legislators and elected state officials to win pay raises. 
Despite the complexity of many of the 17 propositions on the ballot, voters 
appeared to be making careful choices among some proposals. They were showing 
support, for example, for Proposition 121, which would authorize $450 million 
in bonds for higher education. But voters were much more strongly in favor of 
Proposition 123, which would permit an $800 million issue for public schools. 
On the transportation front, Proposition 108, a plan for $1 billion in bonds to 
finance mass transit, was a favorite with the voters, but Proposition 116, an 
initiative that authorizes $2 billion in bonds for rail transportation, held a 
small lead. Proposition 108 cannot go into effect without the passage of 
Proposition 111. 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), chairman of the Assembly Transportation 
Committee and an author of the gas-tax proposal, cautiously predicted victory 
for Proposition 111. 
"I think people recognize that we have to solve the gridlock problems that we 
are facing and I think they understand that periodically you have to make an 
investment in the future," Katz said. 
Anti-tax crusader Ted Costa said he expected the voting to be "awfully close" 
because opponents did not have the financial strength to mount a strong media 
attack. 
Early in the election evening, jubilant Democrats declared victory in their 
fight to defeat Propositions 118 and 119, which had the potential to change the 
balance of power in the Legislature. 
"Once again the voters have indicated they want the Legislature to engage in 
reapportionment," said Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los 
Angeles). 
In the weeks leading up to the election, the governor's proposal for changes in 
the spending limit and the initiatives on reapportionment were the most visible 
ballot measures as transportation and anti-tax groups attacked each other on 
the gasoline tax and Republicans and Democrats locked horns over the drawing of 
district lines. 
Divided by philosophical differences and distracted by internal squabbles, 
anti-tax forces did not emerge as a factor in the gasoline tax debate until 
late in the campaign, when backers of the proposals had already spent millions 
on television advertising, garnered the support of 250 organizations and won 
endorsements from top elected officials. 
The timing of the anti-tax group, however, proved fortuitous. Demanding free 
air time to counter the barrage from the Proposition 111 and 108 forces, 
Assemblyman Tom McClintock (R-Thousand Oaks) and anti-tax activists Tom Rogers 
and Costa persuaded numerous radio stations and a few television stations to 
run low-budget spots attacking the spending limit changes. The counterattack 
hit the airwaves just as the "Yes on Propositions 111 and 108" campaign was 
running out of money and being forced to cancel its final television 
advertising blitz. 
With both Democrats and Republicans viewing reapportionment as a high stakes 
battle that would determine their party's future standing in the state power 
structure, Propositions 118 and 119 drew more media spending than any other 
ballot measures. By the week before the election, the two sides together had 
invested more than $6 million in the campaign. 
Teaming up with organized labor, Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San 
Francisco) and Roberti spearheaded a Democratic assault against the two 
propositions and enlisted Hollywood personalities Jack Lemmon, James Garner and 
Bea Arthur for a spate of commercials. The poorer-financed opposition responded 
with advertisements that starred actor Charlton Heston. 
Both measures would change the way district lines are drawn for elections to 
the state Assembly and Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives. 
Republicans argued that the change is needed to keep Democrats from drawing 
district lines in a manner deliberately designed to maintain incumbents -- 
particularly Democrats -- in office. Democrats countered that the new process 
would have the effect of reducing the number of women and minorities who hold 
political office. 
Under the current system, the task of redrawing district lines is undertaken 
every 10 years by the Legislature with the governor holding veto power over the 
final product. In 1981, Democrats, who held the governor's chair and a majority 
in each legislative house, dominated the process. 
While leaving redistricting in the hands of the Legislature, Proposition 118 
involved changing the process by requiring that any plan receive two-thirds 
vote in each house, the governor's signature and the endorsement of state 
voters. Proposition 119, a more drastic measure, would cut the Legislature out 
of the process entirely and transfer its role to an independent 12-member 
commission appointed by a panel of retired appellate court judges. 
Overshadowed by the big-money battles waged over the gas tax and 
reapportionment were the proposals to streamline criminal justice procedures 
and impose new ethical standards on legislators. 
The criminal justice measure became enmeshed in gubernatorial politics in the 
early months of the campaign when state Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, a 
Democratic candidate for governor, claimed that a privacy provision would 
jeopardize abortion rights. 
An irritated U.S. Sen. Pete Wilson, the honorary chairman of the Proposition 
115 campaign and a Republican candidate for governor, said Van de Kamp was 
trying to create a political issue out of thin air. He said the initiative 
would not limit any civil rights guaranteed under state law because it applied 
to criminal procedures. His argument won support from former San Francisco 
Mayor Dianne Feinstein, the other Democratic gubernatorial candidate and a 
backer of the proposal. 
Seeking to reduce delays in criminal proceedings, the initiative forces 
California to copy more of the federal system. It amends the California 
Constitution to require state courts to follow the generally more restrictive 
federal courts in interpreting a number of rights of criminal defendants. 
Proposed in the aftermath of an FBI investigation into state government 
corruption, the ethics measure stops lawmakers from accepting outside speaking 
fees, puts a limit on gifts they can receive and prohibits them from lobbying 
their former colleagues for 12 months after they leave office. 
But to sweeten what is to some legislators is an otherwise distasteful measure, 
the proposal also creates a seven-member independent commission and gives it 
authority to grant substantial pay increases to lawmakers, the governor and 
other elected state officials. 
HOW THE PROPOSITIONS FARED 
 Edition-time status of the propositions on the election ballot: 
 Proposition 107: Housing and Homeless Bonds: Leading 
Proposition 108: Passenger Rail Bonds: Leading 
Proposition 109: Governor's Review of Legislation: Leading 
Proposition 110: Tax Exemption for Disabled: Passed 
Proposition 111: Gas Tax and Spending Limit: Leading 
Proposition 112: Ethics Standards for State Officials :Passed 
Proposition 113: Practice of Chiropractic: Passed 
Proposition 114: Murder of a Peace Officer: Passed 
Proposition 115: Criminal Law: Leading 
Proposition 116: Rail Transportation Improvement: Leading 
Proposition 117: Wildlife Protection: Leading 
Proposition 118: Redistricting; Legislative Ethics: Failed 
Proposition 119: Redistricting :Failed 
Proposition 120: Prison Construction Bonds: Leading 
Proposition 121: Higher Education Facilities Bonds: Leading 
Proposition 122: Quake Safety for Public Buildings: Leading 
Proposition 123: School Facilities Bonds: Leading 
