A WORLD OF SHOCK AND AFTERSHOCK; 
IRAN: FUNERAL DEPRESSION 
The dirge playing on Tehran radio is not merely a funeral hymn for the 
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini but also the opening theme for a new period in the 
Iranian revolution. 
Khomeini's unconditional rule was simultaneously a blessing and curse for Iran 
-- blessing because it preserved functional unity among rival factions and 
curse because absence of a dominant voice caused policy paralysis. Now that 
Khomeini is gone, it is not clear if the regime can prevent violent internal 
purges. 
What is clear is that continuation of current uncertainty about foreign policy 
and domestic economy can threaten the survival of the regime. The new 
leadership simply cannot afford to ignore the widespread frustrations and 
deprivations that have resulted from a decade of economic decline, war, massive 
unemployment, high inflation and rapid population growth. 
While the theocratic power structure is likely to remain in place, at least in 
the short run, the new leadership to emerge from an inevitable power struggle 
is bound to give government more coherent direction. The quick selection of 
President Ali Khamenei by the Assembly of Experts as the interim supreme 
religious guide demonstrates that there is a mechanism in place to name, in due 
time, a permanent successor or successors to Khomeini. But as the players in 
this high-stakes power game are aware, the task of succeeding "the viceroy of 
God on Earth" is more than a formal or procedural matter. 
At the moment it seems all but certain that Hashemi Rafsanjani, Speaker of 
Parliament, will be named president on Aug. 18. It remains to be seen whether 
at that time the Assembly of Experts will also choose him as the permanent 
supreme leader or whether a council of three clerics (very likely Khamenei, 
Rafsanjani and Ahmed Khomeini, the Imam's son) will be designated as the 
supreme political body. 
It is hard to imagine any of these men ruling as Khomeini did for more than 10 
years. In addition to being immensely charismatic, Khomeini assumed state power 
with virtually unanimous support from the Iranian people. This historic 
beginning was indispensable to Khomeini retaining moral authority while his 
fundamentalist followers built the apparatus of terror and coercion for the 
emerging theocracy. It is doubtful that the principal organs of this apparatus, 
the Revolutionary Guards, the Komitehs and the Intelligence Ministry, would 
give another cleric the loyalty they so faithfully gave Khomeini. 
The ayatollah was always anxious to preserve unity among his lieutenants, but 
at no point did he show any interest in organizing or energizing his followers 
for constructive purposes. He never made a statement in support of social 
welfare or economic well-being. 
Whatever else one might find in Khomeini's thought and behavior, it was hard to 
miss a vivacity for death and destruction in his attitude toward the world. 
This tendency had to be primarily understood as a personality trait of the 
ayatollah, because it certainly is not a distinct feature of Islam, Iranian 
political culture or the nature of its people. 
Perhaps Iran's most conspicuous failure during the decade has been in 
economics. Ten years ago the republic pledged to reduce dependence on oil as 
the principal source of foreign exchange. Yet today, dependence on oil exports 
is greater than it was during the shah's rule. Ironically, the original popular 
base for Islamic leadership, the urban poor and lower middle class, has 
suffered most from the deteriorating economic situation. 
The ruling religious leaders have defined their mission as moral and political, 
and have relegated economic policy to the background. Islam as a cultural and 
legal system may be an alternative to Western liberalism and Eastern communism, 
but it has virtually nothing to offer concerning the practical organization of 
economic life in the contemporary world. 
Since the end of the war with Iraq, however, many influential religious leaders 
seem to have realized that the rhetorical call for an Islamic economics has to 
be abandoned in favor of concrete, pragmatic policy options and programs. 
This is a very delicate task; the slightest suggestion that Islam might not 
have all the answers about a particular subject is likely, in the current 
atmosphere, to foment charges of blasphemy from fundamentalists. Rafsanjani and 
Khamenei are prominent among those wanting to move in a more technocratic 
direction. Whether they can prevail over the political and ideological 
objections of their leftist and rightist clerical rivals is difficult to assess 
at this point. 
The revolution has wrought, despite its repressive evolution, a number of 
powerful achievements likely to be of permanent benefit to Iran. For the first 
time in the nation's history, the gap between the elite and the masses has been 
significantly bridged. This is a positive development, despite the horrifying 
cruelty of the leadership. The revolution has liberated the country, once and 
for all, from the corrupt and exploitative character of dynastic politics. 
The revolution has also succeeded at ending foreign interference in the 
internal affairs of the country, a process that had humiliated Iran in a 
variety of respects for more than a century -- although, paradoxically, the 
current government is doing more harm to the well-being of the Iranian people 
on a daily basis than any of its predecessors. 
The revolution has made Iranians far more conscious of secularism, pluralism 
and popular sovereignty -- the virtues of liberalism. The experience of 
theocracy has meant a systematic negation of such ideas and arrangements; it 
has given them, absent a new value, almost a glorious quality. Ordinary 
Iranians might not express their longings in these terms, but their aspiration 
for a less-regimented life has received abundant testimony, as has their 
growing hostility to the reliance on the symbols of Islam to validate 
repressive practices. 
What the future holds for Iran remains obscure. The revolution makes certain 
kinds of hopeful evolution more plausible than ever before, and yet it has also 
left extensive scar tissue on the Iranian body politic. Khomeini's brooding, 
dominating rule shaped our perceptions to such an extent that we need some time 
to adjust to the idea of life in Iran without him. 
The tenure of the ayatollah's theocracy, like his own life, may be unduly 
prolonged, but its eventual demise is just as inevitable. The atavism of the 
mullahs cannot withstand the challenge of time or the demands and aspirations 
of Iranian society. What remains a distant dream for the Iranian people is the 
experience of belonging to a democratic nation. 
