CUBA FIRES CABINET OFFICER AS DRUG PURGE CONTINUES 
Cuba's interior minister, the Cabinet officer in charge of domestic law 
enforcement, was fired Thursday as that nation's drug purge continued, but the 
crackdown has failed to touch other leaders who U.S. officials say are involved 
in trafficking. 
The minister, Gen. Jose Abrantes, was replaced to allow an investigation to 
proceed into how a group of officers "conducted drug trafficking operations . . 
. with impunity and without being dis covered," a communique issued in Havana 
said. 
The firing came two days after a special military tribunal recommended a 
court-martial and death penalty for Gen. Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez, who confessed 
to smuggling drugs, ivory and diamonds. 
But one member of that tribunal, Vice Adm. Aldo Santamaria Cuadrado, is himself 
under a 1982 U.S. indictment, alleging that he assisted convicted marijuana and 
methaqualone smugglers. 
There are other issues that also call the Cuban crackdown into question, 
according to U.S. officials. These include the continued presence of fugitive 
U.S. financier Robert Vesco on the island, accusations that Cuban leader Fidel 
Castro mediated on behalf of the Medellin cocaine cartel of Colombia and 
continued reports of smuggling operations being carried out through Cuba. 
Selective Crackdown 
The selectivity of the Cuban crackdown has led experts here to suggest that 
there were two drug-smuggling operations in Cuba. 
"I think there was a official operation sanctioned by Raul and Fidel Castro, 
and then there was a second private operation by Ochoa, so Fidel and Raul 
decided to clean house," said Jaime Suchlicki, head of the Institute for 
American Studies at the University of Miami and author of a new book on the 
Cuban military. 
Thursday's firing of Abrantes "is intended to put a wall between Castro and 
Ochoa," Suchlicki said. It is impossible for military-backed drug-smuggling 
operations to continue without the Castro brothers' knowledge, he asserted. 
As recently as Sunday, a plane carrying a ton of cocaine passed over Cuba and 
dropped its load in the Bahamas, according to federal officials here. 
Recently, U.S. patrols observed the Cuban navy "in the immediate area while an 
actual . . . airdrop, was going on" in Cuban waters, said Coast Guard Lt. Jeff 
Karonis. 
