ALLEGED SPY CALLED BRILLIANT, ERRATIC; 
ESPIONAGE: AN FBI AGENT TESTIFIES THAT THE EX-SOLDIER ADMITTED SELLING NATO 
SECRETS. A SEARCH FOR SOME OF THE CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS IS UNDER WAY. 
An ex-Army sergeant charged in one of the most significant espionage schemes 
ever uncovered appeared in court in Tampa, Fla., on Friday, while federal 
agents there searched three sites for top-secret documents that the former 
soldier allegedly hoped to sell to foreign agents. 
An FBI investigator described the ex-GI, Roderick James Ramsay, as a brilliant 
but erratic man who had admitted being paid thousands of dollars for passing to 
East Bloc agents top-secret NATO documents detailing the nuclear defense of 
Europe. 
The government testimony suggested that Ramsay, 28, now an unemployed taxi 
driver, was among the most important figures in an espionage ring that the 
chief federal investigator described Friday as "one of the most serious 
breaches ever." 
According to U.S. and West German officials, Ramsay, working in collaboration 
with an Army superior convicted of treason earlier this week, handed over to 
the KGB information that would have gravely endangered the capability of the 
West to defend itself in the event of a Soviet attack. 
FBI agent Joe Navarro, a specialist in counterintelligence and espionage, said 
the information turned over to the East Bloc agents by Ramsay "in effect 
neutralized" the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, because Warsaw Pact 
nations "knew all our plans." 
"This is a significant case from the point of view of damage to U.S. security 
interests," said Justice Department spokesman Doug Tillet. "It involves an 
extensive amount of information provided to the Soviet intelligence service 
through Eastern Europe surrogates." 
Officials said that Ramsay, whose court hearing was continued until next week, 
had been cooperating with authorities. The ex-sergeant, represented by a 
court-appointed attorney, did not make a statement during the 90-minute 
proceedings. His mother, Dorothy Ramsay, cried as deputy marshals took Ramsay 
from the courtroom. 
Ramsay is charged with conspiracy to gather or deliver defense information to a 
foreign government. The charge carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. 
Federal officials described Ramsay as a junior but important partner of 
then-Army Sgt. Clyde Lee Conrad, who was convicted of treason in a West German 
court earlier this week. The two men had worked together in the mid-1980s as 
archive clerks with top-secret clearance at U.S. Army 8th Infantry Headquarters 
in West Germany. 
One law enforcement official said the government feared that what had been 
learned so far about the spy ring represented "just the tip of the iceberg" in 
a case that may have involved half a dozen soldiers and a wide range of 
national security secrets. He said also that the operation may have continued 
long after the two men left the Army. 
In the Tampa hearing Friday, Navarro said that Ramsay "had the ability to 
recall minute details, facts and figures -- some from documents he hadn't seen 
in five or six years." Ramsay also hid top-secret documents in his mother's 
residence in Tampa and had planned to sell them in the future, the federal 
agent told U.S. Magistrate Elizabeth Jenkins. 
Federal officials said Ramsay claimed to have destroyed the documents two years 
ago, but sources close to the investigation said the FBI hoped to recover them 
Friday, when it served search warrants at the home of Ramsay's mother and two 
other sites linked to the former Army sergeant. 
Navarro described Ramsay as an enigmatic man who had a high IQ and spoke 
Japanese, Spanish and German. He once told of trying to rob a bank in Vermont, 
Navarro said. In recent months, Ramsay had been sleeping in his car near his 
mother's home, he added. 
Navarro said Ramsay admitted to him in interviews dating back to at least April 
that he had participated in spying with Conrad, beginning in 1983, when Conrad 
recruited him. Ramsay said he initially used a 35-millimeter camera to 
photograph the classified documents, but then switched to more effective 
videotape. 
According to Navarro, Ramsay recorded a total of about 45 hours of videotape. 
In an affidavit supporting the criminal complaint against Ramsay in Tampa, the 
agent said Ramsay told of providing Conrad with classified materials on the use 
of tactical nuclear weapons by the United States and its NATO allies, military 
communications and general defense plans for Central Europe. 
Navarro said a significant number of the documents carried "top-secret" 
classification, and many were even more sensitive. According to the FBI agent, 
Ramsay said he knew the classified documents had been given to agents of the 
Hungarian and Czechoslovakian intelligence services. 
Ramsay, a native of Honolulu, joined the Army in November, 1981, and attended 
basic training at Ft. Benning, Ga., according to Army records. 
After being assigned as a mortar man to the 1st Battalion, 28th Infantry in Ft. 
Riley, Kan., he was transferred to West Germany in June, 1983, where he worked 
as a clerk-typist in the archives of the plans unit of the 8th Infantry 
Division. He left the service as a sergeant in November, 1985. 
Staff writer John M. Broder contributed to this story. 
