SCHOOLS LEARN HOW TO KEEP POTENTIAL DROPOUTS IN; 
EDUCATION: MOST DISTRICTS IN COUNTY BOAST DECLINING RATES WITH INNOVATIVE 
PROGRAMS TO REACH OUT TO TROUBLED STUDENTS BEFORE THEY QUIT, AND TO GET 
QUITTERS TO TRY AGAIN. 
Francisco and Maria Grueso had looked forward to the day when their oldest son 
would graduate from high school. It would be a day when they would beam with 
pride, knowing in their hearts that all the work and the gamble of leaving 
their native Spain to move to Orange County had paid off in a way that only a 
parent can truly appreciate. 
But there were no commencement ceremonies for young Francisco. He dropped out 
of Garden Grove High School in the middle of his senior year. To the shock of 
his parents, his younger brothers, Andres, 17, and David, 16, soon followed 
suit. Then, 14-year-old Javier also began losing interest in his studies and 
teetered toward the edge of dropping out. 
For the Gruesos, those were dark days, said Maria, 42. 
"We were so upset because a person without a career is nobody. It's better to 
go on studying for a better future," she said last week from the family's 
Garden Grove home. 
But now, thanks to a Garden Grove Unified School District program that seeks to 
prevent students from dropping out and tries to bring them back to school once 
they do, three of the Grueso sons have made a renewed commitment to their 
education. 
Francisco, 19, eventually enrolled in an adult learning center and earned a 
high school equivalency diploma. David is in continuation school and Javier, 
the youngest, decided not to drop out after learning from the experiences of 
his older brothers. 
Experts say what happened to the Grueso family is far too common in Orange 
County. From Santa Ana to San Clemente, school districts are struggling to keep 
students in school and if they do drop out, trying to persuade them to return 
to the classroom. 
The dropout rate for the 28 school districts in the county is 14.7%, lower than 
the statewide rate of 20.4%, according to a report recently released by the 
state Department of Education. All but Garden Grove, Irvine and the Laguna 
Beach unified school districts showed a decline in the dropout rate, which has 
decreased countywide by 25% over the past three years. Officials say the 
dropout rate is decreasing in part because of the innovative new programs being 
implemented by school districts across the county. 
Many districts, like Garden Grove Unified, have taken the offensive with 
aggressive programs to keep children in school. 
District officials are optimistic about a number of new prevention measures, 
such as the community outreach program that brought the Grueso brothers back to 
school. 
Under such programs, outreach consultants track down students after they have 
been out of school for more than six weeks and try to talk them into returning. 
Other districts bring role models into the classrooms and hire social workers 
to work with students who have dropped out. Still others have programs that 
attempt to reach elementary school students and give them direction before they 
even have any thoughts of leaving school. 
For the Gruesos, these programs made all the difference. After Francisco quit 
school and began working in construction, he realized he didn't want to find 
himself "29 or 30 years old with no future and a pain in my back." Francisco 
said he simply lost interest in school once he bought a car his junior year and 
decided he would rather do other things. 
But his parents, who had left the Spanish capital of Madrid specifically to 
give their children the benefits of a U.S. education, pushed him to finish his 
schooling and asked the school for help. The family was aided by Rose Garcia, a 
community outreach counselor, who presented Francisco with alternative ways of 
completing his education. 
Francisco is now studying electrical engineering at the ITT Technical Institute 
in Buena Park. Now older and wiser, he said he has seen the error of his ways 
and he hopes he is now a better role model for his brothers than before. 
"What I did wasn't right," he said. "I thought if my brothers saw my example 
(of returning to school), things would change." 
Within the last few months, the Anaheim and Garden Grove school districts have 
hired a number of outreach specialists who, among other things, work with 
students who run a high risk of becoming involved with gangs or drugs. Other 
specialists concentrate on tracking down students with attendance problems. 
"We are taking prevention measures at the elementary level and intervention 
measures at the intermediate level," said Alan Trudell, a Garden Grove Unified 
School District spokesperson. 
Cindy Tran was another student who, like the Grueso sons, followed a family 
pattern of dropping out. 
To the 16-year-old Westminster High School dropout, leaving school seemed like 
the natural thing to do. None of her older siblings had ever graduated from 
high school. But after a couple of months of spending days watching television 
and visiting friends, Tran got a call from a dropout recovery specialist, who 
convinced her to enroll in an adult school. 
"I think I'll be staying (in adult school) for a while because the time 
schedule is good and it's easier," Tran said. "I didn't like the long hours and 
going from class to class. I just got sick of going to school." 
Tran was contacted by Cham Nguyen, a dropout recovery liaison from the 
Huntington Beach Union High School District who calls, writes or visits 
students who have been absent from school for long periods of time. She works 
individually with students, trying to get them enrolled in an alternative 
education program and helps them find jobs if they need one. 
The dropout recovery program is coordinated by Catherine McGough, who trains 
and coordinates six people to track students who have been absent for extended 
periods of time. 
McGough believes such programs are valuable, but hopes someday there won't be a 
need for them. 
"We really need to put people like me out of business. We need to pump more 
money into prevention. We need one-to-one counselors, tutoring, mentoring, 
outreach and parent education," she said. 
Westminster High School, which has the highest dropout rate in the Huntington 
Beach Union High School District, has its own prevention program for potential 
dropouts. 
The school selects 50 incoming freshmen who have been identified by their 
eighth-grade teachers as potential dropouts because of low reading skills, poor 
attendance and a pattern of underachievement. The students are placed in 
smaller classes where they receive more personalized attention. The program 
also gets parents involved by having them monitor homework for at least one 
hour on school nights and by having them in constant contact with teachers. 
Anaheim Union High School District, which offers similar programs, has also 
hired its first full-time social worker and plans to hire two more to help 
students with problems at home get assistance from social services agencies 
outside of school. Three interns also assist the social worker and provide more 
one-to-one contact with the family, counselor and faculty. 
While Orange County schools have made progress keeping kids in school, many 
believe there is still a long way to go. 
"We are doing everything that we can to keep students in school," said Bobbi 
Zane, Anaheim Union's spokeswoman. "There is only so much that we can do. It's 
up to the family to take advantage of a free public education. It's just not a 
high school problem, it's a social problem." 
In the Santa Ana Unified School District, officials are not only buoyed by a 
decrease in dropouts from 41.8% in 1986 to 22.8% in 1989, but also by a record 
enrollment of 3,815 ninth-grade students in 1990, about 600 more than the 
previous year. 
District Supt. Rudy Castruita believes one of the programs most responsible for 
the decrease in dropouts and the increase in ninth-graders is Stay in School, 
which was initiated by Superior Court Judge Jack Mandel to show students that 
good things happen when they refuse to quit. 
Mandel's program brings professionals from all walks of life into 8th- and 
10th-grade classrooms at least six times a semester, where they discuss the 
benefits of completing their education. 
"There are lots of ways to overcome what these students may perceive as 
barriers to higher education or certain jobs," said Greg Rankin, principal at 
Lathrop Intermediate School in Santa Ana. "This is one of many ways to raise 
students' expectations of themselves. The students need to see that their 
potential can be unlimited." 
Following a similar theme as the Stay in School program, the district is also 
making an effort to reach students at an even younger age by hosting career 
days at all its elementary schools. 
