ELECTIONS; 
CONGRESS; 
A GUIDE TO CANDIDATES, ISSUES IN DISTRICT 20 RACES 
Overview 
Rep. William M. Thomas (R-Bakersfield) is being opposed in the GOP primary by 
former Los Angeles County Sheriff's Deputy Rod Gregory. In the Democratic 
primary, Michael Thomas is challenging Lita Reid, who lost to Rep. Thomas in 
the 1988 general election, 71% to 27%. Rep. Thomas did not return the Times' 
questionnaire. 
Contenders 
Rep. William M. Thomas, 48, of Bakersfield is serving his sixth term in the 
U.S. House of Representatives, where he is on the Ways and Means Committee, the 
Budget Committee and the Committee on House Administration. From 1974 to 1978, 
he served in the state Assembly. A graduate of Santa Ana Community College, 
Thomas also holds BA and MA degrees from San Francisco State University. He is 
on leave from Bakersfield College, where he taught American government. Thomas 
and his wife, Sharon, have two children, Chris and Amy. 
Rod Gregory, 33, of Santa Clarita owns a swimming pool service and repair 
company. He attended College of the Canyons and Los Angeles Baptist College, 
studying criminal law. He was a deputy in the Los Angeles County Sheriff's 
Department for five years. Gregory has been endorsed by the California 
Republican Assembly and the Young Americans for Freedom. He and his wife, Lori, 
have two children, Andy, 8, and Adam, 7. 
Lita Reid, 60, of Ridgecrest is a free-lance journalist and former newspaper 
reporter and editor. She attended Sacramento State University, studying 
journalism and government, and did independent study in legal issues. Her first 
political race was in 1988, when she lost to Rep. Thomas in the general 
election. Reid and her husband, Robert, an engineer at the Naval Weapons 
Center, have four grown children and six grandchildren. 
Michael A. Thomas, 29, of Nipomo owns a professional attorney service and 
specializes in serving legal papers in difficult cases. He holds a general 
equivalency diploma. He ran unsuccessfully for the Moorpark City Council in 
1986. Thomas is married and has two children, Heather, 3, and Michael, 8. His 
wife's name is Carolyn. 
Questionnaire 
Questionnaires were distributed to candidates in contested primary races and 
were returned this month. Answers have been edited to fit the available space. 
Q. Do you believe that there will be a "peace dividend" as a result of reduced 
tension with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact nations? 
If yes, would you generally be most inclined to use the dividend to: a) spend 
more on domestic needs, b) reduce the deficit, c) cut taxes? 
 Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): Yes. First domestic needs, then deficit and taxes. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. All of the above. 
Q. Do you believe our present system of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies and imprisonment of dealers and users will ever significantly reduce 
the level of drug use in the United States? 
If no, what should be done? 
 Gregory (R): No. Use of military, death penalty for traffickers, education on 
the user/demand side. 
Reid (D): No. Need a national sense of purpose that says we will not become a 
drug-addicted nation. Use positive messages about health. Prosecution should 
include mandate for treatment. 
M. Thomas (D): No. All of the judicial system should be stopped from being 
lawmakers. 
Q. Would you consider the possibility of decriminalizing drugs? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): No. 
M. Thomas (D): No. 
Q. Under the Gramm-Rudman law, the federal government is supposed to cut the 
budget deficit to zero by 1993. Is that a realistic goal? 
Briefly explain your answer. 
Gregory (R): Yes. If we hold the line on no new taxes and the voters demand 
spending cuts by holding Congress accountable on election day for the next 
three years. 
Reid (D): No. Current election trends show same representatives who have not 
controlled excessive spending will return to office. 
M. Thomas (D): No. They cannot cut the budget deficit until they stop sending 
money all over the world. 
Q. Rising property values in the Santa Monica Mountains have made it more 
difficult for state and federal parks agencies to buy land for public use. Land 
prices have escalated in part because local officials have allowed developers 
to build more houses than provided for under zoning laws. To keep property 
prices more affordable to parks agencies, should governments in Los Angeles and 
Ventura counties refuse such so-called "upzoning"? 
Gregory (R): No. Federal government should not be allowed to artificially 
interfere with land prices in a free market, or to intrude in local government 
policy or private property rights. 
Reid (D): Yes. Unless county officials practice some self-control by adhering 
to zoning guidelines, prime recreation and natural areas will disappear. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. 
Q. Do you support capital punishment? 
Gregory (R): Yes. 
Reid (D): Yes, when applied fairly so that poor minorities are not the only 
ones to suffer the death penalty. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. 
Q. Do you support a woman's unrestricted right to an abortion within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): Yes, but women should be discouraged from deciding on abortion 
because baby is not the desired sex. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. 
Q. Do you support President Bush's policy of seeking to maintain good relations 
with China's current regime despite its violent suppression of the 
pro-democracy movement last year? 
If no, what specific measures should the United States take against China? 
Gregory (R): No. Cut diplomatic relations, invoke economic sanctions, grant 
asylum to Chinese national students and dissidents. 
Reid (D): No. Stronger protest and cutbacks in trade. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. Just do not send money to them. 
Q. Do you favor opening up additional parts of the California coastline to oil 
exploration under any circumstances other than a national emergency? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): No. 
M. Thomas (D): No. 
Q. Would you support a national gasoline tax increase if the proceeds were 
dedicated to improving transportation? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): No. Use money already allocated. 
M. Thomas (D): No. 
Q. Do you support limiting the amount of money a candidate for national office 
can spend on the campaign? 
Gregory (R): Yes. 
Reid (D): Yes. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. 
Q. Would you support at least a partial taxpayer-financed campaign funding as 
part of a reform package that limited spending? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): Yes. 
M. Thomas (D): No. 
Q. Do you support limiting the number of terms that U.S. senators and 
representatives can serve? 
If yes, what should the limit be? 
Gregory (R): Yes. Senate, two 6-year terms. House, three 4-year or six 2-year 
terms. 
Reid (D): No. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. Two terms Senate, three terms Congress. 
Q. Do you favor more control over the availability of handguns to the general 
public? 
If yes, what specific controls? 
Gregory (R): No. 
Reid (D): Yes. "Brady Bill" waiting period, background screening. Keep guns 
away from children and out of schools. 
M. Thomas (D): No. 
Q. Do you support the current program to build a "Star Wars" anti-missile 
system? 
If yes, do you think the program is adequately funded? 
Gregory (R): Yes. I don't have enough information to honestly know. Much of it 
is classified. 
Reid (D): Yes. Yes, funding should allow research to maintain parity with 
Soviet research. I do not see the need to fund production, deployment. 
M. Thomas (D): Yes. No. it is not adequately funded. 
