SON COMING HOME AT LAST -- TO BE BURIED 
For 17 years, John and Eugenia Bednarek were torn by the uncertainty of whether 
their only son was alive. 
The uncertainty drove them from the house in Greenlawn, N.Y., where they reared 
Jonathan and his sister Joanne. It consumed their attention. And, despite 
continuing evidence to the contrary, they held out the hope that someday 
Jonathan would join them at the condominium where they now live in Ridge, N.Y. 
-- to once again wear his clothes that they stored in the extra bedroom, to 
once again pick up the belongings stowed in his trunk. 
"In a way, three people have been living in this condo, because we never knew, 
one of these days he might be back," John Bednarek said recently. 
Jonathan Bednarek is now coming home, not to live, but to be buried. And John 
and Eugenia Bednarek finally have the answer they have been seeking for 17 
years. 
Killed in 1972 
Capt. Jonathan Bruce Bednarek was killed in a 1972 bombing mission over North 
Vietnam, where his remains stayed until they were returned to the United States 
late last year. 
Almost immediately, military officials became convinced that Jonathan 
Bednarek's remains were among 38 sets of remains -- 16 tentatively identified 
as those of American servicemen -- handed over to the U.S. government in 
December, his father said. The Bednareks were told shortly afterward that the 
process to identify their son's remains had begun. 
"All these years we didn't know what to grieve for, because we didn't know if 
he was dead or alive," said John Bednarek, who is 78. "Let me tell you, it 
shook us up. At last we knew, but it wasn't the news we wanted." 
Recently, the officials told the Bednareks that the identification process was 
almost complete. They said that the family could arrange funeral services for 
their son, one of 29 Long Islanders listed as unaccounted for after military 
action in Southeast Asia, and the first whose remains have been identified and 
sent home to Long Island for burial since the war ended. 
An honors high school student in Greenlawn who graduated magna cum laude with 
an ROTC commission at Manhattan College, Bednarek had served just one month and 
one day as an Air Force captain when he was reported missing in action on April 
18, 1972, at age 23. Air Force officials said that the F-4 Phantom jet he was 
navigating was on a bombing raid over Ha Bac province, about 35 miles northeast 
of Hanoi. 
Bednarek's remains were charred, leading forensic analysts to conclude that his 
F-4 jet was downed and that he died in the crash, his father said. The 
Vietnamese also furnished an identification card with Bednarek's name and 
photograph, "which means they knew all these years that he was dead and never 
told us," he added. "Of all the grief and anger, that realization may have been 
the worst." 
Larry Belcher, a spokesman for the U.S. Pacific Command, which oversees the 
U.S. Army Central Identification Laboratory in Honolulu, said that he could not 
yet release details on the Bednarek case. But he said that each identification 
is a "painstaking" process, where teams of experts sift through remains and 
match them against computerized medical records, searching for a bone fracture 
or a tooth setting that may unlock the key to an identity. 
Move From Home 
A year after their son disappeared, the Bednareks moved from their house on 
Oakwood Street, a quiet one-way street in Greenlawn where they had reared 
Jonathan and their daughter Joanne, who is now 49 and lives in Florida. 
"We couldn't take it any more, to be in the house he had grown up in," Bednarek 
said. He and his wife now live in a retirement community in Ridge. 
But friends and neighbors still remember the Bednareks and the pride they 
showed when their son enlisted -- as well as the shock when they learned he was 
missing. 
The Bednareks were regarded as "very nice, very friendly people," said Albert 
Dicesare, who still lives next door to the family's former home. He described 
the son -- whom neighbors knew by his middle name, Bruce -- as a friendly, 
outgoing boy who liked to build models of battleships and fighter planes. 
'Very, Very Proud' 
When Bednarek joined the Air Force, his parents were "very, very proud of the 
fact that he was a flier and that he was flying for his country," Dicesare 
said. 
Dicesare remembers looking out the window one day in 1972 and seeing two or 
three officers "wearing a lot of brass" knock on the Bednareks' front door. "I 
saw them come in . . . ," he said. "After that, they did change. They weren't 
the same happy-go-lucky couple. They were preoccupied, and of course, it was 
because of their son." 
Alice Rickard, the Bednareks' other former next-door neighbor on Oakwood 
Street, remembers another knock on their front door a few weeks later. "I 
remember when they shipped back his trunk, she was very upset. She left it in 
the hall, and she wouldn't open it until her husband got home. They were just 
devastated when their son was shot down." 
Like many other servicemen who failed to return from the Vietnam War, Bednarek 
was initially listed as a prisoner of war, and each time the names of freed 
prisoners were announced, the family's hope was buoyed. But a few years after 
the war ended, his status was changed to missing in action. In 1979, along with 
most others previously listed as MIAs and POWs, his status was changed to 
"presumed dead." Bednarek was awarded the Purple Heart and the Distinguished 
Flying Cross. 
2,357 Unaccounted For 
All told, U.S. forensic experts have identified the remains of 226 other 
Americans who served in the Vietnam War. Another 2,357 Americans who served in 
Vietnam are still unaccounted for, Pentagon officials said. Of those, 1,723 
were last seen in Vietnam, 545 in Laos, 83 in Cambodia and six in China. 
"We cannot rule out the possibility that some Americans are still alive or are 
being detained against their will in Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in 1975, 
but we are unable to prove it," said Lt. Cmdr. Jim Kudla, a Pentagon spokesman. 
The government is still investigating reported sightings of about 140 U.S. 
servicemen in Southeast Asia, he said. 
Around the country, the debate continues over whether the U.S. government is 
doing enough to find military personnel still missing in Southeast Asia. 
"Initially, a lot of us were critical of both governments' efforts to find 
those missing in Vietnam," said Rep. Robert J. Mrazek (D-N.Y.), who has been 
active in U.S.-Vietnam issues. But he said since the 1987 visit by Gen. John W. 
Vessey Jr. to Vietnam to discuss the problem with the Vietnamese, "I think both 
sides are working hard to resolve this issue." 
Receive Confirmation 
For the Bednareks, five more agonizing months passed after the December call 
before the Bednareks received the recent confirmation that forensic teams at 
the laboratory in Hawaii had successfully matched the remains against their 
son's medical records. 
And that has brought some relief to Ed Ferraro, a 42-year-old Vietnam veteran 
who is vice president of the Freedom Foundation, a group that promotes public 
awareness of missing servicemen. Ferraro has been wearing a POW-MIA bracelet 
with Bednarek's name on it for two years. 
"When I got up and dressed and put on the bracelet, I'd look at the guy's name 
and wonder what kind of man he was, how he got shot down. . . . If they are his 
remains, and the family is willing to accept his remains, I'm relieved," 
Ferraro said. 
