LIZ SMITH: TRUMP'S DEBT, MARLA'S JEANS, ABC'S GOOD NEWS 
THE HOT SKINNY free-floating over Atlantic City and the Isle of Manhattan has 
it that Donald Trump went to his father, Fred, a man who is a success story in 
his own right. Donald asked to borrow money for the current unpleasantness. 
Papa Fred is said to have answered he'd lend on one condition -- Donald must 
reconcile with Ivana! 
Is this true? Well, it's what insiders say, though I wouldn't expect either 
Trump the Elder or Trump the Younger to confirm it. 
MARLA MAPLES shot her first commercial for No Excuses jeans in an idyllic 
country setting Tuesday in Connecticut. She has decided she really wants to 
make her life in New York and is now expressing an interest in a singing 
career. 
Can Marla sing? She says she can and that she inherited the talent from her 
dear father. 
THE CURRENT craze for big occasions is to make a video tribute for the subject 
being honored by having best pals, family, and the famous or infamous say a few 
words. The Donald Trump 44th birthday celebration in Atlantic City last weekend 
was no exception and one who gave Donald a friendly needle was the 
controversial comic Andrew Dice Clay. 
Trump reportedly hopes to put Clay into one of his big entertainment rooms on 
the Jersey shore. But some who were at the party, attended by Fred Trump, 
skipped out of the room during Clay's diatribe. They said it was "Soooo 
vulgar." 
Fortunately, Donald's splendid mother, Mary, was not there; she is recovering 
from a broken leg. 
ABC won lots of nice publicity from its affiliates meeting last week in Los 
Angeles, with dignified and welcome pronouncements, such as the fact that David 
Brinkley is staying on. (Thank goodness!) 
But what the network also garnered was lots of unexpected, unwanted, 
undignified laughter from the affiliate honchos when they saw a sneak preview 
of "Cop Rock." This is the new dramatic musical series from the gifted "L.A. 
Law" and "Hill Street Blues" creator Steve Bochco. Actors actually break right 
into song in the middle of this epic about cops. And those who have seen it, 
can't believe what they saw -- and heard. 
BEVERLY SILLS has a new job; she will write at least three articles a year for 
McCall's dealing with her zest for life and her very interesting opinions. Yes, 
she can write. too. 
