WON'T ABANDON CAUSES, DEPARTING KOOP VOWS 
Departing Surgeon Gen. C. Everett Koop, reflecting on his eight years as the 
nation's top doctor, promised Thursday that after leaving government he will 
not abandon any of the causes he has actively and publicly promoted. 
"I would like someone to say five years from now that when Koop left the office 
of surgeon general he continued to be the health conscience of the country," he 
said, speaking in his final meeting with reporters as surgeon general. "I will 
continue to deliver health messages to this country as long as people will 
listen." 
Koop, who will leave his post July 13 to write his memoirs, said that his 
greatest satisfactions have come from the public response to his anti-smoking 
campaign, in which he called for a smoke-free society by the year 2000, and to 
his 1986 AIDS report, which, he said, "is just as accurate today as it was 
then." 
His 'Top Success' 
The percentage of Americans who smoke dropped to 26% from 34% during his 
tenure, he said, and his anti-smoking messages have inspired many changes in 
state and local laws regarding smoking in public places. He said that "in the 
matter of numbers," it was his "top success." 
But it was his report to the public on AIDS -- in which he called for AIDS 
education in elementary school and urged the use of condoms to reduce 
transmission of the virus -- that forced a national public debate on issues 
that many Americans had been unwilling to confront, he said. 
"Because I faced the issue squarely and used the language that I did -- and I 
don't know what you can call a penis, a vagina and a condom other than what 
they are -- that finally pushed people reluctantly and slowly into a position 
of reality," he said. 
He said that "certain very conservative" members of the Ronald Reagan White 
House staff, whom he did not identify, "would have done almost anything to shut 
me up." In fact, he said, only one week after the release of the AIDS report, 
they urged him to "update" it by eliminating the references to condoms. He 
refused. 
"They left my office in a huff," he said. "They're gone -- and I'm here." 
Given Free Hand 
However, he added: "Never since I have been in this job has anyone at a high 
level criticized me, or suggested that I not say something, or say something 
that I didn't believe in." 
Koop raised the ire of many conservatives with his AIDS document, and also by 
his refusal to write a report describing the physical and psychological 
ramifications of abortion, a study he said could not be supported by scientific 
data. 
Ironically, it was this same constituency that had avidly backed him during the 
10 months it took for his confirmation to be approved. Congressional liberals, 
led by Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles), had stalled the nomination because 
they considered Koop a right-wing religious zealot with little experience in 
public health. Since then, Waxman and others have become ardent admirers of 
Koop. 
"What happened to me is a lesson about labels," Koop said. "I have always been 
conservative, but never the arch-conservative that the right-wing politicos 
thought I was. When I arrived, I never promised to espouse any causes. All I 
have done in this job is to face issues and deal with them as honestly as I 
could under the umbrella of public health." 
Sees Education as Key 
An avowed opponent of abortion, Koop said that he believes the only way to 
eliminate abortion is not to reverse the 1973 Supreme Court Roe vs. Wade 
decision, but to "educate people in a way we've never done" in matters of 
sexuality and contraception. 
"It is a social issue which divides the people of this country like nothing 
else since the days of slavery," he said. "Both sides have become more 
entrenched, and I don't see any flexibility." 
Thus, he said, preventive medicine in the form of increased education is the 
only solution. "If you want to get rid of abortions, you'd better get rid of 
the reasons for them," he said. 
Koop, a former pediatric surgeon, said he had hoped to be named secretary of 
health and human services in the Bush Administration. "I would have liked to be 
secretary, and I think I would have done a very credible job," he said. 
Koop said he would not have remained as surgeon general, even if the Bush 
Administration had asked him to do so. 
"I'm 73," he said. " . . . I don't know how much time I have left ahead . . . I 
would like to take a crack at the private sector and try, if I can, to make 
some kind of impact on health from that perspective." 
