PRYOR DECIDES NOT TO RUN, ENDORSES MAYOR KELL 
Luanne W. Pryor, last year's dark horse mayoral candidate, has decided to 
endorse incumbent Mayor Ernie Kell, throwing her support behind a man she 
previously criticized as a follower lacking both vision and imagination. 
Ending months of indecision about her political future, Pryor surprised 
followers of local politics by announcing this week not only that she will not 
run, but that she was endorsing Kell in his race against Councilman Tom Clark. 
Kell's camp immediately took the endorsement as a boon that virtually ensured 
Kell's victory at the polls next April. "After this evening, it's going to be 
very easy," Vice Mayor Wallace Edgerton, one of Kell's political allies, 
declared to a banquet room full of the mayor's supporters at a fund-raising 
dinner Tuesday night. 
Clark maintained his even-handed demeanor when informed of the news. "Luanne 
Pryor is certainly not the key to this race," he said, adding that it was hard 
to predict how much weight her endorsement would carry. "I'm rather surprised 
because she hasn't been particularly close to Mr. Kell or his positions." 
Political Newcomer 
Pryor, a public relations executive and political newcomer with a comparatively 
meager campaign fund, managed to capture nearly a quarter of the votes in last 
year's election to choose the city's full-time mayor. Her unexpected success 
forced Kell into a runoff with Councilwoman Jan Hall, which Kell won. 
Had Pryor entered next year's race, the concern in Kell's quarters was that she 
would again take votes from the mayor. Though Clark said he has assumed that if 
Pryor didn't run, he might pick up a good part of her support, Kell's advisers 
look to a poll from the Hall-Kell race. The majority of Pryor's supporters 
indicated they would vote for Kell rather than Hall. 
In a prepared statement at the $250-a-ticket fund-raiser in a downtown hotel, 
Pryor said she has watched Kell grow in his new position during the past four 
months. 
"I have been looking very carefully at what has been happening and Ernie Kell 
knows that I have been looking and I have come to the conclusion that the man 
we honor this evening has done an excellent job as our first full-time mayor. 
He has proved that the newly created position works." 
That was not Pryor's opinion just a few months ago, when she said in an 
interview that she thought Long Beach residents needed "somebody who's more 
awake" than Kell. 
'No Strong Leadership' 
"I just don't see any strong leadership, I don't see anything exciting 
happening," she said then of Kell's performance. "People have said to me that 
they think the (new full-time mayor's position) is a waste of time and it 
hasn't amounted to anything." 
In an interview Tuesday, Pryor said her support of Kell was not an overnight 
conversion. "I have noticed a decided change. If I had not seen that change. I 
would not be here." She also said she preferred Kell to Clark. "I don't like 
his condescension," she said of Clark. 
Another undoubted factor for Pryor, who retains political ambitions, is that 
both she and Kell are Democrats, while Clark is a Republican. 
Money was a decisive issue in keeping Pryor out of next year's race. "I don't 
think I could have raised the amount of money it would have taken to win this 
race," Pryor said, noting that unlike Kell, she could not pour large sums of 
her own money into a campaign. She still has a campaign debt of $6,000 left 
over from last year. 
Both Kell and Pryor insisted that no deal had been made for help with her 
campaign debt or for an appointment to any city commission or committee. 
To the extent that she is eyeing any position right now, Pryor said she is 
toying with the idea of running against Assemblyman Dennis Brown ( R-Long 
Beach) for the 58th District seat. 
