TRYING TO STUMP THE STARS ABROAD; 
BURBANK'S NEIL LASHKARI AND TEAMMATES ON LONGSHOT U.S. CRICKET TEAM JOURNEY TO 
EUROPE IN BID TO QUALIFY FOR 1991 WORLD CUP 
Considering the United States' apathy toward cricket -- a sport so ignored it 
hasn't even had a drug scandal in this country -- nobody should be surprised to 
learn that not one player on the U.S. national team was born in the U.S.A. 
Neil Lashkari of Burbank, however, came close. 
Born 31 years ago in Leeds, England, Lashkari moved with his family to Southern 
California when he was only 6 months old. His U.S. upbringing gives him the 
distinction of being the only American-bred player on the national team, which 
is taking part in the World Cup qualifying tournament this month in the 
Netherlands. 
The United States, a third-rate cricket power, is one of 19 teams entered in 
the qualifier, called the "mini" World Cup. Only the winner -- Zimbabwe is 
considered the favorite -- will be allowed to play in the big tournament next 
year in Australia, where England, India and the West Indies will be among the 
nine cricket superpowers trading googleys (a ball delivered by a bowler that 
appears to be going to break one way but breaks the other way when it hits the 
ground). The United States has never qualified for the quadrennial event. 
U.S. cricket is played primarily on the East Coast -- the governing body of the 
sport, the U.S. Cricket Assn., is in Philadelphia -- and the U.S. national team 
is made up almost entirely of West Indians from Eastern amateur teams. Only two 
California players were picked: Lashkari and bowler Terry Mills, a 27-year-old 
Trinidad native who lives in Inglewood. 
John Reid is the most recent American-born player to have made a U.S. national 
team. Reid played on the 1982 squad and might have made this year's team had he 
not looked terrible during tryouts. "In baseball terms, I went oh for four," 
says Reid, 32, who lives in Glendale. 
That the Valley area produced both Reid and Lashkari is due more to genetics 
than geography. Their foreign-born fathers were international cricketers who 
moved to L.A. in the late '50s. Anil Lashkari, who played for India's national 
teams, and Jim Reid, an English pro, met while playing cricket at Griffith Park 
and became best friends. Jim, a 59-year-old real estate appraiser, is also a 
former president of the U.S. Cricket Assn. 
The two boys "grew up together," John says. "We're like brothers." It was only 
natural for them to play cricket. "Neil's father coached him and my father 
coached me and we had the desire" is John's explanation for their development 
into international cricket players instead of mall rats. 
"Neil and I are extremely unique," Reid says, because Americans "don't usually 
progress beyond league level." 
Reid and Lashkari also improved their cricket skills by playing in England 
during summer vacations from Valley College. Both dreamed of eventually playing 
professionally, but reality woke them up, Lashkari explains, "when we found out 
it wasn't our life style." 
"There's no glamour in it," Reid says. "Eight guys in a flat. Living out of a 
suitcase. I thought it would be pretty posh, but it was just the opposite." 
"Unless you're a top pro," Lashkari says, "there's just no money in cricket." 
"Both of us felt we could do better back home," adds Reid, who, along with 
Lashkari, became a real estate appraiser like Jim Reid. 
Neil and John are standing on the roped-off cricket field at Sepulveda Basin. 
Even though it has no Little League or high school cricket programs, the Valley 
is hardly a cricket wasteland. The Southern California Cricket Assn. plays a 
competitive nine-month season at Sepulveda Basin, and the field, Reid says, is 
considered the best in the country. 
A cricket field has no set dimensions; it may be oval or circular but must be 
limited to a maximum of 75 yards in any direction from its center. At Sepulveda 
Basin, in the center of the field, is a square of manicured grass, about 25 
yards on each side, with wicket creases limed into each corner. Thus the pitch 
-- a strip 66 feet long and 10 feet wide -- can be rotated when each side of 
the square becomes worn. 
Reid and Lashkari, who play for University Cricket Club, are at the basin to 
practice. Only games are played on the field, so a backstop is set up and 
artificial turf is rolled out to give the bowler an even surface off which to 
bounce the ball. About a dozen players participate in the practice. Bowlers 
take turns bowling and batters take a few licks. Several players warm up doing 
the cricket version of pepper. 
A left-handed batter, Lashkari is trying to work on his timing before he 
departs the Netherlands. Reid provides a scouting report on him. "Neil is very 
sound defensively," Reid says, meaning that he's adept at protecting the wicket 
with his bat. "He gets in line and builds his innings." Translation: Lashkari 
steps into the ball and scores a lot of runs. 
Lashkari stands in front of the wicket wearing thick leg pads and a face mask. 
It becomes obvious why he needs protection. Bowlers take a running start and 
uncork the hard leather ball from some 22 yards away. A spinning overhand can 
come in at 100 m.p.h., hitting the turf at the batter's feet and skipping 
unpredictably like a one-hop smash to third base. 
Lashkari takes about 30 swings, protecting the stumps -- each time. When 
Lashkari finishes, sweat trickles off his brow. 
"Cricket is a little harder to play than baseball because you have to hit the 
ball off the bounce 99% of the time," Lashkari says. 
Lashkari played baseball at Burbank High and admits that he "probably should 
have stayed with" the sport. His friends, he says, never teased him about 
cricket and "were quite intrigued by it." Occasionally, his friends would watch 
him play but they had difficulty understanding the odd terminology and rules. 
Indeed, cricket is an alien experience for the uninitiated. A game at the basin 
over Memorial Day weekend seems to proceed in slow motion, with players doing a 
lot of standing around on the field in their all-white uniforms. A problem 
Americans have with cricket: A game lasts all day, at least. And spectators 
have to sit or stand some 100 yards from the square, making it very difficult 
to pick up the ball as it is bowled. 
"Explaining the game to someone is hard," Lashkari says. "The best way is to 
show how it's played." 
In brief, it is a contest played between two teams of 11 players each. The 
object of the game is to score runs when at bat and to put out, or dismiss, the 
opposing batsmen when in the field. Each side has two innings, normally taken 
alternately. 
Matches are played for a predetermined length of time, and often two days or 
more are required to finish. (A team at bat might accumulate as many as 300 to 
400 runs before all of its players are retired.) 
Lashkari figures he can play competitively for an additional 10 years. His 
father, a 55-year-old chemical engineer, played into his 40s and even was 
playing captain of the '79 U.S. national team. That team was also notable for 
having Jim Reid as manager and Neil and John as players. But it didn't emerge 
from the qualifier, a fate that likely will befall the current squad. 
"We've been mentioned as one of six teams that could possibly do well," says 
Lashkari, playing on his fourth U.S. national team. "Personally, I think our 
chances are average." 
