OUTLOOK IMPROVES FOR ORANGE COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL 
Two multimillion-dollar dam projects in West Virginia may help Orange County 
squeeze $20 million out of Congress to finally begin construction of the 
long-delayed Santa Ana River flood-control project. 
Approved 2 1/2 years ago, but not yet financed, the Santa Ana River project has 
been designated a top priority by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The agency 
has declared the Santa Ana River the worst flood threat west of the 
Mississippi. 
Last year, the House of Representatives, seeking to trim the federal budget 
deficit, decided against financing any of the agency's new water projects, 
including the Santa Ana River venture. 
But this year, officials working to get financing for the massive Santa Ana 
River undertaking, which is expected to cost nearly $1.4 billion and take years 
to complete, said they are encouraged about the prospects for beginning 
construction in the 1990 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. 
"Last year, for fiscal year '89, Congress did not fund any new projects. We 
believe that was only a one-year policy," said David C. Kenyon, acting chief of 
the programs division of the Army Corps of Engineers' civil works directorate. 
"I am very optimistic that we will end the moratorium on new starts this year," 
said Rep. Vic Fazio (D-Sacramento), a member of the House Appropriations 
Committee's energy and water subcommittee. 
One reason for the new optimism is the corps' inclusion high on its proposed 
funding list this year of two projects in West Virginia -- $17.9 million to 
replace an old dam-and-lock system on the Monongahela River and $20.8 million 
for a similar project on the Kanawha River. 
Those two projects, which were not in last year's proposal, are expected to 
provide a special incentive to a key player in the funding process, Sen. Robert 
C. Byrd (D-W.Va.), to clear the logjam over new money for flood control. Byrd 
is chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee and a member of the energy 
and water subcommittee. 
"That was smart thinking on their (the corps') part," said James F. McConnell, 
Orange County's lobbyist in Washington. 
Rep. Jerry Lewis (R-Highland), a leading supporter of the Santa Ana project, 
said, "I'm not sure that the corps has (made) those sorts of links." However, 
he added: "Stranger things have happened in the business of making sausage." 
Expresses Reservations 
Approval by the Senate Appropriations Committee is seen as a major hurdle for 
the project. Last month, Sen. Mark O. Hatfield (R-Ore.), ranking minority 
member of the Senate panel, publicly expressed reservations about beginning new 
water projects if long-term financing cannot be assured. 
Supporters of the project believe that the House will be more receptive to 
flood-control fund requests. 
Members of Orange County's congressional delegation said Fazio and Lewis are 
leading the lobbying push for the Santa Ana River project, which is designed to 
ease the danger of disastrous flooding in Lewis' San Bernardino County 
district, as well as Orange County. 
The Corps of Engineers has estimated that in the kind of flood disaster that 
might occur every 200 years, the rising river could kill as many as 3,000 
people and cause as much as $11 billion in property damage over its 100-mile 
course from the mountains in San Bernardino County to the ocean near Newport 
Beach. The river slices through about 30 miles of Orange County's most densely 
populated urban areas. 
During recent hearings before the energy and water subcommittee, Lewis urged 
the panel to approve $32 million to begin the flood-control work. That request 
was endorsed by the full Orange County congressional delegation. 
'Tremendous Help' 
"We've had tremendous help from the members" from Orange County, Lewis said. 
Officials expect that in the next week or two, the subcommittee will receive 
word from the full Appropriations Committee on how much money it may spend on 
water projects. Once that figure is known, prospects for the Santa Ana project 
will become clearer, officials said. 
"Although a number of members have requested that we appropriate more for the 
project than (the $20 million) in the President's budget, it is too early to 
determine whether we will be able to augment that amount," Fazio said. 
Rohrabacher, in an interview, said he has repeatedly raised the issue with the 
subcommittee chairman, Rep. Tom Bevill (D-Ala.). "The man who's got more 
leverage on this knows firsthand that we're going to have thousands of our 
citizens dead if this doesn't go through," Rohrabacher said. 
Lewis said: "I consider it to be a crucial year as far as the project's chance 
of coming forward. The next four or five years don't look easy in terms of 
budget considerations." 
Could Begin Building Dam 
The $20 million requested this year would allow the corps to begin constructing 
a new dam in San Bernardino County on the upper Santa Ana River, to be called 
the Seven Oaks Dam, and pay for other preliminary engineering and design work. 
The new dam would be 550 feet high. 
A quarter of the $20 million would pay for acquisition of wetlands near the 
mouth of the Santa Ana River to provide protection for two birds -- the 
California least tern and Belding's sparrow, whose habitats would be endangered 
by the project. 
Eventually, the project would raise the level of Prado Dam by 36 feet to 
accommodate storage of an additional 195,000 acre-feet of water and upgrade 
flood channels along the Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek. Included would be 
major improvements to the Talbert Channel, the failure of which led to 
widespread damage in the 1983 floods. Some channels would be lined with 
concrete, while others would be graded and widened. 
All but $364 million of the total project cost of nearly $1.4 billion would be 
paid by the federal government. 
