BEYOND THE SUPERPOWER SUMMIT HYPE; 
HISTORY: WHETHER U.S.-SOVIET DEFENSE CUTS CAN RESTORE THE ECONOMIC LUSTER OF 
THE TWO COUNTRIES WILL REQUIRE CHOICES NO TWO LEADERS CAN MAKE. 
Superpower summits inevitably produce grand opportunities for the leaders of 
each nation. Regardless of their substance, summits permit both U.S. and Soviet 
Presidents to claim foreign-policy success. 
The massive media attention arising from these events boosts the leaders far 
above their domestic critics. Both can claim that they are making the world 
safer, and can now divert valuable national resources from swords to 
plowshares. But historians of the rise and fall of nations cannot help but 
wonder whether the superpowers are really learning anything from history. 
In arms agreements unimaginable only two years ago, both the United States and 
Soviet Union have been shedding the military burdens that were dragging them 
down like so many empires before them. Presidential staffs and advisers, not to 
mention strategic think tanks and analysts, are positively giddy. Instead of 
plans for new armaments, there is the cancellation of existing and prototype 
weapons. Instead of a fully blown concentration on a battle in the Fulda Gap, 
or off the Greenland Straits, there is a desperate attempt by the armed 
services to scale down and "reshape" themselves for operations in other parts 
of the world that (we are solemnly assured) have now become more turbulent and 
unpredictable. 
However one assesses the likelihood and seriousness of regional conflicts, the 
prevailing mood among the decision-makers of both superpowers appears to be 
that an open U.S.-Soviet military conflict nowadays is highly implausible and 
that they should get on with making peace, not war. 
What can have caused this swift transformation from Cold War to unprecedented 
detente? The simplest answer -- and that favored by the political right in the 
United States -- is that the Soviet Union "cracked." Unable to match the 
American rearmament program because of its inefficient and stagnant economy, a 
more realistic leadership under Mikhail S. Gorbachev decided that compromise 
was necessary: Having failed to "win" the arms race, the Soviet Union needed to 
get out of it as expeditiously as possible. 
While it was humiliating to concede an American victory, it was more important 
to concentrate resources on restructuring the Soviet economy, aided, as part of 
the detente "deal," by Western credits, technology and other assistance. With 
restoration of the Soviet economy, however, the future of Soviet military would 
be an open issue. Because Moscow's military climb-down was a coldly pragmatic 
decision, the argument of the right goes, the United States ought not to be 
lulled into a sense of false security. 
A different explanation might be that policy-makers in Moscow -- and even in 
the United States -- had begun to appreciate the mutual folly of their 1980s 
arms race. In other words, they had begun to ponder the lessons of history. 
Even when the arms race was at its height, critics pointed out that the 
superpowers ran the risk of hurting themselves economically and thus grow 
weaker in the long run. Scholars like Richard Rosecrance, in his 1986 book "The 
Rise of the Trading State," observed that once again in world history, 
overmilitarized nations were being quietly challenged by societies that 
preferred commerce to conquest. 
An increasing chorus of voices pointed to the irony that Japan and Germany, 
losers of World War II, were becoming the real "winners" of the Cold War. This 
message, it is becoming evident, struck home among the new thinkers surrounding 
Gorbachev and Eduard A. Shevardnadze. Deeply concerned about the structural 
weaknesses in the Soviet economy and society, eager to promote political and 
constitutional change before there was a full-scale collapse, and pressing for 
a firm check on runaway defense expenditures, Soviet intellectuals could 
clearly see the analogy between their country's plight and the fate of the 
Hapsburg and Ottoman empires. 
In such circles, "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers" and other historically 
based studies are used as an argument against their own archconservatives in 
the military and among Russian nationalists who still want large-scale spending 
on armaments. 
Did such a change of mood also occur in the United States? In Congress and in 
public opinion at large, the answer must be yes. Nothing can have been as 
confusing to traditional Cold War warriors during the past few years than the 
news that a large majority of Americans regard threats to their economic 
security (usually meaning Japan) as more serious than threats to their military 
security (usually meaning the Soviet Union). 
The Democrats may have lost the 1988 presidential election on the issue of 
America's military might, but much of the debate continues. Is too much being 
spent on armaments? How can the economy become more competitive? What is the 
use of being "secure" in the Indian Ocean's sea lanes if we are not secure in 
our inner cities? Will the budgetary and trade deficits bring us down? 
Once the summit is over, therefore, both Presidents will have to attend to 
their much less happy domestic fronts. In Gorbachev's case, the problems look 
daunting: From the fundamental failure to get the Soviet economy working to the 
threatened breakup of the union itself, the difficulties are so profound that 
it is hard to believe that a reduction in defense spending alone would solve 
them. It's difficult to imagine just how the Soviet Union, no matter how big 
its "peace dividend," can compete with East Asia or a revived Europe in the 
1990s. 
The relative decline of the Soviet Union, no matter how successful arms- 
control agreements may be, is therefore most likely to continue. 
The position of the United States is, as before, much more uncertain. Signs of 
strength mingle with signs of weakness, voices of confidence challenge the 
doubters and pessimists. Nonetheless, there is enough evidence -- in the 
savings-and-loan crisis, in the plight of the inner cities and public schools, 
in the decomposition of the domestic automobile industry, in the ability of 
vested interests to block structural reforms -- to suggest that the struggle to 
remain competitive with Europe and Asia over the longer term, and thus to 
preserve the American position in world affairs, will be hard, unrelenting and 
not very easy to measure. 
But that also has historical precedents, since many of the great powers of the 
past, such as Britain, did not collapse dramatically and suddenly, but instead 
faded away as imperial powers, decade after decade, generation after 
generation. 
Whether Bush and Gorbachev have really learned those lessons cannot be proved 
by a summit, with all of its bonhomie and media hype and public pronouncements. 
It will be proved in the efforts that the two administrations devote to 
persuading their peoples to take seriously the challenge to both the Soviet and 
the American position in world affairs by the rising commercial powers. 
That implies unpopular choices on the domestic front, as well as popular 
proposals on arms reduction. Because of that, it will be some years yet before 
the historian can judge whether Soviet and American efforts in the 1990s to 
control defense costs and improve economic competitiveness do succeed in 
reversing the course of decline. 
