U.S. OPPOSES FORCED RETURN OF VIET REFUGEES; 
GENEVA TALKS SEEK WAY TO RESETTLE 'BOAT PEOPLE' 
At an international conference seeking new procedures for screening and 
resettling Vietnamese "boat people," the United States on Tuesday strongly 
opposed proposals for the mandatory return of refugees determined to have fled 
Vietnam for economic reasons. 
"Until dramatic improvements occur in that country's economic, social and 
political life," U.S. envoy Lawrence S. Eagleburger told delegates from 50 
countries at the U.N.-sponsored conference, "the United States will remain 
unalterably opposed to the forced repatriation of Vietnamese asylum-seekers." 
In this regard, the United States found an unusual ally in the Communist 
government of Vietnam itself. 
"We strongly support the principal of free choice of residence and of voluntary 
repatriation," said Vietnam Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, who is also vice 
president of the Council of Ministers in Vietnam. "That's why we resolutely 
reject all forms of coercion." 
The U.S. position is also supported by the U.N. refugee commissioner and by 
France, which has a history of humanitarian work with the boat people. 
However, the majority of the Asian countries directly affected by a recent 
dramatic increase in Vietnamese refugees arriving on their shores, as well as 
Britain and Australia, support a rigorous screening process and the mandatory 
return of Vietnamese who cannot prove political persecution in their homeland. 
"We in Thailand will not be able to bear the brunt of the problem much longer 
if there is not a new approach," said Thai Minister of Foreign Affairs Siddhi 
Savetsila. 
"Vietnam must accept that no country has the right to export its surplus 
population to other countries," said British Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe, 
in a speech that reflected the tough mood of many of the delegates. 
The International Conference on Indochinese Refugees was prompted by the 
dramatic increase in the number of Vietnamese fleeing their country. As of May 
31, the U.N. High Commission for Refugees reported 83,296 Vietnamese boat 
people in refugee camps, the highest number since 1979. 
From a high point of 202,121 refugees in 1979, the flow of refugees steadily 
declined until it reached a low of 19,527 in 1986. Since then, however, the 
number has increased again, greatly alarming the countries of "first asylum" 
surrounding Vietnam. 
Different From Predecessors 
Many countries, including British-administered Hong Kong, claim that the new 
wave of refugees are radically different from their predecessors. 
"The great majority of those now arriving in Hong Kong," said Howe, "are 
economic migrants -- farmers, fishermen and peasants from the north with no 
association with the former South Vietnamese regime." 
At the last U.N. conference on Indochinese refugees in July, 1979, also in 
Geneva, the mood of most of the nations was more sympathetic to the Vietnamese 
plight. For the most part, asylum, refuge and resettlement was considered a 
right for the Vietnamese after their involvement in a long civil war. 
Since then, however, the continuing presence of large numbers of Vietnamese 
refugees has caused political friction in the host countries as well as some of 
the settlement countries such as Australia. 
"The resettlement strategy adopted 10 years ago, which was designed to provide 
a generous and humanitarian response to genuine refugees, is no longer a 
complete solution," commented Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade 
Gareth Evans. 
"Indeed, it has in a sense become part of the problem. The belief in the 
ultimate inevitability of resettlement has become the cause of departure of 
those who are not refugees but whose motivation for leaving is clearly economic 
-- who are chasing a dream of a better life elsewhere." 
Since the end of the Vietnam War in 1975, more than 1 million Vietnamese have 
left Vietnam, many braving open seas, pirates and gunboats as they made their 
way to refugee camps mainly in Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, the Philippines 
and Indonesia. 
More than 714,000 Indochinese refugees eventually immigrated into the United 
States, making it by far the largest recipient country, followed by China 
(284,000), Canada (121,182), Australia (117,997) and France (108,241). 
Today, the United States is expected to join the other countries attending the 
conference in approving a new plan to process Vietnamese and Laotian refugees 
in camps. The plan calls for a screening process under the auspices of the U.N. 
refugee commissioner, an expansion of a resettlement program for applicants 
inside Vietnam and acceleration of a "voluntary repatriation" program for those 
refugees who do not qualify for political refugee status. 
U.S. officials are hoping the voluntary repatriation plan will eliminate the 
need for deportation and forced repatriation schemes. 
"We are practically the only country left fighting for a humanitarian way," 
said one frustrated official. 
