FLAG DECISION SETS OFF SCRAMBLE IN CONGRESS; 
LEGISLATION: SOME SEEK SWIFT PASSAGE OF A CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE. BUT POLLS SHOW 
THE ISSUE HAS LOST ITS STEAM. A ONE-THIRD MINORITY CAN BLOCK ACTION. 
Spurred by a Supreme Court ruling, key members of Congress Monday demanded 
swift passage of a constitutional amendment to ban flag burning, while 
outnumbered opponents scrambled to line up votes to block it. 
Proponents of an amendment are helped by several factors. Congress' top two 
Republican leaders -- Sen. Bob Dole (R-Kan.) and Rep. Robert H. Michel (R-Ill.) 
-- are leading the charge, with President Bush's enthusiastic backing. They 
also have strong support from two key Democrats -- the chairmen of the Senate 
and House Judiciary committees: Sen. Joseph R. Biden Jr. (D-R. I.) and Rep. 
Jack Brooks (D-Tex.). 
Moreover, key votes will take place in the patriotic atmosphere surrounding 
Flag Day, which falls on Thursday, and the Fourth of July, less than three 
weeks later. And in the charged politics of an election year, lawmakers will be 
wary of casting votes on emotional issues that might inspire negative TV ads by 
their opponents. 
"People who vote (against the amendment) will have to go home and explain," 
said Dole, the Senate minority leader. "It will make a good 30-second spot." 
Nevertheless, opponents of the flag-burning amendment appear to have several 
things going for them, too. Opinion polls indicate that the issue has lost 
steam in recent months and that it is insufficient to decide an election by 
itself. 
Opponents also have a statistical advantage: A constitutional amendment can be 
blocked by a one-third minority in either house of Congress. And Congress' top 
two Democrats -- House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) and Senate Majority 
Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) -- have vowed to fight it vigorously, with 
the expected help of several prominent Republicans. 
"We are now within 10 or 15 votes of stopping it," said Rep. Don Edwards (D-San 
Jose), chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on civil and constitutional 
rights. "But it's awful tough. There's a mindless stampede out there, and, if 
it passes, the President will sign it and the states will step all over 
themselves to ratify it." 
Dole pressed for quick approval of the amendment on Flag Day, but he was 
rebuffed by Mitchell. 
"It would be a grievous error in the haste and heat of controversy to amend the 
Bill of Rights," Mitchell said, adding later that there will be "ample 
opportunity to discuss this issue in the Senate." 
In the House, Brooks announced that his Judiciary Committee will act on a 
proposed amendment next Tuesday and will bring it to the House floor before 
July 4. 
"The flag is too important a symbol of our nationhood and all that we have 
struggled for over the past two centuries to leave it unprotected," he said. 
By overwhelming margins, the Senate and the House voted last fall to pass the 
Flag Protection Act, which was ruled unconstitutional by the high court Monday. 
Shortly after passing the statute, the Senate voted, 51 to 48, in favor of a 
constitutional amendment -- 15 votes short of the required two-thirds majority. 
There has been no vote in the House on an amendment. 
Political operatives were cautious about gauging the impact of the issue on 
this year's elections. But strategists in both parties agreed that much of the 
initial public indignation that followed last year's court decision on the 
matter has subsided. 
"I don't think anybody is going to win or lose an election on this," said 
political consultant Lyn Nofziger, a one-time aide to former President Ronald 
Reagan. "The issue has been petering out . . . . It's not like there is a lot 
of flag-burning going on to keep it alive." 
"Whether this is an issue that people are going to win or lose elections on, I 
can't say," said Ed Rollins, a chief Republican strategist for House races. 
"But I do think it's an issue that defines values. I think it's an issue that 
Republicans can push and Democrats will run from." 
Democratic pollster Ed Lazarus said that "it's not a big motivating issue in 
terms of how people vote. I don't anticipate that it will be a huge problem for 
Democrats," should they oppose a constitutional ban on flag burning. 
Clearly concerned about the issue, Democratic National Chairman Ron Brown tried 
to set up a rhetorical shield for his party's candidates in a statement that 
cited his own record as a veteran of military service. 
"To drag the flag through cheap politics is every bit as offensive as burning 
it," Brown said. 
