THREE CHEERS: LEGION HONORS 3 FULLERTON POLICEMEN FOR VALOR 
The 29th District of the American Legion honored Fullerton Police Department 
senior officers Bill Wallis and Steve Bair and Sgt. Dave Stanko for bravery and 
exceptional performances in the line of duty. 
Bair, 30, a seven-year veteran, received the Legion's Award of Valor for his 
role in rescuing three people from a car fire on New Year's Eve. 
Stanko, 42, a 13-year veteran, and Wallis, 37, a 15-year veteran, received 
Awards of Valor for capturing a gun-wielding bandit after a chase and 
shoot-out. 
Robin Gurien of Fountain Valley, Michael D. Mason of Fullerton and Cynthia J. 
Wygal of Orange were named winners of Cal State Fullerton's 1990 outstanding 
student Awards. 
Gurien won the President's Associates Award recognizing scholarship and student 
activities; Mason received the Friends of the State University Service Award, 
and Wygal was named the Cal State Fullerton Alumni Outstanding Senior. 
Jennifer Joyce Butland, who holds a 4.0 grade average at Dana Hills High School 
in Dana Point and plans to study sports medicine at UC Davis and later provide 
sports medicine services to Olympic athletes, was presented a $600 scholarship 
by the Pacific Island Villages Kiwanis Club in Laguna Niguel. 
Santa Ana resident James A. Garcia, a student at UC Berkeley, was given the 
prestigious 1990 Truman Scholar award in ceremonies held in the Truman Library 
&amp; Museum at Independence, Mo. 
Garcia will receive a maximum of $7,000 a year for up to four years of 
education leading to a career in public service, according to Elmer B. Staats, 
board chairman of the Truman Scholarship Foundation. 
Garcia was one of 91 promising students who were challenged at a weeklong 
conference in Independence to follow in public service footsteps of the late 
President Harry S. Truman. 
Irvine resident Jean N. Pond, 71, founder of Adult Careers Inc. of Irvine, has 
been named "Citizen of the Year" by the Irvine Chamber of Commerce. 
Humanities teachers Jewel A. Kamita of Capistrano Valley High in Mission Viejo 
and Daniel J. Meylor of La Quinta High in Westminster were selected by the 
Council for Basic Education as 1990 National Fellows for Independent Studies in 
Humanities. 
Both English teachers will receive $3,000 grants to pursue six weeks of 
independent summer study on a humanities topic of their choice and both of 
their schools will receive $200 to buy books for their libraries. 
Kamita will study feminist writings of the later 19th Century and Meylor will 
look at studies of myth. 
Laura Longwill of La Habra, with 12,500 hours; Marjorie Gillilard of Yorba 
Linda, with 11,200 hours, and Myrt Reno of Fullerton, with 8,100 hours, were 
the top contributors of volunteer time to Brea Community Hospital and were 
honored at a recognition luncheon at Los Coyotes Country Club. 
The hospital has 70 volunteers who range in age from 4 to 84. 
A dozen scholarships worth a total of $18,000 were awarded to Saddleback 
Memorial Medical Center employees Irene Barker and Stephanie Dearinger, both of 
El Toro; Stacy Colburn, Debbie McCarthy and Ellen Montalbano, all of Mission 
Viejo; Suzanne Hayosh, Rancho Santa Margarita; Suzanne Holt, Orange; Andrew 
Mleynek, Laguna Hills; Molly O'Hanlon, San Juan Capistrano; Nancy St. Croix, 
Irvine, and Robin Plevney and Tina Stewart, both of Dana Point. All will use 
the money to continue their college education in the health-care field. The 
money was donated by individuals and medical center staff members. 
Yorba Linda resident Linda Smith, foster parent to 24 children, a worker for 
the Orange County Foster Parent Auxiliary, a census worker and host to foreign 
exchange students, has been named Woman of the Year by the Catholic Charities 
Auxiliary. 
Bishop Norman McFarland presided over the awards ceremonies at the Irvine 
Hilton Hotel, where Smith was presented a gold medallion emblazoned with the 
Catholic Charities Auxiliary logo. 
