HOUSE BARS SOVIET HIGH-TECH SALES; 
TRADE: VARIOUS TYPES OF U.S. COMPUTERS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT WON'T 
BE SOLD TO MOSCOW UNTIL IT MEETS CERTAIN DEMANDS. 
The House voted Wednesday to forbid the sale of sophisticated U.S. computers, 
telecommunications equipment and other high-tech goods to the Soviet Union 
until it ends its economic boycott against breakaway Lithuania. 
In the first congressional action since President Bush and Soviet President 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev signed a trade agreement last week, the House also voted 
to ban such sales if Gorbachev carries out a threat to slow the emigration of 
Soviet Jews. 
On a 390-24 vote, the House voted not to grant U.S. companies licenses to sell 
high-tech products to the Soviets unless President Bush certifies that Moscow 
is conducting negotiations with the Lithuanian republic, which has declared its 
independence from Moscow, "without economic coercion." 
The vote was on an amendment by Rep. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., to an 
Administration-opposed bill that would ease the export of high-tech goods to 
the Soviets, the fledgling democracies of Eastern Europe and U.S. allies. 
On a voice vote, the House earlier agreed to forbid the high-tech sales if the 
Soviet Union restricts the emigration rights of Jewish citizens. 
To take effect, the full bill would have to be approved by the House and then 
the Senate. 
"Although the Soviet Union is moving toward peace and openness, it is not quite 
there," Durbin said. "The Iron Curtain is still present when it comes to the 
Baltic republics." 
Since April 18, the Soviets have cut off supplies of oil, natural gas, other 
raw materials and medical supplies to Lithuania in response to its declaration 
of independence a month earlier. 
Bush and Gorbachev signed an agreement Friday that would lower 40-year-old 
trade barriers between the two countries once the Supreme Soviet gives final 
approval to emigration legislation making it easier for Soviet citizens to 
emigrate or to visit the West. 
Moscow is particularly interested in acquiring U.S. telecommunications and 
computer technology. During last week's summit, for example, the Soviets signed 
an agreement with IBM for the purchase of computers to be used in schools. 
In a joint Sunday news conference with Bush, Gorbachev, citing pressure on him 
from Egypt and Syria, threatened to begin denying exit visas to Soviet Jews if 
Israel continues to allow them to settle on disputed territory on the West 
Bank. 
Official U.S. policy opposes Jewish settlements in the occupied territories. 
Supporters of Israel say fewer than 1% of the Soviet emigres actually locate 
there. 
Through other amendments, House lawmakers also expressed their dissatisfaction 
with President Bush's decision last month to extend for another year 
most-favored-nation trade status with China despite the killings near Tiananmen 
Square in Beijing more than a year ago. 
On a 393-15 vote, the House approved an amendment by Rep. Gerald Solomon, 
R-N.Y., that would forbid Bush from approving any more exports of U.S.-built or 
U.S.-owned satellites to China. 
The amendment, however, would not affect the export of three such satellites 
approved last December by Bush. 
Opponents failed in several attempts to weaken the bill despite vehement claims 
by the Administration and other opponents that looser controls on high-tech 
sales will weaken the nation's military security. 
"The thrust of the bill is that business is more important than national 
security," said Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill. "There are military and intelligence 
aspects to some of these telecommunications exports. We're crazy to hand that 
stuff to the Soviet Union." 
Supporters, however, maintained that "cold warrior" attitudes should no longer 
dominate U.S. export policies. 
"Karl Marx wasn't smart enough to take on Jesus Christ, Adam Smith . . . and 
Thomas Jefferson simultaneously," said Rep. Ed Markey, D-Mass. "We should 
accept our victory. Eastern Europeans are going to spend upwards of $140 
billion in the next decade on telecommunications and we should get a chunk of 
it." 
Rep. Bill Frenzel, R-Minn., cited a study by the National Academy of Sciences 
estimating that the existing controls denied U.S. companies about $9.2 billion 
in exports in 1987 "with no perceptible increase in national security." 
The bill basically eases export controls on telecommunications equipment, 
computers and machine tools to the newly democratizing countries of Eastern 
Europe and, to a lesser extent, the Soviet Union. 
U.S. manufacturers have repeatedly complained that they are being shut out of 
Eastern Europe's developing economy while Japan, West Germany and South Korea 
gain toeholds. 
The Administration last month announced that it intended to decontrol sales of 
most personal computers, some mainframe computers and some cellular and 
satellite ground stations. House critics contended that the measures do not go 
far enough in expanding trade opportunities, and earlier this week the Commerce 
Department told US West, the Rocky Mountain telephone company, it would deny 
permission to lay a high-capacity fiber optic cable across the Soviet Union. 
Meanwhile: 
* The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreement on sharing 
food-processing information. 
The agreement creates a team of U.S. and Soviet officials who will study the 
two nations' food-processing systems and determine how U.S. technology and 
methods can be incorporated into the Soviet system. 
* Yuri N. Chumakov, deputy Soviet minister of foreign economic relations, made 
it clear that if a U.S.-Soviet trade agreement wins congressional approval his 
country will be looking for U.S. loans to help the troubled Soviet economy. 
