JAZZ REVIEW; 
COALESCENCE OF BIG-NAME TALENT AT SEGERSTROM HALL 
Multidirectional is the term drummer Jack DeJohnette uses to label his music. 
And the eclectic mix of standards, accessible originals and extended free-form 
excursions heard from his big-name quartet Friday at the Orange County 
Performing Arts Center proved how apt his term is. 
In a long, two-set program, DeJohnette, pianist Herbie Hancock, bassist Dave 
Holland and guitarist Pat Metheny ranged across time and space. Despite muddy, 
reverberating sound in cavernous Segerstrom Hall (a not uncommon problem when 
amplified music is performed in spacious concert facilities), the evening 
combined impressive individual virtuosity with solid, empathetic ensemble work 
into a satisfying, well-varied program. 
The fact that this assemblage of all-stars worked so well as a unit was one of 
the evening's surprises. There were no extended, unaccompanied solos that saw 
the other musicians desert the stage while an ego was indulged. Instead, the 
band remained together, trading lines, sharing the lead duties and reinforcing 
each others' work with intelligent accompaniment. This is one superstar quartet 
where the emphasis is on the group rather than the stars. 
With the exception of Metheny, each of the unit's members has experience 
playing for Miles Davis, so it was appropriate that the group opened with 
"Solar," a Davis tune first recorded in the early '50s. This melodic reference 
to a bit of shared history featured Hancock's wily acoustic solo, DeJohnette's 
touch-conscious percussion and -- though it was difficult to hear in the mix -- 
crisp, responsive groundwork from Holland on upright acoustic. 
Contrast "Solar" with the contemporary-sounding Metheny-DeJohnette 
collaboration "Nine Over Reggae," which appears on the group's recent release, 
"Parallel Realities." Holland switched to electric bass (something he's ignored 
for the last 15 years), Metheny coaxed glossy synthesized tones from one of an 
array of guitars he used, and Hancock moved to electric keyboards, where he 
added color as well as rhythmic interest from programmed sounds. Despite its 
easy-to-follow beat (which had little to do with actual reggae), the tune was a 
showcase for DeJohnette, who provided an endless stream of embellishments and 
offbeat accents to keep things interesting. 
Different still was DeJohnette's "Silver Hollow" (from his 1978 "New 
Directions" recording), a smooth, pastoral piece that opened with a sweet 
acoustic solo from Metheny. DeJohnette's mallet work and delicate tracking of 
the rhythm with subdued hi-hat claps made for a marvel of tasteful reserve. 
The evening's high points, though, were two extended, seemingly free-form 
pieces that worked a variety of tempos and high-pitched emotions, combining 
sounds that ranged from thunderous electronic effects to a ringing telephone. 
One of these adventurous efforts, the title track from the new album, featured 
Metheny's screaming-yet-melodic synthesizer solo over DeJohnette's breakneck 
tom-tom rolls, while Hancock added muted trumpet tones from his synthesizer 
that recalled (who else?) Miles Davis. The music was accompanied by an 
unnerving light show that must have brought back the Summer of Love and nights 
at the Filmore to more than a few in the audience. 
Adding to the variety of the program was Hancock's "Eye of the Hurricane," 
which featured the pianist's appropriately stormy improvisation; a Latin-tinged 
rendition of Ornette Coleman's "The Good Life"; and, as an encore, Hancock's 
funky "Cantaloupe Island." 
