COMPUTER FILE: SAFE WORK SPACE CAN AVERT INJURIES 
One of the first things you learn upon acquiring a personal computer is how 
difficult it is to fit on a desk. There are all those parts -- the main 
computer box, a monitor, a keyboard, probably a printer and maybe an external 
disk drive or an external modem or even a CD-ROM drive. 
But there is a lot more to setting up a computer properly than just finding a 
place to put everything and enough electrical outlets to plug the equipment in. 
Your health and well-being may even be at stake. Federal, state and local 
officials across the nation have been looking into the growing number of 
computer-related repetitive motion injuries. 
Experts suggest several precautions for avoiding such injuries. One of the most 
important considerations is placing the keyboard and the monitor at comfortable 
heights for typing and viewing. You also need to put the computer unit where it 
can be easily switched on and off, with its floppy disk drive conveniently at 
hand. 
More often than not, what happens is that the monitor is placed on top of the 
computer unit, both are shoved to the back of the desk and the keyboard is set 
in front of them. The printer ends up wherever it will fit within stretching 
distance of the umbilical cable linking it to the computer. 
Several things can be wrong with that scenario, according to recommendations 
adopted by the American National Standards Institute. 
The basic ergonomic principles endorsed by ANSI are easy to describe: You 
should sit upright with your feet flat on the floor and your knees bent at 
about 90 degrees. Your lower back should be supported, and your arms should be 
at about a 90-degree angle when your fingers are on the keyboard. 
(ANSI standards say any forearm angle between 70 and 135 degrees is acceptable 
for keyboard work. However, medical and ergonomics experts that I have worked 
with say 90 degrees is the optimum.) 
Further, you should not have to look up at any part of your display screen. The 
top part of the screen (not the case) should be no higher than eye level. 
Depending on your size, it may be difficult to achieve that optimum position. 
You also need to have enough room under the desk or table for your knees and 
feet, preferably a space at least 24 inches wide and from 19 to 24 inches deep, 
depending on how long your legs are. 
The foundation for a good computer work space is a good, adjustable chair. A 
secretarial style chair is better than an executive style chair with big arms 
that interfere with arm movement while you work at the keyboard. 
"A well-designed chair will favorably affect posture, circulation, the amount 
of effort required to maintain posture and the amount of strain on the spine," 
according to ANSI standards. 
The standards also specify that "reclined posturesare acceptable, (but) they 
require that the chair provide adequate support." 
Well-designed chairs can be adjusted for seat height, back support and tilt 
angle. The minimum range of height adjustment should be from 16 to 20.5 inches, 
according to the ANSI standards. Seat width should be at least 18.2 inches, and 
the width of the lower back support should be at least 12 inches. The standards 
make no recommendation for height of the seat back. 
Chairs that have pneumatic tubes for height adjustment are easier to use but 
may tend to lose pressure and sink while you are seated unless the quality is 
very good. Chairs that use screws for mechanical adjustments are more difficult 
to change but stay where you put them. 
Chair adjustability is critical because that is how you assure that your hands 
and arms are at the proper height and angle for the keyboard height, if the 
keyboard surface is not adjustable. In addition, shorter people may find that 
when their chair is high enough, their feet can't rest flat on the floor. A 
variety of footrests are available to support your legs and feet in such cases. 
With adjustable furniture, proper keyboard height for most persons falls in the 
range from 23 to 28 inches high, according to ANSI standards. Few manufacturers 
offer such furniture, however, so you'll probably have to compensate with chair 
height. 
Most computer furniture has a single work surface to support keyboard, CPU and 
monitor. You should choose such furniture for proper typing height. 
The important thing to remember about the monitor is to keep it low. Looking 
down as low as 60 degrees below horizontal is acceptable. 
"People who wear bifocals or trifocals and who adopt a reclined posture may 
have a reduced range of acceptable viewing angles," the standards say. They 
also may have more problems with glare from ceiling lights. 
If you have room on the desk top, you usually can get the monitor at an 
acceptable height by putting the CPU to one side so that the monitor rests 
directly on the work surface. The CPU can also be placed on its side behind the 
monitor or beside it or under the desk, as long as you can still conveniently 
reach the disk drives. 
Stands to support the CPU on its side are available from computer dealers as 
are special extension cables if your power, keyboard or monitor cords are too 
short to reach. 
Common sense should dictate the width and depth of your work space. Certainly, 
it should be deep enough to house your computer equipment without forcing the 
keyboard into your lap. There is no standard acceptable depth, but my 
experience shows it to be a minimum of 24 inches, and 30 inches is preferable. 
A standard of 19.9 inches for width of a work surface was set by ANSI, but a 
lot of computers are wider than that. You shouldn't have much trouble finding 
furniture that is considerably wider, and the wider the better. 
If you find that your present setup doesn't meet these standards, you're not 
alone. I've been amazed at how rarely computer furniture actually does, 
including my own. It will be worth the effort and money to make things right, 
however, if you spend very much time at your machine. 
The ANSI publication, "American National Standard for Human Factors Engineering 
of Visual Display Terminal Workstations," is published by the Human Factors 
Society Inc., P.O. Box 1369, Santa Monica, Calif. 90406. Phone: (213) 394-1811. 
It is available for $25. 
Computer File welcomes readers' comments but regrets that the author cannot 
respond individually to letters. Write to Richard O'Reilly, Computer File, Los 
Angeles Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles, Calif. 90053. 
