JAPAN AND MEXICO BUILDING STRONGER ECONOMIC BRIDGE 
Residents of this huge city are holding their breath -- almost literally -- 
awaiting the outcome of Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's three-day 
visit to Japan, which began Sunday. During the visit, Salinas is expected to 
sign a final agreement under which Japan's Export-Import Bank will lend Mexico 
$1 billion to finance the purchase of anti-pollution equipment. The funds will 
be used, in part, for refining equipment that will reduce the sulfur content of 
gasoline and other fuels. Automobiles account for three-fourths of the air 
pollution in this city of about 18 million people. 
The loan symbolizes the growing cooperation between Mexico and Japan, a 
relationship that trade experts and diplomats say will only be enhanced by a 
U.S.-Mexico trade agreement. Presidents Bush and Salinas agreed June 10 to 
begin preliminary work on a broad free-trade agreement between their two 
countries. 
Japan-Mexico economic relations, already on the move, have picked up steam 
since Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu's visit to Mexico last year. Investments now 
being considered would double the $1.4 billion Japan has already invested in 
Mexico. 
Japanese auto maker Nissan has begun work on a five-year, $1-billion expansion 
of its Queretaro plant. Industrial giant Mitsui is considering an agreement 
with Petroleos Mexicanos -- Mexico's state-owned oil monopoly -- to build a 
$345-million petrochemical plant. And Japan's Aoki hotel firm is completing 
plans for a hotel in Cancun and is considering sites in Puerto Vallarta and La 
Paz. That does not count the dozen expansion projects under way at the 50 
Japanese-owned maquiladoras, factories concentrated near the U.S.-Mexico border 
that assemble foreign-made components for export to the U.S. market. 
More investments and agreements will probably be announced during Salinas' 
visit, predicted Carlos Lalanne, spokesman for the Mexico office of JETRO, the 
Japanese External Trade Organization. 
Besides returning Kaifu's visit, Salinas will meet with members of Keidanren, 
the leading Japanese association of private businesses. He has said the main 
purpose of his trip is to attract more Japanese capital to Mexico. 
Mexico has already surpassed Brazil to become the major Latin American 
recipient of Japanese investment. Japan ranks fourth among foreign investors in 
Mexico, after the United States, Britain and West Germany. Still, Japanese 
investment represents just 5% of foreign capital in Mexico, compared to the 
United States' two-thirds. 
Japanese interest in Mexico was spurred first by oil -- which still accounts 
for a major part of Mexico's $1.7 billion in exports to Japan -- and more 
recently by privatization of Mexican government- owned enterprises. 
The government's decision last year to end its monopoly on 42 petrochemical 
products has industrial conglomerates Mitsubishi and Sumitomo considering 
investments in that industry. And, according to Lalanne, Nippon Electric Co. 
may be interested in participating in the investor group that buys Telefonos de 
Mexico, the telephone company. 
Anticipation of a U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement could provide an additional 
incentive for Japanese and other Asian corporations to increase the pace of 
investment here, said Ryukichi Imai, Japan's ambassador to Mexico. 
"The majority of Japanese investors in Mexico are targeting the U.S. market," 
Hajime Hatano, the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry's 
director for Latin America and Oceana, told the Mexican magazine Proceso. 
A free-trade agreement would assure access to the U.S. market for goods 
produced by Japanese corporations investing in Mexico, thus making such 
investments more attractive. An agreement -- combined with the geographical 
fact of Mexico's long border with the United States -- would make Mexico a 
magnet for Japanese investors, Hatano said. 
Mexico realizes, as a Mexican Senate commission found not long ago, that its 
proximity to the United States is its major strategic advantage as a Pacific 
Rim trading nation. That awareness demonstrates a major change from Mexico's 
hope during the 1980s that it could use Japan as a bargaining chip in 
negotiations with the United States. 
The Japanese have indicated that they will not go for that, so Mexico's goal 
now is to play a key role in a trade triangle in which its partners are the 
major economic powers of the Pacific Rim. 
