DANNEMEYER UNVEILS SCHOOL-PRAYER MEASURE 
The way William E. Dannemeyer sees it, God ought to have a reserved seat in the 
nation's public schools. This week in Congress, he will take the first step in 
an intensified effort to set that seat aside. 
Dannemeyer (R-Fullerton) on Thursday plans to introduce in the House of 
Representatives a "Community Life Amendment," a constitutional amendment that 
would allow states and communities to legalize voluntary school prayer and 
instruction in the Judeo-Christian ethic, including the Ten Commandments and 
the Bible's version of creation. 
"America now serves at the altar of man," Dannemeyer said in remarks prepared 
for delivery Thursday. He said the philosophy of humanism, setting man above 
the Creator, "has kicked the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob . . . out of our 
nation's school system." 
At best, congressional staff members say, the odds against passage of 
Dannemeyer's amendment are tremendous. Even if approved by the required 
two-thirds vote in both houses of Congress, the measure would have to be 
ratified by 38 of the 50 state legislatures to become law. 
Dannemeyer, however, is undaunted. 
"The American public overwhelmingly 
wants this thing to happen," he said in an interview, citing polls that he said 
have shown that two-thirds of Americans support voluntary prayer in schools. 
Even if he is not ultimately successful, the six-term conservative hopes to 
focus new attention on an issue whose time, he insists, is coming. He said he 
hopes to take advantage of an arcane House rule to get his controversial 
measure to the House floor without running the gantlet of a hostile 
subcommittee. Once there, Dannemeyer aides said, they would attempt to rouse 
public support and sway members feeling pressure from hometown constituents. 
If he gets that far, Dannemeyer for the first time would confront Congress 
directly with the explosive issue of teaching the biblical doctrine of creation 
in public schools, said a lobbyist for the American Civil Liberties Union. 
No such measure has yet made it to the floor of either house for a vote, and 
most lawmakers would clearly prefer to avoid the issue. 
"This literally rewrites the First Amendment to the Constitution," said Barry 
W. Lynn, legislative counsel in the ACLU's Washington office. The First 
Amendment bars Congress from making "any law respecting an establishment of 
religion" or infringing on the right to free speech, a free press and peaceful 
assembly. 
Since 1962, the Supreme Court has, in a series of decisions, interpreted the 
First Amendment as barring various forms of prayer in public schools. Two years 
ago, the high court held unconstitutional a state law requiring public schools 
to teach the biblical doctrine of creation along with scientific theories of 
evolution. 
ACLU national spokeswoman Colleen O'Connor on Tuesday referred to Dannemeyer's 
constitutional initiative as "an overt attempt to try to Christianize the 
school system." 
Lynn added: "I think that some of this effort . . . serves as a way to put 
people on record" in Congress to make them targets of public pressure. However, 
he said, "I think it is one that can be defeated." 
The four-paragraph amendment begins: "The right of the people to allow 
voluntary school prayer and the teaching of the Judeo-Christian ethic in public 
schools shall not be denied or abridged by the United States." 
It then says the definition of the "Judeo-Christian ethic" shall include "the 
Ten Commandments, and the creation of the earth as accepted in the 
Judeo-Christian tradition." 
Dannemeyer's press secretary, Paul Mero, said the amendment meets a key test of 
a 1963 Supreme Court decision in that it has a "secular" or non-religious 
purpose. In this case, Mero said, that purpose is to teach youngsters basic 
American values embodied in the Declaration of Independence. 
He cited the second paragraph of the Declaration, which says that all men "are 
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are 
Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." 
Said Mero: "We can't very well come out and tell the kids they have unalienable 
rights if we are unwilling to say there is a Creator, to acknowledge that 
fact." 
Dannemeyer wants to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from referring his 
amendment to the subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights, which is 
dominated by Democrats who have opposed previous Dannemeyer initiatives. 
Employing a rarely used House rule, the congressman hopes to persuade a 
majority of the full Judiciary Committee to sign a letter calling for 
consideration of the measure at that level. 
Dannemeyer is staking his hopes on the fact that 20 members of the 35-member 
Judiciary Committee last month voted for a voluntary prayer-related amendment 
tacked on to a vocational education funding bill. The amendment, which passed 
the House 269 to 135, marked the first House vote on school prayer since 1984. 
The complete bill is still under congressional consideration. 
However, Lynn of the ACLU and others, including several congressional staffers, 
said the constitutional amendment is much more ambitious and potentially 
far-reaching. 
The vocational education amendment, one staff member said, "was an easy one to 
vote yes for. I'm sure a lot of members said, 'I'll vote yes, but the courts 
will save us' " by ruling the measure unconstitutional. 
