MORE THAN $1 MILLION IN ART STOLEN; 
CRIME: PART OWNER OF VAN NUYS AGENCY IS TIED UP BY MASKED ROBBER. ABOUT 1,000 
CONTEMPORARY WORKS WERE TAKEN IN THE HEIST, INCLUDING OIL PAINTINGS, 
LITHOGRAPHS AND SERIGRAPHS. 
An armed man in a "ninja-style" mask tied up a part-owner of a Van Nuys art 
agency and distribution house, then escaped in the company's van with artworks 
reportedly worth more than $1 million, police said Tuesday. 
The robber, who police said might have had accomplices, took more than 1,000 
artworks, including three oil paintings and hundreds of lithographs and 
serigraphs from Eagle Limited's warehouse near the Van Nuys Airport. 
Robert Silver, 43, one of the agency's owners, was tied up and taped to a chair 
during the Monday night robbery. Later, he dialed 911 on an office phone with 
his toes to summon police. 
Janet Klein, director of marketing for Eagle Limited, said only works by 
contemporary artists Ramon Lombarte, Sonya Fe and Roberto Chichorro were taken. 
They included three oils by Lombarte with a total retail value of $78,000. 
Also taken were more than 300 lithographs by Lombarte, 300 serigraphs by 
Chichorro and 200 lithographs by Fe. The lithographs and serigraphs were valued 
at $1,000 to $2,200 each by Eagle Limited, according to Linda Worrell, 
president and a part-owner of the business. 
"We are sure we are talking about at least 1,000 pieces," Worrell said Tuesday 
afternoon. 
Though police originally reported that $4.6 million worth of artworks were 
taken, Worrell later downgraded the estimated loss to $1.2 million to $2 
million. 
The three artists whose works were taken are not well-known in the fine art 
market, although paintings and prints by Lombarte are sold in some galleries 
for up to $65,000. The Merrill Chase gallery chain, based in Chicago, sells the 
Spanish artist's stark, realistic paintings for prices ranging from $20,000 to 
$65,000, according to Lynn Marks, an art consultant with the company. She said 
his lithographs, unframed, go for $1,195 to $1,495. 
Bob Barnes, director of the Landmark Gallery in La Jolla, said Lombarte 
paintings sell there for between $10,000 and $30,000. The gallery, which also 
carries works by popular artists such as Leroy Nieman and Erte, hosted a 
Lombarte exhibition last year. 
Works by Fe, a Los Angeles artist who specializes in colorful paintings of 
children and small animals, are less well known. Paul Sorota, who owns a 
gallery in Boston, said he has sold a small number of her lithographs for about 
$600 each. 
The third artist, Mozambique-born Chichorro, is just now having his works 
introduced to this country, according to Worrell. 
Hundreds of other originals and lithographs by other artists were left behind 
in the robbery. 
"They knew exactly what they wanted," Worrell said. "They didn't waste time. 
They went directly for the Lombarte originals. They took the most expensive 
pieces." 
The losses were covered by insurance, Eagle Limited officials said. The three 
Lombarte originals were oil on linen. The robber took them down from walls of 
the business, including the wall behind Silver's desk, and removed them from 
their frames. 
The lithographs and serigraphs were taken from storage drawers. Complete 
editions of 285 prints were taken from some drawers, company officials said. 
Silver is an attorney in Boston and visits the business once or twice a month 
to oversee contracts and other paper work. While he was working in his office 
alone Monday about 8 p.m., the robber entered through the unlocked front door. 
"He had a gun but he didn't point it at me," Silver said. "He had on what I 
call a ninja-style mask. It was black and pulled down over his face. He said 
only four words, 'Don't move,' and then, 'Stand up.' I did what I was told. I 
didn't want to try to be a hero while he had the gun." 
