PARENTS ADMIT HELPING SON HIDE AFTER SLAYING; 
PLEA BARGAINS: THE COUPLE AIDED JOEY PAUL BELLINGER, WHO WAS CHARGED WITH 
MURDER IN THE SHOOTING OF TWO DEAF BROTHERS. HE WAS ARRESTED AFTER FLEEING TO 
UPSTATE NEW YORK. 
The parents of Joey Paul Bellinger admitted Tuesday that they helped their 
16-year-old son flee to Upstate New York to avoid prosecution on murder charges 
for the shooting of two deaf Palmdale brothers in Granada Hills. 
Joseph Paul Bellinger Sr., 40, and Phyllis Mary Goodman, 37, of Long Beach, in 
a deal with prosecutors, entered pleas in Long Beach Municipal Court to charges 
of aiding and abetting a suspected felon -- their son, who was charged with 
murdering Cesar Vieira, 30, and wounding Vieira's brother, Edward, 25. 
Prosecutors said the couple advised their son not to turn himself in to 
authorities after the shootings in January, then arranged for him to stay with 
a longtime friend in the tiny community of Cassville, N.Y., where he was 
arrested by FBI agents a month later. 
Bellinger's father pleaded no contest to the charge as a felony, which carries 
a maximum sentence of three years in prison. Goodman pleaded guilty to the same 
offense as a misdemeanor, which has a maximum penalty of a year in County Jail. 
But under terms of a plea agreement reached with defense attorneys, Deputy 
Dist. Atty. Alan C. Fork said he will ask the judge to sentence Bellinger to 30 
days in County Jail and three years probation, and to grant Goodman probation 
with no jail time. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Denis K. Petty said the relatively lenient plea agreement 
was reached because the couple's actions "sprung from the normal human emotions 
of parenthood." 
Bellinger's defense attorney, Jeffrey Le Beau, said the couple never intended 
to shield their son from prosecution indefinitely. 
The couple, whose daughter, Michelle, was raped and murdered in 1987 at age 16, 
wanted guarantees that their only surviving child would be tried as a juvenile 
rather than as an adult, the attorney said. 
Bellinger's father briefly tried to negotiate a surrender for his son with 
police, but authorities refused to promise a juvenile court trial. A Sylmar 
Juvenile Court judge has ordered a July 9 hearing on prosecution arguments that 
the teen-ager should stand trial as an adult. 
"This is their last child and I think that they felt they were in a very, very 
difficult position," Le Beau said. "They were under a lot of stress and 
whatever they did, they did out of love for their son." 
Ironically, Le Beau said, the 15-year-old who was convicted of murdering 
Michelle Bellinger was tried as a juvenile and will be freed from custody at 
age 25. If Bellinger, now in custody at Aylmar Juvenile Hall, is convicted of 
murder as an adult, he could be sentenced to 25 years to life in prison. 
Witnesses to the Jan. 28 shooting said Bellinger fired five shots from a 
handgun at the two deaf brothers, who were on a motorcycle, after a 
confrontation at a traffic light. 
The incident began when Bellinger "threw up a gang sign -- a K for Kaos," which 
stands for Kids Against Our Society, and the brothers responded with insulting 
gestures and by spitting on their car, said other occupants of the car carrying 
Bellinger. Both vehicles pulled into a parking lot so the boys could fight, and 
suddenly Bellinger started firing, the witnesses said. 
As the car sped away, Bellinger screamed "I smoked him, I smoked him," 
witnesses said. 
Within days, Bellinger fled to New York, where he stayed with Goodman's high 
school friend, Susan Alguire, who said Goodman asked her to provide temporary 
shelter for her son without telling her that he was wanted by police. 
Phone records obtained by police indicate that both parents maintained contact 
with their son while he was in hiding. 
