FBI'S SESSIONS ELEVATES INVESTIGATIONS OF VIOLENT CRIME TO PRIORITY STATUS FOR 
AGENTS 
FBI Director William S. Sessions, citing a 40% increase in violent crimes over 
the last decade, Wednesday elevated violent crime to a "priority" status for 
FBI investigators, a move that will provide greater assistance to state and 
local police who handle most such violations. 
Making violent crime the sixth of the FBI's priorities also "will invigorate a 
program that has experienced an erosion of funding and manpower in recent 
years," Sessions said at a press conference. The FBI has jurisdiction over such 
violent crimes as kidnaping, extortion, bank robberies and hijackings and -- 
more recently -- drug-related homicides, police killings and the sexual 
exploitation of children. 
In the mid-1970s, the FBI began establishing priorities that dictate to what 
cases the special agents in charge of its 57 field offices will assign their 
investigators. Those priorities have been foreign counterintelligence, 
organized crime, white collar crime, drugs and counterterrorism. 
Violent Crimes Increasing 
"Additional responsibilities and an increasing violent crime rate have mandated 
a revitalization of our efforts," Sessions said. 
In the field, Sessions' move will mean that "no longer will an SAC (special 
agent in charge) take people from the squad working violent crime to do 
something else," said one official with experience in running a major field 
office. 
In supporting state and local law enforcement agencies, Sessions said that he 
wants to make greater use of such new tools as automated fingerprint systems, 
DNA genetic typing that can identify an individual from skin, blood and other 
body fluids at a crime scene, artificial intelligence and behavioral profiling 
to help identify suspects. 
Sessions noted that President Bush's crime package, sent to Congress last week, 
calls for an additional 300 FBI positions at a cost of $19.5 million to help 
combat violent crime. 
Confirms Gray Probe 
Responding to persistent questions at the press conference, Sessions also made 
clear for the first time that the Justice Department had authorized the 
bureau's investigation of suspected payroll padding in the office of Rep. 
William H. Gray III (D-Pa.), an inquiry that became public and threatened 
Gray's subsequent election as Democratic whip. 
In the investigation of Gray's office, Sessions said that the FBI had followed 
its "guidelines, procedures and policies." 
An FBI spokesman, detailing those policies, said that an investigation of a 
member of Congress can be initiated after consultation with the U.S. attorney 
for the area. FBI headquarters is notified immediately and it then advises the 
Justice Department's public integrity section "to further ensure adequate 
predication" for the inquiry. 
On Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh's complaint that he did not know in advance that 
two agents from the FBI's Philadelphia field office were going to interview 
Gray about the case on Memorial Day, Sessions said that he would not describe 
the failure to inform Thornburgh as "a breakdown." 
"There may have been a lapse, there may have been some circumstance where 
communication was not fully conveyed," Sessions said. 
Takes Unusual Step 
On the eve of the House Democratic Caucus' vote, Thornburgh's executive 
assistant, Robert S. Ross, took the unusual step of announcing that Gray was 
"not a target of the investigation." 
The investigation is continuing, and Thornburgh has launched an investigation 
of its disclosure. 
Asked whether the handling of the Gray investigation indicated that politics 
was influencing federal investigations, Sessions -- his voice rising for 
emphasis -- responded with "an absolute resounding no. The bureau is and will 
be apolitical. It will not be involved in the pursuing of political objectives 
through investigation. That's absolutely critical." 
Thornburgh has said that he did not find anything improper in the 
investigation, only in its disclosure. On the subject of terrorism, Sessions 
indicated that he is more confident about identifying those responsible for the 
bombing of Pan American Flight 103 from London to New York last Dec. 21 than he 
is about solving the bombing in San Diego of the van driven by the wife of the 
skipper of the U.S. cruiser Vincennes. 
On the Vincennes inquiry, Sessions said that the dispatch of 15 agents to San 
Diego earlier this month did not signal that the investigation is stymied. But 
he added: "I can't express with strong confidence that we will solve that 
particular case, but I hope we are able to do it." 
