CUSTODY CASE REACHES THE APPEAL LEVEL; 
ARGUMENTS: SOME CIVIL RIGHTS AND FAMILY LAW EXPERTS HAVE CONDEMNED THE COURT 
ORDER THAT FORCED THE MOTHER AND HER 6-YEAR-OLD SON TO MOVE TO VENTURA. 
The Ventura County Superior Court gave Pamela Besser a choice: move with her 
6-year-old son near her ex-husband in Ventura County or give up custody of the 
boy altogether. 
Besser chose to move, but she appealed the court's 1988 order. 
On Wednesday, Besser's appeal reached the 2nd District Court of Appeal in the 
Santa Barbara County Government Center. There, Justice Arthur Gilbert called 
the lower court's order "not much of a choice" for Besser. 
Gilbert and Justices Steven J. Stone and Richard W. Abbe heard oral arguments 
Wednesday on the appeal, but they have not decided whether to overturn the 
Ventura County Superior Court order. 
That decision could come as soon as next month, said ACLU attorney Jon 
Davidson, who argued on Besser's behalf. 
The case has become a cause celebre for some civil rights and family law 
experts, who have condemned the court order that has kept Besser and son Joshua 
in Ventura. 
On Wednesday, Davidson argued that the ruling "smacks of gender bias" and 
forced Besser to quit her job, friends and temple so her husband, Michael 
Fingert, could conveniently visit their son Joshua, now age 8. 
"It's not the kind of order that's in the discretion of the lower court to 
make," Davidson told the justices. "It favored the father's convenience in 
seeing his son on visitation rights over the mother's right to maintain her 
home, her job and her community." 
Fingert's attorney, Richard Taylor, let an earlier filed brief stand as his 
argument and made few comments at the hearing before the appeal court. 
The brief said, in part, "The father's interests just happened to coincide with 
the child's best interests" and Besser's lack of ties to the Bay Area. Taylor 
also argued that Davidson had no legal grounds to bring the case to the appeal 
court. 
Besser, now remarried to and pregnant by another man who shares her desire to 
return to the Bay Area, issued a written statement that said: 
"How do you explain to a child who is constantly asking why and when can we go 
to San Francisco?" 
Fingert and Besser were high school sweethearts from age 16. They moved in 
together in 1970 and married six years later, moving to Ventura in 1979 so 
Fingert could start a bolt business. 
In 1981, Besser became pregnant, which, she said, displeased Fingert. He moved 
out of their East Ventura residence. In 1982, during the last month of Besser's 
pregnancy, he filed for divorce. 
Joshua was born Feb. 1, 1982. The divorce court later granted full custody to 
his mother and visitation rights to his father, who rarely visited the boy even 
though he lived two miles away, according to court documents. 
When Besser announced plans to move to Chicago, Fingert got a restraining order 
prohibiting her from removing the boy from California without his approval. She 
instead took him to San Diego. He lived with his mother three weeks out of the 
month. Every fourth week, Besser drove Joshua to an Anaheim restaurant and 
handed him over to Fingert, who would return him seven days later, court 
records show. 
In 1985, Besser moved to Foster City, near San Francisco. Every fourth week, 
court records show, she would put Joshua on a plane to Ventura to visit his 
father. 
By 1987, the trips were causing Joshua severe stomachaches, crying jags, 
depression and alienation from his schoolmates, Besser said. He was attending 
one school three weeks a month and another school one week a month. 
Besser and Fingert went to Ventura County Superior Court to seek a better 
solution. 
Besser argued in favor of giving custody of Joshua to Fingert on weekends, 
holidays and summers so he could continue his schooling. But Fingert argued 
that it would be better for his son and ex-wife to move back to Ventura so the 
boy could stay at one school, moving back and forth from one parent to the 
other every year. 
Finally, Judge Charles McGrath followed the recommendations of a 
court-appointed psychiatrist. He ordered Besser to move with Joshua back to 
Ventura County or give up her child. 
After Wednesday's hearing, Besser said she was encouraged by Gilbert's remarks 
but insisted she won't settle for a victory in her own case. 
"I want a law," she said. "I want to move, and I want a law" to forbid courts 
from imposing such an arrangement ever again. 
