DEUKMEJIAN OPPOSES MEASURE ON RAIL BONDS 
Parting company with his own transportation commission, Gov. George Deukmejian 
on Friday became the first top state official to publicly oppose Proposition 
116, a ballot measure that authorizes $3 billion in bonds for rail 
transportation. 
Deukmejian, who is heading a campaign to pass a similar measure that authorizes 
$1 billion in bonds for mass transit, said he will vote against Proposition 116 
because of a personal conviction that bond measures generally should be placed 
on the ballot by the governor and the Legislature, not by initiative. 
He said his rail proposal, Proposition 108, is part of a "comprehensive, 
statewide transportation program" developed in concert with lawmakers. 
Proposition 108 is tied to Proposition 111, which modifies the state's spending 
limit and allows a phased-in 9-cent-per-gallon increase in the state gasoline 
tax to go into effect. 
Both proposals would help finance a 10-year, $18.5-billion transportation 
program that provides for highway construction, reinforcing of roads and 
bridges for earthquake safety and expansion of mass transit. 
The governor's announcement surprised backers of Proposition 116, who only a 
week ago announced their strong support for Propositions 111 and 108. 
"I thought we had an understanding that we were supportive of them and they 
were supportive of us," said Gerald Meral, executive director of the Planning 
and Conservative League, which led the drive to collect signatures for 116. 
"It's a very peculiar position because the California Transportation 
Commission, which (the governor) appoints, thinks we should be supported." 
The commission endorsed all three transportation proposals on the ballot, 
saying they would provide much needed funds for improving and expanding the 
state's highway and mass transit system. 
Deukmejian said he would also cast a "no" vote on Proposition 117, an 
initiative prohibiting sport hunting of mountain lions by designating them 
protected animals, because, he said, he opposed a provision that would mandate 
the spending of $900 million to acquire and restore wildlife habitat. 
The Republican governor said he will vote for the other 15 proposals on the 
ballot, including a measure that would authorize bonds for new prisons, impose 
new ethical standards on lawmakers while raising their salaries, and set new 
limits on the rights of criminal defendants. 
