DRIVING AWAY EVIL SPIRITS IS ALL IN A DAY'S WORK FOR PSYCHOTHERAPIST 
Votive candles flicker in red and yellow jars on a makeshift altar of wood and 
cinder blocks. A gnarled piece of incense burns in the hollowed head of a 
ceramic Aztec god -- spewing curls of black smoke into the windowless room. In 
hushed tones, a fatherly healer recites prayers before the altar's crucifixes 
while the emotionally tortured woman at his side drinks three times from a 
goblet of rainwater. When the ritual is over, leaves from a California pepper 
tree litter the floor and the woman seems at peace. 
On the bus ride to her therapist, Maria was panicky. 
The woman, diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic, had begun feeling dangerously 
out of control after her baby girl started crying. Once, when she lost control, 
she threw a pot of boiling water at her husband and ended up in a mental ward. 
This time, the shy soft-spoken woman walked into the Norwalk office of 
psychotherapist Ignacio Aguilar expecting help from the Old World cures that 
abound in the Mexican countryside, not from the theories of Sigmund Freud. 
That's exactly what she got. 
Aguilar has all his professional credentials hanging on his office wall: a 
framed master's degree in social work from USC and a certified therapist 
license from the state of California. Beyond these pieces of paper are 17 years 
of experience working as a psychotherapist at Metropolitan State Hospital in 
Norwalk where he has counseled hundreds of mentally disturbed patients. 
But in his practice, Aguilar, 63, also has borrowed methods from Indian pueblos 
in New Mexico, Tijuana herb shops and village wise men in outposts throughout 
Mexico. The Mexico City native considers himself a folk healer with a 
repertoire of "mystical approaches." He is among a handful of licensed 
therapists in Los Angeles County who turn to ancient rituals of the Hispanic 
culture when traditional therapy fails to make headway with a patient. 
For Maria, who visited Aguilar's office recently, there seemed to be little 
that would help her aside from her faith. 
Trying to raise three girls, the 35-year-old Mexican immigrant was coping with 
an abusive husband and a neighbor she suspected was trying to harm her. Aguilar 
had been providing her conventional counseling. But she wanted a spiritual 
cleansing to drive out evil spirits after she had lost an amulet, which she 
believed protected her from harm. 
The candles were glowing when she quietly entered Aguilar's office and was 
directed to kneel before the altar. After both prayed quietly, Aguilar massaged 
her temples, neck and arms -- making the woman seem as limp as ribbon. Then, he 
abruptly shook her as if to awaken her from a trance and let her sip from a 
goblet of rainwater "from the heavens." He splattered drops of the liquid on 
her head and body. 
Religious Connection 
Next, the therapist took the branch of a California pepper tree and began 
vigorously brushing the woman with its shiny leaves -- releasing the scent of 
pepper in the room. This tree is used because it is thought that Christ's 
crucifix was fashioned from one. More prayers were interrupted by the blowing 
of a large conch shell into the woman's ears. 
Maria snuffed out the bowl of incense with a note pad and peered at the black 
image left behind on the paper. "It looks like a dove," she said. The good 
symbol, Aguilar told her, meant that the evil spirit had been banished. 
The woman looked radiant. "My mind is not cluttered anymore about these ideas," 
she said smiling. "I feel fine." 
Aguilar said he began practicing folk medicine in the mid-1970s at Metropolitan 
State to fill a void in treatment for those unable to benefit from 
Western-style medicine. "When I first started doing it, it was very difficult 
for me. I really had to force myself to do it." But he added, "The important 
thing is not whether I believe, the important thing is that the patient 
believes." 
Newly arrived Latino immigrants from the countryside are the usual candidates 
for the unorthodox treatments, according to a number of mental health 
professionals. Often they blame their mental illness on evil spirits and spurn 
suggestions that their problems might come from within, these experts say. A 
wife might believe a witch placed a hex on her to drive off her husband. 
Seizures could be explained as the wrath of God. 
Specialty Shops 
Usually, these people might seek out a neighborhood folk healer called a 
curandero or find one at a botanica shop, where amulets, herbs, feathers, 
candles and statues of saints are sold. Once primarily confined to East Los 
Angeles, botanicas are sprouting up rapidly across Los Angeles' 
Spanish-speaking neighborhoods -- a few even advertising in the Yellow Pages. 
Curanderos, who have traditionally operated in the shadows, also are getting 
bolder. In downtown Los Angeles this week, several people on Broadway were 
distributing calling cards for curanderos that boasted of being able to cure 
headaches, alcoholism, nervous disorders, and mal de ojo, or evil eye. 
"Whether we like it or not, these people are bringing with them this kind of 
belief," Aguilar said. "There are many places in the community that are 
practicing this non-traditional medicine, but it lends itself to a great deal 
of quackery and exploitation." 
Even the administration at Metropolitan State proved to be disbelievers. 
Several years ago, hospital officials told Aguilar he could no longer conduct 
his controversial rituals on the hospital grounds. He still works at Metro, but 
he also maintains a private office a few blocks away where he practices his 
more unconventional therapies. 
Others who counsel Latinos don't go quite as far as Aguilar, but they applaud 
his work and occasionally send him patients for folk healing. Like Aguilar, 
many said they attempt to honor the spiritualism of their Latino patients and 
believe folk medicine is healthy because it bolsters a person's ties to his 
native culture. 
"Why not utilize it if it connects them with strengths in their past?" asked 
Jerry Tello, a Los Angeles therapist, who keeps a picture of Our Lady of 
Guadalupe and other cultural symbols in his office. If pressed, he will perform 
a ritual cleansing if the client promises to explore through therapy why he or 
she is feeling poorly. 
Traditional Practice 
The number of people who need the services of a faith healer is small, most 
therapists say. Latinos traditionally seek help from family and friends, 
physicians or their church if they are troubled. Yet, it is generally agreed 
that many Latinos loathe seeking help from a therapist because of the stigma 
attached to mental illness. Some mental health professionals who have made 
referrals to folk healers can recite stories of surprising results. 
When therapists "come across someone who believes strongly in folk healers or 
curanderos, it should be the responsibility of the mental health practitioner 
to refer them to a folk healer," said Armando Morales, a professor at UCLA's 
Neuropsychiatric Institute. 
Morales once resorted to a Tijuana curandero when he failed to help a patient 
who was experiencing hysterical seizures. The folk healer spread a large amount 
of garlic on the woman's body and the seizures vanished. 
"If that's what they believe, you have to work within the cultural limits of 
people's belief system to help them," agreed Vangie Montalvo, a bilingual Los 
Angeles County mental health worker. "You can tell them they will get better 
with medication or therapy, but if they don't believe it . . . that's a 
problem." 
Last fall, Montalvo sought Aguilar's help for a 19-year-old woman whose 
protective Latino family was rejecting traditional treatment. The woman heard 
voices and her family was frightened by the way her body would twist 
uncontrollably in grotesque ways. The family, who believed the mother's 
co-worker had placed a curse through black magic, took the woman to Aguilar 
after priests refused to perform an exorcism. 
Improvement Told 
After a limpia, or spiritual cleansing, intended to dispel evil spirits, the 
patient improved and the family became more receptive to traditional 
therapeutic advice, Montalvo said. 
The cures sometimes seem magical, but experts say the explanation is mundane. 
While the dimensions of the human brain remain largely uncharted, the power of 
faith appears to have tremendous curative value. If a person believes that an 
amulet will help, it just might. If somebody thinks it's hogwash, the amulet 
might as well be a lump of coal. 
"Trust . . . is a very important part of the recovery process. If someone 
believes in faith healing, that it will be helpful, it probably will," said 
Arturo Fierro, a Montebello clinical psychologist with a predominantly Latino 
clientele. 
