HIGH-TECH LOCKUP; 
NEW JAIL NEAR CASTAIC ALMOST READY TO RECEIVE 2,800 OF COUNTY'S MOST DANGEROUS 
INMATES 
Sometime in the next two to four months, 2,800 men will arrive in buses to live 
for up to a year in the hills below Castaic. Unlike many residents of the area 
who commute to distant jobs, the newcomers will be within walking distance of 
their jobs in a new bakery, print shop and textile factory. They will also have 
ready access to facilities for exercise, basketball games, card playing and 
other hobbies. 
These men will not be among the hundreds who have flocked to the area in recent 
years to escape the perils of big city living. 
Rather, their experience of the countryside will be limited to glimpses through 
the rectangular, 4-inch-wide bulletproof windows in their new home: a 
$131-million maximum-security jail complex scheduled to open soon at the Peter 
J. Pitchess Honor Rancho, Los Angeles County's largest jail complex. 
The men will be among the county's most dangerous criminals. Most of them will 
be sent to the facility while awaiting trial or sentencing for such felonies as 
murder, armed robbery, assault and rape. 
Relative Danger 
"On a danger scale of one to 10, they are seven or better," said county 
Sheriff's Capt. Michael A. Nelson, who since April has supervised planning for 
the facility and who will be its director when it opens. 
Called the North County Correctional Facility, the 680,000-square-foot complex 
will increase the jail's population of minimum-, medium- and maximum-security 
inmates from about 7,500 to more than 10,000. It will about double the maximum 
security population to about 6,000. 
The jail, east of the Golden State Freeway between Santa Clarita and Castaic, 
for 40 years was known as the Wayside Honor Rancho until officials changed its 
name in 1982 to honor the former county sheriff. 
The new complex, built partly to relieve crowding in the 6,800-inmate Men's 
Central Jail in downtown Los Angeles, will be the latest step in the evolution 
of the rural, 2,865-acre jail site from a minimum-security "honor ranch" for 
low-risk inmates to a sophisticated, high-tech detention facility for dangerous 
criminals. 
Sophisticated Electronics 
Nelson said the new complex, which is about 98% complete, will be among the 
most advanced of its kind in the nation. It will incorporate the latest in 
electronic surveillance and automated security systems, he said, while 
affording inmates opportunities for work and recreation. 
Located behind an existing maximum-security facility, the complex consists of 
four two-story detention buildings and a one-story structure connected by long 
corridors. Four of the buildings are divided into dormitory-style cells for 32 
inmates apiece, while a fifth, "high-risk" building has 196 individual cells 
for the most dangerous inmates. 
A "discipline" section in the high-risk building has 48 individual cells for 
unruly inmates who will be sent to the cells for up to 10 days at a time and 
allowed only an hour of exercise per week, Nelson said. 
The complex has three heavily guarded outdoor exercise areas. Seven smaller 
ones, all covered with heavy metal mesh, are in courtyards in the inmate 
buildings. 
TV Monitors, Cameras 
From a central command post, guards will be able to see virtually every corner 
of the complex through 20 television monitors linked to 128 cameras posted 
throughout the facility's five main buildings, Nelson said. Every door, from 
individual cell doors to the main entrance gates, can be electronically locked 
and unlocked from the command post, he said. 
Using the electronic locks, guards should be able to contain inmate 
disturbances by instantly locking doors leading to other areas, he said. 
"Anyone who thinks they can get a key from someone and get into another part of 
the building is sadly mistaken," Nelson said. 
Nelson said the facility's design has nothing in common with the recently 
completed federal Metropolitan Detention Center downtown, from which five men 
escaped June 18 after cutting through metal mesh enclosing an eighth-floor 
recreation area. The men, who were awaiting trial or sentencing for federal 
crimes, used a rope made of bedsheets to lower themselves to the street. One of 
them was arrested several hours after the escape, another was arrested Sunday; 
the other three remain at large. 
Heavier Screen 
"We have no design similarities with their operation," Nelson said. "Our 
screening in outdoor recreation areas is considerably heavier than the 
screening they use." 
In case of fire, a computer connected to alarms will automatically print out 
instructions showing the quickest route to the blaze, Nelson said. 
The jail is more than a high-tech detention center, Nelson said. It also puts 
inmates to work to save the county money and to develop occupational skills 
that they may be able to use after their sentences end, he said. 
Inmates working in a new, 10,000-square-foot bakery will bake 25,000 loaves of 
bread every day for 22,000 inmates in the county's eight jails, Nelson said. 
Others will be put to work in a 19,000-square-foot sewing shop to manufacture 
T-shirts and underwear for inmates, and some inmates will work in a print shop 
producing crime report forms and other documents used by the Sheriff's 
Department, he said. 
'Keep a Man Busy' 
"Obviously, if you can keep a man busy, give him a job, it's better for him -- 
and for us, too," Nelson said. 
In addition to putting inmates to work, the complex will employ 368 uniformed 
guards and 144 paid cooks, bakers, clerks and other personnel to supervise 
inmate workers, Nelson said. The Sheriff's Department is accepting applications 
for many of those positions, he said. 
Nelson said planners designed the complex using suggestions from guards and 
captains at other county jails. He said the design should prevent a repeat of 
the March, 1985, jailbreak in which seven inmates, including one murderer, 
escaped from the existing maximum-security unit, which was built in 1957. 
The escaped murderer burglarized a home in nearby Bouquet Canyon before 
authorities arrested him in downtown Los Angeles. Five of the other escapees 
were captured not far from the jail. 
Little Opposition 
Despite the escapes, news that nearly 3,000 additional high-risk criminals will 
be moving into the area apparently has not stirred community opposition. 
Several homeowners who live across the freeway from the jail said in interviews 
that they are not worried that inmates might escape and commit crimes in their 
neighborhood. 
"I'm really not worried about it," said Bill Straughan, who lives with his wife 
and two young daughters in a neighborhood north of Hasley Canyon Road. "It's 
full-security, and so is my home -- we have an alarm. By expanding it out here, 
they'll save taxpayers money. They're going to have to put it somewhere." 
Straughan added, however, that he worries about additional traffic from people 
visiting inmates. And he wants the jail to change its practice of releasing 
inmates at the jail's main entrance. If no one is there to pick up the inmates, 
he said, they might wander into the neighborhood and commit crimes. 
Resident Andy Swanson, a California Highway Patrol officer, said he does not 
welcome the new inmates. 
"It's something to think about," he said. "Even the way it is right now, it's a 
constant thought. If they ever escape, where are they going to go?" 
