DOUBTFUL ABOUT 'TRUTHFUL' REFERENCE; 
GIAMATTI 'PUZZLED' BY PART OF ROSE LETTER 
Baseball Commissioner A. Bartlett Giamatti says he is "puzzled" by part of a 
letter he signed and sent to a federal judge on behalf of Ron Peters, Pete 
Rose's alleged bookmaker, but does not regret sending the letter. 
Ohio Common Pleas Judge Norbert Nadel agreed with Rose's lawyers that Giamatti 
has already made up his mind that Rose is guilty of betting on baseball, and on 
Sunday the judge granted a temporary restraining order delaying for two weeks a 
scheduled hearing before Giamatti on the gambling allegations. The judge said 
Giamatti's letter -- a recommendation sent to a federal judge as part of the 
sentencing of Peters -- is at the heart of Rose's case. 
The letter praises Peters for being "candid, forthright and truthful" with John 
Dowd, the investigator for baseball who found evidence that Rose bet on Reds 
games and other baseball games in 1985, 1986 and 1987. 
Giamatti told the Boston Globe in today's editions that he does not regret 
sending the letter. 
"No, my regret about the letter is the selective way in which people want to 
read it. My letter said very clearly three times that I'm in effect 
transmitting the view of my special counsel," Giamatti said. 
". . . I believed myself to be enacting a routine chore of the administerial 
kind that clearly had nothing to do with my view of Mr. Rose." 
Giamatti admitted to the Globe that he was puzzled by the word truthful in the 
letter. 
"I was a little puzzled by that, but I didn't focus on it, frankly, because -- 
I don't want to say I wasn't paying attention -- but I do want to say I looked 
upon it as kind of a routine, standard thing. I was more concerned to make sure 
it didn't go out and ask for leniency, and it didn't," Giamatti said. 
When asked by the Globe if he should have focused on the wording more 
carefully, Giamatti said: 
"I suppose so. Frankly, I still read this letter as being, when you see 
truthful, I think you see special counsel right after it. If that was John 
Dowd's view, it was all right with me. I'm not obliged to accept all of John 
Dowd's views or any of his views. A man does an investigation and he hands me a 
report. I have a hearing and I make a judgment. And that's what's supposed to 
happen." 
