TOURING THE EUROPEAN COUNTRYSIDE BY FOOT OFFERS MEMORABLE IMAGES 
You may not cover much ground when you tour Europe by foot, but there's no 
better way to get a wonderfully intimate look at the countryside. When you have 
laboriously climbed the twisting path of a long hill, its image is burned into 
memory: every rock you stumbled over, every flower you stopped to sniff. 
Six years ago, my wife and I signed up with a tour company for what turned out 
to be an exceptional adventure in Italy. 
For nine days we hiked the gorgeous hills and valleys of southern Tuscany, 
arriving at the end of each day's journey at a comfortable inn, in a small and 
historic hilltop village. 
We had so much fun that we took another walking tour the following year, a 
15-day ramble through the famed Loire Valley of France. 
As recently as six years ago, such escorted walking tours of Europe -- or 
anywhere else, for that matter -- were something of a novelty, and only a 
relatively few tour organizers offered them. Since then, however, exploring 
Europe by foot seems to have captured the imagination of athletic-minded 
Americans. 
Dozens of tour companies have put together walking excursions throughout 
Europe, including Eastern Europe. Some of them are bicycling companies that 
have added walking tours for clients who want to linger along the way. 
The surge of interest in walking tours prompted one Boulder, Colo., travel 
agency, All Adventure Travel, to begin specializing this year in nothing but 
escorted bicycling and walking tours. 
The owners, Pat and Julio Halty, are bicyclists themselves, but they discovered 
a lot of their customers preferred to travel afoot. The firm currently serves 
as a clearinghouse, or reservation service, for about 25 walking-tour 
companies, and the number is growing. 
The price for a European walking holiday can cost $60 or $75 per person per day 
to as much as $300. The price varies for several reasons, says Pat Halty, the 
primary factor being type of accommodations offered. 
Some tours are all-inclusive -- you pay one price and it covers all meals, wine 
and museum entrance fees. Other companies provide breakfast only, and you dine 
wherever you choose -- at an additional cost. 
The country in which you are walking also is a consideration in the price. 
Greece, Portugal and Spain are inexpensive. In France's Loire Valley and the 
wine country of Italy, you can expect to pay much more. 
A more subtle distinction is the ratio between guides and participants. "We 
like an 8-to-1 ratio," says Halty. "I get concerned when it's 15 to 1. It 
becomes a mob scene." 
Among the many travel companies offering escorted walks in Europe this summer: 
 -- Alternative Travel Group: One of the oldest of the walking tour companies, 
Alternative Travel Group, began by specializing in Italian jaunts and then 
expanded to include tours in France, Portugal, Spain, the Alps and Turkey. 
Its colorful 30-page catalogue lists about 20 itineraries, lasting from nine to 
11 days, and dozens of departures from spring into winter. 
The firm's prices tend to be on the high side, compared to other companies, but 
almost everything is included in the cost except air fare. The local wine flows 
as freely as you might wish at lunch and dinner. 
Perhaps the firm's most popular hikes are the "Tuscan Trail" and the "Southern 
Tuscan Trail." Guides escort you over country lanes and hilltop trails away 
from highway traffic. A vehicle shuttles your luggage to the next hilltop 
village. 
One night in southern Tuscany is spent at a historic hot springs spa, Bagno 
Vignoni, where you soak your muscles and drink in a splendid view. 
The nine-day Tuscan Trail tour is $1,745; the 11-day Southern Tuscan Trail tour 
is $1,975. Air fare to Pisa is additional. There are frequent departures 
through October. 
For information: Alternative Travel Group Ltd., 1-3 George St., Oxford, England 
OX1 2AZ, (800) 527-5997. 
 -- Butterfield &amp; Robinson: This Canadian firm began offering bicycle tours 
24 years ago, and since then has added a small selection of walking tours. 
Theirs are, however, among the fanciest -- and most expensive -- walking tours 
on the market. 
Accommodations are in chateaux, villas and small-town auberges and country 
inns. The company offers five- to nine-day walks in the Alsace, Bordeaux and 
Dordogne Valley regions of France; the Swiss Alps, and the Lake Country, 
Chianti and Tuscany regions of Italy. 
With Alternative Travel, you walk with one or more guides. Butterfield &amp; 
Robinson offers a variation. You can choose to accompany a guide, but the firm 
also distributes maps of each tour segment so that you can find your own way to 
the next destination. 
A van carries the luggage. The firm generally plans two-night stops in each 
destination; many companies stay in a different town each evening. 
The eight-day Alsace itinerary links what the firm describes as "the tiny 
half-timbered, flower-bedecked villages for which Alsace is famous." Cost is 
$2,295 per person, excluding air fare to Strasbourg. Departures are June 9, 
July 14, Aug. 18, Sept. 1 and Sept. 29. 
For more information: Butterfield &amp; Robinson, 70 Bond St., Suite 300, 
Toronto, Canada M5B 1X3, (800) 387-1147 and (416) 864-1354. 
 -- The Wayfarers: This English walking company devotes its energies to the 
homeland, offering a series of six-night tours along country lanes and ancient 
right-of-ways. 
Several of the tours have a literary flavor, among them "Sir Walter Scott's 
Borders," "Thomas Hardy's Dorset" and "James Herriot's Yorkshire." Also very 
popular are walks in England's Cotswolds, which tend to sell out quickly. 
On these trips, a guide leads the way, a van carries the luggage and you stay 
in small inns and country hotels. 
On the Thomas Hardy tour, you pass through picturesque villages and the gently 
rolling hills of Wessex in southwestern England. The price for this and all 
other tours is about $1,100. Departures for the Thomas Hardy tour are Aug. 5 
and Sept. 30. 
For information: Contact the U.S. office of The Wayfarers at 166 Thames St., 
Newport, R.I. 02840, (401) 849-5087. 
 -- American Youth Hostels: In this year's tour catalogue, American Youth 
Hostels offers three all-inclusive hikes: to Ireland, the Swiss Alps and the 
French and Italian Alps. Each lasts 16 days. Stays are in inexpensive dorm 
accommodations in hostels, which keeps the price down. 
The organization's "Shamrock Shuffle," a circle tour out of Dublin, costs 
$2,350 per person, including round-trip air fare from New York City. A guide 
leads the way. 
You must take a backpack and carry your belongings. There is one departure for 
adults age 18 or over on Aug. 17; a second departure open to younger hikers is 
scheduled for July 27. 
For information: American Youth Hostels, 1017 K St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20001, 
(202) 783-4943. 
 -- Worldwide Walking: Long a specialist in winter cross-country skiing tours, 
this New Jersey firm recently has introduced a series of walking tours to such 
unusual destinations as the Tatra Mountain region on the Polish-Czechoslovak 
border, several mountain regions in Norway and to Lapland in northern Finland. 
The Tatra Mountain trips are aimed at more adventurous travelers since several 
nights are spent in bunk rooms in mountain lodges. 
While in the mountains, you carry your gear in a backpack. Distances are not 
great. In Finland you stay in Lapp houses or tents. In Norway, accommodations 
are in comfortable inns. 
The 13-day, two-country Tatra Mountain tour begins in Krakow, Poland, and ends 
in Prague. In both cities, accommodations are in first-class hotels. The price 
is $1,090 per person, including lodging and meals but not air fare. Departures 
are July 15, Aug. 12 and Sept. 2. 
For information: Worldwide Walking, P.O. Box 1129, Maplewood, N.J. 07040, (201) 
378-9170. 
 -- The French Experience: This New York City travel agency is introducing an 
unusual walking holiday in Provence. 
Participants stay for a week in a small hotel in the ancient village of 
Moustiers Sainte Marie in Provence, about 60 miles north of Nice. Each day you 
can join an escorted hike, either in the spectacularly scenic Gorge du Verdon 
-- a deep river canyon -- or to mountain villages or through the Provence 
countryside. 
A different hike is scheduled every day of the week and they are available from 
June through October. 
You can begin the week's cycle any day of the week. Picnic lunches are provided 
along the way. Swimming and windsurfing are available in nearby lakes. The 
price of $918 per person, based on double occupancy, includes lodging for six 
nights, all meals, six hikes and transfers from Nice. 
For information: The French Experience, 370 Lexington Ave., New York 10017, 
(800) 283-72623 and (212) 986-1115. 
 -- Distant Journeys: The two Outward Bound instructors who head this firm, 
Andrea Ellison and Julie Head, concentrate on alpine excursions. 
Their basic trip is the classic "Tour du Mont Blanc," a 13-day circle route 
that begins in Chamonix, France, crosses into the Italian and Swiss Alps and 
returns to its starting point. 
The scenery is gorgeous, says Ellison, but you can expect moderate-to-strenuous 
hiking at higher altitudes (though under 9,000 feet). Accommodations are in 
modest hotels or in mountain lodges or refuges. 
You will have to carry a backpack with clothing changes and rain gear. The 
price is $1,250 per person, which includes lodging and most meals; air fare to 
Geneva is extra. 
Departures are June 25, Aug. 27 and Sept. 10. There are seven-day versions of 
the trip at $925 per person. 
For information: Distant Journeys, Box 1211, Camden, Me. 04843, (207) 781-5339. 
 -- Above the Clouds Trekking: Among the few Americans who find their way to 
Romania's Transylvania Alps are the small groups that have been led there by 
this Worcester, Mass., firm since 1984. 
These 16-day trips are not for everyone, since Romania's mountain lodges are 
very basic, according to the firm's Steve Conlon. However, the scenery is 
beautiful, and you have the opportunity to meet and talk with hikers from other 
Eastern European countries. 
The hiking is "surprisingly rugged," says Conlon, so you should be in good 
shape. Daily distances covered are longer, and you will have to carry a 
good-sized backpack. 
Four nights are spent in Bucharest, the Romanian capital. The price is $1,400 
per person, which includes lodging and food; air fare is extra. Departures are 
Aug. 2 and Aug. 16. 
For information: Above the Clouds Trekking, P.O. Box 398, Worcester, Mass. 
01602, (800) 233-4499 and (508) 799-4499. 
 -- Classic Bicycle Tours and Treks: The craggy Pindus Mountains of northern 
Greece are not lofty, says manager Dale Hart of Classic Bicycle Tours and Treks 
of Clarkson, N.Y. 
His firm has put together a 13-day itinerary on marked but remote mountain 
trails. Accommodations are in small hotels, village houses and mountain 
hostels. 
Anyone in good physical condition should be able to complete the hike. Mules 
carry the luggage. The price is $1,089, which includes lodging, breakfasts and 
two dinners; air fare is extra. Departures are June 29 and Aug. 31. In 1991, 
the firm is adding a Crete itinerary. 
For information: Classic Bicycle Tours and Treks, P.O. Box 668, Clarkson, N.Y. 
14430, (800) 777-8090 and (716) 637-5970. 
 -- Peregrine Adventures: Each spring, Peregrine Adventures of Park City, Utah, 
puts together several 15-day walking tours of the little-visited islands of 
Greece. 
You spend two or three days on each island taking day hikes, then travel on to 
the next island by ferry. This year's program has been completed, but similar 
trips are planned for 1991. The price this year was $2,195 per person, which 
included lodging, meals and air fare from New York City. 
In late summer and fall, Peregrine has scheduled a 15-day combination walking 
and sailing tour of Turkey called the "Ottoman Odyssey." 
First stop is Istanbul for sightseeing. You continue on to the culturally 
interesting area of Cappadocia in central Turkey, and complete the journey with 
a weeklong cruise along the Aegean Coast. 
The price is $2,995 per person, including air fare from New York City. 
Departures are Aug. 23 and Sept. 6, 16 and 29. 
For information: Peregrine Adventures, Box 3838, Park City, Utah 84060, (801) 
649-0460. 
 -- Tre Laghi Travel: Tre Laghi Travel's nine-day "Grand Hotel Tour" of 
Northern Italy's Lake Country is aimed at the hiker with a love of comfort and 
good food. All accommodations are in four- and five-star hotels. Among them is 
the majestic 18th-Century Grand Hotel Villa d'Este on Lake Como, where the 
group spends two nights. 
On this tour, Tre Laghi offers a choice of a leisurely hike to the next 
destination or a longer one, if you are so inclined. Luggage is carried by a 
van. 
The price is $2,560 per person, which includes lodging, breakfasts and dinners. 
Air fare is extra. Departures are July 24 and Aug. 31. A less expensive version 
with accommodations in more modest hotels is $1,570. 
For information: Tre Laghi Travel, 301 Southwest Lincoln, Suite 802, Portland, 
Ore. 97201, (503) 274-2827. 
All Adventure Travel publishes a 28-page catalogue of trips throughout the 
world, including a substantial number in Europe. The firm can book a tour and 
handle the necessary air connections and other travel arrangements. For a copy: 
P.O. Box 4307, Boulder, Colo. 80306, (800) 537-4025 and (303) 939-8885. 
