TENANTS AND LANDLORDS AGREE ON FRUSTRATION OVER EVICTIONS 
Esther Walton and Shi-Chin Tung burn in isolated middle-aged frustration. Were 
they to meet, they might appreciate the other's position, but politically this 
is daydreaming. Their lives have been too warped by experience. 
Walton, 63, lives alone in a $241-a-month, one-bedroom apartment with a 
water-stained ceiling in Venice, three blocks from the ocean. Her rent is 
remarkably low because she has lived there 10 years; only small annual 
increases have been permitted by Los Angeles' rent control law. The Westside 
real estate binge has barely touched her. Another one-bedroom unit in the 
complex, recently decontrolled when a tenant left, goes for $695. 
Legal Technique 
The manager of Walton's building recently attempted to evict her by saying he 
wanted to use her unit for a resident manager. The technique is legal, and no 
relocation benefits are required under the city's rent control law. (Relocation 
assistance of $2,000 to $5,000 is required when a landlord is evicting to 
provide housing for a relative, to demolish the building or to perform more 
than $10,000 worth of work.) 
However, tenant advocates routinely complain that unscrupulous landlords bring 
in friends as rent-free resident managers to replace long-term tenants. Then, 
after a few months, the resident manager leaves, and the landlord rents the 
apartment at a far higher rate. That is illegal. First, evictions to make room 
for resident-managers must be made in "good faith," and second, the unit would 
not be decontrolled if the resident manager left and the landlord decided to 
rent it out. However, such maneuvering is largely beyond the ability of the 
city Rent Stabilization Division to monitor. 
Before Walton's eviction was filed in court, her landlord offered to pay her 
$5,000 to move. Most tenants, fearing the inevitable, accept such buyouts, but 
Walton declined. Rents were so high that the money would evaporate within a few 
months and she would be homeless, she feared. 
She found a legal-aid attorney, and eventually the landlord dropped the 
eviction suit with some bitterness, complaining that Walton was "an obstinate 
old lady" with a " 'Grapes of Wrath' mentality." 
But while Walton had won, the Angst would not leave. 
"You become obsessional, depressed, angry and somewhat out of control," she 
said. I would have these continuous dialogues in my head between him and me. 
It's been terrible for me. I'm still emotionally hung up." 
Two months after that interview, her outlook has not changed. 
"I look at most things as sour," she says. "It wears on you. You just get the 
feeling you're really being used, and I'm not the only person this is happening 
to. It was like a trick played on me." 
Shi-Chin Tung, a 65-year-old retired cook, feels a trick has been played on 
him, too. 
Tung owns two small apartment buildings in the Pico-Fairfax area of West Los 
Angeles. He has put them both up for sale. He talks bitterly in broken English 
about moving back to his native China. He has lived in America for 20 years, 
but he has grown to feel angrily betrayed. 
"I very close to Americans. I can't (feel) close any more. (Too many) liars," 
he says at his dining room table, his daughter sitting by to interpret when 
necessary. 
It was always Tung's dream to own property, first a home for his family, then 
these investment properties. But nowadays he says he cannot find reliable 
tenants for the $750-a-month units he rents, and he believes that rent control 
-- which places numerous procedural burdens on evictions -- makes it impossible 
for him to keep order. 
In the eight-unit building where Tung lives, three units are vacant. Two good 
tenants moved out because a third unit -- now empty thanks to a messy eviction 
-- was turned into an obnoxious keg of noise by a pair of young men who stopped 
paying rent after their parents' support quit, according to Tung. 
"So many people get away with lying because of the law . . . too many 
loopholes," he says. In court, the young men signed a judgment promising to pay 
$3,181 in back rent. Tung says he has not seen a cent. 
Why? he asks. Why do nine-tenths of the people who apply to rent his units have 
lousy credit records or past evictions? Why does he lose good tenants, like the 
one at his other building in Pasadena who left because the next-door neighbor 
fired a shotgun through her apartment? "You are a very good landlord and I hope 
you have better luck finding good tenants," she wrote. It was a small 
condolence. 
"I like Americans," Tung says, pulling out a scrapbook with photographs of the 
many American families who employed him. "But I don't want to stay anymore. 
Owner call police, no can do nothing. Owner call court, no can do nothing. I 
don't like to (go to) jail. I don't like kill people. But I do! I so mad!" 
It sounded like anguish of an old man. But Tung's children are taking no 
chances. They have removed their father's gun from his apartment. BOB BAKER 
