EAST-WEST HYBRID IS ECONOMICS' MUTANT 
For months the reform movements in the Soviet Union, China and Eastern Europe 
have taken the world on an emotional roller-coaster ride. Again and again our 
hopes have risen to the sky and then plummeted to earth. We have seen the first 
bloom of glasnost in Moscow and the use of poison gas against protest marchers 
in Soviet Georgia. We marveled at the astounding spectacle of a million 
peaceful demonstrators in Tian An Men Square and recoiled in horror at the 
cruel suppression of the protest by assault troops. Before the firing had 
stopped in Beijing, we were celebrating the victory of Solidarity in Poland. 
Roller-coaster rides are exhilarating, but they are not the best occasion in 
which to evaluate the nature and direction of anything. Now that Beijing has 
been terrorized into silence, we might ask some careful questions about reforms 
in the communist world and their meaning. 
As matters of economics, we know the reforms cannot succeed. There is some 
sense to a command economy on the old Stalinist model, more sense to a market 
economy in the Western style, but no sense at all to the hybrid 
Stalinist/market economies that China and the Soviet Union have begun to 
fashion. 
Stalinist practice taught the world that people will work (not very well) out 
of fear; the West and the newly industrialized countries have taught us that 
people will work (very well) for the right incentives. But mixed 
Stalinist/market economies created by political bargaining are neither fearsome 
nor alluring. In a way, these hybrids bear the defects of both East and West. 
Everyone waits for directions from the center, which do not come, while 
everyone lacks the incentive to take the initiative. Whatever else they 
achieve, the Stalinist hybrid economies will not -- cannot -- deliver 
modernization, high technology and low-priced consumer goods. 
Politically, reformers and traditionalists alike in the Soviet Union and 
Eastern Europe will soon grow tired of all the posturing without power. It is 
humiliating, a kind of bogus political circus in which the reformers must jump 
through meaningless hoops. The outcome of the recent elections to the Supreme 
Soviet showed how the system has been rigged to ensure that the Communist Party 
of the Soviet Union remains firmly in control. At least the Chinese 
authoritarians declined to force this embarrassing ballet on their students and 
reformers. 
For the loyalists in the Soviet Union, the new institutions and procedures are 
annoying and dangerous. Their annoyance is obvious. They are constantly 
criticized. Their accomplishments are belittled. They are exposed to ridicule 
and hatred. Politicians everywhere despise being on the defensive like this and 
will do everything they can to stop it. The reforms are dangerous to the regime 
because they foster the impression that power is up for grabs in the Soviet 
Union. If this impression is allowed to continue, sooner or later reformers 
will try to take power, perhaps through massive demonstrations of the kind seen 
in Beijing and Soviet Georgia. The loyalists and the Gorbachevite reformers 
will fight as Deng Xiaoping and Li Peng have in China to prevent a transfer of 
power out of the hands of the Soviet -- or Polish or Czech or East German -- 
Communist parties. 
The reforms' most interesting development is the final and total collapse of 
Marxism. This truly historic phenomenon carries a number of crucially important 
implications for all nations. I'll briefly sketch three: 
In the industrial democracies and developing countries, the greatest risk is 
hubris, overweening arrogance, a defiance of faith and reason that is 
self-destructive. Now that no serious student of political economy can endorse 
the Marxist path to development, a major counterforce to market economics has 
disappeared. Into that void in the industrial democracies are flooding 
puffed-up apologists of unrestrained capitalism. The resulting conflict already 
shows in the polarized and paralyzed national economic debate in the United 
States. Congress will not cut expenditures, the President will not seek higher 
taxes. Meanwhile, the wealth of the country is being transferred to others. 
These extremes of polarization are already stalking the developed and 
developing world. 
In the Soviet Union the greatest accomplishment of Marxism was to glue a 
multinational country together. While official belief in Marxism prevailed, 
nationalism was overwhelmed. In practice, Soviet authority may have been 
Russian, but in principle nationality didn't matter. One day -- on that brave 
Marxist day of the arrival of true communism -- nationalism was to disappear. 
That pretense is gone. What is left except the increasingly dangerous clash of 
conflicting and aggrieved nationalisms? 
Finally, although it may gall some Western ideologues to admit, most analysts 
would agree that Mao and Marx once held the Mandate of Heaven in China. In 
Western terms, a social contract existed. Now the contract is broken. And it is 
broken at a time when excesses of Mao and Marx have destroyed the old culture 
of China. A new political culture must be born without the old limits and 
restraints, under the heavy and sometimes shaky hand of an increasingly 
illegitimate tyranny. 
Perhaps the most attractive metaphor is not a roller-coaster ride but an 
Indonesian shadow play. There is music and laughter. There are images on the 
screen. They frighten, amuse, educate. But they are only shadows of the 
originals. Behind the screen the sources of change and movement are hidden. It 
is time to look behind the screen. 
