A BRIDGE BETWEEN TWO WORLDS; 
CULTURE: AS HEAD OF THE NEW NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN, RICK WEST 
AIMS TO DISPEL THE STEREOTYPE OF HIS PEOPLE AS NOBLE SAVAGES. 
Sitting prim and proper in the shadow of Smithsonian Castle, it's hard to 
picture W. Richard West in the full tribal regalia of his Cheyenne tradition: 
paint strewn across his cheeks, eagle feathers in his coffee-brown hair, 
buckskins and moccasins in place of his current pin-stripes and penny loafers. 
Rick West has traveled a long way from his family's log cabin to reach this 
sun-soaked day, looking out through the bay windows of his Washington Mall 
office -- contemplating the first full day of his daunting new Dream Job. 
"Quite frankly," says West, smiling and exuding an air of gentle confidence, "I 
can't think of any job I would want more." 
This month, the 47-year-old Indian rights lawyer begins work as the newly 
crowned director of the National Museum of the American Indian. It is an 
ambitious $106-million-plus project to be built on the choicest of D.C. real 
estate, next door to the Capitol and the Air and Space Museum. 
For West, a member of Oklahoma's Cheyenne tribe, this museum sends the overdue 
but welcome signal that American Indians are finally being recognized, he says, 
"as a complicated, rich culture that deserves a prominent place on the Mall" -- 
more than a century after white settlers began herding Indians onto 
reservations. 
"Congress, in doing this, is not motivated simply by guilt," he says, 
"although, you know, guilt is fully warranted." 
A Stanford Law School graduate and a veteran Washington lobbyist, West appears 
more accustomed to the power lunch than the peace pipe, but family and friends 
say his roots in the Indian way of life run deep. 
Cate Stetson, the only non-Indian partner in West's former Albuquerque, N.M., 
law firm notes with admiration: "I have to deal with two worlds, but I don't 
have to live in both of them. It's a tribute to Rick that he pulls it off so 
well." 
West himself puts it this way: "Contemporary Indians realize we live in two 
worlds, and that we have to be equipped to deal with both worlds. But what gets 
us through both worlds is that we are thoroughly grounded in our own culture." 
It has, in fact, been his lifelong mission to preserve and promote that culture 
-- a fact not lost on Smithsonian Secretary Robert McC. Adams, who in 
announcing West's selection last month praised his "commitment to a deeper 
understanding of the meaning of American Indian life and culture." 
West spent his early years on a Cheyenne reservation in eastern Oklahoma, in 
what he describes as a relatively privileged and cultured household amid 
poverty. 
His Cheyenne father, Walter Richard West, was on his way to becoming an 
acclaimed artist, and his white mother, Maribelle McCrea, was a pianist and 
music professor at Bacone College, a local mission school established in the 
1880s by Baptists, primarily to serve the Cheyenne. 
The family -- including his younger brother, Jim -- lived in a four-room cabin 
at a time when most of West's peers still lived in tepees. "The students used 
to come over to our place to learn about what it was like, living in a house," 
West says. 
The Cheyenne children were schooled in mainstream American faiths and ways, as 
the missionaries pursued policies of what West characterizes as "wanton 
assimilation." West's 77-year-old father is a Catholic; he is a Methodist. 
"The reason I cannot speak my native language, Cheyenne, is because my father 
could not," West says. "They were not allowed to speak Cheyenne. The nuns quite 
literally banged the children's heads against blackboards who were caught 
speaking Cheyenne." 
At age 11, Rick West and his father took a "special pilgrimage" to Manhattan to 
see the Heye Foundation collection of Indian art and artifacts. That journey, 
four days each way by train, proved to be a watershed. 
"I have such vivid memories of that trip," West recalls. "Looking up at all 
this beautifully designed, authentic Indian handcraft -- it opened my eyes. 
Some of the ornamented clothing, in particular, had very beautiful beadwork, 
the likes of which I've never seen since. Very beautiful." 
Not coincidentally, the Heye's 1-million-piece collection will form the 
backbone of the planned Indian museum. Most of it will be moved from Manhattan 
to the new museum's archives and 250,000-square-foot display areas, though an 
exhibit will be retained in New York on a floor of the former Customs House 
near Wall Street. 
"Rick has had an interest in Indian culture from the time we were very young 
and war-danced together," says Jim West, Rick's only sibling, who at age 44 is 
a private financial consultant to more than 150 tribes. 
The key to Rick West's success, his brother says, is his character. "By virtue 
of his mixed heritage . . . (he) knows how to build bridges." 
Adds Stetson: "It's very, very difficult to say anything bad about Rick because 
he just leaves no room for it. The rest of us have some particularly glaring 
faults, but Rick has none -- and we know him real well." 
"If he's got a weakness, it's that he's got almost got no ability to be mean," 
asserts West's longtime law partner and friend in Albuquerque, Kevin Gower. 
"Rather than confront and fight and stir up tension and bad feelings, he's 
willing to walk away and say life is too short. He thinks you win more that way 
. . . by softening the views of others rather than beating them over the head." 
West does bridle in his own way, though -- a raised brow here, a chopping hand 
gesture there -- at the prospect of seeing the Indian way of life assimilated 
out of existence. 
He chides the media for largely ignoring the Indian community, preferring to 
traffic in romanticized and derogatory caricature, a la James Fenimore Cooper's 
noble savage. He asserts that museums, including the Smithsonian, tend to treat 
Indians as if they were dinosaurs, a mere collection of models and bones. 
The idea for the American Indian museum was forged in a hostile environment. 
Indian groups for years had protested the Smithsonian's holding of Indian 
remains and burial artifacts in its massive archives. 
The 1989 legislation that authorized the Indian museum's creation -- subject to 
a $36-million private fund-raising drive that West will head -- also mandated 
the repatriation and proper burial of those remains. 
"It's about time," West says. "The circumstances under which many of these 
remains were collected -- and ended up in the Smithsonian collection -- are 
very offensive. Some of the remains actually came from battlefields where 
soldiers gathered up the bodies and shipped them off to Washington. Quite 
frankly, that's a terrible, inhuman way for our ancestors to be treated." 
He notes his own traditional Cheyenne belief that "unless a body has been 
properly buried, its spirit really never starts on the journey up the Milky Way 
to the hereafter, and simply wanders around lost in the village where it died. 
"For us, it is important that the remains be returned so the spirits can be 
liberated." 
The "living" museum West envisions will be "part history, part sociology -- a 
slice of Indian life, past and present." He expects that its emphasis on modern 
community and culture as much as its history will embolden the Indian 
community. 
Indian leaders -- who have criticized the Smithsonian in the past as a staid, 
ethnocentric institution -- praise West's appointment. 
Notes Gower: "I've seen simplistic exhibits (at the Smithsonian) suffering from 
a cultural myopia. Words like primitive and savage are used in a denigrating 
way. It's nice that, for the first time, an Indian is going to have a central 
say about how Indians will be portrayed in the nation's most prominent place." 
To that end, West is planning exhibits that will highlight current political 
controversies besetting the Indian way of life: violent feuding among Mohawks 
over gambling on their New York reservation; the South Dakotan Sioux's battle 
for U.S. reparations over broken treaties and stolen land; the Amazon natives' 
persecution by developers. 
"I want it to be hemispheric in scope," West says. "The diversity and beauty of 
Native American culture don't stop at the U.S. border." 
The philosophical and intellectual continuity of Indians, too, will be 
showcased, he says, noting that some Indian values are "supremely relevant" and 
gaining credence in the non-Indian world. 
"Take what really is one of the driving values of Indian cultural life -- that 
the land is not ours to buy and sell, to be bartered away," he says. "Now that 
sense of balance between us and nature, it can be easily romanticized. . . . 
"But the concept has a lot of relevance. After all, what has the Juggernaut of 
technology done? It's gotten us polluted air, fouled water, et cetera," he 
says. "You're seeing attention being paid now to values that are inherently 
Indian." 
West attended the University of Redlands -- where he was a student leader -- as 
an undergraduate, earned a master's degree in American history at Harvard and 
graduated from Stanford Law School in 1971. He won collegiate honors in legal 
writing and served as a clerk for a federal appellate judge. In 1979, he became 
the first Indian partner in the Washington office of the powerful New York law 
firm Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobsen. 
As an associate, West took a leave of absence in 1977 to teach Indian law at 
Stanford and to help direct the American Indian Lawyer Training Program in 
Oakland. He returned to the firm in 1978, but after nine more years in 
Washington lobbying for Indian interests, in and out of court, his firm phased 
out its Indian accounts, West says, in favor of more profitable clientele. 
He had a choice: Take up corporate law full time, or leave his hard-fought 
partnership. 
In 1988, West uprooted his family for Albuquerque, to become a partner in what 
soon became Gover, Stetson, Williams &amp; West, a firm whose attorneys devote 
their time exclusively to tribal affairs. It is the nation's largest American 
Indian-owned law firm. 
He played an integral role in the firm, becoming its president this year. 
This made the news that West would leave, effective June 1, to take the 
$115,000-a-year Smithsonian job bittersweet for his colleagues. 
"It's terrible," says co-worker Stetson, only partly in jest. "The news came as 
a big thump in my heart. . . . With Rick leaving, I'd feel sick if I didn't 
feel so proud." 
For the next year or two, West plans to commute on weekends from Washington to 
New Mexico. His wife, Mary Beth -- who attended Stanford Law School with Rick 
and today is an expert in international law -- is obliged to stay a year as a 
law professor at New Mexico State University. His 15-year-old daughter, Amy, is 
vehement about finishing high school in Albuquerque. 
As for his 12-year-old son, Ben: "He hasn't got a choice. He's coming out 
here," West says, punctuating the remark with a chuckle and a shake of the 
head. 
"Oh, this isn't going to be an easy move. This is a permanent career change, 
though. . . . It will be the better part of a decade before this museum is even 
up." 
And of that expected opening day in 1998, what happens then? 
West turns away from his desk to gaze out the windows of his office. 
"Americans," he says deliberately, granting each word its own emphasis, "will 
see the richness and diversity of historical and contemporary Indian life -- as 
they have never seen it before. It won't come overnight. But we'll do it." 
