SCANDAL STALKING 3 MIAMI-AREA MAYORS 
Three mayors within one county have fallen under suspicion as a string of 
corruption allegations has tangled Miami-area politics. 
The mayor of Hialeah has been indicted on federal racketeering charges, the 
mayor of Miami Beach is under investigation after the collapse of a savings and 
loan, and three-quarters of Sweetwater's elected officials -- the mayor 
included -- face federal extortion charge. 
All three cities are in Dade County, the densely populated area of about 2 
million people that includes Miami. 
Since his appointment two years ago, U.S. Atty. Dexter Lehtinen, a former 
Republican state senator from Dade County, has made corruption in public office 
his No. 1 priority. 
Some people question his motives. 
"There is a major suspicion in this town that Dexter has politicized the U.S. 
attorney's office," said Miami attorney Jeffrey Weiner, vice president of the 
National Assn. of Criminal Defense Lawyers. 
The scandals in Hialeah and Miami Beach threaten the political careers of two 
Democratic stars, both coming off landslide reelections in November. 
In Hialeah, Raul Martinez, who since 1981 has been mayor of Florida's 
fifth-largest city, was indicted in April on charges of extorting nearly $1 
million in cash and real estate from developers for zoning approvals. He was 
suspended along with a city councilman who allegedly traded his vote for 
$24,000 in cash. 
Martinez emerged as a potential challenger to Lehtinen's wife, Ileana 
Ros-Lehtinen, in last year's U.S. House race. But he stayed out, and Ileana 
Ros-Lehtinen won the seat for the Republicans. 
The U.S. attorney's office said Dexter Lehtinen disqualified himself from the 
investigation into Martinez, who has been under federal scrutiny for years. Two 
other council members in the city of 200,000 have pleaded guilty to federal 
charges in the last three years. 
No trial date has been set for Martinez, who faces up to 180 years in prison 
and $2.25 million in fines if convicted. Martinez, 41, has denied all charges, 
and his supporters say the case is politically tainted. 
In Miami Beach, third-term Mayor Alex Daoud has not been charged but is being 
probed by federal and state authorities and by the Florida Bar. 
Among items being investigated are $35,000 Daoud received from CenTrust 
companies before the thrift was taken over by federal regulators, tens of 
thousands of dollars in renovations to his home and thousands of dollars in 
gifts from Miami Beach socialites. 
Daoud, a popular and media-conscious mayor, has become tight-lipped about his 
troubles except to make periodic denials of any wrongdoing. 
City inspectors found more than $235,000 in improvements to Daoud's Sunset 
Island home, the Miami Herald reported. Daoud lacked city permits for most of 
the work, did not pay all required fees, failed to get final inspections and, 
according to some contractors, refused to pay his bills, the newspaper said. 
A federal grand jury has subpoenaed thousands of pages of city documents as 
part of its investigation of Daoud's dealings with David Paul, former head of 
CenTrust. 
In Sweetwater, Mayor Irain Gonzalez and five of seven council members were 
named Jan. 25 in an extortion indictment. 
Two pleaded guilty, and the mayor and two council members are on trial. Another 
council member, named as an unindicted co-conspirator, testified against them 
in a case involving a $10,000 bribe allegedly made by a developer for a zoning 
variance. Jury deliberations began Friday. 
Miami Mayor Xavier Suarez said the accumulation of scandals doesn't mean city 
government in the booming Miami metropolitan area is suddenly for sale. "I 
guess it's just circumstance," said Suarez. 
He added: "One of my partners is from a state in the Northeast where they've 
had a lot of corruption, and he said some of the stuff that he's been reading 
about here sounds pretty minor compared to what he was used to." 
