USING DIAMONDS, RESEARCHERS REPORT CONVERTING HYDROGEN INTO METAL 
Fulfilling a decades-long dream of theoretical physicists, researchers will 
report today that they have converted hydrogen, the lightest of all the 
elements, into a metal by compacting it between two diamonds under a pressure 
millions of times higher than that of the Earth's atmosphere. 
When it becomes a metal, hydrogen reflects light like a mirror and should be a 
high-temperature superconducter of electricity, although the researchers at the 
Carnegie Institution in Washington, have not been able to measure that 
capability yet, they said in the journal Science. 
Planets' Cores 
Physicists are extremely interested in the new finding because they believe 
that the cores of large gaseous planets such as Jupiter and Saturn are composed 
of metallic hydrogen, which explains their large magnetic fields. Demonstration 
of the existence of metallic hydrogen lends credence to that belief. 
"It's a very exciting development," said Caltech astrophysicist David 
Stevenson. "It means, of course, that hydrogen is the most common metal in the 
solar system." 
Researchers also believe that metallic hydrogen will shed new light on the 
recently discovered ceramic high-temperature superconductors and have 
speculated about other potential uses for metallic hydrogen. If it could be 
stabilized, it might become a fuel for conventional nuclear fusion experiments 
or a highly compact rocket fuel that would generate extraordinary thrust for 
its weight and volume. 
Soviet researchers, in the 1970s, erroneously claimed that they had converted 
hydrogen and other materials into metals under high pressures and stuck to the 
belief long after it was widely discredited. That incident is thought to have 
set Soviet high-pressure research back by at least a decade. 
The new discovery was made possible by the earlier development at Carnegie of 
diamond anvils for producing high pressures -- the concept of using diamonds 
had simply not occurred to researchers before. These anvils "have 
revolutionized the whole field of high-pressure physics," according to 
theoretical physicist Marvin Cohen of UC Berkeley. "It used to take a 
seven-story building to do what you can now do with a device that you can fit 
in your shirt pocket." 
Diamond anvils are now used widely by other researchers to study a variety of 
materials under high pressures. 
At the heart of the Carnegie device are two small, 1/3-carat diamonds that have 
each been polished so that one side is nearly flat. A diamond is the only 
material strong enough to withstand the tremendous pressures exerted over a 
very small area. 
The Process 
The sample to be studied is corraled between the two diamonds by a small hole 
in a stainless-steel plate between the diamonds. The diamonds are then forced 
together with a laboratory press. Because all the force of the press is focused 
on the very small area of the diamond, tremendously high pressures can be 
achieved -- up to 5 million times atmospheric pressure (5 megabars). 
The diamond anvil is also invaluable because the diamonds are transparent, 
allowing researchers to see what is happening to a sample inside the cell and 
to measure the optical properties of the sample. (Pressures are measured by 
observing the change in optical properties of a microscopic ruby placed inside 
the cell. 
Geophysicist Ho-Kwang Mao and physical chemist Russell J. Hemley of Carnegie 
confined a small amount of hydrogen gas in the cell, cooled it to minus 321 
degrees Fahrenheit and began applying pressure. 
At a pressure of about 64,000 atmospheres, the hydrogen becomes a transparent, 
crystalline solid that is an insulator; it does not conduct electricity. It 
remains in that form over a very wide range of pressures. 
But at a pressure of 1.5 megabars, the hydrogen undergoes a structural change 
and begins to absorb light, darkening visibly. At a pressure of 3 megabars, 
nearly the same pressure as at the center of the Earth, the hydrogen becomes 
"essentially an opaque solid," Hemley said in a telephone interview. Electronic 
evidence obtained by optical methods suggests that it should conduct 
electricity, but the sample's extremely small size precludes measuring it. 
Mao and Hemley observed the same metalization process with gaseous nitrogen, 
which became a metal at about 1.8 megabars, but observed no changes in some 
other materials, including sodium chloride (table salt), aluminum oxide and 
silicon dioxide. Theory predicts, however, that all materials will become 
metals if they are squeezed hard enough. 
Astronomers have long believed that gaseous planets such as Jupiter have 
metallic hydrogen at their core, where the pressure is 20 to 50 megabars, 
because that is the only way to explain their magnetic fields. 
'Scientific Process' 
"Everybody believed it would be true," said Caltech's Stevenson. "But still, 
you have to adhere to the scientific process and show that metallic hydrogen 
can be formed." One problem in the past, he said, was that such pressures could 
not be achieved in this type of experiment and that researchers did not know 
the pressure at which the transition to a metal occurred. "Now that we have 
this number, we can do more with it," in theoretical modeling of the large 
planets' interiors. 
Theory also predicts that metallic hydrogen should be a superconductor -- 
carrying electricity without any resistance. It will probably be impractical to 
make electronic devices out of metallic hydrogen, noted Cohen, but study of the 
material could help researchers find the mechanism by which recently discovered 
ceramic materials become superconducting, thereby leading to the discovery of 
even better superconductors. 
The search for metallic hydrogen has proved embarrassing to scientists at the 
Institute of High-Pressure Physics near Moscow. More than a decade ago, 
researchers there built a 50,000-ton press, which extended 84 feet above the 
ground and 45 feet below it, at least partially for the purpose of making 
metallic hydrogen. 
The device used one diamond, which pressed against a metallic plate. The Soviet 
diamond, however, was pointed rather than flat like the Carnegie gem. Because 
Soviet researchers could not see through the cell, they measured electrical 
conductivity between the diamond and the flat plate. When a current passed 
between them, they assumed that the sample had become a metal. 
Over more than a decade, the Soviet researchers reported that they had 
converted hydrogen, rubies and a variety of other materials into metals. 
Subsequent studies showed, however, that the pointed diamond simply pierced the 
samples, making direct electrical contact with the metal plate. 
