WHO MAKES HAY ON U.S. FARM SUBSIDIES? 
It was a spectacle to make a Kansas senator blush. 
On April Fools' Day, a freighter laden with 20,000 tons of Turkish wheat docked 
in New Zealand, courtesy of the U.S. government. 
Turkey is not a big grain exporter. For some years it hasn't even been able to 
meet its own needs. But U.S. grain subsidies under the Export Enhancement 
Program (EEP) have enabled Turkey to buy cut-price wheat from the United States 
and sell its own wheat in American, and even Australian, export markets. 
The giant communist economies have capitalized the most on U.S. subsidies. 
Between January, 1987, and March, 1989, U.S. taxpayers gave $885 million in 
subsidies to traders who shipped 28.8 million metric tons of cut-price wheat to 
the Soviet Union and China. That's more than five times the military and 
security aid requested by the Administration for Central America in '88-'89 -- 
aid justified mostly on grounds that it was to stem communism. 
When Congress and the Reagan Administration struck a deal four years ago to 
introduce the program, its supporters insisted it would help farmers, bolster 
sagging exports and force the European Economic Community to abandon its own 
costly farm export-subsidy program. 
But evidence now shows that the U.S. program has wasted taxpayers' money, 
aggravated trade tensions and violated program guidelines issued by the 
Cabinet-level Economic Policy Council in 1985. 
Under the $2.5-billion program, foreign buyers purchase U.S. commodities 
cheaper than Americans can. U.S. exporters can offer bargain rates because they 
receive free surplus commodities from the U.S. Commodity Credit Corp. In the 
three years to June, 1988, the big three grain traders reaped more than $1 
billion in government aid. Traders, not farmers, benefit directly from 
subsidies at the U.S. end. 
The program's boosters say all of this ignores the surge in U.S. wheat exports. 
While exports have risen, this is at the expense of fewer cash sales and, 
according to farm lobbies, reduced exports of grains not dependent on the 
program. A study of wheat exports by the Economic Research Service of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture in 1988 revealed that the grain would have moved 
without subsidies. Analysts pointed to a lower, more competitive wheat- loan 
rate, decreased exports by subsidy-battered allies and greater world demand. 
The scheme's proponents justify its retention on lofty international grounds, 
claiming that U.S. subsidies force the European Community to hoist its own 
export subsidy payments. Higher payments, they say, apply extra budgetary 
pressure on the community and increase the likelihood that Brussels will 
capitulate to ambitious U.S. demands for agricultural reform at the ongoing 
General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations. 
While EEP has raised European Community subsidy costs for wheat by $538 million 
between 1985 and 1988, this amount is paltry in the context of the 
$23.3-billion budget of the organization's program supporting the modernization 
of agriculture and promotion of scientific research. 
Instead of forcing the European Community to agree to U.S. demands at GATT, the 
Export Enhancement Program has antagonized community officials and accelerated 
European exports of subsidized commodities. In 1988-89 the community was 
expected to be the No. 1 exporter of barley. The European share of the world 
wheat trade is expected to rise from 18.4% to an unprecedented 20%-21% for 
1988-89. 
Ironically, the implementation of the subsidy program by the Reagan 
Administration had nothing to do with helping farmers or achieving trade 
reform. In 1985, David Stockman, then-Office of Management and Budget director, 
desperate to secure enough Senate votes to pass a budget reconciliation bill, 
reportedly agreed to the demands of farm-state senators for an export subsidy 
program. The program's aims were considered only after the deal was struck. 
Program guidelines continue to be flouted. When then-Agriculture Secretary John 
Block unveiled EEP on May 15, 1985, he declared that subsidies would be 
"continuously targeted" at the markets of subsidized countries. By 1988, there 
was scarcely a food-importing country that had not received subsidized U.S. 
produce. 
Domestically, with stock inventories low, farm incomes buoyant and financial 
markets impatient for a sign that the Administration and Congress are capable 
of confronting the budget deficit, this program should be a sitting target. It 
hasn't sunk because congressmen love trafficking in farm subsidies to help 
their reelection. 
Internationally, export subsidies erode U.S. credibility and leadership. Other 
nations find it galling to listen to America preach the virtues of free trade 
while Congress and the Administration unleash every subsidy program imaginable. 
Many U.S. industries are hoping for international trade reform, but such reform 
is foundering on the issue of farm subsidies and bruising encounters between 
America and its allies. At the very least Congress and the Administration 
should signal their commitment to agricultural trade reform by jointly 
announcing their intention to abolish the Export Enhancement Program and freeze 
other export subsidy programs for the duration of the GATT round. 
