A TURN IN THE QUEST FOR CONSUMER RELIEF; 
INSURANCE COMMISSIONER: NOMINATIONS OF GARAMENDI AND BANNISTER MAY REFLECT 
CHANGE IN EMPHASIS TOWARD REDUCING COMPANY COSTS AS A WAY TO CUT HIGH COST OF 
COVERAGE. 
The nominations of Democratic state Sen. John Garamendi and Republican 
insurance agent Wes Bannister in the race to become California's first elected 
insurance commissioner apparently represent a turn in the search for lower 
insurance premiums toward proposals to fund price cuts by reducing the 
companies' claims and legal costs. 
Both Garamendi and Bannister, in looking forward to what is expected to be a 
low-key general election campaign, spoke Wednesday of the importance of 
reducing costs to the companies as a vital prerequisite to bringing down 
California insurance prices. 
That represented a distinct change in emphasis from the talk about simply 
rolling back companies' prices that marked the losing campaigns of Democrats 
Bill Press and Conway Collis and had been the rhetoric of the backers of 
Proposition 103 for the last two years. 
Garamendi declared Wednesday that Proposition 103 "needs to be rewritten" and 
he said that as commissioner he would establish a strong lobbying office in 
Sacramento to push new legislation to do that. 
Bannister said that in the campaign "we have to talk about reduction of 
premiums through no-fault insurance and through reduction of fraud." 
Garamendi vowed to make the commissioner's office the nation's best consumer 
protection agency, and remarked of Bannister, "I don't think the people of 
California are about to elect an insurance agent to watch over the insurance 
industry." But the general tone of his and Bannister's remarks cheered insurers 
Wednesday and concerned their rivals, the trial lawyers. Often, when cutting 
costs to the companies is mentioned as a means of bringing about lower rates, 
legal reform, cutting back on claimants' right to sue and the lawyers' income 
are mentioned in the next breath. 
Such insurers as Pete Ingham, general counsel for State Farm, Wednesday lauded 
the California election returns, both in the governor's race, where Democratic 
nominee Dianne Feinstein spoke Tuesday night of cutting claims costs, and the 
insurance commissioner's contest as representing a new attitude in California 
toward reform. 
But Gary Gwilliam, a former president of the California Trial Lawyers Assn., 
said the results were a shame and came about only because of divisions in the 
consumer movement that saw such consumer or lawyer-oriented candidates as Bill 
Press, Conway Collis and Walter Zelman split the vote against the candidates 
more favorable to company views. 
Gwilliam said that fielding a single candidate in the future should be a top 
priority. 
Press, who ran second for the Democratic nomination, losing to Garamendi by 
about 175,000 votes, said Wednesday: "Somebody told me this morning it was like 
Beirut. We were killing our own." He noted that by adding Zelman's 189,000 
votes to his own 638,000, he would have defeated Garamendi. 
Garamendi takes issue with any assessment that he would be the insurers' 
commissioner. He said after the election that he wants to meet with all 
factions in the insurance crisis, including Harvey Rosenfield, author of 
Proposition 103, to hear their ideas. 
But Rosenfield was smarting Wednesday from the size of the defeat suffered by 
the candidate he backed for the Democratic nomination, Collis, and he appeared 
in no mood to be friendly with Garamendi. In fact, he said, he is going to 
shift his party registration from Democrat back to independent. 
Rosenfield's associate, national consumer advocate Ralph Nader, meanwhile, was 
unavailable for comment on the defeat not only of Collis, whom he had 
supported, but also of gubernatorial candidate Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp. 
Ingham of State Farm said he believes Nader is less effective in endorsing 
candidates than he is in taking stands on issues. 
