OUTDOOR NOTES; 
DFG PRODUCES 31 WARDENS IN FIRST GRADUATING CLASS 
They filed onto a stage to a recording of "Pomp and Circumstance" to receive 
their diplomas, but this was a different kind of June graduation. 
Instead of gowns, they wore forest green uniforms. Instead of mortarboards, 
they wore side arms. 
These were the 31 graduates of the first class of wardens fully trained by the 
California Department of Fish and Game. They completed 20 weeks -- 22 weeks for 
the 13 women -- of the normal intensive schooling at the Napa Valley College 
Police Academy, plus 400 hours of special fish, wildlife and environmental 
indoctrination. 
The ceremonies were held June 16 at the California Maritime Academy in Vallejo, 
where the students were housed. Although they still must serve three months of 
probation with veteran wardens in the field, each is not only fully qualified 
in law enforcement, with expertise in 70 different firearms and the Vehicle 
Code, but can tell a salmon from a salamander and when wildlife habitat is 
being abused. 
Or, as class coordinator Greg Cook said with a demonstration of duck calls, 
"They now know the difference between the soft whistle of a pintail and the 
loud quack of a mallard." 
Previously, candidate wardens were placed at whichever police schools were 
convenient, whenever one was needed, and got their specialized field training 
on the job. With this class, the DFG still will have only 374 wardens to patrol 
the whole state and its offshore marine jurisdictions, but the attitude seems 
to be one of harder resolve. 
The class called itself the Poacher Pinchers. 
Class president Salvatore Amato of Wilton, Conn., said: "A new generation of 
wardens. Before we could become game wardens, we had to become cops." 
DFG Director Pete Bontadelli, who swore them in, called them "our thin green 
line." 
There doesn't seem to be much question about their dedication. All were 
required to have two years of college, were paid $1,900 a month during training 
and will start as low as $2,036, with steps up to $2,437 over three years. 
All are also qualified to work, say, for the California Highway Patrol, which 
pays about 28% better. 
"I took a $900 pay cut to work for the Department of Fish and Game," said 
Jonathan Willcox of Downey, as his wife Karen sighed audibly. 
Willcox, tops in the class, has a degree in wildlife management from Humboldt 
State but also wanted to be a policeman. He quit his job with the Gardena 
police force to take the DFG course because, he said, "It's more than just the 
money." 
Willcox has been assigned to the patrol boat Yellowtail out of Oxnard. 
The female wardens were required to take two extra weeks of initial physical 
training, and two dropped out of the rigorous course. Eva Marie Schultz of San 
Juan Capistrano -- 5 feet 4 inches tall -- was tops in weaponless defense, and 
Christina Barnes of San Luis Obispo was most knowledgeable in the Fish and Game 
Code. Schultz will be based in Long Beach, Barnes in West Sacramento. 
The new program was made possible by an increase in the training budget from 
$300,000 to $800,000 under Bontadelli, who pointed out the necessity of special 
preparation. 
"Most of the time they'll be out alone in areas where they have no backups, and 
70% of their contacts will be dealing with armed people," Bontadelli said. 
He hopes to have at least one full class a year. 
The International Game Fish Assn. is revising and expanding its all-tackle 
world record program by opening it to freshwater and saltwater species not 
currently on its record lists and by reviewing well-documented applications for 
past catches that exceed current listings. 
Catches not included on the IGFA's list of 157 species must be in accordance 
with the IGFA angling rules and world-record requirements. Applications for 
possible record catches made in the past must include as much information as 
possible, including a photograph and positive verification of the weight of the 
fish and the method of catch. 
The Nevada Department of Wildlife says the killing of birds of prey for their 
body parts has reached epidemic proportions in that state and other parts of 
the country. 
Cliff Jett, supervising game warden for the department, said that there have 
been cases where hundreds of raptor carcasses have been discovered by 
investigators. Talons of hawks have been found swinging from cars' rear-view 
mirrors, the feathers of golden eagles hanging from hatbands and, in one 
instance, the head of a great horned owl was found "adorning a living room 
coffee table." 
It is not known how many of Nevada's raptors are killed each year, but Jett 
said: "We do know that quite a bit of illegal traffic is taking place across 
the nation." 
Possession of birds of prey or their body parts, even if taken from a road 
kill, is illegal and anyone with information about possession or trafficking of 
such birds or their parts is asked to notify the authorities. 
Briefly 
The Department of Fish and Game has been unloading more catchable-size trout 
than usual in Mono County lakes because of low production from the wells 
providing water to the Fish Springs Hatchery. It means fewer fish will be 
available later in the summer. Also, Black Rock Hatchery has been under siege 
by white pelicans, cutting the crop about in half. The birds descend by the 
dozens on the open ponds until workers chase them away every morning. . . . 
Angler-author Ronnie Kovach's second and last instructional session on 
freshwater fishing in California is scheduled tonight, 7-10 p.m., at Cerritos 
College. 
Californians Larry Hopper of Santa Ana, Mike Reynolds of Modesto, Dan Leichty 
of Arnold and Al Layton of Parker Dam, qualified to compete among 43 weekend 
bass anglers for the $100,000 first prize in Operation Bass' Red Man 
All-American tournament Friday and Saturday at Little Rock, Ark. . . . 
California Angler magazine's inshore fishing school, featuring advice on how to 
catch local species, will be held July 22 from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at Harbor 
Town Hotel in Ventura. Information: (714) 261-9779. 
The Southern Council of Conservation Clubs will conduct a bighorn sheep census 
Saturday through Tuesday. Those interested may phone (213) 598-5158. . . . The 
Eastern Sierra Bowmen will have their first Family Fun Shoot Saturday and 
Sunday at the Sherwin Creek campground in Mammoth Lakes. They'll be firing at 
28 three-dimensional targets. Entry fees are $25 for a family, $19 a couple and 
$12 for singles. . . . The U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary will have two eight-week 
courses on "Boating Skills and Seamanship" starting on July 5 and 6, 7:30 p.m., 
at the Newport Harbormaster, 1901 Bayside Dr., Newport Beach. Classes are free 
except for the cost of materials. Information: (714) 675-9582 or (714) 
581-5568. 
Alaska wildlife officials and lodge owners say the oil spill in Prince William 
Sound should not affect fishing or bird shooting at two of the state's 
important locations: Bristol Bay and Katchemack Bay. According to the report, 
only 700 of Alaska's 35,000 miles of coastline have been affected. . . . The 
Project Mexico Fisherman's Fiesta, a release-only tournament to benefit 
orphanages and the needy children of Baja California, will be held July 31-Aug. 
4 at Rancho Buena Vista Resort at Baja's East Cape region, about 50 miles north 
of Cabo San Lucas. Information: (818) 305-1517. 
