VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: SIMI VALLEY; 
COURTHOUSE COSTS TO EXCEED ESTIMATE 
The interior of the East County Courthouse in Simi Valley will cost Ventura 
County $600,000 more to build than originally estimated, officials said. 
The estimated cost for the interior of the two-story, 76,800-square-foot 
building is now $7.8 million, about 8% higher than the original estimate of 
$7.2 million. 
The shell of the building was completed last year within budget, at a cost of 
$2,560,767, Ventura County Public Works Agency Director Art Goulet said. 
The interior is scheduled to be completed in December. It will cost more to 
build the interior of the building than estimated in part because plans for it 
were modified and there was a lack of communication between the architect and 
the county Public Works Agency, Goulet said. 
"The engineer's estimate was just totally wrong and way too low," County 
Supervisor James R. Dougherty said. "We added a lot of things" to the project 
after the initial plans were completed, he said. 
"Initially we were just planning on carrying out non-jury trials," including 
civil and traffic court cases, said Goulet, who prepared a report on the 
project's cost overruns for Dougherty. 
However, there are so many court cases in the county that officials decided 
that the East County facility should be outfitted to hold jury trials as well, 
Goulet said. Jury boxes were added in three of the five courtrooms, as well as 
jury assembly and deliberation rooms with restroom facilities. 
With a wider variety of cases being heard, plans for the court's holding 
facility had to be modified to isolate juveniles and inmates who commit less 
serious crimes from hard-core criminals, the report states. Instead of two 
large rooms for men and women, Sheriff's Department officials asked for two 
large and four small cells with security glass and doors. 
Several other changes have been made in the interior building plans, including 
energy-saving lighting, heating and air-conditioning systems, Goulet said. 
Goulet blames the architect, Rasmussen and Associates of Ventura, for failing 
to submit periodic cost statements. However, the Public Works Agency should 
have required the company to turn in such statements, Goulet said. 
Dougherty secured funding in April for the project, even with cost overruns. 
After the Ventura County Taxpayers Assn. accused Dougherty and the Board of 
Supervisors of irresponsible spending on the project, the board approved the 
purchase of $300 seats for the courtrooms, instead of the $500 seats originally 
planned. The supervisors are considering the use of plastic laminates rather 
than more expensive wood for cabinets in the building, said John Spilman, a 
spokesman for Dougherty's office. KIM KASH 
