NATIONAL LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
CARDINALS STEAL WAY TO VICTORY OVER CUBS 
The St. Louis Cardinals might not have the most power in the major leagues, but 
they certainly can steal bases as well as any other team. 
"I think we've got the best percentage in the league," Manager Whitey Herzog 
said Sunday after the speedy but light-hitting Cardinals stole eight bases in 
as many tries and beat the Chicago Cubs, 7-4, at St. Louis. 
"There have been too many days when we haven't had the opportunities," Herzog 
said. "We haven't had many days like this." 
Vince Coleman had four of the eight steals, giving him a major league-leading 
28 in 33 tries. 
"I have high expectations from here on out throughout my career," Coleman said. 
"My approach to the game right now is I know what I'm doing. I know what I have 
to do." 
Coleman's stolen-base total matched his one-game career high, which he has 
accomplished seven times. Ozzie Smith stole three bases, also matching a career 
high, and Willie McGee had the other. 
"There's only one way to stop them," Chicago Manager Don Zimmer said. "The 
pitchers have got to give the catcher a chance. If you're slow getting the ball 
to the plate, then you've got no chance." 
Although not noted for their power, the Cardinals also got home runs by Tom 
Pagnozzi and Milt Thompson. The combination of power and speed was a rarity for 
the Cardinals, who entered the game tied for last in the NL in batting. 
The eight stolen bases matched the single-game high in the majors this season. 
Houston had eight against Pittsburgh May 23. The last time the Cardinals stole 
eight bases was Sept. 13, 1985, also against the Cubs. 
The Cardinals' homers were their first in six games and only 20th and 21st of 
the year. 
San Francisco 7, Houston 3-Robby Thompson hit a three-run homer and Kevin 
Mitchell had a two-run homer at Candlestick Park as the Giants won for the 
fifth time in the last six games. 
Thompson hit his fifth homer of the season in the second inning and Mitchell 
added his 14th in the third as the Giants routed Mike Scott (2-6), scoring 
their seven runs in four innings. 
Houston's Glenn Davis had another productive day, driving in all three runs. He 
has nine RBIs in the last three games. He hit a solo homer -- his fifth in 
seven at-bats over three games and league-leading 15th of the season -- and had 
a two-run single. 
Davis' leadoff homer in the second inning was the Astros' only hit off Atlee 
Hammaker until the sixth. 
Philadelphia 8, New York 3 -- At Philadelphia, Von Hayes hit a home run and 
drove in four runs and Lenny Dykstra, the major leagues' leading hitter, had 
two singles and a double in four official at-bats, extending his hitting streak 
to 16 games. 
Dykstra, who was eight for 12 in the three-game series against his former team, 
raised his average to .413. 
Bud Harrelson is 1-3 since replacing Dave Johnson as manager of the Mets 
Tuesday. 
Montreal 4, Pittsburgh 3 -- Mike Fitzgerald doubled home the go-ahead run off 
rookie reliever Stan Belinda in a three-run ninth inning at Pittsburgh to give 
the Expos their fifth victory in six games. 
Tim Raines walked to lead off the ninth, stole second and continued to third 
when catcher Don Slaught threw the ball into center field. Slaught had thrown 
out runners attempting to steal in the sixth and seventh innings. 
Tim Wallach singled home Raines with the tying run and moved to second when 
right fielder Bobby Bonilla's throw hit him in the leg. After pinch-hitter 
Wallace Johnson was walked intentionally, Fitzgerald doubled, driving in 
pinch-runner Spike Owen. 
Atlanta 4, San Diego 2 -- Pinch-hitter Jeff Treadway doubled in the go-ahead 
run in the 10th inning at San Diego. 
Treadway's double to left-center drove in Alexis Infante. Greg Olson led off 
with a walk against Greg Harris (3-1). Infante attempted a sacrifice bunt, but 
instead forced pinch-runner John Smoltz. Ron Gant's two-out single, his third 
hit of the game, scored Treadway. 
The game marked the first Atlanta appearance by left-hander Charlie Leibrandt, 
who who was obtained from Kansas City last winter. Leibrandt was activated from 
the disabled list Saturday after missing nearly two months with a slightly torn 
rotator cuff. 
Leibrandt yielded seven hits, including a run-scoring single by Mark Parent in 
the second inning, walked one and struck out three in seven innings. 
