RITES OF PASSAGE; 
PROGRAM GIVES AT-RISK TEEN-AGE GIRLS A BOOST 
Last fall, Crystal Evans, 13, faced expulsion after she and some friends were 
caught drinking alcohol on the campus of Stephen M. White Junior High School in 
Carson. 
Then her counselor referred her to Rites of Passage, a 12-week-long pilot 
program aimed at building the self-esteem of troubled teen-age girls and 
showing them that there is an alternative to drugs, gangs and teen-age 
pregnancy. 
Today, the same girl aspires to be a lawyer. 
"Before (the class), I thought I didn't care if I got in trouble; I just wanted 
to fit in the crowd," said Crystal, who has twice refused offers to join gangs. 
"But now I see I do care." 
It was a hard-earned victory for Janice Garcia, the 30-year-old former gang 
member who ran the program. 
"A lot of them don't realize they are at risk" from drugs and gangs, even 
though many of them live in gang-infested neighborhoods and their parents 
openly abuse drugs or alcohol in their own homes, Garcia said Tuesday after the 
program's last class. "To them, it's just a part of growing up." 
The 19 girls who participated in Rites of Passage were referred to Garcia by 
counselors. About half of them are gang members. Most have used drugs and 
alcohol and are considered at risk of dropping out of school. Several are 
sexually active. 
At first, the girls resisted the message, but most of them gradually softened, 
Garcia said. 
During weekly classes of about 45 minutes each, the girls undertook several 
activities designed to make them more aware of their cultural, social and 
personal histories and build their self-esteem. 
They made family trees, saw a video about gangs, listened to a lecture about 
AIDS, and had makeup and etiquette classes. They kept notebooks, learned 
strategies to cope with anger and organized a car wash to raise money for a 
graduation dinner at the Grand House in San Pedro on Tuesday night. 
Wearing a smart red dress and well-coiffed hairstyle, Garcia seems at first 
glance worlds away from her young charges. Her account of her own involvement 
with drugs and gangs, however, rang true to the students. 
Acting more as a mentor and friend than as a teacher, Garcia told them how 
painful it was to remove the tattoos she drunkenly agreed to get as a 
teen-ager. When the girls needed someone to talk to about everything from 
menstrual cramps to fears of being pregnant, she served as a trusted 
confidante. 
In one instance, she helped persuade a student who had run away from home to 
return to her parents. 
"She's what really made me want to come home," said Elsa Aguilar, 14. "She told 
me that being out on the street was not the right way, that a lot of runaways 
get killed, take drugs or get pregnant. I thought it would be easy out there. 
Now I know she was right." 
Rites of Passage was developed five years ago at the Youth and Family Center at 
Leuzinger High School in Lawndale to help teen-age fathers make the transition 
to manhood. The center has since moved to Inglewood. 
The program was designed by Ron Johnson, a former New York gang member and 
consultant on at-risk youth for the California Department of Education, who is 
writing a book about manhood for teen-age boys. 
The premise of Rites of Passage is that many youngsters think adulthood is 
defined by gang involvement, drug use and even prison time, Johnson said in an 
interview. 
In his years of working with troubled youngsters, Johnson identified several 
areas of growth or "rites of passage" that would offer troubled teen-agers a 
different understanding of the transition to adulthood, one that would involve 
personal, cultural, social, physical, economic and emotional growth. 
Unlike other teen-age intervention programs that are organized around a single 
problem such as drug use or gangs or pregnancy, "Rites of Passage teaches kids 
to look at their entire lives," Johnson said. The program is also designed to 
be relevant for all youngsters, regardless of race or ethnic background. 
About 75 young men have completed a yearlong version of the program, and the 
state Department of Education is planning to test the 12-week version of the 
course in a pilot project at six schools, Johnson said. Before this year, 
however, the program had never been adapted to the needs of teen-age girls. 
When the program captured the interest of the federally funded Community 
Reclamation Project, a program that works to strengthen the network of South 
Bay community groups fighting against drugs and gangs, Johnson agreed to create 
a version for girls and to train Garcia to be the coordinator. 
Although school administrators supported the project, there were obstacles: The 
group had to search for an empty classroom every time it met and usually ran 
out of time before the day's activities were complete. 
During their last meeting, however, the obstacles seemed like mere 
inconveniences. When the girls anonymously evaluated the program, not one 
comment was negative. 
"I learned to feel better about myself, how to get closer to Mom, Dad," one 
girl wrote. 
Another defined the ideas that had benefited her the most: "Drugs isn't your 
life. Gangs wasn't or isn't fun." 
As the girls snacked on doughnuts and fruit juice, Garcia became teary-eyed as 
she struggled to find the words she hoped would make a lasting impression. 
"This is the nicest thing I could have possibly done, to make an impact on you 
guys," Garcia said. "Maybe down the line you'll remember something I said: That 
even if you do have problems you can come out of them. It's hard, but you can 
do whatever you want." 
