COUNTY SAYS IT CAN'T AFFORD 2 NEW CITIES; 
CITYHOOD: RECENT DEFECTIONS OF MISSION VIEJO, DANA POINT AND LAGUNA NIGUEL HAVE 
CRIMPED THE BUDGET. LAGUNA HILLS AND EL TORO INCORPORATION PLANS ARE FORCED 
ONTO THE BACK BURNER. 
With the county already hurting financially from the recent incorporations of 
Mission Viejo, Dana Point and Laguna Niguel, officials said Wednesday that it 
cannot afford more defections, and derailed plans to create two new cities by 
the end of the year. 
Leaders of separate drives to incorporate Laguna Hills and the communities of 
El Toro, Lake Forest and Portola Hills have prepared applications to the Local 
Agency Formation Commission in hopes of having ballot measures approved in time 
for the November general election. 
But in a hearing Wednesday afternoon, LAFCO commissioners said that more 
information is needed before a decision can be made on whether the county can 
afford to allow the unincorporated areas to form Orange County's 30th and 31st 
cities. 
Orange County is currently facing a shortfall of more than $30 million for the 
fiscal year beginning at the end of the month. Cutbacks in state funding for 
county programs and increasing demand for county services have been the main 
reason for the fiscal problems. 
But in two reports issued last week, LAFCO and the County Administrative Office 
said the county has lost nearly $14 million in sales tax revenues with the 
incorporations of Mission Viejo in March, 1988, Dana Point in January, 1989, 
and Laguna Niguel in December, 1989. 
If Laguna Hills became a city, the county would lose about $5 million in tax 
revenue in the first year, according to a LAFCO staff report that recommended 
denial of the Laguna Hills plan. 
In fact, sales tax revenue from Laguna Hills makes up about one-third of the 
total sales tax revenues generated by unincorporated areas, the report said. 
Much of that comes from the Laguna Hills Mall. 
No study was made on how much the El Toro cityhood proposal would cost the 
county. 
The incorporations of Mission Viejo, Dana Point and Laguna Niguel -- the first 
since Irvine incorporated in 1971 -- have cost the county $13.81 million in tax 
revenue, according to a Jan. 6 report by County Administrative Officer Earnie 
Schneider. 
The county can no longer afford to either lose the tax revenue from the 
commercial sections of these communities or pay the start-up costs involved in 
providing the new cities with police, fire, library and other county-contracted 
services, said Supervisor Gaddi H. Vasquez, who is also chairman of the 
five-member LAFCO commission. 
"Both groups would like to get to the ballot as soon as possible," LAFCO 
director James J. Colangelo told LAFCO commissioners on Wednesday, "but with 
this county in the present financial condition, a November election is out of 
the question." 
The scheduled LAFCO hearing on the plan to form an 8-square-mile city in Laguna 
Hills was continued to Oct. 3. A hearing on the effort to create a 
21-square-mile city out of El Toro, Lake Forest and Portola Hills was continued 
to July 11. But Colangelo said he will recommend that that hearing be continued 
to either Sept. 26 or Oct. 3. 
In postponing the hearings, Colangelo said the county and cityhood proponents 
must provide more information before commissioners decide whether the proposals 
can go before the voters. 
To that end, the Board of Supervisors on Tuesday ordered a six-month study on 
the practice of providing cities with contractual services. Vasquez said that 
under the current policies, the county is not recouping all its costs, despite 
charging cities millions of dollars for services that include police and fire 
protection. 
The cityhood plans for Laguna Hills and El Toro both call for county service 
contracts. But Vasquez said that cityhood proponents should draft alternate 
reports that guarantee financial stability if the proposed cities provided 
their own police and fire protection. 
In the long term, he said, cities pay for the services, but during the start-up 
phase of cityhood the county foots a large portion of the bill. 
The earliest that voters could decide on either the Laguna Hills or the El 
Toro-Lake Forest-Portola Hills measures will be March 5, Colangelo said. 
Vasquez said that will be sufficient time for the cityhood proponents and the 
county to review their financial conditions. 
Ellen Martin, head of the pro-cityhood group Citizens to Save Laguna Hills, 
said she was disappointed that her organization will be unable to make good on 
their promise of a November vote. 
But, she added, she was not willing to criticize the county for the decision to 
stop the drive for a November vote. 
"I don't think it does any good to cry mistreatment," Martin said. "We just 
have to work through it." 
Since 1988, voters in Laguna Hills have gone to the polls twice to decide on 
cityhood. 
The first attempt to incorporate a wide area of the Saddleback Valley failed. 
The next year, voters in Laguna Hills narrowly defeated a plan to form their 
own city, largely because voters in the Leisure World retirement community 
opposed inclusion. The current Laguna Hills plan excludes Leisure World. 
Cityhood leaders said that they would ultimately prevail in creating a city, 
despite the latest setback. 
"We have certainly developed a lot of patience over the years," organizer 
Melody P. Carruth said on Wednesday. "But given more time, we have a lot of 
confidence that it will be approved." 
Helen Wilson, chairwoman of Community Coalition to Incorporate El Toro, Lake 
Forest and Portola Hills, said she was surprised by the decision and questioned 
why the issue did not come up before last week. 
"I can't understand that they are looking at these numbers today," Wilson said. 
"They they should have looked at the numbers some time ago." 
Vasquez said the decision to postpone the hearings was not made because of 
anti-cityhood sentiment on the commission. 
"There's nothing wrong with incorporation," Vasquez said. "It's the hard 
reality that the dollars are not being made available on the county level." 
