EXPERTS RATE VOTE OUTLOOK -- IT'S APATHY HANDS DOWN 
Spurred by fear that predicting a low voter turnout would only increase the 
apathy level at the polls today, the Los Angeles city clerk's office decided to 
forgo its traditional election eve projection, a spokesman said Monday. 
But consultants to candidates in the handful of contests to be decided and 
other political experts said they would not be surprised if the Los Angeles 
runoff election sets a record for low turnout. With just one City Council 
contest, two school board seats and two Community College board offices on the 
ballot, turnout could drop below the 8.63% record low set in 1983, the experts 
said. 
The April 11 primary, in which just 24.33% of the city's eligible voters went 
to the polls, set a record for a mayoral primary, the city clerk's office 
records showed. 
Few Areas Involved 
Only two of the contests -- those for the community college board -- will be 
decided districtwide. The hottest contests -- Councilman Ernani Bernardi's 
challenge from firefighter Lyle Hall in the east San Fernando Valley's 7th 
District and school board races in the west Valley and the Westside -- will be 
decided only by voters in those areas. 
Consultants in the Bernardi-Hall contest expect a turnout in the district 
ranging from 12% to 18%. In the two races for seats on the Board of Education, 
turnout is expected to be higher than the city average but lower than in the 
council race -- probably in the 10% to 12% range, campaign consultants said. 
The consultants said most voters have little or no interest in school issues. 
Only about 11% of registered voters have school-age children. 
Demographics Cited 
"The people most demographically likely to have kids, are demographically less 
likely to vote," said Parke Skelton, campaign consultant to school board 
incumbent Julie Korenstein of the Valley's 4th District. Korenstein is 
challenged by school Principal Jerry Horowitz. Skelton said families with 
children tend to be younger, more mobile and lack roots in a community -- all 
factors which reduce likelihood of voting. 
Such small turnouts can significantly skew the nature of the electorate and the 
outcome, said Bruce Cain, professor of political science at Caltech. 
In the Westside school board district, for instance, there are 7,000 teachers 
registered to vote, said Rick Taylor, a consultant to Mark Slavkin, a teachers' 
union backed challenger to incumbent Alan Gershman of the 2nd District. 
If most of the teachers vote, "and bring along their spouses or significant 
others," they could represent about 30% of the 30,000 total votes projected to 
be cast in the race, Taylor said. 
While the percentage of voters going to the polls could reach as high as 18% in 
the 7th Council District, it could also hit as low as 3% or 4% in South-Central 
Los Angeles or San Pedro, where only the community college races are on the 
ballot. 
Community college board candidates face the traditional apathy of school board 
hopefuls, but have the additional hurdle of running citywide. 
Regardless of today's turnout, the costs of an election remain constant. 
City Clerk Elias Martinez said that under state law, he is required to fully 
staff 2,800 polling places and have a ballot available for every registered 
voter, even though it is unlikely they will show up. Cost to the city will be 
about $2 million. If only 10%, or 180,000, of the city's eligible voters show 
up at the polls today, that would be a cost of more than $10 for each ballot 
cast. 
VOTER INFORMATION 
Los Angeles voters go to the polls today to choose a City Council member for 
the 7th District and two members each for the Board of Education and the 
Community College District. (Polling information: (213) 485-3581.) 
Also today, the city of Compton will choose a mayor and a 3rd District City 
Council member. (Polling information: (213) 605-5530.) Inglewood voters will 
elect two council members and a school board member. (Polling information: 
(213) 412-5280.) 
In other elections, residents in the South Pasadena Unified School District 
will vote on a ballot measure to increase taxes for school improvements. A 
similar bond measure will be presented to Lancaster-area residents in the 
Westside Union School District. Also, voters in the Three Valleys Municipal 
Water District in the eastern San Gabriel Valley will choose a director for 
Division 6. (Polling information: (213) 727-1900.) 
Inglewood polls are open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. All others are open from 7 a.m. 
to 8 p.m. 
