ASSEMBLYMAN BRADLEY IS DEAD OF CANCER AT 70 
Republican Assemblyman Bill Bradley of San Marcos died early Thursday after a 
nearly four-year battle with cancer. He was 70. 
A low-keyed legislator during his seven years representing the 76th District, 
which covers northeastern San Diego County and parts of southern Riverside 
County, Bradley was perhaps best-known for his ardent advocacy of private 
property rights. 
That stance often put him in conflict with environmentalists over such issues 
as development of coastal farmland, coastal access, toxic wastes and growth 
control. One of his favorite targets was the California Coastal Commission, 
which is charged with regulating development in the coastal zone. 
The soft-spoken, frank assemblyman seldom drew attention as he toiled quietly 
for his pet projects, which his staff members said included funding for 
dyslexic children and an attempt to require the death penalty for anyone 
convicted of killing a child 7 years or younger. 
Was Civil Engineer 
"I'm not a wild-eyed missionary up here," Bradley said in a 1987 interview. "I 
don't go off on flaming causes. I don't scream about it and hold press 
conferences." 
A civil engineer by profession, Bradley was more at home with the mundane 
nuts-and-bolts of government. His grooming in public service came as an 
administrator -- first as assistant city manager of Imperial Beach, then as 
city manager and city engineer of San Marcos from 1972 to 1979. 
"A lot of what we're accomplishing today were his goals -- the road 
improvements, the plans for the civic center which we hope to break ground on 
by the end of the year," said San Marcos Mayor Lee Thibadeau. 
State Sen. Bill Craven (R-Oceanside), whom Bradley succeeded as San Marcos' top 
city administrator, said: "He had a basic, rudimentary knowledge of government 
from the letter 'A.' He knew all the things that had to be done and he knew how 
to do it." 
Bradley's background bred his suspicion of how government administrators 
treated private property owners. 
"Having been a former bureaucrat, I know how they think," he said after his 
first attack on the Coastal Commission. "They have no regard for private 
property. They have no regard for the cost of development." 
With Craven as his political mentor, Bradley won election to the Assembly in 
1982 from a district that is nearly 55% Republican. 
Shortly after he was elected in 1982, Bradley led an unsuccessful charge to 
dismantle the state coastal agency. When that failed, Bradley successfully won 
passage of legislation that, at the behest of developers, limited the 
commission's hold over agricultural land in Carlsbad. 
The move eventually reaped bad publicity for Bradley when it was reported that 
he subsequently received a $3,000 contribution from a developer who stood to 
gain $420,000 in refunded fees because of the legislation. Bradley returned the 
money. 
Although Bradley set a record as the rookie who introduced the most bills -- in 
excess of 100 -- the former San Marcos city manager concentrated more on 
solving constituent problems, said Herb Williams, Bradley's longtime political 
consultant. 
'Worked the District' 
"He worked the district, answered the mail, took care of the problems better 
than anybody I have ever seen," Williams said. 
The attention to voters paid off handsomely, Williams said, when Bradley won 
reelection with a bigger plurality of votes in 1984 than Ronald Reagan received 
for president in the Assembly district. 
Bradley's biggest legislative triumph was passage of a 1985 bill that 
established a three-year pilot program in selected public schools to employ 
special devices to screen for dyslexic children. 
That same year Bradley was diagnosed with terminal colon and liver cancer. 
At first, Bradley announced he would serve out his term and retire. But he 
changed his mind after coming through a successful operation to remove parts of 
his colon and implant a pump to provide direct chemotherapy to his liver. 
"The cancer was in remission, and he said, 'I'm OK. I shall go ahead and run,' 
" Williams said. 
Bradley's fortitude prompted many people to call his office and ask what kept 
him going, said Barbara Downs, his secretary. Inundated by the requests, he 
drafted an open memo that methodically detailed how he overcame his fear of 
death by researching sometimes exotic cancer cures and by relying on his 
Christian faith. 
As recently as two weeks ago, Bradley was talking about returning to his desk 
in Sacramento despite another stay in the hospital, said Assemblyman Richard 
Mountjoy (R-Monrovia). 
"It was like everything in life, he was always positive," said Mountjoy, who 
added that he often talked to Bradley about dealing with death. 
Bradley died in his sleep at his San Marcos home shortly after 4 a.m. Thursday. 
The announcement of Bradley's death prompted tributes to the late legislator in 
San Diego County and Sacramento. 
"He was a person of great humility and a great deal of graciousness, and I 
think love for not only what he did but for people in general," said Craven. 
"You could not know or associate with Bill Bradley without liking him. He was a 
very delightful man." 
Gov. George Deukmejian, who was en route Thursday to a college reunion in New 
York, now has 14 days to call for a special election to fill Bradley's spot. A 
primary will be held about two months from that point and, if no candidate 
garners more than 50% over the vote, a general election featuring the top vote 
getters from either party after that. 
Among those expected to run for the seat is Escondido Councilman Ernie Cowan, 
who said he will form an exploratory committee within the next two weeks to 
test the waters for a possible campaign. 
Others being mentioned as candidates are Chula Vista Mayor Greg Cox, whose 
South Bay city is in the 76th District; Poway Council Member Linda Brannon, and 
David Barber, Bradley's administrative assistant. None of them could be reached 
for comment late Thursday. 
Bradley is the third state legislator to die in the last year after a fight 
with cancer. Three other Assembly members have been diagnosed as having various 
forms of the disease. 
Bradley is survived by his wife, Margaret, and two daughters, Billye Brown of 
Napa and Randy Bradley of Salinas, Downs said. The funeral will be at 11 a.m. 
Monday at the Emmanuel Faith Church, 639 E. Felicita Ave. in Escondido, she 
said. 
