NEWSMAKERS: TEEN-AGER WOWS CROWD: NO ROCK, JUST RACHMANINOFF 
 -- Wild applause and shouts of "Bravo!" rang out in Ft. Worth on Sunday after 
it was announced that the youngest of 38 competitors in the Eighth Van Cliburn 
International Piano Competition had won first place. Nineteen-year-old Aleksei 
Sultanov of the Soviet Union, regarded as the early crowd favorite for his 
aggressive performances, shook hands with Van Cliburn and actor Dudley Moore, 
who served as host. Jose Carlos Cocarelli, 30, of Brazil won the silver medal 
and Benedetto Lupo, 25, of Italy got the bronze. Sultanov attends Moscow State 
University and studies under L.N. Naumov, who taught two other Cliburn 
medalists. For winning the coveted competition, Sultanov receives a gold medal, 
$15,000, a Carnegie Hall recital, concert tours and free air travel. As a 
finalist, he played Chopin's Piano Concerto No. 2 in F minor and Rachmaninoff's 
Piano Concerto No. 2 in C minor. 
 -- About 4,000 Americans will turn 65 today -- and among them will be the most 
important man in the land: President Bush. How all will celebrate their special 
day is anybody's guess. But in the case of the President, he is expected to 
unveil his plan for cleaning up the nation's air and then travel to the Grand 
Tetons and Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming. His age has attracted little 
attention, because he succeeded Ronald Reagan, who was 77 when he left office, 
and because, put simply, he looks years younger than he is. Dr. Burton Lee, the 
White House physician, said: "He's 10 years younger than his stated age, that's 
what he is." Bush, an avid jogger and tennis player, is "very active, very 
energetic," Lee said. 
 -- Ronald and Nancy Reagan -- who are on their first trip abroad since leaving 
the White House in January -- are not typical tourists. The Reagans were 
greeted by U.S. Ambassador Henry Catto and former Foreign Secretary Francis Pym 
upon their arrival at London's Heathrow Airport aboard a private Boeing 727 
jetliner. The couple waved to onlookers before entering a limousine and driving 
off without comment. The former President is to deliver the Churchill Memorial 
Lecture on Tuesday. The English Speaking Union invited Reagan to speak on "the 
problems, perils, challenges and opportunities confronting the English-speaking 
peoples of today." JAMES MARNELL 
