COURT LETS RELIGIOUS CLUBS MEET IN SCHOOLS; 
RULING: THE U.S. SUPREME COURT DECIDES THAT HIGH SCHOOLS THAT ALLOW 
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES ON CAMPUS MUST ALSO PERMIT STUDENTS TO GATHER FOR 
PRAYER. 
The Supreme Court Monday opened the doors of public high schools to prayer and 
Bible reading, ruling that secondary schools that allow extracurricular 
activities on campus must also permit religious students to meet for prayer. 
On an 8-1 vote, the court said that religious clubs may meet as long as the 
groups are student-sponsored. 
Attorneys for Christian evangelicals said that the ruling will stop 
discrimination against religious students in the public schools. 
"Oh, we're dancing in the sky," said the Rev. Louis P. Sheldon, head of the 
Anaheim-based Traditional Values Coalition. "It means that a student does not 
have to check his values and beliefs at the school's front door anymore. . . . 
That's what equal access is all about." 
But critics said that the ruling will also open the school doors to every 
organization from the Ku Klux Klan to the Young Communists League, because the 
law that the ruling upheld also forbids discrimination against groups based on 
their political or philosophical views. 
The case was watched closely by Orange County's Saddleback Valley Unified 
School District, which was involved in another Bible club case that went to the 
U.S. Supreme Court in 1988. The earlier case had the opposite outcome. 
That time, the high court allowed to stand a lower court ruling that denied 
students at two Saddleback high schools the right to promote or advertise 
religious-oriented clubs during school hours. 
Student members of the New Life Christian Club at El Toro and Mission Viejo 
high schools are allowed to meet informally on the campus but must do so 
outdoors, during their lunch period. 
Peter Hartman, superintendent of the Saddleback Valley school district, said 
Monday that it did not appear at first glance he did not believe at first 
glance that Monday's decision would contradict his district's policy. 
that the court's latest decision contradict's his district's policy. 
"Our policy is that groups that we feel are not related to the curriculum 
cannot meet during the school day," Hartman said. "It's called the 
closed-campus rule. If someone wanted to form a ski club and we do not have 
skiing in our curriculum, for example, they could not meet during the school 
day." 
He said the district will study the decision more closely this week. 
Nearly three decades ago, the high court set off a national furor by outlawing 
official prayer and school-sponsored Bible readings. The court has held firmly 
to the view that the Constitution forbids the government from injecting 
religion into the public schools. 
But conservatives and Christian legal activists have complained that the 
doctrine of "separation of church and state" has been extended so far that it 
has turned into hostility toward religion. In fact, many school officials 
interpreted the court's decision against school-sponsored prayer as a ban on 
all religious activities on school grounds. 
Justice Department attorneys under the Ronald Reagan and Bush administrations 
challenged that interpretation, saying that religious students should have the 
same rights as others to meet on campus. 
On Monday, the high court agreed, ruling that the Constitution does not require 
that the schools be off-limits to religion. 
"There is a crucial difference between government speech endorsing religion, 
which the Establishment Clause (of the First Amendment) forbids, and private 
speech endorsing religion," said Justice Sandra Day O'Connor for the court. 
Allowing students to meet on campus and discuss religion is constitutional, 
O'Connor said, because it does not amount to "state sponsorship of religion." 
If a high school allows meetings of groups such as the chess or the stamp club, 
whose activities are "not directly related to" the curriculum, it must also 
allow religious groups to meet there, O'Connor said. 
Attorneys for the Christian students predicted that prayer clubs will spring up 
on high school campuses nationwide. 
"This decision sends a loud and clear message that religious speech on school 
campuses is protected, and that public school officials can't stand in the 
way," said Atlanta lawyer Jay Alan Sekulow, general counsel for Christian 
Advocates Serving Evangelism, who represented the students in this case. 
But an array of religious and civil liberties groups said that the ruling will 
result in students being pressured to join religious groups. 
"Undoubtedly, the evangelicals will try to put one of these clubs into every 
school in the country . . . I think students will be pressured by their peers 
to join these groups," said Marc Stern, an attorney for the American Jewish 
Congress, who represented a Nebraska school board in this case. 
Justice John Paul Stevens, the lone dissenter, said that the ruling "creates a 
constitutional obligation to allow student members of the Ku Klux Klan or the 
Communist Party to have access to school facilities." 
But O'Connor noted that the federal law allows school authorities to ban 
disruptive groups. 
This case (Board of Education vs. Mergens, 88-1597) arose in 1985 when Bridget 
Mergens and several other students at a high school in Omaha, Neb., told their 
principal that they wanted to form a Christian club to meet after school. 
The year before, Congress had passed the Equal Access Act which said that 
public secondary schools which allow extracurricular student clubs may not 
"discriminate" against some clubs because of their members "religious, 
political (or) philosophical" views. 
The principal, backed by the school board, refused. He said that all the school 
clubs were "curricular," so the federal law did not apply. Second, he contended 
that allowing a religious club to meet on campus would violate the First 
Amendment's ban on the "establishment of religion" by the government. 
The Supreme Court rejected both arguments Monday. 
The court also defined one of the act's key terms -- "noncurriculum-related 
student group" -- in a way that applies the law to nearly every high school. 
If French is taught in a high school, a French club would be a curricular club, 
O'Connor said. But if chess and stamp collecting are not taught as subjects, 
those clubs are "noncurriculum" groups. Once the school allows any of these 
clubs to meet, she said, it must open the door to all clubs. 
The ruling leaves high school officials with three choices, said August 
Steinhilber, general counsel for the National School Boards Assn. They could 
eliminate all student clubs. They could allow only clubs that are tied directly 
to the curriculum. Or they must open their doors to all clubs, he said. 
The 1984 Equal Access Act says that teachers may not participate in the student 
clubs, nor may the clubs be controlled by parents or other outsiders. But 
school attorneys said that outside groups can encourage the formation of a 
school club. 
"Planned Parenthood has wanted to have chapters in the schools. If they do, the 
right-to-life groups will want to come in, too," Steinhilber said. "When the 
young Nazis and the Satanic clubs show up, too, the school may figure it's not 
worth the fight, and they will limit it to curriculum-related clubs only." 
Justices Thurgood Marshall and William J. Brennan concurred in the outcome of 
the Westside High School case but expressed serious reservations. Marshall, in 
an opinion joined by Brennan, said that schools such as Westside must be 
careful to "effectively disassociate themselves from the religious speech that 
now may become commonplace in their facilities." 
In another case decided Monday the court ruled unanimously that nuclear 
"whistle-blowers" who are disciplined by their employers may sue for damages in 
a state court, in addition to filing claims under a 1974 federal law that 
protects whistle-blowers (English vs. General Electric Co., 89-152). An appeals 
court in Richmond, Va., said last year that a federal complaint was the only 
remedy for discharged nuclear employees. 
Times staff writer Maria Newman contributed to this report. 
