WHAT'S THE ATTRACTION?; 
VALLEY AREA DRAWS ITS SHARE OF TOURISTS VISITING LOS ANGELES 
For an anticipated 6 million of the 49 million tourists who will visit Los 
Angeles this year, the San Fernando Valley area will be more than just another 
suburb, it will be a major place to play. 
Although a majority of those 49 million people fan out to various Westside 
attractions -- especially the beaches -- upon arrival, the Greater Los Angeles 
Visitors and Convention Bureau says the Valley is the No. 1 specific 
destination in the county, thanks to Universal Studios. (The top spot in 
Southern California is, of course, Disneyland.) Last year, more than 4 million 
people took the tour and, according to company spokesman Joan Bullard, 
attendance is up 30% over last year at this time. 
But Universal is not the only big draw in the Valley area. Of the top Southern 
California attractions tracked by the visitors bureau, the NBC Studio tour in 
Burbank ranks 11th, pulling in 150,000 people a year. Forest Lawn Memorial Park 
in Glendale, which is not ranked by the bureau, attracts about 500,000 tourists 
annually. 
Of course, these Valley-area attractions are not just vying for crowds; with 
exceptions such as Forest Lawn, which does not charge visitors, these amusement 
parks and studio tours are hoping to net some of the billions of dollars -- 
almost $13 billion in 1988 -- that tourists bring to the Los Angeles area. 
What follows is a rundown on some of the top tourist spots in the Valley. 
Universal says the increase in attendance is due largely to its newest ride, 
Earthquake -- The Big One. "Attendance from other states was up 20% from last 
year, other countries up 30% and local attendance up 65%, all because of the 
Earthquake attraction," Bullard said. 
First-time Los Angeles visitor Dennis Dotson of Midwest City, Okla., said he 
brought his family to Universal to see how movies are made. "I've always 
enjoyed movies," he said, "so this is a real treat for us. If we were coming to 
L.A., we had to come here." 
Universal is not the only studio conducting tours. The Burbank Studios runs a 
daily tour for groups of up to 12 people, taking them through the various 
departments and operations of the combined Warner Bros. and Columbia Studios 
lot. About 70% of its 6,500 yearly visitors are from out of state. 
At NBC, up to 15 people at a time can take the 75-minute tour. "Over 50% of the 
people are from out of state or out of country," said Donna Goodwin of NBC. 
"And visitors have included citizens of Australia, New Zealand, Germany, 
England, Japan and France." 
While many on the tour hope to see Johnny Carson, and he does occasionally 
arrive while one is being conducted, it is some of his comments, particularly 
about local landmarks, that has peaked the interest of some tourists. 
"Johnny kept on talking about Forest Lawn, and that's why I came to the San 
Fernando Valley," said Florence Silverstein, 63, of Boston. "It was a very 
pretty place." 
Besides being pretty, 
Forest Lawn promotes itself as the final resting place of a number of Hollywood 
luminaries, including Mary Pickford, W. C. Fields, Humphrey Bogart, Spencer 
Tracy, Nat (King) Cole, Clark Gable, Carole Lombard, Jean Harlow and Errol 
Flynn. 
Six Flags Magic Mountain in the Santa Clarita Valley pulled in 3.1 million 
visitors in 1988, most of whom were from Southern California. (Attendance 
increased almost 9% over 1987.) In fact, Magic Mountain officials regard the 
amusement park as a regional, rather than a national, attraction. "We're 
basically a Southern California park for Southern Californians," said Courtney 
Simmons, a park spokesman. The park's newest ride, Tidal Wave, opened June 3, 
and park officials say it is operating at full capacity -- 1,200 people an 
hour. 
While it is the major attractions such as Magic Mountain, Universal and NBC 
that bring tourists in, some not-so-obvious spots keep them here. 
"There's a lot of things to do in the Valley," said Nancy Hoffman of the Van 
Nuys Chamber of Commerce, who said her office receives daily calls from 
out-of-state tourists wanting to know about local fairs, art shows and parks. 
"A lot of our calls are from people who want to know about shopping malls," 
Hoffman said. "Compulsive shoppers live everywhere. And don't forget the tour 
of the Van Nuys Airport." 
While tours are available at almost all airports in Southern California, only 
at Van Nuys can one regularly get a visit of an Air National Guard C-130 
Hercules as part of the package. 
Photograph Aircraft 
While most of the 2,500 monthly visitors are local school groups studying 
transportation, airport employee Dolly Hickland said, "many foreigners, 
especially the English and the Japanese, like to photograph the older World War 
II-era aircraft parked here." 
Not too far away, tourists are also coming to see the Sherman Oaks Galleria. 
"From the inside, it looks just like the ones we have in St. Paul," Marsha 
Libby said while taking a recent tour of the mall. 
Maybe, but the malls of the Twin Cities haven't been constantly used in such 
movies and television shows as "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," "Commando," 
"Innerspace" and "thirtysomething." Galleria General Manager Jonathan Alpert 
said that because of these starring roles, some out-of-towners come to the mall 
strictly to take a look. 
"It's families with younger kids, teen-agers and older adults. One of the 
things they really wanted to see while in Los Angeles was the Sherman Oaks 
Galleria," Alpert said. "I was in Denver talking to someone and when I told 
them what I did, they said, 'I've got to see that place when I go to Los 
Angeles.' " 
Marriages, Masses Performed 
The San Fernando Mission in Mission Hills, which still performs marriages, 
baptisms and Sunday Masses, draws an estimated 35,000 visitors each year. 
"I've never seen so much stucco in my life," Marvin Beglighter of Ennis, Tex., 
said when asked what he thought of the Valley while touring the mission. 
"Haven't you people ever heard of bricks?" 
It was spots such as the mission and the endless rows of citrus groves in 
pre-subdivision times that enticed tourists of the 1920s and '30s to venture 
over into the Valley, especially Europeans. 
"Lots of Europeans wanted to come and see the endless rows of citrus," Valley 
historian Elva Meline said from her office in the Andreas Pico Adobe in Mission 
Hills. "To see an orange growing on a tree was really something for these 
people. And the movie industry was very busy out here in the '30s too." 
School Tours 
One of the oldest buildings in the Valley, the Pico Adobe draws about 5,000 
people per year, primarily school tours from as far away as Ridgecrest and 
Tehachapi and those who find reference to it in the AAA tour guide book. 
Every year, about 150,000 people, 40% of whom are from out of state, visit the 
155-acre Descanso Gardens in La Canada Flintridge. "Anyone who is a camellia 
fancier from around the world knows about us," said spokesman Paul McBride. 
"We're also well-known for our collection of roses." 
One of the best-kept secrets in the Valley is the Japanese garden in Van Nuys. 
Part of the Donald C. Tillman Water Reclamation Plant operated by the city of 
Los Angeles, the 6 1/2-acre garden "was built as a relief to the traditional 
square boxes this type of facility inevitably becomes," spokesman Gene Greene 
said. 
About 1,000 people visit the garden each month (by appointment only), 35% of 
whom are from out of state. They can gaze at azaleas, cherry trees, magnolias, 
wisteria, iris and lotus as they walk. 
