CONGRESS OKS UNPAID LEAVES FOR BIRTH, ILLNESS 
Defying a White House veto threat, the Senate gave final congressional approval 
Thursday to landmark legislation that would require large companies and 
governments to grant unpaid family or medical leave to their employees. 
The Senate adopted by voice vote a House-passed compromise bill that would 
allow workers to take time off to care for newborn babies or seriously ill 
parents or to recover from sickness themselves. 
The measure, long sought by women's organizations and labor unions but opposed 
strongly by business groups, was sent to President Bush. White House Chief of 
Staff John H. Sununu already has promised business lobbyists that the President 
would veto the bill. 
An election year veto, however, could diminish Bush's popularity among working 
families in view of his campaign promises of a "kinder, gentler nation" that 
would not deprive women of their jobs if they had to take time off from work to 
have a baby or care for a sick child. 
"It's time to see whether this is rhetoric alone," said Senate Democratic 
Leader George J. Mitchell of Maine. 
The bill had passed by a margin of 237 to 187 in the House, well short of the 
two-thirds majority required to override a veto. Republican supporters of the 
legislation, however, said they would appeal to the President to sign it. 
The Senate's swift action came as a surprise because GOP opponents had 
threatened to filibuster against the controversial bill. They ultimately 
decided to let it go through without even a roll call vote. 
"We have a consensus on a bill that I thought would be debated for days," said 
Sen. Christopher J. Dodd (D-Conn.), chief sponsor of the legislation. Dodd 
appealed to Bush to take a close look at the bill in hopes that the President 
would not exercise a veto that Congress could not override. 
Senate sources said opponents of the measure did not want to go on record 
against the family leave bill in an election year when some would have to 
explain their stand to their constituents. 
The measure would require firms with 50 or more workers, as well as state and 
local governments, to grant employees as much as 12 weeks of unpaid leave for 
specified family or medical reasons without losing any health insurance 
coverage during their absences. Federal employees would be entitled to longer 
leave periods under the bill. 
Employers would be required to guarantee the jobs of workers who take the 
unpaid leave. 
Advocates said the legislation is the first breakthrough in government 
recognition of the vast increase in the number of two-earner families and 
mothers of small children in the labor force. 
Opponents, however, contended that the bill would increase costs to employers 
and set a bad precedent for government intervention in setting job conditions 
that might reduce other employee benefits. 
"Anytime we mandate anything, it's bad public policy," Senate Minority Leader 
Bob Dole (R-Kan.) said. 
"We've lost," said Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.), another opponent. 
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) recalled during the debate that he took a 
great deal of time away from the Senate when his son, Teddy, was hospitalized 
with cancer in 1973. 
"As a senator, I was able to take time off from work to care for my child," 
Kennedy said. "Millions of Americans are not so lucky. No working Americans 
should be denied the opportunity to fulfill their basic obligations as 
parents." 
Proponents of the bill relied on government figures showing that nearly 
three-fourths of married women with school-age children are working, and more 
than half of all mothers with preschool children are in the labor force. 
To get the legislation through the House -- and through the Senate without an 
all-out battle -- the sponsors modified it considerably. Instead of affecting 
firms with 20 or more workers, the revised version would apply only to 
companies with 50 or more workers. That would reduce the impact to just 5% of 
all employers from 12% under the original legislation. 
Employees would be required to have at least one year with their company to 
qualify for leave and would have to work at least 1,000 hours a year to 
qualify. Leave would be allowed for childbirth, adoption and serious illness of 
a child, a parent, a spouse or the employee. 
Employers would not be required to provide the leave to "key employees," 
defined as the highest-paid 10% of a company's work force. Special rules would 
be enforced for school employees to minimize disruption of classes. 
A doctor's certification would be required to justify leaves in cases of 
serious illness. 
Judith Lichtman, chairman of a coalition of organizations supporting the bill, 
said that she is "thrilled" by the outcome. 
"We are particularly pleased that the vote came just days before Father's Day 
-- truly wonderful timing, especially since the House voted right before 
Mother's Day," she said. "Now the focus is on President Bush, and we are by no 
means convinced that he will veto this bill," she said. 
