CEASE-FIRE WITH S. AFRICA NEAR, ANC LEADER PREDICTS 
The African National Congress and the white-led government could soon negotiate 
a cease-fire and end decades of hostilities, a top ANC official predicted 
Thursday. 
Meanwhile, President F.W. de Klerk declared six neighborhoods open to all races 
as part of the government's plan to ease 40 years of strict residential 
segregation. 
The six relatively small neighborhoods include one suburb each in Johannesburg 
and Cape Town, a rural area outside Durban and parts of three small towns -- 
Knysna, Messina and Zuurbekom, the government said. The government opened four 
neighborhoods to all races in November. 
Joe Slovo, an ANC leader and the head of the South African Communist Party, 
said the government and the ANC would seek to work out a cease-fire once they 
resolve several preliminary issues. Those include the return of 20,000 ANC 
exiles and the release of about 3,000 activists convicted of politically 
motivated crimes. 
"There is a good chance that if the obstacles are removed we will at a very 
early stage move toward . . . the negotiation of a suspension of hostilities," 
Slovo said in an interview with the Associated Press and several other news 
organizations. 
The question of violence has been one of the most contentious issues between 
the government and the ANC as they seek to launch discussions on drafting a new 
constitution and ending apartheid. 
The government has called on the ANC to renounce its largely dormant guerrilla 
campaign in order to improve the climate for negotiations. 
President Bush, who hosted ANC leader Nelson Mandela at the White House on 
Monday, also urged the organization to disavow violence. 
However, Mandela and other ANC leaders continue to support the armed struggle, 
saying it is necessary to maintain pressure on the government and also as a 
measure of self-defense. 
The ANC, the country's largest opposition group, has not carried out any major 
attacks this year. Dozens of anti-apartheid demonstrators have been killed by 
police fire during the same period. 
The government and the ANC held their first talks in May. The two have since 
worked together on a document to remove the obstacles to full-scale 
constitutional negotiations. 
The government says it approves of the document, while the ANC has requested 
until July 10 to respond. 
