PLANS FOR NEW FACILITIES IN LEGAL LIMBO; 
JUDGE UPHOLDS REJECTION OF JAIL TAX OKD BY VOTERS 
Leaving San Diego County's plans for new jails and courts in legal limbo, a 
Superior Court judge Monday upheld his March ruling invalidating a half-cent 
sales tax narrowly approved by voters last June to raise $1.6 billion for 
criminal-justice facilities. 
Reaffirming his March 23 decision, Riverside County Superior Court Judge Gordon 
Burkhart rejected San Diego County officials' request that he set aside his 
earlier order that struck down Proposition A, thereby setting the stage for a 
possibly protracted appeals battle. 
In his decision, Burkhart declared the half-cent sales tax illegal on the 
grounds that its 50.6% countywide approval at the polls fell short of the 
two-thirds margin mandated by Proposition 13, the landmark 1978 property 
tax-cutting initiative approved by statewide voters in 1978. 
Appeals of Burkhart's decision, expected to ultimately reach the state Supreme 
Court, could last as long as two years, according to lawyers on both sides of 
the case. 
Collection to Continue 
During that period, the half-cent sales tax will continue to be collected, but 
county officials have indicated that the funds will not be spent unless 
Burkhart's order is overturned. 
If, on the other hand, the 4th District Court of Appeal and the California 
Supreme Court uphold the judge's ruling, the local sales tax would be 
temporarily rolled back to enable local consumers to recoup the funds 
"illegally" collected under Proposition A. 
Over its 10-year life, it is estimated, Proposition A, which raised the local 
sales tax to 7%, will generate $1.6 billion for new jails and courts to 
alleviate San Diego's longstanding jail crowding and a badly overextended court 
system. 
Heard in Riverside County 
The lawsuit against the tax, filed on behalf of leaders of the San Diego County 
Libertarian Party, was heard in Riverside County because of San Diego judges' 
conflict of interest in a matter affecting courtroom space. 
Officials representing San Diego County and the Regional Justice Facility 
Financing Agency, the board set up to administer Proposition A's revenues, 
argued that 1987 state legislation that set the stage for last June's 
Proposition A election stated that a majority vote would be sufficient for 
passage. 
The seven attorneys who filed the lawsuit for the Libertarians, however, 
described that 1987 bill as a sham that violated both the spirit and the letter 
of Proposition 13 -- an argument that Burkhart sided with in his ruling. 
