4 1/2-YEAR ODYSSEY; 
DRUG'S LONG ROAD TO FDA APPROVAL 
A small truck rumbled south from New Jersey in late 1983 with an unlikely 
one-ton load -- an 851-volume application to the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration for permission to sell a single drug for aching joints. 
The drug, called Voltaren, was no major breakthrough. It represented little or 
no advance over what was already available, federal officials said. It was 
similar in many ways to a half-dozen other arthritis drugs the FDA had already 
approved. 
But 4 1/2 years would slide by before the FDA approved Voltaren -- more time 
than was taken to build Hoover Dam. Before Americans could use Voltaren, it 
would be available in 120 other countries and would become the top-selling 
arthritis drug in the world. 
Time, Expense 
Voltaren's odyssey through the federal bureaucracy offers a graphic picture of 
the time and expense required to get a new drug on the market -- conditions 
that lie at the heart of a bitter debate over Americans' access, or lack of it, 
to innovative drugs. 
It takes an average of 30 months to get a prescription drug through the FDA -- 
on top of three to 10 years of development and testing. The cost of delays to 
firms, in added expenses and lost sales, has been estimated at $1 million a 
month -- not to mention the price in public health. 
Industry officials say the estimated $125-million cost of moving a drug from 
discovery to market has become a disincentive to pharmaceutical research. That 
research has helped spawn a $40-billion-a-year industry and extend the average 
American's life span. 
Meanwhile, public impatience for new treatments for diseases like AIDS and 
Alzheimer's has inspired an outcry for an overhaul of the FDA's review process. 
Some want the FDA to move more quickly; others want some approval requirements 
removed so new drugs will be available sooner. 
That outcry has raised the question: Can the drug-approval system be made more 
efficient without risking disaster? Can it be accelerated without undermining 
the scientific scrutiny credited with keeping dangerous drugs like Thalidomide 
off the U.S. market? 
"The question is: What are the trade-offs?" Dr. Samuel O. Thier, president of 
the federal Institute of Medicine, said in a recent interview. "What are we 
gaining in terms of safety versus what are we giving up in not having drugs 
available for a year or two?" 
Interviews with dozens of industry officials, regulators and others in recent 
months suggest that problems lie not in the design of the system itself, but in 
the conditions under which it has been forced to operate, perpetually hamstrung 
by shortages of funding and staff. 
* Federal budget cutting in the last decade has left FDA staffing well below 
what it was just 10 years ago. For want of a typist, physician-reviewers often 
type lengthy drug reports themselves. Crucial FDA documents go untyped or 
unprinted for months. 
Uncompetitive salaries make it difficult to hire qualified scientists for the 
FDA, and to keep them from defecting to private industry. Every year, the 
agency loses 10% of its drug reviewers, according to FDA Commissioner Frank 
Young. 
* Working conditions at the FDA are notorious. Offices are overcrowded, 
equipment is outdated, desks are occasionally shared. Electronic equipment to 
speed the review process is donated or loaned by drug companies that the agency 
polices. 
* The FDA's workload has multiplied with the advent of AIDS, the rise of 
biotechnology and the development of new drugs for an aging population. 
Applications for permission to test AIDS products alone have multiplied -- from 
five in 1982 to 275 in 1988. 
Transfer of Staff 
To handle the increase, FDA reviewers and other staff members have been 
reassigned to divisions handling AIDS drugs. Those transfers have left other 
offices and divisions riddled with vacancies, agency officials say. 
The pharmaceutical industry often adds to the problem, studies by the FDA and 
industry researchers suggest. Firms impatient to get their products on the 
market sometimes take short cuts in designing their drug studies, then fail to 
meet FDA requirements. 
As a result, time-consuming drug trials must be repeated and the review process 
is delayed while applications are "recycled" back and forth between the agency 
and companies. 
"People seem to think it's all the FDA's fault," said Thier, whose institute is 
part of the National Academy of Sciences. "(But) people are pressing for 
reducing the cost, increasing the safety, and getting drugs to market as fast 
as possible. You can't do all that simultaneously." 
"I don't think public policy has been terribly realistic," added Dr. Theodore 
Cooper, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the Upjohn Co. and 
a former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of health. "As a company man right 
now, I'd much rather see them have adequate resources and then I could feel 
better about bitching about their performance." 
Voltaren was far from an unknown quantity by the time the truck from the 
Ciba-Geigy Corp. backed up to the FDA loading dock on Dec. 20, 1983. It had 
been used widely by patients in Japan, Switzerland, France, Italy, Belgium and 
Germany since the mid-1970s. 
For the previous three years, Ciba-Geigy had put it through the dozens of tests 
required by the FDA for approval. Scientists had tested the drug in animals, 
then in humans, on arthritic hips and arthritic knees, in studies lasting from 
six weeks to a year. 
The data filled hundreds of colored binders. There were laboratory reports, 
analyses, medical records of thousands of patients. Binders were copied in 
triplicate for the FDA's physicians, pharmacists, chemists, statisticians and 
specialists in pharmacokinetics. 
Part of a Long Trip 
Ingrid Fengler, a young Ciba-Geigy regulatory affairs specialist who had 
accompanied the application down from headquarters in Summit, N.J., watched as 
five years' work disappeared into the massive belly of the FDA building in 
Rockville, Md., a suburb of Washington. 
Did she ever imagine that another 4 1/2 years would elapse before approval? 
"You always assume it's not going to go 'one, two, three,' " Fengler answered, 
diplomatically. 
The FDA, after all, is a gargantuan bureaucracy. It has more than 7,000 
employees and a half-billion-dollar budget. It is the largest 
consumer-protection agency in the federal government, overseeing an estimated 
25% of all consumer spending. 
The time swallowed up in drug review has been a sore point since the 1970s, 
when it became apparent that it was taking close to a decade to get a drug to 
market. The FDA has tried repeatedly -- and failed -- to cut the average time 
required for approval. 
"We've in one way or another been trying to 'speed things up' for at least 15 
years," said Dr. Robert Temple, director of one of the FDA's offices of drug 
evaluation. "But the average approval time hasn't changed in a long time. 
There's no question about it." 
Asked why, Temple said: "That's not easy to answer. One possibility is that 
we're holding our own even though the (applications) are getting larger, and 
that what we've been able to do is not so bad considering how much more there 
is." 
Reasons for Delay 
But Fengler had other reasons to expect that approval would not come quickly: 
Arthritis drugs are toxic and can damage the digestive tract and liver. One 
year before, Eli Lilly &amp; Co. had pulled one from the market amid reports of 
dozens of drug-induced deaths. 
The drug, called Oraflex, had been approved just months earlier by the same FDA 
division that would later review Voltaren. Lilly was eventually prosecuted and 
fined $25,000 by the Justice Department for having withheld information about 
the drug from the FDA. 
"We look at each drug with the experience of the ones we have behind us," said 
Dotti Pease, an FDA project manager on the Voltaren application. "If (Lilly) 
had told us about the liver problems . . . we might have done something 
different." 
The Voltaren application reached Pease's division in early 1984. It went 
immediately to an in-house chemist for review. A second copy went to an FDA 
pharmacologist to review such things as the animal studies to determine how 
they might apply to humans. 
According to Pease, the chemist completed his review early. The pharmacologist 
completed his in January, 1985 -- but then it took the pharmacologist six 
months to have the review typed, circulated and approved. 
"That's not unusual," Pease said, ensconced in a tiny office piled high with 
documents. "We sometimes get to the point where if we just can't get enough 
typists to type things, we just put things in our files in handwriting -- if 
you can read the reviewer's writing. 
"You might have a hundred-page handwritten review in the file," said Pease, 
adding later that the situation has begun to improve. "If we just didn't see 
any hope of ever getting it typed, we would just put it in the file that way, 
hoping that people could read it." 
Centerpiece of Process 
A third copy of the application went to an FDA physician for a so-called 
medical review, the centerpiece of the FDA process. That review entails 
weighing a drug's benefits and risks, in addition to analyzing its 
side-effects, proper dosages and labeling. 
The medical reviewer took about a year to complete his examination. It came in 
unusually long, at about 600 pages. Then, according to Pease, "The reviewer got 
tired of waiting for a typist to type it. So he asked the company to type it." 
The company obliged -- a step Pease acknowledged was highly irregular. But any 
question of appropriateness shortly became moot: The FDA reviewer's supervisor 
felt the review was insufficiently rigorous and declined to sign off on it. 
The reviewer eventually left the agency. His review languished on an office 
shelf. 
"I've never looked through it," said Dr. Rudolph Widmark, the next reviewing 
medical officer to be assigned the case. "It was a 600-page review, which I 
thought was a waste of time. You know, I have to construct my own way of 
looking at the data." 
The 1980s have not been happy times at the FDA. 
Federal budget-cutting reduced full-time staff from about 8,000 in 1979 to less 
than 7,000 in 1986, according to congressional and FDA figures. Meanwhile, the 
number of applications to market new drugs rose from 182 in 1979 to 269 in 
1983, one internal study shows. 
The number of applications to begin testing new products skyrocketed -- from 
940 in 1979 to 1,904 in 1985. Applications to test AIDS products rose from five 
in 1982 to 60 in 1985 to 275 in 1988. 
"The FDA was and continues to be a lean organization," said John Norris, an 
executive vice president of Hill &amp; Knowlton, who served as FDA deputy 
commissioner between 1984 and 1988. "So right away, the cuts went into meat and 
bone, and not into fat." 
Morale suffered too. 
Political Dangers 
Until the arrival of FDA Commissioner Frank Young in 1984, tenure in the top 
job averaged just over one year. The post had become "unrewarding . . . 
politically dangerous . . . (and) a public target for ridicule," as Norris put 
it. 
Travel budgets were so tight that, Norris said, "I often had to pay from my own 
pocket to cover government travel because meetings were held in expensive 
hotels and the government per diem doesn't cover a third of that." 
Pay for skilled professionals stands 30% to 500% below what the same people 
could earn in the private sector, Norris says. He recalls taking "a sixfold cut 
in pay" to come to the FDA from his job as chief executive officer of a 
management-consulting firm. 
"How do you hire an ophthalmologist for $65,000 a year?" asked Jere Goyan, a 
former FDA commissioner who is now dean of the UC San Francisco School of 
Pharmacy. "That's petty cash for an ophthalmologist." 
In late 1985, the Voltaren application encountered yet another delay: The FDA 
and Ciba-Geigy decided to computerize the medical review. In the long run, the 
FDA hopes computerization will speed up the process; but in the Voltaren 
approval process, it devoured another year. 
It took the two sides four months to agree on terms for the new system. Then a 
consultant spent five months developing programs. By July, 1986, Ciba-Geigy had 
installed a terminal at FDA headquarters, giving the agency computer access to 
the company's data. 
Later, the company installed a fax machine in the FDA reviewers' office to 
speed up the review -- an arrangement FDA officials said may raise questions 
about propriety but proved expedient. 
Review in Earnest 
Finally, in late 1986, the medical review began in earnest. 
All through the following year, Widmark and his supervisor, Dr. John Harter, 
sorted through the Voltaren application. They re-examined data, scrutinized 
patient records, hunted out subtle side-effects. 
Gradually, as Widmark worked with the data, he noticed an unexpected pattern in 
the way the drug affected patients' livers: The side-effects were worse in 
patients with osteoarthritis than in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
That finding prompted the agency to require an addition to the drug's labeling 
-- the elaborate description of a drug's chemistry, pharmacology, risks and 
proper use that goes to all prescribing physicians. 
Because such labeling also dictates how the drug may be advertised, companies 
take labeling issues seriously. They know that physicians, or a competing drug 
firm, might take an unusual warning as grounds for not prescribing the drug. 
After months of negotiation, the FDA and Ciba-Geigy agreed that the label would 
advise physicians to monitor the blood of patients on long-term Voltaren 
therapy. They were to test for certain enzymes whose presence can be a sign of 
liver injury. 
But the advice was undercut by the FDA's inability to specify when monitoring 
should be done. While the data from the drug's trials suggested that monitoring 
might help avert more serious liver problems, it was unclear how often patients 
needed to be tested. 
"We hated at this end to recommend monitoring too specifically when the data 
didn't really show how often we should tell them to monitor," Pease said. 
There is little agreement on precisely how the drug-approval process might be 
changed. 
Some industry officials would like to see the FDA less involved -- for example, 
in determining when it is appropriate to advance from animal to human testing. 
Cooper of Upjohn suggests local hospital review boards could ensure that human 
tests are ethical and safe. 
Others, including former FDA commissioner Goyan, want the agency to consider 
new statistical methods for extrapolating research findings to the general 
population. They wonder if it might be possible to test some drugs on fewer 
patients, saving time to approval. 
Some top cancer researchers say the FDA should use more liberal standards in 
judging whether drugs work. For example, must sponsors prove that a cancer drug 
prolongs survival, or simply that patients responded and some biological 
function was restored? 
The FDA, on the other hand, would like companies to turn in better 
applications. Commissioner Young likes to cite one that he calls "the epic 
application": Seven of nine studies supporting the drug in question were "of no 
value" in the review, Young said. 
But the agency has also made its own adjustments in recent months, under 
pressure in part from AIDS activists. The changes have included a commitment to 
allow drug testing to be shortened in the case of drugs for life-threatening 
diseases. 
Some experts warn that there may be dangers in speeding up the process. 
"There's always a risk in putting any drug on the market," said Dr. F. Gilbert 
McMahon, who headed a commission on the FDA in the early 1980s. "No drug is 
free of side-effects. Drugs are put on the market because their benefits seem 
to outweigh their risk. 
"So if you shorten the (trials) to 200 to 500 people before market, the public 
and the Congress have to know . . . that there are going to be some terrible 
mistakes," said McMahon. "They've got to be willing to accept that risk." 
By mid-April, 1988, all the FDA reviewers had largely completed their work on 
Voltaren. The next step was to present their written reports to Dr. Temple, the 
drug-evaluation office director with final say over when, and with what 
conditions, the drug would be approved. 
Harter proposed that the reviews be presented to Temple orally in a marathon 
one-day workshop. The plan was to avoid the perpetual pileup of so-called 
approval packages awaiting Temple's attention like aircraft waiting for 
permission to land. 
"Packages historically have idled for quite a while. It's fair to say, 
certainly, for months," said Pease. "What we tried to do was bring everybody 
into a room all at once and say, 'Speak now or forever hold your peace.' " 
Twenty-five FDA officials convened at 9 a.m. on April 25 in a conference room 
on the 13th floor of the FDA building. Four floors below, in another conference 
room, a dozen Ciba-Geigy officials stood by to answer questions carried 
downstairs by runners. 
The meeting lasted 11 hours. The Ciba-Geigy contingent missed the last plane 
back to New Jersey. But the session was pronounced a success: After three more 
months of discussions, Voltaren was approved. 
On July 28, 1988, Voltaren's 55-month odyssey ended. The FDA formally approved 
the drug. Fengler and Ron Califre of Ciba-Geigy took the first flight from New 
Jersey to Washington to pick up a copy of the approval. 
"It's traditional," Califre explained of the final voyage. "It's like 
delivering a baby." 
Applications Up, Manpower Down 
While the number of applications to begin testing of new AIDS drugs has been 
rising in recent years , FDA manpower has been declining. 
Number of applications per year: 
1982: 5 
1983: 8 
1984: 29 
1985: 60 
1986: 104 
1987: 164 
1988: 275 (projected) 
FDA manpower (Full-time equivalents) 
1979: 8,179 
1980: 8, 089 
1981: 7,799 
1982: 7, 316 
1983: (missing) 
1984: 7,279 
1985: 7,186 
1986: 7,000 
1987: 6,960 
1988: 7,207 
1989: 7,350 
Source: FDA, congressional reports 
