FRIENDSHIP FLIGHT TONY CIRCLES THE GLOBE; 
AVIATOR, DAD COME DOWN TO EARTH FOR A WHILE, GO FISHING 
There will be few Father's Day weekends as memorable for Gary and Tony 
Aliengena as the one they spent on this small North Atlantic island nation. 
The father-son team from San Juan Capistrano, piloting around the world in an 
attempt to establish Tony as the youngest aviator ever to circumnavigate the 
globe, spent Saturday on the ground, fishing, after 12 days in the air crossing 
the United States, Canada and Greenland on the way to Europe. 
After a nine-hour flight Friday across the North Atlantic, the 11-year-old 
aviator was determined to try his luck fishing, and he announced his intentions 
to do so at breakfast. 
So Tony, his father and Tony's Soviet pen pal, 10-year-old Roman Tcheremnykh, 
unpacked their fishing rods and set out on Saturday afternoon to test the water 
on a nearby lake. They returned empty-handed. "We just froze," said Gary 
Aliengena, a certified pilot who has accompanied Tony in a one-engine Cessna 
Centurion. "We didn't even get a bite." 
Despite their lack of luck at the lake, the stopover in Iceland was anything 
but dull. 
It was National Day in Iceland, a day of feast and celebration commemorating 
the nation's independence from Denmark on June 18, 1944. 
Tens of thousands of Icelanders, decked out in colorful Nordic dress, jammed 
the parks and streets of this small capital, kicking up their heels to polka 
music, cheering on outdoor wrestling matches and providing a spectacle for 
tourists. 
The Icelandic capital seems a long way from Boston, where Tony began the second 
week of his around-the-world flight Tuesday. More precisely, it was 3,000 
miles, about the same distance he traveled in crossing the United States in the 
first week after leaving John Wayne Airport. 
The Canadian crossing was the best so far of the trip, as the entourage flew 
over vast lakes and forests, rich in caribou, bear and moose. 
Departing Boston on Tuesday, Tony encountered a large storm system with light 
ice at higher altitudes. The storm system persisted through Maine to the 
Canadian border, where the clouds broke up and the weather was clear all the 
way to Moncton, where Tony and his entourage from one chase plane spent the 
night. 
With time dwindling rapidly for the Atlantic crossing, the entourage did not 
get a chance to visit two of Moncton's natural attractions: the Magnetic Hill, 
where cars appear to roll uphill, and the Tidal Bore, where a tidal surge 
occurs twice daily on the Peditcodiac River. 
Tony's father and Gunter Hagen, a National Aeronautic Assn. observer aboard 
Tony's plane, spent hours poring over aeronautical charts to prepare for the 
crossing. They also checked out survival gear required by Canadian law for 
transoceanic flights, including life rafts and preservers, wet suits and 
flares. In addition, pilots of each plane brought enough candy to sustain each 
passenger for five days. 
On Wednesday morning, Gary Aliengena underwent questioning and an inspection of 
his Cessna by a Canadian aviation representative to obtain clearance to cross 
the Atlantic. The clearance is required in Canada only of single-engine planes. 
In a coffee shop at Moncton Airport, Transport Canada inspector Bob Lavers 
asked the 39-year-old Aliengena such questions as how many people he could hold 
on his lifeboat and the types of emergency radios he had on board. Afterward, 
Lavers nodded his approval at Aliengena's preparation. 
Watch Weather 
"Just be sure to keep a close eye on weather," Lavers said. "It's a very 
hostile environment up north, and there's a lot of water. If you go down in the 
water (without wet suits and lifeboats), your chances of survival are nil." 
Tony's group eventually arrived in Iqaluit, a village with a population of 
3,000, on the shores of an inlet that plunges between the low rock hills of 
southern Baffin Island. 
In Iqaluit, formerly known as Frobisher Bay, the weary travelers were 
enthralled to find a world of Inuits, polar bears and 24-hour sun. 
During April, Indian natives are drawn from the surrounding High Arctic islands 
for Iqaluit's Toonik Tyme carnival. The carnival, which celebrates the arrival 
of spring, features skinning, igloo building, ice sculpturing and a toboggan 
race. The highlight is the choosing of a Mr. Toonik and a queen. 
Waiting at airport at Iqaluit was a delegation of Canadian dignitaries, who 
presented Tony with a polar bear flag and a certificate naming him and his crew 
members to the polar bear chapter of the Charter of Arctic Adventurers. 
On Thursday, Tony got a chance to meet some Inuit youngsters about his own age. 
After introducing himself and answering questions from about 50 students of 
Nakasuk Elementary School, Tony then took turns asking questions, inquiring how 
many of the children had dog sleds and how sealskin tents and igloos are made. 
Close Call 
Afterward, Tony and Roman participated in a school track meet. But the most fun 
for Tony almost resulted in a serious mishap. Tony and some other youngsters on 
the trip had all been invited to drive around on a Hoverjet, which uses a 
cushion of air to glide on a frozen bay. 
Tony drove the craft, as did his sister, but when Roman and another boy climbed 
on, they crashed into a ditch. The steering wheel of the Hoverjet was broken in 
the accident, but none of the youngsters were injured. 
Even in Greenland, where he stopped for refueling, Tony could not escape the 
limelight. 
Inside the terminal at Sondrestrom, a U.S. Air Force base wedged at the head of 
a fiord, the clerks and workers bursted with excitement at Tony's two-hour 
visit. 
"We hear about the boy on radio," said Asprid Jensen, 24, a postal clerk. "Many 
of the clerks here asked yesterday, 'Where's that boy? Where's that boy?' " 
Tony seemed to barely notice the attention, however. Fatigued from his 
four-hour flight from Iqaluit to Sondrestrom, he checked into a hotel room at 
the airport and napped before setting out on his next 860 miles to Iceland. 
In Reykjavik on Saturday night, Tony and his father finally acquiesced to a 
little sightseeing. They dined at the Reykjavik Cafe and afterward toured the 
Hofdi House, a government building where former President Reagan and Soviet 
leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev met three years ago. 
There was no time to take in any of Iceland's spectacular geologic attractions, 
which include volcanoes, glaciers and waterfalls. 
After arriving in Oslo, Tony is scheduled to rest another day before setting 
out Tuesday on a relatively short 250-mile flight to Stockholm. Later in the 
week, he will visit Helsinki, Finland, before entering the Soviet Union on 
Friday at Leningrad. 
