JANET ADKINS' CONTROVERSIAL ASSISTED SUICIDE 
I am outraged by the story of the doctor who actively assisted the death of a 
woman with Alzheimer's disease. The prosecutors in Michigan will decide whether 
what Kevorkian did was illegal, but as a physician specializing in the care of 
persons with dementia I know that what he did was unethical and bad medical 
care. 
Kevorkian was a pathologist and he was not the woman's doctor. He would have 
little knowledge regarding the care of patients with Alzheimer's disease, nor 
would he know the important details of this woman's case. Did Kevorkian know if 
she were depressed, did he advise her and her family on ways to maintain the 
quality of her life, did he know if she were truly competent to decide to 
commit suicide? Did he do anything to try to alleviate her suffering, or did he 
just hasten her death? 
Alzheimer's disease is a progressively debilitating illness that robs a person 
of his or her mind. Although there is no cure yet for this illness, that does 
not mean there is no treatment. Working together, patients, families, support 
groups and physicians can do much to maintain the quality of life of someone 
with Alzheimer's disease. Despite their cognitive deficits most patients in the 
early and middle stages of the illness can still enjoy being with people, can 
still appreciate the comforts of life, can still give and accept the love of 
their families. As the illness advances, usually the patient becomes blessedly 
unaware of the problem. It is at that stage that most physicians will allow the 
patient to die from the illness by withholding the medical support that 
artificially sustains life. Even then, the decision must be made by the family 
and physician taking into consideration the patient's previously known wishes. 
The participants in active euthanasia are avoiding the difficult problems of 
making the quality of life better for a patient with a bad disease. They are 
taking the convenient way out for themselves, masquerading their needs as mercy 
for the patient. It was murder, not mercy and not medical care. 
MICHAEL E. MAHLER, M.D. 
UCLA, Assistant Professor 
of Neurology 
