COLUMN ONE; 
A SECOND TRANSPLANT REVOLUTION; 
A NEW GENERATION OF ANTI-REJECTION CHEMICALS APPEAR MORE POTENT AND MORE 
SELECTIVE. THEY MAY MAKE ORGAN REPLACEMENT EVEN MORE ROUTINE. 
Every week last year, more than 30 livers and hearts were transplanted in the 
United States in operations that, quite literally, gave the patients months or 
years of extra life. Just eight years ago, only 62 livers and 103 hearts were 
transplanted during the entire year. 
That sharp increase was a result of the discovery of an anti-rejection drug 
called cyclosporine, which, by making transplants both safer and more 
effective, revolutionized the field of transplant surgery to the point where a 
major organ is transplanted every 40 minutes in the United States. 
Today, surgeons are experimenting with a new generation of anti-rejection drugs 
that may alter the field every bit as much as cyclosporine did. These drugs are 
more potent than cyclosporine at preventing rejection and, so far at least, 
seem to have fewer side effects. Some also are cheaper -- a not insignificant 
consideration for drugs that must be taken for the remainder of a person's 
life. 
But more important, most of the new drugs seem more selective, pinpointing and 
suppressing only the portion of the immune system that attacks the organ and 
leaving the rest free to fight off infections. 
Dr. Hans Sollinger, a transplant surgeon at the University of Wisconsin in 
Madison, predicts that the use of transplant drugs will soon bear a strong 
resemblance to the current situation with antibiotics, where physicians choose 
from among 20 or more drugs to treat a certain type of infection and a certain 
type of patient. 
"I foresee a time in the future when we will determine the type of rejection, 
what (immune) cell type is involved, and so forth, open our drawer, and select 
the proper drug for a given organ and a given type of rejection," he said. 
As a result, transplants will become even more routine than they are now. More 
people who have a defective organ will be able to receive a replacement and 
those replacements will last longer than they do now. 
On the darker side, however, these developments will increase the demand for 
donor organs, which are already in short supply. More than 19,000 Americans are 
on waiting lists for donor hearts, kidneys and other organs, and increased 
success rates will make the demand even larger. 
Attempts at transplants have been recorded as long ago as Egyptian manuscripts 
written in 2000 BC, but it was not until the 1940s that scientists comprehended 
how to successfully carry out a transplant. During that period, the late Nobel 
laureate Sir Peter Brian Medawar of Oxford University demonstrated definitively 
that transplant failure was caused by the very immune system that protects the 
body against infections. 
Based on Medawar's work, researchers realized that it was necessary to stop the 
immune system from attacking an implanted organ as it would a disease-causing 
bacterium. Unfortunately, the only technique available to suppress the immune 
system was whole body irradiation, which destroyed all the immune system cells. 
Several kidney transplants were attempted using this technique. The kidneys 
survived but the patients did not, succumbing to infections. 
The first successful kidney transplant was achieved in 1954 by Harvard surgeon 
Joseph E. Murray. He used steroids, hormones that suppress the inflammation 
that is part of the rejection process. Because the steroids did not suppress 
the immune system effectively, he was forced to use organs from living donors 
who were closely related to the recipient. 
In the late 1960s, chemist George Hitchings of the Burroughs Wellcome Co. 
synthesized a derivative of a cancer drug that strongly suppressed the immune 
system. This drug, called azathioprine or Imuran, made transplants practical 
when it was used in conjunction with steroids. Its development made possible 
the first heart, lung, liver and pancreas transplants. 
But none of these transplant procedures was successful in more than 65% of the 
patients, and most were much less successful. Furthermore, Imuran's broad 
suppression of the immune system left patients susceptible to a variety of 
infections, as well as to an increased risk of cancer, which is normally kept 
in check by the immune system. 
That situation changed dramatically with the 1970 discovery of cyclosporine in 
a fungus from southern Norway. Immunologist Jean Borel of the Swiss 
pharmaceutical firm Sandoz Ltd. showed that it suppressed only a part of the 
immune system -- specifically one type of white blood cell (lymphocyte) called 
the T helper cell. He speculated that the drug thus could reduce the chance of 
rejection while leaving most of the immune system intact to fight off 
infection. 
Once surgeons began using cyclosporine in the early 1980s, they never went back 
to Imuran. At Stanford University, the two-year survival rate for heart 
transplants jumped from 63% to 83% by 1985. For kidney transplants throughout 
the United States during the same period, the one-year survival rate leaped 
from 60% to 80%. But liver transplants showed the most dramatic increase, with 
one-year survival rates more than doubling, to 70%. Transplant operations 
flowered as never before. 
But cyclosporine had its unfortunate side effects as well. Most critical, it 
damaged the kidney by lowering its clearance of wastes from the blood -- a 
supreme irony in that the drug had made kidney transplants so successful. 
It also did not greatly improve survival rates after the first year: Fewer than 
70% of the organs that survived for the first year survived for a second, noted 
Stanford immunologist Randall C. Morris. In practical terms, that attrition 
means many patients, perhaps as many as half of all kidney recipients, are 
coming back for second, third and even fourth organs. 
But researchers such as Morris are studying a number of new drugs that they 
think will change that curve for the better. One of the most thoroughly studied 
so far is called FK506. 
FK506 was discovered in 1984 by researchers from the Fujisawa Pharmaceutical 
Co. in a soil sample taken only a couple of miles from their laboratory in 
Tsukuba, Japan. They were using what Morris describes as an "extremely 
sophisticated" -- and still largely secret -- system for screening soil and 
water samples to look for anti-rejection drugs. It is the first such agent that 
was not found by accident. 
The new chemical belongs to a class of bacterial products called macrolides, a 
family that includes the commonly prescribed antibiotic erythromycin. Fujisawa 
scientists found that FK506 was 30 times more potent than cyclosporine in 
suppressing the immune system, which meant that it potentially be could given 
in much smaller doses to minimize side effects. 
But FK506 was almost never used in humans. Immunologist Roy A. Calne of 
Cambridge University in England found that it was toxic in dogs, and his report 
in the British journal The Lancet caused many researchers to abandon their 
studies. 
But surgeon Thomas E. Starzl of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center 
found that the toxicity varied from species to species. More important, he 
found that the drug could greatly extend the survival of transplants in animals 
other than dogs and that it could rescue organs suffering acute rejection 
episodes. 
In February, 1989, 28-year-old Robin Ford was brought into the University 
Hospital in Pittsburgh because she was undergoing an acute kidney rejection. 
Starzl decided to use FK506 in conjunction with cyclosporine to try to rescue 
the organ. The combination proved extremely toxic to Ford, but when Starzl took 
a gamble and stopped using cyclosporine, FK506 stopped the rejection episode. 
Unfortunately, the cyclosporine had already destroyed Ford's kidney, but she 
received FK506 along with a second donor organ and is back at work for the 
first time in two years. Most important, Starzl had seen the potential of the 
drug. 
Starzl has used the drug in more than 300 liver and kidney transplant patients 
with uniformly good results. Interestingly, Morris said, the drug not only 
halts rejection episodes, it also stimulates regrowth and repair of damaged 
liver cells. "No other drug does that," Morris said. 
Starzl said that most patients who receive the drug leave the hospital within 
two weeks after a liver transplant, about half the recuperation time required 
with cyclosporine. They also have fewer rejection episodes, infections and, so 
far at least, side effects. 
Because of the improved recuperation time, Starzl predicted that the cost of 
liver transplants will be reduced by at least one-third from the current level 
of about $200,000, and that cost reductions also will be achieved with other 
types of transplants. 
Clinical trials of the drug at other medical centers are expected to begin 
shortly. 
A variety of other drugs that promise to improve on FK506 are being studied at 
Stanford and elsewhere. 
To speed up research on the drugs, Morris has developed an innovative 
technique: He takes small pieces of heart tissue from one strain of mouse and 
places them between the cartilage and skin in the ears of mice from a different 
strain. Blood vessels grow into the heart tissue and within four to six days, 
the muscle tissue begins beating, although it is not pumping blood. 
"If we don't treat the recipient, it will be rejected in 10 days," he said. "We 
can treat it with new drugs to see how long the hearts beat. This has really 
speeded up the process of drug discovery and development." If drugs appear 
promising, they are tested in rats and monkeys before trials in humans. "When 
we test them head-to-head like this, we can make clear distinctions among them 
and see what the role of each will be," he said. 
One new drug that Morris considers promising is rapamycin, a close relative of 
FK506 that was discovered in the 1970s by researchers from Ayerst Laboratories 
in Canada who were looking for antibiotics to fight yeast infections. 
Rapamycin was a good antibiotic, Morris said, but it also interfered with the 
immune system, so it was shelved. But it was that very property -- plus the 
fact that it has a molecular structure much like that of FK506 -- that prompted 
Morris to evaluate it as an anti-rejection drug. 
"I didn't expect it to be much different from FK506," Morris said. "I was very, 
very surprised because in rats it is very potent" -- about 60 times as potent 
as cyclosporine and twice as potent as FK506. "It's the most potent drug we've 
ever seen." Morris hopes to begin testing rapamycin in primates this year. 
Morris has high hopes for another drug called RS-61443 because it operates by a 
completely different mechanism than FK506 and other macrolides and thus may be 
able to intervene at a different stage of rejection. 
Morris has tested RS-61443 in all three animal systems -- mice, rats and 
monkeys -- and found that it could prevent rejection and reverse advanced 
rejection. It is particularly promising, said Wisconsin's Sollinger, who has 
also tested it in dogs, because it combats chronic rejection, which none of the 
other available drugs does. 
Sollinger used the drug -- which is routinely used to treat the skin disease 
psoriasis -- for the first time in a human transplant patient in April, and he 
and researchers at the University of Alabama plan to study it in more kidney 
transplant patients. Morris said that the Stanford team plans to test RS-61443 
in heart transplant patients, perhaps as early as this summer. 
Two other drugs deserve mention. One is deoxyspergualin, a bacterial product 
that "is more impressive than FK506 in some species, particularly primates," 
said surgeon Robert Corry of the University of Iowa Medical Center. 
Deoxyspergualin already has been used successfully for a small number of kidney 
transplants in Japan and kidney and pancreas transplants in Europe. Corry is 
head of a group of U.S. investigators who plan to begin testing the drug in 
humans this summer. The test group will consist of patients receiving a second 
kidney. 
"We'll be dealing with a population for which there is a 60% success rate 
rather than 90%" as is the case with first kidney transplants, he said. "If we 
have a success there, it will be more clear-cut than it would be with patients 
who are already doing pretty well." 
The other drug that is attracting interest is not new, but it is one that was 
largely discredited 25 years ago. Thalidomide was developed as a tranquilizer 
and a sleeping aid, but those uses were abandoned after it caused unusually 
severe limb deformities in almost 12,000 European children whose mothers took 
the drug while they were pregnant; the drug was never approved for use in the 
United States. 
Now, researchers at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore are 
finding that it is useful in treating recipients of bone marrow transplants, 
which are used for the treatment of certain types of cancer, such as chronic 
myelogenous leukemia. 
These transplants are unusual because the transplanted organ -- bone marrow -- 
is the source of lymphocytes and thus part of the immune system. When the 
transplant goes bad, the body does not reject the transplant: The transplanted 
organ rejects the body. This graft-versus-host disease, which affects nearly 
half of the 2,000 cancer patients receiving bone marrow transplants each year, 
causes severe damage to the recipient's tissues, even death. 
Thalidomide, said oncologist Georgia B. Vogelsang of Hopkins, is the only drug 
that has been shown to reverse graft-versus-host disease in animals once it has 
started. 
Vogelsang and her colleagues have treated about 100 patients with thalidomide, 
and were successful in reversing graft-versus-host disease in about 60 of them. 
In half the other cases, she noted, the drug was not absorbed by the patient's 
body and thus never had a chance to function. 
The only significant side effects she has observed, Vogelsang said, are 
sleepiness and mild constipation. Birth defects are not a problem because the 
radiation used to destroy a patient's own bone marrow before the transplant 
sterilizes the recipient. 
Researchers still do not know completely what to expect with all these new 
drugs. "We're still in our infancy with all these things," Corry said. But they 
all hold out high hope for the future. 
"Our main message to people who will need transplants is to have hope and 
patience because there are some nice therapeutics out there," Morris said. 
"There really is a light at the end of the tunnel." 
