SCHOOL DISTRICTS NOT LIABLE FOR CAMPUS VIOLENCE, COURT SAYS 
School districts may not be held liable for campus violence under a 1982 
anti-crime initiative, nor do they have a special duty under the measure to 
make schools safe, a state Court of Appeal ruled Wednesday. 
The three-judge panel unanimously overturned a decision by an Alameda County 
trial judge -- the first of its kind in California -- that would have allowed 
parents to seek monetary damages against districts for failing to protect their 
children from harm. 
The appellate panel found that the "safe schools" provision of Proposition 8, 
the "victims' bill of rights," provides only a "general" constitutional right 
to campus security and that any steps to enforce such a right must be 
implemented by state legislators. 
"There is nothing in the (measure) to suggest that it was intended to create a 
civil action for damages or an affirmative duty to ensure that schools are free 
from all risk of crime and violence," Appellate Justice Clinton W. White wrote 
for the court. 
"The right proclaimed . . . although inalienable and mandatory, simply 
establishes the parameters of the principle enunciated; the specific means by 
which it is to be achieved for the people of California are left to the 
Legislature." 
Widely Watched Legal Test 
The panel's 15-page opinion came only a week after arguments in the widely 
watched legal test of a provision of the far-ranging initiative that guarantees 
students and school staff members the right to attend "safe, secure and 
peaceful" schools. 
John P. MacMeeken of San Francisco, attorney for an Oakland woman suing local 
school authorities under the initiative, said he planned to appeal the decision 
to the state Supreme Court. 
"I think the ruling is contrary to the law and does a disservice to the 
children of Oakland and all the children of the state," MacMeeken said. "I'd be 
very disappointed if the Supreme Court doesn't review this case. I don't know 
anyone who's not fed up with violence in our schools." 
Joseph Remcho of San Francisco, attorney for the defendant Oakland Unified 
School District, welcomed the ruling, saying that it correctly affirms that 
"school officials should be making decisions about school safety and how scarce 
dollars are spent, rather than judges imposing their own views of safety." 
The decision came in a suit brought in 1984 by Constance M. Hosemann of Oakland 
and her son Stephen R. Hosemann charging that school officials had failed to 
adequately protect the boy from being beaten, robbed and harassed by an older 
youth over a period of several years. In 1986, Alameda Superior Court Judge 
Richard Bartalini ruled that parents may sue school districts for damages under 
the initiative for failing to protect students from violence. Bartalini also 
ordered local officials to adopt a new security plan to combat crime on campus. 
A group of 40 local school districts, including the Los Angeles Unified School 
District, and state Schools Supt. Bill Honig backed Oakland officials in urging 
the panel to overturn Bartalini's decision. They warned that the ruling, if 
upheld, could force districts to take funds away from educational programs and 
spend them instead on security plans, insurance and legal fees. 
Several law enforcement groups, education authorities and public officials 
joined the Hosemanns in arguing that the initiative's safe-schools provision in 
itself provided the legal tools to achieve its goal. No further legislation was 
needed to establish a district's potential liability for unsafe campuses or to 
allow judges to order new campus security programs, they said. 
Must Comply 
In Wednesday's ruling, White, joined by Appellate Justices Betty Barry-Deal and 
Gary E. Strankman, agreed that all governmental agencies must comply with the 
initiative and are prohibited from "taking official actions which violate it or 
contravene its provisions." 
But the safe-schools declaration "merely indicates principles, without laying 
down rules" to implement those principles, White said. 
The justice cited a ruling last year in another case by a state Court of Appeal 
in Sacramento that also found the initiative could not be used as the basis for 
a damage suit against school districts. 
"We agree . . . that the (initiative) declares a general right without 
specifying any rules for its enforcement," White said. "It imposes no express 
duty on anyone to make schools safe. It is wholly devoid of guidelines, 
mechanisms or procedures from which a damages remedy could be inferred." 
