400 ARRESTED AS CHINA GEARS UP TO CHOKE OFF DISSENT 
As China's sophisticated apparatus of repression geared up to reassert strict 
political controls, state-run television announced Saturday the arrests in 
Beijing of more than 400 people. 
Additional arrests were made elsewhere of protesters who fled the capital after 
last weekend's martial-law crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators, according 
to the television report. These came in surrounding Hebei province, the cities 
of Tianjin, Shanghai, Wuhan, and other locations, it said. 
Those arrested were accused of burning military vehicles, destroying other 
government property, beating soldiers, stealing weapons, attacking government 
agencies or spreading rumors. 
Also on Saturday, China carried out its first expulsion of a foreign journalist 
since the current crisis began, and authorities launched a harsh verbal attack 
on the Voice of America, a key source of information about events here for many 
Chinese listeners. 
Propaganda Barrage 
In a heavy propaganda barrage that began several days ago, the official media 
outlets are portraying last weekend's bloody crackdown, which ended seven weeks 
of escalating pro-democracy protests, as a response to violent 
"counterrevolutionary" rioting. 
This reverses the actual order of events. The weeks of pro-democracy 
demonstrations, which began in mid-April, were nonviolent and usually festive. 
The rioting, which involved heavy destruction of military vehicles and the 
killing of some soldiers, came as a response to the deaths of hundreds or 
perhaps thousands of unarmed people in Beijing as martial-law troops, using 
automatic weapons and tanks, moved into the city a week ago Saturday night and 
the next morning to clear protesters from Tian An Men Square. 
Most deaths were of Beijing citizens who poured into the streets to try to 
block the military assault on the square. A large majority of the several 
thousand students who remained in the center of the square through the pre-dawn 
hours Sunday -- and perhaps nearly all of them -- were allowed to leave shortly 
before dawn. They left the southern side of the square and dispersed through 
the city. 
Foreign correspondents in Beijing generally remain uncertain about what 
happened in the northern part of the huge square during the final half-hour 
before dawn, as it appears that no foreigner was able to fully witness events 
in the area during that critical period. Chinese who claim to be eyewitnesses 
give conflicting reports about what happened. 
What is absolutely clear is that hundreds of unarmed citizens were killed on 
the western side of the city as advancing troops fought their way through 
crowds, and that at least several dozen people were shot and killed on Changan 
Avenue, at the north side of the square, during the early morning hours Sunday 
before the protesters at the center of the square were forced south. 
The Chinese Red Cross initially reported that night's death toll as 2,600, and 
estimates widely circulated within the diplomatic community put the figure at 
3,000 or more. The Chinese government, however, now insists that only about 300 
people died and that the majority were soldiers. 
It appears that proof of the true figures will never be obtained. Bodies have 
already been cremated, and for Chinese to claim that the government figures are 
wrong is now the martial-law crime of "spreading rumors." 
Many of the destroyed military vehicles, including armored personnel carriers, 
were abandoned during the day Sunday by troops presumed at the time to be 
unwilling to kill unarmed citizens. It now appears that the vehicles may have 
been ordered abandoned for the purpose of obtaining dramatic videotapes of 
destruction by supposed counterrevolutionaries. These videotapes are now being 
repeatedly shown on state-run television. 
Propaganda Barrage 
In Beijing, it appears that few people believe the government line. But the 
current propaganda barrage may have a strong influence on people in outlying 
provinces. Even for those who know the government reports are false, it has 
become dangerous to publicly deny them. There are also severe, but somewhat 
ambiguous, restrictions on foreign reporting on events in Beijing. 
Some journalists were shot or beaten while covering the army's move into Tian 
An Men Square last weekend, but none were killed or critically injured. In 
recent days, authorities have issued vague warnings to foreigners that appear 
aimed in part at chilling news coverage of the current wave of arrests. Some 
correspondents have been issued specific warnings that they have violated 
martial-law rules. But there has not been any concerted effort to impose a 
genuine news blackout on the Chinese capital. 
On Saturday, Peter Newport, a journalist with London-based Independent 
Television News, was ordered out of China after trying to cover a student 
protest in Shanghai, according to reports from that coastal city. 
An ITN spokesman in London told Reuters news agency that police destroyed 
Newport's videocassettes and gave him 24 hours to leave China. He later arrived 
in Hong Kong, the agency said. 
Tourist Visa 
It appeared that the pretext on which Newport was expelled was that he was 
working on a tourist visa, according to reports from Shanghai. 
The government also issued harsh criticism Saturday of the Voice of America, 
which beams English- and Chinese-language broadcasts to China. A letter said to 
have been written by an unidentified teacher accused the radio station of false 
reporting. 
"The teacher described the report by Voice of America as irresponsible, saying 
that it aimed at instigating hatred and resistance," the official New China 
News Agency said in a report. The letter was also published in the official 
People's Daily newspaper and broadcast on state-run radio. 
One of the martial-law press restrictions is that "Chinese or foreign 
journalists are strictly forbidden to utilize press coverage to make 
instigating and inciting propaganda." The wording of the letter thus appeared 
aimed at preparing the groundwork for some sort of action against Voice of 
America. 
Another VOA attack came during the evening television news. A man identified as 
a "rumormonger" was shown telling a foreign reporter and a small crowd of 
listeners that martial-law troops had crushed and beaten people to death. He 
first claimed to be an eyewitness, but then changed his story to say that he 
had heard it on Voice of America. The scene concludes with the narrator 
declaring: "We hope the people will turn in rumormongers like him." 
The television news announcement on the arrests in Beijing reported that among 
those detained was student leader Guo Haifeng. According to the report, he was 
arrested at Tian An Men Square when he was about to use a gasoline-filled 
bottle to try to set fire to an armored car. 
Vigilant Residents 
News announcers said that some student leaders had given themselves up or had 
been turned in by vigilant residents of Beijing who answered a request to phone 
in the whereabouts of "inciters of the counterrevolutionary rebellion." 
The broadcast showed some of the detainees being led at gunpoint by a phalanx 
of police into interrogation cells. Their heads were forced down by guards in a 
ritual display of submission. 
One by one, they sat forlornly in a corner, evidently giving self-incriminating 
evidence to a pair of note takers. Then they were handcuffed and led away. 
The media have identified most of those arrested simply as "ruffians" and 
lawbreakers, and it is not clear how many are students. But it appears that 
many, if not most, of those arrested so far are not students. 
The arrests were viewed by foreign observers as a sign that government power 
had been consolidated, at least for the moment. The night before, senior leader 
Deng Xiaoping appeared on television in the company of hard-line conservative 
leaders and a flock of army generals. Saturday's edition of the People's Daily, 
the official Communist Party newspaper, and every other paper in the city 
published a front-page picture of Deng alone shaking hands with army officers. 
"The message seemed to be that this is the man who controls the guns," said a 
Western diplomat, referring to the photo. 
Fall From Grace 
Nothing has been heard of reformist leader Zhao Ziyang, who is technically 
still the head of the Communist Party but who fell from grace for sympathizing 
with student demands and opposing the crackdown. 
The bulk of the arrests seemed to be carried out by combined police-army sweeps 
in neighborhoods in Beijing. Soldiers have fanned out to all neighborhoods of 
the city, converting what was once martial law in word only into a very visible 
reality. 
The government has taken pains to get the city back to normal after a week of 
chaos, but most residents remained indoors. Bus service was renewed on a 
limited basis, and many shops and factories remained closed. Most roads were 
cleared of debris left from the popular resistance to the army's move on the 
square. 
Despite the wave of arrests and the more widespread positioning of martial-law 
troops -- who stood 50 feet apart along some stretches of major roads and 
engaged in foot patrols through other areas -- the random shootings of the past 
few days subsided and it seemed reasonably safe Saturday to move through the 
city. 
Tian An Men Square, however, was blocked off except for city bus traffic 
allowed to pass through its northern side along Changan Avenue. 
Pedestrians and bicyclists who passed the southern side of the square gawked at 
10 tanks parked to face them, but they were quickly shooed along by armed 
soldiers if they paused too long. 
Voice of Anguish 
"Why did they have to do this?" one Chinese bicyclist said with anguish in her 
voice as she passed the square. "It was perfectly peaceful on June 3." 
Short convoys of empty troop trucks, usually about five vehicles long, moved 
out of the city Saturday afternoon bearing banners declaring "People's 
Liberation Army rice-for-the-people transport team." By early evening, the same 
or similar trucks, apparently laden with supplies for the troops still 
occupying Tian An Men Square, were parked behind the Great Hall of the People, 
which faces the square. 
Parked in the main part of the square Saturday evening were about 50 tanks and 
about 300 apparently empty troop transport trucks. Soldiers armed with 
automatic rifles stood guard at the four corners of the square, while a few 
tanks and armored personnel carriers were positioned at two locations outside 
but near the square. 
A group of about 90 Americans were bused from the coastal city of Tianjin to 
Beijing in a U.S. Embassy convoy, with the intention that they would 
immediately leave the country from Beijing airport on a special flight. The 
flight was delayed, however, for reasons that were not clear. 
The diplomatic motorcade from Beijing had to leave one American couple behind. 
The two had not completed the final legal formality for adoption of their 
Chinese-born infant, and under U.S. law it was impossible to issue the child a 
visa. 
Another evacuee, Don Wycoff, a 39-year-old research chemist from St. Louis, 
said repression of the student pro-democracy movement would cost China a whole 
generation of future leaders. 
"The Chinese haven't had this kind of repression before," Wycoff said. "Before, 
it was political repression, with mass movements and all that. This time it was 
sheer force by the police and army. It will take 15 years to repair the damage 
-- at least." 
The U.S. Embassy in Beijing organized the motorcade to take the foreigners to 
Beijing, where they could catch flights out of the country, after U.S. business 
people stationed in Tianjin were unable to arrange transportation. John P. 
Cragin, president of Management Technologies International Inc., a 
Tianjin-based consulting firm, said the Americans were refused a special 
flight, and when buses were privately chartered Thursday, police barred the 
drivers from leaving. 
"We felt trapped here," said Cragin, whose home is in Los Angeles. "They 
wouldn't even let us on an empty plane." 
Saturday's television news showed Beijing Mayor Chen Xitong addressing a 
meeting and calling for a moment of silence to honor the soldiers and police 
officers who died during the assault on the square. He also accused those who 
resisted the troops of having engaged in rioting. 
China News Inside 
A TIME TO MOURN -- More than 1,000 people attend memorial service in Los 
Angeles to honor those slain in China's crackdown.: Page 8 
PHONING HOME -- Chinese students in the United States seek to jam Beijing's 
'tipster' hot-lines, thereby taking up the fight.: Page 9 
EYE OF THE STORM -- Much of China has been rocked by unrest, but the southern 
Guangdong province has stayed relatively calm.: Page 9 
CAUGHT IN THE MIDDLE -- The status of Americans employed at Occidental 
Petroleum's coal mine project is suddenly in doubt.: Page 9 
GOING UNDERGROUND -- Amid growing fears, Shanghai students say they will take 
their campaign underground.: Page 9 
RISKY BUSINESS -- The widespread turmoil has created a new dilemma for American 
companies in China.:Business, Page 1 
