NEW MAYAN ALPHABET PROVOKES ANGRY LETTERS 
Almost 1,000 letters and telegrams from people in rural villages, mountains and 
valleys sit on Jose Sanic's desk at the Academy of Mayan Languages in Guatemala 
City. Many warn of serious consequences if a new alphabet for the country's 22 
Mayan languages changes the letters used to represent "w," "q" and "k." Sanic 
smiles wryly and says he is confident that the law will stick and that it is 
the beginning of a resolution to Guatemala's "Indian problem." 
Mayans, who prefer the term indigena (native) to Indian, are the majority of 
Guatemala's 8 million people. No more than 600,000 Mayans can read and write in 
any language at any level. In schools where teachers used Spanish, indigenous 
children were thrown into what Eliu Cifuentes, Guatemala's director of 
bilingual education, calls "a violent encounter with literacy, being taught a 
foreign language by a teacher who doesn't speak their tongue." 
With President Vinicio Cerezo's election in 1985, the government announced a 
radical change in policy. Spanish will remain the official language, but 
Guatemala will have at least 22 protected languages. As a symbol of its 
commitment to Mayan culture, the government published its new constitution in 
the languages of the four largest Mayan groups -- Mam, Kaqchikel, K'iche' and 
Q'eqchi'. 
The bilingual education program, begun as an experiment with funds from the 
United States Agency for International Development, includes 400 schools with 
bilingual classes up to the fourth grade. Cifuentes expects 260,000 students to 
be in the program by 1990. This would represent more than one-third of all 
rural primary school students. 
The prospect of so many new readers and writers inspired activists to push for 
what they hoped would be a truly Mayan alphabet. Previous efforts to teach 
Mayan were hobbled by a variety of alphabets, most invented by Europeans and 
North Americans. Many used symbols not found on a typewriter or in a print 
shop. 
Shortly after the election, Mayans and their friends in Congress created the 
Academy of Mayan Languages within the Ministry of Culture and Sports. The 
academy's first project was to create a unified Mayan alphabet. 
During several meetings organized by the academy, most of the debate focused on 
the letters "w," "k" and "q." In the new alphabet, "w" represents sounds 
previously written with "cua," "gu," "qu" and "v." Sounds previously assigned 
to "q" and "k" in most alphabets were reversed, and the European "qu" has 
disappeared. The Aguacateca are now the Awakateka. The Quiche are now the 
K'iche' (the apostrophe indicates a glottal stop). 
Many find no fault with the new alphabet's method of equating one letter to one 
sound -- a generally accepted principle among linguists concerned about 
teaching. But debate over the new alphabet is only one part linguistic; it's 
also political and economic. 
At the academy, Sanic said, most of the mail on his desk comes from members of 
evangelical Protestant churches, which claim almost 20% of Guatemala's 
population as members. In many communities, evangelicals and their Mayan 
congregations have a large economic and public relations stake in materials 
published using earlier alphabets. 
Some consider the rapid adoption of the new alphabet a violation of human 
rights. A K'iche'-speaking senator, Diego Velasco Brito, lodged a formal 
complaint with Guatemala's attorney general for human rights. Abraham Garcia 
responded for the Assn. of Mayan Writers of Guatemala, a 10-year-old indigenous 
group that includes many teachers. He said the association had already begun to 
publish and teach the new alphabet. Its quarterly bulletin also uses the 
alphabet and, "to date, it has had a wonderful reception by readers," he said. 
While a few proponents of the new alphabet worry about the evangelical 
preachers, they are disturbed by what they feel is professional opposition from 
the best-known organization of linguists, one that has translated most of the 
Christian materials used in evangelical churches as well as religious and 
secular material sold in the Mayan writers association's small bookstore. 
Linguists from the Summer Institute of Linguistics have done by far the largest 
amount of scholarly work on Mayan languages. Most of the dictionaries, school 
texts and books of Mayan stories published in indigenous languages bear the 
institute's imprint. 
Mayan activists say it is more important to seize the political opportunities 
than to worry about what they consider nit-picking. Virgilio Ajenal, director 
of the Assn. of Mayan Writers, contended: "The fight is mainly among 
intellectuals. . . . Ninety-nine and nine-tenths of all indigenous people are 
still illiterate, so they will not have to learn anything over." 
He said Mayans have listened to outsiders too long. "We don't want outsiders to 
think, to decide and to act for us." As for the value of the material already 
printed, most of it religious, he said: "The people in the countryside cannot 
eat those things." It is time to write practical, how-to-do-it things about 
agriculture and health, he said. 
Stephen Elliot, director of the Center for Mesoamerican Investigations in 
Antigua, said the need to get on with the new alphabet is exemplified by three 
proposals he received during a week in May. Each asked for help in publishing a 
dictionary of Kaqchikel, each in its own alphabet. "If the energy invested in 
opposing the alphabet were invested in promoting the transition, it would be 
over with," Elliot said. He sums up the debate saying, "It's a matter of what's 
important to us -- the past or the future." 
Cifuentes said the country is "trying to find a new national identity." The new 
alphabet is an important part of the process. "We are beginning to end the 
colonization of the language that began 400 years ago," he said. 
