DRUG SALE PRACTICES; 
IS MEDICINE INFECTED BY MARKETING? 
Few of the millions of Americans who make the U.S. the largest consumer of 
prescription drugs in the world have heard of people like Shellie Rothstein. 
Rothstein, a pharmaceutical sales representative whose well-traveled turf is 
doctor-dense Beverly Hills, is a foot soldier in a highly competitive drug 
industry army dedicated to shaping physicians' decisions about drugs. 
The industry's weaponry is a mix of pedagogy and propaganda -- scientific 
papers, symposiums, research grants, stethoscopes, free samples, frequent-flier 
miles, resort weekends, lavish dinners, $500 honorariums and innumerable 
logo-imprinted pads and pens. 
Pharmaceutical marketing permeates American medicine to a degree few consumers 
understand. It plays a powerful and controversial role in the complex process 
by which prescription drugs travel from the laboratory to the patient's bedside 
table. 
Stakes Are Higher 
The techniques are not unlike those used by other businesses. They help sell 
everything from breakfast cereal to cars. The difference here is that the 
stakes are far higher and the choice of which drugs patients will take is made 
by a middleman -- the physician. 
For many doctors, drug industry marketing is their prime source of information 
about drugs, according to numerous studies. Some medical policy researchers 
believe that its influence eclipses that of professional societies, scientific 
journals and medical school education. 
As some physicians and drug industry experts see it, industry marketing is 
indispensable in keeping doctors up to date in a rapidly evolving field. With 
well over 8,000 prescription drugs on the market, they say the industry is 
essential to ensuring that drugs are properly used. 
But critics, including professors of medicine, hospital pharmacists and some 
consumer advocates, see a more insidious influence. They say the industry 
cultivates a taste for more drugs, the latest drugs, the most expensive drugs. 
The price of the industry's largess, they say, is paid by patients in the 
spiraling costs of prescription drugs. 
"It has become a much more flagrant problem" in the last 20 years, said Dr. 
Roger Rosenblatt, a professor of family medicine at the University of 
Washington School of Medicine. "It infects medicine in a very deep way and 
there's much less public debate about it. 
"There's almost a conspiracy of silence in medicine that we will not discuss 
this hidden subsidy, this kind of hidden transfer from patients to 
pharmaceutical companies to doctors that occurs on a day-to-day basis," 
Rosenblatt asserted. 
A few recent examples: 
* Ayerst Laboratories offered physicians a round-trip ticket to any city served 
by American Airlines if they would prescribe the company's hypertension drug 
Inderal LA to 50 patients and send in details on specially provided, 
personalized prescription pads. 
* Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme invited health care managers and their spouses to an 
expenses-paid weekend at the Newporter Resort Hotel in Newport Beach. The 
subject of the symposium, managing patients with high cholesterol, was 
discussed for less than four hours. 
* Pfizer Laboratories picked up the tab for a weekend symposium at the Sheraton 
Scottsdale Resort in Arizona on the subject of "Cost Containment and Arthritis 
Therapy." Spouses or guests also received free accommodations -- but had to pay 
their own air fare. 
* The Veterans Administration this year disciplined 32 employees for accepting 
honorariums and "gratuities" from drug firms seeking to sell drugs to the VA. 
According to records obtained through the Freedom of Information Act, one 
physician had accepted nearly $50,000 from a single firm. 
* Ortho Pharmaceutical invited physicians to participate in a drawing for a 
personalized Cross pen and pencil. In return, the doctors were to prescribe 
Ortho's birth-control pills and write on the order "Do not substitute" to 
prevent replacement with a cheaper equivalent. 
* Jelly beans, grooming sets, opportunities to be photographed with Captain 
America, umbrellas, playing cards and cappuccino were among the gimmicks used 
to attract doctors to sales booths at the recent convention of the American 
Academy of Family Physicians. 
Doctors at the meeting waited in line for up to an hour to have models shine 
their shoes. 
The U.S. market for prescription drugs is the world's largest, valued at $30 
billion. Drugstores dispensed 1.61 billion prescriptions in 1987. By some 
estimates, two out of every three times an American visits a doctor, a drug is 
prescribed. 
The industry that feeds that demand is highly competitive. No single 
pharmaceutical firm dominates the field. The four largest account for just 25% 
of industry sales, and no major company holds more than a 7% share of the 
market. 
'Me-Too' Drugs 
Every year, the industry brings several dozen new drugs to market. All but a 
handful are so-called "me-too" drugs. That is, they represent little or no 
advance over what is already available, in regulators' opinions. But they 
present a marketing challenge. 
There are at least 22 different penicillins available in the U.S. There are 
seven different beta blockers, for heart conditions, and 15 versions of the 
antibiotic cephalosporin. A new chemical entity is approved for human use on an 
average of every two to three weeks. 
But prescription drugs cannot be peddled like other products. Federal 
regulations prohibit advertising them directly to consumers. Instead, firms 
must target their promotions to doctors, who make choices on behalf of 
consumers, who in turn pay the price. 
The proliferation of new drugs is a challenge to physicians as well as 
salesmen. About 70% of all drugs on the market were not around 15 years ago. 
Doctors find themselves forced to choose among products that did not exist when 
they were being trained. 
That rapid evolution intensifies the need for continuing medical education. The 
pharmaceutical industry, in cooperation with universities and professional 
groups, has stepped in with an abundance of symposiums and seminars to help 
fill that need. 
"I think that's a socially responsible role for us to take," said Grant 
Denison, president of U.S. operations for G. D. Searle &amp; Co. "Science has 
become so complex, the number of products so vast. Physicians have a crying 
need to keep up." 
Others, however, doubt that the influence is entirely benign. 
Result of System 
"The education of American physicians about drugs . . . has (been) relegated to 
drug companies by default," charged Dr. Jerry Avorn, an associate professor at 
Harvard Medical School who has studied the influence of pharmaceutical 
marketing. "As a result, pharmacological solutions are thought of first, rather 
than nonpharmacological approaches that could be just as effective and safer." 
The cornerstone of the marketing and promotion process is so-called detailing, 
a practice one physician likened to lobbying: In face-to-face encounters with 
physicians and pharmacists in offices and hospital corridors, sales reps sing 
the virtues of their products. 
As the industry and many doctors tell it, the aim is educational -- to supply 
practitioners with information about new drugs and refresh their memories about 
old ones. Sales people work closely with the profession to ensure optimal use 
of drugs, industry officials say. 
But as critics tell it, the aim is propaganda -- to bombard doctors with often 
selectively compiled data, reinforcing the message through relentless repeat 
visits and ubiquitous "reminder items" such as pens, coffee cups and lunch. 
Detailing, which is almost entirely unregulated, is widely believed to be the 
most effective of all industry strategies. 
"A lot of the company hinges on that sales representative," said Jim Shamp, 
manager of media relations for Glaxo Inc., the nation's third-largest drug 
company in prescription drug sales. "That's where the rubber hits the road." 
Shellie Rothstein is Glaxo's top representative in the Western region, a 
33-year-old pharmacist who left a job with the drug information service at the 
University of Chicago for what she calls "real-world medicine." She is one of 
1,600 Glaxo representatives nationwide; the company hopes to increase that 
number to 2,000 by the year 1993. 
Rothstein's territory includes 500 physicians and pharmacists, to whom she 
promotes four Glaxo products. Her success or failure is reflected in her annual 
earnings -- a salary plus a commission based on sales in the ZIP codes she 
traverses. 
On a recent morning, her itinerary began with a visit to a gastroenterologist 
at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. He had recently returned from speaking at a 
medical conference, with Glaxo's help. Glaxo had covered the costs of his air 
fare, hotel and honorarium. 
Later came an infectious-disease specialist who lectures on antibiotics, 
including Glaxo's, at local hospitals, sometimes with a Glaxo honorarium. 
Rothstein also stopped in at three pharmacies, two hospitals and the office of 
a Beverly Hills internist. 
Along the way, she dispensed information and a few freebies -- Glaxo pens, 
pads, note-pad holders, pill-counting trays, pamphlets and books. In each 
doctor's office, she checked the free-sample cabinet and replenished the supply 
of Glaxo drugs at the physician's request. 
All her clients described Rothstein and Glaxo as highly ethical. They described 
their dealings with the company as mutually beneficial. One crusty pharmacist, 
however, described detailing with some ambivalence, saying it was useful but he 
disliked the "gimmicks." 
"This is what we call brainwashing . . . to remember the drug," cracked Max 
Stollman, who runs the Family Pharmacy on the fringe of Beverly Hills. He was 
pondering a black Glaxo pill-counting tray and two Glaxo pens and scratch pads 
he had just received. 
Rothstein looked incredulous. 
"Do you really believe that, Max?" she asked. 
"Oh yeah, sure. Getting the name across is the name of the game." 
Why didn't he reject the offer? a reporter asked Stollman. 
"I really didn't want to refuse it," he said. "That's rude." 
Drug companies' generosity extends far beyond counting trays. 
Sales representatives buy lunches for a physicians' office staff -- to "make 
their day a little nicer," as Rothstein put it. Some cater lunches to coincide 
with meetings of entire medical center departments, or sponsor lunches with 
speakers. 
Firms invite physicians to dinner at well-known hotels and restaurants, serving 
up a free meal and a speaker on a topic of interest. In addition to picking up 
the tab, firms often reimburse the dining doctors "for their time." 
Dr. Calvin Kunin, a professor at Ohio State University, said he recently turned 
down a drug company representative's invitation to attend a dinner at a hotel 
in downtown Columbus, listen to an after-dinner talk and receive $100 for his 
efforts. 
Large Grants 
Drug companies also give large grants to physicians working in academic medical 
centers to study the companies' products. In some cases, they pay the 
researchers by the patient -- up to several thousand dollars per patient 
enrolled, some researchers say. 
Supporters of the practice say it is reasonable: Who better to study a new drug 
objectively than academic researchers? But some critics suspect that firms use 
some grants to win coveted spots on the hospital's formulary, the list of drugs 
approved for regular use. 
Many large companies sponsor symposiums at resort cities. The topic is less 
likely to be the company's product than some condition it treats. The firms 
foot the bill for not only the speakers but often for the carefully selected 
"thought leaders" flown in to attend. 
Dr. Stephen Goldfinger recalls an invitation sent several years ago to 
directors of gastroenterology training programs; each was invited to designate 
one young trainee to a two-day symposium in Florida, all expenses paid by the 
sponsoring drug company. 
Goldfinger, associate dean for continuing education and associate professor of 
medicine at Harvard Medical School, calls such arrangements "manipulative 
pedagogy." 
"No person attending such a conference should have any doubt about either the 
fundamental motives of its sponsor or the high quality of the market research 
that determines how doctors can be influenced," he wrote in The New England 
Journal of Medicine. 
"The assumption that one can accept the blandishments without any risk of being 
compromised is incredibly naive, but even if it were true, would that make it 
right?" Goldfinger asked. "Indeed, isn't it a bit sleazy to take the corsage 
without at least yielding its sender a place on one's dance card?" 
Attitudes toward pharmaceutical promotions vary widely. 
Most physicians accept and welcome the activities, according to both the 
industry and research on the subject. Those physicians say the information and 
funding helps them and their patients. They say they are capable of judging 
critically anything the industry offers. 
One physician, responding to Goldfinger, charged in a letter that Goldfinger's 
criticisms in the journal article "smacked of holier-than-thou moralism that 
harks back to a bygone era." The industry is not the Evil Empire, the doctor 
argued; it is an equal partner. 
"I see absolutely nothing wrong with providing a physician medical-education 
events. They are busy people," said Denison of G. D. Searle &amp; Co. "I think 
that's a very, very appropriate role for us to take as a pharmaceutical 
company." 
"Good will is certainly a part of it, with no apologies," said Shamp of Glaxo. 
"But it's a whole lot more complex than giving someone a cigar or buying favor 
with a pen. You're selling to a highly ethical, highly skeptical middle-person 
who would not ever be swayed." 
Others, however, find the practices distasteful. Kunin, of the University of 
Ohio, has a policy of seeing no sales representatives. He calls paid dinners 
"payola." He says he keeps himself up to date by reading the medical journals 
and attending scientific meetings. 
"A physician is responsible to keep up and should devote the time to that," 
said Kunin, who has examined the relationship between researchers and the 
pharmaceutical industry. "That's what they went to medical school for and this 
is a service profession." 
There appears to be little doubt that drug promotion is highly effective. 
In one study on the subject, Avorn of Harvard Medical School examined 
physicians' perceptions of two heavily advertised prescription drugs. Both 
drugs had been shown in scientific studies to differ little from the 
non-prescription versions. 
According to Avorn's published report, he found that the perceptions of many of 
the physicians were shaped by advertising rather than scientific literature. 
Yet they were unaware, or unwilling to admit, that they had been influenced by 
non-scientific sources. 
The danger, Avorn and others argue, is "irrational prescribing" -- the use of 
inappropriate drugs or inappropriate doses. Such practices may contribute to 
what some researchers believe, and some studies suggest, is a significant 
problem of physician-induced illness. 
Physicians are prescribing sleeping pills for problems that could be cured 
through diet and life style, Avorn contends. Expensive new anti-depressants and 
drugs for hypertension and cholesterol are being used where older drugs, or no 
drug, would suffice, he says. 
Resistant Strains 
Excessive use of antibiotics to treat trivial infections is contributing to 
resistant strains of micro-organisms, Kunin argues. Money is being spent on 
developing, and purchasing, new generations of antibiotics to fight new 
resistant strains. 
Nevertheless, pharmaceutical detailing is almost entirely unregulated. 
The Food and Drug Administration has no authority over the practice, according 
to Kenneth Feather, acting director of the division of drug advertising and 
labeling. In his 17 years with the office, Feather can recall no action ever 
taken against detailing. 
A few institutions and individuals have begun exploring ways of controlling the 
influence of pharmaceutical promotions -- without, some of them say, 
excessively restricting an industry that has made many important contributions 
to medical care. 
Unbiased Information 
One approach entails a practice sometimes called "public interest detailing" or 
"counter-detailing." Pharmacists or other health professionals use the 
techniques of the drug companies to promulgate what they contend is unbiased 
drug information. 
In a pilot program, Avorn and other researchers found that public-interest 
detailing accomplished a 14% reduction in prescribing of the drugs being 
studied. An expanded program could save government health insurance programs 
millions of dollars, Avorn estimates. 
Kaiser Permanente, with 2 million members in Southern California, has quietly 
implemented a program in which pharmacists and physicians work together to 
evaluate drugs, taking into account both their therapeutic benefits and their 
cost-effectiveness. 
At the University of Connecticut, a new seminar series for doctors in training 
examines pharmaceutical marketing in hopes of turning out new physicians 
capable of critically evaluating information provided by drug companies. 
In England, the Royal College of Physicians has suggested that gifts be 
accepted only if they will not impair judgment. The size of any gift should be 
such that the physician would be willing to have the arrangement known 
publicly. 
A few skeptics, however, wonder whether moderation is possible. 
"Perhaps some middle ground can be found that will resolve the ethical morass 
in which we find ourselves," Rosenblatt wrote recently. "However, I suspect 
that as in many types of addictive behavior, only one therapy will ultimately 
be effective -- abstinence." 
