CONGRESS FIGHT SEEN AS PRESIDENT VETOES PARENTAL LEAVE BILL 
President Bush today vetoed a bill that would guarantee workers as much as 12 
weeks unpaid leave for childbirth, adoption or family illness. 
"I strongly object . . . to the federal government mandating leave policies for 
America's employers and work force," Bush said, setting the stage for a major 
confrontation with Congress. 
In a written statement before leaving for a vacation, Bush said parental leave 
is an important benefit for employers to offer workers. However, he said, "we 
must insure that federal policies do not stifle the creation of new jobs, nor 
result in the elimination of existing jobs." 
The issue of parental leave is a politically charged one. The Republican 
sponsor of the bill that Bush vetoed, Rep. Marge Roukema of New Jersey, has 
said it is a "bedrock family issue" that could backfire on Republicans. 
In vetoing the bill, Bush said America faces its stiffest economic competition 
ever. 
"If our nation's employers are to succeed in an increasingly complex and 
competitive global marketplace, they must have the flexibility to meet both 
this challenge and the needs of their employees," he said. 
Judith Lichtman, president of the Women's Legal Defense Fund and head of a 
coalition of groups that lobbied for the bill, said: "I'm stunned by the 
cynicism that this veto reveals. President Bush doesn't care about American 
families. He really only cares about big business." 
It was Bush's 13th veto. To date, Congress has not been able to muster enough 
votes to override him. 
The bill passed comfortably in the House, although the margin fell 46 votes 
short of the two-thirds majority that would be needed to override a veto. 
Senate passage came without a recorded vote. Sponsor Christopher J. Dodd 
(D-Conn.) said he was "within two or three votes" of a two-thirds majority. 
The new legislation would require business and government employers to provide 
workers with up to 12 weeks of unpaid medical leave or with leave so they could 
care for a newly born or adopted child or an ill child, parent or spouse. 
Employers would have to continue health coverage and then restore a returning 
employee to his or her previous job or an equivalent position. 
Lichtman said Bush seemed to support such family leave provisions during his 
presidential campaign. 
"I held out hope he meant what he said in the campaign and he really did want 
to do something," she said. 
