'IDEALISTIC' THOUGHTS ON EXECUTIVES' PAY 
I enjoyed your Disney article ("Delayed Ride at Disneyland Has Been Making 
Quite a Splash," April 30). Your timing along with the May 1 issue of 
Businessweek is interesting, and I wonder if it caused any questioning in your 
mind as it did mine. 
Let me explain. 
I had read the Businessweek issue and was somewhat appalled at the salaries 
that made up the cover story for "Executive Pay." No. 1 happens to be Michael 
Eisner of Disney, ultimately responsible for the layoffs of personnel because 
of "off-the-shelf" thinking and consequently the delay and cost overruns for 
Splash Mountain. But because of his "revising Disney's dismal fortunes," he is 
rewarded with $40.1 million, and the cost of Cash Mountain goes from $20-25 
million to $70 million. I wish I could be so rewarded. Better yet, I wish that 
the previous employees could have been kept, utilized and paid decent wages 
instead of let go. After all, at $40-plus million, you could have retained 200 
people at $50,000 per year for four years. Plus the possibility exists that the 
terminated specialists could have kept the Splash Mountain's original 
construction and cost schedules, which means an additional $45-50 million. 
Oh, well, you can tell that I do not possess an MBA. But in this day of 
individuals "earning" more than some developing countries, I wonder. Would 
America's economy be more competitive if the business managers (who should be 
leaders) were to accept a fair wage? They would not have to be asked to bite 
the bullet like those who have taken pay cuts for a better America, or those on 
minimum wage. Just accept a fair wage and allow the remaining monies to be 
reinvested, let's say, for sorely needed American R&amp;D. 
Naw. Too silly. Too idealistic. Too simplistic for such a complex situation. Or 
is it? 
I am not a socialist. I am a proud American capitalist who thinks that America 
needs some basic value changes to better compete in the world market, and I 
think that executive America can also contribute to this effort. 
EDWARD J. CROGAN 
Glendale, Ariz. 
