VIOLENCE ERUPTS AT RALLY MARKING CHINA CRACKDOWN 
Hundreds of students at Beijing University staged a bold anti-government 
protest early today, the anniversary of last year's bloody crackdown on 
pro-democracy demonstrations. 
Shortly after midnight, the crowd of students marched through the campus 
shouting anti-government slogans despite the pleas of a Communist Party 
official to return to their dormitories, witnesses said. About 200 of the 
students then gathered to listen to speeches calling for democratic reforms and 
better treatment of intellectuals. 
Paramilitary police sealed entry into the suburban campus district shortly 
after the demonstrations began. 
But some foreign journalists were already gathered on a public street running 
outside one edge of campus, where graduate students had thrown bottles and 
rocks from windows late Sunday evening. Some were thrown at police, who 
initially left the area. 
By 1 a.m. today, only about eight foreigners remained at this spot, which by 
then was quiet. Then four or five paramilitary police vehicles arrived. Police 
jumped out and ordered those present to leave. As the foreigners moved quickly 
toward their cars, two were assaulted. Helmeted men carrying semiautomatic 
weapons and pistols beat this reporter's wife, who is Japanese. She sustained a 
severe bruise topped by a four-inch-long red welt on her back. This reporter 
was also knocked to the ground but was not injured. 
Earlier in the day, at the edge of Tian An Men Square, Richard Ellis, a 
photographer for the British news agency Reuters, was assaulted by plainclothes 
officers when he attempted to photograph police harassing a CBS cameraman. 
Ellis was pushed to the ground and kicked in the head, suffering a bruise, and 
a man smashed his camera on the concrete, Reuters reported. The CBS cameraman, 
Bradley Simpson, was not beaten, Reuters reported. 
The Beijing University protest came exactly one year after army troops shot 
their way into central Beijing to suppress pro-democracy demonstrations, 
killing hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people in crowds that sought to block 
their path. 
Sunday night's demonstration began about 10:30 p.m., when students in an 
undergraduate dormitory began setting off firecrackers and throwing beer 
bottles out of windows. 
Breaking bottles in public is a brazen act of political protest in China, 
because the Chinese word for "small bottle" -- xiaoping -- sounds like the 
given name of senior leader Deng Xiaoping. During last year's demonstrations, 
protesters sometimes broke bottles to show their dissatisfaction with Deng. 
The bottle-throwing then was taken up by many people in the graduate student 
dormitories near the edge of campus. Some students also began singing 
"Internationale." This socialist anthem, learned by all Chinese as 
schoolchildren, calls on slaves to rise up against their oppressors. Students 
last year, without changing any words, turned it against their rulers as an 
anthem of the protest movement. 
Around midnight, Lin Yanzhi, head of the university's Communist Party 
organization, was booed by students when he urged them to return to their 
rooms. 
Hundreds of students then marched around campus, shouting slogans against the 
government, including calls for Premier Li Peng to step down. Li and Deng are 
the two leaders most widely blamed for ordering army troops to shoot their way 
into Beijing last year. 
"Go ahead and shoot us," some students shouted, according to a report by United 
Press International. "Rise up. Rise up. Beijing University, have no fear." 
About 200 students then gathered in an area where anti-government posters were 
put up during last year's demonstrations, and where political rallies were 
sometimes held. One man gave a speech calling for direct election of members of 
China's National People's Congress, or Parliament, which is now selected 
through an indirect process tightly controlled by the Communist Party. 
According to a witness, he also called for factories to be turned over to the 
control of workers, for peasants to have control of their land and for greater 
respect for intellectuals. Two men, apparently plainclothes police officers, 
attempted to grab the man but were initially blocked by students, the witness 
said. They soon made a second attempt and many students stood and crowded 
around, blocking the witness's view. Later, word spread on campus that the man 
had been detained, but this could not be confirmed. 
Security forces briefly detained about a dozen foreign correspondents as they 
left the campus area and forced them to line up against a wall, the Associated 
Press reported. 
"Guns were in our faces," said an American reporter, speaking with AP on 
condition of anonymity. 
ABC News in New York sent a telegram to the Chinese ambassador to the United 
States protesting "the unprovoked physical attack" and detention of the 
network's Beijing bureau chief and a camera operator by university guards. 
A West German reporter in the campus area said police struck her with an 
electric truncheon, a device often called a cattle prod. 
By 2 a.m., nearly all students had returned to their dormitory rooms and the 
campus was quiet. 
Security was tight throughout the city Sunday, with scattered truckloads of 
paramilitary police cruising the streets during the day. By late evening, 
checkpoints were in place at major intersections. 
The main part of Tian An Men Square, center of last year's protests, was closed 
to the public, but pedestrians were allowed to walk along the perimeter of the 
square. 
Here, there were several incidents of individual protest and arrests. 
On Sunday morning, a middle-aged man who appeared to be a worker, approached a 
Canadian Broadcasting Co. television crew in front of the great gate of Tian An 
Men and tried to display a poster that declared: "To all the world's 
journalists, we report that a new philosophy has been invented." 
Within seconds, he was grabbed by uniformed police officers. 
One woman was dragged off after she approached a West German television crew at 
the square. 
In the evening, as lightning bolts lit the Beijing sky, another man stood at 
the edge of the square for about 25 minutes, his hands folded in prayer. 
Finally, plainclothes police grabbed him, United Press International reported. 
"What are you doing?" a paramilitary police officer yelled, while plainclothes 
officers held the man. 
"I'm praying," the man replied in a clear voice, UPI reported. "Can't a man 
pray in peace?" 
The man was questioned, his identity papers were checked, and then he was taken 
away. 
