WILKENING ORDERED TO STAND TRIAL ON 18 COUNTS IN CALL-GIRL CASE 
Karen Wilkening was ordered Friday to stand trial on 18 counts of pimping and 
pandering in connection with a call-girl operation that catered to some 
prominent San Diegans. 
Ten counts of pimping and pandering were dismissed at the conclusion of the 
four-day preliminary hearing by San Diego Municipal Judge Lisa Guy-Schall. The 
dismissed counts include those involving witnesses who failed to show up, 
including two counts involving civil attorney Wesley Harris. 
Harris, 56, was hospitalized early Friday for high blood pressure on the eve of 
his testimony about his contact with Wilkening, 43. Harris failed to show up 
Tuesday or Wednesday in response to a subpoena, and a $5,000 warrant was issued 
for his arrest. He showed up Thursday afternoon with his attorney, Nelson Brav, 
but was not called to testify. 
In the Hospital 
On Friday morning, Brav informed the court that Harris had to be hospitalized 
before the start of proceedings. He said Harris' doctor feared that his client 
might suffer a stroke or a heart attack if required to testify about his 
dealings with Wilkening. 
The claim prompted a dubious Guy-Schall to confer with Harris' doctor, but she 
later declared in court that the sudden illness appeared to be real. 
Before Friday's hearing, Harris wrote a series of rambling letters to the 
district attorney's office, asking that he not be required to testify in 
public, claiming "my reputation will be ruined and my family will be 
embarrassed." Harris also claimed he had information that could embarrass the 
district attorney's office -- information that might affect Dist. Atty. Edwin 
Miller's reelection bid. 
His letter also stated that the list of Wilkening's customers had been 
"sanitized" to omit the names of judges, police officers and members of the 
media, and that the action against Wilkening is designed to embarrass 
attorneys. 
The civil law specialist also wrote a page titled "personal beliefs of Wesley 
Harris," in which he promoted legalized prostitution, claiming that it reduces 
rape. 
Guy-Schall, who commented in court that part of Harris' letter could be 
construed as extortion, scheduled a contempt of court hearing for the attorney 
on Tuesday because of his failure to appear as a witness on Tuesday and 
Wednesday. 
Also testifying Friday was Jeffrey Benter, who said Wilkening arranged for him 
to have sex with women whom he paid $100. 
National City car dealer Tony McCune testified Wednesday that he was a customer 
of the call-girl ring. In addition, a tape played in court identified "I Love 
Lucy" star Desi Arnaz as a Wilkening client. Arnaz died in 1986. 
A trial date will be set at Wilkening's arraignment June 16. 
In another court action, a preliminary hearing on charges that Wilkening 
conspired to obstruct justice is scheduled for Wednesday. The charges stem from 
her flight to the Philippines to avoid prosecution on the pimping and pandering 
charges. 
Her former defense lawyer, Buford Wiley Jr., is also charged with aiding her 
flight before a 1987 preliminary hearing. 
Wilkening is being held in jail on both cases in lieu of $4 million bail. 
