CRAMPED CUDAHY PUTS TEMPORARY HALT ON RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION 
Cudahy city officials are the first to admit that they have done almost nothing 
to prevent their town's fast-growing population from overwhelming city 
services, but last week they took their first stand against uncontrolled 
growth. 
The City Council voted 4 to 1 to impose a temporary moratorium on residential 
construction in most of the city while officials figure out how to handle the 
burgeoning population. Councilman John Robertson voted against the moratorium. 
Councilman Joseph Fregeau said, "Everyone I talk to has said, 'Hey, we have 
enough people in Cudahy. Let's stop and see what we've got and what we're going 
to do.' " 
The county estimates that about 21,000 residents are crammed into the 
square-mile city, making it the third-most-crowded municipality in the county. 
City officials said schools are overcrowded, streets are clogged with traffic, 
water supplies are strained and the sewer system is overtaxed. 
The moratorium "is something that should have been done years ago," Fregeau 
said. "But back when it should have been done, the council had its mind on 
other business." 
The moratorium limits construction of apartments, homes and duplexes in 
multifamily residential areas, which cover about 70% of the city, Fregeau said. 
Cudahy joins a handful of cities in southeastern Los Angeles County that have 
clamped down at least temporarily on building permits in a bid to try to 
control neighborhood development. Maywood, the most crowded city in the county, 
approved building restrictions last year. Whittier and Montebello recently 
passed construction moratoriums. 
The Bell and Norwalk city councils also ordered moratoriums, but those didn't 
stick. Bell's moratorium was in effect for a year before being lifted. Norwalk 
officials on May 1 placed a 45-day moratorium on building in the downtown area, 
where small apartment buildings are replacing aging single-family residences. A 
proposal to extend the moratorium for 10 1/2 months failed. 
A moratorium is initially limited by state law to 45 days. A city council can 
extend a moratorium up to two years, but only with the approval of four-fifths 
of council members. 
During the 45-day moratorium in Cudahy, city staff members will study 
development standards and their effects on growth, Planning Director William 
Davis said. Employees will also begin updating a master plan for developing the 
city. 
Fregeau said the council would like to reduce the number of residential units 
per lot, increase requirements for open space, and enlarge the industrial area. 
Most city officials agree that it is too late to try to reduce the density of 
the town. "The point is not to reduce the density of the town. The point is to 
be wiser planners for the future," Fregeau said. 
BACKGROUND 
Like most cities in southeast Los Angeles County, Cudahy started out as the 
California version of the Midwestern farm town. When it incorporated in 1960, 
fewer than 10,000 people lived within its square-mile boundaries. The 
population increased to 16,000 by 1970, and has been growing steadily since 
then. An estimated 21,000 people now live in the city, making it the 
third-most-crowded municipality in the county, according to county planning 
officials. 
