MISSION OF LOVE; 
DISPLAYS OF RESPECT FOR HER HUSBAND EASE PAIN OF VERA CLEMENTE'S NICARAGUA 
VISIT 
Clemente's flight hasn't made it to Managua this time, either. Vera Clemente's, 
that is. 
But the plane taking her back to Nicaragua for the first time since the death 
of her husband, Roberto Clemente of the Pittsburgh Pirates, on New Year's Eve, 
1972, has not disappeared into the Caribbean, as his did. It simply has not 
gotten off the ground in San Juan. 
Commandante Emmett Lang, Nicaragua's minister of sport, huddles with an 
entourage from the Institute of Sport at Augusto Cesar Sandino International 
Airport. Magdalena Lacayo, 16, daughter of the chief of protocol, stands 
quietly nearby, her bouquet of flowers wilting in the late spring afternoon. 
Lang and the welcoming party retreat to the shade while aides try to track down 
Vera Clemente's flight. Mechanical difficulties have grounded it in Puerto 
Rico. Perhaps, they hope, she will find other connections. 
If not, this Central American nation of 3 million, who have waited for more 
than 16 years to honor the man who died on a mission to help the victims of the 
1972 Managua earthquake, will wait even longer. 
But Vera Clemente, 48, unfazed by a roundabout itinerary that takes her in an 
arc around the Caribbean, does not disappoint. The woman with short black hair 
swept back over an unlined face arrives after dark. 
With a grace that has evolved over a quarter of century as the wife and then 
widow of the Caribbean basin's greatest athlete ever, Vera Clemente faces the 
impending swirl of recognition with composure. 
"I came to Nicaragua with Roberto in November, 1972, when he managed the Puerto 
Rican team in the world amateur baseball championships," Vera says as she walks 
through what once was downtown Managua. 
Despite four batting crowns and 12 Gold Gloves, the Pirate right fielder had 
labored in relative obscurity until dazzling the baseball world during the 1971 
World Series. The next season, he got his 3,000th hit and became a hero across 
the Caribbean basin. 
"We came to Nicaragua and found the people as we had been in Puerto Rico 30 
years ago," Vera says. "Roberto saw himself in the boys in the streets -- 
without shoes, living in a one-room house -- much like it had been when his 
father worked for the sugar mill in Carolina. 
"He changed a twenty-dollar bill into coins each morning and called boys over 
as we walked to ask them about their families. What work did their father do? 
What had they eaten for dinner last night? And then he dug into his pockets for 
them." 
They returned to Puerto Rico on Dec. 8, accompanied by Federico and Marianne 
Lacayo. Marianne, who was from Puerto Rico, was pregnant with Magdalena. 
"We were eating at our house on Dec. 23, when Federico felt a terrible upset in 
his stomach and had to lie down," Vera says. "We soon found out that that was 
when the earthquake hit Managua." 
The upheaval killed 7,000, injured 20,000, and left 200,000 homeless. The 
Clementes spearheaded relief efforts in Puerto Rico. 
Only the Bank of America building, the National Palace, and the 
Intercontinental Hotel survived the tremors. Sixteen years later, central 
Managua remains largely unreconstructed. Families squat in the shells of 
buildings while boys play stickball in the hulking ruins of the national 
cathedral. 
Vera takes it all in as she walks down streets where she once strolled arm in 
arm with Roberto, in what was to be their last time alone together. 
Clemente is quiet as she enters the elevator -- one of only five in the country 
-- of the Intercontinental Hotel, where she and Roberto stayed in 1972. Moments 
later, standing by the window in what was then Howard Hughes' penthouse, she 
stares at Lake Managua and the craggy mountains and volcanoes that surround the 
city. 
When the earthquake hit, Hughes and Gen. Anastasio Somoza, Nicaragua's 
president-dictator, were in this room negotiating the sale of the Corn Islands 
off the Atlantic Coast. 
Soon after the quake, stories of the National Guard pilfering relief supplies 
began to surface and crews on the aid flights the Clementes sent had difficulty 
getting their goods to those in need. 
"Our people here kept asking Roberto to come and straighten things out," 
Clemente says. "He didn't want to come. 'I will work better in Puerto Rico,' he 
said. But our people were having to fight to get the supplies to Masaya, where 
many of the survivors had gone. 
"We almost went together, but we had friends coming and one of us had to stay. 
Then, I almost went instead of him, but he decided to go," Vera says with a 
shake of her head. "Someone asked him to wait until after New Year's Eve so 
that we could be together, but Roberto said, 'Don't worry. For me, every day is 
the same.' " 
Roberto Clemente's flight took off the evening of Dec. 31 but plunged into the 
waters off Playa Isla Verde minutes later. Four others died with Clemente, 
whose body was never recovered. 
An earthquake ultimately caused Roberto Clemente's death, and a hurricane 
brought Vera back to Nicaragua. 
"It was hard to come back," she said on the road to Masaya the next day. "We 
were so happy here together. That is why I waited so long. And I was a little 
scared by the revolution and fighting that has gone on here." 
But last October, Hurricane Joan smashed into Nicaragua's Atlantic coast, 
pulverizing Bluefields and leveling the Corn Islands. There were 115 deaths, 
and the storm left hundreds of thousands homeless and caused millions of 
dollars in damage on an already devastated economy. 
Just as Puerto Ricans could not deny Roberto Clemente's plea to aid Nicaragua 
in 1972, they could not refuse Nicaragua help after the hurricane. Vera soon 
joined the Committee to Aid the Victims of the Hurricane. A flotilla of 
container vessels filled with seeds and medicine and paid for by the committee 
arrived in Nicaragua in April. "I had been asked to return many times, but I 
wasn't ready," she said. "Then Trish Beatty from Pittsburgh called and asked me 
to go as the guest of the Roberto Clemente Sports Project in San Isidro. I was 
going to say no, but finally I thought, 'Let me go and take the chance.' " 
It was time to complete Roberto's mission. 
They remember Roberto Clemente better on the streets of Masaya than they do in 
Pittsburgh these days. Every boy playing ball on its cobblestone streets can 
recite at least some of his statistics. But they recall Clemente in Masaya, and 
throughout Nicaragua, not so much for the verve with which he played, but 
because, as the grizzled groundskeeper at the ballpark there explains, "He died 
for us." 
"Roberto adopted Masaya," Vera Clemente says. "And Masaya adopted Roberto right 
back." 
There weren't bullet holes pocking the walls the last time Clemente was here 
and the market where they bargained with Indian artisans had not been destroyed 
by the air strikes Somoza ordered in a last-ditch effort to stop the 
Sandinista-led insurrection. But the ballpark, since renamed Estadio Roberto 
Clemente, still is perched above the lagoon. 
Vera Clemente heads first to the pediatric clinic that she and the Clemente 
Foundation helped build in 1976. Clemente lost touch with its staff during the 
insurrection. 
"I don't even know if it is still functioning," she had whispered on the drive 
from Managua. 
Her fears multiply when she finds the clinic padlocked, and the marker missing 
from an engraving of her husband. 
Federico Lacayo scrapes corrosion off the plaque at the front gate with his 
pocket knife. Vera excuses herself and walks to the edge of the lagoon. Across 
the water, Volcan Masaya smolders. 
But when Clemente returns to the clinic, it has opened for the day and her 
unhappiness with the shabbiness of its exterior is replaced by relief at the 
cleanliness of its interior and attentiveness of the staff. 
Clemente's caravan proceeds to the stadium. The party enters under a painting 
of Roberto and walks up a ramp to a statue of him at bat. 
The directorate of the San Fernando club, Masaya's entry in the Nicaraguan 
league, assembles on the infield grass and presents Vera a club uniform. On its 
sleeves, and those of every other jersey, is stitched the number 21, Clemente's 
number with the Pirates. 
The directors escort Vera to the San Fernando clubhouse, where the fourth game 
of the Nicaraguan championship series is about to begin on television. They 
stand when a minute of silence is observed for Roberto after the national 
anthem. 
If Vera Clemente's return to Nicaragua is an encounter with a bittersweet past, 
for Nicaragua, it was a moment a long time in the coming. 
Clemente's return was front page news, vying for coverage with Gorbachev's 
visit to Cuba and Nicaragua's championship series in baseball. For the 
Sandinista government, it was a chance to enjoy the spotlight. 
One evening, Clemente shared a table with Minister of Sport Lang, who regaled 
her with tales of the underground. A boyish-looking 41 with a Clark Gable 
mustache, Lang told of guerrilla theater in the barrios. 
Earlier in the day, Vera had broken bread, actually vanilla wafers, with a 
group of women, each of whom had had a child kidnaped by the contras. They 
petitioned her to help force the contras to allow inspectors into their camps 
in Honduras to determine if their children are there. 
On her fifth day in country, Vera Clemente accepted, for Roberto, the highest 
honor Nicaragua bestows upon a sporting figure, the Eduardo Green award. Named 
for the best ballplayer the country produced, the award had never before been 
given to a foreigner. 
Lang paid thoughtful tribute to Clemente at the ceremony, before President 
Daniel Ortega pinned the award to Vera's dress and embraced her. At the 
reception afterward, Ortega invited Clemente to join him the next day at the 
start-up of a hydro-electric project in Asturias. 
On the road before dawn, Clemente's caravan races northward at twice the posted 
speed limit into country that only months ago was a hit-and-run battlefield. It 
is good terrain for growing coffee, and for contra ambushes. One of the drivers 
points to a spot where he was shot earlier in the conflict. 
The attacks have lessened since last year's truce, and signs of re-building are 
evident. 
Ortega swoops overhead in his camouflage-painted helicopter an hour before the 
Clemente convoy reaches Asturias. But Ortega, elected president in 1985, delays 
the ceremony until Clemente arrives. 
Seated on the stage, Clemente listens as Ortega describes the Central American 
peace process and stresses his nation's need to determine its own destiny. 
Alluding to the fierce sense of independence that propelled Roberto Clemente's 
evolution on and off the field, Ortega says, "And we will continue in the 
spirit of Roberto Clemente, a ballplayer and a man who showed his solidarity 
with the people of Nicaragua." 
Afterward, at lunch in a hilltop pavilion, Ortega sits with Clemente and her 
party for over an hour. He questions more than answers, listening closely to 
his guests. 
They discuss from Puerto Rico's political culture to a history of the 
Sandinista insurrection and the U.S.-backed counter-revolution. 
Before she leaves Nicaragua, Clemente returns to a lakeside restaurant near 
Granada. As she did the last time, Vera takes a ride through the swamp-like 
archipelago of little islands, egrets, and freshwater sharks. Her launch is 
named the Carolina. The outboard's propellers become tangled in the lily pads 
and Lacayo, chief of protocol for this quasi-state visit, cuts a lily for Vera. 
Vera Clemente has been married now to Roberto Clemente's memory twice as long 
as she was to the man himself. "For me, he was such a good husband, such a good 
father, and such a good son," she says. "It is as if I owe him fidelity. I 
never thought of marrying again. I feel satisfied to have my children and use 
my time the way I am using it -- to help whomever I can in my own way." 
She acknowledges: "There are moments when I think about how different it would 
be if he were here, but then I throw myself back into my work. . . . When we 
walked through Managua and went to the Intercontinental Hotel where we stayed, 
it brought back a lot of remembrances. They were sad memories because he is not 
here now, and here I am. At the same time, I feel sad because all these years 
these people have suffered so much. They are trying to come up again, now, 
little by little, but it is a hard situation, and it will take time. When I 
went to the clinic in Masaya and the Roberto Clemente school in Managua and saw 
their needs, I was wishing that I was a millionaire just to help." 
Clemente said she has a new commitment to the future instead. 
"I think now that my feelings for Nicaragua are stronger," she says. "Somehow, 
if I can do something to help, I will. I will try to learn more about the 
situation here. Roberto always said that he was with the government that wants 
to help the people. I hope that is what will happen here. . . . 
"It has been hard coming back, but at the same time, I feel better because I 
know that the people still love Roberto here. Even the kids that did not know 
him -- who were born just a few years ago -- they show their love for him. I 
did not expect all that. I knew that some people remembered him, but all these 
people, everywhere you go. It makes me feel he is still alive." 
