ENVIRONMENT / SAVING THE OZONE; 
U.S. HAS KEY ROLE AT GLOBAL TALKS 
When environmental ministers arrive here next week to wrap up a major 
conference on protecting the ozone layer, none will have more work cut out for 
them than William K. Reilly. 
Reilly, chief of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, may well become the 
focus of attention -- and the court of last resort -- for many countries here 
who are urging the United States to change its position on a number of problems 
that have threatened the harmony of the conference. 
At stake are major amendments to a three-year-old international accord to 
protect the Earth's ozone layer from being stripped away by man-made chemicals. 
The existing accord, known as the Montreal Protocol, calls for a 50% phase-out 
of those chemicals in industrialized countries by the year 2000. 
There is wide agreement that these steps are half-hearted and that there must 
be a 100% phase-out by the year 2000 -- perhaps as soon as 1997 -- of chemicals 
already covered by the protocol. Further, new chemicals not now controlled must 
be covered. 
The Background 
Of particular concern are chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and halons. CFCs are used 
as cooling agents in air conditioners and refrigerators, as blowing agents in 
the manufacturer of foam, and as cleaning agents for electronic components. 
Halons are used in fire extinguishers. 
Over a period of time, they percolate into the stratosphere and are broken down 
by ultraviolet radiation from the sun. This releases a chlorine atom, which in 
turn devours up to 100,000 ozone atoms. That is the chemical reaction that is 
drilling a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica and is thinning the layer 
over the North Pole and over North America and Europe. 
On these issues there is little disagreement. 
The rub comes in establishing a new executive committee of 15 to dispense about 
$240 million in funds to help Third World countries afford the more expensive 
chemical substitutes for CFCs and halons that do less harm to the ozone layer. 
Meeting on the banks of the Thames across from Parliament, lower-ranking 
delegates from 75 nations have been laboring since Wednesday to lay the 
groundwork for these changes and to reach a consensus to present to the 
environmental ministers next week. 
But in the first three days of the working sessions, the United States has 
found itself largely isolated by its insistence that it be awarded a permanent 
seat on the new executive committee and that nations contributing the most 
money to the fund be given more votes on the committee. 
The issue has stirred indignation from Third World countries -- the so-called 
Group of 77 -- because it is the executive committee that will decide which 
developing nations receive funds and how they will be used. The U.S. proposal 
was a "bombshell," in the words of India's delegate, Mahesh Prasad, secretary 
of the Ministry of Environment. 
On Friday, China urged the United States to "radically" alter course, strongly 
hinting that if the American position won out, China -- with 20% of the world's 
population and a tremendous potential to help or hinder the cause of ozone 
protection -- would refuse to sign the protocol. 
Third World countries are holding out for equal representation on the committee 
along the lines called for by Mostafa K. Tolba, executive director of the 
United Nations Environment Program, which is sponsoring the conference. 
Tolba has called for a 15-member committee made up of seven representatives 
from Third World countries and seven from industrialized nations. They, in 
turn, would elect a chairman, who would become the 15th member. 
What the Americans Want 
American delegates have been instructed by Washington to hold fast to that 
position on grounds that the United States would be contributing 25% of the 
fund -- more than any other country. Japan would be second, contributing 11 
1/2%. "That does not seem unreasonable," an EPA aide said. 
The United States also wants to be given credit against its 25% share if it 
sends foreign aid directly to another country to help it switch to more 
desirable chemical substitutes. 
But, in an interview, Prasad of India said a committee controlled by the 
industrialized West may make mistakes in allocating the funds and specifying 
ways they are to be used. 
Reilly will also hear arguments, dealing with issues not of procedure but of 
trust and national sovereignty, delegates from the Third World say. Reilly is 
scheduled to meet with President Bush on Monday before arriving here Tuesday. 
While nothing has been said in London about the Third World countries voting as 
a bloc to deny the two-thirds vote required for approving amendments to 
strengthen the protocol, a number of delegates, including one from Britain, 
said that the veto is in the back of everyone's mind. 
At this point, it is unclear whether Reilly will bring with him additional 
authority to negotiate. But Washington is getting daily diplomatic reports on 
the sentiment here. 
What Washington is being told is that it may once again be alone on an 
environmental issue of global significance, just as it was until last week, 
when it changed its position and belatedly agreed to contribute money to the 
proposed $240-million ozone depletion fund to assist Third World nations in 
joining the fight to close the ozone hole. 
