WEEKENDER: COLORFUL GLIMPSES OF YESTERDAY ARE STITCHED TOGETHER. 
Dollhouses and miniature rooms, with their small, authentic furnishings and 
tiny figures, are invitations to fantasies -- little glimpses of other times 
and places. 
Quilts that dazzle with their colors, patterns and intricate stitchery are 
sometimes a window on family histories or reflect the inner thoughts of the 
people who make them. 
A collection of these things -- miniatures and colorful quilts -- will be 
brought together Saturday in San Pedro when the Las Primeras Auxiliary of the 
Assistance League of San Pedro-Palos Verdes stages its annual Quilt and 
Dollhouse Exhibit. 
The long-running event raises funds for South Bay charities supported by the 
league. The 60 or so quilts to be displayed range from an unfinished 1880 quilt 
with a design suggesting a frontier log cabin to several made just last year. A 
1990 panel from the AIDS Memorial Quilt, which commemorates people who have 
died of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, will also be shown. 
The quilts are a kaleidoscope of patterns -- from geometric zigzags to flowers, 
stars and animals -- and colors, ranging from old-fashioned calico to shining 
satin. 
Quilt exhibit Chairman Mitzi Cress sees quilting as "an expression of the inner 
self. . . . You get an idea, think about it and start a quilt, and you never 
know what it will be like until it's finished." 
Cress and general show Co-Chairman Louise Campbell says some visitors are 
inspired to begin quilting or resume work on quilts they tucked away long ago. 
In the world of miniatures, the league will display 10 crafted fantasies, 
including such things as a circus museum, country store, thatched-roof cottage 
and a Halloween party complete with a witch. One of them, a horse corral 
decorated for Christmas, was made as a class project by Omar Vasquez, a 
sixth-grader at Carson Street School. 
The standout dollhouse will be the turn-of-the-century world of tiny, 
intricately woven Victorian wicker furniture and baby buggies created by Marie 
Terrones. The San Pedro artisan began her craft seven years ago after she tried 
to find a dollhouse for her daughter, who was then 2, and didn't like what was 
available. 
With a long veranda containing a porch swing, tables and chairs, the miniature 
three-story blue house rises to a peaked roof, where wispy threads of cotton 
simulate smoke coming from the chimney. 
A tiny bird, fashioned from real feathers, lives inside a wicker cage. Prams 
have lacy canopies to ward off the sun, colorful patchwork quilts adorn the 
elaborate beds, tiny glasses rest on a closed book, and a dressing table 
contains a mirror and brush the size of fingernails. 
Terrones, who uses antique doilies and handkerchiefs for her throw rugs and 
curtains, calls her house "my own small world" that offers an instant retreat 
from the real world. 
People attending the show can buy $1 tickets for chances to take home three 
prizes: a handmade Irish chain quilt, which gets its name from the chain-like 
stitching; a miniature dollhouse with shingles, porch and fireplace, and one of 
Terrones' miniature wicker baby buggies. Home-made cakes and cookies will also 
be sold. 
Cress said quilts are appealing to some people because of craftsmanship in the 
colors and stitching. Others are interested in what quilts have to say, she 
said, citing a quilt made by a cancer patient as a thank-you to the people who 
took care of her. It was never finished. 
They are art and history combined, she said. "People look at a 100-year-old 
quilt and wonder what (the person who made it) was thinking about and 
imagining." 
Terrones, who has made her wicker furniture for miniature collectors around the 
world, said the appeal of dollhouses is having "a piece of the past. They make 
people feel good. When they get depressed, they can look into the rooms and it 
totally takes them away." 
Campbell says she sees a strong link between both dollhouses and quilts. "They 
have a lot of history and are something that can be passed on to other people." 
Gerald Faris What: Quilt and Dollhouse Exhibit. When: Saturday, 10 a.m.-5 p.m. 
Where: Assistance League of San Pedro-Palos Verdes, 1441 W. 8th St., San Pedro. 
Admission: $2 donation; $1 seniors and children. Information: 832-8355. 
