JACK SMITH: WHEN TEENS ESSAY TO WRITE ABOUT VALUES 
We keep hearing that our teen-agers don't read and can't write, and there is 
abundant evidence to support that dismal notion. 
There is also evidence to the contrary. 
I was recently asked by Rabbi Alfred Wolf to be one of three judges of a high 
school essay contest. As Rabbi Wolf is my spiritual adviser, I agreed, though I 
hate judging anything. I have judged beauty contests and seen the tears of the 
losers. 
Rabbi Wolf, now retired as rabbi of the Wilshire Temple, is director of the 
Skirball Institute on American Values, and the theme of the contest was 
American values. The students were asked to select an American value, document 
it historically, and relate it to their lives. 
There were two contests: one for Catholic schools, one for Los Angeles district 
schools. I received copies of the six finalists in each group. Some unheralded 
teachers had done the preliminary judging. My fellow judges, I had learned, 
were Tritia Toyota and Irving Stone. I tried not to think what they would 
decide. 
The first essay I read was by Joel G. Aldape of Huntington Park High School. I 
was amazed. Its grammar was impeccable. Its argument was logical and forceful. 
His theme was the Puritan ethic. He concluded that he believed the Puritan 
ethic had built America. One striking line was that the Puritans had thought 
their ideas would bring them closer to God. Today, he suggested, we think the 
Puritan ethic will bring us closer to success. 
We were supposed to judge each essay in various categories on a scale of 1 to 
10. I gave Aldape 9 or 10 in every category. Then I read the next essay. It, 
too, was grammatically neat, well-reasoned, and persuasive. I realized that if 
I gave the writer the same ratings, neither would win. I went back and took a 
few points away from Aldape. 
I hated it. In the end, I gave almost every contestant a good grade. An essay 
is a private thing. How can you judge one against another? I hoped that my 
fellow judges would be more decisive than I was. 
The awards were to be given at 4 p.m. at Lawry's California Center, an oasis 
north of Dodger Stadium and the railroad tracks. It is a lovely place, replete 
with patios and fountains and gorgeous California flowers. 
Unfortunately, the ceremony coincided with one of the rather common natural 
catastrophes on Mt. Washington, where I live, a mile from the Lawry's center. 
As I was driving down the hill to the Skirball meeting, I noticed a plume of 
white smoke rising from a nearby canyon. I knew I ought to stop and call the 
fire department. But I also knew that someone else would surely do that. We on 
Mt. Washington are all alert to fires. 
When Rabbi Wolf began the ceremonies, shortly after 4 o'clock, his remarks were 
accompanied by the kind of sounds that only a metropolis can produce. Freight 
trains rumbled by, grinding and whistling. We were suddenly assaulted by the 
clatter of helicopters, one after another. Then came the roar of fire engines 
and the scream of sirens. 
Rabbi Wolf carried on imperturbably, despite the noise. Msgr. Aidan Carroll, 
representing the Catholic schools, spoke with great charm, ignoring the clamor. 
His aplomb, in fact, almost converted me to the faith. 
The two grand prize winners were asked to read their essays. They did so with 
calm and poise. The winner in the Los Angeles district division was the young 
man who wrote about the Puritan ethic. Robert M. Bautista of Bishop Amat was 
first in the Catholic schools. 
While Aldape was reading his essay, a train went by, grinding and clanging, 
Helicopters chattered overhead; a fire engine roared by, siren shrilling. Young 
Aldape continued with his essay, which, after all, was about freedom of speech, 
but when the center's chimes began to stroke the hour of 5 he gave up. With 
great patience, he waited out the bells. 
Rabbi Wolf had asked me to say a few words in conclusion. I could only say that 
writing an essay was probably the most important thing a student could do. I 
said, as I believe, that one does not think until one has expressed his 
thoughts in writing. I thank God I finished before the chimes stroked 6. 
