EL SEGUNDO LOOKS AT NEW TAX TO SOLVE BUDGET WOES 
In a move that has prompted the city's largest employer to cry foul, El Segundo 
council members are proposing that a payroll tax be imposed on business to bail 
the city out of its fiscal woes. 
The council has scheduled a special meeting Tuesday to try to reach agreement 
on just how high the new tax should be. The tax would replace at least one tax 
now levied on business. 
"We want a tax that not only allows us to balance the budget immediately, but 
also will allow us to avoid having to come back to the table again in the 
future and say we need other taxes," Councilman Jim Clutter said in an 
interview. 
Officials of Hughes Aircraft Co., the city's biggest firm with about 27,000 
workers, said that a payroll tax, which is levied as a percentage of the money 
a company spends on wages and salaries, will not provide the city with a stable 
solution for its financial problems. 
The company argues that a number of other El Segundo employers do a great deal 
of defense work, which results in the number of workers on their payrolls 
fluctuating tremendously. 
Hughes also contends that a payroll tax discriminates against corporations that 
employ a large number of well-paid professionals, which it does. 
"We are dead set against a payroll tax," said Jim Hurt, the company's director 
of public affairs. "It'll hit a company like Hughes disproportionately harder 
than it will others." 
The council's decision to adopt a payroll tax comes after months of debate over 
how the city should go about raising new monies. Besides Hughes officials, an 
official at Rockwell International also questioned whether the adoption of a 
payroll tax is wise. 
Jerry Saunders, president of the 500-member El Segundo Chamber of Commerce, 
said the organization had taken no position on the payroll tax until it is 
determined how much it would be and what existing taxes would be eliminated. 
Although once flush with money, the city has been forced to search for new 
sources of revenue since 1982, when the local Chevron USA refinery lost a major 
contract for the sale of fuel oil and the city's sales tax revenues plummeted 
by millions of dollars annually. 
As a result, city officials in the past two years have been forced to delay 
millions of dollars of capital improvement projects, and this coming fiscal 
year, the city faces a budget deficit of $1.6 million. Without a new source of 
revenue, cutbacks in all the city's major departments, including fire and 
police services, could result, said interim City Manager Frank Meehan. The 
city's annual operating budget is about $20 million. 
As now planned, the payroll tax would supplant a $60-per-employee tax that 
council members adopted in 1986. The council has complained that the tax is 
hard to administer because the methods for computing the number of employees 
vary. For instance, many larger companies hire temporary, or contract, workers 
and do not count them as part of their own work force, the council has said. 
This is particularly true of aerospace companies. 
Council members also said they might abolish another tax, which charges a 
business a nickel for each square foot of space it occupies over 5,000 feet. 
The city collected just under $5 million last fiscal year from both the 
employee and square footage taxes. 
Just how much more money a payroll tax would generate is uncertain because 
council members have yet to decide just how high it should be. 
Los Angeles' Rate 
However, if the council decides to charge the same payroll tax as the city of 
Los Angeles -- 0.75% -- it could raise more than $14 million annually, 
according to El Segundo officials. 
Councilman Alan West said that he favors a payroll tax of 0.25%. 
Clutter, however, has said he wants to charge the same percentage as Los 
Angeles. "I see no reason why El Segundo should take a lesser tax than Los 
Angeles," Clutter said. 
Hurt said that he did not know how much Hughes could wind up paying under the 
payroll tax. The company paid $2.1 million this fiscal year in employee and 
square footage taxes, he said. 
Hurt argued that a payroll tax makes little sense at a time when the company's 
local work force has dwindled in response to expected federal defense spending 
cutbacks. During the past several years, Hughes' El Segundo work force has 
decreased by about 3,000 workers, and further reductions are planned in coming 
months. 
'Not Good' 
"For the city to hang its hat on a payroll tax in this kind of climate is not 
good for the city and certainly not good for us," Hurt said. 
That same view was expressed by Rockwell International, which has about 4,200 
employees in El Segundo. At the peak of the company's B-1 bomber program in 
1985, it employed 8,400 workers locally. 
"It just seems to me that a payroll tax in this area, which is heavy with 
defense work, would be counter" to providing a stable source of revenue, said 
George Wiley, the company's director of human resources. 
Councilman West countered that a payroll tax makes sense because, as the work 
forces at companies such as Hughes and Rockwell decrease, so does the cost of 
providing city services for them. 
TAXING BUSINESS IN EL SEGUNDO 
El Segundo is considering levying a payroll tax to help it make up a projected 
1989-90 deficit of $1.6 million in a $20 million operating budget. Here are 
1988-89 revenues from the city's current $60-per-employee tax and 5-cent 
square-footage tax compared with projected revenues from a payroll tax. 
CURRENT TAXES 
Employee tax: $3.9 million 
Square footage tax: $960,000 
TOTAL: $4.86 million 
PAYROLL TAX OPTIONS 
at 0.75%: $14 million 
at 0.5%: $9.3 million 
at 0.25%: $4.7 million 
SOURCE: city of El Segundo 
