LANDMARK MISSILE PACT OUTLINED; 
SUMMIT: GEORGE BUSH AND MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV ALSO SIGNED AN AGREEMENT TO SLASH 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS. THEY VOWED TO FINISH THE LONG-RANGE NUCLEAR MISSILE TREATY BY 
YEAR'S END. "THE COLD WAR MUST END," BUSH SAID. 
President Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev approved the outlines of a landmark 
treaty Friday for the first-ever cuts in long-range nuclear missiles and signed 
a pact to slash chemical weapons. "The world has waited long enough, the Cold 
War must end," Bush said. 
In a major concession to Gorbachev, the two leaders signed a trade agreement 
that is politically important for the Soviet president, who is burdened by 
deepening economic problems at home. Also sealed was a five-year grain sale 
anxiously sought by American farmers. 
Bush said the nuclear arms agreement was designed to "enhance stability and 
reduce the risk of war." It will require months of work to put the treaty in 
final form, but Gorbachev said he shared Bush's goal of signing it by year's 
end. 
Heralding the pact to cut stockpiles of poison gas, Bush said: "Let this 
landmark agreement quickly lead to a global ban on chemical weapons." 
Negotiations are under way among 40 nations for a worldwide treaty. 
"We are making steps toward a new world," Gorbachev said. "The area of 
disagreement is being narrowed." 
Midway through a four-day summit, Bush and Gorbachev sat down at a gleaming 
mahogany table in the East Room to sign an array of agreements. The two men 
were flanked by Soviet and American flags. 
Barbara Bush and Raisa Gorbachev, who traveled together to Wellesley College 
earlier in the day, applauded their husbands' achievements from their front-row 
seats. 
They capped the day with a dinner honoring Bush at the Soviet embassy. The menu 
featured roast duck, suckling pig and baked fish, accompanied by the best wines 
of the Soviet Union. 
The televised ceremony ended a day of suspense and last-minute bargaining, and 
stole the spotlight from disputes ranging from German unity, European security 
and reductions in conventional forces. The two men will talk again Saturday in 
the quiet surroundings of Camp David. 
At a news conference later, Secretary of State James A. Baker III took note of 
"two areas where real disagreements do remain": Germany and Lithuania. 
"While we did not narrow our differences on these two issues, we did heighten, 
I think, our understanding of each other's concerns," Baker said. 
As the day unfolded, the two leaders hit snags in the outlines of the nuclear 
weapons pact and sent Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze 
into a harried round of talks. 
The signing ceremony was postponed as the leaders waited for an agreement. 
Intent on wresting trade concessions from Bush, officials said Gorbachev 
stalled on the grain-sale agreement. In the end, they split their differences. 
The trade agreement is a step toward granting most-favored-nation status to 
Moscow, providing the lowest possible tariffs on Soviet goods. Baker said they 
would not even send the treaty paper work to the Senate for ratification until 
the Soviets enact a law protecting Jewish emigration. 
Along with the major accords, the leaders signed agreements to improve 
verification of underground nuclear explosions under treaties dating from 1974 
and 1976. They also put their names on agreements for student exchanges and 
cooperation on atomic energy. 
"We may not agree on everything, but we agree on one great truth: The world has 
waited long enough, the Cold War must end," Bush said. 
Referring to their storm-tossed meeting in Malta last December and the dramatic 
changes across Eastern Europe, Gorbachev said: "The turbulent developments in 
recent months after Malta have not led us astray from the goals we set 
together." 
Gorbachev said he is committed to wrapping up the final elements of the nuclear 
weapons pact before the end of the year. Bush concurred. The final treaty will 
force both superpowers to cut their nuclear arsenals by about a third. 
Baker said the two sides, after six days of intensive negotiations, had made 
"workman-like progress across the full spectrum" of nuclear weapons, including 
limits on heavy mobile intercontinental missiles. 
The Soviet leader put a premium on winning a trade agreement from Bush, saying 
it would be an important political prize for him. "We are not asking for a free 
ride," he told congressional leaders at the start of the day. He said it would 
be "humiliating" to beg for concessions. 
As a price for improved trade, the Bush Administration has demanded an easing 
of Soviet pressure against Lithuania, as well as passage of a Soviet law 
protecting Jewish emigration. In the end, Bush decided not to send Gorbachev 
home empty-handed. 
"They understand full well that they will not get (most-favored-nation 
benefits) until the legislation passes the Supreme Soviet," Baker said. 
He insisted there was "no formal linkage" between the trade issue and 
Lithuania, although Bush has acknowledged it would be hard to get the Senate to 
approve a trade treaty as long as Moscow put pressure on the Baltic states. 
The chemical weapons accord imposes a halt in production of poison gas and 
requires the two nations to cut their stockpiles to 5,000 tons each. 
Bush and Gorbachev were unable to make progress on cutting troops and 
non-nuclear weapons in Europe. They issued a statement declaring their hope to 
reach agreement by the end of the year. 
On a related front, sources said Gorbachev, trying to break a stalemate, had 
proposed creation of a new "Council of all Europe" to play a decisive role in 
shaping the military future of Germany. The United States and the Soviet Union 
would participate in the deliberations along with other members of the NATO and 
Warsaw Pact alliances as well as neutral countries. 
A U.S. official said: "We are prepared to work with it. It is not something we 
would reject out of hand." The idea will be considered by top diplomatic aides 
in Copenhagen and Berlin later this month. 
The superpower summit was spiced with colorful sideshows. Mrs. Bush and Mrs. 
Gorbachev were cheered at Wellesley College commencement exercises and 
Gorbachev once again stopped his entourage to work the noon-hour crowds on a 
brilliant sunny day. 
Both women spoke of traditional values at Wellesley. Mrs. Bush, whose selection 
as a graduation speaker had irritated some students, counseled them to put 
family and friends first in their lives. Mrs. Gorbachev said women have a 
special mission of "peacemaking, humanism, mercy and kindness." 
Gorbachev began the day by confronting some of his toughest critics in 
Washington -- congressional leaders unhappy over Moscow's coercion of 
Lithuania, the Baltic republic struggling for independence. Televised live 
across America, it was a freewheeling exchange over trade, German unity, 
Lithuania and Soviet economic reforms. 
Gorbachev took the offensive. He said Bush was too rigid about insisting that a 
unified Germany be a member of NATO, and rejected any suggestion that he was 
politically weak. "That's not serious," he said. 
"This is a genuine revolution," Gorbachev told the lawmakers, some of whom have 
expressed doubts that he will survive. "Please don't be frightened, because you 
can frighten us, too, if you get frightened." 
Extolling his economic reforms, Gorbachev said increased trade with the West 
would be an important step toward a free market system in the Soviet Union. 
However, Gorbachev said: "I'm not going to ask for anything, to beg for 
anything. . . . Certainly we are not asking for a free ride. We will be asking 
for normal credits, and of course we will be paying, and paying the interest. 
For us it would humiliating if we were to ask, to beg for something from you." 
When congressmen pressed him on Lithuania, Gorbachev pointed out that China had 
received most-favored-nation status despite the bloody crackdown in Tian An Men 
Square a year ago. "Maybe we should introduce martial rule in the Baltics," he 
said sarcastically. 
The agreement on strategic weapons, the deadliest arms in the superpowers' 
arsenals, has been under negotiation for eight years. It would be the first to 
reduce long-range nuclear arms; previous agreements set overall limits but 
still allowed more weapons to be made. 
Even after both sides initial a treaty outline, the superpowers will face 
months of tedious negotiations over details to satisfy lawyers in each country. 
Overall, both sides would agree to destroy about a third of their long-range 
nuclear weapons over seven years. 
The chemical weapons pact would require the United States to destroy about 
20,000 tons of its stockpile and mandate a 45,000-ton reduction by the Soviet 
Union. The United States also would be required to stop producing poison gas; 
the Soviet Union already has stopped. 
Along with the arms agreements, there also were accords expanding air travel 
between the United States and Soviet Union, increasing student exchanges, and 
making it easier for commercial ships to deliver goods to ports in one 
another's country. 
There was an agreement for closer cooperation on atomic energy and another to 
open reciprocal cultural and information centers in Washington and Moscow. 
