POINDEXTER GIVEN 6 MONTHS IN PRISON; 
IRAN-CONTRA: THE FORMER REAGAN AIDE RECEIVES THE HARSHEST SENTENCE OF THE SEVEN 
CONVICTED IN THE SCANDAL. THE JUDGE CITES THE DEFENDANT'S LACK OF REMORSE. 
John M. Poindexter, the highest-ranking former official convicted in the 
Iran-Contra scandal, was sentenced Monday to six months in prison after a judge 
said that he had sought to "nullify" the actions of Congress and had shown no 
remorse. 
The former national security adviser in the Ronald Reagan White House was the 
only one of seven convicted in the scandal to receive a prison term. The 
others, including two former White House officials, were placed on probation or 
required to perform community service. 
The retired rear admiral, standing ramrod straight before U.S. District Judge 
Harold H. Greene, looked grim and pursed his lips on hearing the sentence. But 
he managed a faint smile as he walked to embrace his wife, Linda, in the front 
row of the courtroom. 
He refused to speak with reporters and drove off with his lawyers after briefly 
thanking a group of flag-waving supporters who demonstrated outside the 
courthouse. 
Greene allowed Poindexter to remain free until a ruling on his appeal, which is 
likely to occur next year. The judge did not impose any fine, noting that 
Poindexter already had incurred large legal bills. Navy spokesmen have said 
that Poindexter's pension, which is about $55,000 a year, will not be affected 
by his conviction. 
Dan K. Webb, the associate independent counsel who prosecuted the case, told 
reporters later that the sentence was "very fair and very proper." Webb said 
that it should alert other public officials that "when you serve in high 
government office . . . you must do so with the highest levels of integrity and 
honesty." 
Before sentencing, Poindexter's lead attorney argued that "what he did, he did 
for his country." 
Poindexter, who did not take the witness stand at his trial, faced a maximum 
sentence of 25 years in prison and fines of $1.25 million. 
Reagan refused to comment on the sentence, according to his press secretary, 
Mark Weinberg, in Los Angeles. The former President gave videotaped testimony 
that was presented at the trial in which he said that he had never authorized 
anyone to break the law and did not, in fact, believe any laws had been 
violated. 
Before imposing sentence, Greene told Poindexter that decisions of Congress 
cannot be "nullified by appointed officials." Congress voted in 1984 to cut off 
military aid to rebel forces in Nicaragua. Greene said that, by lying and 
obstructing congressional inquiries about the National Security Council's 
involvement in supplying arms to the Contras in Nicaragua, Poindexter had 
sought to "invalidate the decisions made by elected officials." 
A jury last April found Poindexter, 53, guilty on five felony charges for 
seeking to conceal from Congress that a subordinate, Oliver L. North, was 
secretly violating a congressional ban by raising funds for the Contras and 
supplying them with weapons. Jurors found that Poindexter had also obstructed 
congressional efforts to learn about covert U.S. arms sales to Iran and 
diversion of the profits to benefit the Contras. 
After calling Poindexter's offenses serious and noting that he had shown no 
remorse, Greene said: "Congress is entitled to accurate and complete 
information and cannot fulfill its constitutional duties without it." 
Greene said that the defendant had conducted his scheme "for a lengthy period 
of time" and, along with North, had "engaged in the destruction of evidence," 
including 5,000 computer memos dealing with the Nicaraguan supply mission and a 
presidential authorization for shipping arms to Iran. 
The judge noted that, under new federal sentencing guidelines, Poindexter would 
have received a prison term of 21 to 27 months. But the guidelines do not apply 
to such crimes committed before 1987, and a sentence of that length would be 
unfair because six other defendants received probation from other judges, 
Greene said. 
He took note also of Poindexter's 33 years of military and government service. 
On the other hand, Greene said, a prison term is necessary to deter other high 
government officials from considering perjury. 
Before delivering his lecture, Greene listened to a plea for leniency by 
Richard W. Beckler, Poindexter's chief defense attorney. 
Greene asked Poindexter if he wished to speak himself. 
"Your honor, I don't have any comment," the defendant replied. 
Beckler called Poindexter "an honorable person" and pointed out that he had 
received "no personal gain, no personal profit" from any of his actions. 
Webb conceded that Poindexter, who resigned from the White House when the 
Iran-Contra scandal broke in November, 1986, had been "a well-respected public 
official in one of the highest positions of government." 
After remarking on Poindexter's "brilliance" and the fact that he had been 
graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy at the top of his class, Webb told the 
court: "Except for the events of this case, I don't quarrel with his 33 years 
of service to his country." 
But Webb said that the defendant's five felony convictions showed that "John 
Poindexter was carrying out presidential policies at all costs. He accepted 
that the end justified the means. 
"This is not a malevolent or evil man in any way," Webb continued. But, because 
his crimes "undermined the very fabric of our government," a prison sentence 
must be given, he told the court. 
IRAN-CONTRA DEFENDANTS 
John Poindexter, former national security adviser, convicted April 7 of 
conspiracy, two counts of obstructing Congress and two counts of making false 
statements in connection with Reagan Administration assistance to the Contras 
and a November, 1985 shipment of missiles to Iran. He was sentenced Monday to 
six months in prison. 
Oliver North, former National Security Council aide, was found guilty in May, 
1989, of three felonies -- aiding and abetting the obstruction of Congress, 
destroying official documents and accepting an illegal gratuity -- and 
sentenced to two years probation, fined $150,000 and ordered to perform 1,200 
hours of community service. He is appealing while serving the community service 
in an anti-drug program. 
Robert McFarlane, former national security adviser, pleaded guilty to four 
misdemeanors of withholding information from Congress by denying that the NSC 
staff was soliciting support for the Contras' military activities and helping 
move supplies to the rebels and denying that he knew anything about 
other-country financing of the Contras. He was placed on two years probation, 
fined $20,000 and sentenced to 200 hours of community service. 
Richard Secord, a retired Air Force major general, pleaded guilty Nov. 8 to 
lying to congressional investigators when he said he wasn't aware of any money 
that went to the benefit of North from the maze of companies known as "the 
enterprise," which Secord had used in the Iran-Contra affair. Secord on Jan. 24 
was sentenced to two years probation. 
Carl (Spitz) Channell, pleaded guilty to using his nonprofit National Endowment 
for the Preservation of Liberty to raise more than $2 million to buy weapons 
for the Nicaraguan rebels. He was sentenced to two years probation for 
conspiring to defraud the Treasury of taxes due on the money raised with 
North's assistance. He died last month. 
Richard Miller, head of a Washington public relations company, pleaded guilty 
to conspiring to defraud the Internal Revenue Service of taxes on contributions 
used to supply military aid to the Contras. He was sentenced to two years 
probation. 
Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born businessman who with Secord ran "the enterprise," 
pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor of aiding and abetting in supplementing North's 
income by paying for a security fence at North's home. Hakim was fined $5,000 
and sentenced to two years probation Feb. 1. 
Joseph Fernandez, former CIA station chief in Costa Rica, is charged with 
obstruction and making false statements in connection with his assistance to 
North's Contra resupply network. The judge in the case said the charges must be 
dismissed due to the attorney general's ban on the use of classified material 
Fernandez needs for his defense. Prosecutors are appealing. 
Thomas Clines, former CIA agent, was indicted for allegedly failing to report 
to the IRS some of his income he received for working for North's Contra 
resupply network. Clines, a business partner of Secord and Hakim, has pleaded 
innocent and is scheduled to go on trial Sept. 4. 
