GINGRICH, RIGHT'S BAD BOY, TARGET OF ANGRY DEMOCRATS 
For years he has been the bad boy of the Republican Right, the congressman 
whose roughhouse partisanship has delighted conservatives and enraged 
Democrats. 
But now, having led the crusade to topple Speaker Jim Wright, Rep. Newt 
Gingrich of Georgia is on the defensive, beset by many of the forces he helped 
set in motion. 
Gingrich, who rode the ethics issue to become assistant House Republican 
leader, is battling charges that, like Wright, he profited unethically from a 
book deal financed by campaign contributors. He is also trying to contain the 
controversy over an aide's alleged role in spreading unsubstantiated rumors of 
homosexuality about Rep. Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.), who replaced Wright as 
Speaker. 
"Newt has made a career out of attacking people around here and trying to rip 
them apart," said Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), a liberal who has clashed 
bitterly with Gingrich. "Now the shoe is on the other foot. He's going to have 
to answer for a lot of things." 
Controversy is nothing new to Gingrich, 45, who has crusaded passionately 
against the "corruption" of Democratic House leaders since he was first elected 
to the House in 1978. 
At a time when most of his GOP colleagues were resigned to their minority 
status, he and other young conservatives went on the offensive, launching a 
spirited campaign to keep the rhetorical heat on Democrats and lay the 
foundation for an eventual Republican majority in the House. 
In the process, Gingrich earned a reputation for slashing, personal attacks and 
an ideological intensity that borders on evangelism. When he blasted Democratic 
foreign policy in a 1983 House speech, critics charged that he was questioning 
their patriotism in the manner of the late Sen. Joseph R. McCarthy. Former 
Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. called it "the lowest thing" he had seen in 
32 years on Capitol Hill. 
Seen as Gadfly 
Despite his steady attacks, opponents at first viewed Gingrich as a political 
gadfly. But they took notice this year when the ethics charges he filed against 
Wright resulted in the Speaker's resignation. 
"None of this would have happened without Newt, and that's the reason why 
there's so much resentment out there," said Rep. Lynn Martin (R-Ill.), a strong 
Gingrich supporter. "He did something no one believed he could do, but that's 
been typical of his career. He's just unbelievably persistent in getting what 
he wants." 
Now, with the ethics controversy continuing to dominate Congress, the spotlight 
has turned on Gingrich himself. Some Republicans predict he may come in for the 
same kind of scrutiny that ultimately destroyed Wright. 
"I think a lot of Democrats are gunning for Newt, no question," said one 
moderate Republican, who asked not to be identified. "He's going to come under 
the microscope." 
For once, Gingrich seems uncomfortable with all the attention. 
"I am the victim of a hypocritical, one-sided morality," he said in an 
interview. "I've been the whistle-blower, because I helped bring a man (Wright) 
who was a scoundrel to justice, and now I'm being punished for this." 
Impatient With Inquiries 
Gingrich, whose pudgy face is framed by a helmet of thick gray hair, added that 
he has little patience with the questions that have been dogging him lately. 
"I'm tired of being smeared," he snapped. "I'm tired of Democrats bashing me 
around." 
Partisan politics has been Gingrich's passion all his adult life. He lived on 
military bases around the world as a child before his family settled at Ft. 
Benning, Ga., and received a graduate degree in European history from Emory 
University in Atlanta, but he was soon attracted to politics. He managed a 
congressional campaign in 1964 and worked on Nelson A. Rockefeller's southeast 
presidential campaign in 1968. He taught history and geography at West Georgia 
College and, after two losses, was finally elected to Congress in 1978. 
His sixth two-year term has been his most controversial. Gingrich came under 
new fire just last week when it was learned that Karen Van Brocklin, an aide in 
his office, had spread sexual rumors about Foley to reporters. 
'Stupidly Said Yes' 
In an interview, Gingrich insisted that Van Brocklin had merely been asked by a 
reporter if there were stories circulating about Foley's personal life, "and 
she stupidly said yes." He said it was wrong for her to have talked with the 
press, but he did not criticize her for disseminating the rumors. 
Several reporters offered a different account. Speaking not for attribution, 
they said she had brought up the subject of Foley's alleged behavior with at 
least three news organizations and had tried to get them to publish stories on 
the subject by claiming other newspapers were about to do so. No such story was 
ever published. 
The episode infuriated Democrats. "This is a new low for him," said Rep. Beryl 
Anthony Jr. (D-Ark.), chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign 
Committee. "He's engaged in personal attacks before, but I can't remember 
anything quite this bad." 
Gingrich later apologized to Foley but refused Democratic demands that he fire 
Van Brocklin. Instead, he instructed her not to talk with the press again. 
"That's quite a punishment he handed out," said Frank. "Newt has gotten 
intoxicated with this kind of stuff. It's pure sleaze." 
Cites Coelho Incident 
Gingrich said the story has been blown out of proportion. Changing the subject, 
he recalled that House Majority Whip Tony Coelho of Merced had circulated to 
his colleagues a 1984 magazine article about the breakup of Gingrich's first 
marriage. 
"I don't recall any Democrats demanding an apology when that happened," he said 
tartly. "All of this is nothing but cheap partisanship." 
The effort to spread rumors about Foley created a backlash that claimed one 
victim. Mark Goodin resigned as communications director of the Republican 
National Committee after admitting that he wrote a memo criticizing Foley as 
"out of the liberal closet" and compared his voting record with that of Frank, 
an acknowledged homosexual. Republicans from President Bush down publicly 
deplored the memo. 
Although the Foley incident showed signs of receding by week's end, Gingrich 
has had no such luck with the controversy over his 1984 book, "Window of 
Opportunity," which showcased his conservative views. He and his wife, 
Marianne, used a highly unusual scheme to raise promotional funds for the book, 
which was co-authored by the Gingriches and a third writer. 
Concerned that their publisher had only modest plans to market the book, 
Marianne Gingrich formed a limited partnership to finance a $105,000 marketing 
campaign, according to documents made available by the congressman. 
Campaign Donors 
The group was made up of 21 investors, including politically influential 
campaign donors in Gingrich's district, who contributed $5,000 each. Gingrich, 
although not a partner himself, solicited a $5,000 contribution from at least 
one of the supporters. 
The book was not an enormous commercial success -- it has sold about 29,000 
copies so far -- and investors who had been promised a share of the profits 
instead received tax-deductible losses. 
But the Gingriches came away with more than $35,000. Under the agreement, 
Marianne Gingrich was paid $11,500 for helping to establish and operate the 
partnership. For writing the book, Gingrich and his wife each got a $5,000 
advance and $7,018 in royalties. 
Democrats charged that Gingrich was guilty of the same sort of actions that he 
had criticized Wright for in conjunction with his book, "Reflections of a 
Public Man." 
The House Ethics Committee accused Wright of making $57,000 in royalties from 
his book to circumvent the congressional limits on fees for speaking or writing 
articles. Book royalties are exempt from these limits, and the former Speaker 
was found to have sold his book in bulk to special-interest groups that heard 
his speeches. 
Gifts Key Issue 
Wright was also accused of accepting gifts from a Ft. Worth businessman, George 
A. Mallick Jr., at a time when Mallick had a direct interest in legislation. 
Mallick allegedly funneled income to Wright in the form of salary payments to 
his wife. Wright announced his resignation as Speaker and as a House member 
before the charges could go before the full House. 
Rep. Bill Alexander (D-Ark.) raised similar accusations against Gingrich when 
he filed charges in April with the Ethics Committee. 
Alexander said Gingrich's book payments did not qualify as royalties but 
represented an attempt to evade limits on outside income. He also contended 
that the $105,000 in investments could be construed as gifts from people who 
had a direct interest in legislation before Congress. Finally, he said the 
salary paid to Gingrich's wife could be viewed as an attempt to funnel money to 
Gingrich himself. 
Citizens Lobby 
Common Cause, the citizens lobby that had raised charges against Wright, asked 
the House Ethics Committee to appoint an outside counsel to check into 
Gingrich's book deal, much as a special counsel had investigated Wright. 
Gingrich was incensed by the charges. In a heated press conference last month, 
during which his wife ran from the room in tears, he said his book deal was 
unusual but not illegal. He produced documents showing that his wife had earned 
her salary. 
The heart of his defense, however, was that investors in the book deal got no 
special treatment from him and knew they were involved in a straight business 
transaction. 
"None of the people . . . who are investors have received any unusual 
involvement, have received any unusual care on my part," he said. "These 
investors came when the publisher didn't have the total resources to adequately 
promote the book and get if off the ground. . . . This arrangement was worked 
to raise money." 
Among the investors, Gregor Peterson, a Lake Tahoe investor, said that he 
contributed because he liked Gingrich's conservative philosophy, but that he 
also expected a profit. But Joseph Bigard of Bigard Oil &amp; Manufacturing in 
Newton, Ill., said he viewed his $5,000 contribution not as an investment but 
as an endorsement of Gingrich's views. 
'Enlighten the People' 
"I looked on it as a political contribution and money spent to enlighten the 
American people on a different approach," he said in an interview with the 
Washington Post. 
Gingrich initially tried to brush off questions about whether the investors had 
a stake in legislation. He later conceded that some of them did, but he 
stressed that he had done nothing on their behalf that he would not have done 
for any other constituents. 
For example, the congressman said he would look out for the interests of 
Southwire Corp., a wire producer that employs 3,000 people in his district, 
even if James Richards, a company executive, had not been not among the 
investors. "I would be derelict in my duties if I did not," Gingrich said. 
"Southwire automatically has my attention every morning." 
The Ethics Committee has yet to act on the complaints filed against Gingrich. 
Democrats do not intend to let them fade away. 
"I want them to treat him fairly," said Rep. Louise M. Slaughter (D-N.Y.). "But 
I certainly want them to treat him." 
Staff writer Brian Couturier contributed to this story. 
