THREE CHEERS / HERBERT J. VIDA: WINNERS NAMED IN SLOGAN CONTEST 
Joe Leicht, a graduating senior at Placentia's El Dorado High School, won first 
place and $650 for his entry in the Americanism Educational League's 20th 
annual Patriotic Slogan Contest, open to Orange County high school seniors. 
His slogan was "America -- Where Freedom Is Job 1!" It was judged best of the 
10,135 submitted. 
Andrea Higuera of El Toro High School won second place and $450 for "Strong 
Defense -- Forget Dollars, Think Sense." 
Third place and $300 was taken by Scott Fitzpatrick of Canyon High School in 
Anaheim, who submitted "Freedom -- The Universal Language." 
The traditional Trustees Trophy was awarded to Alex Vuong Nguyen of La Quinta 
High School in Garden Grove for her entry, "Drug Users Are Big Losers." She 
also received $75. 
Laguna Hills resident Sharlene Goodman, a licensed speech pathologist who 
co-owns a speech and audiology center in Laguna Hills, has been named the 1990 
Cal State Long Beach Distinguished Alumnus from the School of Humanities. She 
graduated with a bachelor's degree in 1973 and a master's degree in 1975. 
Geoffrey M. Moore, 19, and Susan L. Pipes, 21, both Fullerton residents and 
students at Fullerton College, were named Man and Woman of the Year for 1990 by 
the school. 
A photograph by Newport Beach resident Drew Motta, a senior art and design 
student at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, was used in the final competition of a 
printing press operators contest. The photo was entitled "Eyeglasses." 
Each of the 170 press operators from 11 states participating in the contest 
used identical machines to produce a two-color brochure that featured his 
photograph. 
Motta attended the final competition held in Long Beach at the annual Gutenberg 
Festival, a graphic arts trade show and exposition that drew hundreds of 
spectators. 
Garden Grove resident Cecilia Shu-Tzu Rai, a senior at Mater Dei High School in 
Santa Ana, was awarded a $1,000 scholarship from San Diego-based Tough On Drugs 
Inc., a national nonprofit organization dedicated to fighting the war on drugs. 
Students nationwide were given the opportunity to vie for scholarships by 
writing a short essay summarizing their anti-drug efforts and outlining their 
school, community and employment activities. 
Rai has served on the Orange County Student Advisory Council Against Drug Abuse 
for two years. 
Sunny Hills High School junior Michael R. Verity of Fullerton constructed a 
wood rail fence at the Santa Ana Zoo's eagle exhibit as his commuity project to 
attain the Boy Scouts' Eagle rank. He was feted at a Court of Honor at the 
First Presbyterian Church in Fullerton. 
The Greater Irvine Lions Club was named Lions Club of the Year, and its 
president, Vernon Bonar of Corona del Mar, received the district governor's 
award as Best Lions Club President in the Saddleback Region. 
The Irvine club competed against other clubs in District 4-L4, which includes 
Orange County and portions of Los Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino 
counties. 
In naming the Irvine club, district officials recognized its numerous donations 
of labor, material and money to local organizations and needy individuals in 
the greater Irvine area. 
Gia Crecelius, a 1987 graduate of Mater Dei High School in Santa Ana, was named 
Colorado's Miss Teen All-American and will participate in the July 13-14 
national pageant in Miami. A student at Colorado College in Colorado Springs, 
she is the daughter of Anahid and Daniel Crecelius of Fountain Valley. 
Arthur Zepeda of Fullerton High School and Jeffrey Fuentes, Francisco Quinones 
and Rudy Torres, all Santa Ana High School students, were presented $1,000 
scholarships by the Hispanic American Commitment to Education Resource, a 
community program funded by the McDonald's Operators' Assn. of Southern 
California. 
The four honor students, from families experiencing financial hardships, rank 
in the top 5% of their graduating classes. 
Criteria for their selection included grades, letters of recommendation, 
academic class ranking and leadership qualities. 
