CERTIFYING PRODUCE 
Your May 21 editorial "Gimmicks Won't Do," criticizing the state's Quality and 
Safety Assurance Program, indicates a lack of knowledge of the program and the 
food safety issue. 
The certification program is intended to let consumers know about California's 
$40 million pesticide regulatory system, far and away the world's most 
progressive and comprehensive system to assure consumer food safety. The 
program is more than a stamp on a box of fruit. Under the proposal, growers are 
required to report all pesticides used on a crop in order to use the state's 
certification seal. The state will also increase its pesticide monitoring 
program by 20%. The certification program is a proper and prudent step in 
assuring the public that the food they purchase and consume is the safest in 
the world. 
While we agree the program is going to be expensive, it is important to 
remember that growers themselves are voluntarily footing the bill, something 
you failed to mention. 
Your editorial states that "even when a grower follows existing regulations, 
the crop may not be free of pesticides." You also said "the proposal would give 
assurances that food is safe when it may not be." The science of toxicology 
adheres to the widely accepted principle that the dose of a chemical causes 
toxicity, not the mere presence of a chemical in our food supply. Even so, 1987 
statistics from the California Department of Food and Agriculture show nearly 
80% of 14,000 produce samples tested with no pesticide residues. These samples 
are in addition to those tested by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. I 
think that speaks highly of the system in place in to safeguard the public. 
The proposal was not "forced" to the Legislature for budget approval as a 
result of any article that appeared in your newspaper. To obtain the necessary 
start-up funding, CDFA was required to go through the established legislative 
process to obtain a budget appropriation to start the program as soon as 
possible. 
The public has become confused and concerned about food safety. A topic as 
important as food safety deserves to be addressed openly and honestly. The 
public should hear the facts about what is being done to produce and promote a 
healthy food supply. We believe your readers deserve nothing less. 
BOB L. VICE 
President 
California Farm Bureau Federation 
Sacramento 
