SHAMIR FORMS FAR-RIGHT COALITION TO RULE ISRAEL 
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir formed the most right-wing coalition in Israeli 
history Friday and said its top priority would be Jewish emigration from the 
Soviet Union. 
After protracted last-minute wrangling, seven right-wing and religious parties 
and three independent members of the Knesset signed a coalition accord that 
calls for expanded Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
The accord came 12 weeks after the dovish Labor Party brought down a national 
unity government over Shamir's refusal to accept U.S. proposals for 
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. 
The new government, which claims the backing of 62 members of the 120-seat 
Knesset, will seek a vote of confidence Monday. But political sources said the 
coalition was highly unstable and unlikely to last long. 
Once it takes office, Shamir could quickly become a prisoner of hawks in his 
own party, of ultraorthodox rabbis, and what one aide described as "right-wing 
crazies." 
The pressures may drive him to seek early elections or a renewed unity 
government with Labor, political sources said. 
"It's very difficult if you only have a narrow majority and you can be 
blackmailed on every parliamentary vote. There will be three crises a week in 
this coalition," a seasoned Cabinet official said. 
The unpopularity of the new government, which opinion polls showed only 14% of 
Israelis wanted, could also increase public pressure for a reform of an 
electoral system that gives fringe parties the balance of power. 
"Whatever government is formed, it is clear that Israel's political system is 
rotten to the core," political commentator Yeshayahu Ben-Porat wrote in the 
mass-circulation Yedioth Ahronoth. The newspaper Maariv, in an editorial, 
lambasted the country's politicians as "pigs, pimps and prostitutes." 
An exhausted-looking Shamir, 74, toasted his new coalition as "a national 
government that will conduct affairs of state during a tough period with many 
dangers." 
But even after signing the pact, religious parties continued to haggle for 
control of the ministries of religion and education. 
"The government's main effort will be on the most important matter in our lives 
today -- the mass immigration flowing into the country and the absorption (of 
immigrants)," Shamir said. 
Israel expects up to 250,000 Soviet Jews to arrive this year and Jewish Agency 
officials disclosed last week that about 1.1 million Soviet Jews had received 
immigration visas. 
If it holds, the Cabinet will be dominated by opponents of peace talks with the 
Palestinians and advocates of increased Jewish settlement in the occupied 
territories. 
Political commentators said it could set Israel on a collision course with the 
United States, its guardian ally. 
"Barring a miracle, Shamir will find himself in direct conflict with the United 
States, the Soviet Union, Europe, the Palestinians and the Arab world," 
diplomatic commentator Akiva Eldar wrote in the Haaretz newspaper. 
The coalition's policy guidelines said the new government would work to 
"strengthen, expand and develop" Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank 
and Gaza Strip, the biggest source of friction between Israel and Washington. 
"Settlement in all parts of the land of Israel is the right of the Jewish 
people and an inseparable part of national security," the document said. 
Shamir said he had not finalized Cabinet posts, but sources in his Likud party 
said a troika of hard-liners -- David Levy, Ariel Sharon and Yitzhak Modai -- 
would receive the key ministries of foreign affairs, housing and finance. 
Sharon, architect of Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon and the most 
controversial figure in modern Israeli politics, will have overall control of 
immigration. 
Dubbed the "constraints ministers," the trio forced Shamir last July to accept 
hard-line restrictions on his government's peace initiative for Palestinian 
elections leading to self-rule in the occupied territories. 
The new policy guidelines reaffirmed that plan, but added one key constraint -- 
ruling out Palestinian elections or autonomy in Israeli-annexed East Jerusalem. 
