LATIN LABOR REVOLT; 
THESE DAYS, MAIDS AREN'T SO DOMESTIC 
During the seven years that Nadir Soares worked as a maid in the home of a 
large family, she started every day before dawn and often ended after 9 p.m. 
"The next day, get up again, the same thing," Soares, 42, recalled recently. 
She made about $45 a month, less than Brazil's minimum monthly wage of $57. One 
Saturday each month was her only day off. At the end of March, Soares fell ill 
with high blood pressure and anemia and, after missing several weeks of work, 
she was fired. 
Soares, a thin woman with an air of patient resignation, told her story as she 
waited to talk with a lawyer about what she could claim as compensation from 
her former employer. Other women, all maids, also waited. 
No Vacation Time 
Zilda da Silva, 36, wanted to ask the lawyer if she could demand pay for 
vacation time she never received during the six years she worked for a family. 
Maria Cecilia Teixeira, 37, wanted the extra pay she said she was promised for 
working from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. without a day off for three months. 
The lawyer, Rosane Lima Franco, said about 60 maids come to her each week with 
questions about their legal rights. She said she helps file an average of 40 
official demands a week. 
"Domestic employees are unprotected, unfairly treated and alienated by the 
whole society," Franco said. 
That is true not only in Brazil but also in most other Latin American 
countries, where "domestic employees," or maids, are a huge female underclass, 
numbering in the tens of millions. In some countries, most are Indians or 
blacks -- victims of discrimination not only because of their social class and 
sex but also because of their race. 
Miserable Wages 
But Latin American domestics are increasingly less willing to accept 
exploitation and miserable wages with docile resignation. Around the region, 
there are stirrings of discontent in the quarters behind the kitchen as more 
domestic employees organize to defend their rights and demand their due. 
More than just a campaign for labor rights, this growing movement also tackles 
the injustices of a class structure that has been part of Latin American social 
fabric for centuries. 
Lawyer Franco works with Rio's Professional Assn. of Domestic Workers, an 
organization that has been struggling since 1960 to improve conditions for 
maids and other household employees. By most accounts, the struggle made little 
headway until the national Congress began drafting a new Brazilian constitution 
in 1987. 
The Rio association and similar groups from other cities began a lobbying 
effort that captured congressional attention. Five times between March, 1987, 
and September, 1988, maids gathered at the modernistic congressional building 
in Brasilia to demand that the constitution include basic labor rights for 
domestic employees. 
When the new constitution was promulgated in October, it included such 
guarantees for maids as monthly pay of at least the legal minimum salary, 30 
days' paid vacation a year, a full day off each week, at least 30 days' notice 
before dismissal, four months' paid maternity leave and the right to organize 
unions. 
The success has put wind in the sails of a maids' movement that, for the first 
time in Brazil, is organizing on a national level. In January, a convention of 
nearly 40 local organizations formed a National Council of Domestic Workers. 
One of the main goals of the council is to help organize unions that will 
defend maids' rights and become active in the national labor movement. So far, 
a dozen domestic workers' unions have been formed. 
The maids' movement continues to lobby the Congress for other laws that will 
give domestic employees such gains as an eight-hour workday and premium pay for 
overtime. The movement's main ally in Congress is Benedita da Silva, a member 
of the Chamber of Deputies who once was a maid herself. 
Da Silva gives the Brazilian maids' movement full credit for its "conquests" in 
the new constitution. 
"They fought, they struggled for that," she said. "They conquered those rights 
because they are women who are organizing and are working." 
As a result of their unprecedented momentum, maids have become news. At the 
headquarters of the Rio association, a large bulletin board is filled with 
clippings of newspaper articles about the movement. 
"When was the press ever interested in domestic employees? That is new," said 
Odette Azevedo Soares, a social worker and long-time adviser to the 
association. She said publicity has helped raise awareness among the workers 
themselves. 
"They are starting to become aware that they have rights," she declared. "It is 
an arousing, an awakening to a new reality." 
In less than a year, the number of domestics who come to the Rio association 
for legal advice has increased from 10 or 12 a week to an average of 60. 
Associations in other Brazilian cities have experienced similar surges. The 
maids' association in Recife, in Brazil's impoverished northeast, has increased 
the office hours of its legal adviser from four to 15 a week since October. 
Nila Cordeiro dos Santos, president of the Recife association and chairman of 
the national council, said the new constitutional guarantees have pumped life 
into the movement. 
"Since October, after the new constitution, it began to grow a lot because the 
employees began to believe that change is possible," Dos Santos said. "Before, 
they didn't believe anything." 
Still, the movement's membership includes only a small fraction of the more 
than 3 million Brazilians who are registered as domestic employees. And leaders 
of the movement say the number of unregistered maids may be nearly twice as 
large. 
In Brazil, as in the rest of Latin America, more women are employed as 
domestics than in any other occupation. A study by the U.N. Economic Commission 
for Latin America estimated that at least 20% of the region's paid female 
workers are domestic employees. 
In most countries, a maid's pay is no more than $30 to $50 a month, according 
to the 1988 book "Muchachas No More: Household Workers in Latin America and the 
Caribbean." Muchachas means "girls" in Spanish, a patronizing term for maids. 
"Domestic workers are searching for unity and are communicating among 
themselves; they are attempting to integrate their struggle with other sectors 
of the working class while retaining their relative autonomy," wrote the book's 
editors, Elsa M. Chaney and Mary Garcia Castro. 
In a sign of new unity, leaders of maids' organizations from 11 countries met 
last year in Bogota, Colombia, and founded the Confederation of Household 
Workers of Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Aida Moreno, a Chilean who is the confederation's secretary general, said the 
organization's main work so far has been to establish contact among maids' 
groups in different countries and encourage them to organize. She said groups 
in some countries, including Paraguay and Guatemala, have begun to form only 
recently as authoritarian governments have given way to more democratic 
administrations. 
In many countries, Moreno said, existing domestics' groups are church-sponsored 
and oriented toward spiritual reflection -- but such groups are becoming more 
militant. 
"Today they are taking another line, making demands," Moreno said. "The people 
are seeking to better their condition." 
The domestic servant has been at the bottom of Latin America's socioeconomic 
scale since colonial times, when slaves and Indians did household work for the 
Spanish and Portuguese ruling class. What had been a respectable, temporary 
occupation for young people in much of Europe became a dead-end job for 
exploited Latin American women. 
Just as colonial rulers once relied on Indian labor and slavery in the 
household, the region's post-colonial middle classes rely on the institution of 
the domestic employee. 
"It has its origins in slavery," said Celma Vieira, a Brazilian historian and 
social researcher. 
Middle-class apartments in Rio and other Latin cities have tiny maids' quarters 
beside the utility area behind the kitchen. 
"They don't have a window, they don't have breathing space," Vieira said. "The 
living conditions are degrading." 
Because of their long working day, beginning before breakfast and ending after 
dinner, maids have little opportunity for study or courtship. Sometimes, Vieira 
said, the domestic employee is sexually exploited by male members of the 
household where she works. 
Some feminists have taken up the cause of the maid, but in many cases 
"liberated" Latin American women depend on low-paid domestics for their own 
freedom. 
"For the woman to be liberated, to be a career woman, she has to oppress 
another woman who stays at home and does that work," Vieira said. 
Many maids must neglect their own children to care for those of their 
employers, said Nair Jane de Castro Lima, president of the Rio association. 
"That is why there are so many children on the street," Lima said. "The 
majority are the children of domestic employees." 
Lima and other critics of Latin American social conditions blame the plight of 
maids on class structures that keep a majority of the people poor. She said the 
"bosses" of society must come to understand that only by raising the majority's 
standard of living will a country like Brazil progress. 
But that would mean giving up cheap household help, she noted, adding: "The 
laws are made by the bosses, and they are not going to want to give up that 
perquisite." 
Some Brazilian "bosses" have started a movement to oppose the maids. In 
January, lawyer Margareth Galvao Carbinato founded the Union of Domestic 
Employers in Sao Paulo, Brazil's largest city. 
In a telephone interview, Carbinato said that since the inclusion of new rights 
in the constitution, homemakers have been "driven to desperation" by an "excess 
of demands" from domestics. 
Carbinato, 35, said the new employers' union has begun a blacklist of "bad 
domestic employees" accused of stealing or making "abusive" demands. It also 
has prepared documents useful to employers, including standard labor contracts, 
work rules and warning slips "to show how far the rights of employees go and 
where the rights of employers begin." 
