HOT PROPERTY: STREISAND STARS IN $6-MILLION DEAL 
BARBRA STREISAND closed escrow last week on the former Richard Harris home in 
the Beverly Hills post office area. 
Title was taken in the name of a trust to benefit the actress, said realtors 
not involved in the nearly $6-million deal. The house was sold by John 
Donnelly, described as the British actor's "front man." 
Neither Stephen Shapiro, president/partner of Stan Herman &amp; Associates, who 
represented the seller, nor Juan Alvarez of Alverez, Hyland &amp; Young, who 
represented the buyer, would comment. 
The house was built in the late 1930s by architect Wallace Neff for pioneer 
film maker King Vidor. Singer/songwriter Mac Davis and Broadway 
composer/lyricist Jerry Herman were later owners. Harris bought it in the '70s 
but never lived there. 
The 1987 film "The Witches of Eastwick" was filmed in the barn-style house, on 
6 acres with a view from the ocean to downtown. The house will be torn down by 
Streisand, according to sources. 
Streisand also has homes in Holmby Hills and Malibu. Her Malibu compound has 
been for sale since 1987. Bruce Nelson of Asher Dann &amp; Associates has the 
current listing, at $19 million. 
CHRISTOPHER SKASE, known as the Donald Trump of Australia, is buying the Goetz 
Estate in Holmby Hills, real estate sources say. 
Skase, whose Qintex Entertainment announced in April that it would buy MGM-UA 
Communications Co. for $1 billion, has been house hunting for months but opened 
escrow a few days ago, we were told, on the 17,000-square-foot Georgian-style 
house. 
Referring to what Skase is paying for the mansion, a Beverly Hills realtor who 
asked for anonymity said: "He's paying in the 8s. We're talking millions, of 
course." Asking price was $12 million. 
Built in 1934, the house was owned for years by Edie Goetz, daughter of movie 
mogul Louis B. Mayer, and her producer-husband, William. The star-studded 
dinner parties they gave at the house were renowned during Hollywood's golden 
era. 
William Goetz died in 1969; Edie, a year ago this month. The 2-acre property is 
being sold by their daughters, Judith Shepherd of Beverly Hills and Barbara 
Windom of Malibu. 
There is another house for sale at $22 million in Orange County. That was 
believed to be the highest price ever asked for an Orange County home when a 
Tustin house, listed with Beverly Hills agent Bruce Nelson, came on the market 
in February. 
Now Marion Buie, a Newport Beach broker, has a $22-million listing: the 
18,500-square-foot South Laguna home of Harry Reinsch, former president of 
Bechtel Corp., and his wife, Helen. 
"They just aren't using it that often," Buie said. The Reinschs' principal 
residence is in San Francisco, and they have another house in Rancho Mirage. 
It should be fun to see which house becomes the county's largest single-family 
sale. So far, the highest is thought to be the $6.5-million purchase in 
December of John Wayne's former Newport Beach home by Robert Cohen, co-owner of 
the Four Seasons hotel in Los Angeles. 
Besides the $22-million listings, an impending Orange County sale is in the 
running: the 18,000-square-foot house under construction on Harbor Island and 
in escrow for "close to its asking price" of $14.5 million, according to its 
listing broker. He wouldn't say when escrow will close, but the house won't 
even be completed for eight months. 
Farther south . . . La Jolla is getting its share of multimillion-dollar home 
sales, judging from three handled by the Willis M. Allen Co. 
Among them was the $9.95-million sale of an estate with a view stretching to 
Newport Beach. That 5-plus-acre property has waterfalls, nature trails, golf 
greens, a tennis court, lap and free-form pools, spas, a basketball court, an 
office suite, a wine-tasting room, a wine cellar and a garage that can house 
eight cars, including a limousine. 
The seller was Douglas F. Manchester, developer of the Hotel Intercontinental 
(now the San Diego Marriott) and chairman of Torrey Enterprises, and the buyers 
were William Bennett and his wife, Sam, owners of the Circus Circus 
Hotel/Casino in Las Vegas. 
Then there was the $5-million-plus purchase of a 33-room, 17-year-old mansion, 
which has an indoor/outdoor swimming pool as well as racquetball/handball and 
tennis courts, a golf green, a gym, spa, sauna and a shuffleboard court. The 
buyer was David Dunn, a longtime La Jolla resident and chairman of Prime 
Computer. 
Finally, there was the $3.1-million-plus sale of an 8,365-square-foot home 
built in the '30s and extensively remodeled in 1973. That 1.5-acre property has 
fountains, tennis court and three wine cellars. It was owned by investor and 
former Las Vegas casino owner Allen Glick and was purchased by sports attorney 
Jeremy Kapstein. 
