PANEL CANNOT HEAR PORTER RANCH PLAN, L.A. RULES 
The Los Angeles city attorney's office on Wednesday disqualified the Planning 
Commission from hearing or voting on plans for a $2-billion residential and 
commercial development in Porter Ranch, saying a commissioner who owns property 
near the project has a conflict of interest. 
Assistant City Atty. Anthony S. Alperin said Commissioner Theodore Stein Jr. 
has a conflict because he is part owner of a 10-acre, 19-home tract at Rinaldi 
Street and Canoga Avenue, about a mile from the Porter Ranch site. 
Because of the conflict, the proposal will be heard by the five-member Board of 
Referred Powers. The board is made up of City Council members and headed by 
Councilman Hal Bernson, who has received $50,380 in campaign contributions from 
the project's developer and associates since 1982. 
The development firm, headed by Beverly Hills builder Nathan Shapell, wants to 
build 2,195 single-family homes, 800 multifamily housing units and 7.5 million 
square feet of commercial space. Bernson has recommended reducing the 
commercial area to about 6 million square feet and adding 400 multifamily 
units. 
Changes Would Affect Tract 
Alperin said street improvements and traffic mitigation measures required for 
Porter Ranch would affect the Stein tract. The improvements would include a 
traffic signal at Rinaldi and Canoga, street restriping and the completion of 
Rinaldi Street south of the Simi Valley Freeway. 
Alperin said any Planning Commission decision on the Porter Ranch project and 
the area's general plan "would have a material financial effect on Mr. Stein's 
property." He said the city Department of Transportation concluded that the 
improvements would benefit the 19-home subdivision. 
The ruling marks the sixth time this year that the city attorney's office has 
disqualified the Planning Commission from considering project plans because of 
a financial or non-financial conflict of interest, Alperin said. The Porter 
Ranch proposal cannot be heard by the other four commissioners because the City 
Charter requires disqualification of an entire board if any member has a 
conflict. 
Stein said he did not believe the proposed traffic improvements "would benefit 
or hurt me." He said by the time the improvements could be completed, he will 
have sold his property. 
Stein said nine homes in the subdivision have closed escrow, four are in escrow 
and the remaining six will be sold within the next six months. 
'No Ownership Interest' 
"After that, I will have no ownership interest in that property whatsoever," he 
said. 
But Alperin said the conflict existed. 
"Unless he would be disqualified, he would be called upon to make a decision 
today that would have an effect on his property," Alperin said. "The fact that 
he owns it now is the relevant consideration." 
Commissioner Suzette Neiman also owns property in the subdivision, but she was 
not included in the ruling because only Stein had asked the city attorney's 
office to assess his potential conflict, Alperin said. 
Bernson, whose council district includes the proposed development site in the 
hilly Porter Ranch area north of Chatsworth, called the city attorney's ruling 
"a very poor and improper decision. 
"There is not the possibility of personal gain for the commissioner," he said. 
"It's ridiculous. It's a tragedy that casts a shadow of doubt on the entire 
commission system." 
Bernson said contributions he received would not affect his view of the 
project. "I have no personal gain in this thing," he said. 
Twenty companies and individuals involved with the project, including Porter 
Ranch Development Co., its consultants and lobbyists, have donated to Bernson 
over the last seven years, according to campaign documents. 
"Contributions do not affect my decisions at any time or with anyone," Bernson 
said. "I listen to everyone equally. That's my job. I have nothing to be 
ashamed of and nothing to hide. I don't have any conflicts." 
Alperin said Bernson should not be disqualified from voting on the plans 
because the city has "no facts to indicate that he has a conflict. The fact 
that he received contributions from persons associated with this project does 
not form a legal basis for disqualification." 
Other members of the Planning Commission, which had been scheduled to consider 
the plan at a hearing today, said the ruling upset them. 
"I'm disappointed with the conclusion that was reached," said Commission 
President William G. Luddy. He said the decision may set a bad precedent. 
"I'm particularly concerned by the implications this might have for the 
operations of commissions in general," he said. 
In effect, the issue will go to City Council members without being addressed 
first by planning commissioners, who are not elected officials. 
Project opponents also were disappointed by the ruling. "It's unfortunate," 
said David Miller, president of the Granada Hills Chamber of Commerce. "My 
concern is whether there will be an adequate hearing of the issue since one 
step is removed." 
But spokesmen for the development said they had no quarrel with the decision. 
"We have no interest one way or the other on who hears it," said Paul Clarke of 
Porter Ranch Development Co. "Our position is that we are happy to present the 
plan before any of the two panels. The plan is an excellent one, and if it's 
good in one place, it will be good in another." 
Bernson said the plan should come before the board within the next two weeks. 
He said that although the Planning Commission already has considered the plan 
at a public hearing, the board will have to hold another public hearing. 
