NAVY STAGED A WAR, BUT THE 'ENEMY' WAS LEFT SITTING ON THE LAUNCH PAD 
An attack was expected at any minute, but the enemy was having problems getting 
its missiles off the ground. 
More than 100 miles off the Ventura coast, a U.S. Navy battle group of five 
ships waited for the chance to blast the incoming missiles out of the sky. 
And waited. 
Officials had hoped to provide a rare public view of what goes on at the 
Pacific Missile Test Center at Point Mugu as well as a display of Navy 
firepower. 
But the plans went awry back at the launch pad. In a sense, it was as if the 
Navy had given a war and nobody came. 
The military dramatics began just after dawn Tuesday when the commanding 
officer of the Pacific Missile Test Center, Rear Adm. G. H. Strohsahi Jr., told 
a room of reporters that they soon would be in the middle of the coming action. 
Rare Glimpse of War Game 
As the press munched on doughnuts, Strohsahi announced that they would be flown 
by helicopter to the Antietam, one of the nation's newest guided missile 
cruisers, for a rare glimpse of a Navy war game. 
"Our purpose today is to give you a chance to see the real Navy in action," 
Strohsahi said. "The Antietam is in the middle of a war right now. You're going 
to go out and see four hours of that war." 
The Navy's readiness exercise had begun the previous Saturday. On this Tuesday, 
the Antietam was preparing to try to knock two incoming missiles out of the air 
before they reached the ship from their launch pad on San Nicolas Island. 
But the enemy attack never got off the ground. While the Navy was preparing to 
blast the daylights out of any "enemy" missiles aimed at the Antietam, there 
was an unexplained breakdown at the launch site. 
An aging Navy H-46 Sea Knight transport helicopter had already delivered the 
Antietam's visitors to the expected battle site, and the ship's commanding 
officer, Capt. Larry E. Eddingfield, had delivered his welcoming speech when 
the launch problems were first reported. 
At first, there was talk of a brief delay. Then there was talk of a long delay. 
Finally, there was a decision to scrub the public missile deal altogether. 
"Things break," Eddingfield said. 
A Consolation 
One immediate consolation as reporters proceeded with a scheduled tour of the 
Antietam was the rather obvious conclusion to be drawn that it would have been 
a pretty lopsided war in any event. 
Heading to the bow of the missile cruiser, Lt. Cmdr. Lanny King, the ship's 
combat systems officer, first pointed out the Antietam's missile launching 
system, capable of firing a mix of 122 Standard, Harpoon and Tomahawk missiles 
with nuclear capability if deemed appropriate. 
Then King showed off the rest of the ship, including the sophisticated AN/SPY 
1A radar system that makes the Antietam and other AEGIS missile cruisers the 
most electronically advanced surface battleships in the U.S. fleet, virtual 
floating radar shields for the battleships and aircraft carriers they were 
designed to protect. 
Against the Antietam's formidable defenses, the Navy had been planning to 
launch two of its antique and unarmed Talos missiles, once part of the nation's 
military arsenal but now useful only as expendable targets for high-tech Navy 
firing practice. 
Some of the Antietam's officers pointed out that the Talos missiles 
occasionally never got close enough to a cruiser to get shot down anyway, 
sometimes barely making it off the ground before sputtering into a quick form 
of missile suicide. 
Pausing on the bridge of the Antietam, King said the momentary launch failure 
was not too upsetting. 
"I'm disappointed, but there will be plenty of chances in the future to test 
ourselves," he said. "This would have been my 86th shot, so I think I can 
afford to miss this one." 
Watched Ship Fire Shells 
In lieu of a missile blasting out of the 30-foot mini-silos built into the 
Antietam's deck, reporters were given the chance to watch the ship fire some 
five-inch shells from a front gun position and a demonstration of a modernized 
Gatling gun known as CIWS, for Close In Weapons System, capable of firing 3,000 
rounds a minute at approaching targets. 
Then the helicopter returned and it was time for the Antietam's visitors to 
return to shore. Navy spokesmen shrugged off the minor glitch of the day and 
said plans call for more public glimpses of the Navy in action in the future. 
Meanwhile, the Antietam, one of two missile cruisers escorting the battleship 
New Jersey on this particular readiness exercise, continued to prowl the 
coastline, waiting for the inevitable. 
Soon enough, the enemy would figure out how to get its missiles launched. 
And the Antietam would be there, waiting. 
