THE BEST YEARS; 
SENIORS; 
SEX AND SUPPER; 
THE PARTY WASN'T A DUD. MAYBE THE GUESTS JUST LEFT EARLY TO TEST THE TOUCH 
THERAPIST'S TECHNIQUES. 
When my not-so young Ojai friends come down to L.A. for dinner, I always try to 
have a sort of piece de resistance for them to make the hour-and-a-half trip 
worthwhile. 
One time I invited a couple just back from China. Another time I showed the 
video of a terrific French film. The last time I invited Helen Colton, a touch 
therapist. 
Helen is very outspoken about her field, sex therapy. So I was a little anxious 
but thought my guests would enjoy her. 
She came with her companion, retired screenwriter Bobby Lees. Dinner went well. 
Bobby, who wrote the Abbott and Costello comedies of the '30s and '40s, told 
wonderful old Hollywood stories. 
After dinner I took Helen aside to ask her advice. I showed her a letter I'd 
received from a reader, which began "Dear Norma" but seemed intended for Dr. 
Ruth. It read: 
"I am 65 and my husband is 70. We've been married 10 years, second marriages 
for both of us. Up to six months ago when we moved to a retirement community, 
sex was exciting and regular. My husband plays tennis, even singles, so I know 
he's in good physical shape, but he seems to have lost interest. What should I 
do?" It was signed "Trouble in Paradise." 
I also showed Helen my reply: 
"If sex was so great for 9 1/2 years and it diminished in quantity and quality 
just when you moved, it must have had something to do with the move. Either 
your husband has met someone else, maybe a tennis player, or something about 
the new setting is not conducive to lovemaking. 
"Try coming to L.A., see a show, spend the night in a hotel with breakfast. 
Perhaps changing surroundings and breaking out of a tight closed-in 
togetherness might help." 
Then she stopped and clapped her hands until the talking died away and she had 
everyone's attention. "I think you should hear what I'm advising Norma to say 
in her column. It can only do you good. We're all from a very inhibited 
generation." (Helen is seventysomething herself.) "The young may have had a 
sexual revolution, but we haven't. 
"Masters and Johnson, the pioneer sex researchers, started a two-week course 
for couples. The partners are told to begin by touching each other's body -- 
lovingly, slowly, tenderly, gently, playfully -- everywhere but in the genital 
and breast areas. The partners take turns, one being the toucher, the other the 
touched. They discover that they get sensual stimulation and feel exquisite 
pleasure without having to have intercourse. What's more, they keep getting 
aroused over and over. . . ." 
She paused for a moment. 
"When the pressure's off -- that is, when the impotent male sees he doesn't 
have to perform -- he finds he's getting erections more often and keeping them. 
"The non-orgastic female," Helen continued, "learns her body can respond with 
intense desire when her face, lips, eyes, ears, abdomen, knees, and shoulders 
are stroked and her most sensitive areas are deliberately left untouched. 
Eventually, those sensitive areas cry out for contact. At the end of a two-week 
period . . . " 
"Two weeks?" somebody gasped. "You keep that up that long?" 
" . . . when they've learned to touch each other," Helen went on calmly, 
"couples are given permission to have intercourse -- and generally they're able 
to have a satisfying sex act." 
"That was very interesting," I said, hoping to put an end to it. 
"Yes, I've got more," Helen said. "For example, the morning is frequently 
better than the evening -- testosterone levels are higher, and older people are 
fresher. Or I could point out that if nude in bed gets boring, clothed on the 
sofa may be diverting. In other words, time and place and conditions can be 
changed. But the important thing to remember is, as Ashley Montagu, the great 
anthropologist once said, 'Half the world's frenetic sex may be a search for 
the gratification of the need for touch.' " 
I breathed a sigh of relief when I saw Helen had finished. But the guests left 
soon afterwards. 
"They left so early," I complained to Bobby as he and Helen turned to go. 
"Maybe it's just because some have a long trip ahead. But it does look as if my 
dinner party was a big bomb." 
"On the contrary," said Bobby dryly. "They couldn't wait to get home to try out 
some of Helen's advice." 
