MAN GUILTY IN SMUGGLING MISSILE PARTS TO EGYPT 
In a plea bargain with federal prosecutors, an Egyptian-born rocket scientist 
pleaded guilty Friday to attempting to smuggle out highly sophisticated missile 
components to the military of his native country. 
As Abdelkader Helmy switched his plea to guilty to a single charge in a 
multicount indictment, U.S. District Judge Raul A. Ramirez noted that Helmy may 
be required to testify against unspecified officials of the Egyptian 
government. 
During questioning of Helmy, the jurist told him, without elaboration, "You 
could be called on to testify against agents and high-ranking authorities of 
the Egyptian government." Helmy said he understood this. 
In exchange for dropping all but the one charge to which he pleaded guilty, 
Helmy, a former rocket propulsion scientist employed by Aerojet Solid 
Propulsion Co. near Sacramento, agreed to "fully cooperate" with federal agents 
investigating other defendants, including two Egyptian nationals. 
The slightly built, bearded and balding scientist stood stiffly at attention 
during the hourlong session and answered the judge's questions in a soft, 
heavily accented voice. At one point, he said that if the plea agreement were 
to turn sour on him, he would have no option but "to trust my God." 
Helmy, 41, a naturalized American citizen, pleaded guilty to attempting to 
export without a license from the State Department about 430 pounds of a carbon 
phenolic fabric, a high-tech material used for ballistic missile nose cones, 
rocket nozzles and radar-evading aircraft. 
The maximum sentence for the offense is 10 years in prison and a $1-million 
fine. Under the plea agreement, which is subject to approval by Ramirez, U.S. 
Atty. David F. Levy recommended that Helmy be sentenced to serve almost five 
years in prison and be fined up to $358,690. 
Federal authorities have identified Helmy as the key American figure in an 
alleged illegal operation to smuggle missile system components and technical 
data out of the United States to Egypt, an American ally in the Middle East. 
Helmy, who lives in the Sacramento suburb of El Dorado Hills, allegedly was 
sent $1 million from a Swiss bank account between December, 1982, and March, 
1988. Customs agents subsequently seized $810,000 from his bank accounts, which 
officials said would be forfeited to the federal government under the plea 
arrangement. 
Also charged in what the government contends was an elaborate illegal export 
and money-laundering scheme are James Huffman, 47, of Lexington, Ohio, a 
defense aerospace company marketing representative; Hussam Yusef, an Egyptian 
colonel and diplomat based in Austria, and Faud Algamal, who entered the United 
States as an Egyptian diplomat. 
Federal authorities said Helmy had been under close surveillance before the 
seizure at Baltimore-Washington airport last June 24 of a shipment of the 
carbon fabric as it was about to be loaded aboard an Egyptian military C-130 
cargo plane. 
The indictment also charged that in March, 1988, the defendants actually 
smuggled out of the country the fabric and two technical manuals that dealt 
with the use of carbon materials. 
Huffman, free on $250,000 bond, is scheduled to be tried Aug. 8. Levy noted 
that efforts have been under way to extradite Yusef and Algamal, who are 
believed to be in Egypt. However, besides being difficult to pursue, both could 
invoke diplomatic immunity from prosecution in the United States. 
