AMERICAN LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
CLEMENS JUST WHAT DOCTOR ORDERED FOR BOSTON 
The Boston Red Sox, who lately have been putting more players in the infirmary 
than runs on the scoreboard, turned to their pitching ace, Roger Clemens, for 
help Friday night at Chicago, and the two-time Cy Young award winner provided 
an antedote -- a two-hit, 2-0 shutout of the White Sox. 
Ater hearing the bad news that center fielder Ellis Burks would undergo surgery 
for torn cartilage in his left shoulder and be lost four to six weeks, joining 
Jim Rice and Marty Barrett on the disabled list, the Red Sox were heartened as 
Clemens struck out a season-high 12. 
Clemens (8-4) faced just 29 batters. It was the 21st shutout and sixth 
two-hitter of his career. 
Clemens retired the first 10 men he faced before Steve Lyons singled to center 
with one out in the fourth inning. However, he was caught stealing. Ozzie 
Guillen singled to lead off the ninth, but Dave Gallagher hit into a double 
play. 
Danny Heep's infield single in the ninth inning scored Wade Boggs from third 
base. The run, given up by loser Ken Patterson (3-1), who relieved rookie Greg 
Hibbard, broke a scoreless tie. 
New York 8-6, Texas 3-1 -- In a doubleheader that lasted nearly nine hours, the 
Yankees, led by pitchers Andy Hawkins and Jimmy Jones, swept the Rangers at New 
York. 
It was the Yankees' second doubleheader sweep in a week. 
In the opener, Andy Hawkins, who has resumed throwing a cut fastball after 
dropping the pitch four years ago, allowed seven hits and no earned runs in 
eight-plus innings to even his record at 7-7. 
The Yankees broke a sixth-inning 2-2 tie with four runs off loser Bobby Witt 
(5-7). New York sent 10 batters to the plate, six of whom got hits, including 
Steve Sax, who had three for the game. 
In the second game, delayed three times by rain, Jones (2-1) gave up three hits 
in six innings and left after the third delay. Dale Mohorcic and Dave Righetti 
finished in relief. 
Rafael Palmeiro hit his first home run since May 4 for Texas. Don Mattingly led 
off the seventh inning against Drew Hall with his seventh homer. 
Oakland 7-1, Baltimore 5-5 -- Jay Tibbs gave up six hits in seven innings, and 
Joe Orsulak drove in two runs as the Orioles beat the Athletics to gain a split 
at Baltimore. 
Tibbs (3-0) walked two, struck out six and during one stretch retired 10 
consecutive batters. 
In the first game, one day after the Orioles turned the American League's first 
triple play of the season, the Athletics made five double plays. Ron Hassey 
drove in three runs with a single and a two-run homer. 
Storm Davis (5-3) got the win, although he allowed five hits and three earned 
runs in five innings. Rick Honeycutt, Oakland's fifth pitcher, earned his sixth 
save and the club's 25th, the most in the majors. 
Mark McGwire hit his 13th home run, off loser Brian Holton (2-5). 
Cleveland 1, Kansas City 0 -- A bases-loaded walk by Tom Gordon to Pete O'Brien 
in the bottom of the ninth inning enabled the Indians to win at Cleveland. 
Bud Black (6-7), pitching against his former teammates, yielded six hits, 
struck out five and walked two for his third complete game. He was traded to 
Cleveland for Pat Tabler last June. 
With two on and one out in the ninth, Gordon, who replaced loser Terry Leach 
(1-1), walked Dave Clark to load the bases. After Joe Carter flied to left 
field, O'Brien walked on four pitches. 
Right-hander Luis Aquino, just off the disabled list with a stiff neck, started 
for the Royals and allowed five hits and one walk in six innings. He struck out 
four. 
Toronto 4, Seattle 3 -- Fred McGriff's double and a wild pitch by reliever Mike 
Schooler with the bases loaded in the ninth inning helped the Blue Jays beat 
the Mariners at Toronto. 
Schooler (1-1) relieved starter Brian Holman, who had a three-hitter until he 
gave up a leadoff single to Kelly Gruber in the ninth. 
Schooler then hit George Bell. McGriff followed with a drive over the head of 
center fielder Ken Griffey Jr. It bounced into the seats for a ground-rule 
double, scoring Gruber to tie the game. Ernie Whitt was walked intentionally to 
load the bases. 
Schooler, who has 14 saves this season, bounced a pitch to Rance Mulliniks, and 
Bell scored. 
Milwaukee 8, Minnesota 6 -- Greg Brock's two-out, two-run single in the seventh 
inning helped the Brewers beat the Twins for the sixth consecutive time at 
Minneapolis. 
With the Brewers trailing, 6-5, Brock, who missed the first two months of the 
season recuperating from shoulder surgery, lofted a fly ball off reliever Gary 
Wayne that hit inside the left-field line, scoring Gary Sheffield and Glenn 
Braggs. 
