POLL FINDS AMERICANS OPPOSING INCREASE IN LEGAL IMMIGRATION 
Nearly half of all Americans believe that the nation accepts too many 
immigrants and an overwhelming majority opposes bills that would allow even 
more to enter, according to a poll released Monday by a Washington lobby that 
advocates stricter immigration limits. 
The Roper Organization poll, which was commissioned by the Federation for 
American Immigration Reform, was immediately criticized by immigration 
advocates, who contend that it asked the wrong questions of a public that is 
misinformed on the issue. 
When asked whether current laws "allow too many immigrants, too few immigrants 
or about the right number" into the country annually, 48% of the respondents 
said that too many are permitted to live here. Only 9% said too few, and 29% 
said about the right number are allowed to enter. Fourteen percent had no 
opinion. 
More than seven in 10 expressed opposition to legislation that could double the 
estimated 600,000 immigrants allowed to enter the country legally each year, 
20% supported such a bill and 8% were undecided. Congress is considering 
legislation that would raise the limits on legal immigration in order to 
reunite American citizens with their families or attract foreign workers who 
have skills that are in demand here. 
"The bottom line is that Americans want less, not more, immigration," FAIR 
President Dan Stein said. "The poll shows that the age of large-scale 
immigration is coming to an end in America." 
Cecelia Munoz, a lobbyist with the National Council of La Raza, a 
Washington-based organization that supports increased immigration, said that 
the poll's findings were not surprising, given the way the questions were 
framed. 
"When you ask the general public should there be more immigration the answer is 
always no," Munoz said. "But when you talk about families -- reuniting a 
married couple or a mother with her children -- the American public is very 
generous. It's all a matter of the kind of question you ask." 
The Roper Organization polled 1,000 adults, 18 years or older, by telephone 
between April 20 and May 2. In a supplemental survey, 144 Latino adults were 
questioned, bringing the total number of Latino respondents to 201. The poll 
has a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. 
Additional findings: 
 -- Nearly four of five respondents (79%) believe that the federal government 
is doing no better than a fair job in controlling illegal immigration, but 14% 
believe that the government is doing an excellent or good job. The remainder 
were undecided. 
 -- Almost two in three (62%) believe that the country has a "serious problem" 
with illegal border crossings, 29% believe border security is "pretty good" and 
10% had no opinion. 
 -- Nearly half (48%) said that U.S. immigration policy needs revision, but 30% 
believe that current policy is sufficient, and 22% were undecided. 
Stein acknowledged a "tiny" measure of racism or xenophobic concerns among the 
poll's results but downplayed that aspect. 
