GROUPS, INDIVIDUALS ON LIST FOR PASADENA ARTS GRANTS 
City grants ranging from $22,500 for the Pasadena Playhouse to $2,870 for a 
12-year-old musician to $600 for a dance ensemble will be recommended by the 
city Arts Commission to the Pasadena Board of Directors June 13. 
The proposed awards, totaling $180,000, would go to six individuals and 23 
organizations based on their proposed projects and quality of work. This will 
be the first year the city has conducted a competition for arts grants. 
The city received applications from 32 artists and 41 organizations asking for 
a total of more than $1 million under the new Grants-in-Aid program, but has 
only $180,000 to award. 
Dorrie Braun Poole, chairman of the Arts Commission, said the awards process 
has raised a number of controversial issues, particularly including whether 
Pasadena should give money to arts organizations outside the city and whether 
students should be eligible for grants. 
The commission is recommending grants to a number of organizations outside 
Pasadena, such as the Southwest Museum in Los Angeles and the Huntington 
Library in San Marino, based on the service they provide to Pasadena residents. 
The commission based its recommendations on artistic appraisals made by a group 
of peer-review panels that studied funding applications and assessed their 
merit. 
Poole said the panels, consisting of artists, critics and others involved in 
the arts, were given few guidelines. The only instruction given to the panel 
and the applicants was, "Give us quality." 
Most of the money is being recommended for established institutions, but some 
funds were allocated to help individual artists. 
For example, the commission is recommending that Gregory Jefferson, a 
12-year-old flutist, be given $2,870 to continue his musical training. 
Budding Career 
The boy's mother, Joann Jefferson, said that even though her son applied for 
$4,100, she is quite happy with any encouragement the city can offer her son's 
budding career, which has already included solo performances at the Hollywood 
Bowl. "I'm satisfied with any acknowledgement for him, whether it's $500 or 
$5,000," she said. 
Poole said there is no doubt that the youngster has exceptional talent, but the 
question that has been raised is whether grants should be made for educational 
purposes. When the program was being formulated, Poole said, "none of us 
considered that we would, in essence, be giving scholarships." 
In making its recommendations to the Board of Directors, the commission did not 
exclude any of the individual artists or organizations proposed for funding by 
its peer-review panels. But it did change the funding amounts. 
The panels had originally recommended grants totaling more than $250,000. This 
amount was pared to $180,000 by a committee of panelists by putting a cap of 
$10,000 on the top awards. The commission decided to remove the cap and apply 
proportional cuts instead. 
Major Grants 
Three organizations, the Pasadena Playhouse, the Pasadena Symphony and the 
Pacific Asia Museum, received the highest possible ranking in the art panel 
evaluations. The commission recommended allocations of $22,500 each to the 
Pasadena Playhouse and the symphony and $9,000 to the Pacific Asia Museum. 
Other major proposed grants include $16,000 to the Los Angeles Chamber 
Orchestra for concerts at Ambassador Auditorium; $10,500 to the Music Center 
Opera Assn. to bring 3,000 Pasadena children to the opera; $8,000 each to 
Kidspace to expand its ethnic arts festival and the Huntington Library for 
general operations; $7,500 to the Da Camera Society to present chamber music 
concerts at historic sites, including five in Pasadena, and $7,000 to the 
Southwest Museum for general operations. 
Other smaller grants would go toward an experimental art program for preschool 
children, create an art studio at Pasadena Alternative School, help support 
concerts in Pasadena by the Southwest Chamber Music Society and the Coleman 
Chamber Music Assn., and provide general support to the Pasadena Community 
Orchestra. 
Individual artists recommended for funding include Randall West, who proposes 
to produce a billboard and photographs of Pasadena; Richard Bunkall, who plans 
to create paintings, sculptures and drawings; Gifford Myers, who would create 
sculpture and other artworks; Milbre Burch, who would give storytelling 
performances for children and adults; and Sally Storch, who would create six 
paintings depicting city dwellers. 
