MEDICINE BEHIND BARS: QUALITY CARE IS ELUSIVE, DESPITE LAWSUITS; 
HOSTILE PUBLIC, SHORTAGE OF GOOD DOCTORS AND NURSES WORSEN PRISON PROBLEM 
Medicine behind bars begins with the fundamental paradox of caring for misfits 
banished from a society that couldn't care less about their well-being. 
This and a heap of more specific problems add up to a constant struggle. 
Doctors and nurses, in great demand in the outside world, must be recruited to 
work for civil service wages in steel-barred surroundings. The National Health 
Service Corps, a federal program that allowed doctors to pay off education 
loans by working in prisons, was dismantled by the Ronald Reagan 
Administration. 
Convicts bring a hodgepodge of untreated ailments into prison. Overcrowded 
cellblocks sizzle with fear of AIDS, tuberculosis and other contagious 
diseases, and prisons are being forced to open costly geriatric wards for 
graying inmates with heart or lung disease and other chronic conditions. 
One source of relief from many other societal ills, the state legislator, has 
been more likely to dole out condemnation than compassion for criminals -- who 
cannot vote. 
Inmates' advocates say that quality medical care in prisons remains elusive 
despite court orders, national guidelines and more money grudgingly given. 
"There's a general contradiction in providing health services and locking 
people up in steel cages. Prisons deform everybody," said Robert Cohen, former 
medical director at New York City's Rikers Island Prison and an expert medical 
witness. 
Armond Start, medical director of the Wisconsin prison system, added: "Prisons 
are the most anti-therapeutic places there are." 
Most Americans seem indifferent to what happens inside prisons. 
"Prisoners are a pariah kind of constituency," said Edward Koren of the 
American Civil Liberties Union. "We treat them like garbage. You leave it 
outside in the trash can and don't want to see it again. Nobody cares -- unless 
it comes back again." 
Minnesota inmate Henry Jackson, a 69-year-old sex offender who has diabetes and 
high blood pressure, said: "We're just dogs. We're nothing." 
Medical care for inmates is a legal obligation, however. 
The Supreme Court ruled in 1976 that "deliberate indifference to serious 
medical problems of inmates constitutes cruel and unusual punishment." The 
decision made prisoners the only U.S. citizens who are guaranteed medical care 
at government expense. 
Having the right to care does not guarantee Mayo Clinic-style treatment, 
however. No federal or state authority has spelled out what constitutes 
adequate medical attention, so it remains a matter of court interpretation. 
Since 1982, only 10% of the nation's 600 prisons have complied with guidelines 
offered by medical professionals. 
The following court cases illustrate some of the problems in prisons since the 
guidelines were issued: 
* Six inmates in a Pittsburgh prison died within the last two years under 
"appalling, shocking and dangerously inadequate" conditions, according to 
Cohen, who testified in May in a federal lawsuit brought by several inmates. 
Cohen said that one AIDS-afflicted prisoner died of pneumonia, a diabetic died 
from lack of insulin and the other deaths resulted from improper diagnoses and 
treatments of heart attacks and cancer. 
* In Minnesota's Stillwater Prison, a third of the 1,200 inmates and at least 
five guards contracted tuberculosis between 1982 and 1986. The first case was 
not diagnosed until six months after the inmate sought treatment, and 
corrections officials waited until two years after inmates filed suit to test 
for the airborne bacterium in the prison. 
* A 25-year-old convict died in May, 1987, after suffering an asthma attack at 
Deer Island House of Corrections, a pre-Civil War lockup near Boston. According 
to a pending wrongful-death suit, the man was turned away from the infirmary at 
the 8 p.m. lockup, and the guards who dragged him to his cell ignored agony so 
intense that the inmate urinated as he was hauled up three flights of stairs. 
* Hospitalized inmates from Rikers Island were shackled to bed frames and 
watched by guards until 20 months ago. Among them were AIDS patients, pregnant 
women and life-support patients. 
"They were too ill to get out of bed, much less get out of the building," said 
Dale Wilker of the Prisoners Rights Project, which sued to have the shackles 
unlocked. 
* At New York's Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women, several patients 
had to be hospitalized because dentist Donald Collings' drill slipped in their 
mouths while he was drunk, according to a 1984 suit filed by the Prisoners 
Rights Project. Collings resigned and the state paid damages of $650,000. 
Medical care remains a frequent topic of lawsuits filed by U.S. inmates, whose 
numbers reached a record 627,402 in January. 
Courts have ordered eight states and Puerto Rico to improve the medical care in 
their prison systems, and are demanding corrective actions at individual 
prisons in 30 other states. Lawsuits are pending in five states, according to 
the ACLU. 
Obvious Improvements 
But there is unanimous agreement that prison medical care has improved since 
the courts got involved. 
Robert Brutsche, who retired last year after 19 years as medical director of 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons, said the quality of care "improved by light 
years. The changes are like night and day." 
One indication of progress is the amount of money being dedicated to the 
problem. The states spent $80 million on prison health care in 1975 and $215 
million in 1980, according to a survey conducted by the Associated Press. The 
costs this year will be about $1 billion, or about 8% of the $16 billion it 
costs to house inmates, according to national estimates. 
Michigan spends the most, an average of $7.58 a day, for its inmates' medical 
care, according to Corrections Yearbook. Hawaii spends the least, $1.14 a day. 
The national average is $3.57. 
The tide began to turn 15 years ago, when federal Judge Frank Johnson found 
"barbarous" and "shocking" conditions in Alabama and for the first time placed 
an entire state system under federal control. 
Judge's Complaints 
Johnson said that "unsupervised prisoners without formal training regularly 
pull teeth, screen sick-call patients, dispense as well as administer 
medication, give injections, take X-rays, suture and perform minor surgery." 
The conditions, which inmates' attorney Matthew Myers called "symptomatic of a 
national crisis," included these atrocities: 
* A quadriplegic's bedsores developed into open wounds and became infested with 
maggots. His bandages weren't changed in the month before his death. 
* An inmate who required intravenous feedings received no nourishment for three 
days before he died. 
* An inmate who had suffered a stroke was forced to sit on a bench so he 
wouldn't soil his bed. He fell so frequently that his legs became swollen and 
crippled, and he died a day after one leg was amputated. 
Alabama improved conditions enough that federal control was lifted last 
December. One problem Alabama shared with other states was that unlicensed 
doctors were hired to practice on inmates. It was the first state to contract 
with a private company that supplied licensed physicians; now, all or part of 
medicine in the prisons of 29 states is handled by such contractors. 
Doc Holiday Syndrome 
"The norm 15 years ago was a broken-down doctor with an institutional license, 
someone who couldn't practice on the outside because he was too old, too sick 
or an alcoholic," said Dr. Jay Anno of the National Commission on Correctional 
Health Care. 
At about the time the courts began demanding improvements, health-advocacy 
groups were reacting to conditions exposed through rioting at several prisons, 
including the 1971 uprising at Attica, N. Y. 
In 1982, the National Commission on Correctional Health Care identified 71 
minimum standards for medical care in prisons. About 60 prisons have met the 
standards. 
The guidelines recommend medical screening of all incoming inmates, daily 
access to sick call, 24-hour nursing care in hospital wards and uniform 
licensing standards and regulation of doctors, nurses and other personnel. 
While most state prisons now employ only reputable physicians, problems with 
doctors persist. Many facilities have hired graduates of foreign medical 
schools who understand little English. 
Communication Difficult 
"That doesn't necessarily mean they're quacks. Their English is terrible and 
they have a hard time communicating," said William Rold of the Prisoners Rights 
Project in New York. 
Prison doctors may also treat ailments for which they have no training. In the 
1970s, a gynecologist did dental exams at Bedford Hills, the Prisoners Rights 
Project said. In another New York prison, a pathologist practiced general 
medicine and a pediatrician served as an internist. 
Low salary is one of the biggest barriers to attracting doctors. 
Hawaii, for example, pays prison doctors $35,000 a year -- and a third of the 
nursing jobs in Hawaii prisons are unfilled. 
"What doctor in his right mind would want to practice medicine for 
civil-service pay under harsh conditions for a group of patients that doesn't 
like or trust him?" Curtis Prout, director of the internship program at Harvard 
Medical School, asked. 
Or, as Dr. Ronald Shansky, medical director of the Illinois prison system, put 
it: "No one goes to medical school and says, 'Boy, when I get out, I'm going to 
go to a prison and make my mark.' " 
