A FAST NEW TAKE ON CHINESE COOKING; 
RECIPES: IN-HOUSE SEASONINGS AND CHINESE-COOKING METHODS MAKE QUICK WORK OF 
MEALS. 
As my traveling, writing and consulting activities take up more and more of my 
time, I find myself designing meals based on the simplicity and rapidity of 
their preparation. These "quick and easy" recipes entail no sacrifice of 
quality, nor do they imply machine-made "fast food." The menus mean only that 
the more elaborate and time-consuming elements of Chinese cooking have been 
omitted or re-fashioned in order to expedite the preparation of authentic and 
delectable meals. The essence remains the same. 
I have been developing these quick and easy recipes and techniques throughout 
the years. Freshness of primary ingredients remains my first concern. I have, 
however, employed alternative techniques and allowed for substitution of 
secondary ingredients. 
This has not been as difficult as it might seem. Except for a few sauces and 
seasonings, authentic Chinese cookery doesn't depend upon ingredients the way, 
for example, Japanese cooking does. We substitute "Western" or processed foods 
and ingredients if necessary or desirable. Thus tomatoes, corn, potatoes, sweet 
potatoes, asparagus and a host of "alien" foods have been readily accepted into 
Chinese cuisine. 
Remember too that not all processed foods must be scorned. Canned tomatoes are 
an excellent substitute for fresh, and frozen vegetables are sometimes superior 
to (and less expensive than) fresh but out-of-season varieties. 
Techniques too may be modified as the time available permits. Pressure cookers, 
electric mixers and slow cookers, food processors, even microwave ovens have 
been accepted into "authentic" Chinese kitchens. After all, even the wok was 
once an innovation. 
Technique and a few essential seasonings can make everyone's native foods 
"Chinese." They also make for excellent quick and easy food. What matters, once 
a pantry is stocked with some basic Chinese staples, is organization, the right 
recipes and experience. 
Use these recipes as a point of departure. When you shop, do it when you can 
take time; savor the experience of building a pantry. Note that some of the 
recipes have a longer list of ingredients. This is essential to capturing the 
flavors of authentic good cooking. Even quick and easy requires attention, but 
few things in this world are more worthy of time and concern. 
 Scallops are fragile, sweetly delicate morsels and need very little 
preparation or cooking time. They embody the virtues of "quick, easy, 
delicious." In this recipe, they are combined with nutritious, flavorful and 
colorful sweet red and green peppers. The result is a festive-looking dish that 
belies its ease of preparation, perfect for a family meal or as the centerpiece 
of a dinner party prepared on short notice. 
 Preparation Time: 15 minutes. 
Cooking Time: 10 minutes. 
STIR-FRIED PEPPERS WITH SCALLOPS 
1 pound fresh scallops 
2 sweet red peppers 
1 green pepper 
4 1/2 teaspoons peanut oil 
4 1/2 teaspoons coarsely chopped green onions 
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped garlic 
2 teaspoons finely chopped ginger root 
1 tablespoon light soy sauce 
2 teaspoons yellow bean sauce 
2 tablespoons rice wine or dry Sherry 
1 teaspoon sugar 
1 teaspoon sesame oil 
Dry scallops with paper towels. Set aside. Cut peppers into 1-inch squares. 
Heat wok or large skillet until hot. Add oil, green onions, garlic and ginger 
and stir-fry 10 seconds. Add peppers and stir-fry 2 minutes. Stir in scallops, 
soy and yellow bean sauces, rice wine, sugar and sesame oil. Cook 4 minutes 
longer. Makes 4 to 6 servings. 
Note: Asparagus, zucchini or snow peas may be substituted for sweet red and 
green peppers. Mussels or clams may be used instead of scallops. If very spicy 
food is desired, add 2 fresh seeded and chopped chiles. 
 This unusual fish dish makes perfectly cooked fish in almost no time at all. 
The fish is pounded thin (very easy to do) and then actually cooked on the 
plates, which, of course, must be heat-proof. The plates must be preheated to a 
very hot state. Carefully place a little oil on them, place the flattened 
fillets on the plates, add the heated sauce and the fish cooks through in about 
5 minutes. Timing and "touch" are important here. Practice this very quick dish 
a few times before you make it the feature of a dinner party. Once you have it 
mastered, it will delight guests. 
 Preparation Time: 15 minutes. 
Cooking Time: 10 minutes. 
5-MINUTE FISH COOKED ON PLATE 
1 pound fresh fish fillets, preferably salmon or tuna 
5 ounces rice wine or dry Sherry 
Water 
1 tablespoon dark soy sauce 
1 teaspoon light soy sauce 
2 teaspoons finely chopped ginger root 
2 teaspoons sugar 
1 teaspoon sesame oil 
1 teaspoon cornstarch 
1 tablespoon peanut oil 
3 tablespoons finely chopped green onions 
Place 4 heat-proof plates in 325-degree oven. Heat 15 minutes. 
Meanwhile, divide fish into 4 portions. Place each piece between 2 sheets of 
plastic wrap and gently pound until fish is 1/8-inch thick. 
Combine rice wine, 3 tablespoons water, soy sauces, ginger, sugar and sesame 
oil in saucepan and bring to simmer over medium heat. Combine cornstarch with 1 
teaspoon water. Stir into pan and cook until thickened. 
Carefully remove hot plates from oven. Rub each plate with small amount peanut 
oil. Place 1 fillet on each plate. Spoon sauce over top of each piece of fish. 
Let stand 5 minutes to cool slightly. Garnish with green onions. Makes 4 
servings. 
Note: Hot sauce and hot plate will be sufficient to cook fish. Timing is very 
important. Try several times before using recipe for dinner party. Makes 
excellent entree or main course with salad. 
 Orange and lemon are wonderful flavors that chicken breasts readily absorb and 
blend with. This is a classic quick and easy meal, quite fulfilling as a main 
course with plain rice and a salad. 
 Preparation Time: 15 minutes. 
Cooking Time: 5 minutes. 
QUICK ORANGE-LEMON CHICKEN 
3/4 pound boneless chicken breasts 
1 tablespoon peanut oil 
2 tablespoons coarsely chopped garlic 
1 teaspoon finely chopped ginger root 
2 teaspoons finely chopped orange zest 
2 teaspoons finely chopped lemon zest 
1/4 cup orange juice 
1/4 cup lemon juice 
1 tablespoon light soy sauce 
1 tablespoon sugar 
1 teaspoon cornstarch 
1 teaspoon cold water 
1 teaspoon chili bean sauce 
2 teaspoons sesame oil 
3 tablespoons coarsely chopped green onions 
Remove skin from chicken and cut meat into long, thin strips. Blanch chicken 30 
seconds in pan of boiling, salted water. Drain and set aside. 
Heat wok or large skillet until hot. Add oil, garlic and ginger and stir-fry 10 
seconds. Add orange and lemon zests, orange and lemon juices, soy sauce, sugar, 
cornstarch mixed with cold water, chili bean sauce, sesame oil and green 
onions. Bring mixture to simmer. Add chicken and cook through. Makes 2 
servings. 
Note: Remember that chicken continues to cook at least 30 seconds after removed 
from wok. Serve dish cold for exotic picnic item or as part of cold buffet. 
 Chinese cuisine offers some of the most delicious and stimulating barbecue 
sauces. This combination of sauces is delicious with chicken wings, 
transforming an inexpensive food into a delightful dish. Serve these tasty 
morsels with drinks. The recipe is meant for a large group, but for an even 
bigger gathering, simply double or triple the ingredients. They take a few 
minutes to cook but need no watching. Serve them hot or let them cool to room 
temperature. They are just as wonderful after they've cooled and thus make a 
most appropriate picnic dish. 
 Preparation Time: 10 minutes. 
Cooking Time: 35 minutes. 
CHINESE BARBECUE CHICKEN WINGS 
2 pounds chicken wings 
2 tablespoons dark soy sauce 
3 tablespoons hoisin sauce 
2 large cloves garlic 
1 tablespoon coarsely chopped ginger root 
1 tablespoon rice wine or dry Sherry 
1 tablespoon sesame oil 
2 teaspoons chili bean sauce 
2 teaspoons sugar 
Place chicken wings in heat-proof baking dish. 
Combine soy and hoisin sauces, garlic, ginger, rice wine, sesame oil, chili 
bean sauce and sugar in blender and process 5 seconds. Add sauce to chicken 
wings, mixing to thoroughly coat wings. 
Bake at 475 degrees 15 minutes. Reduce temperature to 350 degrees and cook 20 
minutes longer. Serve hot or cool to room temperature. Makes 4 servings. 
Note: Make double batch of barbecue sauce and use later in week as sauce for 
grilled lamb or pork chops. Prepare wings and sauce in morning and leave 
covered with plastic wrap in refrigerator. Be sure to bring to room temperature 
before cooking. 
 This is a refreshing soup and makes a sparkling meal starter. It's a 
year-round favorite of mine because canned tomatoes are one of the few 
processed foods I use. Use fresh tomatoes when available, but remember, they 
cook quickly and need little preparation. Note: The soup reheats nicely. 
 Preparation Time: 9 minutes. 
Cooking Time: 6 minutes. 
TOMATO-GINGER SOUP 
1 pound fresh or canned tomatoes 
1 quart chicken stock 
3 tablespoons coarsely chopped ginger root 
1 tablespoon light soy sauce 
2 teaspoons chili bean sauce 
2 teaspoons sugar 
If using fresh tomatoes, cut in half horizontally. Squeeze out seeds, coarsely 
chop tomatoes and set aside. 
Pour stock into saucepan and bring to simmer. Add ginger, soy sauce, chili bean 
sauce, sugar and tomatoes. Simmer 2 minutes. Makes 4 to 6 servings. 
Note: Recipe can easily be doubled for entertaining number of friends. For 
Southeast Asian touch, add 2 tablespoons lemon juice. For hot summer days, 
serve soup at room temperature. 
