BUSH ORDERS A CUT IN CHINA CONTACTS, WILL OPPOSE LOANS 
President Bush cut off most high-level contacts between the United States and 
the Chinese government Tuesday and ordered action to block China's access to 
loans from international financial institutions. 
The new measures, a break from the Administration's strategy of using 
diplomatic pressure rather than sanctions against the Chinese, were imposed to 
protest the death sentences given to 11 protesters for attacking soldiers or 
vehicles during pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing and Shanghai. 
Administration officials hope that the tactic will prompt Chinese leaders to 
pull back from widespread arrests and prosecutions of protesters and perhaps 
head off executions. 
"The President felt it was necessary to send a strong signal of unhappiness 
with the arrests and death sentences," said a White House official, speaking on 
condition of anonymity. 
The White House chose the punitive actions from a series of possible responses, 
pulling up well short of tough economic sanctions or a break in diplomatic 
relations. 
A White House official said that, within the next six months, China is expected 
to apply for $1.4 billion in loans from the World Bank and international 
development banks. In addition, China has applied for $230 million in loans for 
a power plant and for agricultural development. 
If the United States succeeds in stalling consideration of the loan 
applications, the move could block China's access to crucial international 
financing needed for its struggling economy. Already, the World Bank has begun 
to freeze loans that were pending for China totaling roughly $800 million. 
Announcing the halt in high-level contacts, White House Press Secretary Marlin 
Fitzwater said: "This action is being taken in response to the wave of violence 
and reprisals by the Chinese authorities against those who have called for 
democracy." 
Hopeful Tone Retained 
Echoing the hopeful tone of previous statements, he emphasized that the United 
States recognizes the importance of China and hopes "to continue productive 
relations." The suspension of top-level diplomatic exchanges does not include 
recalling U.S. Ambassador James R. Lilley from Beijing. Bush has argued that 
such a step would be counterproductive because it would block U.S. access to 
information about developments in China. 
The immediate impact of the decision would be to cancel a trip to China 
scheduled for next month by Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher. Over time, 
a halt in contacts between Cabinet and sub-Cabinet officials and their Chinese 
counterparts would impede progress in U.S.-Chinese relations and would be 
likely to curb Chinese access to U.S. goods and financing. 
A White House official said that, while no specific terms were set for lifting 
the suspension, it would require "a lessening of tensions and a return to more 
normal standards" in China. 
With the United States expressing growing concern about the death sentences, 
Chinese Ambassador Han Xu was summoned to the State Department on Monday 
evening to hear the U.S. protest about the sentences and to receive a plea for 
clemency from William Clarke, acting assistant secretary of state for Asia. The 
ambassador said that he would relay the Administration's concerns to Beijing, 
an Administration official said. 
"Sentences of death in Shanghai and Beijing could only deepen the wounds of the 
past few weeks," Fitzwater said before the President's decision was announced. 
Defending Bush's efforts thus far in trying to pressure the Chinese leadership 
to relax its repression of the pro-democracy movement, the White House 
spokesman said that "the President has spoken out faster and stronger than any 
other world leader. His position has been unequivocal." 
No Break in Trade Sought 
He said that the President would refrain from seeking to interrupt U.S. trade 
with Beijing because such commercial activity is "in the best interests of the 
United States' relationship with China." 
"Ultimately, the economic development in China, at least the President seems to 
believe, is for the benefit of the Chinese people and will promote the movement 
toward political liberalization," said one government official familiar with 
the formulation of the Administration's China policy. 
Administration officials are uncertain whether executions of those sentenced to 
death can be averted, and whether China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, and 
Premier Li Peng will continue to pursue hard-line policies indefinitely. 
"It may depend on how solidly Deng, Li and company feel they are in control," 
said one American observer of China. "If they feel they have terrorized people 
enough, then clemency is possible. If they feel they need to terrorize people 
more, then executions are possible." 
As Deng has overseen the liberalization of Chinese economic and political life 
over the last 10 years, trade between the United States and China has 
increased, with the Chinese gaining access to much sought-after Western 
technology for their modernization efforts. Any interruption of international 
financing likely would slow the economic progress on which Deng has focused. 
$14 Billion in Trade 
In 1988, two-way trade between the United States and China totaled $14 billion, 
and it had been expected to reach as much as $16 billion this year. 
In addition to seeking the World Bank loans, the Chinese are seeking membership 
in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based organization of 
96 nations that administers world trade rules. Until the government used 
military force to quell demonstrations in and around Tian An Man Square 2 1/2 
weeks ago, China was expected to gain entry to the organization. The United 
States now could lobby against such a step. 
In a further move, the United States could withdraw the "most favored nation" 
trade status awarded to China, a status granted to favored trading partners to 
ease access to U.S. markets. However, Bush is believed to be reluctant to take 
any measures that would be difficult to reverse and that would hurt the Chinese 
people economically. 
Times staff writers Art Pine and Robert C. Toth also contributed to this 
article. 
VISA RULES ENFORCED -- China acted to screen youths seeking exit permits. Page 
16 
