DIRTY BUSINESS; 
P&amp;G TO FUND RECYCLING OF PAPER DIAPERS 
Procter &amp; Gamble Co. said Tuesday that it plans to fund projects to recycle 
the plastic from disposable diapers into such things as flower pots, garbage 
bags and park benches. 
The pulp lining of the diapers, once "sanitized," could be used in cardboard 
boxes, building insulation and wallboard liner, the company said. 
About 85% of babies in the United States wear disposable diapers, adding up to 
18 billion discarded diapers each year, which account for as much as 2% of U.S. 
landfill use. Environmentalists have warned that the plastic-coated diapers 
don't decompose once they're carted to the garbage dump; that, they say, could 
provide a potential breeding ground for dangerous viruses and bacteria that 
cause polio, hepatitis, meningitis and other diseases. 
"We believe as a company it is our responsibility to ensure that our products 
are good not only for the baby but that they are good for the environment and 
can be easily recycled . . . and incinerated," said Nancy Eddy, P&amp;G's 
project coordinator. 
Cincinnati-based P&amp;G, the largest disposable diaper maker, sells $1.65 
billion worth of Pampers and Luvs annually. 
Speaking at a news conference at the National Press Club, company officials 
said P&amp;G would spend an undetermined amount of money over the next five 
years on recycling projects in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Washington and Florida. 
The project includes an effort with Rabanco Co. and the Solid Waste Utility of 
Seattle, Wash., which will collect used diapers from 1,000 volunteer 
households. The diapers will be washed and sanitized before being separated 
into plastic and pulp. 
'Applaud Efforts' 
P&amp;G will also provide money and soiled diapers to Recomp Inc., a St. Cloud, 
Minn., recycling company that turns much of that city's garbage into a 
composted soil used in landscaping and to reclaim salt-tainted highway strips. 
Carl Lehrburger, an Albany, N.Y., recycling expert who has studied disposable 
diapers for the cloth-diaper industry, questioned whether the recycling of 
plastic and paper would be economically feasible. 
"I applaud their efforts in seeking alternatives to the environmentally harmful 
disposal of their product," he said, but added that the company seems 
determined to maintain its product rather than changing to a more ecologically 
sound diaper. 
In response to the disposal problem, some manufacturers have introduced 
biodegradable diapers -- using a plastic made from corn -- that disappear into 
the environment once discarded. 
Lawmakers in Nebraska, a key corn-producing state, have banned the sale of 
non-biodegradable diapers by 1993. Legislators in Iowa, Washington and Oregon 
have considered similar action. 
But Richard Nicolosi, vice president of P&amp;G's paper products division, said 
the announcement Tuesday was not motivated by market or legislative pressures. 
"I don't think that any one announcement is going to stop the concern within 
state legislatures," he said. "What I hope it will do is focus attention on 
viable solutions." 
P&amp;G said it will also spend $160,000 on an effort to prove that 
competitors' diapers, touted as biodegradable, don't decompose any faster than 
P&amp;G brands. 
