ORANGE COUNTY PERSPECTIVE; 
SHOWING THAT INDEPENDENT STREAK 
Despite a low turnout, voters in Orange County displayed a fascinating mix of 
sentiment on Tuesday. They recognized a shoddy argument, and they seemed more 
willing than before to tax themselves for the common good, even as they 
retained a fierce tradition of anti-tax feeling. Voters wisely and 
overwhelmingly rejected Measure A, which would have required a new county jail 
to be built in Santa Ana. It was a thinly veiled attempt to foist the 
countywide jail crisis on one city, and voters had no problem seeing its 
unfairness. 
Proposition 111, which will raise the gasoline tax by nine cents in the next 
five years, won statewide approval despite losing in Orange County by 52% to 
47%. But that was a small enough margin to at least raise hopes that county 
voters may be ready to approve a half-cent sales tax increase for urgently 
needed transportation and transit projects. Another optimistic note was sounded 
when voters approved Proposition 111's companion measure, 108, which will 
provide bonds for passenger-rail and clean-air projects. 
Last fall, a county sales tax measure went down by 53% to 47% -- a narrower 
edge than ever before. If voters understand that local matches are required to 
qualify for many projects that could be funded by Proposition 111, they will at 
last follow in the footsteps of every other urban county in California in 
approving a sales tax for transportation. 
In some ways, Orange County was true to its conservative image -- with a 
notable exception. It voted against every other bond measure -- 
homeless/housing, school facilities and earthquake rehabilitation (all were 
approved statewide). But it voted for prison construction bonds, proving once 
again it is tough on crime. Oddly, it joined voters statewide to defeat two 
measures backed by the GOP as a way to wrest power from Democrats when new 
district lines are redrawn in 1991. Local voters are at least showing 
independence. 
In local races, voters surprised three incumbents, who now face November 
runoffs, and Irvine Mayor Larry Agran was defeated by Councilwoman Sally Anne 
Sheridan. 
What lies ahead? In Irvine, big changes. At the county level, Supervisor 
Harriett M. Wieder and Dist. Atty. Michael R. Capizzi deserve to retain their 
offices in November. But the strong showing of John F. Dean in the race for 
county schools superintendent showed that 24-year incumbent county Schools 
Supt. Robert D. Peterson is out of step with needs of schools today. 
