THERE'S NO RIGHT ANSWER TO THIS QUERY ABOUT SEX 
Question: I have been in a relationship with a man for about three years, and 
so far it has been very satisfactory except for one thing. I'm not a frigid 
woman, but he wants to have sex a lot more often than I do. I would appreciate 
it if you would let me know what is considered the normal number of times for a 
couple to have sexual relations, either for a week or over a month. 
Answer: You are asking a question for which there is no answer. There is no 
such standard as a "normal" level of sexual activity. It would be just as 
inaccurate to say that one person is abnormally interested in sex because his 
sexual desire apparently is stronger than yours, as it would be to say that you 
are abnormally disinterested in sex because your sexual desire apparently is 
weaker than his. 
Q: There seems to be so much divorce these days that I don't think that people 
who get married really expect to spend the rest of their lives together. The 
ones who get hurt the most are the children. Don't these children who come from 
families where there's been a divorce have more psychological problems? 
A: The loss of a parent through divorce does not seem to be as important a 
factor in determining a child's future emotional adjustment than the quality of 
home life following the divorce. In one study of adults who had experienced the 
loss of a parent when they were children, a history of psychological problems 
was found to depend on the quality of the home life, including the relationship 
between the child and the remaining or surviving parent. 
Q: I don't recommend that athletes should use steroids or any drugs like that 
because they are too dangerous. But I've come to the conclusion that some 
athletes would perform better if they weren't so keyed up before a game. In 
such cases, wouldn't a drink to settle them down sound like a pretty good idea? 
A: Some people who drink do claim that alcohol raises their level of 
self-confidence, and a self-confident athlete may be a better athlete. But 
alcohol also tends to impair the athlete's psychomotor performance. 
For example, an athlete who drinks before an event will find that his or her 
reaction time has deteriorated, as has hand-eye coordination and other motor 
skills. This can be seen most clearly in sports that call for rapid reactions, 
such as basketball, football and tennis. It should go without saying that 
automobile racing drivers should not use alcohol as a means of boosting their 
self-confidence. 
In brief, alcohol will not have a beneficial effect on any bodily function that 
would enhance performance. 
Q: For many years I've been under the impression that one of the things that 
makes pasta such a good choice for a meal is that it doesn't have any 
cholesterol. My sister says that that's just not true. Was I wrong all these 
years? 
A: Pasta made from flour and water does not contain cholesterol. Pasta made 
with egg yolks (for example, egg noodles) does contain some cholesterol. 
Q: It's easy to see why children have to eat a lot more once they enter 
adolescence, but I doubt that girls should eat as much as boys. Am I correct in 
this observation? 
A: Teen-age girls require about 20% fewer calories than do teen-age boys. The 
reason is that girls normally add fat tissue as they mature, while boys 
generally add muscle tissue, and fat needs fewer calories to maintain. 
