SUMMER BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
SMITH PROPELS PANORAMA CITY TO 3-2 VICTORY 
Josh Smith hit a bases-loaded single in the eighth inning to score Fran 
Espinosa and lift Panorama City to a 3-2 victory over North Hollywood in an 
American Legion District 20 Eastern Division baseball game Wednesday at Monroe 
High. 
Panorama City's Shad Ortiz walked to lead off the eighth and was replaced by 
pinch-runner Espinosa, who advanced on Roland De La Maza's bunt. John Langley 
hit an infield single and Colyn Van Buren was intentionally walked to load the 
bases, setting up the game-winning hit. 
With his team trailing, 1-0, in the sixth, De La Maza drove in Sean Henson. 
Later, Van Buren was hit by a pitch with the bases loaded to give Panorama City 
(9-2) a 2-1 edge. It was the sixth time this season Van Buren has been hit by a 
pitch. 
North Hollywood's Harry Marks scored in the seventh to forge a 2-2 tie. 
David Unter (4-1), who struck out 12 in a game against North Hollywood on June 
5, did not record a strikeout Wednesday. Unter, a 6-foot-5 right-hander, held 
North Hollywood (1-10) to four hits to record the complete-game victory. 
In other American Legion games: 
Sun Valley 7, Valley ET 2 -- Marlon McKinney tossed a three-hitter in notching 
his second win against no defeats in a District 20 Eastern Division game at 
Poly High. 
McKinney walked three and struck out three. He also drove in two runs. 
Sun Valley (7-1) scored four runs off Valley ET starter Jason Mansfield in the 
first inning. Roy Lozano hit a two-run single and Robert Aros followed with a 
single that scored two runs, including one on an errant throw. Jonathan 
Campbell scored two runs for the winners and Lozano had two hits in three 
at-bats. 
Las Virgenes 6, Encino-Crespi 3 -- Paul Schaffer continued to pound the ball 
for Las Virgenes (6-5) in a District 20 Western Division game at Calabasas 
High. 
Schaffer, hitting .450, had three hits, including two doubles. 
Studio City 8, San Fernando 3 -- Lorenzo Morales and Mike Engler had three hits 
each, pacing a season-high 15-hit barrage for Studio City in a District 20 
Northern Division game at San Fernando High. 
Conejo Valley 5, Camarillo 4 -- Adam West's relay throw to catcher David Skeels 
caught a Camarillo baserunner at the plate to blunt a two-run Camarillo rally 
in the bottom of the seventh and end the District 16 game. Conejo Valley (11-4) 
scored all of its runs in the first inning. Brett Christenson stroked a 
three-run double and Bryan Corey added a two-run double. 
GOODMAN COLLEGIATE LEAGUE 
Woodland Hills Astros 4, Valley Rangers 3 -- Randy Cooper's run-scoring single 
scored Danny McAdoo in the bottom of the eighth inning at Pierce College. 
Mike Head struck out the last two batters with runners on second and third to 
earn his first save and make a winner of Eric Raba. 
