RILEY, BUSS WORK ON NEW DEAL; 
BASKETBALL: THE FORMER COACH IS NEGOTIATING FOR A FRONT-OFFICE POSITION. HE 
ALSO IS CLOSE TO A NBC CONTRACT. 
Pat Riley's future, the main issue left unresolved after Monday's news 
conference announcing his resignation as Laker coach, is likely to be decided 
soon. 
Riley is close to reaching an agreement with NBC to be a commentator for the 
network's NBA coverage next season, and sources say an announcement is expected 
early next week. 
But it was also learned Wednesday that Riley is not expected to completely 
sever ties with the Lakers, whom he coached for nine seasons. He is negotiating 
a new contract with owner Jerry Buss for a front-office job that could begin 
immediately or wait until after Riley's broadcast commitments are over. 
Buss said Wednesday that, contrary to published reports Tuesday in the Long 
Beach Press-Telegram, he is not negotiating a "settlement" of Riley's coaching 
contract, which had two seasons to run. Instead, Buss said a new contract for a 
different job is being negotiated, even though a job title for Riley has not 
been determined. 
"We have torn up the old contract and offered him a new one," Buss said. "What 
position he would have depends on how free he is." 
Riley and Buss denied the Press-Telegram story that quoted unnamed sources as 
saying that Riley actually was fired, rather than resigning, and that Buss has 
settled Riley's contract for $6 million over 10 years. 
"The decision was totally Pat's," Buss said Wednesday. "I don't know where that 
came from. It sure didn't come from me." 
Said Riley: "It's wrong. It's not true. (Buss) is not just trying to protect 
me. Every indication he gave me is that he wanted me to stay. What he said at 
the press conference about wanting me to stay as coach is exactly what he told 
me all along. 
"Dr. Buss has always been supportive of me and appreciative of what the 
coaching staff has contributed to the Lakers' success. If Jerry Buss -- or 
Jerry West, too -- ever looked me in the eye and told me I was hurting the 
team, I would've left and said so. That's not what happened." 
West, the Lakers' general manager, also denied the report. 
"Jerry Buss did not fire Pat Riley, period, period, period," West said. "To 
suggest otherwise is ludicrous . . . The thing is, this guy just did not want 
to coach anymore. Jerry and (Riley) have a good relationship. That's what makes 
this so ridiculous." 
Riley had two seasons remaining on a contract of $650,000 a season, plus 
incentives. Because he resigned, Riley would forfeit the final two years of his 
coaching contract. Any new position with the Lakers or Buss would be done under 
a new contract. 
"If he is free to do so, he could start with the Lakers immediately," Buss 
said. "Our offer is on the table. He can take it now or down the road. He has 
other deals to negotiate first. I can't comment on those. I only know what we 
have offered him." 
To avoid perceptions of a conflict of interest, Riley might be asked by the 
network to wait to work for Buss until after leaving NBC, should he choose to 
accept the network's offer. Brian McIntyre, NBA vice president for public 
relations, said the league has no authority over the announcers used on network 
telecasts. He said the league would not intervene if a broadcaster were also 
employed by an NBA team. 
Neither Buss nor Riley gave details of the new Laker offer. 
"Dr. Buss has offered me a deal for the future," Riley said Wednesday. "It has 
nothing to do with any settlement. It's just a long-term thing if I choose to 
stay with the Lakers." 
Riley would not comment on the reports that he already has reached an agreement 
with NBC and is merely waiting for the NBA finals to end to announce it. The 
NBC job, a source said, would pay about the same as his coaching salary, 
$650,000 a year. 
Riley also has offers from Prime Ticket, HBO and Columbia Pictures for various 
projects. 
John Severino, the president of Prime Ticket, said: "If his NBC contract will 
allow it, we would like to use him in a variety of ways -- on our news show 
(scheduled to begin Oct. 1) and also at halftime or following Laker telecasts." 
"Everything should be cleared up in two or three weeks," Buss said. "Pat has a 
lot of decisions still to make." 
Laker Notes 
New Coach Mike Dunleavy has met with Bill Bertka, Randy Pfund and Jim Eyan, as 
well as General Manager Jerry West, and soon will decide on his coaching staff. 
It is possible that one or all of Pat Riley's former assistants will be 
retained. But sources said Dunleavy also is considering hiring Jan van Breda 
Kolff, an assistant coach at Providence College and son of former Laker coach 
Butch van Breda Kolff. 
Times Staff Writer Steve Springer contributed to this story. 
