LITHUANIANS GIVE IN, AGREE TO MORATORIUM 
The would-be independent nation of Lithuania, ground down by Kremlin economic 
sanctions and months of pressure, gave in Friday to Soviet President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev and agreed to suspend its independence declaration for 100 days if 
talks begin with Moscow. 
"Two years ago, we chose the peaceful route to independence, the route of 
negotiations," President Vytautas Landsbergis told the Parliament of his small 
Baltic land as he reversed position and urged adoption of the largely symbolic 
measure. "Now the condition for negotiations is a moratorium." 
Formerly, Lithuania's leaders said the unilateral proclamation of independence 
adopted by the Parliament on March 11 was untouchable. By voting 69-35 for a 
conditional suspension, they yielded to a key demand from Gorbachev and 
acknowledged that Lithuania, a Soviet republic for 50 years, was still 
something less than totally sovereign and independent. 
"Seeking negotiations does not mean a retreat -- it means a step forward to 
independence," Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene, one of the original 
advocates of a moratorium, said during the often heated Parliament debate that 
began Thursday and ran for nine hours. 
There was no immediate reaction in Moscow to the vote by Lithuania's Supreme 
Council, as the Parliament is called, but it seemed a clear-cut victory for 
Gorbachev, who is also faced with governments in the neighboring Baltic 
republics of Latvia and Estonia that are bent on independence, as well as 
rising demands for autonomy from minority groups throughout the country. 
By forcing the Lithuanians to backtrack, Gorbachev made them an example for 
other restive ethnic groups and dramatically reasserted his personal authority, 
which is expected to be under fierce attack from hard-line Communists and 
radicals at a national party congress that opens Monday. 
According to officials in Vilnius, Lithuania's capital, the deal offering a 
moratorium in exchange for the opening of negotiations was worked out at two 
meetings between Gorbachev and Landsbergis earlier in the week, as both sides 
searched for an end to the standoff. 
It was not certain, however, whether the 100-day period would be enough to 
satisfy the Soviet leader. 
The document adopted by the Supreme Council says "the independent Lithuanian 
state, seeking bilateral negotiations between the republic of Lithuania and the 
U.S.S.R., declares from the start of negotiations, a unilateral 100-day 
moratorium on the act of March 11, 1990, suspending all legal action arising 
from this act." 
The March declaration, passed by the Supreme Council after little debate, had 
proclaimed the restoration of the independence Lithuania enjoyed between the 
world wars and before Soviet dictator Josef Stalin engineered its annexation by 
the Kremlin in 1940. 
Gorbachev, who has pledged to oppose the breakup of the Soviet Union, denounced 
the March declaration as illegal and hence invalid, and deployed an array of 
pressure tactics to bring the government of the Ireland-size republic to heel. 
Soviet troops seized some government and Communist Party buildings in Vilnius, 
and armored columns rumbled through the streets with the evident aim of showing 
residents that Moscow had the means of reasserting control. 
In April, the central government shut off all shipments of crude oil and most 
of the natural gas to the resource-poor republic. In the 10 weeks since, about 
50,000 workers have reportedly lost their jobs, and Landsbergis has said the 
economy has suffered $173 million in losses. 
Prunskiene told Parliament that it had to agree to concessions, in part because 
Lithuania's economy could be ruined by winter if the sanctions remained in 
force. 
Landsbergis, the leader of the grass-roots group Sajudis that led the 
successful two-year campaign for the proclamation of Lithuania's restored 
independence, was at pains to stress that Lithuanian resolve had not been 
vanquished by months of Kremlin arm-twisting. He said he changed his mind and 
was supporting a freeze of the independence declaration because the wording 
adopted after consideration of at least a dozen rival versions was not 
automatic or unconditional. 
"It is not an immediate moratorium," he told reporters after the vote. "It is a 
promise of a moratorium under certain conditions. We are making a step toward 
an agreement. The next step should come from Moscow." 
The Lithuanian leader said Gorbachev had assured him and Prunskiene earlier 
that the economic sanctions would be lifted as soon as a moratorium was 
approved. 
There was no immediate indication when the partial economic blockade might be 
lifted, or when talks with the central government on a negotiated secession 
from the Soviet Union might begin. 
Many in the republic of 3.8 million consider the 50 years of Soviet rule as 
occupation by a foreign power, and outside the building in Vilnius where the 
Supreme Council meets, dozens of hard-line nationalists assembled to oppose the 
idea of tampering with the March declaration. 
"A moratorium is the death of independence," one demonstrator's sign said. 
Others denounced Kremlin "blackmail" or branded Prunskiene, who endorsed the 
idea of a moratorium two weeks ago, "a traitor to Lithuania." 
As radios blared a live transmission of the proceedings inside, a small group 
of people waved the yellow-green-red flag of independent Lithuania trimmed with 
black ribbon as a symbol of lament. 
Some lawmakers objected that the moratorium would be more valuable to 
Gorbachev, now prey to intense criticism from both the Soviet left and right, 
than to Lithuania. 
The Supreme Council fell silent after the vote, from which two deputies 
abstained. 
Obviously wary of the possibility that Gorbachev could impose direct 
presidential rule, the lawmakers granted themselves an escape clause by 
stipulating that they could cancel or prolong the moratorium and said it would 
automatically be lifted if the Supreme Council were unable to perform its 
duties for some reason. 
Gorbachev has said he is in favor of the constitutional right of the 15 
constituent Soviet republics to secede, but insists that they follow newly 
established procedures that could engage them in a five-year process of 
negotiations. 
Despite his support for the moratorium, Landsbergis sounded a warning, saying 
such talks with Kremlin representatives, far from marking the start of a more 
relaxed phase, would be the beginning of new trials as the Soviet government 
fights tenaciously to safeguard its prerogatives and interests. 
"The true tension and crisis is not the present, it is still distant," he said. 
"When we come closer to the negotiating table . . . then all the little animals 
will be unleashed: slander, quarrel, provocation, threats and all types of 
pressure. Let us prepare." 
