AT 39, DAVE PARKER STILL SWINGING WITH POWER 
At one time he was considered the most complete player in baseball. 
His offensive skills featured blacksmith power and wide receiver speed in a 
tight end body. Defensively, sure hands and a rocket arm earned him three Gold 
Gloves. 
He grew up in the shadow of Willie Stargell, the "We Are Family" leader of the 
Pittsburgh Pirates. It was the late 1970s and early 1980s, and Dave Parker 
ushered in the era of seven-figure contracts. 
Now it is the turn of another decade, the past is clouded by an ugly drug trial 
and a lawsuit brought against him by the Pittsburgh club. Parker is three teams 
removed from the Pirates, still an imposing physical specimen, but not the 
dominating performer he was in his prime. 
His career probably extended by the designated hitter rule, Parker is in his 
third year in the American League. After two seasons in Oakland, during which 
the A's started what many consider a dynasty with two pennants and a world 
championship, he has taken his elder statesman role to Milwaukee. 
The 6-foot-5, 230-pound left-handed hitter ended up with the Brewers as a free 
agent because the A's felt they had enough hitters to pick up his at-bats, even 
though Parker led them in RBIs last year. It was a decision that didn't 
surprise Parker, but is not one with which he necessarily agreed. 
"I had some indication it would be a problem to sign there again," said Parker. 
"With the kind of talent the A's have, they probably felt they didn't have to 
gamble on 38-year-old Dave Parker. 
"As it looks now, it hasn't hurt them yet," he said. "But I think there are 
some teams over there (the Western Division) who could come at them, and if it 
tightens up, they might find I could've been used." 
The words roll easily, without noticeable resentment, but it's obvious Parker 
felt his presence in Oakland went beyond his 97 RBI last year. "I think I 
played a role for them," he said. "I think I helped show them what it took to 
win. I represented a lot to them in Oakland." 
In Milwaukee, Parker joined a pair of home-grown leaders in Robin Yount and 
Paul Molitor. His major contribution has been to lend some stability as the 
designated hitter, a role that has been generally unproductive for the Brewers 
in recent years. 
A .322 average and 37 RBI, prior to Thursday night's game in Baltimore, is an 
indication that there is still productivity in Parker's bat. "The first year 
(in the American League) was an adjustment," he said. "There's definitely a 
difference in the strike zone. That first year I had no clue what was a strike. 
But then again it was up to me to adjust to them (the American League umpires). 
The second year you know what to expect, you have an idea about the pitchers 
and how they'll throw to you. Last year I was real productive and this year I 
think will surpass last year." 
Parker isn't the all-around threat he once was, because time rarely allows such 
a luxury, and he has no trouble admitting as much. "You start with the physical 
side of it," he said, applying pre-game balm to knees that have paid a toll to 
AstroTurf fields. "I've lost foot speed -- my position by now would probably be 
first base. That's where I expected to be playing at this stage of my career. 
"But nothing has been lost from my bat speed," said Parker, who hit his fifth 
home run and drove in three runs against the Orioles Wednesday night. "And 
mentally, I'm more mature, smarter. My approach to the game is a help to other 
people." 
Parker's self-analysis of his career makes it obvious that he also finds 
satisfaction with his approach. "I'm totally content with myself," he said. 
"After going through all the trouble in Pittsburgh, the drug trial, the 
lawsuit, to be on top of my game and now to get some added praise makes me very 
content." 
Inevitably there is the question as to whether Parker perceives himself now as 
he did Stargell during his early years with the Pirates. "All of that 
(leadership) is gained by what you've achieved in baseball," Parker said of the 
Hall of Famer. 
"I think Willie and I came in by different directions. I'm a verbalizer, a 
little more of a free spirit than some others, so I think the younger guys feel 
they can identify with me. They know I've been through some adversities, so 
maybe I can understand them better." 
If Parker's game plan holds up, he'll put up a few more numbers for the younger 
players to digest. "I'd like to play 20 years," said Parker, who is in his 18th 
season in the big leagues. "I should be around 2,600 hits by the end of the 
year and if it looks like 3,000 hits is in the cards after the next two years, 
then hopefully I'll be able to stay around." 
