QUOTABLE QUITTERS; 
GOING IN STYLE: THOSE NOTABLE EXITS 
Going in style: As recent events have pointed up, it's not always whether you 
win or lose but how you bow out. 
Charged with multiple ethics violations, House Speaker Jim Wright, who formally 
left his post Monday, didn't just go quietly; he protested his innocence in a 
memorable and tearful speech to the House: "Let me give you back this job you 
gave to me as a propitiation for all of this season of bad will, . . . I don't 
want to be a party to tearing up this institution -- I love it." 
Going in style. 
Humphrey Bogart did it, in the 1943 Oscar-winner "Casablanca," sending Ingrid 
Bergman off with Paul Henreid with these parting words: "Here's looking at you, 
kid." And, of course, Clark Gable as Rhett Butler did it in "Gone With the 
Wind," walking out on a distraught Scarlett O' Hara with the immortal exit 
line, "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn." 
Edward, Duke of Windsor, did it with elegance. Abdicating his throne to marry 
American divorcee Wallis Warfield Simpson, he told British subjects in a radio 
broadcast on Dec. 11, 1936: "I have found it impossible to carry the heavy 
burden of responsibility and to discharge my duties as king as I would wish to 
do without the help and support of the woman I love." 
Richard M. Nixon, on the other hand, having lost the California gubernatorial 
race in November, 1962, snarled at the press, "You won't have Nixon to kick 
around any more because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference." 
After mounting reports of ethical problems, Rep. Tony Coelho of Merced stunned 
everyone last month with his resignation, only hours after his press spokesman 
had said Coelho planned to jump into the race for House majority leader "with 
both feet." Instead, Coelho quit, saying, "I don't intend to put my party 
through more turmoil. I don't intend to put this institution through more 
turmoil. And more importantly, I don't intend to put my family through more 
turmoil." 
Gen. Douglas MacArthur did it with style -- twice. Forced to flee Corregidor in 
March, 1942, he proclaimed, "I shall return." Almost a decade later, fired by 
President Harry S. Truman in a dispute over conduct of the Korean War, 
MacArthur delivered a ringing oratory before a joint session of Congress, 
declaring, ". . . Old soldiers never die; they just fade away." 
The late Shah of Iran gets credit for exiting with understatement. Fleeing 
revolution-torn Tehran in January, 1979, he said, "I am going on vacation 
because I am feeling tired." 
And former President Lyndon B. Johnson, battered by national divisiveness over 
the war in Vietnam, scored style points for his televised speech on March 31, 
1967, in which he told a surprised nation: ". . . What we won when all our 
people united must not now be lost in suspicion, distrust, and selfishness or 
politics among any of our people . . . accordingly, I shall not seek and I will 
not accept the nomination of my party for another term as your President. . . 
." 
It was election night, 1966, and Dick Tuck, having lost his bid for a seat in 
the California Senate, stepped to the microphone to deliver his speech of 
concession: 
"Well," he said, "the people have spoken -- the bastards." 
Now, that's going in style. 
In their 1981 book, "Doing it With Style," international eccentric Quentin 
Crisp and writer Donald Carroll observed, "There are two distinct groups of 
people who are virtually precluded from having style: politicians and 
criminals. Actually, as recent political history has taught us, the two groups 
are more distinct from the rest of us than they are from each other." 
Politicians, they argue, depend for their very survival on the opinion of 
others, something a stylist never frets about. But, they concede, "The ability 
to make a great speech will compensate for just about any shortcoming." 
Former U.S. Sen. S. I. Hayakawa, a semanticist by trade, never did quite get 
the speech making right. There was his unforgettable pronouncement about the 
poor not being affected by rising gasoline prices because the poor didn't need 
gas anyhow. 
Hayakawa, a septuagenarian with a penchant for dozing off during Senate 
sessions, told an interviewer after losing to Pete Wilson in 1982 that he left 
with few regrets: "There was too much to do, too much to pay attention to. Very 
often, at 4 o'clock in the afternoon, I would be trying to remember what I had 
been doing that morning. . . ." 
A basic tenet of stylishness, in the view of Crisp and Carroll, is the 
necessity of bowing out of public life with finality. They believe, "You cannot 
play peekaboo with the world," though Greta Garbo did, as did Abbie Hoffman, 
and does J. D. Salinger. "If you want to vanish with style, you must leave 
behind a vacuum so absolute and so dramatic that the world will be forever 
tantalized by your withdrawal from it." 
The principle applies, presumably, to retirements and job departures, voluntary 
and otherwise. 
From the annals of sports come some unforgettable exit lines. 
Baseball great Lou Gehrig, terminally ill with the disease that would be named 
after him, told the crowd on Lou Gehrig Day at Yankee Stadium, July 4, 1939: 
"On this day I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth." 
Milwaukee Brewers outfielder Henry Aaron, announcing his decision to retire, 
explained: "You can only milk a cow so long, then you're left holding the 
pail." 
And heavyweight Jerry Quarry hung up his gloves with this explanation: "I want 
to leave boxing with a little bit of looks and the ability to talk." 
As the old joke goes, "You're fired." "I quit." 
In his book of strategy, "The Termination Trap," psychiatrist Dr. Stephen 
Cohen, who has worked extensively with individuals caught in the job loss 
experience, offers practical survival tips for the just-fired. 
Among them: Do not pretend to the person who fired you that it does not hurt. 
Don't fuel the fire between you and your ex-boss. Do not go to a bar. Avoid 
acting on the inclination to run away. And: Be aware that "some people, afraid 
for their jobs, may shrink from you as if you were contagious." 
If you decide to fight for your job, Cohen advises, "Be assertive, do not worry 
about your trembling voice and hands or your wobbly knees. If you elect this 
route, you have to go with the drama of it all. It's fair to beg, plead, 
cajole, negotiate . . . this is your final card. . . ." 
Another expert advises: "Race to the bank" and take out the biggest possible 
personal loan. Once you're off the payroll, no bank will touch you. 
Does one seek revenge? Usually unwise. Try to keep the firing an ugly secret? 
Usually impossible. 
In the film, "Willard," Willard, an office clerk, was fired by his mean boss. 
Willard chose revenge. He returned to the office with a suitcase full of 
trained rats, which, on command, attacked the boss, causing him to fall, 
screaming, through an open window to the pavement below. But that's the movies. 
In real life, more subtle strategies may be called for. If your boss invites 
you to get together at an airport on a Friday, cautions one expert, "You are 
doomed. Miss your plane." 
Mary Cunningham wasn't fired; she quit. After a meteoric rise to a vice 
presidency of the Bendix Corp. at age 29, she resigned in October, 1980, citing 
the pressure of "unfounded rumors" and "malicious gossip" concerning her 
romantic involvement with Bendix Chairman William Agee, 42. Agee, for his part, 
assured his employees that "her rapid promotions are totally justified." 
Nineteen months later, Cunningham and Agee married. 
Vanessa Williams, the first black Miss America, was forced to relinquish her 
crown in July, 1984, after Penthouse magazine told of plans to publish nude 
pictures taken of her two years earlier in sexually explicit poses with another 
woman. Williams, protesting that the pictures were never intended for 
publication, said: "It is one thing to face up to a mistake one makes in youth. 
But it is almost totally devastating to have to share it with the American 
public and the world at large, as both a human being and as Miss America." 
Going in style. Capt. Queeg didn't pull it off, rambling on during his "Caine 
Mutiny" court-martial that the trouble aboard the Caine had to do not with any 
shortcoming on his part but with problems in the ship's laundry and a sloppily 
run ship's mess. 
Neither did deposed Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos, who on heading into 
exile in March, 1986, said he left his country because "I have no heart to shed 
Filipino blood." 
Jack Paar's departure in a huff as host of "The Tonight Show" in February, 
1960, was more puzzling than provocative. Assailing the NBC "idiot" who cut him 
off the air during an anecdote network officials thought was in bad taste, Paar 
said angrily, "I believe I was let down by this network at a time when I could 
have used their help." 
Israeli Premier Golda Meir's explanation for resigning in 1968 at age 70 was 
neither eloquent nor lofty. Meir said simply, "I want to be able to read a book 
without feeling guilty and go to a concert when I'd like . . . but I do not 
intend to retire to a political nunnery." 
Convicted spies Ethel and Julius Rosenberg protested their innocence loudly to 
the end. In a letter to their defense attorney, she declared, "My husband and I 
shall die innocent before we lower ourselves to live guilty!" The Rosenbergs 
were executed. 
Heretic Mormon-turned-feminist Sonia Johnson, explaining in 1981 her break with 
the church, said, "I couldn't help feeling uneasy that the church was opposing 
something with a name as beautiful as the equal rights amendment." 
Some of the more stylish ultimate departures are chronicled by Malcolm Forbes 
in his book, "They Went That-A-Way." 
Consider the departure of John Jacob Astor IV, a passenger on the Titanic on 
its ill-fated voyage of 1912. Giving up his place in the lifeboat to women 
passengers, he insisted, "The ladies have to go first." Then, lighting a 
cigarette, he waved to his young bride -- "Goodby, dearie. I'll see you later." 
Amelia Earhart told a reporter in 1937 shortly before taking off on her final 
flight, "I have a feeling there is just about one more good flight left in my 
system and I hope this is it." It wasn't. Earhart, attempting to fly around the 
world, disappeared in the Pacific. 
But Marie Antoinette garners style points for her exit line. It is told that 
the French queen, moments before her beheading in 1793, stepped upon her 
executioner's foot, whereupon she said, "Monsieur, I beg your pardon." 
