TELECREDIT TALKS MERGER WITH SEVERAL FIRMS; 
BUYOUTS: ANALYSTS SAY THE BIG CHECK-GUARANTEE FIRM'S SUITORS COULD RANGE FROM A 
MAJOR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION TO A NATIONAL RETAILER. THE COMPANY'S STOCK SOARS. 
Telecredit, one of the nation's largest check-guarantee firms, said Friday that 
it is holding merger talks with several unidentified firms. 
The announcement sent the stock of the Los Angeles-based company soaring. It 
closed at $52.50, up $9.375, in over-the-counter trading. 
Telecredit, which also processes credit card transactions for small- to 
medium-sized financial institutions, could fetch about $60 a share, or $661 
million, analysts said. Potential buyers could range from a major financial 
institution to a national retailer, they said. 
Despite a highly competitive environment, Telecredit commands about 50% of the 
check-authorization business, handling about $7 billion in checks annually. 
Typically, retailers call Telecredit to verify that customers' checks are good. 
"They make a lot of money at it, and they manage it really well," said 
electronics industry analyst Jackson Spears at First Chicago Corp. "This 
clearly is a good property." 
In a statement, company Chairman Lee A. Ault said: "Although Telecredit has not 
determined that a business combination is its most attractive alternative, 
Telecredit believes it is in the best interests of its stockholders to explore 
the possibility of such a transaction." 
Company officials were not available for further comment. 
Founded in 1961, Telecredit pioneered the electronic check-guarantee business. 
The industry experienced rapid growth in the 1980s, despite a big increase in 
automated teller machines and other forms of electronic payment that do without 
checks or cash. 
The company branched into processing credit card transactions for credit unions 
and smaller banks and savings and loans. That niche allows it to avoid 
head-to-head competition with much larger firms, such as Citibank, said analyst 
Jordan Cox at Johnston, Lemon &amp; Co., a Washington-based investment banking 
house. 
Telecredit also set up a subsidiary, Light Signatures, to market an electronic 
system to thwart the counterfeiting of consumer goods. But the system was 
poorly received and Telecredit decided to phase out most of the subsidiary, 
which caused it to suffer a $7-million loss in fiscal 1988. The company 
licensed most of the anti-counterfeiting technology to other firms. 
The check-guarantee business remains Telecredit's largest money maker. It 
generated about 57% of the company's $158 million in revenues for fiscal 1989. 
Net income for the year totaled $24.9 million. 
The check-guarantee business's annual growth has fallen to about 10% from 
historical highs of 18%, said Cox. But, he added, the lower rate remains 
impressive, given the huge volume of checks that Telecredit processes and the 
increased competition. 
