NO NEW GORBACHEV OFFER ON ARMS, AIDE INDICATES 
Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov suggested here Friday 
that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will not be offering any dramatic arms 
reduction proposals during his four-day visit to West Germany next week. 
Many Western observers had predicted that Gorbachev would climax his first 
appearance in the Federal Republic with a new initiative on weapons or troop 
cuts in Europe, partly to upstage President Bush and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization in the East-West competition for Western European public opinion. 
Meanwhile, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze arrived in East 
Berlin on Friday to brief and reassure East German leaders about Gorbachev's 
first trip to West Germany. 
In Bonn to prepare for Gorbachev's much-ballyhooed visit, Gerasimov told a news 
briefing that the Soviet Union is not happy with remarks by Western officials 
that the Soviets should be "put to the test" in their advocacy of arms 
reductions in Europe. 
"We're against using words like 'test,' " said Gerasimov. "We don't like them." 
As to whether Gorbachev might counter Bush's proposal to cut U.S. and Soviet 
forces in Europe to 275,000 on each side, which the President made during last 
week's NATO summit in Brussels, Gerasimov declared: "There are no reasons to 
demand a quick response from us during Mikhail Gorbachev's visit in Bonn." 
He was referring to statements by Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 
III that Gorbachev should give his response to Bush's proposal during his West 
German trip. 
Gerasimov pointed out that the Bush Administration had taken several months to 
complete its review of foreign and national security policy. 
"We didn't ask him to hurry up," said Gerasimov, ignoring repeated Soviet 
complaints about the slowness of the U.S. review process. 
At the same time, Georgy A. Arbatov, one of the Soviet Union's most prominent 
expert on American affairs, said that Bush's arms control proposals, and his 
call for agreement to be reached within six months to a year, could be achieved 
if the U.S. negotiators speeded up their tactics. 
"A new way of negotiating would be to set a goal and work very quickly to get 
it," Arbatov said. "The Soviet Union would be ready for this new way of 
negotiating." 
Another Soviet expert at the briefing, Nikolai Portugalov, said the Gorbachev 
visit to Bonn should be a "great ice melter." 
West German officials said the major point of the meeting will be a joint 
declaration of cooperation and the signing of a dozen bilateral accords in the 
cultural, economic, and scientific fields. 
In East Berlin, Shevardnadze appeared to be selling Gorbachev's ideas about 
perestroika, the Soviet reform program, to an East German government reluctant 
to accept the new concepts coming out of Moscow. 
"Perestroika has been becoming a fashionable conversation piece in the West," 
Shevardnadze told Foreign Minister Oskar Fischer. "Now and again some incorrect 
comparisons of one socialist country against another can be heard. We stick to 
the principle whereby every fraternal country can arrange socialism in its own 
national colors." 
Fischer replied that East Germany remained a close ally of Moscow and did not 
need any lessons in this regard from the West. 
Although East Germany is Moscow's leading trade partner, it has resisted the 
economic reforms pushed by Gorbachev, which are beginning to take hold in 
varying degrees in East European countries such as Hungary and Poland. 
