EXPLOSIONS STILL RING IN EARS OF NEIGHBORS 
Directing a pained squint at the gutted wood-frame building that only hours 
before had been his home, a disheveled Jack Caminiti leaned against a palm tree 
Tuesday as he pondered his future. 
"All of my clothes, my belongings, my cane -- everything is in there," lamented 
Caminiti, a resident of the Koreatown apartment house that was ripped apart by 
two explosions Tuesday morning. "Almost everything I own is gone. And I have no 
idea what I'm going to do. . . . I just wish I'd had time to grab something out 
of there." 
Instead, Caminiti, who is partially blind, chose to save his most valuable 
possession -- his life. 
"The police came and banged on my door and helped me out of there," said 
Caminiti, who was wearing only the bathrobe and slippers he managed to throw on 
before fleeing. "They helped me out of there just before the place blew up." 
Ten police officers were injured in the blasts, a pair of fireworks-related 
explosions that tore through the two-story Victorian house at 943 Menlo Ave. 
Tenant Arrested 
Gary Wexler, a tenant who police believe hoarded a large amount of fireworks 
that may have triggered the blast, was arrested after the explosion. 
And now, milling about among the throng of neighbors, firefighters and police 
officers outside their charred home, Caminiti and his fellow tenants tried 
desperately to make sense of the incident -- and of Gary Wexler. 
"The explosion was like an earthquake," said Kim Dong Kim, 29, who lives next 
door to the apartment house. "It felt like a huge rumble." 
Another neighbor, who declined to be identified, said he dropped to the ground 
as soon as he heard the explosion. 
"I just fell," said the man, who was across the street when the building 
exploded. "I covered my head and stayed there for a few minutes. Then I got up 
and ran." 
Unhui Harris, who lives in a nearby building, said she had just returned from 
church when she heard the explosion. 
"I looked out of the window, and I saw four or five police cars," Harris said. 
"It all looked really suspicious. Then, all of a sudden, something blew up. I 
saw policemen fall down and glass go everywhere. I told my husband to call the 
Fire Department. 
"Thank God only the windows were damaged. I thought it could have been much, 
much worse." 
Added her husband, David: "I was in the (bedroom) when I heard it. I was 
worried it would hit this building, and all the apartments would blow up. I was 
shocked." 
When told of Wexler's possible role, neighbors registered little surprise. 
"Yeah, the (explosion) is hard to fathom," said Cliff Jones, 25, who lived on 
the second floor of the Victorian building. "But (Wexler) being the one to do 
it isn't. . . . He's not altogether your average person. There was something 
very odd about him." 
Jones recalled an incident about three months ago when he heard another 
explosion -- a much milder one -- from Wexler's apartment. 
"I went downstairs, and he was standing naked and dripping wet in the doorway 
of his apartment," said Jones. "He claimed he was in the shower, and a butane 
lighter had blown up in his face. . . . He was really strange; even some of my 
friends who had passed him in the hall commented on him." 
Romeo Acosta, a neighbor who lives in apartment building across the street from 
Wexler's, said those who lived outside the Victorian building almost never saw 
him. 
"But if he did it, he's stupid," said Acosta. "People could have been killed." 
Tenants of the gutted apartment house agreed. 
"It's incredible," said one, Kenneth Himes, 46, who had left on an errand only 
minutes before the first explosion. "The more I think about it, I ask: 'How did 
we all not get killed?' " 
