PACIFIC PERSPECTIVE; 
BEIJING CONTINUES TO ASSAULT THE SPIRIT OF PRESS INDEPENDENCE; 
RIGHTS: SINCE LAST JUNE, MANY CHINESE JOURNALISTS HAVE BEEN PURGED, JAILED OR 
HUMILIATINGLY COMPROMISED. 
He was young, good-looking in an austere way and spoke excellent, 
British-inflected English -- not surprising, given that he listens to the BBC 
English-language service every day in Beijing (that is, when his government 
doesn't have it jammed). 
He wore exactly the intent, searching expression we had seen so often on the 
faces of the Chinese student demonstrations on television a year ago. Yet his 
words -- a confession that could have been taken from "Darkness at Noon" -- 
seemed to spring out of a unreconstructed past. 
"I was in the Democracy Movement," he explained, "but I didn't know what I was 
doing. I shouted slogans with everybody else, but I didn't know what they 
meant. We were demanding a free press, but what does that mean? There is no 
need for an independent press in a country like China, where the Communist 
Party truly represents the will of the people." He has seen the light, the 
young journalist says, and has repudiated the Democracy Movement and his 
involvement in it; when he goes back to China he will be formally investigated 
by the Communist Party, but he feels he has "nothing to fear." 
The young man's humiliating compromise is clearly one that is necessary now for 
any Chinese journalist who wishes to continue in the profession. Liu Binyan, 
China's most famous journalist-in-exile and a victim of many purges himself, 
captures the sense of moment when he quotes the proverb, "The greatest sadness 
is the death of one's spirit." 
According to Liu, in the wake of the past year's crackdown on the Democracy 
Movement in China, journalists have suffered more sweeping, and lasting, 
retaliation that any other category of intellectuals. The Committee to Protect 
Journalists' latest reckoning holds that 20 Chinese journalists have been 
arrested since June, 1989. Of these, only one, Dai Qing (an offspring of 
Communist Party elite), was reported to be among the 211 detainees released by 
the government in mid-May. The other 19, including Song Yuchuan and Wu Xuecan 
of the People's Daily and Xu Xiaowei and Zhang Weiguo of the Shanghai World 
Economic Herald, are presumed to remain in detention. 
Scores of others who have escaped imprisonment have lost the right to work as 
journalists. At the country's leading newspaper, the People's Daily -- the 
Communist Party's mouthpiece -- about 100 journalists have been driven out, 
including the editor-in-chief, the director and almost all middle-ranking 
editors and department heads. Most of those removed were placed under house 
arrest and obliged to write self-criticisms; they were replaced by editors from 
the army news paper and editors shipped in from provincial party papers, 
untainted by first-hand knowledge of the massacre. China's most prestigious 
independent publication, the World Economic Herald, has been closed. 
The intense young man I met, like the vast majority of Chinese journalists, 
will remain at their publications, however dead in spirit. The party 
"investigation"of his activities will probably beginwith small group meetings 
in which he will have to pronounce and sign a confession of his "errors." If he 
is a party member, he will also be obliged to write a letter of self-criticism 
-- or three or four if the first is too weak. His access to foreign travel will 
be limited. No doubt at least part of his speech to me was directed at his 
Chinese colleagues in the room who might be reporting back to Beijing. 
With the ground-breaking publications and leading talents of the Chinese media 
silenced or obliged to recant, the readership encounters a press whose familiar 
hallmarks are conformity and acquiescence to Communist Party policy. Until 1985 
three subjects were taboo: human-rights violations, military abuses and the 
corrupt activities of high-ranking party cadres and their children. For a brief 
time, open discussion of these issues galvanized Chinese journalism, but they 
have disappeared from China's news pages again. But even more distressing is 
the number of journalists who have disappeared into China's jails as political 
prisoners, many of them because of their profound commitment to freedom of 
expression, a concept Americans regard as a basic principle. 
There are ways to help. Unfortunately, one was missed last month, when the Bush 
Administration renewed China's most-favored-nation trade status. Many Chinese, 
including Liu Binyan, feel it would be a mistake to revoke it entirely. But Liu 
believes that MFN -- or similar instruments -- could have human-rights 
conditions attached, such as the release of political prisoners. Such a measure 
would leave China open to positive foreign cultural and trade influences, while 
still sending a message to Beijing that all is not forgiven, or forgotten. 
