IMAGINARY WEAPON, REAL CORPSE; 
POLICE HAVE TRUE REASONS FOR FEAR, BUT NOT FOR DISTORTION 
Most Americans support and applaud the diligent efforts of law-enforcement 
officers to maintain order and secure our streets. Random and brutal crime has 
increased to the point that our reliance on the police is overwhelming. Highly 
publicized incidents of violent street crime have shaken our society to the 
point that we often fear to leave our homes. We cry out to our guardians in 
blue for relief from criminals. Yet in calling on the police as a solution, we 
have commissioned a law-enforcement response against the criminal that too 
often is turned against the law-abiding. I know well the daily threat of 
violence and danger that police officers face. However, no American should 
justify or commend abuses by police officers under the pretense of enforcing 
the law. 
While incidents of police abuse are not exclusive to African-Americans or 
people of color, the likelihood of it happening to them is far greater. Black 
youth do not graduate into adulthood without the mark of police intimidation or 
police violence sealed in their memory. Unfortunately for Marcus Donel, his 
recent encounter with the police ended tragically. Unarmed and shot down 
without a trial or conviction, the 30-year-old Hawthorne man's misfortune again 
raises the greater questions: What is legitimate use of deadly force by police 
officers? What are the parameters? Marcus Donel's loved ones grieve their loss 
and await answers to this awful killing. The Los Angeles County Sheriff's 
Department has already given its answer to this killing. Less than 48 hours 
after the shooting, sheriff's investigators pronounced the shooting "tragic" 
but justifiable. 
This script is not new. Indeed, any kid in South-Central or East Los Angeles 
can recite it to you. A black or Latino man is stopped because he is a "viable" 
suspect in a crime. He is described as being belligerent and aggressive in his 
posture. He supposedly reaches for a weapon or "a flashy metal object." He is 
shot down in the street. No weapon is found. Typically, the man was unarmed, or 
certainly less armed than the police. Nonetheless, it is considered a good 
shooting by police standards. 
Though blacks account for less than 12% of the population in the United States, 
they compose nearly half of those killed each year by police across this 
country, according to a 1986 article in Black Scholar Magazine. Absent 
extraordinary evidence, all but a handful of shootings are confirmed as 
justifiable by police officials. Less than 3% of the fatal encounters involving 
police and private citizens in Los Angeles County result in prosecution of the 
officer, according to information provided by the District Attorney's office. 
Lacking legal resources, African-Americans who are the disproportionate victims 
of these encounters are forced to rely on law enforcement's own internal 
investigations, which often result in a questionably objective evaluation of 
the facts and evidence. 
History has taught African-American men that to be in the vicinity of a crime 
could lead to a deadly encounter. In the past, lynchings were a frequent 
solution to alleged criminal conduct by African-American males. Today's 
lynching, however, does not take place in the rolling fields of the Deep South. 
Today's lynching takes place on the concrete streets of the inner city. The 
burn of a rope around one's neck is now replaced by the explosion of a metal 
projectile from a gun barrel or the squeeze of the infamous chokehold around a 
gasping throat. The results are the same. And so are the explanations. Here and 
nationwide, the list of victims reads like a war memorial. 
The chain of events leading to the use of deadly force follows a disturbing 
pattern when cases are viewed collectively. One situation that stands out in 
nearly every shooting is that the officer feared for his life and the safety of 
others. Does fear for one's safety excuse a mistake or poor judgment? We all 
acknowledge that police officers have good reason to be scared. Yet when fear 
is out of control and clouds judgment, it must be eliminated by training and 
experience. Fear is no excuse for seeing imaginary weapons, imaginary movements 
and imaginary demeanor. Are some officers firing their weapons at 
life-threatening suspects -- or are they allowing fear to alter the 
circumstances that may exist? Fear at times exaggerates the size and strength 
of people who wind up as police-shooting victims. It can also change a beer can 
into a chrome-plated automatic. 
The circumstances of many shootings by law-enforcement officers over the years 
raise questions about the integrity of police investigations into their own 
alleged misconduct. An abbreviated Southern California roll call: 1966, Leonard 
Deadwyler, unarmed, shot in the chest by a Los Angeles police officer while 
driving his pregnant wife to the hospital. Police said the shooting was an 
accident. 1979, Eulia Love, shot eight times in front of her home in the 
presence of her daughters by Los Angeles police officers. Police, called 
following a dispute over Mrs. Love's gas bill, said she was in the process of 
throwing a kitchen knife at them. 1985, Danny Smith, unarmed, shot seven times 
by Los Angeles and Culver City police officers. They said they thought they 
heard a sliding gun bolt and fired after he failed to raise his hands as 
ordered. 1986, Yusef Bilal, unarmed, shot three times in the back by a 
California Highway Patrol officer. The officer said the shooting was 
self-defense after he scuffled with him. 1988, 18-year old Frank Martinez, shot 
in the presence of his family at their home by Westminster police. The officer 
said Martinez charged at him with a beer bottle. 1988, an African man shot and 
critically wounded by Newport Beach police as he strolled along the beach with 
his wife. Officers said they mistook his portable radio for a gun. 1989, 
transient Betty Jean Aborn, shot 18 times by Los Angeles County sheriffs in the 
Antelope Valley. She had threatened a clerk with a butcher knife after she 
allegedly stole several ice cream bars from a store. 
In all of these cases, my question does not focus so much on the officers' 
intent or conduct, as malevolent as they may appear to be. Rather, my questions 
address the processes by which law-enforcement officers reach such speedy 
conclusions about the need for force when the suspect and subsequent victim is 
nonwhite. 
The patented excuses do begin to ring hollow. To say in almost every black or 
Latino male shooting that it is correct because an officer saw things that no 
one else saw is an insult to the intelligence of the public. The public must 
seek a higher standard of conduct to prevent these deadly mistakes. Most people 
killed by the police are not gang members. Everyone who exits a car to ask 
questions is not standing in a "karate stance" or with "clenched fists." Police 
officials must raise the integrity of their investigations to a level beyond 
question. It is tragic to think that any citizen in this country, has to fear 
attack by the very police officials who are paid to protect him or her. 
