HOT TO SHOP: A LITTLE BLACK MAGIC DOESN'T HURT 
DEAR HOT: I have recently escaped Washington, the land of gray suits, strings 
of pearls, sensible shoes and grown women named Muffy. I find myself in a bit 
of a culture shock, albeit a welcome one. The L.A. crowd I hang out with now is 
vastly different from the one I associated with in D.C., obviously. These 
people go to see performance artists who do weird things with canned 
vegetables. They frequent crowded coffee houses till 4 a.m. and watch foreign 
films with no subtitles. 
I love my new friends, but I've also noticed that they wear almost nothing but 
black. I've wanted to ask them why, but figured they'll think I'm incredibly 
brainless. While I like the look, I'm not sure it's for me. I'm not sure that I 
want to alter my wardrobe , but I also don't want to stand out looking like a 
dweeb. And I didn't even know that at my age I'd still have to deal with peer 
pressure. 
 -- GEEK OF THE WEEK 
MISS STEIN SUGGESTS: You can hardly hang out with a crowd like that in an 
Adolfo suit and not be mistaken for a Tipper Gore wanna-be. But face it, peer 
pressure never goes away. If your new friends wear nothing but black and you 
want to fit in, then the answer is . . . wear black! There are many reasons why 
black works, especially for this crowd: It almost never shows dirt, you don't 
have to worry about matching patterns and it makes pale, pasty skin look even 
paler and pastier. Try it for a month or so and watch how much more readily you 
are accepted into your new clique of friends. Why, they'll probably even ask 
you to participate in their next nihilistic poetry reading. 
MISS KRIER BEGS TO DIFFER: The question is this: Do you want to look like your 
life is a party, a fiesta filled with fun and joy and delight? Or would you 
rather go around wearing mortician's clothes just because they happen to be 
fashionable? 
The colors you surround yourself with both reflect your inner state and 
influence it. Thus, my preference is for almost any color except black. 
Of course, it's up to you to decide what's right for you, but if it were me, 
I'd ditch the Munsters look and get on with the party. If you want to be 
up-to-the-minute fashionably correct, switch to an all-white wardrobe, which 
the usually black-garbed Miss Stein neglected to tell you is the new, chic 
neutral anyway, according to many fashion authorities. As for peer pressure, it 
can go away. All it takes is moderately enlightened friends who appreciate you 
no matter what color your wardrobe, skin or attitude. 
DEAR HOT: It's hot. I want to look cool. But I don't want to invest large bucks 
for a Madonna/I Dream of Jeannie hairpiece; in other words, something that's 
hip today, gone tomorrow. I don't mind her retro-sitcom look, or even the 
trashy stuff, but anything the material girl wears gets so popular it's in and 
out of style in less than a year. 
 -- MADONNA NADA 
DEAR NADA: There's one fun, cheap, new accessory that doesn't have the stam of 
Madonna-style that you might want to try: great, little, nerdy-looking 
sunglasses. Some of the best-priced ones on the market are from a new 
MTV/Riviera line. Don't worry, the MTV logo's safely stuck on the inside of 
these glasses (those pictured here sell for $18 and are available at The 
Broadway). Much of the MTV collection consists of small, dark, wire-rimmed or 
faux tortoise shell glasses. Back in the '60s, these frames were favored by 
hippies. Today, the style is showing up on young urbanites such as Arsenio 
Hall, who sometimes wears a similar version on his talk show. 
