OUR TIMIDITY IS WRONG; GIVE CHINA STIFF SANCTIONS 
Official Washington's response to the bloody massacre in Tian An Men Square has 
been limp and tardy. President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III 
waited for days as army tanks crushed students and workers before announcing 
the suspension of military sales to China, then ruled out economic sanctions 
that would have had far greater significance. And Congress has been reluctant 
to press for sanctions beyond the President's ban on arms sales. This timidity 
is wrong. 
A good place to start on sanctions is a prohibition on the sale of 
high-technology items to China. In 1988, the United States sold $2.9-billion 
worth of strategic goods and technology to China. These "dual-use" sales 
included computers and other sophisticated items that could contribute 
significantly to China's military programs, but do not include weapons. This 
trade with China dwarfs the $600 million in sales of weapons that President 
Bush halted. 
The United States can and should announce that it is adopting a "no exceptions" 
policy with respect to exports of high-technology goods to China. That would 
influence far more than U.S. exports, since exports of dual-use items to China 
are approved by a multilateral coordinating committee that includes the United 
States, NATO countries, Australia and Japan. A decision by one member of the 
group to ban exports of the most sophisticated high-tech items is binding on 
the others. 
Congress also should insist that the United States oppose loans to China from 
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. That would be is consistent with 
current U.S. human rights law, which instructs our representatives to the 
multilateral development banks to vote against loans to countries whose 
governments are engaged in a "consistent pattern of gross violations of 
internationally recognized human rights." 
According to the Treasury Department, there are four loans to China pending in 
the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, totaling $5.8 billion. The United 
States should work behind the scenes to prevent these loans from even coming up 
for a vote; failing that, our representatives should vote against them and urge 
our allies to do the same. 
If existing human rights laws were applied to China, they also would limit the 
activities of the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corp. The agency is 
prohibited from granting insurance and guarantees for U.S. investments in 
countries whose governments have committed gross abuses of human rights. In 
1988, OPIC provided $48-million worth of coverage to 11 American investment 
projects in China, making China the ninth-highest recipient out of about 100 
countries covered by the agency for political violence insurance. 
While American firms will probably be wary of further investment in China in 
the wake of the violence and political uncertainty, Congress should signal 
Beijing its revulsion for the massacre by suspending future OPIC activity in 
China. 
President Bush's suspension of arms sales to China was a welcome step, but his 
-- and Congress' -- failure to consider further sanctions is regrettable. Why 
the tepid response? 
Bush has justified his refusal to consider economic sanctions on the grounds 
that he wants to avoid "hurting" the Chinese citizens. The sentiment is noble, 
but hardly answers the question. There was little concern about the impact of 
trade sanctions on "the people" when the United States imposed trade sanctions 
against Poland, Iran, Nicaragua and the Soviet Union. The more likely answer is 
that the President is reluctant to interfere with lucrative business 
relationships between the United States and China, and fears a fraying of the 
Washington's "special relationship" with Beijing. 
Congress appears to be content with condemning the massacre, and has suggested 
that further sanctions won't be considered unless the human rights situation 
worsens. The worst has already happened: Tian An Men Square doesn't have to be 
invaded by tanks twice. Significant sanctions should be imposed immediately. 
And the Chinese should be warned that further sanctions, including suspension 
of "most favored nation" trade status, will be considered if killings continue 
or if leaders and participants in the democracy movement are jailed. 
In communist countries other than China, our executive branch has needed no 
prodding from Congress to adopt strong human rights policies, including, in 
some cases, economic sanctions in response to gross violations of human rights. 
In non-communist countries with severe human rights problems, including El 
Salvador, Chile, South Africa, Korea, Somalia and Haiti, Congress has taken the 
lead on human rights. Neither Congress nor the President appears to be 
considering a sufficiently strong response to flagrant and horrifying abuses of 
human rights in China. 
U.S. policy towards China needs a strong dose of outrage. If the President 
can't bring himself to take appropriate action, Congress should enact sanctions 
legislation requiring him to do so. 
