CONFEREES SAY SOME OF THE STING CAN BE TAKEN OUT OF BEE MIGRATION 
Bee experts and agricultural officials, grappling with a projected "invasion" 
of Africanized bees into the United States as early as next spring, say the 
northward advance will not immediately herald a mass migration and could be 
slowed if enough information is disseminated. 
State and federal agriculture officials, gathered with international experts at 
a symposium Wednesday in Mission Valley, said educational efforts such as those 
under way in Mexico also would dramatically reduce fatalities. 
Even if the so-called "killer" bees decide to stay in the more temperate 
climates found in the United States -- Africanized bees prefer tropical to 
subtropical climes -- living with the insect is possible, the conferees said. 
Expected to Reach San Diego in 1993 
The bees will probably make their way into Texas from northern Mexico in one to 
three years, and officials expect the bees to enter California in 1993 -- in 
San Diego County if they make their way up Mexico's Pacific Coast, or Imperial 
County if the bees move west from Texas. 
"The most important thing that can be done right now is information (campaigns) 
to try to take away the idea of the 'killer' bee," said Elba Quintero, Mexico's 
program manager on the Africanized honey bee. "As soon as people hear 'killer 
bee,' there is a panic. The bee is not going to come in swarms and attack San 
Diego and the state of California. It doesn't work that way. The bee only 
defends itself when it feels threatened." 
Since 1987, when the Africanized bees first made their way into Mexico, five 
people have reportedly died after being stung, Quintero said. By comparison, 
more than 70 people were reportedly killed in Venezuela in 1988 from the bees' 
attacks. 
Temperament Earns It 'Killer' Nickname 
While the sting of an individual Africanized bee is no more venomous than that 
of the European bee common to the United States, its nasty temperament has 
earned it the nickname "killer bee." The Africanized bees are easily agitated, 
sting in larger swarms, and pursue a person for a longer period over a greater 
distance. 
Efforts to destroy the bee, change its behavior or counterattack with a new 
breed have produced minimal results. Although the European and Africanized bees 
look identical, the latter is a hybrid of the two and is slightly smaller. 
Genetically, the traits of the Africanized bee are dominant when cross-breeding 
occurs. It takes an expert to tell the two apart. 
By alerting beekeepers and setting traps to detect the bees' arrival, U. S. and 
Mexican officials hope to slow down the northward migration. They say that 
slowing the bees' progress is essential to allow time to develop emergency 
services to handle possible bee attacks. 
Given the bees' volatile disposition, officials are in the awkward position of 
alerting the public while striving to avoid mass hysteria, said Susan Golding, 
chairman of the San Diego County Board of Supervisors. 
"Although the wingspan of this little bee is less than 20 millimeters, the 
dread that it has generated cannot be accurately measured," Golding said. 
"Today we are not talking about something that is science fiction at all, even 
though a number of years ago it may have been thought to be. 
"The nice part of this particular disaster, if there is a nice part, is that we 
have time," she said. "The bad part is that we don't know much about this type 
(of disaster) because we haven't dealt with it before." 
The effect on California's estimated $15-million to $18-million apiary industry 
could be far-reaching. About 50% to 70% of the state's crops depend on bee 
pollination. Destroying hives to get rid of Africanized bees would have drastic 
results and has been ruled out, officials said. 
Won't Arrive in Darkening 'Mass' 
Some scientists feel the Africanized bee will not make it to the frigid 
northern regions of the United States. Others, however, believe that an altered 
strain will show up throughout North America. 
Still, the bees will not arrive in "a mass that will darken the sky," said Dr. 
James Tew, national program director of apiculture for the U. S. Department of 
Agriculture. The bees will probably migrate to the United States in single 
swarms, he said. 
Dr. Eric Mussen, an apiculturist at the University of California at Davis, said 
he is unsure what effect the more temperate climate in the United States will 
have on the bees' behavior. (European bees are more easily agitated in colder 
weather.) 
"The habitat here might not be suited to (the Africanized bees') needs," Mussen 
said. "They need a year-round food supply. In Africa, when the food supply runs 
out, they pull out and swarm to other locations. Here, if it's winter, they 
still might not find other food locations." 
Two Types Could Coexist 
Mussen said skilled beekeepers will be able to prevent the Africanized bees 
from overtaking the commercial European hives. The two types of bees could 
coexist, though typically the drones of the African strain tend to infiltrate 
European hives. 
After an extended period, less volatile strains of the Africanized bees might 
be produced, much the way European bees were altered through selective breeding 
after they were introduced to the Americas in the late 1600s, Mussen said. 
Today's European bee is generally docile and more productive. 
The Africanized bees were introduced into the Western Hemisphere by scientists 
in Brazil in 1956. The bees escaped in 1957 and rapidly multiplied, heading 
north at the rate of 200 to 300 miles a year. 
The two-day symposium, sponsored by the U. S. Department of Agriculture and the 
San Diego and Imperial County agricultural commissioners, ends today. 
