PARK MISSION; 
YOUNG DAY CAMPERS AIM TO RETAKE GROUND 
When Willie Jordan started a day camp for poor children, she did not settle for 
the obvious. 
Facing the expected worries about costs and logistics, the director of the Fred 
Jordan Mission came up with a campsite that met her needs. She chose one of the 
city's most trash-laden, crime-ridden, drug-infested areas -- MacArthur Park. 
"It's turned into such a dangerous park," said Jordan, 56, wife of the late 
founder of the mission, as her Kid Row Day Camp opened its third season this 
week. "Because it is not safe, that's exactly why we wanted to go there." 
Determined not to be intimidated by the crime and squalor that have overtaken 
the 32-acre urban park, Jordan and her campers return to the site each year to 
fulfill the day camp's pledge to "take back the parks for the children." 
"It's great that we are going there," she said. "The parks should be used by 
kids without them having to fear for their lives. We go right to where the kids 
live, and make it safe for a couple of hours." 
Last weekend, volunteers from the mission distributed flyers around the park, 
inviting children living nearby to attend the camp, which runs until July 27. 
Each day at about 3:30 p.m., after year-round classes let out, children from a 
20-block area around the park gather for the camp near the corner of Park View 
and 6th Street. 
Other children are bused to the park from hotels on Skid Row, where the mission 
is located. 
Still others, like Teresa Chavez's six children -- who attended the camp during 
previous summers but have since moved away from their Westlake neighborhood 
near the park -- are driven in from more distant areas. The Chavez family now 
lives on 84th Street in South Los Angeles. 
"Of course, I worried at first, because the park is kind of scary," Chavez, 32, 
said in Spanish. "But now, I know the children are all right. The people from 
the mission take care." 
Instead of heading for the mountains or some other bucolic setting, these 
campers remain in the city, joining in sing-alongs, party games and a show 
called, "Bible Boot Camp," run by a pastor wearing military-style camouflage 
clothing. 
One 11-year-old girl sat among the campers holding a Teenage Mutant Ninja 
Turtles coloring kit -- her prize for winning a camp game. The girl, who lives 
in a Skid Row hotel, said she was going to take the prize home. 
"I'm going to share it with my brother," she said. "He's always saying he 
doesn't ever get anything." 
The day campers have been sharing the park this summer with police horse and 
foot patrols. The stepped-up LAPD patrols in recent weeks are aimed at ridding 
MacArthur Park of drug dealers and unlicensed vendors. The crackdown, which 
began last month, is part of an effort to ferret out the ragged, violence-prone 
crowds that had taken over the park, contributing to a 43% increase in arrests 
in the area over the first half of the year. 
"If we went to the nice neighborhoods in the San Fernando Valley or Orange 
County, it wouldn't be a big deal," Jordan said. Such a program in the affluent 
suburbs, she said, would make "no difference for the children there. They can 
use their parks." 
Not everyone appreciates the mission's efforts. Jordan recalled a disturbing 
conversation during a radio talk show appearance three summers ago. 
"The caller was very abrasive, very confrontational," she said. " 'How dare you 
take these poor little children and try to show them how the rest of the world 
lives. Don't you know they will be so dissatisfied?' the man scolded. It was 
one of the most bizarre conversations I've ever had." 
The camp program, which travels to Hollenbeck Park on July 23, also includes 
weekly field trips. Outings to the Queen Mary and the Spruce Goose, Universal 
Studios and the Ringling Brothers &amp; Barnum and Bailey Circus are scheduled. 
"Actually, I want the children to be dissatisfied with poverty conditions," 
Jordan said. "This program gives these kids a chance to see things that other 
kids take for granted. It gives them the little extras. It's like saying, 'Hey, 
there is more. You can be more.' " 
