ACTRESS REBECCA SCHAEFFER FATALLY SHOT AT APARTMENT 
Rebecca Schaeffer, an actress who co-starred in the television sitcom "My 
Sister Sam" and appeared in the recent movie "Scenes From the Class Struggle in 
Beverly Hills," was shot to death Tuesday morning by an unidentified man at her 
apartment house in the Fairfax District. 
Police said the man shot the 21-year-old Schaeffer in the chest, probably with 
a pistol, as she opened the glass security door at the front of the apartment 
complex in the 100 block of North Sweetzer Avenue. 
The man probably had rung Schaeffer's doorbell to summon her, investigators 
said. 
"We can assume she may have known him, or maybe she was just a trusting 
person," Los Angeles Police Detective Dan Andrews said. ". . . Another 
possibility is (that) he might have stepped to the side . . . out of the view 
of the door. The third possibility is that she merely was going outside to 
leave or pick up a paper or whatever and was confronted by the suspect." 
Schaeffer was rushed to nearby Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where she was 
pronounced dead on arrival. 
Detectives said they knew of no motive for the fatal attack on the actress, who 
lived alone. 
The assailant, who reportedly had been loitering near the apartment house 
before the shooting, ran from the scene after the attack, and investigators 
said they had made no arrests. 
A former boyfriend of the actress was questioned, police said, but he was not 
considered a suspect. 
"We have no record of her ever having called for assistance or being a victim 
of anything, or being harassed," Andrews said. 
"She didn't have an enemy in the world," her agent, Jonathan Howard, said 
Tuesday afternoon. "She was one of the nicest people I've ever known -- 
sincere, honest and kind. 
"She was a very successful young actress, on the ascent, getting job after 
job," Howard said. "I can't believe this has happened." 
Richard Goldman, who lives across the street from the eight-unit apartment 
complex where Schaeffer resided, said he was in his kitchen about 10:15 a.m., 
making a pot of coffee, when he heard a gunshot. 
"After the shot, there were two screams. Two loud screams," Goldman said. "I 
put on a shirt and ran across the street. . . . There was a man with a yellow 
shirt, short, kinky hair, trotting up the block." 
Kenneth Newell, who lives in the building next door, said he, too, heard the 
shot and screams and ran to help, but by the time he arrived there was little 
he could do. 
"She was lying on the ground . . . wearing nothing but a little black 
bathrobe," Newell said. " . . . Her eyes were open, staring. It looked to me as 
though she was already dead." 
Goldman said he did not notice whether the man who fled up Sweetzer Avenue and 
into an alley was carrying a gun. He said other residents of the area told him 
they had seen the man loitering by Schaeffer's apartment building earlier in 
the morning. 
Police said the gunman was believed to be white, between 20 and 30 years old 
and between 5 feet, 7 inches and 6 feet tall. They said his hair was believed 
to be brown. In addition to the yellow shirt, they said, he was wearing blue 
denim pants and floppy sandals. 
Schaeffer, who grew up in Portland, Ore., was a 14-year-old student at Lincoln 
High School there when she went on a "cattle call" at a local modeling agency. 
Less than two years later, after appearing in a number of Portland-area 
publications, she went to New York to pursue her modeling career. 
"From my standpoint, it seemed very natural," she told an interviewer for a 
Portland newspaper a couple of years later. "But I know my parents went through 
hell." 
Soon, she appeared in Seventeen magazine, then went to Japan for more modeling 
assignments. But she told the interviewer that she was uncomfortable in Japan, 
so she returned to New York. There, a few months later, Schaeffer landed a 
small part in the television soap opera "One Life to Live," did a few 
commercials and finished up high school at New York's Professional Children's 
School. 
Then, in 1986, after a series of auditions in New York and Los Angeles, she was 
selected for a lead role in the new CBS sitcom "My Sister Sam." 
"That was her big break," Howard said Tuesday. 
Schaeffer played a 16-year-old would-be rock star who invades the comfortable 
life of her elder sister, a 29-year-old San Francisco free-lance photographer, 
played by actress Pam Dawber. The show, which opened to mixed reviews in 
October, 1986, ran through that season and in parts of the next. The last 
episode aired in April, 1988. 
"Words cannot express the grief and rage that I feel," Dawber said in a 
statement from New York on Tuesday night. "My question is, why? My heart and 
sorrow go to her mother and father for losing such a beautiful child." 
Schaeffer currently can be seen in the film "Scenes From the Class Struggle in 
Beverly Hills," a risque sex farce that is showing across the country after 
opening to generally good reviews in June. The actress played a supporting role 
as the daughter of a recently widowed sitcom queen, played by actress 
Jacqueline Bisset. 
According to Howard, Schaeffer recently completed work on a new film, "One 
Point of View," that stars and was directed by Dyan Cannon. In the film, which 
has yet to be released, Schaeffer plays the Cannon character in her teen-age 
years. 
Howard said Schaeffer returned here a few weeks ago from Italy, where she had 
played a supporting role in an upcoming television miniseries about the tragedy 
aboard the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro. 
