INNOVATION / MICHAEL SCHRAGE: DOES IT MATTER IF WOMEN AREN'T INTO PHYSICS? 
WELL, YES 
When it comes to the vexing topic of women, most scientists and engineers rely 
heavily on Sigmund Freud and Henry Higgins for inspiration. Dr. Freud's 
question, "What do women want?!" and Prof. Higgins' lament, "Why can't a woman 
be more like a man?" pretty much capture the mainstream attitude. 
Historically, culturally and economically, science and technology are 
overwhelmingly male enterprises. Pick a society, any society, and you'll find 
that women play only the most peripheral roles in shaping the flow of pure 
science and applied technology. Sure, there's the occasional Madame Curie and 
Ada, Countess of Lovelace, but they're atypical to the point of anomaly. 
Current statistics reinforce the historical patterns: Only 6% of all working 
engineers in America today are women. Women probably have greater influence 
over the future of baseball than they do over emerging technologies. 
But wait; it gets worse. Although women represent more than 40% of law school 
enrollment and more than 35% of medical school enrollment, barely 14% of 
baccalaureate engineering graduates last year were female -- an astonishingly 
low figure but positively grandiose compared to the 2.3% level of 1975. 
European and Japanese figures are scarcely better. For all intents and 
purposes, women have been practically irrelevant to the revolutions that have 
swept through the physical sciences and sparked the dominant technologies of 
this era. 
There's no question that there are a lot of male chauvinist pigs snuffling 
among the Pyrex test tubes. The hard sciences -- notably physics and chemistry 
-- are notorious for their "old boy" cultures; it's as much "who you know" as 
"what you know" to get that lucrative post-doctorate fellowship. Deans of 
engineering colleges piously shrug their shoulders and bleat how difficult it 
is to graduate top-flight female talent even as they call them "girls." Much of 
this sexism is open; far more is subtle and subconscious, the result of 
self-perpetuating traditions that treat women as exceptions to the rule rather 
than participants who happen to be the other gender. 
"For a profession that fancies itself as intellectually neutral, science, like 
any other part of our life, is heir to all the social realities," says feminist 
scholar Vivian Gornick, author of "Women in Science." "The life for women in 
physics and chemistry, for example, has been crippling." 
And yet, can tacit sexism and overt misogyny really explain this overwhelming 
gender gap? After all, weren't lawyers and doctors once paragons of sexist 
professional elites? A generation ago, law schools and medical schools -- not 
to mention business schools -- treated women as less than second-class 
citizens. That's no longer true. Similarly, women now exert significant 
influence in political, economic and social circles that were once barred to 
them. Does anyone out there really believe that a cabal of scientists and 
engineers could successfully thwart the active participation of women in their 
domains when lawyers and doctors could not? 
Reality indicates that there may be other reasons for this gender gap. The 
principal of an elite Southern California private girls school that recently 
went co-ed acknowledges that, despite the school's best efforts, females are 
consistently significantly under-represented in the advanced science classes. 
"I can't deny that there's a gap," she said, "but I can't really explain why 
it's there." 
This isn't unusual. Girls are rarely equitably represented in elective high 
school physics, chemistry or calculus classes. Indeed, barely a third of the 
finalists of the nationwide Westinghouse Science Talent Search are girls -- 
that's already below their classroom percentage. 
Is this because girls have their interest in science squeezed out of them by 
the time they enter high school? Or is it because, on average, girls are simply 
less interested in science than in other subjects? There are even respected 
studies from Johns Hopkins University purporting to show that, discounting 
social biases, young girls' math skills are, on average, inferior to boys'. 
Basically, is this dearth of women in science and technology simply "society's 
fault?" Or something inherent? 
The correct answer is "none of the above." In fact, there are active and 
exciting domains of science where women are increasingly active on all levels: 
molecular biology, medical research and biotechnology. According to Dr. Brigid 
D. Leventhal, director of clinical research administration at Johns Hopkins and 
a Westinghouse judge for more than 20 years, "girls are more heavily into the 
biomedical sciences than in the physical sciences." 
There's no inherent reason for this except, perhaps, says Leventhal, that "to 
be in the biological sciences may be less distorting to the female nurturing 
self-image than the physical sciences or engineering." 
I am neither bold enough nor foolish enough to assert that this self-image 
comes about because of acculturation or deeply biological urges that sway 
individual choice. Is it more socially acceptable for women to be involved in 
engineering life than engineering silicon chips? I don't know. What I do know 
is that, even though organic chemistry is more difficult to master in college 
than physical chemistry, more women in college take the former. This issue, I 
believe, isn't intellect; it's interest. For whatever reasons, women simply 
aren't as interested in being chemists, physicists and electronics engineers as 
they are in being doctors, molecular biologists and genetic engineers. 
This raises a fascinating question: Does gender matter in scientific research? 
Do women, because of their interests, temperaments and backgrounds, bring a 
different sensibility to scientific research than their male counterparts? 
Talk with people at Johns Hopkins, Stanford and Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology's Whitehead Institute, and it's immediately clear that the influx of 
women in molecular biology has influenced the nature of research. Women make a 
difference. According to one lab director, they are more interested in finding 
patterns than solving problems. 
On one level, this shouldn't be surprising; men and women are, of course, 
different. On another level, it's disturbing, because if men and women really 
are different, one runs into the thorny questions of the strengths and 
weaknesses associated with those differences. 
Given current trends, women will continue to rise in importance and influence 
in life science research. However, unless there are fundamental changes in 
society and the engineering infrastructure -- such as requiring all high school 
students to take four years of science and math -- we may never know just what 
sort of a sensibility women can bring to the various disciplines of 
engineering. At the very least, more women would make a quantitative difference 
-- but the more intriguing question is would they make a qualitative 
difference? 
Given that companies and industries are struggling to become more competitive 
in an increasingly technological marketplace, that becomes a very provocative 
question. My guess is that it will be another generation -- if at all -- that 
women have the same impact on, say, electronics engineering as they will have 
on genetic engineering. 
