AMERICAN LEGION ROUNDUP; 
PICKOFF HELPS VAN NUYS EARN NOD OVER SUN VALLEY 
With a shake of the head, Van Nuys-Notre Dame pitcher Eric Vellozzi sent quite 
a tremor through the Sun Valley dugout in an American Legion District 20 
Eastern Division game Tuesday night. 
With runners on first and third, one out, and the score tied in the fourth 
inning, Vellozzi shook off a pitchout sign from Coach Jody Breeden. Instead, 
Vellozzi and catcher David Supple opted for a pickoff play at third. 
The play worked to perfection, Vellozzi escaped the jam and his teammates added 
a run in the bottom of the inning as Van Nuys-Notre Dame handed Sun Valley a 
2-1 defeat in a game at Poly High. 
The defeat was the second in 16 decisions for Eastern Division leader Sun 
Valley and kept alive the playoff hopes of Van Nuys-Notre Dame (10-6). 
Van Nuys-Notre Dame took a 2-1 lead in the fourth when Vinnie Orlando singled 
and stole second. One out later, Eric Martorano beat out an infield single off 
the glove of Sun Valley pitcher Robert Flores. Glen Carson drove in Orlando 
with a sacrifice fly to center. 
In other District 20 games: 
West Hills 8, Newhall-Saugus 7 -- West Hills ended a 10-game losing streak by 
scoring three runs with the help of three Newhall-Saugus errors in a wild 
seventh inning at Chaminade High. 
After West Hills scored once in the seventh to come within 7-6, Aaron Weiss 
walked with one out and a runner at second. One out later, Mike Andry nubbed 
one in front of the plate. Newhall-Saugus catcher Steve Mann and reliever Oscar 
Silva bumped and Silva dropped the ball for an error. 
Jeff Meyer -- who was at second -- stormed around third to score. Silva tried 
to gun down Weiss -- who was at first -- as he sped for third, but threw the 
ball into left field for another error and Weiss continued home with the 
game-winner for West Hills (6-13). 
Panorama City 4, Burbank 0 -- Roland De La Maza (3-2) threw a three-hitter, 
struck out seven and walked one at Monroe High. 
Sean Henson went two for two with a run-scoring single for Panorama City 
(12-5). 
Woodland Hills East 11, Chatsworth 1 -- Brett Reisner was four for four in a 
game at Taft High that was called after five innings because of the 10-run 
rule. 
Right-hander Chris Brown allowed four hits, struck out six and walked one for 
East (15-3) while teammate Jamie Zeichick had a home run and four RBIs. 
Granada Hills 9, Las Virgenes 6 -- David Cipolla had three hits and teammates 
Heath McElwee, Darryl Stroh and Robert Rundquist added two each. 
