STARS TOAST PAL WITH A LOT OF MEMORIES 
"I don't care if you are Batman ... park that thing on the street." 
 -- Inscription on 80th-birthday card for Howard Washington. 
It's a touchy job, deciding who gets to park in the lot and who's left out on 
the street, but according to the folklore at Warner Bros. Records, 80-year-old 
Howard Washington has rarely let a rock star's VIP status get in the way. 
Washington is famous for telling the best of them to park on the street, 
whether they're Prince or Madonna or anybody else who doesn't have an assigned 
parking slot -- or who arrives when all the other spaces in the too-small lot 
are already taken. 
Not too surprisingly, everyone respectfully obeys the man who holds the key to 
their parking futures. Parking access is a highly regarded perk, a status 
symbol on most show-biz lots. Plus, Washington possesses a commanding voice (at 
50 yards) and subtle but certain, you'd-be-a-fool-to-mess-with-me presence. 
He also has a garden on the lot where he grows eggplant, cantaloupe, tomatoes, 
artichokes, string beans, peppers, petunias and marigolds, right there in 
beautiful downtown Burbank where space is at a premium. 
'Philosophy Corner' 
Washington's garden patch is just outside his air-conditioned, stereo-wired 
guard shack, also known as "the philosophy corner" to employees such as Adam 
Somers, senior vice president of creative services. "You can come in in the 
morning and hang out with Howard and he talks about money, women, divorce, the 
company -- the long view of things," Somers said. 
The senior vice president, who is white, didn't hesitate to jokingly tell the 
crowd at the birthday party for Washington, who is black, that "all the stories 
that I'm Howard's illegitimate son are true." And he pointed out that 
Washington has handled far more than parking-related duties for the 
organization. 
One time, Somers recalled, he needed to get a bulldozer for an advertising 
photo session and he needed it within half an hour. Knowing that the usual 
bureaucratic channels of the company would delay the shoot, perhaps for days, 
Somers turned to Washington. "Howard called me back and said, 'You think you 
can come up with a six-pack of beer and six cassettes?' " said Somers, adding 
that the bulldozer appeared within half an hour. 
David Lee Roth, rock's Spandex king, was on hand to emcee the Friday-afternoon 
festivities and told the gathering of Warner Bros. Records employees and 
friends that Washington "denied me access (to the lot) my first time . . . he 
still denies my manager . . . access." 
Roth, who was dressed conservatively in a black vest, white cotton shirt and 
black-and-white checked pants and wore his usually wild mane in a simple 
ponytail, joked that Warner Bros. visitors are all nobodies until they've 
passed through Washington. "It's not that he has that much clout," he 
explained. "It's just that there's no other way to get in here." 
Fondness for Washington 
Asked later why he agreed to serve as emcee, Roth expressed true fondness for 
Washington and remembered that the honoree "was my first contact with the big 
corporate empire of the music business. Howard's your first barometric reading 
when you get here." 
Roth told of one particular visit, arriving at the lot after 2 1/2 days in the 
desert where he developed "Just a Gigolo." The song became one of his biggest 
records as a solo artist after leaving the group Van Halen. 
"I drove in here, I hadn't changed clothes for 2 1/2 days and told Howard my 
idea for the song. He was the first person to hear it and he said, 'It'll be a 
hit,' " Roth recalled. 
Singers Randy Crawford and John Fogerty also were at the birthday party, which 
had been originally billed as a listening party for Roth, so Washington 
wouldn't suspect the hoopla was for him. 
Like Roth, Fogerty, the former lead singer of Creedence Clearwater Revival who 
signed with Warner Bros. when he became a solo artist, remembered that he 
repeatedly had to park on the street when he was visiting the record company at 
the time his "Centerfield" album was in the works. "He (Washington) didn't want 
to let on that he knew I was a big star," Fogerty remembered. 
Artists Know Him 
Or perhaps he just didn't know. Said Bob Merlis, head of the Warner Bros. 
public relations: "Most of the Warner artists know him even though he doesn't 
know who they are." 
Indeed, it seemed most everyone at the party not only knew Washington but at 
one time or other had to park on the street. Many employees were still 
consigned to the street. Thus, they presented Washington with his own framed, 
platinum record, titled "Howard Washington On the Lot." Among the cuts: "You 
Can't Park Here," "Park on the Street," "The Lot Is Full," "They Didn't Tell Me 
You Were Coming," and the long version of "I Don't Care Who You Are." Though he 
didn't say much from the stage except thank you, Washington sat down later and 
explained that his attitude toward stars and other big wigs is plainly 
egalitarian: "I treat them just like everybody else. I've been around stars. 
They're human like everybody else." 
Born July 15, 1909, in Norco, La., Washington said he was an only child who ran 
away from home at age 16 to come to Los Angeles. He began working at Warner 
Bros.' film studio in 1929, he added, providing a concession service of shoe 
shines and car washes. 
Friend of Warner Family 
"I had people working for me," he remembered, noting that he became friends 
with members of the Warner family and was one of about 40 people invited to the 
funeral of co-founder Jack Warner. 
Asked if he encountered discrimination because of his color working either for 
the film studio or the record company, which he joined exclusively when the two 
firms' offices were separated, Washington replied: "Sure, there was 
discrimination, but I was treated as an equal. I know there was discrimination. 
I've seen it many times. But I've always been treated very nicely. . . . I was 
probably discriminated against, but in very subtle ways." 
In his years with Warner Bros., Washington has greeted stars from Joan Crawford 
to Bette Davis to Ronald Reagan, "when he was married to Jane Wyman." And he's 
tried a bit of everything. He worked briefly in the prop department. Served in 
the Navy in World War II. And had a small speaking part as a waiter in the 1951 
Hitchcock film "Strangers on a Train." 
In the '50s, Washington also went to real estate school and began buying and 
selling real estate, while still working at Warner Bros. 
Owns Buildings 
He now owns several buildings around town, including a 12-unit apartment 
complex on Slauson Avenue, though he still rents his own home in the West Adams 
district. Currently single, he has been married five times ("instead of 
shacking up, it was better in those days to get married") and has two sons, one 
deceased. 
A warm, gregarious man who looks more as though he's in his 50s or early 60s 
than his 80s, Washington attributed his good health and vitality to familiar 
precepts: "I do most everything -- in moderation. I believe in God. I live by 
the Commandments. I try to treat my fellow man right. And if I don't get along 
with you, I move on. I try to think right. You can live practically as long as 
you can move around if you think right. 
"And I keep myself having fun all the time. I work because I enjoy my job." 
Washington also has a good time off the job, as his girlfriend, Eunice Glover 
testified after the party. "I've known Howard for 30 years, intimately for the 
last four years," she said. "He's a very thoughtful person." 
But, after all these years tending cars on the parking lot, he still doesn't 
know much about them. "You'd think after a quarter of a century or so working 
on a parking lot, he'd know something about cars," declared Merlis. "His answer 
to everything is, 'Have you got jumper cables?' " 
