REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK; 
FOR FIREFIGHTERS, IT WAS 'LIKE WALKING INTO HELL' 
The blistering heat inside the Metro Rail tunnel was intense -- even to veteran 
Los Angeles firefighters accustomed to such dangers. Donning hard hats, 
fireproof gear, masks and oxygen tanks, four-man teams of firefighters went in 
for a only brief stay before giving way to another squad. 
As they emerged, they spoke of the hardships of fighting a fire underground. 
"If hell was like this, I think I would go to church more often," said 
firefighter-paramedic John Gonzalez of the Studio City station. 
Firefighter Al Gear, who spread fire-retardant foam on the flames, said: "You 
know when you put your turkey in the oven for Thanksgiving? Imagine being in 
there with it." 
Drenched with perspiration, Fire Capt. Richard Borowski said there was no wood 
left and that circular steel beams lining the tunnel were bending under the 
intense heat. 
"I bet I lost a lot of weight," he said. "(This fire is) one of the hardest 
ones that I have been in in 16 years. It's scary when you're inside and embers 
are falling all around." 
Chief Dean Cathey, head of planning for the Fire Department, said that battling 
the tunnel fire had proved extremely difficult and dangerous. 
"You have one way in and one way out. It is like walking into hell. It is that 
hot," he said. 
Firefighters, Metro Rail workers and commuters were not the only ones affected 
by the blaze. Gas pipelines to a number of nearby businesses were temporarily 
shut off, as was a pipeline to the Metropolitan Detention Center. 
But the prisoners may only have noticed it at mealtime. 
"Everything has gone on as scheduled. Ordinarily we use the gas for the oven 
and the dishwashers," said Gary Katsel, associate warden of the Metropolitan 
Detention Center. "But today we used paper plates and a microwave. Things are 
pretty much routine." 
Two evacuation signs were posted at Piper Technical Center on the doors of the 
City of Los Angeles' Department of General Services. One handwritten sign on 
the second floor door window said: "The building has been evacuated! Go Home!" 
The other handwritten sign was on the third floor. 
Scrawled on paper, it read: "Summer Workers -- No Work Today." 
