HEARINGS ON PROTECTION OF DESERT OPEN 
Launching what promises to be a bitter political struggle, a House subcommittee 
opened hearings Thursday on a sweeping proposal to extend federal wilderness 
and parkland protection to nearly 8 million acres of Southern California 
desert. 
The controversial legislation would establish three national parks east of Los 
Angeles and more than double the amount of land set aside as wilderness. It 
would greatly restrict access in these areas to tourists and automobiles, as 
well as mining, grazing and development. 
While supporters predicted that the bill has a good chance of passage in the 
House, its fate in the Senate is not clear. Similar legislation sponsored by 
Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.) died last year, largely because Sen. Pete Wilson 
(R-Calif.) strongly opposed it. Wilson's aides indicated Thursday that his 
position is unchanged. 
Willing to Negotiate 
But Cranston and Rep. Mel Levine (D-Santa Monica), who are co-sponsoring this 
year's desert bill, said they are willing to negotiate key changes with Wilson 
and other opponents. They said the bill is an attempt to balance environmental 
concerns with the needs of people who use the desert for recreation and other 
purposes. 
"California's fragile desert is one of the crown jewels of America's public 
lands and it must be protected," Levine said. "The act of selecting wilderness 
is not a decision about which lands to scar. It is a decision about which lands 
to preserve." 
Levine told members of the House Interior subcommittee on national parks and 
public lands that nearly 12 million acres of publicly owned desert in Southern 
California are vulnerable to recreation, development, mining and grazing. He 
also charged that current federal policies designed to protect the desert are 
inadequate. 
But critics, including Wilson and four Republican congressmen who represent the 
sprawling area, blasted the measure as needless regulation that would reduce 
citizen access to the desert, cut off mining activities and threaten farmers' 
grazing rights. 
They also complained that Levine and Cranston had not conducted public hearings 
in communities affected by the measure. Although the House panel plans future 
Washington hearings, opponents said that it should travel to California to hear 
residents' views. 
"The fact is, the desert basically has gotten along awfully well without us 
over a long period of time, and we should be cautious about locking it up for 
all time," said Rep. Jerry Lewis (R-Redlands), who is spearheading House 
opposition to the measure. 
Lewis said that only a fraction of California's desert lands are vulnerable to 
damage from tourist activities, such as the use of off-road vehicles. 
"In terms of the vast desert, almost nobody ever arrives," he said. "So there's 
really little need for more federal controls." 
The legislation covers a vast stretch of southeastern California, from Inyo 
County south 240 miles to the Mexican border. Most of the land is currently 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management and is open to mining, ranching 
and off-road vehicle use. 
Key sections of the bill would create new national parks in Joshua Tree 
National Monument and Death Valley National Monument, as well as in the east 
Mojave Desert. Nearly 8 million acres would be designated as wilderness area. 
The area includes open desert as well as the new national parks. 
Doug Scott, conservation director for the Sierra Club, suggested that the fate 
of the bill would be a "pivotal test" of congressional resolve to preserve 
endangered public lands. 
He noted that "vast areas of the desert have been irreparably scarred by 
off-road vehicles. And the desert is so fragile, the damage will probably never 
heal. What right have we to bequeath to generations upon generations to come 
millions of acres of scarred, eroded, lifeless desert lands?" 
However, a coalition of off-road vehicle users, farmers, miners and other 
residents of the area voiced bitter opposition. They said that a 1980 federal 
plan to protect the desert has worked well and should not be replaced by more 
restrictive legislation. 
