MAN WAS RUN OVER 3 TIMES FOR A THRILL, PROSECUTORS CHARGE 
A prosecutor told jurors Wednesday that Dallas Keith Carter ran over a victim 
with his car three times because he had "built himself up to a crescendo" of 
violent behavior the night that it happened and committed murder "for his own 
perverted pleasure." 
Carter, 19, of Costa Mesa could face a sentence of 25 years to life in prison 
if convicted in the May 15, 1988, death of motorcyclist Javier G. Sarabia, 23, 
of Garden Grove. 
Prosecutors allege that Carter, then 18, and two other men robbed Sarabia and 
his brother, Alex, at gunpoint in Garden Grove. The victim reportedly got into 
a struggle with Carter, who knocked him to the ground. 
Witnesses said they could hear shouts from the car of "Hit him again!" as 
Carter revved the motor and aimed his car at Sarabia, lying on the pavement. 
After running over him once, the witnesses said, Carter made a U-turn and ran 
over Sarabia again. Two of the three witnesses said they saw him run over the 
victim at least a third time. 
Two Passengers Both Pleaded Guilty 
The two passengers in the car with Carter, Ernest J. Busto of Garden Grove, now 
21, and Sergio Sanchez, 19, of Santa Ana, both pleaded guilty to lesser charges 
of assault with a deadly weapon and are awaiting sentencing. 
Carter testified that he had been drinking so much that he was not clear on 
what happened, but that he may have thought he was running over a speed bump. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Jeoffrey L. Robinson told jurors in closing arguments 
Wednesday in Superior Court in Santa Ana that the speed-bump argument is an 
insult to their intelligence. 
"If you believe that, let him walk; acquit him," Robinson said. 
The jurors began their deliberations late in the day and are scheduled to 
continue today. 
Robinson said Carter and his friends had gotten drunk at a party and obtained 
possession of a gun, which gave them confidence to go on a crime spree. 
They reportedly committed two robberies before spotting the Sarabia brothers on 
a motorcycle. 
The brothers, with Alex driving, were heading east on West Street when Carter, 
driving in the opposite direction, made a U-turn and began following them. The 
Sarabias were forced off the road on Morgan Lane and confronted by Carter and 
the others, who robbed the brothers at gunpoint, prosecutors said. 
Robinson pointed out that Carter had shot the pistol during one of the earlier 
robberies, "just to be a big guy . . . just wanting to get in the face of 
anyone." 
The evening was building to a crescendo, Robinson said, because Carter was 
getting "more and more turned on" by their violent acts. 
Sarabia, Robinson said, "had the audacity to question what they were doing. But 
this guy wasn't going to come on to Big Bad Dallas and get away with it." 
Deputy Public Defender Roger B. Alexander argued that Carter's actions were the 
result of "confusion, alcohol and fear." 
He noted that Carter's blood-alcohol content that night was 0.15%, well above 
the legal maximum for driving a car. 
Carter "was drunk, he was scared and he started to panic," Alexander told the 
jury. 
He also argued that whatever Carter may have done, his actions did not amount 
to first-degree murder, which is the conviction that Robinson is seeking. 
Robinson countered that alcohol may be a factor in someone's actions but not an 
excuse. 
"Alcohol cannot be used as a shield against justice," Robinson said. "If it 
could, we'd have an awful lot of empty prisons." 
Carter's actions amount to first-degree premeditated murder, he said, because 
"he deliberately aimed two tons of steel at the victim, revved the engine, and 
headed right for him." 
And not just once, Robinson noted. 
The deputy district attorney admitted to jurors that he is worried about their 
reaction, because Carter is a small, soft-spoken man, with a polite demeanor 
from the witness stand. 
"He's not Charlie Manson," Robinson said. "But he's not some angelic guy out 
for peace and love and harmonious relationships in society, either. The guy you 
see here in court is not the guy who was out there on that night of incredible 
horror." 
