SATURN SPECTACULAR LEAVES ASTRONOMERS IN A HEAVENLY STATE 
Saturn sailed across the heavens with a diamond in its rings Monday morning, 
dazzling mortals on a distant planet. 
Witnessing the event were thousands of amateur and professional astronomers who 
traveled to the high country throughout the Southwest so they could take part 
in a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. 
And Saturn, one of the most popular objects in the sky because of its 
spectacular rings, did not let them down. 
Standing out in brilliant contrast against a black, moonless sky, the 
second-largest planet in the solar system passed in front of a bright star late 
Sunday night and early Monday morning. That happens so rarely that it drew the 
undivided attention of many of the largest telescopes in the West, from Chile 
to Arizona to Hawaii to California. 
Saturn Owned the Skies 
The event gave scientists a chance to study the size and nature of Saturn, and 
its rings and many moons, but it was far more than that. From the moment 
shortly before midnight that the star first flickered and dipped behind the 
outer ring to the time it emerged more than three hours later from the other 
side, Saturn owned the skies. 
"That's pretty bloody spectacular," sighed Leif Robinson, editor of Sky and 
Telescope Magazine, who talked to the fledgling Mt. Wilson Institute about 
using the 60-inch telescope at the Mt. Wilson Observatory to study the event. A 
handful of scientists and a few guests crouched on their hands and knees on the 
observatory's concrete floor to watch the entire drama on a small television 
monitor hooked up to the historic scope. 
Much of the time the crowd was quiet, almost reverent, but every time the star 
blazed through a hole in the rings it brought cheers and applause from 
astronomers who are more accustomed to fighting sleep than controlling their 
exuberance during long, nighttime stints at the telescope. 
"You could measure the size of the rings by the sound level in this room," 
observed astronomer Art Vaughan of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Vaughan is 
chairman of the board of the Mt. Wilson Institute and one of the prime movers 
in the drive to save the historic observatory from the scrap heap. 
Major Role in Astronomy 
For nearly a century the Mt. Wilson Observatory played a major role in 
astronomy, but a few years ago the Carnegie Institution shocked the scientific 
world by announcing that the institute would concentrate its limited resources 
on its more modern observatory in Chile, and that would force it to close Mt. 
Wilson. 
But scientists and enthusiasts like Vaughan rose up en masse to challenge that 
move, giving birth to the Mt. Wilson Institute, a grass-roots organization that 
is dedicated to preserving the observatory. Last Jan. 5, the Carnegie 
Institution turned over the entire observatory to the Mt. Wilson Institute, and 
the old facility began a new life. 
The institute plans to turn the observatory into a major educational facility, 
and Vaughan noted that along the way it would be nice if it could fill in a few 
gaps left by the upstart observatories that have come along to take its place. 
That is exactly what it did Monday morning. 
Just a few days ago Robinson, whose magazine enjoys the respect of professional 
as well as amateur astronomers, was trying to find some way to capture the 
moment for his readers when he thought of Mt. Wilson. At first, Robinson said 
Monday night, he thought he would just ask permission to attach a small 
telescope to a 
drive mechanism at the observatory, giving him a chance to photograph the 
event. 
But when he approached the institute, he got a surprise. 
A team of scientists from the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics has 
been using the 60-inch telescope to study other stars to see if they have 
sunspots like the sun (they do, it turns out) and they were willing to turn the 
instrument toward Saturn for its rendezvous with a star known as 28 Sagittarii. 
"I was amazed by how quickly this all came together," Robinson said. "In a 
matter of a day or two we knew we had a telescope." 
Others quickly came aboard with instruments needed to study the eclipse, which 
astronomers call an "occultation," and by Sunday night the only thing lacking 
was a drum roll. 
"There it goes," astronomer Jim Frazer of the Harvard Smithsonian yelled as the 
star edged up to the outer ring. 
The rings of Saturn have long fascinated celestial observers because they 
create one of the most spectacular views in the sky. 
The Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 spacecraft took much of the mystery out of the 
rings when they confirmed earlier evidence that the rings were not solid. Their 
contents range from gas and dust particles to the second largest moon in the 
solar system, but they also have gaps and even intermittent rings that are 
largely void of matter. 
Knowing that, the scientists at Mt. Wilson expected the star to disappear 
behind the rings almost immediately, but it turned out to be rather reluctant 
to leave the stage. 
"Bye, bye, starlight," Frazer said as the star first dipped behind the outer 
ring. 
But a second later it blazed brightly again, and the old dome housing the 
telescope reverberated with shouts and applause. 
"Holy mackerel, it's still there," Robinson said. "This is more fun than a 
pinball machine." 
"It's more fun than Christmas," added Lyndine McAfee, executive director of the 
Mt. Wilson Institute. 
And so it went, throughout the evening. 
Meanwhile, other scientists at other observatories in Arizona, California, 
Hawaii and Chile were compiling data on the event. Videotapes from Mt. Wilson 
will be sent to the University of Arizona as part of that effort. 
Unchanged by it all was Saturn, second in mass among the planets only to 
Jupiter, an ethereal vision that does not look real as it moves across the sky, 
cloaked in rings of gold. 
But Sunday night and Monday morning, it blocked out the rays from a distant 
star, proving that it is, indeed, real. 
