DOGS FIND 26 ALIENS IN BOX ATOP TRUCK 
Twenty-six illegal aliens bound for Orange County were found "packed like 
sardines" in an 18-inch-high sealed attachment to a delivery truck roof early 
Thursday morning, the U.S. Border Patrol reported. 
The 18 Mexicans and eight Salvadorans were on their way to Irvine, about 20 
miles from the San Onofre checkpoint where they were discovered. Each had paid 
$300 to be smuggled from the border, supervisory Border Patrol Agent Michael 
Gregg said. No one was seriously injured, he said. 
The passengers had been in the poorly ventilated compartment for more than 
three hours when agents found them. Gregg said the sealed compartment ran the 
length of the 1964 Ford bobtail truck, which looks much like a small delivery 
truck. 
"This could have been a very tragic situation. There were women in there and 
one elderly gentleman over 70 years old," Gregg said. No small children were in 
the compartment, he said. 
Some of the passengers were suffering from slight delirium from the heat when 
they were removed from the compartment, which was about 20 feet long. No one 
was hospitalized, Gregg said. 
The driver of the truck, a San Diego resident, was arrested and will be charged 
in connection with transporting illegal aliens, Gregg said. His name has not 
been released, pending arraignment. 
Gregg said agents, who stopped the truck at 3:30 a.m., noticed the freshly 
painted box had a seam that looked unusual. He said agents suspected a false 
compartment had been added to the top. Canine units detected the hidden people. 
Agents had to climb on top of the truck cab to peel back the sheet metal that 
formed the top of the truck and pry the top open. Gregg said the compartment 
was very tightly sealed shut. 
Most of the aliens will be returned to their country after questioning, Gregg 
said, although some will be retained as material witnesses. 
"Alien smugglings are not uncommon. The fact that you have a large number of 
people crammed into such a tiny space makes this case unusual," Gregg said. 
"That's an extremely dangerous situation for those people. They could have been 
abandoned by the smuggler or great injury, even death, could have resulted from 
the poor ventilation." 
Gregg said the compartment's construction and the type of truck used indicate 
the smuggling might be a part of a professional operation. 
The aliens most probably had been picked up near the border, although the exact 
location has not been pinpointed yet, he said. 
