JAZZ; 
JAZZ PUTS IN STAKES AT LEGENDS OF HOLLYWOOD 
Every time a jazz club folds, two others open up. The latest addition is 
Legends of Hollywood, a deli and steakhouse on Hollywood Boulevard, where 
straight-ahead sounds are now heard three nights a week. 
Jay Migliori, best known for his long dues-paying with Supersax, is the regular 
Friday incumbent. With him are Stu Pearlman on electric keyboard, Larry Steen 
on upright bass and, as drummer and vocalist, Bob Marks, who owns the club and 
launched the jazz policy last month. 
Given a rare chance to stretch out here, Migliori displays a strong be-bop 
orientation in his solos, bringing undulant life to such vintage works as 
"Billie's Bounce." 
It was when he switched from tenor to soprano sax during this tune that his 
sound, phrasing and ideas best reflected his long years of creative input. The 
thought came to mind that Migliori was offering a slight idea of how Charlie 
Parker, who wrote this blues line, might have sounded had he played soprano (an 
instrument virtually unused in the jazz of his day). 
Pearlman, who plays a Yamaha keyboard standing up, had to grapple with the 
instrument's lack of a true bass function; in a long and otherwise satisfactory 
solo on "Just Friends," he hardly used the left hand except for occasional 
punctuations. 
Steen is a young, limber bassist whose works sparkled with fresh ideas. Marks, 
who was away from jazz drumming for years playing the Vegas circuit, has 
successfully made the transition back. His underlining of the accents in two 
bossa novas was brisk and propulsive. As a singer he ought to stay away from 
molasses-tempo ballads. His attempt to combine "Weaver of Dreams" and "There 
Will Never Be Another You" didn't merely lose the audience, it never found them 
-- they just yakked their way through it. 
Ray Pizzi takes the stand Saturdays at Legends of Hollywood: Sundays are given 
over to jam sessions. The sound in the high-ceilinged, 107-capacity room is 
adequate, and the lack of air-conditioning is compensated for by eight large 
overhead fans. More fans -- the human type -- can be expected if Marks moves 
toward what he says may soon be a five-nights-a-week policy. LEONARD FEATHER 
