COLUMN ONE; 
SEARCHING FOR HEART OF DARKNESS; 
A WOMAN'S TORTURED EFFORT TO FIND A BROTHER WHO DISAPPEARED SPANS THREE 
CONTINENTS. IT LEADS TO A MYSTERIOUS -- AND POSSIBLY MURDEROUS -- AMAZON GUIDE. 
Sandy Reed climbed out of the small airplane and squinted into the cloudless 
tropical sky. Paint was peeling off the deserted terminal. The Rio Negro, the 
largest tributary of the mighty Amazon, lay hidden behind a screen of trees. 
Only a rutted road sliced through the jungle. 
Somewhere down that road lay the end of a quest -- the end, if not the 
solution, to a mystery that had awakened Reed on countless nights, propelled 
her across three continents and drained her meager savings: the unknown, 
perhaps unknowable, fate of her brother, John Reed, who in 1980 disappeared 
somewhere beyond this silent clearing. 
There had been rumors about him, purported sightings of a tall white man among 
the Indians, unconfirmable tales of a partial skeleton lying in a hammock 
beside the river, even allegations of murder. In the worst of her dreams, his 
frightened voice had told her, "It's not like I thought it would be here." 
In the Amazon Basin, myths are as thick as vines, and its 2.5 million square 
miles remain today as impervious to the order and logic of civilization as in 
the year 1500, when Spanish explorer Vincente Yanez Pinzon recorded first 
seeing the river. 
Armies and adventurers have sought their fortunes and their futures here. But 
the often impenetrable Amazon does not surrender treasures or truths readily. 
For five centuries, many who sought them have left empty-handed -- or not at 
all. 
John Reed, who hungered for some undefined higher knowledge and once wrote a 
book about UFO sightings, had come to believe in one of the countless stories 
of lost cities inhabited by ancient tribes, their location known only to a 
solitary guide. In this case, the guide was a shadowy figure called Tatunca 
Nara, the progenitor of this particular tale. 
Reed was not the only one who thought there was a lost civilization to be 
found. Herbert Wanner, a 24-year-old Swiss who came to the jungle in 1984, was 
a believer, too. So was Christine Heuser, a middle-aged Swedish yoga instructor 
whose fascination with Indians led her to Tatunca Nara in 1987. 
These three shared something else: One by one, they disappeared -- murdered, 
some authorities believe -- while in the company of Tatunca Nara. 
Now, after retreating once in fear of her own life, Sandy Reed had come back to 
the Amazon -- with a German filmmaker and a Times reporter along -- to demand 
the truth. 
The village of Barcelos, with its 3,000 residents, 10 cars and one telephone, 
lay before her, dirty and unwelcoming, on the edge of the Rio Negro. Television 
sets blared incongruously through open windows as she walked -- in jeans, 
Reebok sneakers and a bush jacket -- past dilapidated shacks and silent stares. 
She stopped to ask directions from an elderly woman hanging wash on a wooden 
fence. She had only to speak the name of the man she sought. Everyone in 
Barcelos knew the legendary Tatunca Nara. 
Tatunca Nara claimed to be the chief of a tribe that for 3,000 years supposedly 
had ruled Akakor, the capital of a lost civilization where descendants of gods 
were supposed to have lived in stone pyramids and subterranean shelters. He was 
born, he said, in the jungle near the border with Peru, the son of a German 
nurse who had been captured by Indians and taken by their chief to be his wife. 
His tale became the basis for a book, "The Chronicle of Akakor," written in 
1976 by Karl Brugger, a German journalist based in Rio de Janeiro. The book 
described Akakor, its people and its history in alluring detail. 
Over the years, Tatunca parlayed his legend into a business, leading tourists 
into the Amazon. He took them by boat along endless miles of postcard-perfect 
rivers and streams. He even served as guide for an elaborate expedition mounted 
by Jacques Cousteau, the famous French explorer-scientist. 
Few who went into the wilds with Tatunca believed the story of Akakor; it 
merely added another layer of exotica to the adventure of a lifetime. 
For some, however, Tatunca's tale touched deeper chords. John Reed had gone so 
far as to have what Brugger's book described as the symbol of Akakor, a sun 
rising out of water, tattooed over his heart. 
When he vanished into the malarial jungle in 1980, John Reed, tall and blond, 
had left behind four hope-filled letters, his dog tags and his ticket back to 
the States. The last person known to have seen the 28-year-old man was his 
guide, Tatunca. 
West German police say they suspect that Tatunca murdered Reed, Wanner and 
Heuser, although no charges have been filed and no bodies have been found. 
The jungle has relinquished little evidence in this strange case. A jaw 
discovered by Swiss tourists in 1986 was identified through dental records as 
that of Wanner. About Reed, there have been only rumors; about Heuser, not even 
that. 
The German police also suspect that Tatunca played a role in the death of Karl 
Brugger in 1984. Brugger was shot in the heart on a Rio street by a gunman who 
had demanded his money. A companion said Brugger was reaching for his wallet 
when the man shot him and ran off without taking anything. Rio police declared 
robbery the motive. 
Stories circulate in the Amazon, however, that the robbery was a ruse, and that 
Brugger's death was the result of an argument with Tatunca over royalties from 
"The Chronicle of Akakor." 
The suspicions do not stop there. Brazil's federal police acknowledge that they 
are investigating the separate disappearances of an Austrian man and a woman 
from New Zealand, both of whom were last seen with Tatunca. 
Tatunca denied involvement in the killings in statements to Brazilian 
authorities and a U.S. consular agent. As he told it, Reed and Wanner each ran 
away and hid in the jungle when he asked them to return with him to Barcelos. 
He said he put Heuser on a boat to Manaus, a city down the river, and never saw 
her again, just as he did with the Austrian and the woman from New Zealand. 
But like the jungle butterflies whose brilliant patterns mimic bad-tasting 
varieties to throw off predators, Tatunca Nara has seemingly cloaked himself in 
deception and disguise. 
According to West German authorities, Tatunca is really Guenther Hauck, a West 
German citizen born on Oct. 5, 1941, in Bavaria. The police have his birth 
certificate and other personal records. A police expert studied photographs of 
Hauck from his teens to early 20s, and of the man who calls himself Tatunca. 
The expert declared that they are the same person. 
Police records show that Hauck was a sailor on a West German freighter in 1966 
when he jumped ship in Venezuela. Arrested, he claimed to be an Indian. A 
psychiatrist diagnosed him as schizophrenic, and Hauck was returned to West 
Germany, where he was jailed for three months for failing to support his wife 
and two sons. 
Three years later, Hauck sailed to Brazil and again jumped ship, the West 
German police say. This time he disappeared, and Tatunca Nara emerged. He 
married a Brazilian and they have two teen-age children. Last year, Hauck's 
ex-wife traveled to Barcelos from West Germany and identified Tatunca as her 
former husband. 
"His whole story is crazy," insists Kurt Hartert, the detective heading the 
West German investigation. "This man we are talking about, who is suspected of 
having killed three people, is Guenther Hauck. There is no doubt about this." 
Hartert claims jurisdiction because Hauck is still a West German citizen, and 
West German law extends to its citizens anywhere in the world. But Brazilian 
authorities have refused to allow the West German investigators into the 
country, contending that Brazil is conducting its own inquiry. 
The U.S. State Department has sent diplomatic notes to the Brazilians asking 
that the German investigators be allowed into the country. Edwin L. Beffel, the 
U.S. consul general in Brazil, recently went to the Foreign Ministry in 
Brasilia to reiterate the request. So far, the Brazilians have continued to 
resist. 
Diplomatic niceties, however, have been no barrier to Sandy Reed's struggle to 
discover what happened to her brother. 
For years, Sandy Reed and her mother, Virginia, clung to the improbable belief 
that John was living with the Indians in the Amazon. Hadn't his last letter 
said he was only a day or two from Akakor? Hadn't the U.S. consular agent in 
Manaus sent them assurances that Tatunca was a "genuine Amazonian Indian" who 
was capable and responsible? 
Even when warned by the State Department in early 1981 that John Reed could be 
in danger, his mother had said she did not want anyone to search for him. She 
felt he was following his plan to live with the Indians. 
In early 1984, Sandy Reed was reading her local newspaper when she spotted a 
small story from Rio de Janeiro. It said a West German journalist had been 
killed during a robbery attempt. His name was Karl Brugger. 
"I wondered if it was somehow connected to Johnny," said Reed. "I was really 
worried. I thought of going to Brazil to try to find him, but I kept postponing 
it, hoping for some news from Johnny." 
Five years later came worse news. A West German adventurer told the Reeds that 
the West German police suspected Tatunca of killing three people in the Amazon, 
including John Reed. They wrote the police for details, and the reply brought 
another shock: Not only was Tatunca Nara a suspect in three homicides, he was 
actually a West German citizen. 
The letter ended with a disheartening assessment: "The corpse of your son was 
never found, and there is little hope that the mortal remains might ever be 
discovered." 
Sandy Reed quit her sales job, scraped together what money she could and began 
arranging the long-delayed trip to South America from her home near San 
Francisco. 
She had always admired her brother, who was two years older. He was not just a 
dreamer but a doer who had always followed his convictions. Now she would 
follow hers and find out what happened to him. To do that, she would have to 
find Tatunca Nara. 
In June, 1989, she flew to Manaus, an isolated city of 1.2 million about 900 
miles from the Atlantic Ocean in the heart of the Amazon. Farther up the Rio 
Negro, two days by boat and two hours by plane, was Barcelos, the home of 
Tatunca Nara. 
At the turn of the century, Manaus was a boom town where rubber barons built 
colonial mansions overlooking the river. An opera house was erected out of 
stone and marble shipped from Italy in 1896; Caruso once sang there. Instant 
tycoons sent their soiled clothes to England for cleaning. 
Today, the rubber boom is long gone and so is the prosperity. Manaus is clogged 
with pollution, begging children and crumbling concrete buildings. About 200 
foreign-owned assembly plants, paying low wages and turning out goods from 
television sets to sunglasses, ring the city. 
Sandy Reed spent three weeks there in 1989, badgering a Brazilian prosecutor 
about her brother's disappearance and scouring the city for scraps of 
information about John and Tatunca Nara. 
A friendly tour agent looked at John's picture and thought she might have seen 
him on the outskirts of the city, dazed and wearing large black rubber boots. 
The prosecutor said Tatunca told him two miners had spotted someone fitting 
John's description with an Indian tribe a few months earlier. 
Before going to Manaus, Reed had arranged a meeting with James R. Fish, the 
part-time U.S. consular agent who had written several letters to her family. 
Fish did not show up for the meeting. So, Reed tracked him down in Fortaleza, a 
resort city on the Atlantic, flew there and confronted him in an exchange that 
she tape-recorded. 
Fish described Tatunca delivering her brother's final letters to his office in 
late 1980, claiming Reed had run away from him. Fish said he figured John had 
found "an interesting situation" in the jungle and had decided to stay. 
Pressed about his assurances in a 1981 letter that Tatunca was a "genuine 
Amazonian Indian," Fish said: "He is not an authentic Indian in the sense of 
being born with Indian blood in him. But he does all the things that Indians 
do. All the people in Manaus that you talk to say that his trip is the real 
thing." 
Back in Manaus, Sandy Reed was warned not to try to meet Tatunca. Barcelos was 
too remote, the sort of place where someone could be killed quietly and 
anonymously. She grew frightened and moved from cheap hotel to cheap hotel each 
night, always registering under a different name. 
She decided not to confront Tatunca -- at least not then, and not alone. 
One story she heard during this period was more terrifying than all the others. 
A former Swissair pilot reportedly had gone into the jungle with Tatunca in 
1981 and come upon a headless skeleton lying in a green nylon hammock. Beneath 
the hammock lay a hair brush and tooth brush. Tatunca reportedly had said that 
the bones, hammock and personal items were those of John Reed. 
Sandy Reed flew to Zurich, where the ex-pilot, Ferdinand Schmid, repeated the 
story. He said Tatunca had tossed the bones into the river and given the 
hammock to an Indian boy. He gave Reed a photo of the boy holding the hammock. 
A friend of Schmid's, who had gone on a later trip with Tatunca, said the guide 
had told him that John Reed had been living with an Indian tribe when he 
ventured too close to a woman bathing in a river and was shot to death by her 
jealous husband. 
From Zurich, Sandy Reed took a train to Wiesbaden, West Germany, and spent a 
long evening discussing the case with Kurt Hartert, the German detective. 
Hartert was sympathetic but uncertain about the chances of solving the mystery. 
There were no bodies, and the Brazilians were blocking his attempts to 
interrogate Tatunca. 
"You can only come to the truth when you break Tatunca -- when you are able to 
convince him that he must say he is Guenther Hauck," Hartert said. 
Reed refused to let go. Returning home to Northern California, she began 
cleaning houses for $12 an hour to earn money for a return trip to Brazil. At 
36, she could have been building a career, but she needed to be able to resume 
her search at a moment's notice. 
She talked with Wolfgang Brog, a West German documentary producer who was 
gathering information about the disappearances for a television show. She flew 
to Munich and met with him. They arranged to rendezvous in Manaus to track down 
Tatunca. 
Her second trip to the Amazon was planned for late last month. This time, Reed 
would go on to Barcelos. A Times reporter and Brog would go along. 
"There are days when I don't feel Johnny is alive," said Reed as she packed for 
the trip. "The evidence that I'm collecting makes me think he's not alive. I 
don't know. Somewhere in my heart, oh . . . I guess I can't know until I face 
Tatunca." 
On June 21, Sandy Reed arrived in Manaus and checked into a $20-a-night hotel 
on a noisy downtown street. She spent several days tracking down new 
information, doggedly scribbling in a small red notebook and tape-recording 
conversations. 
One afternoon, after failing to find the local prosecutor in his office, she 
paid an unexpected visit to his home. Joao Bosco Sa Valente was polite enough, 
perhaps even a bit embarrassed, as he admitted that he had made no progress 
since their meeting a year ago. 
"It's only me doing this case," Valente lamented, turning up the palms of both 
hands. "Nobody helps." 
Valente said his requests for assistance from the federal police had been 
ignored. He said he had documents showing that Tatunca once worked for the 
Brazilian army, and he speculated that the military might be protecting him. 
"Very strange things happen around this case," he said. 
A few days later, the federal police said Valente had never asked for help. 
They showed Reed their own file on Tatunca Nara. She was stunned. Rather than 
the names of her brother, Wanner and Heuser, the file concerned two different 
people -- an Austrian man and a woman from New Zealand -- who had disappeared 
separately after saying that they were going into the jungle with Tatunca. 
Tatunca told the police that he put them on boats back to Manaus and never saw 
them again. 
"We have no proof," said a federal police officer in Brazil, who asked that his 
name not be used. "We never found any bodies and no eyewitnesses or anything. 
All we have is hypothesis." 
On Monday, July 2, a clerk at Reed's hotel placed an anonymous call to the only 
telephone in Barcelos. Yes, Tatunca Nara was in town. He was at the Hotel 
Oasis, the three-room inn on the Rio Negro that he and his father-in-law had 
built years before. 
Arrangements had to be made hurriedly. The small scheduled airline to Barcelos 
was flying up the next day, but no return was available until Thursday. Two 
nights in Tatunca's territory, where he ran the only hotel, seemed a foolish 
risk. 
A series of telephone calls and a substantial amount of cash secured the 
promise of a chartered airplane. It would be waiting at the Manaus airport the 
next morning. 
Reed slept little that night, tossing restlessly in her bed. In the dark early 
morning, her hands were shaking as she cradled a cup of coffee. She stuffed a 
knapsack and the pockets of her bush jacket with a tape recorder, a small 
notebook, a red folder containing documents and, emblazoned with the words "Top 
Secret," pictures of her brother and his last letters from the Amazon. 
Before leaving the hotel room, she reached down and yanked the buckle free on 
her leather belt, exposing a lethal-looking, four-inch dagger. Slashing 
horizontally across the belly of an imaginary foe, she said: "This is how my 
cousin showed me to use it. It doesn't even show up in an airport metal 
detector." 
The small twin-engine plane lifted off shortly after 10 a.m. and rose to 8,500 
feet. The Rio Negro spread out below, half a mile wide in places, black water 
laced with strips of bright green jungle and dotted by tiny islands. 
Reed had left her morning bravado on the ground. Replacing it was a mixture of 
fear, sadness and exhilaration as she approached the climax of her journey. She 
scanned her two-page list of questions for Tatunca, drawing a heavy line under 
the first one: "What happened to my brother?" 
She leafed through her brother's letters and extracted one found among Karl 
Brugger's papers after his death. It was dated Nov. 24, 1980. John Reed had 
said that he had met Tatunca in Manaus that day and gone with him to Barcelos. 
They were about to set off for Akakor, and Reed was excited. But there was a 
note of doubt about Tatunca. 
"Is he a liar or a prince?" he wrote to Brugger. 
The plane bounced twice and settled onto the rough landing strip that had been 
chopped out of the jungle at Barcelos. It was almost noon, and the sun was hot. 
There was no breath of wind. The dense foliage pushed against the edges of the 
unshaded road leaving the airport. 
Unsmiling children watched the athletic, auburn-haired woman walk through the 
town, occasionally whistling in an eerie, low monotone. Along the river bank, a 
girl of 6 or 7 bathed naked in the water beside a beached houseboat. 
Suddenly, there was the Hotel Oasis, perched on a high bank above the Rio 
Negro. It was more a large home than a hotel. Just inside the wooden gate, 
watching the strangers approach, was Tatunca Nara. He wore only a pair of 
patterned shorts. A turtle was tattooed on his chest. His eyes and hair were 
brown, and he was deeply tanned. His features were sharp, more European than 
Indian, and he was lean and muscular. 
Smiling warmly, he invited the visitors in and directed them to the shaded 
veranda overlooking the river. Reed and her companions sat at a small table and 
sipped Cokes in silence while Tatunca finished his lunch. 
When Tatunca moved to the small table, Reed brought out the pictures of her 
brother and identified herself. A broad smile crossed Tatunca's face as he 
shook her hand and asked, "Why didn't you come years ago?" 
"They told me you are a dangerous man," Reed said. 
She began to question him gently, retelling the stories that had circulated 
about those who had disappeared -- her brother, Herbert Wanner, Christine 
Heuser. 
"These stories are crazy," said Tatunca. "It's crazy. I have killed no one." 
He said that he had barely known John Reed. They had spent only two or three 
days together, heading up the Rio Negro and the Rio Padauari. Tatunca wanted to 
return to Barcelos, but Reed insisted on staying. 
"I told him, 'You don't go in the jungle. You are crazy.' But he wanted to see 
the Indians," said Tatunca. 
Reed shook her head in disbelief. Her brother's letters indicated that he had 
spent at least 10 days with Tatunca and the guide had promised to show him 
Akakor. 
What about Schmid, she asked -- the Swiss who said Tatunca had shown him bones 
in a hammock and said they were her brother's? 
"It's absurd," Tatunca said. He insisted that the bones were from a wild pig he 
had killed some months before. And he said they were beneath the hammock, not 
in it. The hammock and other items, he said, were his. "I was just joking with 
him. I said only, 'Maybe someone died here.' " 
He told of two gold miners who had come out of the jungle about a year ago and 
described seeing a tall blond man living with the Indians. "Nobody knows who 
this blond guy is," he said. "Maybe your brother is still alive." 
When Tatunca grew agitated or needed to explain something complicated, he 
abandoned English and Portuguese and launched into fast, fluent German. He said 
he had spent seven years in West Germany. But he denied that he was born and 
reared there, claiming that his birthplace was near the border of Peru and 
Brazil. Sure, he knew of Akakor. No, he had never promised to take anyone 
there. 
The subject of Brugger's book irritated him. Pointing both thumbs down, he 
denounced the book as "80% lies." But when asked if he killed Brugger, he said, 
"I did not kill him -- he was my blood brother. 
"Why would I kill a man? For what? No reason. No reason." 
As the questioning wore on, Reed appeared to grow more incredulous. Tatunca's 
story conflicted too sharply with her brother's letters and with the stories 
she had heard from others around the world. If Tatunca were telling the truth, 
then her brother had lied. She could never accept that. 
Finally, Reed could endure no more. She rose from her chair, fists clenched. 
Tatunca jumped up too. 
Tears streaming down her face, Reed spoke each word clearly and deliberately: 
"Tatunca, you are a liar. I have no respect for you. I hate you. You killed my 
brother. You killed my brother." 
Tatunca winced under the blunt accusation and pleaded: "No, Miss Reed. What 
motive? What motive? Why would I kill your brother?" 
"Because you're crazy -- and you will pay for my brother's death," Reed 
responded sharply. 
She gathered up her papers and tape recorder and walked through the door and 
into the road without turning. Tatunca slumped into his chair and shook his 
head slowly. 
The road back to the airport was as hot as a sauna. Reed ducked into a tiny 
grocery store and emerged with two large bottles of Antarctica beer and plastic 
cups tucked in her blue knapsack. At the empty terminal, she pried off a beer 
cap with a Swiss army knife. 
"Now, I know my brother is dead," she said calmly, as if some chasm of 
suffering and uncertainty had been bridged. "Tatunca lied to me about 
everything. It's time to get this behind me. But Johnny would have been proud 
of me." 
A few minutes later, the plane lifted off, swept low over Barcelos and the Rio 
Negro and climbed into the sky. Dark clouds were visible in the west; the 
pilots were in a hurry to beat the storm. 
