NURSING HOME MIGHT APPEAL FINE FOR ABUSE; 
ELDERLY CARE: THE $10,000 PENALTY WAS LEVIED AFTER A NURSE'S AIDE ALLEGEDLY 
RAPED A PATIENT. OFFICIALS MAINTAIN THAT THE HOME IS NOT RESPONSIBLE. 
Autumn Hills Convalescent Home officials said they probably will appeal a 
$10,000 fine levied by Los Angeles County officials after an elderly patient 
was allegedly raped at the facility by a nurse's aide. 
Officials representing Autumn Hills have argued that the Glendale nursing home 
is not responsible for the actions of employee Roy Alton Seaton, a 45-year-old 
Burbank resident who had a prior conviction for a sexual offense that Autumn 
Hills officials were unaware of. 
Seaton allegedly attacked an 82-year-old patient who was suffering from 
Alzheimer's disease. He has pleaded not guilty and is in County Jail awaiting 
an Aug. 14 preliminary hearing. 
On July 5, about a week after the alleged attack, the county Department of 
Health Services fined the home $10,000 because a resident suffered physical and 
sexual abuse, and $1,000 because Seaton's background was not checked properly 
before he was hired, said Spencer Barr, an assistant supervisor with county 
Health Services. 
Although both citations remain on the nursing home's record, the lesser fine 
was dropped after the home agreed to ensure that in the future the references 
of job applicants would be checked to verify they had state certification for 
the job. 
Attorneys for Autumn Hills, however, argue that the home should not be blamed 
because its operators must depend on a system for obtaining and sharing 
information about nurse's aides that is too complex. It requires them to know 
about an employee's past but makes it very difficult for them to obtain the 
information, the attorneys said. 
Seaton's criminal record dates to September, 1983, when he was convicted of 
lewd and lascivious conduct with a child and put on six years' probation. The 
conviction, however, did not directly threaten Seaton's livelihood because it 
did not involve a patient or occur at a nursing home. 
Under state law, a convicted child molester can work as a nurse's aide -- 
provided the offense did not occur at a nursing facility or involve a patient, 
county officials said. If a nurse's aide is convicted of abuse or neglect of a 
nursing home patient, the offense is automatically reported to the state 
Department of Health Services, which revokes the aide's certification, said 
Mary Louise Mock, a state Health Services assistant deputy director. 
Seaton, who was certified as a nurse's aide in 1979, joined Golden State 
Colonial Convalescent Hospital in North Hollywood in October, 1986. His wife, 
also a nurse's aide, got a job there too, said Bette Zimmer, the home's 
administrator. 
In an interview, Zimmer said that Seaton and his wife were excellent employees 
and that she did not know when she hired Seaton that he had been convicted of 
child molestation. Zimmer said she followed standard procedures in hiring him: 
She called state Health Services to make sure his certification was valid, and 
she called his references to verify his former employment. 
Neither method, however, offered any substantial information about his past, 
Zimmer said. Industry and county officials said that generally is the case: 
Former employers, fearful of lawsuits, are reluctant to give out information 
about employees, even to other nursing homes. And the state certification hot 
line tells only whether an aide's certification is valid. 
There is no uniform system nursing homes can use to obtain information about 
employees' criminal backgrounds and in many instances, the information is 
confidential, said Rod Leonard, in charge of the district attorney's nursing 
home and dependent care branch. 
"You can't just call me up and say, 'Rod, can you check my boyfriend's records 
to see if he has any criminal past,' " Leonard said. "There's a right to 
privacy involved in criminal records." 
Zimmer said Seaton left Golden State in April, 1988, for a better paying job at 
Riverdale Convalescent Center in Glendale. Like Zimmer, Kathleen Reinke, then 
administrator of Riverdale, said she did not know of Seaton's conviction when 
he was hired. But several months later, she received anonymous complaints that 
he was treating residents roughly and heard rumors that he was on probation for 
a sex offense. 
Reinke, who now administers Brighton Convalescent Center in Pasadena, said she 
confronted Seaton about the complaints and rumors. She said Seaton told her 
that he had been accused of child molestation, but that the charge was 
unsubstantiated. Reinke said she suspended him from resuming work until he 
could provide proof from a legal authority that it was safe for him to work 
with the elderly. 
In November, 1988, she got such a letter -- from Seaton's probation officer. 
The letter acknowledged Seaton's offense and said there was no documented 
evidence that suggested that child molesters posed a threat to ill or elderly 
adults, according to Carol Koelle, regional director of the county probation 
department. 
Because the complaints seemed to be unsubstantiated and because the law does 
not prohibit convicted child molesters from working as nurse's aides, Reinke 
allowed him to return to his job, she said. 
Seaton, whose probation expired in April, 1989, left Riverdale in July and was 
hired at Autumn Hills in August. Months later, during an early morning shift on 
June 27, a supervisor allegedly caught Seaton raping and sodomizing a resident. 
Seaton was arrested a day later and charged with three felony counts of sexual 
assault. He also was fired, said Tami Smason, Autumn Hills' attorney. 
Smason said Seaton had been known as a "helpful and fine" employee. The home 
had no way of knowing about his criminal record because he lied when he wrote 
on his job application that he had never been convicted of a felony, she said. 
Smason refused to say whether Autumn Hills checked Seaton's references. County 
officials, however, said the home failed to do so. If it had, the officials 
charged, it would have learned about his past and considered it in the decision 
to hire him. 
"The law says that each facility should establish personnel policies and 
procedures that should include verification of license, credentials and 
references," Barr said. "Yes, it's up to each facility to decide how to do it . 
. . but if you're not doing it thoroughly, you take a chance." 
Obtaining information about nurse's aides may become easier. All states, 
including California, are establishing hot lines that will offer more 
information about nurse's aides, such as whether a conviction or substantiated 
complaints of abuse ever have been lodged against an aide, Mock said. 
Comprehensive criminal records are available through the U.S. Department of 
Justice for some kinds of care facilities, such as homes for the 
developmentally disabled. A bill by Assemblyman Lloyd G. Connelly 
(D-Sacramento) pending in the Legislature would give nursing homes the same 
access to those records. 
But some industry officials said they will oppose the bill if it means that 
homes will have to employ costly, time-consuming measures to obtain records. 
"We're in a segment of the labor market where people aren't coming in with fat 
resumes and a lot of work experience. There are always problems ascertaining 
prior work history," said Dave Helmsin, program director for the California 
Assn. of Health Facilities, a trade group for most of the 1,250 nursing homes 
in the state. "Still, we can't support anything that seriously inhibits our 
ability to recruit employees." 
