SIX MEN ARRESTED IN FATAL STABBING IN BALBOA PARK 
Police arrested six men Wednesday night in connection with the stabbing death 
of a man in Balboa Park earlier in the day, authorities said. 
Franklyn James Black, 34, no current address available, was found by a 
passer-by near Balboa Drive and Maple Street about 5 a.m., said police 
spokesman Bill Robinson. Black had been stabbed several times, authorities 
said. 
The passer-by notified police, who discovered signs of a struggle 60 to 70 
yards from where Black was found. 
He was wearing white athletic shoes and shorts, leading police to believe he 
had been walking or jogging, Robinson said. 
One park visitor told police that he had encountered a group of men on 
Wednesday who he believed were going to rob him, Robinson said. The man told 
police he picked up a stick and scared off the group. 
The stabbing death is believed to have occurred during a robbery, Robinson 
said. 
As police combed the canyons of Balboa Park for men matching the descriptions 
provided by witnesses, the body of another man was found by a police dog in the 
underbrush near 6th Avenue and Elm Street, Robinson said. 
The death of that man is not believed to be related to the stabbing death, 
Robinson said. A preliminary investigation led police to believe the second 
man, unidentified, died of a drug overdose, said Sgt. Jerry Callaway. There 
were no signs of trauma on the man, Callaway said. 
Autopsies on both men are scheduled for today. 
The search prompted police to pick up two groups of people -- some of whom were 
reported to have blood on their clothes -- for questioning. 
A wallet belonging to Black was found near where some of the people were taken 
in, said Sgt. Frank Martinez. 
Police arrested six men ranging in age from 18 to 20 years old, who identified 
themselves to police as Mexican nationals who had entered the country 
illegally. They were being booked and held in County Jail downtown on suspicion 
of homicide, Martinez said. 
