PERSPECTIVE ON THE SUPREME COURT; 
PIG IN A POKE SHOULD ROE VS. WADE RIGHT IN; 
IT'S THE SENATE'S JOB TO PRY FROM SOUTER WHETHER HE'LL DEPART FROM 
BRENNAN-THINK. BUSH SEEMS NOT TO HAVE A CLUE. 
The President who has now nominated the unknown Judge David H. Souter to the 
nation's highest court is the man who cavalierly put Dan Quayle a heartbeat 
from the nation's highest political office. So it is only prudent to insist 
that Souter bear the burden of proving that he is not a Quayle -- not a cipher 
recklessly miscast for Bush's political convenience. 
The convenience is as obvious as Souter's qualifications, obscure. 
Before the 1980 primaries, Bush said of the 1973 abortion ruling (Roe vs. 
Wade): "I happen to think it was right." His political situation, and hence his 
convictions, soon changed: He said the 1973 ruling was so wrong that the 
Constitution should be amended to change it. Republicans used the abortion 
issue to energize a particular constituency. But public opinion has changed, so 
Republican convictions are changing. And at this awkward moment, Bush has had 
to nominate a justice. 
Bush says he has not asked Souter what he thinks about Roe vs. Wade, which 
means about the precedents that produced the "privacy right" that produced Roe 
vs. Wade. Bush either is not telling the truth or is telling a terrible truth 
about himself -- that he is willing to buy, and is asking the Senate to buy, a 
pig in a poke. 
The White House waffle is: Abortion is just one subject, not a litmus test. The 
real test is Souter's commitment not to legislate social preferences under the 
guise of construing the Constitution. But the most efficient way of 
ascertaining Souter's conception of the job is by asking what he thinks of the 
reasoning in Roe vs. Wade. 
Many senators hoped for a nominee whose views on contentious issues are not, as 
Robert Bork's were, well-known. But senators should not permit any nominee's 
reticence to survive the confirmation process. 
It would be improper to ask Souter, "What are your views about abortion?" But 
it would be irresponsible not to ask, "What do you think of the constitutional 
reasoning that resulted in creation of a privacy right that includes a right to 
abortion?" It is as proper to ask a nominee's opinion of the reasoning behind 
Roe vs. Wade as it would be to ask about the reasoning behind Brown vs. Board 
of Education. 
No nominee should be asked about pending cases. However, any nominee should be 
required to reveal the caliber of his or her mind by discussing the reasoning 
in important past cases, including those concerning capital punishment. That 
subject illustrates the anti-constitutional jurisprudence of Justice William J. 
Brennan Jr. 
Because Brennan opposed capital punishment, he declared it unconstitutional. 
The Constitution in several provisions accepts such punishment, so Brennan said 
that such punishment has lately become "cruel and unusual" because of America's 
"evolving standards of decency." But Brennan's supposedly empirical claim 
foundered on a fact: The public's notion of decency, expressed in polls and 
reflected in states' laws, favors capital punishment. So Brennan argued that 
the Constitution defends human dignity, and justices can say what that 
requires, regardless of the original intention of constitutional language or 
today's democratic choices. Souter should be required to say what he thinks 
about Brennan's reasoning. 
Souter should also be forced to be forthcoming on the subject of previous cases 
involving race-conscious government policies. Brennan wrote one of the crucial 
opinions affirming the constitutionality of today's racial spoils system. He 
helped transform the 1964 Civil Rights Act into a law creating special 
entitlements for government-approved minorities. 
Bush and his equally nervous and calculating minions argue, ludicrously, that 
it is fair to inquire about Souter's "intellect" and "judicial temperament" 
but, golly gracious, it would be "inappropriate" to seek Souter's opinion about 
the only matters that can definitively reveal his intellect and temperament. 
These matters include the court's arguments in the broad range of landmark 
cases that have reduced constitutional law to its current sorry condition. 
