YSL PROTEGE MAY BECOME HEAD OF HOUSE 
He's being called Yves Saint Laurent's protege. Robert Merloz, 24, caught the 
eye of the fashion press last winter with his first collection of furs for 
Saint Laurent. Now the Paris-born designer says of the attention it brought 
him: "I'm shy. I can't hide it. It's overwhelming." 
Merloz, an assistant to Saint Laurent for almost three years, made his debut 
for the house with the 114-piece collection. 
Now, rumors abound that Merloz is the heir apparent and will take over all 
design duties when Saint Laurent retires. 
It was Pierre Berge, Saint Laurent chairman, who discovered the new talent. 
Five years ago, when Merloz was a student at the Chambre Syndicale de la Haute 
Couture fashion school, Berge saw his sketches and immediately offered him an 
apprenticeship. He was asked to stay on after graduation to help with the 
ready-to-wear collections. 
"When I was asked to do the furs, I was very excited," Merloz said. "Everything 
was a discovery, like a research project." 
This first collection featured coats, jackets and wraps that appeared as 
malleable as fabric. "The objective was suppleness," Merloz said after the 
show. 
He is very aware of the controversy surrounding real fur, and the strength of 
the animal rights movement. "I go along with it, to the extent that I would 
never use the skins of wild animals -- only animals raised for their skins," he 
said. "But I do feel strongly that, if a woman wants to wear a fur coat, that 
should be her choice." 
Working closely with Saint Laurent has influenced his style; there were echoes 
of YSL in many of Merloz's coats and jackets. But the latter's own personality 
emerged in the softer shoulder silhouette, the short coats with shirttails and 
the jewel-studded fur hoods. Other Merloz-isms: a black mink short coat lined 
in shaved red mink and worn with red and black lace-trimmed lingerie, and a 
chinchilla blouson knotted at the hips with a wide satin ribbon and worn over a 
black satin teddy dripping with gray lace. 
Tall and boyishly thin, dressed in his navy blazer and gray flannel trousers, a 
mop of black curls descending low on his forehead, Merloz looks more like an 
British schoolboy than the fashion creator he has grown up to be. 
