LIZ SMITH: DOUGLAS GETTING $15 MILLION FOR 'BASIC INSTINCT' 
MICHAEL DOUGLAS is going to have more than the usual incentive to do his very 
best work when his next movie, Carolco's "Basic Instinct," begins filming in 
February. About $15 million worth of incentive! 
Yes, that is what Douglas will be paid for the sexual thriller, and it is 
reported to be a record salary for a non-sequel (Sylvester Stallone is said to 
have collected more than $20 million for one of his "Rambo" films). 
And let's not forget that Douglas' eight-figure salary is on top of the huge 
amount collected by "Basic Instinct" screenwriter Joe Eszterhas. This was 
another record, industry insiders say. 
"Basic Instinct" is to be directed by Paul Verhoeven. We haven't heard what 
he'll be paid, but you can be sure that the success of his "Total Recall," 
still cleaning up at the box office, is insurance enough that he won't be 
working for peanuts. 
SONIA BRAGA, the great Brazilian beauty of "The Milagro Beanfield War," "Kiss 
of The Spider Woman," "Moon Over Parador" and countless films in her own 
country, where she is a mucho big star, has just completed "The Rookie" with 
Clint Eastwood, Raul Julia and Charlie Sheen. Braga had some reservations at 
first about taking the part, as "The Rookie' is another one of those young 
cop/old cop shoot-'em-up-and-let-them-die-in-the-streets movies. But she got 
over that and soon found the make-believe violence enjoyable. 
Braga also has a stunning American Express print ad coming out soon. The 
actress is pictured on the desert sands, alone and wind-swept, wearing a tight 
white dress of tissue paper consistency. Sonia Braga, she never leaves home 
without it. And even if she does, she'll get by. 
IT WAS supposed to have been Meg Ryan and Dennis Quaid in Paramount's 
"Butcher's Wife." But now two of this summer's hot stars, Demi Moore and Jeff 
Daniels ("Ghost" and "Arachnophobia") will portray the Outer Banks, North 
Carolina, girl and the Greenwich Village butcher. 
P.S. Late last week we tried to confirm (or get someone to deny) the rumor that 
Dennis Quaid had admitted himself to St. John's Hospital in Santa Monica for 
detox. The actor's press representatives said they'd get back to us. 
On Wednesday, Quaid's publicist, Susan Geller, absolutely denied that Dennis is 
now, or has ever been in St. John's. So that's the official word, despite what 
you read in this week's tabloids about Dennis and his drinking. 
