HORSE RACING; 
EASY GOER WILL HAVE TO TAKE ON OLDER HORSES 
Shug McGaughey has been fortunate that his barn has been deep in talent in most 
divisions this year. Belmont Stakes winner Easy Goer is about the only 
important McGaughey runner who has escaped injury. 
Because of circumstances, Easy Goer has been pushed into an unlikely role -- 
McGaughey's wild-card substitute. An ankle injury to Seeking the Gold, who was 
expected to be McGaughey's best older horse, has thrust Easy Goer into the job 
of running outside the 3-year-old division in the Whitney Handicap at Saratoga 
on Aug. 5. McGaughey had planned to run Easy Goer against 3-year-olds until 
fall. 
Dancing Spree might have been McGaughey's candidate for the Whitney, after his 
victory over some members of the weak handicap division in the Suburban at 
Belmont Park on July 4. But Dancing Spree, a son of Nijinsky II, has grass 
breeding, and McGaughey still thinks he will run well on the turf. As a 
3-year-old last year, however, Dancing Spree was winless in six grass starts. 
Dancing Spree is one of those McGaughey horses who showed only ordinary talent 
initially. Awe Inspiring is another example, and while he is not in the same 
league with Easy Goer, he is still part of a large group of horses that make up 
the 3-year-old division's second echelon. 
Dancing Spree probably cost his more highly regarded stablemate, Seeking the 
Gold, a victory in the Metropolitan Handicap. While they battled down the 
stretch, Proper Reality came through on the rail and beat them both in a 
three-horse photo finish. 
Awe Inspiring, good enough to finish third in the Kentucky Derby and fourth in 
the Belmont besides winning the Jersey Derby, is another McGaughey horse who's 
been unlucky. Scheduled to go to Chicago to run in this Saturday's Arlington 
Classic, Awe Inspiring has remained in New York, where he suffered a minor 
injury this week. There was a storm at Belmont Park; Awe Inspiring reared in 
his stall and was injured. 
With Easy Goer out of the Haskell Invitational at Monmouth Park on July 29, 
King Glorious, the winner of the Ohio Derby and a horse who has lost only once 
in his life, becomes the major contender. At 1 1/8 miles, the Haskell is well 
within the capabilities of King Glorious, whose stamina has been questioned at 
longer distances. 
Music Merci, a distant third in the St. Paul Derby, becomes a viable candidate 
for the Haskell with Easy Goer not running. Trainer Craig Lewis' other option 
is to stay home and try to beat Sunday Silence at 1 1/4 miles in the Swaps at 
Hollywood Park a week from Sunday. 
Some thoroughbred horsemen reluctantly went along with Hollywood Park in 
switching its day card to night on July 21, when the track will honor Bill 
Shoemaker, who will retire early next year. 
The quarter-horse trainers at Los Alamitos didn't get a vote, but many of them 
are unhappy because July 21 is the same night they're running the Los Alamitos 
Derby. 
In effect, Hollywood Park is competing with itself that night, since the track 
also owns Los Alamitos. Last year, when Hollywood ran a special night program 
to mark its 50th anniversary, business was off about 10% at Los Alamitos. 
Both thoroughbred and quarter-horse trainers are concerned that these two night 
programs could lead to regular evening racing at Hollywood Park. Bay Meadows, 
which opens next month, will feature twilight racing on Fridays and apparently 
needs no special permission from the California Horse Racing Board, which views 
a dinner-time first post as daytime racing. 
The quarter-horse trainers would be opposed to competing against the 
thoroughbreds on a regular basis; thoroughbred trainers are against night 
racing because it would mean longer hours and the hiring of extra help. 
Twilight racing would be better for many fans at Hollywood Park, because they 
wouldn't have to face rush-hour traffic after the last race. On a weekday, a 
trip across town after Hollywood's last race can take as long as 90 minutes. 
When the state lottery began in Kentucky this year, there was a tie-in with the 
Kentucky Derby, so the advertising agency that had the account developed a 
television commercial with a horse-farm theme. 
Kentucky traditionalists had a difficult time swallowing the fact that the spot 
featured a corny "talking" horse, but they were more indignant because the 
commercial had been obviouslyfilmed at a farm outside Kentucky. The footage was 
shot in Ocala, Fla. 
The spot also identified the horse as a Kentucky Derby winner, which was only 
close. Laser Light, the horse used in the commercial, finished second to Gato 
Del Sol in the 1982 Kentucky Derby. 
Goodbye Halo, who has finished second to Bayakoa three straight times, will try 
to turn the tables Saturday in the $200,000 Vanity Handicap at 1 1/8 miles at 
Hollywood Park. 
Bayakoa will carry 125 pounds, three more than Goodbye Halo, and not many other 
fillies or mares are expected to challenge them. 
On Sunday, Ruhlmann is expected to be the starting high weight, at 122 pounds, 
in the $300,000 Bel Air Handicap at a mile. Laffit Pincay, Hollywood's leading 
rider, has a chance to sweep the weekend while riding both Bayakoa and 
Ruhlmann. 
Horse Racing Notes 
Hilco Scamper, the 6-year-old thoroughbred sprinter who has been running 
against quarter horses this season at Los Alamitos, won his first race there by 
capturing last Saturday's Jeep Challenge Handicap -- an 870-yard race -- by a 
neck. Gary Stevens came over from Hollywood Park for the mount. . . . Gorgeous' 
victory in the Hollywood Oaks came at the right time. Her dam, Kamar, has a 
filly by Danzig who will be sold at Keeneland later this month. 
Del Mar will offer two triples when the season opens on July 26. There will be 
a triple on the third, fourth and fifth races and fans will also have the 
chance to pick the winners of the sixth, seventh and eighth races. . . . Forest 
Fealty, who ran seventh as the favorite in last Saturday's Landaluce at 
Hollywood, has been sidelined because of a shin injury. . . . Philadelphia 
Park, part of the struggling racing empire of Robert Brennan, has been sold for 
$63 million to an English group that hopes to use the track as the flagship for 
an off-track betting network in Pennsylvania. 
