TIME TO REASSESS AFGHAN AID 
Is it in the interests of the United State to continue sending a lot of 
military aid to anti-government guerrilla forces in Afghanistan? More to the 
point, is it in the interests of the Afghan people, who increasingly seem to be 
the victims rather than the beneficiaries of actions by the insurgent 
moujahedeen? The State Department, over objections from some defense and 
intelligence analysts, wants to go on giving arms to the guerrillas, for years 
to come if need be, and that view seems to have prevailed within the Bush 
Administration. Left unexplained is just what goal this expensive program is 
intended to serve. 
For most of the 1980s, U.S. policy in Afghanistan had a clear purpose. Through 
clandestine arms shipments, it first of all aimed at keeping the invading 
Soviet army from occupying the whole country and then at making the cost of 
just holding on so high that the Soviets would decide to bring their forces 
home. The policy worked. The Russians are gone, leaving behind a pro-Soviet 
regime that controls little more than a few large urban areas. Confounding the 
predictions of some American experts, though, the regime has managed to 
survive, not least of all because the tribal-based moujahedeen remain unable to 
put aside their traditional suspicions and rivalries and cooperate on a 
coherent military strategy to bring down the Kabul government. 
The best the insurgents have been able to do is put the cities of Jalalabad and 
Kabul under siege. But heavy shelling and blockades have so far done little but 
kill hundreds of mainly innocent civilians and threaten hundreds of thousands 
more with a loss of food supplies. The regime itself hasn't been discernibly 
weakened. Meanwhile, though, there are signs of growing public mistrust of the 
moujahedeen, who remain as far from political unity and as mutually suspicious 
as ever. 
To continue to shower the moujahedeen with weapons and so to encourage the 
tactics they have adopted comes perilously close to endorsing actions that 
promote deliberate mass starvation. That is not what American efforts in 
Afghanistan have been all about. Instead of just doing more of what it has been 
doing for the last seven or eight years, the United States should be rethinking 
what its ultimate goals in Afghanistan are, and asking whether the crude 
tactics and apparently incurable political divisiveness of the moujahe-deen are 
the most promising means for getting there. 
