SAN DIEGO SPORTS ET CETERA: SAN DIEGO'S RILEY YOUNGEST OF MEDALISTS AT SINGING 
HILLS 
Chris Riley of San Diego was believed to be part of two firsts Wednesday at the 
USGA Junior Boys' golf championships at Singing Hills Golf Course in El Cajon. 
Riley, 15, is believed to be the youngest player to win medalist honors in the 
42-year history of the tournament, and his tie with three other golfers at 
one-over 145 after 36 holes of medalist play was also the first time that more 
than two had tied for medalist. 
Riley, who was one-shot behind after a 69 in the first round, tied with Chris 
Edgmon of Edmond, Okla., the first-round leader, Jason Worth of Des Moines, 
Iowa, and Brian Gay of Daleville, Ala. 
The 156-player field was cut to 64 after Wednesday's round, and match play 
begins with two rounds today beginning at 7 a.m. Players will play the third 
round and quarterfinals Friday and the semifinals and final Saturday. 
Also advancing to match play is Todd Demsey of Rancho Santa Fe at 150. 
Leta Lindley of Carlsbad and Kristyl Sunderman of El Cajon advanced to the 
third round of match play at the USGA Junior Girls' championship at the Pine 
Needles Resort in Southern Pines, N.C. 
Lindley defeated Tracy Dupre of Newport Beach, 3 and 2, in the first round and 
then won, 2-up, over Kristen Krogsrud of Placerville. 
Sunderman, who just made the cut of 162 in medalist play, defeated Emilee Klein 
of Studio City, 3 and 2, in the first round. Sunderman, who played at Valhalla 
High School, then went 19 holes to defeat Canadian Marie Josee Desbiens, 1 up, 
in the second. 
Harry Rudolph III of La Jolla was defeated, 1-up, by Michael Glaesel of Arvada, 
Colo. in the first round of match play at the Broadmoor men's tournament at 
Colorado Springs, Colo. 
Rudolph, a sophomore at Oklahoma and two-time San Diego Section high school 
champion at La Jolla High, was the tournament medalist. 
SOCCER 
The San Diego Nomads will play the Portland Timbers Saturday at 7:30 p.m. at 
Aztec Bowl in a Western Soccer League playoff semifinal match. 
If the Nomads win, they will play host to the winner of the Los Angeles 
Heat-San Francisco Blackhawks match Aug. 12 in San Diego. 
The Nomads (12-4) split their two matches with Portland, losing, 4-0, in Oregon 
and winning, 1-0, on penalty kicks in San Diego. 
The winner of the WSL championship will meet the American Soccer League 
champion in early September at San Jose State. The WSL and ASL, which has 10 
teams in the eastern United States, are planning to merge within the next six 
months. 
