GLENDALE FEARS AIR RULES COULD HIKE POWER COST 
Stringent new air quality regulations on electrical power production in the Los 
Angeles Basin could cause record increases in utility rates to consumers, 
Glendale city officials warned this week. 
The South Coast Air Quality Management District next week is expected to adopt 
rules that could force Glendale to double the city's bonded indebtedness by $50 
million and boost residential electric rates by 13.6%, according to a report 
presented Tuesday to the Glendale City Council by W. E. Cameron, city public 
service director. 
Mayor Jerold Milner accused the district of attempting "to become a super 
government" by imposing rules that may force the city to abandon its power 
production plants altogether. 
Growing Animosity 
The criticism demonstrated an apparent growing animosity among officials in 
Glendale and other cities over the state agency's efforts to clear the air in 
Los Angeles. 
Glendale Councilman Carl Raggio said Tuesday: "Sometime this tea party is going 
to have to have some different people sit at the table. We can't let the Tom 
Haydens of the world continue to be responsible." 
The rules scheduled to be adopted at a AQMD hearing Aug. 4 would require all 
electrical producers to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions from gas turbine 
engines and steam boilers by installing expensive catalytic reduction 
equipment, Cameron said. 
The new equipment would cost Glendale more than $50.4 million -- double the 
city's total present debt of $50 million, said Brian Butler, city finance 
director. 
The rule would apply to Glendale, Burbank and Pasadena -- which produce a 
relatively small amount of supplemental electrical power -- as well as to the 
giant Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and the Southern California 
Edison Co. 
Glendale officials said they are considering abandoning the city's power plant 
or joining Burbank and Pasadena to develop a new plant outside the AQMD's 
jurisdiction. 
Review Energy Policy 
"We might have to review our entire energy policy before we spend the money," 
Cameron said. 
However, air quality district officials said the proposed rules on power 
production are part of a wide-ranging plan to reduce nitrogen oxide levels in 
the basin, which they said is the last region in the nation to meet federal 
ambient air quality standards. 
District spokesman Tom Eichhorn said the cost of the proposed new rules can be 
measured in two ways: Residents can "either pay for it with clean air or pay 
for it with their lungs." 
Steven A. Broiles, an attorney representing Glendale, Burbank and Pasadena in 
their fight with the district, called the proposed new regulations "the most 
expensive that the South Coast Air Quality Management District has ever 
adopted." He maintains that they are unworkable, unfeasible and unnecessary as 
a solution to air-pollution problems. 
