THIEVES UPROOTING SMALL PALMS FOR LARGE PROFITS 
Marie Bunnell awoke Monday morning to the sight of a gaping hole in the front 
yard of her Yorba Linda home. Down the street, Andree Noeppe stepped outside to 
discover a similar hole in his front yard. 
Someone had made off with their miniature palm trees during the night. 
The thefts of the sago palms are just the latest to hit Yorba Linda. In the 
last month, dozens of the small palms have been stolen, police said. 
Police and landscapers say the trees are an attractive target because they sell 
for between $500 and $15,000, depending on their height. The small palms grow 
so slowly -- about an inch a year -- that mature trees are considered a prized 
addition to the garden. 
"I always warn the people who want to plant them in the front yard that it is 
better to plant them in the back yard where they can keep them under lock and 
key," said Gary Huddleston, manager of the Country Garden Nursery in Placentia. 
Sago palm thefts also have been reported in Cypress, Fullerton and Garden Grove 
in Orange County over the last year. In Los Angeles County, sheriff's deputies 
report that a number of the small palms were uprooted and stolen in the Santa 
Clarita Valley about two months ago. Sago palms have also disappeared in the 
San Gabriel Valley and around Whittier, nursery owners there say. 
Until a month ago, police in Yorba Linda would receive the occasional report of 
a stolen sago, said Lt. Chester Panique of the Brea Police Department, which 
provides police protection for adjoining Yorba Linda. 
Nowadays, "we might get seven or eight taken in one night," Panique said. 
Police and local nursery owners estimate that several dozen of the palms have 
been snatched from Yorba Linda residences. 
In almost all cases, Panique and other police officials around the region said, 
the palms are taken from residential areas, where homeowners like to show them 
off in their front gardens. Having shallow roots and standing no higher than 
about 5 feet, the trees are easily uprooted and carted away, officials said. 
