IN CONCEDING ONE ELECTION, SALINAS TEMPTS FATE 
For the first time in modern Mexican history, the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party (PRI) has conceded loss in a state governorship election. The new 
governor of Baja California is Ernesto Ruffo Appel of the PAN (National Action 
Party). 
The decision to accept the government party's defeat was President Carlos 
Salinas de Gortari's. It was the right decision, and he deserves credit for it. 
But this historic change in Mexican politics -- the first truly important 
transformation wrought by the Salinas administration -- cannot mask the context 
in which it took place, the reasons that brought it about and the problems that 
are left pending. Each of these nuances is important; together, they raise 
serious questions about the situation in Mexico. 
To begin with, if the decision to recognize defeat was Salinas', the previous 
decision to try and win by hook or by crook also was his. 
The entire electoral process, right up to election night on Sunday, was marred 
by the traditional Mexican election vices. Massive funds were transferred from 
a government bank into the coffers of PRI candidate Margarita Ortega Villa; 
electoral rolls were padded to include thousands of ghost voters, while the 
names of thousands of PAN sympathizers were "shaved" from the rolls; ballot 
boxes were tampered with on election day. Salinas had committed himself 
personally to Ortega's campaign, appearing on nationwide television with her 
four days before the election. 
Polls published before the election showed either a dead heat or the PRI ahead 
by a small margin. The PRI, having tried to avoid defeat literally at any cost, 
was caught by surprise by the margin of Ruffo's victory -- 15% to 20% over 
Ortega -- and by the scope of his party's operations to defend its vote at 
every precinct. This does not not detract from the merit of Salinas' 
concession, but does qualify it. 
As of Wednesday, while the PRI had accepted defeat in the gubernatorial race, 
it was claiming victory for its candidates in Mexicali, Tijuana and Tecate, as 
well as in the state legislature. The PAN, charging that PRI was still trying 
to steal the election, claimed victory in the legislature as well as in 
Tijuana, Tecate and Ensenada, where Ruffo was mayor. 
In Michoacan, the PRI was still following its policy of trying to steal the 
state legislature election, where the opposition is the Cardenista, 
left-of-center Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD). As in Baja California, 
the authorities had prepared for a narrow opposition victory, which they 
believed they could overturn by careful, relatively limited (10%-15%) "modern" 
tampering -- ghost voters, "shaving" the electoral rolls, etc. This system 
worked in Chihuahua, where a low voter turnout and a close race allowed the PRI 
to win virtually every municipality. But it proved insufficient in Michoacan; 
thus, "old-fashioned" tactics were resorted to: expulsion of opposition poll 
watchers, ballot-box stuffing, forgeries or "lost" tally sheets and so on. 
Again, the authorities were caught by surprise by the breadth of the opposition 
victory -- between 18% and 20%, according to PRD figures backed by official 
vote tally sheets. 
PRI national chairman Luis Donaldo Colosio, in the same speech in which he 
conceded Baja California, claimed 10 of 18 seats for the PRI in the Michoacan 
legislature, despite PRD figures showing it had won 15 of 18 seats, with more 
than 52% of the vote. The PRD leader Cuauhtemoc Cardenas is not the only one in 
Mexico suspicious that the government will use the PAN's victory in the north 
to cover up fraud and an illegitimate PRI victory in the center of the country. 
It is important to note that beyond the spectacular nature of the PAN victory 
in Baja California, and the less important but not inconsequential triumph by 
the PRD in Michoacan, the election results tell a new story about public 
opinion nationwide: that where voters have a choice in contested elections, 
they are against the ruling party, in proportions similar to those of last 
year's presidential elections. In a modern, urban, literate, right-of-center, 
booming northern state, the PRI lost overwhelmingly; in a rural, backward 
central state plunged in economic crisis, it did so, too. 
While Salinas' personal popularity may continue to be enhanced by the changes 
he is bringing to Mexican politics, his party and his government continue to be 
trapped in the age-old dilemma: The PRI and the government can win a 
tampered-with election or lose a clean one; they cannot emerge victorious in a 
clean contest. 
Salinas has decided to try the second option -- losing -- in contrast to his 
predecessors who all followed the first road -- fraud. It is a better choice 
for Mexico, but if it is followed through to the end, it probably means that 
the PRI will lose nearly every election in sight. A sobering thought, in a 
moment of celebration for the country. 
