SUBLIMINAL MESSAGES AT HEART OF CASE 
How do you prove something exists if it cannot be seen or heard? 
That's the challenge facing attorneys Timothy Post, Ken McKenna and Vivian 
Lynch. They represent the families of two Sparks youths, Raymond Belknap, 18, 
and James Vance, 20, who shot themselves on Dec. 23, 1985, after an afternoon 
of drinking beer, smoking pot and listening to the music of Judas Priest. 
Belknap died instantly. Vance survived the suicide attempt but died three years 
later, allegedly due to related complications. The parents of both young men 
hold the British heavy-metal band responsible for the deaths of their sons and 
have filed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit against Judas Priest and its record 
company, CBS Records. 
The unprecedented case in Washoe District Court centers around the alleged 
existence of subliminal messages purported to be implanted on the band's album, 
"Stained Class." Subliminal messages, experts say, are stimuli that function 
below the threshold of conscious perception. 
"Our job is not easy," Post said. "It's like chasing phantoms. Sometimes the 
fact that you can't find it may be an indication that it's right in front of 
your face. It's like we're the ghostbusters or something." 
Two years ago, Post and the other attorneys representing the plaintiffs hired 
William Nickloff Jr., a Sacramento sound engineer and private investigator, to 
scour the "Stained Class" album for subliminal clues. Nickloff allegedly 
uncovered a subliminal chant which said the words "do it" implanted on a cut 
titled "Better By You, Better Than Me." 
Two weeks ago, Nickloff appeared at the trial as an expert witness for parents. 
Utilizing a home computer music software package and a portable stereo, he 
played digitized samples of specific phrases from the album forward and 
backward. 
He testified that he believed the band took extensive precautions to implant 
the alleged subliminal "do it" commands at several key points in the song, 
splashing the phrase in phonetic segments across 11 of the 24 tracks on the 
master recording, so as to escape detection. In a random survey by a Reno 
newspaper reporter, only two of 12 courtroom observers said they heard the "do 
it" chant. Judge Jerry Carr Whitehead sat poker-faced throughout the 
demonstration. 
Anthony J. Pellicano, a Los Angeles private investigator and audio tape analyst 
who is scheduled to testify as an expert witness for Judas Priest and CBS on 
Wednesday, insists that there is no subliminal content or backward sounds 
anywhere on the recording. 
"These allegations are like something straight out a 'Twilight Zone' episode," 
said Pellicano, seated before a wall of computers, oscilloscopes and spectrum 
analyzers in his Hollywood laboratory. "I will prove in court that there are 
absolutely no subliminal messages on the album." 
In the last two years, Pellicano said that he has spent more than 200 hours 
analyzing the original 24-track recording of "Better By You, Better By Me." 
"I don't dispute that there appears to be a a two-beat rhythmic sound present," 
Pellicano said. "But it was not put there intentionally and it certainly does 
not say 'do it.' " 
According to Pellicano, the alleged subliminal "do it" chant is actually the 
result of a breathy sound caused by the inhalation and exhalation of the lead 
vocalist in combination with a wispy electric guitar strum. 
Victoria Gehman Evans, an expert witness who staged a second computer 
demonstration in court Monday on behalf of the parents, said she too can 
testify to the presence of the subliminal "do it." 
"This album is a time bomb waiting to go off," Evans, a University of Nevada 
lecturer who holds masters degrees in physics and computer science, told The 
Times. 
"I have found enough subliminal references to suicide in different songs on the 
'Stained Class' album to know that this is not some kind of isolated incident. 
I don't pretend to know why, but I do believe it was done deliberately." 
In addition to the forward "do it" subliminal phrase, Evans alleged that the 
album contains numerous backward sayings such as "commit suicide" and "try 
suicide." Evans said that the only way a listener can consciously hear these 
phrases is to physically spin the record backwards on a turntable. 
Attorneys for the parents claim that such backward sayings can be unscrambled 
by the subconscious mind even when a record is played in the normal direction. 
In that regard, the plaintiffs maintain that the alleged backward sayings could 
have influenced the shootings. 
Pellicano disputed the argument. 
"Do you have any idea of the number of permutations it would take to come up 
with words that would say one thing in reverse and still correlate to the 
forward content of the lyric and also operate within the natural rhyme scheme 
of the song?" Pellicano asked. 
"If you let your imagination run wild, you can infuse just about any sound or 
image with a variety of subjective interpretations. But in science, we don't 
talk about imagination -- we talk about facts." CHUCK PHILIPS 
