MEMORIAL SERVICE TO GIVE FINAL THANKS TO GOOD SAMARITAN 
Gary Smith, the North Park carpet layer whose six-day fight for life drew the 
admiration of San Diegans after he tried to stop a burglary July 19 in 
University City, will be eulogized tonight. 
A memorial service for Smith, whom the press dubbed the "good Samaritan," will 
be at 6 p.m. today at the Anderson-Ragsdale Mortuary, 5050 Federal Blvd., and 
will be open to the public. 
Smith, 35, died Tuesday of four gunshot wounds he received at close range when 
he confronted the burglar. His heroics have been saluted throughout San Diego 
for the past week. 
"He always tried to help people. He was a hero. I can say I wish he hadn't done 
it, but you can't say that," said Sandra Budik, Smith's girlfriend and the 
mother of two of his three children. 
"It's heartwarming to know how much everyone cared. It helped a lot in such a 
horrible time," Budik, 27, said. Smith died on her birthday. 
During the past week, more than $27,000 in donations to defray medical expenses 
and assist Smith's family have poured into the Gary Smith Memorial Fund, 
established at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla, where he underwent five 
operations. More than 1,000 letters and cards also have been sent to Smith's 
family. 
"It's times like this that you really find out how people care," Budik said. "I 
wish to thank the people of San Diego for all the support, contributions, 
prayers and thoughts. It's been a comfort to the family." 
Smith has three children: Dominique, 7, a son from a former marriage; Kenny, 3, 
and Danielle, 9 months. Custody of Dominique will be given to his natural 
mother, Budik said. 
On Wednesday, the San Diego Police Officers Assn. announced it had established 
a $1,000 scholarship fund for Smith's children, a practice usually reserved for 
children of officers killed in the line of duty. The group had already dipped 
into its blood bank and donated 21 pints of its reserved blood to Smith. 
Although Budik had originally been identified as Smith's wife, she clarified 
the couple's relationship Thursday, saying they were not married but had lived 
together for two years. 
"Gary and I were not legally married, but we considered ourselves married," 
Budik said. "We weren't trying to deceive anyone in any way at all. We were 
planning on getting married. We just didn't get a chance." 
Budik, a claims adjuster with Mercury Insurance for three years, said she 
doesn't think her salary will be enough to support herself and her two 
children. 
Of the money donated to the Smith fund, hospital spokesman Mike Dabney said 
about $8,000 will be given to the Smith family for family expenses, and nearly 
$19,000 has been set aside to pay medical bills. 
Dabney said Smith's hospital bill is estimated at $100,000. Budik said MediCal, 
the Victim-Witness Assistance Program and other sources will be tapped. 
Smith had been installing carpet in the 7900 block of Camino Tranquilo when he 
heard screams from the building next door and chased a gun-wielding man before 
being shot in the face, stomach, left arm and right thigh, police said. 
Timothy Howard Pemberton, 22, was arrested last week in connection with the 
shooting and has been charged with murder, burglary, robbery, auto theft and 
possession of methamphetamine. Pemberton pleaded not guilty on all counts. 
The district attorney's office said it is considering filing for a finding of 
special circumstances, which would make Pemberton eligible for the death 
penalty if convicted. 
Pemberton "will pay for what he did. I'm glad they caught him," Budik said. 
"I'd rather see him in prison for the rest of his life so he can suffer a 
little bit." 
The Rev. George Walker Smith, minister of the Christ United Presbyterian 
Church, will lead funeral services for Smith at Anderson-Ragsdale. The mortuary 
donated funeral services. 
Budik said the body will be shipped Saturday to Smith's hometown, Columbus, 
Ohio, for funeral services and burial. 
