ART BUCHWALD: GOLDEN CHANCE FOR SOFT LANDING 
The dream of every good executive is to have a golden parachute, so that if his 
company is ever sold or merged, he can bail out for a soft landing. 
The finest golden parachute company is located in Wilmington, Del. A visit 
there gave me an insight into the American business safety net system. 
Norman Bradford, the manager of the plant, took me on a tour. 
"There was a time when most upper-level executives were satisfied to work just 
for their salaries and pensions. But ever since the hot trading of the '80s, 
everyone wants a golden parachute to protect No. 1. We're backed up on orders." 
I walked through the brightly lit, immaculately clean room where people in 
white smocks were bent over sewing machines. 
Norman stopped at one and showed me a sample. 
"This is a parachute for the CEO of a book publishing house. He heard he was 
being raided by a razor blade company, so he ordered the parachute before the 
raider made a bid." 
"Is he worried?" 
"He couldn't care less because no matter who buys his publishing house, this 
parachute will guarantee him $30 million." 
"What about the shareholders? Do they know he has a golden parachute?" 
"I doubt it. There was a time when CEOs worried about the shareholders, but 
they got no thanks for it. So they decided they had to look out for themselves. 
That's why they come here." 
"How much does a golden parachute cost?" 
"They can run anywhere from $1 million for one year to $100 million for a 
lifetime. When a raider is after another company, he will pay for a 
top-of-the-line parachute so the executive won't fight the buyout. Over here, 
we have a golden parachute of the president of an investment banking company. 
The company lost $800 million last year, but when the firm goes bankrupt, the 
president won't even wind up with a sprained wrist." 
"It's remarkable what silk and strings will do for someone who has run his 
company into the ground." 
Norman said: "I wish you had put it some other way. With our golden parachutes, 
we are making it possible for the average executive to have a little security 
in an age where sharks are eating dolphins and Wall Street yuppies are tearing 
the heads off chickens. Without parachutes, the American landscape would be 
littered with the bodies of executives who lost their life's savings in junk 
bonds." 
"I'm not saying you don't provide a service," I told Norman. "But it seems to 
me that many executives are more interested in getting fitted for a golden 
parachute than they are in running their companies." 
"Perhaps, but that isn't our worry. We don't ask what the condition of their 
business is. We might assume that anyone ordering a golden parachute is not as 
secure about his business as he would like to be. At the same time, we believe 
such a parachute is as important to the financial health of this country as a 
sushi bar is to Rockefeller Center." 
"There's a glass-enclosed booth over there with a gorgeous parachute inside. 
Who is that for?" 
Norman whispered, "That's for our chairman of the board." 
"He's having one made for himself?" 
"Of course. The RJR-Nabisco people have been sniffing around for the past week, 
and our chairman isn't taking any chances." 
