SHE'S PLAGUED BY PAIN -- AND WANTS ANSWERS; 
DISABILITY: CECILE GRACY TOOK L-TRYPTOPHAN TO IMPROVE HER HEALTH BEFORE HER 
WEDDING. SHE CLAIMS A BAD BATCH OF IT HAS RUINED HER LIFE. 
Last July, Cecile Gracy was an excited Burbank bride-to-be who vowed to get in 
shape before her September wedding. So she began exercising, dieting and taking 
a health supplement called L-tryptophan. 
Gracy had taken the over-the-counter product in 1984 after her doctor 
recommended it for sleeping difficulties and cramps. The tryptophan proved so 
effective that she figured it would help her become a healthy, fit bride. 
"What had been good for me before is going to be good for me now," Gracy 
recalled saying last year. Though tryptophan is not normally prescribed for 
fitness or dieting, she had come to regard the supplement as a harmless 
vitamin. "I wanted to clean up my act, and this supplement was kind of like 
extra protection and support." 
One year later, 31-year-old Cecile Gracy is disabled. She cannot walk without a 
cane and has difficulty breathing. She feels pain in her muscles when her new 
husband tries to hug her. She cannot remember much of what she reads or hears. 
And she fears she will never be able to have children. 
What once cured her cramps and was expected to improve her health, her doctors 
say, is precisely what disabled her: the supplement L-tryptophan. 
On Monday, Cecile and her husband filed a $30-million lawsuit in Burbank 
Superior Court against the largest of six Japanese suppliers of tryptophan. 
They allege that Showa Denko of Tokyo produced a contaminated batch of the 
product that damaged Cecile's body. 
"Everything's gone to hell," said Mike Gracy, her 27-year-old husband, in an 
interview at the couple's small Burbank apartment. "It's been almost a year and 
she's not even close to being able to function normally. They don't even know 
if she'll live past her next birthday." 
Cecile and hundreds of others nationwide were diagnosed last fall as having 
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, a mysterious ailment marked by abnormal levels 
of white blood cells called eosinophils and severe muscle pain. These cells are 
part of the body's immune system, but in this ailment abnormally large amounts 
release a toxin that attacks bodily tissues. Victims and doctors initially were 
baffled by the cause, but researchers eventually linked the syndrome to 
tryptophan. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recalled the supplement in 
mid-November. 
Medical, federal and state officials say there is increasing evidence that the 
epidemic was caused by a contaminated batch of tryptophan manufactured 
specifically by Showa Denko. 
Neither the FDA nor the federal Centers for Disease Control has officially 
blamed the company, and Showa Denko has acknowledged only a "statistical 
association" between the epidemic and its product, said Bob Schwadron, a 
company spokesman. He said more research is needed to pinpoint the cause. 
But other medical researchers said they believe Showa Denko is responsible. 
"We have no evidence that it's anybody's product but Showa Denko's," said Dr. 
Michael Osterholm, a Minnesota state epidemiologist who helped author an 
upcoming New England Journal of Medicine article that details that theory. 
For Cecile and Mike Gracy, that is a partial relief. Finding a cause should 
help them seek redress, and more important, might help find a treatment or 
cure, they said. But it is the uncertainty of the future -- of whether Cecile 
will fully recover, bear children or die -- that worries the newlyweds. 
"The worst thing is the unknown," Mike Gracy said. "We're staring into an abyss 
and there's nothing coming back. To start a life together like that . . . it's 
not fair." 
Neither Cecile, a blond-haired woman with a soft, girlish voice and face, nor 
Mike, her burly, bearded spouse, was ever athletic or particularly 
health-conscious, they said. But they loved the outdoors, often riding mountain 
bikes or going four-wheel-driving in the hills. 
Cecile Gracy diligently recorded memories of those times on a wall calendar she 
treated as a daily diary. The square for each day was filled with notes 
describing her workday and the time she shared with her husband. 
Then, starting in July, "it just got filled with rotten things," such as notes 
about her deteriorating condition, she said. Shortly after she resumed taking 
tryptophan, she began getting sore throats, and her face, feet and hands 
started to swell. Soon she was having trouble breathing and was losing weight 
and hair. 
Her co-workers and friends attributed the problems to nervousness about the 
upcoming wedding; she and Mike thought it was the stress of her job, as a title 
assistant at a large Glendale real estate company. 
The Gracys were married Sept. 16, but the honeymoon was cut short because 
Cecile felt increasingly ill. In the weeks that followed, she began to feel 
pain in her muscles and to lose her memory at work. Eventually, she could 
neither urinate nor eat. But until she could no longer get the pills down her 
throat, she said, she continued taking tryptophan. 
"That's the pathetic part," she said. "Every morning I'd say, 'OK, maybe today 
the tryptophan will get rid of this stress and these problems.' " 
Cecile was hospitalized in October and was routinely ordered to stop taking any 
medicines or vitamins. After three weeks of testing, her doctors knew she had 
an abnormal level of white blood cells but could not identify her illness. 
Dr. Peng Fan -- a Sherman Oaks rheumatologist who years earlier had recommended 
tryptophan for her cramps -- prescribed prednisone, a steroid, for reducing the 
white blood cell count, and sent her home. Weeks later, as other cases appeared 
nationwide, Fan and other doctors identified her case as being part of the 
epidemic of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, caused by tryptophan. 
Today, Cecile Gracy visits a doctor and physical therapist six days a week. But 
most of her time is spent resting on the couch or sitting in a hot bath, trying 
to relax her muscles, she said. Each day, Mike Gracy rises early, helps her get 
settled for the day, and returns periodically from his job as a manager at an 
electrical supply company to check on her. 
Most of his nights and weekends are spent sifting through stacks of medical 
documents, he said, and fighting with his insurance company over its share of 
the bills -- -- which he said now might be in the six-figure range. They are 
worried that if her condition deteriorates, the demands of caring for her could 
force him to lose his job, threatening the couple's ability to pay their share 
of the medical bills. 
"She's still pretty afflicted at this time," Fan said in an interview. "She 
still is in a lot of pain from the damage done by the tryptophan. Right now, we 
really don't have any effective treatment. All we have are some medicines that 
make it more tolerable." 
The prednisone steroid, despite some side effects, has helped reduce her white 
blood cell count, Fan said. Cecile is able to move around somewhat with a cane 
and at times can accomplish household tasks, although she said her memory is 
still poor. 
Fan said Cecile actually is faring better than some of the other 
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome patients he and other Los Angeles doctors now are 
treating. Some people afflicted with the malady have died, while others have 
suffered few or no symptoms. But he said that it is impossible to predict her 
future. 
That is what frustrates and scares Cecile and Mike Gracy the most. And what 
makes them angriest at Showa Denko, the company they allege is responsible. 
"We wanted to get married, build a house and raise a family. My biggest dream 
was to have a set of twins," said Cecile, her voice cracking. "I don't want 
vengeance. If they can come up with the chemical to reverse all this, I'd take 
that instead of any amount of money. 
"There's a fair trade," she said. "Make it go away." 
BACKGROUND 
Tryptophan is a natural amino acid contained in proteins found in meat, eggs, 
dairy products and other foods. Tryptophan supplements were widely used for a 
variety of problems, including sleeping difficulties, anxiety and premenstrual 
syndrome. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration last November ordered the 
supplements recalled after they were linked to an epidemic of a blood and 
muscle ailment called eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. So far, more than 1,500 
cases, including 27 deaths, have been reported to the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control. 
