THE MARTYR OF THE RAIN FOREST; 
THE BURNING SEASON THE MURDER OF CHICO MENDES AND THE FIGHT FOR THE AMAZON RAIN 
FOREST BY ANDREW REVKIN (HOUGHTON MIFFLIN: $19.95; 511 PP.) 
We Norteamericanos are suddenly smitten with the Amazonian rain forest. Now 
that our passion burns so brightly -- and seemingly without end -- it is 
politically instructive to consider briefly how such a state of affairs came to 
pass in just a few years. 
Only a decade ago, biologists working in the tropics began to warn their 
colleagues that agricultural practices and development in tropical America were 
beginning to have an impact on some species, and that ambitious development 
plans such as the trans-Amazonian highway could lead to catastrophe for what 
was then the largest and most diverse uninterrupted biological community in the 
world. Anthropologists had begun to protest the progressive extinctions of 
native people both through loss of habitat and by direct genocide. 
By the mid-'80s, climatologists were contributing a new chord: the Greenhouse 
Effect, in which the burning of Amazonia was contributing carbon dioxide while 
eliminating one of the world's great storehouses of excess carbon. And perhaps, 
they suggested, clear-cutting would lead to irreversible desertification of one 
of the wettest places on Earth. 
We worried about trading golden lion tamarins in the forest for Brazilian beef 
for our hamburgers. Photographs of the scarring and burning from the space 
shuttle offered dramatic visuals. 
Now, as we enter the '90s, the world's bankers, agronomists and politicians are 
asking if there isn't a "softer path" for the tropics to develop, something 
more compatible with its own ecological rhythms. And finally the world's 
communications media have penetrated Amazonia in a big way, providing their own 
peculiar contribution of information and shallow, exploitative confusion. 
This last has meant -- as usual -- that the First World, especially America -- 
as usual -- has engendered an Amazonia in its own image, with noble rustics, 
exploitative capitalists, cuddly animals, graceful trees and miraculous powers 
of global salvation. Almost nobody north of the Equator knew who Chico Mendes 
was until he was murdered, but today he is the martyr of the rain forest. 
The best thing about "The Burning Season" is its insistence on complexity. The 
Amazon of our imaginings is a cartoon. Andrew Revkin, whose customary beats are 
science reporting for The Times and Discover magazine, demolishes that cartoon. 
His foil is Chico Mendes, the radical Brazilian rubber tapper (seringueiro) who 
fought deforestation to sustain the culture of his people, and who was adopted 
by the world's environmental avant-garde shortly before his predictable murder 
by ranchers as 1988 drew to a close. 
Revkin took a cram course in Portuguese, then spent a couple of months talking 
to people in the Amazon basin and another month getting to know the rest of 
Brazil. He invested enough time and consideration in his story to do what 
reporters are supposed to do but usually don't. He has constructed a 
representation of "reality" in multiple dimensions, in which the characters 
have motivations -- often multiple and imperfect -- and in which both the good 
guys and the bad guys get to tell their own stories and show themselves to be 
quite human. He tells enough of the history of Brazil and the Amazon and 
provides enough data about the geography, ecology and resources of the Amazon 
for an American to begin to get the picture. 
The gist of this story concerns the first indigenous counterforce that has 
arisen in Brazil to stem the deforestation of the Amazon. Until quite recently, 
most of the pressure to conserve arose from foreign environmentalists, who had 
started by crying alarm and had progressed, with only slightly more success, to 
applying pressure on Brazil by getting to the vast flow of North American and 
European capital that not only fuels development but keeps the Brazilian 
economy from collapsing in red ink. 
As conservationists slowly have come to realize, environmental protection never 
really succeeds until it is adopted by local people. In Brazil, the only "local 
people" who have had any say have been members of the traditional Latin 
American clique of autocrats who, abetted by First World capital, have achieved 
vast wealth at the expense of both human and natural resources. 
In the past, one of the greatest sources of Brazilian wealth was latex 
painstakingly extracted from the native rubber trees of the Amazon rain forest 
by the seringueiros for slave wages, but sold on the international market at 
vast profit. In South America, rubber trees must grow as a relatively scarce 
element of the intact forest, or else they are attacked by pests and diseases. 
"The Burning Season" focuses on the efforts of Mendes and his compatriot rubber 
tappers to organize themselves for economic survival. Once, that meant 
eliminating the middlemen who sucked most of the profits from the raw-rubber 
trade. Now, it is preserving the very forest where these hardy folk have carved 
a sustainable niche from harvesting rubber and Brazil nuts. In this, the 
mixed-blood seringueiros have of late discovered a natural alliance with the 
Indians, who likewise require the forest to survive and who have had even less 
political power than the tappers. 
The ranchers, their wealthy sponsors and their local lackeys have represented 
traditional right-wing power; the tappers, as they have learned to organize 
politically, have therefore found themselves naturally allied with leftist 
revolutionary forces in Latin America. But to view this as a struggle between 
left and right is to miss much of the point and most of the consequences. 
Contrary to the myth that Greens have constructed around Mendes, he was never a 
Brazilian John Muir. But he was a quick study, and rapidly learned the 
connection between the protection of the tappers' way of life and larger global 
desires to protect the rain forest. Smart, well-read and charming, he led his 
dispersed flock to political awareness, to alliances first within Brazil and 
later beyond its borders. 
Despite its rich store of insight, "The Burning Season" does not reveal what 
will happen to the Amazon. Brazil has recently become more democratic; even the 
wealthy and relatively conservative new president has shown a strong interest 
in environmental preservation and in protecting indigenous, non-destructive 
uses of the forest. On the other hand, the forest continues to fall and burn at 
a fearsome clip, and the meager economics of latex and Brazil nuts are not 
sufficient to save it. What Revkin does offer, and it is substantial, is the 
understanding necessary for any of us who care to contribute to a solution. 
