R.S.V.P.; 
TIPS FOR STYLISH TRIP DOWN BAD-TASTE LANE 
In the car culture of Los Angeles, the limousine may be the ultimate status 
symbol. A quick look through the Yellow Pages reveals a dizzying array of 
accouterments with which one can appoint a hired car: moon roofs, color TVs, 
VCRs, quadraphonic stereo systems with CD players, wet bars, fax machines, 
bodyguards, cellular phones, and even "personalized napkins" (the final touch 
to an elegant evening). 
The question: When does the well-appointed limousine run the red light of 
decorum and crash squarely into bad taste? 
"Limos with Jacuzzis are in decidedly bad taste, as are those 
stretch-stretch-stretch limos," best-selling author Jackie Collins says, adding 
that she believes the elegant car can only come in black, white or silver. 
Charlie Scheips, project manager for ART-LA89, the L.A. Contemporary Art Fair, 
is even more strict. "I don't think they should be anything but black," he 
says. "And believing that a limousine makes you a more important person is in 
very bad taste." 
"The redeeming value of a limousine is to be in company you enjoy without 
worrying about the driving," restaurateur Piero Selvaggio says. "I see the new 
long stretch limos, and I think I would not like to be inside. I would feel 
silly. 
"(Limousines in) colors are even worse. They are looking to other people to be 
noticed. They're stretching it, like they're stretching the limo itself." 
Ellen Byrens, a Beverly Hills socialite and charity worker who often travels by 
limousine, stresses that "black is the only acceptable color. Really, they're 
only for transportation, not entertainment. Have you heard about the ones with 
the hot tubs? Disgusting." As for the new super stretch limos, the ones that 
almost require a flexible joist in the middle to traverse corners, Byrens says, 
"they should live in them -- not ride them." 
Screenwriter Bruce Wagner, who began his Hollywood career as a limo driver, has 
developed his own opinions on limousines from the perspective of both the front 
and the back seats. "Stretch limousines are really for the nouveaux riche," he 
says, the curled lip evident in his voice. "When I see one of those block-long 
stretch limousines, I know the person inside is one of two things: Either some 
prom kid, or some guy who pays for Ike Turner's bail or something." 
