WALL STREET / JOHN CRUDELE: IF TIME, WARNER MERGE, WILL DAVIS BE FAR BEHIND? 
Will he or won't he? 
The "he" here is Martin S. Davis, chairman of Paramount Communications, and the 
biggest question gnawing at the wallets of Wall Street speculators right now is 
whether Davis will shoot the works by trying to acquire both Time Inc. and 
Warner Communications in what would be a $30-billion transaction. 
Earlier this month, Chancellor William T. Allen in Delaware Chancery Court 
sided with Time Inc. by allowing it to go ahead with its acquisition of Warner 
Communications. Time and Warner had wanted to merge in a stock swap, but that 
plan was scrapped after Paramount upset the arrangements by making what ended 
up being a $200-a-share offer for Time. 
Allen's decision is being appealed Monday, but the guessing on Wall Street is 
that the Delaware Supreme Court will back Allen and permit Time and Warner to 
mate. So the question becomes: After Paramount loses in the higher court, will 
Davis decide to go after the combined Time-Warner company? 
Sources close to the Paramount/Time/Warner fiasco say there is only a slim 
chance that Paramount will try to buy both Warner and Time. 
But Wall Street's legion of speculators apparently think that Paramount will. 
The speculators think that Davis wouldn't give up this easily. They think that 
Davis will find himself a partner to split the $30-billion cost. 
If the street believed that Paramount was giving up, Time's stock could be down 
another $20 a share or so. Last week, it was trading in the high $130s. 
Murky Message 
Davis, as well as Paramount, is mum on the whole question of whether Paramount 
will try to acquire Time and Warner. (Paramount could ruin its court appeal by 
letting the cat out of the bag.) 
Here's what is known so far. In a deposition before the Delaware court, Davis 
is reported to have said that he hadn't decided whether Paramount would go for 
the combined company. (The deposition, however, is still secret, so Davis' 
entire statement isn't really known.) 
Up to that point, the situation was clear-cut. Davis had a decision to make. 
After that, however, things got rather murky. A few days after Davis was 
deposed in court, Paramount said a "Time Warner deal effectively precludes any 
bidder at all, and absolutely precludes any bidder at a price anywhere near 
$200 a share. And that includes us." 
Huh? What does that mean? 
Does it mean that Paramount won't bid? Or does it mean that Paramount simply 
will wait for Time's stock to fall in price after it combines with Warner (as 
it has already done) and then go after Time Warner at something considerably 
less than $200 a share? 
Here's what Wall Street sources working on the Time/Warner/Paramount situation 
think. 
"Paramount has never absolutely slammed the door" on a bid for Time Warner, 
said one Wall Street source close to the situation. "But they have hinted that 
it is highly unlikely." 
Heavy Debt 
Said another source familiar with the situation: "Davis tends not to shut doors 
unnecessarily." No comment, he says, to the specific question of whether Davis 
is considering a bid for Time Warner. 
Source No. 1, however, says it is his personal view that there is only a 5% to 
10% chance that Davis will decide to pursue the Time Warner acquisition, whose 
$30-billion price tag would include the assumption of up to $15 billion in debt 
that Time will take on when it acquires Warner. 
"I don't think there is any way to suggest at this point that it's a serious 
option," added the source. "It's a theoretical option only." 
Even if Paramount did decide to go after Time Warner, another source says it is 
unlikely that the newly formed company would sit back and watch without taking 
action. 
For one thing, Time borrowed nearly $28 billion to complete the Warner 
acquisition, which is twice what it needs even if it decided to pay $70 cash 
for all of Warner's stock. 
The borrowings are four times what Time would need to acquire Warner if it 
decides to pay cash for only 100 million of Warner's shares and exchange the 
other 100 million for stock. 
This source suggests that it might come down to Time playing dueling bankrolls 
with Paramount. "I don't believe Martin Davis has gone away yet. I haven't seen 
any white flags," he said, adding that Time might have to outbid Paramount for 
Time's own stock when all is said and done. 
Here's one last idea on where to find hidden corporate assets that, once 
discovered, could lead to takeover attempts. 
Kenneth Hackel of Systematic Financial Management, Ft. Lee, N.J., says a 
company's assets sometimes get hidden inadvertently in overspending. If a 
company spends too much in one year on capital improvements, Hackel says a 
raider might see this and, realizing that the company's profits and stocks are 
being abnormally depressed by this spending, initiate an attack on that 
company. 
Hackel, in fact, claims that there is a "very high correlation" between 
companies whose spending has risen to abnormal levels and those taken over. 
Among the companies that recently showed up on Hackel's list as having 
abnormally high spending are: H. B. Fuller Co., Rohm &amp; Haas Co., V. F. 
Corp., Lance Inc., Bristol-Myers, Emerson Electric, Hillenbrand Industries and 
Melville Corp. 
In the case of H. B. Fuller, Hackel says the Minneapolis-based specialty 
chemical company spent $40.2 million last year on capital expenditures. It 
averaged just $24.3 million in capital spending in the previous four years. 
Hackel says that after allowing for what he considers "normal" capital spending 
growth, he estimates that H. B. Fuller's "excess" capital spending was $7.9 
million. 
A raider could cut capital spending, improve the company's earnings and stock 
price, and thus tap another "hidden" corporate asset." 
Even if you are only a casual follower of Coca-Cola Co., you probably have 
heard that the Atlanta soft-drink giant has had enough of the entertainment 
business. 
Coke bought Columbia Pictures, the movie studio that made the infamous "Ishtar" 
movie, in the late 1970s. But Coke sold 51% of the company to the public a few 
years ago and has been widely rumored to be ready to give up the remaining 49% 
to the right bidder. 
"My gut feeling is a large company from the Far East would pay a fairly large 
price" for Columbia Pictures, says Joseph Doyle, an analyst with Smith Barney, 
Harris Upham &amp; Co. Two names being mentioned recently as potential buyers 
are Sony Corp. and Mitsubishi Corp. 
Meanwhile, Coke's business has been doing what Coke's business always does -- 
growing. Joseph Frazzano of Oppenheimer &amp; Co., for instance, thinks that 
Coke will earn $3.40 a share this year, compared to $2.85 a share in 1988. Its 
earnings in 1990 will rise by about the same amount, Frazzano says. 
Lately, however, the company's profits have been growing faster in Europe than 
in the United States. 
The only thing exciting about Coke these days, in fact, is the situation at 
Columbia Pictures. 
Frazzano says Coke has never said it is interested in selling Columbia 
Pictures. "They've said that there is a lot of interest from other companies in 
buying it. But for the right price they might be talked into selling it," 
Frazzano adds. 
The right price, the analysts say, would probably be in the high $20s. The 
stock was mired in the low $20s last week, and even that was 75% higher than 
the stock's level at the beginning of this year. 
There is one other mystery surrounding Coca-Cola these days. A usually reliable 
Wall Street source of mine swears that Coke recently purchased 3% of Paramount 
Communications, the entertainment company that is trying to buy Time Inc. 
The source's story couldn't be confirmed independently. But if true, it would 
mean that Coke isn't really down on the entertainment business. It is simply 
down on its entry in that business, Columbia Pictures. 
Apparently you can't keep an indicted man down. A Wall Street source says John 
Mulheren, who is accused of committing securities laws violations on Ivan F. 
Boesky's behalf, has been telling people that he's opening a boat company in 
Florida. Thomas Puccio, Mulheren's attorney, didn't return telephone calls. 
Several weeks ago, Puccio denied reports that Mulheren, a resident of luxurious 
Rumson, N.J., had moved to Florida. . . . 
The takeover business has been slow since before summer began, but a Wall 
Street source who usually has a good feel for the number of undisclosed deals 
in the pipeline says things are starting to get busy. But he says the deals are 
"not big, penny-ante stuff" . . . Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, an 
out-placement service, says 2% of the 600 fired managers it recently surveyed 
could be considered suicidal. . . . 
What happened to the reduction in banks' prime lending rate that was supposed 
to be such a sure thing? An official of one major New York money center bank 
said his and other big banks weren't really convinced that the Federal Reserve 
was dedicated to lowering interest rates. So they didn't follow New York's 
Chase Manhattan Bank and Southwest Bank of St. Louis down to the lower 10.5% 
level on the prime a few weeks ago. The lower-than-expected rise in consumer 
prices announced last week could make believers of the other banks . . . 
Ryder Systems stock has been trading extra heavily the past few weeks, and the 
company is concerned enough to have asked its proxy solicitor, D. F. King &amp; 
Co., to find out why, according to a Wall Street source. 
