TV PUTS ENGINEER'S LIFE IN FOCUS 
One day in 1969, Pasadena engineer Melvin Matthews bought his first color 
television set and eagerly plugged it in. 
He was terribly disappointed. 
For years, Matthews had accepted fuzzy pictures on his black-and-white set as 
part of life in the hilly Kinneloa Canyon area. But after investing several 
hundred dollars in a new color television, he wouldn't settle for anything less 
than crisp, vivid colors. 
"That prompted me to find a solution," said Matthews, then a test engineer for 
Rockwell International Corp. Because no cable company was willing to wire up 
Kinneloa Canyon just to attract 36 households, Matthews did it himself. 
From the handful of neighbors who first paid him $5 a month to share his 
antennas 20 years ago, Matthews has built a cable-television business that now 
serves 3,250 customers in three communities. 
He started out with Kinneloa Antenna Service, selling and repairing television 
sets and installing antennas for hotels and apartments. He now owns KTS Corp., 
which operates two cable systems. Kinneloa Television Systems serves the 
Kinneloa Ranch area and parts of Altadena, and Duarte Cable Communications 
holds the cable franchise in Duarte. 
Kinneloa and Duarte Cable are among the few owner-operated mom-and-pop cable 
systems in Southern California's highly competitive cable industry. 
Matthews and his wife, Donna Reed Matthews, plan to keep it that way. 
"We are very satisfied in keeping small," said Matthews, 44. 
Staying small allows the company to offer more personalized service. "We don't 
like to keep anybody on hold," Matthews said. 
"Being small, there's not too many departments for a customer to go through." 
Together, the Pasadena and Duarte offices have nine employees, all of whom are 
trained to handle several jobs, he said. 
Staying small also means that Matthews must wear half a dozen hats. He juggles 
duties as chief engineer, customer service representative, president, 
maintenance worker, bookkeeper and payroll clerk. 
"That was the attraction, initially, to do a lot of things," he said. 
Despite its growth, the business has remained a family affair. Donna Matthews 
helps with the bookkeeping, and his 19-year-old stepson, David Reed, works 
part-time cleaning and repairing channel-selector boxes. 
Housed in a one-story building on E. Washington Boulevard, the company's 
Pasadena office is within a mile of the Matthews' home and has become a family 
gathering place. 
On a recent morning, 4-year-old Kristiana Matthews bounded into her father's 
office to say hello. A few minutes later, her mother came in to use the 
computer to plan a family reunion. Darren Reed, 8, occasionally strolled in to 
hand writing assignments to his mother, who has chosen to teach him at home. 
Surrounded by his family, Matthews looked pleased and relaxed. Being his own 
boss allows him flexibility in his schedule, he said. But it also means 11-hour 
days, few lunch breaks, work on holidays and being on call 24 hours a day. 
"I'm ultimately responsible for keeping the system going," Matthews said. "Even 
though I'm president, I still go out to fix the cable when it breaks down." 
Matthews said he has no plans to switch careers. 
"We have had various companies offering to buy the system, but we were 
concerned about who the buyer was," he said. "The only reason to sell out is if 
you don't want to wait 10 or more years to get profits out." But Matthews is in 
no particular hurry. 
"If we sold out, I'd have to go and look for another job," he said, explaining 
that selling his business would not bring financial independence. But it could 
mean he'd lose control over reception quality, which was what got him into the 
cable business in the first place. 
"If we sell the system, then we'll be just a cable customer like everyone 
else," he said. 
