WOULD PUBLIC BE SERVED BY A PARDON FOR NORTH?; 
GOOD REASONS NEEDED; GRACE ALONE WON'T DO 
As demonstrators outside the courtroom chanted "pardon North now," U.S. 
District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell announced the sentence of convicted 
Iran-Contra felon Oliver L. North. The former National Security Council 
assistant was ordered to pay a $150,000 fine, serve two years probation and 
perform 1,200 hours of community service. Now it is up to President Bush to 
decide if there is good reason to pardon him. 
In 17th and 18th Century Europe, monarchs did not worry about giving reasons. 
Answerable to no one but God, they granted pardons that -- like divine 
forgiveness -- were arbitrary, unearned gifts of grace, bestowed for any reason 
or for no reason at all. 
Most often, their reasons for pardoning were practical and personal. By giving 
away full pardons, they rewarded friends and undermined enemies. By granting 
conditional pardons, they populated their colonies and manned their navies. By 
selling pardons (for prices ranging from two shillings to 16,000 pounds 
sterling), they supported their mistresses and paid the court musicians. In 
those days, the very concept of pardon deflected criticism. Since a pardon was 
a personal act of mercy, not justice, no pardon could be criticized as unjust. 
The framers of our Constitution expected Presidents, unlike kings, to pardon 
with "scrupulousness and caution." Presidents could grant pardons, Alexander 
Hamilton wrote in The Federalist, to "restore the tranquility of the 
commonwealth" during "critical moments." Or the pardon power could be used to 
keep the law from being "too sanguinary and cruel" by making "exceptions in 
favor of unfortunate guilt." Impeachment is the remedy the framers provided to 
call to account a President who abused the pardoning power. 
Reaffirming this view, the Supreme Court sharply distinguished the presidential 
pardon from that of the European monarchs. "A pardon in our days is not an act 
of grace," wrote Oliver Wendell Holmes in Biddle vs. Perovich. Since a pardon 
is not an arbitrary exercise of absolute power, it should only be granted for 
good reason. A pardon is the President's judgment, Holmes continued, "that the 
public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment 
fixed." 
The court thus provided a standard against which all presidential pardons can 
be measured: Is the public welfare better served by pardoning than by punishing 
this felon? 
By this standard, a pardon is not justified if it serves only the President's 
private interests or narrow partisan interests. The most blatant abuse in this 
category is, of course, selling pardons. Gov. James Ferguson of Texas was 
impeached after 1,774 pardons made him a rich man. 
But there are subtle examples as well. President Gerald Ford may have lost his 
campaign for the presidency because of widespread suspicion that he abused the 
pardoning power -- that he may have promised to pardon Richard M. Nixon in 
exchange for appointment as vice president. Ford was compelled to defend the 
pardon as being in the national interest. Echoing Hamilton, he argued that a 
pardon would preserve "the tranquility to which this nation has been restored." 
The Supreme Court standard also rules out the possibility that a pardon is 
justified if it serves the felon's interests. Merciful treatment of an offender 
who has suffered through an expensive and painful trial must be weighed against 
the effects of the kindness on the public welfare. After the Civil War, 
President Andrew Johnson worried about pardoning leaders of the Confederacy: 
"By a too extended, thoughtless, or unwise kindness the man may warm into life 
an adder . . . Offenders must be made to feel the extreme rigor of the law . . 
. to put the seal of infamy on their conduct." 
This leaves two other kinds of pardons that do serve the public welfare. 
Pardons used to carry out sound public policy are clearly justified. President 
Ronald Reagan, for example, properly granted pardons in order to facilitate a 
prisoner exchange with East Germany. President Jimmy Carter pardoned Vietnam 
War draft evaders who had come home under an amnesty proclaimed by Ford. 
But pardons best serve the public interest when they serve justice. The pardon 
was always intended primarily to be a last-ditch measure to prevent 
miscarriages of justice. For example, a pardon was the only way out of jail for 
Dr. Samuel ("My name is mud") Mudd, who was unfairly convicted as an accomplice 
in the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln. Today, the majority of 
pardons are granted to help correct a legal quirk that continues to deprive 
convicted felons of their civil rights, even after they have served their 
sentences and become model citizens. The very best reason to pardon is, 
finally, that a person does not deserve to be punished. 
Amid the noisy public clamor for a pardon for North, President Bush should 
listen for the muted voice of Alexander Hamilton, reminding him to be 
"scrupulous and cautious." He should remember that his pardoning power is that 
of a President, not a king, and that a pardon must serve the public welfare, 
not private or partisan ends. 
