POLICE SWEEPS SEEK TO DEFUSE VIOLENCE OVER HOLIDAY BREAK 
A task force of 300 police officers has been deployed in Los Angeles' most 
troubled neighborhoods in an effort to curb gang violence and reckless gunplay 
expected over the summer's first holiday weekend. 
"We want to set a tone and pattern for this summer, and especially for the long 
holiday weekend," LAPD Cmdr. William Booth said. "We want to reestablish in the 
minds of the community that their neighborhoods are not going to be given over 
to the violent people." 
On Friday and Saturday nights, the first of several sweeps to be conducted 
through July 4 resulted in hundreds of arrests at known gang hangouts 
throughout the LAPD's South Bureau, stretching from Watts to San Pedro, police 
said. 
Stabbings at Coliseum Concert 
Saturday night, about 150 members of the task force were suddenly dispatched to 
the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in response to reports of three stabbings 
during a rap music concert. The officers supervised clearance of the Coliseum 
after the concert ended and made several arrests in connection with the 
stabbings. One of the victims was in extremely critical condition, officers 
said. Police also received reports of several incidents of gunshots fired on 
streets adjacent to the Coliseum. One man was reported wounded. 
The task force made 47 arrests in the first two hours of Saturday night's 
sweep. Officials said they expected to be busier than Friday night. 
The task force arrested 235 people -- 136 of them reputed gang members -- on 
suspicion of crimes ranging from selling narcotics to driving under the 
influence of alcohol Friday night and early Saturday morning, Booth said. 
In what Booth called the largest anti-gang dragnet of the year, police officers 
also conducted 469 field interviews, and issued warnings against lighting 
illegal fireworks or shooting guns into the air. 
"Indiscriminate shooting on the Fourth of July and New Year's Day has become a 
major problem over the past several years," Booth said. "People don't seem to 
realize that when you shoot a bullet into the air it comes down in a way that 
can be fatal." 
Massive anti-gang task forces -- nicknamed "the hammer" by department officials 
-- have been routinely deployed since early 1988, on occasion involving as many 
as 1,000 officers. They resulted in the arrest of about 25,000 people last 
year, about half of them gang members. 
Roll call for the first sweep of the weekend took place at 4 p.m. Friday in the 
parking lot of the Southeast Division Station. From there, officers patrolled 
known 
gang hangouts in the Southeast, Southwest, Harbor and 77th Street divisions 
until 1:30 a.m., Booth said. 
Outside the boundary of the crackdown, deadly gang violence erupted in the Echo 
Park area shortly after midnight Friday, authorities said. 
Eduardo Diaz, 23, of Los Angeles, was standing on the corner of Douglas and 
Colton streets at 12:30 a.m. when he was struck in the upper torso by four to 
five shotgun rounds fired by a passenger in a passing vehicle, said Sgt. 
Richard Fox of the Rampart Division. Diaz, a suspected gang member, was 
pronounced dead at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan, Fox said. 
The suspect fired a sixth round at Eduardo Hernandez, 32, of Los Angeles, who 
was sitting in a car parked nearby, Fox said. Hernandez, who suffered minor 
wounds on the face and upper body, was in fair condition at County-USC Medical 
Center, Fox said. 
