EDUCATIONAL SKILLS DECLINING, JOB RECRUITERS SAY 
Sixty-four percent of big U.S. companies are unhappy with the reading, writing 
and reasoning abilities of high school graduates entering the work force, a 
poll of business executives said. 
The National Alliance of Business survey found that 72% of executives also 
thought that new employees' math skills had worsened the past five years. 
Sixty-five percent said reading skills had decreased over the same period. 
Alliance President William Kolberg said the poll results should worry everyone. 
"We are on a collision course with the reality that America is developing a 
second-class work force whose best feature in the future, compared with other 
nations, will be low pay," Kolberg said in an interview about the survey 
results. "Low skill means low pay." 
Kolberg said new attitudes and approaches are needed to prepare 
non-college-educated Americans for work. 
"We have abandoned the millions of kids who don't plan to attend college," he 
said. "Somewhere along the way, we lost respect for the skills we now so 
desperately need in our factories and on the front lines of our service 
industries." 
Kolberg said about 82 million U.S. jobs don't require a college degree, and 
filling those jobs may become impossible unless the educational system is 
changed. 
"The entire school enterprise needs to be restructured, rethought and taken 
much more seriously," he said, pointing to the national education goals 
established by President Bush and the nation's governors. 
Kolberg was an assistant secretary of Labor and administrator of the Employment 
and Training Administration from 1973-77. 
The poll, described by the alliance as the first to survey executives either 
directly or indirectly responsible for recruitment of workers at the 1,200 
largest U.S. corporations, said only 36% were satisfied with the competence of 
those entering the work force. 
Kolberg defined competence as being able to read beyond the seventh-grade level 
and use math at higher than a fifth-grade level. 
The survey indicated that companies -- many of whose blue-collar and 
secretarial employees face more challenging work than in the past -- have to 
interview seven to eight applicants to find one acceptable employee. 
Personnel officers also said many of those who are hired require too much 
training to become effective in their jobs. Forty-eight percent were satisfied 
with the capability of new hires to be trained. Only 16% were satisfied with 
the educational training of new employees, however. 
"Most American companies, particularly smaller companies, have not been able to 
adopt new forms of work organization because they can't afford to spend money 
upgrading worker skills," Kolberg said. "Our competitors in Europe and Asia 
have increased productivity by using these new methods of work. Our only 
response to this competitive situation has been to lower wages." 
The business alliance predicts that by the year 2000, an estimated 5 million to 
15 million manufacturing jobs will require skills other than those being used 
today and that an equal number of service jobs will be obsolete. 
The weekly wages of high school graduates dropped from $387.24 in 1969 to 
$335.20 in 1989. The alliance attributes the 12% decline to a loss in 
productivity by so-called front-line workers. It compares that to a wage gain 
of about 8% for a college graduate. 
