TAKE MY WORD!: EXTOLLING THE PERIMETERS OF A PARAMETER 
She is more to be pitied than censured; 
She is more to be helped than despised; 
She is only a lassie who ventured 
 Down life's thorny path ill-advised. 
Do not scorn her with words harsh and bitter; 
Do not laugh at her shame and downfall. 
 For a moment, just stop and consider 
That a man was the cause of it all. 
I recalled that melodramatic old song while contemplating the pathetic picture 
of an innocent -- indeed, an immaculate -- word taken from sublime heights to a 
state of tattered ignominy among hoi polloi, simply by being embraced by 
ignorant lovers. Recently, I mentioned the word parameter, which has been 
misused to death in recent years. 
I said that, strictly speaking, parameter is an expression from 
crystallography, about which I know nothing. The first parameter definition in 
my Webster's New International, Third Edition, tells me that it is "the 
relative intercept made by a plane on a crystallographic axis, the ratio of the 
intercepts determining the position of the plane." 
I feel sure that there are many thousands of perfectly sane people who know 
exactly what that means, but I'm not one of them. The second definition is from 
mathematics, about which I know so little that I couldn't even begin to ask 
intelligent questions regarding what I don't know. I think my last brush with 
mathematics -- not counting checkbooks, taxes, and what-do-I-tip-on-this-tab -- 
was in high school algebra, circa 1942. The mathematical definition of 
parameter begins, "an arbitrary constant characterizing by each of its 
particular values some particular member of a system . . . " and I'm already 
way over my head. The succeeding definitions in WNI III are no more 
enlightening. 
My WNI III was published in 1966. It must have been sometime after that, 
probably during the Nixon years, when an anonymous member of the booboisie 
discovered parameter, thought it was a nifty, high-class, state-of-the-art way 
to say perimeter and took the word to dinner parties, to bed, and introduced it 
to all his friends, happily misusing it for his own pleasure and the 
titillation of his social circle. 
Its misuse achieved almost instant popularity and was accepted with 
overwhelming enthusiasm. It started appearing on talk shows and in political 
discourse, showing up in phrases such as the parameters of our current options, 
where it was completely out of place. Obviously, a lot of people who hadn't a 
clue as to its meaning thought it impressive enough to display in public, no 
matter what it meant. Anyway, it sounded a lot like perimeter, which we had all 
met in plane geometry in junior high. 
In my column, I implied that parameter had been stripped of its "legitimate" 
meaning, forgetting momentarily that language changes fairly constantly, so 
that illegitimate meanings often achieve legitimacy rather quickly, and that 
misuse through ignorance is one of the most common causes of change. It is the 
job of lexicographers to record the current usage of words and to reach a 
consensus on what the new meanings are. 
I got some mail on that column. I'd have welcomed mail from crystallographers 
or mathematicians who might have enlightened me, brushing away the shadows from 
my benighted state of not-knowing. Alas, my mail was entirely from people who 
missed my point. Not their fault, of course. What they had done was to go to 
their dictionaries and look up parameter. A perfectly sensible move. They found 
references to such notions as "a characteristic element or constant factor," 
"limit," and "boundary," none of which had any currency in 1966. I'll bet my 
entire Swiss bank account that their dictionaries were all published during the 
1970s or, more likely, the '80s. 
I turned to my most recently published dictionary -- the American Heritage, 
Second College Edition (1982). What I love about American Heritage is that it 
not only gives us the current definitions of words; it lets us have a peek at 
the seamy side of their history. Under parameter, it says, "Usage: This 
scientific term has been adapted to general usage. It is sometimes used in the 
sense of 'a constant, a given, or a precondition.' And sometimes in the sense 
of 'a limit or boundary' (perhaps influenced by perimeter): We must stay within 
the parameters of the present budget. They want to narrow the parameters of 
public debate. Violence and rebellion are parameters of modern life. None of 
these examples is acceptable to a majority of the Usage Panel." 
So this extraordinary word that had known only the lofty realms of 
crystallography and higher mathematics, where ignoramuses like me would be 
hopelessly lost, was, through no fault of its own, brought down to a tattered 
existence in the pedestrian world of common colloquy. Not only that; it is 
unacceptable to a majority of the Usage Panel. Crystallographers and 
mathematicians probably still use parameter in its original sense, but I 
suspect that they have some sense of regret, knowing that it has been sullied. 
I think, though, that it is more to be pitied than censured. 
