A NOURISHING TASK; 
SAN DIEGO FOOD PANTRY SOLICITS, COLLECTS, STORES AND DISTRIBUTES GOODS TO 
AGENCIES HELPING POOR, HOMELESS 
Right now, what Ileen Bates needs most is bread. The other day it was spaghetti 
noodles. She can always use peanut butter, tuna and powdered milk. 
Bates' job is to help feed North San Diego County's poor, although it's a sure 
bet that none of the region's hungry has been to her office -- a small, 
nondescript warehouse in San Marcos. 
Bates is a former executive secretary for a Rancho Bernardo electronics firm 
who decided, during a self-described mid-life crisis, to direct her energy 
toward a social cause so she could offer something to the world besides a 
perfectly typed memo. 
Today she is coordinator of the North County Food Co-Op, a community food 
pantry that solicits, collects, stores and distributes food to nine agencies 
from Oceanside to Escondido. The agencies provide a menu of services and 
programs to the hungry, the unemployed, the homeless and the battered. 
The Food Co-Op was formed in March, 1988, by three of the agencies -- Oceanside 
Community Action Corp., North County Interfaith Council and North County Centro 
-- which met daily with hundreds of people who were hungry but had no efficient 
way of collecting and distributing food to them. 
"Someone would call with a large food donation and none of the agencies had 
anywhere to store it, or one agency would need some food for an emergency 
situation and they wouldn't know where to turn," Bates said. "It was decided 
that a single food bank to serve all of the agencies in North County would be 
the best way to go." 
Bates estimated that since its inception 15 months ago, the co-op has collected 
and distributed more than 150,000 pounds of food. 
Some of the food comes from singularly large donations. The other day, a San 
Diego woman who happened upon 8,000 pounds of onions from a farmer near El 
Centro donated 1,000 pounds of her haul to the co-op. 
NeMo's, an Escondido wholesale bakery, sends entire pallets of baked goods -- 
carrot cake, blueberry muffins, croissants, cookies and the like -- to the 
co-op. The food does not meet cosmetic standards for retail sale but is 
nonetheless tasty and healthy. 
The Ryder truck rental company in Escondido offers the use of its vehicles to 
pick up and deliver contributions. 
The Lawrence Welk Vacation Resort recently donated hundreds of small bottles of 
shampoo and bars of soap -- the kind that are put in motel rooms -- to the 
co-op. Bates is looking for similar donations of razors, toothpaste, 
toothbrushes and other items she can put together as "street packs" for the 
homeless. 
Far and away, however, most contributions come from individual donors and food 
drives. A recent Girl Scout drive, for instance, generated 8,000 pounds of food 
for the co-op. 
Occasionally, unusable food is donated -- a fact that brings both a cringe and 
a laugh from Bates. 
"We sometimes get caviar, pate, pickled sardines -- things like that," she 
said. "You figure one of two things happened. Either the person received that 
as a gift and had no use for it, so decided to give it to us, or a youngster 
was asked to bring a donation to school and his mom or dad said grab something 
out of the pantry, and that's what he came in with." 
Such items are difficult to pass on to a hungry person who would just as soon 
eat a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, she said. "To give someone who's hungry 
a can of caviar is a bit like pouring salt in an open wound." 
Bates' favorite contribution is money. 
"There are things we need that people generally don't donate -- baby formula, 
disposable diapers, baby food, things like that," she said. "One time we had a 
request for roast beef from one of the agencies that has a residential home. 
The women there were getting tired of macaroni and cheese and said they would 
have died for a nice Sunday dinner. I went out and bought them one." 
With cash, Bates is able to shop around for the best possible bulk purchases of 
items that are needed all the time. The co-op has a kitty of about $4,500, the 
result of several small grants. Bates hopes to bring the account to $12,000 
with a constant source of revenue from a private foundation or funding source, 
so she can purchase $100 in hard-to-come-by food and supplies each month for 
each of the nine member agencies. 
The largest single expense for the agency is the rental of the San Marcos 
warehouse. The cities of Carlsbad, Oceanside and Escondido contribute $6,000 
each toward the rent. San Diego County contributed an additional $40,000 in 
seed money last year, and this year added $14,000 toward the program to help 
cover operating costs. Bates is the sole paid employee; others volunteer their 
time in soliciting and distributing the food. 
Member agencies say the Food Co-Op is the answer to their dreams, resolving 
what had been a logistical nightmare. 
"We're all into loaves and fishes -- feeding people who are hungry. We don't 
compete with one another but, until the Food Co-Op was established, we weren't 
able to really help one another," said Bob Klug, who coordinates North County 
Interfaith Council's food program. The council offers a soup kitchen and also 
provides emergency food to individuals in need. 
"Every once in a while, someone would offer one of the social agencies in North 
County 10 or 20 pallets of food -- and we'd have to turn it down because we 
simply had nowhere to store it," Klug said. "Now we can have it stored at the 
co-op, and even share it among the members who need it most." 
With Bates in the middle, the agencies also are able to share food among 
themselves. One agency, for instance, might receive perishable food that it 
cannot use before it spoils; the food is shared among the various agencies. 
"I'd rather give, say, pistachios to another agency than to keep it for myself 
and have them rot before I can use them all," Klug said. 
He recalled the time when his agency was in need of onions, and put the word 
out to other agencies that work through the co-op. Sure enough, another agency 
had more onions than it could use, and sent them over to Klug. Everyone was 
happy. 
"A couple of years ago, we were all throwing up our arms in frustration," Klug 
said. "Now we have the answer, and I don't know of anything like this in 
Southern California." 
Darlene Ulrich is the executive director of the Oceanside Community Action 
Corp., which is the fiscal agent for the co-op. 
"One of the things we've learned from this is that it's easier to get donations 
from companies if they know they're serving nine agencies, not just one, with 
their donation," Ulrich said. "It's easier for companies to donate if they see 
us working together on the same problem, rather than overlapping one another 
and not being as efficient." 
In addition to the three founding agencies, other members include Casa de 
Amparo, a shelter for children in Oceanside; the Ecumenical Service Center, 
which provides food, clothing and shelter in Oceanside; the Hidden Valley 
House, a shelter for women and children in Escondido; Lifeline Community 
Services, which provides crisis intervention, emergency housing and 
transportation out of Vista; St. Clare's Home, which operates three women's 
shelters in Escondido, and the Salvation Army Family Services, which provides 
food and clothing in Oceanside. 
Each of the member agencies conducts its own food drives, which are warehoused 
in San Marcos. 
Bates said she is aware of cynicism that food might be steadily provided to 
people who come to rely on it as their sole source and who don't then work to 
better their situations. 
"The beauty of this co-op is that each of the member agencies counsels its 
clientele to find out how they got into the problem they have, and how they can 
get out of it," Bates said. "These are the people who need some temporary help 
until they get back on their own feet. This is not a welfare giveaway program, 
and I don't think a person who is unwilling to help himself will get food from 
us more than twice before being identified." 
Help for Other Agencies 
In addition, the co-op provides emergency supplies to eight other agencies in 
North County -- agencies that have no way of contributing to the food bank but 
have their own food needs. 
For instance, Bates is trying to find a daily supply of bread for a youth camp 
in the Pauma Valley that will provide summer vacations for disadvantaged youths 
from Los Angeles. Since bread spoils so quickly in the summer, she is hoping 
for a daily contributor to help feed 80 teen-agers daily through the end of 
August. 
In addition to food and cash donations, there are a few big-ticket items Bates 
would love to receive: a computer, to better record donations, current 
inventory and help with fund-raising efforts, and an institution-size 
refrigerator or freezer for perishables. 
"What we could really use is a service club or someone personally to help 
sponsor us, to make us their charity," Bates said. "I know that everyone needs 
money these days, and there are a lot of charities out there, and a lot of 
groups have their pet charities. We don't have one yet, and we're like nine 
charities in one. 
"If we can provide the food needs for these member agencies so their clients 
aren't hungry, they can better do what they're trained to do." 
