EMULEX CORP. PROSPECTS STILL LOOK CLOUDY; 
MANAGEMENT: CO-FOUNDER FRED COX'S SURRENDER OF CEO'S POST LEAVES SKEPTICS 
UNCONVINCED THAT THE SLUMPING COMPUTER PERIPHERALS FIRM CAN REPOSITION ITSELF 
IN A CHANGING MARKET. 
If there was any doubt that Emulex Corp. is in transition, it was made clear 
when company co-founder Fred B. Cox said he would surrender his title as chief 
executive officer in a surprise announcement two weeks ago. 
But whether the changes will bring the decade-old maker of computer peripherals 
consistently higher earnings or a fizzling financial performance is another 
question. 
To skeptical outside observers, the timing of Cox's decision suggested that he 
was taking the blame for a failed strategy that caused Emulex operating losses 
of $3.1 million in its third quarter ended April 1, the worst financial slump 
since in the firm's history. 
But Cox says Costa Mesa-based Emulex is bound for recovery as a diversified 
technology company, and he said his voluntary decision to step down from 
day-to-day management was needed to prepare Emulex for a successor and growth 
in the 1990s. 
"There's nothing sinister here," said Cox, 56, who will remain chairman and 
retain the CEO title while searching for a successor. "I feel good about the 
decision. I don't have any retirement in mind. I'm trying to make a selective 
and controlled transition." 
But skeptics who know Cox's management style say that he is a typical 
entrepreneur who has ruled Emulex with an iron fist and that it is unlike him 
to give up any control of the company without a bitter fight with the company's 
board of directors. 
"I'm not surprised about the downturn of the firm under Fred's leadership," 
said Steven W. Frankel, president of Emulex from December, 1984, to January, 
1988. "Fred should retire and a new chief executive should be given leeway to 
rebuild the company's place in the market." 
Frankel, recruited as Cox's heir-apparent, left Emulex after a power struggle 
in which he felt he was made a scapegoat for Emulex's lackluster performance. 
Now chief operating officer with a Santa Monica software firm, Frankel feels 
vindicated. 
"This is a repeat performance," he said. "They're moving in circles." 
Cox's interim replacement, David W. Hanna, said the company hasn't suffered 
irreversible damage in its latest downturn. But he acknowledges that Emulex has 
had a tough year in 1990 and that the company is in the midst of challenging 
period of change. 
Emulex derives its name from trying to "emulate" Digital Equipment Corp., for 
whom it first made minicomputer storage products. Despite several attempts to 
diversify, Emulex became known as the premiere third-party supplier in the DEC 
aftermarket. 
While DEC storage products accounted for 36.2% of sales last year, the company 
now also makes networking support equipment for DEC computers, add-on equipment 
for IBM-compatible computers, custom computer products, and microchips based on 
the increasingly popular Small Computer System Interface standard. 
Only a year ago, strong performance in each of its businesses produced record 
net income of $13.3 million on revenue of $148.6 million for the fiscal year 
ended July 2, 1989, compared to net income of $9.1 million on revenue of $125.1 
million in fiscal 1988. 
But times change quickly in the computer industry: 
The minicomputer market, which Emulex depends upon for 60% of its sales, is 
shrinking, and market leader DEC is slashing prices to compete with networks of 
increasingly powerful personal computers. That means Emulex must forage for new 
sales in a flat market where the industry leader is axing profit margins. 
The market competition is more fierce now. One fast-growing competitor, 
Anaheim-based Micro Technology Inc., has built a $54-million business in three 
years by focusing on higher-growth product niches than Emulex in the high-end 
DEC storage business, according to industry observers. Even Cox says he admires 
Micro Technology's success. 
Meanwhile, Emulex was hobbled this year by false starts in diversification. It 
withdrew a VME bus product from the market and canceled the development of 
another product at a cost of $1.2 million. It also suffered from a transition 
from a generation of high-profit SCSI computer boards to a new generation 
low-profit computer chips. 
"They spent a lot of money on research and development that hasn't come to 
fruition," said Mike Vizard, news director for Digital Review, a DEC trade 
journal in Newton, Mass. "They haven't introduced anything technically 
spectacular in a while." 
The company reported lower earnings in the first half of the fiscal year and an 
operating loss of $3.1 million for its third quarter ended April 1. During the 
quarter, the company restructured and wrote off more than $1.8 million in 
assets. 
"On Wall Street, this stock is considered a fallen angel," said Michael Woods, 
editor of OTC Review Special Situations, an investment advisory newsletter in 
Philadelphia. "The company is past its period of skyrocketing growth, and it 
must find new ways to grow." 
Some analysts think it will. Candace King Weir, an analyst with C.L. King &amp; 
Associates in Albany, N.Y., believes that Emulex is poised for a turnaround in 
fiscal 1991, based on the growth potential of the company's non-DEC businesses. 
She estimates that the company will earn $7.5 million on revenue of $155 
million for the year ending June 30, 1991, contrasted with an expected loss of 
$1.6 million on revenue of $120 million for the year ended June 30, 1990. 
But Vizard at Digital Review said he would be surprised if Emulex performs that 
well. Aside from a significant custom-manufacturing contract, he expects little 
change in the company's revenues because of overall flat sales and stiff 
competition in its market segments. 
Hanna said DEC has such a large installed base that it will survive any 
minicomputer shakeout; thus Emulex can depend on the DEC market for sales 
growth, especially in the area of networking products. And although the DEC 
products market remains competitive, it is comfortably free of foreign 
competitors, he said. 
On the non-DEC side, Hanna said Emulex is introducing more products that allow 
computers to communicate, and the SCSI-chip business is blossoming. The company 
has also landed a contract for custom-manufacturing a product for an 
unidentified computer firm that could bring it up to $20 million in revenues 
during fiscal 1991, contrasted with $3 million expected for fiscal 1990. 
Hanna said the company has kept its engineering team intact and made 
multimillion-dollar investments in key manufacturing technology. Cox said the 
company rebounded in its fourth quarter ended June 30 and expects to report 
profits for the period. Hanna predicted that the company would continue to be 
profitable in the first quarter of fiscal 1991. 
"We've had a tough year, but we're past the bottom," Cox said. "We've got the 
revenue turnaround, we have a lot of cash, no debt, a stronger balance sheet, 
world-class manufacturing and the same good engineering team." 
Cox said he plans to remain active in the company as chairman and retain his 
large share of stock in the corporation, and he will take his time to find the 
right successor this time. He expects the search to be completed by the end of 
the year. 
"This has been a tough decision," Cox said. "But I would not take a hike and 
leave this company at a point when it needed me." 
While Cox said he has the full support of the company's board of directors, 
some observers believe that the restructured board, which still has one empty 
position, will play an increasingly important role in Emulex's future. 
P. Andrews McLane, a partner with the venture capital firm TA Associates in 
Boston, raised eyebrows among skeptics when he rejoined Emulex's board in March 
after a five-year hiatus. Skeptics took that as a sign that TA Associates, 
which owns 13% of Emulex, was concerned about the problems at Emulex and that 
McLane was maneuvering to remove Cox from the company. 
But McLane, whose company provided start-up capital for Emulex in 1979, said he 
rejoined Emulex's board at Cox's invitation. He said he removed himself from 
the board earlier only because TA Associates was considering a takeover of 
Emulex in the fall of 1988. 
Hanna, a turnaround manager who has been involved with a dozen companies since 
1982, also has McLane's blessing. He wants to make Emulex a market-driven 
company instead of a technology-driven company. 
Hanna said that could mean a closer relationship with DEC than in the past, a 
possible acquisition in the networking products market, more emphasis on 
marketing campaigns at trade shows, and a new focus on international sales, 
which account for 40% of business. 
"The real transition (at Emulex) is not related to management changes, but to 
new markets," Hanna said. "We've cleaned up the balance sheet and we're 
shifting into a new way of doing business." 
EMULEX CORP. AT A GLANCE 
Top Executive: Fred B. Cox, chairman, president, chief Executive 
Interim CEO: David W. Hanna 
Business: Computer enhancement products for DEC and IBM-compatible computers, 
microchips, ;and custom manufacturing. 
Employees: 850 
Headquarters: Costa Mesa 
