BODY FOUND IN DESERT BELIEVED TO BE MISSING CAR SALESMAN 
A body discovered Saturday in the desert north of Palm Springs is believed to 
be that of Charles Washington, a Los Angeles car salesman who apparently was 
kidnaped earlier this year while on a demonstration drive with a prospective 
customer, Riverside County sheriff's deputies said. 
Homicide detectives from the Los Angeles Police Department's Wilshire Division 
went to the scene to help identify the body. 
A man who claims that he killed Washington, Yale Booska, 21, was arrested near 
Grand Island, Neb., four days after the car salesman disappeared on April 17. 
Booska reportedly told Nebraska sheriff's deputies that he killed Washington 
and dumped his body somewhere near Interstate 10 "between L.A. and Palm 
Springs." 
The body discovered Saturday was in an isolated area known as Painted Hills, 
north of Interstate 10 and west of California 62, the main road between Palm 
Springs and Twentynine Palms. 
"It is believed the victim may be Charles Washington," said a press release 
issued by the Riverside County Sheriff's Department, although no positive 
identification has yet been made. 
Before his arrest, Booska led Nebraska officers on a wild chase that spanned 
about 75 miles and at one point reached speeds of about 130 m.p.h. He was 
driving the $21,000 sports car in which he and Washington disappeared. 
Officers searched the desert along Interstate 10, but were unable to locate the 
body. 
A hiker reportedly spotted the dead man about 8 a.m. Saturday. Riverside County 
Sheriff's Sgt. John Sebastian said the body appeared to have been dumped and 
was "pretty well intact. It was partially mummified" by heat and sand, he said. 
Washington disappeared from Barrish Chrysler-Plymouth on La Brea Avenue in the 
Mid-Wilshire area, apparently while taking Booska on a test drive in a 1989 
Chrysler Conquest sports car. As a result of Washington's kidnaping, the 
Greater Los Angeles Motor Car Dealers Assn. urged dealers and sales people to 
be more cautious with test drives, to obtain a copy of the customer's driver's 
license before allowing anyone to drive a car and to try to have two sales 
people go on each demonstration drive. 
