RESTAURANT REVIEW; 
GLENDALE GRILL OFFERS A BOARDROOM LOOK BUT A GREAT BURGER 
Opening a restaurant and stuck for a name? Why not call it the Anywhere Grill? 
An actual grill is not required. 
I'm not implying that the Glendale Grill, an upbeat-concept restaurant in the 
old Rusty Scupper area, doesn't serve grilled dishes. They do have a few, but 
not really so you'd notice. 
The place is owned and managed by Stouffer, which might account for a certain 
generic quality. The dining room has a glossy boardroom ambience, like an 
upscale cafeteria dressed up for dinner: all sharp angles and blond wood on the 
outside in the Finnish sauna mode, stark white and spacious inside. Only a 
soaring ceiling saves it from looking like the executive dining room of a large 
corporation. 
Finding the restaurant might be a bit daunting. It's a free-standing building 
amid a jumble of high-rises several blocks north of downtown Glendale. Enter 
through the garage, rather than between the buildings, or you could miss the 
sign (I did) and find yourself walking in circles around an office complex. 
The transparent plastic menu, with its computer paper inserts, has a glossy 
look itself. It's filled with appetizing selections, and at the busy lunch hour 
it moves a lot of trendy sandwiches, exotic salads and good, intelligently 
conceived pizzas. In the evening, when things are far more subdued, the grilled 
items and fresh seafoods are more popular. Should you wish, say, pizza for 
dinner or seafood for lunch, there shouldn't be any problem, because much the 
same menu is served throughout the day. 
You might want to start with a buzzword sandwich such as the muffaletta, made 
with prosciutto, salami, provolone cheese and an olive pate. This isn't the 
sandwich you'll get at Central Grocery in New Orleans -- the pate is far too 
creamy and lacks bite. But it is served on a round of fresh, oily focaccia 
bread, and it does make a savory lunch. 
The Glendale burger comes on the same bread and is even better. The meat is 
fresh and tasty, and I liked the combination of grilled peppers and provolone 
with the garlic and Dijon mustard glaze underneath. It's one of the more 
interesting burgers I've tasted in a long time. 
Salads come in large glass bowls and tend to be more show than substance; 
they're attractive but short on flavor. Caesar salad, for instance, is a 
creamy, passable Caesar crowned by a slightly overcooked piece of grilled 
chicken breast. 
The so-called Thai beef and grilled vegetable salad is one to consider: a large 
chunk of garlic-marinated beef, sliced London broil style atop greens with 
grilled onions and peppers. It's a good concept, but without ginger, lemon 
grass, mint or indeed any of the herbs or spices Thais use in their cooking, 
its name is pretty misleading. 
Heartier appetites will want to start with a crusty pizza or one of the 
appetizers. The four-cheese pizza is properly gooey and pungent. The best 
appetizer, hands down, is Glendale Grill chili, a thick, meaty dish of ground 
chuck and Italian sausage. It isn't at all spicy, but the sausage gives it a 
distinctive flavor. 
An appetizer called shrimp with four-pepper sauce isn't bad, either, but the 
menu description totally misleads us. It claims the sauce contains green 
peppercorns, cayenne and two kinds of black pepper (Malabar and Tellicherry). 
Whatever it contained was fine with me, but the stuff looked and tasted like 
green apple sauce. 
The grilled dishes are almost twice the price of the sandwiches and salads -- 
and about half as interesting. The grilled shrimp, for instance, have a neutral 
flavor, bedded on an oily rice pilaf with abundant chopped nuts. There's a pork 
chop that tastes as if it could have come from any coffee shop. The grilled 
chicken breast tends to be overcooked and the sauces -- herb, barbecue and 
Parmesan -- taste no different from the ones in frozen entrees. Only the big, 
juicy cut of prime rib scores high. 
There are three house-made desserts, two of which merit attention. One is Toll 
House pie, a Mrs. Fields-like cookie batter in a pie crust featuring Nestle's 
chocolate bits, topped with vanilla ice cream and a rich chocolate sauce. The 
other is the house specialty, a steamed chocolate pudding served piping hot. 
This is really like an English tea cake that has been steamed in a jar: soft 
and fudgey, with a scoop of molten hard sauce running down its sides like lava. 
As for the fresh fruit trifle, a gloopy melange in a cocktail glass, forget it 
altogether. Or better yet, send it on up to the executive dining room. 
Recommended dishes; Glendale Grill chili, $3.50, four-cheese pizza, $5.50., 
prime rib, $13.95, Toll House pie, $2.95. 
 Glendale Grill, 200 Burchette St., Glendale; (818) 241-1187. Lunch from 11:30 
a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. Dinner from 5:30 to 10 p.m. Monday 
through Thursday, 5:30 to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday; 5 to 9 p.m. Sunday. 
Sunday brunch 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Validated parking in lot. Full bar. All 
major credit cards. Dinner for two, food only, $20 to $40. 
