ASSAULT AGAINST VIOLENCE 
Violence is an everyday occurrence in parts of the black community. Murders are 
common in poor neighborhoods. But the fatal shooting of two women at a church 
in Southeast Los Angeles is prompting many black worshipers to wonder if any 
place is safe, even though the cause was not gangs, as originally suspected, 
but appears to have been a domestic dispute. The murders nonetheless 
highlighted the somber facts of life in many parts of this metropolis. 
A more sustained assault on drugs, gangs and crime is necessary to reduce the 
rampant lawlessness and hopelessness. Everyone must find a way to contribute. 
Assemblywoman Maxine Waters (D-Los Angeles) deserves credit for quickly taking 
the lead. She attended services with the grief-stricken congregation on Sunday 
and announced, in conjunction with the Black Women's Forum, a $5,000 reward. 
Mayor Tom Bradley is meeting with police officials and black religious leaders 
in theaftermath of the tragedy. Such gatherings and rewards are steps in the 
right direction, but only preliminary ones. 
The Brotherhood Crusade, a black-run philanthropy, is setting up community 
patrols in a 110-block area of South-Central Los Angeles. As many as 500 men, 
volunteers armed only with walkie-talkies, will patrol day and night during the 
campaign "To Take Our Community Back." The street patrols will depend primarily 
on black men from the target area and neighborhood block clubs, but the entire 
city is invited to a kickoff picnic Aug. 5 at Green Meadows Park. 
The Brotherhood Crusade's 45-day campaign is supported by hundreds of black 
churches and dozens of organizations. The crusade hopes Los Angeles businesses 
will make a major contribution by committing themselves to hire one unemployed 
person each. The number to call is (213) 231-2171. The crusade also wants 
volunteers to address housing problems, illiteracy, health concerns, 
recreational needs and other pressing problems in the high-crime area bounded 
by 93rd Street, Manchester and Central avenues and Avalon Boulevard. Volunteers 
also can help by removing trash, painting out graffiti and making small 
repairs. The combined effort can make the area attractive as well as safe. 
The Brotherhood Crusade campaign to attack crime and grime must succeed. The 
volunteers must then tackle neighborhood after neighborhood. At the very least, 
more law-abiding citizens must take a stand. 
