CULINARY SOS: FROM GILLILAND'S, THE PLEASURE OF A WONDERFUL SODA BREAD, INSTEAD 
DEAR SOS: I recently had the comforting pleasure of dining on the Irish bread 
pudding at Gilliland's in Santa Monica. Please indulge me with a recipe so I 
can delight my family with this homey bread. 
 -- PATTY 
DEAR PATTY: Guess what? Gilliland, who is from Ireland and is the chef-owner of 
Gilliland's, mistakenly sent us a recipe for Irish soda bread instead. It is 
such a good bread we thought we'd give the recipe until the pudding recipe 
shows up. Gilliland's breads (and pastries) are divine and the soda bread is no 
exception. Wonderful for brunch or salad lunches. 
GILLILAND'S IRISH SODA BREAD 
2 1/2 cups all-purpose flour 
2 1/2 cups whole-wheat flour 
1 1/2 teaspoons salt 
1 teaspoon soda 
1 1/4 teaspoons sugar 
2 cups buttermilk 
Sift together flours, salt, soda and sugar in bowl. Make well in center and 
stir in buttermilk until soft, but not sticky. 
Turn out onto floured board and form into flat patty 6 to 8-inches in diameter. 
With sharp knife cut crisscross 1/2-inch deep. Bake at 350 degrees 40 to 50 
minutes or until golden. Cool before slicing. Makes 1 loaf. 
DEAR SOS: We do quite a bit of salmon fishing and would like to make our own 
lox. I would appreciate any help in getting recipes. 
 -- LOIS 
DEAR LOIS: Lox (cured salmon), also called gravad lax or gravlox in 
Scandinavian countries, is a specialty of Scandia restaurant in Los Angeles, 
where this recipe originated. It's a great recipe to keep in mind for summer 
parties. 
SCANDIA'S GRAVAD LAX 
1 (2-pound) piece salmon 
3 tablespoons salt 
3 tablespoons sugar 
1 tablespoon crushed peppercorns 
1/2 bunch dill 
Mustard-Dill Sauce 
Thaw salmon if frozen. Cut salmon in halves lengthwise. Remove bones. Combine 
salt, sugar and peppercorns. Rub half spice mixture over 1 salmon half and 
place fish, skin side down, in baking dish. Spread dill over. 
Rub other half of salmon with remaining spice mixture and place, skin side up, 
on first salmon half. Cover with foil. Place plate on top of fish and weight on 
top of plate. 
Refrigerate 48 hours. Turn fish over every 12 hours, separating fillets 
slightly to baste with pan liquid. 
When ready to serve, scrape away dill and seasonings. Place fillets, skins side 
down, on cutting board. Cut salmon diagonally in thin slices away from skin. 
Serve cold with Mustard-Dill sauce. Makes 24 appetizers servings. 
Mustard-Dill Sauce 
1/4 cup Dijon mustard 
3 tablespoons sugar 
2 tablespoons vinegar 
1 teaspoon dry mustard 
1/3 cup oil 
3 tablespoons chopped dill 
Combine mustard, sugar, vinegar and dry mustard. Slowly beat in oil until 
thick. Stir in dill. Chill. Makes 3/4 cup. 
DEAR SOS: Would you please find out how Mexican restaurants prepare their fried 
ice cream? It has a corn-flake type, sugary covering and some syrup on the 
bottom. It's an excellent treat. 
 -- D. Q. 
DEAR D. Q.: Fried Mexican Ice Cream is made by covering scoops of ice cream 
with sugared corn flake crumbs, then dipping them in an egg batter to seal the 
coating before frying. Honey is drizzled on the dessert. It is an excellent 
do-ahead dessert because you can freeze the coated ice cream balls until ready 
to pop in the fryer. 
FRIED MEXICAN ICE CREAM 
1 pint vanilla or other flavor ice cream 
1/2 cup crushed corn flake or cookie crumbs 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
2 teaspoons sugar 
1 egg 
Oil for deep frying 
Honey 
Whipped cream 
Scoop out 4 or 5 balls of ice cream. Return to freezer. Mix corn flake crumbs, 
cinnamon and sugar in shallow bowl. Roll frozen ice cream balls in 1/2 crumb 
mixture and freeze again. 
Beat egg and dip coated balls in egg, then roll again in remaining crumbs. 
Freeze until ready to use. (For thicker coating, repeat dipping in egg and 
rolling in crumbs.) 
When ready to serve, heat oil to 350 degrees. Place 1 frozen ice cream ball in 
fryer basket or on perforated spoon and lower into hot oil for 1 minute. 
Immediately remove and place in chilled dessert dish. Drizzle with honey and 
dollop with whipped cream. 
Serve immediately or keep in freezer while continuing to fry remaining balls, 1 
at time. Balls will be crunchy on outside and just beginning to melt inside. 
Makes 4 to 5 servings. 
Only recipes of general interest will be printed. We are unable to answer all 
requests. Please include restaurant address when requesting recipes from 
restaurants. Send your letter with self-addressed, stamped envelope to Culinary 
SOS, Food Section, The Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles 90053. 
