STATE ALLEGES DRUG PROGRAM ABUSED CLIENTS; 
SOCIAL SERVICES: OFFICIALS CITE COMPLAINTS OF PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ANGUISH TO 
DENY LICENSE TO NATIONALLY KNOWN STRAIGHT INC. ORGANIZATION, WHICH TREATS 
YOUTH, WILL APPEAL. 
State social service officials, citing numerous allegations of physical and 
mental abuse, have denied an operating license to Straight Inc., a nationally 
known adolescent drug treatment program that has come under fire for its 
confrontational methods. 
The Florida-based organization, one of the largest live-in drug programs for 
youth in the nation, had opened its first California treatment center a year 
ago in Yorba Linda and had applied for a license as a foster family agency. The 
facility's license had been pending since its opening in July, 1989. 
But in a letter sent to Straight's St. Petersburg headquarters in June, state 
authorities ordered the facility closed, citing evidence of "unusual 
punishment, infliction of pain and humiliation, mental abuse and withholding 
(of) medication," among other violations. 
As recently as July 19, the Yorba Linda program was served with notice that it 
was in violation of state law because it had continued to operate the facility, 
a misdemeanor that carries a fine of $200 per day and possible criminal 
charges. 
However, Straight officials said this week that the program has been shut down 
since the July 19 notice and that they are complying with Department of Social 
Service orders. Straight officials also strongly denied charges of abuse and 
said they are mystified by the state's action and will appeal the license 
denial. 
"We have not seen any of the documentation they are referring to so we have no 
idea what they mean," said Joy Margolis, Straight's vice president for 
communications. "In the letter that was sent to us they are in error in a lot 
of things they said. We have been meeting and working with the department since 
July of 1989 to make sure that we complied with state laws, and as far as we 
knew everything was going fine." 
Margolis said 68 people, most of them minors, were enrolled in the Straight 
program at Yorba Linda when it closed. The clients have been released to 
parents and families, she said. 
Kathleen Norris, spokeswoman for the Department of Social Services, said the 
state's action was based on an extensive investigation and numerous complaints 
about Straight's tactics. She would not divulge details of the investigation, 
citing concerns about confidentiality. 
Norris acknowledged that Straight officials have not been told of details of 
the alleged abusive incidents "but that type of thing will be included in the 
grounds for denial and they will have a chance to be fully heard and respond in 
front of an administrative law judge," she said. 
While Straight has garnered praise for its treatment program from President 
Bush and Nancy Reagan, among others, it has run afoul of licensing officials in 
several states for alleged abusive practices. 
Investigators in Virginia and Massachusetts are checking allegations of abuse 
at Straight's Springfield and Boston centers, the Dallas-area program is being 
monitored, the group was on probation in Florida last year and it has been sued 
in Ohio. 
At the heart of Straight's treatment program are daily "rap" sessions, at which 
clients are required to sit straight up in plastic chairs for as long as 10 
hours. Clients must confess their drug abuse at the sessions, and if 
uncooperative, they are verbally attacked. 
At night, the youngsters are taken to "host homes" -- usually the homes of 
parents of other Straight clients who have agreed to house the kids for up to a 
year. The owners of the "host homes" are expected to equip bedroom windows and 
doors with alarms and other security devices to prevent escape. 
California authorities allege that Straight has failed to comply with several 
state regulations and has violated health and safety code requirements. 
"Documentation on file indicates that there have been incidents where children 
have been subjected (to) unusual punishment, infliction of pain, humiliation, 
intimidation, ridicule, coercion, threat, mental abuse, or other actions of a 
punitive nature, including . . . interference with daily living functions such 
as eating, sleeping, or toileting or withholding of medication," according to a 
June 27 letter to Straight signed by Fred Dumont, the Department of Social 
Services' Santa Ana district manager. 
The state also alleges that "certification of host homes, placement of children 
and social work practices" are not in accordance with standards established by 
the department. 
Public records on file at the Santa Ana office contain several complaints from 
former Straight clients and a physician at a San Bernardino County hospital who 
had treated a 17-year-old female Straight client. Social Services officials 
deleted the doctor's name on the public copy of his complaint. 
The girl had been taken to Straight for a substance abuse problem, but the 
doctor said it was "questionable" whether she actually had one, according to 
the complaint filed July 19. 
"She related to me that she was being 'held against her will' at Straight . . . 
that there was 'a code of silence' where people at Straight were unable to talk 
with either their families or with anyone on the outside about what transpired 
in the program," the doctor wrote. "She reported to me that if she did not sit 
up straight, she would be restrained forcibly and rather violently on the floor 
with her face down. The staff would then pin her arms and legs up behind her 
back." 
In another complaint dated July 23, a former client relates being "restrained 
by my mouth being covered and my arms held down, not being able to breath. I 
advised Straight that I was in pain several times but was denied medical 
treatment for two and one half weeks . . . I was denied bathroom privileges for 
up to two to three hours . . . I was afraid to say or do anything wrong for 
fear of being restrained, yelled at or having my mouth covered." 
Margolis said she was unaware of the incidents and said that Straight does not 
physically abuse or unnecessarily restrain clients. 
"Clients," she said, "are not allowed to restrain other clients. Only staff 
members (are allowed), and only when it becomes necessary. For example, when a 
client is physically violent." 
Margolis said Straight had not been notified about any complaints "lodged 
against the California program." 
"To our knowledge the (state) has not investigated the situation by going to 
Straight and asking us about it," she said. "There are two sides to every 
story. How much of this is accurate?" 
