BUSH'S CALL FOR MISSION TO MARS RECEIVES BROAD SUPPORT FROM SPACE COMMUNITY 
Without spending a nickel, President Bush won widespread support from dissident 
elements of the space community Thursday when he committed the United States to 
embarking on a megabillion-dollar mission that will test human engineering and 
endurance to the limits. 
The manned expedition to Mars that the President endorsed is not simply a 
longer journey than a trip to the moon, which takes only about a day and a 
half. It could cost hundreds of billions of dollars over the next three decades 
and the crew aboard the spacecraft would have to endure enormous risks during a 
voyage that would last between two and three years. 
Despite those obstacles, leaders within the nation's space community hailed the 
President's proclamation because for the first time in more than a decade the 
United States has a goal in space exploration mandated from the top. 
Blueprint Remained Dormant 
"He has set our sights very clearly," said Thomas O. Paine, head of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration during the Apollo moon landings 
and the chief architect of a congressionally mandated blueprint for the future 
of the U.S. space program -- a blueprint that has remained dormant since it was 
submitted to the White House several years ago. 
"I think it's great," said John M. Logsdon, director of the Space Policy 
Institute at George Washington University and a leading space analyst. "The 
President did exactly the right thing. He gave the kind of overall direction to 
why we are putting humans in space that so many have thought has been lacking." 
Within hours of the President's speech, the nation's space community began 
healing some deep, self-inflicted wounds. Various factions have fought bitterly 
over which projects should get the highest priority, and that lack of unity has 
threatened to undermine congressional support for space exploration. 
"Actually, I have not been a chronic admirer of Republican presidents," said 
Caltech planetary scientist Bruce Murray, who directed the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory during one of its most productive periods. "But Bush said this is 
where we ought to go and that (sense of direction) has been the central problem 
since the end of Apollo." 
Like a number of other scientists across the country, Murray has been pushing 
for years for a manned expedition to Mars. He has consistently criticized plans 
to build a manned, orbiting space station, claiming that the $30-billion 
project -- which faces stiff opposition in Congress -- is just another piece of 
equipment, not a goal. 
That criticism softened considerably Thursday on the heels of the President's 
speech because the space station, like so many other projects in the space 
program, could play a role in any effort to send astronauts to Mars. 
Louis Friedman, executive director of the Pasadena-based Planetary Society and 
another outspoken critic of the space station, also eased his position after 
hearing Bush's speech. 
The strongest criticism of Bush's statement stemmed from the fact that he did 
not outline the role that other nations would have in a manned expedition to 
Mars, and many believe that only an international program is likely to succeed. 
"International really means the Soviet Union," noted Murray, because the 
Soviets have the best information about the effects of long-term exposure to 
space. The record -- one year -- is held by a Soviet cosmonaut. 
A manned expedition to Mars would be costly, "probably hundreds of billions of 
dollars over a long period of time," but it's "not going to cost much extra 
over the next five years," Logsdon said. 
What is needed now, Friedman said, is to work out the details on how such a 
mission should be approached. 
Many of the projects that would be precursors to a Mars mission are already on 
the drawing boards. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory is already developing plans 
for robotic, unmanned missions to Mars that would collect the information 
needed long before a manned expedition could be launched. 
The Freedom Space Station would serve as the beginning step toward a permanent 
manned presence in space. It would be followed by an "international spaceport" 
where large vehicles could be assembled in space so that they could be launched 
toward Mars without having to burn the fuel necessary to overcome Earth's 
gravity. 
Knowledge of Mining 
A manned laboratory on the moon would allow astronauts to learn how to mine 
materials for permanent facilities, and possibly even extract oxygen and 
hydrogen from the lunar surface to fuel their rocket ships. 
Even if all of that could be carried out successfully over the next couple of 
decades, the actual trip to Mars would be filled with such profound challenges 
that it may be beyond human endurance. 
Throughout the years-long trip, the astronauts would be faced with the 
possibility of a meteoroid ripping through their spacecraft, causing rapid 
decompression that would kill them within seconds. 
A violent storm on the surface of the sun could blast the spacecraft with 
deadly radiation. So the craft would require some sort of storm shelter. 
Throughout much of the trip, the craft would be so far from Earth that the 
astronauts would be pretty much on their own. It would take about 30 minutes 
for messages to travel back and forth between the craft and Earth by the time 
the astronauts reached the vicinity of Mars. 
The astronauts would probably have to spend a year there, waiting for Mars to 
reach the right point in its orbit for them to launch themselves back toward 
Earth. 
And it would take about a year to get back. 
