IN SOVIET STRATEGY, POWER STILL COUNTS 
Four years after Mikhail S. Gorbachev began transforming Soviet foreign policy, 
a clear picture of his grand strategy is finally emerging. 
Much of it is comforting to the West and represents a victory for America's 
postwar containment of Soviet power. Most important, Gorbachev has recognized 
that nuclear competition has yielded the Soviets more risks than results and he 
has joined U.S. efforts to eliminate the threat of nuclear war. But Moscow also 
is mounting challenges in areas of strategic importance to the West that the 
United States is ill-prepared to counter. 
Judging by his actions, the Soviet president has divided the world into three 
broad spheres of policy. Beyond the periphery of the Soviet Union, he has been 
ending involvements that either proved unprofitable or that brought marginal 
gains -- in strategic terms, he is shortening his lines of action. Two 
developments stand out. In Africa, Gorbachev has supported U.S. efforts to 
secure independence for Namibia, to remove Cuban troops from Angola and to move 
the Angolan civil war to the bargaining table. In Central America, he has 
announced a halt to military aid to Nicaragua. 
In both cases, Gorbachev has gained something in return. In Africa, Moscow has 
an improved image. In Central America, the Soviets have increased confidence 
that the Sandinistas will remain in power now that President Bush's agreement 
with Congress has acknowledged the failure of the Contras. In both places, 
Moscow is reducing the drain on its resources caused by unproductive Cuban 
adventures. Gorbachev also must have recognized that Soviet communism has lost 
its appeal virtually everywhere. Indeed, Moscow is more likely to increase its 
influence in Third World countries by embracing a Western liberal agenda than 
by continuing to play a visible role as spoiler -- while it retains both 
considerable capacity to project naval power and key bases in countries like 
Cuba and Vietnam. 
Obviously, the United States benefits from any Soviet retreat from distant 
regions. But the West's gains must be kept in perspective. In many areas, the 
United States has exaggerated the significance of the Soviet challenge. Even 
without Moscow's involvement in the Third World, Washington would still face 
staggering difficulties, especially in Latin America. 
Far more important in judging the future of East-West relations will be what 
happens in regions close to Soviet borders. Here, Gorbachev has drawn up two 
spheres -- the stable and the unstable. In Europe, Gorbachev has recognized 
that the Soviet Union has more to gain by formally recognizing that neither 
side can prevail in war than by trying, through massive military deployments, 
to intimidate the West and to separate the United States from the Continent. It 
is not for nothing that he is the most popular political figure in Western 
Europe. 
Again, the West also profits from Gorbachev's diplomacy. Only leaders who lack 
vision or self-confidence can mourn the reduction of military threat to Western 
Europe. If and when a more temperate Soviet Union becomes commonplace, it will 
be required to compete in terms of economic and political life, where it has 
little to offer. China offers a different example. Moscow has ratified several 
years of stable relations with Beijing by abandoning the albatross of direct 
military engagement in Afghanistan, thinning out forces in Mongolia and 
disciplining Vietnam in Cambodia. Thus Gorbachev has reduced, if not 
eliminated, the U.S. strategic advantage -- the China card -- that derived from 
the renewal of Sino-American relations. This act of competing with the United 
States is less serious than it might have been a decade ago. For some time, 
U.S. ties to China have been important more because of developments within the 
region -- and thus worthy of preserving, even after recent events -- than 
because of a three-cornered great-power game. 
This comparison of relative benefits does not apply to basically unstable areas 
close to the Soviet Union that are more in contention between the superpowers 
than China. The Soviet Union has been vigorously seeking primacy in southwest 
Asia. In Afghanistan, it is bent on winning through knowledge, craft, diplomacy 
and patience what military involvement did not avail. And in the past few 
weeks, the Soviets have come closer to realizing their ambitions in Iran -- 
critical to Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf, Western oil supplies and the Indian 
subcontinent -- than at any other time since the Great Game in the region 
between Russia and the West began two centuries ago. 
Unfortunately, the Bush Administration has reacted with more bewilderment than 
insight. The Administration clucked that arms sales to Iran would not be 
consistent with joining what the President has called the global 
"neighborhood," and it seemed surprised that Gorbachev sent condolences when 
the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini died. 
It may be understandable that a young Administration has not yet marshaled the 
resources to match the Soviets in Afghanistan or surmounted domestic political 
inhibitions against competing in Iran. But it must realize the consequences of 
failure to master all parts of Gorbachev's grand strategy -- the negative as 
well as the positive. The President and his team must learn to compete and 
cooperate with the Soviet Union at different places at the same time, and they 
must explain this dichotomy to the American people. At best, the alternative 
will be dashed expectations -- which a decade ago killed detente -- when it 
becomes clear that the Soviets have not abandoned the pursuit of power. 
