MAN ACCUSED OF FRAUD, THEFT IN SECURITIES SCAM 
A Costa Mesa man has been arrested and charged with bilking investors by 
selling worthless securities in a Pennsylvania oil and gas company, Newport 
Beach police said Tuesday. 
David E. Arnold, 38, was arraigned Monday in Harbor Municipal Court in Newport 
Beach and charged with 25 counts of grand theft, telemarketing fraud, 
securities fraud and the sale of unregistered securities. 
Arnold is accused of running a so-called boiler room operation known as the St. 
James Financial Group from a small office in Newport Beach, police said. The 
firm is alleged to have used telephone solicitors to sell an investment known 
as the PennGas Insured Drilling Program, Police Sgt. Andy Gonis said. 
Gonis said Arnold was arrested Friday at his Costa Mesa home. He is being held 
in Orange County Jail with bail set at $25,000, a court clerk said. 
Arnold could not be reached for comment Tuesday. 
Thirteen investors allegedly lost a total of $238,000 while St. James Financial 
was in operation in 1987 and 1988, Gonis said. 
The majority of the investments were for $14,000, said Police Detective Doug 
Parmentier, who investigated the case. He said investors were told that they 
were buying interests in oil and gas wells in a proven field and that their 
investment was insured for repayment. 
Investors allegedly were told by St. James that the wells were insured by its 
general partner in Texas, which was doing the actual drilling, Parmentier said. 
He refused to name the Texas partner, which he said is the subject of a federal 
investigation. 
Parmentier said one St. James customer told him that he decided to invest 
because of potential tax writeoffs and because the program seemed to be of 
minimal risk. 
Some of the investors received occasional checks for $100 to reassure them of 
their investment, Parmentier said. 
In late 1987, Newport Beach police began receiving phone calls from worried 
investors who said they couldn't reach St. James Financial, Parmentier said. 
The company closed in the spring of 1988, he said, and police began an 
investigation in June, 1988. 
The company, which was incorporated in the U.S. Virgin Islands, had been open 
for business for less than two years, Parmentier said. He said he does not know 
why it closed. 
Testifying in hearings before Congress last week, law enforcement officials 
called Southern California, especially Orange County, the "boiler room fraud 
capital" of the United States. 
