BOOK REVIEWS; 
TWO AUTHORS SEE A KINDER, GENTLER BEING; 
THE COMPASSIONATE BEAST WHAT SCIENCE IS DISCOVERING ABOUT THE HUMAN SIDE OF 
HUMANITYBY MORTON HUNT WILLIAM MORROW &amp; CO. $17.95, 256 PAGES; THE BRIGHTER 
SIDE OF HUMAN NATUREALTRUISM AND EMPATHY IN EVERYDAY LIFE BY ALFIE KOHN BASIC 
BOOKS $19.95, 320 PAGES 
There are tides in the affairs of science that reflect and at times even 
predict the greater tides in society at large. Optimism about our biological 
and psychological potential for salvation may be the theme of the 1990s. 
Experienced science writers Morton Hunt and Alfie Kohn have produced, 
independently, popular books about the human capacity for empathy, altruism, 
and what they define as "pro-social" behavior. In other words, we have two 
volumes demonstrating that people can be good, and with some encouragement, can 
be even better. 
Hunt's "The Compassionate Beast" and Kohn's "The Brighter Side of Human Nature" 
refer, on the whole, to the same cluster of psychological and sociological 
studies that affirm the existence of altruism as an integral part of human 
behavior. Why do people dive into rushing water, give blood anonymously or risk 
their lives and those of their families to protect strangers? There is no quid 
pro quo for these acts, and like the rescuers who drowned in the Sierras this 
winter trying to save the young campers who fell through the ice, there were no 
familial ties between the victims and their would-be saviors. The answer seems 
to be that they felt the threat as if threatened themselves and acted to ease 
the pain. 
Hunt's book is less ambitious than Kohn's and a great deal more accessible. By 
dramatizing not only the heroics of memorable altruists but also the lives and 
motivations of the investigators who set up experiments or surveys to test 
their hypotheses, he leaves indelible impressions of his subjects. 
Hunt notes that good deeds, like the rescue of three car passengers from the 
frigid Potomac in 1982 by Arland Williams Jr., who died during the ordeal, are 
less understandable to most of us than those selfish, aggressive or brutal acts 
that benefit the actor. We tend to doubt the motives of heroes, suspecting that 
underneath it all there must be a lust for praise, for public approval. But 
whether or not there is such motivation, we cannot deny that heroic acts occur, 
acts in which "behavior is carried out to benefit another without anticipation 
of rewards from external sources." 
Hunt seems to accept the human capacity for evil without dwelling on its 
causes. Kohn, who is equally convinced that people are capable of generosity 
and kindness, does not seem to accept the explanation that man's inhumanity to 
man is part of the package. He attributes the contemporary acceptance of 
selfishness and brutality as facts of life to a mistaken general belief in 
heredity over environment. He implies that many people believe that our 
nastiness is biologically "hard-wired," and that non-negotiable factors such as 
excess testosterone in men or right-brainedness lead to aggression and 
insensitivity. 
While Hunt explores the personal motivations of the researchers whose work he 
describes, Kohn focuses on what he sees as the enemy -- sociobiology and 
scientific reductionism. Neither author pays much attention to animal models, 
but Hunt finds some work with animals worth describing. Rather than excoriate 
certain evolutionary biologists, he dismisses the idea that a single gene could 
be responsible for such complex human drives as ambition or romantic love. Hunt 
does not accuse scientists who use terms like "the altruistic gene" of serving 
an authoritarian political agenda. Rather he calls the phrase a scientific 
"shorthand: it refers to those built-in neural and visceral reactions to 
distress in others that are the substructure of altruistic behavior." 
Both authors build on the work of the late Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget, who 
discovered that infants and children develop in specific stages. Piaget's work 
implies that at a certain stage, usually about the age of 7, children are able 
to put themselves in someone else's shoes, to imagine someone else's pain, and 
act to soothe and comfort as they would like to be comforted. Both authors also 
refer frequently to the remarkable work of Holocaust survivor Saul Oliner, a 
Humboldt State University sociologist. Oliner mapped the motives, explanations 
and backgrounds of European Gentiles who risked their lives to save Jews during 
World War II. Contrary to expectation, he found that these altruists included 
both self-confident and insecure people, the deeply religious as well as 
atheists. The single trait these heroes shared was an upbringing free from 
corporal punishment where, instead, their parents reasoned with them. 
Hunt's approach is rich in anecdote and narrative. He includes a test so the 
reader can measure his or her own sensibilities. Kohn tends to emphasize the 
psychological and philosophical ramifications of what it takes to have a humane 
society. 
Besides style, a major difference in the way these authors document altruistic 
behavior is the way each suggests change be effected. Hunt seems, almost 
naively, to take for granted that most people want their children to be kind 
and generous and good. Kohn believes our selfishness is the product of a 
society dominated by people committed to competition and individualism. In 
fact, Kohn indicts individualism for the widespread appeal of belief systems 
that promise transcendence. He suggests that "our detachment from others has 
turned us into hitchhikers, anxious to escape the self in the first vehicle 
that comes down the road -- even one that propels us right past humanity." 
Their conclusions reveal their agendas. Hunt sums up: "Perhaps it is time for 
another call to arms. . . . to serve in a Helping Corps or a Samaritan Service 
would bring us to our feet cheering, sensing that our inner desire to do good 
to our fellow human beings can transform and ennoble us, and that when we ask 
not how we can be served but how we can serve, we ourselves are well serviced." 
And Kohn, clearly impressed by the feminist idea of Carol Gilligan that women 
speak "in a different voice," declares: "Very roughly, my intention here is to 
contrast an individual morality with a relational one, a cognitive morality 
with an affective one, a principle- or rule-based morality with one grounded in 
care or empathy." 
Although both authors downplay the evidence of altruism in other social 
mammals, those studies, together with the experiments they describe in their 
books, add weight to the argument that we are biologically as well as 
psychologically primed to act kindly toward one another. These tendencies can 
be cultivated by encouraging pro-social behavior in school and cooperative 
learning, as well as by example at home. Whatever the power of heredity, these 
authors are eager for the pendulum to swing toward the efficacy of a good 
environment and they intend, with their books, to give the pendulum a good 
push. Would that they are right, that human beings are kinder and more generous 
than it sometimes seems and that by cultivating empathy in our children we can 
achieve a more peaceable kingdom. 
Next: Jonathan Kirsch reviews Michael Gannon's "Operation Drumbeat: The 
Dramatic True Story of Germany's First U-Boat Attacks Along the American Coast" 
(Harper and Row). 
