ASHTON-TATE POSTS BIG LOSS FOR QUARTER; PRESIDENT QUITS 
Ashton-Tate Corp., reeling from problems with its latest personal computer 
database software, Tuesday announced both a $19.8-million quarterly loss and 
the resignation of president and chief operating officer Luther J. Nussbaum. 
Chairman and Chief Executive Edward M. Esber Jr. said Nussbaum had quit as a 
result of "differences in management philosophy," but he declined to elaborate. 
Esber, who brought in Nussbaum from Businessland in 1986 for his "operational 
expertise," will permanently assume the post of president. 
Nussbaum, reached at his home Tuesday night, described his departure as being 
"as amicable as a departure of this kind can be." He declined to comment on his 
differences with Esber. 
Ashton-Tate grew to be the nation's third-largest independent software vendor 
on the strength of dBase, a program for storing, sorting and managing large 
amounts of information in a personal computer. But the most recent version of 
the software, dBase IV, released last fall after several delays, contained a 
large number of bugs, or errors, and damaged the Torrance-based company's 
reputation. 
The financial results released Tuesday were worse than the company had 
projected; last month Ashton-Tate said it expected to lose $15 million for its 
second quarter ended June 30. The company's actual loss of $19.8 million came 
on revenue of $59.5 million, down from a profit of $11.5 million on revenue of 
$71.9 million in the year-ago quarter. Ashton-Tate's stock fell $1.75 to close 
at $14.50 Tuesday in heavy over-the-counter trading. 
"This is a reflection of the trials and tribulations of the dBase IV 
development process," said Marshall Moseley, an analyst with the market 
research firm Dataquest. Whether the company can return to profitability in the 
third quarter still depends on the release date for the revised dBase IV 
program, Esber said, and he would not predict when that would occur. 
"The highest priority is shipping a quality product," he said. 
The second quarter loss was higher than expected, Esber said, because of low 
tax benefits on its losses in overseas jurisdictions, though he could not 
explain why that was not anticipated. 
Ashton-Tate has also attributed its financial difficulties to excess 
inventories, which resulted from extensive use of a now-discontinued delivery 
practice known as "channel stuffing." This involves shipping large inventories 
to distributors at a discount just before the end of a quarter in order to 
boost revenue. Nancy McSharry, an analyst at International Data Corp., said 
Ashton-Tate had four to seven months of inventory on hand, compared to an 
industry norm of 45 days. 
'Good Strategy' 
While most analysts expect a financial recovery in the short term, they were 
divided on the company's longer-term outlook. Ashton-Tate has long suffered 
from over-dependence on the dBase product, which still accounts for 75% of 
revenue, and a lack of new, internally developed software. 
IDC's McSharry said Ashton-Tate has "a good strategy." 
"They still have 45% of the market (for new shipments of PC database management 
products) and 50% of the installed base, and the next biggest vendor has 7%," 
she said. 
"This seems like the culmination of the bad news," added Kevin Cluskey, an 
analyst with Swiss Bank Corp. "They're a good company with a very good 
franchise and a good balance sheet with no debt." 
Another analyst, however, who asked not to be identified, said: "They have 
fundamental problems that Esber inherited -- the limitations of their product, 
their misunderstanding of third parties, too many diversifications into too 
many areas." 
The analyst added that the resignation of Nussbaum was probably due to genuine 
business disagreements rather than a personality conflict, but declined to 
speculate on the nature of the dispute. A number of high-level executives have 
departed since Esber assumed the chairmanship upon the death of George Tate in 
1984. 
Several analysts suggested, however, that Nussbaum's resignation was linked to 
the problems with dBase IV, which was released last fall but infuriated users 
with its large numbers of bugs. 
