JAPAN'S WOMEN VOTERS: A PINK REVOLT 
Yellow was the color of Corazon Aquino's "people power" revolution in the 
Philippines three years ago. If there was a theme color in Sunday's crushing 
electoral defeat for Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party, it would have to 
be pink. 
Pink because the country's demure, soft-spoken women emerged from political 
obscurity to dominate campaign rhetoric with outrage over a new consumption tax 
they claimed betrayed ruling party promises and gouged their pocketbooks. An 
unprecedented number of women candidates vied for seats in the upper house of 
Parliament -- and an unprecedented number were elected in a wave of protest 
voting against the conservative, male leadership. 
Women supporting Takako Doi, the charismatic chairwoman of the Japan Socialist 
Party, attested to their loyalty with pink neckerchiefs. NHK, the 
semi-government television network, illustrated dramatic gains by the 
Socialists and other opposition parties early today with a chart showing pink 
pillars rising out of a stylized map of Japan. 
Looming large in the mind of the irate electorate was the "pink scandal" of 
Prime Minister Sosuke Uno, who has been disgraced by recent accusations that he 
paid for sex in extramarital relations with a geisha and several other women. 
Uno has refused to comment on the allegations but conceded in a news conference 
this morning that he was resigning "to assume all responsibility" for matters 
contributing to the ruling party's defeat. 
Erosion of public confidence in Uno and his Liberal Democrats began with 
revulsion against the tax reform, then worsened with disgust over disclosures 
of widespread political corruption in the Recruit Co. influence-buying scandal 
and contempt among farmers for a policy of liberalizing agricultural imports. 
But repudiation of the ruling party, which controlled Parliament for 34 years 
before losing its majority in the upper house Sunday, was galvanized by the 
moral pique of women. 
"Women felt they had to stand up, speak up and do something, otherwise nothing 
would change," said Doi, the Socialist Party leader, who credited female 
candidates and voters with shaping the direction of the polling. 
Indeed, a record 143 women entered the race as candidates, and early returns 
indicated that at least 20 had been elected among the 126 seats being 
contested. Such a strong representation has not been seen since 39 women were 
elected to the lower house of Parliament in 1946, soon after Japanese women 
were first granted the right to vote. And since only half the seats were 
contested in the upper house Sunday, it was proportionately the best showing 
for women in national politics ever -- at least a 15% share of the spoils. 
In getting out the vote, as well, women set the pace Sunday, out-voting their 
male counterparts by more than a percentage point with a turnout of 65.63%. 
Registered women voters outnumber men by 2.7 million. 
Although women's groups had vociferously protested Uno's alleged extramarital 
indiscretions, the focus of female wrath in the election was the more pragmatic 
matter of livelihood. Specifically, they rallied against the 3% consumption 
tax, introduced unilaterally by the ruling conservatives earlier this year. 
"I think this election illustrates anger over the consumption tax . . . 
especially among women and the elderly," said Yaeko Itohisa, a Socialist who 
won a seat in Chiba Prefecture (state). She vowed in a televised interview to 
fight for abolition of the tax, as did nearly all the opposition winners. 
