SKAGWAY, ALASKA GOLD-RUSH TOWN, PUSHES FOR THOROUGH LEAD CLEANUP 
Crews have removed tainted soil near Skagway's ore terminal, but eight months 
after the discovery of extremely high levels of lead in the town there is no 
plan for cleaning homes, yards or Skagway Harbor. 
"It's supposed to be a cleanup, but it's a half-hearted effort," said Susan 
Fredricks, one of about a dozen of Skagway's 712 residents who in April formed 
"Get the Lead Out," which is pushing for a thorough cleanup. 
Two Anchorage-based environmental groups, the Alaska Center for the Environment 
and Trustees for Alaska, last month asked the federal government to take over 
the cleanup. They called the work so far "patently irresponsible." 
Records indicate that the effort has been ineffectual and marred by legal 
problems and lack of agreement among the four companies responsible. The 
removal of soil near the terminal and railroad tracks halted in May for the 
tourist season. 
Dick Stokes, regional supervisor of the state Department of Environmental 
Conservation in Juneau, says the cleanup is going as fast as possible 
considering its complexity, but gave the companies until July 14 to agree on a 
plan for the terminal. 
Federal Order 
Extremely high lead levels in the terminal's soil were revealed last fall in 
tests conducted by terminal operator Bowhead Equipment Co., which is under a 
federal order to stop polluting the harbor. Further tests confirmed that the 
Gold Rush town's role as a mining port had created an insidious byproduct. 
"There's lead dust in people's carpets, on their windowsills, on their 
doorsills, embedded in their beds and furniture," said Kristine Benson, a soil 
scientist with the Alaska Center for the Environment. 
The highest levels were at the terminal and railroad tracks, where 
concentrations of 133,000 parts per million have been found. Lead naturally is 
present in Skagway soil at about 50 parts per million, and the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency has ordered cleanups elsewhere if levels in 
soil exceeded 500-1,000 ppm. 
Lead also is in residents' blood, although state health officials concluded in 
November that few had absorbed enough to pose a risk. Environmentalists say 
that conclusion was based on an outdated standard. 
Lead can cause headaches, anemia, colic, paralysis and cramps. It also can 
stunt growth in children and cause birth defects. 
"The symptoms are very subtle," Benson said. "I don't think anyone can say with 
any confidence that there have been no ill effects in Skagway." 
In any case, the state conservation department said a risk exists -- especially 
for children -- and promised to remove the lead. Officials decided to clean the 
terminal area first while testing to determine the extent of contamination in 
residential areas. 
"Our first priority was to cut off contamination from the source," Stokes said, 
adding that Bowhead Equipment has been able to prevent the ore from being 
spread through town by trucks and released into the air during ship loading. 
State Records 
Meanwhile, according to state records: 
* White Pass &amp; Yukon Route violated state law twice by leaving a pile of 
contaminated soil uncovered and exposed to wind. Stokes, in a letter, scolded a 
railroad official for failing to "understand the seriousness of the cleanup." 
No punitive action was taken, but Stokes said the company will have to pay for 
the state's investigation of the violations. 
* Soil has been removed twice from the east side of the terminal, but tests 
after each found more than the target of 1,000 ppm. of lead. The area, 
traversed by cruise ship passengers until last month, has been sealed. 
* Tests showed that the cleanup of a 10-foot corridor along the railroad tracks 
also was insufficient. 
