VENTURA JOINS OPPOSITION TO EDISON MERGER 
The Ventura City Council has joined the cities of Simi Valley and Ojai in 
opposing the proposed merger of Southern California Edison with a San Diego 
utility. 
After a lengthy, late-night public hearing Monday, the council voted 4 to 3 to 
join the two cities with the worst pollution problems in the county in 
objecting to the merger. 
Edison's consolidation with San Diego Gas &amp; Electric, the council majority 
determined, will increase pollutants in Ventura County, which has the 
fourth-worst air pollution level in the state. 
"We can't support a merger that will lead to further pollutants being dumped 
into our air, in exchange for a token reduction in utility bills," said Vice 
Mayor Donald Villeneuve, who introduced the resolution against the merger. "The 
mitigation measures proposed by Edison have yet to be proven to be reliable." 
However, neither the county nor its cities have veto power over the merger. 
That decision lies with the state Public Utilities Commission, which is 
expected to make a ruling before the end of the year. 
During the hearing, about a dozen residents and environmental leaders spoke 
against the merger. 
"If you feel that the cities' air should not be used as Edison's garbage dump . 
. . support your sister cities . . . in their opposition to any emission 
increases taking place in Ventura from the proposed merger," said Pat Baggerly, 
a leader of the Ventura-based Environmental Coalition. 
Edison officials pleaded unsuccessfully with the council to support the merger, 
which company officials said would lead to a significant reduction in air 
pollution in the county over the next 17 years. 
Under the terms of an agreement reached last month by Edison and the County 
Board of Supervisors acting as the Air Pollution Control District, the utility 
would be allowed to emit hundreds of tons of additional pollutants over the 
next five years. In exchange, Edison would help the county achieve long-term 
reductions by paying companies to convert to cleaner sources of energy. 
That agreement would lead to reductions of more than 300 tons of pollutants in 
13 of the next 17 years. But in 1994, which is projected to be the worst year 
of air quality, the merger will result in an increase in emissions of more than 
400 tons. 
Edison officials also said the merger will result in lower electricity bills 
for Ventura County residents, but they haven't said by how much. 
However, a majority of the council members said they did not trust Edison's 
commitment or ability to reduce air pollution. 
"Despite what you're telling me here, I don't see your track record as being 
that good," Councilwoman Cathy Bean told utility officials. 
Voting against the council resolution were Councilman James Monahan, who 
supports the merger, Councilman Todd Collart and Mayor Richard L. Francis. 
Francis and Collart backed a compromise position of supporting the merger only 
if the utility takes further measures to mitigate at all times the effects on 
air quality resulting from the consolidation -- not just in 14 of the next 17 
years. 
After the vote, Edison spokesman Nador Mansour said he was not surprised by the 
council's decision. "The council expressed concern about pollution in their 
city, and we understand that, we share their concern." 
But, he added, "the council has neither the expertise nor the time to evaluate 
our mitigation package. The county and the APCD have done that and arrived at 
the responsible decision of supporting the merger and our mitigation measures." 
