BURBANK FIRM OFFERS CLOTHES FOR THE DISABLED; 
APPAREL: THE FOUNDERS BUY OFF-THE-RACK PRODUCTS IN OTHER STORES, THEN ALTER 
THEM. THE IDEA IS TO LET THE CUSTOMERS DRESS LIKE EVERYONE ELSE. 
The most frustrating part of Tom Pirruccello's old job was shopping for 
clothing for the developmentally disabled people at the residential facility 
where he used to work. 
Trips to the department store were ordeals because of difficulties in 
transporting and fitting clothing for Pirruccello's clients, many of whom were 
in wheelchairs. 
But out of that frustration came the idea for a company that is now two years 
old and will log sales of $350,000 this year. 
Pirruccello and Kurt Rieback, the young founders of Professional Fit Clothing 
in Burbank, have built a thriving business by buying off-the-rack clothes and 
altering them to fit disabled customers. They choose clothes for their style 
and durability, but the primary purpose is to help the disabled dress like 
everyone else. 
"People think disabled people should wear plaids and polyesters," said Susan 
Hart, administrator of Jackson Place, a residential facility for 104 disabled 
adults in Santa Ana. "Our clients have a pretty tough life as it is, without 
their clothes looking odd or unusual." 
Dressing properly may also become more important because of the passage of the 
Americans With Disabilities Act, which was signed into law Thursday. 
The law, heralded as a major victory by disabled rights activists, is aimed at 
requiring and encouraging business owners to hire more disabled employees. This 
means that handicapped people now working in sheltered workshop situations, or 
in menial jobs, may soon be out applying for more mainstream positions, 
according to administrators who run the group homes and centers that care for 
the disabled. 
Administrators said they welcome Professional Fit's personalized shopping 
services because taking even one wheelchair-bound person to visit a local 
shopping mall can be exhausting and time-consuming. 
In addition to fitting properly, the clothes boost morale for both the clients 
and staff members who take their charges into the community to work and play. 
"It's an incredible service -- I'm really pleased with it," said Dave Kittleson 
of the United Cerebral Palsy/Spastic Children's Foundation center in 
Chatsworth. "They could become leaders in the field." 
Kittleson, who recently ordered 72 bathing suits from Professional Fit, said 
most of his clients have money to spend, because they receive about $80 a month 
in government aid to buy personal items, including clothes. 
Professional Fit's clothing prices are comparable to those of a department 
store. For example, a pair of pants sells for $22, with a $2.50 charge for 
alterations. 
What sets the company apart is the idea that came to Pirruccello, 27, when he 
was an assistant administrator in a residential facility for the disabled in 
Baldwin Park. 
He thought that other administrators would welcome the shopping service because 
one of his most onerous tasks was buying and keeping track of his clients' 
clothes. "It was so difficult to take them out shopping," he said. 
About two years ago, while he was driving on the freeway, Pirruccello spotted 
Rieback, an old friend from high school. He signaled Rieback to call him so 
they could catch up. At the time, Rieback, 26, was working in the downtown 
California Mart, selling three women's swimwear lines. 
"I gave up a real lucrative job for this, but I knew it would be rewarding," 
said Rieback, who with his wife, Sandra, handles the buying and fashion 
selection for Professional Fit. 
Rieback said he knew that the business would take off when the first 
administrator they met with gave them an $8,500 order on the spot. That first 
order spawned a business that now grosses about $350,000 a year. 
But their small business poses definite challenges. Sometimes Rieback and 
Pirruccello must measure clients who are violent, incoherent or severely 
crippled. "Some people hit me or try to pull my hair," said Pirruccello. Other 
clients tear or chew their clothes and must be dressed in extremely durable 
fabrics. 
"Sometimes we have to find appropriate clothes for a 60-year-old man who wears 
a boy's Size 10," said Pirruccello. 
Despite the difficulty in dealing with some clients, the pair personally tries 
to measure every person in a residential facility. Then, with everyone's 
measurements on file, administrators and staff members can easily order new 
clothing over the phone. 
To make dressing easy, they seek out pants with elastic or drawstring waists, 
zippers near the ankles and pull-on shirts and sweaters with roomy necklines. 
But they can also take a regular sports shirt with buttons and make it easy to 
put on by sewing a Velcro strip behind the button placket. 
