FIRM TO OFFER AIDS DRUG FREE IN CRITICAL CASES 
In a decision that AIDS activists hope will lead to significantly widened 
access to experimental AIDS drugs, Bristol-Myers Co. pledged Thursday to 
provide "compassionate use" of its drug DDI, or dideoxyinosine, to any AIDS 
patient who cannot participate in formal trials but "for whom the drug is 
critical." 
The new program will begin in September and will run parallel to Phase 2 trials 
designed to test the antiviral drug's effectiveness as an AIDS therapy. The 
company said the plan conforms to Food and Drug Administration regulations and 
appears to fit with the innovative dual-track drug-testing program outlined 
last month by Dr. Anthony Fauci, National Institutes of Health AIDS research 
chief. 
Bristol made its announcement here after weeks of behind-the-scenes 
negotiations with government officials and members of the AIDS advocacy group 
ACT UP -- and on the same day as three dozen Canadian AIDS activists staged a 
demonstration at the drug giant's Toronto office. Six members of the group AIDS 
Action Now were arrested for trespassing. 
"This could be the start of a historic shift . . . in which the AIDS community 
and the pharmaceutical companies sit down and cooperate with one another," said 
Mark Harrington, who negotiated with Bristol on behalf of ACT UP. 
Harrington added, however, that "it all depends on how they define the word 
critical." In the past, he noted, some companies have restricted 
compassionate-use distribution to patients who are within days or weeks of 
death rather than making drugs available in earlier stages of an illness. 
Cousin of AZT 
DDI, which is taken orally, is a chemical cousin of Burroughs-Wellcome's drug 
AZT, the only antiviral drug currently approved by the FDA for use against the 
human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. Bristol bought worldwide 
marketing rights to DDI from the drug's developer, the National Cancer 
Institute, in January, 1988. 
In Phase 1 toxicity trials of the drug at the National Cancer Institute and 
other medical centers, DDI suppressed production of the virus and led to what 
scientists said were statistically significant increases in T-4 helper cells, 
the white blood cells that are key sentinels of the immune system. 
More important, DDI appeared to be well-tolerated by AIDS patients. AZT, on the 
other hand, is so toxic that some have estimated that up to 50% of AIDS 
patients have been forced to reduce or eliminate their use of the drug. 
"DDI is the only drug we have now for people who are intolerant of AZT, or for 
those who develop strains of the virus that are resistant to AZT," said Dr. 
Mathilde Krim, founding chair of the American Foundation for AIDS Research. 
"The company is to be praised for its moral leadership in the face of this 
public health emergency." 
"For the first time, we can really talk about giving people an antiviral drug 
other than AZT," said Dr. Ellen Cooper, director of the FDA's division of 
antiviral drugs. 
Free to Patients 
Under the plan, details of which remain to be worked out, Bristol is expected 
to provide the drug free. In return, said Thomas D. McCann, vice president for 
corporate communications, "we would hope to collect data" to supplement data 
gathered in the more rigorous formal trials for eventual submission to the FDA. 
Bristol said it will begin formal trials and compassionate-use programs in both 
the United States and Canada by September, 1989, after regulatory officials 
review and accept the company's Phase 1 safety data. 
By collecting data from the compassionate-use patients, Bristol hopes to 
overcome one of the biggest problems drug companies have encountered in the 
past under such programs. Drug industry observers believe that FDA licensing of 
Syntex Corp.'s drug ganciclovir was delayed by several years because the 
company gave so much of it away on compassionate use to treat AIDS-related 
cytomegalovirus retinitis, an infection that can cause blindness. 
Although the compassionate-use program will probably add millions of dollars to 
the company's drug development expenses, "if DDI proves itself to be superior 
to AZT, it will be a very nice product for Bristol," said Drexel Burnham 
Lambert drug analyst David Lippman. Annual revenues, he estimated, would be "in 
the hundreds of millions of dollars." 
FDA licensing of the drug could also provide a measure of financial relief to 
employers, insurance companies and government programs that currently pay up to 
$8,000 a year per patient taking AZT. 
Control on Price 
Under the terms of the National Cancer Institute's contract with Bristol, the 
government can force Bristol to license the drug to another company if Bristol 
does not set a reasonable price for the drug. A Bristol spokesman said it is 
premature to discuss the drug's pricing. 
The struggle over access to DDI represents a new phase in the efforts of AIDS 
patient-advocates to obtain promising drugs. 
"Hallelujah," added ACT UP's founder, playwright Larry Kramer. "I pray that 
Bristol's magnificent example will be duplicated by the manufacturers of 
numerous other life-saving drugs." 
The company's announcement capped a week in which some government regulators 
feared that Bristol seemed paralyzed by steadily mounting pressure from the 
activists and conflicting signals from the FDA and the NIH involving 
terminology and general ground rules of the program. 
Ultimately, Bristol chose to call the plan a "compassionate-use" program -- 
language favored by the FDA -- rather than using the "parallel track" 
terminology embraced by the NIH. 
Whatever the label, said Bristol spokesman Jerry Parrott, "we are committed to 
the idea conceptually" and "we are working with the government right now" to 
develop the details of the program." 
"Any patient who does not meet the criteria for Phase 2 clinical trials, but 
for whom DDI is critical, would receive the drug under this plan," the company 
said. Spokesmen for Bristol said they could not estimate how many patients 
would receive the drug under the trials and compassionate-use programs, 
although it would certainly be in the thousands. 
Effective Dosage 
The drug has been used by 90 patients during Phase 1 trials. In addition, an 
undetermined number of people have purchased an alleged chemical equivalent 
through the flourishing AIDS treatment underground. Based on Phase 1 data, a 
safe and effective dose appears to be two grams per day, according to sources 
within the Public Health Service. 
Bristol spokesman Parrott insisted that the company was not swayed by the 
Toronto demonstration or the threat of similar actions at its Park Avenue 
headquarters in New York, where ACT UP has in the past marshaled more than 
3,000 people for major demonstrations. 
Still, Harrington said, "our Canadian friends gave Bristol a foreshadowing of 
what was in store for them" if the company refused to release DDI. Activists 
also raised the possibility of a boycott of Bristol's consumer products, which 
include Bufferin, Ban and Windex. 
Other lobbyists for the program included government officials such as Fauci and 
Dr. Neil Schram, a Harbor City physician and head of the American Assn. of 
Physicians for Human Rights committee on AIDS. 
"The rules have just been rewritten," Schram said Thursday. "It is a remarkable 
thing." 
