JACK MATHEWS: IN HOLLYWOOD, THE ONLY CREED IS PLAIN GREED; 
ENTERTAINMENT: SOME CHARGE THAT A WHITE-MALE FRATERNITY OF EXECUTIVES STILL 
DECIDES WHO GETS TO JOIN THE CLUB. 
During this week's NAACP convention in Los Angeles, a report was released 
showing evidence that blacks are woefully underrepresented among Hollywood 
management. As a shocker, this one compares to Surgeon General reports showing 
that people who suck tobacco smoke into their lungs are apt to die sooner than 
those who don't. 
All you have to do is look around -- on the screen, behind the camera, in the 
executive suite, in studio commissaries -- to know that Hollywood is 
predominantly a white man's game. Blacks are excluded, for sure, but so are 
Asians, Latinos and women of all hues. 
'Twas always thus. 
The real shocker of the convention was the conclusion drawn by one black leader 
during a panel discussion on "Blacks in the Entertainment Industry" that the 
blacks-need-not-apply sign was put up in Hollywood by the Jews in charge. 
"If Jewish leaders can complain of black anti-Semitism, our leaders should 
certainly raise . . .the century-old problem of Jewish racism in Hollywood," 
said Legrand Clegg, the Compton city attorney who chairs the Coalition Against 
Black Exploitation. 
Clegg's conclusion is the tail end of a false syllogism -- many Hollywood 
leaders are Jewish/few blacks are employed in Hollywood/therefore Jews are 
racists -- but his anger is understandable. For most of this century, Hollywood 
has been the Western World's primary source of popular entertainment, and 
blacks have had almost no access to it. If the leadership is not to blame, then 
who, or what? 
Jewish leaders in the community reacted quickly to media coverage of the NAACP 
panel, issuing comments of their own that ranged from countercharges of 
anti-Semitism to a call for an open dialogue between leaders from both groups. 
But the most telling reaction of all was the non-reaction of leaders in 
Hollywood. 
Not one member of Hollywood's white-male fraternity of studio bosses, Jew or 
Gentile, would respond to Clegg's charge this week, or discuss the issues of 
the industry's scandalously poor record of minority employment. To ring up 
executives with questions on almost any non-film issue is to watch them 
disappear like sea anemones poked with a stick. 
The thing that has been consistent in Hollywood from the mogul days to the 
global days is its leaders' certainty that their business stands apart from the 
rest of society. Individually, the rich and powerful with political consciences 
may participate actively in the system, raise and donate funds for righteous 
causes, even protest injustices they see out there in the real world. But to 
lend the weight of their own studios to the causes, or to do the right thing 
about inequities in their own companies, is to take risks that might weaken 
their own grasp on power. 
There are five "isms" to Hollywood, black actor-producer Jim Brown said at the 
convention Tuesday -- "nepotism, sexism, racism, cronyism and good-ol'-boyism." 
In other words, it's a self-perpetuating club where the value of leadership is 
measured by the number of powerful relationships. If there are any blacks, 
Latinos, Asians or women reading this who can deliver an Arnold Schwarzenegger, 
Jack Nicholson, Eddie Murphy or Tom Cruise vehicle, please show up for work on 
Monday -- any studio. 
Hollywood is not inherently racist, it is inherently avaricious. It is a 
market-sensitive business that cannot exist without being on good terms with 
the lowest common denominators of society, and one look at this summer's 
release schedule will show how hard it is working to feed that need. 
"The film industry is almost like a quasi-political industry," film historian 
Neal Gabler said in a phone interview Thursday. Gabler meticulously chronicled 
the Jewish involvement in Hollywood through the mogul era in his book "An 
Empire of Their Own." "Every film has to attract a large constituency, and that 
is the white middle class," Gabler said. "It doesn't make any difference who's 
deciding which movies to make. The only ones that become blockbusters are those 
that attract that constituency." 
When he speaks to Jewish groups, Gabler said, he's often asked why Hollywood 
doesn't make more films on Jewish themes. "I tell them that when they're more 
than 4% of the population, there will be more movies.' It's the same for blacks 
(who represent 12% of the population)." 
The situation for studio heads is pretty simple. With most of them operating on 
three-year contracts, their tenures become Visionquests, triumphs of survival 
rather than attempts at pure leadership. If they have a high ratio of hits to 
misses, they can weather any storm outside. So, they hide from issues that have 
become priorities for upper management in other industries, and they get away 
with it because very quickly they either become heroes to their shareholders or 
are sent packing to the lucrative humiliation of independent production. 
Gabler believes the black community has to look to Bill Cosby, Eddie Murphy, 
Michael Jackson and other blacks whose stardom gives them the power to affect 
employment. "That's where the clout is," said Gabler. At the NAACP panel, Jim 
Brown told the black audience, "You need to make our stars come to the table 
and reinvest with you." 
But putting pressure on minorities who have succeeded seems neither fair nor 
realistic, and it diverts attention away from the real power. Only when the 
heads of the major studios commit to improving their employment records will 
there be any progress. And they will only do that when they have to. 
