LIFE SENTENCE OF 'CAREER CRIMINAL' REVERSED; JUDGE ORDERS A NEW TRIAL 
Warren James Bland, who was labeled a career criminal last year by a San Diego 
federal judge and ordered to prison for the rest of his life without parole, 
has won a reversal of his sentence from a federal appeals court. 
The U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Bland's life-without-parole 
sentence -- for gun possession by a repeat felon -- because U.S. District Judge 
J. Lawrence Irving, who presided over the case, improperly told jurors that 
Bland was wanted in the murder of a 7-year-old Pasadena girl. 
The ruling, issued Wednesday by the San Francisco-based court, entitles Bland, 
54, of Los Angeles, to a new trial on the gun charge, which federal prosecutors 
indicated Thursday they are likely to pursue. He also faces a pretrial hearing 
on the murder charge July 31 in Riverside County, according to Municipal Court 
records. 
Bland was the first prisoner in California and only the fourth in the nation to 
be sentenced to life without parole under a relatively recent federal law that 
targets repeat offenders. 
Five times over the past three decades, Bland has been released from prison. 
Five times, he has been rearrested for terrorizing women and children in a 
series of sexual assaults in Southern California. 
When Irving imposed the life term last August, he called Bland a "vicious, 
incorrigible predator." Because of Bland's bespectacled, grandfather-like 
appearance, Irving said, he is "particularly dangerous" and a "wolf in sheep's 
clothing." 
Bland was most recently released from prison in 1986. 
In February, 1987, he was wounded and arrested by San Diego police and charged 
in the torture and murder of 7-year-old Phoebe Ho of South Pasadena, whose body 
was found in a Riverside County ditch. She had disappeared while walking to 
school in December, 1986. 
Bland also has been named as a suspect in the slayings of Wendy Osborn, 14, of 
Placentia in Orange County, and Ruth M. Ost, 81, of San Diego, 
San Diego police had been looking for Bland on the Riverside murder warrant. 
Officers found a gun in his car. 
Bland, who had spent 21 of the previous 26 years in either prison or mental 
institutions, was charged under a 1986 federal "career criminal" law with 
possession of a gun by a felon with at least three serious convictions. The law 
set maximum punishment as a no-parole life term. 
According to 9th Circuit Judge Edward Leavy, Bland had been visited after his 
arrest in San Diego by his parole officer, who advised him of his right to 
remain silent but failed to tell him that he had a right to have a lawyer 
present. 
Bland then admitted having stolen the car and the gun, Leavy said. That 
confession, Leavy ruled Wednesday, will be barred at a retrial because the 
warning did not meet constitutional muster. 
Bland's primary defense to the gun charge was his claim that the weapon had 
been planted in the car by police to justify the shooting, Leavy said. Federal 
prosecutors said the officer was justified in shooting based on his knowledge 
of the murder warrant against Bland. 
During pretrial questioning and over defense objections, Judge Irving told 
prospective jurors about the warrant and the planned police testimony that the 
warrant for Bland was in connection with the "molestation and torture and 
murder of a 7-year-old girl." 
Irving ordered potential jurors to consider the warrant only to show the 
policeman's state of mind when he shot Bland, not as proof that Bland was 
guilty of murder. 
Leavy, however, said the evidence should simply have been excluded because it 
was irrelevant to the gun case. It would have been enough, he said, to tell 
jurors, as San Diego defense lawyer Mario Conte had offered to do, that the 
warrant justified shooting Bland as a fleeing felon, without discussing the 
warrant's details. 
"We cannot expect jurors to remain impartial when information that should not 
have been mentioned permits them to believe that acquitting (Bland) may mean 
releasing an exceedingly dangerous child molester and killer into the 
community," Leavy said. 
Judges Stephen Reinhardt and Pamela Ann Rymer concurred in the opinion. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Judith Feigin in San Diego, who handled the case on 
appeal, said Thursday that prosecutors are committed to a second trial. 
However, the government may still ask the 9th Circuit for a rehearing of 
Wednesday's decision, she said. 
The prosecution had contended that the information in the murder warrant never 
would have been mentioned if the defense had not insisted on bringing the 
shooting incident into the case, Feigin said. 
Despite Wednesday's opinion, Bland remains in federal prison pending further 
court action, U.S. Atty. William Braniff said. 
