SIERRA MADRE'S PLAN FOR BUSINESS DISTRICT RUNS INTO HARD REALITY 
When fire ravaged six businesses in Sierra Madre last December, some saw the 
disaster as an opportunity to build from the ashes a dream downtown for which 
the city had hungered for years. 
City officials and architect Don Watts envisioned a large plaza stretching 
along the south side of Sierra Madre Boulevard from Baldwin Avenue to 
Renaissance Plaza, the area hit by the $721,000 fire. 
Under the dream plan, the town's premier corner would have underground parking 
for 25 cars and 12 new, retail stores to lure the city's 11,250 residents from 
nearby malls and back to hometown shops. 
But those dreams have since collided with the reality of small-town life, said 
Ron Hutson, the city's Main Street project manager. 
"Everything you need, from cooperation to dollars to expertise, is in shorter 
supply here than in larger communities," Hutson said. 
The result is not a totally revamped downtown, but three fairly standard 
two-story buildings totaling about 9,000 square feet. 
Nonetheless, City Manager James McRea believes the new building plans, now 
being scrutinized by city planners, represent progress for Sierra Madre, which 
lags far behind other San Gabriel Valley cities in sales tax earning power. The 
city earns only about $160,000 annually in sales tax revenues -- about $16 per 
capita compared to the valley average of $50, McRea said. 
"It's not a solution, it's a beginning," McRea said of the development 
proposals. "I don't think it will substantially improve the tax base, but it 
will put in motion Sierra Madre's commitment to retail." 
The Dec. 6 fire began when a faulty extension cord ignited paint thinner in the 
back of one of the shops. The blaze gutted buildings housing the Treasures of 
Sierra Madre gift shop, Webb &amp; Gordon Realtors, the Spinning Wheel gift 
shop and the Soft Touch Nail Salon. 
Rooftop flames also put the Tequila Sunrise gift shop out of business and 
damaged Happy's Wine &amp; Spirits. 
After the fire, town merchants rallied to aid the fire victims, raising about 
$6,000 at a sidewalk sale. Another $400 remains in an account kept by Harlequin 
Gallery, which sold photos and videos of the fire, said Frank Van Dongen at the 
gallery. 
Although most of the fire-damaged businesses struggled to reestablish their 
shops earlier this year in temporary quarters in town, Hutson and others tried 
to persuade about six Sierra Madre Boulevard property owners, including some on 
Baldwin Avenue untouched by fire, to band together to create a major project 
for the corner. 
But the plan seemed too risky for some. 
"To be honest, it wasn't a very good deal for us," said Tracy Miller, whose 
family owns Happy's. "They wanted us to tear down the building for the good of 
the town, spend half a million dollars just to improve a corner." 
Instead, Miller said his family preferred to collect $90,000 in insurance money 
to repair their shop and continue in the building they have owned since 1934. 
The plans now submitted have been scaled down. Two buildings, one of 2,400 
square feet and the other 2,600 square feet, would be built on land owned by 
Helen Elliot and Fred Crockett. 
A 10-foot wide corridor separating the two-story buildings would lead to a 
courtyard with access to a back parking lot and the city's public parking lot 
on Mariposa Street. 
Next door to the east, property owner Berge Yeghiaian has submitted plans for 
another two-story building with a back entrance. 
Lower floors of the buildings would be reserved for an unspecified number of 
retail establishments, with offices on the second floors. 
To speed work on the project, the city's Community Redevelopment Agency 
promised to pay for the architectural plans, now estimated at $20,000. If those 
plans are approved, the building owners must pay back the city. The owners 
could also qualify for low-interest redevelopment loans. 
But the very modesty of the new plans could pose a stumbling block for their 
approval and for the granting of the loans. 
The plans do not meet the city's parking ordinance, which requires one parking 
space per 300 square feet of retail area. The City Council, which has taken an 
increasingly stern position in getting developers to meet parking requirements, 
would have to be persuaded that the project is of sufficient value to allow a 
variance from parking requirements. 
In addition, a smaller project with fewer tax benefits for the city becomes 
harder for the council to justify spending public money on as a redevelopment 
project. 
"There may be some reluctance on my part to do anything unless there is 
something that is really going to benefit the community," said Councilman Clem 
Bartolai. 
To assess just what benefits Sierra Madre would derive from the proposed 
buildings, the city plans to hire a consultant to look at the economic and 
legal issues involved. The package could come before the council in another 
month. 
Meanwhile, Sierra Madre residents are eager for their city to recover from the 
most devastating downtown fire in its history. 
"The whole city is waiting for the opening," gallery employee Van Dongen said. 
