BYU-HAWAII AND DOMINGUEZ HILLS COURT CAGE STAR; 
VICO NOMAAEA, ON CHURCH MISSION IN SAMOA, STILL THINKING IT OVER 
It is winter in the tiny Pacific island chain of Western Samoa where Vico 
Nomaaea of Carson has spent almost two years. 
Nomaaea, a 1984 all-City basketball player from San Pedro High School, has been 
walking the rain forests, visiting remote villages in search of religious 
converts, oblivious to the speculation at home about his basketball plans. 
The 6-foot-3 guard, who buried three-point shots at Cal State Dominguez Hills 
as often as tropical rain falls in the islands, is completing a two-year 
mission for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Visiting faraway 
lands on religious missions is expected of Mormon men in their late teens or 
early 20s. 
Nomaaea's tour ends Sept. 7 and he has two years of college eligibility 
remaining. It is unclear, however whether he will return to Dominguez Hills. 
The Hawaii campus of Brigham Young University also wants his talents. Neither 
school has heard from Nomaaea. In a telephone conversation he said he is not 
sure what the next few months will bring. 
"I don't know what I'm going to do yet," he said from the mission house in 
Savaii, the main island of Western Samoa. It took a reporter two weeks to 
locate him. The few telephone lines into the country were interrupted by bad 
weather numerous times. Often it was impossible to get a line into the country, 
and getting Western Samoan operators to answer was frustrating. 
Not much is known as to the whereabouts of Nomaaea, even by church elders. He 
was located on the third try at dialing the mission home, but he was not in the 
house. He was "out in the field" according to the house mother. Nomaaea was 
expected back the following Monday (the call was placed on a Thursday), and, 
although the quality of the phone line was weak, an appointment was made to 
call back at 9 a.m. local time. 
Nomaaea made the appointment, but it is that kind of communication frustration 
that has kept college recruiters away. Nomaaea said he had not used a telephone 
in some time. 
Winter in the Samoan Islands is very much like winter in Hawaii. The trade wind 
blows and it rains a bit more. Still, it is a busy time for Nomaaea, who has 
worked himself into a leadership position in the search for converts. As a zone 
leader on remote locations, he says he has converted six persons and has 
another three waiting. 
Nomaaea, however, knew little about the interest his return is generating back 
home. Both Dominguez Hills and BYU-Hawaii have spoken with his parents, Willy 
and Rosie, who have moved several times since Vico left the mainland. 
"I'd like to see him do whatever he wants, Willie Nomaaea said. "It's his 
future, not mine. I'm going to sit back and see what happens." 
As a sophomore at Dominguez Hills (he sat out one season because of eligibility 
problems), Vico averaged 10.5 points, 3.1 assists and three rebounds a game. He 
is best remembered for his performance in a Western Regional playoff game when 
he carried a flu-riddled Toro team by sinking eight three-point shots. 
But Vico, whose real name is Victor, cautioned that when he returns home he 
won't be up to his old playing form immediately. He has not played basketball 
in quite a while and, he said, is out of shape. In addition, he's not sure he 
has his head into the game, or into college, anymore. 
"I'm not jumping into school," he said. "I will miss the first few weeks 
anyway. I think I'll sit out the first quarter of the year." 
Nomaaea also said that basketball has been the last thing on his mind. 
"Over here the big sport is volleyball," he said. "For two years I have touched 
nothing but a volleyball. I don't know if I have my (shooting) touch now." 
He has gained from 35 to 50 pounds. 
"He's a lot thicker," his father said. "He left at 182 pounds. Now he's 210 or 
215. I look at the pictures he sends me and I can see he has filled up. He's 
not really fat, just solid." 
Vico acknowledged that he has rounded out. 
"Eating Samoan food has put meat on my body," he said. "Lots of taro and poi. 
All we do is eat and walk, eat and walk." 
Rumors began circulating at Dominguez Hills last fall that Nomaaea would return 
to the Carson campus to play his junior year for Coach Dave Yanai. Word was 
that Willie Nomaaea, who plays in a recreational basketball league with Yanai, 
had guaranteed his son's return to a Toro uniform. 
But his father was noncommittal in a phone conversation. He indicated that Vico 
wanted to see what Dominguez Hills has to offer. 
"Most likely he's not coming back to Dominguez Hills," his father said. "He 
wants to talk to the coach, to see what the deal is." 
BYU-Hawaii, which heard about Nomaaea from a church member here on the 
mainland, is very interested in Nomaaea. 
"A Polynesian Mormon, you bet we are interested in him," said BYU-Hawaii Coach 
Chuck Hess. Hess admitted that he had not seen Nomaaea play. However, assistant 
Hiram Akina indicated that Nomaaea came so highly recommended that he could 
have a spot on the BYU-Hawaii team almost for the asking. 
"We'd love for him to sit down with us and talk," Akina said. 
BYU-Hawaii lost its top player, a popular Hawaiian, to a Mormon mission, Akina 
said. That makes Nomaaea a prized recruit. However, the college lost contact 
with Nomaaea's parents, who moved from Carson to Long Beach several months ago. 
School officials seemed delighted when a reporter from California called to 
inquire about their interest in Nomaaea. The reporter had the new phone number 
for Vico's parents. 
"I got a couple of letters from them," Vico said about BYU-Hawaii. "I'm not 
sure exactly what I am going to do." 
Akina said BYU-Hawaii could offer Nomaaea more than Cal State Dominguez Hills, 
which remains mum as to its financial plans for its former guard. 
Akina said Nomaaea is entitled to a free year of tuition at any BYU campus 
because of the time he has served on the church's behalf. 
A stumbling block for Nomaaea's return to Dominguez Hills has been his release 
date from the mission house. He is not due back in the United States until the 
second week of September. That would be the fourth week of classes. School 
officials said that would make it difficult to get Nomaaea enrolled in time to 
be eligible to play before January. 
Akina said that problem would not exist at BYU-Hawaii, an NAIA school also 
affiliated with the NCAA Division II, because the campus is affiliated with the 
Mormon church. He said he would ask the church to cut Nomaaea's mission short 
by about a month, if needed, so he could enroll at the Oahu campus in late 
August and be eligible to play basketball when the season begins in November. 
BYU-Hawaii seems to be taking a chance on Nomaaea, and Dominguez Hills, which 
would like to have him back, is prepared to march ahead without him. After 
Dominguez Hills managed a 20-11 record and a Western Regional Division II berth 
last year, Yanai was asked what he would do if Nomaaea returned. 
"We are recruiting as if he never comes back," he said. "But we certainly would 
like to see him here." 
Yanai had a fine recruiting year, but sources at the school say the addition of 
Nomaaea would give the team maturity. The Toros are expected to start only one 
senior next year. 
Said Hess: "I've never heard from (Nomaaea), but I would like to see him come 
here." 
And so Nomaaea walks the back roads of Western Samoa, looking for converts, 
unaware of the mounting interest on the mainland about his future. 
"I've been kind of busy here," he said. "It's been a different experience. I've 
noticed that I have grown a lot physically and spiritually. I'm 23 years old 
and I'm getting to know myself better." 
Nomaaea indicated that he wouldn't push basketball when he returns to Southern 
California. 
"I might get back into the spirit when I get home. That might help me play ball 
again." 
The bottom line is, Vico Nomaaea has his fate in his hands. And yet, because of 
the difficulties in communicating in his part of the world, he is wandering the 
tropical islands of Western Samoa oblivious to the waiting game being played 
out back home.DR, PETE BENTOVOJA / Los Angeles Times 
