AUTHORITIES BREAK UP RIOT AT JOB TRAINING FACILITY 
More than 30 law enforcement officers, clad in helmets and armed with batons, 
broke up what was termed "a small-scale riot" Monday night at the Job Corps 
Training Center dormitory in Imperial Beach. 
A team of San Diego police officers and county sheriff's deputies arrested 
seven people -- all participants in the federal training program -- after a 
struggle to bring a crowd of about 50 job trainees under control, said Sgt. 
Glenn Revell, a spokesman for the Sheriff's Department. 
The riot, which left nine people hospitalized, apparently broke out because of 
the arrest of a Job Corps trainee after a disturbance on an Imperial Beach 
street earlier in the evening, said Sgt. John Maschka of the Sheriff 
Department's Imperial Beach substation. 
"A group of people from the Job Training Center were wandering the streets of 
Imperial Beach, causing trouble," Maschka said. "They were just being kind of 
rowdy and boisterous." 
After deputies warned the group twice to calm down, they arrested one trainee 
about 9:20 p.m., Revell said. He was identified as Charles Edward Thomas Jr., 
19. 
Thomas had allegedly scuffled with the deputies, injuring one of them slightly, 
Revell said. 
"Apparently, the group went back to the (Job Corps) center to try to incite the 
others into taking some form of retaliation against the police," Maschka said. 
That started a riot at the Iris Avenue center, Maschka said. 
Officers from the San Diego Police Department, Sheriff's Department and the 
U.S. Border Patrol converged on the scene around 10:15 p.m., accompanied by a 
canine unit and a helicopter team, Revell said. 
"Upon arrival, the deputies heard screams and the sound of breaking glass 
coming from inside one dormitory," Revell said. 
They moved into the dormitory and found the trainees fighting among themselves, 
Revell said. 
"They were fighting with each other," Revell said. "They were not fighting the 
officers." 
Officers brought the situation under control around 11 p.m., Revell said. 
The seven people arrested, all ages 18 to 25, were job trainees who lived at 
the center, Revell said. 
About 500 to 600 young people live and study at the center, a residential 
education facility directed by the U.S. Department of Labor, Revell said. 
No officers were injured while bringing the riot under control, Revell said. 
