CITY AIDS OFFICIAL RESIGNS FOR HEALTH, PERSONAL REASONS 
Dave Johnson, Los Angeles' first AIDS coordinator, is resigning, both for 
health reasons and a desire to be a "full-time activist" in the battle against 
the fatal disease. 
Johnson was appointed to the $45,000-a-year city post in July, 1989, to help 
address housing, education and medical needs of AIDS victims. 
In a statement Tuesday, Mayor Tom Bradley said Johnson "has been compassionate, 
forthright, and determined in his efforts to improve access to AIDS education 
and treatment to those who might otherwise not receive this assistance." 
Johnson, 35, himself was diagnosed with AIDS-related complex three years ago. 
In an interview Thursday, he said he had been taking treatments, such as the 
drug AZT. 
"The existing treatments only last two to three years," the Van Nuys resident 
said. "For me, some of the existing treatment options are wearing off. The 
disease is progressing." 
Johnson has lost 15 pounds from his normal 185-pound weight in the last six 
weeks and, he added: "It's very difficult to keep a 50-hour-a-week pace running 
temperatures every day." 
A tall, dark-haired man with rings under his eyes from evident fatigue, Johnson 
spoke in his office at the Community Development Department. 
The room was simply furnished, with no personal touches, except a bulletin 
board filled with lists of AIDS-related "tasks" to accomplish. People who know 
Johnson say such "tasks" as public advocacy, housing, and public awareness have 
occupied most of his time. 
"He knew there was so much to be done and obviously it's taken a toll on his 
health," said Rick Abeyta, associate director of Being Alive, a Hollywood-based 
AIDS support group, after learning of Johnson's resignation. "It's 
disheartening." 
Johnson said he will stay in the job until September, when he hopes a successor 
will be in place. But he still plans to "be involved, as a writer and as an 
activist. . . . 
"I see this as a freeing thing. I can devote myself full time to activism, as I 
have the energy." 
Although he was in the coordinator's job -- which he believes is the only one 
in the country held by someone from the AIDs-affected community -- for only a 
year, Johnson said, "I feel secure a firm foundation has been laid." 
The city has made several advances in the battle against the disease, Johnson 
said, including: 
* $2 million of city funds budgeted for construction of AIDS hospices, or other 
shelters for victims. 
* $85,000 in the last fiscal year, and $500,000 in the 1990-91 fiscal year, 
allocated for the distribution of AIDS prevention kits -- including condoms and 
bleach for sterilizing needles used by intravenous drug users; early treatment 
and awareness programs in minority communities such as South-Central and East 
Los Angeles. 
Johnson also brought attention to the converging issues of AIDS and 
homelessness. 
"We're finding alarming rates of HIV positive among the chronically homeless in 
places like Skid Row," he said, "as high as 20%." 
Johnson also sought to expand services to minority sufferers of AIDS, among 
whom, he said, "the disease is progressing faster, because of a lack of access 
to information and treatment." At the same time, he added, "People with color 
will soon be the majority of people with AIDS." 
Johnson believes AIDS awareness is "mainly a matter of communication." He said 
it is a constant battle to get people to recognize that it is "their problem. 
People don't want to look at it, first because of who it affects, and because 
nobody wants to look at a frightening, contagious, fatal illness. That's human 
nature." 
Johnson first became an activist for gay and lesbian rights in the early 1970s 
as a student at UCLA, he said, heading the UCLA Gay Students Union and helping 
to create the first Gay and Lesbian Awareness Week, which has become an annual 
campus event. 
By the early 1980s, Johnson had taken on a "mainstream, fairly regular career 
path" as a data processing project manager for May Co. department stores. " I 
settled on a wonderful relationship," he said, "and then friends began to die. 
. . ." 
First his lover, and then an old college friend, succumbed to AIDS. Johnson 
quit his job in 1987 to work against the disease. 
"I remembered my old political activism . . . ," he said. "The analogy I used 
was how the war must have been for my parents' generation. . . . I had to 
enlist until it's over just as my father did after Pearl Harbor was attacked." 
Despite his accomplishments, Johnson said he believes even more activism is 
needed now, "more likely in the streets, which is where the battle is going." 
In the past year, in fact, Johnson has been arrested three times while 
participating in public demonstrations for more medical treatments and more 
funding for AIDS patients. Last month, he was among seven protesters arrested 
at a county Board of Supervisors' meeting, part of an ongoing set of 
demonstrations to persuade board members to increase funding for AIDS services. 
He faces a city attorney's hearing in August for disrupting a public assembly. 
"The epidemic is getting worse and the government is turned off and the media 
has been turned off," Johnson said. "The only thing that works is taking to the 
streets. I think there will have to be much more civil disobedience in the best 
tradition of the civil rights movement." 
Such tactics, Johnson believes, are the only way to break the tide of 
indifference toward the disease and its victims. 
Many people in power, he said Thursday, "do understand what a holocaust this 
is. And it's fine with them." 
"I think, ultimately, the gay community and other communities affected by this 
disease have to face the fact and mount an eloquent, powerful political 
response." 
