3 TORCHES AT OLD DUMP REIGNITED; 
GLENDALE CUT OFF METHANE FLARES TO MEET AQMD ORDER 
Glendale officials Friday reignited three fiery torches that burn off methane 
gas leaking from a covered-over landfill, reversing a decision to extinguish 
the flames more than 24 hours earlier that briefly raised fears that the gas 
could gather in nearby areas and explode. 
Glendale officials put out the flares at about 7 p.m. Thursday, saying they 
were bowing to a decree from the South Coast Air Quality Management District 
that the equipment at the Scholl Canyon Landfill did not meet state standards. 
City officials mounted a 24-hour watch on nearby neighborhoods, looking for 
signs that leaking, but unburned, methane was accumulating. City officials said 
that if they found such signs, they were prepared to defy the AQMD and relight 
the flares, justifying the action on safety grounds. 
No gas clouds were located, however, and the incident passed without further 
trouble when the AQMD reversed its order, allowing the flares to be reignited 
at about 8 p.m. Friday. An AQMD spokesman said the agency had not realized its 
order would cause the flares to be turned off. 
Covered Over 
The Scholl Canyon dump is owned by Glendale and operated by Los Angeles County. 
A large portion was closed in 1974, covered over and converted to a golf 
course, tennis courts and sports field. 
Methane gas from decomposing trash -- which reaches down to a depth of 245 feet 
beneath the golf course -- leaks from the soil. To dispose of it, the city in 
1983 installed a system that collects the gas and burns it. 
Leaks found in the system last September forced closure of the golf course and 
tennis courts. In addition, the city was also ordered to close the entire 
massive recreation center built over the landfill. 
Since October, the AQMD has been attempting to get the city to replace its old 
system with modern equipment that releases less pollution. 
An AQMD hearing board on Thursday ordered the city "to either shut down the 
equipment or to abide by a set of conditions" set by the board to meet emission 
standards, said David Rutherford, an AQMD spokesman. The city was ordered to 
act immediately or face fines of up to $25,000 a day. 
A roadway into the recreation area was blocked Friday and posted with warning 
signs. 
The flares were extinguished, but Glendale City Manager David H. Ramsay warned 
that the AQMD order could result in greater problems from the leaking gas than 
the emissions from the flare system. 
Ramsay said it was feared that the leaking gas, if not burned, could gather in 
canyon pockets around the landfill, causing odors and posing the danger of an 
explosion. Ramsay complained that the city was forced into "a Catch-22 
situation." 
Variance Denied 
"On the one hand, they have denied our variance to use the flares, and on the 
other hand, we have the concerns about gas migration," he said. 
However, when the AQMD was contacted about the problem Friday by reporters, 
officials said they were surprised that the flares had been extinguished 
immediately. 
"It was not the intention of the hearing board . . . to have the city shut the 
flares down," Rutherford said. "We feel that shutting off the flares could 
cause a potential risk to the public's health and safety." 
Ramsay said AQMD officials agreed not to cite the city over the weekend. He 
said city and district officials agreed to meet early Monday "to sit down and 
try to resolve the issue. 
The Glendale City Council this week awarded a contract to install a new gas 
collection system, which is expected to be completed within a few months, 
officials said. 
