AFTER 38 YEARS, A MOTHER IS REUNITED WITH HER SON 
When Virgie Byrns lapsed into a coma after a traffic accident in 1952, she was 
married and the mother of four children. When she awoke three months later, she 
found that she was no longer married and that her children had disappeared. 
For more than 30 years, she worked to track down her three oldest children. By 
1987, she had found them. But her fourth child, whom she named Wayne Albert 
Bryan, was nothing more than a vague shadow in her impaired memory. 
On Thursday, after 38 years, Byrns was reunited with her "forgotten" son -- now 
named James Robert Cottam -- in an emotional scene in the front yard of her 
cluttered Santa Ana home. 
"Oh God, I never thought I'd see you again," Byrns, 70, cried as she tightly 
embraced Cottam, now 39. "Oh, thank you, Jesus! Thank you, Jesus!" 
Although Byrns last saw Cottam in diapers, she said she immediately recognized 
the heavyset, gray-bearded man with a wife and 8-year-old son in tow as her 
long-lost child. "You sure do look like your daddy," Byrns told Cottam, whom 
she continues to refer to as Wayne. 
For Cottam, the reunion capped a whirlwind 12-hour period that brought back his 
lost past with dizzying urgency. For Byrns, the reunion was the final chapter 
in a bizarre odyssey that spanned nearly four decades. 
The tale started in 1952 when Byrns, then a diesel-truck driver transporting 
fertilizer, was critically injured in a wreck outside of San Diego. She lapsed 
into a three-month coma that resulted in severe memory loss, she said. 
When she emerged from unconsciousness, hospital workers told her that her 
husband, Albert Bryan -- he died in 1964 -- had filed for divorce. But even 
more shocking was news that the father and the state legal system, believing 
that Byrns would not survive, placed her three oldest children in foster care. 
Byrns said that while she remembered her two daughters and older son, her 
memory loss caused her to forget that she had given birth to a fourth child. 
In 1954, at age 3, Wayne Albert Bryan was adopted by Robert L. Cottam, a San 
Diego County elementary school principal, and renamed James Robert Cottam. 
Although he knew he was adopted, Cottam said he had no knowledge of his natural 
parents. 
"I was born near San Diego, in a Navy town, so I assumed I was a war baby," 
said Cottam, a plumber and mechanic from Grass Valley near San Jacinto in 
Riverside County, referring to the Korean War. "I had a good home -- I have no 
complaints about that." 
Meanwhile, Byrns set out to find her three oldest children, Joycelene, Dolly 
and Alfred. But under strict state guidelines of the time, adoption information 
was sealed and Byrns was unable to determine the whereabouts of her children. 
After a while she gave up, remarried, and gave birth to two more children. 
When the laws changed in 1984 to allow release of some information on adopted 
children -- albeit not their identities -- Byrns was able to track down her 
three lost children. But Cottam remained a mystery. 
Last year, Byrns turned to Lori Carangelo, who runs "an adoptive civil 
liberties organization" from her Palm Desert home, for help. Carangelo 
eventually succeeded in tracking down Cottam. 
At 11 p.m. Wednesday night, Carangelo phoned Cottam's adoptive father, who 
delivered the news to Cottam. "He was telling me, 'You have brothers and 
sisters and your mom is looking for you,' " Cottam said. 
