ART BUCHWALD: FOR PEOPLE WITH CASH FLOW PROBLEMS 
The Supreme Court ruled that drug dealers, racketeers and others of that moral 
persuasion cannot use their ill-gotten gains to pay their lawyers when they get 
caught. The court declared that money made from drug trafficking does not 
belong to the alleged criminal. 
This means that many of our wealthy criminal lawyers are going to get cheated 
out of large fees, and clients may no longer be defended in the manner to which 
they have become accustomed. 
"Is it right or wrong?" I asked. 
Rich, the lawyer, told me that the court's decision was wrong -- dead wrong. 
"Every person in this country deserves the best defense money can buy, no 
matter where his legal fee comes from." 
"What if it isn't his money -- suppose it's cash made in the underworld? Why 
should the person be allowed to defend himself with the funds he earned 
committing a drug crime?" 
"Who can be sure that it's drug money? Maybe it comes from an uncle who worked 
in HUD. The government is trying to destroy the defense of people they don't 
like, and also drive lawyers away from their waterfront homes in Miami Beach." 
"Are you upset because the Supreme Court is taking liberties with the 
Constitution, or are you more bothered because there is nothing left in the 
Brink's truck for you?" 
"That is the most insulting question anyone has ever asked. I want you to know 
that I would defend Noriega even if he couldn't pay me." 
"You're kidding," I said. 
"OK, I'm kidding. What I don't like about all of this is that in the past, the 
big wheels in crime and dope always came to us first. Now they're going to some 
dumb ambulance lawyer instead. If the client approaches us, the government will 
assume that our client still has some ill-gotten gains hidden away." 
"Don't despair. The top crime figures are still going to have to hire you even 
if it means borrowing on their mother's Medicare insurance policies." 
Rich was optimistic, "I hope you're right. I hate to think of someone going to 
jail just because he couldn't afford me." 
"Is it easier to defend a man who can pay you than one who can't?" I asked. 
"Yes, but I don't know why," he replied. "When I'm getting paid I feel good all 
over. If there's no fee, I feel as if I've got Lyme disease." 
"Will you still do a bang-up job if a person is indigent?" 
"I don't know. I've never taken on anybody like that. Here's what I believe. 
When it comes to being defended, people should not have to explain the source 
of their money. Suppose that half of a defendant's income is derived from dope, 
and the other half from winning at bingo. I never question which part of his 
estate he's paying me from. I've had guys who paid me with suitcases of cash -- 
and I've always assumed that it was from the sale of their Pete Rose baseball 
cards." 
"If you can't get paid now by the bad people who are in trouble, how will you 
make your living?" 
"I'm going to Texas and defend indicted savings and loan officers. Nobody would 
dare ask them where they got their money from." 
