DODGERS ESCAPE BRAVES, 4-3, PULL WITHIN 8 OF REDS; 
BASEBALL: MARTINEZ EARNS HIS 13TH VICTORY AS THE CLUB GAINS GROUND ON 
CINCINNATI FOR THE SIXTH CONSECUTIVE DAY. 
During spring training, Dodger Manager Tom Lasorda told Ramon Martinez he was 
capable of winning 15 games this season. 
"He looked at me," Lasorda said, "like I was crazy." 
That is the same look Lasorda has received when he has said his Dodgers still 
are in the pennant race. 
But in the last week, he is being taken more seriously. 
The Dodgers' 4-3 victory over the Atlanta Braves Sunday at Dodger Stadium 
before 34,975 was the club's fourth in a row and sixth in the seven games of 
the home stand. 
The Dodgers, 51-48, picked up ground on the slumping Cincinnati Reds for the 
sixth consecutive day. Thirteen and one-half games back at the low point, the 
Dodgers are eight behind, the closest they've been since May 31. 
In the next 11 days, the Dodgers will play the teams ahead of them five times 
each. The Reds will start a two-game series tonight at Dodger Stadium. The 
second-place San Francisco Giants will follow for a makeup game. Then, the 
Dodgers will play four in Candlestick Park and three in Riverfront Stadium. 
"When we were losing, people were walking around with their heads down," Dodger 
third baseman Lenny Harris said. "But we've played too much baseball to fall 
down now." 
Friday night, the Dodgers beat the Braves despite leaving a club-record 25 men 
on base. Saturday, they won despite trailing by three runs with two out in the 
ninth inning. 
Sunday, a key blow was a pop fly in the fifth inning by Alfredo Griffin that 
Atlanta second baseman Mark Lemke lost in the sun. 
"Right from the start, I didn't judge it right," said Lemke, who was filling in 
for the injured Jeff Treadway. "By the time I looked up, I had lost it in the 
sun. You don't want to lose sight of the ball."' 
When he did, it fell behind him for a single that gave the Dodgers two base 
runners with one out and the score 1-1. 
Martinez sacrificed to advance the runners before Stan Javier hit a two-run 
single. After Javier stole second, Mike Sharperson singled him home. 
Sharperson had scored the Dodgers' first run in the first inning. His double 
had been followed by ball hit by Kal Daniels that bounced over Lemke's head. 
Martinez (13-4) struck out nine in eight innings and walked only one. 
"I threw some high pitches," Martinez said. "Today, I did not feel like I felt 
before. So, I tried to throw some breaking balls." 
Those high pitches produced only two groundouts all afternoon. And the Braves 
teed off on several. Jimmy Kremers tripled to right in the third inning and 
scored Atlanta's first run on a sacrifice fly by Lonnie Smith. 
The other two Brave runs came on home runs: Jim Presley's 17th of the season 
deep into the left field pavilion in the seventh inning and pinch-hitter Tommy 
Gregg's fourth to right field in the eighth. 
Tim Crews took over for Martinez in the ninth inning, but the Braves didn't go 
quietly. 
Ron Gant opened up the final inning by laying down what looked like a perfect 
bunt. 
But home plate umpire Ed Rapuano motioned Gant back, indicating the ball had 
hit him. 
Gant had to be restrained as he went after Rapuano. 
Even after the game, Gant remained incensed. 
"It (the ball) didn't touch me," he insisted. "When he called me back, I 
thought the ball had rolled foul. But it didn't come close to me. 
"Besides, from where (Rapuano) was standing, he couldn't see anything. The 
third-base umpire called it fair. He or the first-base umpire could see, but 
not the guy at home plate. He must have been in a hurry to get the game over. 
That's the only explanation I can think of." 
It didn't take long after that. Gant bounced to third, Presley flied to right 
and Dale Murphy struck out. 
The last time the Dodgers were this close to the division lead, they also were 
playing Cincinnati. The Reds then won three in a row, outscoring the Dodgers, 
15-5. 
"The Reds don't mean a hill of beans to me," said Daniels, a former Red. "They 
are just another ballclub." 
Dodger Notes 
Starter Charlie Leibrandt (4-4) took the loss for Atlanta. . . . Although he 
continues to struggle, the Dodgers will give Terry Wells another shot at the 
fifth spot in the rotation. He has been announced as the starter for 
Wednesday's game against the Giants. 
DODGER ATTENDANCE 
Sunday: 34,975 
1990 (53 dates): 1,947,448 
1989 (53 dates): 2,076,847 
Decrease: 129,399 
1990 average: 36,744 
