HOW WILL "BATMAN" SHRINK? ; 
HBO AND CINEMAX BRING LAST YEAR'S DARK HERO DOWN TO TV-SCREEN SIZE 
Holy cable television! 
 "Batman," last year's megahit (250 million bat-dollars), is making its cable 
debut this week. 
Pow! 
 With "Dick Tracy" T-shirts at almost every retailer and Tom Cruise posters 
looming from city billboards, last summer's Batmania is almost a faded memory. 
But not for Joe Desris, a Kenosha, Wisc., advertising executive, who has the 
largest collection of "Batman" memorabilia in the world. 
Zowie! 
 Desris has some bat-facts to share just in time for this week's cable 
premiere, on HBO Sunday at 8 p.m. and Tuesday at 3 p.m. on Cinemax. 
 Ker-plow! 
 And just how many times has he seen "Batman" take flight? 
"I lost count after a while," he said with bat-sigh. "I was out in Los Angeles 
last year and saw the film about a week before it came out. 
"Interestingly enough, there was a really brief scene they subsequently cut 
out. It was when Batman was in the Batmobile and he drives into Ajax Chemical 
Company and blows it up. When he drives out and gets out of his car, he looks 
up and the Joker is in his helicopter. There were 10 or 15 seconds they cut 
out, which is just as well because it looked like a toy helicopter." 
Holy whirlybird! 
 Desris found a lot to like in the Michael Keaton-Jack Nicholson action flick, 
especially the Oscar-winning art and set design. "There is this contrast in the 
architecture," he said. "There is modern stuff and throwbacks to the 1880s. The 
scene where reporter Alexander Knox is in the office of Vicki Vale -- there's a 
good contrast with the manual typewriter on the desk and Knox's microcassette 
recorder -- it's set in the '40s, the '90s and in the future." 
Zounds! 
 One of the most visually impressive scenes to Desris is set during the opening 
moments when two crooks are on the top of a building and Batman mysteriously 
pops down behind them. But, he said, some of that is lost on the small screen. 
"Some of the things in the Ajax chemical factory with all the steam and the 
liquid escaping are good," Desris said. "Some moments in the bat cave are 
interesting, but they may be trouble on TV. It's like translating the chase 
scene in 'Bullitt' onto a 19-inch TV. 
"It's really fun to see a movie like this on the big screen because of the 
whole audience participation thing. It's much more enjoyable." 
Though Desris saw the film countless times and owns the video, he's the first 
to confess "Batman" is a flawed creature. 
Thud! 
 "'Some grade school back east had bats in the lunchroom and they had to get 
the kids out of there because of the stench," said Desris, laughing. 
"Obviously, if you have bat droppings all over the place, it will be a pretty 
nasty smelling bat cave. 
"There are other things: Batman designed this really interesting craft that 
could fly all over the place, but the Joker could shoot it down with an 
itty-bitty gun. And if the Joker fell from that high of a building why would 
his body still be intact?" 
Holy gaffes! 
Desris quickly pointed out, though, that he once read an article about "Star 
Wars" which pointed out the 1977 George Lucas classic contained more than 150 
mistakes. "As much as I like 'Rear Window' and 'Psycho,' there are flaws in 
them." 
Powie! 
 Desris hasn't seen "Dick Tracy" and has no inkling if the highly publicized 
Warren Beatty film will cause as big a flap at the box office. "Last week I was 
in a Target store and they had a whole aisle devoted to 'Dick Tracy' stuff, 
which was great, but nobody was there," he said. "(Last year) if you found any 
stuff in toy stores on 'Batman,' there would be 18 kids around it or it was 
already sold out. 
"It's great (Disney) has made plans in advance and made all this stuff 
available, but when you plan a blockbuster, it's not a blockbuster," Desris 
said. 
"Warners aired its first ("Batman") TV spot, I think, on Memorial Day. They 
didn't want to give away a lot of things. Whereas with 'Tracy,' you could get 
stuff a long time ago. 
"(Warners) didn't know if 'Batman' was going to be great. There was a lot of 
publicity, but it wasn't coming from Warners; it was coming from the media and 
all the fans." 
Kaboom! 
