MUSIC: LEO DOWNEY; 
HE'S EVERYWHERE; 
THE MAN IS ALIVE AND WANTED. AND HE'S PROBABLY PERFORMING SOMEWHERE TONIGHT. 
A person could see Leo Downey's face on walls all over town at least as often 
as Bonnie and Clyde when they were popular. But it's not the cops that want 
Downey, it's Santa Barbara music lovers. The guy's got fans. 
Downey is the musical equivalent of weather in the Midwest -- if you don't like 
it now, wait a minute. Downey, 30, has been a musician for half of his life, 
and a performer since he was 19. He's as hard to pin down as Houdini's shadow. 
First of all, he's an accomplished classical guitarist. He also fronts a 
regular rock band, The Leo Downey Band, which has anywhere from three to a 
million members. They rock hard. They rock soft. They rock in between. They do 
mostly originals; they can do covers. 
Downey was born in Singapore, but has lived in Santa Barbara for 15 years, 
graduating from Santa Barbara High School. On just about every side of every 
kiosk in Santa Barbara there is Downey's face staring at you from a poster 
advertising his next gig, which is seemingly every night. He is as ubiquitous 
as a skilled politician. He's everywhere. And he's only one guy. 
"No, we really don't play that much," said Downey in a recent interview. He 
plays The Ketch on Thursdays and The Grill in Montecito on Tuesdays with a 
three-man band. And he's doing a solo show at The Green Dragon on Saturday. 
"The whole band has only played together about 10 times. The membership sort of 
fluctuates. The band has only been around for about 2 1/2 years -- we played on 
St. Patrick's Day for our first gig. The last original member, Jack Folks died 
last month -- he was only 37. He got leukemia, and within two months, he was 
dead." 
When Downey does his regular Tuesday and Thursday gigs, it's with two other 
musicians, guitarist Jason Frost and harmonica player Tom Crockett. He begins 
with a set of classical acoustic guitar songs before the other members show up 
around 10:30. "I need both types of music -- classical and rock. I don't know a 
damn thing about music -- I'm entirely self-taught. I suppose I'd like to make 
it as a rocker because I always have the classical stuff as well." 
He's doing OK as a hyphenate. A classical CD Downey made a few years ago has 
recently been added to the play list of a Los Angeles easy-listening station. A 
full-on rock CD, "Heaven and Hell," featuring the band has sold more than 400 
copies the first month. 
"Hopefully I can land some sort of distribution deal for the new one," Downey 
said. "We've done a few showcase gigs in L.A. and some industry people from 
three different labels have expressed interest. I just want to be able to make 
more music and play all over the world." 
While Downey is easy to find around the Santa Barbara night club scene, other 
times he can be as invisible as friends on moving day. From time to time, 
Downey disappears for a wildlife sabbatical. 
"Usually I go over the hill," said Downey pointing, "into the San Rafael 
Wilderness. Sometimes I need to just get away and be happy. The music business 
can be pretty high pressure, so I just go out into the woods to relax and write 
a little bit. In fact I just came back -- I was gone for four days." 
Downey doesn't have a day job -- music is his business, although he had some 
part-time work a few weeks back -- helping to fight the recent Santa Barbara 
fire. He helped save Joe Cocker's house. 
But for now, he'll be found at The Ketch on Thursday, surrounded by adoring 
fans. It's a mellow Santa-Barbara-chic, State Street hangout (with patios and 
everything) and it's free. 
