THE BUTCHER: SAM'S CAFE ANCHORS THOSE ADRIFT ON FISH SEARCH 
"Man does not live by meat alone." Not even a butcher. Certainly not one who 
spends much -- if not most -- of his time in Tiburon, Calif., not 50 yards from 
the San Francisco Bay and a lot of great fish. 
Sam's Anchor Cafe is a marvelous place in my little town of Tiburon. It's been 
there as long as any living being I know, and it hasn't changed much. From the 
looks of it as you come in off Main Street, it's an old bar, but out back on 
the bay side there are a couple of dining rooms and a huge outdoor deck with a 
magnificent view of San Francisco. 
A couple of young guys, Brian Wilson and Steve Spears, bought Sam's a few years 
back. They didn't remodel the place, and they didn't paint everything mauve, 
gray and green or anything like that. They did clean the place up some; having 
been there as long as it had, there were a few cobwebs in the corners. But 
basically, Sam's today is as Sam's has always been, with one notable exception 
-- the food. 
Hamburgers have long been the specialty of the house at Sam's, and they still 
make one of the best in the country, but in the past few years the menu has 
gone far beyond burgers. 
When they took over, Wilson and Spears hired a 22-year-old cook named Matthew 
Raftery. Raftery had paid his dues. He'd been cooking professionally since he 
was 16, and he had learned to love the creativity the kitchen offers. He has 
made a marvelous difference at Sam's. He's even made a fish-eater out of me. 
When Raftery first started at Sam's, I used to give him a hard time because he 
seldom had a serious meat dish on the specials board. A man can get a little 
tired of hamburgers, even great ones. One day, Raftery said, in response to my 
complaint about the lack of meat: "Merle, man does not live by meat alone. Try 
one of my fish specials. They're good. You'll like them." 
I did. Raftery was right. I've been eating lots of fish at Sam's lately. Try 
it, you'll like it. 
 Some simple preparation gives this dish an elegant taste and presentation. The 
rich taste of the melted Brie along with the subtle sweetness of the roasted 
peppers make the salmon melt in your mouth. Serve with pecan-flavored wild rice 
and fresh steamed asparagus. 
BAKED SALMON WITH BRIE AND ROASTED RED PEPPERS 
2 or 3 medium sweet red peppers 
1 cup bread crumbs 
1 tablespoon flour 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh oregano 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil 
Salt, pepper 
4 (6-ounce) salmon fillets 
Olive oil 
2 to 3 cloves garlic, minced 
2 tablespoons lemon juice 
1/4 cup dry white wine 
10 to 12 ounces Brie cheese 
Place peppers on baking sheet. Broil 10 to 15 minutes, rotating until skin 
blisters and turns black on all sides. Remove peppers and place in plastic bag, 
close and let steam until cool enough to handle. Discard skin and seeds. Cut 
flesh into strips and reserve. 
Combine bread crumbs, flour, oregano, basil and dash of salt and pepper. Dredge 
fish in bread crumb mixture until completely coated. 
Heat about 1 ounce oil per fillet in saute pan to smoking point. Carefully 
place fish in pan and add garlic. Cook until golden brown (about 1 minute per 
side). 
Remove fish from pan and place on lightly greased baking sheet. Deglaze pan 
with lemon juice and wine. Keep sauce warm. 
Arrange alternate strips of roasted peppers and cheese across top of each 
fillet. Bake at 450 degrees 5 to 7 minutes (depending on thickness). Serve with 
sauce. Makes 4 servings. 
 This is an easy back-yard barbecue recipe that reflects the philosophy at 
Sam's: Make it taste great, make it fast and simple, make it again. The dense 
flesh of the tuna makes it perfect for the barbecue, but it will work just as 
well under the broiler. Remember, it will cook fast. 
BROILED AHI 'MARGARITA' 
(Tequila Lime Marinade and Avocado Salsa) 
2 avocados, chopped 
1 tomato, chopped 
1 onion, minced 
1 sweet yellow pepper, chopped 
1/2 jalapeno chile, minced 
1 1/4 cups chopped cilantro 
1/4 cup lemon-lime carbonated beverage 
2 cups lime juice 
1/2 cup lemon juice 
1/4 cup triple sec 
1 cup flat beer 
1/2 cup tequila 
1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin 
4 to 6 (8-ounce) tuna (Ahi) fillets 
Combine avocados, tomato, onion, yellow pepper, chile, 1/2 cup cilantro and 
lemon-lime carbonated beverage. Set aside. 
Combine lime juice, lemon juice, triple sec, beer, tequila, coriander, cumin 
and remaining 3/4 cup cilantro. Add fish and marinate 30 minutes. 
Grill or broil fish. Acid from citrus begins to cook fish, so be careful not to 
overcook. 
Serve with reserved salsa, either on top of fish or on side. Makes 4 to 6 
servings. 
POACHED SWORDFISH SALAD WITH HONEY-MUSTARD VINAIGRETTE 
2 to 3 bay leaves 
1 teaspoon peppercorns 
3 cups lemon juice 
1 gallon water 
2 pounds swordfish 
1 egg 
1 cup olive oil 
1/4 cup honey 
1/4 cup balsamic vinegar 
3 tablespoons Dijon mustard 
Mixed salad greens 
Combine bay leaves, peppercorns, lemon juice and water in large saucepot. Bring 
to boil. 
Cut fish into 3- to 4-inch pieces. Carefully place fish in boiling water and 
poach to delicate flake (about 5 to 7 minutes). Remove from water with slotted 
spoon or pour into colander and chill. 
Beat egg in mixing bowl until frothy. While beating, gradually drip in olive 
oil to create thick emulsion. Add honey, vinegar and mustard. Arrange fish on 
greens and pour dressing over. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
Note: Although many recipes call for uncooked eggs, the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture has found them to be a potential carrier of food-borne illness and 
recommends that diners avoid eating raw eggs. Commercial egg substitutes may be 
used in place of raw eggs in certain circumstances. Check egg substitute 
package for applications. 
