FUEL, FOOD COSTS PUSH CONSUMER PRICES UP 0.5%; 
ECONOMY: THE INCREASE WAS HIGHER THAN ANTICIPATED. BUT EXPERTS EXPECT THE BIG 
GAINS IN ENERGY AND FOOD TO ABATE DURING THE NEXT FEW MONTHS. 
Unexpected increases in food, gasoline and housing costs pushed consumer prices 
up 0.5% in June, nearly double consensus expectations and well above the 
moderate 0.2% monthly inflation of April and May, the Labor Department reported 
Wednesday. 
Despite the unforeseen surge in the consumer price index, which brought 
inflation to an annual rate of 5.9% for the first half of 1990 and 4.7% for the 
past 12 months, economists said that the big gains in energy and food should 
abate in coming months. 
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan conceded that last month's inflation 
was "higher than we would like to see." Even so, he said, the economy "is not 
on the edge of either falling apart into a recession or about to take on highly 
inflationary characteristics." 
Responding to signs of economic slowing and a possible credit crunch, the Fed 
last week eased its grip on the nation's money supply and indicated Wednesday 
that it is willing to allow interest rates to ease further to offset the impact 
of an agreement to reduce the federal deficit. 
Last month's unexpected price surge, which was considerably higher than the 
0.3% gain anticipated by private economists, reversed recent declines in energy 
and food prices after weather-related surges earlier in the year. 
Food prices increased 0.7% in June, the government reported, after two 
consecutive months of price declines. Economists said the price increase 
reflected efforts by retailers to catch up with earlier jumps in wholesale food 
costs. 
Donald Ratajczak, an economist at Georgia State University in Atlanta, noted 
that wholesale food prices fell in June, suggesting that grocery store prices 
would moderate in future months. 
Gas prices spurted 2.5% in June after falling 1.6% the previous month, despite 
steady wholesale declines in energy prices. As with food, the price gains at 
the pump are expected to decline later on. 
"Dealers are taking advantage of a strong driving season when prices normally 
go up," Ratajczak said. "But (wholesale) gasoline and other energy prices were 
down . . . in June, and retailers are getting very good margins right now. So 
that should moderate." 
Yet last month's price surge reflects more than just food and energy. Excluding 
those volatile components, the consumer price index still rose 0.4% in June. 
The gain reflects persistent increases in the cost of most services, which 
account for 55% of the index. 
Because productivity improvement has lagged in service industries, labor costs 
are higher and inflation has become virtually endemic, said economist Allen 
Sinai of First Boston Co. 
Medical costs, for instance, were up 0.7% in June after increases of 0.8% in 
each of the previous four months. Medical costs have risen 9% during the past 
12 months and have soared at a 9.4% annual rate during the past three months. 
Sinai noted that inflation for goods and commodities other than food and energy 
was only 0.1% in June but that the increase for services was 0.7% 
An unexpected source of pain on the service side was a 0.6% increase in the 
cost of housing, which includes taxes and maintenance expenses as well as 
actual house prices. The big jump had been unexpected in view of the continuing 
slump in the real estate market nationwide. 
"Housing was the big surprise here," said Ratajczak. "Obviously it wasn't up 
this much because housing prices are going up because they aren't. But the cost 
of running a home continues to rise." 
Separately, the Commerce Department said housing construction continued to 
slump last month, with new housing starts tumbling 2.3% in June to the lowest 
level since the 1982 recession. 
But the department also reported that applications for new building permits, 
off 3.9% in May, rebounded at the same rate in June, providing a possible early 
hint that the real estate slump may gradually be bottoming out. 
The consumer price index was pegged at 129.9 in June from a base of 100 in 
1982-1984. That means that an assortment of goods and services that cost $100 
in the base period cost $129.90 in June. 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX 
Percent change from prior month 
June, '90: +0.5% 
May, '90: +0.2% 
June, '89: +0.2% 
Source: Labor Department 
HOUSING STARTS 
Seasonally adjusted annual rate, 
millions of units 
June, '90: 1.18 
May, '90: 1.21 
June, '89: 1.41 
Source: Commerce Department 
