THEY HAVE DESIGNS ON THE FUTURE 
Exuberance was the order of the day at the graduate fashion shows for Los 
Angeles Trade-Technical College and the Fashion Institute of Design and 
Merchandising. The shows encompassed everything from vampish voguing to the 
spirit of glasnost. 
Restaurateur and school alumni Mario Tamayo hosted the show at the Los Angeles 
Trade-Technical College. He opened it by sashaying down the runway with an 
entourage of students modeling avant-garde creations to the tune of "When the 
Saints Come Marching In." 
Nighthawk Tamayo paused during the fast-paced presentation to put in his bid 
for evening wear: "obviously my personal favorite." 
During its 63-year history, the school has produced some of California's most 
successful designers -- Carole Little, Robin Piccone, Bill Whitten and Tadashi 
Shoji among them. Seniors had just seven weeks to complete up to five garments 
in various categories. The designs were judged by a group of Los Angeles 
designers and manufacturers. 
Gold thimbles went to Marguerite Leslie for her quilted denim children's wear 
decorated with gold studs, Maria Tsuji for her green corduroy coat and tunic 
over a black bodysuit, Grace Motamedi for her ivory wrap dress and ivory and 
black tweed overcoat, Gloria Lira for her gold lame strapless evening gown and 
Marcella Jennings for her vinyl raincoat appliqued with a moon and stars. 
At the Fashion Institute of Design and Merchandising, the heavy-hitting 
audience included Mayor Tom Bradley and a delegation of entrepreneurs from the 
Soviet Union, here to discuss business opportunities. 
Hollywood costume and ready-to-wear designer Bob Mackie was a guest. "Most 
students try to be practical and gear their way into sportswear," he said. "But 
every now and then, there's some wild person who comes to see me -- and that's 
nice." 
Richard Magnanti, from the school's theater costume program, showed a whimsical 
twist on hats, tying up a hat box-sized hat with a taffeta bow to resemble a 
gift box. 
After a tribute to Bullock's, the day's honoree, and a presentation about the 
school's new, $33-million building at 919 South Grand Ave., the student show 
began. 
Advanced fashion design students each showed eight garments to a panel of 
judges that included costume designer Robert Turturice and FIDM alumni active 
in the fashion industry. 
Jill Schleisman took home a trio of awards. Her '60s-inspired, op-art print 
knits with removable purse pockets collected FIDM's Debut Award for Originality 
and Creativity. 
Cu Tran's richly colored men's sportswear earned him the school's Debut Award 
for Greatest Commercial Potential. Loretta Pickering was honored for her 
pumpkin-colored ponchos over teal bodywear. FIDM's Debut Award for Fabrication 
and Coloration went to Janie Shiau for her crushed velvet-accented evening 
separates. Most awards were accompanied by a prize of $1,000 supplied by local 
merchants. 
Jean-Lafleche Giasson won a awarded for his wool flannel sportswear that 
included jackets with zip-off bottoms. Wearing his solution to the day's heat 
wave, Canadian-born Giasson took his bows in a tailored suit with thigh-high 
trousers: He had sheared them short just before the show. 
