EIGHTH-INNING RALLY GIVES CUBS WIN, 6-3 
While the Dodger bullpen may be one of the best in the league, it remains the 
worst place for a Dodger starter. 
Tim Leary, making his first relief appearance since being moved to the bullpen 
last week, in place of disgruntled starter Tim Belcher, illustrated Monday 
night what Belcher had been complaining about. 
Leary paved the way for the Chicago Cubs to break a 3-3 tie by loading the 
bases in the eighth inning and then walking in the go-ahead run before 39,914 
at Dodger Stadium. The Cubs took it from there, getting two more runs to walk 
away with a 6-3 victory. 
Leary started trouble by walking Lloyd McClendon to start the eighth, after 
replacing Dodger starter Ramon Martinez in the seventh and setting down the 
Cubs in order. Then he allowed a single up the middle by Mark Grace. After 
Damon Berryhill bunted the runners to second and third, Leary intentionally 
walked Mitch Webster to load the bases for Curtis Wilkerson, who entered the 
game hitting .129 against right-handed pitchers such as Leary. 
But Leary treated him as if his first name was Babe, and walked him on four 
consecutive pitches to score a run. Things quickly fell apart from there, as 
the Cubs scored two more runs in the inning with reliever Ray Searage pitching, 
on an RBI fly in a rare pinch hit performance by Andre Dawson and on an RBI 
single by Domingo Ramos. 
The Dodgers should have known they were in trouble from the start. The Cubs 
scored before the game was 15 minutes old, on a 400-foot, three-run homer to 
center fence by Mark Grace. The first-inning blast came off rookie Martinez, 
who certainly wouldn't have imagined that kind of flight on his on his flight 
here from triple-A Albuquerque Sunday morning. 
The Dodgers countered with runs in the first, third and sixth innings to tie 
it, although they blew twice as many chances. In the first, off Cubs starter 
Scott Sanderson, Eddie Murray followed Willie Randolph's single with an RBI 
double. In the third they teamed up again, with Randolph hitting a single to 
center, being balked to second, and scoring on Murray's single, giving Murray a 
team-leading 51 RBIs. 
They finally tied it in the sixth, against reliever Steve Wilson, when Jeff 
Hamilton followed Jose Gonzalez's pinch single with a double to left. 
But at that point, they were frustrated than happy, as they had left runners in 
scoring position in four of the first six innings. 
Lost in the late-inning mess was the early inning mess of Martinez, making his 
first start since Sunday's recall. 
Martinez had been up here once before, but just for a minute. He was recalled 
from Albuquerque June 4 to help the Dodgers weary pitching staff following 
their 22-inning game in Houston a day earlier. He threw a six-hit shutout 
against the Atlanta Braves June 5, and was sent back down the next day. He will 
stay longer this time, if only for his pure entertainment value. 
In just six innings, Martinez managed to throw 90 pitches. You'd throw that 
many, too, if you walked five, struck out five, hit one batter in the helmet 
and allowed another one to drive the ball 400 feet. Allowing three runs on just 
three hits, he was never boring. 
The first batter he faced, Jerome Walton, stuck out his bat and dribbled a ball 
down the third base line that finally stopped just inside the bag for a single. 
After Ryne Sandberg flied to right, Martinez walked McClendon on four straight 
pitches. 
Next was Grace, who was batting .424 against the Dodgers this year, including 
.400 at Dodger Stadium. After one pitch, a strike, Grace had seen all he needed 
to see. He sent the next ball over the center field wall, just above a leaping 
Kirk Gibson, for his fourth homer. 
Martinez retired the next two batters on groundouts, but his idea of fun was 
just beginning. 
He started the second by allowing a single to center by third baseman 
Wilkerson, an occasional starter. After Shawon Dunston forced Wilkerson at 
second on a grounder, Sanderson bunted Dunston to second with two out. 
It was time for the scare of the night. With Walton batting, Martinez uncorked 
an 0-and-1 fastball that smacked him in the side of a batting helmet. Walton 
crumpled in front of the plate with his hands over his face, but a few minutes 
later was trotting down to first base, perhaps thankful this wasn't the good 
old days when helmets were for sissies. 
With runners on first and second, Sandberg ended the threat with a grounder to 
third that started Martinez on a roll. He retired 11 of his next 15 batters 
before leaving for a pinch-hitter in the sixth. The four who reached base were 
walked there. 
That stretch included five strikeouts, including three in the fourth after a 
leadoff walk to Webster. He struck out Wilkerson swinging, Dunston swinging and 
Sanderson looking. 
Dodger Notes 
Pitcher Orel Hershiser remained home Monday with the stomach flu, but told a 
club spokesman that he still planned to make his scheduled start against 
Chicago today. "We'll have to see how weak he is," pitching coach Ron 
Perranoski said of Hershiser. . . . Sore-shouldered pitcher John Tudor 
continues to work out with the team, but is still as many as two weeks away 
from picking up a baseball. 
