PEACEFUL REVOLUTION IS AT HOME IN BAJA 
Much is being made of the fact that Mexico's powerful ruling party has lost a 
major election for the first time. It could mean a monolithic political system 
is becoming more democratic, and anyone interested in the stability and 
progress of Mexico should hope that's the case. But just as interesting is 
where that defeat occurred -- our neighboring state of Baja California. 
The historic upset occurred when the candidate of Mexico's ruling Institutional 
Revolutionary Party (PRI) was defeated for governor by Ernesto Ruffo Appel, the 
nominee of the rival National Action Party (PAN). This was the first time in 60 
years the PRI did not use fraud to hold on to power and accepted defeat in a 
major election. Apparently, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is determined 
to live up to his pledge that Mexican elections will henceforth be conducted 
honestly. 
Salinas could not have chosen a better place to put his new policy of openness 
and change to the test. While Baja California is not the biggest or most 
important state in Mexico, it is on the cutting edge of trends that the nation 
will face well into the 21st Century, one of several interesting distinctions 
it shares with its big, rich neighbor across the border. 
Like Californians, residents of Baja believe their state has a distorted image 
in the rest of their homeland, and that the unfair image is based as much on 
envy as misunderstanding of what their state is really like. We don't like it 
when people from other states stereotype California as nothing but Hollywood 
glitz and Marin County hot tubs. Baja Californians resent other Mexicans, 
especially Mexico City sophisticates, dismissing them as would-be gringos eager 
to ape the United States. It is the closeness of Baja to the United States, and 
the impact of U.S. citizens and culture there, that help set it apart from the 
rest of Mexico. 
Like us, Baja Californians point with pride to the diversity of their state's 
economy and they note that it is quite healthy in contrast to the rest of their 
country. Despite a recession in Mexico, traditional industries like tourism, 
agriculture and fishing remain viable in Baja. But the most important change 
has been the growth in Baja's manufacturing sector, as high-tech companies set 
up border plants, known as maquiladoras, to produce goods for the Mexican and 
U.S. markets. And, like their California counterparts, business leaders in Baja 
are looking to the nations of the Pacific Rim for future opportunities. 
Like this state, Baja is a magnet for immigrants. As in California, Baja's 
rapid growth has brought as many problems as benefits. Tijuana shares smog with 
San Diego. Mexicali shares water-quality problems with the Imperial Valley. And 
not all of Baja's new immigrants are legal. 
Everyone is aware of the presence of thousands of Mexican workers in 
California's fields and industries, of course. But recently Mexicans have begun 
debating an influx of U.S. citizens into Baja California. 
The U.S. Consulate in Tijuana says more than 40,000 U.S. citizens are 
registered as living in Baja, and consular officials admit that number is 
probably low. Many of these people enter Baja on tourist visas rather than as 
residents, so technically they are in that country illegally. Most are retirees 
who have found pleasant places to live on small pensions. But many are young 
workers attracted by a cost of living far cheaper than in Los Angeles or San 
Diego, according to a recent report in the New York Times. And recent changes 
in Mexican law, making it easier for foreigners to lease property in Mexico, 
could push even more U.S. citizens south of the border looking for relatively 
inexpensive land and housing. 
A few Mexicans are concerned about this. One minor political party, in fact, 
tried to make an issue of Baja's U.S. "illegals" in the recent election. But 
most Baja Californians appreciate the financial benefits that U.S. citizens 
bring to their state, just as many Californians know that they benefit from the 
labor of Mexican workers up here. 
Mexican nationalists will almost certainly try to make more of the issue in the 
future, especially in Mexico City, where the United States always seems more 
threatening. I expect Baja Californians will reply that chilangos, as they 
derisively call residents of the capital, don't understand the way things work 
along the border. 
For a long time, political analysts in Mexico assumed that the PRI would never 
allow a border state to fall to an opposition party precisely because of the 
fear with which the United States, and gringo influence in general, is seen in 
Mexico City. The fact that Salinas allowed it to happen indicates he has an 
open mind about the border region and its residents' relationship with the 
United States. 
That's good. For if the peaceful political revolution about to begin in Baja 
California gets all the attention it deserves, both nations could learn a few 
things -- like why most folks who live around here see U.S.-Mexico relations a 
lot differently than officials in faraway places like Mexico City and 
Washington, D.C. 
