ALL-STAR GAME; 
A QUICK STUDY; 
AL PITCHERS TEACH A LESSON BY MAKING FAST WORK OF NL 
They've all heard the rap about the quality of pitching in the American League. 
You know, the league is full of pitchers who wouldn't challenge a hitter with a 
fastball. 
It's a reputation the 10 American League All-Star pitchers -- from Nolan Ryan, 
42, to Greg Swindell, 23 -- were determined to change, if for only one night. 
"I just heard something this morning about how the National League hitters 
always dominate this game," said Cleveland's Doug Jones, who gave up one hit in 
1 1/3 innings to earn a save in the AL's 5-3 victory. 
"We've got guys who are throwing just as hard as they do. I think the American 
League is basically a fastball league now. The only difference between the 
leagues is the designated hitter." 
There weren't a whole lot of National League players belittling AL pitching at 
Anaheim. The National League's best had nine hits -- all singles -- and three 
of those came in the first inning when they roughed up Oakland's Dave Stewart 
for two runs. 
Then came the AL's don't-let-'em-hit parade: Texas' Ryan, Kansas City's Mark 
Gubicza, Oakland's Mike Moore and Cleveland's Swindell. Those four held the NL 
to three hits over the next 5 2/3 innings. 
"The way Swindell and Gubicza were cranking it up there might change some of 
those opinions just a tad," said Angel Manager Doug Rader, who was the AL's 
third base coach. "If you want a benchmark, how about this? When Roger Clemens 
doesn't even make the club, I think this league's pitching is in pretty good 
shape." 
It didn't look so great in the first inning when Stewart gave up three singles, 
two walks and a stolen base. The National League scored twice, but it could 
have been considerably worse. St. Louis shortstop Ozzie Smith was caught 
stealing, and teammate Pedro Guerrero lined to left to end the inning. 
"I struggled with my forkball and that's my bread-and-butter pitch," said 
Stewart, who was passed over for the last two All-Star squads despite 
impressive statistics. "I've given up two runs in the first inning lots of 
times and come back to shut a team out the rest of the way. Unfortunately, you 
don't get that chance in a game like this and you can't be selfish about it. " 
The majority of the American Leaguers who pitched -- a record-tying eight -- 
made the most of their opportunities, though. 
Ryan became the oldest pitcher to win an All-Star game, taking that honor from 
Early Wynn, who was 38 when he won in 1958. Ryan struck out three and yielded 
only an infield single to San Diego's Tony Gwynn in two innings. 
"I think this is the highlight of my All-Star career," Ryan said. "It was 
special because it was in Anaheim Stadium. This place brings back a lot of 
great recollections for me. And it's been a nice trip for myself and my family. 
"The key to my two innings was a good changeup and a pretty good curve. I think 
they were looking for my fastball, but I got ahead of them and didn't have to 
give them many good pitches to hit. I think most of our pitchers did what we 
expected. Their pitching was indicative of the seasons they're having so far." 
Swindell wasn't sure what to expect. He admitted to being so excited, he almost 
forgot where he was. But he managed to match Ryan, striking out three and 
giving up two hits in a 1 2/3-inning stint. 
"I really didn't care if I gave up 10 runs, I just wanted to have fun here," 
Swindell said. "but Tony (La Russa, the AL manager) told us in a meeting 
yesterday that we were going to do what it takes to win this thing. 
"I was really pumped up. The adrenaline was flowing when I went in." 
This was not exactly a dream spot for a young pitcher making his first All-Star 
appearance. He threw his warmups and then had to enter the game against 
Houston's Glenn Davis (16 homers and 47 RBIs this season), San Francisco's 
Kevin Mitchell (31 and 81) and Cincinnati's Eric Davis (16, 52). 
"I didn't really think about who I'd be facing until I got out there, but 
that's why they call it an All-Star game," Swindell said. "I did what we all 
did pretty well tonight and that's keep the ball down. We got a lot of ground 
balls and some line drives, but we kept the ball in the park. 
"You have to give Tony some of the credit. He put together a pretty good 
staff." 
