METHENY REAPS SUCCESS WITH A NO-COMPROMISE ATTITUDE 
Call Pat Metheny a skeptic. With a decade's worth of achievements in hand, 
ranging from Grammy Awards and poll-winning performances in Down Beat, Cash 
Box, Playboy and Record World magazines to a string of chart-busting 
recordings, he still can't quite believe it's all happening. 
"I find it really interesting," said the guitarist-composer last weekend in a 
phone call from a tour stop in Santa Fe, N.M., "to hear my name mentioned in 
very commercial company -- some of it not all that attractive to me. I mean, my 
musical references are Herbie Hancock's sextet in the late '60s, Wes Montgomery 
playing with Wynton Kelly and Jim Hall -- any time -- and Sonny Rollins and 
'Trane. 
"So, when I sometimes hear our record played on the radio right after Kenny G's 
record, I have mixed reactions like, 'Gee, I'm glad they're playing our 
record,' contrasted with, 'Gosh, what did I do wrong?!' " 
Hardly anything, if his recent activities are any indication. In the last year 
or so, Metheny, 35, has composed a dance piece for Les Ballet Jazz de Montreal, 
scored the music for an "American Playhouse" TV production, completed an 
11-month world tour, which included 13 shows in the Soviet Union, premiered a 
composition written for him by Steve Reich and released a new Geffen Records 
album, "Letter From Home." So much for comparisons with Kenny G. 
Metheny, who performs with his group at the Wiltern Theatre tonight through 
Saturday, has his own thoughts about the reasons behind his success. "I guess 
the melodic nature of what I play helps," he theorized. "I like melodies and 
they're a basic part of my style. And I think my choice of the guitar as an 
instrument plays a part, too. It's so much the symbol of our generation. We've 
all grown up hearing it. 
"But the bottom line is that I've been at this for a long time. I've traveled a 
lot and built up a kind of grass-roots thing. I've been lucky that the people 
who've become fans seem to stick around for a while, hopefully because there's 
something about the music they like." He makes it clear, however, that he has 
does not intend to compromise his musical values for the sake of commercial 
success. Metheny's pieces -- the new album provides a number of good examples 
-- are filled with shifting meters, sensuous Brazilian percussive accents and 
soaring improvisations: not exactly the stuff of everyday fusion jazz. His 
rigorously creative outlook recalls the everything-for-the-sake-of-the-music 
attitudes of the jazz players of a generation ago. 
"Yeah," he said, "I want to be able to play hip notes. I want to play with a 
good feel. I want to be able to get in there with the rhythm section and churn 
things around. And I see no reason for that kind of aesthetic level not to be 
achieved in the contemporary stylistic groove that I happen to use. 
"Sure, I know it doesn't make sense for me to go back and play Wes Montgomery 
tunes, much as I love them. Things are different now. I've got a Synclavier; 
I've got all these other technical resources. 
"It's 1989, it's not 1969. The scene today is not as musically hip as it was 20 
years ago, and I can't put my head in the sand and pretend things aren't 
different. But on the other hand, I can't forget all the things that don't 
change -- all the things that I know are true about music, no matter what the 
style or the time." 
Metheny's program this evening will feature the same group heard on "Letter 
From Home": keyboardist Lyle Mays, drummer Paul Wertico, bassist Steve Rodby, 
percussionist Armando Marcal and all-purpose instrumentalist-vocalist Pedro 
Aznar. The continuity in the band has been remarkable. Metheny and Mays have 
been working together for 12 years; Wertico and Rodby have been with the them 
for more than seven years, and the other players for at least three. 
Like so many other aspects of the Metheny career, his band's longevity has 
evolved out of a determination to keep the music in the forefront. "Look," he 
said, "I'm not real goal-oriented in the sense that I want to sell X number of 
records, and so forth. To me, this whole business of going around and playing 
tours and being moderately successful is still sort of amazing, because I never 
really planned on it. Especially because I haven't really changed anything in 
order to get a big audience. 
"I play real hard. The whole band does. There's a lot of energy in the music, 
and I like to get it out to people. I'm not an introverted player. When I play 
I really want to play. I don't hold back." 
"In one sense, I guess I've always been kind of backward. For some performers, 
the purpose of a gig is to get people to buy the record. To me, the recording 
is a way to get people to come to the gig. . . . Because when it comes right 
down to it, getting up there and playing is what it's all about." 
