RICHARD EDER: A PASSAGE FROM INDIA; 
THE JOURNEY BY INDIRA GANESAN (ALFRED A. KNOPF: $18.95; 175 PP.) 
After years in the United States, where she was a chemistry professor, a 
widowed mother returns to her family home in Pi, a fictional island just off 
the South Coast of India. With her are her two daughters: Renu, a college 
student, and Manx, who is in high school. 
Out of this return, and the different things it means to each, Indira Ganesan 
has written a first novel that is something better than delicate, and something 
better than wise. There is a fine chiseling in the portraits of the hesitant 
Renu and the self-confident Manx, but it is the carving on two wands submitted 
to fire. And there is wisdom in what each goes through, but it is wisdom not 
conquered but struggled over. 
Ganesan, born in India and educated here, has taken the first-novel step of 
writing about what formed her. In this case it is two worlds, and the civil 
strife they ignite when inhabited by the same person. It means that Ganesan can 
write with a lovely balance not common to first novels. Memory calls up -- it 
has to -- both golden warmth and cool questioning. 
Everyone in "The Journey" -- Renu and Manx, their mother, Rukmani, and the 
extended family they find in the rambling country household -- is set off on a 
spectrum ranging from the reds and oranges of tradition to the blues and 
indigos of Westernization. 
There is the beautifully drawn character of the grandfather, who took to his 
bed years before on the grounds that Pi was about to sink, and that the most 
sensible course was to prepare for death. It was also the most comfortable; his 
"dying" makes the pleasantest of lives, solicitously attended by his children, 
strolling in the garden and making an occasional pilgrimage to the mainland 
just to check on the progress of world dissolution. 
There are Rukmani's highly traditional sisters, Bala and Chitri. There is her 
high-spirited brother, Adda, who traveled in Europe and brought back, to the 
family's horror, a Spanish wife. She soon died, though, and Adda occupies the 
traditional place of a bachelor uncle, with cheerfully free ideas and agreeably 
conservative ways. 
There is Amir, a former revolutionary once jailed for leading the Pi 
independence movement, who has settled down to manufacture umbrellas with 
erotic handle-carvings. There is a real estate developer who believes in 
American-style progress and regards even Europe as behind the times. "Paris is 
just another park of lost civilizations," he proclaims. 
The returning mother and her two young daughters are the moving figures across 
the family spectrum. They take their places perhaps too neatly; 
overexplicitness is a young author's apprenticeship, even one as good as 
Ganesan. 
Rukmani followed the lead of her husband -- also a scientist -- in living 
Western in the United States. She "moved through American life, tough as a 
pioneer, conquering dryers, parking meters, elevators, cellophane-packed goods. 
. . ." Ganesan writes. But widowhood reversed the current; the death of a 
nephew becomes her excuse for moving back and, once back, for taking up the 
mostly rooted of family roles. 
When Renu, for reasons we shall see, goes into extended depression, Rukmani 
suggests an age-old solution: an arranged marriage to a nice doctor or 
engineer. "She saw it as a party, a distracting, exciting spectacle that would 
take months of planning, shopping, issuing invitations, visiting, not to 
mention all the details to attend to in selecting a groom." 
On the other side is Manx, anchored to her life as perhaps only a 15-year-old 
needs to be. Her life, of course, is America: rock music, Cokes, high school, 
the future. She packs her suitcase with jars of peanut butter and eats it on 
store-bought white bread, while her uncle and aunts, her mother and sister are 
eating rice and dall. 
We see her sitting on the veranda plugged into her Walkman: "Self-absorbed, 
immensely bored, Manx had the ability to fall asleep anywhere, any time." It is 
a protection, a healthy one. Manx is the most clearly drawn of Ganesan's 
characters; we glimpse the generous and independent spirit that is taking shape 
between the Walkman's two earplugs. When a banana seller stops to chat -- as 
everyone does on Pi -- and begins to lament the death of her husband, years 
before, Ganesan writes: 
"The woman was rocking now, wringing her sadness out like water. Manx began to 
rock too." In that detail, we see that Manx will go back to America, will 
finish growing up American, and that her Indian identity will find ways to grow 
up too. 
In the middle, straddling the divided world and temporarily wrecked by it, is 
Renu. She is all openness, all ears, all readiness to be reclaimed by her 
roots. For her, the journey to Pi is, specifically, a journey to a childhood 
with which she has never come to terms. 
Rajesh, her dead cousin, haunts her. They were intimate playmates before Renu's 
family moved to America; they studied Sanskrit and read comics together; they 
were like twins. He died in a train that skidded off a bridge into the water. 
And the Indian saying goes: "If one twin dies by water, the other will die by 
fire." 
Renu feels herself pulled back into the family tradition. She half-welcomes it; 
she dreams continually of Rajesh; he seems to be holding her. But something 
resists, as well. Slipping into tradition suggests slipping into the saying. 
When her mother prattles about marriage, Renu dreams of a line of girls with 
apes as consorts. The result is a long spell of catatonic depression. At the 
end, after a series of reluctant moves and encounters, Renu will come out of it 
quite suddenly. She too will resume her American life; for her there can no 
longer be a place for the Indian life that came so close to extinguishing her. 
There is a certain tidiness in the scheme, in the growing-up, in the lessons 
learned. This is a minor flaw, the legginess of the writer as thoroughbred 
colt. And in some ways, perhaps, the tidiness actually helps us find our way 
through the Indian world that Ganesan locates with such nuance between beauty 
and oppression. 
Here is a sample. The family is sitting in the garden; the grandfather has 
disappeared on one of his pilgrimages. We see it through Manx's eyes: 
"She went outside, where most of the family had gathered. Long incense sticks 
were lit to keep the mosquitoes away, and someone was spraying bug repellent. 
The neighborhood was awake, the season too hot for sleep during a government 
current-rationing blackout. A murmur of voices drifted near the gate as 
neighbors patroled the area to make sure everyone was suffering equally. A card 
table was set up and a deck was cut. 
"Manx imagined that this tableau would last forever. That her aunts would 
always chatter and gossip, her sister remain catatonic, her grandfather absent. 
If she were to hold her breath, if she never uttered another sound, it would 
still be the same. The moon flicked in and out of the clouds, soundlessly 
fishing the sky. 
"There was a sudden rattle at the gate, a shuffle of feet. Her grandfather 
stood before them, returned from his trek. He had dried sandalwood paste on his 
arms, red and ash powder on his forehead. His feet were dirty and swollen. 
" 'The island is sinking,' he announced. 'The god told me there is nothing to 
be done.' " 
