HINTS FROM HELOISE: SUN TEA -- SOLAR POWER MAKES IT EASY AND TASTY 
DEAR HELOISE: What is sun tea? I've seen special jars for it in the 
supermarkets and even have seen special teas, but I haven't been able to find 
out exactly what it is. 
 -- JANIE, Dallas 
DEAR JANIE: Sun tea is just that -- tea made by warmth from the sun rather than 
with boiling water. It's popular because it makes very smooth tea and is really 
easy to do. 
Fill a large jar with water, put in the number of tea bags for the servings 
you're making and place the container in the sun. That's all there is to it, 
thanks to solar power. In a couple of hours you'll have great-tasting tea 
without heating up the kitchen. 
Special sun-tea jars are handy because they usually have spigots and handles, 
but any large glass jar or pitcher will do. Plastic may take a little longer. 
No sunshine? Make the tea indoors by just letting the jar sit on a counter or 
even in the fridge. It takes longer but it works. 
We drink ice tea all year long here in Texas, and sun tea is an easy way to 
always have a ready supply. Experiment a little and I'm sure you'll discover 
why it's so popular. 
 -- HELOISE 
DEAR HELOISE: I enjoy baking cookies, but the cooling racks I find in stores 
are never large enough to suit me so I made my own. 
When our old refrigerator broke down and had to be replaced, I kept the wire 
shelves. I scrubbed them well and now they make great cooling racks large 
enough to accommodate all my cookies. 
 -- JANET, Carmel, Ind. 
DEAR HELOISE: I'm trying to use my microwave more, but I'm not sure about some 
recipes. Do I need to change the amount of seasonings used, or is it just the 
same as regular cooking? 
 -- TIM, Newark, N.J. 
DEAR TIM: Most seasonings can be added as usual to recipes for cooking in 
microwave ovens, but there are a couple of things to be aware of. 
Salt shouldn't be sprinkled on food; the crystals can reflect the microwaves 
and cause uneven cooking. Dissolve it in liquid or mix it into the food. Better 
yet, don't add the salt until just before serving. 
Pepper becomes more intense when microwaved, so use it sparingly in recipes, 
then add more to taste after cooking. 
Try different amounts of seasonings in recipes and see what pleases you. 
 -- HELOISE 
DEAR HELOISE: I use a clean old toothbrush to scrub hand-held food graters. It 
gets into all the holes and really gets the grater shiny-clean in a hurry, with 
no scraped knuckles or torn dish rags. 
 -- SHANNON, La Grange, Ky. 
DEAR HELOISE: I enjoy watching television cooking shows and it was almost 
inevitable that every time I was writing instructions down for a recipe the 
telephone would ring or someone would come to the door and I would miss a vital 
part of the recipe. 
Then I got a brainstorm. Tape the show with my VCR. Now if I have interruptions 
it's no big deal. An added bonus: When I get ready to cook I can run the tape 
and follow right along. Aren't VCRs wonderful? 
 -- ANITA, Glendale, Ariz. 
