THE WOMAN BEHIND 'NAVY SEALS'; 
MOVIES: A RADICAL FEMINIST PRODUCER CALLS THE SHOTS IN THE MACHO 
ACTION-THRILLER. 'I THINK IT IS FEMINIST, HUMANIST TO HATE TERRORISM,' SHE 
SAYS. 
"Barrooooom!" A ramshackle Beirut building collapses in a cloud of blazing 
orange flame. "Ak-ak-ak-ak-ak-ak!" The sub-machine guns and Kalishnikov rifles 
spit fire and death. "Craaaack!" Blood spurts and brains splatter as one of the 
good guys is executed by a Middle Eastern terrorist. 
Meet Orion's "Navy SEALS," the latest entry in this summer's parade of 
action-adventure films where the body count and expletives run high and the 
prop blood flows freely. Like most of the others, this is a mostly men-only 
story, the one female role could be filled by a man. The love interest: nil. 
The main relationship is one where co-stars Charlie Sheen and Michael Biehn try 
to out-tough one another. Weapons, tough guys, more blood, more bodies. "Tag 
'em and bag 'em," says one character. 
But wait a minute. On the screen credits, we see this: "A Brenda Feigen 
Production." Brenda Feigen? The Brenda Feigen? The to-the-barricades radical 
feminist of the '60s and '70s? What on earth is she doing producing a film 
light-years from what one thinks of as a "woman's" movie, a film that 
celebrates with a vengeance a gung-ho organization that is one of the very few 
military operations left still prohibiting women (because of its state of 
constant combat readiness)? 
The SEALS, by the way, are an elite force of 1,200 men, descended from World 
War II's Frogmen (a term they still use for themselves) and created in 1962 by 
John F. Kennedy, who saw a future need for highly-trained teams that could be 
mobilized fast for hazardous reconnaissance and counterterrorism action. 
Feigen, still a radical feminist and whose hazel eyes blaze with the intensity 
of her commitment, sees no conflict between her personal philosophy and this, 
her first film production: "If this movie had been made about dropping nuclear 
bombs, I never would have done it," she says. "But I think it is feminist, 
humanist to hate terrorism. It is natural and logical. I had no problem making 
a movie about the guys who go after these people. I may be a feminist but I 
don't want to be blown up by a terrorist's bomb any more than anyone else." 
At 46, deeply tanned and with streaked blond hair, Feigen says she has been a 
feminist all her life. Her passionate commitment to the cause, however, began 
soon after she entered Harvard Law School in 1966. 
"They had 'ladies day' then," she recalls, "the one day in the year when women 
in the classes were called on. I remember in Criminal Law the professor called 
on women to discuss how much penetration constitutes rape and in Property Law 
class called on us to discuss who actually owned the engagement ring when an 
engagement is called off! Totally sexist. 
"I was instrumental in integrating Lincoln's Inn, the eating club for the law 
school that had never allowed women, and the squash courts so I wouldn't have 
to disguise myself as a man to play -- which I had been doing." 
While at Harvard she met and married classmate Marc Fasteau (they divorced in 
1987). "Just as I was graduating I was contacted by (the National Organization 
for Women) to run for national vice president for legislation," where she was 
in charge of hearings on women's legal rights. 
In May, 1970, she and her husband moved to New York where Feigen and Gloria 
Steinem eventually started the Women's Action Alliance and Ms. Magazine. 
Steinem recalls the early days of the magazine: "In a way it was her idea. 
Together we had formed the Womens Action Alliance which is basically an 
information center. We were initially thinking of a newsletter and Brenda said 
no, it should be a real magazine . . . she was in on the founding." 
"I learned, many years later," Feigen smiles, "that that was what gave me the 
honor of having a CIA file started on me," which she discovered in 1976 under 
the Freedom of Information Act. 
Feigen then was offered the job of running the Women's Rights Project of the 
ACLU which, after two years, she left to go into a law partnership with her 
husband. In 1978, she ran for the New York State Senate from New York's 
silk-stocking district. Feigen lost by 3% to a candidate who spent $600,000 to 
her $38,000. 
In 1982, she joined the New York office of the William Morris Agency, first as 
a business affairs attorney and then as an agent (her clients included Jane 
Alexander, Karen Allen and Loretta Swit), eventually segueing into the 
production of "Navy SEALS." "I'm glad I lost that election," she laughs, "or I 
might still be in Albany instead of having produced my first film." 
Through a writer client she met Chuck Pfarrer, an active duty SEAL writing 
screenplays in his spare time. "I tried to talk to him about it," she recalls, 
"but couldn't get much information. When the Achille Lauro happened he 
disappeared, and when the Pakistani jet was hijacked he disappeared again. He 
kept disappearing. . . . Chuck was the commander of the counter-terrorist SEAL 
team from the Atlantic Fleet. 
"The mortality rate among these guys is about 40% and I kept telling him he 
should leave." 
Pfarrer eventually did retire and wrote the first screenplay. 
"I took it to Orion," she says. "The minute they got it they called and said 
they wanted it, and by the next day it was a done deal." 
Richard Marquand was hired as director, and all was ready to go when his death 
stopped all work. By September, 1989, a new director (Lewis Teague, "Jewel of 
the Nile") was on board, and filming commenced in Spain and Norfolk, Va. "Navy 
SEALS" was made without active Navy support because of the top-secret nature of 
the SEAL's activities, said Capt. Tom Lawson, commander of the Naval Special 
Warfare Center in Coronado. "Now, they're all over it," Feigen adds. 
Feigen claims she imposed her woman's viewpoint in many places in the film. 
"There were some pretty bad things that came in a number of the drafts, and I 
said, 'I'm sorry guys, no way!' There were scenes with the role of Claire 
(co-star Joanne Whalley-Kilmer) that made no sense . . . and in one instance 
there was a reference to her so obscene I can't repeat it. . . . I said this 
has got to go! 
"In the (various) scripts there was a lot more shooting than there needed to 
be. I remember saying to Chuck, 'Don't you guys ever do anything else to keep 
people quiet?' and he said, 'Yes, but using a gun is the most efficient way.' 
The script would say things like 'and his head was blown off. . . .' I said 
that this is not going to be. As it turned out it was also cheaper," she 
laughs. 
"And there was one scene where each one of the guys was with what they call 
'frog hogs,' " (a SEALS term for female groupies), "including an unnecessary 
amount of sexual activity that had nothing to do with feelings. That's all 
gone." 
Feigen adds that "the guys" also made it pretty clear to her that she would be 
in the way when they visited bars frequented by SEALS in San Diego. "When 
you're not a SEAL and not 'one of the guys,' if you are a woman producer in a 
movie like this you seem almost expendable. I took exception to that every time 
it happened. 
"I believe if I had been a male producer there would have been no question 
about a lot of the things I had to fight for." 
Feigen's next films are far more what one would expect from a feminist: 
"Inalienable Right" is a two-hour CBS-TV movie about two black girls in the 
South sterilized without their knowledge, and based on a case she became 
familiar with while working with the ACLU; "Grounded" is a "9-to-5" type film 
about airline attendants, to be made with Jane Fonda for Columbia. 
She is also developing a film project planned to star Meg Ryan and based 
loosely on Feigen's own experiences in the early days of the women's movement. 
And there is talk of two sequels to "Navy SEALS." 
Feigen says she does regret having "Navy SEALS" as her calling card to 
Hollywood instead of one of the other projects. "I think that if you are a 
woman producer, if you get typecast as doing 'soft' movies, it's very hard to 
break that mold. 'Navy SEALS' was a film I knew I had to make because the stuff 
is so good and the story is not about nothing . . . what drew me to it was its 
substance. . . . 
" 'Total Recall' and 'Die Hard' are fantasy, futuristic movies. My film is 
action-adventure, but it's real, about real situations that could happen like 
'China Syndrome' could happen. It also happened to be the first," she smiles. 
If Feigen doesn't fit into the film industry's mold, she certainly is enjoying 
its rewards. But none of this is incompatible with her political beliefs, she 
says. 
"I don't think there is anything inconsistent with making a lot of money and 
being a feminist. I think it's important, though, to realize what your 
priorities are and who you give money to." 
And no, she doesn't intend to quit railing against the system as strongly as 
she did 25 years ago. "It's important that women have the same power as men in 
order to control the creative process -- at least have half of the control," 
she says. "There is an audience out there that does not want to see all these 
macho movies as much as they want to see movies about real people including 
real women. 
"I intend to be in the forefront of trying to change this." 
