SUSPECT'S STRIP UPSETS MERCHANTS 
Two owners and an employee of a Gaslamp clothing store said Wednesday that they 
plan to file complaints with the San Diego Police Department charging that the 
search of a man arrested last week on suspicion of heroin possession was done 
in poor taste because the man was standing partly nude on a public street. 
"If I was able to see this, I'm sure other people could," said Chris Bates, who 
works at The Catwalk, a retail clothing shop in the 700 block of G Street. 
The police, he added, "should think about the other people around who don't 
want to see that sort of thing going on." 
The incident occurred on the afternoon of July 11, when two police officers 
stopped a car for following another vehicle too closely near 6th Avenue and G 
Street. After officers questioned the man and the woman in the car, it was 
discovered that they were parolees, and a search of the man was authorized by a 
parole agent. 
Police Officer Phil Stanley, who was involved in the incident, said he never 
asked the man to strip in the street because searches are usually done in the 
privacy of a police station or jail. Stanley said the man apparently thought 
the search was going to be done immediately because his parole agent had 
authorized it. 
"He thought we wanted a search right there, so he pulled his pants down and we 
told him, 'No, not right here on the street.' So we pulled them back up and put 
him in the car," Stanley said. 
Once inside the car, Stanley said, the man was found to be carrying a bag of 19 
heroin balloons. In a routine pat-down search of the woman in the car, 240 
heroin balloons were found in her possession and more than $1,000 in cash was 
found in her purse, said police spokesman Bill Robinson. 
William Rayon, 22, has been charged with transporting a controlled substance, 
and DeAnna Rocha, 24, has been charged with selling a controlled substance, 
jail officials said. Rayon and Rocha, who had been living in a National City 
hotel, are being held on $75,000 bail. 
Bates, along with Ray Campbell and Jeanne Machold, owners of The Catwalk, said 
they will file citizen complaints with the Police Department within the next 
few days. 
Bates said the man lowered his pants for about a minute during the police 
search. He also said the police did not fully shield the man's privacy. 
"I don't think they were really trying to guard, because they were standing 
more off to the side," Bates said. 
Campbell said the incident disrupted his business. "It's gross that it happened 
right out in front of the store," he said. "It deters people from coming into 
the business." 
But Laura Sinclair, who works at Ace Uniforms &amp; Accessories in the 700 
block of 6th Avenue, said there was nothing tasteless about the incident. 
"You couldn't really see anything because (the police) concealed it so well. 
They were very professional about it," Sinclair said. 
