SECURITY DROPS NET -- TOY GUNS, PARKED CARS ARE SUSPECT 
When a policeman recently approached officials at Yorba Linda Preschool and Day 
Care about using it as a security base for Thursday's dedication of the Richard 
M. Nixon Library and Birthplace, he looked around with concern at the playing 
children. 
"He said that if we had any toy guns we'd better put them away," recalled Carol 
John, an assistant director at the school. 
From a real estate office next door, meanwhile, U.S. Secret Service agents 
began jotting down license numbers of vehicles lingering in the area a full two 
weeks before President Bush and former Presidents Nixon, Reagan and Ford were 
scheduled to appear at the dedication of the nation's ninth presidential 
library. 
With the big day drawing ever nearer, a security net the likes of which Yorba 
Linda has never seen is descending rapidly over the sleepy bedroom community of 
50,000 residents. 
Teams of Secret Service agents -- one for each President -- are being deployed 
to provide protection. Bomb-sniffing dogs and walk-through metal detectors are 
being readied for use at the site. More than 150 Orange County police officers 
are rehearsing for their role in ringing the library and surrounding streets. 
Even helicopter gunships are being made available -- just in case. 
Although no one is expecting trouble -- the vast majority of the estimated 
20,000 people expected to turn out are predicted to be staunch Nixon loyalists 
-- Secret Service officials say they can never be too ready. 
"We go in wary at all times," said Hamilton (Ham) Brown, a retired Secret 
Service agent and executive secretary of the Former Agents' Assn. in Annandale, 
Va. "As a matter of fact, the more friendly the crowd the more vigilant we 
become because you expect the unexpected." 
Security preparations for the dedication have been jointly planned by the 
Secret Service and Brea Police Department, which provides police protection for 
Yorba Linda. According to Brea Police Lt. William Lentini, the two entities 
have been meeting constantly in recent weeks to work out such details as street 
closures and officer placements. 
For its part, Lentini said, the Brea Police Department will be heading a 
contingent of more than several hundred uniformed officers from Brea as well as 
the Orange County Sheriff's Department and nearly every department in the 
county, including Anaheim, Placentia, Fullerton, La Habra, Santa Ana, 
Huntington Beach, Westminster and Costa Mesa. All those officers, he added, 
would primarily be responsible for crowd and traffic control -- but would also 
be available to deal with any demonstrations that got out of control or handle 
other unforeseen problems. 
Lentini said he did not expect trouble, however. 
"It's a very 'pro' event," Lentini said, adding that he anticipates many 
families in attendance. Lentini said an area will be provided for 
demonstrators. 
"We recognize our obligation to provide an opportunity for those with different 
points of view to express their feelings and concerns," he said. 
The police will be using grounds at the preschool to store equipment and to 
give officers a place to rest. 
As is their custom, Secret Service agents were closemouthed about the specifics 
of their security preparations. Richard Adams, a Secret Service spokesman in 
Washington, emphasized, though, the importance his agency attaches in working 
with local law enforcement such as the Brea police. 
"We are on local law enforcement turf," Adams said. 
Adams said the groundwork for the library dedication was laid by the Los 
Angeles office of the Secret Service, while the intricate details of security 
would be handled by a Secret Service detail assigned to protect President Bush. 
Those agents, he said, generally arrive at a presidential venue a week ahead of 
time. 
Both Reagan and Ford have their own Secret Service details, which Adams said 
will be coordinated by the main presidential team. Nixon did away with his 
Secret Service protection in 1985 and has used private security since. Nixon 
personal assistant John Taylor said the former President would defer to the 
Secret Service in protecting him for his library visit. Taylor declined to 
discuss the security arrangements. 
Nixon is scheduled to arrive at Yorba Linda Middle School via helicopter and 
then be whisked to the library a few blocks away by police motorcade, said Roy 
Stephenson, Yorba Linda city engineer. The former President will be flying from 
the Century Plaza hotel in Los Angeles, arriving in Yorba Linda at about 7 a.m. 
Former Presidents Reagan and Ford will be arriving in bulletproof limousines. 
Bush will have spent the night in the Anaheim Hilton. 
If past experience is any indication, however, former agent Brown said Bush's 
helicopter would shuttle him to the library site. 
Before any Presidents arrive, the Federal Aviation Administration will have 
already sealed off the airspace around the library to all unauthorized traffic. 
FAA spokeswoman Elly Brekke said her agency routinely does this at the request 
of the Secret Service. The airspace restrictions usually are lifted after the 
dignitaries have left, she said. 
Although Secret Service officials would not comment about enforcement of 
airspace violations, Brown said local police agencies and even the Marines all 
have armed helicopters on standby to deal with any aerial encroachments. 
On the ground, Brown said, the Secret Service will conduct sweeps of the 
nine-acre library grounds with bomb-sniffing dogs and other bomb-detection 
apparatus. The uniformed branch of the Secret Service will also set up 
metal-detecting machines at entrances to the dedication site so all visitors 
can be screened for weapons, Brown said. 
The machines were put into use after Lynette (Squeaky) Fromme attempted to 
assassinate former President Ford in Sacramento in September, 1975, Brown said. 
He said that having the visitors checked gives a little more peace of mind to 
the Secret Service. 
If anything were to happen, Brown said the Secret Service would throw all of 
its protection around the Presidents. If it came down to it, Brown said Bush 
would receive the most security. 
