TURNER FINDING NO HANDICAP IN LIMITED PRACTICE; 
GOLF: VAN NUYS RESIDENT FORGOES EXTENSIVE PREPARATION, BUT THAT DIDN'T KEEP HIM 
FROM SECOND L.A. CITY AMATEUR TITLE. 
According to one school of thought, it doesn't take much effort to play 
even-par golf. All one has to do is play golf or hit practice balls seven or 
eight hours a day, seven days a week, sometimes at night, until the bones in 
one's hands begin to show through the skin, and then spend the rest of the time 
putting and analyzing videotape of one's swing. 
All of which leaves precious little time for other things, such as living. Most 
PGA stars make that little sacrifice, however, and have turned themselves into 
well-oiled, shot-producing machines capable of amazing golf shots and not too 
much of anything else. 
Amateur golfers, however, don't have the luxury of being able to pound golf 
balls until the shafts of their drivers begin to overheat. They have to work 
their golf in around a few other things, such as making a living and spending 
time with their families. 
But often, despite those great obstacles, amateur golfers succeed in honing 
their game to a great sharpness. 
Mike Turner is one who has done it. The furniture pillow manufacturer from Van 
Nuys has brought his game to a high level despite playing and practicing only 
around the schedule mandated by his job and the needs of his wife and young 
son. 
Turner, 33, won the Los Angeles City Amateur championship in 1987, and won it 
again last weekend. All of which makes one wonder what he'd be capable of if he 
ever got serious about the game. 
"I leave for work at 7 or 8 a.m. and get out at 5 p.m. or so," he said. "When 
I'm preparing for a tournament, I stop on the way home from work and hit balls 
at a range and one day during the week, I play a round of golf, starting at 5 
a.m." 
Owning his business -- with his father -- provides Turner the sole benefit to 
his game. 
One day a week he can arrive at the Paltex Inc. offices in Los Angeles at 11 
a.m. without losing his job. 
When he's not in a two- or three-week preparation program for a tournament, his 
golf falls to just a round a week at the Woodland Hills Country Club, with no 
time for hitting practice balls. And by the time September rolls around, golf 
falls yet another notch. 
"In September, I've really gotten burned out on golf and I put the clubs away," 
Turner said. "I play once in a while, maybe once a month or so, but until 
January, I never practice, never hit balls. Those are the months that I spend 
all of my time with my wife and son. I give them all of my time for the fall 
and winter." 
But yet, even with his clubs collecting dust, Turner will see his handicap fall 
only from scratch to a three by the time spring comes. 
And that goes a long way toward disproving the theory that golf is all 
practice. According to common belief, the more one practices, the better one 
gets. But that does not explain why so many 60-year-olds who have played golf 
two or three times a week for 40 years must yell "Fore!" while they're still in 
their backswings. 
"Golf requires talent," Turner said. "No question about it. Some people do some 
things better than other people. The best golfers in the world didn't get that 
way just because they hit range balls all day." 
Turner, the only left-hander ever to win the Los Angeles City Amateur in its 
70-year history, was always a better-than-average golfer. At Cal State 
Northridge, he was one of the school's top two golfers for three years. But it 
wasn't until a few years after he left school that his game began showing great 
improvement. 
Turner credits the improvement not to hours and hours of hand-blistering 
practice, but rather to a cerebral approach to practice and competition. 
"I watch guys all the time at the range hitting ball after ball, all day long," 
Turner said. "But they're not getting any better because they don't know what 
they are practicing. They spend three hours hitting balls and all it did was 
reinforce a bad swing habit. 
"I learned that with limited time, practicing the right way is the key. 
Everyone hits a certain percentage of their shots well, at any level. The more 
you practice the things that created those good swings, the higher the 
percentage of good swings you will make." 
Even though a high percentage of Turner's swings are good ones, he has never 
given much thought to the idea of turning professional. 
"At the time I had that decision to make, when I got out of college, I just 
wasn't good enough to really consider it," he said. "I just did not dominate my 
peers in golf. To realistically consider a life on the PGA Tour, you have to 
dominate the people you play against. I didn't do that. 
"I am very content to be the best amateur golfer I can be." 
For Turner -- and he makes this point emphatically -- that requires a wife who 
does not regularly throw steak knives past his head whenever he mentions that 
he might be playing golf in the morning or might be a bit late for dinner 
because he'll be at the practice range after work. 
"Lorrie is great about it," Turner said. "She knows how much it means to me. 
I'm lucky. She and our son, Sean, put up with me and my golf. My wife doesn't 
really play the game, but she gives me great support anyway." 
And sometimes, the support of a family can make a difference, even in golf. 
"In the last round of the L. A. Amateur, I had about a 20-foot putt near the 
end," Turner said. "Lorrie and Sean were following me in a golf cart, and just 
as I got near the green, Sean fell out of the cart. My wife and I were pretty 
nervous and shaken up, but I had to keep playing. And I stood over that 20-foot 
putt and smashed it 10 feet past the cup. I was just worrying about my son, and 
I forgot about golf. 
"Then I walked over to them and saw that he was OK. And I came back to the 
green and made the 10-footer and hung on to win the tournament. Winning it was 
nice, but having my family there to watch it made it really special." 
