GLUT OF FILM HITS HAS EXHIBITORS REELING 
In this, the hottest summer in movie history, America's theater owners and 
operators are discovering that there can be too much of a good thing. 
With a block of solid hits dominating almost half of the country's 24,000 
theater screens, and setting a pace that will shatter all Hollywood box office 
records, exhibitors are giving themselves headaches trying to decide which 
films to leave on their screens and which to take off. 
The decision is not as arbitrary as it seems. Exhibitors who pull films from 
theaters before their contractual commitments face penalties and studio 
pressure. 
"It's a problem that occurs when pictures continue to have strong legs," said 
John Krier, president of Los Angeles-based Exhibitor Relations. "That means 
that they might have been booked for a certain period of time, but because of 
the volume of business, the run has to be extended." 
"This is happening all over the country," said Salt Lake City buyer and booker 
David Sharp. "These blockbusters are smacking into each other left and right. 
One major studio wants you to hold, another wants you to open. It's very 
difficult to reach a compromise. . . . Somebody wins and somebody loses in 
every market. Whoever pushes the hardest wins." 
When Disney's "Peter Pan" alights on 1,450 screens Friday, it will join two 
surprise Disney/Touchstone pictures already in release that continue to baffle 
industry experts. The family film "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids," now in its third 
week, trailed only "Lethal Weapon 2" and "Batman" in last weekend's box-office 
race, grossing $9.4 million. And after seven weeks in release, "Dead Poets 
Society" is still very much alive. It has combined with "Honey, I Shrunk the 
Kids" to earn Disney more than $115 million. 
"It's difficult when a studio starts commanding too many national tracks," said 
Mike Ogrodowski, senior booker for Marcus Theaters in Milwaukee. "Paramount, 
Warners and Disney all have two tracks . . . and now 'Peter Pan' is opening. 
That's three tracks for Disney. In a lot of towns you have to take off a 'Dead 
Poets' to play a 'Peter Pan.' Or delay a 'Peter Pan' to keep on 'Dead Poets.' " 
"The question becomes: Can we maintain our screens?" said Phil Barlow, general 
sales manager of Buena Vista, Disney's distribution arm. "If you look, we're 
edging up. 'Dead Poets' is gradually increasing -- it was never our goal to be 
on 1,100 screens simultaneously with 'Dead Poets.' The one thing most 
exhibitors know is that you just don't mess around with success on the gamble 
that another film will do better." 
"Peter Pan," backed by Disney's solid box-office projections based upon the 
last re-release of the film, has already delayed James Bond from stepping onto 
one screen in the small market of Glenwood Springs, Colo. Friday's scheduled 
release of MGM/UA's "Licence to Kill" has been pulled because "all the pictures 
on the screen were too strong to take off," theater booker David Sharp said. 
" 'Batman' is playing on one screen and 'Lethal Weapon' on the second. The 
third screen has 'Ghostbusters' and 'Karate Kid,' which were stacked together 
to get 'Lethal Weapon' on last week. 'Peter Pan' opens this Friday, and it 
effectively leaves Bond out in the lurch." 
Insiders predict that the big showdown will occur in two weeks, when Disney 
opens "Turner and Hooch," starring comedy superstar Tom Hanks and a drooling, 
180-pound dog. Exhibitors say the film's trailer is playing exceptionally well 
in theaters and the one-stop advertising board in lobbies is drawing lots of 
attention. 
Exhibitors from larger, overscreened markets with multiplex theaters say the 
Disney squeeze should not cause severe scheduling conflicts because their films 
can usually be shuffled to smaller screens to oblige commitments to studio 
suppliers. 
"If we our able to hold our screens, does it affect the other guys?" said 
Disney's Barlow. "Yes. It might mean that 'Great Balls of Fire' doesn't get a 
third week. That may be unfortunate for Orion. But it all evens out. No one can 
predict with any great accuracy ahead of time what anyone else will do. There's 
a tendency for pictures that have been overestimated for what they are supposed 
to do to make room for pictures that were underestimated." 
Helping to ease the crunch are several films that did not meet studio 
expectations at the box office. Columbia placed high hopes in its tandem of 
"Ghostbusters II" and "The Karate Kid III," but the films are at a summer's-end 
pace that will earn them less than half of what their predecessors grossed at 
the box office. 
" 'Great Balls of Fire,' 'Roadhouse,' 'Renegades,' 'Pink Cadillac' -- many 
thought (those films) were going to play longer, and they did not," said Chan 
Wood, Pacific Theaters head film buyer. "There will be a number of important 
films opening late July, early August. By the time we get to them there will be 
pictures coming off the screen to make room." 
Ushering films into theaters involves a complex set of moves and negotiations 
in which the studio holds most of the keys. One film buyer called it a 
"seller's market," and said that a studio once threatened to withhold its 
product if he did not comply with the studio's demands. 
In negotiating for booking of major-studio movies, exhibitors commit to keep a 
film playing as long as it is performing above a predetermined level of 
business. The conflict occurs when the run of one studio's film is extended 
beyond the opening date of another studio's release. 
The exhibitor who backs out of a film early is typically required to pay a 
penalty or a percentage of box-office receipts. To avoid this trap, some 
exhibitors engage in an illegal practice known as "double booking." 
"You do it on the sly," said one industry source who asked not to be 
identified. "If you book a 'Great Balls of Fire' and have no faith in the 
picture -- and sign a contract for six weeks -- you might have a new film 
penciled in at Week Four. But you don't tell the distributor of 'Great Balls of 
Fire.' Then you wait and keep your fingers crossed so you can call the 
distributor and say, 'Your film is weakening. I have to take it off.' 
"That's what the smart booker does. All the time he has another film to put 
in." 
Compounding the scramble caused by Disney's two surprise summer hits is the 
fact that the summer is less than half over and there are several potential 
hits on the way. Among the candidates: Columbia's romantic comedy "When Harry 
Met Sally . . . " starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan; Universal's domestic 
comedy "Parenthood" with Steve Martin; Fox's underwater science-fiction 
thriller "The Abyss" directed by James Cameron, and Tri-Star's serving of 
Sylvestor Stallone in the prison drama "Lock-Up." 
"There's a balance of intelligence in the exhibition community that is going to 
hold onto the good pictures," Disney's Barlow said. "Now, (Disney) is certainly 
the beneficiary of that. There are times when we've been the victim of that. 
There's some pressure -- you're doggone right there's some pressure -- but 
we're not feeling it right now. We've felt it in the past, and we'll feel it in 
the future." 
