MINUS A GOVERNMENT, ITALY VOTES FOR EUROPE 
The longer a foreign observer lives in Italy the more difficult it is to 
account for the Italians. Familiarity breeds black holes in one's sense of the 
national fabric. Why, for instance, did 88% of the adult population go to the 
polls last month to vote for their representatives in the European Parliament 
at Strasbourg? (How many Italians know precisely where Strasbourg is?) 
That turnout was about two or even three times greater than in the 11 other 
countries voting, including those such as Britain and Denmark, with longer 
democratic traditions. And why did 88% of the voting Italians also vote "yes" 
in a referendum asking if they favored strengthening the powers of that distant 
Parliament, to include drafting a constitution destined to become the supreme 
law for everyone in the European Community? 
The big question is why Italians are so gung-ho for a united Europe, itself a 
notion not yet clearly defined beyond the dropping of barriers affecting 
customs, goods and people. 
Some answers will be hazarded. 
Forty-one years ago most Italians (and all Italian women) voted virtually for 
the first time in a democratic election, and in those early years the turnout 
was 92%. Since "civic duties" are not taught here in school -- and probably 
seldom at home -- the number of voters can perhaps be explained by the fact 
that those who fail to vote in any election may be branded on the "certificate 
of good conduct" everyone must have to apply for some civil service jobs. 
While life was admittedly less complicated when Benito Mussolini decided 
everything, Italians have continued to vote with the same conviction that takes 
them into a church for baptisms, weddings and funerals. It is the thing to do. 
Meeting obligations, and little more, in the polling stations may also explain 
why the Italians so seldom switch politicial parties, even with a vast choice 
of about 12 parties on each ballot. 
When those 40 million Italians voted in June they had been without a government 
of their own for exactly one month. Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita and his 
five-party coalition cabinet had resigned, causing no excitement, much less 
panic. The political leaders solemnly announced that the new government 
"crisis" would be "difficult and long" and they were right. All of the resigned 
cabinet ministers have remained in their offices during the hiatus and no one 
so far has noticed the difference. 
Could it be that after 47 governments in nearly 45 years, Italians hanker for a 
big change -- namely, collective rule with 11 foreign countries with whom they 
share so little in common? Do they reckon, perhaps, that a government dominated 
by friendly aliens might be better, or at least not worse? 
To hear the citizens talking about "1992" as if it were a magic number fills a 
friendly visitor with foreboding. (By 1992 they really refer to Jan. 1, 1993, 
when all those barriers are expected to drop.) 
Italians may be right, for example, in thinking that banking will be better. 
You can be sure that people with small checking accounts will switch to, say, 
German or British banks when they open for business here, so shoddily do the 
Italian banks now treat their clients. And a Danish dentist who decides to hang 
his shingle here -- where the sun shines almost every day and where schools of 
dentistry were first opened only five years ago -- could expect a waiting list 
of eager patients. 
But what about Italy's art treasures? Even though thousands of artworks are 
routinely stolen in Italy each year, usually on commission, this country is 
still custodian for about 60% of the entire Western art heritage. The 
regulations for 1993 say that "goods" may circulate freely within the 12 
countries. Then, if an Italian painting is sold to someone in France, will the 
French guard against legal or illegal exportation to Tulsa or Tokyo? One must 
assume that proper precautions will one day be taken but, few Italians so far 
have expressed much concern. 
Italian interest in the European Parliament did not stop voters from electing 
candidates known to have no intention of setting foot in Strasbourg more than a 
couple of times -- or not at all -- during the next five years. Most party 
leaders ran for office and won. This means that their salaries as 
parliamentarians in Rome -- $6,500-a-month, plus perks -- double when they sign 
on the good ship Europa as well. 
There have been enterprising Italian politicians who were members of a city 
council, members of the Italian Senate and members of the Strasbourg Parliament 
-- all simultaneously. No one thinks any less of them for being that clever. 
There is a faint suspicion that some wily Italians already regard Europe as a 
gravy-train and they want to become its conductors. There is also a curious 
dichotomy between what Italians think they want, or expect to get from Europe, 
and what their own politicians back home are doing for Europe. 
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has been whooping like a Wagnerian 
soprano about Italy's delinquent record as a European partner, including the 
fact that milking cows on the island of Sicily have been getting subsidies from 
the European Community chest. Meanwhile, the Rome government admits that about 
40% of the value-added tax, which pays for the Community, is artfully dodged by 
Italians. 
One of Italy's permanent commissioners in European Community administration, 
Carlo Ripa di Meana, allows that his country has chosen to ignore 200 Community 
rules, but he also complains about the people who tally up those shortcomings, 
claiming them to be motivated by "ruthless" obstinacy. 
Italians are not great newspaper readers; they may not know the sorry facts -- 
or they may not care to know them. Directives from above, like laws, are made 
to be circumvented when they no longer can be ignored. 
Perhaps the strangest aberration in the Italian choices for the European 
Parliament was the election of two candidates from the Lombard League. Lombardy 
is the Italian region bordering on Switzerland. The League advocates liberating 
Milan and the rest of Lombardy from Rome, in order to establish a government of 
federated regions. That government would restrict the number of southern 
Italians who migrate to Lombardy and who thus threaten racial purity. The 
league obviously intends to push its peculiar project from the Strasbourg 
floor, thereby doing more to promote Italy's disintegration than Europe's 
unification. 
