WYOMING RANCHER BATTLES STATE OVER PLANS FOR EXOTIC ANIMALS 
Millionaire rancher John T. Dorrance III is battling the state of Wyoming over 
the concept of exotic game ranching. 
Some wildlife managers predict that game ranching will be an issue of 
increasing controversy in Western states in the coming years, and so far the 
battle is not going well for Dorrance. 
The 45-year-old Missouri native, whose share of the Campbell's Soup fortune is 
estimated at $660 million by Forbes Magazine, wants to bring to his ranch near 
Devils Tower National Monument about 100 animals from 15 exotic species and 24 
animals from four native Wyoming species. 
The species include arctic wolves; Russian boar; red, roe, sika, axis and 
fallow deer; ibex; muntjac; markhor; blackbuck; chamois, and Barbary, mouflon 
and Marco Polo sheep. The native species he seeks are moose, elk, pronghorn 
antelope and bighorn sheep. 
Dorrance wants to set aside about 4,200 acres of his 17,000-acre ranch for a 
drive-through wildlife park and to use the animals for hunting, meat production 
and research on controlling leafy spurge, a virulent weed crowding out natural 
vegetation on some western ranges. 
The Wyoming Game and Fish Commission, citing the threat to native wildlife, has 
rejected the proposal. 
But Dorrance -- one of the richest men in America -- gives every indication 
that he is not inclined to accept the decision unchallenged or give up his 
20-year dream of an exotic game ranch. 
"We've got three or four options," he said. "We can accept it, we can take it 
into the court system, attack it legislatively to seek some changes in the 
Wyoming statutes or a combination of the last two." 
He also said he could pursue the ranch in South Dakota or another state with 
less restrictive laws. 
Dorrance stressed that he plans to fully evaluate the financial requirements of 
his game ranch options before taking further action. 
"If we pursue it and win we are still faced with the Wyoming Game and Fish 
Department," he said. "They might be very bitter and vindictive. They could 
make our life impossible." 
Game and Fish Commission President Don Scott said there was nothing personal in 
the decision, noting that Wyoming law specifically prohibits private 
importation or possession of native big game animals and bans import of a 
living wolf from any source. 
The permit request for importing the exotics was more controversial, Scott 
said, but the decision was still clear-cut because of the threats of disease, 
hybridization and competition for habitat. 
He said the commission's responsibility is to protect the state's wildlife, and 
his mail on the issue has run about 150 to 1 against Dorrance's plan. 
"We have wild and free-ranging herds that are truly a national treasure and we 
just don't believe that that treasure should be placed in jeopardy -- even a 
remote jeopardy," he said. "We don't want to turn Wyoming into Texas." 
Texas has the most widespread exotic game ranching in the nation, and Scott 
said discussions with wildlife managers in states that allow such ranching 
indicates "they wish they'd never let them in." 
Officials of the National Wildlife Federation and its Wyoming chapter said they 
share the Wyoming department's concerns and support its denial of the game 
ranching permits. 
"Those states that have it are quickly scrambling to see how they can undo what 
they've already done," said Tom Dougherty, the federation's regional executive 
for the Rocky Mountain region. "Colorado is actively pursing legislation and 
administrative changes relative to some portions of its exotic statutes." 
He said New Mexico has problems with exotics, some introduced by wildlife 
managers themselves, that are forcing native wildlife out of its habitat. 
In both states there is evidence of exotic species crossbreeding with the 
native wildlife, Dougherty said, and there is some indication that exotics 
might have spread disease in New Mexico. 
"There are examples in every state that, no matter what means are used to 
contain them, the exotics always escape," Dougherty said. "When they hybridize 
with native species, the breakdown in the genetic integrity of both species 
causes them to become terribly vulnerable to disease." 
Rick Kahn, a wildlife biologist for the Colorado Division of Wildlife, said 
about 30 escaped mouflon sheep are crossbreeding with bighorn sheep in the 
Gunnison area, some 75 Barbary sheep are loose near Grand Junction and as many 
as 100 ibex, Barbary sheep and red deer have escaped from the William Cox ranch 
along the Colorado-Wyoming border. 
"I'm convinced we have more (escaped exotics) than reported," Kahn said. "There 
are problems all over and I think exotic species are going to be a big topic 
for wildlife managers for years to come." 
Tory Taylor, president of the Wyoming Wildlife Federation, said he is concerned 
about exotics breeding not only with native wild animals but also domesticated 
farm animals. 
Although Dorrance has the resources to provide the best fencing available, 
Taylor said that's not enough because human error, vandalism, floods, drifting 
snow or fires all could lead to escapes. 
The Game and Fish Department estimates Wyoming's wildlife brings the state 
about $200 million from hunting and fishing annually and Taylor said it is 
obvious people who only observe or photograph the animals also contribute 
millions to the economy. 
"With the exception of wolves, Wyoming has every species we ever had," Taylor 
said. "Some, like the grizzly, the black-footed ferret are very low, but we 
hope to get them back. To think we run the risk of jeopardizing 100 years of 
successful game management for the concept of game ranching is just 
ridiculous." 
Dorrance questions the threat of disease and escapes, saying the animals would 
be certified disease-free and it would not be in his interest to allow escapes 
of animals that cost as much as $1,800 each. 
"If I wanted to bring in a new strain of cattle from Europe, I wouldn't have 
this problem," he said. "You can go buy untested goats that carry the same 
diseases and release them in the state." 
He pointed out the domestic livestock raised in Wyoming and some species of 
game birds are not native to the state, but he acknowledged that they were 
widespread in the state before there was any organized wildlife management. 
Wyoming Agriculture Commissioner Don Rolston and Wyoming Wool Growers Assn. 
Director Carol Paseneaux share Dorrance's skepticism about the threat of 
disease or hybridization, but neither has taken a position on the proposal yet. 
"If there is something that can economically benefit the state, I think we 
should look at it," Rolston said. "Health has to be considered, but nobody has 
said yet what diseases these animals would bring in." 
He suggested that the department has quarantine and inspection programs in 
place to deal with the disease threat. 
