CHINA, INDONESIA TO RESUME RELATIONS 
China and Indonesia agreed Tuesday to resume diplomatic relations that were 
suspended 23 years ago over Beijing's alleged support for a coup attempt by 
Indonesian Communists. 
Chinese Premier Li Peng will travel to Jakarta on a goodwill visit to mark the 
official resumption of ties, which is set for Aug. 8, according to a communique 
issued by the two governments. 
"We have just signed a document of historic significance," Chinese Foreign 
Minister Qian Qichen told reporters Tuesday at a joint press conference held 
with his Indonesian counterpart, Ali Alatas, after the communique-signing 
ceremony. 
Qian and Alatas, who acted like old friends as they fielded questions, said 
resumption of diplomatic ties would lead to a major expansion of economic links 
between the two countries and contribute to peace in the Asia-Pacific region. 
Indonesia, which with 177 million people is the world's fifth most populous 
country, first recognized Beijing's Communist regime in 1950 but suspended 
relations in 1967, two years after an attempted Communist coup in Jakarta that 
Indonesia alleged was backed by China. 
Resumption of relations, which has been under negotiation since early last 
year, marks an important diplomatic breakthrough for Beijing as it attempts to 
repair international ties damaged by its violent crackdown on pro-democracy 
protests last year. 
As part of the normalization process, each country pledged non-interference in 
the other's internal affairs. Indonesia also agreed to repay $84 million owed 
China from loans made before 1965. 
Resumption of Sino-Indonesian ties also lays the groundwork for Singapore to 
extend diplomatic recognition to Beijing. Singapore, which is primarily 
populated by ethnic Chinese, has long said it would not establish ties with 
Beijing until Indonesia did so. The explanation for this has been that it did 
not want to be perceived as a beachhead for Chinese influence in Southeast 
Asia. 
Qian said Tuesday that preparations are now under way for talks with Singapore 
on establishment of diplomatic relations. 
China has long sought renewed ties with Indonesia, but Jakarta held back 
largely from fear that Beijing would seek influence among Indonesia's 4 million 
ethnic Chinese. Ethnic Chinese are a major force in Indonesian trade, banking 
and manufacturing, and are a frequent target of envy and distrust by ethnic 
Indonesians. 
Before 1965, ethnic Chinese also were a major force in the Indonesian Communist 
Party. The abortive 1965 coup was followed by a right-wing backlash and a wave 
of killings directed largely against suspected Communists and ethnic Chinese. 
The violence, in which hundreds of thousands of people are believed to have 
died, basically wiped out the Indonesian Communist Party, which at the time was 
the third largest in the world. 
Qian, in a statement Tuesday reiterating that Beijing would have no relations 
with Indonesian Communists, said that China does not even know whether the 
Indonesian Communist Party still exists. 
Direct trade between Indonesia and China was resumed in 1985, with two-way 
trade last year totaling $920 million. 
Alatas said Tuesday that "after the resumption of full diplomatic relations, 
one of the first things to follow will be to work for a new trade agreement 
between us." 
