WALLACH DENIES ATTEMPTING TO IMPRESS CLIENTS 
E. Robert Wallach, the San Francisco lawyer-lobbyist who had a close 
relationship with former Atty. Gen. Edwin Meese III, took umbrage Friday when a 
prosecutor suggested that he was an inveterate name-dropper. 
"I did not drop names," Wallach said flatly to Assistant U.S. Atty. Baruch 
Weiss, who is trying him with two associates on racketeering and 
influence-peddling charges in U.S. District Court here. 
But, in one of the lighter moments of his five days on the witness stand, 
Wallach's scowl dissolved into a sheepish grin when Weiss read him a memorandum 
in which Wallach had boasted about name-dropping. 
In an Aug. 8, 1985, memo to Swiss businessman Bruce Rappaport on a meeting with 
U.S. Export-Import Bank President William Draper, Wallach reported: "I dropped 
every major political name involved, understanding the effect it would have on 
him and his staff." 
Jury Also Smiles 
Wallach turned with a broad grin toward members of the jury, who also had 
smiles on their faces. 
Wallach's reference to political names apparently included Meese and 
then-National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane, to whom Meese had 
introduced him. Wallach has testified that besides approaching Meese -- a 
longtime friend -- about helping scandal-plagued Wedtech Corp., a Bronx-based 
defense contractor, he also contacted Meese and McFarlane in 1985 about an 
ill-fated Middle East pipeline project that was unrelated to Wedtech. 
The pipeline venture that Wallach and Rappaport were promoting eventually was 
backed by the Export-Import Bank but collapsed when Iraq, the host country, 
said it was dissatisfied with assurances from Israel that it would not sabotage 
the project. 
Wallach, who was on the witness stand all week and will return to it Monday, 
has sought to downplay his contacts with Meese in attempting to gain government 
contracts for now-defunct Wedtech. But prosecutors have introduced dozens of 
memos written by Wallach in which he bragged about his contacts at the time. 
In one such memo dated March 2, 1984, Wallach told Wedtech executives that they 
and Meese were "my two major East Coast clients." He was referring to his 
representation of Meese at stormy Senate hearings that year on Meese's 
nomination to be attorney general. Meese, a longtime confidant of former 
President Ronald Reagan, had been White House counselor. 
The memos show that Wallach advised Wedtech officials to do some gentle 
name-dropping when they spoke with a Navy program manager in Washington, Capt. 
David de Vicq, about obtaining a prospective multimillion-dollar pontoon 
contract. 
"He should be aware of Wedtech's general ally structure," Wallach wrote about 
De Vicq. "He doesn't have to know it in detail. The fact that we have it, and 
his awareness of it, ought to be gently indicated." 
Wallach and his co-defendants, former Wedtech consultants W. Franklyn Chinn of 
San Francisco and R. Kent London of Honolulu, are accused of conspiring to 
obtain nearly $2 million from the struggling company under false pretenses. 
Wallach illegally extracted at least $525,000 himself on a promise to use his 
influence with Meese, concealing from stockholders the purpose of these 
payments with false letters and invoices, the federal grand jury that indicted 
him has charged. 
