HIGH COURT PUTS ITS FAITH IN 'LABORATORY OF THE STATES'; 
NEWS ANALYSIS 
In its most important decision of the term that ended last week, the Supreme 
Court upheld Missouri's limits on the so-called "right to die" in the case of a 
comatose young woman. 
Last year's leading decision, also in a Missouri case, upheld the state's limit 
on abortion in public hospitals. 
Yet, neither decision endorsed Missouri's "right to life" philosophy nor tried 
to set national rules for the termination of a life or the termination of a 
pregnancy. 
Rather, in these cases and many others, the Supreme Court under Chief Justice 
William H. Rehnquist gave state and local authorities more freedom to determine 
their own policies. Unless a state policy violates the clear words of the 
Constitution -- which itself says nothing directly about privacy, abortion or a 
right to die -- the Rehnquist court is inclined to uphold the states. 
Although this is a conservative approach to constitutional law, the results may 
be liberal in most parts of the nation. California and most other states, 
following the wishes of the majority, have maintained liberal policies on 
abortion and the right to die. Nonetheless, Missouri is now free to move toward 
a "right to life" philosophy that seeks to protect and prolong life in nearly 
all instances. 
This year, like last, the court usually sided with legislatures, school boards, 
the police or Congress. Whether the issue was the death penalty, drug crimes, 
religion or abortion, the court generally upheld governmental authority over 
broad claims of individual rights. 
Civil libertarians complain that the court is abdicating its historic role of 
protecting individual rights against intrusions by the government. 
"Both this year and last, the Rehnquist court has shown a willingness to defer 
to majoritarian rule when basic constitutional rights are at stake," said 
Steven Shapiro of the American Civil Liberties Union. 
But Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in a concurring opinion in the right to die 
case, summed up the prevailing conservative philosophy: 
"No national consensus has yet emerged" on how to decide, or who should decide, 
when medical treatment can be ended for the hopelessly ill, she said. "Today we 
decide only that one state's practice does not violate the Constitution. The 
more challenging task of crafting appropriate procedures . . . is entrusted to 
the 'laboratory' of the states." 
Rehnquist and O'Connor said it is better to rely on the "laboratory of the 
states" -- a phrase coined by Justice Louis D. Brandeis -- to work out the 
intricate rules for when life can end, rather than having federal judges set 
the rules for all. 
This standoffish approach prevailed in most of the court's major rulings. In 
its 1989-1990 term, for example, the court ruled that: 
 -- Drug agents may operate freely outside of U.S. borders without the need for 
search warrants. 
 -- Police may force a driver to submit to a sobriety test even though they 
have no reason to suspect drunkenness. 
 -- States may require doctors to notify at least one parent of a teen-ager who 
wants an abortion. 
 -- High school officials may allow students to meet on campus for Bible 
reading. 
 -- States may make it a crime to possess child pornography. 
 -- Prison officials may forcibly medicate disturbed inmates. 
In these decisions and more, Rehnquist gained the support of the three 
appointees of former President Ronald Reagan -- O'Connor, Antonin Scalia and 
Anthony M. Kennedy -- plus Byron R. White, a 1962 appointee of John F. Kennedy. 
Last term, the five conservatives voted as a bloc, not only narrowly defining 
constitutional rights but also restricting the scope of federal civil rights 
laws. 
But this year, White switched sides on several crucial constitutional cases, 
creating a majority for the court's 84-year-old liberal leader, Justice William 
J. Brennan Jr. These rulings declared: 
 -- Elected officials may not use politics as a basis for handing out routine 
government jobs. 
 -- Federal judges may order city or state officials to raise taxes to pay for 
desegregation decrees. 
 -- Congress may order minority-preference policies in awarding federal 
contracts. 
Again this year, Brennan wrote a 5-4 opinion upholding flag burning as a form 
of protected free speech, a ruling joined by Scalia and Kennedy. 
With this perplexing mix of decisions, commentators affixed conflicting labels 
to the Rehnquist court. 
Former federal appeals Judge Robert H. Bork, who was rejected by the Senate 
when Reagan nominated him to the Supreme Court, said that the rulings 
demonstrate that the Rehnquist court is "really a moderate-to-liberal court." 
The ACLU's Shapiro said that it is "still a conservative court, moving in a 
generally conservative direction." 
What most surprised many legal experts was the very unpredictability of the 
court. 
"The streak of conservative victories came to a sudden stop," said Northwestern 
University law professor Lawrence Marshall. "Last year was a slam dunk for the 
conseratives, so some of what we saw this year comes as a shock." 
Several recent rulings shocked conservatives. "It's clear there's no consensus 
on the major issues -- abortion, religion and civil rights. It's still very 
fluid," said Richard Samp, chief counsel of the Washington Legal Foundation. 
On abortion, the court still appears split 4 to 4 to 1. Rehnquist, White, 
Scalia and Kennedy are ready to overturn the constitutional right to abortion. 
Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun and John Paul Stevens strongly 
support the right to abortion. 
In the middle sits O'Connor, who says that the states may regulate abortion so 
long as they do not put an "undue burden" on a woman's right to end a 
pregnancy. So far, O'Connor has not been forced to decide a case in which a 
state has directly blocked a woman's choice to abort. 
On the role of religion in public life, the court lineup is much the same. The 
four liberals insist that the Constitution demands a "separation of church and 
state." The four conservatives say that religion in the public schools or 
elsewhere is not a problem unless the government favors one religion over the 
others. 
O'Connor takes a middle position. She says that the government may not do 
anything -- such as putting a creche in city hall -- that appears to "endorse" 
a particular religion or religion in general. 
Affirmative action stands by a different 4-4-1 split. Four conservatives -- 
Rehnquist, O'Connor, Scalia and Kennedy -- say that the Constitution's 
guarantee of "equal protection of the laws" means that the government may not 
discriminate in favor of blacks and against whites. The four liberals -- 
Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun and Stevens -- say that the government may in some 
instances favor blacks over whites because of this nation's history of racial 
discrimination. 
Last year, White joined the conservatives in ruling that state and local 
governments may not use minority-preference policies. But last week, he voted 
with the liberal bloc to say that Congress and the federal government can give 
preferences to minorities. 
White, 73, did not explain why he switched sides on affirmative action, but 
legal experts noted that he generally upholds acts of Congress. "White has long 
had the view that Congress can do many things (under the Constitution) that 
states cannot do," said Georgetown University law professor Louis M. Seidman. 
Besides last week's affirmative action ruling, the most surprising and sweeping 
ruling of the term grew out of an unlikely case -- a dispute over whether 
Oregon could fire two drug counselors who chewed peyote as a part of religious 
ritual of Indians. 
The court had no trouble upholding Oregon's decision to dismiss the two 
counselors. But Scalia wrote a broad opinion declaring that religious adherents 
do not have a constitutional right to be exempt from general laws that conflict 
with their religious beliefs. 
In the past, the court had said that Amish children may be exempted from 
compulsory school laws and Seventh Day Adventists may not be required to work 
on Saturdays. Only when the government had a "compelling interest" -- such as 
need to get medical care for the dying child of a Christian Scientist -- could 
government officials infringe on a person's deeply held religious beliefs. 
Scalia announced a new approach. The court will no longer force the government 
to bend its policies or make an exception to a general rule to protect the 
beliefs or practices of a religious adherent. 
In dissent, O'Connor said that this rule "is incompatible with our nation's 
fundamental commitment to individual religious liberty." 
SUPREME COURT HIGHLIGHTS 
 In its 1989-1990 term, the Supreme Court received nearly 5,500 appeals and 
issued written opinions in 129 cases. Here are the highlights, along with the 
names of the cases and the votes by the nine justices. 
CIVIL RIGHTS 
Congress may order minority preferences in awarding federal contracts and 
benefits. (Metro Broadcasting vs. FCC, 5-4) 
As a last resort, a judge may order local or state officials to raise taxes to 
pay for a valid desegregation decree. (Missouri vs. Jenkins, 5-4) 
Judges may not fine elected officials for opposing a court decree until all 
other means of persuasion have been exhausted. (Spallone and Yonkers councilmen 
vs. U.S., 5-4) 
RELIGION 
Public high schools that permit extra-curricular 
clubs to meet on campus must also allow a student-sponsored Bible club. (Board 
of Education vs. Mergens, 8-1) 
Churches do not have a religious right to be exempt from a state sales tax. 
(Swaggart vs. California, 9-0) 
FREEDOM OF SPEECH 
Congress may not make it a crime to burn a U.S. flag. (U.S. vs. Eichman, 5-4) 
Public officials may not hire, fire, transfer or promote low-level employees 
based on politics. (Rutan vs. Republican Party of Illinois, 5-4) 
States may make it a crime to possess child pornography. (Osborne vs. Ohio, 
6-3) 
THE PRESS 
News columnists and other commentators may be sued for libel for statements of 
opinion that are false and malicious. (Milkovich vs. Lorain Journal, 7-2) 
Detroit's two daily newspapers may operate jointly without violating antitrust 
laws. (Michigan Citizens vs. Thornburgh, 4-4) 
SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
The Fourth Amendment does not cover searches outside of U.S. borders. (U.S. vs. 
Verdugo-Urquidez, 5-4) 
Police may briefly stop motorists at sobriety checkpoints, despite having no 
evidence that a particular motorist is impaired. (Michigan State Police vs. 
Sitz, 6-3) 
Police may stop and question motorists based on anonymous tips as long as some 
of the allegations prove reasonably accurate. (Alabama vs. White, 6-3) 
SELF-INCRIMINATION 
Police may arrest suspects and ask "routine booking questions" without advising 
them of their right to remain silent. (Pennsylvania vs. Muniz, Brennan, 8-1) 
Police may trick suspects into confessing by putting undercover agents into 
their jail cell. (Illinois vs. Perkins, Kennedy, 8-1) 
CHILD ABUSE 
Accused child molesters do not have an absolute right to confront their 
accusers in court, and so child victims may testify via closed-circuit 
television. (Maryland vs. Craig, 5-4) 
Doctors and child-abuse investigators may not generally testify in court as to 
what victims of abuse told them. (Idaho vs. Wright, 5-4) 
DEATH PENALTY 
California's death sentencing law is constitutional, despite allegations that 
jurors are called upon to mechanically "weigh" the evidence rather than make 
personal judgments. (Boyde vs. California, 5-4) 
Death Row inmates may not use new Supreme Court rulings to challenge their 
convictions and sentences. (Butler vs. McKellar, 5-4) 
STATES 
States may require clear and convincing proof of a desperately ill patient's 
wish to die before medical treatment may be ended. (Cruzan vs. Missouri, 5-4) 
The federal government, not the states, has full authority to regulate the flow 
of water from rivers and streams into hydroelectric power plants. (California 
vs. FERC, 9-0) 
Governors may not block the Pentagon from sending state national guard units to 
combat areas. (Perpich vs. Dept. of Defense, 9-0) 
Hospitals may sue states in federal courts to get "reasonable" reimbursement 
for treating Medicaid patients. (Wilder vs. Virginia Hospital Assn., 5-4) 
FEDERAL BENEFITS and REGULATIONS 
Pensioners who lose benefits because they are advised wrongly by government 
officials may not sue to recover the money. (OPM vs. Richmond, 7-2) 
Migrant workers may sue employers in federal court if they are injured on the 
job, even if they also have state unemployment benefits. (Adams Fruit vs. 
Barrett, 9-0) 
The White House Office of Management and Budget may not block congressionally 
mandated rules requiring that workers and consumers be warned of toxic 
chemicals. (Dole vs. Steelworkers Union, 7-2) 
BUSINESS 
Corporations may not be sued for price-fixing just because they have insisted 
that dealers lower prices. (ARCO vs. USA Petroleum, 7-2) 
State attorneys general may move to break up mergers that threaten to reduce 
competition and harm consumers. (California vs. American Stores, 9-0) 
Corporations that file for bankruptcy may be forced to keep paying their 
pension obligations. (Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. vs. LTV, 8-1) 
