ROSE BOOK WAS A STORY IN ITSELF; 
BASEBALL: EVEN BEFORE HE BEGAN WRITING THE BIOGRAPHY, THE AUTHOR HAD 
FRUSTRATIONS. IN THE END, HE WONDERS IF IT'S FAIR TO CONDEMN THE CINCINNATI 
STAR. 
Pete Rose, my friend, the felon, and I started working together four years ago 
after a $250,000 misunderstanding. A flash and glitz publishing company called 
Warner Books decided that an accurately spelled work prepared by Pete Rose and 
myself would be worth a million dollars. We did not argue. Exciting a bodyguard 
of agents, Laurence Kirshbaum, a thin-chested, nasal fellow who is president of 
Warner Books, said he would pay us each $50,000 a year for 10 years. Twenty 
payments. Fifty big ones. A cool million. 
But money, as one is reminded at least monthly, has the quality economists call 
time utility. With two children in college, I was concerned with immediate 
income. Reuven Katz, Rose's attorney, said that Pete had plenty of cash, but 
what did we know about Warner Books and Laurence Kirshbaum? "I'm reluctant to 
put my client into a 10-year relationship with an unknown," Katz said. 
So Warner would have to pay us over three years, not 10. Time utility persisted 
and Kirshbaum's offer shrank. Over three years we could split $750,000. Still, 
agents cheered. 
Warner had offered us a million, sort of, and Warner wanted to tell the press 
that it was publishing the FIRST MILLION-DOLLAR SPORTS BOOK ABSOLUTELY EVER 
SINCE THE DAWN OF TIME. 
Kirshbaum and agents wrote clauses in which Rose and I agreed possibly to put 
some of the advance into zero coupon bonds. At a later date our haul actually 
might reach a million, if the companies issuing the bonds did not go bankrupt 
and the Ohio River didn't rise. 
Warner lured the press into an executive suite a few days later where Kirshbaum 
announced to nibbling, guzzling reporters that he had signed a million-dollar 
book. Warner then sent us a small fraction of the $750,000, which is all we 
ever saw. The book for Warner never worked. Books that begin with a naked hype 
seldom do. 
This was a Rose in the full bloom and bluster of great triumph. A few months 
earlier, Sept. 11, 1985, he had broken Ty Cobb's record for major league hits. 
As a sophomore manager he brought the Cincinnati Reds home second that season, 
their best finish in years. Attendance jumped 600,000. Pete Rose of Cincinnati 
was not only the man who broke Cobb's record; he was the man who saved the 
major league franchise for the river town where professional baseball began. 
He had agents and lawyers and accountants and a company. Pete Rose Enterprises, 
Inc., marketed lotions and chocolates and chili, and breakfast food and most of 
all marketed Pete Rose. He was one aggressive corporate entity. 
If you wanted Rose to speak, you had to pay the company $15,000, and add in 
transportation by private jet. "I like," he said, "money coming in, a young 
wife, a fast life. I got all three." 
As he spoke, the publisher was gone and the misled press had vanished. Pete 
Rose, corporate entity, was now Pete Rose, feller, dressed too casually for the 
Waldorf Astoria Restaurant where we sat. Sports shirt. No jacket. No tie. "Any 
favorite books?" I said. 
"Nah. I'm not a reader. I only read two books in my whole life and one was the 
official Pete Rose scrapbook." He looked suddenly serious, called me by name 
and said, "I'll never lie to you." I called him by name and said that he was 
lying. 
Rose's face darkened. He was not used to being contradicted. "You graduated 
from high school," I said. 
"Took me five years." 
"Still you must have read more than two books." 
The face softened. "Uh-uh," he said. "Not books. Chapters." 
For a long time, it was difficult to envision a book with a self-proclaimed 
semiliterate. Rose said he wasn't going to tell sex stories about ballplayers 
on the road and I said who asked for any. "I betcha," Rose said, "Jim Bouton is 
sorry he told sex stories in 'Ball Four.' " 
"He's not sorry at all. He's proud of the book." 
"Well, I'll bet he's sorry he don't get asked to old-timers' games." 
"We are going to have to tell stories about you," I said, uneasily. Rose went 
through a battering divorce and a page-one paternity suit. "I won't set the 
whole book at second base." 
"The divorce," Rose said, "is 100% my fault." On the suit, he said, "I never 
admitted paternity in court." 
Rose is a quick and sometimes witty man, but his grammar and vocabulary are 
shaky. I decided I would write the book in my voice. Pete could enter only in 
conversation. That took care of form and left me to puzzle out the content. 
Across a playing career without parallel, three incidents dominate. During the 
1970 All-Star game at Cincinnati, Rose had crashed into young Ray Fosse, a 
promising catcher who was blocking the plate. It was one rugged play. "Hey," 
Fosse explained when I telephoned him. "I knew what I was doing. The President 
of the United States was watching. Great players, Frank Robinson and Harmon 
Killebrew, were on my team. I wasn't gonna give it the ole." Pause. "I stood in 
there and boy, did Pete hit me a shot." 
Rose: "Nobody told me they changed it to girls' softball between third and 
home." 
In 1973, Rose slid hard into Bud Harrelson, the Mets' shortstop, during the 
league championship series. Rose, 190 pounds, and Harrelson, perhaps 155, then 
pummeled each other on the ground. The New York press said Pete beat up a 
smaller man. 
Rose: "He called me a bad name. I don't like the word. It's the one that begins 
with a 'c'. So I hit him. What happens? Do I gotta do time?" 
Finally, after breaking Cobb's record, Rose glanced at the sky and began to 
weep. His son Petey, then the Reds' batboy, rushed toward him and the two 
embraced, the father, tough Pete Rose, crying hard. "When I looked up," Rose 
said, "I saw clear in the sky my dad and Ty Cobb. Ty Cobb was in the second 
row. Dad was in the first. With Dad in the sky and Petey in my arms, you had 
three generations of Rose men together that night. So that's what it was that 
made me cry." 
On the divorce . . . well, it was nasty. The first Mrs. Rose, Karolyn, said she 
would always love Pete and someday he would stop chasing and come back. 
Meanwhile, she needed $6,000 a month in alimony. At least the property split 
seemed equitable. Karolyn got a white Rolls. Pete got to keep a black Porsche. 
Rose settled the paternity suit out of court. That is, he paid. He could, he 
said, have made a defense but that meant describing the woman's sexual habits 
and fingering some teammates. Instead, he bit the bullet. He wanted no praise 
for that. Neither did he feel he warranted blame. 
Gambling? He liked ponies. And what was wrong with that? He could afford 
gambling. He never bet rent money. Bowie Kuhn had assigned baseball's top 
security men to investigate his gambling in 1978. Rose was exonerated. 
I have a favorite memory of a conversation I had with Rose: 
"I play baseball harder than anyone you ever saw," he told me. 
"Jackie Robinson played hard as you." 
"And I'm the best hitter you ever seen." 
"That was Stan Musial in Ebbets Field." 
"I'm the best baseball public relations man you ever met." 
"Casey Stengel." 
There was no anger, no upset. "You're entitled to your opinions. I'm just 
telling you what I think." 
Now life broke in, or Truth, with what Robert Frost called "all her matter of 
fact about the ice storm." One of my sons, fine athlete, poet, spring-training 
companion, took his life. 
The phone rang three days later. 
Rose: "That the boy I met? You didn't lose him. I swear to God you didn't lose 
him. He's up in the sky now, playing catch with my dad." 
Pete Rose can weep and so, I learned, can I. 
Kirshbaum telephoned and asked me to lunch. When I said I couldn't work on the 
book right then, that I was grieving, he hired lawyers and sued both me and 
Pete. "Hey," said an agent. "You got heavy stuff. Rose did his work. He'll 
cross-complain against you." 
Rose never did, would never allow it. Instead, he put a hand on my arm and told 
his own son, "This man lost his boy and has the strength to go on. I couldn't 
do that myself." 
"You could," I said. We settled the suit at great cost and found another 
publisher. 
Someone else who claimed to be a fan of Peter Edward Rose was Angelo Bartlett 
Giamatti, who showed up one spring training a-twinkle and bearded, under a 
large floppy hat. Rose was managing the Reds in his hands-on way, picking up 
baseballs near the batting cage, chattering, dominating the morning. 
"Isn't he marvelous!" Giamatti said. We had met years before during a sports 
panel discussion at Yale. 
"We're doing a book." 
"I know. It's going to be some trick for you, bottling up all that energy. But 
I envy you the time you spend with him." 
Giamatti possessed a wonderful gift for friendship and a glorious eloquence on 
many topics, including baseball. But what in the world was he doing as 
president of the National League? 
An umpire named Dave Pallone made a ninth-inning call against the Reds in 1988 
and Rose ran toward first base to argue. Pallone gesticulated and one of his 
fingernails nicked Rose's face. Rose bumped Dave Pallone twice. 
Sound umpiring practice dictates walking away from confrontation. Turn your 
back. March fifteen paces. Usually matters calm. To general surprise, Giamatti 
suspended Rose for 30 days. 
Most baseball men believed Rose's offense called for a penalty of three days. 
Rose appealed. Lawyer Katz advised him to wear a conservative suit. 
Rose walked into the hearing in a suit of luminous gray. It reflected low 
intensity desk lamps. "If they're gonna treat me like Capone, I'm gonna dress 
like Capone," he said. 
Giamatti stuck to his call. He and Rose were on a juggernaut course that ended 
in tragedy. 
Once I saw Pete place basketball bets from a spring-training clubhouse. "Should 
you be doing that?" I said. 
Pete gave a terse answer. "Everybody does." 
Everybody doesn't, but I had no sense of addictive gambling. Rose had plenty of 
money. He talked betting, but not incessantly. He seemed to be someone who 
would not accept limits on behavior, but he had broken through the limits in 
his profession. Why not break through in other areas as well? 
On Feb. 20, 1989, Rose met in New York with Commissioner Peter Ueberroth and 
Giamatti, still president of the National League. Rose brought lawyers. He 
claims he was being shaken down by Paul Janszen, one of the old, unappetizing 
characters he ran with late in the 1980s. Ueberroth asked if Rose gambled and 
Rose said yes. He had lost $2,000 on the Super Bowl. 
"Baseball?" 
"I do not bet baseball, sir. I got too much respect for the game." 
"That's all I want to know," Ueberroth said. 
"There's nothing ominous," Ueberroth was quoted in the New York Times as 
saying. "And there won't be any follow-through." That turned out to be a 
baseball equivalent of Neville Chamberlain's Munich statement that he had 
achieved "peace in our time." 
Ron Peters, a bookmaker from Franklin, Ohio, with a sideline cocaine business, 
contacted Sports Illustrated through a lawyer. Peters had been caught, 
convicted and needed money. He wanted to sell the magazine a story that he had 
booked Rose's sports bets, including bets on baseball. 
Sports Illustrated heard out Peters' lawyer, and declined to purchase the 
story. Instead, the magazine would follow up leads on its own. 
Word spread through spring training that Sports Illustrated had damaging 
charges against Rose and panic erupted in the offices of the baseball 
commissioner. Would Sports Illustrated break a story that Rose, color him hero, 
was a compulsive gambler, who might just possibly have bet baseball? 
Absolutely not. On the recommendation of Fay Vincent, the commissioner's office 
engaged a well-connected Washington lawyer named John Dowd, a former federal 
prosecutor renowned for his zeal. The announcement of baseball's investigation 
was issued on March 20; Sports Illustrated's story appeared a day later, but it 
had been defused. Tough John Dowd was in place, preserving the integrity of the 
game. 
Reuven Katz thought Pete and I should talk to the new publisher about delaying 
our book. 
"They'll sue us then," I said. 
The armies of Giamatti-Dowd were being arrayed against the forces of Katz-Rose. 
"But how are you supposed to write the history of World War II," Katz said, 
"with World War II still going on?" 
"You're going to help me," I said. "You and Pete." 
"The commissioner insists that everything stay confidential," Katz said. "We're 
not going to help you." 
"Confidential?" I said. "Follow the New York Times and CBS for leaks." 
I don't know whether Rose bet baseball, but I know this. Giamatti and Dowd 
played dirty pool with Pete. 
Dowd's hearing was set up as an "administrative procedure." Rose was not 
allowed to confront his accusers. His lawyers were not permitted to 
cross-examine them. In its post-Watergate panic, the commissioner's office was 
leaping back into the 1920s, when Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis was able to 
throw out eight Chicago White Sox for throwing World Series games, although the 
players were acquitted by a jury. The 1920s was a Jurassic age for baseball 
rights. 
In the 1980s, Rose turned over years of telephone records and bank statements 
to Dowd. Rose says he did that because he was innocent of betting baseball. 
Dowd dug and dealt. When Ron Peters, burned by Sports Illustrated, shut up, 
Dowd offered him a deal. If Peters told his story to Dowd, Giamatti would write 
the judge who was about to sentence Peters on felony charges. Peters took the 
deal. Giamatti wrote Judge Carl D. Rubin that Peters' statement -- Rose bet 
baseball -- was "candid, forthright and truthful." 
After that, Rose would not testify. He never would. Giamatti, he and Katz said, 
prejudged the case. 
After I studied the Dowd report, I thought not of Landis so much as former 
senator Joseph R. McCarthy. Consider page 233. "The testimony of Peters (and 
others) has been voluntary and forthright. None of them had anything to gain 
for this voluntary act of cooperation." 
Peters had nothing to gain? Dowd cut a deal. If Peters talked, Dowd would write 
a letter to the judge who would be sentencing Peters for felony charges of drug 
dealing and tax evasion. Dowd would write the judge that Peters was "candid, 
forthright and truthful." Probably the sentence would be lightened. 
Rose was banned from baseball on Aug. 24. Our book appeared toward Thanksgiving 
to a somewhat hostile press. The best thing about its reception was that nobody 
sent me a letter bomb. 
Katz and Rose, now clearly desperate, wanted to manage the news, and sent the 
publisher a list of writers to whom they would speak. "You can't do that, 
fellers," I said. "Editors make the assignments. You'll just antagonize them 
more if you try to manipulate." 
A lot I knew. Rose was available for an exclusive New York area interview with 
a Times sports columnist named Ira Berkow. Rose liked to tell a friend that he 
could really handle Berkow and with him the New York Times. "I say, 'Ira, 
you're one writer who really knows baseball.' The stupid s.o.b. believes me." I 
laughed and repeated the story more than I should have. 
Berkow refused the exclusive interview. But he broke the release date and wrote 
in the New York Times, "there are voluminous taped phone calls between Rose and 
his gambling-associate-turned-chief-accuser, Paul Janszen . . . Kahn, who 
writes that he was going to get at the truth, never brings this matter up." No 
tapes, voluminous or otherwise, exist. Tapes? That's Richard (Library) Nixon; 
not Peter (Fifth Race) Rose. 
How long had Berkow and the New York Times covered Rose on the supposition that 
tapes proved he bet baseball? 
How long, oh Lord, how long? 
That was one aspect of the post-Watergate press. Wrongheaded stuff. Other 
aspects were miserable. Giamatti dies. Rose goes to jail. Baseball exposed its 
all-time hit leader to the kindly IRS folk who run your audits. 
Talking to Don Fehr, head of the Major League Players Assn., I say: "If Pete 
Rose were a player," I begin. 
Fehr: "Giamatti's outta there. He isn't neutral. We get an arbitrator. We put 
Dowd on the stand. We do our job." 
"Baseball says no," I say. "This new feller, Vincent, whoever he is, says no." 
"You're talking strike." 
Rose goes to jail. Dowd investigates Steinbrenner. What of Laurence Kirshbaum 
and Warner Books? 
Kirshbaum recently agreed to meet a national need and commission a sequel to 
"Gone With the Wind." The announced money dwarfs the offer to Rose and myself. 
I imagine corporate conversation. 
"In this version, guys, the Confederacy wins." 
I mean, who among us is right to judge Pete Rose? 
