U.S. SOLDIER STANDS GUARD IN A LUXEMBOURG CITY 
In the 1970s one of the cheapest ways to fly from the United States to 
continental Europe was on Icelandic (now called Icelandair), which landed in 
the tiny country of Luxembourg. 
For many of the backpacking, college-age American passengers (I was among them 
on my way to study at a German university), Luxembourg was nothing more than a 
place to transfer from plane to train en route to more alluring cities such as 
Paris, Amsterdam and Berlin. 
Today, many Americans are again landing in Luxembourg, via Icelandair. Once 
more, I was one of them -- but this time I sought one of the nation's secluded 
villages. 
I wanted to relax, hike through woods and settle slowly into European life. 
Clervaux, which is in the hills of the Ardennes and easily reached within an 
hour by train from the city of Luxembourg, sounded like just the place. 
Along with Vianden, another castle town, Clervaux is one of the most 
picturesque villages in the country. 
As my train rumbled north from Luxembourg, known as "the City," the rolling 
farmland and pastures of the south soon gave way to the hilly, forested 
Ardennes. 
Luxembourg, with only 999 square miles, is roughly two-thirds the size of Rhode 
Island. A third is blanketed with forests in a mountain region shared with 
France, Belgium and West Germany. 
There are no majestic peaks. The Ardennes is an area of hills pinched close 
together, covered with spruce and pine and laced through with narrow meadows 
and mountain streams. 
Glens slide in and out of view, hinting at private and secret places. Villages 
of stone come and go. 
The countryside is similar to the country itself -- miniature, hemmed in and 
singularly inviting. 
Luxembourg has more hiking trails than it does roads. And with 50 miles of 
marked pathways surrounding it, Clervaux proved perfect for exploring on foot. 
A village of 1,000, Clervaux is in a deep and narrow valley beside the River 
Clerve in the midst of the Ardennes, only nine miles from the Belgian border. 
It is dominated by an imposing 12th-Century stone castle and a red-roofed 
abbey. But an American flag flies in the town square and a statue of an 
American soldier stands guard. 
A plaque reads: "To Our Liberators, 1944-1945." This is, after all, "Battle of 
the Bulge" country. The people of Luxembourg have not forgotten. 
"We used to get a lot of American visitors, many of them soldiers coming back 
with their families," a Clervaux resident said. "They returned to see how the 
place had changed, or maybe they were looking for a meaning in the hardships 
they went through as young men during the war. Maybe they came back in tribute 
to their buddies who didn't make it. 
"Now, most of our tourists are Dutch." 
I entered the grounds of Clervaux Castle, which was almost destroyed by the 
Germans in December, 1944, during the Battle of the Bulge. Restored, the castle 
houses several exhibits. 
An American tank, a favorite of Luxembourg school children, sits in the 
courtyard. 
The museum, dedicated to the battle, contains Allied and German memorabilia, 
including submachine guns, uniforms, mess kits, photographs and newspaper 
clippings. 
Luxembourg has two other Battle of the Bulge museums, in Wiltz and Diekirch. Of 
the three, Diekirch's is the newest and most extensive. 
In a small room on the castle top floor is where doudebilder (obituary 
photographs) are displayed of Luxembourg men and women who died in the war. 
Traditionally handed out at funerals or printed in newspapers, these 
photographs are also of civilians who were killed during air raids or attacks. 
Less somber are the museum's two other exhibits. 
One displays 22 models of Luxembourg castles and details their history, with 
photographs and floor plans, showing whether they are in ruins or restored and 
whther they are privately or state-owned. 
The other exhibit is Edward Steichen's "Family of Man," with photographs from 
around the world of people working, playing, mourning, laughing and crying. 
Photographers represented in this display include Robert Capa, Henri 
Cartier-Bresson, Margaret Bourke-White and Dorothea Lange. 
Also in the castle courtyard is the Clervaux Tourist office, which has 
information on the town and an inexpensive map of the many walking paths 
radiating from Clervaux. 
One path is a 6.8-mile circular trail that starts and ends in Clervaux. Soon I 
found myself in the hills, in valleys and walking beside streams, wheat fields 
and wild flowers. The path encircles Clervaux, offering changing vistas of the 
village of stone. 
Highlight of this hiking tour is the Benedictine Abbey of St. Maurice and St. 
Maur, a striking, red-roofed structure in the midst of green woods on the crest 
of a hill overlooking Clervaux. 
Built in 1910 in Romanesque style, it was founded by a group of Benedictine 
monks who were forced to leave their native France because of religious 
antagonism. 
In the basement of the abbey is a small museum showing the life of the monks. 
And in a small gift shop are religious recordings and artifacts as well as post 
cards that feature photographs taken by the monks. 
Coffee, roasted in Belgium and packaged by the monks, is sold at the front 
door. 
Clervaux, a quiet town, is engulfed by wooded hills. Life in the village 
centers on a pedestrian lane that hugs the base of the castle and an adjoining 
square lined with sidewalk cafes. 
Shops sell woolens, cotton undershirts, walking canes and gaudy souvenirs. 
Men sporting berets or tweed caps, gray-haired women with canes, dogs on 
leashes, children in strollers and an occasional monk in a black flowing robe 
are part of the parade on Clervaux's main lane. 
By 10 p.m., however, streets are empty, except for the soldier that stands 
facing the tank in the castle courtyard. 
The statue erected in 1983 was sculpted by a Luxembourg artist and paid for 
from the admission fees of Clervaux's Battle of the Bulge museum and from local 
contributions. 
 -- -- -- 
Icelandair is the only airline that flies from North America to Luxembourg, 
with gateways in New York City and Orlando, Fla. 
In the city of Luxembourg, Luxair buses run from the airport to the train 
station. The ride to Clervaux is less than an hour. 
Luxembourg tourist offices, at the airport and next to the train station, can 
make hotel reservations, but most hotels in Clervaux are closed in January and 
February. 
Hotel du Parc, on the rim of Clervaux on a wooded slope, is 120 years old. Its 
outdoor veranda, a good place for lunch, affords a great view of the castle and 
offers a menu of river trout with almonds, Burgundy snails, quails in grape 
sauce, veal, steak and lamb. Rooms start at $35 U.S. for two, including 
breakfast. 
Hotel du Commerce is a family-owned hotel in the middle of town. Doubles are 
about $40, including breakfast. 
For more information on travel to Luxembourg, contact the Luxembourg Tourist 
Office, 801 2nd Ave., New York 10017, (212) 370-9850. 
