LATEST TESTS SHOW NO TRACE OF OIL IN SLICK FROM TANKER 
Coast Guard tests released Thursday showed no evidence of oil in an offshore 
slick probably caused by the Exxon Valdez, contradicting earlier state tests 
that confirmed that the tanker's discharges were petroleum-based. 
Exxon Shipping Co. officials welcomed the announcement. But Coast Guard 
officials downplayed those results, and state authorities insisted that the 
substance leaked in the 18-mile slick discovered 30 miles offshore Monday was 
in fact oil. 
In a related development, Alaska state officials said the Valdez trailed a 
1-mile sheen of oil as it left Prince William Sound on June 23. 
"They definitely trailed a sheen, and we definitely believe it was oil. It's 
probably similar to what you have off the coast right now," said Bob Flint, 
regional program manager for the Department of Environmental Conservation in 
Anchorage. 
The slick off San Diego, on Monday within a mile of the Valdez, and two smaller 
discharges that leaked from the tanker Tuesday and Wednesday, have dissipated, 
Coast Guard officials said. 
However, new discharges were reported to be coming from the ship Thursday 
morning, and officials said they would keep the ship about 50 miles from the 
San Diego coast and continue to lower it in the water until the discharge 
stops. 
Continuing Mystery 
The continuing mystery about the discharge meant that the Valdez was no closer 
to resolving the problems that have delayed its entrance into San Diego Bay for 
repairs. Before the ship can enter the bay, divers must remove as many as five 
huge steel plates that have peeled downward from the hull and wouldn't clear 
the bottom of the bay. Before that can happen, the discharge has to stop so the 
tanker can receive permission to move to a protected area closer to the coast 
to make repairs. 
On Thursday, Cmdr. Frank Scarborough said preliminary Coast Guard tests had 
found no oil in samples of the slick, but could not explain the discrepancy 
between that finding and the opposite conclusion reached Tuesday by the the 
state Department of Fish and Game. 
"The tests indicate no presence of oil, but some unidentified organic matter," 
Scarborough said. "But we're still assuming we have discharges of oil." 
One fish and game department scientist said state tests might be more fallible 
than those of the Coast Guard. 
"Our laboratory had inherent limits on its ability to identify crude oil," said 
Greig Peters, an environmental specialist with the state water quality control 
board, which analyzed the original samples. 
"I think the true test is whether this stuff is going to be toxic or not. And 
we won't get a good sample until divers can actually get inside and take 
scrapings off the inside of the vessel." 
But other officials rebuffed Thursday's test results. 
"Based on preliminary lab results, appearance, smell, feel . . . based on 24 
years of experience with oil, yeah," it's oil, said Reed Smith, pollution 
response coordinator with the Fish and Game Department. 
Scarborough said that, to prevent further discrepancies, scientists from the 
Coast Guard, state and federal agencies, and Exxon have formed a single team to 
test more samples of the original and subsequent discharges coming from the 
tanker. Gary Patrae, a scientist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, arrived Wednesday to head that team, Coast Guard officials 
said. 
Meanwhile, officials Thursday still had not determined where the ship could be 
taken to remove the five steel plates jutting from the tanker's hull. 
Although Pirate Cove near San Clemente Island appears to be the primary choice, 
officials also are considering Long Beach as a removal site. Pete Bontadelli, 
director of the fish and game department, said Thursday in San Diego that 
removing the plates in Long Beach poses less risk to the marine environment 
than the San Clemente Island site. 
Conditions Demanded 
State politicians continued to demand that Exxon meet certain conditions before 
entering state waters to remove the steel plates from its hull, and kept the 
possibility of a lawsuit against the oil company hovering. 
Lt. Gov. Leo McCarthy, head of the state Lands Commission, late Thursday said 
Exxon had verbally agreed to commission demands expressed Wednesday, but he 
wants a written confirmation of that agreement. 
The demands included no pollution of state waters by the Valdez, no leaking for 
a 24-hour waiting period or when the ship is moved for removal of the steel 
plates and a contingency plan provided by Exxon to prevent or clean up any 
spills. 
Growing involvement by state and federal politicians and agencies clarified on 
Thursday, as the state Fish and Game Department was acknowledged as the lead 
representative for all state agencies. But the decision on what happens to the 
tanker, officials stressed, remains with the Coast Guard. 
Scarborough, who has had that responsibility, today will hand it over to Cmdr. 
Don Montoro. Scarborough is retiring and will be moving to Miami to teach 
business classes at a small Catholic university. 
The giant tanker hit a reef in Alaska on March 24 and spilled millions of 
gallons of oil, fouling hundreds of miles of pristine Alaskan shoreline, 
killing thousands of animals and upsetting the fishing industry. 
The crippled Valdez arrived off the coast late Sunday from Alaska, and was to 
have docked Tuesday morning at the National Steel &amp; Shipbuilding Co. in San 
Diego Bay for a $25 million, nine-month repair job. 
