ASSEMBLY VOTES TO MOVE UP STATE PRIMARY TO MARCH 
Seeking to increase the state's clout in the presidential nominating process, 
the Assembly on Friday passed and sent to the Senate a bill that would move 
California's presidential primary from June to the first week in March. 
Rushing to complete action before a self-imposed deadline Friday night, the 
Assembly also approved legislation to protect Mono Lake from water shortages 
and to require teen-age welfare mothers to get their high school diplomas. 
The presidential primary bill, approved on a 50-16 vote, would move California 
from the end of the nominating season to near the beginning, leaving only the 
Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary before Californians would have 
their say. 
Assemblyman Jim Costa (D-Fresno), author of the bill, said the current system 
allows other states to choose 85% of the delegates to the presidential 
nominating conventions before California voters go to the polls. 
"Our citizens have very little impact on choosing the presidential nominees for 
both major parties," Costa said. "The current system makes California a 
bridesmaid." 
Although Gov. George Deukmejian has said he would support moving the primary, 
he has linked his support to the Legislature passing a proposal to elect the 
governor and lieutenant governor as a ticket. That proposal was shelved by a 
Senate committee earlier this year. 
Kevin Brett, the governor's press secretary, said the two issues are still 
linked in Deukmejian's mind. 
"If they send the presidential primary bill to his desk without the other 
legislation, the chances for a veto are very strong," Brett said. 
On another election issue, the Assembly narrowly passed a bill that would let 
voters decide whether to create a system of public financing for legislative 
elections. Backers of the legislation contend that the bill would reduce the 
influence of campaign contributions from special interest groups. 
The bill by Assemblyman John Vasconcellos (D-Santa Clara) would give the voters 
the chance to overrule Proposition 73, approved last year with a provision 
banning the use of taxpayers' money in state and local campaigns. The measure 
was approved by a vote of 41 to 34 and sent to the Senate. 
Vasconcellos argued that the voters should have another chance to decide the 
issue since they also approved Proposition 68 in the same election, which 
called for taxpayer financing of campaigns. However, the public financing 
provision of Proposition 68 never took effect because Proposition 73 received 
more votes. 
The Mono Lake measure, introduced by Assemblyman Phil Isenberg (D-Sacramento), 
is an attempt to end a decades-long dispute over how much water should be 
diverted from streams that feed the lake and shipped to Southern California. 
The bill, passed by a vote of 54 to 12, would require the state Department of 
Water Resources and the city of Los Angeles to set a water level for the lake 
that would preserve its environment and protect the nesting and migratory birds 
that inhabit its islands. 
At the same time, the legislation would pay for a host of environmental 
projects by resolving a lingering dispute over $432 million loaned by the state 
to the Metropolitan Water District and other water contractors in the 1960s. 
Under the compromise, the water contractors would be required to pay more than 
$200 million for environmental, recreational and agricultural cleanup programs 
-- with Mono Lake receiving top priority. The bill now goes to the Senate. 
The welfare bill by Assemblywoman Delaine Eastin (D-Union City) is designed to 
help young mothers get off welfare by requiring them to complete their high 
school educations. Approved by a vote of 70 to 4, the bill would apply to 16- 
and 17-year-old parents who receive welfare. 
The measure takes advantage of a provision in the new federal welfare law that 
allows a state to require teen-age welfare mothers as young as 16 to get their 
high school diplomas as a condition of receiving their welfare checks. With 
Assembly passage, the bill was sent to the Senate. 
Earlier Friday, Deukmejian signed a much broader bill by Eastin that would 
conform the state's workfare program to the new federal law, including imposing 
the requirement that welfare parents with children as young as 3 participate in 
the work and training program. 
In another action, the Assembly passed a bill by Assemblyman Johan Klehs 
(D-Castro Valley) that would give a 50% tax credit for the purchase and 
installation of "telecommuting" equipment -- items used as a partial or total 
substitute for commuting to work. 
Equipment covered by the bill would include telephones, personal computers, 
modems, fax machines and copy machines. The measure, passed by a vote of 54 to 
8, now goes to the Senate. 
The Senate, meanwhile passed a bill that would require the installation of 
fire-extinguishing systems in high-rise buildings. The measure by Sen. Art 
Torres (D-Los Angeles) was prompted by the May, 1988, fire at the First 
Interstate Bank Building in downtown Los Angeles that killed one person. The 
Senate sent the legislation to the Assembly on a vote of 21 to 13. 
And Deukmejian signed a bill requiring all licensed day-care homes, no matter 
how small, to install smoke detectors. The bill by Sen. Diane Watson (D-Los 
Angeles) was prompted by a fire at a Huntington Beach day-care center that 
killed two infants earlier this month. 
