COLUMN LEFT; 
GO SMALL AND CLEAN, NOT BIG AND GREEN; 
THE DEFENSE ESTABLISHMENT HAS ITS EYE ON ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION AS A WAY TO 
PROTECT ITS EMPIRE. 
When Sen. Sam Nunn proposed last month that military forces be used for 
environmental protection, I got a queasy feeling in my stomach. Not that I 
disagree with him; many disarmament activists, like myself, for years have 
argued that environmental destruction was a fundamental threat to the nation's 
well-being. 
But the imprimatur of Sam Nunn made me first blink in disbelief, then look 
twice at the small print. 
Nunn and his Democratic colleagues Albert Gore, Tim Wirth, Jeff Bingaman and 
James Exon are proposing a "Strategic Environmental Research Program" that 
would use the skills and resources of the military, the CIA and the Energy 
Department to blunt the assault of this new national security threat, 
environmental degradation. Nunn, the hard-nosed chairman of the Armed Services 
Committee, saying that ecology was the stuff of generals and admirals, jet 
pilots and spooks? How did this happen? 
The proposal has roots in the work of peace researchers, who insisted that 
America's obsession with military security ignored other perils, such as global 
warming, deforestation, ozone depletion, loss of croplands and overpopulation. 
(Similarly, drug addiction and economic deterioration should be treated as 
security threats.) The federal government spent little money on such problems 
while lavishing resources on increasingly antiquated military strategies. 
A small cottage industry of researchers sprouted in the mid-1980s to develop 
this analysis. Magazines like the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists and Nuclear 
Times published the first articles attempting to redefine security. Long 
accused of reflexively opposing all weapons (and the U.S. doctrine of national 
defense), peaceniks could instead offer a positive notion: global security. 
This concept holds that environmental decay is international, unmindful of 
boundaries and sovereignties, and that it can cause serious social strains that 
lead to conflict. For example, overpopulation and over-grazing can lead to 
drought, which sends masses of starving people across borders in search of 
food. The reluctant host country might be no better off, and the pressure 
erupts in war, involving allies and enemies far away. 
The idea of global environmental security became widely accepted, particularly 
in the U.S. policy Establishment, after the hot summer of 1988. Articles 
touting the link between the environment and security began to appear in 
influential journals like Foreign Affairs. Polls showed that the American 
public, with little prompting, saw global warming, cocaine and trade imbalance 
as far greater threats than the Soviet Union. 
So when I saw Sam Nunn's suggestion, I felt a certain satisfaction. But the 
purpose of this "natural security" initiative has a side never intended by the 
concept's originators. Nunn &amp; Co. are apparently using the high public 
concern about the environment to keep the bloated and increasingly irrelevant 
Pentagon afloat. 
This is doubly ironic. The U.S. military is the nation's -- perhaps the world's 
-- largest polluter. Its use of fossil fuels and other natural resources is 
awesome; it has created 15,000 toxic waste sites; the radioactive hazards at 
its 17 nuclear-weapons plants are a national scandal. The first aim of Nunn's 
"Strategic Environmental Research Program" should be to clean up the ecological 
disasters spawned by the armed forces, a cleanup that rivals the 
savings-and-loan crisis in financial scale. 
Equally important, the Nunn initiative fails to understand that military 
approaches are inappropriate to the new threats we face. The global security 
concept includes reducing the role of the military in the political life of 
nations. The sources of armed conflict in the Third World -- poverty, for 
example, and depletion of resources like forests and croplands -- are 
impervious to armies and nuclear doctrines. In short, applying military ideas 
and assets to environmental issues will solve nothing. Environmental 
restoration requires sensitive economic development, tough regulation of 
industry, birth control, and sweeping changes in attitudes -- tasks for which 
the military is ill-equipped. 
We do need to accept and act on the realization that environmental degradation 
threatens our long-term health as a society. But acting on a new agenda for 
global security and keeping the military-industrial complex intact are 
incompatible. A better mission for the Pentagon brass is to scale down 
dramatically -- matching the scaled-down Soviet threat -- and let the savings 
be used to attack the horrific mess they've created. 
