NURSE REGISTRIES HAILED, ASSAILED BY HOSPITAL STAFFS 
It is 6:45 a.m., and the medical reinforcements are arriving at Kaiser 
Permanente's towering Panorama City hospital. 
Half a dozen nurses and attendants in sensible shoes and collarless white 
shirts, part of a small army of temporary medical workers brought in each day 
to staff Southern California hospitals during a continuing nursing crisis, sign 
in near the bustling emergency room. 
"We need them to function," said Anita Zermeno, operating room nursing 
supervisor. But while most of the temporaries are capable, Zermeno said, some 
have such limited abilities that she must give them easy assignments. She also 
orders a staff nurse to watch over them, which she said is galling since a 
temporary nurse is paid at least $5 an hour more than a staff nurse. 
"Here comes someone getting the big bucks and all they can do is a 
hysterectomy," Zermeno said. "Give me a break." 
40% of Staff 
A national nursing shortage has made a number of medical facilities reliant on 
agencies, commonly known as registries, that supply temporary nurses and 
attendants. In some hospitals at times, 40% of the nursing staff is from 
outside registries, while the figure is as high as 80% in some nursing homes, 
health-care specialists said. 
Some hospital officials now see the registries, once considered a solution to 
staff shortages, as a part of the problem. Critics said that registries are 
competing with institutions for nursing school graduates and are draining off 
staff nurses by offering pay that hospitals cannot match. 
Members of an association of state nursing homes grew so frustrated that they 
persuaded Assemblyman Gerald N. Felando (R-San Pedro) to introduce legislation 
that would put the agencies out of business -- even though without them many 
hospitals and nursing homes would have trouble staffing their facilities. 
Felando put the bill, sponsored by the California Assn. of Health Facilities, 
on hold after the registries rose up in protest. 
"If I had my druthers, they would not exist," Donna Robinson, associate 
director of nursing at Olive View Medical Center in Sylmar, said of the 
registries. 
Experts say the nursing shortage was brought on by a changing business climate 
that has made traditionally male-dominated careers more attractive to women who 
ordinarily might choose nursing as a vocation. 
At the same time, some nurses are deciding against the long hours and pressure 
of working on a hospital staff. If they go to work for a registry, they can 
pick and choose from the jobs offered. They can turn down a job if they don't 
like the hours or the hospital. If they feel like taking a vacation, they can 
just go. 
They also earn more money because hospitals pay premium rates to the registries 
for skilled nursing personnel, although the difference in wages is partly 
offset by the health benefits offered to hospital staffs. 
A registered nurse is paid $15 to $17 an hour to work in a nursing home, while 
registries may pay upward of $27 an hour. Olive View, a public hospital run by 
Los Angeles County, pays $573.50 to the registry for a nurse to work a single, 
12-hour shift on the weekend in critical care. 
"Our business is doing very, very well now," said Pat Donohoe, vice president 
of business development for NSI Home Health Care. 
The industry as a whole is booming, according to health-care observers. 
Hospital nursing supervisors said they get several calls a week from new 
registries springing up. "It's a gas war out there," Penny Hammer, nursing 
supervisor at Valley Presbyterian Hospital in Van Nuys, said of the competitive 
market. 
Figures on the usage of registry nurses at hospitals demonstrate the importance 
of registries to the delivery of health care. 
Rising Costs 
In the 1986-87 fiscal year, Los Angeles County paid $1 million for temporary 
nurses at its six public hospitals, including Olive View. In the previous 
fiscal year, the figure was $3.3 million. This year, it is expected to soar to 
$12 million, officials said. 
The University of California's teaching hospitals have seen a similar growth 
pattern. UCLA Medical Center spent $2.4 million for registry nurses in the last 
nine months of the 1986-87 fiscal year, according to figures gathered by the 
California Nurses Assn. That amount nearly tripled last fiscal year, to $6.1 
million. 
All this has put the nurse who is looking for work in an advantageous position. 
"Every registry in town is fighting to get that nurse," said Carmen Baker, 
regional director of STAT Nurses Registry, which has an office in Granada 
Hills. 
The increasingly competitive market among registries has caused some of them to 
begin offering benefits and even bonuses and vacations to nurses to encourage 
them to sign up. Several agencies have resorted to hiring nurses over the 
phone, without checking their credentials, some hospital officials say. 
This has led to problems. Hammer said one agency sent a nurse attendant who was 
unable to take a patient's temperature. The attendant, it turned out, had never 
worked at a hospital before. "I called the registry. They had not checked her 
references. They just put her to work," Hammer said. 
Dangerous Errors 
In other cases, Hammer said, nurses have showed up in clothes so dirty that 
they had to be sent home to change. One temporary nurse administered a 
potentially fatal dose of medication to a patient, Hammer said. The patient 
survived. 
And another nurse assistant at Valley Presbyterian cursed a patient who was 
complaining of pain. "She said, in effect, 'It's in your head.' She fired 
four-letter words off" at the patient and at the hospital and walked off the 
job, Hammer said. 
Despite the criticism, however, nursing supervisors agree that the vast 
majority of registry nurses are skilled professionals who know their jobs as 
well as most staff nurses. 
"We screen very carefully," Baker said. "The nurses that we send out are highly 
qualified." Before sending a nurse on a job, STAT checks to see that the nurse 
has at least one year of hospital experience, as well as experience in 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and a nursing license. 
"The mama-and-papa registries are the ones that are hurting us," Baker said. 
"When we refuse a nurse, they sign up with the mamas and papas who are working 
out of their homes." 
Chip Baker, director of human resources for ARA Living Centers, a large nursing 
home company in California, said there are many "fly-by-night" agencies. 
Horror Stories 
Jean Orr, chief of the state Bureau of Personnel Services in Sacramento, has 
heard the horror stories. Although her office is supposed to regulate the 
industry, the vast majority of registries are not required to file papers with 
her, or are operating outside the law. Only 50 agencies are registered with her 
office, she said. 
"You can find 50 in any community of Southern California right now," she said. 
By law, nursing agencies must register with her office only if they require 
employees to pay them a fee to work. Many are paid directly by hospitals. Then 
there are others that operate without required licenses, she said. 
"If you've got white shoes and a clean white shirt, you can be a nurse's aide 
and open a registry," she said. "There is a whole unregulated industry out 
there. No one really has a handle on it." 
Hospitals Blamed 
In the eyes of Rose Ann De Moro, assistant director for collective bargaining 
of the California Nurses Assn., the hospitals have only themselves to blame for 
the situation. Hospitals would be better able to hang on to staff nurses if 
they paid them more and gave them more freedom in setting their hours, she 
said. 
"Hospitals are making registries a very appealing place to go," she said. "It's 
not like registries are out there trying to overthrow the hospitals." 
Now nurses are feeling their power. "You're seeing a whole different kind of 
nurse these days," said Shirley Hamill, associate director for the Western 
United States of Upjohn Health Care Services, which operates a nursing agency. 
This new crop of nurses is more assertive, she said. 
Nursing agencies "give them another option to keep them in the hospitals," said 
William York, executive director of AMI Health Care Staffing, a nursing agency. 
Problem Worsens 
But spokesmen for health-care facilities say just the reverse is happening -- 
nurses are being drained from the hospitals. Registries have "worsened the 
situation," said David Helmsin, a spokesman for the California Assn. of Health 
Facilities, which represents nursing homes. Registries "are like vultures 
almost, feeding on a big problem." 
The agencies have not only forced hospitals to compete with them for nurses, 
but with one another, critics say. Hospitals with bad reputations, or in poor 
areas, may find it difficult to locate even a temporary nurse on some days. 
Robinson at Olive View said it can take as many as 44 phone calls to find a 
nurse. Then, "it's not unusual for a registry to call two hours before" a shift 
begins "and say, 'Nurse Jane Doe cannot work for you.' We do a little checking 
and we find Nurse Doe is at Northridge" Hospital Medical Center, Robinson said. 
The situation is magnified in nursing homes, which run on slim financial 
margins because they depend more heavily on government reimbursement. They 
cannot afford to pay nurses what acute-care hospitals pay. As a result, keeping 
staff becomes difficult. 
Changing Staff 
Nursing home officials said some facilities are run almost entirely by 
employees of registries, which may change daily. A nurse on the floor only one 
day may not notice signs that a patient is deteriorating, officials say. 
State law requires three hours of nursing care per patient a day. It also 
requires that a registered nurse be on duty at all times at larger facilities. 
Nursing homes have trouble attracting required ancillary staff, which include 
nurse's aides, and hire registry personnel at up to $20 an hour for jobs that 
normally pay about $5 an hour. 
The result is a strain on budgets. The cost of registry employees for ARA's 30 
California nursing homes doubled from 1987 to 1988, and there is a chance that 
it will double again this year, officials said. 
