ARMENIANS DEFY GORBACHEV'S DECREE ON SURRENDERING ARMS 
Armenian lawmakers have voted to defy President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's decree 
that armed groups must turn in their weapons and disband, a local activist said 
Sunday. 
Lawmakers Saturday gave preliminary approval to a resolution that would suspend 
Gorbachev's decree on Armenian territory, as well as in the disputed region of 
Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, according to a spokesman for the Armenian 
National Movement. 
The measure will be discussed further at the legislative session today, said 
the spokesman in a telephone interview from Armenia's capital of Yerevan. 
The spokesman, who declined to give his name, said the lawmakers believe the 
presidential decree contradicts the Armenian constitution. 
Gorbachev issued a decree Wednesday giving illegally armed militants across the 
country 15 days to turn in their weapons or risk having them confiscated by 
local police, officials of the republics or Interior Ministry troops. 
Soviet Interior Minister Vadim V. Bakatin said Friday that if armed groups 
disobeyed the order, military force would be used. He referred specifically to 
armed groups in Armenia. 
Besides Armenia, Bakatin said illegally armed groups also operate in Moldavia, 
Georgia, Azerbaijan, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia. 
Meanwhile, in the republic of Georgia, hundreds of protesters demanding 
immediate registration of political groups for multi-party elections were 
blocking trains at a railroad hub. 
The protest, which began Thursday, has stranded 30 passenger trains and 90 
freight trains laden with wheat, oil, sugar, meat and gasoline at the Samtredia 
railway junction of the trans-Caucasian railroad, the Communist Party newspaper 
Pravda said. 
The junction is about 125 miles northwest of Tbilisi, the Georgian capital. 
The protesters -- numbering about 700, according to the unofficial Postfactum 
news service -- are demanding that the Georgian Parliament convene immediately 
to adopt a law to register groups for Oct. 28 elections. 
