LIZ SMITH: BROOKE BUBBLING OVER ON 'BACKSTREET DREAMS' 
BROOKE SHIELDS is back! The former child star, pre- and post-pubescent pin-up, 
great beauty and Princeton graduate is all grown up and ready to tackle her 
career with new maturity and enthusiasm. 
Brooke called our office the other day bubbling over with news about her 
upcoming film "Backstreet Dreams," an ambitious, modestly budgeted feature that 
will be released in late summer from Vidmark. In this, Brooke plays a 
psychologist treating an autistic child. The star describes her role here as 
"my first truly adult portrayal." The 25-year-old actress says, "I'm a young 
woman, on her own, making her own choices. There are no parents or parent 
substitutes. I'm different from what I've been previously on screen -- and of 
course I look older." (Brooke laughs and says that since she's been acting all 
her life, people assume she's much older than she is. "Usually they come up, 
stare at me and go away saying, 'Doesn't she look great for 35!' ") 
Brooke was drawn to the role through her own study of autism at the Eden 
Institute in Princeton, N.J. "It's the inexplicable nature of this condition 
that fascinated me. As soon as I read the script, I knew I had to do this." 
Brooke has her own production group, Brooke Shields &amp; Co. and she was a 
full partner on "Backstreet Dreams," which gave her the opportunity to become 
involved with other aspects of the film -- "and also it made me realize how 
little control most actors have over their own performances or the ultimate 
outcome of a movie." 
Brooke is currently negotiating to make three movies back to back -- and she 
hasn't given up hope that her "Brenda Starr" will be released sometime soon. "I 
love this picture so much. I want people to see it! I just saw 'Dick Tracy' and 
there were a lot of similarities, I mean, the comic strip aspects of it. I was 
as much Brenda Starr as anyone could be. I certainly want it to have a chance 
with the public." 
NOW, REMEMBER Brooke's "Blue Lagoon" boyfriend, Christopher Atkins? For a hot 
minute, Atkins seemed on the brink of a big movie career. However, his 
post-"Lagoon" films ("The Pirate Movie," "A Night In Heaven") and even his 
guest-starring stint on TV's "Dallas," as the young love of perennially 
overwrought Linda Gray, served chiefly as a showcase for his athletic physique. 
Now a more mature Christopher, married with children, will have a spate of new 
movies in the coming year. Two are already in the can, "Shakma" and "Fatal 
Charm" to be released in the fall. And next month in Orlando, Fla., Chris 
begins work on "Fire, Ice and My Wife" an offbeat look at relationships in the 
'90s. 
