PRIVATE FACES, PUBLIC PLACES; 
DOWN IN THE DUMP AND MAKING THE BEST OF IT 
Most of us know about dumps. They are hidden places where mangy dogs and slimy 
rats, scavengers and pariahs roam by moonlight. By day, they are picked over by 
human scavengers and pariahs, crones with carbuncled skin and leering voices. 
On a list of social desirability, dumps come somewhere between prisons and 
sewage plants, and calling them "landfills," or "land reclamation schemes," 
does nothing to change the fact that they are dumps, and full of garbage, 
preferably sitting on our neighbors' water supply, not our own. 
The Azusa dump is in the desert -- or would be had man not tinkered with the 
San Gabriel Valley. It is a fitting site: the scapegoat, laden with man's sins, 
is driven out into the desert to perish. Only, there is no perishing; just the 
threat of poisons leaking into our future, of plastic liners and promises that 
the hot, fermenting jumble of yesterday's trash is not tomorrow's death. 
Picture the trucks rattling off the 210 and 605 freeways toward this hapless 
place. A line forms outside the dump, waiting in the dry, brackish back streets 
of Azusa. It is a rather jolly line. Truck drivers call out to one another. 
There is a comradeship in garbage. Timid outsiders in small, disintegrating 
pick-up trucks arrive bearing leftovers from an old kitchen or garden work. 
They soon melt into the clubbiness of the day. 
What is missing? Sea gulls. Where are the usual wheeling, plummeting hunters 
dragging chicken bones from beneath old hospital needles? Where is the smell? 
What is a dump without that festering whiff to curdle the strongest stomach? 
Where are the women? 
This is a man's place. Some time warp has captured this entrance on Vincent 
Street: men, big, brawny, little, hacking coughs, sweat-glued hair, in cowboy 
heels, sneakers, with large hats, young men, old men, enjoying the idea of 
being with MEN. 
It is a postcard from Marlboro country, from life before cholesterol. 
Somewhere, in the distant spires downtown, six lawyers toil on behalf of the 
Azusa Land Reclamation. They go to court, they file, they counter: The talk is 
of aquifers below the 302-acre rock quarry, of 36 million more tons of garbage. 
But at the dump, the talk is of the workers' softball team, of practice, of 
their planned outing to Magic Mountain, of coffee and doughnuts for the 
drivers. The dump is home; it is family, a family of men drawn together in the 
freedom of work they love. Enormous yellow machines, like lumbering dinosaurs, 
crush and crumble all before them, never slowing, never cringing. "It's in a 
man's genes to do a manly thing like this -- it's a calling," says Ralph 
Chavira. "I look on this landfill as one of my kids -- it's an emotional 
thing," says Rick Spencer, the manager. 
Rick's grandparents were poor farmers in Kansas. His father brought in oil 
wells when Rick was a child. Now he teaches positive attitudes in the federal 
penitentiary in Ft. Leavenworth. "A very amazing man, my father. He believed in 
a lot of very good hard work." Rick dropped out of college three times and was 
working in a chicken slaughterhouse when a notice caught his eye for a highway 
construction technology course at Ferris State College in Michigan. He found a 
calling: big machinery, heavy equipment, sludge disposal, chemical 
"management," the inexorable might of man. 
He hates Los Angeles and pines for the Midwest, which he sums up by its gas 
stations: "First you pump, then you pay." But he has found his dominion on the 
shaking, decomposing garbage of the Azusa landfill. He prides himself on how 
few men quit working here, on the way they cover the garbage over each night, 
on the methane gas wells, so precisely calibrated, on the "spotters," the men 
who pull up weeds and set bird feeders in the perimeter hedges for the hawks 
and pheasants. 
His hands are clean. It is other men who throw away paint cans and batteries 
that bleed toxics, who toss out reams of computer paper, who destroy leftover 
toys and clothes, thousands of dollars' worth, lest -- heaven forbid -- the 
needy get them free. He sees our sins as he sees our cruelty: the transients 
who tumble out of garbage trucks, scooped up from the dumpsters where they 
slept, cold and crazed. 
Rick recalls his grandfather saying: "People who were alive 200 years ago are 
all dead today. You have to die comfortable with the way you lived your life." 
He likes the neat community of garbage he has built: cleanly swept and watered, 
acre by acre, buried and forgotten. Occasionally, he drives up into the 
mountains and looks down: "Nothing you can see forever but lights and cars." 
And he hates what he sees. 
Back East, a landfill charges $100 a ton to take in garbage. Here, Rick Spencer 
has had to roll back prices from $22.50 to $19.25 -- as if the whole of 
California is ripe for dumping and using and never asking where nor why. 
Good American garbage: alive and ticking in 200 years' time. 
