IT'S EASY TO WORK FITNESS IN WITHOUT WORKING OUT; 
EXERCISE: AUTHOR SAYS EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES THAT REQUIRE ACTIVITY CAN MAKE A 
SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO A FITNESS REGIME. 
Porter Shimer has the zeal of the recently reformed. Yes, he says, he once 
bought it all. The pavement pounding, the sweat-until-you-drop mentality, the 
endless rides to nowhere on a stationary bike. He used to carry 10-pound hand 
weights during his daily run -- in, he swears, a rubber suit in the middle of 
July. He was a fanatic about fitness. 
And what did it get him? 
Well, he says, he was lean, all right. 
And when he went to his doctor a few years back, the doctor thought Shimer had 
some kind of a heart defect because his resting pulse rate clocked in at 34 -- 
about half the average. 
But was Shimer fit? According to some definitions, he was. Was he healthy? 
Probably not, he now believes. And was he happy? Well, the answer to that is a 
resounding no. 
"I was a prisoner to it," the former editor of Rodale Press' "Executive Fitness 
Newsletter" says of his old workout schedule. "My exercise needs began to eat 
into my work hours. I didn't feel comfortable without it (working out)." 
Now Shimer no longer suffers from workout-aholism. He says he has jumped off 
the exercise treadmill -- at least compared to the old days. And he wants the 
rest of us to do the same. 
"The principles are that you don't need to exercise within the target heart 
rate to be healthy," he said of his new philosophy, outlined in a newly 
published book he co-wrote with exercise physiologist Bryant Stamford. 
The book is called "Fitness Without Exercise: The Scientifically Proven 
Strategy for Achieving Maximum Health with Minimum Effort." And while the title 
is something of a misnomer, Shimer insists that the book's premise is sound. 
"We look at 'exercise' as a magic bullet, but it's not," Shimer said recently 
at his home outside Limeport, Pa. 
According to Shimer, the reason most people don't exercise is that they think 
that to do any good, they've got to exercise their hearts out. For the last 10 
or 20 years, he said, people have been hearing fitness instructors and running 
gurus preaching that to get fit, people need to get their heart rate up to 60% 
to 80% of maximum capacity and keep it there, at minimum, for 20 minutes three 
times a week. 
For many, that idea was just too daunting, he said, so they stayed on the 
couch. And those who did try to meet the goal often ended up suffering from 
boredom, injuries or burnout. 
Shimer proposes that the idea of aerobic fitness isn't a true measure of 
health. People who do a lot of aerobic exercise may strengthen their hearts and 
be considered "fit," as he was, he says, and they may keep their weight down 
because aerobic exercise does burn fat. 
But, he says, all that may lead people to believe that if they do enough 
aerobic exercise, they can eat whatever they want -- including many fatty foods 
that ultimately contribute to disease. 
In other words, you can be aerobically fit but in rotten health. 
"You may look lean," Shimer said, "but your arteries can be a mess." So, 
leaping on new research that documents the benefits of "moderate" exercise, 
Shimer believes we need to redefine exercise to include any kind of physical 
activity. 
In his view, energy spent mowing the lawn counts as much as that used on a 
three-mile run. And the exertion you use playing a fun game of softball or 
volleyball with the guys after work is just as good as that spent on the rowing 
machine -- even if your heart doesn't pound the whole time. 
Spent the weekend cleaning the house? It counts. So does digging in the garden, 
raking leaves, grocery shopping, walking the dog, playing badminton with the 
kids, fixing the car or dancing. 
Even activity on the job -- moving stock, fixing pipes, climbing utility poles, 
chasing after 3-year-olds -- counts. 
"Aerobic exercise -- it burns a lot of calories. But you can burn those same 
calories and get something done," Shimer said, noting how silly it sounds to 
say that you're putting off household chores because you're too tired from 
working out. 
In place of aerobic training, Shimer and Stamford prescribe what they call 
"lipo-fitness." 
To achieve it, the two recommend any kind of activity that burns 2,000 calories 
a week -- combined with controlling the amount of fat in the diet. 
"The best way to keep fat out of your arteries is by keeping it out of the 
mouth," Shimer said. 
The book recommends that 20% of a person's calories come from fat -- less than 
the 30% the American Heart Assn. recommends. 
Stamford said that since following the dietary guidelines, he has been able to 
tone down his running workouts and still lose weight. 
The book lists recipes, fat counts and foods to be avoided, as well as 
activities that count as exercise and the calories they burn. 
"What our book is trying to do is open up the whole fitness concept to people 
who can't get into that torture." 
