UNREST IN BLACK HOMELAND IN S. AFRICA LEAVES 11 DEAD 
A bitter dispute over South Africa's homelands policy erupted in weekend 
rioting, leaving nine black police officers and two civilians dead in 
Leeuwfontein, a village recently forced by Pretoria to become part of the 
nominally independent homeland of Bophuthatswana. 
Bophuthatswana police went door to door Sunday, arresting at least several 
hundred residents of the town, including two key tribal leaders. And police 
helicopters scoured the countryside for others who had fled onto white-owned 
farms in South Africa seeking refuge. By nightfall, only a few women and 
children remained in the shacks of the rural community of 18,000. 
The melee came six months after South Africa's white minority-led government 
decreed that Leeuwfontein and next-door Braklaagte were to become part of 
Bophuthatswana, a homeland comprising seven separate tracts of land inside 
South Africa. So far, court challenges to the South African proclamation have 
been unsuccessful, and the angry residents are seeking permission to appeal. 
'A Desperate Point' 
"It had reached a very desperate point where people had lost faith in anything 
ever returning to normal," Aninka Claassens, a spokesman for the Transvaal 
Rural Action Committee, said in an interview Sunday night. "They had tried 
everything." 
The Action Committee provides legal support for Leeuwfontein and Braklaagte and 
has worked extensively in the towns, about 180 miles northwest of Johannesburg. 
The violence was the latest in a series of incidents that have hampered 
Pretoria's 13-year-old attempt to force blacks into ethnic homelands, thereby 
depriving them of their South African citizenship. More than 11 million of 
South Africa's 26 million blacks live in 10 homelands, four of which, like 
Bophuthatswana, have been declared independent states but remain almost totally 
dependent on South Africa. 
Little Recognition 
Most of the world refuses to recognize the Pretoria-created homelands as 
sovereign states. In fact, international anti-apartheid groups have 
consistently called on entertainers to boycott the Sun City casino resort, 
which is located in Bophuthatswana and pays taxes to its 12-year-old black 
government. 
The latest trouble broke out Saturday afternoon during a meeting of several 
thousand Leeuwfontein residents that was called to discuss the efforts to 
extricate themselves from Bophuthatswana's control. The town's population had 
swelled because it was the end of the month and many migrant workers had 
returned home with their paychecks. 
Some residents said fighting erupted after police arrived to break up the 
meeting. Police used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse the crowd, and 
witnesses said they heard automatic weapons fire. 
Four Officers Killed 
The Bophuthatswana authorities said four police officers were killed when their 
armored personnel carrier was destroyed by a gasoline bomb. South African 
authorities, who last year stepped in to put down an attempted military coup 
d'etat in Bophuthatswana's capital, Mmabatho, said they were not involved in 
the weekend incidents. 
But Paul van der Merwe, a farmer who lives near Leeuwfontein, said he saw South 
African security forces on Sunday conferring with Bophuthatswana police 
officials on a remote section of his farm, in South Africa just outside the 
Bophuthatswana border. 
Van der Merwe said dozens of residents of Leeuwfontein have used his farm to 
escape harassment by the Bophuthatswana police in recent months. And the farmer 
has refused requests by South African and Bophuthatswana authorities to press 
charges against the villagers for trespassing, saying he relies on them to help 
him plant and harvest his 4,000-acre farm and ranch. 
"I'm not going to do that. We are neighbors," he said. 
Before Jan. 1, the land that includes Leeuwfontein and Braklaagte had been part 
of South Africa, in between two distinct sections of Bophuthatswana. The 
government proclamation incorporating the two villages into the homeland 
surprised most residents, who said they had not been consulted, as required by 
South African law. 
The two communities didn't want to lose their South African citizenship, but 
they also feared retribution from Bophuthatswana authorities. The region's 
Tswana tribal chiefs have been violently opposed to Bophuthatswana's South 
Africa-supported president, Lucas Manyane Mangope, also a Tswana chief, since 
the 1950s. 
Patrolled by Police 
Since they became part of Bophuthatswana, Leeuwfontein and Braklaagte have been 
heavily patrolled by the homeland police, and sporadic violence has been 
reported. Eighty people were injured during a police raid in Leeuwfontein in 
March, and residents said that the authorities beat or arrested anyone who 
refused to say they loved Bophuthatswana. 
About one-third of South Africa's residents -- or about half of the nation's 
blacks -- live in the homelands, which cover only 13% of the country's land 
area. Pretoria's original intent was to counter the increasing demands for 
black voting rights in South Africa by creating independent states outside 
white-designated South Africa where the country's voteless black majority could 
exercise their political rights. 
But the policy has been a drain on Pretoria's coffers, and it has come under 
heavy criticism from outside and inside the government in recent years. South 
Africa spends more than $1 billion annually supporting the homeland 
governments, but, because the land is generally rugged and the homeland leaders 
often corrupt, poverty remains endemic. 
Times researcher Gigi Maartens contributed to this story. 
