METRO RAIL TUNNEL COLLAPSES IN FIRE; FREEWAY IS CLOSED; 
TRANSPORTATION: A 150-FOOT SECTION OF SUBWAY PROJECT CAVES IN. A DOWNTOWN 
THREE-MILE STRETCH OF U.S. 101 WILL REMAIN CLOSED AT LEAST THROUGH THE WEEKEND. 
A stubborn fire raged underground in an uncompleted section of a Metro Rail 
subway in downtown Los Angeles Friday, collapsing a 150-foot stretch of tunnel 
near the Hollywood Freeway and snarling commuter traffic for hours. 
The fire, which erupted before dawn and burned out of control throughout much 
of the day, produced an eerie scene of flames and smoke shooting from holes in 
the ground. 
The cause of the fire was not immediately determined. California Highway Patrol 
officials said that a three-mile stretch of the freeway, one of the busiest 
arteries through the heart of downtown Los Angeles, would be closed at least 
through the weekend, and possibly next week. 
The tenacious fire continued to burn late Friday night and was not expected to 
be fully extinguished until this morning. 
It was by far the worst setback to mar construction of the first 4.4-mile phase 
of the Metro Rail subway system, a $1.4-billion project that is running 
millions of dollars over budget and months behind schedule. 
And it came on the eve of the opening of Metro Rail's intersecting Blue Line 
light-rail system between downtown and Long Beach. Officials said the Blue Line 
would start up today as planned. 
Six workers facing a wall of flame when the fire erupted at 1:50 a.m. escaped 
by dashing under the freeway to safety, but at least four of about 150 
firefighters battling the blaze sustained minor injuries. 
Fire officials said wooden shoring timbers and highly flammable plastic lining 
burned along the length of the 750-foot subway tunnel for most of the day. 
At 2:30 a.m., heavy smoke forced the California Highway Patrol to close a 
downtown portion of the freeway, officially known as U.S. 101, between Mission 
Road and the four-level interchange. Then, a stretch of the tunnel collapsed 
within 10 feet of the freeway, raising fears about the structural safety of the 
roadway. 
As for what caused the cave-in, Richard B. Dixon, chief administrative officer 
for the county, reported to the Board of Supervisors that metal rings that bind 
the tunnel together may have failed. 
Clouds of moderately toxic smoke from the burning plastic liner forced 
firefighters to wear protective masks, further complicating a task already made 
arduous by high humidity and temperatures that approached the 100-degree mark. 
"If hell was like this, I think I would go to church more often," John 
Gonzalez, a firefighter-paramedic from the Studio City station, said as he 
emerged from a 30-minute foray into the burning tunnel. 
Firefighters battled the blaze from both ends of the tunnel, which runs from 
Union Station, under the Hollywood Freeway to a maintenance yard at the 
intersection of Center and Commercial streets. But fears of another collapse 
and the thick smoke, intense heat and toxic fumes prevented firefighters from 
entering the shaft until about 1 p.m. 
"You can't put a man in there," a safety engineer said early Friday. "It would 
be like walking into a burning chimney." 
In the predawn hours, flames spurted from both ends of the tunnel and at times 
shot 100 feet into the air. 
Then at dawn, smaller jets of flame erupted through the ground above the tunnel 
and marched toward the freeway, marking the steady advance of the collapsing 
tunnel. By noon, about 150 feet of the tunnel had caved in. 
Firefighters at first adopted a "defensive position," aiming fans and fire 
hoses into each end of the tunnel to keep the fire from spreading and to 
dissipate the smoke. There was little else they could do but wait. Plans to 
spray high-density foam into the tunnel were rejected because the suds would 
obscure efforts to survey the damage. A lighter foam was eventually used, which 
enhanced the ability of water to penetrate wood. 
"The longer it burns, it's like hot coals on the bottom (of the tunnel)," said 
Fire Capt. John Maleta. "And all that steel will keep the heat. We just have to 
go in there and soak it (the heat) out." 
Finally, at 1 p.m., the first four-member team of firefighters, wearing oxygen 
masks and protective clothing, ventured into the northern end of the tunnel, 
where much of the fire had been extinguished. Spraying water on the floor to 
cool their path, they doused flames and crept about 250 feet into the tunnel. 
One firefighter from the team was scalded by water that got into his boots. 
Once they emerged, several required intravenous fluids. 
Firefighters planned to install 12-inch timbers across the top of the shaft to 
prevent further collapse. As night fell, workers cleared openings and erected a 
pipeline to pump water and light foam into the burning sections. The work would 
continue all night, but no more teams of firefighters would be dispatched 
underground. 
"We're still letting the tunnel cool," Asst. Fire Chief Bob Ramirez said late 
Friday night, as about 25 firefighters kept vigil at the site. 
"These are horrible fires to fight," said firefighter Ken Evanoff. "It's just a 
waiting game. You just peck away and peck away hard to get to the seat of the 
thing. You . . . can't just run a bunch of people in there." 
It was a matter of dispute as to whether the fire will further delay completion 
of the subway -- already 18 months behind schedule. 
Each day of delay costs an estimated $100,000 in interest and escalating costs, 
but Southern California Rapid Transit District officials said the loss to the 
tunnel itself is covered by insurance. 
"It is a tremendous disaster," said Ronald Tutor, president of Tutor-Saliba 
Corp., the contractor building the tunnel. "Part of the tunnel is collapsed. 
The other (tunnel) is subject to review. It is almost mind-boggling." 
Tutor said he anticipated that the fire will delay completion of the tunnel by 
a matter of months. It had been three weeks behind schedule and would have been 
finished by Sept. 15, he said. Now, he added, it is "entirely probable" that it 
will not be done until next year. 
But state engineers said the fire would probably not delay the September, 1993, 
scheduled opening of the subway. "It should not affect that date," said Al 
Vardanian, a project engineer for RTD. 
Gas lines in the area, including one to a federal prison, were turned off as a 
precaution. Even the U.S. Postal Service was affected, with some mail not being 
delivered to areas near the fire. 
Commuters fumed in widespread morning traffic jams, and some gave up and went 
back home when they could not reach their downtown destinations. 
Traffic officials said smoke from the fire and fears that the roadway over the 
tunnel could collapse prompted closure of a three-mile section of the Hollywood 
Freeway, the so-called "slot." 
The result was a massive tie-up that backed up traffic all the way to the 
Foothill Freeway in the Pasadena area and the San Diego Freeway in West Los 
Angeles. 
"Generally, it affected everything in the system at one point or another," said 
Officer Lydia Martinez of the California Highway Patrol. 
Some commuters traveling from the Westside found that traffic, if they got away 
from the freeways, was actually lighter than usual, in part because many people 
just stayed away. For others, it was a different story. 
Elaine Taiyoshi, who lives in East Los Angeles, said her usual 15-minute 
commute to the Wells Fargo Tower downtown took two hours. 
"It was unbelievable," she said. "I wasn't sure I was going to make it to 
work." 
Officials said the freeway could remain closed for days, or even weeks, 
depending on how much the underpinnings of the roadway may have been weakened. 
CHP Deputy Chief Edward Gomez said late Friday that the freeway would be closed 
at least through the weekend and possibly into next week. A separate, elevated 
busway may be opened during weekdays for all traffic starting Monday, and 
trucks might be banned to cut down on vibrations, officials said. 
Jim Drago, a spokesman for the California Department of Transportation, said 
the highway will remain closed until it can be inspected for damage and the 
stability of the soil under the freeway can be assessed. 
"If the damage is bad, this could be closed for awhile because the bottom line 
is we're not going to put any traffic on the roadway until we're absolutely 
convinced there is no risk," he said. 
Officials said the cause of the fire cannot be fully investigated until the 
tunnel has cooled down sufficiently for inspectors to enter. They initially 
ruled out an explosion involving methane gas and spontaneous combustion. 
Several officials said the fire was suspicious because no work had taken place 
in the tunnel for 10 to 12 hours before the blaze erupted. 
Work in the tunnel involved installation of the plastic lining and "shouldn't 
involve any kind of flammable material or anything that would smolder" or 
equipment that would spark a fire, said Harold Stories, director of 
construction safety for RTD. 
Neil Peterson, executive director of the Los Angeles County Transportation 
Commission, said an independent investigation of the fire's cause will be 
conducted by Minneapolis-based Kellogg Engineering. A preliminary report is 
expected within two weeks. 
But early speculation centered on arson. 
Byron Ishkanian, Cal/OSHA's senior mining and tunneling engineer, said he 
suspected the fire was started by transients, who have crept onto the project's 
property through openings along the Los Angeles River and started a fire 
elsewhere on Metro Rail property last week. 
"I just can't help but think it was something like that. It was the only way 
you could get ignition," said Ishkanian, who was in charge of safety for the 
overall Metro Rail project until May, when he quit to join Cal/OSHA. 
The tunnel that burned was one of two parallel shafts -- A-130 Left and A-130 
Right -- which are not to be used for passenger traffic between MacArthur Park 
and Union Station. 
Instead, they will carry empty trains between Union Station and a maintenance 
yard now under construction beside the Los Angeles River. 
As they were dug, each tunnel was shored with wooden beams -- each about six 
inches thick, 12 inches wide and four feet long -- held in place against the 
tunnel wall by a series of 17-foot steel rings that extend down the length of 
the tunnel like the ribs of a whale. Fiber packing was crammed between the 
beams to ensure a tight fit. 
The shoring was then covered by a polyethelene membrane about one-eighth of an 
inch thick to seal out flammable gases like methane that abound underground in 
the Los Angeles area. 
Tunnel A-130 Right is largely completed, its shoring and liner covered with a 
thick concrete lining. But in Tunnel A-130 Left, the one that was burning, the 
concrete had yet to be poured and the flammable packing and liners were still 
exposed. No underground passageways connect the tunnels, which are about 12 
feet apart and top out about 15 feet below the pavement of the Hollywood 
Freeway. 
Fire officials said the blaze apparently started at about 1:50 a.m. in A-130 
Left. No one was in that tunnel at the time, but a half-dozen men were working 
in A-130 Right. 
Andrea Greene, a spokeswoman for the RTD, which has overall authority over the 
project, said that the workers heard the roar of the flames in the adjacent 
tunnel and ran to the west end of their tunnel to escape. 
More on Tunnel Fire 
FINGERS CROSSED -- Metro Rail engineers hope to be able to hold to the 
scheduled September, 1993, opening date of the subway. A2 
AGONIZING WAIT -- Forced back by torrid temperatures, firefighters did not 
venture into the tunnel until nearly 11 hours after the blaze erupted. A2 
FREEWAY CLOSING -- Officials fear heat from the fire might have weakened the 
ground beneath the closed Hollywood Freeway. A33 
ALTERNATE ROUTES -- How to maneuver through the blocked freeway system. A35 
SUBWAY FIRE 
1. At approximately 1:50 Friday morning fire starts in the 50% completed, 
750-foot service section of the Metro Rail Red Line tunnel below the Hollywood 
Freeway (101). 
2. Wooden shoring, and highly flammable plastic burn throughout the tunnel, 
emitting mildly toxic fumes. 
3. At 5:00 a.m. a portion of the tunnel roof collapses, expanding to 150 feet 
by noon and coming within 10 feet of the freeway. Bulldozers are brought in an 
effort to fill the holes. 
Research by Michael Meyers. 
Source: Southern California Rapid Transit District 
