RESCUE THE WAR AGAINST AIDS; 
ONLY A CZAR CAN INSTILL COURAGE, REBUILD PROGRAMS 
The AIDS epidemic has been studied to death. Numerous sound recommendations 
have been made, and most have been ignored. 
The failure of the federal government to act on the medical experts' advice is 
leading to an imminent crisis: The patchwork quilt method of dealing with AIDS 
is about to be overwhelmed. 
Most of our elected officials have been paralyzed by the perceived 
"controversial" nature of this epidemic. There is now only one with the stature 
to provide the necessary leadership to deal with the escalating problem: 
President Bush. He must appoint an AIDS czar with the responsibility for 
developing and implementing major new programs. Continued lack of presidential 
leadership will likely result in social devastation growing to the point of 
outrage until finally the necessary political pressure is created -- a high 
price for our society to pay for political cowardice. 
The U.S. Public Health Service has predicted that an additional 250,000 
Americans will require medical treatment for AIDS over the next 3 1/2 years or 
need expensive medications to delay or prevent the disease. This compares with 
100,000 Americans diagnosed with AIDS during the first eight years of the 
epidemic. 
AZT, the one medication proven effective against the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), is now provided through a federal program that is due to end soon. 
Congress has shown little interest in renewing it, yet imagine how tens of 
thousands of patients and their friends and loved ones will respond if AZT is 
suddenly unavailable? 
We heard at the International AIDS Conference in Montreal earlier this month 
that about 50 potential AIDS drugs are being studied, and 17 are considered 
high priority. As some of these are proven effective, it follows that they 
should be provided to people who need them. Yet tens of thousands of people 
will be denied them, either because the drugs are still considered experimental 
or because the patients do not have health insurance with a drug benefit that 
makes them affordable. 
Our response to AIDS also is collapsing on another front. The voluntary 
agencies that have been the backbone of the response to the epidemic are in 
trouble. Most of the early volunteers are burned out or are ill themselves. The 
newer volunteers are overwhelmed by the continually growing number of people 
needing services. Voluntary funding for these agencies cannot keep up with the 
need. As services outside hospitals decline, more AIDS patients will have to be 
hospitalized longer, adversely impacting public hospitals and all their 
patients. 
Solving these problems requires federal funds, and only an effective, 
coordinated response and leadership from the Bush Administration is likely to 
persuade Congress to act. Too many politicians seem to believe that their 
constituents are not concerned enough to spend money for people who are sick 
with AIDS. 
At present, there is no master plan for a government response to this national 
public health crisis. One is desperately needed. President Bush must appoint an 
experienced, knowledgeable physician to lead the AIDS effort -- not to do more 
studies, but to develop programs to submit to Congress, and then to implement 
them when they are approved. Retiring Surgeon General C. Everett Koop would be 
an ideal appointee. 
Apathy remains the main roadblock. On the policy front, public health 
officials, frustrated by lack of funding, are encouraging AIDS activists to 
mount dramatic public protests, the only thing politicians are known to respond 
to. People in the AIDS fight have tried to get more Americans to care by 
pointing out the heterosexual threat, by appealing to compassion and by trying 
to show that money spent now on prevention saves money and lives later. None of 
these has succeeded: At present, the heterosexual threat affects mostly 
minorities, so white Americans are not concerned; compassion seems in short 
supply these days; and prevention requires programs that politicians do not 
have the courage to implement. 
President Reagan successfully evaded the AIDS epidemic by ignoring it for 
years, then by appointing a commission when Congress seemed ready to appoint 
one of its own. But he never followed through on his commission's key 
recommendations. Now there will be a new commission, with the new President's 
appointees, who undoubtedly will have to do more studies and make more 
recommendations. And the commission will not have the authority or the ability 
to implement programs. 
We do not have time to start all over again. President Bush should read the 
reports of the earlier commission and of the National Academy of Sciences. And 
he must give someone the mandate to implement their recommendations. 
The concept of leadership in the United States has changed. When difficult 
problems arise, we can no longer look to political leaders for vision and 
direction. Instead of leading us, politicians watch the polls; they have become 
followers of what a handful of people tell an interviewer. In the area of AIDS, 
can President Bush make an exception? The price of not doing so will be 
devastating. 
