JACK SMITH: BETTER TO TAKE NAVY STORIES WITH A GRAIN OF SALT 
Several readers have questioned the veracity of Cal Wharton's reminisences of 
his tour as skipper of a PT boat in World War II, as recently reported here. 
Cal, a retired Times sportswriter, said that during a recent reunion with his 
crew one man recalled that Wharton's first command was: "All right, you guys, 
take the ropes off the posts and let's get going." 
"No way. Couldn't happen," writes Don Driscoll, a wartime PT commander himself. 
"I can assure you uttering such a non-Navy order would have been impossible, no 
matter how green the skipper." (Navy lingo would be "cast off the lines.") 
"In the first place," Driscoll says, "an officer had to have small boat 
experience to get in the PT service. Long before you stood in front of a 
full-length mirror and were tailored for your first set of Navy Blues, you had 
ceased describing lines as 'ropes.' Certainly after two months of intense 
indoctrination you had learned that there are three ways to do everything: the 
right way, the wrong way, and the Navy way, and God help you if you didn't pick 
the Navy way. . . . By the time you took advanced training at the Motor Torpedo 
Boat School . . . you had become saltier than any Academy graduate." 
I was skeptical of Wharton's story myself. But I considered it a harmless 
distortion caused by the passage of too many years or the absorption of too 
much booze. Old wartime buddies tend to exaggerate. 
From my own experience in the Marines, I know that when a man emerged from boot 
camp he would no more call a line a rope than he would call a rifle a gun. A 
boot was made to feel that his rifle was a part of himself, and if he 
mistreated it in any way, including verbally, he was made to sleep with it and 
hand it to his drill instructor the next morning warm. 
Driscoll also doubts Wharton's story that when an admiral was aboard one day 
his cook asked the admiral if he would like some coffee, and when the admiral 
replied "Yes, thank you," the cook said 'Just a minute, sir. I'll go downstairs 
to the kitchen and get you some.' " 
"In the first place," says Driscoll, "the cook wouldn't ask the admiral if he 
wanted some coffee. He would ask him if he wanted a cup of Joe. After the 
admiral replied 'Yes, thank you,' he wouldn't have said anything. He would have 
gone to carry out the mission. He wouldn't have used the words downstairs and 
kitchen since those words were essentially unknown to Navy men whose 
recollections of a civilian life (with its quaint vocabulary) had been 
effectively eradicated in boot camp." 
Again, I tend to agree with Driscoll that Wharton's reunion was perhaps a bit 
soggy. On the other hand, perhaps Wharton and his cook hated the Navy, and were 
deliberately defying protocol by using civilian language. 
Louis Hockman of Agoura Hills recalls a display of non-nautical language by a 
crew of hot rod automobile mechanics who had acquired a speedboat and invited 
him aboard for the trial run. On returning to port the skipper ordered, "Hey, 
Lou -- jump out and grab the front end . . . and Don, you grab the rear end and 
pull it in." The word used was not rear, however. 
War stories don't have to be true. My favorite is the one about the young 
British subaltern who was caught by an MP chasing a Wren (a member of the 
Women's Royal Naval Service) down a hallway in a Cairo hotel. The young officer 
was nude. He was put up on charges of being out of uniform, but was acquitted 
on the grounds that he was properly attired for the activity in which he was 
engaged. 
I have serious doubts about the authenticity of that story, but I have always 
chosen to believe it. It makes my memories of the war so much more palatable. 
As Wharton and his cook may have been, I was guilty myself of pulling the 
tiger's tail now and then. 
Once, when the war was over but I was still stationed at Pearl Harbor, I asked 
my colonel why he couldn't let me go home. 
He said, "Smith, I don't like it here either, but I have to stay." 
"But sir," I said, "you've got a jeep and a girl friend." 
Not long after that I was shipped back to the States. 
After I had become a civilian I was introduced in the old press club to Gen. 
Graves Erskine, then commandant of the Marine Corps, as "an ex-Marine." 
The general shook my hand and said, "There's no such thing as an ex-Marine, is 
there Smith?" 
Wringing the general's hand, I replied, "You're looking at one, general." 
Even though I was a civilian, I thought that was a pretty risky thing to say. 
The general might have been right. 
