GLASNOST SPAWNS RENEWED INTEREST IN CZAR NICHOLAS II AND MONARCHY; 
RUSSIA: THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE VIOLENT DEMISE OF THE COUNTRY'S LAST MONARCH 
ARE BEING QUESTIONED MORE INTENSELY. 
A planned movie chronicles his tragic reign, a hit play depicts his brutal 
death at the hands of the Bolsheviks, and black marketeers hawk his portrait 
all over Moscow. 
Seventy-three years after he abdicated, Czar Nicholas II is back in vogue. 
On May Day, monarchist backers even paraded a portrait of Nicholas II through 
Red Square in front of the disbelieving eyes of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
Later in May, monarchist advocates sat beneath a portrait of the czar to 
officially found a Monarchist Party to compete in the country's new multiparty 
system. 
Nelli Milovanova, 30, a programmer and member of a club to perpetuate the 
memory of the czar, is helping prepare the platform of a Monarchist Party in an 
Orthodox Christian Russia. 
"The Russians are real Christians, believers in the Orthodox religion, they 
have the idea of monarchy in their souls," said Milovanova. 
"Russians are waiting for freedom," she said. "The party program is aimed at 
restoration of the monarchy by peaceful means, through achieving a majority in 
the Parliament and transition of the power to an Assembly of the Land, which is 
the only legal institution that can call the czar to the throne." 
There are 16 male descendants of the imperial Romanov dynasty scattered around 
the world. At present the monarchists' leading contender to the throne is Grand 
Duke Vladimir Kirolovich, great grandson of Alexander II, who lives in France. 
This year, Ogonek magazine, always on the cutting edge of the latest rage, 
carried an interview with the grand duke. 
One royal descendant has already visited Russia, with the gossipy yellow-press 
Trud newspaper supplying the details and even a picture of the blue-blooded 
personage. 
The visit this spring was by David Chevchavardze, a great grandson of Emperor 
Nicholas I, but now an American citizen who fought in the U.S. Army in World 
War II. The magazine Literaturnaya Gazeta said he then went to work for the 
CIA, enjoying a 25-year distinguished career there. 
The recent curiosity about Russia's last czar emerged when Gorbachev in 1985 
urged an end to all "blank spots" in the country's history that it had been 
forbidden to explore or write about. 
"It was like reading a detective story, and you never get to the end because 
there is always something unsaid -- like why was the czar killed, who ordered 
it," said Yuri, a young foreign ministry official. 
Zhenya, his friend, traces the intense interest and rediscovery to glasnost 
through Russian eyes. 
"You have to understand our history was ripped out," he said. "People want to 
know who ordered this crime -- and it was a crime -- of murdering innocents. 
People are also rediscovering their past -- flags, symbols and the czar." 
Interest in the violent demise of Russia's last monarch surged after last 
April's sensational revelation in the Moscow News that his skull had been found 
in a pit near a swamp in Sverdlovsk in the Urals. 
That same pit yielded the bones of his wife, Czarina Alexandra, Crown Prince 
Czarevich Alexis and their four daughters. Nicholas II and his family were shot 
by Bolshevik gunmen in a basement of a merchant's house in Ekaterinenburg, now 
Sverdlovsk. 
The discovery was made by former policeman-turned-crime writer, Geli Ryabel, 
who said he found the gruesome remains 10 years earlier but was forbidden to 
publish the result of his find. 
"The times were different then and nobody would undertake to identify the 
skulls and bones," Ryabov said. 
Today, interest abounds. 
One of the country's most famous movie directors, Gleb Panfilov, is planning a 
film on Czar Nicholas Romanov's last days. 
On Moscow street corners, the czar's picture is sold along with copies of the 
new independent newspapers -- no more than leaflets in some cases -- that are 
popping up all over the country as part of Russia's political reawakening. 
A new play, "I Will Repay," re-creating the murder of the czar, is playing to 
full houses nightly in the Maly theater. 
Written by an obscure author Sergei Kuznetsov, the play is hardly a classical 
drama and features some wooden acting. 
"Nevertheless," said the Moscow News, "for 2 1/2 hours, the audience follows 
the action with bated breath. The subject is really fascinating." 
Little wonder. It addresses such questions as whether the czar was killed 
because White Russian forces fighting the Bolsheviks were about to capture him 
and use him as a counterrevolutionary symbol to rally forces and bring down the 
communists. 
Even more volatile, it explores the question of whether local Jewish commissars 
carried out the killings without the knowledge of Soviet leader V. I. Lenin. 
The anti-Semitic Pamyat organization blames Jews for the czar's death and 
demands retribution. Soviet history books make no mention of a role by Lenin. 
Yuri Mitunov, a Moscow political activist who works for Radio Liberty, says 
interest in the czar and his death stems from growing anti-communist sentiment. 
"It is because it was the very first crime of the Bolsheviks and then the 
hypocrisy about it," he said. "That is why we are returning to the study of 
it." 
A picture published in Moscow News of the skull of imperial Russia's last 
monarch spawned a host of monarchist clubs and informal nationalist 
organizations, dedicated to finding the truth about how the czar and his family 
were killed. 
"The aim of our society is to commemorate the memory of Nicholas II to clean 
his name of all the dirt which has been poured on it by Bolsheviks," said 
Milovanova, the Monarchist Party worker also active in a nationwide commission 
on the czar. 
The more rabidly nationalistic groups are demanding that the czar be given a 
decent burial in the St. Peter and Paul Cathedral in Leningrad, which was 
formerly the imperial capital of St. Petersburg. 
They also seek to build a cathedral on the site of the house where the imperial 
family was slaughtered. The house was ordered razed during the rule of Leonid 
Brezhnev. Boris Yeltsin, now a populist hero, was made to carry out the 
destruction when he was the Communist Party first secretary in Sverdlovsk. 
Nicholas himself was canonized by the Russian Orthodox Church because of his 
martyr's death, and Russian religious tradition calls for such a "cathedral in 
blood" at the site of martyrdom. 
Meanwhile, the more politically minded monarchist groups, claiming the support 
of as many as 22 million Russians, are gearing up to test the waters of the new 
multiparty pond. 
"Only the monarchy can make make Russia a great power," Milovanova said. "Ten 
percent of the population support us." 
