KHASHOGGI ENDS CLAIM TO REAL ESTATE, ART; 
PHILIPPINES: IN EXCHANGE, RACKETEERING CHARGES STILL PENDING WILL BE DROPPED. 
PROPERTY WAS PURCHASED FROM FERDINAND AND IMELDA MARCOS. 
Saudi financier Adnan Khashoggi, who was acquitted of fraud charges last week 
along with Imelda Marcos, has agreed to waive all personal claims to millions 
of dollars in art and real estate acquired from Mrs. Marcos and her late 
husband, former Philippine dictator Ferdinand E. Marcos, it was learned Monday. 
In exchange, federal racketeering charges still pending against him will be 
dropped. 
"My client is tired of being in our country's courts," attorney James P. Linn 
said, explaining the settlement. 
The settlement, reached Monday after negotiations between Linn and Assistant 
U.S. Atty. Charles LaBella, clears the way for proceeds from a sale of the 
property to go to the Philippine government. The costs of prosecuting Khashoggi 
and Imelda Marcos, an estimated $150,000, according to U.S. officials, also 
will be deducted. 
Khashoggi agreed to terms of the deal before jetting off to Houston, where he 
said he will be meeting friends attending the economic summit. He had delayed a 
return to Saudi Arabia until the last of his lingering legal problems here 
could be resolved. 
Khashoggi called the settlement "another victory for us." However, it also 
represented a victory of sorts for the Justice Department, which had sought to 
seize the same properties under forfeiture rules in its unsuccessful 
racketeering prosecution of Imelda Marcos, who was Khashoggi's co-defendant. 
Both won acquittals last week, ending a three-month trial. Marcos was cleared 
of all four fraud, racketeering and conspiracy counts. 
Khashoggi was acquitted of two mail fraud and obstruction of justice counts. He 
was not prosecuted at that time on racketeering and conspiracy charges under 
terms of a limited extradition agreement with Switzerland that allowed 
Khashoggi to stand trial in the United States. Those charges could have been 
reinstated. 
Prosecution attorneys contended that the Marcoses had acquired art and real 
estate with funds looted from their nation's treasury. They also charged that 
Khashoggi aided their attempts to conceal that ownership and to evade court 
orders freezing the assets. 
Defense lawyers argued that the Marcoses bought paintings and property either 
with their own private funds or as investments for the nation and that it was 
properly sold to Khashoggi. 
Ironically, Monday's settlement seemed to give a belated boost to the 
prosecution's view of the transaction. 
Included in the agreement was Khashoggi's claim to ownership of four Manhattan 
skyscrapers with a value estimated from $5 million to more than $30 million. He 
agreed to assert no personal claims on the buildings that were at the center of 
the criminal case against him and Marcos. 
Other claims to ownership of the buildings, including one by a fugitive 
business associate of Khashoggi, still are being contested. 
Khashoggi also renounced his claims to 28 paintings, some of them by old 
masters, estimated to be worth more than $6 million. That agreement apparently 
clears the way for the paintings to be auctioned soon. 
The financier also signed over his personal claims on a $2-million house in 
Beverly Hills formerly owned by actor George Hamilton. Philippine officials 
contend that Hamilton was a front for Imelda Marcos and that the house was 
secretly purchased with government funds. 
"Mr. Khashoggi never claimed any rights to that property," attorney Linn said. 
"But he was willing to sign a quit claim for the Empire State Building if it 
made everybody happy." 
