HOME RENOVATION; 
VISION AND REVISION; 
THREE EXPRESSIONS OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S PASSION FOR REMODELING 
FROM THE STREET, this 1920s-vintage house looks much the same as it always has. 
But step around to the back and the dramatic change is apparent: A two-story 
addition, in contemporary Craftsman style, expands the house with 2,000 square 
feet of much-needed living space. 
Wayne and Lana Selness bought this house in the Hancock Park section of Los 
Angeles despite the fact that it needed remodeling. They were attracted to its 
character -- the central hallway, decorative plaster moldings, spacious 
upstairs bedrooms. But the kitchen was small and outdated, there was no family 
room, and the couple wanted a larger master bedroom and bath. 
Brentwood designer Nick Berman, with the assistance of associate designer Cory 
Buckner, reworked the existing rooms and expanded the four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 
home to include five bedrooms and 4 1/2 baths. 
"What I did is redefine the proportions and the scale of things. I opened rooms 
up and let light shine in," Berman says. "Homes from this era tend to be dark 
and rather confined on the interior. Though the new rooms have a contemporary 
feel, they're detailed in a classic sense so that they adhere to the character 
of such an old house." 
On the first floor, the new family room, kitchen and banquette open onto the 
back yard and pool. Although visible and accessible from the family room, the 
modern kitchen is divided by a long granite-top counter and cabinets enclosed 
with clear and ribbed glass. A banquette, located in a rounded bay, echoes the 
bay in the new master suite directly above it. 
Materials are elegant yet simple. Grid patterns are repeated in glass block 
walls, windows and doors. "The colors -- pale, soft blues, pinks and yellows on 
the walls and ceilings -- are a counterpoint to the crispness of the shiny 
white trim and moldings. During different times of the day, the light 
reflecting off the colors creates subtly different moods," Berman explains. 
Berman designed many of the tables and sofas. Other furniture is a mix of 
classics by Donghia and modern chairs by Philippe Starck. Fabrics in the family 
room are in soft colors; in the living room, they're dramatic. 
"Nick always seemed to understand what we wanted, and his interpretation of 
that really works for us and this house," Lana Selness says. "From the outside, 
our house remains appropriate for this older neighborhood. Inside, it now has 
the ideal balance of old and new." 
A Dark '50s Bungalow Opens Up to Airy '80s Style 
When architect Kaye Secomb and her husband, David Spetner, found this 
three-bedroom, two-bath home in the Los Feliz area, they called it "the house 
nobody wanted." But Secomb and Spetner saw potential in the bungalow's small, 
dark rooms and outdated '50s styling. 
After two months of remodeling, the house had an entirely new look. Secomb 
didn't change the house's basic layout, but she reworked its flow of space and 
she added skylights, larger windows and French doors to give it a bright, sunny 
ambience. Japanese, tropical and contemporary interior-design touches create 
what she jokingly calls an Ethno-Deco look. 
Secomb, a native of Australia, wanted to connect her house to the outdoors, so 
she installed French doors in the kitchen and den / office that open onto a 
sunny terrace. French doors in the master bedroom lead to a rear patio. 
In the kitchen, Secomb removed all the upper cabinets and installed windows 
along an entire wall. "My kitchen is modeled after an open-air kitchen in Bali 
-- my favorite kitchen in the world," Secomb says. "I tried to give it a 
similar feel -- sunny, open, casual. 
"I've used very little color in the interior of this house," she says. "I've 
ended up with a lot of black-and-white furniture. Art, flowers and people's 
clothing provide the color. 
"David and I have discussed a formula that describes what we've done here," she 
continues. "We've taken a house from the '50s, added some touches from the '30s 
and come up with something that suits the 1980s." 
Ethnic Influences Enliven a Simple Spanish Cottage 
Bands of color encircle the wood-frame windows and front door. The rustic-pine 
door, a Mexican import, is finished with a sunny yellow wood stain. Even before 
you cross the threshold, it is apparent that this house is owned by someone who 
is not afraid to express herself. 
Claudia Grau, who designs and sells contemporary sportswear at the Melrose 
Avenue boutique that bears her name, bought this Spanish-style two-bedroom, 
one-bath house in West Hollywood last year. "It was the only one I liked and 
could afford," she explains. 
After a contractor completed the major work -- repairing the foundation, 
removing the wall between the dining room and kitchen, adding a large window in 
the second bedroom and remodeling the bathroom -- Grau hired a friend, designer 
/ artist Paul Glynn, to help add decorative touches. 
Glynn, who owned the innovative but now-defunct Melrose boutique, Cowboys &amp; 
Poodles, fashioned the front fence, the frames around the doors and windows, 
kitchen cabinets and breakfast-room chairs. 
Glynn gilded Grau's bathroom medicine chest and painted the natural-looking 
artificial rocks in the living-room fireplace. Glynn also installed a 
cracked-tile back splash in Grau's kitchen above the granite counters. 
After construction, there was not much money left for decorating, but Grau was 
able to pare costs by buying some of her new furnishings (such as her 
metal-frame furniture and the front door) in Mexico. 
"The bold color combinations used in and on Mexican and Central American homes 
are so positive and upbeat," she says. "I wanted to bring some of these same 
qualities to my home." 
