DEALS: MARKET WATCH; 
IF YOUR NAME'S NOT PIA, WATCH OUT FOR RIKLIS; 
SECURITIES: THE WILY FINANCIER IS A TAKEOVER VETERAN, BUT INVESTORS DON'T 
ALWAYS BENEFIT. NOW HE'S AT IT AGAIN. 
Anybody who knows anything about the traps that await the unwary on Wall Street 
knows that to avoid disaster, you should follow three rules: Don't do big home 
repair jobs when the hardware stores are closed. Don't spit into the wind. And 
never, never, never become Meshulam Riklis' junior partner. 
There may be exceptions to Rules 1 and 2. But Rule 3 is ironclad. 
Most people who recognize Riklis' name know him from the gossip pages, where he 
is portrayed as the indulgent, elderly husband of Hollywood personality Pia 
Zadora. But to investors, Riklis is much less benign. Anyone who has owned 
stock or bonds in a Riklis company knows that Riklis somehow ends up with the 
cash and high-grade assets, and you end up owning paper that drops sharply in 
value. 
Now, Riklis, who at age 66 has been playing takeover games for more than three 
decades, is at it again. This time, he's trying to take control of American 
Real Estate Partners LP, a big master limited partnership whose units trade on 
the New York Stock Exchange. AREP, as it's known, is run by the now-bankrupt 
Integrated Resources, which is trying to raise money to help pay its creditors 
by selling the company that controls AREP. 
Why am I reasonably sure that Riklis is up to mischief here? Because he's 
offering a price that isn't rational unless he plans to change AREP to his 
advantage -- and to everyone else's disadvantage. 
Let me explain a little. AREP is the successor to 13 limited partnerships 
peddled by Integrated that actually turned out to have real value. The 
partnerships owned more than 300 properties leased to tenants, including such 
blue chips as K mart and Duke Power. In 1987, Integrated persuaded the limited 
partners to swap their units for units in AREP. As a master limited 
partnership, AREP has partnership units that trade on the NYSE like stocks, so 
they can be easily bought and sold. The other big sweetener was that Integrated 
promised that the units would pay $2 a year, which they have done. 
Integrated, in its typical fashion, shortchanged the investors somewhat by 
taking about 1.25 million units when the partnerships were transformed into 
American Real Estate Partners. That was in payment of future fees. Integrated 
also owns AREP's general partner, which controls the partnership and owns 1.99% 
of it. It's virtually impossible to dislodge the general partner, thanks to 
some cute provisions that Integrated stuck into AREP's charter. 
The units that Integrated owns produce about $2.5 million of distributions a 
year, and the general partnership interest produces about $600,000. How much 
would you pay for that $3.1 million a year, given that it has little chance of 
increasing? Not much more than $30 million. But Riklis is offering $40 million. 
That's almost $10 million more than the high bid, submitted by former AREP 
Chairman Richard Ader, at an auction that Integrated ran a few months ago. 
Why is Riklis offering so much money? What do you think? 
AREP's charter allows the general partner to do deals with affiliates. That was 
fine when Ader ran the show, but it's a whole different thing if Riklis runs 
it. Riklis' proposed deal with Integrated has loopholes big enough to siphon 
millions of dollars through -- and AREP's assets are worth $250 million more 
than its debts. Starting in 1992, by my reading of the documents, Riklis could 
eliminate AREP's $2 distribution or sell his own assets to AREP at fancy 
prices. 
If you think I'm being unfair, remember that the last time we looked at Riklis, 
in January of this year, we saw how he had trashed the bondholders of E-II 
Holdings by taking cash out of the company and substituting properties and 
paper of questionable value. 
Fearing a Riklis raid, money managers Glen Bigelow of New York and Charles 
Jones of Shrewsbury, N.J., whose clients own AREP units, are circling the 
wagons and reaching for their guns. In other words, they have sued everyone in 
sight and are even trying to figure out a way for AREP's holders to buy out 
Integrated themselves. Which is how I came to hear about this deal. 
Bigelow, especially, is vehement on the subject of Riklis. He recalls that in 
1968, when he was a student at Harvard Business School, Riklis told the 
school's finance club that when he was a stockbroker, he would call people at 
random and say that a particular stock would rise in price and call other 
people to say it would fall. At the end of the day, then, Riklis had some 
potential clients who thought he was a genius. "I realized that this was a man 
who would say anything or do anything to get his hands on your money, and would 
then do whatever he wanted with it," Bigelow says. 
I don't know Riklis' side of this, because he wouldn't talk to me. Neither 
would Integrated Chairman Stephen Weinroth, who used to handle both the 
Integrated and Riklis accounts during his days as an investment banker at 
Drexel Burnham Lambert. 
Normally, the bankruptcy court would have let this deal sail through, because 
Riklis was offering the highest price for an Integrated asset. But U.S. 
Bankruptcy Judge Howard Buschman III is obviously trying to do what's right, 
instead of blindly approving the deal. He has appointed a special 
representative, New York Law School Prof. Karen Gross, to tell him whether 
limited partners in Integrated's partnerships have any rights in the bankruptcy 
proceedings. A hearing is set for September. 
Had AREP's buyer been someone with a better reputation, Bigelow and Jones would 
probably not have sued, and the deal would have gone through. But this time, 
Riklis' reputation has hurt him, and it might actually cost him the deal. Which 
proves that sometimes, a bad reputation is bad business. 
