JAMES FLANIGAN: OF ALL PEOPLE, BUSH DRIVES STAKE THROUGH HEART OF REAGANOMICS 
President Bush is reversing Reaganomics. Bush's statement last week that "tax 
revenue increases" will be needed to cut the budget deficit signals a return to 
the way things were before the 1986 tax reform lowered income tax rates, 
reduced the number of tax brackets and got more people to pay. 
In the future, the tax system will go back to more graduated brackets, with an 
offsetting increase in deductions, and capital gains will be taxed at a lower 
rate than ordinary income. Tax shelters will make a comeback, and new tax 
wrinkles will appear. 
To be sure, nothing so dramatic was announced last week; the President merely 
conceded that more taxes would be needed to reach a budget agreement. 
But Bush also said he wants "entitlement reform" and "growth incentives." 
Translated into plain English -- "read my lips" -- that means new taxes on 
Social Security benefits and a differential rate for capital gains. 
Yes, there will be months of political argument before such tax changes are 
imposed. But keep in mind that both parties want to change the tax system -- 
Bush's statement was drafted by both Democrats and Republicans, working over 
breakfast in the White House. You will be paying more taxes next year. 
Why is this happening? Because a slow economy made a mockery of the 
Administration's economic assumptions. Tax returns brought in $20 billion less 
than anticipated, and high interest rates cost the government at least $30 
billion more than planned in payments on the national debt. Budget chaos 
loomed. 
So the scramble is on to raise taxes, beginning with hikes on gasoline, alcohol 
and tobacco. Politicians regard such taxes as painless, although gasoline taxes 
hit Western states harder than Eastern states and are inherently unfair because 
the same burden is levied on rich and poor. Indeed, poorer people, with older 
cars, will pay more. 
Objections will arise. "There should be equity involved," says Professor Frank 
Levy of the University of Maryland, an expert on income distribution. "It's 
particularly unjust at a time of widening income inequality to try closing the 
budget deficit on the backs of those who've been less fortunate." 
Inevitably, the government's quest for revenues will lead to income taxes. A 
higher tax on the Social Security benefits of well-to-do retirees is probable. 
But the elderly will benefit from a new lower tax rate -- probably 20% or so -- 
on gains from investments in businesses, stocks and real estate. 
The marginal rate on the highest incomes will almost certainly be hiked to 33%, 
from 28% at present, as public opinion shifts against business executives and 
Wall Street deal makers who made big incomes in the 1980s -- and politicians 
say they'll close the deficit by taxing millionaires. 
Trouble is, there aren't that many millionaires -- the top 1% of taxpayers 
includes folks with less than $100,000 in annual adjusted gross income. And 
while the rich pay taxes, they also pay tax accountants $250 an hour to see 
they don't pay too much. 
So Congress will be reaching for new taxes down through the top 20% of 
taxpayers, to two-earner couples with income above $50,000. Those taxpayers 
can't afford $250 an hour, but they'll pay $50 to get tax help. 
And the result will be a return to the days of tax shelters, a reversal of the 
flat tax reform of 1986 that was praised by Sen. Bill Bradley (D-N.J.) for 
allowing people "to invest money to make money, not to lose money for tax 
purposes." 
That 1986 reform worked. More people paid up and federal tax receipts rose $50 
billion to 20% of the gross national product, from 19% and less in previous 
decades. 
"A lot of my clients gave up tax shelters because the deals no longer made 
sense," says Philip Holthouse, a tax accountant in the Los Angeles firm of 
Parks, Palmer, Turner &amp; Yemenidjian. Now his clients will once again look 
for ways to shelter income. 
You have to wonder why tax law changes so much -- this will be the ninth tax 
change in 14 years -- when practically all taxpayers end up paying the same 20% 
to 25% of their income in federal taxes no matter what. 
The explanation for the changes, and the growth of the income tax, goes back 
about 100 years, according to UC Berkeley scholars Carolyn Webber and Aaron 
Wildavsky. In their massive "History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western 
World," they write that "as governments in Europe and America assumed 
responsibility for citizens' personal welfare, by funding public roads and 
water supply as well as public insurance against unemployment and old age, the 
idea arose that in an industrial society -- where differences in wealth exist 
-- the fairest way to raise taxes was on the ability to pay" -- that is, 
through a graduated or progressive income tax. 
Ever since, the need for taxes has grown along with demands for social benefits 
-- to the point today that taxes and government budgets seem to grow 
continuously. 
Well, Ronald Reagan tried to stop that process -- lowering tax rates and 
limiting government in the belief that citizens were better off assuming more 
responsibility for their own welfare. It was a controversial position. 
Inevitably, some citizens suffered -- but public roads and water supplies 
suffered too. 
And now George Bush has signaled that he doesn't believe in Reagan's policies 
anyway. He believes government should meet increased needs, in education and 
the environment, in drug rehabilitation and aid to the Soviet Union -- read his 
"kinder, gentler" lips -- and he wants higher taxes to pay for it. 
Is that wrong? "It's not a matter of right or wrong," says Wildavsky, "but of 
political philosophy. What kind of society do we want?" 
George Bush last week -- more than 10 years after he called Reagan's policies 
"voodoo economics" -- asked for the money to pay for the kind of society he 
wants. 
