LIBRARIES READ SIGNS OF CHANGE, GO ETHNIC 
John Perkins, Inglewood's head librarian since 1962, has a rule of thumb about 
the relationship between the faces of library visitors and the books he must 
stock on the shelves: When one changes, so must the other. 
When the city's population shifted from white to black years ago, the library's 
collection expanded to include materials on black issues. Today, as a large 
population of immigrants from Mexico, Cuba and Central America moves into the 
city, Perkins is rearranging the shelves again. 
The library is hiring a Latino librarian and staff member this year to handle a 
$116,000 expansion of its Spanish-language periodical collection. The new 
Hispanics Services Division was created when librarians began noticing the many 
Spanish-speaking visitors and the popularity of Latino-oriented materials. 
Latinos make up more than a third of the city's population. 
"A library is always changing," said Adalin Torres-Zayas, who will manage the 
Latino collection. "If it doesn't change, it just becomes an empty building." 
The libraries in other South Bay cities also are adapting to ethnic changes. 
The Torrance Public Library has added to its Chinese, Japanese, Korean and 
Vietnamese collections in recent years, and a study on the library's future 
recommends more emphasis on Asian-language materials. 
The Carson Regional Library, which is part of the county library system, has 
expanded its dial-a-story service to include children's stories in English, 
Spanish and Japanese. The library offers orientation tours in English and 
Spanish. 
"What libraries are trying to do is base their collection on their population," 
said Jim Buckley, the head librarian in Torrance. 
Among Inglewood's plans are a language lab to teach Latinos English, more 
books, newspapers, magazines, videos and compact disks in Spanish, and new 
bilingual library information brochures and maps. 
Inglewood library officials are planning to survey families in predominantly 
Latino neighborhoods to determine what the community wants from the library. 
They also hope to lure to the stacks Latinos who may not currently use the 
library. 
"If you come from a country in Latin America, the only contact you have with a 
library is in the university," said Torres-Zayas, a Puerto Rico native who is 
the library's head of circulation. "The public library system is very new in 
Latin America. People are not used to going to the library. We have to say, 
'This is what we can do for you.' " 
Inglewood's Spanish collection already includes more than 4,000 book titles, 25 
magazines and newspapers and 400 records, paperback books and pamphlets. 
Some of the most popular items are English-as-a-second-language materials, 
comic books for children with such titles as "Pato Donald" ("Donald Duck") and 
"Conan el Barbaro" and romance comic books for adults. 
In conversations with visitors, Torres-Zayas said, she has found a need for 
more how-to books on such subjects as helping children with their studies, 
disciplining children and preparing for careers. 
Eduardo Garcia, 27, a native of El Salvador who was checking out a stack of 15 
Spanish-language books on a recent morning, said he fully supports expanding 
the Inglewood collection. Among his books: a history of Rome, an encyclopedia 
of medical terms and a biography of King Juan Carlos I of Spain. 
Hector Carrio, the bilingual coordinator for the Inglewood Unified School 
District, said the library can be an important resource for newly arrived 
immigrants. He welcomed the proposed expansion and said providing reading 
material in Spanish for Latino youngsters keeps them in touch with their 
culture and helps to preserve their self-esteem. 
Getting newly arrived Latino immigrants into the library with Spanish-language 
materials will also eventually help them learn English, Carrio said. 
Torres-Zayas said the essence of the expansion is to make the Inglewood library 
more welcome to people from other cultures. As part of that effort, about 60% 
of the staff has completed a short course on basic Spanish phrases. 
The staff members didn't learn any arcane vocabulary or the conjugations of 
irregular verbs, Torres-Zayas said, but "now they know how to say, 'I don't 
speak Spanish, but I can get someone who does.' " 
While Inglewood is beefing up its Spanish-language collection, other libraries 
in the South Bay are concentrating on different populations. 
In Torrance, where the 1980 census counted 20% of the population as Asian and 
8% as Latino, there are 400 items in the Spanish collection and between 2,500 
and 3,000 in Asian languages. In recent months, Chinese-language materials have 
been checked out more often than other items in the Torrance foreign-language 
collection, followed by Japanese. 
Along with Spanish, the Carson library has materials in Hindi, Samoan, Korean, 
Tagalog and several other languages. 
"Every culture, every ethnic group, can find information about themselves in 
our library," said Billie Frierson, the community library manager in Carson. 
"If we don't have it, we can find it. We're here as a resource for everyone." 
