THE SOUL-SEARCHING ROAD TO ONE'S ROOTS; 
ADOPTION: THERE ARE TWO SIDES TO THE PENDING LEGISLATION THAT WOULD OPEN 
ADOPTION RECORDS TO BIOLOGICAL AND ADOPTIVE PARENTS AND ADOPTEES. 
After almost three decades of a love that has weathered temper tantrums, 
unfinished homework, preteen confusion, adolescent anguish, and addictions 
ranging from cookies to amphetamines, I could not say "No, Judi, do not search 
for your birth mother." 
Our daughter was 28 years old. Her decision to search for her roots was 
overdue. 
That was 12 years ago. It has been a long time since I have thought about our 
daughter's trip to North Carolina to find her "first" mother. When I read that 
the state Assembly had passed a bill that "would end confidentiality in 
adoptions," the memory became current once again. 
The pending legislation would allow records of adoptees between 1938 and 1984 
to be open to adoptive parents, biological parents and, of course, themselves. 
Although I agreed with Judi's decision to search, I am ambivalent about this 
new, potential erosion of confidentiality in adoptions. 
As the mother of two adopted children, I have enjoyed an anonymity that 
protected my husband and me from intrusion and my children from possibly 
unpleasant surprises. On the other hand, I remember the many troubling 
questions our children asked over the years that I was unable to answer. 
As a toddler, our daughter tolerated a consistently asked question from 
strangers on the street and even visitors in our home: "Where did you get your 
blond hair?" She would look at me and my black bob and shrug her small 
shoulders. 
As she grew, Judi had questions of her own? "Were my 'first' parents Jewish?" 
"Why do I have such high cheekbones?" "Do you think that my other mother had 
any other children?" My answers had to be generalizations and platitudes. I had 
so little information. 
In the early '50s, agencies gave adoptive parents only the most basic facts. We 
learned that our baby was physically and mentally healthy, that her mother was 
small and her dad was tall, that she cried and laughed a lot. She was named 
Barbara at birth. 
When Judi was 28, she asked a challenging question, one she had never posed 
before. "Tell me, Mom, did 'she' have cancer, kidney disease, problems with her 
period, diabetes, etc.?" Our daughter had awakened to the fact that the answers 
she was giving on her doctors' questionnaires concerned her adopted parents and 
grandparents, but their genes and disabilities were not relevant. Judi was 
having medical problems and she needed family history. 
She hesitated to tell us that she wanted to find her biological mother, lest 
she hurt our feelings. But our parenthood was not threatened. We supported and 
encouraged her. 
Judi contacted a social worker in North Carolina, at the agency that had placed 
her in a foster home, temporarily, and then in our home. At the worker's 
invitation, she traveled there. 
The social worker shared her birth mother's first name and the general location 
where she had lived. That's all. Feeling cheated, Judi continued her journey 
through the mountains, speaking to farmers and their wives, sharing coffee and 
chatter with anyone who would take the time. 
She returned to the city of her birth and, using the name supplied by the 
social worker, her own birth name, her birthdate and the hospital, found her 
mother's full name in the city clerk's records. 
But, suddenly afraid of confronting her birth mother, our daughter did not 
proceed further. She simply flew home. 
Judi's social worker had opened the file as far as she was permitted by law. 
When we adopted our children, we were told that when they were 18 years old 
they could see their records. But by the time our daughter tried to exercise 
that privilege, the law had changed. 
Not every adoptee shares Judi's desire to find her biological parents. We know, 
because 18 months before we adopted Judi, we adopted Jeff, who can't understand 
his sister's search for the past. When Judi suggested that Jeff obtain similar 
information, his impatient response was, "Who needs it?" 
When Jeff, now 41, was a teen-ager, we visited the community in which we 
adopted our children. He refused to walk down the street or stay in a local 
motel. Years later, he confided that, at the time, he had been afraid that his 
birth mother would recognize him and "steal" him back. 
Every child is different. I shudder when I try to imagine what it would have 
been like if confidentiality and anonymity had not protected our son. What if 
his birth mother had known where to find him? 
There are two sides to this legislation. There is a wealth of information that 
can help adoptive parents understand the infants who become their very own. 
There is a real and deep-seated need among some adoptees to find their "roots" 
and satisfy themselves that they were not heedlessly abandoned. And there are 
many parents who relinquish babies in the children's best interest, who might 
suffer less if they could learn, at the very least, that the children are 
thriving. 
But safeguards must be included in any legislation. If I were a new adoptive 
parent today, I would need to know that no one could arrive at my doorstep to 
confuse my child, demand him or her back, or harass us. I would also hope that 
biological parents could be protected from confrontation and embarrassment. 
Finally, I would wish that adopted children would be able to seek and receive 
the family medical histories of their birth parents. 
Each member of the adoption "triad" has special needs. Not one of those needs 
should be met at the expense of any one of the members. 
Judi would still like to know if her mother was a towhead. But the possibility 
of opening wounds for her biological mother, who now must be close to 80 years 
old, have kept her from completing her search to this day. 
