TIME TO HEED CONSUMER CONCERNS 
California must take stronger action to assure that its food supply is safe 
from pesticides that can cause cancer and other illnesses. The Legislature may 
be on the verge of passing a measure that purports to provide that protection 
but ignores critical problems. The lawmakers should be talking more about 
phasing out carcinogenic pesticides and phasing in pest control measures that 
reduce reliance on harmful chemicals. Instead, they seem intent on taking 
half-measures to head off a potential ballot initiative. Failing to heed 
consumer concerns now could be a big mistake and lead to harsher controls 
enacted by the voters. 
The Assembly has just passed AB 2161, sponsored by Assemblyman Bruce Bronzan 
(D-Fresno). It would establish a long-overdue testing program for pesticide 
residues in processed foods, expand monitoring of raw agricultural products and 
improve protection for infants and toddlers who can tolerate less exposure to 
some pesticides than adults can. 
Bronzan's bill is fine as far as it goes, but it does not go far enough. It 
gives the agricultural and chemical industries too much control over pesticide 
regulation and takes too little action to reduce pesticide use. Critics like 
Ralph Lightstone of the California Rural Legal Assistance Foundation point out, 
for example, that there is already a state law requiring a plan for monitoring 
processed food. The Department of Health Services "prepared the plan, which was 
apparently not welcomed by some industry groups," says Lightstone. "It was 
never formally released, and has been gathering dust in the governor's office 
for the past four years." 
More can and must be done. Based on extensive animal testing, the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency has already identified, but not acted against, 
13 pesticides that either clearly cause cancer in humans or probably do so. 
These pesticides include alachlor, a weed-killer used on beans and corn, and 
captan, a fungicide used on fruits and vegetables. Federal indecisiveness 
should not stop California, which has long had higher standards. AB 417, 
proposed by Assemblyman Lloyd Connelly (D-Sacramento) would phase out these 
chemicals over a 5-to-8-year period. The acutely hazardous pesticide aldicarb, 
used on watermelons and cucumbers, would also be phased out. 
Connelly's bill, which the Legislature so far has ignored, also calls for more 
research into alternative pest-control methods. It also would transfer 
decisions about health impacts of pesticides from the state Department of Food 
and Agriculture to the health department. 
Environmental groups support Connelly's bill; growers and chemical 
manufacturers support Bronzan's bill. The environmentalists and farm-worker 
attorneys are considering a pesticide-safety ballot initiative along the lines 
of Connelly's bill. In a fair fight -- one not fought with tons of money and 
simplistic slogans -- odds are that the same voters who approved the insurance 
initiative could be persuaded to go for tighter pesticide controls. 
Once again the Legislature's credibility and concern for public interest is at 
stake. It should not try cosmetic touches but should have an open and thorough 
dialogue about real public concerns. It probably won't. And once again 
lawmaking may slip out of lawmakers' hands. 
