FOR GEORGE C. PAGE, THE PITS ARE A PLEASURE 
The museum at the La Brea tar pits exists because of an orange. 
Early in this century, when George C. Page was a 12-year-old schoolboy in his 
native Nebraska, a teacher gave him an orange from California. 
"I was so awed by the beauty of that piece of fruit that I said I hope someday 
I can live where that came from," Page, now a trim, energetic 89, recalled in 
an office of the Hancock Park museum that bears both his name and his personal 
stamp. 
At 16, Page hitchhiked to Los Angeles with $2.30 in his pocket, living on 
Hershey bars and 10-cent bowls of bean soup fortified with crackers and 
ketchup. He knew no one here, but "any place that produced that piece of fruit 
must have merit," he believed. He got work as a busboy, although he was so 
naive that at first he thought the job involved driving a bus. 
On his single day off each week, Page did what many curious young Angelenos 
with little money did for fun. He went to the ostrich races in Pasadena -- once 
he and a bunch of his pals shared a scrambled ostrich egg. He went to Busch 
Gardens, formerly in Van Nuys. And one day he went to Hancock Park to see the 
oozing pools of asphalt famous around the world as the La Brea tar pits. 
Fascinated by the puddles that had trapped saber-toothed cats, mastodons and 
other ancient animals, he was dismayed to learn that the only way he could see 
the fossilized bones was to travel seven miles to the Museum of Natural History 
in Exposition Park. 
"What a pity they haven't been exhibited on the site where they were found," he 
thought. Then, he recalled, "a half-century goes by before I'm in a position to 
do anything about it." 
What Page did about it was to give Los Angeles a $4-million museum for its La 
Brea treasures, a unique cache of thousands of remains, some caught in the 
lethal goo 40,000 years ago. But, more than that, he shaped the George C. Page 
Museum of La Brea Discoveries, which opened in 1977, bringing his years of 
experience in marketing and packaging to the building and its contents. 
Although Page never went to business school (his formal education ended with 
eighth grade), he knows packaging. When he was 17, living in a $3-a-month attic 
room in downtown Los Angeles, working days busing tables and nights jerking 
sodas, he started the company that would make his fortune. 
He decided to send a box of California fruits to his mother and brothers back 
in Nebraska as a Christmas gift. He artfully lined the box with red paper and 
decorated it with tinsel. The teen-ager's gift was so attractive that 37 other 
roomers in his boarding house offered to pay him "what's right" to make up 
similar boxes to send back to their Midwestern families. The result was Mission 
Pak, the gift-package company Page operated until 1946. 
"Believe me, to open the purse, you had to appeal to the eye," he said. 
Throughout his professional life, Page was always aware of the power of 
attractive packaging. On a trip to France when he was 21, he saw a new material 
called cellophane and grabbed up as much as he could to beautify his gift 
baskets. He once operated a small business that made spiffy auto bodies to 
upgrade the appearance of battered but functional cars. And, as a developer, he 
was sensitive to the importance of landscaping in enhancing the value of a 
property. 
Page wanted to create a setting for the La Brea fossils that would "be right 
for the subject and something that was different and outstanding." He rejected 
the proposals of five established architects whose designs included a kind of 
open-air circus tent and a gigantic three-leafed clover. On the recommendation 
of a friend, he talked to two young men not long out of architecture school: 
Willis E. Fagan and Franklin W. Thornton. Using their own limited funds, the 
pair spent a month touring the museums of America, asking professionals what 
they would do differently if they could re-create their institutions. Finally, 
they came to Page with a proposal. 
"You've taken them out of the ground here," the young architects said of the La 
Brea discoveries. "Why don't we put them back in?" 
They proposed building a burial mound for the collection, a museum half 
underground to conserve energy and to keep the park grounds as intact as 
possible. 
Once construction was under way, Page got a trailer and was on the site at 7 
o'clock every morning, including Christmas, for three years. 
Originally, Page was only committed to paying for the museum's shell. But it 
soon became clear that if he wanted to see the museum operating in his 
lifetime, he would have to do more than that. 
He is not impressed by how long it takes the county to get things done nor how 
much it ultimately costs. 
"What they do," he said, "is they call in an expert, and he calls in an 
assistant expert." 
Page used his money and energy to streamline the process. "I happen to be a 
persistent cuss," he said, "and when I start something, I finish it." 
He was horrified when he first saw them at how the La Brea discoveries had been 
displayed at the Museum of Natural History. The skeleton of the imperial 
mammoth was propped up with plumbing pipes, and the bones fell with every 
good-sized tremor. Even worse, in his view, "they had the 9,000-year-old woman 
stretched out on plywood, covered with dust, and the kids would look at her and 
yawn." 
"I was determined to breathe life into every exhibit," he said. If the fossils 
were not exhibited skillfully, he feared, visitors would see nothing but 
"bones, bones, bones." 
Page was especially concerned about displaying the bones of the woman -- the 
only human remains found in the tar pits -- to maximum effect. He makes it 
clear that not everyone appreciated the fact that he, an amateur and a 
non-scientist, had strong views on the museum's displays. 
There were those at the parent museum, he said, who wondered "how can a man 
who's been lucky in the jungle of commerce presume to arrange a museum in a 
professional manner?" Eyebrows were raised, he said, when he sought advice -- 
not from the museum but from the Walt Disney Co. -- on displaying the 
9,000-year-old woman. 
Page approached the creator of the spectral figures for Disneyland's Haunted 
Mansion attraction. 
"There's what is known as Pepper's ghost," Page was told, describing an optical 
illusion in which an object seems to turn into another image and back again. As 
a result of that conversation, when visitors to the museum look into a dark 
case containing a cast of the ancient woman's skull atop a modern woman's 
skeleton, the bones seem to become a young girl. 
The effect is created with the composite skeleton, a model of a young Indian 
woman with long, black hair, careful lighting and a piece of plate glass. (The 
17 bones actually belonging to the 9,000-year-old woman are in the museum's 
ossuary.) A similar display shows a skeleton seemingly transformed into a 
snarling saber-toothed tiger. 
"Evidently I've done it right, because the kids squeal with ecstasy," Page 
said. 
Over the objections of purists, the museum features a "dinosaur theater," where 
visitors can see a short film about that most-charismatic of creatures. No 
dinosaur bone has ever been found at the tar pits, but virtually every visitor 
to the museum expects to see their remains. Page thinks the youngsters who come 
by the thousands should be educated, not disappointed. 
Page also insisted that there be two theaters, not one, so visitors can see an 
explanatory film about the tar pits. "People don't like to wait," he said. The 
theaters are next to the entrance because Page says he thinks visitors should 
have a vivid image of what life was like in Los Angeles of the Ice Ages before 
they see the inanimate remains in the rest of the museum. 
In Page's view, pictures are far better than words at engaging the public. He 
likes pithy explanatory cards, not epics, next to exhibits. 
"I'm not going to put a book on the card," he said. He is also proud of the way 
that painted backgrounds, showing the La Brea "monsters" as they were in life, 
flesh out exhibits of skeletons and plaster models. 
A resident of Hancock Park, Page is a hands-on patron who continues to keep 
close tabs on the museum. When natural asphalt proved inappropriate for a 
display that shows visitors how strong the sticky stuff can be, he found a 
chemist to develop a synthetic version that didn't harden up like the real 
thing. 
"When they have these problems come up, they call George," he said. When he 
walks through the museum, he notices everything from the health of individual 
plants in the atrium garden -- "That sego lily looks a little sick," he warned 
the gardener -- to the condition of the carpet. 
The carpet is emblematic of his ongoing involvement. Page wanted carpet, not 
marble or ceramic tile, on the floor because it is more comfortable to walk on. 
He thought the present carpet would stand up well when he chose it 13 years 
ago. And he's glad he got a 10% overrun: It's proved invaluable for repairing 
spots damaged by high heels. 
But 13 years is 13 years, and half a million people walk on that carpet every 
year. Recently, Page said, he heard that a European manufacturer has developed 
an ultra-durable tile that might be just the thing for the museum floor. 
