ANTIQUES: AROUND HOME; 
SHIP MODELS 
FROM SCANDINAVIAN fiords to the South Pacific, ship models have been made by 
many different civilizations. Among the most fascinating models are the "spirit 
ships" that were buried in Egyptian tombs to assist the dead in crossing the 
Nile. 
On long voyages under sail, some seamen passed their leisure time making 
scrimshaw artifacts, while others made smaller versions of the ships on which 
they were serving. Some of the rarest and most interesting models now popular 
were made by French prisoners of war in the 19th Century. During the Napoleonic 
Wars, prisoners in England and Scotland made wonderfully detailed models of 
French and English men-of-war, imaginatively put together from scraps of ivory 
and leftover bones from the cookhouse. 
Of great interest to collectors today are models from the 18th and 19th 
centuries, particularly those representations of great sailing ships such as 
Cutty Sark and Flying Cloud and such wonders of the sea as that iron leviathan 
of 1858, the Great Eastern. 
Models generally fall into three categories: those made by shipwrights to aid 
in the planning and construction of full-size vessels; elaborate models 
authentic down to the last bolt and the last lashing in the rigging, made for 
advertising and display purposes, and models constructed by hobbyists, many of 
them active (or retired) sailors. 
The variety is endless: Viking longboats, Portuguese carracks, Spanish 
galleons, British men-of-war, American tea clippers, paddle-wheel steamers and 
those swift, sleek ocean liners of the 1930s. There are few artifacts more 
romantic or more historical than model ships and, for homes up and down the 
California coastline, few more appropriate or more decorative. 
Antique ship models can be found at Millstein's General Store in Los Angeles; 
Dana Book and Navigation Co. in Dana Point; Minney's Ship Chandlery and Vallejo 
Gallery (previously Antiques &amp; Nautical) in Newport Beach; West Sea Co. and 
Maidhof Brothers in San Diego. NEWBOOKS 
