2 BRITONS GUILTY IN SCHEME TO CHEAT IRS 
The U.S. attorney's office announced Tuesday that two British citizens had 
pleaded guilty to charges of participating in an elaborate scheme to defraud 
the Internal Revenue Service, which involved phony trades on the London Metal 
Exchange. 
David H. Lamb pleaded guilty to two counts of wire fraud and Barry Hughes 
pleaded guilty to one count of conspiring to defraud the IRS. The two are to be 
sentenced Sept. 18 by U.S. District Judge Terry R. Hatter. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Terree A. Bowers, the prosecutor in the case, said he 
believes it is the first time that British brokers have pleaded guilty to 
assisting American citizens in defrauding the IRS. 
"This is a landmark case; it shows we can go after foreign brokers," said 
Bowers, who directs the major fraud unit of the U.S. attorney's office in Los 
Angeles. 
Important Case 
Harland W. Braun, a veteran criminal defense lawyer who represented Lamb, 
agreed that it was a case of considerable importance. 
"The case established American criminal jurisdiction over British businessmen," 
he said. 
After Hughes and Lamb were indicted in 1985 following a lengthy joint 
investigation by the IRS and the FBI, Braun and other defense lawyers asserted 
that U.S. courts had no jurisdiction over them. But last year Judge Hatter 
ruled against them. 
"The trend of the law is in favor of what the government is doing in this 
case," said Braun. "With the growth of international business," he added, there 
are likely to be more cases where foreigners are subject to U.S. criminal laws 
and U.S. citizens are subject to the criminal laws of other countries. 
Bowers said there were two schemes in the case. 
One involved the creation of false losses through trades on the commodities 
exchange in London on which there was no risk and the return of the money 
supposedly lost through corporations set up in places like the British Virgin 
Islands and the Bahamas. The second scheme involved the laundering of money on 
successful investments so that taxes would not have to be paid. 
Elaborate Sting 
Bowers said Hughes, 37, and Lamb, 45, were caught through the use of an 
elaborate undercover sting involving agents from the FBI and the IRS. He said 
one IRS agent posed as a taxpayer who wanted to generate bogus losses on 
commodity trades, while an FBI agent posed as the IRS agent's financial 
adviser. 
Initially, the FBI agent contacted an American broker, Ronald N. Kane of Canoga 
Park, and told him he had a client who needed to generate losses in a specified 
account. Soon, he and the IRS agent were put in contact with Lamb and Hughes in 
London. The agents opened a trading account in London and requested the 
creation of a trading loss of $35,000. They were advised to send an odd sum of 
money to lessen the possibility that tax officials would become suspicious. 
