SOVIETS WELCOME NATO PROPOSALS TO CUT FORCES 
The Soviet Union on Thursday welcomed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's 
new proposals to reduce conventional forces in Europe. 
Ambassador Oleg A. Grinevsky, chief Soviet negotiator at the talks on cutting 
conventional forces on the Continent, said he hopes that the new ideas, first 
suggested by President Bush at the NATO summit in May, will "promote rapid 
progress," and he promised that they will be carefully studied. 
The NATO proposals, dealing with numbers of troops and aircraft, were presented 
to the Warsaw Pact nations earlier Thursday, the final day in the current round 
of talks. The proposals came about two months ahead of schedule, leading one 
veteran Western negotiator to describe the pace as "almost breathtaking." 
In Moscow, Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov told a news 
conference that the Soviet Union regards the proposals as "serious and 
constructive and meeting our proposals halfway," Reuters news agency reported. 
"It would have been counterproductive to delay these proposals until September 
-- this gives us an extra two months," Gerasimov said. "We shall do everything 
we can to reach these agreements within six months." 
Although welcoming the ideas, Grinevsky noted here that they were previously 
stated at the Brussels summit. He also complained that NATO's objections to 
excluding Soviet jet fighter interceptors as part of the cuts in air power in 
Europe were "totally at odds" with the concept of restricting the Vienna talks 
to offensive weapons. 
Defining 'Defensive' 
The disagreement over including what the Soviets call defensive warplanes among 
the arms reductions is expected to be a major sticking point in the East-West 
conventional talks here. 
The Western proposals added to the overall agenda important new cuts in combat 
aircraft, combat helicopters and troop strength. 
Thus, the total number of military categories under discussion in Vienna was 
raised Thursday to six -- along with the previous elements of battle tanks, 
heavy artillery and armored troop carriers. 
Grinevsky was full of praise for the progress of the talks, which began early 
this year. "Up to now, there has been great progress," he told a news 
conference here. 
And despite his reservations about some of the new NATO proposals, he said it 
is possible to reach agreement next year, "if all sides are ready." 
"I'm not afraid of difficulties," he added. "I'm afraid when difficulties are 
not resolved." 
The Soviets insist that their air interceptors are totally defensive and should 
not be included in the totals of combat aircraft to be reduced. 
The NATO position is that an interceptor, although defensive, could be 
reconfigured within hours to become an offensive attack bomber. As Stephen J. 
Ledogar, Washington's chief negotiator at these talks, put it: "If it's 
combat-capable, it's a combat aircraft." 
In the package presented Thursday, NATO negotiators proposed a reduction of 
combat aircraft in Europe to 5,700 planes and 1,900 helicopters on each side 
and a reduction of U.S. and Soviet troops stationed in Europe to 275,000 each. 
According to NATO, the new level for combat aircraft would represent a 15% cut 
below NATO's current level and almost a 60% cut below the East Bloc's level. 
The current helicopter levels on both sides are apparently close to the desired 
figure. By NATO's calculations, setting a ceiling of 275,000 troops would mean 
removing 30,000 American soldiers and 325,000 Soviet troops. 
To help verify reductions, NATO proposed that aircraft and helicopters 
withdrawn from service should be destroyed, as tanks, artillery and troop 
carriers would be under earlier proposals. 
In his remarks, Soviet negotiator Grinevsky complained that British, French and 
Canadian forces based in West Germany were left out of proposed reductions. 
And he specifically criticized the NATO package for omitting the category of 
light tanks, those under 26 tons. The Soviets believe that all tanks should be 
included in reductions since, as Grinevsky argued, modern technology could in 
the future upgrade smaller tanks to the effectiveness of current main battle 
armor. 
The talks, formally known as the Conventional Forces in Europe talks, reconvene 
in September. 
Cruise Missile Plan 
In another arms-control development, a senior Soviet military official in 
Moscow said his nation is willing to give up all cruise missiles deployed at 
sea with nuclear warheads if the United States does the same, according to the 
Washington Post. 
The remark by Col. Gen. Nikolai F. Chervov, chief of the arms-control 
directorate in the Soviet military's general staff, represented a departure 
from the Soviet position at the superpower arms negotiations in Geneva. That 
position was that each side could retain up to 400 of the winged, pilotless 
missiles with nuclear warheads and 600 with conventional warheads. 
Washington has long resisted limiting these weapons at all on the grounds that 
inspectors cannot readily monitor them. The dispute has been a major obstacle 
to a new treaty reducing strategic arms. 
