SUN, SKIN &amp; CANCER; 
ON BEACH, SLOPES OR IN SALONS, TANNING IS DANGEROUS, 14 SCIENCE EXPERTS 
CONCLUDE 
Zonker Harris, the Doonesbury comic-strip character known for his great tan, 
got the message and went "pale" a few months ago. But for sun worshipers still 
denying the dangers of too much sun, a government panel issued a report 
recently that left no more room for doubt. 
The 14-member panel, sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, spent two 
days examining the scientific evidence on the effects of sunlight and 
ultraviolet radiation on the skin. They concluded that tanning, whether it 
occurs on the beach, in a tanning parlor or on the ski slopes, is "deleterious 
to the skin." 
"Tanning is visible evidence of injury to the skin," said David Bickers, 
chairman of the panel and director of the Skin Diseases Research Center at Case 
Western Reserve University in Cleveland. 
That damage can be measured not just by sagging and wrinkling -- signs of early 
aging -- but also by an increased risk of skin cancer. Skin cancers caused by 
ultraviolet-radiation exposure, the kind found in sun rays, are now the most 
common form of cancer in the United States. In 1978, the latest year for which 
figures are available, half a million new cases of skin cancer were diagnosed. 
The panel said recently that this figure is "probably a gross underestimate 
(for the number of cases) in 1989." The reason: visits to the doctor for 
non-melanoma skin cancer treatment rose 50% in the past 10 years, at a time 
when visits for other ailments increased just 11%, reported Kenneth Kraemer, a 
dermatologist with the National Cancer Institute. 
The amount of time spent baking in the sun is directly correlated with the risk 
of skin cancer. That is one reason why basal-cell carcinomas, the most common 
skin cancer found in Caucasians, form primarily on sun-exposed areas of the 
body, such as the face and neck. 
Basal-cell carcinoma and squamous-cell skin cancer are far less deadly than 
melanoma -- the most virulent type of skin cancer. "While the risk factors for 
melanoma . . . are less clear, it too has been associated with exposure to 
ultraviolet radiation," the panel concluded. 
Too much sun also causes changes in the immune system, and that may in turn 
increase the risk of other forms of cancer. Margaret L. Kripke, a researcher 
with M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, told the panel that only in the 
past several years have researchers discovered that ultraviolet radiation can 
modify immune function in animals. "There is increasing evidence that similar 
effects occur in humans exposed to UV radiation," Kripke said. 
For those who thought that they could simply slather on Retin-A to help erase 
sun-caused wrinkles and other damage, the panel's advice is that there is no 
proof that it works. "Available evidence is insufficient to recommend the use 
of Retin-A and similar compounds for treating sun-induced wrinkles," the panel 
concluded. 
Because people who use Retin-A must continue it for the rest of their lives, 
one concern about the drug is whether its long-term use also could pose a 
cancer risk. 
Ortho Pharmaceutical Co., the maker of Retin-A, said the company has completed 
studies of 2,000 patients who have used the drug to treat sun damage since 
1985. The results, not yet made public, will be submitted later this year to 
the Food and Drug Administration. "We are very confident about that data," an 
Ortho spokesman said. 
The best bet for preventing both premature aging and skin cancer is to minimize 
sun exposure, especially between the peak hours of 10 a.m. and 3 p.m., the 
panel advised. More than 60% of the ultraviolet rays reaching the Earth's 
surface do so during midday. 
Children and adolescents who spend a lot of time outdoors playing or involved 
in sports are the most likely to be affected during these peak hours. Studies 
show that more than half of all lifetime sun exposure occurs before age 18. 
For this reason, the panel advised parents and schools to change the time of 
outdoor activities. "Keep recess and recreation time away from those peak 
hours," Bickers said. 
Those who cannot avoid the sun need to take precautions when exposed, the panel 
said. They should start by wearing clothing "constructed of tight woven 
fabrics, long sleeves, long pants, (and the like)," they advised. 
The next step is frequent and liberal use of sunscreens, with sun-protection 
factors (SPF) of 15 or higher. But a sunscreen with a very high SPF rating is 
not necessarily that much more protective. "There is no evidence to suggest 
that a sunscreen with an SPF of 44 is twice as good as one with an SPF of 22," 
Bickers said. 
What most sunscreens do not do is guard against the effects of ultraviolet A 
radiation -- the longer-wave type known as UVA. Many studies in animals and 
humans suggest that UVB -- the shorter-wave ray -- is the more dangerous as far 
as causing cancer. But both types of rays penetrate the skin, and UVA is not 
without damaging effects, the panel noted. Studies of mice and guinea pigs 
show, for example, that UVA can damage DNA, cause redness and produce 
squamous-cell carcinoma. 
For this reason, the panel said, "combination sunscreens that are effective 
against UVB and UVA are preferable." Currently only one -- Photoplex, which 
offers extensive protection against both -- is on the market. It is available 
without prescription. Whatever sunscreen consumers choose, the panel said, 
should "be applied 30 minutes before exposure" and then frequently reapplied. 
Those living in the Sun Belt were advised to consider daily use of sunscreens 
for the best protection. 
The panel also advised people taking regular medication of any sort to check 
with their doctor before going into the sun. Among the drugs that can react to 
sunlight are some oral antibiotics, blood pressure medicine, drugs to suppress 
the immune system and anti-inflammatory medication. 
Worries about the possible cancer-causing effects of sunscreens themselves also 
surfaced in recent weeks. Lester Gurelik, a photochemist with the National 
Cancer Institute's Cancer Prevention and Control Branch, told the panel that a 
class of chemicals called benzophenones, which are found in many sunscreens, 
may themselves help promote cancer. With sun exposure, benzophenones "produce 
intermediate chemicals that cause reactions in the skin that normally cannot 
occur," Gurelik said. "These chemicals could potentially cause damage that 
might promote cancer." 
After reviewing the current scientific evidence, however, the panel said 
benefits of sunscreens clearly outweigh their risks. Benzophenones have been 
used for 10 to 15 years, Bickers said. "The panel has considered this at great 
length," he said. "At the moment, the use of sunscreens is (deemed) safe." 
Despite all their precautionary warnings about sun exposure, the panel said 
they are not advising Americans to live hermit-like existences indoors. 
"You have to lead a normal life," said Maria Turner, a panel member who 
practices dermatology at George Washington University Medical Center. "I tell 
my patients to adopt a more Spanish life style. Play tennis at 4 p.m. Swim at 5 
p.m., and children should not be out in the sun at noon." 
ANATOMY OF SKIN CANCER 
BASAL-CELL CARCINOMA 
May be a small pearly nodule, a red patch, or a smooth growth with a rolled 
border and an indented center. There may also be tiny blood vessels on the 
surface. Often on exposed areas, such as the back of hands and face, but may be 
elsewhere. 
SQUAMOUS-CELL CARCINOMA 
May be a thick, hard nodule with white or yellow scales, or a red, crusty 
patch. May ulcerate or bleed easily. Usually on exposed areas, including lips, 
but may be elsewhere. 
MALIGNANT MELANOMA 
Can be a lethal form of skin cancer. Usually a brown-black or multi-colored 
patch or nodule. Asymmetrical, raised shape, with an irregular border which may 
bleed easily. Usually on the upper back and also on the legs of women. 
SOURCE: American Cancer Society, American Academy of Dermatology and Anatomy 
and Physiology by Dr. James Bevan 
DANGER SIGNS: 
Asymmetry &amp; Irregular Borders -- One half unlike the other half; scalloped 
or poorly circumscribed border. 
Multicolored -- Color changes from one area to another. Shades of tan and 
brown; black; sometimes white, red or blue. 
Size -- Diameter larger than 6mm as a rule, about the size of a pencil eraser. 
ULTRAVIOLET RAYS 
Ultraviolet radiation from the sun is the main cause of skin cancer. 
Ultraviolet A rays: Penetrate deeper than B rays. Harm is more long-term. 
Ultraviolet B rays: Main cause of sunburn, they burn just the upper layers of 
the skin. 
Ultaviolet C rays: Toxic to life, they are filtered out by the earth's ozone 
layer. 
