COLUMN ONE; 
SPORTS AS A SECOND LANGUAGE; 
IMMIGRANT STUDENTS AROUND THE SOUTHLAND ARE USING ATHLETICS TO HURDLE SOCIAL 
BARRIERS AND ADAPT TO AMERICAN CULTURE. 
Soi Hoang will graduate from Verdugo Hills High School in June, and he hopes to 
play college volleyball someday. If he does well, he could make an All-American 
team. 
That would be a new experience for Hoang, who played on a high school team with 
students of just about every nationality except Americans. 
Verdugo Hills finished second in its division of the city playoffs this spring 
with a team made up entirely of players from Vietnam, China and the 
Philippines. And none of the eight Latino players on the junior varsity even 
lived in this country a year ago. 
If the United States is a melting pot, the pot has boiled over in Southern 
California. In the Los Angeles Unified School District, which includes Verdugo 
Hills High, students speak more than 83 languages and dialects. 
In such an environment, school officials say, sports have become invaluable in 
the process of acculturation. Not only can sports draw students to class and 
help keep them there, but they also provide a way around the social, cultural 
and linguistic obstacles facing new immigrants. 
"Athletics are one of the easiest ways to break down the barriers," said Lou 
Ramirez, the athletic director at Birmingham High, a Los Angeles Unified School 
District campus in Van Nuys with a large non-English-speaking enrollment. 
"There's no question that athletics is the best deal. It's an international 
language. The kids get to know each other better. They come to depend on each 
other. 
"Once they get a little confidence in one thing, it carries over into others." 
Ramon Salcido, an associate professor of social work at USC and an adviser to 
Rep. Esteban E. Torres (D-La Puente), believes sports can also alter 
perceptions and boost self-esteem. 
"Let's say I'm a recent immigrant, and people don't like the way I talk and 
they don't like the way I look," Salcido explained. "But when I'm out there on 
the soccer field, hey, I'm a hero. I'm someone important. 
"It's important for mental health and social health." 
Varant Vartabedian, athletic director at Holy Martyrs High School in Encino, 
believes this is especially true for immigrants whose homelands are at war or 
struggling with civil unrest. Dealing with uncertainties about friends and 
relatives left behind, he said, can be more difficult than learning a new 
language or style of dress. 
Nearly half the students at Holy Martyrs, which is affiliated with the Armenian 
Apostolic Church, come from strife-torn countries such as Lebanon, Iran and 
Syria. Vartabedian says involvement in sports "takes their minds off other 
things." 
"The way of life here is so different," said Vartabedian, who emigrated from 
Lebanon 12 years ago. "The majority of the students, until they get used to it, 
they are depressed. They feel something missing." 
Sports, Vartabedian said, can fill that void. 
"With a team, they feel like they are something important rather than just 
being a student in a school somewhere," he said. "It's something special." 
Although other methods of cultural integration -- such as classes, church and 
social groups -- are available for most students, experts say sports have one 
important advantage: relevance to the life students knew before. 
"English as a second language programs assist in socialization and give 
(students) something to strive for," Salcido said. "But the only way they can 
find something of social relevance, something that reminds them of home, is 
often through sports." 
The highly acclaimed Eastman Project, named for the East Los Angeles elementary 
school where it was founded, was built around that concept. Using sports, art 
and music, the program seeks to draw ethnic and non-ethnic students together 
and hold their interest through a creative break in the academic schedule. 
Los Angeles school district officials, alarmed at the growing dropout rate 
among ethnic students, are counting on such creative approaches. The district 
has seen its Latino enrollment nearly quadruple in the last two decades; today 
62% of the district's students are Latino. But with the Latino dropout rate at 
40% nationally, officials fear the district could lose many of those students 
before graduation. 
Outlying school districts are beginning to confront similar problems as large 
immigrant populations spread to suburban areas such as the San Gabriel Valley, 
Glendale and Ventura County. 
"A lot of the kids . . . find themselves lost in the classroom," said Rudy 
Campos, who left a teaching and coaching position at Oxnard High last year to 
sell real estate. "(But) I saw a lot of changes in personalities and their 
attitude toward school on the soccer field." 
Campos remembers experiencing many of the same feelings when he and his family 
left Mexico and moved to Monterey Park more than 20 years ago. 
"My experience was culture shock," said Campos, who was 13 at the time. "I 
didn't speak a word of English. I didn't know what anyone was saying." 
Fortunately, he remembered to bring a soccer ball -- and with that he began to 
find himself. 
"A lot of kids played kickball, and that was a natural for me," he said. "That 
kind of broke the ice." 
Campos followed soccer to East Los Angeles College and eventually wound up at 
Whittier College on an athletic scholarship, graduating with a degree in life 
sciences. 
"It was a big deal to get a scholarship to college, to go to a private college 
and live on campus," Campos said. "Sports was the thing that motivated me to 
continue in school. It was an incentive for me." 
But the link between athletics and academics can be a tenuous one, and moves to 
strengthen it can be controversial. 
Students in the Los Angeles school district, for example, must maintain a C 
average to be eligible for extracurricular activities. Although that may lead 
some students to take their studies seriously, others struggling with the 
language often find the challenge too demanding. 
"I have mixed feelings about that (the C requirement)," said James Diego Vigil, 
an associate professor of anthropology at USC and an expert in minority 
affairs. "I know a lot of the athletes have the ability to achieve that. But 
there are some kids who, for some reason or another, cannot abide by that 
requirement. 
"We have to find a way to integrate those kids." 
Such a task is often easier on the athletic field than in the classroom, 
coaches, teachers and athletes say, because the most obvious obstacle, 
language, is more easily negotiated in sports. 
"People talk fast and they're hard to understand," said Dragan Jovanowski, a 
tennis player at North Hollywood High and a native of Yugoslavia. "But when you 
play tennis, you only count the points." 
At Oxnard High, Campos made the process of acculturation part of his team's 
daily regimen by refusing to speak Spanish during practice. That proved to be a 
break with tradition, but Campos believes his players benefited from it when 
they got back to the classroom. 
"In the past, most of the other coaches were walk-on coaches who really didn't 
understand the academic end of it," Campos said. "They always spoke to the kids 
in Spanish. (But) I wanted to get them familiar with what they would 
encounter." 
Campos' soccer players, most of them immigrants from Mexico, were already 
familiar with their sport. However, with the growth in ethnic diversity among 
recent immigrants, that's not always the case. 
Edvin Babayova, a Times All-Valley and All-City Section football player from 
Van Nuys High, played soccer as a youngster and didn't see his first football 
game until coming to the United States from Italy six years ago. His first 
gridiron was an asphalt street in the New York City borough of Queens. 
"It was weird," Babayova, 19, said of the experience. "The ball was a different 
shape, and all the rules, they didn't make sense to me. The first time someone 
threw the ball to me, I didn't run or move or anything. I think I threw it 
back." 
But football was popular. Everyone played football, and Babayova didn't want to 
stand out by refusing to play. 
"I felt that in being part of a team, I would belong," he said. "The team is a 
lot like being with your brothers. I knew there was no going back (to Italy). I 
knew I would make it." 
At Alhambra High, a recent wave of immigrants from Southeast Asia has turned 
the school's athletic program upside down. The school, which once fielded a 
strong football team, has struggled in the sport recently. The Moors, as the 
team is named, won just four games in each of the last two seasons and, last 
fall, had to combine the freshman and sophomore teams because there weren't 
enough students to form two squads. 
In badminton, however, the school has evolved into a power in its region, 
reaching the playoff semifinals. One of its girls' doubles teams, meanwhile, 
won the section title. 
The change in Alhambra's athletic direction reflects a larger change in the 
community, which has absorbed a large number of Asian immigrants since the end 
of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War. 
"The athletic program changes as the athletes change," Alhambra Athletic 
Director Steve Kemp said. "I don't think it's a matter of making a conscious 
effort to change the emphasis. Kids coming in with different abilities and 
different interest make that change." 
Nevertheless, they can put a strain on a school's athletic program and a 
premium on creative thinking. Kemp actively courts students with athletic 
talent once they enroll at Alhambra, and the approach has paid off. Students at 
Alhambra have apparently adapted to their new environment faster and have made 
consistently high scores on standardized academic tests. And at the same time, 
in basketball and badminton, Alhambra's teams have become among Southern 
California's best. 
Samuel Mark, an associate vice president of civic and community affairs at USC, 
says academic achievement can be linked to participation in athletics, 
especially in the case of immigrant students. 
"(Sports) provides an area where students can feel good about themselves, and 
that carries over into academics," he said. "It serves as a way to boost 
self-esteem." 
Those who work most closely with the athletes, as coaches and as teachers, 
insist that the benefits enrich the school as well as the students. 
"Sometimes it's more challenging, but I wouldn't have it any other way," said 
Dino Stirpe, the volleyball coach at Verdugo Hills High. "They (the immigrant 
students) bring so much to the school." 
It's clear that the students are beginning to feel more comfortable. 
"Right now, I think of myself as an American," said Babayova, the football 
player from Van Nuys. "I play an American game and I believe in the American 
dream." 
