TAPE RULED INADMISSIBLE IN TRIAL OF BRANDO SON; 
SLAYING: POLICE FAILED TO FULLY INFORM HIM OF HIS RIGHTS BEFORE TAKING 
STATEMENT ON SHOOTING, JUDGE SAYS. 
In a stunning victory for actor Marlon Brando's son, Christian, a judge ruled 
Monday that a tape-recorded statement he gave hours after the shooting death of 
his half-sister's boyfriend is inadmissible as evidence against him. 
The portly film star sat impassively, occasionally taking notes and ignoring 
the groupies who packed the courtroom, as Superior Court Judge Larry Fidler 
found that Los Angeles Police Detective Steve Osti failed to properly read 
Christian Brando his Miranda rights before questioning him. 
"It's clear error," Fidler said. "I will not allow that statement to come in." 
Osti testified that when he advised Brando that he had a right to remain silent 
and to have an attorney present during questioning, he "might have left out the 
part, 'if you can't afford one,"' the section that informs suspects that they 
have a right to appointed counsel, because he assumed his father was a rich 
man. 
The beginning of the tape, played in court, confirmed that Osti had indeed 
omitted a crucial part. Osti admitted further, under questioning by defense 
attorney Robert Shapiro, that he had not asked if Brando had a lawyer, or if he 
had the money to hire one, and thus, Fidler ruled, he had violated a 
fundamental requirement of the interrogation process. 
Shapiro and co-counsel Gerald Uelmen, dean of the Santa Clara University law 
school, argued that the detective had taken advantage of Brando's state of 
mind, and hastened to get an account of the events from him before an attorney 
had an opportunity to advise him not to talk. 
"We are very pleased with the way the hearing is proceeding," Shapiro said 
after the preliminary hearing recessed for the day. 
Despite the apparent setback dealt the prosecution's case, a Los Angeles Police 
Department investigator told reporters outside court that Christian Brando made 
numerous other admissions that can still be used against him. 
"This is a case where you couldn't get the guy (Christian) to shut up -- he 
talked for three hours," Detective Andrew Monsue said. "Christian is a very 
talkative individual." 
Earlier, at the start of the court proceeding to determine whether the 
32-year-old welder should be ordered to stand trial for murder, the first 
police officer to arrive at Marlon Brando's gated Mulholland Drive estate last 
May 16 testified that the defendant had blurted out that he had shot Dag 
Drollet, 26. 
"He (Christian) stated that he didn't mean to shoot him," Officer Steve 
Cunningham testified. "He stated he didn't care for the guy a whole lot, but he 
didn't want anybody to be shot." 
Members of Drollet's family, who flew in from their home in Tahiti, were seated 
opposite Marlon Brando in court, neither acknowledging the other's presence. 
Cunningham said the elder Brando opened the front door and the officer asked 
the actor where to find his son. "He said, 'I don't have any idea where he is 
and I can't believe he shot him,' " Cunningham recalled. Christian Brando was 
found in the living room, seated on the floor with his half-sister, Cheyenne. 
"He had his arm around her shoulder and they were talking," Cunningham 
testified. "She appeared to be upset. . . . I could not hear her crying, but I 
remember she had tears on her face." 
After Cunningham handcuffed Christian Brando and they awaited detectives, the 
officer said, the suspect appeared relaxed and aware and started talking 
voluntarily: 
"He stated that it was an accident, that they were struggling over the gun, 
wrestling, and that the decedent had grabbed the gun and made it go off. 
"He stated that he had the gun under the couch, that he kept it (at the 
residence) for the family's protection . . . that he told the decedent to get 
off the couch," and that a struggle ensued in which it was unclear who was 
trying to shoot whom. 
The officer quoted Brando as saying that he and Cheyenne had gone out to dinner 
and returned to his father's residence, where "things got crazy." 
Los Angeles Fire Department Capt. Tom Jefferson, however, contradicted the 
defendant's account, testifying that he found no signs of a struggle. 
The victim, Monsue testified, was found lying on a couch with a lighter, 
rolling papers and a tobacco pouch in one hand and a TV remote control in the 
other. He had been shot in the face at close range. 
Later, attorneys argued over whether statements made by Cheyenne Brando to 
investigators suggesting a motive for the shooting should be admitted as 
evidence -- despite the fact that she is unavailable for cross-examination. 
Investigators have said that Christian became enraged when Cheyenne told him at 
dinner that Drollet had physically abused her. 
Cheyenne is hospitalized in Tahiti "under heavy sedation and both mentally and 
physically unable to travel," Shapiro said. 
Prosecutors argued that her statements were admissible under a provision in 
Proposition 115, which went into effect on July 6 -- three weeks after the 
slaying. Such "hearsay" evidence was previously held inadmissible. 
Uelmen argued, however, that Proposition 115 could not be used retroactively 
and that the attempt to apply it was unconstitutional and "an act of 
desperation." 
Monsue acknowledged that Cheyenne's comments were "critical" to prove the 
shooting was premeditated. Prosecutors are seeking a first-degree murder 
conviction. 
