KID STUFF: STARTING WEDNESDAY, COSTA MESA'S A FAIR PLACE TO PIG OUT 
In the dark days before Nintendo and mega-malls, the opening of the county fair 
found Pa hitching up the wagon and Ma spiffing up the kids in their Sunday best 
for a day of family fun. It was a day to forget the chores, eat too many candy 
apples and generally kick up your heels. 
Times have changed, but not much. Families visiting the 98th annual Orange 
County Fair, which opens next Wednesday, are more likely to sport Bart Simpson 
T-shirts than calico, but what lies beyond the fair gates is pure country fun, 
Orange County style. The fair continues daily through July 22. 
Under the theme "Very Berry Extraordinary," this year's event salutes the 
county's strawberry industry with a strawberry pie-eating contest and, for 
those 2 to 12, the Strawberry Jello Squeeze, a genteel little game in which the 
players squirt gobs of the jiggly stuff at a target, and possibly each other. 
Do your youngsters have a passion for pigs? The fair also honors our porcine 
pals: Children can take part in the Pig Root Race, the Eat-Like-the Piggies-Do 
contest and the Pin-the-Tail-on-the-Piggy game. Presiding over all the fun will 
be the fair's 350-pound mascot, Shortcake, a congenial Yorkshire crossbreed pig 
who will greet visitors from her pen on the livestock grounds. 
Shortcake will have plenty of company. Nearly 1,000 animals will be on display 
-- steer, sheep, rabbits, chickens and, of course, more pigs -- many of them 
raised by area 4-Hand Future Farmers of America youth groups. (Watching the 
young competitors bathe, powder and otherwise primp their animals for exhibit 
can be a show in itself.) Children also can mingle with with deer, ducks, 
goats, antelope, llama and more at the Great American Petting Zoo, every day 
from noon to 9. 
What's a fair without a Midway? B&amp;B Amusements handles the thrills and 
chills here with more than 50 rides ranging from the warp-speed Global Wheel to 
the Orbiter, an "alien ship" in which weightlessness is simulated. Tamer 
attractions include elephant rides, a carousel and a "kiddie carnival" for 
preschoolers. 
Children's entertainers will roam the grounds, or play the fair's many 
permanent stages. There'll be unicycle-riding mime Mark Wenzel, Veekay the 
Clown, the Ken Ashley Puppets and the Mitchell Marionettes. Older kids may 
enjoy bike and skateboard stunts emceed by "America's Skateboard Mom," and the 
Earl Marcellus International Lumberjack Show, a hair-raising display of logging 
skills. The two-man Swan Brothers Circus combines comedy, music, magic and 
juggling in three shows daily, and a parade will wind its way through the main 
grounds each evening at six. 
During Kids' Days, July 13 and 20, children 12 and under will be admitted free 
and can ride all attractions for just 75 cents a pop. A special schedule of 
games and activities is planned for those days as well. 
What: The Orange County Fair. 
When: July 11-22. Noon to midnight Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 
midnight Fridays through Sundays. 
Where: The Orange County Fairground, Newport Boulevard and Fair Drive, Costa 
Mesa. 
Whereabouts: The southern end of the Costa Mesa Freeway, where it turns into 
Newport Boulevard. 
Wherewithal: $5 for adults, $3 for seniors, $2 for children 6-12, free for 
children under 6. All children under 12 will be admitted free on Kids' Days, 
July 13 and 20. 
Where to Call: (714) 751-3247. 
