U.S. AUTO MAKERS SPLIT ON GAS TAX HIKE 
The Big Three domestic auto makers are divided over the idea of raising the 
federal gasoline tax to help reduce the budget deficit, unusual in an industry 
that often puts unity ahead of competition in lobbying Congress. 
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. favor boosting the 9-cent-per-gallon federal 
levy on gasoline by a nickel a year for three to five years. Every penny 
increase would raise about $1 billion. 
But General Motors Corp., the nation's largest automobile manufacturer, opposes 
any increase in gasoline taxes. 
"We have constantly said, and I think Congress has said, that the gasoline tax 
is too regressive, that it hurts the poor people," GM Chairman Roger B. Smith 
said. He discussed the issue with lawmakers during a visit to Washington last 
week. 
Chrysler Chairman Lee A. Iacocca is an outspoken supporter of higher gas taxes, 
which he says would encourage people to drive more fuel-efficient cars. In the 
1980s, Chrysler's marketing strategy emphasized more fuel-efficient vehicles. 
Iacocca said the higher taxes would boost conservation, lower the nation's 
trade deficit and help counter global warming by curbing emissions. 
"Consumers must demand more fuel-efficient vehicles, and today they have no 
reason to do that," Iacocca said. The cost of driving has been cut in half 
since the 1960s when adjusted for inflation and improved fuel efficiency, he 
claimed. 
Ford would accept a gradual increase in the gasoline tax as part of a package 
of consumption taxes, company spokesman Mark Miller said. "But we believe it 
should go toward reducing the deficit and not toward increasing government 
spending," he said. 
The gasoline tax frequently is mentioned as a potential source of new revenue 
as the White House and congressional leaders negotiate a deficit-reduction 
plan. 
President Bush has indicated a willingness to abandon his no-new-taxes pledge. 
Senate Republican leader Bob Dole said this week that he expects Bush to reject 
income tax increases in favor of other sources. A White House spokeswoman said, 
however, that the President had ruled out nothing. 
At the heart of the Big Three domestic auto makers' disagreement is how a gas 
tax increase would affect auto sales. 
GM contends that many people would delay new-car purchases. The company has 
predicted that a 15-cents-per-gallon increase would reduce sales by 500,000 and 
eliminate 120,000 jobs. 
"I don't think the country wants to see lower car sales," Smith of GM said. 
Chrysler agrees that a higher tax might hurt sales, "but not significantly," 
spokesman John Guiniven said. "We also feel that reducing the budget deficit 
would reduce interest rates and that could spur car sales and the entire 
economy." 
Smith agreed that the federal Treasury needs new revenue but said Congress 
should focus on taxes that would affect a broader segment of the economy. 
The Big Three are a powerful force on Capitol Hill. They usually reach common 
positions on legislative issues with a major impact on their industry, such as 
the Clean Air Act rewrite. 
Sometimes, however, consensus eludes them. 
"It isn't the norm, but it does happen," said Tim McCarthy, lobbyist for the 
Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Assn., which represents the Big Three, Honda, Volvo 
and some truck companies. "We spend a lot of time trying to reach a consensus. 
It's a competitive industry, with differences of opinion." 
McCarthy said it was too early to tell whether the auto makers would clash if 
the budget summit produced an agreement to seek a gasoline tax increase. 
Auto makers are more concerned with the impending clean-air negotiations and a 
bill awaiting Senate debate that would boost the minimum average fuel-economy 
requirement for new-car fleets to about 40 miles per gallon from 27.5, he said. 
