ALLEGATIONS DISPUTED IN CASE OF THE PURLOINED KINKAJOUS 
This letter is written to respond to allegations made against my client in two 
letters to the editor printed July 1. The letters were written by Priscilla 
Feral, a representative of Friends of Animals, and Kyle Owens, a representative 
of the Fund for Animals. 
First, there is an allegation made in the letter by Priscilla Feral that my 
client, Cary Chevalier, violated court rules, and thereby "unlawfully obtained 
the temporary restraining order" that allowed the University of California to 
take possession of the subject kinkajous. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. 
At the hearing on May 22, 1990, the court simply found that a simple procedural 
error had occurred regarding the return of the kinkajous. If, as claimed in the 
letter from Ms. Feral, the kinkajous had been "unlawfully obtained," then it is 
certain that the judge would have returned the animals to Primarily Primates 
Inc. 
Therefore, although there might have been a minor procedural error on the part 
of one of Mr. Chevalier's attorneys, it did not change the findings of the 
court that the animals should remain in the possession of Mr. Chevalier and the 
University of California. 
Further, Ms. Feral goes to great pains to argue that as a grand jury failed to 
indict the individuals who stole Mr. Chevalier's property, that no wrong could 
have been committed against Mr. Chevalier. We dispute this strongly and believe 
that at the close of the civil litigation, there will be sufficient evidence to 
demonstrate the injuries suffered by Mr. Chevalier and his animals. 
Mr. Owens claims that the kinkajous were not taken illegally from Mr. 
Chevalier, and further claims that the experimentation performed by Mr. 
Chevalier has no valid scientific purpose. However, Mr. Owens provides no 
factual support for either of these allegations. Unfortunately, it is not 
unusual for people in our client's position to have to respond to allegations 
of his type. 
Finally, all of Mr. Chevalier's experimentation was performed without any harm 
to the kinkajous and with all of the appropriate authorizations pursuant to 
federal and state law, as well as the in-house rules of the University of 
California. 
The only harm that has come to the animals has occurred while they were in the 
possession of the so-called "animal rights" groups. While the kinkajous were in 
their possession, two of the animals disappeared and one of the animals was 
castrated. 
Although we prefer to have these controversies aired within the context of the 
lawsuit presently pending in Texas, it is clear that certain animal rights 
groups are bent on pursuing these allegations in a public forum. Therefore, we 
felt we had no alternative but to address the allegations made against our 
client in that same public forum. 
KENNETH E. GERTZ 
Hollins, Schechter &amp; Feinstein 
Orange 
