COLUMN LEFT; 
CALL A SUMMIT FOR CITIES, POOR HITTING BOTTOM; 
AS IN EASTERN EUROPE, IF PEOPLE'S NEEDS ARE NOT MET THEY WILL REPLACE THEIR 
LEADERS. 
There have been three important summits recently. Such meetings are useful 
instruments. And that is why we need a new kind of summit for the people of 
urban and rural America. 
Summits foster direct communication, break down barriers and build 
relationships. The Bush-Gorbachev meeting in Washington continued to reduce 
tensions East and West and built bridges of understanding between the Soviet 
and American peoples -- even as Mikhail Gorbachev sought U.S. economic 
assistance for the ailing Soviet economy. 
Then there was the NATO summit in London. With the changes taking place in the 
Soviet Union, and the democratic revolutions in Eastern Europe in 1989 and 
1990, NATO is having to adjust its purpose and structure. It is shifting from 
providing stability primarily by using military might to maintaining stability 
through political and economic development. 
Following the NATO meeting was the G-7 economic summit in Houston. The seven 
most industrialized nations in the world gave special attention this year to 
the environment, world agricultural policy and aid to the Soviet Union and 
China. 
Bilateral and multilateral summits help focus attention on trends and critical 
issues. They educate leaders and the general public, and they contribute to the 
public debate of important issues. 
In that spirit, what is most needed in the United States today is for President 
Bush to convene a "domestic summit." It is needed for the same reasons that the 
other summits were held: At their heart, all of these conferences focused on 
the need for social and economic development. 
In the United States, the unjust economic and bad social policies of the 1970s 
and 1980s appear to be cresting. The shift in wealth and income from the poor, 
the workers and the middle class to the rich has resulted in budget deficits, 
national debt, slow growth, slow job creation, high real interest rates, 
infrastructure collapse, non-competitiveness and more. 
It has also resulted in rising poverty, malnutrition, infant mortality, 
homelessness, a health-care crisis, an educational crisis, hopelessness and 
nihilism. If these underlying causes are not addressed, drugs, crime and 
violence will continue to rise also. And in response, more repressive, 
expensive and less effective policies for combatting these ills will emerge. We 
will build more jails and put more people to death. 
But how is this different from our fears about the Soviet Union and Eastern 
Europe? We fear that if the underlying social and economic development needs of 
the Soviet and Eastern European people are not met, repressive and autocratic 
leaders will return to replace the current ones. They will repress democracy, 
and retreat to ineffective economic policies, in order to restore order. 
This year's international summits analyzed the problems confronting them, 
weighed the costs of inaction and came up with a plan, a budget and a timetable 
for solving them. But there is no such analysis, plan, budget and timetable for 
the social and economic redevelopment of America -- no plan for Philadelphia, 
New York or Chicago; for Flint, Mich., or Anderson, Ind., or for rural America. 
In fact, President Bush has inflamed racial fear rather than inspired our 
common hope for racial justice. In the debate over the 1990 Civil Rights Act, 
he used the term "quota bill" to incite fear and divide the people as he used 
Willie Horton in his presidential campaign for the same purpose. 
Why do we need a domestic summit conference? Because America needs an urban 
reinvestment plan, a rural redevelopment plan, and a plan to achieve gender 
equality and racial justice that has a budget and a timetable attached to it. 
My grandmother used to tell me how everyone would stop what they were doing and 
huddle up close to the radio when President Franklin Delano Roosevelt would 
give his fireside chats. There was hope and help in his messages. 
Currently, there is no such hope or help coming from the leadership in the 
White House. But if President Bush were to convene a domestic summit 
conference, inclusive of a representative and broad range of American 
leadership, and put forth a plan, budget and timetable for national economic 
and social development, the people would rise to the occasion and rally around 
him. 
