MOSBACHER DISREGARDED LAWYERS ALSO IN AIDING SHRIMPERS; 
SCIENTISTS IGNORED IN RULING ON TURTLES 
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher ignored both his scientific experts and 
department lawyers when he allowed shrimpers in the Gulf of Mexico to discard 
devices designed to save sea turtles that are on the endangered species list, 
according to Commerce Department documents. 
Mosbacher acted Monday after a meeting with a number of Gulf Coast congressmen 
and after a weekend in which shrimpers blockaded shipping lanes in Houston and 
other coastal cities. The shrimpers were protesting the imminent imposition of 
federal regulations that would have required use of the devices in shrimp nets. 
Acceded to Politicians 
Mosbacher acceded to the demands of the politicians and shrimpers and ordered 
that so-called turtle excluder devices would not have to be used for at least 
the next three months, during the height of the shrimping season. 
South Carolina is one of several states that have successfully used the 
excluder devices, commonly known as TEDs, designed to allow turtles to escape 
while keeping shrimp in the nets. During the first two weeks in July, turtle 
deaths off the Carolina coast were down dramatically. Only six dead sea turtles 
were documented, compared to an average of 56 during the same period over the 
last nine years. 
Shrimpers along the Texas and Louisiana coasts contend that they will lose up 
to a third of their catches if the excluder devices are placed in the nets 
because the shrimp would escape with the turtles. 
The major species that the TED is designed to protect is the Kemp ridley sea 
turtle. One estimate is that there may be only 260 egg-laying females in the 
world, down from 40,000 a generation ago. When Mosbacher was asked Monday if 
political pressure had caused him to change his mind, he replied that he had 
altered the regulations because it was "the right thing to do." 
Rep. W. J. (Billy) Tauzin (D-La.), who convened the Monday meeting, said that 
most of the time was spent convincing the commerce secretary that he was 
empowered to change the regulations. "Mosbacher has that authority," he said. 
An internal Commerce Department memo and a letter by Mosbacher himself showed 
that department scientists and lawyers were opposed to the change in the 
regulations. 
In a memo from B. Kent Burton, an official of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, Mosbacher was told: "The only reasonable and 
prudent alternative which will allow shrimping to continue without jeopardizing 
the continued existence of identified sea turtle species is full implementation 
of the TED regulations." 
The memo was based on a "biological opinion" written by Terry Henwood of the 
National Marine Fisheries Service protected species branch. 
"I'm totally amazed" at Mosbacher's decision, Henwood said Wednesday. 
On July 20, just four days before changing the regulations, Mosbacher wrote a 
letter to Rep. Bob Livingston (R-La.), saying that "my legal counsel has 
advised me there is no basis in current law for modifications in the existing 
regulations." 
"This . . . is in turn compelled by the best scientific advice from NOAA that 
any significant modification of the TEDs regulations would jeopardize the 
continued existence of the Kemp ridley turtles as a species," Mosbacher said. 
The easing of the rules regarding the use of TEDs caused an immediate outcry in 
the environmental community. The National Wildlife Federation filed suit late 
Tuesday afternoon seeking a restraining order against Mosbacher's new stance. A 
hearing is set for Friday in Washington. 
In the suit, the wildlife federation said that the Commerce Department failed 
to consider the environmental impact of the postponement; didn't seek adequate 
public comment, violated the Endangered Species Act by placing the Kemp ridley 
turtle in jeopardy and violated the provision of the act that calls for changes 
only if they are for "good cause." 
Mosbacher could not be reached for comment Wednesday. 
Steven Moyer, a legislative representative with the wildlife federation, said 
that Mosbacher's decision may "have helped fan the flames" in the volatile Gulf 
issue. Other environmental groups expressed similar misgivings, saying that, if 
the original regulations are restored, it could lead to violence if the Coast 
Guard attempts to cite shrimpers for non-compliance. 
"The news reports we've been getting (are) that the shrimpers are prepared to 
blockade again and use violence," said Michael Weber of the Center for 
Environmental Education. 
The prime mover in the fight against the use of TEDs is Louisiana shrimper Tee 
John Mialjavich, president of an organization called Concerned Shrimpers of 
America. Mialjavich said that, no matter what the outcome of the Washington 
court hearing, he and other shrimpers would not use TEDs. 
"We're not the villains, we're the victims," he said. He accused federal 
biologists of promoting TEDs even though their data was faulty. 
