WASHINGTON; 
HOUSE EXPECTED TO VOTE SOON ON PROPOSAL TO CURB 'JUNK FAXES' 
Junk mail has spawned what could be called Son of Junk Mail or Junk Mail II. 
It's the junk fax. 
The problem is so severe in some quarters that the powerful House Energy and 
Commerce Committee has passed legislation to restrict the use of telephone 
facsimile machines as well as their audio counterparts, automatic dialing 
recorded message players. 
The Telephone Advertising Regulation Act (H.R. 2921) is expected to come up for 
a vote on the House floor any day now. 
"The bill is intended to protect the legitimate privacy rights of consumers and 
to protect the public safety," said Rep. Edward J. Markey (D-Mass.), who worked 
with the Federal Communications Commission and direct-marketing industry to 
draft the bill. "The legislation is not designed to impose unreasonable burdens 
on telemarketers or to ban the appropriate use of these new technologies." 
By next year, the number of fax machines in offices, homes and other places is 
expected to reach 5 million, according to the American Facsimile Assn. 
Lawmakers are concerned that many machines will be swamped by mass marketers 
selling everything from submarine sandwiches to fax paper. 
The bill would authorize the FCC to establish a national clearinghouse that 
would keep lists of telephone subscribers who do not want to receive the 
electronic equivalent of junk mail. The service would be provided at no cost to 
consumers. Advertisers would have to pay to obtain the list. 
The FCC would set penalties for advertisers who failed to abide by the list. 
The bill would also require the agency to set technical and procedural 
standards for fax and automatic dialing systems. 
Markey, chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee's subcommittee on 
telecommunications, wrote the bill, along with the ranking minority member, 
Rep. Matthew Rinaldo (D-N.J.). It combines two bills proposed by Reps. Barney 
Frank (D-Mass.) and Marge Roukema (R-N.J.). 
The Markey-Rinaldo version is "a reasoned approach" to the issue, said Mag 
Gottlieb, director of government affairs for the Direct Marketing Assn. 
"However, we are concerned any time Congress attempts to limit First Amendment 
commercial speech." 
The bill is not expected to meet serious opposition in the House. So far, there 
is no companion legislation in the Senate. 
'Right to Strike' Battle Promises to Be Bitter 
People in Congress worried that unions are losing one of their most effective 
tools -- the right to strike -- have proposed legislation to retain it. The 
effort may ignite a labor-business donnybrook. 
Rep. William L. Clay (D-Mo.) has signed up 114 co-sponsors for his bill to 
prohibit employers from hiring permanent replacement workers during a strike. 
Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio) introduced companion legislation in the 
Senate and has 10 co-sponsors. The bills are highly controversial and staffers 
in both bodies say it is unlikely either will come up for a floor vote soon. 
"There is currently no effective right to strike in this country," Clay said at 
a hearing of the House labor-management subcommittee. "American workers find 
that, all too frequently, the result of exercising the fundamental right to 
strike is to lose their job. 
"Once a strike was thought to be a means by which employees could seek to 
maintain or improve their wages and working conditions. Today, the strike is 
used by employers to get rid of a union. The method is simple. An employer 
demands that workers accept unreasonable contract concessions -- in effect, 
daring the workers to strike. The employer then sits back to see if the 
employees bite. This makes a mockery of collective bargaining." 
Clay traces the problem to former President Ronald Reagan's firing of air 
traffic controllers and hiring of permanent replacements in 1981. He says it 
was a "green light" for private employers to use similar tactics. 
Not surprisingly, business and industry are in a fury over the legislation. 
Pete Lunnie, director of employee relations at the National Assn. of 
Manufacturers, said strikes and the right to hire permanent replacements work 
as countervailing forces, and tinkering with the balance could damage the 
system. 
Fred Krebs, manager of business and government policy at the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, echoed Lunnie. "The right to strike is not unconditional," he said. 
"It must be balanced with an employer's right to stay in business." 
Organized labor is just as determined to back the measure, which Alan Reuther, 
assistant general counsel at the United Auto Workers, called "not just a labor 
issue, but a civil rights issue." 
Securities-Abuse Bills Clear House Panel 
Markey and Rinaldo teamed up again on one of two pieces of legislation giving 
the Securities and Exchange Commission broader power to curb penny stock fraud 
and other illegal activities. 
Both the Penny Stock Bill (H.R. 4497) and the Securities Law Enforcement 
Remedies Act (H.R. 975) recently passed the House Energy and Commerce 
Committee. They could arrive on the floor for votes before Congress' summer 
recess. Similar bills are making their way through the Senate. 
Penny stocks are speculative securities that usually sell for $5 or less on the 
over-the-counter market. They are often used to finance small, new companies, 
but have frequently been employed in all manner of investor scams. 
Currently, the SEC has the authority to seek significant fines and other civil 
penalties only for insider trading violations. It can only warn other violators 
or, as a last resort, revoke their licenses. 
Markey and Rinaldo, joined by Rep. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), introduced the penny 
stock bill to expand the SEC's authority. 
The proposal would encourage regulators to develop an automated stock quotation 
system to help investors track penny stock prices. It also would strengthen 
disclosure procedures and set limits on how much money could be raised for 
unspecified investments -- so-called blind pool offerings. 
The SEC, the Consumer Federation of America and the North American Securities 
Administrators Assn. support the legislation. 
The other piece of the package is a bill introduced by Rep. John D. Dingell 
(D-Mich.), chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, that would expand the 
SEC's authority to levy civil penalties in securities fraud cases. 
Under the bill, the SEC could ask judges to impose fines in other fraud cases 
besides just insider trading. It also could ask judges to bar violators from 
serving as officers and directors of publicly traded companies. 
