JURY STILL REVIEWS KILLER'S WORDS IN SANITY TRIAL 
The jury that is to decide whether Toufic Naddi was sane or insane when he 
killed five family members in 1985 will continue today to listen to testimony 
he gave at his first trial last year. 
Court reporters began rereading Naddi's testimony to the San Diego Superior 
Court jury last Wednesday . 
Naddi, 48, of El Cajon, was convicted June 8 of the first-degree murders of his 
wife, her parents, and two in-laws in El Cajon on June 1, 1985. 
The first jury deadlocked 11-1 on whether Naddi was sane at the time of the 
murders. A second jury is now attempting to determine Naddi's mental state at 
the time of the crimes. 
Naddi's attorney, Hodge Crabtree, argued last week that Naddi was insane, and 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Bob Boles said he was sane. 
If found to have been insane, Naddi would be committed to a mental hospital for 
the criminally insane, but could eventually be released if he proved he had 
regained his sanity. 
If the jury determines Naddi was sane, the trial moves into the penalty phase. 
The jury would then decide whether to recommend that Naddi be put to death or 
be sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. 
In this second trial, Naddi has refused to testify, so his comments are being 
read back. Last year, Naddi spent three days on the stand detailing how he shot 
each victim and why. 
He claimed his father-in-law, Habib Sabbagh, 73, was "a sex maniac" who had 
molested Naddi's wife, Aida Naddi, 26, and said he killed them as part of God's 
plan. 
"I thought that God had set up this situation, and it was His will that I kill 
these people," Naddi testified then. 
Naddi said his mother-in-law, Lillian Sabbagh, 58, was "involved in the incest 
matter herself," so he killed her too. 
Also shot repeatedly in the head were Michael Sabbagh, 38, a cousin, and Osama 
Mashini, 38, a brother-in-law and a comedian/actor in Jordan. The Sabbagh 
family was wealthy and well-known in Amman, Jordan. 
