RESIDENTS CLING TO A 'TREASURE'; 
CHANGES WORRY MOBILE HOME PARK DWELLERS 
Arched on gentle bluffs overlooking a curving sweep of the Pacific Ocean, 
Treasure Island Mobile Home Park in Laguna Beach is, by all accounts, choice 
property. 
"It's one of four undeveloped, privately owned oceanfront tracts in Orange 
County," said Richard A. Hall of Costa Mesa, who, along with some partners, 
purchased the 27-acre tract last September. 
Located just north of Aliso Beach off Coast Highway, the park provides its 500 
residents with modest homes and billion-dollar views. But in recent months, 
they have become alarmed, and agitated, about the transfer of ownership. 
Fear Losing Homes 
"People fear they'll be losing their homes," said Michael Kenney, president of 
the homeowners' association. The concern, he said, was a prospectus put out by 
Hall's company that calls for developing the land into multimillion-dollar 
homes and condominiums. 
In an interview Wednesday, however, Hall said that he has no immediate plans 
for such a move and countered that he even had planned to offer long-term 
leases to the present tenants. 
"I'm not saying it will always be a mobile home park, but I have no plans for 
the foreseeable future," Hall said. He noted that city zoning and California 
Coastal Commission plan approvals are among the long, time-consuming steps 
required before the property could be developed into homes and condos. 
Yet despite Hall's assurances, residents remain worried. 
"I don't care what they say, I know what these people want, and it's big bucks 
-- big bucks that come from development," said May Brown, 70, a retiree who has 
been a resident of Treasure Island for the last 23 years. 
"My husband and I moved here because we wanted to spend the rest of our lives 
here," she explained. "We love it. But we're worried about what's going to 
happen. You see, we mobile home owners own our homes but not the land under it. 
And the owner can keep raising the rent until people can't afford it anymore." 
Brown, who retired after 30 years as a motion picture and television script 
supervisor in Los Angeles, said her current mobile home rental is $1,100 a 
month. 
"If the rents keep going higher, my husband and I are very worried," she said. 
"We're retired and on fixed income." 
Brown noted that before South Laguna was annexed by Laguna Beach, Treasure 
Island residents fought a plan for the park to be converted into a $90-million, 
time-share resort hotel. 
In the early 1980s, a partnership of proposed developers won approval from both 
the Orange County Planning Commission and the state Coastal Commission to build 
a high-rise, time-share hotel on the park. Tenants were to be relocated to 
apartments under the plan. 
"But we took them to court, and finally it got to the point that it wasn't 
financially feasible for the developers to proceed, so they withdrew," Brown 
recalled. "If we hadn't fought back then, we all would have had to move in 
1981. Darn right, we fought." 
Laguna Beach Mayor Robert F. Gentry said the city is watching the situation 
"because we don't want these longtime residents, many of whom are retired, to 
lose their homes there." 
Fear and rumors began sweeping the mobile home park more than a year ago when 
word spread that the two brothers who owned the park, Howard and Warren 
Hopkins, had plans to sell it. 
"We residents made an offer of $40 million for the park, but we never heard 
firsthand from the owners about our offer," Kenney said. He added that he later 
learned the park had been sold for $43 million to a partnership which includes 
the Richard A. Hall Co. of Costa Mesa. Escrow on the sale is scheduled to close 
in September. 
Kenney said residents became fearful that the new owners planned to oust them. 
The uneasiness was aggravated when the residents' association was leaked a copy 
of Hall's prospectus for developing the property, Kenney said. 
The prospectus said, among other things, that Hall "intends to convert the 
subject parcel from a mobile home park to a residential development which would 
include about 50 home sites and a mid-rise condominium development. The subject 
property is currently zoned VSR-2 (Visitor-Serving Recreation Area), which 
allows boating, residential homes, condominiums, retail, hotel and motel uses." 
Hall acknowledged that his prospectus called for developing the mobile home 
park. But he said that that was a "long-range plan" and that current tenants 
should not worry about it. 
"The longer we hold the property, the more valuable it gets," he said. "But 
obviously that property at Treasure Island is not going to be for mobile homes 
forever." 
To head off any quick attempt by new owners to develop the property, the 
Treasure Island Residents Owners Assn. last December petitioned the Laguna 
Beach City Council to put a legal hold, or moratorium, on the acceptance and 
processing of any new development applications for mobile home parks in the 
city. The council agreed to the request, and a temporary moratorium is now in 
place, Gentry said. 
"The city staff and the City Council have been very supportive and sympathetic 
to the residents of Treasure Island," Kenney said. Nonetheless, he noted that 
the moratorium is scheduled to end this winter, and the city must decide what 
permanent zoning to put on Treasure Island. 
"We want the land permanently zoned for mobile homes," Kenney said. Hall, by 
contrast, said his company hopes to keep the land at its present zoning, which 
allows home and condominium construction. 
"Our concern is once Hall owns the land, he will cause rents to go up 
considerably higher because he'll be interested in moving us out of our homes 
and developing that land," Kenney said. 
Gentry, in a separate interview, said he also got the impression that Hall's 
plans called for developing Treasure Island into home sites and building condos 
on part of the land. "I was told that the company would move the tenants into 
the condos and let them live there for the same rent they are now paying," 
Gentry said. 
The mayor added: "That may sound OK, but I found out that these mobile home 
residents very much prefer to live in their own homes. They don't want to move 
into condos or apartments. 
"Now, the city could get more tax money if it favored apartments and hotels for 
that land, but getting more money is not our interest. Our interest is in 
seeing that these people who live there are not uprooted from their 
neighborhood. We're going to work to see that they're well taken care of." 
