VIEWPOINTS; 
NEW TAXES: WHO SHOULD PAY? 
Now that President Bush has abandoned his "no new taxes" pledge, the question 
confronting lawmakers is: which new taxes? 
 Free-lance journalist Sharon Bernstein interviewed several prominent 
economists and business leaders for their views on how to increase taxes. 
Murray Weidenbaum 
Director of the Center for the Study of American Business at Washington 
University in St. Louis; adviser to President Reagan. 
Conceptually, the best taxes are ones that have the least adverse effect on the 
work ethic, savings and investment. These tend to be consumption taxes rather 
than income taxes. 
If you raise the marginal tax on income, that reduces the incentive to work 
longer. On the other hand, if they raise your sales tax it doesn't affect the 
amount of after-tax income. If you work harder, you're still going to make more 
money. If you work longer you're going to make more money. If a business takes 
more risk, it will increase income. 
I sure wouldn't encourage an increase in the corporate profit tax, which is an 
income tax. We are a high consumption, low savings society, so if we have to 
increase taxes, let's tax consumption. Economically, it makes good sense. 
John Kenneth Galbraith 
Professor of economics, Harvard University; adviser to presidents Johnson and 
Kennedy. 
I wouldn't object to raising the gasoline tax -- it's too low. And if they want 
to tax tobacco and whiskey more, that's all right with me. But overwhelmingly, 
the revenue should come out of the income tax. And that would mean eliminating 
the "bubble" that reduces the marginal rate for the highest bracket and putting 
the tax on ability to pay. I can't say how much rates should increase -- that's 
a subject for long discussion and long negotiations. 
I would not increase corporate taxes. The corporate tax does not have as clear 
a relationship to ability to pay, which is the civilized and fundamental test 
of a good tax. If the government wants a modest increase in corporate taxes, 
I'm not going to oppose it, but I'm not going to make it as a substitute for 
the personal income tax. 
Michael Reich 
Professor of economics, UC Berkeley. 
I would support what's called a "turnover tax" on the stock market of 0.5%. 
Every time you buy or sell stock, you pay 0.5% of the amount to the government. 
Other countries have it. You could have it just on short-term turnover, on 
shares that have been held for less than six months or a year. It would 
discourage people and institutions from holding shares for such a short time. 
It would help in allowing companies to have a longer-term time horizon. 
I think it would change the relation between ownership and management of 
companies. It would bring the owners a little closer. If they felt they were 
long-term owners, they might feel more involved. They might help the company 
adopt a long-term perspective instead of dropping it as soon as the price went 
down. 
Another tax I'd be in favor of is a tax on legal services. The idea is to 
create disincentives to use legal services, because I think they're overused. I 
would do it above a certain threshold, so it would affect corporations instead 
of individuals. 
In both cases these are progressive taxes. They would mainly be borne by those 
most able to pay. But they would also have policy effects. 
Richard A. Overton 
Vice president for tax, Monsanto Co. 
If tax increases are imposed, we favor a broad-based, low-rate, invoice-method, 
value-added tax. This tax is not only neutral between savings and consumption 
but helps level the playing field between the United States and its major 
trading partners, as most, if not all, have such a tax. 
Any new tax revenue should be used solely for deficit reduction and not new 
spending programs. Under the free market system, workers keep more of their 
earnings so that they, not the government, make the decision on how, when and 
where to invest and spend their money. 
Taking into account federal, state and local taxes, government today claims 
about one-third of the nation's resources. More importantly, this percentage 
has steadily increased over the years, with no end in sight. The real question 
becomes, at what point does the government's claim on the nation's wealth 
become so great as to jeopardize our free market system. 
To help focus this debate, we believe it would be helpful if Congress could 
establish revenue and spending goals so that everybody could have a clear, 
identifiable and understandable target as to where America's economic future 
lies. 
David M. Gordon 
Professor of economics, New School for Social Research in New York. 
I would increase rates in the top personal income bracket to undo some of the 
damage done in the 1980s. I would push the rates on the top brackets back up to 
38%, which is where they were before the last stage of tax reform, and pausing 
for breath at that point and assessing the need for further tax reform in view 
of further revenue needs. 
I would rather concentrate on personal tax rates rather than corporate tax 
rates. There is a legitimate argument made about double taxation of income if 
you tax both corporate and personal income. 
I would also seriously consider something like (Sen. Daniel Patrick) Moynihan's 
proposal to reduce social security tax rates, since really the two things on 
the personal tax side that have contributed to such a regressive realignment in 
the 1980s were both the dramatic slashing of personal income tax rates in top 
brackets and increasing of social security tax rates. 
A value-added tax or a national sales tax would have a regressive impact, and 
the tax system has been pushed in a regressive direction for long enough. 
The strong preference of many economists for sales taxes is based on the idea 
that the way to revitalize the economy and revitalize investment is to try to 
curb consumption expenditures. 
I disagree with that logic fundamentally. That mainstream argument is based on 
a core idea of profit-led growth. It says the way to stimulate growth is to 
fatten profits and savings. We tried to do that in every way we could during 
the 1980s and it hasn't worked. Less affluent families have increased personal 
borrowing tremendously in order to keep themselves afloat. So a byproduct of 
efforts to cut wages and cut consumption is that families have gone more into 
debt. 
Lee A. Iacocca 
Chairman, Chrysler Corp. 
The best way I know to increase revenue is to tap some people who have been 
getting a free ride in this country for too long -- foreign companies who do 
hundreds of billions of dollars worth of business in this market every year but 
pay virtually no income tax. 
There is a simple way to make them pay their fair share. It's called a business 
transfer tax. It is a type of value-added tax that would work like this: 
A tax would be imposed on all goods sold in this market. It would be paid by 
American and foreign producers alike but with a couple of important wrinkles. 
First, the tax would be rebated on exports by American companies. Second, 
American companies would be able to offset the tax by deducting it from their 
U.S. income or payroll taxes. 
So, for U.S. companies, it would be a wash. The business transfer tax would 
substitute dollar for dollar for taxes they now pay. But since foreign 
producers don't pay those U.S. taxes, there would be no substitution and all of 
their payments would represent new revenue flowing into the Treasury. 
A 7% business transfer tax would mean a net increase of $42 billion a year for 
Washington, with no tax increase for individual Americans or American 
businesses. 
