ON A ROLL; 
IN SOME U.S. CITIES, BIKE-RIDING POLICE ARE MAKING A DIFFERENCE 
Silent as the night, the two cops were on the men before they knew what was 
happening. Their bicycles made no noise as they sped along the muddy path under 
the viaduct. 
They surprised three prowlers who were watching, from a distance, unsuspecting 
motorists putting their valuables in car trunks. The prowlers had not yet 
zeroed in on a good mark in the parking lot, so officers Debbie Brooks and 
Steve Kilberg found only a hefty screwdriver on them, the kind that could be 
used to pop open a trunk. They told the trio to keep walking. 
Five minutes later, the officers arrested a man as he was about to inject 
cocaine into his arm as he sat amid the filth so much a part of life under the 
viaduct -- and consequently the life of Seattle's bike cops. 
There were broken bottles and mud-covered remnants of clothing. The guy with 
the needle had heated his cocaine on the peeled-off bottom of an aluminum can. 
He was little more than a kid, but the bike cops had had many dealings with him 
before. 
With their prisoner in handcuffs, Brooks and Kilberg wheeled their mountain 
bikes out to the street, where they waited for the paddy wagon. While they were 
there, two other bike cops, Vic Maes and Al Lopez, appeared at the top of the 
hill. 
Now that's a pair, Maes and Lopez: Maes is the serious one when he's on the 
street looking for the pushers and dealers he knows by their first names; Lopez 
is a bodybuilder with a soft voice and an eye for the ladies. Many is the time 
Maes has looked back to find his bike partner talking to a pretty woman 
somewhere down the street. 
These are four of Seattle's bike cops, and this is the city where mountain 
bikes were first used to go after crooks. What started with two officers making 
rounds in 1987 has evolved into 28 "cycle cops" citywide. 
They began in rudimentary sartorial fashion, using rubber bands around their 
legs to keep their pants from being caught in the chain. But the uniform 
quickly became cycling shorts, special lightweight shoes, and, of course, rain 
gear. This is Seattle, after all. 
Using bicycles on the beat isn't exactly new. English bobbies rode them. Police 
in the California beach communities have employed them for work on the 
boardwalk. 
But it was the trick of using mountain bikes, machines designed to go most 
anywhere, that made police on bikes people to be reckoned with. 
They can dart down alleys and stairs, zip across parks and up hills. They can 
slither through heavy traffic and go the wrong way on a one-way street. And 
they are so quiet that many a criminal has found himself staring at a badge in 
the middle of an illegal transaction. 
Paul Grady, one of the officers who dreamed up the bike idea, said he has 
received queries from almost 200 police departments around the world on how to 
start a cycling squad. He wrote a how-to manual on bike patrols and sold 50 of 
them in two weeks at $44.50 a pop. 
Police departments nationwide, from Hollywood, Fla., to Sacramento, Calif., now 
have or are planning bike patrols. They have grown so popular that bike cops 
from around the nation converged on Seattle recently for their own 
mini-Olympics, which Seattle, by the way, won. 
It was fitting that the first competition was here, where the bike cops began 
and have flourished in a city that is a cyclist's nirvana. 
Seattle recently was rated by Bicycling magazine as the best place in the 
nation to practice the sport. 
"It's just taken off across the country," said Grady, who has been transferred 
from the bike patrol as he pursues his sergeant's stripes. "It's incredible." 
In Salt Lake City, there are plans to almost double the bike force this year, 
from 8 to 14. The New York borough of Queens has them, as does the upscale 
Dallas neighborhood of Highland Park. In Chicago, burglaries were up last year 
-- except in places where there were cops on bikes. And in Tampa, Fla., police 
use bikes to roam high-crime public housing projects. Boston recently began a 
bike program, and the Sacramento Police Department has put all its downtown 
foot patrolmen on bikes. 
"I think bike patrols will become standard in the future," said Sacramento 
Police Sgt. Kent Thorpe. "They did it in London a long time ago and now it's 
coming back into style, except updated with mountain bikes." 
So popular is the cop on a bike concept that consulting with other departments 
has become almost a full-time job for Grady. He takes vacation time to train 
others. 
There are small drawbacks, such as a hefty amount of needling from fellow 
officers and the need for assistance once an arrest is made. "You're not going 
to arrest people and then put them on your handlebars," Grady said. 
Brooks and Kilberg were back at the station filling out paper work, and Maes 
and Lopez were on the street. Only a few blocks away is the Pike Street Market, 
one of the major destinations for tourists and locals alike. Fresh fish is 
piled high, as are vegetables. Stalls of handiwork and T-shirts line the 
sidewalk. 
Maes and Lopez worked the streets a few blocks away, where life takes a serious 
plunge. They call it the "cesspool" and the "pit." It's where drug deals go 
down in the alleys and muggers cruise, looking for prey. 
Maes and Lopez know the street people by their first names. They know what 
they're doing and what they're selling. The two cops cruised the alleys, 
pointing to small piles where ends of balloons had been cut off. (Cocaine and 
crack cocaine are stuffed in balloons, which then are knotted before the ends 
are cut off, the better to swallow them if they see cops about to move in.) 
Maes and Lopez don't see this scene in quite the same way. Maes is the driven 
one always looking for the bust. He stops known addicts on the street and makes 
them open their mouths to see whether balloons are hidden inside. Lopez 
sometimes tires of the territory, of seeing the same lost faces day after day: 
"Sometimes, it just gets old." 
After a lunch of beef teriyaki, they swung up the street and around the corner, 
just in time to see a man and woman get out of a car. The man rolled his eyes 
when he saw Maes and Lopez; the couple are addicts who have had many run-ins 
with the bike cops. 
"Man, I swear: We just came down to get our bus passes," the man said. 
"Sure," Maes replied. "Sure. Where'd you get the car?" 
"We just borrowed it from a friend," the man said as Maes pulled out his 
citation book. Maes eventually charged him with driving without a license, 
although he could have hit him with much more. 
But before he had finished writing the ticket, the couple was talking about how 
they had tried to stay clean, how they had really tried. 
Lopez listened to the woman intently. 
"I got cleaned up and dirty again, cleaned up and dirty again," she said, 
sobbing. 
"You need to get some help," Lopez said. The woman shook her head in assent. 
"We tried," the man said. "But we screwed up. We're really stupid." 
Down another alley. More balloons. Two kids, one fat, one thin, standing behind 
a trash bin, obviously intent on cutting a drug deal. Maes frisked the thin one 
and found a homemade hash pipe. He pushed the thin one up to the wall and 
lectured him about how stupid he was to be in the area. "People die on this 
street," he told the kid. "People die on that stairway." 
Then he put the pipe on the alley and crushed it with the heel of his shoe. 
Cruising again. Maes and Lopez swung by an abandoned building, where addicts 
live at times. 
This day, something was different. There was a sheet over a window. The cops 
rode to the back of the building, where the rear lot was littered with junk -- 
old wire fence, rotting lumber, bricks. 
Maes took the point and Lopez covered, walking stealthily on rotting boards, up 
a flight of stairs and into the putrid room where the addict lived. 
He was there and offered no resistance. A paint can was on the floor, filled 
with urine and feces. 
"Sometimes it's a lot worse," Maes said. "Sometimes they just pick a room and 
designate it as the toilet." 
Brooks and Kilberg rode up just as the squad car was pulling away. They chatted 
before the call came over the radios attached to their shirts. Two crack 
dealers were peddling their wares on a street about a mile away. The four of 
them moved quickly through traffic, darting around a bus and lines of cars. 
Two dealers started running in opposite directions when they saw the bike cops. 
Maes and Lopez went west. Brooks and Kilberg went east. Both got their man. It 
was no contest. 
It was late afternoon and the dark clouds were rolling in off Puget Sound. 
The sprinkles turned to a downpour as the cops headed for the station to do the 
worst part of police work: the paper work. 
The question had been raised several times about what they could point to as 
proof they were having a real effect on the neighborhood. 
Kilberg came up with the yellow coat anecdote, referring to the color of the 
rain gear used by the bike cops. 
"When the street criminals see a messenger with a yellow coat on, they start 
throwing their dope away," he said. "All statistics aside, you know you're 
doing good." 
