CULINARY SOS: GREAT POTATO DISH LOOKS LIKE A PIE 
DEAR SOS: Delmonico's Seafood Grille serves an outstanding potato dish that 
looks like a pie. I'd love to surprise my family with these great potatoes. 
 -- GRETA 
DEAR GRETA: Delmonico's garlic-potato pie would make a terrific accompaniment 
to grilled meats, fish or poultry. 
DELMONICO'S SEAFOOD GRILLE GARLIC-POTATO PIE 
1 bulb garlic 
Olive oil 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley 
Salt, pepper 
3 to 4 medium Russet or White Rose potatoes 
Cut garlic bulb horizontally into halves. Place in heavy oven-proof skillet. 
Sprinkle with 1 tablespoon olive oil and roast at 350 degrees 30 minutes. 
Remove garlic from oven and cool. 
Remove garlic cloves with small spoon. Place in small bowl and break cloves 
into small pieces with fork. Combine garlic with 1/2 cup olive oil, parsley and 
salt and pepper to taste. 
Peel and slice potatoes paper-thin, using knife, electric slicer or mandolin. 
Brush 9- or 10-inch baking pan or pie plate with oil. Place single layer of 
overlapping potato slices in bottom of pan. Spread 1/4 garlic mixture on top. 
Repeat 4 times or until pie is at least 1 inch thick. 
Cover with foil and bake at 350 degrees 30 minutes. Remove foil and bake 1 hour 
longer or until potatoes are golden brown and crisp. If desired, invert onto 
serving platter. Bottom should also be golden brown. Makes 6 servings. 
DEAR SOS: Do you have a recipe for Peanut Butter Cake with peanut butter 
frosting that might have been popular in the '50s or '60s? 
 -- D.S. 
DEAR D.S.: Yes, we do. And it is an oldie but goodie, going back to the '50s. 
The peanut butter frosting contains cocoa, giving it a special chocolate-peanut 
butter flavor you find in candy. 
PEANUT BUTTER CAKE 
2 1/2 cups sifted cake flour 
2 1/2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup butter or margarine 
1/4 cup peanut butter 
1 1/2 cups sugar 
2 eggs, separated 
1 teaspoon vanilla 
1 cup milk 
Cocoa-Peanut Butter Frosting 
Sift together flour, baking powder, soda and salt. Cream butter with peanut 
butter in bowl. Gradually add 1 1/4 cups sugar, beating mixture until light and 
fluffy. Blend in egg yolks and vanilla. Add dry ingredients alternately with 
milk, beginning and ending with dry ingredients. 
Beat egg whites until frothy. Gradually add remaining 1/4 cup sugar, beating 
until whites form soft peaks. Gently fold whites into batter. 
Turn batter into 13x9-inch pan that has been greased, then lined on bottom with 
wax paper. Bake at 350 degrees 35 to 40 minutes or until cake tester comes out 
clean. Turn cake onto rack to cool. Remove paper and cool competely before 
frosting. 
Cocoa-Peanut Butter Frosting 
6 tablespoons cocoa 
1/2 cup hot water 
1/2 cup peanut butter 
1 teaspoon vanilla 
Dash salt 
3 1/2 cups sifted powdered sugar 
Blend cocoa and water. Beat in peanut butter, vanilla and salt until smooth. 
Gradually stir in sugar. Makes enough frosting for top and sides of 13x9-inch 
cake or 2 (8-inch) layers. 
Only recipes of general interest will be printed. We are unable to answer all 
requests. Include restaurant address when requesting recipes from restaurants. 
Send letter with self-addressed, stamped envelope to Culinary SOS, Food 
Section, The Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles 90053. 
