MEDICINE / UNFINISHED BUSINESS; 
POLIO'S END IN AMERICAS SEEN BY 1991; 
ONLY THREE CASES OF THE DISEASE HAVE BEEN DETECTED SO FAR THIS YEAR. 
Buoyed by substantial progress in recent months, Pan American Health 
Organization officials remain cautiously optimistic that they can achieve their 
goal of eradicating polio from the Western Hemisphere by the end of this year. 
So far this year, only three cases of the feared crippler of children have been 
confirmed -- one in Mexico, one in Ecuador and one in Peru. Another 10 cases 
are classified as "polio compatible," which means there is not enough evidence 
to definitely exclude the diagnosis. About 500 cases of polio-like illnesses 
remain under investigation; more than two-thirds are in Brazil, Chile, Colombia 
or Mexico. 
"Things look good. . . . People are confident that the goal will be achieved," 
said Dr. John Andrus, a medical epidemiologist with the Washington, D.C.-based 
international health agency. 
The Pan American Health Organization launched its polio eradication campaign 
for the Americas in 1985. The group hoped that announcing a concrete goal would 
spur fund-raising efforts and motivate health officials. 
The campaign could still be derailed by a number of factors, Andrus said. These 
include wars, ineffective batches of vaccine or persistent transmission of the 
virus in the areas of greatest concern -- northwestern Mexico and the northern 
Andean regions of Ecuador, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela. 
Through immunization, many Western nations, including the United States, appear 
to have eliminated the natural polio virus. But the virus is still responsible 
for more than 250,000 cases of paralysis worldwide each year, primarily in 
Africa and Asia, where the vaccine is not as widely used. 
For an infectious disease to be eradicated, not simply controlled, the natural 
transmission of the virus that causes it must be halted. Then, this result must 
be confirmed over several years. So far, the only human germ eradicated 
worldwide is smallpox. 
The World Health Organization's goal is to eradicate polio from the world by 
the year 2000. 
Smallpox eradication was aided by the fact that people infected with the virus 
almost always became sick and developed a rash. Polio cases, by comparison, 
must be confirmed in the laboratory, and most infections are asymptomatic. 
The polio virus can easily be transmitted through food and water contaminated 
with human feces, as well as close person-to-person contact. 
The first step toward global eradication of polio is success in the Western 
Hemisphere. The nearly $50-million campaign by the Pan American Health 
Organization has relied on several strategies: 
National vaccination days, in which health workers try to immunize each child 
up to age 5 against polio and other childhood illnesses. 
Intensive surveillance of potential cases, including comprehensive reporting of 
unexplained cases of paralysis, particularly in children. 
"Mop-up" operations, in which public health workers go house-to-house in 
high-risk areas and immunize all children under age 5. 
In 1989, 130 polio cases were confirmed in the Americas. But much of the 
decrease so far this year can be explained by a change to more stringent 
criteria for diagnosing cases. 
If the new classification system had been used last year, only 24 of the 130 
cases -- those in which the virus was isolated from stool specimens -- would 
have been classified as confirmed, Andrus said. 
Even if success appears at hand by December, the Pan American Health 
Organization will not certify polio eradication until three years after the 
onset of the last case. 
