STAGE REVIEW; 
PLAY ANALYZES THE CONFLICTS THAT SPLIT UP JUNG AND FREUD 
Imagine a day in the lives of Freud and Jung in which the gods of 
psychoanalysis fall down from their pedestals to squabble like ordinary men. 
What a revenge fantasy, especially for a female patient who, admittedly, has 
felt at the mercy of both. 
In this case, the patient is also a playwright. And the experts stalking her 
consciousness are none other than Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, 
and his star pupil, Carl Jung, the guru of analytic psychology. 
Playwright Lynne Kaufman, who reveals in the program biography her own 
experience with couch time, depicts a watershed day in which Jung wars with his 
wife -- and with Freud -- in her play "The Couch," now playing at the North 
Coast Repertory Theatre through July 21. 
It's a minor, odd, but intriguing little play, nicely produced by the North 
Coast, which has an affinity for the sort of offbeat, provoking piece that 
sends you home thinking -- even if you don't agree with its precepts. 
What makes "The Couch" minor, ultimately, are the simplifications that abound 
in Kaufman's attempts to assert that Jung's inability to commit to Freud's 
theories was equivalent to his inability to be monogamous with his wife. 
Jung wants "roads, not fences," as he says in the play. He wants to affirm 
life's urges in all their shapes and forms, not repress them for the greater 
good, as Freud advises. 
In this scenario, Freud comes across as an inflexible old man, terribly 
threatened at the idea that Jung, his star protege and heir apparent, was 
planning to challenge his theories. 
What's missing is the tragic dimension of Freud fighting for his life, rather 
than just his ego. Is it paranoid for Moby Dick to fret about Ahab being out to 
get him? 
Was it unreasonable or prescient of Freud, skeptical of religion and 
civilization, to feel threatened by the pro-religious, pro-German Jung falling 
out with him in 1913, when, 25 years later, Freud found himself labeled guilty 
of being Jewish in a rising tide of Nazism? 
Before he died in exile in England, his books were among the first to be burned 
by the Nazis as the fruits of a "Jewish science." 
But Kaufman blocks out the world outside Jung's house to concentrate on the 
dynamics of two real events fictionalized as happening on the same day: the 
time Jung broke from Freud and broke from even the appearance of conventional 
monogamy, living openly with his wife and mistress with his wife's consent. 
A talented cast aids director Olive Blakistone in this tricky mix. Susana Moore 
is consistently funny as the acerbic, deadpanning Mrs. Jung. Stina Sundberg is 
lovely, sometimes breathtakingly so, as the mistress (although she comes across 
more as histrionic vamp than as the intellectually gifted helpmate she is 
described as being in the play). 
La Jolla Country Day School eighth-grader Rachael Lawrence is invigorating as 
Jung's precocious teen-ager who seeks to charm her father by making up 
imaginative phallic dreams. Gary Seger brings out the frailty under the 
imperiousness of Freud, and Ocie Robinson brings heft, though not complete 
elucidation, to Jung -- by far the most emotionally complex characterization in 
the play. 
Bernard Harland's set design is warm, inviting and inventive, as are Ocie 
Robinson's additional scenic choices and lighting design. Sound designer Marvin 
Read's choice of classical piano pieces softens the mood, though more could be 
done to suggest the sounds of the countryside where the Jungs live. 
The play is not deep or cutting enough to change the way anyone may think, but 
it does make you think -- not only about the life of the mind and the spirit 
and civilization itself -- but about the North Coast Rep as a quality podium on 
which playwrights can air an alternative viewpoint such as this. 
'THE COUCH' 
By Lynne Kaufman. Director is Olive Blakistone. Set design by Bernard Harland. 
Scenic art and lighting design by Ocie Robinson. Sound by Marvin Read. Costumes 
by Kathryn Gould. With Ocie Robinson, Gary Seger, Susana Moore, Stina Sundberg 
and Rachael Lawrence. At 8 p.m. Thursdays-Saturdays and 7 p.m. Sundays with 
selected matinees at 2 p.m. through July 21. At 987D Lomas Santa Fe Drive, 
Solana Beach, (619) 481-1055. 
