HARDEMAN CHALLENGES THOMAS' USE OF 'INCUMBENT'; 
NEW LEGAL SKIRMISH IN INGLEWOOD COUNCIL RACE 
Inglewood City Council candidate Garland Hardeman, adding another twist to a 
two-year legal battle over the city's District 4 seat, has asked the Los 
Angeles Superior Court this week to order his opponent to stop portraying 
himself as an incumbent. 
Hardeman is seeking an injunction that would prevent opponent Ervin (Tony) 
Thomas from describing himself as an incumbent throughout the campaign, even 
though Thomas spent nearly two years in office. In court papers filed Monday, 
Hardeman said Thomas violated state election law in his official two-page 
candidate's statement filed earlier this month with the city clerk, when he 
said he was "elected" two years ago and when he urged voters to "reelect" him 
in the Oct. 3 election. 
A judge annulled Thomas' June, 1987, election in December, 1987, and ordered 
another contest between Thomas and Hardeman after finding that Thomas campaign 
workers intimidated voters and improperly handled absentee ballots on Election 
Day. Thomas, however, remained in office for almost two years, until this May, 
when his appeals in the case were exhausted. 
"My opponent continues to violate the law after massive fraud in the last 
election," Hardeman, a Los Angeles police officer, said at a news conference 
Tuesday outside City Hall. "Many voters are very intelligent, but some could be 
fooled by his masquerading as an incumbent councilman." 
The election code says candidates cannot pretend or imply that they are 
incumbents "when that is not the case." The code also gives the city clerk 
authority to challenge candidate's statements "upon clear and convincing proof 
that the material in question is false, misleading or inconsistent." 
City Atty. Howard Rosten said he advised City Clerk Hermanita Harris not to 
make a ruling on Thomas' campaign statement because it is not a clear-cut case 
and "the government should not involve itself in free speech or election issues 
unless absolutely necessary." 
Hardeman's petition seeks to force the city clerk to delete all references to 
incumbency from Thomas' official statement before it is mailed to registered 
voters, along with the sample ballot. 
Thomas' statement says: "When you first elected me your councilman in 1987, you 
saw the difference between smooth talk and hard work." Later in the statement, 
Thomas says: "Thank you for voting to reelect a good neighbor -- a great 
councilman -- Tony Thomas." 
Hardeman's attorney, Mark Borenstein, said Thomas' campaign statement is 
"absolutely inconsistent" with Superior Court Judge Leon Savage's 1987 decision 
annulling the election results and revoking Thomas' certificate of election. 
Borenstein said it was a "quirk" in the election law that allowed Thomas to 
remain in office pending appeals in the case. 
Thomas did not return several telephone calls this week, but he said previously 
that he disagrees with the court's decision to annul the election and does not 
believe he was implicated in any illegal activities. He said he plans to run on 
his record during his two years in office. 
Thomas' attorney, Robert Stroud, called Hardeman's petition "trivial" and an 
attempt to gain more publicity for his campaign. 
Stroud said Thomas was elected in 1987 and did make legal votes on the council 
for almost two years, while the case rose through the courts. He said the 
dispute over the wording on the campaign statement could have been best 
resolved if Hardeman had simply talked to Thomas about his objections. 
A hearing on Hardeman's petition is scheduled for early August, Borenstein 
said. 
