HOT TOPICS: HIGH LIFE; 
A WEEKLY FORUM FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS; 
YOUR FAVORITE SAYING? HERE ARE SOME OLDIES 
Have you ever found yourself without an answer to a question and suddenly you 
find yourself quoting something you read in English class? 
Almost everyone has some famous or favorite line that they carry with them and, 
perhaps, pattern their lives after. 
Hot Topics wonders, "What famous words do you live by?" 
"People are basically bad. . . . How good they appear to be depends on how well 
they can fake it." 
Linda Lawson 16, junior, Sunny Hills 
"Life is like a bowl of cherries -- once you eat them all, it's just the pits." 
Susan Harris, 14, freshman, Villa Park 
"The only person I need to judge is the one staring back at me in the mirror." 
Cindy Scheller, 14, freshman, Edison 
"What have you done for me lately?" 
Sherrie Wells, 16, sophomore, El Dorado 
"If you can't stand the heat, get out of the kitchen." 
Geoff Redmond, 14, freshman, Santa Ana 
" 'Tis better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all." 
Susan Sandoval, 16, sophomore, Newport Harbor 
"Live each day as if it was your last. You could be dead tomorrow." 
Jennifer Pooler, 14, freshman, Dana Hills 
"Quitters never win and winners never quit." 
Polly Gifford, 14, freshman, Irvine 
"A ship is safe in a harbor but that's not what ships were made for." 
Bruce Dennis, 16, sophomore, Santiago 
"A penny saved is a penny earned." 
Emily Raat, 15, sophomore, El Modena 
"Don't spend it all in the first day." 
Cara Pettite, 16, junior, Rosary 
"Actions speak louder than words." 
Jenny Cates, 16, junior, Los Alamitos 
"Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." 
Heather James, 15, sophomore, Esperanza 
"When life hands you lemons, make lemonade." 
Brenda McCabe, 15, freshman, Tustin 
"Beggars can't be choosers." 
Lisa Boese, 16, junior, Edison 
"If you can't say something nice, don't say anything at all." 
Lisa Spalding, 15, sophomore, Laguna Hills 
"Variety is the spice of life." 
Vanessa Chavez, 15, sophomore, University 
"Take it as it comes." 
Stacy Bosinoff, 15, junior, Edison 
"I am the king!" 
Angel Swanier, 16, sophomore, Orange 
"Don't worry, be happy." 
Mark Hall, 17, junior, Orange 
"To be or not to be. . . ." 
Golnaz Movafaghi, 15, junior, Villa Park 
"Always follow the Golden Rule." 
Kendra Kaufman, 15, sophomore, El Dorado 
"If you never had it, you can't lose it." 
Jason Robles, 15, freshman, Trabuco Hills 
Next Week's Hot Topic: 
Which one moment of your life would you most like to relive? 
