EXPERTS SAY GORBACHEV REFORMS WILL CONTINUE; 
PERESTROIKA: EVEN IF HE LOSES POWER, CHANGE IS IN THE WORKS, THEY BELIEVE. FOR 
THE U.S., HE OFFERS STABILITY. 
As Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev prepares for the crucial Communist 
Party congress this week, most American experts in and out of government have 
concluded that his reforms will probably continue -- possibly at a headier pace 
-- if Gorbachev himself loses power. 
"He is father of the revolution," a senior Administration official said, "but 
the children of his revolution have moved beyond him. Other leaders might push 
things along faster, like democratization, market economy, withdrawal from 
foreign commitments." 
But to the United States, this official said, Gorbachev offers something that 
none of his adversaries can match: That something is stability, and for now the 
Bush Administration values stability more than accelerated reform. 
"The faster the change, the greater risk of instability" in the Soviet Union, 
this official said. The explosive caldron of change could bubble over, he said, 
with enormous and possibly disastrous consequences for Europe. 
Many outside analysts agree with this view. 
"Gorbachev is less indispensable to reform than he was a year ago," said the 
RAND Corp.'s Arnold L. Horelick, a former senior CIA analyst of Soviet affairs. 
"Indeed, he may have become part of the problem. But he is also indispensable 
to reasonable stability in the short term. So the dilemma is whether it's 
riskier to accept stasis with Gorbachev or accept the risk of doing without 
him." 
"We are on the eve of momentous events," said Walter Laquer, a Soviet scholar 
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "Gorbachev is fighting 
for survival." 
How he will attempt to meet this challenge -- move left or right, quit as 
general secretary of the party but remain as Soviet president, retire 
altogether -- is anyone's guess. So are the consequences if he retires 
voluntarily or is forced out by his opponents. 
"The Soviet Union, for so many years the most predictable country, is now the 
least predictable country," observed Laquer, author of a new book, "Soviet 
Union 2000: Reform or Revolution." 
The Bush Administration has decided to continue working with Gorbachev at least 
until it can complete arms reduction talks and German unification accords. It 
has formulated its policies so as not to jeopardize Gorbachev's political 
standing at home. 
"We're not betting that he succeeds or even that he'll be around in five 
years," a senior State Department official said, "only that he's the most 
efficacious way to get there (into the mid-1990s) without violence. 
"We want the democratic movement in Eastern Europe to continue, we want the 
Soviet forces out of Germany, and we want German unification, we want START and 
CFE," he added, referring to treaties under negotiation to reduce both nuclear 
and conventional military forces. "These goals could be endangered if he fell." 
Most European states, particularly Germany and France, are even more frightened 
of the possible effects of Gorbachev's departure than is the United States. To 
help Gorbachev, they are pushing for a multibillion-dollar economic aid program 
for the Soviet Union. Gorbachev's fall, they believe, would be catastrophic for 
the West. 
Some American scholars are equally concerned. Without Gorbachev, said Columbia 
University's Marshall Shulman, his reforms would be "put on hold" and "disorder 
and even chaos" could follow. "He's still the linchpin holding that polarized 
situation together," said Shulman, a professor emeritus of international 
relations. 
Not so, argued Allen Lynch, a colleague of Shulman, in the current issue of 
Foreign Affairs magazine. Gorbachev was the "right man at the right time" to 
create the breakthrough in East-West relations, he wrote. But fears that his 
domestic failures will force a reversal of Soviet foreign policy and even 
Gorbachev's downfall are misplaced. 
"The disappearance or marginalization of Gorbachev would have a detectable 
impact on Western international interests," Lynch acknowledged. But "it is now 
unlikely," he wrote, "that a change in Soviet leadership -- or a change in the 
pace, scope and character of reform -- would have a corresponding impact on 
East-West relations and the most vital geopolitical interests of the United 
States." 
The Soviets need a benign international environment to pursue their domestic 
reforms, Lynch said. Conservatives in the Soviet Union accept this fact. Also, 
Lynch maintained, Soviet leaders recognize that foreign aggressiveness, such as 
the invasion of Afghanistan, causes a backlash in the West that far outweighs 
whatever benefits are to be gained. 
These factors mean that Gorbachev's foreign policies would continue without 
Gorbachev, Lynch predicted. "The sooner the West relinquishes its fascination 
with Gorbachev, the sooner it can assume responsibilities of a sober, long-term 
analysis of the foundations of its relationship with the U.S.S.R. and their 
consequences for peace," he said. 
U.S. policy toward Gorbachev reflects President Bush's generally cautious 
approach around the world, particularly in relations toward China. There, after 
last year's massacre of protesters in Beijing, the Administration refused to 
distance itself from the regime as far as U.S. and Chinese liberals urged. 
More radical reformers are challenging Gorbachev. But as in China, U.S. 
officials do not believe these Soviets are yet capable of running the country. 
