MOVEMENT TO SAVE CARWASH GAINS AN ANTHEM 
People were whistling distinctly different tunes Friday as the San Fernando 
Valley's carwash culture controversy turned more bizarre. 
Studio City residents wore "Save Our Corner" T-shirts and sang an 
anti-development anthem that asked, "Is there nothing sacred anymore? Is our 
community going out the door?" as they rallied to prevent a popular 
neighborhood carwash from being demolished to make room for a mini-mall. 
Nearby, representatives of the developer who hopes to build the $15-million 
shopping center wore dejected looks and sang the blues as they watched the 
spectacle and mulled over ways of counteracting the growing carwash crusade. 
The homeowners announced that architects from the community have volunteered to 
help redesign developer Ira Smedra's retail project if the Los Angeles Cultural 
Heritage Commission votes July 19 in favor of making the carwash an official 
city cultural monument. 
Hindering Demolition 
If ratified by the City Council, such a designation would delay demolition of 
the carwash, an adjoining gas station and a coffee shop next door for one year. 
That would give the architects time to incorporate all three structures into a 
new shopping center design, neighborhood leader Walter McIntyre said. 
Showing off shirts that they plan to sell for $10 each, residents sang along 
with musicians Jean Frye of Studio City and Olivia Duke of Hollywood. Their 
lyrics demanded: "Save our corner, save our precious history. Save our corner, 
gateway to Studio City." 
Carpenter Avenue School fourth-grader Jacqueline Wolfstein, 9, read an essay 
that warned that destruction of the steel boomerang-topped carwash "would be 
bad for the movie makers who need a backdrop for the 1960s" for their films. 
In the background, developer representatives Ira Handelman and Amy Goldberg 
looked on unhappily. "This is great theater, but I think a cultural heritage 
designation is a more serious matter," Handelman said. 
Handelman said the monument nomination should have failed last week when the 
three existing members of the five-member panel failed to approve the monument 
designation. Two commission seats were vacant at the time. 
Panel Divided 
The commission was split 2 to 1 in favor of preservation, but commission 
President Amarjit Marwah refused to take an official vote because three 
affirmative votes are needed. 
Handelman complained Friday that Marwah should have taken a vote and the 
nomination should have died. 
As a result, Handelman said, Smedra is considering suing Marwah. Smedra is also 
considering incorporating the "landmark" boomerangs into his mall -- even 
though he is convinced most Studio City residents dislike the gaudy, 
55-foot-tall tower, Handelman said. 
Marwah, who showed up at the carwash as the rally was ending, denied that he 
abused his power as president in delaying the vote until after newly appointed 
Commissioner Reynaldo Landero starts work. 
"I felt that having three members of the commission was not sufficient to vote 
that day," he said. "I did not feel it was fair to the citizens, who in my 
opinion had presented a very good case of the cultural importance." 
Landero, a Carson physician whose appointment was approved Tuesday by the City 
Council, said he plans to visit the carwash this weekend to check on its 
cultural importance for himself. 
He said he has read all of the commission documents on the carwash and is 
leaning toward supporting the landmark designation, although "I haven't really 
made my mind up yet." 
All in all, Landero said, he would rather have avoided the controversy. 
"But it's a healthy sign of democracy. And I love the diversity of culture in 
L.A.," he said. 
