PRODUCER OF L-TRYPTOPHAN NAMED IN $30-MILLION SUIT 
A Burbank couple filed a $30-million lawsuit Monday against a manufacturer of 
the dietary supplement L-tryptophan, alleging that impurities in the product 
severely disabled the woman. 
Mike and Cecile Gracy filed the suit in Burbank Superior Court, claiming that 
Showa Denko of Tokyo produced impure batches of tryptophan in late 1988 and 
early 1989 that caused Cecile Gracy to develop eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, a 
potentially fatal muscle and blood ailment. 
The 30-year-old woman was hospitalized last October for back pain, muscle 
atrophy, partial paralysis and skin thickening, among other problems, after 
taking the supplement for about six months, Mike Gracy said. She has since been 
released but has not recovered, he said. 
"I have not noticed anything else in her medical records that would seem to 
indicate that this was caused by anything other than L-tryptophan," said Robert 
R. Star, an Encino attorney representing the Gracys. "We're dealing strictly 
with a product created and distributed in a negligent manner." 
Bob Schwadron, a spokesman for Showa Denko in New York, declined to comment on 
the lawsuit. He acknowledged that other lawsuits had been filed against the 
company, the largest of six tryptophan suppliers. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration last November ordered a total recall of 
L-tryptophan, after federal and state health officials concluded there was a 
link between a U.S. epidemic of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome and the 
supplement. 
As of last Friday, 1,531 cases, including 27 deaths, had been reported to the 
Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. Of those, 275 were reported from 
California. 
Last month, researchers presented the strongest evidence to date linking the 
epidemic to batches of the supplement manufactured in late 1988 and early 1989 
by Showa Denko. 
Health officials from Minnesota, Oregon, New Mexico and New York presented data 
at a medical meeting in New Mexico showing that about 95% of the cases they had 
studied extensively could be traced to Showa Denko. Minnesota researchers said 
they had identified specific changes in Showa Denko's manufacturing techniques 
that seemed to be related to increased amounts of an impurity in the company's 
tryptophan. 
The meeting was organized by Dr. Phillip Hertzman, a Los Alamos, N.M., family 
practitioner who helped discover the syndrome last October. 
