SPECULATOR STASHES CARTOON WAREHOUSE 
Millions of Saturday morning television cartoon images -- super heroes, 
extraterrestrials, talking animals and characters from traditional folk tales 
-- are tightly packed into numbered cardboard boxes in a nondescript Woodland 
Hills warehouse next to a railroad track. 
One-dimensional, brightly colored paintings on acetate, they depict such 
well-known characters as the Lone Ranger, Lassie, Tarzan, Pinocchio and Flash 
Gordon, as well as characters familiar only to cartoon-addicted children. For 
much of the 80-year history of animation, such paintings -- known as cels, 
because in the early days of animation they were done on celluloid -- have been 
considered valueless scrap, mere raw material from which animated films were 
made. 
Take Over Storage 
In fact, Filmation Associates, the Woodland Hills animation company that 
created many of these cels, was on the verge of destroying them last year when 
Herman Rush came along. Rush, a former top television marketing executive, 
agreed to take over storage of the cels, and his company offered to pay 
Filmation a royalty in return for the right to sell them. 
Royal Animated Art of Burbank, owned by Rush and a partner, has acquired rights 
from other studios as well. It can market nearly 7 million cels -- which are 
stored in warehouses in Japan and Korea, in addition to Woodland Hills -- and 
controls what he said is the world's largest inventory of animated art. 
Royal's main competitor as a large independent distributor of animation art is 
Linda Jones, daughter of Chuck Jones, who helped develop such Warner Bros. 
cartoon characters as Bugs Bunny and Wile E. Coyote. Royal is the sole 
legitimate source of cels from 43 television series and animated movies 
depicting 132 principal characters. Although others may possess cels from those 
series, only Royal has acquired the legal right to sell them. 
The original cost of creating the cels, according to Rush, was nearly $200 
million. The resale value of even the fraction of the cels considered 
marketable, he is hoping, could be that much or more. 
Wall Decoration? 
But whether Rush can find a large enough market for his holdings is a matter of 
sharp debate. Clearly, to be successful, Rush must reach far beyond the small 
circle of serious collectors and speculators. Dealers and galleries 
specializing in animated art are divided on whether a sufficient number of 
buyers will be willing to pay hundreds of dollars for art that may become 
decoration for their children's walls rather than a good investment. 
"I believe there is a multimillion-dollar market here, but I have to find a 
route out to the marketplace," said Rush, former president of Coca-Cola 
Television. To do that, he is targeting large galleries but also selling to 
gift stores and hobby shops, two outlets heretofore untried for animation art. 
Recently he also arranged for dealers to sell his cels in the United Kingdom. 
Early, rare animated art, mostly from Walt Disney Co., is unquestionably 
soaring in value, doubling in price every six months for the past two years. 
But the value of recent animation cels, particularly from cartoons featuring 
less well-known characters, remains largely untested. 
"I think there is a mass market for art today in the U.S., if not the world, 
and I think animated art falls into that category," Rush said. "Time will tell 
if I'm right." 
But Stuart Reisbord of Wallingford, Pa., one of the nation's largest and most 
respected collectors and dealers of animated art, is skeptical. 
"It's much harder to sell to the masses," he said of Rush's strategy. "It's 
much harder to sell something for $200 to $300 than it is to sell something for 
$20,000 to $30,000." 
Reisbord said buyers with less money to spend would rather purchase cels from 
recent Disney movies and cartoons than cels from a less well-known company such 
as Filmation. In fact, he said, his gallery has virtually stopped selling 
Filmation cels. 
"There is an awful lot of that art around and . . . the vast quantities might 
make it harder to sell," Reisbord said. "Everything will depend on the price 
he's going to ask." 
Record Purchase 
The top price ever paid for a piece of animated art soared in May to $286,000 
for a black-and-white cel from a 1934 Disney film, "The Orphan's Benefit," at 
Christie's East auction house in New York. That price was five times the record 
set a year earlier. 
But the price of a cel from a broad range of cartoons -- such as "The 
Flintstones," "The Jetsons," "Yogi Bear" and most Warner Bros. cartoons -- is 
increasing rapidly as well, although it still is less than $1,000. 
Harry Kleiman, a Studio City dealer credited with helping establish a West 
Coast market for animation art, said all cels will eventually go up in value. 
But how fast and how much is unknown. "When this stupid market started, Hanna 
Barbera cels were going for a dollar or two," he said, referring to the famous 
producer of such shows as "The Flintstones." "Now they are $100 or $150. The 
only problem is that a new cel is going to cost $100 or $150, and where is it 
going to go from there?" 
Kleiman said many of the characters represented by Rush -- including the 
Archies, Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids, Ghostbusters and others -- are 
overpriced, given present demand. Others agreed, but said that demand -- and 
the cels' value -- may eventually increase dramatically, especially if the 
number of collectors continues to build and the present supply of older cels is 
snapped up. 
Indeed, publicity about the high prices brought by a few cels -- including a 
selection of 560 from the 1988 "Adventures of Roger Rabbit" auctioned in June 
for $1.6 million, nearly twice pre-sale expectations -- is drawing new 
enthusiasts to the art form. 
'Gold Mine' 
The June sale of Roger Rabbit cels amazed some collectors. Jerry Muller, a 
longtime collector based in Costa Mesa, said: "That was one film's cels that 
were cranked out a year or two ago, and not all of the cels were the best. If 
that is any indication of where the market for recent animation art is going, 
then Herman is sitting on a gold mine." 
The circulation of Animation Magazine, a 1-year-old Los Angeles publication 
that covers the animation art market, already has reached 20,000 and is 
increasing rapidly, editors said. Christie's recently became the first art 
auction house to establish an animation art department, and four auctions of 
cartoon cels are planned for this year. Christie's top animation art buyer will 
be in Los Angeles for a week in August to appraise older cels. 
The higher prices are drawing valuable cels out of storage in basements and 
garages. Several dealers said former animators frequently have large caches of 
their work, with or without a studio's permission. "A lot of the time, these 
cels were going to be thrown away," said Arnold Kowan, a dealer who works out 
of his home in Van Nuys. "I try to find these people." 
Kowan said he tries to be sure that people from whom he buys cels actually own 
then. But he and a number of dealers across the country failed to detect that 
numerous cels they purchased last year and this year probably had been stolen 
from a Warner Bros. warehouse in Toluca Lake. 
Anonymous Tip 
An anonymous letter received by the Burbank Police Department in April, 1988, 
tipped off Warner Bros. that several boxes of cels and drawings may have been 
taken from the warehouse. A studio investigation discovered that cels worth an 
estimated $275,000 had disappeared. Disney officials believe that cels worth 
$200,000 were taken from a warehouse in Glendale. 
In February, FBI agents and Burbank police raided galleries and dealers' homes 
in Los Angeles, Studio City and Van Nuys -- including Kowan's -- and seized 
hundreds of cels featuring such characters as Bugs Bunny, Foghorn Leghorn, 
Porky Pig and even a few forged cels of Disney's Roger Rabbit. Cels were also 
seized from collectors in Virginia and were believed to have been sold in 
Boston, New York, Atlanta, Guam and Europe. 
Federal authorities are investigating whether at least one San Fernando Valley 
dealer engaged in interstate commerce in stolen property. 
Determining who owns cels is but one hurdle facing the novice collector. Cels 
are easily faked, dealers said. And even legitimate production cels -- those 
actually used to make an animated film -- may be worthless if they only contain 
partial images. 
Because Rush deals almost solely in recent cels obtained from their producers, 
he is able to certify to purchasers that he has the legal right to sell them. 
That approach, Rush believes, legitimizes a market that has thrived on 
underground sources of cels slipped out of studios surreptitiously. 
Guarantees Downplayed 
Several dealers said serious collectors do not need such assurances. They know 
whether older cels are legitimate. And they usually do not fear that a studio 
will try to reclaim ownership of cels taken by animators or given or thrown 
away by studios many years ago. 
Recent cels, however, have been much more closely guarded. And, dealers said, 
that is where Rush's completely aboveboard approach is already paying 
dividends. 
According to several dealers, Rush's aggressive enforcement of his legal rights 
to be the sole source of cels depicting certain characters is having an impact 
on the market. Kowan said he stopped selling cels from DIC Enterprises, a large 
studio based in Burbank that markets its cels through Rush, after receiving a 
letter from Rush threatening to sue him. Others agreed that Rush has also 
succeeded in becoming the sole source of Filmation cels. 
"I'm all for what Herman is doing and ultimately the market . . . will have to 
be 100% legitimate," Muller said. "But there are always going to be gray areas 
because most of this stuff has never been officially released." 
To distinguish his company from speculators and underground dealers, Rush said 
he will not offer cels to galleries that market cels from unofficial sources. 
But Kleiman, the Studio City dealer, was scornful. "He should be promoting the 
cels on their . . . quality, rather than trying to scare people with the 
certificates," he said. 
Eventually, said Leonard Surico, a downtown Los Angeles dealer, the underground 
sources of cels are going to dry up. And when they do, Rush will be in a good 
position. 
"I think what Herman is doing is the future," Surico said. "It's a good 
business move, if he can hold on long enough." 
