PALESTINE'S PEACE MAY LIE EAST OF THE JORDAN 
Over the past 18 months, Americans have been bombarded with images comparing 
rock-throwing young Arabs with the Israelite David who confronted Goliath in 
biblical days. Images of kaffiyeh-bedecked youths hurling rocks and boulders at 
Israeli soldiers have occupied network television news footage and newspaper 
telephotos. On the surface, their actions seem parallel to the ancient David's. 
Both threw rocks. 
But David did not hijack wagons. And David did not murder children. And David 
did not endanger bystanders. He specificly attacked Goliath, who had challenged 
the Israelites to send a representative against him in a one-on-one battle to 
the death. 
The bus that traveled on the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem highway last week did not carry 
among its passengers any Goliaths, nor did the Achille Lauro cruise ship. They 
carried civilians whose crime was that they were Jewish. And despite Israeli 
politicians' fierce warnings that "Jewish blood is not cheap," these murderers 
have successfully established a different thesis. 
The intifada, or Arab uprising, is not limited to a struggle over sovereignty 
in the West Bank regions of Judea and Samaria. Nor has it ever been so 
territorially circumscribed. The intifada is aimed just as surely at Tel Aviv 
and Jerusalem. It is aimed at Haifa and the Galilee. It is aimed at removing 
the Jewish state from a region otherwise in the exclusive orbit of Islam. 
No minority has found peace or security under Arab Islamic patronage. Not the 
Berbers of Algeria and not the Kurds of Iraq and not the Coptic Christians of 
Egypt. Even intra-Islamic doctrinal differences become cause for bloodshed: 
Alawites and Sunnis face off in Syria; Iraqi Sunnis wage war for a decade 
against Iranian Shiites; several Lebanese sects intent on destroying one 
another are destroying the very country each seeks to dominate. 
The Israelis know what majorities in the Arab Islamic world have done to each 
other and how minorities fare when the dust settles. And the Israelis know that 
their Jewish ethnicity and religion leaves them as the ultimate sitting ducks 
should they ever let down their guard for even a moment. They know that if the 
Syrians can massacre 40,000 of their own countrymen, as happened when the city 
of Hama was razed in 1982, the fate awaiting the Jewish state will not be even 
that merciful. 
That is why the Israelis appear to be hard-liners, why they hestitate to 
succumb to the well-meant advice of friends like the U.S. secretary of state 
who never lost a relative to terrorism and whose nation has allies on all its 
borders. 
The Arab terrorist who murdered 14 bus passengers on a day's innocent journey 
to Jerusalem undoubtedly sought to send a message to all Israelis. He 
succeeded, but the message he sent may not have been the one intended. 
Israel has again faced its enemy, eyeball-to-eyeball, and has seen that there 
are no short roads to peace. Camp David concessions of territory and military 
bases and oil fields have not brought peace. The 1985 Pandora's Box decision to 
release 1,150 convicted Arab terrorists has not brought peace; indeed, many in 
Israel have come to acknowledge that the seeds of the intifada were sown on the 
day those convicts were set loose. Proposals to allow elections among Arabs in 
Judea, Samaria and Gaza have not brought peace. Each Israeli concession has 
instead sent a renewed signal that, given enough pressure, Israel might cave in 
altogether. 
There is only one course of action left: Israel should annex the West Bank 
regions of Judea and Samaria, in a firm and clear affirmation that the Jews are 
there to stay. The government should disband the military occupation and offer 
every Arab in Judea and Samaria a choice: Stay in your homes and live with us 
in peace, or go to the Palestinian homeland east of the Jordan River and 
express your self-determination there. 
The country of Jordan, after all, embraces 78% of Palestine. The majority of 
its citizens are Palestinians. And no one ever did elect King Hussein. Jordan 
is ripe for self-determination. 
