THE BUTCHER: A NEW GENERATION OF BEEF CUTS 
Twenty or thirty years ago, 85% or 90% of the cattle that came to market came 
in carcass form. When a butcher ordered beef, he ordered quarters, two fore 
quarters and two hind quarters per carcass. All of the further processing of 
the carcass was done in the cutting room of the retail market. 
As a result, you seldom saw skirt steaks or flank steaks in the meat case of 
any but the largest supermarket. There is only one skirt on every fore quarter 
and one flank on every hind, hardly enough to make a display in the meat case. 
Cuts that are today called tri-tips, ball tips and flaps also weren't seen in 
the meat cases of a generation ago. They are individual boneless muscles of the 
sirloin section of the carcass, and back then the muscles of the sirloin were 
not sold separately but rather all together in one huge slab of sirloin steak. 
Each steak contained a bit of tri-tip, a bit of ball tip and a bit of flap in 
addition to larger sections of the top loin and tenderloin muscles. 
Today, most beef is sold boneless, each carcass divided into its individual 
component parts at the packing plant and shipped to the market in boxes, each 
box containing so many vacuum-sealed plastic bags of like parts. Most of these 
subprimal cuts (as they are called) require some further cutting at the market 
to turn them into the retail steaks, stew, stir-fry and stuff that you find in 
the meat case. Some cuts, however, are small enough to be tossed on the grill 
just as they come from the bag. 
The following is a list and description of some of the cuts that you may be 
able to save some money on if you buy them by the bag. 
TRI-TIP: The tri-tip is not only the tastiest muscle of the sirloin but one of 
the tastiest of the entire beef carcass. Only a prime New York strip has the 
flavor and the tenderness of a tri-tip. 
Each tri-tip will weigh between 1 1/2 and two pounds and will average between 1 
1/4 to 1 1/2 inchesin thickness, a perfect size for the barbecue grill. A 
tri-tip seasoned simply with salt and pepper and garlic salt is the cut used 
for the Santa Maria Barbecue, a regional specialty along the south central 
coast of California. 
You may be able to save some money on steak for your barbecue grill if you buy 
a bag of tri-tips. They usually come two to the bag. 
SKIRT: Another cut of beef in a bag, the skirt steak, has become very popular 
in the past few years because it is the cut called for in another regional 
barbecue specialty -- fajitas (marinated skirt steaks that are grilled and 
placed in a tortilla with various condiments). 
The skirt is the diaphragm muscle of the beef animal. There are only two 1 1/2- 
to two-pound skirts per carcass and because of the popularity of fajitas, plus 
the popularity of the cut in Japan where it is used for teriyaki steak, the 
skirt is a hard cut to come by. If you should find a market that has some, buy 
a bag. They come three or four skirts per bag. 
FLAP: The flap, like the tri-tip, is a muscle from the sirloin section of the 
carcass, but its texture is more like that of the skirt steak. I have, in fact, 
seen it in many markets lately labeled fajitas. 
The flap is a small portion of the flank of the animal somewhat akin in texture 
to the tail of a T-bone or Porterhouse steak. They come four or five to a bag, 
each weighing just over one pound. They work well as fajitas or teriyaki steak. 
They are also wonderful sliced thin for stir-fry dishes. Since, unlike skirt 
steak, flaps have not yet been "discovered," they still are comparatively 
inexpensive. Buy a bag. 
BALL TIP: The ball tip is a small round muscle from the sirloin section. It is 
actually a portion of the sirloin tip muscle left in the sirloin when the hind 
quarter is divided into its primal cuts. 
Each ball-tip steak will weigh just over one pound and usually come three or 
four steaks per bag. They can be grilled or broiled just as they come from the 
bag, then sliced thin across the grain as you would a London Broil. 
