MEDIA / JOURNALISTS IN THE CROSS HAIRS; 
COLOMBIA: CENSORSHIP BY TERROR 
In their narco-terrorist campaign, cocaine traffickers have frequently targeted 
the Colombian press, with the obvious goal of subduing the country by muzzling 
the media. They appear to be succeeding: After the murders of dozens of 
journalists and threats against the lives of uncounted others, many reporters 
and news organizations are softening their coverage of the drug-trafficking 
Mafia. 
"You can see it in the newspapers and you can certainly hear it on the radio," 
a foreign correspondent who lives here said the other day. 
A local newspaper editor said, "The professional now thinks twice about what he 
is going to publish, and some try to evade the subject of narcotics traffic." 
An investigative reporter said television news programs and the two leading 
radio networks, Caracol and RCN, avoid using the term narco-terrorist and other 
language that might anger traffickers. 
Even El Espectador and El Tiempo, major newspapers known in the past for 
hard-hitting reports on drug-related crime and corruption, are assigning fewer 
reporters to investigate these subjects, the reporter said. 
This is not to say that the entire Colombian press has caved in to 
narco-terrorists. A few journalists at El Tiempo and El Espectador still defy 
danger to expose the drug lords' activities, and both newspapers still publish 
editorials and opinion columns that take tough stands against the traffickers. 
"It's amazing that people speak out as much as they do," said U.S. Embassy 
official Phillip McLean. 
Rafael Galvez, president of the Circle of Bogota Journalists, said at least 65 
Colombian journalists have been slain in the past seven years, 29 of those in 
1989. Most were killed by narco-terrorists, Galvez said. He estimated that 20 
journalists now live outside the country because of narco-terrorist threats. 
"Not only is the journalist's life in jeopardy, but they menace his children, 
his wife," Galvez said. He said journalists have responded in three ways: 
* With courage, defying the drug lords. "This was the position of those who 
were killed," Galvez said. 
* With prudence, avoiding many sensitive subjects and softening references to 
drug traffickers. "This is the position of a large number of journalists," 
including those running radio and television networks, he said. 
* With a see-no-evil approach, ignoring the subject of drug traffic. 
The Circle does not criticize any of the approaches, Galvez said, adding, 
"Everyone is free to administer his own fear." But he voiced concern over the 
threat posed by narco-terrorists to Colombia's traditional freedom of 
information. 
"They are not only trying to silence the press, but they also are attempting to 
undermine the institutions of democracy," he said. 
Perhaps the most dramatic example of the struggle between the Colombian press 
and narco-terrorists is the case of El Espectador. Assassins killed Guillermo 
Cano, the newspaper's editor, in 1986. Police blamed traffickers for Cano's 
death and the deaths of seven other El Espectador employees in the past four 
years. 
Last September, narco-terrorists bombed the newspaper's Bogota headquarters, 
damaging the plant and injuring 89 people. 
In April, traffickers drove El Espectador out of Medellin, Colombia's 
second-largest city and home of the notorious Medellin cocaine cartel. Gunmen 
invaded the newspaper's circulation depot, killing the transportation 
supervisor. Last October, narco-terrorists killed El Espectador's circulation 
and administrative managers. 
"We decided that we couldn't continue to risk the lives of our employees, so we 
stopped circulating," said Fernando Cano Busquets, 34, a son of Guillermo Cano 
and now co-editor of the newspaper. 
Cano vowed that the newspaper will continue to speak out forcefully against the 
drug lords and their crimes. "If we don't eradicate that evil from the country, 
the country will get nowhere," he said. 
