FEW GAINS FOR LAROUCHE CANDIDATES; 
POLITICS: THE LEADER OF THE GROUP HAS LOWERED HIS SIGHTS. HE IS WAGING A 
JAILHOUSE CAMPAIGN FOR CONGRESS. 
Imprisoned political extremist Lyndon LaRouche and his followers are running in 
scores of primary and general election races this year as they try to regroup 
politically after a string of legal defeats. 
LaRouche followers stunned and embarrassed the Democratic Party in 1986 by 
winning primary nominations for two statewide offices in Illinois. But this 
time around, the organization's candidates appear to be having little success. 
After running for President four times, both as a Democrat and independent, 
LaRouche has lowered his sights to a jailhouse campaign for Congress. 
One of his top lieutenants, Nancy Spannaus, is waging an independent campaign 
for the U.S. Senate in Virginia and is the only candidate running against GOP 
Sen. John W. Warner this fall. State Democratic leaders rebuffed her bid for 
the party's nomination -- deciding instead to nominate no one. 
LaRouche is serving a 15-year federal prison sentence in Minnesota for fraud 
and tax evasion. He is running as an independent candidate in Virginia's 10th 
District, in the Washington suburbs, against Republican Rep. Frank R. Wolf. 
"You don't need an analyst to tell you LaRouche doesn't have much popular 
support. But they know the political process," said University of Virginia 
political scientist Larry Sabato. "It doesn't constitute an endorsement of 
LaRouche or his policies, but they will inherit votes simply by being on the 
ballot, and they will undoubtedly claim some great movement." 
Aside from a few minor victories in Texas, and a candidate who got 25% of the 
vote in losing a statewide primary there, LaRouche candidates haven't gained 
much notice. 
"We just consider him and his candidates more of a nuisance now, rather than a 
threat," said Ginny Terzano at the Democratic National Committee. 
The success of LaRouche candidates in the 1986 Illinois primary sparked a party 
effort to warn voters away from LaRouche and his nightmare conspiracy theories, 
which some say carry anti-Semitic themes. It also brought new public scrutiny 
to his financial network of corporate shells and high-pressure fund-raising. 
LaRouche and six of his associates, including Spannaus's husband, Edward, were 
convicted in December of 1988. The case stemmed from an investigation into more 
than $30 million in loans raised from individuals by LaRouche's organization. 
Prosecutors said the group used heavy-handed tactics and had no intent to repay 
the money it borrowed. 
Dennis King, who has investigated the LaRouche organization for more than a 
decade and is the author of a book, "Lyndon LaRouche and the New American 
Fascism," says the group receded immediately after the convictions but has 
strongly rebounded. 
"They have made a rather remarkable comeback," King said. "I don't get the 
impression the Democratic Party is paying much attention to this, and they may 
be in for an unpleasant surprise." 
Debra Freeman, LaRouche's spokeswoman, estimated that thousands of 
LaRouche-connected candidates are running nationally. She characterized 
LaRouche's House bid as the organization's "flagship candidacy." 
LaRouche candidates often fare best in races that attract little attention. 
Some LaRouche followers have won small, uncontested party posts in Texas, and 
another ran unopposed to win the Democratic nomination for Congress in the 
state's safely Republican 22nd District. 
In Texas' Democratic Senate primary, LaRouche follower Harley Schlanger lost to 
state Sen. Hugh Parmer, who is seeking to oust Republican Phil Gramm. But 
Schlanger pulled in 247,205 votes -- a number that the LaRouche organization 
claimed was a victory in itself. 
Law enforcement officials and others say the LaRouche candidates don't have to 
win to succeed. Even losing campaigns generate publicity and serve as a source 
of fund raising. 
"This business of running for office is one of the techniques LaRouche people 
use," said Newbold Smith of Paoli, Pa. Smith's son, Lewis DuPont Smith, is a 
LaRouche follower and independent candidate for Congress in Pennsylvania's 5th 
District. 
"One, to feed the egos of the people. That's important. This is a cult," the 
elder Smith said. "Second, it does bring the publicity. They don't care whether 
the publicity is favorable or unfavorable. And, it allows them to raise money." 
Newbold Smith and other family members won a court order declaring the son 
legally incompetent after the younger Smith -- an heir to the DuPont fortune -- 
turned over much of his money to LaRouche's organization. 
Reports filed with the Federal Election Commission show LaRouche had raised 
$222,348 for his congressional campaign as of April. His separate National 
Democratic Policy Committee reported debts of $486,934. 
Federal prosecutors argued in court during LaRouche's trial that his followers 
raised money by promising it would be used for specific purposes, such as 
political efforts, when they knew the money would be used for other purposes, 
including supporting him. 
John B. Russell Jr., Virginia senior assistant attorney general, said a state 
investigation indicates that much of the LaRouche group's money is being sent 
to its foreign operations. These include one based in West Germany, where 
LaRouche's wife, Helga, is believed to live. 
Five of LaRouche's followers have been convicted of or pleaded guilty to state 
charges in Virginia. 
