COLUMN RIGHT; 
CYNICISM, THY NAME IS GEORGE BUSH; 
HE EATS HIS WORDS, AND NOW HIS ONLY IDEA -- TAXES ARE ICKY -- MAY BE NULLIFIED. 
Different people have different ideas of Heaven. Will it feature, as one poet 
supposed, eating pate de foie gras to the sound of trumpets? Perhaps. But for 
many Democrats, Heaven on Earth is watching George Bush eat his words to the 
sound of snickering from a cynical public that never thought he meant them. 
The cynicism of high-level Republicans here is such that they are happily 
proclaiming that Bush's changed position regarding taxes, even if the change is 
real, will not do real political damage, because most people assumed he was 
being cynical all along. And how do you suppose senior Republicans acquire such 
cynicism? Presidential leadership. 
"Read My Lips -- I lied," roared the New York Post, aflame with a rage 
altogether as bogus as Bush's too-tricky-by-half statement on taxes. Bush can 
neither speak effectively nor keep silent with dignity, so he made his 
carefully crafted, and crafty, tax statement in a terse written message. It was 
dropped into the press corps like a scrap of wastepaper. 
This method of communicating his message did nothing to make the message seem 
candid, which even a cursory reading reveals it isn't. Disdaining the 
leadership task of explaining himself, he said only that the statement "speaks 
for itself." Indeed it does, loudly and damningly. 
From sea to shining sea, the press took the bait. The Washington Post headline 
said Bush "calls for new taxes." The Los Angeles Times said he "backs a tax 
increase." Never have so many fat trout been hooked on such a small fly. And 
Democrats, allowing their wish to be the father of their thoughts, also read 
Bush's statement as saying what it ostentatiously does not say. 
It says "it is clear to me" that deficit reduction requires, in addition to 
spending cuts, "tax revenue increases." Democrats, who were busy demanding that 
Bush include the words "to me," evidently did not notice the labored nature of 
the locution "tax revenue increases." Such language signals a refusal to use 
other language. In this case the eschewed words are "tax increase." 
Clearly "tax revenue increases" can refer to increased yields from existing 
taxes as a result of economic growth; or the billions Bush anticipates from 
improved enforcement of existing taxes; or a short-term spurt of revenues from 
a cut in the capital-gains tax. 
Republicans are panicked by the tax issue, as a Democratic operative 
understands: "A lot of Republicans are going to have to wake up tomorrow and 
find another reason for running for office." Many Republicans are reassuring 
themselves that Bush has not said anything new, or that he is, with admirable 
deviousness, misleading everyone. Republicans are so dependent on taxophobia 
for their political identity, they are telling one another that Bush is a 
cynic. 
Chief of Staff John Sununu, Bush's Doberman, who flaunts his cynicism so that 
his employer's will be less noticeable, told some Republicans that Bush has not 
committed himself to anything new. Rep. Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip, 
says "(Bush) very explicitly didn't say 'raise taxes.' He said 'seek new 
revenue,' " so Bush's statement "didn't represent significant change in 
Republican policy." 
Given the signals of cynicism sent by Bush, Sununu and Gingrich, and so avidly 
seized upon by grateful Republicans, sensible Democrats assume Bush's statement 
is designed to lull Democrats into proposing tax increases. At that point Bush 
will deny accurately -- if not honorably -- that he ever said such a thing. 
Democratic realists think that the press, by misreading Bush's statement, may 
force him to mean what he flinched from saying. If not, Democrats will sit mute 
until Bush proposes a tax increase. If he does, his only idea -- taxes are icky 
-- will be nullified. 
If he does not, the deficit-reduction process will pit Democrats emphasizing 
defense cuts against Republicans emphasizing entitlement cuts: tanks against 
wheelchairs, closing military bases or closing rural hospitals. And Bush 
probably cannot have the grand passion of his life, a capital-gains cut, 
without proposing a higher income-tax rate for the rich. 
In Heaven, 'tis said, all will be made plain. How tiresome. If everything is 
made plain, what will there be to talk about? Such a Heaven sounds hellish. For 
now, in Washington, nothing is clear, except that cynicism is realism. 
RELATED STORIES: Please see Robert Borosage in Column Left and William 
Schneider on Page 1, this section. 
