MANDELA MEETING DRAWS MIXED REACTION; 
KEY S. AFRICA BLACKS SHOW ANGER, PRAISE FOR VISIT WITH BOTHA 
President Pieter W. Botha's surprise "courtesy visit" with jailed nationalist 
leader Nelson R. Mandela drew widely divergent reaction Sunday, with 
anti-apartheid leaders calling it a "cheap government scheme" to raise false 
hopes for Mandela's release and others applauding it as a first step toward a 
peaceful settlement of South Africa's problems. 
"The supposed meeting does not constitute any dramatic event in the history of 
this country, as the South African government would like the world to believe," 
said the Rev. Frank Chikane, secretary general of the South African Council of 
Churches, reading a statement from Mandela's family and other black leaders. 
To suggest otherwise, when Mandela is unable to freely consult with his people, 
"is nothing short of political mischief . . . designed to sow confusion in the 
minds of our people and of the outside world," said Chikane, flanked by 
Mandela's wife, Winnie, at a news conference in Soweto. 
"As Mandela himself has said, 'Prisoners cannot enter into contracts. Only free 
men can negotiate,' " Chikane added. 
The 45-minute meeting Wednesday between Botha and Mandela at the presidential 
mansion in Cape Town, disclosed by the government Saturday, was an informal 
chat over tea, and Justice Minister Kobie Coetsee said that possible 
negotiations and policy matters were not discussed. Botha's white minority-led 
government has over the years repeatedly refused to negotiate with Mandela's 
banned guerrilla group, the African National Congress, saying that it does not 
"negotiate with terrorists." 
Anglican Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu, the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize winner, said he 
was encouraged that Botha "has, at long last, heeded the calls of those who are 
interested in negotiations." But he said he was puzzled by the timing of the 
meeting, coming amid the ruling National Party's campaign for the Sept. 6 
general elections. 
Winnie Mandela said Sunday that she intends to visit her husband this week to 
find out why he had agreed to meet Botha. 
Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the moderate leader of the 2-million-member Zulu 
nation, said the meeting meant that the 70-year-old Mandela's release from 
prison, where he has been held for 26 years of a life sentence for sabotage and 
attempting to overthrow the state, "is now only a question of time." 
'One of Last Great Gestures' 
The meeting, the first publicly known face-to-face encounter between the two 
men, "is certainly one of the last great gestures for which Mr. Botha will 
always be remembered by black South Africa," Buthelezi said. 
Although government officials described the meeting as important, and likely to 
improve South Africa's image overseas, many political analysts here said they 
considered the unusual get-together little more than the rogue act of an 
outgoing president with no authority to negotiate the country's future. 
Botha, 73, will step down after the parliamentary elections, after losing a 
bitter power struggle within his own National Party. He resigned in February as 
party leader and recently refused to attend the party convention or a farewell 
dinner that the party had planned for him. 
Some analysts think Botha arranged the meeting with Mandela either to confound 
his party, to take credit for beginning the process toward peace or simply to 
meet the man whose incarceration has caused the government so many headaches. 
The two men did not discuss or plan further meetings, the government said. 
'President's Prerogative' 
If the National Party wins the parliamentary elections as is widely expected, 
the new party leader, Frederik W. de Klerk, will become president, and 
government sources have suggested that a wide array of reform measures, 
including Mandela's release, would then be possible. De Klerk has declined to 
comment, except to say "it is the president's prerogative" to meet whom he 
wishes. 
The right-wing Conservative Party, the National Party's chief opponent in the 
elections, said it was "astounded by the fact that our head of state cordially 
entertains a convicted criminal in the presidency." Conservative Party 
information officer Koos van der Merwe said he was demanding "some straight 
answers from the government." 
Mandela's African National Congress and leaders of other anti-apartheid groups 
have said that meaningful negotiations about the nation's future cannot begin 
until Mandela and all political prisoners are released, the three-year-old 
state of emergency is lifted, the bans on the ANC and other groups are lifted 
and exiles are allowed to return home. Hundreds of white South Africans have 
made pilgrimages to ANC headquarters in Lusaka, Zambia, in recent months, 
however, to talk with the outlawed group and, in almost every case, have urged 
the government to do the same. 
Mandela, considered by millions of South Africa's voteless blacks as their true 
leader, is being held on a prison farm about 60 miles from Cape Town. He has, 
over the years, refused many conditional offers of release, declining, for 
example, to accept exile or to renounce violence in exchange for his freedom. 
