LET THE HIRER BEWARE: CASUAL LABOR IS TAXED; 
STATE EMPLOYMENT OFFICE CAN BE INCONSISTENT IN ITS ADVICE, SURVEY DISCOVERS 
Instead of hiring day laborers who wait on street corners around Los Angeles, 
Val Holwerda, owner of Bristol Press in West Los Angeles, frequently called the 
Santa Monica branch of the California Employment Development Department for 
help. 
In 1987 and 1988, when she first opened the business, Holwerda hired more than 
100 different casual laborers, paying them about $26 a day to move boxes, put 
up shelves, collate papers, sweep floors and perform other tasks. 
"I felt it was simpler to do it the right way by calling the state, rather than 
paying people illegally under the table," said Holwerda, a former copywriter 
and publicity director for major department stores. 
But, to her surprise, Holwerda now faces a $3,500 to $4,000 tax bill for state 
payroll taxes she was supposed to pay for the day workers. And she is waiting 
to hear from the Internal Revenue Service regarding the federal taxes she may 
owe. 
Holwerda is angry because she insists that she asked several different state 
job service workers about the tax ramifications of hiring the casual laborers. 
And, she said, if she had been aware of the need to put each one on the 
payroll, she would have just hired one person instead of several. 
"I was told by several Employment Development Department people, 'Just pay them 
in cash -- petty cash -- and as for taxes -- forget it,' " Holwerda recalled. 
"They said these guys are just day workers." 
It appears that Holwerda is not the only small-business owner who has been told 
not to worry about paying taxes for casual laborers. A recent informal phone 
survey by The Times found that employers who call EDD branch offices in 
Hollywood, central Los Angeles and other areas are still often told to pay the 
workers in cash and not to worry about taxes. 
Several EDD tax auditors said there has been a long-running battle between the 
department's tax and job placement sections over the payroll tax information 
provided to potential employers. 
Now, the problem has been brought to the attention of the Employment 
Development Department's tax chief. 
"I became aware of this issue about a month ago and took steps to communicate 
with the operations branch," said Karl Grossenbacher, EDD's deputy director. 
Grossenbacher said the department is preparing a memo to job service staff 
members reminding them that they should refer all questions about payroll taxes 
to the tax division and not provide any tax information themselves. 
Grossenbacher said employers with questions should feel free to call the tax 
offices and get the correct information, even if they prefer to remain 
anonymous. 
"Our general theory is most employers want to do it right, because they don't 
want the hassles of doing it wrong," Grossenbacher said. 
Many Misinformed 
He said employers do not have to pay payroll taxes if they pay someone less 
than $50 in one three-month period to do something unrelated to their business 
purpose. For example, a shop owner who hires a man to wash the shop windows on 
a one-time basis would not be responsible for payroll taxes. Most other 
arrangements between an employer and an employee require paying taxes to cover 
disability insurance, unemployment insurance, employment training fund expenses 
and personal income tax withholding. 
Richard Camarillo, supervisor of the employment tax division in the Santa 
Monica branch office, said he is "aware of inconsistencies" in the tax 
information being provided to employers by the job placement workers in Santa 
Monica. 
Although he declined to discuss the specifics of Holwerda's case, he said many 
small-business owners are misinformed about state payroll tax laws. 
"I think the employer community goes to the wrong source for tax information," 
said Camarillo. "If they talk to the wrong person, they will get the wrong 
information." 
He said employers believe that it is "completely burdensome" to put people on 
the payroll who work only one or two days, but nonetheless the law makes the 
employer ultimately responsible for paying the taxes. 
That explanation, however, doesn't diminish Holwerda's complaint. 
Several calls to EDD labor desks in various locations revealed a lack of 
consistency. One day last week, the person answering the phone on the labor 
desk at the Central Los Angeles branch said employers usually pay the day 
workers in cash. When asked specifically if employers were responsible for 
payroll taxes, he said: "No, no, you don't have to pay any taxes." 
Instructed Not to Give Advice 
A supervisor in the Hollywood branch said employers are not responsible for the 
payroll taxes "if you tell them you are hiring them as an independent 
contractor." But that isn't accurate, according to state tax laws. 
A woman answering the phone at the South Gate branch said it did not matter how 
the day workers were paid. She suggested calling the state labor commission or 
employment tax division for information. "I would hate to give you the wrong 
information," she said. 
The EDD job service workers are instructed not to provide any tax information 
because it is beyond their scope of training, said Suzanne Schroeder, EDD 
spokeswoman in Sacramento. 
"Maybe, because the people like to be paid in cash, an employer might think 
that means you don't have to pay taxes," Schroeder said. 
Although casual laborers are those who do not work more than three days at any 
one job, they are handled just like any other job-seeker, Schroeder said. 
For the fiscal year ended June 30, Schroeder said, the department placed 41,369 
individuals in jobs lasting three days or less. That compares to the 246,793 
individuals placed in non-agricultural jobs during the same period. 
Like many small-business owners starting out, Bristol Press owner Holwerda said 
she relied on casual laborers when she couldn't afford to hire full-time help. 
She paid them all by check and kept track of every expense. When she asked her 
accountant about the tax implications, he told her that she didn't have to file 
tax forms until the amount reached $600. However, she later learned that the 
rule is a federal one applicable only to independent contractors. 
Prefers Agencies Now 
Holwerda's tax audit was triggered when she decided to cut back on the work of 
a free-lance artist she was using regularly. The artist filed for unemployment 
insurance benefits, claiming that she was a Bristol Press employee. When state 
officials researched the claim, they found that Holwerda had not been paying 
payroll taxes for the woman because Holwerda considered the artist to be an 
independent contractor with a separate business. 
In hindsight, Holwerda said she wishes that she had never hired any casual 
laborers or independent contractors. She now relies on outside vendors or 
workers supplied by temporary agencies if she needs extra help. 
