FAST-MOVING BRUSH FIRE CHARS 119 ACRES BUT LEAVES HOUSES UNTOUCHED; 
THOUSAND OAKS: NO INJURIES ARE REPORTED IN A BLAZE THAT BURNED FOR FOUR HOURS 
AND COULD BE SEEN FOR MILES. THE CAUSE HAS NOT BEEN DETERMINED. 
A fast-moving brush fire swept across a steep hillside in Thousand Oaks on 
Thursday, threatening neighborhoods of new and old houses and causing a small 
power outage before firefighters were able to bring it under control. 
The fire, which sent plumes of black smoke hundreds of feet into the air and 
could be seen from as far away as Chatsworth, charred 119 acres within a 
four-hour period, fire officials said. No injuries were reported and no 
structures were damaged in the blaze, authorities said. 
Arson investigators said the fire was of suspicious origin but had not 
determined its cause by late Thursday. 
The fire erupted about 2:15 p.m. in a brushy area in the 1500 block of Erbes 
Road, across the street from a residential neighborhood where many houses have 
wood-shake roofs. 
Fire officials did not call for an evacuation, and many residents hosed down 
their roofs and the sides of their houses to fend off the intense heat from the 
blaze. A section of Erbes Road, between El Monte and La Granada drives, was 
closed to traffic for about three hours as firefighters fought to control the 
blaze. 
"We heard sirens and helicopters," said Sari Wade, who lives two blocks from 
where the fire is believed to have started. "My son went outside and he said, 
'Mom, I can see smoke.' I thought he was putting me on. We walked out on our 
front lawn, and we saw an immense amount of flames." 
Residents along nearby Sapra Street said they feared their houses would be lost 
when a wall of flames came within 100 feet. 
"I was mowing the lawn, and I looked across the hill and I saw this flame," 
said Shane McCarthy, 16. "Then it just spread." 
McCarthy said he ran into the house and alerted his family. He said he climbed 
onto the roof and began hosing it down. 
"We just panicked," said Betty Adolph, McCarthy's mother. "We've just seen all 
that destruction in the Santa Barbara fire, and we were afraid we'd lose our 
home." 
Westerly winds eventually pushed the blaze up a steep hillside toward the 
exclusive community of North Ranch. However, about 200 Ventura and Los Angeles 
county firefighters, assisted by a number of hand crews and three 
water-dropping helicopters, managed to keep the blaze away from the houses in 
the area. 
Capt. Tom Law of the Ventura County Fire Department said the city's strict 
weed-abatement ordinance was largely responsible for keeping the fire at a 
distance. The law requires that residents keep a clearance area of 100 feet 
around their houses and other structures. 
"It's definitely working today," Law said of the ordinance. "It's saved our 
bacon many times." 
Carol Larson, area manager for Southern California Edison, said about 50 
customers in the area were without power for several hours because a single 
utility pole had been damaged in the blaze. 
"We initially turned off power to approximately 2,000 homes for 60 seconds in 
order to isolate the equipment that was damaged," she said. There are a large 
number of power poles in the charred brush area, but the poles are treated with 
a special fire retardant, Larson said. 
Debbie Beaumont, a Ventura County Fire Department spokeswoman, said fire 
officials were pleased that they were able to get a handle on the fire as 
quickly as they did. 
"Everybody was really nervous after the Santa Barbara fire," Beaumont said. 
"But everything went really smoothly." 
Brush fires in Santa Barbara and Glendale last week destroyed 637 houses, 
injured dozens of people and caused more than $200 million in damage. A brush 
fire also charred 585 acres and threatened high-priced houses on the northern 
edge of Ojai last week. 
Times staff writer Carol Watson contributed to this story. 
