OTB LETS DEL MAR BREATHE; 
RACING: BUT THERE STILL WILL BE PLENTY OF PEOPLE IN THE STANDS WHEN THE 51ST 
MEETING BEGINS WITH A 2 P.M. POST TIME TODAY. 
When one of his horses won a race at Hollywood Park last weekend, trainer Doug 
Peterson said: "That's shipping money for Del Mar." 
The same day, in the paddock, Kent Desormeaux, the Eclipse Award-winning 
jockey, was talking about Del Mar. 
"I've seen the town, but never been to the track," said Desormeaux, who came to 
California from Maryland early this year after winning a record 598 races in 
1989. 
Desormeaux was here a few weeks ago, shopping for a condominium rental. Someone 
suggested a $16,000 deal for the seven-week season, but Desormeaux was able to 
find something slightly closer to budget, and not far from the track, either. 
Today, Peterson starts trying to pay for his horses' travel, and Desormeaux for 
the digs of his family, when Del Mar, the seven-week breath of ocean air 
between Hollywood Park and Santa Anita on the Southland's major racing 
schedule, begins its 51st season. 
There's almost enough money to go around at this seaside track, where business 
went from brisk to bustling two years ago with the introduction of off-track 
betting. 
Del Mar was on the verge of becoming too much of a good thing, a turf by the 
surf that couldn't accommodate one more bettor without attracting the fire 
marshal, when the state opened up betting on its races at Santa Anita, 
Hollywood Park and points as far north as Santa Barbara. 
Last summer, the daily handle, off-track and on, grew to $7.3 million, which 
put Del Mar in the same betting league as Santa Anita, the national record- 
holder. 
This year, the off-track network has grown from 11 to 13 locations. The new 
sites are the Cabazon Indian Bingo Palace and Gaming Center in Indio, and Los 
Alamitos, which will segue into the Del Mar races after the Orange County Fair 
season ends Aug. 18. 
As a result of all this action, Del Mar is offering about $14 million in 
purses, nearly $4 million of it in a 28-race stakes program. There are nine 
races six days a week, Wednesday through Monday, with the season running 
through Sept. 12. First post is at 2 p.m. 
Sunday Silence, Criminal Type and Steinlen have gone East, but there are enough 
horses on the grounds to give the Del Mar stakes some glitter. Prized, 
Hawkster, Saratoga Passage, Brown Bess and Petite Ile are expected to run here, 
as well as the Southland's best 2-year-olds. 
The $300,000 races are the Del Mar Derby Aug. 19, the Cabrillo Handicap Aug. 
25, the Del Mar Debutante Sept. 2, the Del Mar Handicap Sept. 3 and the Del Mar 
Futurity Sept. 12. Also on the schedule are the $250,000 Eddie Read Handicap 
Aug. 12 and the $250,000 Ramona Handicap Aug. 18. 
Today's split Oceanside Stakes, at a mile on grass, will have 11 3-year-olds in 
one division and 12 in the other, an early test of the mettle of handicappers. 
Trainer Ron McAnally, who won a division of the Oceanside last year with 
Hawkster, has an outside chance to sweep the stake today through sheer numbers. 
He will have Officer Hawk and Old Alliance in the first half and Single Dawn 
and Balla Cove in the second. 
Officer Hawk, a son of Silver Hawk, who also sired Hawkster, is trying to make 
the jump into stakes company, and Old Alliance has won one of three starts 
after spending his 2-year-old season in Europe. Single Dawn hasn't won since 
November, when he took the Hoist the Flag at a mile on the grass at Hollywood 
Park. Balla Cove hasn't won in fives race dating to January. 
In the first division, Mehmetori, with only one victory in eight starts, comes 
in off a good second to Jovial in the Cinema Handicap at Hollywood. Jovial came 
off grass to win the Swaps Sunday. In the second half, Bel Air Paster also has 
a recent second behind Jovial. 
Horse Racing Notes 
The meeting's defending champions are jockey Eddie Delahoussaye and trainer Ron 
McAnally. . . . Only 26% of the favorites won at Del Mar last year, several 
points below the national average and the lowest percentage at the track since 
1955. . . . This is the seventh time the Oceanside Stakes has been split in the 
last 10 years. 
Sunny Blossom is expected to run Sunday in the six-furlong Bing Crosby 
Handicap, then head to Pimlico for the Frank De Francis Memorial Dash Aug. 18. 
. . . The other weekend stake will be Saturday's Palomar Handicap, for fillies 
and mares going 1 1/16 miles on grass. Bayakoa has been nominated. 
A $2 exacta will be offered on all nine races. . . . Vann Belvoir, 16, one of 
the leading riders at Longacres, near Seattle, is an apprentice who will ride 
at Del Mar. . . . At Monmouth Park today, Julie Krone will ride for the first 
time since she suffered a broken left forearm in a spill last November. . . . 
Pat Day will ride Steinlen in the Arlington Challenge Cup on Aug. 4. Jose 
Santos, who usually rides the horse, will be serving a five-day suspension that 
week. . . . Michael Wrona, the Hollywood Park announcer, will be calling the 
races for the next week at Arlington. Trevor Denman, who calls the races at Del 
Mar and Santa Anita, did the announcing for the past week at Arlington. Denman 
and Wrona have been replacing Phil Georgeff, who has a sore throat. 
DEL MAR FACTS 
Dates: Today through Wednesday, Sept. 12. Six days a week (dark Tuesdays), 43 
total days of racing. 
Location: The fairgrounds of Del Mar, west of Interstate 5. Exit at Via de la 
Valle. 
Time: First post at 2 p.m. daily. Gates open at noon weekdays, 11:30 a.m. 
weekends. 
Prices: Grandstand and infield admission $2.50. Clubhouse admission $5. 
Reserved and box seats $3.50. On weekdays only, senior citizens and the 
military are admitted for $1 at a special gate at the main entrance to 
grandstand and infield. 
Wagering features: $2 daily doubles on first-second and eighth-ninth races; $2 
exactas on all nine races; $3 triples on third-fourth-fifth and 
sixth-seventh-eighth races; $2 pick six wagering on second through seventh. 
Early Bird wagering from 8:30 a.m. to 10:30 daily. 
Highlights: The Del Mar meeting will award more than $14 million in purses, 
including $3,875,000 in 28 stakes races. The feature race will be presented as 
the eighth on the nine-race card. They first will be the $75,000 Oceanside 
Stakes for 3-year-olds over a mile on turf today. Others will include: 
$250,000-added Eddie Read Handicap, Sunday, Aug. 12; $250,000-added Ramona 
Handicap, Saturday, Aug. 18; $300,000 Del Mar Derby Invitational, Sunday, Aug. 
19; $300,000-added Cabrillo Handicap, Saturday, Aug. 25; $200,000-added Del Mar 
Debutante, Sunday, Sept. 2; $300,000-added Del Mar Handicap, Monday, Sept. 3; 
$200,000-added Del Mar Budweiser Breeders' Cup, Sunday, Sept. 9; $200,000-added 
Del Mar Futurity, Wednesday, Sept. 12. 
