HARSH APPRAISAL OF L.A. PROGRAM; 
FUZZY GOALS, FAVORITISM MARK MINORITY CONTRACTS 
As a black Los Angeles businesswoman who owned a small, family clothing store, 
Erma Nelson, 48, thought she was an ideal candidate for a new program designed 
to "substantially increase" the percentage of city contracts awarded to 
minority and female entrepreneurs. 
So three years ago, excited by her success with an Olympics gift stand, Nelson 
filled out the necessary paper work to qualify for the Minority and Women-Owned 
Business Enterprise Program and began contacting major concessionaires at Los 
Angeles International Airport. 
Nelson, who hoped to get a shop in a busy terminal, made repeated calls to 
airport contractors -- all to no avail. None, she said, was returned, and 
eventually she was forced to put aside her quest. 
Last month, Nelson was not surprised by reports that the wife of a prominent 
black congressman and several others with strong political connections to City 
Hall had succeeded in landing airport concession contracts where she had 
failed. 
"It's who you know," Nelson said. "This is nothing but a racket." 
Nelson is not alone in her harsh appraisal. Six years after the program was 
first announced by Mayor Tom Bradley, it is under attack from minority and 
female professionals, City Council members and even some officials in the 
mayor's office. 
The critics say the program has been overwrought with bureaucracy while falling 
short of its promise to direct millions of dollars in city contracts to 
minorities and women. Instead, critics complain, contracts have gone to a 
favored, select group of politically connected entrepreneurs. 
"Somewhere (beyond) the noble goals there are serious questions about 
implementation that have not been adequately addressed," said Councilman 
Michael Woo. "How do we know we aren't just providing benefits to a few 
individuals?" 
City officials, conceding the program is in trouble, are trying to re-evaluate 
the effort and spell out -- surprisingly, for the first time -- just how it 
should work, who should benefit and what office should take charge. 
Audit Began Last year 
The principal vehicle for this reassessment is an audit of the program started 
quietly last year by the city's chief administrative officer. The review was 
initiated by council members who had received complaints that minority 
contracts were going only to a favored few. 
The audit was accelerated sharply last month, officials have told The Times, in 
the wake of revelations about airport concession contracts awarded through the 
program. 
The Department of Airports approved lucrative gift and food concessions 
contracts for a group of politically well-connected minorities and women, many 
of whom have had little involvement in running the concessions. 
The contracts were given to such influential minority partners as Betty Dixon, 
the wife of Rep. Julian Dixon (D-Los Angeles); Los Angeles Urban League 
President John Mack and Bishop H. H. Brookins, a longtime community religious 
leader and Bradley supporter who helped launch the mayor's start in politics 
nearly three decades ago. All have defended their contracts as legitimate. 
In a sweeping political gesture, Bradley in 1983 ordered all city departments 
to become "fully committed" to developing programs to "substantially increase" 
the share of city contracts going to minority- and women-owned businesses. 
'Disadvantaged' Companies 
The plan called for city departments, which contract for everything from 
flipping burgers to building sewers, to give a greater share of their business 
to minority and women firms and encourage majority, Anglo-owned contractors to 
share a slice of business with these "disadvantaged" companies. 
What Bradley's executive order boasted in theory, it lacked in nuts-and-bolts 
guidelines. The city program allows each of the more than two dozen departments 
to implement its own plan. The departments set different goals for minority 
participation, different qualifying standards for firms and different 
procedures for monitoring the programs. 
Furthermore, the mayor's office, which oversees the program, does not collect 
complete information from all the various departments, nor does it have a 
systematic way of reviewing what information it has. 
As a result, no one at City Hall can say exactly how many minority-business 
contracts there are, what they are worth and who holds them. The mayor's office 
estimated that for the five years ending in June, 1987, about 8% of $3.8 
billion in city contracts went to minority and women firms. But Wilfred 
Marshall, who oversees the mayor's minority business program, cautioned that 
the numbers "may not be good" because of reporting problems and lack of 
auditing. 
Compounding the confusion are federal programs that, unlike the city program, 
require minority and women partners to serve a direct management role in 
operations so they can one day compete for government contracts on their own. 
In cases like the airport, maintained with both federal and city funds, there 
is confusion whether the stricter federal or less stringent city rules should 
apply. 
Help for Whom? 
Additionally, the program never specified what type of minority- and 
women-owned firms it was supposed to help. Some city officials say struggling 
small businesses that need a boost should be the prime target. Others say 
large, well-established firms -- or even wealthy individuals -- should be 
allowed to participate in minority contracts, so long as they qualify as 
minority firms. 
"That's (a) basic philosophical dilemma," said J. P. Ellman, a City Council 
legislative analyst who is reviewing the program. "And we don't know what the 
answer is." 
The sweeping review by the city's administrative officer, expected to be 
completed by the fall, will provide the first detailed examination of a program 
that critics contend is vulnerable to abuse because of fuzzy goals, 
inconsistent guidelines and poor monitoring. The audit will address the lack of 
reliable citywide data to monitor the program's progress and examine the 
hodgepodge of regulations that vary from department to department, said Stephen 
Wong, the assistant administrative officer overseeing the audit. 
In addition, the audit will attempt to determine whether a small number of 
minority firms are getting the bulk of the business. 
Nelson, the businesswoman passed over by major concessionaires at the airport, 
said she thinks the city's program does little for small business owners. 
Nelson suffered a setback last year when she closed her South Los Angeles 
clothing store. 
No Record of Calls 
A spokesman for the main airport concessionaire, Duty Free Shoppers Group Ltd. 
Partnership, responded by saying the company had no record of Nelson's calls. 
But he added that Nelson may have called after the firm had selected its 
minority partners. 
Nelson, a Teletype supervisor for the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, 
said that the prominent minority leaders who received the concession contracts 
needed assistance "like I need a hole in the head." 
Criticism of the program is not new. 
Concerns were raised in connection with the minority business program during a 
running City Hall debate last year when several close allies of Bradley -- 
including airport concessionaires Brookins and attorney Andy M. Camacho -- were 
added to a team of developers seeking the contract for a hotly contested, 
$200-million expansion of the Civic Center. 
The contract was controversial because, at the time the City Council selected 
the Brookins-Camacho team, the proposal as presented would have cost the city 
$3 million a year more than another bid preferred by city staff members. 
Bradley said neither he nor his office was involved in the selection. 
Several months later, in November, nearly 100 black, Latino and female 
professionals came forward at an extraordinary City Hall public hearing on the 
city's program. At the meeting -- called in response to mounting criticism 
about the program -- speaker after speaker vented frustration. Many of the 
minorities and women who attended the hearing shared their own personal 
experiences about how city departments had resisted their efforts to compete 
for contracts. 
Five-Year Wait 
Donald A. Harvey, a black Beverly Hills businessman, said that Harbor 
Department officials told him last year they would have no business 
opportunities for minorities for the next five years. 
"A lot of people here are complaining about this issue of opening the doors and 
participating," Harvey said. "It just cannot be done." 
(Harbor official Lonnie Tang subsequently said the remark was made "in a 
general sense" to minority entrepreneurs regarding commercial and retail 
opportunities for any business in the port area. He said the Harbor encourages 
minority participation, but that contracts in retail and commercial areas are 
tied up in long-term commitments). 
Charles E. Dickerson, president of the John M. Langston Bar Assn., also 
testified at the hearing, complaining that few black lawyers in Los Angeles 
have been successful in their attempts to get bond counsel or legal work from 
the Community Redevelopment Agency. 
"To a certain extent, the old boy network continues," Dickerson said in an 
interview last week. "Those (minority and women lawyers) who are getting the 
work were allowed in as essentially tokens so that . . . at least the 
appearance of meeting the goals (of the program) could occur." 
After listening to the complaints at the hearing, Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky 
called for the city to revamp the mayor's program. 
'Pet Peeve' 
Yaroslavsky, a frequent Bradley critic, said the minority business program has 
"been used to advance the interests of specific individuals occasionally and 
not to advance the causes of minority-owned businesses. This has been one of my 
pet peeves about the program. It's not what you know, but who you know that 
gets you in." 
Bradley acknowledges some concerns about the program. Earlier this month, 
before revelations about Dixon and her partners obtaining the airport contract 
became public, the mayor issued a letter endorsing the chief administrative 
officer's audit and calling for reforms that will "guard against sham 
businesses that act only as fronts." 
"The city must take every necessary step to guarantee that city contracts are 
available to all interested businesses, not just those few who have learned the 
ropes around City Hall," Bradley wrote. 
Mayoral aides, though, say the weaknesses in the program are not entirely their 
fault. 
Marshall, the Bradley aide who oversees the program, said that in most cases 
prime contractors -- not the mayor's office -- choose minority subcontractors 
on city jobs. He also said that many minority businesses do not utilize his 
office to understand the city contracting system or develop contacts with prime 
contractors. 
Asked about complaints that the program is weighted in favor of firms who 
already have been successful in obtaining city business, he responded: 
"Don't blame me. This whole world operates on relationships. This is not about 
fairness. Business is not about fairness. Business is about taking advantage of 
what is there to take advantage of." 
Staff writer Elizabeth J. Mann contributed to this article. 
