HEAT WAVE WARMS THE OCEAN WATERS; 
CLIMATE: HOW HOT IS IT? WELL, IT'S BEEN SO HOT THAT THE PACIFIC IS CONSIDERABLY 
WARMER, OFFICIALS SAY. BUT YOU WON'T HEAR ANY COMPLAINTS FROM BEACH-GOERS. 
While the heat wave turns us into limp, damp creatures that crawl between work 
and home, it is also doing something a little less predictable: It is warming 
up the ocean. 
Lifeguards say the past week's persistent record-breaking heat has boosted sea 
temperatures off the county coast into the middle and high 70s, in some places 
more than 10 degrees above normal. Oceanographers and meteorologists said the 
warm currents may be coming from off the Baja California coast, where there is 
hot, humid tropical weather associated with a hurricane and a tropical storm. 
The enticingly warm waters are a treat for those fortunate enough to escape to 
the beaches, but they bring extra work for lifeguards, who must be even more 
vigilant in monitoring the big crowds. 
Surface water temperatures are as high as 79 degrees, a mark recorded Saturday 
by a city lifeguard boat about 100 yards off Corona del Mar State Beach. Even 
temperatures well below the surface, where the water is generally cooler, are 
in the mid-70s, lifeguards said. 
Clinton Winant, director of the Center for Coastal Studies at Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, said temperatures normally hover 
around 68 degrees at the water's surface this time of year, and they slide to 
about 60 degrees at depths of about 15 feet. That is what made Winant term 
"amazing" the last couple of days' readings of 73 to 76 off the Newport Beach 
pier at a depth of about 15 feet. 
"It's rare that the warmth can penetrate that deep into the water," Winant 
said. 
Logan Lockabey, a supervisor with U.S. Ocean Safety, a private firm that 
contracts with Orange County to provide lifeguard services on county beaches, 
said temperatures at the three-foot-deep level, about 100 yards offshore, rose 
to 72 and 73 degrees last week and pushed up to 76 degrees at beaches in South 
Laguna, Capistrano and Dana Point. 
Gordon C. Reed, a marine safety officer with Newport Beach's lifeguards, said 
the water temperatures remind him of the El Nino weather pattern that heated 
ocean waters in 1983, when the sea produced mercury readings of 70 to 75 
degrees. 
"We've got a lot of those same things happening now," he said. "Warm water 
temperatures, heat, humidity, thunderstorms." 
But Winant cautioned that it is too early to pin the abnormally high water 
temperatures on a "long-term phenomenon" such as El Nino. He said he suspects 
that a hurricane off the coast of Baja California, and another tropical weather 
system in the same area, are to blame. 
Southerly winds produced by those weather systems can account for the warming 
of the waters, Winant said. When the wind blows toward the north over the 
ocean, he said, it drags the top layer of the water with it and pushes it onto 
the coast. The result is that the uppermost, warmest layer of water piles up on 
the shore. 
Rea Strange, a private oceanography and meteorology consultant in Montecito, 
believes that the water temperature changes are the result of the Davidson 
effect, a pattern of warm currents making inroads north from Baja. That would 
also account for the tropical storm activity in that area, he said. 
Lt. John Blauer of the Newport Beach Marine Safety Department said the 
combination of searing temperatures, few night and morning clouds and only 
faint winds has allowed the sun to bake the still water. 
"It's just like leaving a glass of water on your roof," he said. 
But those on the beaches seemed to be enjoying it. 
"The water is very nice, very pleasant," Reed said. "People don't have a bit of 
hesitation before going in." 
Lockabey, in Laguna, agreed. 
"A lot of people sit around the beach and don't go in when the water's colder," 
he said. "But now everyone's in." 
Heating of Coastal Waters 
1. Southerly winds blow over the ocean, dragging the top layer of water with 
them. 
2. As the winds push the water north, the uppermost, warmest layer of water 
piles up on shore. 
Source: Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
