PEANUT OIL BREAST IMPLANTS COULD MAKE SURGERY SAFER 
A breast implant filled with peanut oil could mean safer breast enlargements 
for thousands of women who have the surgery each year, a radiologist says. 
Because the oil is transparent, the new implants do not interfere with X-ray 
mammography for breast cancer the way silicone breast implants can, said Judy 
Destouet, head of the mammography unit at Washington University's Mallinckrodt 
Institute of Radiology. 
"They appear like the fat in the breast -- you can see through it," Destouet 
said. 
Destouet and Leroy Young, associate professor of plastic and reconstructive 
surgery at Washington University School of Medicine, are heading the 
development of the new implant. 
The most common implant now is filled with silicone gel, which appears as dense 
as bone in X-rays and therefore can hamper early detection of breast cancer, 
Destouet said. Others are filled with saline, or a combination of silicone and 
saline. 
"I think many women need (breast augmentation) for self-esteem, and I think 
that we should have the freedom to do what we want for our bodies," Destouet 
said. 
"We hoped to develop a better product that would allow women to augment their 
breasts but won't take away the benefits of state-of-the-art mammography. We 
feel that we have something that really can be a safe alternative." 
Breast augmentation is one of the most popular cosmetic surgery procedures 
available, according to the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgeons Inc. in Arlington Heights, Ill. About 72,000 women undergo breast 
augmentation each year, said spokeswoman Cathleen Coyne. 
But some doctors disagree that implants interfere with early cancer detection. 
Studies by Dr. Garry Brody at the University of Southern California followed 
3,000 women in the Los Angeles area who have had breast augmentation. 
"Thus far, the delay is theoretic only. It's certainly a possibility, but when 
we look at the statistics, we can't find the delay. Their cancer seems to be 
picked up at the same stage as the unaugmented population." 
The American Cancer Society estimates that one woman in 10 will develop breast 
cancer in her lifetime. 
Carolyn Cline, a plastic surgeon and psychologist in San Francisco, said she 
discourages women with a family history of breast cancer from having the 
surgery. "But the average women, I don't feel -- given the improvements in 
radiological techniques -- that it is a major issue," she said. 
The Washington University researchers have spent the last year conducting tests 
on rats and rabbits to make sure their implants have no adverse effects, such 
as allergic reactions or extreme scar tissue formation. 
"So far our animal studies are very favorable," Destouet said. "There really 
are no side effects." 
Once the researchers get U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, the 
implants will be tested in women. They could be available commercially in about 
two years. 
Destouet said the researchers came upon peanut oil as a safe implant filler 
when they turned to their chemistry books to find which substances would allow 
X-ray penetration, and which of those substances were not carcinogenic. 
The implants still use a thin silicone shell to hold the peanut oil. 
"We need a better envelope too," Destouet said. "You can't invent everything at 
the same time." 
