YOUR BODY: THERE'S HELP IN QUELLING QUEASY RIDES 
It is one of the most common medical problems associated with traveling. It can 
strike in the middle of an airplane ride, a roller-coaster ride, a cruise, even 
the briefest car trip. 
It is motion sickness. And whether it's just a slight queasiness or a 
gut-wrenching bout of nausea and vomiting, it can ruin a trip. 
Creative and physically fit people are among the most likely victims, two 
recent research studies suggest. But a local expert, Dr. Fred Linthicum, a 
researcher at the House Ear Institute, believes more research is needed. 
It is difficult to predict who will suffer motion sickness, he said, and hard 
to say which mode of transportation will cause the upset. People who get 
airsick don't necessarily get carsick, he said, and vice versa. "Different 
motions affect people differently. We don't know why." 
There are two theories currently enjoying popularity among motion sickness 
researchers, said Linthicum. According to one theory, the nervous system 
becomes overloaded with signals traveling simultaneously to the eyes and the 
ears. Another theory suggests that the brain's balance centers are close to the 
areas of the brain that receive vomit-reflex messages and the signals just get 
mixed up. 
"This last (theory) is more recent and makes the most sense to me," Linthicum 
said, "but it is still not proven." 
The afflicted are, understandably, more interested in prevention and remedies 
than causes. For help, Linthicum suggests over-the-counter medications like 
Dramamine. Or ask your doctor to prescribe a scopolamine patch, which can be 
placed behind the ear several hours before you embark. 
"Be sure not to use two patches," Linthicum warned, noting that many people 
overdose themselves with the patch. The patch can cause its own discomforts, he 
said. "It can blur the vision and give you a dry mouth." 
Low on Linthicum's list of preferred treatments is a wrist band designed to 
stimulate the acupressure point some believe is associated with nausea. 
"There's never been a controlled study (to prove) that this works," he said. 
Once you are on board ship, in a car or on a plane, try lying down and closing 
your eyes, said Linthicum. Travelers prone to motion sickness should not read 
while in motion, according to the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head 
and Neck Surgery. And don't sit in a seat that faces backward, says the 
academy. Queasy riders should also avoid strong odors and spicy foods before 
setting out on a trip. 
The motion-sick may take comfort in Linthicum's belief that the affliction is 
not psychologically based. "It's definitely not all in the head." 
For more information on motion sickness remedies, send a self-addressed, 
stamped envelope to the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck 
Surgery, 1 Prince St., Alexandria, Va. 22314. 
