BEIJING DIARY; 
EYEWITNESS AT TIAN AN MEN SQUARE 
A YOUNG STUDENT, HIS GLASSES a bit askew, his clothes wrinkled and unwashed, 
waved at me from under the army-green awning of his tent on Beijing's Tian An 
Men Square on Saturday afternoon, June 3. He looked tired, the weariness of the 
past weeks of marches, hunger strikes and speeches slowing his words, weighing 
his shoulders down. He motioned me into the tent, lifting the strand of twine 
that demarcated the inner sanctum of his university's encampment. We stepped 
over soiled padded mattresses and patterned cotton quilts and settled onto low, 
three-legged stools in a corner. He lit a cigarette from a package I pushed 
toward him and exhaled a cloud of bluish smoke as if expelling a last worry 
from the recesses of his soul. 
Nearby, students sat on quilts, silently playing cards, the soft slap of 
cardboard on a makeshift table somehow audible through the din of loudspeakers 
in the square. My friend -- he and I had met a week or so earlier as I wandered 
among the tents of Tian An Men Square -- produced two aluminum cans of warm 
soda, a carbonated orange concoction that had become the principal beverage of 
China's democracy movement. We sat quietly. The jubilation of the previous 
weeks, the exhilaration of speaking freely, of proclaiming to the world that 
China, too, wanted democracy, was being gnawed away by uncertainty, by the wait 
for the forces of the state to act. 
It had been two weeks since Li Peng, the uncompromising and doctrinaire premier 
whose resignation the Tian An Men demonstrators were demanding, had appeared on 
national television to announce the imposition of martial law in the capital. 
"It must be stressed," Li had said, his face bathed in sweat, stumbling 
occasionally in the harsh staccato delivery of his orders, "that even under 
such circumstances, we should still persist in protecting the patriotism of the 
students, make a clear distinction between them and the very, very few people 
who created the turmoil, and we will not penalize students for their radical 
words and actions in the student movement." 
Beyond the shadowed cool of the tent, shimmers of heat like crinkled cellophane 
rose from the baked concrete expanse of the square. About 100 feet from where 
we sat, a 30-foot-tall, almost luminescent white statue of a stylized woman, 
her short hair puffed as if by a gust of wind, her hands holding aloft a 
flaming torch, stood amid a small sea of blue and red nylon igloo tents. Four 
ideograms, cut from fabric and sewn on a curtain of white cloth that hung at 
the base of the sculpture, read minzhu zhi shen, the Goddess of Democracy. 
I asked my friend about the statue. He nodded as he talked, smiling slightly 
and tugging on his cigarette. He was nervous, more nervous than I had ever seen 
him, and less willing to chat. "Many people have come to see the statue," he 
said. "I think when they see it, they understand. This statue is a symbol 
against feudalism, against anti-democratic tendencies. It is face to face with 
the portrait of Mao Tse-tung. That picture is the face of tyranny. The statue 
represents the mass image of the people." He stopped speaking and I thought it 
best to leave. 
That night, the army came, with tanks and guns. I never saw my friend again. 
PRELUDE 
Friday night and Saturday morning, June 2-3. For two weeks, the people of 
Beijing -- steelworkers, old men with wooden canes, swaggering young taxi 
drivers, aproned shop girls, grandmothers with gray hair wrapped into buns, 
college students in bold T-shirts reading ji shao shu, ji shao shu ("very, very 
few") -- had stopped the Chinese army from entering their city. 
They swarmed over the Liberation-brand trucks, arguing, cajoling, pleading with 
the soldiers not to advance, not to raise their weapons against their own 
people. At critical intersections and main trunk roads, barricades of 
red-and-yellow public buses, blue-and-white-striped water trucks, coal trucks 
and garbage trucks blocked the march of the People's Liberation Army into 
Beijing, a city it had taken without firing a shot in the autumn of 1949. 
Now, in the middle of the night, 5,000 young, unarmed recruits were 
double-timing down Changan Avenue toward Tian An Men Square. 
The phone jolted me awake. I was staying with another journalist in an 
apartment in Jianguomenwai Compound, the largest of the four walled residential 
areas for diplomats and journalists, on Changan Avenue a little more than a 
mile from Tian An Men Square. It was a reporter, a friend of mine, saying that 
troops were moving from the east. I telephoned two other American journalists, 
and in minutes we were dashing down the stairs -- the elevators, as usual, were 
broken -- and speeding from the compound to catch the army. 
In soft-soled boots, the soldiers moved almost silently, just the thump of 
rubber on the asphalt of the six-lane road that slices Beijing in half from 
east to west. They wore white shirts and green pants and carried small 
backpacks and metal thermoses. They moved swiftly, urged on by platoon leaders 
counting cadence in the night air. 
It was 2:30 in the morning, yet almost magically, the citizens of Beijing 
materialized on the streets. Youngsters on bicycles swept up the avenue raising 
the alarm, windmilling their arms as they rode. From the hutongs, the alleys 
that burrow into the old residential areas of the capital, people rushed, some 
still in pajamas or nightgowns. 
I was in a car full of journalists, and we raced abreast of the jogging troops, 
trying to outrun the column, to witness what we believed would be a major 
confrontation. We screeched into the parking lot of the Beijing Hotel, a few 
hundred yards east of Tian An Men Square, 10 minutes or so ahead of the column 
of soldiers. 
I bolted from the car. Looking back, I still could not see the soldiers we had 
passed. At the western edge of the hotel, a convoy of civilian trucks roared 
up, horns blaring, to block the width of Changan Avenue. A wave of applause 
surged through the rapidly filling streets, and bare arms sprouted above the 
sea of heads, two fingers forked in V signs. Then, in front of the hotel, 
students and citizens, men and women, linked arms in a line across the avenue, 
perhaps 50 in all, facing the wave of troops. A young woman with a ponytail and 
glasses was crying, large tears dropping darkly onto her pink blouse. A man who 
put his arm through hers hushed her, "Don't be afraid." 
Under the hazy yellow glare of street lights, everyone was still. At first 
faintly and then louder, the sound of thousands of pounding feet swept over the 
crowd. A student shouted through a hand-held electronic megaphone, "The whole 
people have stood up," a paraphrase of Mao Tse-tung's line when he declared the 
establishment of the People's Republic some 40 years earlier from atop Tian An 
Men, the Gate of Heavenly Peace. "Let the whole world know." 
I circled through the crowds in front of the Beijing Hotel. Cars of foreign 
journalists squeezed through the throng, and the lights of television cameras 
bathed clots of people in eerie white pools. The head of the column came into 
sight, and the line of people across Changan Avenue huddled closer. A chant 
burst from the crowd: "Go back, go back, go back." 
As the troops moved forward, still tightly bunched, five or six abreast, in a 
moving river of humanity, the crowd pushed against the column, funneling it 
toward the line of protesters linking arms. Almost instantly, the soldiers were 
swallowed by the mass of people, surrounded like an invading organism and 
pushed back. The young soldiers grabbed each other, their eyes fearful, 
astonished, uncomprehending. They stumbled sideways, backward, the column 
disintegrating into clumps of sweating troops wildly looking about for a place 
to hide. 
A soldier fainted next to me, caught by two companions before he fell to the 
pavement. The crowd took up another chant: "Sit down, sit down." Others 
countercalled, "Down with Li Peng." Then, as if on command, the soldiers 
hunched down, some on the street, many more on the sidewalks. 
Two teen-agers, perhaps 18, a boy and girl arm in arm, drifted over to me, 
innocence and wonder on their faces. "It's marvelous," the girl said in 
carefully syllabled English. "The people of Beijing are marvelous. I don't 
think these soldiers have ever seen anything like this, never since liberation. 
It's like the Philippines. It's really people power." 
The tension of the crowd had dissipated like air rushing from a balloon. It was 
3 o'clock. Once again the people of Beijing had stopped the army from reaching 
Tian An Men Square, from moving against the students who protected the Goddess 
of Democracy. 
Everywhere, soldiers crouched on the sidewalks or in front of buildings, and 
people talked softly to these frightened youngsters in uniform. "Don't be 
afraid of the people," someone said. "With the people, the country has hope. 
The people don't want you to hurt them." Some soldiers cried, wiping their eyes 
with the backs of their hands. "They're not from Beijing, you know," a man 
pushing a bicycle told me. "They're from Liaoning. They know nothing. They 
don't even know why they are here." 
Popsicle vendors maneuvered their wheeled ice chests through the crowds crying, 
"Bing guan, bing guan." Two young women shoved a wad of bills into the hands of 
one and marched off with two cartons filled with popsicles, which they began 
passing out to soldiers huddled along the east side of the Beijing Hotel under 
a propaganda banner reading, "Firmly oppose turmoil. Maintain order and 
stability." 
Gradually, the young soldiers rose, urged on by the people, and began 
straggling back east on Changan Avenue. I walked with a group of soldiers for 
the first mile, tracing my route home, their ragged retreat cheered by 
bystanders who lined the sidewalks in the predawn hours. Rhythmic clapping and 
laughter carried the soldiers on, out of the heart of Beijing, away from Tian 
An Men Square and what the students called "the throat of democracy." 
Saturday afternoon and evening, June 3. In my student friend's tent, I 
recounted the events of the previous night. He had slept through it, too 
exhausted to venture over to the Beijing Hotel to witness the river of soldiers 
staunched by a determined citizenry. Like many of the students in the square, 
he possessed a tough optimism, but an optimism that often collapsed into doubt. 
In the space of a few minutes, he would insist that the students would triumph, 
then he would turn gloomy. "I think the Communist Party in China is the shadow 
of feudalism," he said. "They will not compromise with the students. Maybe the 
government will win. They have the guns." 
Great swaths of the square, only a week before crowded with blanket-covered 
lean-tos, tents and cardboard shacks, were now empty. Small mounds of discarded 
clothes or books or crumpled quilts dotted the 100-acre field of concrete. 
Still, perhaps a hundred crimson banners of China's colleges and universities 
flapped above the dwindling clusters of settlements. 
I walked north from the tent, toward the towering red walls of the Forbidden 
City, an immense portrait of Mao hanging over the central portal, which edges 
Changan Avenue and the northern boundary of the square. Looking to the right, I 
could see the Revolutionary History Museum, and to the left the Great Hall of 
the People. After Mao's death, a blocky columned mausoleum was erected in the 
southern half of the square to display the preserved corpse of the Great 
Helmsman. Curiously, during the entire occupation, the mausoleum remained 
undisturbed. One day, I had even managed to buy from a souvenir seller a blue 
polyester baseball hat imprinted with a rendering of the mausoleum. 
On the west side of the Great Hall of the People, a pink-columned edifice where 
the rubber-stamp parliament gathers, a contingent of 5,000 soldiers armed with 
AK-47 assault rifles was surrounded by singing, chanting, hectoring crowds. 
Some soldiers passed their canteens to protesters to have them refilled. Others 
accepted proffered sticks of ice cream. An officer stood and tried to lead his 
troops in song, a futile effort to drown out choruses of the socialist hymn the 
Internationale from the crowd. A student orator lectured the troops. There was 
no sense of crisis, of impending cataclysm. It was, as far as I could tell 
then, another in what had become a series of routine nonviolent victories over 
the army. 
I left the square sometime after 6 o'clock, in time to get back to my friend's 
apartment for the half-hour evening television news program, which provided not 
only the sole window into China's leadership but also an excuse to eat. We 
threw together a bowl of pea and bacon soup and some toast. 
At precisely 7 o'clock, the broadcast opened with a dour-faced Li Peng, oddly 
attired in a Western jacket and tie, reading a bizarre speech about global 
environmental problems. "What in the hell. . . ?" I muttered. My friend, who 
works for a Hong Kong magazine, had stopped taking notes, the surprise evident 
on his face. Even as Li spoke, it would turn out, armored vehicles were 
grinding into Beijing from the west. 
As darkness crept over the city, the streets and boulevards teemed with 
restless, skittish streams of bicyclists and pedestrians. By 8:30, the inner 
city, what was once contained by the old city wall, was electric with tension. 
I walked outside the compound to talk to people pedaling west, toward the 
square. "There's been shooting at Muxidi," someone said, referring to one of 
the distant western districts of the capital. Truckloads of workers in yellow 
hard hats -- looking tough, alert and confident, to my eyes -- sped down the 
Second Ring Road, a six-lane highway that encircles the inner city and skirts 
the diplomatic compound, on their way to man the people's roadblocks, I 
figured. 
At the Jianguomenwai Bridge, I watched a procession of about 40 canvas-backed 
army trucks lumber north, jolting to a halt at a roadblock, where they were 
swallowed up by chanting crowds waving fists and V signs. "This isn't the 
people's army, it's a traitor's army," a man shouted as he pounded on the 
fender of an army truck. These troops clutched rifles between their legs. At 
one point, a group of workers burst from the crush around the truck waving 
steel helmets and webbed bandoliers taken from one of the trucks. 
THE MASSACRE 
Late Saturday and early Sunday. At midnight, while I was doing some work in the 
apartment, I got another phone call. A reporter yelled into my ear, "The army's 
moving from the west." I immediately called two other reporters, one of whom 
had an almost-new Toyota sedan. "Let's go," I shouted. "They're moving on the 
square, the army." I rushed around collecting my camera and notebook. I stuck a 
flask of Scotch in my back pocket, thinking that it might serve as a 
last-recourse antiseptic if someone was shot. 
It was impossible to drive across the city on Changan Avenue, now a sea of 
barricades. So we sped north and west on the Second Ring Road, careening 
through roadblocks, a sign in our window reading jizhe -- journalists. As we 
circled the center of the city and headed south toward the Fuxingmen Bridge, 
the commotion in the streets was intense. Bicyclists, who in Beijing usually 
crawl sedately along the road, were tearing along highways and down side 
streets in packs. People were running away from the bridge. We rounded a curve 
that brought the bridge into sight. 
A wall of flaming buses down the entire length of the bridge lit the sky like 
day. The reporter driving the car slammed on the brakes, sliding the car into 
the curb along the highway. We ran, crouched over, toward the on-ramp that led 
to the inferno. The other two reporters hung back, talking to a group of people 
at the base of the ramp. The stutter of automatic weapons crackled in the air, 
mixing with the low whoomph of a bus's exploding gas tank. As I got closer, I 
could see a column of armored personnel carriers crashing through the flaming 
blockade. "They're firing at children," someone hollered at me as I ran past. 
People were lying next to the hedges that lined the ramp but I couldn't tell 
whether they were dead or alive. A man who had followed me up the ramp, shaking 
in anger, screamed, "Kuomintang fascists!" The gunfire was too intense for me 
to get closer, so I retreated to where my two friends were waiting. A man, 
almost hysterical, said that he had seen 30 people shot -- "old people, young 
people." 
"Are you a journalist?" a woman asked, her words clutching at me in despair. 
"Yes, yes, I am," I said. 
"Thank you," she exhaled, "thank you." 
I could see the alarm and shock on my friends' faces. They said they had been 
told that people who had been killed were brought down the ramp just before we 
got there. We stood for a moment behind a telephone pole, stunned, peering at 
the column of armor roaring over the bridge. It was simply too dangerous to 
stay where we were, so we jogged back to the car. In the years I lived in 
Beijing, it was never more than a gray, placidly boring city where people's 
public emotions were confined to drinking games and cooing over babies. A wave 
of student protests that swept the country in 1986 had petered out when the 
government shook the fist of repression. It was inconceivable that the army 
would actually fight its way into Beijing. 
We decided that we had to get to Tian An Men Square before the first assault 
troops. We were scared, but we only talked of that much later. 
We wound east through the inner city streets, dense with people. At one 
roadblock, we slowed to weave through barricades lined with thousands of 
people. Suddenly, someone pointed at our "journalist" placard and started 
clapping. Then another, and another. Applause swept us along. V signs were 
waved in front of our car. The people of Beijing wanted us to be there to 
record that night. 
"God, I can't believe it," one of the reporters said. "I can't believe it." She 
said it again and again as we drove. 
A reporter on a motorcycle drew up alongside and handed me a soldier's hat. 
"Hang on to this for me," he shouted. I stuffed it under the front seat. He 
pulled away. Days later, the cap was discovered under the seat. It was soaked 
with blood. 
We parked the car just north of Changan Avenue, next to Zhongnanhai, the old 
imperial compound where the Chinese communist leadership lives and works, a 
couple of blocks west of the square. Hurrying toward Changan, we were ahead of 
the army. The next day, I learned that many people had died at Xidan Road, just 
to the west. 
We ran toward the square, rushing along with a tide of retreating people, some 
on foot, others pedaling furiously on their black bicycles. Breathing heavily, 
unsure of escape routes, the other two reporters and I stopped under the 
portrait of Mao affixed to the face of the Forbidden City. We agreed that if we 
were separated, we would meet by one of the stone lions that guard the archway 
to the ancient city. 
As I looked east, about 30 or 40 yards away, I could see an armored personnel 
carrier ablaze. I ran over to take some pictures. People were heaving cardboard 
boxes and blankets on the searing metal surface. I could see the fractured 
silhouette of a 50-caliber machine gun pointed crazily into the starless sky. 
"They killed too many people," cried a young girl who grabbed my sleeve as I 
scribbled notes. "We hate them. We hate them." It was 1:30 a.m., June 4. 
Still the army had not made it to the square. Then, loudspeakers on the massive 
floodlight stanchions edging the square blared to life. "A serious 
counterrevolutionary rebellion is taking place in the capital tonight," a voice 
echoed. "Rioters have furiously attacked soldiers and stolen their weapons and 
ammunition. . . . The counterrevolutionary rebellion must now be resolutely 
counterattacked. . . . Residents should strictly abide by the specific 
regulations as provided by the martial law. . . . Safeguard the constitution 
and defend the security of the socialist motherland. . . . The personal safety 
of anyone who ignores this warning cannot be guaranteed." 
I wandered along the northern edge of the square, watching. Buses were on fire, 
their window frames white with flames that billowed from the vehicles' innards. 
Nearby, the Goddess of Democracy flickered with each surge of fire. A bus 
rocketed through the crowd on Changan Avenue, its driver wrestling with the 
huge steering wheel as he pointed it toward the main gate of the Forbidden 
City. The bus sliced through the gate, jackknifing across the inner entrance in 
what seemed to be an effort to block soldiers from charging through. Over the 
heads of the horde of people, blue flashing ambulance lights spun as the white 
vans crept toward the square from the east. A woman with long black hair 
wearing a white satin dress clacked past me on white spiked heels, swinging a 
white patent-leather purse. I watched her for a moment, stopped by the sight of 
her effortless saunter, her studied obliviousness to the building storm. 
To the west, I heard the thunder of engines and the churn of tank treads; the 
crowd turned to watch as a wave of closely set pairs of headlights came into 
view. I looked at my watch. It was 1:45. Dozens of tanks, the barrels of their 
cannons almost parallel to the ground, shuddered to a halt almost 100 yards 
from the western edge of the square. I heard sporadic cracks of rifle fire. 
Behind the headlights, through my binoculars, I could make out the shadows of 
troops, thousands of steel helmets glinting faintly in the darkness as the 
soldiers moved behind the tanks, running toward the wall of the Forbidden City. 
I hurried to where my two friends were to meet me. They were not there. 
People walked or ran aimlessly through the square, across Changan Avenue, as if 
they did not know where to go. I trotted toward the lights of the tanks. There, 
about 100 yards from the wall of armor that spread across the avenue, not more 
than a hundred people formed a thin line, not linking arms, but standing 
quietly. I ran up behind them. I wanted to see their faces, to look in their 
eyes, to see these people who stood unarmed in front of the Chinese army. The 
people, baby-faced students and weathered workers, gazed toward the army that 
had come for them, some vacantly, some worried, some, it seemed, without fear. 
Suddenly there was a sharp popping sound, then a rattle, like firecrackers 
going off in a neighbor's back yard. Some people in front of me fell to the 
ground, awkwardly, as if broken apart. I dove onto the pavement and began 
crawling backward. I bumped into another American journalist who was also on 
all fours, holding his bicycle upright. The bicycle seemed to tower over us, a 
target for the bullets flying over our heads. I suggested that he abandon the 
bicycle, that perhaps we needn't draw attention to ourselves. "It's not your 
$500 bicycle," he shot back. 
The crowd retreated, some running bent over, some crawling. Two young men ran 
by me furiously pushing a bicycle cart. On the flatbed of the cart a man lay, 
bathed in blood. More people ran by, carrying a woman whose shoulder was soaked 
red. There were some screams, but now I cannot remember many. Instead, there 
was a silent anger and a frenzy to move the wounded to the ambulances. A chant 
of "ji shao shu, ji shao shu," -- "very, very few" -- erupted from the mob, 
which regrouped in straggly lines of 40 or 50 to face the troops. Again, a wave 
of people moved to meet the army, and again the rifles cracked. More people 
fell. 
I ran farther east, past the edge of the square. Behind me, helmeted troops ran 
around the line of tanks, their engines thundering as they crept forward. 
Another bus sped through the retreating crowd, young men leaning from the 
windows waving bamboo poles fixed with crimson flags, the driver, in a 
snow-white headband, barreling suicidally toward the oncoming tanks. 
"Ba gong, ba gong, ba gong," the crowd chanted. "Strike, strike, strike." 
People swarmed by me, some moving to the square. Many were weeping. Now the 
sound of gunfire was almost continuous. Threads of yellow light shot from the 
southern edge of the square, machine-gun tracer bullets, I later learned. 
I stopped a young man to talk for a moment. "I don't believe it," he said, his 
voice shaking. "How is this possible? How could we prepare?" He stopped 
abruptly as another young man lying face down on a cart, blood seeping through 
his clothing, was pushed past us. The first young man put his hands on his 
face. "You must support the Chinese people," he said, turning to me. "You must 
go to your country and support the Chinese people." 
"Si duo le, si duo le" -- "Many are dead, many are dead" -- I heard this again 
and again as the crowd fell back under the crackle of gunfire, retreating 
eastward, down Changan. I was caught between my desire to see what happened on 
the square and the gunfire from the troops to the west. I ran, then walked with 
the throng, too frightened to figure out how to get back to the square. The 
journalist with the bicycle weaved toward me through the crowd. I hopped on the 
back and we rode east, back to the diplomatic compound. 
I learned what happened later at Tian An Men by talking with students and the 
few foreign reporters who stayed till dawn. As the avenue on the north side of 
the square emptied of people, a strange quiet enveloped the square. Bicyclists 
circled over the expanse of concrete. In the tents that had been set up earlier 
to treat hunger strikers and ailing students, doctors in stained white coats 
worked furiously. Students filtered out of their tents, away from the edge of 
the square where the growling APCs were assembling. In some tents, they told 
me, despite the gunfire, the roar of tanks, students slept. I could only 
understand it as a response of catatonic, paralyzing fear. 
Near 3:30 a.m, Taiwanese rock singer Hou Dejian, who was on a hunger strike at 
the Monument to the People's Heroes, a squat pillar set atop friezes of 
socialist heroism in the middle of the square and for weeks the command center 
for the student leaders, walked over to the row of soldiers at the north end of 
the square. There, I later learned from several eyewitnesses, he managed to 
negotiate time for a retreat for the thousands of students still huddled on the 
steps of the monument and in the tents scattered across the square. 
At 4 o'clock, the floodlights on the square were doused and only the headlights 
of APCs and an occasional television light pierced the darkness. A wave of 
soldiers moved from the Great Hall and marched onto the southern half of the 
square, their rifles, bayonets fixed, pointed before them. Twenty minutes 
later, the lights came on again. 
"I remember the APCs moving," a Western reporter told me days later. "It was 
eerie, the dark outlines of the APCs against the floodlights, the elongated 
shadows stretching into the square." As the APCs churned over the northern edge 
of the square, a column of students started pouring toward the southeast corner 
through a gantlet of student marshals holding hands, forming a tunnel to 
apparent safety. It was 5 a.m. 
Five minutes later, the first soldier was on the monument. Five minutes after 
that, about 100 yards away, the Goddess of Democracy toppled forward, ground 
under the tracks of an APC. 
What happened in the next 60 minutes may never be fully known. The next day, 
many students told of APCs rolling over tents filled with students, grinding 
their bodies to a pulp. A senior American diplomat said later that many 
students were crushed to death. There have been dozens of firsthand accounts of 
bodies being burned on the square with flame throwers, of soldiers shoveling 
bodies into piles "like cordwood," one Chinese told me. 
There is, too, a tale -- maybe apocryphal -- of students standing to protect 
the Goddess of Democracy. In the days that followed, as I visited university 
campuses, I heard the story over and over: A dozen students had linked arms 
around the statue, facing the armor that would devour them. "They were run 
over," a student said to me, tears streaming down his face. "They were all 
killed." 
Somehow, though, the students who retreated south escaped the square unharmed. 
A Western reporter who walked the last yards with the students said that he saw 
no one shot during the withdrawal, that even the last stragglers made it off 
the square alive. "I was impressed by the calm," he told me, "indeed the 
serenity of the students." 
At the same time, the Chinese army fanned throughout Beijing, the rattle of 
machine guns and automatic rifles filling the air. Tanks pushed through the 
streets, bashing through barricades, retaking the city from its own citizens. 
AFTERMATH 
Sunday morning, June 4. It was 4:30 when I made it home. I could barely absorb 
what I had seen, and, somehow, I slept for several hours. The morning sun, 
rising through Beijing's gray-brown haze, brought little solace. The 
continuing, sporadic gunfire reminded me of what had happened the night before, 
and what was still taking place. I talked to a fellow reporter about going back 
out on the streets, something we regarded as dangerous, but something we 
thought we should do. We took bicycles -- the road was impassable to cars -- 
and gingerly headed back toward the square where we could hear gunshots. 
Changan Avenue bore the scars of battle. Twisted steel lane dividers pretzeled 
across the road. Flattened garbage cans, gutted buses and pulverized concrete 
barriers lay like the entrails of madness the entire distance to the square. As 
we weaved through the debris, Beijing's residents peered from the mouths of the 
hutongs, staring at the wreckage. There were few bicyclists. One, a tough, 
grizzled youth, pumped up behind us. "It's dangerous," he informed us. "Aren't 
you scared?" I assured him that I was. 
I did not see what happened next, just the result. But four people, three 
flight attendants from Air France and a Portuguese reporter for a Hong Kong 
magazine, described the scene. 
Beginning in the morning, about 10:25, a frail line of about 60 protesters, 
unarmed, walked past the Beijing Hotel toward the army, pleading with their 
eyes to stop the slaughter. Rifles chattered. Dozens of people slumped onto the 
pavement. Another line of protesters pushed toward the wall of soldiers, and 
again the rifles crackled. More people fell, blood spreading across their 
chests, some wounded, some dead. In all, more than 50 people were killed or 
wounded. 
"They just stood there and died," the Portuguese reporter said. "The first time 
the troops started shooting, it lasted for 60 seconds. I was looking at my 
watch, counting the seconds." There were, the reporter told me, four lines of 
protesters and four fusillades before the suicidal effort was extinguished. 
We rode up to the Beijing Hotel just after the slaughter. There were still 
bodies on the street, some being hefted onto bicycle carts, others just lying 
there. The other reporter and I ran through the upper floors of the hotel, 
straining to find a better vantage point on the square. We tried locked door 
after locked door. One door opened into an office full of Chinese security 
officers with walkie-talkies. We rushed to the balcony, but the security people 
forced us back. Racing back down the hall, we found a stairwell to a fire 
escape that led to the roof. Shoving aside planks that had been piled on the 
exit to block access, we ran to the edge of the roof. Chinese security people 
on another corner of the roof began moving toward us. We stared for a minute, 
perhaps two, toward the square, the scene of the previous night's carnage. 
There, on the vast expanse of deathly gray, like a piece of chalk ground 
beneath a heel, was a stain of white, the shards of the Goddess of Democracy. 
IN THE DAYS THAT followed, I tried to learn as much as possible about what had 
happened all over Beijing. I visited a few Chinese friends, but already the 
suffocating blanket of repression was falling on the city. Chinese were being 
told not to talk to foreigners. 
At one campus, the Institute of Politics and Law, I saw a makeshift wake. In 
the rotunda of the administration building, the battered body of a student, his 
skull crushed, lay on a table surrounded by blocks of ice. Students filed 
slowly past, small swatches of black fabric pinned to their sleeves. No one 
knew the student's name, only that he had died when the army moved into 
Beijing. 
Three days after Tian An Men, as authorities began to round up worker and 
student leaders, some of whom were later executed, a radio broadcast from Hong 
Kong brought China, and the world, the voice of Chai Ling, a 23-year-old 
student at Beijing Teachers College and one of the most prominent student 
leaders. 
"I am Chai Ling," the voice said. "I am still alive. Ours was a peaceful 
protest. The ultimate price of a peaceful protest was to sacrifice oneself. Arm 
in arm, shoulder to shoulder, we sang the Internationale and slowly walked 
toward the Monument to the People's Heroes. We sat quietly at the monument 
awaiting with dignity the arrival of our executioners. We realized that what 
was happening was a conflict between love and hate and not a battle of brute 
forces. My compatriots, even at the darkest moment, dawn will still break." 
photo credit for pg. 6 
