OFFICIALS PRAISE STIFF TERM IN S&amp;L FRAUD CASE 
The sentencing Friday of Janet Faye McKinzie to a 20-year prison term for her 
role in the collapse of North America Savings &amp; Loan brought wide praise 
from thrift regulators and law enforcement authorities. 
McKinzie's sentence, which was coupled with an order to repay $14 million 
swindled from the now-defunct Santa Ana thrift, is one of the stiffest 
penalties in the nation for anyone charged with thrift fraud. 
She was a consultant to North America, but, as a close associate of the 
S&amp;L's late owner, Duayne D. Christensen, she was the thrift's de facto 
head, regulators had charged. 
Comments came from across the country: 
"From the evening of Jan. 16, 1987, I have been certain of the mass fraud that 
was committed by Jan McKinzie and (Duayne) Doc Christensen," said William D. 
Davis, commissioner of the state Department of Savings and Loan. Davis acted as 
conservator for the state when it seized the S&amp;L after Christensen's death 
in a car accident. 
"Her sentence fits the crime," said William K. Black, counsel for the Office of 
Thrift Supervision's district headquarters in San Francisco. "We're delighted 
the court had the courage to impose a sentence commensurate with the incredible 
scope of criminal conduct at the S&amp;L. I think it sends a very important 
signal deterring people from this kind of conduct in the future." 
"Both portions of the sentence are excellent," said Lawrence G. Lawler, special 
agent in charge of the FBI's Los Angeles office. His seven-county district, 
which includes Orange County, is continuing to investigate further allegations 
at North America. 
"This represents a dramatic increase in the length of sentences now being 
handed out to these white-collar criminals. It's a reflection of an 
understanding on the part of courts about the public outcry on these financial 
fraud-related cases," said Douglas Tillett, a Justice Department spokesman in 
Washington. 
The order to repay $14 million is an "unknown factor," Davis said. 
"There was a lot of money that disappeared from that institution and nobody has 
been able to nail down where it went," he said. "It wouldn't surprise me that 
she would have access to those funds." 
Her stiff sentence is also part of a nationwide trend that federal authorities 
are beginning to see in prosecutions of white-collar criminals in the savings 
and loan scandal. 
"Typically, we've seen a dramatic increase in the length of sentences," Tillett 
said. Statistics to support the trend, however, were not available Friday. 
Data provided by the Justice Department, however, does indicate that the days 
of the slap on the wrist as punishment for fraud are drawing to a close. 
The agency has won convictions of 211 people in major thrift fraud cases since 
Oct. 1, 1988. Of that total, 153 people have been sentenced so far, and 78% of 
them -- 119 -- sent to prison, Tillett said. 
The average jail time is a little more than three years, he said. But he 
estimated that about half the sentences meted out are three- to five-year terms 
and roughly 25% exceed 10 years. 
While Black also sees a trend toward heavier sentences of thrift defrauders, he 
said a continuing problem remains -- courts are inconsistent. 
