THE CARWASH AND THE DEVELOPER 
In response to my May 27 letter, Richard Shedenhelm (Letters, June 17) says 
"profitability should determine land use," and adds that my call for a 
moratorium on the corner of Ventura and Laurel Canyon boulevards, where a 
developer wants to level the neighborhood's carwash, service station and coffee 
shop to build an upscale two-story retail complex, is politically dangerous. 
I take that to mean that my call for Councilman Joel Wachs to protect the 
present site to "allow us time to meet (with the developer) and discuss the 
alternatives to total destruction" is a threat to the political freedoms of 
this land. Hardly. What is politically dangerous, however, are untrue 
statements made by overzealous, uninformed and ignorant developer sympathizers. 
The members of this community want all developers to make a profit and be 
successful. Our concerns are exactly the words of Shedenhelm: "The 
entrepreneurs who fail to accurately forecast the wants of consumers sustain 
losses." 
Shedenhelm states that I am in fact substituting my personal preferences over 
that of my neighbors. Where was Shedenhelm during rallies attended by members 
of the Briarcliff Improvement Assn., the Studio City Residents Assn. and the 
Studio City Chamber of Commerce -- who all oppose removal of existing 
improvements? 
He states that market forces of profit and loss should be the only 
considerations in determining the viability of a development, and infers that I 
am against an "owner's inalienable right to peacefully use his property as he 
himself determines." Read my letter again, Mr. Shedenhelm. I supported owners' 
rights to redevelop, but not freely when there is strong opposition from 
consumers and residents. 
When some developers are allowed to proceed with redevelopment plans without 
considering the desires and needs of the surrounding community, it is 
commercially dangerous. One Studio City retail project was allowed to proceed 
over the protests of the neighborhood residents. Today it remains only 
partially occupied, and this community is stuck with it. 
WALTER M. McINTYRE 
Studio City 
 McIntyre is president of the Briarcliff Improvement Assn. and a member of the 
Ventura Boulevard Citizens Action Committee. 
