WHO'S WHO IN THE BROWN TRIAL 
David Arnold Brown: 
Masterminded a twisted plot to have his 14-year-old daughter, Cinnamon, kill 
his wife, Linda Marie, collect $835,000 in life insurance on his wife and then 
marry the dead woman's 17-year-old sister, Patti. When the plot was unraveled 
and Brown arrested, he hired a fellow inmate to kill the three people he felt 
responsible for his predicament.Linda Marie Brown: 
As David Brown's fourth wife, the 24-year-old was the target of the 1985 
murder/insurance fraud scheme plotted by him, her sister, and stepdaughter 
Cinnamon Brown. Cinnamon Brown: 
Since her father "didn't have the stomach for it," Cinnamon carried out the 
murder of Linda Marie. Hours after fatally shooting her stepmother twice in the 
abdomen, Cinnamon, then 14, was found nearly comatose, lying in her own vomit 
in a back-yard doghouse, clutching a suicide note that read, "Dear God, please 
forgive me. I didn't mean to hurt her." She confessed to the murder and was 
sentenced to 27 years to life but remained silently loyal to her father for 
three years until she was persuaded in 1988 to reveal the whole story. 
Patti Bailey: 
The younger sister of Linda Marie, she lived with the couple, and she and Brown 
had sex from the time she was 11. Originally designated to kill her sister, she 
backed out at the last minute. A little more than a year after the murder, she 
secretly married her dead sister's husband. She and Brown have a 2-year-old 
daughter who is living with a Bailey family member. 
Jay Newell: District attorney investigator responsible for persuading Cinnamon 
to reveal her father's murder plot. Because of his persistence, Newell himself 
became a target in Brown's murder-for-hire scheme. The others were his wife 
Patti and prosecuting attorney Jeoffrey L. S. Robinson. 
Richard Steinhart: Picked up on a parole violation from an earlier cocaine 
conviction, he met Brown while in Orange County jail. The two quickly hit it 
off, and Steinhart agreed to murder Jay Newell, Patti Bailey and Jeoffrey 
Robinson for at least $21,700. 
Jeoffrey L.S. Robinson: 
The prosecuting attorney who sought to bring Brown to justice and one of the 
targets of Brown's murder-for-hire scheme. 
