ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
For those who prefer to skip the museum and go directly to the gift shop: 
New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art is opening a retail outlet in the Century 
City Shopping Center this fall. 
In addition to posters and stationery, reproductions of sculptures from the 
Met's massive collection will be offered for purchase. 
Also available will be museum memberships -- for the old-fashioned folks who 
would rather gawk at the originals on 5th Avenue than spend all their time and 
money at the West Coast, Westside retail emporium. 
Switching from Manhattan to Manhattan Beach, but keeping with the subject of 
art: 
Those city-installed dumbbell sculptures that were heisted from a seaside bench 
last month still have not been recovered. 
"It would be a surprise if they did turn up," acknowledged Howard Spector, the 
community's public arts administrator. "There was no reward put up this time." 
"DDumbbell," consisting of two cast bronze 25-pound hand weights, was first 
stolen hours after being bolted down by city workers last September. The art 
piece was recovered that time with the help of a $500 reward. Police were on 
the lookout for any suspicious-looking hulks, possibly with hernias. 
Add serial criminals: the mad manhole-cover lifter is still on the loose. 
City sanitation officials report that 185 of the iron covers now have 
disappeared in little more than a week in locations ranging from Hollywood to 
South-Central Los Angeles. 
With the total replacement cost exceeding $15,000, authorities are beseeching 
the public for help. 
"If you see someone lifting a manhole cover, especially the ones in the 
sidewalk near the corner catch basins, please report the event," says 
Sanitation Bureau Director Delwin A. Biagi. 
Authorities surmise that the thief has been getting away in a vehicle. Each 
cover weighs 40 pounds. Police were on the lookout for any suspicious-looking 
hulks, possibly with hernias. 
America's most wanted: Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner, who has shunned the spotlight 
since his defeat in the June Democratic primary for state attorney general, 
also skipped the National District Attorney's Assn. conference in Kalispell, 
Mont., this past weekend. The session was held at a rural resort called, of all 
things, the Outlaw Inn. 
Need a lift? Today marks the start of "Things Are Looking Up Week" in Los 
Angeles, in conjunction with the 1990 International Jugglers Assn. convention 
at UCLA. More than 1,000 prestidigitators are expected to be on hand for a slew 
of juggling-while-running races, consecutive-toss contests and an all-star 
comedy-juggling show. Police were expected to be in the audience, on the 
lookout for anyone juggling manhole covers. 
Do city sign makers have trouble with heights? 
After seeing a picture of a "Castle Hegihts Avenue" street sign in Only in L.A. 
last month, reader Steve Kipnis reports that he happened upon a sign in 
Hollywood for "Crescent Heihts Boulevard." 
miscelLAny: 
Faith, Hope and Charity streets were once side by side in downtown L.A. But 
residents of the latter resented jokes about "living on Charity," and it was 
changed to Grand. Faith was later renamed Flower. Hope remains. 
