IMELDA MARCOS ACQUITTED; 
CLEARED OF LOOTING PHILIPPINES TO BUY N.Y. SKYSCRAPERS; 
KHASHOGGI ALSO FREED IN BLOW TO JUSTICE DEPT. 
In a verdict that electrified the courtroom, former Philippine First Lady 
Imelda Marcos was acquitted today of looting her homeland's treasury of $222 
million to buy New York skyscrapers, jewelry and art. 
Adnan Khashoggi, the jet-set Saudi businessman once described as the world's 
richest man, also was cleared of two counts that accused him of helping Marcos 
hide ownership of the property. 
The decision -- on Marcos' 61st birthday -- came midway through the jury's 
fifth day of deliberations. It capped a three-monthlong trial. She was 
acquitted on all counts. 
As the jury forewoman read the first innocent verdict, Marcos supporters cried 
out in happiness, ignoring U.S. District Judge John Keenan's warning against 
outbursts. Marcos was in tears. She smiled and hugged her lawyers. Others in 
the courtroom were hugging and crying. 
The prosecutors sat facing the judge, eyes downcast. 
The verdict was a crushing blow to the U.S. government, which had taken the 
unusual step of prosecuting a wife of a former head of state who had sought 
sanctuary in the United States. 
As she left the courthouse in a crush of reporters, Marcos said: "A great 
burden is lifted. I'm glad it's over." She appeared to be weeping as she walked 
down the steps, and she added: "Thank you. Thank you. God bless America." 
Khashoggi, smiling broadly, said, "I believe in the American system where 
people can decide the fate of an individual." 
A Muslim, he said he planned to leave New York to go to Mecca, the holy city of 
Islam, where pilgrims are gathering now. 
If she had been convicted on all four counts -- racketeering, racketeering 
conspiracy, mail fraud and obstruction of justice -- Marcos could have faced up 
to 50 years in prison and $1 million in fines. Khashoggi could have drawn a 
sentence of 10 years and a $500,000 fine on two counts -- mail fraud and 
obstruction of justice. 
Marcos had been accused of conspiring with her late husband, former President 
Ferdinand E. Marcos, to buy art, jewelry and four Manhattan commercial 
buildings with money stolen from their country. It was charged that much of the 
millions of dollars came in kickbacks Marcos collected from government 
contractors. 
Ferdinand Marcos also was indicted in October, 1988, but was ruled too ill to 
stand trial. He died in Hawaii last September. 
Mrs. Marcos' flashy attorney, Gerry Spence, of Jackson, Wyo., conceded she was 
a "world class shopper," but said she did not know the source of her husband's 
wealth. In his closing argument, Spence said she was guilty only of loving and 
supporting her husband. 
Witnesses testified that the money was funneled to the United States through 
numbered bank accounts in Switzerland, Hong Kong, Manila and Los Angeles and 
was used to secretly buy the buildings for the Marcoses through nominees and 
offshore corporations. 
The alleged offenses took place in the latter part of Marcos' two decades as 
president of the Asian nation. Marcos was deposed in February, 1986, by a 
"people's revolution" led by Corazon Aquino, widow of a murdered Marcos 
opponent. She became Philippine president as the Marcoses fled to exile in 
Hawaii. 
Carmen Pedrosa, a spokesman for the Philippine government, said in a hastily 
written statement issued here that even though Mrs. Marcos was acquitted, the 
trial showed that her late husband's regime was rife with "unbridled corruption 
and total abuse of power" and a ban on her returning to the country remains in 
effect. 
The federal prosecutor's office issued a statement saying that "our system of 
justice has spoken" and that the team of prosecutors who tried the case had 
done a good job. 
Khashoggi, 54, is a financier and arms dealer who divides his time between 
homes in New York, France, Saudi Arabia and other locales. He played a 
middleman role in the Iran-Contra scandal, in which U.S. arms were secretly 
sold to Iran by officials of the Reagan Administration and the profits diverted 
to the U.S.-backed Contra rebels in Nicaragua. 
The trial, which began in late March, involved 95 witnesses, all called by the 
government. 
It filled 5,900 pages of transcript and included bank records, receipts, 
letters, diaries and phone logs as evidence. Some of the key documents were 
recovered at Manila's Malacanang Palace after the Marcoses fled. 
The testimony was highlighted by witnesses' accounts of Mrs. Marcos' shopping 
habits, including spending sprees at Bloomingdale's and numerous New York 
jewelry stores. Witnesses also said she used close friends and a secretary to 
handle purchases and deliveries of large amounts of cash for her expenses. 
The New York branch of the Philippine National Bank was described as her 
"personal piggy bank," and its manager called himself the "satchel man" who 
carried a valise containing $100,000 when he accompanied Mrs. Marcos' entourage 
to a state funeral in South Korea. 
The prosecution claimed its evidence, though heavily circumstantial, proved 
that as a Cabinet minister and mayor of Manila, Mrs. Marcos would have had 
knowledge of Marcos' corrupt practices. 
The basic allegation of the racketeering charges was that Mrs. Marcos violated 
U.S. laws against wire fraud and the transfer of stolen money into the United 
States. 
