WORST-CASE EXAMPLE OF POLITICAL SHENANIGANS; 
COUNCIL MEMBERS ARE MORE INTERESTED IN PROTECTING EMPIRES THAN DOING RIGHT 
THING 
The San Diego City Council's latest exercise in political chicanery was on 
display last week, and, to no one's surprise, its machinations on 
reapportionment produced no shortage of maneuvering. It took less than 24 hours 
for the Chicano Federation to take the entire matter back before U.S. District 
Judge John Rhoades. That's probably where this mess belongs. 
The redistricting battle has been brewing for some time in City Hall offices, 
where council members' number-crunchers have been plotting strategy to gain 
maximum political advantage from the required rebalancing of populations in the 
eight districts. No surprise there; that's how the system works, sort of. 
Simultaneously, an advisory redistricting panel appointed by the council had 
been holding public hearings to redraw district lines. 
Its map wasn't free of political taint, either, offering significant advantages 
to some of the council's conservative Republicans. But it was based on months 
of public testimony and debate. 
On Monday, the council's liberal, pro-environment "Gang of Five," which 
controls city policy on many issues by the narrow margin of a single vote, 
produced a map that only its bloc members had seen before. Then it tentatively 
adopted the boundaries by a 5-4 vote. 
It appears that the decision violates a provision of the 1988 legal settlement 
of the Chicano Federation's voting rights suit against the city. In that 
document, Rhoades ordered the council to allow minority community 
representatives a meaningful role in shaping the map. 
By Thursday, U.S. Magistrate Harry McCue had barred the council from formally 
adopting the map, a decision that was the best course of action under these 
circumstances. 
The majority's sin pales before the unparalleled political cowardice of 
Councilwoman Linda Bernhardt, who voted for new boundaries that remove Scripps 
Ranch from her 5th District. Bernhardt won an upset victory over incumbent 
"bulldozer" Ed Struiksma last November with the zealous volunteer aid of 
Scripps Ranch environmentalists, who believed the promises that she would 
protect Miramar Lake and the I-15 corridor from development. 
Those problems apparently have proven more intractable than Bernhardt foresaw. 
With another major headache -- the reopening of Pomerado Road through Scripps 
Ranch -- on the horizon, Bernhardt simply fled the district. 
Who takes over as Scripps Ranch's representative? Bruce Henderson, the reigning 
pro-growth councilman. Henderson, by the way, was the victim of a naked 
gerrymander designed to make him more vulnerable to defeat in 1991. 
At the behest of environmental activists, the burgeoning I-15 corridor was 
Balkanized into three council districts so that the council could not dump the 
city's growth on one council member. That may have been a clever growth-control 
tactic, but the fact remains that, in testimony before the advisory panel, many 
I-15 residents asked to be lumped together in one district. 
The main issue facing Rhoades, however, is whether the council obeyed federal 
guidelines requiring it to augment the voting power of Latinos and other 
minorities. The adopted plan contains an 8th District that is 51% Latino, 
compared with the 52.2% on the advisory commission map. 
That is a small difference. But Chicano Federation lawyers make a compelling 
argument that the ruling bloc, by excluding some fast-growing Latino districts 
in favor of the heavily white neighborhood where incumbent Bob Filner 
conveniently bought a house during the redistricting process, the council 
demonstrated its intent to curb minority voting power. 
Rhoades will have to sort that one out. We don't know if the reapportionment is 
legal. We do know that, so far, the process has been a crime. 
