SUDDENLY IT WAS ALL ACTION; 
GOOD WORK BY MEXICO CITY, WASHINGTON ON MAJOR DRUG CASE 
Daniel James Fowlie, a reputed drug kingpin, had eluded federal and local 
investigators for years. The operation he allegedly masterminded served as a 
reference point for President Bush, who delivered a major address from a seized 
ranch in Orange County. 
But Fowlie became a symbol both for the objectives of the war on drugs and for 
its frustrations. Six of his associates were convicted of drug-smuggling 
charges in the United States while he remained in Mexico, successfully eluding 
his day in U.S. courts. Fowlie's extradition this week was an important new 
sign of cooperation in the drug war between Mexican and American authorities. 
Fowlie reportedly had been living a very comfortable prison life in La Paz, 
Mexico. He appealed to the Mexican Constitution to fight extradition and 
enjoyed such cordial relations with prison authorities that he was given 
generous four-day passes to go marlin fishing and pursue development interests 
in Cabo San Lucas. U.S. authorities had their 32-page indictment, with its 
charges of income tax evasion, distribution or intention to distribute 53,000 
pounds of marijuana and more, but they did not have their man. 
A court in Mazatlan, Mexico, paved the way last month with a ruling upholding 
extradition. On Monday afternoon, about 20 Mexican officials met with U.S. 
agents at a meeting so hastily assembled that Fowlie had no time to gather 
personal belongings before his extradition. 
It's interesting how quickly things can happen when two countries cooperate. 
Nearly five and one-half years elapsed from the time federal agents uncovered 
evidence of drug smuggling at the ranch to the time Fowlie returned for 
arraignment on Tuesday in federal court. In the United States alone, the case 
engaged a host of agencies. Progress came quickly in one chapter of the war on 
drugs only after the wheels of justice started turning in the courts and 
bureaucracies of two nations. 
