AMERICAN LEGION ROUNDUP; 
ENCINO-CRESPI FALLS SHORT AGAIN, 5-3 
Encino-Crespi's American Legion baseball team has struggled this season, 
failing to capitalize on its opportunities. 
Encino-Crespi came up short again Saturday, failing to produce with the game on 
the line. 
Western Division-leading Woodland Hills East rallied for three runs in the 
eighth to win, 5-3, in the District 20 game at Valley College. 
"It was the same old story," Encino-Crespi Coach Scott Muckey said. 
After East (14-1) took a 5-2 lead in the top of the eighth, Encino-Crespi 
rallied for a run off reliever Chris Brown in the bottom of the inning. 
Encino-Crespi left the bases loaded, however, which served as a prelude to the 
ninth. 
With runners at first and third in the ninth, Vic Seper sent a shot down the 
line at first, but East's John Erganian gloved the ball for the final out. 
With the score tied, 2-2, East shortstop Benji Belfield started the 
eighth-inning rally with a one-out triple off reliever Brett Farlow (0-1). 
After a pair of walks loaded the bases, Erganian gave East a 3-2 lead with a 
run-scoring ground out to first. Carey Wilbur then delivered a two-run single 
for a 5-2 lead. 
Casey Snow was two for three and stole two bases for Encino-Crespi (4-10). 
Belfield had two hits for East. 
In other District 20 games: 
Woodland Hills West 6, Granada Hills 1 -- Catcher Bobby Kim (two for four) 
slammed a two-run homer to spark a three-run first inning for West at El Camino 
Real. 
Right-hander Terry Morrow (3-0) allowed six hits, struck out 10 and walked 
three for West, which won for the eighth time in nine games. 
West improved to 12-5, 9-4 in district play. Granada Hills is 4-11. 
Sun Valley 3, Verdugo Hills 2 -- Roy Lozano's single in the ninth drove in Sef 
Carlin from third to win it at Poly. 
Right-hander Jake Loveridge (3-1) allowed one earned run on three hits, walked 
five and struck out two for Sun Valley (13-1). 
In the ninth, Carlin beat out a bunt and took third on an errant pickoff. After 
Jonathan Campbell walked, Lozano punched a game-wining looper into right-center 
field. 
Lozano, Carlin and Marlon McKinney each had two hits for Sun Valley. Verdugo 
Hills is 6-8. 
Reseda 4, Las Virgenes 3 -- Reseda turned three double plays to back the 
six-hit pitching of Louis Vanacore at Reseda High. 
With the score tied, 3-3, and two out in the fifth, Ari Jacobs (three hits) 
singled and scored on a double by Jeff Taylor. Jesse Yeomans had two hits for 
Reseda (8-7). Tom Lynch and Tom Hoover each had two hits for Las Virgenes 
(9-6). 
Chatsworth 10, Agoura 8 -- Chatsworth catcher Mike Mancuso nailed down the game 
and bailed out his batterymate with three innings of relief at Agoura High. 
With Chatsworth ahead, 10-7, Mancuso allowed a lone run in the eighth to earn 
his first save. Starter Danny Rodriguez (2-2) earned the victory. 
Mancuso was two for three and drove in two runs for Chatsworth (6-7). Bob 
Kazmirski and pitcher Joey Medaglia (1-2) each had two hits and drove in two 
runs for Agoura (7-9). 
