SANTA BARBARA FIRE FLARES ANEW; 
SETBACK: AN UNEXPECTED RISE IN TEMPERATURES AND GUSTING WINDS HAMPER THE FIGHT 
TO CONTROL THE BLAZE. BUT FULL CONTROL IS STILL EXPECTED TODAY. 
Firefighters, hampered by an unexpected rise in temperatures and gusting winds, 
suffered a setback Monday in combating the stubborn blaze that has blackened 
4,900 acres and destroyed more than 400 homes here, but said they still 
expected the fire to be under full control today. 
Aided by cool, moist ocean breezes over the weekend, firefighters were able to 
surround the fire. But early Monday morning 35-m.p.h. gusts flared up without 
warning and temperatures climbed into the 80s. 
"The crews are always dependent on the weather," U.S. Forest Service spokesman 
Maeton Freel said. "If the cooler weather had held, everything would have gone 
as planned. We'll still get control. It'll just take a little longer." 
The sudden change in conditions and drop in humidity "caused some edginess" 
among the fire crews because "they didn't expect it," said Santa Barbara County 
Fire Capt. Charles Johnson. 
"We're still confident about gaining control pretty soon," said Susan 
Mockenhaupt, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Forest Service. "The hot spots are 
within the fire perimeter . . . so everything still looks pretty good out 
there." 
Damage from the fire was estimated by the U.S. Forest Service at about $500 
million. 
By Monday, more than 75 people had been cited for "sightseeing at the scene of 
an emergency," a misdemeanor, after they were caught combing though the rubble 
in burned-out neighborhoods, said Tim Gracey, spokesman for the Santa Barbara 
County Sheriff's Department. 
Gracey said most of the homes were leveled by the fire, "so there's not a whole 
lot left to take. . . . But after losing a $500,000 house, the last thing I'd 
want is to find some yahoo looking through my rubble." 
The firefighters spent most of Monday battling two "stubborn hot spots," 
Mockenhaupt said, both in rugged terrain, several miles from residential areas. 
In addition to the ground crews, helicopters continued to drop water and fire 
retardant on smoldering areas. 
On Saturday night the fire was contained, which means a fire line around the 
blaze was completed. Control means that there are no flames within about 300 
feet of the fire lines. 
Meanwhile, in San Diego County, firefighters battling the Lake Henshaw blaze 
predicted it would be extinguished by 6 a.m. today. As of 1 p.m. Monday, it had 
been entirely contained and was 60% extinguished, said Audrey Hagan, 
spokeswoman for the California Department of Forestry. Authorities believe the 
blaze, like the Santa Barbara fire, was set by an arsonist. Officials in both 
areas have offered rewards for any information leading to an arrest. 
Just as firefighters were taming the Lake Henshaw fire that has raged since 
last Thursday, 330 of them were called out to battle a new fire just north of 
Lake Wohlford, east of Escondido. Hagan said the fire started at 2:45 p.m. and 
had engulfed 100 acres by 4:30 p.m. 
