STANDING OUT IN JAPAN; 
WOMEN HAVE BEGUN TO CRACK THE TRADITIONAL MALE-DOMINATED CORPORATE CULTURE BUT 
THE GOING CAN BE TOUGH. 
When Mie Teno was hired to help a major Japanese company establish a U.S. 
plant, she went about the project just as any Japanese man would. She quietly 
cultivated allies at all levels of the corporate bureaucracy, beginning with 
the section chiefs and working her way to the vice presidents. Finally, with 
the consensus of all of them, her recommendations went to the top. 
Teno worried that her effectiveness might be diminished because she happened to 
be a woman. But she soon knew that the president was sold on the U.S. plant: He 
entertained her at a posh restaurant in Tokyo. 
Instances of businessmen entertaining Japanese female executives are virtually 
unheard of in this country, where women are typically relegated to the role of 
"office ladies" who serve tea to their male bosses and colleagues in addition 
to their clerical duties. 
Teno is one of the few Japanese executive women making it in male-dominated 
corporate Japan. "Japanese top management is very reluctant to take women 
within their companies, but they are willing to work with women," explained the 
45-year-old consultant who heads her own firm, Deltapoint International Ltd., a 
joint venture with a Bellevue, Wash., company. 
A handful of women executives like Teno are slowly making their way in the 
corporate world. Most head their own businesses. Many prefer working for 
foreign firms because they offer better opportunities. Japanese companies only 
recently lifted discriminatory hiring practices against women and now allow 
them to take management-track jobs, once reserved exclusively for men. 
New Assertiveness 
The idea of high-ranking women in business is at odds with the traditional 
image of Japanese women as supportive homebodies whose primary concern is the 
care of their husbands and children. But this self-sacrificing image is 
unraveling among modern Japanese women such as Socialist Party Chairwoman 
Takako Doi, the first woman in Japanese history to head a major political 
party. 
She effectively rallied women, who showed a new assertiveness in recent 
elections. Women exhibited stunning political clout last Sunday in helping to 
defeat candidates of the Liberal Democratic Party, which has been embroiled in 
political scandals and also initiated an unpopular 3% consumption tax. 
The defeat caused Prime Minister Sosuke Uno to resign. Earlier this month, 
Japan's Agriculture Secretary Hisao Horinouchi had to make a public apology for 
saying a women's place is in the home. 
In short, Japan is offering new alternatives to women. "My thinking is quite 
different than the Japanese thinking," said Mieko Hirabayashi, director of 
Spazio Design Associates, a Tokyo design and business consulting company. "I 
never say marriage and making a family is that important. It is part of my 
life, but not my whole life." 
Today, women account for 39.9% of Japan's work force, but a third of those 
female workers are part-time or contract workers. Women hold very few corporate 
positions, according to a survey by Tokyo Shogo Research Ltd. They headed only 
3.7% of the 376,800 small companies surveyed. Of the top 100 companies (by 
sales) headed by women, 73 succeeded their fathers or husbands because of death 
or illness, and 19 were founded by women. 
Still, bucking the deeply ingrained traditional roles of women is not easy. 
Japanese companies may have earned international kudos for their quality and 
productivity, but women have long been nudged out of their jobs after they 
marry and have children. Equality in the workplace did not become legally 
mandated in Japan until 1986. 
Projected Labor Shortage 
Ten years ago, when Chizuko Nara went on her first interviews with Japanese 
companies, "They would ask me 'would you be all right if you had to stay late 
to work with other men? Could you find your way home all right?' Maybe it had 
to do with my being so young." 
Nara, now 33, went to the United States instead, where she earned an MBA at the 
Leonard N. Stern School of Business at New York University. She worked for 
Nomura Securities in New York before moving to Tokyo to become a vice president 
in Japanese Equity Research at Salomon Bros. Asia Ltd. 
Working to the advantage of women, who account for more than one-third of 
Japan's college graduates, is demographics. "Women will play a greater role 
because of a projected labor shortage," said Charlotte A. Kennedy-Takahashi, 
president of Oak Associates, a Tokyo-based human resources company. "There are 
already two jobs for every college graduate. By 1991, there will be five jobs 
for every college graduate." 
For now, Japanese women seeking managerial or executive positions find 
employment at foreign firms more attractive. IBM Japan, for example, has been 
the No. 1 choice for the past five years among female graduates seeking 
employment, according to an annual employment survey by Recruit Co. 
"I think the foreign firms have given more opportunity to women, partly because 
there has been a shortage of men," explained Kennedy-Takahashi, an American who 
has lived in Japan for nearly two decades. 
Bilingual and Bicultural 
The Japanese government and companies typically snap up the top male graduates 
from the country's prestigious universities and colleges. Until recently, a 
stigma attached to job hopping and nonconformity forced men to seek lifetime 
employment at Japanese firms. 
"If one had gone to work for an international company, it was seen as outside 
of the Establishment," explained Nara at Salomon Bros. "It is still very 
difficult to get Japanese men who are very experienced, in their 30s or 40s or 
50s, to work at American companies or any foreign firm," she added. 
The opening of Japan's financial markets to foreign companies in 1985 "opened a 
big, big road" for women, according to Nara. Many of the women who went to work 
for U.S. banks and financial companies were bilingual and bicultural, having 
been educated abroad while their brothers were forced to stay in Japan to get 
the domestic education that Japanese firms traditionally prefer. 
Hirabayashi at Spazio, for example, lived in Flushing, N.Y., for five years and 
returned to Japan at age 18 when her father was transferred back home. Nara, 
who spent many years abroad because her father was in the Japanese diplomatic 
corps, earned an undergraduate degree in international relations and business 
and economics at Pomona College. 
"With women, foreign banks have found that they have tapped a rich vein that 
has been overlooked in Japan," said Robert L. Sharp, vice president of Asian 
corporate banking at Manufacturers Hanover's office in Los Angeles. "We get an 
awful lot of ladies who are well educated, bright and do great work. About 
two-thirds of our staff are female. That has been very good for us," said 
Sharp, who worked at the bank's Tokyo office for 12 years. 
Other women have created their own niches in the business world. When Teno 
returned to Japan after working for three years at the United Nations in New 
York, she did not fit into any employment category at a Japanese firm. One 
major Japanese company, however, referred her to the Tokyo office of A. T. 
Kearney International, a U.S. consulting company, where she worked for 14 
years, working her way up to become a vice president. She left to form 
Deltapoint International. 
Background Hinders 
Mariko Fujiwara, who lived in the United States for 12 years and earned a 
degree in anthropology from Stanford, returned to Japan in 1981 with an 
academic background that made her hard to place in corporate Japan. She began 
work with the Hakuhodo Institute of Life &amp; Living, a research arm of the 
Hakuhodo advertising agency, where she now oversees projects on a contract 
basis. "With someone with my background, it is not possible to work full time, 
male or female, it wouldn't matter." 
Women have a long -- and hard -- way to go. Japanese women, like foreigners, 
face some formidable challenges in working in Japan's closed and clubby 
business circles where much business is generated by personal relationships and 
transacted after-hours over drinks. 
When Hirabayashi worked as an account executive for McCann Erickson-Hakuhodo, 
the advertising agency, she was one of many assigned to the Asahi beer account. 
She dutifully visited the client every day, had meetings in the evenings at 
least twice a week, chatted and drank beer. 
However, she soon realized that some business relationships were beyond her 
control. "My boss' niece was sent to marry the Asahi's boss' son." She switched 
to a firm that is partly owned by an Italian company. 
Another woman left a Japanese firm to join Citicorp a year ago. At the Japanese 
company she had been one of the few women hired in sogo shoku, the 
predominantly male employment category that is the track to management. 
Although the Japanese company had told her that she was of equal status with 
her male counterparts, she received secondary assignments in support roles to 
the men. 
Working among Japanese men also means matching their long hours, and many women 
headed up the corporate ladder have and continue to make personal trade-offs. 
Many Sacrifices 
"Working in Japan as an executive, male or female, you have to make quite a bit 
of sacrifices," said Yoko Ishida, 37, a vice president at Citicorp Japan's 
investment banking division in Tokyo. "If you want to compete, you have to work 
late. . . . It is difficult for women, especially if they are married. 
Fortunately, my husband is sort of used to it." Ishida, who has no children, 
began her career in the clerical staff, or ippan shoku as it is known in 
Japanese, at Bank of America's Tokyo office 15 years ago. 
"An executive woman must be someone who has the ability to be dedicated to the 
company," observed Hirabayashi, 34, who is single. "Even now I hire someone to 
clean once a week. I can't take care of myself. How can I take care of a 
husband or baby?" 
Meanwhile, these few executive women are developing a certain business style 
that may be unique in its indirectness and perceived as unassertive from a 
Western perspective. Few will directly confront or take issue with their 
Japanese colleagues; it's not the Japanese way, they say. "The American image 
of aggressive is forward, mannish," explained Nara at Salomon Bros. 
Part of this indirectness stems from the Japanese business culture in general. 
Decisions are made by consensus and a substantial amount of information 
gathering is done on an informal basis. "To a large extent professional women 
in Japan are still proving themselves," explained Shirley Lichti, program 
manager of international marketing at IBM Asia/Pacific Group and president of a 
Tokyo group called Foreign Executive Women. "To take a Western approach would 
be career suicide." 
Hirabayashi's consulting work demonstrates some of this indirectness. "If I 
have a meeting, my client wants to do something and I feel what he is saying is 
not correct, I would not say it straight out. I would try to understand why he 
came to that conclusion, is it the character of the company? If I feel it is 
possible to change the situation, I will try. After the meeting, I'll have 
dinner or a drink to find out what he is thinking. Those indirect things are 
the basic ways of how to do business. I always remind myself not to be too 
aggressive or too direct. It is part of the culture." 
Difficult Task 
Skirting two cultures is a daily task for Ishida, who uses a different style 
when dealing with American business associates than she does with Japanese 
businessmen. "I think and act like an American when I'm with American 
colleagues. I switch to the Japanese mode when I'm with Japanese companies. You 
have to do that to gain credibility. In Japan, we're more subtle in expressing 
our ideas. If I become too direct, I could be offending that person. . . . It 
is very different." 
Even when it comes to serving tea, Japanese women on the managerial track might 
do it. "Serving tea doesn't mean so much to me," explained Hirabayashi. "It's a 
question of hierarchy, not gender." 
Kennedy-Takahashi describes the style of Japanese female executives as "quiet 
modesty. If they have been successful, they do not act aggressively. It's a 
quiet managing. . . . A lot of Japanese women did it by being soft -- by being 
softly aggressive -- that means they were thinking ahead, being there at the 
right moment with the information at the right time . . . maneuvering. The 
American concept is to get in there and push your name. Successful Japanese 
women scare me. I get a feeling of the incredible ability to manipulate. A 
woman who harnesses that is deadly." 
Teno exudes this quiet confidence. Her busy schedule has her out to business 
dinners or lunches two or three times a week. "My policy is that I don't eat 
alone," she explained in her Tokyo office decorated with expensive cut class 
and crystal. 
"Doing business in Japan, you have to be in a responsible position. You have to 
be high-ranking and confident, " she explained. 
Yet for all their achievements, which are considerable in slow-changing Japan, 
the new generation of executive women does not like the phrase "executive 
women" because it attracts too much attention. 
Nara at Salomon Bros. explained: "I don't like the term executive women. I feel 
it is unnecessary. It places emphasis on what I've done because I'm a woman. I 
don't think that is necessary. It draws extra attention. It increases the 
difference that is already there." 
Hirabayashi summarized her feelings: "Executive woman sounds like a woman who 
has given up a lot of things to have a career." 
