ARCO TUNE-UP CENTERS SHIFT ATTENTION TO SMOG CHECKS 
Atlantic Richfield Co. plans to change the emphasis of its MP&amp;G Tune-Up 
centers to focus on the smog-check business as tougher state laws have forced 
many service stations and auto repair shops to limit or stop performing 
inspections. 
MP&amp;G franchisees, which provide automotive repairs at about 100 Arco 
stations in Southern California, said the company will change the name of the 
operation later this summer as part a new marketing campaign that will put 
greater emphasis on the smog-check business. Officials at Arco, a Los 
Angeles-based energy company, declined to comment. 
The move comes as many stations have abandoned or curtailed smog inspections, 
citing the high cost of new equipment and a tougher new state exam that has 
dramatically cut the number of technicians qualified to conduct inspections. 
"Arco is trying to cash in on this here," said Mostafa El Ali, a former 
MP&amp;G franchisee. "The only thing that has salvaged MP&amp;G is the 
smog-check business." 
At the end of June, 15,850 technicians -- about 10,000 fewer than last year -- 
were certified statewide to conduct smog inspections, according to the state 
Bureau of Automotive Repair, which oversees the smog inspection program. The 
number of smog inspection stations has also dropped to 7,900 from 8,200. 
"They made it so tough that mechanics who have been in the business 25 years 
could not pass the test," said Al Juntila, manager of A-1 Automotive in Los 
Angeles. "I took the test and failed myself." As a result, Juntila says the 
shop performs only five smog inspections a week, compared to 25 a year ago. 
At Sedgeman Automotive Service in Los Angeles, owner Bob Sedgeman said he 
stopped performing smog inspections after balking at spending up to $20,000 for 
new testing equipment. "It ain't worthwhile to do the test," he said. 
State officials expect the situation to improve as technicians retake the exam. 
Government and industry officials note that the high failure rate highlights 
the shortage of mechanics qualified to repair the new breed of high-tech autos. 
A little more than 50% of those tested since last September have failed the 
portion of the exam that would permit them to perform smog checks on cars made 
after 1979, when the automotive industry began widely using high technology. In 
contrast, 72% of those tested have qualified to inspect less sophisticated cars 
made in 1979 or earlier. 
"You have a lot of mechanics who were in the business a long time, and the 
technology got ahead of them," said bureau spokeswoman Kate McGuire. "They 
wanted to keep it simple. We just wanted to keep up with the technology of the 
auto industry." 
Many in the auto repair industry agree. 
"The handwriting has been on the wall for the past 10 years," said William 
Plummer, who owns two auto repair shops in Pasadena and Walnut and passed the 
state exam. "The automotive trade needs high-tech people and they are not 
getting them. It's hard to get people into the field." 
"It's expensive," Plummer said of the inspection equipment. "It may cost you 
some money, but I still think it's the right thing to do for the environment." 
