HIGH COURT TO RULE ON HALTING TREATMENT; 
FAMILY'S RIGHTS AT HEART OF 'RIGHT-TO-DIE' QUESTION 
For more than six years, 32-year-old Nancy Cruzan has lain unconscious, kept 
alive by round-the-clock care and feedings through a tube surgically implanted 
in her stomach. 
Since Cruzan nearly suffocated in an automobile accident, she has been in a 
"persistent vegetative state," a form of permanent unconsciousness in which she 
is able to breathe on her own. Like thousands of other patients in this 
condition, she has no awareness of herself or her surroundings. 
Her face is red and bloated; her arms and legs are severely contracted; when 
she is awake, her eyes move randomly in all directions. And she may remain this 
way well into the next century, unless the U.S. Supreme Court decides 
otherwise. 
Although there is no hope for recovery, Cruzan has a normal life expectancy. 
Her care at a state rehabilitation hospital here costs about $130,000 a year. 
Cruzan, like most young accident victims, had not left specific instructions 
about whether she would want to be kept alive indefinitely in a coma. 
Her parents, however, armed with strong beliefs about what their daughter would 
want if she could realize her condition, have been fighting a legal battle to 
stop her tube feedings and let her die. 
"Nancy would not want to live like this," her father, Lester (Joe) Cruzan, said 
in a recent interview at the family's home in Carterville, the small 
southwestern Missouri town where Nancy was born and reared. "The last thing 
that we could do for her is to set her free." 
"Twenty years ago, Nancy would have died that night, but medicine stepped in 
and pulled her back," said her older sister, Christy White. "So now what we 
would like to see is medicine step out and let her go." 
When the Supreme Court announced earlier this month that it would review the 
Missouri Supreme Court decision that Cruzan's feedings must be continued, it 
transformed the anguish of one family into one of the nation's most important 
"right-to-die" cases. 
It is the first time the high court, despite four previous requests, has agreed 
to rule on the circumstances in which medical treatment can be halted, a topic 
that is routinely debated and decided in state courts, state legislatures and 
in hospitals nationwide. The case, Cruzan vs. Director of Missouri Department 
of Health, will be argued this fall. A decision is expected early next year. 
'Most Significant Decision' 
If the court makes a broad ruling one way or the other, it likely "will be the 
most significant decision on death and dying and overshadow even the Karen Ann 
Quinlan case," said Alexander M. Capron of the USC Law Center in Los Angeles, 
an expert on medical ethics. 
In that landmark 1976 case, the New Jersey Supreme Court granted a father's 
request to remove his comatose daughter from a respirator. The decision -- 
which the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review -- set the stage for a gradual 
expansion of the rights of individuals to determine the course of their medical 
treatment, particularly at the end of life. 
The Cruzan case raises anew some of the thorniest questions in medical ethics, 
as well as the role of the federal Constitution in shaping medical practice. 
These questions -- some of which may be resolved by the Supreme Court -- 
include: 
* Do patients have a constitutionally protected right to refuse medical 
treatment? If there is such a right, what "right-to-die" issues are still 
subject to state regulation? 
* When does the interest of society in preserving life outweigh the right of 
individuals to make decisions about their medical care? 
* Do families and physicians have the right to make medical decisions for 
permanently unconscious patients whose wishes about medical treatment are not 
known? 
* Can medical treatments be stopped for patients such as Cruzan, who are 
permanently unconscious, even if they are not terminally ill? If treatments are 
stopped, is the patient's death the result of the condition that caused the 
unconsciousness, or a form of euthanasia? 
* Are food and water administered through a stomach tube or a vein a type of 
medical treatment, similar to breathing machines or kidney dialysis, that can 
be stopped and started? Or are food and water more basic care that must always 
be given to patients? 
At the heart of the Cruzan case is the interpretation of individual liberty as 
set forth in the Constitution. According to Laurence H. Tribe of Harvard Law 
School, the case centers on "the right to resist force-feeding in accord with 
one's own previously expressed wishes" and on the right not to "force-feed or 
otherwise artificially sustain the life of an intimate relative." 
Tribe, author of the 1988 treatise, "American Constitutional Law," said the 
case might allow the high court, outside of the bitter abortion controversy, to 
"address the fundamental question of how far the liberty clause of the 14th 
Amendment goes in protecting rights that are not explicitly stated in the 
Constitution." The 14th Amendment says in part that no state shall "deprive any 
person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." According to 
Tribe, the use of the term "liberty" in the 5th and 14th amendments is the 
basis of the widely discussed -- and disputed -- constitutional right of 
privacy. 
Different Issues 
On July 3, the day the Supreme Court announced that it would hear the Cruzan 
case, it also upheld a Missouri law restricting abortions and agreed to hear 
three new abortion cases. While some observers are struck by the parallels 
between abortion and death and dying cases, attorneys on both sides of the 
Cruzan case caution that many of the issues are quite different. 
Abortion cases involve the competing rights of mother and fetus. The Cruzan 
case involves a woman who is permanently unconscious, has no dependents and, 
unlike a fetus, "has no potentiality ahead of her," said William H. Colby, a 
Kansas City attorney representing the Cruzan family. 
The Missouri case began in the early morning hours of Jan. 11, 1983, when 
Cruzan, then 25, was driving home from her job in a cheese-processing factory. 
She lost control of her 1963 Rambler. It crashed and overturned. Cruzan, who 
was not wearing a seat belt, was thrown clear, landing face down in a field. 
The state trooper who arrived first examined the young woman and believed she 
was dead. About 15 minutes after the accident, paramedics arrived. They quickly 
turned Cruzan over and resuscitated her, restoring her respiration and 
heartbeat. 
Irreversible Brain Damage 
Cruzan never regained consciousness after the accident. Her physicians 
concluded that she had suffered irreversible brain damage when her airway was 
obstructed during the time she had been face down. As a result of the lack of 
oxygen, her brain later atrophied and filled with fluid. 
The part of the brain that controls voluntary behavior and consciousness was 
destroyed but the brain stem, which controls breathing and other reflex 
behaviors, was not. This differs from "brain death," when the entire brain 
ceases to function. 
In February, when the extent of permanent brain damage was still uncertain, 
Cruzan's parents and her then-husband authorized her physicians to surgically 
implant a feeding tube into her stomach. Later, the probate court in nearby 
Carthage, Mo., approved a divorce and appointed her parents as her guardians. 
On Oct. 19, 1983, Cruzan was moved here to the Missouri Rehabilitation Center, 
where she remains today. 
No Awareness 
A reporter recently visited the hospital with Thad C. McCanse, a Carthage 
attorney appointed by the probate court to represent Cruzan's interests during 
the case. Her sunny private room was adorned with cards and stuffed animals 
from family members. Lying in bed wearing a bright floral nightgown, she made 
indistinct noises and moved her arms but appeared to have no awareness of 
either her nurse or her visitors. 
Initially, the family had hopes for Cruzan's recovery. They became active in a 
head injury support group. But gradually, in mid-1986, they realized that she 
was not going to get better. 
Slowly, her parents reached a decision to seek the removal of her feeding tube. 
"I read everything I could get my hands on," said Joe Cruzan, a sheet metal 
worker. "We began to focus on what would be her wishes. . . . She would be 
horrified at her existence now." 
Before the accident, Cruzan had several general conversations about death. 
According to court records, in one "somewhat serious conversation" with a 
friend she indicated that if sick or injured she would not want to go on living 
unless she could live at least "halfway normally." But she never had specific 
discussions with her family covering her current situation. As a result, the 
family relied on its sense of her "values." 
Fiercely Independent 
During a two-hour interview, her parents and older sister described Nancy 
Cruzan as a fiercely independent, upbeat young woman who was much loved by 
family and friends. They said she particularly enjoyed animals, children, 
holidays and the outdoors. 
"So much of it stems from who she was before the accident. She was so vibrant, 
so vital, so alive," her sister Christy explained. 
The Cruzans anticipated that a court order would be necessary to discontinue 
the feeding tube. 
According to the Society for the Right to Die, a New York-based advocacy group, 
Missouri and four other states have laws prohibiting the withholding of tube 
feedings. In contrast, 10 states have laws specifically authorizing physicians, 
in consultation with patients and their families, to withdraw food and water in 
certain circumstances. 
In the fall of 1986, the Cruzans set in motion the protracted series of events 
leading to the court case. They contacted the Society for the Right to Die, 
which has assisted many other families in similar circumstances. Through the 
Kansas City chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, they were put in 
touch with Colby, of the firm Shook, Hardy &amp; Bacon, who is representing 
them without charge. 
In the spring of 1987, the hospital denied their formal request to stop the 
feedings. In October, they asked their county probate court to intervene. In 
March, 1988, a three-day trial was held in the county courthouse at Carthage. 
In July, Circuit Judge Charles E. Teel Jr. ruled for the family. He held that 
Missouri's 1985 Life Support Declarations Act -- which prohibits the 
withholding of artificial feedings -- violated Cruzan's federal constitutional 
rights to decline medical treatment, including nutrition and hydration. 
The case was appealed directly to the state Supreme Court. In November, 1988, 
that court, in a 4-3 decision, reversed the trial court and upheld the state 
law. 
The majority opinion expressed "grave doubts as to the applicability of privacy 
rights to decisions to terminate the provision of food and water to an 
incompetent patient." It also discounted the significance of Cruzan's general 
statements about death. 
'Err on Side of Life' 
The Missouri court held that "the burden of continuing the provision of food 
and water" was "emotionally substantial for Nancy's loved ones," but not for 
her. In the face of "the uncertainty of Nancy's wishes and her own right to 
life," it concluded: "We chose to err on the side of life, respecting the 
rights of incompetent persons who may wish to live despite a severely 
diminished quality of life." 
Even before the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the Cruzan case, it had 
captured the attention of "right-to-life" and "right-to-die" advocacy groups 
and leading medical organizations. 
This is because the Missouri Supreme Court decision clashed with nearly all 
similar decisions by courts in other states, including Arizona, California, 
Connecticut, Florida, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Rhode Island. Many of these 
courts had upheld on constitutional grounds the withholding of various forms of 
medical treatment, including food and water, from patients in a persistent 
vegetative state. 
These decisions likened tube and intravenous feedings to other medical 
interventions, not to the routine provision of nursing care or comfort. In a 
widely cited 1986 Florida case, an appellate court allowed the removal of a 
nasal feeding tube from a 75-year-old woman in a persistent vegetative state, 
ruling that her constitutional rights to decline treatment took precedence over 
a state law prohibiting the removal of such feedings. 
California Case 
California law does not specifically mention artificial feedings, although 
local and appellate courts have upheld the withdrawal of such feedings. For 
example, in a 1988 case similar to the Cruzan case, an appellate court 
authorized a relative to order disconnection of the nasal feeding tube that had 
sustained a 45-year-old San Jose man since a 1983 auto accident. Both the state 
Supreme Court and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case. The man, 
William Drabick, died after the tube was removed. 
Against this legal backdrop, "right-to-life" organizations were thrilled by the 
Missouri Supreme Court's decision. According to James Bopp Jr. of Terre Haute, 
Ind., general counsel for the National Right to Life Committee, the decision 
made clear that there is no constitutional right to "starve to death" the 
medically dependent and disabled, including vegetative-state patients. 
But leading medical groups, such as the American Medical Assn., the American 
Academy of Neurology, and the Missouri State Medical Assn., were sharply 
critical. They said the Missouri court had rejected many clearly stated 
principles of medical ethics, such as shared decision-making for incompetent 
patients by physicians and families and the AMA's widely accepted 1986 
statement that "it is not unethical to discontinue all means of life-prolonging 
medical treatment" for patients in irreversible comas, including artificial 
feedings. 
'Family Has No Control' 
Unless the person has left clear written directives, "We have a decision in 
Missouri that once you become unconscious . . . the family has no control over 
your medical treatment," said Colby, who represents Cruzan's family. "Your 
doctor has no control over your medical treatment and, if you read the opinion 
literally, you simply have to accept all medical treatment possible." 
Colby's interpretation "is just wrong," said Robert Presson, the Missouri 
assistant attorney general who has argued the case for the state. Presson said 
the Missouri court had issued a more limited and "flexible" opinion that does 
not "categorically rule out the withdrawal of food and water" from patients. 
But, in Cruzan's circumstance, "they didn't find it justified." 
Already, however, the impact of the state Supreme Court's decision is being 
felt throughout Missouri, according to Gerald Sill, senior vice president of 
the Missouri Hospital Assn. Previously, there were "many instances" in the 
state where food and water were withdrawn from patients similar to Cruzan, Sill 
said. "Now, I feel confident that this has stopped." 
Legal scholars are uncertain how the U.S. Supreme Court is likely to approach 
the case. 
Tribe, of the Harvard Law School, said that a "bare majority" of the court 
might come down on the side of individual liberties and set forth broad 
constitutional limits on the power of state and local officials to override 
medical decisions. But he added that it is "quite plausible and to some degree 
more likely" that the high court will use the case to further restrict 
constitutionally protected privacy rights. 
"They might leave it to the states to remain 50 laboratories of competing 
approaches to this issue," he said. " . . . I certainly sympathize with both 
the individual and the family who say forcing us to keep this person alive is a 
profound intrusion, but it doesn't follow from that that it violates the 
federal Constitution." 
USC's Capron said it is possible to see a compromise decision or one "going 
either way." For example, Capron said the court might affirm a constitutional 
right of Americans to make decisions about their personal health care, 
including the withdrawal of artificial feedings, while at the same time finding 
insufficient evidence to reverse the Missouri Supreme Court decision. 
The Cruzans hope for a clear-cut decision that will let their daughter die. 
Visiting Nancy is "not that emotional, wrenching thing anymore that it used to 
be," Joe Cruzan said. "It isn't my daughter (at the hospital). My daughter's 
been gone for over 6 1/2 years and that is just what is left of her." 
