INTERNAL EXILE 
In February, 1989, Marianne Wiggins became, to use a phrase Moscow once favored 
for those it banished to Siberia, an internal exile -- from literary London to 
pastoral Wales. The American-born author of two warmly reviewed books of 
fiction had just published her most ambitious effort yet, the novel "John 
Dollar." But Wiggins was married to the Indian-born novelist Salman Rushdie, 
whose new novel, "The Satanic Verses," had brought an Iranian death sentence 
down on his head. Already emigres, the two writers became true exiles when they 
went into hiding in Wales, that little country so regularly and so wrongly 
counted among the English-speaking peoples. 
 The pages that follow were written two months later and may be read as a 
meditation by, on and from an exile. Since then, Wiggins and Rushdie have left 
Wales. Wiggins has returned to London where, still married to Rushdie but no 
longer in hiding with him, she is at work on a historical novel about the Bill 
of Rights. 
WE WERE ON the lam in Wales, running through the Black Mountains like unarmed 
smugglers from the righteous with their guns. Everywhere we went, there were 
slate tombstones, upright shadows on the hills. In the towns, there were slate 
houses, plastered-over slate walls with slate roofs. There was darkness, dead 
as coal, behind the windows of the houses. There were ravens in the fields and 
on the roads. English words from a Welsh poet seemed to sit on the horizon like 
an advertisement for the land: "This sad distracted abstract of my woe." 
The mountains wore a beard of snow, even as the pussy willows in the valleys 
bloomed. Pussy-willow trees in Wales are called goat willows, I found out, 
because goats like to eat their leaves. Only the male trees, with their yellow 
catkins, are called pussy willows. Where we'd found a hide-out for a while, 
there was a male goat-willow tree in bloom that I looked onto from my window. I 
cut some of its branches for a jar that I placed in the window in the kitchen 
of the house, but then the catkins, turning golden, made me sneeze. I learned 
about the goat name for the tree from a book called "Trees of Britain" that I'd 
found on the bookshelf in the kitchen next to cookbooks and some novels by 
Alistair MacLean. 
That's how I knew about the catkins, but I didn't know what catkin meant. I 
looked it up in the dictionary that I always travel with. Anyone who knows me 
knows that I can't spell. I have to keep a dictionary within reach even for 
something as simple as writing a letter. There are times when I can't spell 
sincerely. At home, where we used to live, I had a dictionary in each room. Now 
I have a single one and a good thing, too -- the people who are with us now 
depend on it for Scrabble. A catkin, I can tell you, is an inflorescence. I 
depend on books for meaning. I depend on them for definition. A catkin is a 
thing defined as "a reduced flower of either sex." 
Following the definition of catkin in my dictionary, there was the advice: "See 
ament." I didn't feel like seeing ament. Instead, I watched the thaw of snow 
across the tops of the mountains. The Welsh say that when there's snow on the 
mountains, it's an indication there'll be more. I learned that from a book 
about Welsh legends. Eventually I did see ament, and its definition was 
"another word for catkin." Its second definition, ament II, was "Noun. 
Psychiatry. A mentally deficient person." 
Next to the houses built of plastered-over slate along the roads, the houses 
with dark windows, there were hedgerows, yews and daffodils. No kitchen gardens 
grew. A kitchen garden -- chamomile, dill, parsley, carrots, rue -- is an 
English affectation; in Wales, the land around a house is purely land, no 
frippery, no spices. The potato did not root in Wales until a century 
post-Raleigh, and even in the middle of the 18th Century at the Aberystwyth 
market, potatoes were as expensive as the local cheese. Oats were what the 
Welsh ate then, in a porridge they called bwdram. Cawl, a vegetable hot pot 
with potatoes and a bit of bacon or a sheep joint added to it, is the 
traditional dish in Wales. Sheep are the common stock. Walking up a hill one 
morning, I found a sheep skull, embedded in the earth beside a corkscrew holly. 
Sheep were everywhere. We laughed sometimes and called the scenery the Big 
Sheep. 
On days when it wasn't pelting hail or rain or snowing, on days when they 
allowed me to, I walked and walked, straight up sheer hills, out of anger, up 
over turfy, lichen-strewn terrain punctuated now and then by those 
wind-bleached sheep skulls beached like whelks and by foxholes and those 
twisted holly trees surprising the horizon. Above me at scarifying intervals: 
jump jets, a Harrier's harangue, RAF, unmarked, some of them dark green and 
some of them with red-and-white striped bellies. These were the Hunters, I 
learned. And I learned other things: That a sheep can recognize another sheep 
but can't differentiate between a horse and a human. That a swede is a rutabaga 
and is used for cattle fodder. That sheep eat beetroots and molasses. That 
great tracts of Wales are designated by Great Britain solely for the practice 
of war games. Near where we were hiding, there was a Ministry of Defense 
training camp where paratroopers trained. Young men in green track suits with 
"Combat '89" stenciled on their sweat shirts practiced calisthenics in our 
road, and military Land Rovers outnumbered every other sort of vehicle I saw. 
I was afraid I would be recognized. Once a military Land Rover passed me on our 
road and slowed down and stopped and waited, and I took off, changed direction 
and headed back across the meadows. When I told this to the people with whom we 
have to live now, they told me that it wasn't that the person in the Land Rover 
had identified me as the person I am but that he had identified me as a woman. 
The people with whom we have to live now have taught me a few things about an 
all-male camp: For example, they like to look at women. Men do. So I'm told. 
Then once, too, I thought the woman in the health-food store in the market town 
I shopped in had recognized me, owing to the way she stared at me. But the 
people with whom we have to live now told me that she stared at me, most 
likely, because I have an accent. One of the people with whom we have to live 
now asked me, "Say, do you know Neil Schreiber?" No, I said. Who's Neil 
Schreiber? "Chap I know. American. He has an accent just like yours. I thought 
maybe you knew him." But in my village, I was tempted to reply, there are 
two-hundred-million people. 
 Another one of the people with whom we have to live now told me that when his 
wife, who's Thai, came to live in England, she thought the sheep were a foreign 
breed of dog. There were so many sheep where we were hiding that 100,000 were 
stolen last year around the town of Brecon. Brecon is a market town. At the 
Brecon market, there are barren cows, fat bulls, fat ewes, fat hoggets, weaned 
calves, breeding cows, bulling heifers, cull bulls, pedigree beef bulls and 
rams. I learned this by reading local papers. While we were in hiding, I read 
the papers like someone on a river, like the colonel in Garcia Marquez's story 
who reads the papers that come on the boat once a week, out-of-date papers from 
elsewhere, who reads every word of them, chronologically, front to back, 
everything, even the ads. 
The local paper that I looked forward to the most was published every week on 
Thursdays. Thursdays, then, held definite excitement. The paper cost 24 pence. 
No other journal -- not El Pais or Applausos or The Observer -- was more 
eagerly awaited by me than The Brecon-Radnor Express &amp; Powys County Times, 
16 pages every week. It was through that paper that I learned location, began 
to find out about where I was and who the people were that sometimes passed me 
on the road. I was not allowed to hold a conversation with a stranger. When I 
went into a store one day to buy some coal to fire the stove that heated the 
house where we were hiding, the question "Are you staying in the village?" 
prevented me from ever going back. I was the American -- Americans in those 
parts were few. Why was I there? What was my purpose? 
The coal stove in the kitchen was a Bosky. I learned about the different sizes 
of anthracite that one can buy. I learned why many of the sheep are painted 
colors -- blue, magenta, orange, like flash cards on the hills. One color means 
they've lambed; another means the ram has visited. Dafad is the Welsh word 
meaning "sheep," and dyfodol is the Welsh word meaning "future." I know this 
because in Brecon one day I bought a dictionary and a book called "Welsh for 
Learners." 
I wanted to find out how the daffodil became a symbol of the Welsh. I knew 
about the leek because a leek is on pound coins. There are three imprints of 
pound coins in Great Britain: One of them is English, one is Scottish, one is 
Welsh. All bear the Queen's profile on one side, although on the English and 
the Scottish coins, her image is much younger-looking than on the Welsh coin. 
The Scottish pound coin has, verso, a thistle set inside a crown. Around the 
edge of the Scottish version, there's the motto Nemo Me Impune Lacessit: "No 
one touches me without unpleasant consequences." On the verso of the English 
one, there's the coat of arms of England and a lot of French -- Honi Soit Qui 
Mal y Pense and Dieu et Mon Droit -- and around the edge of it, there are the 
Latin words Decus et Tutamen. On the Welsh pound coin, there's a fancy leek, 
looking like a fleur-de-lis, with its stem stuck through a crown just like the 
Scottish thistle. Around its edge are etched the words Pleidiol Wyf I'm Gwlad. 
I needed to find out what Pleidiol Wyf I'm Gwlad meant. Its meaning became a 
sort of test, a sort of project for me. 
My days were filled with projects: One day I cooked a swede, for instance. It 
seemed to take forever. One day, too, I catalogued the differences among the 
sorts of lichen I had found. One day I tried to learn about the game of rugby. 
I made a project out of watching birds for about a minute every other day, or 
when I saw an interesting, bright-colored one. A nuthatch -- or something blue 
and yellow-breasted -- liked to feed on certain catkins in the tree outside my 
window. And I learned the border-country legend that says one magpie brings you 
rotten luck, but when you see two magpies on the wing together, you're going to 
get a treat. So every time you see a single magpie, you're supposed to say, 
"Where's your mistress, Mr. Magpie?" and the magpie is assumed to answer, "By 
my side, but you can't see her." One day we got a letter from a friend in 
Canada whose 8-year-old daughter wrote that she was working on a project about 
blinking. This was a subject that I filed away for future use. 
In the meantime, I learned that plismon is the Welsh word for "policeman." But 
as for Pleidiol Wyf I'm Gwlad, I was having trouble cracking it. Gwlad, I found 
out, means "country." But the rest, the other words . . . the closest I could 
come to pleidiol was pledio, the verb that means "to plead." In hiding, as I 
was, the signs, the symbols, slogans, took on added meaning: I remembered a 
short story by Paul Bowles in which some Buddhists in (back then) Ceylon ask 
some Western gentlemen whom they encounter on a bus about the meaning of the 
stripes and colors of their ties. What did the stripes and colors signify? Why 
did some men wear ties while others did not? 
"Who can believe the story?" "Who can remember?" "What's reasonable these 
days?" These were sample questions from the book called "Welsh for Learners." 
"What's cooking in the oven?" "Who's perfect?" "What's in the soil?" "What's 
better than this?" "Who was collecting stones?" "Who had been crying?" "Which 
ones had failed?" "Who cleaned the edges?" Some sample sentences employing the 
conditional were "We could have purposely deceived them." "I should have taken 
the bitter medicine." "The woman should have suffered it." "They should pay 
half at least." I liked especially the Welsh expression yn eich elfen, which 
means "in your element," elfen meaning "element" but sounding small, manlike 
and mischievous. 
I made a project of learning to translate Welsh place names. I'd grown up in 
Pennsylvania never knowing that Bryn Mawr is Welsh for "big hill." I made a 
project of Welsh sounds. Bwl is easier to say when you know that it's the word 
for "bull," when you know that bwcl is the word for "buckle," bwm for "boom," 
bwlb for "bulb," bwrdd sgor, "scoreboard," bwrdd sbring, "trampoline." 
Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch is the longest place 
name on the map. It means "Saint Mary's Church of the pool of the white hazel 
near the rushing whirlpool of Saint Tysylw's Church, near the red cave." What's 
a red cave? I wrote down in my notebook. What makes it red? I kept trying to 
make sense from nothing. What is the name of that bird? I kept thinking to 
myself, What if these are the limits of life, what if this is the all of what 
is? 
Once a month, The Brecon-Radnor Express had a page called "W. I. News." "W. 
I.," I found out, stood for Women's Institute. Women's Institute was the name 
of a club, a service club, and hundreds of them were scattered throughout 
Wales. Once a month on the "W. I." page, I could read the reports from the 
clubs in the county -- from Three Cocks and Llanwrtyd and Aberhonddu and Bwlch 
and Defynnog and Garth. "A pleasant half-hour was spent looking at local and 
holiday slides taken by members, which proved to be very interesting. Japan is 
densely populated, but Mrs. Scutt saw no litter and found the people polite and 
friendly. Mrs. Ursula Pumphrey proposed a vote of thanks. . . ." From 
Crickhowell: "The competition, a Valentine verse based on bread, was won by 
Mrs. Freda Jones." From Builth Wells: "The competition 'Most Artistically 
Folded Napkin' was won by Mrs. Dilys Jones." From Penderyn: "The competition 
'The Most Unusual Teapot' was won by Mrs. Cooke." From Llangasty: "Refreshments 
were served and there followed a 'social time,' organized by Mrs. Wendy 
Griffith, during which members had some fun demonstrating how ambidextrous they 
were." From Garth: "The competition was for the longest apple peel." From 
Defynnog: "The competition for the most unusual button was. . . ." From 
Glasbury: "The competition for an unusual pebble was. . . ." From Tretower: 
"Competition winners for the best covered coat-hanger were. . . ." 
There was an article one week called "From Sheep to Shells," about a woman in 
the Brecon hills who had decided that her small holding would not provide her 
with a decent living raising sheep, so she had sold them and invested in a 
100-breeder-strong conurbation of land snails, African ones, said to be more 
tender and less rubbery than their North European cousins. It was by reading 
this article that I learned that the African land snail gestates in four months 
as compared to two years for the European species, and that Eastern European 
snails have been contaminated ever since Chernobyl. It was in The Brecon-Radnor 
Express, too, that I read that "a farmer who staggered into a neighbor's house 
half-naked, covered in blue dye, with his hands and testicles bound with rubber 
bands, has been cleared of the charges that he planted a hoax bomb and wasted 
police time. . . . Stephen Gilmore Williams said that he had crossed two fences 
with his hands tied behind his back and his testicles bound in a rubber band, 
but Detective Inspector D. A. Davies of Ammanford had tried to do the same but 
had failed to do so." Talk about your projects. . . . 
"Only Jesus Saves," I saw one day painted on a railroad bridge when we were 
driving somewhere on the run near Merthyr Tydfil, and the plismon in my company 
remarked, "Not on our bloody pensions, Jesus couldn't." "Wales Is Not for 
Sale," I saw painted on some rocks in the Black Mountains. I learned that there 
had been an increase in the incidence of arson, that Welsh Nationalists were 
setting fire to the summer homes owned by the English. And there was murder, 
too. And racial violence. From The Express, I learned about the findings of an 
inquest -- "Jury Returns Verdict That Youth Who Died in River Plunge Was 
Unlawfully Killed" -- into the death of a 20-year-old boy from Trenewydd, 
Llanfaes, who had fallen 20 feet from the Llanfaes Bridge in Brecon into the 
River Usk the previous December. A Home Office pathologist had found that the 
deceased had died of brain damage resulting from a fractured skull. The doctor 
had discovered no evidence of drowning. The report, which I read in my room at 
my place of hiding, said, "Passing Christ College, the two defendants, who were 
quite merry by then, began singing a Max Boyce song about the English not being 
able to raise a rugby team to beat the Welsh. It was fairly rude, they added." 
Who's Max Boyce? I wrote down in my notebook. It was the 47th item on my list 
of things to find out, learn and do. No. 46 was Try to get a copy to reread Hal 
IV, Part I, re: Owen Glendower. No. 45, crossed out, had been Find out the diff 
betw scree and slag. 
"As they were a quarter-way across Llanfaes Bridge, still singing," the article 
continued, "a witness noticed two other youths on the opposite side of the 
bridge who were carrying paper-wrapped portions of fish and chips and eating 
from them. 'Because we thought we might have offended them,' the defendants 
said, 'we shouted, "Are you English?" ' Then all of a sudden, they testified, 
the blond-haired person charged across the bridge and grabbed one of them by 
the collar and was abusive towards him, calling him 'a wanker.' Aware that the 
other person, the deceased, had come across the bridge as well, one of the 
defendants testified, 'Something caught my eye, and I saw him against the 
railings. He flipped over backwards over the bridge. The whole incident 
happened within seconds.' At the outset of his summing up, the coroner told the 
jury what verdicts they could consider appropriate to return. The choices 
facing them, he said, were a) unlawful killing, b) accidental death or death by 
misadventure, and c) an open verdict." "Unlawful killing," the article went on 
to teach me, "means manslaughter or murder." What's an open verdict? I wrote 
down. I looked it up. An open verdict is a finding of death by a coroner's jury 
without stating the cause. Death by unstated causes: Death by death, in other 
words. Marw is the word in Welsh that translates "dead." It sounds like mort 
when spoken. Marwoldeb is the word that means "mortality"; marwol is the word 
for "lethal"; marwor is the word for "cinder, a dead fire." 
One night, watching news from elsewhere on the television, I saw the president 
of a bankrupt desert nation speak into a microphone while an English-accented, 
male voice translated his, the president's, intent to send a black arrow of 
revenge from that distant desert into my husband's heart. 
We were hiding in a legendary place, a place where legends grew from ground, 
Arthurian, Tolkienate. To learn to write was an ancient Celtic fear, an 
accomplishment charged with retribution and with danger. Caesar, encountering 
the Celts, judged their belief to be that knowledge, rite, wisdom, rune -- 
those who could write of those things held power; those who could write of the 
arcane, of rite and of worship, were people who deserved to be, who must be, 
feared. Hiding one's name, never writing it down, never committing one's name 
into symbol, is still a recurring motif in Welsh legends and stories. It's 
still dangerous to put one's name on paper. 
Warplanes fly sideways through the valleys. We wait for one aged psychopath to 
die. We try to study and to learn. Names of things. One legend says that Welsh 
fairies are afraid of iron because the fairies are the lost survivors of a 
tribe of never-aging children whose ancestors fell victim to a race of 
conquerors who conquered them with weapons made of iron. What is the name of 
that bird? What is ink made of? Could I write in blood? What are words made of? 
One time, long ago, I wrote a book about adventures on a desert island. Isn't 
that a laugh? Crusoe used to go around his desert island and, as Orlando did, 
Crusoe used to carve his name in trees. Crusoe and Orlando were both fictions. 
They weren't men. Others made them up and wrote them down. Tomorrow, in a book 
called "The Oxford Companion to the Mind," I will read an essay titled "Chinese 
Evidence on the Evolution of Language" so I can learn about the use of 
pictograms. Tomorrow, I will shout at planes and jets that come at us like 
arrows. Tomorrow, I will burn myself on what I take to be a cinder. Tomorrow, I 
will find the picture with the diagram inside the book that tells me finally, 
simply and beyond a doubt -- the way religion tells some things to some people 
-- This tiny thing of beauty in the tree outside your window is a chaffinch, 
Marianne. 
