CHILDREN'S INN: NEW HELP FOR TINY PATIENTS; 
MEDICINE: A LOW-COST HALFWAY HOUSE FOR MORE THAN 100 CHILDREN AND THEIR 
FAMILIES IS OPENING AT THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH IN BETHESDA, MD. 
Tyler Small looks like any healthy 5-year-old kid. He has blond hair, an impish 
grin and an appetite for hot dogs. His 40-pound body is dressed in a Teenage 
Mutant Ninja Turtle shirt with matching socks and shoes. 
Yet there is something unusual about him too. He adores broccoli topped with 
cheese for breakfast, lunch and dinner. (George Bush, take note.) And, from 
beneath his shirt protrude two thin plastic tubes that are tethered to an 
intravenous drip hung on a stand that accompanies his every move. 
Tyler Small has AIDS. 
Born to an IV-drug-abusing prostitute, his illness was diagnosed 2 1/2 years 
ago. Since March, he and his adoptive mother, Cindy Small of Las Vegas, have 
been making biweekly visits lasting up to seven days to Bethesda, Md., where he 
is undergoing experimental drug treatment at the National Institutes of Health. 
When Tyler is not required to be in the hospital, they stay at a modest motel 
nearby, as do other NIH families. NIH picks up the cost of travel and 
treatment, and allots them $65 per day for lodging. After the bill is paid, 
Cindy Small is left with a total of $9 a day for meals at the hospital 
cafeteria. Meanwhile, her husband Larry, a drugstore assistant manager, remains 
at home to care for their three other children, ages 10 to 13. 
The Smalls' world, and that of other families like them, is about to enlarge. 
On their next trip to Bethesda, Cindy and Tyler will be able to stay at 
Children's Inn, a $4.4-million home away from home for chronically ill children 
and their families that opens today on the NIH campus. For $10 per family per 
night (or for free if the family cannot afford that), the inn offers a private 
room and bath, plus two other important elements: the opportunity to share 
common experiences with other families and space enough for children to play. 
In this sort of halfway house, white coats and stethoscopes must be checked at 
the door. Here families can cook and care for, bathe and discipline their 
children, much as they would do at home. And, whereas one parent usually 
accompanies a sick child to the hospital, the space offered by Children's Inn 
will make it possible for other family members, including brothers and sisters, 
to be there too. At the same time they will have the help of other families in 
learning to deal with illnesses, prognoses, courses of treatment and the 
changes that these make in the family structure. 
"It is a recognition that it is important to treat physical illness in tandem 
with the emotional well-being of the child and the family," said Dr. Philip 
Pizzo, 45, chief of pediatrics and head of infectious diseases at the National 
Cancer Institute. 
Children's Inn is the newest and most elaborate facility of its kind. It is a 
36-bedroom, 1 1/2-story, 32,000-square-foot building on two sylvan acres. 
Substantial efforts were made to disguise its institutional character with 
homey touches. Thus the hotel-like bedrooms and the public rooms are decorated 
with original prints and crafts such as quilts and Shaker pieces. 
"It's gorgeous!" exclaimed Cindy Small as she toured the premises. For her it 
means the end of eating peanut butter and crackers in a hotel room, the end of 
stares by other motel guests. Best of all for the Smalls, it means a chance for 
the family to be there together. 
The concept of low- or no-fee communal housing for patients and families 
originated in 1972 in Buffalo, according to the National Assn. of Hospital 
Hospitality Houses. Kevin House was established by the parents of a 12-year-old 
leukemia victim. When they took their son for treatment, they noticed other 
parents sleeping in automobiles, existing only on sandwiches. After Kevin's 
death, his parents bought a $17,000 house in Buffalo and set up a nonprofit 
corporation to run it. 
Today, there are several hundred nonprofit patient-family residences in 
existence throughout the country. The best known of these are the Ronald 
McDonald Houses, which number 133 in the United States and Canada. 
Children's Inn was designed as a model facility. Advice was sought from other 
hospitality house directors, plus a multitude of professionals, including 
physicians, social workers, computer experts and safety specialists. Parents of 
sick children were also asked what features mattered most to them (The answers 
were: privacy and interaction with others). 
The heart of Children's Inn is the hearth, from which a round stone chimney 
eight feet in diameter rises to a skylighted cupola. 
The dual-level community room surrounding the gas fireplace is also its 
symbolic heart. It is here that sick children, parents, siblings and relatives 
are expected to gather to participate in one of the most important aspects of 
the house: emotional support through sharing of experiences, hopes and fears 
with one another. 
There are no required activities or counseling, no pets, no smoking, no alcohol 
and no private TV. 
Danielle Speller, a 9-year-old sporting a Simpsons T-shirt, grimaced when she 
learned no television sets were installed in the bedrooms; her father, Leroy 
Speller, cheered. "You watch too much TV anyway," he kidded her. The absence of 
bedroom sets is meant to encourage families to interact in the common rooms. 
However, bedrooms are cable-ready, and a number of portable TVs are available 
for patients too ill to get out of bed. 
Danielle, who has Cushing's disease, a metabolic disorder that stunts growth 
and causes obesity, has been traveling regularly from her New Jersey home to 
NIH since February. Physicians are "giving me pills to make me grow," she 
explains. Like other parents, Leroy Speller, who is employed in a General 
Motors parts factory, welcomes Children's Inn as an alternative to the motel 
that he finds too expensive and too far away. 
Too far away is not in the vocabulary of Cherie Harden, 17, of Farnham, 
England. Each month the teen-ager, who suffers from a rare metabolic disease 
called Niemann-Pick, and her mother, Norma Cockroft, must cross the Atlantic 
because there is no treatment available in Britain. Neighbors in their village 
hold charity cricket matches to pay for the flights. 
Cherie is on a cholesterol-free diet, which makes eating at a motel difficult. 
Norma Cockroft looks forward to cooking proper foods for her daughter at 
Children's Inn. Each of the inn's two kitchens contains a pair of stoves, 
microwave ovens, dishwashers, sinks, industrial-size ice machines in adjacent 
pantries and four refrigerators. Two refrigerators in each kitchen are reserved 
for patients' medicines. Only two families can cook at one time in a kitchen 
without crowding. "Mostly they'll be reheating meals in the microwave. We don't 
expect anyone to be doing a Thanksgiving turkey here," executive director 
Andrew Tartler said. 
The homelike atmosphere is enhanced by the absence of tile floors, fluorescent 
lights and hospital beds. But there are some special features. For example, 
there are two playrooms for small children: one is filled with sunlight; the 
other is shaded because chemotherapy makes skin sensitive to light. Play areas 
include seats for adults. The custom-made furniture had rounded edges to 
prevent injuries. Similarly, no glass tops cover tables. The carpet is not only 
soil resistant, but can be safely bleached to prevent infection. The ground 
floor contains large storage areas for bicycles and other playthings as well as 
wheelchairs and medical equipment. 
All bedrooms have private baths. Each of the four sleeping wings has a room 
that is accessible for the disabled and a laundry room. Other rooms include a 
library, a game room, a "quiet" room for meditation, and a computer room for 
children's links to schools programs and for games -- adults can use it too if 
they behave. Outside there are barbecues and basketball hoops plus sidewalks 
perfect for tricycle riding and plots ready for amateur gardeners. 
Each wing is decorated in a different color scheme -- blue-gray, peach, mauve 
and soft green -- with complementary floral draperies. Country pine sofas and 
chairs are covered with tapestry-type fabric or woven patterns in jewel tones. 
Depressing colors like brown, gray and black were avoided; hot pink was a 
no-no. 
"It reminds kids of the pills they have to take," explained interior designer 
Pamela Hughes. The bright primary kindergarten colors were eschewed because 
this is a facility for all ages. For the same reason, the artwork is not 
primarily childlike in nature. 
Watching workers put the finishing touches on the inn, Pizzo exclaimed, "This 
is a fantastic moment." 
The moment was a long time coming. Back in 1981, Pizzo began dreaming out loud 
about a temporary lodging for cancer patients and their families. He was 
getting nowhere fast in his efforts to buy a residence when a chance occurrence 
in 1986 became the catalyst that brought his dream to fruition. 
Carmala Walgren, wife of Rep. Douglas Walgren (D-Pa.), was visiting their 
teen-age baby-sitter, who was in NIH's clinical center after developing cancer. 
Talking with another patient's mother, the congressman's wife discovered that 
the federally funded hospital had cut off free long-distance phone service, the 
cherished lifeline between sick children and their relatives back home. Besides 
the cost, government auditors objected to patients using phones intended for 
federal employees making business calls. Walgren took the matter to then-House 
Speaker Jim Wright twice, and within six months the newly installed 
coin-operated phones were removed, she said. 
Soon Walgren and two other congressional wives, Debbie Dingell, wife of Rep. 
John Dingell (D-Mich.), and Chris Downey, wife of Rep. Thomas Downey (D-N.Y.), 
formed the Friends of Children's Inn and became involved in the quest for an 
NIH patient-family lodging. The breakthrough came in 1987 when Merck &amp; Co., 
the pharmaceutical giant, agreed to fund construction of an inn on land donated 
by NIH. It helped that Merck's president, Pindaros Roy Vagelos, was a former 
NIH research scientist. 
Merck eventually contributed $3.7 million, the largest single gift it has ever 
made. Total corporate and private donations were in excess of $5 million, 
meaning there are sufficient funds to operate the facility for the next 18 
months, Thereafter about $350,000 must be raised annually to meet its operating 
budget. NIH will provide upkeep, utilities and janitorial services. A $500,000 
gift from the Children's Cancer Foundation is earmarked for an endowment. 
The facility is available to patients up to age 25 and their families for both 
short and long-term stays. The average stay is three to five days, but some 
patients remain from two to five months. Children's Inn can accommodate about 
109 people, if family members are tucked into two double beds and pull-out 
sofas in the bedrooms. Its capacity slightly exceeds the immediate housing 
needs of NIH's pediatric patients, but increased numbers of AIDS cases in the 
future are expected to fill any empty spaces. About half the children have 
cancer, the others having a variety of diseases or are undergoing transplants. 
The inn has a full-time administrative staff of four, supplemented by 
volunteers. While emergency assistance is available in acute cases, medical 
care is usually limited to that provided by the family, such as injections or 
bandage changes. Children's Inn is not a hospice. 
"That is not to say there are not acute deaths here," resident manager Kate 
Higgins said. "But our motto is hope." 
This is Children's Inn's commitment to Tyler, Danielle and Cherie and their 
families as well as the many others like them to follow. 
"I think of it not only as a place of comfort for patients of today, but as an 
insurance policy to allow research on these diseases to continue," its founding 
father said. "It creates the reality that NIH is committed to children." 
 For the location of a low- or no-cost patient-family residence in your area, 
contact the National Assn. of Hospital Hospitality Houses at (800) 542-9730. 
