'BOILER ROOM' CON ARTISTS USE CRACKS IN LAW 
Fraudulent telephone marketers, who bilk consumers out of billions of dollars a 
year, often escape prosecution because they tailor their crimes to fall through 
jurisdictional cracks in state and federal law, a top California regulator 
testified Thursday. 
In addition, law enforcement agencies are so understaffed that they usually 
cannot track the extent to which telephone "boiler room" operators comply with 
laws already on the books, said G. W. McDonald, assistant commissioner for 
enforcement of the California Department of Corporations. 
McDonald was among eight state and federal officials who testified on the 
second and final day of telemarketing fraud hearings conducted by the consumer 
affairs subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations. 
The committee is studying ways that Congress can help state and federal 
agencies arrest and prosecute fraudulent boiler room operators, who use 
telephones to market everything from vitamins and office supplies to 
investments in coins and precious metals, and then either fail to deliver the 
goods, or deliver products worth a fraction of what the victim paid. 
McDonald was particularly critical of what he said is the inability of the 
California Attorney General's office, because of inadequate staffing, to keep 
tabs on the more than 300 boiler rooms in the state that are required to 
register under the state's 1986 Telemarketing Registration Act. 
"The California telemarketing statute has not worked because it has not been 
enforced," he said. 
"The sales material, the (telephone sales) script, and everything they 
(telemarketers) file with the A. G. is not what they're actually using. So if 
you don't follow up . . . having all the registration laws in the world doesn't 
do anything," McDonald said. 
Equally troublesome, McDonald testified, are the number of fraudulent 
telemarketing pitches that fall between murky legal definitions that 
distinguish securities from commodities. 
The most serious such scam involves the financing by legitimate banks of 
precious metals purchases made by investors who are brought into the market by 
independent "dealers" operating out of telephone boiler rooms. The dealers 
broker both the purchase of the metals and the bank financing. In that process 
the metal serves as collateral for the bank loan and the dealers gain an 
inflated commission. 
The fraud involves the failure of the boiler room operators to disclose to the 
investor the dealer's huge commissions. Authorities have calculated that in 
many cases the value of the metal would have to rise 30% during the life of the 
contract merely to allow the investor to earn back the money he has paid in 
commissions and fees. 
"The banks deny any responsibility for the massive abuse at the dealer level," 
McDonald said in written testimony presented to the subcommittee. 
Under current law, the Department of Corporations cannot regulate California 
bank-financed precious metals programs because the department has concluded 
that the programs do not involve the sale of securities. 
At the same time, the federal Commodities Futures Trading Commission, which 
regulates transactions in commodities futures, has determined that the bank 
programs amount to "cash and carry," where the purchaser pays for the metal and 
immediately receives it, even though a portion is financed. Therefore, the 
commission has concluded that no futures contract is involved and it has no 
jurisdiction. 
