SWITCH IN POWER PUTS DWP ON A NEW ROAD 
The team of environmentalists appointed by Mayor Tom Bradley to head the city's 
giant Department of Water and Power plans to champion an activist agenda 
ranging from a ban on new coal-fired power plants to tree planting to improving 
air quality. 
The new commissioners, led by Bradley's former chief deputy Michael Gage, say 
they will pull the DWP out of a major fossil fuel-burning power project in 
Utah, now on the drawing boards, and instead invest in solar, wind and 
geothermal energy. 
Handpicked by Bradley to become president of the DWP Board of Commissioners 
later this month, Gage said he envisions that much of the city's future power 
needs will be satisfied through greater conservation and construction of mini, 
cogeneration power facilities owned by private companies. 
"The DWP is the best-run department in the city," said Gage in an interview. 
"But like any organization, it has its blind spots. They'll be getting more in 
touch now. The dialogue has changed." 
Some commissioners and analysts see Gage's agenda as everything from benign 
environmentalist platitudes to a dangerous direction that could jeopardize the 
city's water and power supplies. 
A few City Council members say they support many of the individual goals but 
are concerned that the positions are too strident. "You cannot totally 
eliminate your current reliable energy source (coal) from your future 
planning," said Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky. 
Rick Caruso, the current DWP board president, said he hopes the new appointees 
will soon "have a better appreciation of what the DWP has done" and will change 
little at the nation's largest municipally owned utility. 
He fears that the appointees, facing confirmation this month, have not "shown 
their true colors" and may be harboring an even more sweeping agenda. 
In January, Bradley appointed Gage, a self-styled environmentalist, and Dorothy 
Green, of the environmentalist group Heal the Bay. 
To form a three-vote environmentalist majority on the five-member board, 
Bradley two weeks ago nominated Mary Nichols, senior staff attorney with the 
Natural Resources Defense Council. Her appointment was approved by a City 
Council committee last week and she awaits confirmation by the full council. 
Caruso, an attorney and real estate developer who has been at odds with Gage, 
said some of the new plans, such as abandoning the option of new coal plants, 
are "unrealistic." 
"Those types of decisions can cost us a lot of money," said Caruso. "To say we 
are not going to do it, period, puts the city in jeopardy. I don't think he 
knows what he is talking about." 
City Council members are also growing increasingly skeptical as the new 
environmental agenda unfolds. 
"You should look at this as a well-run department and not come in there and 
think that you're going to change the whole course of it," council President 
John Ferraro cautioned commission nominee Nichols at her recent confirmation 
hearing. 
One financial analyst expressed concern that Bradley wants to turn the 
$3-billion utility into what the mayor called an "environmental trend-setter." 
"It's been well-documented that when politics play a role in utilities, it can 
cause severe problems," said John Costagliola, assistant vice president and 
primary DWP analyst for Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., one of the nation's two 
most influential credit rating agencies. 
Gage insists his plans won't lead to increased water or electric rates in Los 
Angeles -- now among the state's lowest -- or affect supplies. 
In an interview, Gage said that the alternative energy sources he wants pursued 
will cost less in the long and short runs. Gage said alternative sources, such 
as wind, "once were thought to be flaky. Now they are seen as efficient." 
Commissioner Green said that seemingly small conservation measures could save 
DWP money. "Just by using more efficient light bulbs (citywide) we could 
eliminate the need for a new power plant," Green said. She was unable to cite 
figures to back up the assertion. 
Utility analyst Costagliola said many energy innovations have been 
disappointing to disastrous for other utilities. "To be dependent on them is 
not prudent utility practice," he said. 
Gage maintains that -- when future costs of cleaning up pollution from 
coal-fired plants are considered -- wind, solar and geothermal are more 
economical energy sources. 
"Do we have a responsibility to remove some of the (pollutants) we put into the 
air?" Gage said. "The answer is yes." 
Currently, about 50% of the DWP's energy comes from coal-fired plants, 20% from 
oil and gas burning facilities, 10% from nuclear generation, 10% from 
hydroelectric and 10% is purchased from other utilities. 
Less than 1% of the DWP's power comes from the alternative sources being 
championed by Gage. 
"I don't think most of this is 'out there,' " he said. "Most of this has been 
around for a long time." 
Board President Caruso said that some alternative energy sources have been 
explored, but are not feasible on a large scale. Others worked and are already 
incorporated in DWP's programs, he said. 
DWP has spent millions of dollars experimenting with solar and geothermal 
energy over the last 10 years and found both to be troublesome, expensive and 
unreliable, officials said. One geothermal plant, for instance, was an 
efficient provider of power, but the liquids in the hot springs were so 
corrosive that engineers "couldn't keep pipes in the ground," said Dennis B. 
Whitney, assistant engineer of systems development. 
The department has another geothermal project on the boards and has spent $15 
million on its development, Whitney said. 
DWP also spends $4.5 million a year on solar power development, and in the 
mid-1980s, operated an experimental solar-powered house in the San Fernando 
Valley. So far, the technology is not efficient enough for commercial use, 
Whitney said. 
A test of Gage's agenda, which is endorsed by the mayor, may come soon. The DWP 
is seeking 600 megawatts of additional energy by 1995 -- enough to handle 
projected population growth through the year 2000. 
On the water side of the DWP, Gage's agenda generally is less controversial 
than on the power side. 
Gage wants the department to do a better job on water conservation and to pay 
farmers to use more efficient irrigation. 
But his position on the use of Mono Lake water clashes with that of DWP 
management. 
Gage says he wants to "negotiate, rather than litigate" to find a solution to 
the lawsuits brought by environmentalists who allege that DWP is destroying the 
lake's fragile ecosystem. 
Caruso said the department recently was close to settling the dispute, after 
seven years of negotiations, but the agreement was scuttled when commission 
nominees inadvertently gave environmentalists hope of getting a better deal 
with the new board. 
Gage said that "the discussions have gotten substantially more serious" since 
he and Green joined the board. 
