FORMER BOESKY ALLY FOUND GUILTY OF 4 TRADE FRAUD COUNTS 
Former high-flying stock speculator John Mulheren Jr. was found guilty today on 
four counts of securities fraud for helping Ivan Boesky break a long list of 
securities laws in exchange for inside information. 
But the jury remained deadlocked on 26 other charges. U.S. District Judge 
Miriam Cedarbaum accepted the partial verdict from the jury and sent them back 
to continue deliberations on the other charges. 
The maximum sentence is five years in prison and a $250,000 fine on each of the 
counts. 
Mulheren, 40, formerly a chief trader at now-defunct investment firm Jamie 
Securities, had been charged with 30 counts of conspiracy, securities and mail 
fraud and keeping false records. 
Although the government objected to the partial verdict, the judge said she 
would accept it. 
"My experience is that it is wise to take from the jury the verdicts they have 
reached and to allow them to continue on those they have not reached," she 
said. 
After accepting the partial verdict, she told the jury that she did not believe 
that it had spent an inordinate amount of time deliberating the charges. 
The jury began deliberating June 29 after a seven-week trial. 
The charges stem from several schemes in which Mulheren allegedly helped Boesky 
cheat on his income tax, manipulate stock prices and avoid rules dictating how 
much money trading firms must have on hand to cover losses. 
The trial was closely watched because Boesky, who was at the heart of the 
government's long-running probe of insider trading on Wall Street, took the 
stand for the first time as a key prosecution witness. 
Boesky, once one of Wall Street's most powerful speculators, was sentenced to 
prison for three years and paid $100 million in fines and repayment of 
ill-gotten funds. Boesky was released from a Brooklyn halfway house in April. 
Although Boesky and Mulheren had been close friends at one time, their 
relationship soured after Boesky began cooperating with prosecutors. 
Mulheren, a manic depressive who takes lithium to control his condition, 
threatened to kill Boesky in 1988. When police arrested Mulheren in front of 
his New Jersey home, they found several firearms in his car. 
Mulheren's defense attorney attempted to discredit Boesky during 
cross-examination and final arguments. At the close of the trial, Mulheren's 
attorney called Boesky a liar and a "pile of human garbage." 
Mulheren, who always dressed casually at the trial, had taken the stand on his 
own behalf. He usually wore sports shirts, no tie or jacket and frequently no 
socks. 
Among the charges were that Mulheren manipulated the price of Gulf and Western, 
now Paramount Communications Inc., to help Boesky make a greater profit when he 
sold a large stake in the company. 
