ISRAEL CRITICAL OF U.S. REACTION TO ATTACK ON BUS 
Israel's foreign minister complained Sunday to the U.S. ambassador about 
Washington's evident unwillingness to use the word terrorism to describe last 
week's attack on a bus that left 14 Israelis dead. 
Israel's government as a whole expressed concern that its allies in the United 
States as well as friendly governments in Europe displayed a lack of 
"sensitivity" toward the incident, which has left intense bitterness in Israel. 
Foreign Minister Moshe Arens told U.S. Ambassador William Brown that the bus 
crash, which was caused by a Palestinian who seized the steering wheel and 
plunged the vehicle off a busy highway, was reason enough for Washington to end 
its seven-month-old dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization. 
"The foreign minister summoned the ambassador of the United States and told him 
Israel is unable to understand how the State Department could evade defining 
the murder of 14 civilians on the bus to Jerusalem as an act of terror," a 
Foreign Ministry spokesman said. 
"The minister drew the ambassador's attention to the fact that the PLO has long 
violated the conditions set by the United States government when starting the 
dialogue." 
Arens told Brown that the PLO tacitly approved of the bus assault because its 
leaders said that they could "understand" how someone might be provoked to take 
such a step by the ongoing violence between Israel and Palestinians. 
Ambassador Brown last week described the bus incident as "loathsome." Neither 
Britain nor France commented directly. By way of contrast, the Soviet Union 
described the assault as "terrorism" on a Hebrew-language broadcast of Radio 
Moscow, Israeli Foreign Ministry officials said. 
The Reagan Administration began talks with the PLO last December after its 
chairman, Yasser Arafat, professed to abandon terrorism. The Bush 
Administration has deepened the contacts as it has sought a formula to end the 
Israeli-Arab conflict. 
U.S. Embassy officials declined to comment on Arens' meeting with Brown. 
Relations between the two countries have been strained in recent months. The 
Bush Administration has pressed Israel to come up with ways to talk peace with 
Palestinians in revolt against Israeli rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza 
Strip. Over the weekend, Secretary of State James A. Baker III was reported to 
be growing impatient with the unsteady outline of Israel's plan to allow 
elections in the West Bank and Gaza. 
Washington's continued conversations with the PLO irritate Israel. Israeli 
officials contend that the talks undermine its own efforts to find local 
Palestinians willing to accept Israeli conditions for limited self-rule in the 
territories. 
Israel defines almost any attack on its citizens and soldiers as terrorism, a 
usage that has lost favor abroad during the past 19 months of the Arab 
uprising. More than 500 Palestinians have been killed during the unrest, mostly 
at the hands of Israeli troops. At least 35 Israelis have been victims of the 
unrest, including the 14 bus passengers last Thursday. 
Since the bus crash, a volatile mood of despair and anger has overtaken Israel. 
On Sunday, government leaders urged an end to mob attacks on Arabs that have 
taken place during the past three days. 
The Cabinet issued a statement that expressed empathy with the emotions raised 
by the crash and the deaths but called for vigilante violence to stop. "The 
government deplores irresponsible acts by Jews out of bitterness. Such things 
must not occur. They are harmful, not beneficial," the statement said. 
"The people in Israel have been exposed to provocations and challenges for a 
long time, and this exposure is leaving its mark. The leaders and the people 
must maintain their composure and judgment in order to overcome our troubles," 
the message concluded. 
Police Minister Chaim Bar-Lev described Israeli assailants as "inciters, many 
of whom are primitive." 
One Arab has been killed during three days of attacks by Israelis on Arab 
neighborhoods and automobiles. The attacks began after news of the bus crash 
spread throughout the country. Besides the 14 dead, 27 passengers were injured 
in the single worst assault by an Arab on Israeli civilians in more than a 
decade. 
The site of the crash along the busy Tel Aviv-Jerusalem highway has become a 
way-stop for curiosity seekers and sympathizers who pull their cars over to 
stare, lay wreaths or pray. 
In Jerusalem, nationalist demonstrators took to the streets Sunday, chanted 
"Death to the Arabs!" and threw stones at cars bearing blue license plates that 
indicate Arab ownership. Police broke up the protest and arrested 12 people. 
Some of the protests have been spearheaded by the anti-Arab Kach movement 
headed by American-born Rabbi Meir Kahane. 
For the second day in a row, a government representative at a funeral of one of 
the victims was shouted down by mourners. This one, Ehud Olmert, is a member of 
the rightist Likud Party headed by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. Olmert was 
greeted with the heated question, "For an Arab, is it allowed to kill Jews?" 
The municipal council of Shaarei Tikva, an Israeli settlement on the West Bank, 
imposed a ban on Arabs entering the enclave. One of the 14 dead on the bus had 
lived there. "We took this step . . . to express our protest against the number 
of incidents in the recent past, . . . to prevent an outburst of accumulated 
anger of residents against Arabs and . . . to reconsider our security setup," a 
settlement spokesman told Israel government radio. 
Arab Unrest Hits Home 
For the first time, the tension of the Arab uprising has deeply shaken the 
detached life of Tel Aviv and other Israeli cities that considered themselves 
remote from Arab-Israeli violence. Said a visitor to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv: 
"Suddenly, we are waking out of a dream. We too live this problem. The bus 
disaster made us realize that." 
The one-man assault on the bus occurred on one of the most popular routes in 
Israel and on its most crowded highway. The assailant, identified as Abdel Hadi 
Suleiman Ghanem, 25, had no previous police record, thus defying identification 
by security agents at the border crossing from the Gaza Strip where he lives 
and where Palestinians must show new identification cards. 
On Sunday, soldiers demolished Ghanem's house in the Nusseirat refugee camp in 
the Gaza Strip. 
Investigators told Israeli newspapers that the primary motive for the attack on 
the bus appeared to be vengeance for the beating of a brother of Ghanem's by 
soldiers. 
The political repercussions of the bus crash are still being played out. At 
Sunday's Cabinet meeting, Avner Shaki of the National Religious Party called 
for imposition of the death penalty, but no decision was taken. 
Members of the Labor Party are scheduled to meet today to reconsider their 
participation in the coalition government with Likud. Labor has taken a dovish 
stand on the issue of peace talks and was shaken by Likud's recent decision to 
tighten conditions for holding elections in the West Bank and Gaza. 
However, political observers said that the deaths of Israelis last week may 
inhibit Labor from pulling out of the ruling partnership. "They do not want to 
appear to be soft on Arabs at this particular time," said one analyst. 
