SHOTGUN SLAYINGS IN L.A. CHURCH SANCTUARY; 
DEATH FOLLOWS GRIM PROPHECY 
In retrospect, it seems, Patronella Luke's was a death foretold. 
All week, the children of Mt. Olive Church of God in Christ had been studying 
the Bible in a small chapel next to the main sanctuary on a corner in Southeast 
Los Angeles. Friday night, during commencement ceremonies, the pastor, the Rev. 
J. C. Brewster, taught a chilling, although apparently unintentional, lesson 
about prophecy. 
In a voice audible to the entire congregation of about 50 people, he praised 
33-year-old Peter Luke, who was sitting near the front. Then Brewster told 
35-year-old Patronella (Pat) Luke, who was in the last row, to stand by her 
husband and support him. 
From this point, recollections differ. By one account, the minister told the 
couple, "The Lord is going to take one of you." By another, he said, "The Lord 
is going to use one of you." By yet another, "God is going to get one of you." 
Man Bursts In 
The pastor said he did not mean to foreshadow anybody's murder. 
But as the ceremony ended, a man burst in, clad in a black sweat suit, its hood 
pulled tight around the ski mask hiding his face. He brandished a sawed-off 
shotgun. He walked down the aisle, slowly, calmly, deliberately, turned around 
near the pulpit and walked back, stopping at Pat Luke's pew. 
The gunman trained his weapon on the people in the pew. Pat's mother, Vivian 
Worthen, raised her hand. "The blood of Jesus!" she shouted. Then, Worthen 
said, the first pellets missed their mark. Pellets from the second shot, she 
said, grazed her left shoulder and slammed into Pat's temple. Pat was gone. 
When the shooting ended, 76-year-old Mae Lee was dead, too, shot as she ran in 
fright toward the bathroom. Peter Luke was wounded in the leg and slightly in 
the arm. 
Saturday, as Peter Luke was in surgery at California Medical Center in Los 
Angeles, police and parishioners tried to sort out the mystery. There were no 
suspects and no known motive. Who, they wondered, was the man in black and why 
did he pick that time, that place? 
"I wish I knew the reason," Brewster said. "I'd feel better. I could have some 
release." 
Church, after all, was supposed to be a sanctuary. Mt. Olive had always seemed 
to live up to that ideal. Although gangs and drugs were far from unknown in the 
graffiti-sprayed neighborhood surrounding the stucco building with its 
stained-glass windows, local gang members had told the pastor they'd help if he 
ever had any trouble. No gang slogans were ever scrawled across the church 
walls and a year had passed since the police had cleaned out the narcotics 
traffic in the alley in back. 
"Once, as I was coming in, a guy asked me if I wanted to buy some drugs," said 
church secretary Olevia Hart, who is the pastor's sister-in-law. "A gang member 
came up and told him to leave me alone." 
Brewster has not been particularly active in fighting drugs and gangs in the 
community, which has become largely Latino as blacks, including most of the 200 
church members, moved away. "We don't get on a soap box. That's not our 
ministry," Hart said. "We're against everything the Bible is against, but we 
don't single anything out." 
Veteran Police Shocked 
The idea of murders in a church shocked even veteran police officers who had 
seen many strange things over the years. "It's crazy," said Police Officer Andy 
Thedford, who has been on the force for 21 years. "It makes you want to rent an 
apartment on the moon." 
This was not, however, the first time for such violence in the Los Angeles 
area. In 1987, a bullet splintered the stained-glass window of a Baptist church 
in Watts, killing a choir member walking down the aisle after rehearsal. In 
1986, a man described as despondent over the end of his engagement opened fire 
with an automatic pistol inside a La Puente Church of Christ. He killed two 
church members and wounded two others. 
In 1985, a man fatally shot a pastor and a deacon inside a Chinatown Baptist 
church. A former church member, he was shot to death in a gunfight with an 
off-duty Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy who had been attending the service 
with members of his San Fernando Valley congregation. 
These incidents, and now the Mt. Olive shootings, have frightened ministers. 
"We're so vulnerable to violence," said Lloyd Johnson, of Harmony Missionary 
Baptist Church in South-Central Los Angeles. "I'm afraid something like this 
will make some people start coming to church armed . . . with guns. I hope they 
won't, but in a city like this, somebody's going to do it." 
Mt. Olive church members do not believe that gangs had any connection to the 
murders in their chapel. 
"I think it was a maniac. I think he found the people who were moving. The rest 
of the people were all on the floor," Brewster said. "The one lady was running. 
The other was trying to get her mother to the floor . . . and I think the man 
was trying to save his wife." 
Stalking the Lukes? 
Others wonder if the gunman was stalking the Lukes. 
"It seemed like he was almost looking for somebody," Hart said. 
"This guy was a cold-blooded murderer," said another church member. "I'd say he 
was a hit man, not a gang member. He just came in there like he owned the 
place." 
But no one could figure out why the Lukes would be targets. Both had long been 
active in the church. She was a soprano who had traveled around the country and 
to Europe with the Albert McNeil Singers, excited about her invitation to sing 
with the Mormon Tabernacle Choir in the fall. He is a computer technician who 
goes from the couple's home in Southwest Los Angeles to the neighborhood where 
he grew up, near 41st Street and Compton Boulevard, to try to talk addicts into 
giving up drugs. 
Their marriage of seven years seemed strong. Recently, said Lorna Luke, Peter 
Luke's mother, the two were teasing each other, talking about who would die 
first. The husband said he would. "Pat was saying she would. She wanted to go 
first," Lorna Luke said, "because she didn't think she could stand to see him 
go." 
Some congregants told police investigators and reporters about a squabble that 
Pat Luke's cousin was having with her husband. The cousin was also a church 
member; the husband had been in the past. The cousin had obtained a court order 
Friday to keep her husband away, because he had allegedly been threatening her. 
In a telephone interview from his hospital bed, Peter Luke declined to comment 
on the quarrel. He said, however, that the gunman was taller than the cousin's 
husband. 
Approach the Church 
Witnesses said the gunman and another armed man in black approached the church 
about 9 p.m. One man, a church member who was on the porch outside the chapel, 
said the gunman came up the stairs and muttered an obscenity. The church member 
jumped off the porch and ran, but said the gunman fired three shots at him, 
then entered the chapel. 
The second man in black stayed outside, witnesses said. 
In the church, the awards and certificates for completing the Bible course 
already had been handed out. The choir had sung "Jesus Loves Me," the older 
children had performed a skit and the younger children, including the Lukes' 
5-year-old "Peter Two," had answered questions about the doctrine they'd 
learned that week. 
The pastor had just finished his remarks -- including his message to the Lukes. 
He doesn't recall what his exact words were. "In my discourse when I speak, I 
sometimes don't remember what I even said," Brewster said. "When your love goes 
out, you just say it." 
"God puts words in his mouth and he speaks them," said his wife, Julia. 
As the gunman moved into the chapel, the congregants dove for cover. "I thought 
I better get my wallet out and give it to him," one deacon said. Many of the 30 
or so children, ranging in age from 4 to 15, cried and shouted for their 
mothers. 
Underneath the pew where 13-year-old Estela Lopez was hiding, "I just closed my 
eyes and started praying," she said. 
She Ran and Was Killed 
Pat Luke was shot. Mae Lee, mother of six, a regional official of the Church of 
God in Christ who led intense, three-day prayer sessions and often took meals 
to Skid Row, ran and was shot. 
Peter Luke saw the man point the gun at him. He prayed "Lord protect me" and 
was shot. 
"My children! My children!" Worthen screamed. 
Donald Luke was watching an 11 p.m. news show on television when he realized he 
had just seen his brother being wheeled away on a stretcher. "That's Peter!" he 
yelled, shocked. He telephoned his mother to let her know what had happened. 
The next day, Worthen told little "Peter Two" about the results of the 
frightening incident they had both witnessed. "I told him his father was going 
to be operated on and his mother had gone to be with Jesus in heaven and if he 
was a good boy, he would see her," she said. The boy said he understood and 
asked if there was going to be a funeral. 
About noon, the Rev. Tobe Sneed of Mt. Olive came to open the church building 
while a squad car stood guard across the street. Blood stained the floor. Blood 
soaked a maroon choir gown that had been used to cover one of the victims and 
now lay crumpled between two overturned pews. Blood splattered a cardboard fan, 
with a funeral home advertisement, that had been used to cool a congregant 
during the sultry evening before. 
Times staff writers Andrea Ford and George Stein contributed to this article. 
