ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: CYPRESS; 
PRO-RABBIT FORCES HOPPING WITH JOY 
After weeks of arguments, the City Council has decided that the floppy-eared 
rabbits that irritated residents by snacking on their lawns but at the same 
time won the hearts of animal lovers can finally call Nature Park home. 
The City Council this week rejected a recommendation to turn the bunnies over 
to the local Humane Society. Instead, after listening to emotional testimony 
from pro-rabbit forces, the council decided to let the animals run free. 
"I would think that Cypress could afford to take care of these rabbits," said 
resident Jack Swank, who presented a petition to the City Coouncil that he said 
bore the signatures of about 700 residents. 
Added Ted Hill, another rabbit proponent: "We get all tied up with big 
buildings. We forget that there is a lot that Mother Nature can teach us." 
Councilwoman Margaret M. Arnold cast the sole dissenting vote against the 
rabbits. She said the park is not a safe place for the animals, and that the 
city's decision amounts to "leaving them to cats and dogs who will destroy 
them." 
The fate of the rabbits, many of them abandoned Easter presents, has become the 
talk of the town. Last month, in response to complaints from neighbors who live 
near Nature Park, the Public Works Department tried to capture the animals. 
However, the department was thwarted by a disgruntled animal lover who stole 
the city's lone trap. 
Earlier this month, to placate people on both sides of the issue, the council 
decided to fix the fence in Nature Park in an effort to keep the stray rabbits 
away from the lawns of residents. The city also refused to send the rabbits to 
Orange County Animal Control to be destroyed. 
This week, in a review of its earlier decision, the council agreed to let the 
rabbits stay in the park. "The bunny issue is resolved," declared Mayor Cecilia 
L. Age. 
However, this may not be the last word about the rabbits. If the 30 or so 
rabbits -- notorious for their ability to reproduce -- are left in the confined 
area, hundreds may result. 
"If there are too many rabbits (the policy) will have to come back" before the 
council, Councilwoman Gail H. Kerry said. Some baby rabbits have already been 
discovered, city officials added. 
Age suggested advertising the availability of the rabbits around Easter or 
starting adopt-a-rabbit programs at local schools. 
In the meantime, a sign will be posted to advise people of the proper food to 
feed the rabbits and city workers will continue to herd wandering bunnies back 
inside the park. LYNDA NATALI 
