CIGARETTE MAY HAVE SET FIRE ON MT. LAGUNA 
A "carelessly discarded" cigarette may have been the cause of a fire on Mt. 
Laguna that burned to within 200 yards of campgrounds and homes Monday morning 
and has scorched more than 4,000 acres, fire officials said. 
The blaze, which began Sunday morning, has forced scores of campers and 
residents to flee, said California Department of Forestry Capt. Dan Frias. The 
blaze was still out of control Monday night and may take several days to 
control. 
Meanwhile, a convict firefighter was killed and six others were injured in Big 
Sur as they battled one of more than 40 major wildfires that continued to burn 
out of control Monday in the hot, dry West. 
At Mt. Laguna, cabins and a one-time Air Force base have escaped damage from 
the fire, which started about 8:30 a.m. Sunday on U. S. Forest Service land 
just south of the Cuyapaipe Indian reservation, where fire investigators found 
a cigarette they believe started the fire, Frias said. 
Reservation Land Scorched 
About one-third to half of the reservation land, home of the Southern Diegueno 
tribe, was destroyed, said Rosalinda Ewen, a spokeswoman for the U. S. Forest 
Service. No structures on the reservation were burned, Ewen said. 
Five firefighters have suffered minor injuries, said forestry department 
spokeswoman Cele Cundari. 
Firefighting operations were complicated Monday when one of the tanker planes 
being used to drop fire retardant was damaged in a "wheels up" landing at an 
airstrip in Ramona. No one was injured, but the plane blocked the runway, 
stranding two other tanker planes on the ground. 
The fire traveled quickly north through the reservation Sunday night and early 
Monday, Frias said. About 11:15 a.m. Monday, the fire roared west through a 
canyon and threatened the Burnt Rancheria campgrounds and landmark Laguna 
Mountain Lodge and Trading Post. 
"We had a run for our money," Frias said. The fire, he said, "made a good run 
at homes." 
The fire burned through a fire retardant line that crews had set up by hand at 
the top of the canyon, Frias said. 
But firefighters from the forestry department, the Forest Service and several 
rural departments built another fire line that stopped the blaze about 200 
yards from the campgrounds. 
Gary Seda, owner of Laguna Mountain Lodge and Trading Post, could see smoke 
from his business as it rose through the trees across Sunrise Highway. 
'It Was Boiling Up' 
"It was boiling up, and that's when (authorities) told us to leave," Seda said. 
But Seda, who said he was in no danger, decided to stay. "The building, that 
was the only thing I was concerned about," Seda said. 
Most of the lodge's occupants had left Sunday night. 
Down the road, Pat Huntington also decided to stay in her home. 
"This is the homestead -- you just don't bail," Huntington said. Her wooden 
house was built by her great-grandfather in the mid-1800s, Huntington said. 
"We're not dumb. We got everything ready just in case (we had to leave," 
Huntington said. 
The rocky terrain and steep canyons made it difficult for crews to reach 
sections of the blaze, Frias said. The terrain also created fire pockets that 
endangered crews, Frias said. 
"We're just hoping to get through till the evening," said Frias, when cooler 
temperatures made it easier to fight the blaze. "There's still a potential 
danger until we get a secure line," Frias said of the hazard to homes. 
Four air tankers, three helicopters and 1,050 firefighters battled the blaze 
Monday. 
The blaze, dubbed "The Thing" by firefighters because of its location in Thing 
Valley, caused authorities to close four to five campgrounds on Mt. Laguna. 
Sunrise Highway north of Interstate 8 was also closed to non-residents through 
late Monday night, Cundari said. 
Authorities ask that anyone with information about the cause of the fire call 
445-5587 or 588-0364. 
Across the West, more than 11,500 firefighters were on lines in California, 
Oregon, Arizona, Utah, New Mexico, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado and Nebraska, among 
them personnel shipped in from Alaska where they were freed up by rains that 
had quenched several weekend blazes there. 
Ann Finklestein, a spokeswoman at the federal Interagency Fire Center in Boise, 
Ida., said fires burning since the weekend began had charred more than 167,000 
acres by nightfall Monday. At Big Sur, gusting winds, rugged terrain, heavy 
brush and a lack of access roads hampered the more than 700 firefighters 
deployed around an arson blaze in and around Molera State Park about 20 miles 
south of Carmel. Officials said at least 2,600 acres had been blackened by 
nightfall. 
The officials said Antonio Hernandez, 26, who was serving time on a 
narcotics-possession conviction in San Diego County last November, was killed 
Sunday night when a fire-weakened tree fell on him and other members of a state 
Department of Corrections crew from the Galiban Conservation Camp near Soledad. 
The injuries suffered by six others were said to range from minor scrapes to 
broken bones. 
Mike Sanders, a state corrections officer, said that, despite the tragedy, the 
convicts want to continue battling the fire. 
"They're all shook up, but they want to keep fighting," Sanders said. "All this 
time, they've been losers -- druggers, dopers. But when they see a wall of fire 
and cut the line that stops it, they know they are doing something positive." 
In Northern California, almost 1,150 fire personnel continued to work the lines 
around a blaze that had charred more than 4,600 acres of timberland in the 
Sierra west of Honey Lake in Lassen County. 
In nearby Plumas County, gusting winds continued to harass about 600 
firefighters working in heavily forested terrain south of Prattville. There 
were no reports of injury or damaged structures, but more than 4,000 acres had 
burned since the fire broke out Saturday. 
The West's most devastating blaze, in property damage, was the 1,760-acre 
Sugarloaf Mountain fire west of Denver, where 42 homes and seven other 
structures burned Sunday afternoon as flames raced through Boulder Canyon. 
In Nebraska, a fire continued to spread after charring more than 60,000 acres 
and destroying an undetermined number of ranch and farm buildings near the town 
of Crawford. 
In Utah, fire crews reported they were close to containing a 15,500-acre fire 
in remote brushland about 20 miles west of the Colorado state line and three 
other blazes that had blackened a total of about 10,000 acres. 
Contributing to this article were Valarie Basheda in Big Sur and Eric Malnic in 
Los Angeles. 
