DISLIKE ABORTION RULING? WE VOTED FOR IT 
Sorry to say, the Supreme Court's whittling of abortion rights is the ultimate 
pro-choice decision. 
Pro-choice -- as in our choice. We made our choice in 1980, again in 1984, and 
for good measure we reaffirmed it in 1988. We made it despite the fact that we 
knew we would someday regret it. 
We made our choice when we elected and reelected Ronald Reagan, despite his 
repeated warnings to us that he intended to pack the Supreme Court (in fact, 
all our courts) with judges who would abort the precedent-setting decisions 
that affirmed a woman's right to have a safe abortion. 
It's perverse but true: We pick our presidents these days even though we may 
disagree with them on fundamental issues. We chose Reagan, for example, even 
though we disagreed with him on most issues -- the deficit, defense spending, 
the environment and, especially, abortion. 
Polls show that we have for years believed women have both the right to have an 
abortion and the right to make for themselves this very personal decision that 
affects their bodies. A recent Gallup Poll showed that 58% of Americans did not 
want the court to roll back its 1973 Roe vs. Wade decision, which (as the 
pollster phrased it for those interviewed) "ruled that states cannot place 
restrictions on a woman's right to an abortion during the first three months of 
pregnancy." Just 37% wanted the ruling overturned and 5% were undecided. 
Also, in another Gallup survey last October, a whopping 66% of us opposed the 
Reagan Administration's decision to withhold government funds from clinics 
providing abortion counseling. Only 26% of us backed the Reagan decision. 
Yet here we are, stuck with a carefully stacked court that has given us just 
what we don't want. The Rehnquist Court has dropped upon us a neutron bomb 
ruling on abortion. They left standing the shell of Roe vs. Wade but wiped out 
the vitals that were inside. 
Abortions are not illegal -- yet. But by upholding a Missouri law that bars 
public employees and public funds from being used in abortions unless the life 
of the mother is endangered, and inviting each state to set its own laws, the 
Supreme Court has struck hardest at those who can least afford it. 
This will be the result: America will become a land of safe abortions for the 
rich and the well-to-do. Poor women will be left to their own devices -- and 
those of quacks. Safe abortions will still be available for women who can 
afford to pay private physicians and hospitals or who can afford to shop from 
state to state until they find one that will permit a safe public abortion. 
As our TV weathermen say, there is no relief in sight; in fact, it just figures 
to get worse. Three of the four dissenting justices in the latest abortion 
decision are the court's only octogenarians. Justice William J. Brennan Jr., an 
Eisenhower appointee who turned out to be a court moderate, is 83; Justice 
Thurgood Marshall, a Johnson appointee who is the court's only liberal vote, is 
81; Justice Harry A. Blackmun, a Nixon appointee who proved to be a court 
moderate and the author of the original Roe vs. Wade ruling, is 80. 
Actuarial tables tell us it's possible President Bush could wind up naming 
replacements for all three. Also, Justice Byron R. White, a Kennedy appointee 
who has turned out to be one of the court's most conservative justices, is 72 
and has talked of retirement. If Bush winds up picking successors to Marshall 
and White, it will mean that we will have a Supreme Court comprised of justices 
chosen entirely by Republican presidents. 
The true legacy of the Reagan years is that he bequeathed to us a Supreme Court 
that will rule our lives and those of our children and grandchildren in ways 
that are not to our liking. For this, we have only ourselves to blame -- that 
is, ourselves and Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis, who never could focus 
public perceptions on the danger we faced from an all-conservative court. 
Just this past week, the news reminded us of all there was to know about the 
Reagan presidency and why we wind up with government policies we oppose. There 
was the sentencing of Ollie North and the scandals of HUD -- reminders of all 
our President never cared to know. There was the Supreme Court's abortion 
ruling -- a reminder of all we never cared to know about what his decisions 
could do to us. 
But then there was that news report about Reagan himself -- a reminder of why 
he'd captured our spirit and our votes in the first place. Ever-heroic, he was 
riding the range at age 78, when the horse bucked and landed him first on the 
ground and briefly in a hospital. "My own private rodeo," Reagan reportedly 
quipped. 
What a guy. That's what we like in our Presidents. 
