THE HEAT IS ON; 
TROUBLES ABOUND FOR LOS ANGELES' PRO SOCCER TEAM 
Bobby Bruch, the 23-year-old in charge of community affairs for the Los Angeles 
Heat, was undaunted when only 19 youngsters showed up recently for a youth 
soccer camp in Torrance. The turnout was disappointing, but those connected 
with the Heat are used to disappointment. 
Still, Bruch was optimistic. 
"We've got to start slow and build," said Bruch, who is also a forward for the 
struggling professional soccer franchise. "I get the feeling being in the 
community that the attitude about the team is getting better." 
On the field, the Heat is 7-6, considered mediocre for a franchise generally 
accepted as the most talented in the American Professional Soccer League West. 
Off the field, there are deeper, more pressing problems. The Los Angeles Heat 
has no live radio, television or cable exposure, plays its games on a high 
school field, suffers from poor attendance and is awash in red ink. 
Bruch, General Manager Jill Fracisco, 26, and part-owner John Ajemian, 31, are 
part of a youthful management team that hopes to rekindle the franchise, which 
was founded in 1986 by three South Bay businessmen. 
"This is a test year," Fracisco said. "Everything we do we have to look at and 
see how we can make it better." 
They also acknowledge that the Heat faces extinction if it is not turned around 
soon. 
PROBLEMS, PROBLEMS 
The Heat, which plays host to the Salt Lake Sting tonight at 7:30 at West 
Torrance High, has not turned a profit in five years. It lost $150,000 last 
year and is expected to lose even more this season because it signed several 
high-priced players in the last few weeks. 
The club lacks some of the basic supplies needed to run day-to-day business. 
Money is needed to upgrade personal computers and printers and to pay for 
receptionists and secretarial services. Sometimes ball girls answer telephones 
in the front office. 
The Heat cannot afford to pay players full-time salaries, as some of the 10 
other APSL clubs do. Many Heat players hold regular jobs or work part time in 
the youth camps. Los Angeles practices only twice a week, at night. Coach Bobby 
Sibbald sells hair products for a living. 
League officials want the Heat to play at Murdock Stadium at El Camino College 
in Torrance, where it played its first year. The West High field is too small, 
Sibbald concedes, but it is more affordable. 
Gate receipts have been dismal, although Fracisco said some cutting in other 
areas will probably help the club stay within its $400,000 operating budget, 
lean by professional standards. A series of 11 youth camps is expected to raise 
$20,000, but only if each attracts 50 kids. Still, Fracisco said she "refuses 
to skimp" on amenities for players. 
Trade-outs have offset other costs, yet some of them give the impression that 
the Heat is a team for hire. For instance, the players don't wear their names 
on the back of home jerseys. Instead, the shirts bear the logo of a shoe 
manufacturer that supplied them free, along with shoes, as a promotion. 
Explained another co-owner, Roland Martin: "My theory is to keep the costs low 
but pay the players more than the (semiprofessional) Greater L.A. Soccer 
League. If we keep it highly competitive on the field, then as the (attendance) 
numbers go up, we can grow slowly." 
The largest crowd to watch a Heat game this year was 1,100 on July 1, drawn by 
the promise of a fireworks display that was canceled at the last minute because 
Fracisco couldn't get Torrance school officials to approve the show. 
Other teams in the APSL have better followings. The Sting, which receives 
regular clips on three network TV stations, drew nearly 10,000 fans to its 
opener in Salt Lake City in April. The last-place California Emperors have 
capitalized on the large Latino population in the Inland Empire, broadcasting 
games on a Spanish-language radio station. California drew 4,500 people to the 
University of Redlands for its home opener with the Heat. 
Soccer ranks third in the United States in number of participants, but in the 
South Bay, the birthplace of the American Youth Soccer Organization, the Heat 
has found it difficult to attract fans. In a recent promotion, 800 mail-in 
coupons for free tickets were distributed near the pier at Redondo Beach. Only 
three were returned. 
Said club President John Ajemian: "There are days when we just sit in the 
office, laugh and ask, 'Why do we put ourselves through this?' " 
THE IMAGE 
"What is the Heat?" 
It's the most-asked question a beat writer has received this summer, next to 
"Who cares about soccer?" 
The Heat is working hard to improve its image, but there are several major 
obstacles. 
Location. The league insists that the team call itself the "Los Angeles Heat." 
In reality, the club plays in Torrance, practices in Manhattan Beach, has its 
headquarters in Redondo Beach and would like to play some of its games in 
Orange County, which has a larger youth market. In fact, some of the owners 
have said they would like to move the team to South Orange County as early as 
next season, if attendance and revenues in the South Bay don't improve. League 
officials are split on such a move. 
Exposure. There are nearly 90 radio stations in the Los Angeles market. None 
wanted to broadcast Heat games live. The Heat was upstaged when cable rights 
were negotiated last spring. It is a 15-minute drive to the offices of Prime 
Ticket from West Torrance High, but it is the Emperors in Redlands who can be 
seen on Prime Ticket. Fracisco said the Heat is considering showing its final 
four home games on tape delay on a Torrance cable company if it is not too 
costly. 
The Heat has advertised in advance of some of its games in local newspapers, 
including The Times, but the team's advertising budget is only $30,000. A 
one-time, quarter-page advertisement in the Times that would run only in the 
Westside, the South Bay and Long Beach costs about $4,000 without contract 
discounts. The Heat plays a 10-game schedule, which would require $40,000 for 
advertising in just one publication. 
Newspapers, at first cool to the Heat, have stepped up coverage during the 
summer. Both The Times' zoned edition and the South Bay Daily Breeze have sent 
reporters to cover some games live. The Spanish-language newspaper La Opinion, 
which has a tremendous soccer following, has also done some stories on the 
team, but with mixed results. After the Heat dropped its home opener, 1-0, to 
the Colorado Foxes, La Opinion charged that the Heat couldn't defeat a 
handicapped team from El Salvador. 
Stadium. Playing on a high school football field instead of in a stadium also 
tarnishes the team's professional image. Said APSL secretary Arthur Dixon: 
"Over the years, the L.A. Heat seemed that they had very steady increases in 
their attendance. But when they got away (from El Camino), they seemed to lose 
all their fan support." 
The cost of playing at El Camino is prohibitive, Heat officials say. 
"I can run an entire season at West High for the cost of one game at El 
Camino," Fracisco said. The team's season opener at 12,000-seat Murdock Stadium 
on April 13 drew 500 fans and cost more than $12,000, she said. 
Said co-owner Martin: "In smaller cities like Albuquerque, for example, they 
have nothing going on. They can draw six or seven thousand people to a game. 
But here in L.A., it is the most competitive market in the world." 
Fracisco agreed: "I love the atmosphere at El Camino, but, realistically, 
playing there is down the tubes. I'd rather play at West High (because it is 
inexpensive) rather than let this team (fail)." 
Club owners have considered building their own stadium or leasing an existing 
one. Three sites have been mentioned: the old Aviation High School football 
field in Redondo Beach, a former warehouse site at Wilson Park in central 
Torrance and a sinkhole behind a fast-food restaurant next to Bishop Montgomery 
High School in west Torrance. But no formal proposals have been made to 
officials in either city. 
Martin said settling the stadium issue is crucial to building attendance. 
"Let's face it," he said. "Nobody will build a stadium for the Heat. (The 
owners) keep (the idea of building a stadium) around, but we just don't know 
what to do about it." 
Audience. The American perception, according to a recent edition of the 
television news program Nightline, is that soccer games are boring. ESPN Senior 
Vice President Loren Matthews told the Times recently that "the sport suffers 
from the image of a very patient, low-scoring game where you go into a 
defensive shell with a 1-0 lead." 
Americans want scoring, Matthews said -- lots of it. Heat management has tried, 
with little success, to give its fans what they want. 
"We want to try to score more goals," said Martin, who came up through AYSO 
ranks in Torrance. "That's entertainment, scoring. That's what we have to do to 
draw a crowd." 
Despite those attempts, which included signing several high-profile players, 
the Heat averages two goals a game and allows 1.7. 
Said Ajemian, an Armenian who played soccer as a boy in Syria: "To Americans, 
the bigger the numbers, the better. . . . To attract a following, we need to 
come up with a gimmick (like more scoring)." 
The league bases its standings on a combination of wins and numbers of goals 
scored. Ajemian would like the APSL to add a bonus system that pays players to 
score. 
Identity. To try to get more goals, the management signed seven new players 
after the season began, meaning that Sibbald has played the same lineup only 
twice. Fans have trouble identifying with the team's stars because whenever a 
new player has started, another player has been benched or released. 
"If we are trying to get the money out of this community, then we better make 
heroes out of some of the local boys," said another co-owner, Dave Graefe of 
Torrance. "The problem is, the faces keep changing out on the field, but the 
(uniform) numbers stay the same." 
THE OWNERS 
No one is sure how many owners the Heat has, or has had over the past year. The 
best guess, Ajemian says, is six or eight. Some "owners" are people who have, 
at some time or another in the club's history, paid some of its expenses. Some 
like to remain anonymous. Others, like Ajemian, who can be seen in the press 
box during games counting tickets, take an active interest. 
"I'm in this because I love soccer," said Ajemian, who works in a family-run 
business that includes a string of gasoline stations and real estate interests. 
"I'm not in it to make money. Anybody involved in soccer in this town has to 
expect that he won't make a lot of money." 
The team is attempting to draw up legal documents that would divide ownership 
into percentages based on the amount of money each owner will pay each year. 
The process has been slowed, Fracisco said, because the lawyer working out the 
deal has spent the past six weeks at the World Cup in Italy. It could be 
completed in the next two weeks, with Ajemian and record-company president 
Lionel Conway getting 25% each. 
The L.A. Heat Inc. was founded in 1986 by three South Bay men: Bill Buxton, 
Graefe and Eugene Schiappa, an Italian immigrant who owns the Pacific Coast 
Highway building in Redondo Beach where the Heat is headquartered. Each man put 
in $40,000, and the team joined the Western Soccer Alliance, the forerunner of 
the APSL West. 
Ajemian bought into the Heat when he sold the California Kickers (now the 
Emperors). Ajemian purchased the Kickers, who played in the San Fernando 
Valley, in 1987 for $10,000. He doubled his stake and sank an estimated $40,000 
into the Heat. The infusion attracted new partners, including Conway, who owns 
a semipro team that some Heat players play for in the off-season. 
Ajemian, considered the most active of the owners, says all the owners agree on 
a go-slow approach in spending, although he has boosted the team's budget by an 
estimated $250,000 this season. He would like to see the team break even in 
three years. Sponsoring youth summer camps will eventually pay off in increased 
attendance, he said, and that will boost revenues. He would also like to play 
several exhibition games in South Orange County, where he said the team can 
draw 2,500 people per game. 
A few agree with Ajemian that a move to Orange County would be beneficial, but 
they differ on the location. Santa Ana, where a burgeoning Latino community has 
greater soccer awareness, is a possibility. 
However, Schiappa would like to see the team stay put. "We will do whatever we 
need to get this team going," he said. "It's the best thing for the league." 
Graefe has been frustrated with some of the changes since the new owners moved 
in. 
"This year we are spending more money, we have more people on the payroll and 
I'm not sure we are doing any better," he said. 
THE FRONT OFFICE 
A recent graduate of USC, 23-year-old Dawn Smith discovered quickly that her 
first full-time job, as Heat public relations director, requires her to wear a 
lot of hats. Hired last February, she answer phones, finds halftime shows, sets 
up promotions, takes reservations for youth camps, runs a shuttle service for 
visiting bigwigs and purchases advertising space, to name a few of her duties. 
A Bay Area native, Fracisco, 26, is the only female executive in the APSL. She 
was hired as an assistant to then-General Manager Mike Hogue. As a student at 
San Jose State, Fracisco had worked in promotions for the Oakland A's, the 
Golden State Warriors and the Invaders of the defunct U.S. Football League. 
Fracisco considers her forte to be preparing for and running game operations. 
She has been an assistant promoter for more than 30 international matches. 
Widely respected, she has recieved two offers to work for soccer clubs abroad. 
Her dark hair and features have made her a favorite among the Spanish-language 
press, where she is known simply as "Geel." 
When Smith had the flu last month, she missed the team's road trip to Portland, 
and a report of the game missed some of the morning newspapers. Because of 
budgetary considerations, she did not travel to San Jose last week, and the job 
of phoning newspapers with the results fell to Fracisco. 
Explained Ajemian: "We know that (in the front office) we do not have enough 
people, but for this year it will have to do. Next year we hope to add one or 
two more people." 
The front-office staff seems to get along well with the players. 
"I'll tell you, in the years that I have been around, this is the best I've 
seen the Heat run," said reserve goalie Marine Cano, who is also the soccer 
coach at Cal State Dominguez Hills. 
For four previous years, Hogue was the Heat. He wrote press releases, purchased 
advertisements, answered phones in the office and was the game announcer. A 
promoter with some experience in putting together international soccer matches, 
Hogue was a one-man band who turned out to be quite good at managing what 
Graefe termed the "shoestring budget." 
Hogue, however, was an entrepreneur, a love-him-or-hate-him type of guy. Last 
fall he resigned rather than surrender his authority. 
Said Hogue: "There were going to be changes in management, and I was absolutely 
against the changes to be made, so it was easy for me to leave." 
Graefe was sorry to see Hogue leave, but he understood the need to enlarge the 
front office. 
"Mike is the kind of guy who wants to run his own show, and sometimes there 
were conflicts. Mike did something that no one else had the guts to do: that 
is, put a team on the field and run it. . . . I told Mike that you can't do 
everything, that you need people to help you. . . . He had to do some things he 
probably shouldn't have been doing." 
Fracisco has been slow to make inroads in solving some of the Heat's basic 
problems, like building attendance and getting a radio or cable TV contract. 
Part of that, suggested one owner who asked not to be named, may be due to her 
unfamiliarity with the Southern California market. 
Said Fracisco: "Obviously, I'm still learning. I'm pretty young." 
She says she expects attendance to gradually improve by targeting people in 
their early 20s and late teens and tapping into corporations with ticket deals 
in exchange for advertising. She also wants to expand the team's target area 
for spectators, perhaps north into the Westside and east into West Long Beach, 
where the burgeoning ethnic population has swelled soccer's popularity in 
recreational leagues. 
Fracisco has a delicate job of balancing the wants of all the active owners, 
estimated to be at least five. As the team struggles on the field and at the 
gate, several have become restless. 
Fracisco, however, is not one to speak out unless challenged. 
Said one player: "The way we have been playing lately, we need a good chewing 
out, but I don't see (Fracisco) doing that. I think that will be left up to one 
of the owners." 
Fracisco, who instituted a series of fines for violations of team rules, 
received a lukewarm reception from the players at first. But as time went on, 
she seems to have earned respect through her attempts to boost the team's 
image. One of her ideas was to have the team dress alike in slacks, shoes and 
shirts when it travels. 
"I want the team to look good, to impress," she said. 
THE COACH 
Bobby Sibbald's No. 2 jersey from his days with the defunct L.A. Aztecs of the 
North American Soccer League is framed and hung on a wall of the cramped Heat 
office. 
Born in England, Sibbald came to the United States in 1975 to play with the 
Aztecs and rapidly became a crowd pleaser. Schooled in the English style of 
long ball, he was an aggressive attacker who also had a keen sense of the game. 
Eventually, he was named the Aztec player-coach. 
The NASL folded in 1984, and Sibbald stayed active in soccer as a coach at 
Redondo High and for a top club team, Torrance United. 
Sibbald would like to see the APSL go to a split season, playing the first half 
in the spring and the second in the fall. He said that would make it easier to 
draw crowds from youth organizations, which play a September-to-December 
schedule. 
His biggest complaint about American soccer players is their "lack of 
professionalism -- that is, their ability to know how to win a game and how not 
to lose a game." 
Sibbald would also like to see the APSL experiment with a system to liberalize 
scoring opportunities -- perhaps by adjusting the off-side call, which kills 
many breakaway attempts. 
"Realistically, FIFA (the international governing body of soccer) should look 
at that, too," he said. 
Sibbald is well respected by the players. Said forward Dale Ervine: "Bobby is 
somebody who has played the game and still stayed involved with it in a 
positive way. He has played it at its highest level. People like to learn from 
someone who has been at the highest level." 
Sibbald agrees that the Heat has the best talent in the league. He blames the 
league's scoring system, which bases standings largely on the number of goals 
scored, for holding the team back. 
"I keep telling my guys that we have to win," he said. "Well, we won three 
straight, and I see we are dropping in the standings because we have not scored 
enough goals." 
THE PLAYERS 
It's difficult to put a finger on exactly what the Heat is missing on the 
field, yet team members appear to play as individuals without a team concept. 
That fact hasn't gone unnoticed by other players in the league. 
Said California Emperor goalie Chris Wilson of Torrance, who shut out the Heat 
twice in regulation play, only to lose both times in overtime: "I could just 
tell, by the things that they were saying to each other on the field . . . that 
they don't know their roles, are not willing to give (their all) and don't care 
to give." 
Said a Heat player who asked not to be identified: "We've just got a bunch of 
guys who are out there to collect their paychecks. They don't know how to play 
like a team." 
Ervine wouldn't go that far: "We have the kind of players that can shine as 
individuals, but maybe we are trying to shine as individuals all the time, 
instead of playing like a team." 
Entering tonight's game, the Heat was in third place in the APSL West Southern 
Division. 
"I've never seen anything like this," said Sibbald. "I'm going gray. I don't 
know what it is. We've got the players. I thought we'd be blowing people away." 
Injuries, over-spirited play and big egos have played major roles. 
In the first 10 games, Sibbald had to use a different starting lineup each 
time. In addition, he said, "red cards are killing us." 
One red card (ejection) or a combination of yellow cards (cautions) in 
consecutive games means that a player is required to sit out the next game. On 
July 1 against first-place Real Santa Barbara, for example, two starters missed 
the game. The Heat won on penalty kicks, but only after a lethargic performance 
that necessitated two goals in the final two minutes to send the game into 
overtime. 
Another reason the Heat is making Sibbald gray may be that most of the players 
have been signed to contracts that last only through the end of the season. For 
example, Mike Getchell, Dale Ervine and Jim Gabarra are expected to return to 
indoor soccer in the fall. The indoor game offers much more lucrative 
contracts. 
Publicly, management wants to promote its players. Privately, it complains that 
many players have not learned the responsibilities that come with being 
professional athletes. Explained Fracisco: "We are not very flashy, but we need 
to be stylish. We need to build heroes, no matter who they are. But for some of 
them it is very hard to deal with the media. They're not used to talking." 
Soccer is a spirited game, but from the bleachers, some of the finger-pointing 
and shouting among Heat players has left the indelible impression of a team in 
turmoil. 
In one confrontation, reserve Steve Sharp got in a shoving match with Sibbald 
on the field in front of the Heat bench during a game. Sharp was later released 
and is now with the San Diego Nomads. 
THE LEAGUE 
In the magazine Soccer International, Chairman Clive Toye of the APSL's eastern 
division described the APSL as "professional with a lower-case p." 
That the APSL would even exist as little as a year ago points out that the 
coming World Cup is already having an impact in the United States. As part of 
its contract with FIFA to receive the cup, the U.S. Soccer Federation agreed to 
create a professional soccer league in this country before 1993. But the USSF 
has been slow to act, mostly because it is awaiting the outcome of elections 
next month. 
Seizing the opportunity to get a head start on the USSF, the American Soccer 
League and the Western Soccer League merged to form the APSL last February. The 
two semiprofessional leagues, with a total of 22 teams, agreed to upgrade 
salaries and play for a national championship in Boston on Sept. 22. 
Differences need to be worked out before the merger is complete. The American 
Soccer League had little or no restriction on the number of foreign players per 
team. The Western Soccer League (now the APSL West) allows only two. Because of 
travel costs, teams will play only within their own divisions this year. Toye 
told Soccer International that he doesn't expect interdivisional play next 
year, either. 
The league's wacky scoring system -- which gives teams extra points for the 
number of goals they score -- has come under scrutiny. Trying to encourage more 
offense, the league may have only confused the public. Through the first week 
of July, for example, Arizona (5-8) was atop the Southern Division standings, 
followed by Real Santa Barbara (7-4) and the Heat (7-5). The reason: Arizona 
had scored more goals than either the Heat or Santa Barbara. 
Still, Sage and Dixon say, league attendance is up through the first half of 
the season. They say they have taken the lead in providing what FIFA demanded 
and the USSF has not delivered -- a professional soccer league. 
Said Ajemian: "Where is the plan, and why doesn't the USSF implement it now?" 
They just can't wait until the last minute." 
President Werner Fricker of the USSF has steadfastly refused to recognize the 
APSL -- a stand that has angered league members, according to Fracisco. 
Fricker, who is up for reelection, has proposed a professional league of three 
to five divisions, each containing eight teams. Fricker said existing teams 
would be eligible to apply for some of the spots, but it seems unlikely that 
all the APSL teams would qualify, because Fricker plans to restrict the regions 
of the country where professional soccer could be played. 
Theoretically, any existing franchise in the Los Angeles market would be 
coveted by the USSF, because of possible fees for television rights. In 
addition, it is generally acknowledged that Los Angeles will host either a 
semifinal or a final game of the 1994 World Cup at the Coliseum or the Rose 
Bowl. 
Those prospects seems to put the Heat in a good position if it can hang on. But 
other teams in less-populated areas, such as Albuquerque or Salt Lake City, may 
not be as fortunate. 
So far, the APSL has received some attention from the U.S. media, both good and 
bad. Soccer International said the merger leaves "new hope for the eventual 
return of a fully functional national league." But a headline last month in The 
National said: "U.S. pro soccer: Barely alive and kicking." 
Sibbald disputed that claim, pointing out that the Western Soccer League has 
been in operation since 1986, when it called itself the Western Soccer 
Alliance. 
"A lot of people didn't think the league would be here (that long)," he said. 
"But it is, and that will tell you something about the people involved in it." 
THE FUTURE 
The year 1994 will be pivotal for the Heat and professional soccer in general. 
That's when the World Cup will be held in the United States, and many experts 
say it will be the make-or-break year for soccer's reputation in this country. 
Said Heat co-owner Martin: "If soccer doesn't go here by 1994, then it is never 
going to go in the United States. We might as well just give up the idea of 
professional soccer and let it exist on a recreational level." 
Sibbald said he has waited two decades for the United States to build a viable 
international soccer program. Instead, it has spun its wheels. 
"Ten years ago I thought the United States would dominate the world of soccer 
by this time," he said. "Now I'm not so sure." 
Already there are storm clouds on the horizon. NBC has said it will not bid for 
the rights to broadcast World Cup games here, and representatives of ABC and 
CBS have speculated that they, too, will drop out of the bidding. The three TV 
networks reach 98% of the people in the United States. 
Three cable networks have shown an interest, but cable reaches only 51% of the 
neighborhoods in the country. Without full national exposure for the World Cup, 
soccer alliances such as the APSL may discover that it will not generate a lot 
of fan support. 
That prospect is chilling to some. 
"If the World Cup doesn't create interest in soccer here," said Ajemian, "then 
nothing will." 
And that means that the Heat would be turned off for good. 
