ANNEXATION SOUGHT TO SAVE SANTA MONICAS PARKLAND SWAP; 
JORDAN RANCH: VENTURA COUNTY WILL PROBABLY VOTE DOWN THE BOB HOPE LAND DEAL. 
SIMI VALLEY COULD GAIN FINAL SAY ON A DEVELOPMENT THAT MUST BE APPROVED TO 
SALVAGE THE PACT. 
Giving up on the Ventura County Board of Supervisors, developers of the Jordan 
Ranch project have asked the city of Simi Valley to save a land swap involving 
entertainer Bob Hope by annexing about 5,900 acres of the controversial 
property. 
If the annexation goes through, Simi Valley would have jurisdiction over the 
property and thus have the final say over the 750-house Jordan Ranch project in 
the rolling hills of southeast Ventura County. 
The five county supervisors, three of whom have either pledged to vote against 
the development or have voted against it in the past, would lose control over 
the project. 
Approval of the Jordan Ranch project must occur or the proposed land swap 
between Hope and the National Park Service will fall apart. 
Under the land-swap proposal, the National Park Service would exchange 59 acres 
needed for an access road to the Jordan subdivision for 1,100 acres of the 
2,308-acre ranch. In addition, Hope is donating and selling 4,600 acres in the 
Santa Monica and Santa Susana mountains to park agencies for a below-market 
price of $10 million. 
Attorneys for Hope and for Potomac Investment Associates, which has an option 
on Jordan Ranch, proposed the annexation in a July 19 letter to the Simi Valley 
City Council. The council on Monday will discuss the proposal, which must 
ultimately be approved by the Local Agency Formation Commission, a five-member 
board made up of two county supervisors, two representatives of the county's 10 
cities and a public member. 
The 5,900 acres that would be annexed include 2,300 in Jordan Ranch just south 
of Simi Valley and 3,600 acres in Runkle Ranch to the northeast, said Julie 
Zeidner, a spokeswoman for the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, which buys 
parkland. 
Potomac officials and attorneys for Hope refused to comment Thursday on the 
annexation proposal. But proponents of the land swap said they support 
annexation because they believe the Jordan Ranch project stands a better chance 
of being approved by Simi Valley officials than by the supervisors. 
The election of slow-growth advocate Maria K. VanderKolk to the Board of 
Supervisors ruined the project's chances by providing the swing vote against 
it, Zeidner said. VanderKolk made her opposition to the project the centerpiece 
of her campaign. 
If the land-swap deal is lost, its supporters say, Hope will sell part of the 
property north of Simi Valley to the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts, 
which has rated some of the area as an ideal site for a landfill. 
"It's the best thing since sliced bread," said conservancy Chairwoman Carole 
Stevens of annexation. 
However, opponents of the project vowed to fight annexation with the same zeal 
they displayed while campaigning for political novice and long-shot VanderKolk, 
who won the election against incumbent Supervisor Madge L. Schaefer by 98 
votes. VanderKolk was out of the state Thursday and could not be reached for 
comment. 
"We've been fighting for almost three years to save Jordan Ranch, and we're not 
giving up now," said Mary Wiesbrock, director of the environmental group Save 
Open Space. "It's just totally outrageous to make Jordan Ranch part of Simi 
Valley when most of the impact will be felt in Agoura Hills and Oak Park." 
Part of Jordan Ranch lies on Simi Valley's southern border. Simi Valley council 
members Glen McAdoo and Bill Davis -- two of the five city officials who will 
decide whether to ask LAFCO to approve the annexation -- said that if the land 
swap goes through, the city stands to gain a guarantee that thousands of nearby 
acres will be converted into parkland. 
"Strictly from a selfish standpoint, the land swap would be very good for the 
residents of Simi Valley," McAdoo said. "If in fact you are going to protect 
4,000 acres of open space, then it behooves us to look at it." 
Simi Valley Councilwoman Vickie Howard, who represents the county's 10 cities 
on the LAFCO board, and Simi Valley Mayor Gregory A. Stratton said they will 
reserve judgment until they learn more about the annexation proposal. 
Councilwoman Ann Rock could not be reached Thursday for comment. 
Supervisors Schaefer and John K. Flynn are also LAFCO members. A spokesman for 
Schaefer said she was out of town Thursday and could not be reached for 
comment. Flynn, who last July unsuccessfully opposed a county study of the 
environmental effects of the project, said that annexation "was a giant end-run 
by Bob Hope" and that Hope "is becoming kind of a pain." 
Flynn said he did not see how Simi Valley could support annexation after 
announcing this week that it will sue the city of Los Angeles to block the 
massive Porter Ranch development in nearby Chatsworth. The council voted to sue 
Los Angeles under the Environmental Quality Act to try to block the $2-billion 
development, which will include 3,395 residences and 6 million square feet of 
commercial space. 
Simi Valley officials have said that taking legal action against Porter Ranch 
is necessary because concerns about traffic and smog have not been adequately 
addressed in the environmental impact report on the project. 
"It seems to me that it would be a little difficult for the city of Simi Valley 
to side with this proposal after its reaction to Porter Ranch," Flynn said. 
"That seems inconsistent that they would even have this on their agenda." 
Both Davis and McAdoo said it is unfair to compare Jordan Ranch with the 
planned Porter Ranch development in Chatsworth. 
"The two don't compare at all," McAdoo said. "This is not the monster Porter 
Ranch is. With Jordan Ranch you're talking about 750 homes with a golf course; 
with Porter Ranch you're talking about 6 million square feet of commercial 
space." 
Davis agreed, saying, "It's like mixing apples and oranges." 
Port Hueneme Mayor Dorill Wright, who also represents the county's 10 cities on 
LAFCO, said that he has not made up his mind about annexation but that he 
believes the land swap is a "great deal in terms of preserving open space in 
perpetuity. So, you're caught in a dilemma -- the question is if the 
preservation is worth allowing any development." 
Bob Embry, LAFCO's public member, could not be reached Thursday. 
