STUDIES ORDERED FOR OLD MASONRY BUILDINGS 
Calling the risk too great to ignore, the Santa Monica City Council is 
requiring all owners of pre-1933 unreinforced masonry buildings to conduct 
seismic engineering studies by next January to determine the structures' 
resistance to earthquakes. 
The council stopped short of proposing specific corrective measures, saying it 
was unprepared to do so because of conflicting data about how dangerous the 
buildings are. The council instead voted at its Tuesday night meeting to gather 
more expert opinion before determining later this year what constitutes an 
adequate level of safety. 
Officials said the city has 183 unreinforced masonry buildings built before 
1933. Four are residential buildings, but most are commercial or mixed-use 
structures, with the bulk of them in the downtown business district. Under a 
1986 state law, the city is required to make an inventory of its old masonry 
buildings, set up a program for making them safe and report back to the state 
on their progress by Jan. 1, 1990. 
Some Latitude 
Although cities have some latitude in how they comply with the law, the state 
recommends that all unreinforced masonry buildings constructed before 1933 be 
divided into risk groups depending on their use and occupancy. Load-bearing 
walls should then be reinforced, with priority given to the buildings found 
most dangerous. The state program is modeled after one instituted by the city 
of Los Angeles in 1980. 
Santa Monica's Building and Safety Commission held two public hearings last 
winter on implementing the state law but concluded that additional studies 
would be necessary to determine the safety of the buildings and what 
corrections were needed. 
Testimony by experts and members of the public Tuesday and at last winter's 
sessions showed clear differences of opinion about the ability of pre-1933 
masonry buildings to withstand earthquakes. 
Points of dispute focus on determining buildings' resistance to ground forces 
generated by earthquakes, the actual potential for a damaging quake and the 
cost of upgrading buildings. 
The council authorized the city staff to determine the best scientific 
standards for assessing the risk of earthquake damage in the buildings and to 
reconcile contradictory or competing claims of hazard. The staff will also 
determine cost estimates based on Los Angeles' figures from its 1980 ordinance. 
"There seems to be some misinformation in the community, as well as honest 
disagreement" about how dangerous the buildings are, said Mayor Dennis Zane. 
"It would be irresponsible of us if we did not impose this moderate (step) of 
implementing these tests." 
Aside from Los Angeles, several other major cities in the area have already 
conducted inventories and adopted a version of the state's suggested mitigation 
program. They include Long Beach, Torrance, Pasadena and Beverly Hills, 
according to Karl Deppe, a senior engineer with the Los Angeles Building and 
Safety Department. 
The studies authorized by the council Tuesday are preliminary measures 
estimated to cost property owners between $1,000 and $4,000 per building. The 
studies consist of an analysis by a state-licensed structural engineer of the 
building plans and tests of the strength of the building's bearing walls based 
on one or two sites on each wall. The procedure takes at most a few days. 
As part of its compliance with the 1986 law, the council ordered environmental 
impact studies to clear the way for any eventual corrective program that is 
adopted. The environmental studies are expected to cost the city $40,000 to 
$60,000. The six-month timetable for seismic studies means that the city will 
not meet the Jan. 1 state deadline, but the law contains no late penalty. 
