PADRES PLAYING BROKEN RECORD: RIDDOCH'S (1-11) 
The office was bare. Gone are the portraits of Jack McKeon. Gone are the 
memorabilia that McKeon accumulated over the past two years. 
There wasn't even a scent of cigar smoke. 
No matter, even with everything cleaned out of the Padre manager's office, the 
same woes continue for whoever dares to sit in the chair. 
Greg Riddoch, watching his team lose its eighth consecutive game, 9-2 Monday 
night to the Cincinnati Reds, is finding out firsthand what drove McKeon out of 
the office. 
The Padres landed Riddoch in the team record book with their longest losing 
streak since 1980. Riddoch's 1-11 record is the worst of any starting Padre 
manager in history. 
No wonder Riddoch says, "'I'm not sleeping real good, and I'm not eating. Heck, 
now I'm even starting to lose my hair." 
The Padres -- who were booed loudly several times during the game by the crowd 
of 18,238 at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium -- put on their usual performance. 
They lost for the 24th time in the past 27 games. They failed to score more 
than three runs for the 19th time in the past 24 games, and the 50th time of 
the season. And, oh yeah, the second they committed three more errors and are 
proud owners of the second-worst defense in the major leagues. 
Just how bleak has the Padres' situation, 38-54, 21 games out of first place, 
become? 
Well, look at this way: If the Reds continue at this current pace, the Padres 
will have to go 66-4 the remainder of the season just to tie for first. 
Ouch. 
Riddoch tried to forget all his problems while he was putting put up two 
snapshot pictures of his youngest son. He placed his hitting tendency charts in 
the desk. And that was about the extent of his decorating. 
"I've learned in this business, you can't put too many pictures on the wall," 
Riddoch said, "because you might soon be taking them down." 
Riddoch then went about opening his mail, trying to put at least a dent in the 
bulk on his desk, which consisted of three stacks of letters, 10 telegrams and 
five telexes. 
"I'm hearing from people I haven't heard for years," Riddoch said, "and most of 
them are wondering the same thing I am. What's going on? People are used to me 
turning things around, working so hard that things will come together. 
"I reached a point where I feel I can make an impact on people's lives, but I 
haven't done that. It's difficult for anyone to say he can make an impact, and 
I still feel I can." 
Then came the kicker. 
"I'm also intelligent enough to know that there's a lot of things I can't 
control." 
Yes, the Padres have now reached the conclusion that it might be impossible for 
even Connie Mack to turn this team around. And considering they've already 
changed mangers once this season, you can be assured that it'll be the players 
who next will go. 
Say hello to Trader Jack, whose fingers are starting to get callouses from 
dialing the phone these past two weeks to general managers. 
"I'm totally embarrassed right now," said McKeon, vice president/baseball 
operations. "I can't understand it. I left the manager's job, and I'm still 
beating my head against the wall. 
"Something's going to have to be done." 
McKeon is talking with three or four clubs about possible trades before the 
July 31 waiver period expires. He talked with the Boston Red Sox and Kansas 
City Royals during the All-Star break, and spoke again with Red Sox General 
Manager Lou Gorman late last week. In fact, Eddie Kasko, scouting director of 
the Boston Red Sox, spent four games in St. Louis scouting the Padres. 
McKeon said no specific trade proposals have been discussed with the Red Sox, 
but sources close to the Red Sox say that Gorman is interest in acquiring 
either left-handed starter Bruce Hurst or Dennis Rasmussen. The Padres, sources 
say, have expressed interest in left fielder Mike Greenwell, center fielder 
Ellis Burks and triple-A third baseman Scott Cooper. 
Although the Padres would prefer obtaining Burks in a trade involving Hurst, 
sources say that the Red Sox are unwilling to trade him. Instead, they are 
offering Greenwell. 
The Padres, however, are a bit skeptical of acquiring Greenwell for the simple 
reason that they have plenty of left fielders who are marginal defensively on 
their roster. Greenwell also is plagued by tendinitis in his left ankle, which 
requires him to wear an air cast, and is scaring off several teams. 
"It's like a pitcher with rotator-cuff tendinitis, trying to throw the ball," 
said Red Sox physician Arthur Pappas, describing Greenwell, who has only four 
homers this season. "You just don't develop the same power thrust." 
"I have no idea whether anything will happen," McKeon said. "I do know what 
they want is pitching." 
The Padres still are interested in acquiring reliever Mark Davis and either 
outfielder Bo Jackson or outfielder Danny Tartabull from the Royals, but 
Jackson and Tartabull are on the disabled list. 
"I'm talking to some clubs," McKeon said, "but I don't see things breaking 
loose. My phone's not exactly ringing off the hook with teams wanting these 
guys. 
"I don't know. You look at the names, and it's not a bad ballclub. But that's 
individually, not collectively. 
"You can't bet your ass we'll be hearing about how good they were (from their 
agents) this winter, though." 
The Padres are scheduled to address their plan of attack in a meeting this 
morning between Padre chairman Tom Werner, McKeon and Riddoch. One of the 
primary topics will be whether to retool for 1991 or to continue plugging 
holes. 
"I think we're going to go for the championship," McKeon said. "Look at the 
Reds, they bounced back. We need to plug a gap here, and a gap there. I just 
can't see how these guys can keep staying down." 
The Padres also could address the potential free-agent market, and sources in 
the organization said that St. Louis Cardinal center fielder Willie McGee will 
be atop their list. 
McGee, 32, who was National League Player of the Week with his .448 batting 
average, said he would be highly interested in playing for the Padres on one 
condition. 
"The main reason I'd want to come is because of (first baseman) Jack Clark," he 
said. "He's a great player, and a great guy to have around. I played with him 
once, and wherever he plays next year, that's where I want to play. 
"He can make a big difference on any club." 
McKeon grunted when he heard McGee's comments. 
The way things are going, it's not a question of who goes, but just who stays. 
Padre Notes 
National League President Bill White is expected to rule today on Padre first 
baseman Jack Clark's ejection Sunday in St. Louis. Clark threw his bat and 
helmet on the field. Then, after he reached the dugout, he threw two more 
helmets and made an obscene gesture. National League officials said Monday that 
Clark definitely will be fined; it's unknown whether White will suspend Clark 
for between one and three days. . . . Padre starter Andy Benes will miss his 
second successive start Wednesday because of a stiff left shoulder he sustained 
July 12 in a melee with the Pittsburgh Pirates. He will be replaced by either 
Calvin Schiraldi or John Davis will make the start. . . . Padre catcher Benito 
Santiago, who sustained a broken left arm June 14, is expected to get his cast 
off in another 10 days to two weeks, when his arm will be X-rayed again. The 
Padres don't expect to be back before Sept. 1. "We're not going to rush him," 
Manager Greg Riddoch said. "I don't want to say he's going to lead us to the 
promised land, because he's not." 
You want to know why the Padres aren't scoring? Take a look at the Padres' top 
of the order with two out and runners in scoring position: Bip Roberts: .233, 
no homers, eight RBIs; Roberto Alomar: .286, no homers, 11 RBIs; Tony Gwynn: 
.229, no homers, eight RBIs; Jack Clark: .167, one homer, eight RBIs; Joe 
Carter: .137, two homers, 12 RBIs. Shortstop Garry Templeton is the only 
starter with success in that situation, batting .344 with two homers and 14 
RBIs. . . . The Padres and Chicago White Sox are working on a trade, but it's 
expected to involve an exchange of minor-league players. . . . The Padres had 
their first Kangaroo Court meeting since it was installed at the All-Star 
break. The judges were outfielder Fred Lynn, pitcher Ed Whitson and catcher 
Mark Parent. Whitson and pitcher Eric Show were fined the most, $35 apiece. The 
judges did not disclose the total amount of the fines, but let's just say the 
San Diego Children's Hospital, the recipient of the money at the end of the 
year, is quite appreciative. 
Reds owner Marge Schott spent the game visiting with former Padre owner Joan 
Kroc. The two plan to spend today at the San Diego Zoo, and then will watch 
tonight's game on Cable TV. . . . Joe Carter, who leads the team with 64 RBIs, 
has had 233 men on base when he has batted this season. . . . The Padres will 
play the second game of their four-game series at 7:35 tonight to accommodate 
ESPN-TV. Bruce Hurst (5-8) and Jack Armstrong (11-5) are the scheduled 
starters. . . . There were 21 players in attendance Monday from the Padres' 
Class A team, which had the night off. . . . Injuries continue to plague the 
Padres' minor-league teams. The latest occurred Saturday night when center 
fielder Craig Pueschner of Class A Charleston sustained a broken leg and 
dislocated ankle while sliding into second. Manager Jack Krol told Tom 
Romenesko, director of player development, that "it was as nasty an injury as 
I've seen in 35 years." The injury was so severe that it took 30 minutes for 
Pueschner's leg to be immobilized, and then removed from the field by 
helicopter. And what were Pueschner's final words before leaving the field? 
"Don't forget my Copenhagen." 
