GENETICALLY ENGINEERED PROTEIN SPEEDS WOUND HEALING 
Minute quantities of a genetically engineered protein can accelerate the 
healing of human wounds, according to a study of 12 patients reported in 
today's New England Journal of Medicine. 
The preliminary findings by a team of researchers led by Dr. Gregory L. Brown 
of the University of Louisville may lead to improved treatments for patients 
with severe burns and chronic wounds, such as bedsores and foot ulcers. 
The report, the first of its kind in humans, "is a historical event," said Dr. 
Thomas K. Hunt of UC San Francisco, the co-author of an editorial published in 
the medical journal along with the study. 
"Wound healing has been one of the last frontiers for medicine to try to 
influence," Hunt said in an interview. "These people have not (hastened wound 
healing) by a huge margin, but they have done it." 
Faster Healing 
The researchers found that areas of wounded skin treated with the protein 
healed an average of 1 1/2 days faster than comparable areas that were not 
treated with the substance. Previously, they and others had obtained similar 
results in animal studies. 
But the researchers have yet to demonstrate that the use of the experimental 
growth factor has important clinical effects in humans, such as the ability to 
prevent wound infections, decrease pain or shorten hospital stays. Larger 
studies seeking to show such benefits are in progress, Brown said. 
The protein is known as human epidermal growth factor (epidermis is a medical 
term for the outer layers of the skin). It is one of a group of proteins that 
play a key role in regulating cell and organ development in animals and humans. 
In 1986, Stanley Cohen, a biochemist, and Rita Levi-Montalcini, a 
neurobiologist, were awarded the Nobel Prize in medicine for the discovery of 
growth factors. 
Genetic Engineering 
Epidermal growth factor is normally produced by the body. It is already present 
in many injured areas of skin. Scientists have reasoned that they might hasten 
the healing process by applying creams containing additional growth factor to 
wounds and burns. The protein is produced in the laboratory using genetic 
engineering techniques. 
The new study involved 12 patients who required skin grafts for various 
reasons, primarily for treatment of burns. To perform such grafts, surgeons 
often cover areas where skin had been lost with a partial thickness of healthy 
skin taken from "donor sites" on the patient's own body. The removal of the 
healthy skin, in effect, creates a wound. 
For each patient in the study, two paired donor sites were selected. After the 
skin for grafting was removed, one donor site was treated with a cream commonly 
used to prevent infections. The other site was treated with a preparation of 
the cream that contained epidermal growth factor. Neither the researchers nor 
the patients knew which donor site received the growth factor treatments. 
The creams were applied every 12 hours. 
The researchers found that treatment with epidermal growth factor 
"significantly decreased the average length of time" to achieve total wound 
healing by about 1 1/2 days. Accelerated healing was seen in all patients; 
typically, the wounds took one to two weeks to heal entirely. 
After a minimum of one year of follow-up, the researchers said there had been 
no complications, such as abnormal scars or early evidence of skin tumors. 
Brown said the study was important because it showed "efficacy in man," not 
because physicians would necessarily use the growth factor exactly as it was 
used in the study. The growth factor might prove most valuable for 
"problematic, non-healing wounds," he said. These include bedsores, diabetic 
skin ulcers and venous skin ulcers of the lower legs, as well as extensive 
burns, where skin grafts must be repeatedly harvested from non-burned areas of 
the body. Patients with extensive burns often spend months in the hospital. 
In their New England Journal editorial, Hunt and Dr. Frederick B. La Van, also 
of UCSF, sounded a cautionary note. "Critics will no doubt note that the 
practical results of this study are trivial," they wrote. The editorial pointed 
out that other researchers had used similar experiments to demonstrate 
"equivalent accelerations" in the rate of wound healing with the use of oxygen, 
electromagnetic waves, and Preparation H, an over-the-counter hemorrhoidal 
remedy that contains a "live yeast cell derivative." 
But Hunt and La Van said that the new study advanced upon these earlier 
efforts. 
They added: "The annual market for products used in the care of wounds in this 
country is more than $1 billion, and a successful growth factor-based product 
would be expected to capture a substantial share of the market." 
The epidermal growth factor research was conducted at the University of 
Louisville, Vanderbilt University in Nashville and Emory University in Atlanta. 
The growth factor was manufactured by Chiron Corp., of Emeryville, Calif., one 
of a number of biotechnology firms that are seeking to develop growth 
factor-based medications. 
