GOLDSMITH BIDS $21 BILLION FOR BAT INDUSTRIES 
An investment group headed by flamboyant takeover specialist James Goldsmith 
launched an "unsolicited and unwelcome" $21.5-billion bid Tuesday for BAT 
Industries PLC, the British conglomerate that includes American subsidiaries 
ranging from Saks Fifth Avenue to Farmers Insurance Group Inc. of Los Angeles. 
It is by far the biggest buyout ever attempted here, and London financial 
markets bet heavily Tuesday that the price may yet go high enough to rival last 
year's world record $25-billion purchase of RJR Nabisco Inc. by Kohlberg Kravis 
Roberts &amp; Co., a New York firm specializing in leveraged buyouts. 
Goldsmith said he intends to sell off BAT's non-tobacco interests, starting 
with the Farmers Group, which BAT acquired for $5.2 billion last Dec. 16 
following a protracted takeover battle. 
Farmers, California's second-largest and the nation's third-largest writer of 
personal lines of insurance, has 15,500 employees and another 15,000 agents and 
district managers with exclusive contracts to sell Farmers' products. The 
company's largest operation by far is in California. 
BAT Chairman Patrick Sheehy promised a fight against the Goldsmith offer, 
calling it "no more than an ill-conceived attempt at destructive financial 
engineering." The company "considers this unsolicited and unwelcome offer to be 
of dubious value," according to a BAT press release, which added, "It should be 
rejected." 
An expectant British business community has been awaiting a high-stakes 
Goldsmith grab for some company ever since he announced his return to the 
London financial scene last March in partnership with his old friend, financier 
Jacob Rothschild. 
But the size of his quarry clearly stunned the City, as London's equivalent of 
the Wall Street financial district is called. 
BAT (formerly British American Tobacco) shares closed up by more than 30%, at 
906 pence (the equivalent of $14.77) a share Tuesday after trading earlier at 
as much as 940 pence ($15.32). Both figures were well above the 850 pence 
($13.86) a share offered by Goldsmith's group, indicating that the City expects 
the bidding to go higher in what analysts said is shaping up as a titanic 
battle for control. 
Also in on the deal with Goldsmith and Rothschild is Kerry Packer, a colorful 
Australian entrepreneur and owner of Consolidated Press Holdings. The three are 
the principal members of Hoylake Investments PLC, an investor group formed 
specifically to make the BAT bid. 
Sent Index Soaring 
The bid and the associated takeover fever Tuesday sent the Financial Times' 
100-share index to a post-1987 crash high, up 55.7 points, or more than 2.5%, 
to close at 2,250.9. 
Known in the British press as "the buccaneering billionaire," Goldsmith, 56, 
has made nearly as many headlines because of his life style as he has because 
of his roller-coaster business career. 
After an early up-and-down business career, he made millions in the food 
business here and was knighted before quitting England a decade ago in despair 
over its political and economic future. 
He exported his takeover talents to the United States, where he multiplied his 
fortune in raids on Diamond International Corp., St. Regis Paper, Crown 
Zellerbach and, finally, Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. But his greatest coup 
was to pull most of his assets out of the stock market just before the Black 
Monday crash in October, 1987. 
He told a London news conference Tuesday that he had decided to return to 
Britain now because its economic prospects look "pretty good." 
He also rejected suggestions that his BAT bid was an example of 
asset-stripping, arguing that international conglomerates are a failure. He 
said BAT, which marked a watershed last year by generating more than 50% of its 
profits from non-tobacco interests for the first time, had made a mistake by 
diversifying. Goldsmith maintained that he only wants to "liberate" companies 
that have been "stifled" under the conglomerate structure. 
Hoylake's plan is to arrange bridge loans to buy BAT, then to immediately sell 
all the non-tobacco interests to pay off the debt as soon as possible. 
Goldsmith admitted that the plan entails risk but argued that "the ultimate 
risk is not taking a risk." 
BAT posted an after-tax profit equivalent to $1.55 billion on revenue of $28.8 
billion in its most recent fiscal year, which ended March 31. It is the 
third-largest publicly held British corporation, following British Petroleum 
and Shell Oil. 
