3 ON COUNCIL HIRE LAWYER IN REMAP FIGHT; 
GOVERNMENT: FILNER, HARTLEY AND BERNHARDT EXPRESS CONCERN THAT CITY ATTORNEY'S 
OFFICE COULD NOT ADEQUATELY REPRESENT THEM. 
Frustrated over growing legal woes surrounding the city's redistricting plan, 
three of the five San Diego City Council members who tentatively approved the 
measure hired an outside lawyer Friday to replace the city attorney as their 
representative. 
In what the private lawyer himself described as a "highly unusual situation," 
council members Bob Filner, John Hartley and Linda Bernhardt retained David 
Lundin to represent them in possible legal proceedings involving the redrawing 
of council district boundaries. 
As members of the prevailing council majority that gave conceptual approval to 
a redistricting map Monday -- igniting a controversy that led to multiple 
federal court hearings over the next three days -- Filner, Hartley and 
Bernhardt normally would be represented by the city attorney's office. 
However, dissatisfied with the city attorney's performance, and with critical 
court hearings scheduled for later this month, the three decided to retain 
Lundin -- a move that city lawyers have emphasized will come at the council 
members' own expense. 
"Our clients' perception is that there's a problem . . . with the city attorney 
trying to represent the council as a whole when the council is so divided," 
Lundin said. "Basically, they felt the city attorney could not adequately 
represent their position." 
Nevertheless, his own efforts, Lundin stressed, "certainly should complement" 
those of the city attorney in the redistricting case. 
On Thursday, a federal magistrate delayed until July 23 any council action on 
the plan, which Latino activists contend illegally dilutes minority voting 
strength and violates the settlement of a 1988 Chicano Federation lawsuit 
challenging the constitutionality of the city's electoral system. 
Unless the council, which originally planned to move toward formal adoption of 
that map next week, reverses itself and approves an alternative proposal 
developed by a citizens advisory board, further court review of the plan is a 
certainty, U.S. Magistrate Harry McCue said. 
"I suspect Mr. Filner wasn't real happy with what happened," said Assistant 
City Atty. Curtis Fitzpatrick, offering his explanation for the legal switch. 
Although the plan that was passed by a 5-4 council vote Monday was introduced 
by Hartley, Filner is widely regarded as one of its major architects. 
"Maybe he feels we weren't as assiduous as he'd like in our advocacy, even 
though I'd have to say we were," Fitzpatrick said. "But, if (Lundin) can be 
more persuasive with the judge, more power to him." 
For each of the three council members who hired Lundin, Hartley's plan offers 
political advantages over the advisory board's proposal, creating boundaries 
more to their liking. Indeed, under the advisory panel's plan, the new or 
future homes of both Filner and Bernhardt were left outside the proposed 
realignment of their respective districts. 
Beyond their unhappiness with the outcome of the preliminary legal skirmishing 
over the redistricting plan, the three also were angered by the fact that their 
first detailed explanation of the magistrate's order came via newspaper stories 
Friday, not from city attorneys, Lundin said. 
The hearing that resulted in McCue's order, however, ended late Thursday after 
most council members had left City Hall. Deputy City Atty. Kenneth So said 
that, although he tried to contact the council members Thursday night, Ron 
Roberts -- who voted against Monday's plan -- was the only one he reached. 
Fitzpatrick added that the city attorney's office sent a memo on McCue's order 
to the council offices Friday. 
None of the three council members who retained Lundin returned telephone calls 
Friday. The two other members who supported Monday's redistricting plan -- Abbe 
Wolfsheimer and Wes Pratt -- are lawyers and have not sought outside counsel. 
Ironically, when the city attorney's potential conflict in representing a badly 
divided council was discussed in court earlier in the week, U.S. District Judge 
John Rhoades' major concern appeared to be whether the council's minority could 
receive adequate representation. 
With the city attorney's office obliged to represent the position of the 
five-vote council majority, Rhoades asked, how could it simultaneously defend 
the other four members' interests? In a letter to Rhoades, Councilman Bruce 
Henderson raised the same concern, suggesting that those four members also 
might eventually need private lawyers. 
Friday's maneuvering over which attorneys should represent whom seemed an 
appropriate end to a week in which the redistricting plan spent more time in 
court than at City Hall. 
Hartley's plan reduces the Latino composition of Filner's 8th District from the 
advisory board's 52.2% to at most 51%, and perhaps less, as well as 
dramatically alters the configuration of a number of other council districts. 
Based on some estimates, the plan would change council representation for up to 
300,000 San Diegans. 
To date, however, the two sides' court debate has focused more on how Monday's 
council vote occurred than on the content of the redistricting plan itself. In 
particular, Chicano Federation officials argue that the council's approval of 
Hartley's plan, only hours after it was publicized, denied them a meaningful 
voice in its development, as guaranteed by an agreement that settled the first 
stage of the group's lawsuit. 
Those procedural questions prompted McCue to order the council to reconsider 
both Hartley's plan and the advisory board's map when it resumes debate on the 
subject July 23. 
Reacting to McCue's order, several council members suggested Friday that the 
council might hold several public hearings on the plans before formally voting 
on either or perhaps adopting an amended version later this summer. 
"In retrospect, we could have avoided some of the outcry if this had been 
handled differently," Pratt said. "But, in one way, the judge has done the 
council a favor by giving us a chance to sit back for a week or so to reflect. 
When we go through it all over again, who knows whether the result will be the 
same or change? But, at least, the process will be better." 
