DOWN-HOME PARTY RAISES $40,000 FOR HOMELESS 
From the outside, the high-priced cars parked at the Crazy Horse Steak House on 
Saturday afternoon made it appear as if a convention of BMW and Mercedes-Benz 
dealers was taking place at the club. 
But inside, more than 250 people gathered for an event benefiting people on the 
opposite end of the economic scale. Paying $150 a ticket, the luxury-car crowd 
packed the Santa Ana venue to hear singer, songwriter and actor Kris 
Kristofferson perform to benefit Orange County's homeless. 
Kristofferson participated in a five-hour barbecue and concert hosted by the 
Orange County Building Industry Assn. as part of its ongoing HomeAid program. 
"This is turning out better than I thought it would," said Julie Brinkerhoff, 
one of the organizers of the fund-raiser. "We were fortunate to get the likes 
of Kris Kristofferson, who is very committed to helping the homeless." 
Kristofferson has appeared at numerous benefit functions, including FarmAid and 
concerts for Vietnam veterans. However, in the last few years, the performer 
has become increasingly concerned about the nation's growing homeless 
population. 
"We can't leave it up to the politicians to solve this problem," Kristofferson 
said. "We, as people and concerned citizens, must take it on ourselves." 
Housing officials estimate the county could have from 8,000 to 10,000 homeless 
people, many of whom are children. 
Organizers said that Saturday's hoedown raised about $40,000 in donations, 
including $13,500 in corporate sponsorships. Since the program's inception, 
more than $750,000 has been raised. 
HomeAid was created last year by the BIA, which promised to build or renovate 
five shelters throughout the county. The nonprofit program pulls together 
donations of time, materials and money from the building industry. 
Bart Hansen, vice chairman of HomeAid and principal of Shawntana Development, 
said he has been astounded by the positive response of the building industry to 
HomeAid. In addition, he said, HomeAid is proving to be such a success that 
building industry associations in San Bernardino, Riverside, Ventura and Los 
Angeles counties are showing interest in the program. 
So far, the proposed $1-million program has been responsible for construction 
of a $350,000 duplex in El Modena and the renovation of three shelters -- 
Thomas House in Garden Grove, Interval House for abused women in unincorporated 
Midway City and Anchor House in San Clemente. The program also is sponsoring 
the partial reconstruction of the New Vista House, a shelter in Fullerton. 
Mike Lennon, director of HomeAid, said the economic slowdown in the building 
industry may hamper future donations to the program, but he is hopeful that 
projects will continue. 
"It could slow us down a bit," he said. "But everyone is committed to this 
program. We all share a common cause: to help with the homeless in any way we 
can." 
Christine D. Reed, executive director of the region's BIA and former director 
of the state Housing and Community Development Agency, said it is vital that 
the private sector get involved with this issue. 
