NOTEBOOK; 
WELKER ACCEPTS OXNARD COLLEGE BASEBALL POSITION 
Reg Welker hopes his blend of competitiveness and practical jokes plays well on 
the junior college circuit. 
Welker, who coached Hueneme high baseball team for nine years, has been 
selected as the new coach at Oxnard College and awaits final approval from 
Ventura County Community College District. He will replace George Peraza, who 
resigned in May after one season as coach of the Condors. 
"I think this is an important step up for my coaching career," said Welker, who 
will remain as Hueneme's athletic director. "I've reached a point where I 
needed a new challenge. It was time to either get a new coaching job or time to 
move on to another career." 
Welker had a 124-105-5 record after taking over the Hueneme program in 1981. He 
won his only Channel League title in his first season. 
And although he didn't win a bunch of championships, Welker did earn the 
respect of his colleagues. 
"Reggie was my best friend in baseball," Ventura Coach Dan Smith said. "I will 
miss his competitiveness. He played to win and at the same time, he played with 
class. When the game was over, it was over. There were never any grudges." 
Welker and Smith have both been known to employ practical jokes to gain the 
upper hand in their friendly rivalry. 
They both have pulled worm-eating stunts to motivate their players. This season 
against Ventura, Welker handed in a lineup card with the names Robinson, Reese, 
Snyder and Gilliam printed on it. 
Smith thought they were players called up from Hueneme's junior varsity, but 
they were really the names of the 1959 Brooklyn Dodgers. 
"I didn't see anyone I recognized," Smith admitted. "He got me with that one." 
Endless summer: Santa Clara Coach Lou Cvijanovich has developed a reputation 
for running grueling, militaristic-type basketball practices that are not meant 
for the fainthearted. But his players won't have to worry about those practices 
until November. 
Instead, they will compete in four summer tournaments, attend three basketball 
camps and play in two summer leagues. 
"I don't hold practices during the summer," Cvijanovich said. "I think kids 
should go out and have some fun. I give everyone a chance to play and let the 
younger kids develop. 
"I don't think winning a summer league is a prerequisite to winning a CIF 
championship." 
The Saints, who won the State Division IV championship last season, began their 
vacation by attending a weekend camp held by Coach Jerry Tarkanian at 
Nevada-Las Vegas. Cvijanovich and Santa Clara boosters drove the players in 
vans to Las Vegas and they spent three days participating in drills and playing 
in games. 
"They play nothing but man-to-man defense," Cvijanovich said. "They work the 
living daylights out of the kids. It's great for the kids because they have fun 
and it reinforces what we teach them in practice." 
It also gives college coaches an opportunity to scout prospective Division I 
players. 
"Everyone is talking about Shon Tarver," Cvijanovich said about last year's 
State Division IV Player of the Year. "I think he'll have his pick of what 
college he wants to attend." 
Cvijanovich will split up his squad to compete in two tournaments beginning 
today at Fairfax and Carson highs. 
The Saints will conclude their vacation by attending a mini-camp at Cal State 
Long Beach run by 49er Coach Joe Harrington. 
Starting over: Playing without any returning starters, the Santa Clara girls' 
basketball team faces its first test of the summer when it competes next week 
in the Santana tournament in San Diego. 
The 16-team tournament begins July 13th and features perennial powers Point 
Loma and Brea-Olinda. 
"We have no height, no quickness and no real experience," Santa Clara Coach Tom 
McConville said. "If we win a game, it will be interesting." 
But McConville believes the Saints will be able to extend their 73-game winning 
streak in Frontier League play. 
"I'm sure teams think they'll have a better chance of beating us this season," 
he said. "But I think we'll still be one of the favorites to win the league 
title." 
Baseball tryouts: The Major League Scouting Bureau will hold its final baseball 
tryout camp Saturday beginning at 9 a.m. at Loyola Marymount. 
Players ages 16 to 25 are eligible to try out. American Legion participants are 
required to have written permission from their coaches. 
Comeback kids: Westlake-Agoura captured the Gene Waid Memorial American Legion 
baseball tournament Monday by coming back from a five-run deficit to defeat 
Camarillo, 7-6, in the final. The victory was the 12th in a row for 
Westlake-Agoura, which is 19-1-2 overall. 
Mike Suarez singled home Ken Teasley with two out in the seventh for the 
winning run. 
