EXILED STUDENT SEES NEW HOPE FOR CHINA 
Standing before a towering replica of the Goddess of Democracy, the statue 
built by students in Beijing as a symbol of their quest for greater liberties, 
student leader Wuer Kaixi fixed his audience with an intense, doleful gaze. 
"Some people say the democracy movement of 1989 is over," he said. "Some say 
China is hopeless at the moment. I want to say the hope is just beginning." 
Referring to the statue that students patterned after the Statue of Liberty and 
that the military destroyed in its bloody crackdown on student protesters last 
month, Wuer told 600 Chinese students Friday in Chicago, "I believe we will be 
united and we will erect a Goddess of Democracy (again) on Tian An Men Square 
someday." 
Lectured Li Peng 
Wuer, one of the fugitive students most wanted by the Chinese authorities for 
his role in organizing the student revolt in Beijing, first came to the 
attention of Americans when television cameras captured him, weak from a hunger 
strike, lecturing Premier Li Peng in a meeting during the demonstrations. 
The charismatic 21-year-old brought that same seriousness of purpose to Chicago 
on Friday. Under heavy guard, their movements cloaked in secrecy, Wuer and five 
other organizers of the Chinese protests are here this weekend to attend what 
is being called the "First Congress of Chinese Students in the United States." 
It is an organizational meeting of more than 600 activists from 200 colleges 
nationwide who want to lobby the U.S. government, raise funds and establish a 
radio station and newspaper to carry the pro-democracy message to the people of 
China. 
Wuer was one of the handful of student leaders who escaped China after the 
military crackdown June 3-4 in which hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people 
reportedly were killed. Many of the leaders fled to Hong Kong and later to 
Paris and are now are working to rally support for their cause. 
On the first day of the three-day conference, the students received videotaped 
messages of support from Illinois Sens. Paul Simon and Alan J. Dixon, both 
Democrats who have supported the students' movement in Congress. 
Wuer also exchanged vows of support with Hubert Romanowski, the U.S. 
representative of the Polish Solidarity movement, who attended the conference. 
Afterward, the student leader said they agreed to hold a formal meeting to 
discuss what Romanowski described as their common struggle against government 
oppression. 
In a news conference, Wuer, speaking through an interpreter, said the goal of 
the democracy movement is not to overthrow the Chinese Communist Party but to 
obtain for the Chinese people the right to choose what type of government they 
want to live under. 
"I have never said . . . we are going to overthrow communism," he said. "I have 
been repeatedly emphasizing that the primary thing we would do is give the 
people the right to choose." 
In response to a question about whether the movement might eventually join the 
Chinese government, as the Polish Solidarity movement has done in Poland, Wuer 
said: "First of all, we have to struggle for the right of people to choose. As 
for the question of whether we will join the government or whether we will be 
the government, that is something for the future." 
Wuer and Yan Jaiqi, former director of the Political Science Institute of the 
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, were kept in seclusion after arriving in 
Chicago on Wednesday because of concern for their safety, according to Minxin 
Pei, a Harvard University student and spokesman for the conference. 
He said Chinese students at universities in the United States have faced 
harassment from Chinese officials, including threats because of pro-democracy 
activities. 
Rumors of Taiwan Meeting 
At Friday's news conference, Wuer also denied rumors that he met formally with 
a representative of the Taiwanese government to enlist Taiwan's aid. He 
declined to say whether they might hold informal meetings. 
China has claimed that Taiwanese agents helped instigate the student protests. 
"To us, anyone who opposes dictatorship is our friend," said Li Lu, another of 
the student-leaders-in-exile attending the conference. "Those who support it, 
our enemy." 
