ASIAN RADIO IS A HARD SELL FOR ADS, BROADCASTERS FIND 
An independent Chinese-American programming company working for KAZN-AM had 
lobbied hard to get a Los Angeles nightclub to advertise on the radio station's 
Chinese show. So the firm was stunned recently when a rival KAZN programmer 
persuaded the club to buy time on KAZN's Korean segment instead. 
"They were ready to sign up with us . . . but those Korean (American) salesmen 
are quite aggressive," said William Parker, a station employee and head of the 
independent company that programs KAZN's Chinese segment. 
Bryan Byungwoo Kim, who heads the company that provides Korean programming on 
KAZN, said he did not recall the incident. But he admitted that there has been 
friction at the station among the various ethnic groups. He accused salesmen 
for KAZN's Chinese show of encroaching on other sales territories because "they 
don't have any big business in the Chinese community" to support their 
programming. 
Selling a unified Asian-American market of consumers to advertisers has proved 
problematic for KAZN -- the nation's only all-Asian language station. 
Since it went on the air in January, KAZN has tried to market six diverse Asian 
languages and cultures -- Japanese, Korean, Thai, Filipino, Chinese and 
Vietnamese -- to companies eager to reach the 2.7 million Asian-Americans 
living in Southern California. 
Although the owners say the station is profitable, it has encountered 
resistance from some major advertisers, and neither station owners nor Arbitron 
Ratings Co. can provide estimates of how many listeners the station has. In 
addition, KAZN has experienced friction among its independent Asian-American 
producers. Meanwhile, there is concern among some experts that as Asians 
assimilate into U.S. society, they will lose the language skills and culture 
that define them as a unique market. 
Affluent Groups 
"This is a conceptual sell, not a marketing sell," said Dwight Case, chief 
executive and co-founder of the 5,000-watt station in Pasadena. "One thing we 
know is that we are not going to have (big) ratings. We have to sell 
advertisers on the concept" of a unified Asian-American market. 
Visions of such a market have long intrigued entrepreneurs interested in 
reaching what are some of the most affluent and highly educated ethnic groups 
in the United States. 
In Southern California, 60% of all Japanese- and Korean-American households 
earn $30,000 or more, reported a study released in June by Los Angeles 
television station KSCI. And Filipino-Americans, though from a poor country, 
had the highest average annual income of all Asian ethnic groups in Los Angeles 
County, according to a United Way study of 1980 census data. Japanese-Americans 
placed second in the study. 
By comparison, the U.S. Census Bureau estimated in 1987 that the national 
average annual household income for Latinos is $24,666 and $20,743 for blacks. 
Asian-Americans are a "tremendously promising market but 90% of the major 
advertisers aren't ready for them," said David Chen, executive vice president 
of the Los Angeles advertising agency Muse Cordero Chen, Inc. "When (most) 
people refer to Asian people, they think of Buddhist temples and Confucian 
thought, but things are more complicated than that." 
Indeed, Case, 60, and KAZN co-founder George Fritzinger, spent nearly five 
years studying the market before they launched KAZN in January. The pair had 
been watching the economic development of fast-growing Pacific Rim countries 
such as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan and were convinced that mainstream 
advertisers were not catering to the burgeoning Asian-American population. 
Rates Are Cheaper 
To hedge their bets, however, the owners lease KAZN's 19 hours of daily air 
time to independent programmers and sell commercial spots to advertisers. 
Prices for air time range from $250 to $1,000 an hour, depending on how much 
commercial time a programmer wants to sell. 
A 60-second commercial at KAZN sells for $100 to $200, station officials said. 
By comparison, the average cost of a 60-second commercial at Southern 
California's 200-odd radio stations is about $450, according to the Southern 
California Broadcasters Assn., a trade group. 
The mix of music, news and information that KAZN broadcasts has proved to be a 
big hit with some advertisers, especially on the Korean and Japanese shows. 
"We have more than 150 advertisers," declared Kim, a former Seoul, South Korea, 
broadcaster who heads the 22-member production company that provides 10 hours 
of daily Korean language programming on KAZN. "This is a good business." 
Mayumi Shirai, president of Asahi Homecast, which produces Japanese language 
programming for KAZN, said there is already a waiting list of Japanese banks, 
brokerage firms, travel agencies and food companies trying to buy time on the 
two-hour show. 
But for others at the station, broadcasting has not been so rosy. 
Last month, for instance, Case canceled Dragon Broadcasting Co.'s two-hour 
Chinese language show after the company fell $20,000 in debt to the station. 
Dragon was unable to sell a sufficient number of ads on the show. 
Case, who is searching for replacement Chinese programming, blames Dragon's 
lack of experience in sales and marketing. But Parker, who heads the company 
and has worked as a broadcaster in Hong Kong and Tokyo, said even Case's sales 
staff was unable to sell all the commercial slots for the show. 
Some Have Faltered 
Despite some advertiser resistance, a few large retailers such as May Co. and 
the Broadway department stores as well as Korean Airlines and the Los Angeles 
Police Department, among others, have bought commercial time on KAZN. And Case 
says there is even greater demand from smaller concerns such as beauty salons, 
restaurants, grocery stores and travel agencies, although he said he's been 
disappointed that specialty food concerns and the telephone company have not 
been heavy advertisers, as he expected. 
Over the years, several California-based publications and broadcast outlets 
have cropped up to serve Asian-Americans, including KSCI and Radio Pacific 
Japan in Gardena. But while KSCI, Channel 18, has had a measure of success 
serving Asian-Americans and several other ethnic groups, some media enterprises 
that have targeted the Asian-American community have faltered. 
For instance, Rice magazine, a Los Angeles-based publication that targeted 
second- and third-generation Asian-American readers, folded this year, and 
broadcasters such as Radio Pacific Japan of KMAX-FM, report having financial 
difficulty because Asian companies seem comfortable with their existing 
advertising relationships and U.S. advertisers feel that they can reach 
Asian-Americans through mainstream publications. 
"The radio business is a very difficult business because the audience (that 
speaks Japanese) is very small," said Yoshioki Mizuno, president of Radio 
Pacific Japan. Mizuno, who spoke through an interpreter, estimates that only 
about 63,000 Japanese-Americans in Southern California tune into the one-hour 
evening show. 
Fred McLaren, president of Hughes Market, which the KSCI survey found was the 
second most popular supermarket among Japanese-Americans in Southern California 
behind Vons, said the chain's popularity among Japanese-Americans "is more a 
function of our location than anything else." He said that while Hughes used to 
advertise some years ago on a Japanese-language television program it doesn't 
any longer because the Japanese-American community in Los Angeles is made up of 
"mostly second- and third-generation" residents. 
The decline in native language skills concerns many who target the 
Asian-American community. While the native language skills of some groups, such 
as Koreans and Filipinos, are replenished by the influx of many newcomers to 
the United States, acculturation has eroded the language skills of other 
groups. 
KSCI's study found that while 94% of Korean-Americans said they planned to 
teach their children to speak Korean, less than two-thirds of 
Japanese-Americans surveyed in Southern California indicated that they would 
teach their children to speak Japanese. 
Despite the changing foreign language fluency of his audience, Case is 
optimistic over KAZN's long-term outlook. 
Case, who said he hopes to expand to round-the-clock broadcasting beginning in 
August, notes that Spanish broadcasters also initially encountered advertiser 
reluctance until they persuaded advertisers to ignore broadcast ratings and 
focus more on the overall demographic characteristics of the Latino market. 
"Years ago, you couldn't market a Spanish-language station either," Case 
observed, "but look at where the Spanish market is now." 
