ED EMSHWILLER, 65; ARTIST, CALARTS DEAN 
Ed Emshwiller, an abstract Expressionist and video artist who was dean of the 
California Institute of the Arts' School of Film and Video, died Friday. He was 
65. 
Emshwiller, who signed his paintings and award-winning science fiction 
illustrations "EMSH," died of cancer at the Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial 
Hospital in Valencia. 
"Ed Emshwiller was a wonderful man and an exceptional artist," college 
President Steven D. Lavine said. "As much as any one person, he embodied the 
spirit of CalArts. This is a tremendous loss for us all." 
The versatile artist and administrator studied art at the University of 
Michigan, the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, and at the 
Art Students League. He became dean of the CalArts film school in 1979 and 
served as provost from 1981 to 1986. 
Praising Emshwiller's "extraordinary gifts" as an artist, former CalArts 
President Robert J. Fitzpatrick once commented: "To his own surprise and our 
great benefit, he has shown a special talent for administration and leadership. 
. . . He is the only person I know who could successfully combine triple 
careers of artist, dean and provost." 
Always trying to extend the limits of film and video, Emshwiller at the time of 
his death was working with composer Morton Subotnick in what he called 
"interactive and three-dimensional performance with sound/image generation and 
various controlling devices." 
The new work was to create changeable images in the same way that the two men 
had created constantly changing sound in the electronic video opera called 
"Hungers," which they created for the 1987 Los Angeles Arts Festival. "Hungers" 
employed live performance and interactive devices that changed the sound of the 
music according to the environment, so that no two performances were ever the 
same. 
To Emshwiller, the innovative technique was merely a way "to get film out of 
its can." 
A pilot for the last three years, Emshwiller was also planning a video project 
that involved mixing airplane-view images of the Mojave Desert with computer 
graphics and a voice-over. 
Emshwiller's experimental films, including "Relativity," "Totem," "Three 
Dancers" and "Thanatopsis," have been screened at film festivals in New York, 
London, Berlin, Edinburgh and Cannes. 
His multimedia productions were exhibited at Lincoln Center, the Museum of 
Modern Art and the Guggenheim Museum in New York, as well as at the Los Angeles 
Film Festival. 
Emshwiller won grants for his work from the NEA, the Rockefeller, Ford and 
Guggenheim foundations and the Corp. for Public Broadcasting. 
He served on boards of the American Film Institute, the Filmmakers Cooperative, 
the Assn. of Independent Video and Filmmakers and the Independent Television 
Service. 
Survivors include his wife, Carol, three children, Eve, Susan and Peter, and a 
brother, Maclellan. 
A memorial service is scheduled for 7 p.m. Sunday in the Graduation Courtyard 
of the CalArts campus in Valencia. 
