DEFECTORS: DEATH &amp; LIFE; 
INEPT HANDLERS CREATE MORE PERILS FOR ALREADY DESPERATE PEOPLE 
The Moscow suicide of former U.S. Navy intelligence analyst Glenn Michael 
Souther last month only confirmed what CIA defector-handlers have been saying 
for years -- that switching sides is an act of personal desperation and the 
landing is rarely soft. Souther's story is sad but typical: First he sold 
secrets to the Soviets, then he panicked three years ago when an FBI 
interrogation convinced him the spy-hunters were closing in. The Soviets seem 
to have handled his escape with professional skill, but bungled the follow-up 
-- the delicate task of creating a new "home" for a man who left everything 
behind. 
If Souther's suicide was really a suicide -- probable but not certain -- his 
KGB handlers have doubtless been called on the carpet for the sort of grilling 
that would have once led to Siberia. 
Their CIA counterparts would be sympathetic. In the 40 years they have been 
recruiting, debriefing and resettling Soviet defectors, they have learned the 
hard way that the political and intelligence officials who show up on Western 
doorsteps are often unstable personalities, going through something akin to a 
nervous breakdown. Often defectors have changed their minds and gone home -- 
but none more publicly than KGB officer Vitaly S. Yurchenko, who held a 
Washington press conference in 1985 to announce his second thoughts. More 
recently, KGB Col. Viktor P. Gundarev, who defected in February, 1986, 
contacted writer David Wise to complain of insensitive and sometimes highhanded 
treatment by the CIA. The agency has denied the charges but a congressional 
hearing has been promised. 
CIA officers who have handled defectors say no two cases are the same, but most 
have certain common characteristics. Perhaps most important: Virtually all are 
"walk-ins" -- Soviet Bloc officials who contact Western governments to 
volunteer their services. Almost all important defectors have simply showed up 
to sell secrets or plead for asylum. In most cases, the motive is a personal 
crisis -- a failing marriage, heavy debts, professional disappointments, even 
fear of arrest. This despite the fact that CIA stations worldwide devote much 
time to gathering information about East Bloc officials who might be recruited 
-- building up huge files on potential candidates. 
Standard CIA procedure is to attempt to persuade the volunteer to return home 
and work as a spy for a time in return for a promise of future resettlement. 
Sometimes it works, more often not. 
Once a volunteer has been accepted as a defector the personal crisis deepens. 
Within a day or two the defector realizes he can change his mind only at the 
risk of his life; friends and family are left behind;, the people handling him 
are strangers; he feels totally alone. Sensitive handling is critical, just as 
it will be later, when the defector has been pumped of all immediately useful 
information and begins to lose his luster. What defectors need at both 
junctures are friendly faces that do not change too frequently, familiar food 
and surroundings, reassurance they will be protected from the long arm of the 
KGB and confidence they are not going to be set adrift on the alien ocean of 
America. 
Defectors generally say that few things are more important than hearing and 
speaking their own language. In its early days, the CIA had plenty of native 
Russian-speakers, but they have long-since died or retired. The agency is now 
hard put to find fluent Russian linguists. 
The CIA has handled scores of defectors more or less successfully -- but 
sometimes it all goes wrong. The case of Yurchenko is an administrative and 
human horror story from start to finish. Yurchenko complained when debriefings 
were conducted in English, emphasizing his feeling of dislocation. His 
questioners pumped him relentlessly for operational detail, and then fanned his 
personal fears by passing on his still-warm secrets to the press. Loneliness 
increased after an affair collapsed when his lover refused to join him in 
exile. He began to miss his daughter and adopted son in Moscow. None of this 
seems to have been picked up by his CIA handlers. 
Yurchenko's three-page biography, released by the CIA after his embarrassing 
redefection, suggests he was genuine, not an agent dispatched to muddy the 
waters as some claimed. Questions of allegiance are difficult to answer, but it 
seems the CIA squandered an important source of information by its failure to 
hold Yurchenko's hand through an agonizing period of psychological adjustment 
that can seem like dying. 
One chronic weakness of agency handling has been its appetite for operational 
details -- especially nuggets of hard counterintelligence information with the 
average life-span of a black fly. Agency handlers well know that a pell-mell 
damage assessment will begin as soon as a defector is missed. If investigators 
don't move quickly they will find the scene swept clean and suspects whisked 
off before the Black Maria can arrive. But the U.S. government has a voracious 
appetite for personal information about their shadowy opponents and the CIA 
debriefers lose no time in passing on gossip about the Soviets and their 
allies. 
Anyone who has talked to defectors will remember initial puzzlement at the 
weirdly detailed stories of human failings and bureaucratic infighting behind 
the Iron Curtain. This compulsive retailing of scandal is a kind of debriefing 
shell shock. Defectors are only human; they quickly learn that Washington ears 
prick up at the first breath of venal or sexual intrigue. Yet most defectors 
resent that initial punishing period of long days when teams of debriefers drag 
out every last detail. The unhappy defector is at least the center of attention 
while being sucked dry. Worse is the arrival of the clerical drones to tidy the 
paper work -- a sure sign the intelligence professionals have lost interest. At 
that point the promise of meaningful work is what defectors need, but rarely 
get. 
The criticism of CIA defector-handling sparked by the Yurchenko case, and 
revived by Gundarev's complaints, is only the latest appearance of an old 
problem dating back to the earliest days of Western relations with the Soviet 
regime. 
No nation has ever had more defectors over a longer period of time than the 
Soviet Union -- and the rest of the world has never depended more heavily on 
defectors for important information about an opponent. Secrecy was clamped down 
immediately after the 1917 October Revolution; Soviet borders were all but 
sealed to emigration by the end of the 1920s, and the Soviet population was 
effectively cut off from contact with foreigners inside the country by the 
purges of the 1930s. The result was the world's first modern totalitarian 
society -- opaque and conspiratorial. Outsiders had only two sources of 
information: passive clues such as the lineup of leaders during May Day parades 
and the testimony of defectors. One of the first was Boris Bajanov, who had 
been Josef Stalin's personal secretary in the early 1920s, closely followed by 
Georges Agabekov, the OGPU agent in charge of the hunt for Bajanov. 
Much important Soviet history is still known only from the reports of defectors 
-- but Western analysts and intelligence officers were slow to learn how to 
exploit it. Two defectors from the NKVD of the 1930s, Walter Krivitsky and 
Alexander Orlov, provided much of what the West knows about Stalin's conduct of 
the purges. But neither was systematically debriefed by U.S. intelligence 
organizations. The FBI first learned of Krivitsky after his memoirs ran in the 
Saturday Evening Post in 1939. They had still not questioned him when he was 
found dead in a hotel room two years later, an apparent suicide. Orlov defected 
in 1938, but entered the United States secretly and remained in hiding until 
1953. Some CIA officers valued what Orlov could tell them but most of them 
thought it ancient history. 
Defectors continued to be an important source of information about Soviet 
politics and leaders after World War II, and the Soviets took extraordinary 
measures to prevent their escape. In one celebrated case of the early 1950s, 
teams of CIA and KGB officers tore a Vienna restaurant apart in their battle 
over a Soviet diplomat who could not make up his mind to flee or to stay. 
On other occasions the Soviets have snatched would-be defectors from under the 
noses of Western intelligence officers. But it rarely comes to that. The first 
line of Soviet defense has been the isolation of citizens and officials. 
Diplomats abroad live in supervised compounds; their older children are 
educated in the Soviet Union where they serve in effect as hostages. Official 
delegations are routinely accompanied by KGB guards who read the roll call 
morning, noon and night. When defectors manage to slip through the net, the 
Soviets try to lure them back, promising forgiveness and arranging for tearful 
phone calls with relatives. 
But successful escape in the past did not end Soviet interest. Those who made 
it safely knew the KGB's memory was long -- over the years many have been 
murdered or kidnaped or died mysteriously. In the early 1970s, a Russian emigre 
organization in West Germany obtained a KGB wanted list that included names and 
descriptions of about 470 defectors between 1945 and 1969, many under sentence 
of death for illegal departure. This document was used as the basis for a study 
of Soviet defectors by Vladimir Krasnov, who fled a Soviet tour group in 1962 
and is now a professor at the Monterey Institute of International Studies in 
California. 
In "Soviet Defectors," Krasnov found that defections offered a barometer of the 
quality of Soviet life. Russians were unhappiest, and most likely to defect, 
during the rigors of the Stalinist period. When life opened up, as it did under 
Nikita S. Khrushchev, defections dropped. 
Krasnov's book was completed before Mikhail S. Gorbachev began his reformation 
of Soviet society. But if the past is any guide, then the defection of ordinary 
Soviet citizens to the West has probably fallen off -- it is easier to leave 
legally, and not so many want to go. Gorbachev's most important break with 
Soviet custom has been his willingness to risk glasnost -- a combination of 
open politics, free discussion and telling the truth about the Soviet past. But 
some observers suspect that Gorbachev is saying one thing in public and another 
in the Politburo. If this should be true, then a defector will probably be 
first to bring the news. 
