ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: BREA; 
RESIDENTS LOBBY FOR THEIR SMALL TOWN 
At this week's Town Hall meeting, concerns that Brea's small-town atmosphere 
was under siege overshadowed discussions about the city's traffic, noise and 
glut of office space. 
Speaker after speaker and caller after caller, the later watching at home on 
Brea's cable TV channel, addressed the City Council about what they considered 
to be the adverse impacts of the city's ambitious redevelopment plan. 
Despite Councilman Ron Isles' remarks that downtown redevelopment represented a 
"heart transplant" for the city, several residents were more concerned about 
what would happen to the old heart -- the downtown merchants whose shops have 
lined Brea Boulevard for years. 
"Small merchants add a special feel to the small-town atmosphere," Bev Perry 
told the council and audience of about 75 people. "I'd hate to see Brea become 
a city of franchises." 
Another caller asked the council and the rest of the city to remember the 
loyalty and support these merchants have shown the city. 
Both residents were assured that the new downtown would have a place for the 
mom-and-pop establishments. 
Not so easily answered were questions regarding the financing of downtown 
redevelopment. 
Several speakers and callers wanted assurances that the redevelopment agency 
had the funds to pay for the entire project and to pay for the debt that would 
be incurred. 
More specifically, resident Bill Vega asked how much the project would end up 
costing taxpayers. 
"We need to know what percentage (of the price tag) is the developer's money 
covering. How much is put into redevelopment bonds? How much is going to be 
paid down the line (by taxpayers)?" Vega asked. 
Councilman Wayne D. Wedin said the city could not reveal cost information now 
because it is still negotiating an agreement with the developer. 
But he added that the figures would be available in the future. 
Of equal concern to residents was development in general, which has been 
chipping away at Brea's small-town atmosphere -- the very thing that attracted 
them to the city in the first place. 
A caller who identified himself as W. C. Larry asked bluntly: "Why haven't you 
stopped all the building?" 
Others echoed that sentiment, complaining about increased traffic and noise. 
More residential and commercial development will only add to those problems, 
they said. DANIELLE A. FOUQUETTE 
