SHELLS RAIN ON BEIRUT; 13 DIE IN 'NIGHT OF TERROR' 
Warring Syrian and Christian forces battered Beirut with 50,000 shells and 
rockets overnight, killing 13 people in a random bombardment that one radio 
station called "a night of insane terror." 
The eight-hour barrage Thursday and Friday sparked fires that raged out of 
control and gutted scores of warehouses, shops and apartment buildings. 
Orange flames blazed against the night sky as residents cowered in basements 
and bomb shelters. 
Like an Earthquake 
Almost every neighborhood in the divided capital and the Christian port city of 
Juniyah were hit "as if by a killer earthquake," said a police spokesman. "It 
was Beirut's night of horror and terror." 
He said 13 people were killed and 65 were wounded, raising the toll to 494 dead 
and 2,014 injured since the latest fighting erupted March 8 between Lebanese 
army commander Maj. Gen. Michel Aoun's mainly Christian troops and an alliance 
of the Syrian army and Druze Muslim militias. 
It was the heaviest shelling duel in the four-month confrontation "in terms of 
firepower used and destruction wreaked," said the police spokesman. 
Syrian gunners in West Beirut and northern Lebanon joined forces at 8 p.m. 
Thursday and started blasting Juniyah, East Beirut and the Christian port of 
Byblos, he said. 
Aoun's forces struck back at Syrian batteries with howitzers, but their allies 
from the Lebanese Forces militia fired an indiscriminate barrage at West 
Beirut. The shelling tapered off at 4 a.m. 
People emerged from bunkers and jammed supermarkets, buying food and bottled 
water in anticipation of another bombardment. 
"Is this apocalypse?" asked Hisham Sinno, a Sunni Muslim grocer whose shop was 
destroyed. "I'm destroyed. I have no source of income left." 
"Let them all roast in hell, those who are roasting Beirut!" said Albert Tawil, 
a Christian bank employee in East Beirut. "I wish one day I'll drink their 
blood." 
Broken power cables dangled on streets littered with craters and glass shards. 
Hundreds of burned-out cars smoldered. 
"A night of insane terror," the Muslim-controlled Voice of the Nation radio 
said of the thunderous duel waged with multi-barreled launchers that fire 40 
rockets a minute. 
"We're being killed in our beds. . . . Beirut is being massacred, and no one in 
the Arab world or the outside world seems to care," said an announcer on 
Christian-run Voice of Lebanon, his voice choking with emotion. 
One rocket devastated the top floor of the seven-story building housing offices 
of the Associated Press and the U.S. television networks CBS and NBC. 
"The explosion blew me out of my bed. I found myself flat on the floor with 
glass shards showering me," said AP correspondent Farouk Nassar, who lives on 
the sixth floor. 
The blast shattered windows and hurled pieces of furniture down the street. 
The U.N. headquarters in West Beirut and the Soviet Embassy compound also took 
direct hits, but police said no casualties were reported. 
An electric tools warehouse in West Beirut burned from midnight to midday. Fire 
engines were unable to battle the fire because of a water shortage. 
Another exodus followed the bombardment. Police estimated at least 100,000 
residents fled Beirut on Thursday and Friday. 
"What have children done to be butchered like that?" asked one of the refugees, 
Alia Shami, as she loaded the family car. Hundreds of vehicles formed convoys 
carrying frightened civilians to safer areas. 
