PAIR OF LAGUNA ART FESTIVALS OFFER DOUBLE THE DIVERSION; 
SAWDUST AND ART-A-FAIR EXHIBITS, BOTH IN 23RD YEAR, FEATURE VARIETY OF ITEMS IN 
PRACTICALLY ALL MEDIA 
Well, it's that time of year again for people who love to wander the booths of 
arts and crafts festivals, hands clutching fattening goodies, eyes peeled for 
handcrafted objects that simply can't be passed up. 
The Laguna Beach perennials, Art-a-Fair and the Sawdust Festival -- each in its 
23rd year -- are neighbors once again at 777 and 935 Laguna Canyon Road, 
respectively. Both fairs feature items in virtually all media from quilts and 
toys to paintings and sculpture, and will remain open through Aug. 27. 
Art-a-Fair offers work for sale by a jury-selected group of 160 artists and 
craftsmen, and by "celebrity artist" Red Skelton. Demonstration booths offer 
tastes of diverse media and techniques, including stone sculpture, paper 
collage, etching, watercolor, ceramics, oil painting and Chinese brush 
painting. 
A major attraction is a motor-driven, 30-foot-long kaleidoscope with 9-foot 
stained-glass wheels; it's billed as the world's largest. Entertainment 
includes bluegrass, oldies pop, folk, reggae, Celtic and dulcimer music ("all 
upbeat," according to a festival spokeswoman) as well as children's activities. 
Refreshments are available. 
Art-a-Fair hours are 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 
11 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays. Admission is $3.50 general, $2.50 for senior 
citizens. Children younger than 12 get in free when accompanied by an adult. 
Group rates are available. For information, call (714) 494-4514. 
The Sawdust Festival, Art-a-Fair's wealthier cousin, offers work for sale by 
220 artists and craftsmen on its landscaped grounds, which now contain several 
permanent California bungalow-style buildings. Sawdust is a non-juried show; 
artists are admitted on a lottery basis. More than 20 demonstration booths 
feature such activities as glass blowing, glass sculpture, leather working, 
jewelry making, portrait drawing and face painting. 
Daily entertainment includes mimes, jugglers, magicians and numerous musical 
groups. The Young Artists Booth offers free arts and crafts lessons to children 
ages 6 to 12. Refreshments are available. 
Sawdust Festival hours are 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays, 10 
a.m. to 11 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays. Today only, the hours will be 10 a.m. to 
7 p.m. Admission is $4 general, $3 for senior citizens. Children younger than 
12 get in free when accompanied by an adult. For information, call (714) 
494-3030. 
