FRENCH OFFICIAL LOSES JOB AFTER RENT-A-CROWD CAPER 
A French Cabinet minister has resigned in disgrace after he was caught hiring 
unemployed actors, students and day laborers to pose as an audience for senior 
Socialist Party speakers at a sparsely attended conference here. 
The rent-a-crowd scheme unraveled Tuesday when a news cameraman from one of the 
French networks recognized a television comic actor in the audience of the 
somber colloquium sponsored by an intellectual futurist organization, Dialogues 
2000. 
Other journalists became suspicious when members of the crowd, mistaking the 
reporters for conference organizers, asked directions for collecting the 343 
francs ($60) they had been promised for attending speeches by the Speaker of 
the National Assembly, Laurent Fabius, and Socialist Party First Secretary 
Pierre Mauroy, among others. 
By Thursday, the affair had expanded into a national embarrassment for the 
ruling Socialists, who were ridiculed in cartoons and articles on the front 
pages of all the daily newspapers. 
"A Big Hand for the Politicians," mocked the headline in the Communist daily, 
L'Humanite. For the Socialists, who have shown a steady decline in public 
opinion polls recently, it was the latest in a series of setbacks that began in 
March when party leaders feuded petulantly at a political convention over who 
would be the next candidate for president in 1995 when incumbent Francois 
Mitterrand retires. 
At first, Minister of Tourism Olivier Stirn, organizer of the ill-fated 
Dialogues 2000 colloquium, attempted to defend himself by arguing that paying 
the audience helped to alleviate unemployment. The several hundred actors, 
students and day laborers applauded enthusiastically during the three hours of 
speeches Tuesday afternoon. 
"It was a tiny mistake with no bad intentions," Stirn blurted under questioning 
from a television reporter. He said the stand-ins were hired after only a few 
legitimate invitees attended earlier sessions. 
Late Wednesday night, however, Stirn was forced to resign under mounting 
pressure from members of his own political party and members of the opposition 
gleeful over the latest pratfall for the ruling Socialists. 
Invited to speak after Fabius and Mauroy late Tuesday afternoon, Minister of 
Defense Jean-Pierre Chevenement had watched in astonishment as the meeting hall 
emptied as he approached the speaker's platform. The audience had been hired 
for only three hours and that time was up just as it was his turn to speak. 
Informed of the ruse, Chevenement could barely contain his rage. He was among 
the first to call for Stirn's head. 
The French political system forgives many sins that would be considered fatal 
in the United States and other Western democracies. Cabinet ministers are 
seldom forced to resign. The last was in 1985 when the late Defense Minister 
Charles Hernu resigned for his role in the bombing of the ship Rainbow Warrior 
in New Zealand. Greenpeace, the environmental organization, employed the vessel 
in its fight against French nuclear tests in the Pacific. 
The one sin that apparently finds no forgiveness in the French political scene 
is provoking public embarrassment. There is a common expression in French that 
"ridicule never killed anyone." But from infancy, French children are chided by 
their parents to avoid being ridicule. 
Being ridiculous apparently proved fatal to Stirn's political career. 
"The affair is basically just embarrassing," an adviser to Prime Minister 
Michel Rocard told a reporter from the Paris newspaper, Liberation. "But it 
came at a bad time. There are times when it is criminal to look ridiculous." 
