MAGNATE SUES TINY FIRM OVER USE OF 'TRUMP CARDS' 
Real estate magnate Donald J. Trump usually enjoys seeing his name on things, 
but he's fighting a small Georgia company over "Trump Cards," snazzy business 
cards the billionaire says infringe on his name. 
Positive Concepts Ltd., the Lithia Springs company that makes the cards, 
contends it got the name from the term used for a suit in a card game that 
ranks above all others. The company's lawyers say the case has escalated into a 
battle over the limits of money and power. 
"Donald Trump simply wants to own the word 'trump,' and anybody who wants 
anything to do with it will have to face Donald Trump," said Atlanta attorney 
Kevin L. Ward. "We can't give up a word in the English language just because 
somebody has the power and money to do so." 
But Trump's attorneys say their client's name has become so well known that 
consumers are going to be confused into thinking the cards are backed by the 
man. 
Last month, Trump won a federal court order temporarily barring a company from 
using the name "Trump Shuttle" for a moving and storage subsidiary in New York. 
Trump renamed Eastern Airlines' Washington-to-New York-to-Boston air shuttle 
the "Trump Shuttle" after buying it for $365 million this year. 
Attorneys now are compiling depositions for the business card case, which 
ultimately will be considered by the federal Trademark and Patent Board in 
Washington. 
Used by Another Firm 
At issue is PCL's line of business cards, which feature a photograph of the 
holder. The suburban Atlanta company has been making and distributing the cards 
since 1982, and currently has sales of about $2 million. 
Company President Edward A. Zito said he adopted the name from a California 
company that also made the cards under the name "Trump Cards." Zito said the 
California company went out of business in 1982 and never obtained a trademark. 
Zito said he was unfamiliar with Donald Trump at the time. Zito does not play 
cards, but said he decided to stick with the trump name after looking it up in 
a dictionary. 
PCL applied for a trademark registration in 1985, and Trump's attorneys filed a 
notice of opposition after the government published the request in 1988. 
In a written notice, Trump's attorneys alleged that PCL chose the "Trump Cards" 
name to "benefit . . . from the worldwide fame, distribution and glamour of 
Donald J. Trump and his 'Trump' name." 
