THEATER OWNERS HIT ON-SCREEN ABC PROMOS 
Moviegoers may be surprised when a new type of advertising pops onto the screen 
later this month. Beginning July 28, viewers at nearly one-third of the 
country's movie screens will be shown not only trailers for upcoming movies, 
but also one for upcoming ABC television shows. 
Marketing experts are praising the ingenuity of the idea, but some theater 
owners are crying foul. 
"I think it's ludicrous," said Greg Rutkowski, vice president of West Coast 
operations for the 1,614-screen AMC Entertainment chain. "I don't think we 
should in any way, shape or form be encouraging our patrons to stay home and 
watch TV. Let's face it, if they're sitting at home watching ABC's fall lineup, 
they're not in the theaters. Television and the theaters really are not 
complementary businesses. It's the dumbest thing I've ever heard of." 
The ABC ad will be shown through Aug. 24 via Screenvision Cinema Network, the 
nation's largest independent broker of cinema advertising. With more than 5,700 
screens nationwide, Screenvision handles such advertisers as Kodak, Mitsubishi, 
Dr Pepper and Toyota. 
Metropolitan Theatres, which has 80 screens in Palm Springs, Santa Barbara and 
downtown Los Angeles, is the only chain with a large number of California 
theaters that contracts with Screenvision. But despite the contract (which is 
limited to Metropolitan's Los Angeles and drive-in theaters), Metropolitan 
President Bruce Corwin said that his chain has "great concerns" about the ABC 
ad. 
"By encouraging people to stay home," Corwin said, "it keeps them away from the 
movies. Our major job is to get people to go out to the movies." 
According to Mark Zakarin, ABC's vice president of marketing, the network's 
60-second spot will advertise two prime-time series -- the returning comedy 
"Anything But Love," starring Jamie Lee Curtis and Richard Lewis, and a new 
show about the Pony Express, "Young Riders." 
"We did 'Young Riders' because it is a show that we feel will have teen and 
young adult appeal (in addition to) the production value and action that will 
make it look really good on movie screens," said Zakarin, who described the 
program as a "new- age Western" with rock music and teen-age stars. 
The network selected "Anything But Love," he said, because of Curtis' following 
with movie audiences after starring in such hit films as "A Fish Called Wanda." 
Zakarin said the ad will be targeted at teen and young-adult audiences, who in 
the summer are "out doing things, like going to the movies" and are therefore 
hard to reach through regular on-air promotion. 
Although Zakarin and Alex Szabo, Screenvision's executive vice president, 
maintained that the ABC ad is based on entertainment values and takes a 
"soft-sell" approach, the spot has sparked off a whole new round in the 
continuing debate over whether advertisements of any kind have a place in movie 
houses. 
"It's an awkward position for us," said Bob Selig, president of the Theatre 
Assn. of California. "We have some of our members who favor advertising and use 
a great deal of it in their theaters, and others who are extremely opposed to 
it (and) firmly believe you do not have the right to impose (an ad) upon your 
theater patron." 
Spokesmen at several chains, including United Artists Theatres, SoCal Cinemas, 
Pacific Theatres and Landmark Theatres, spoke out flatly against screen ads, 
saying that they antagonize people who go to the movies in part to escape the 
barrage of ads on television. 
"No matter how good the production values are, it's overwhelming when (a 
commercial) is up there on the screen," said Gary Meyer, Landmark's executive 
vice president. "They're shoving it down your face, and you can't leave, 
because it only lasts a minute or two and the movie starts before you're even 
out of the theater." 
Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Assn. of America, agreed. "I'm 
opposed to all advertising in theaters," he said. "I just don't think that 
people who spend $5, $6, $7 to go see a movie should be bombarded with 
advertisements." 
Nor does advertising revenue necessarily offset potential costs, Landmark's 
Meyer pointed out. 
"You want to get a certain number of showings (of a film) in each day," he 
said. "When you add up all (the trailers for) coming attractions, you lose a 
show a day, and when you add on commercials you can lose another show or two a 
day." 
On the other hand, Toronto-based Cineplex Odeon, which has 1,300 screens in the 
United States and an additional 575 in Canada, takes the pro-advertising stand. 
"Screen advertising has been practiced and accepted in Europe for decades," 
said Lynda Friendly, the chain's executive vice president. "Am I opposed to the 
concept of advertising at the movies? No -- especially if it's done right and 
if it has artistic and redeeming qualities." 
Although Cineplex Odeon does not contract with Screenvision and won't be 
running the ABC spot, the chain has run ads for such companies and products as 
Club Med, Coca-Cola, Nike, Dentyne, American Express, Chex Cereal and First 
Chicago Bank. 
Although several of the major studios refused to comment on the issue, Barry 
Reardon, president of distribution for Warner Bros., agreed with those who are 
againstmovie screen ads. "We don't condone running commercials with our 
movies," he said. "We think it belittles our features and is an annoyance. We 
are definitely opposed to it." 
But Charles Glenn, Orion's executive vice president of marketing, said he would 
be concerned only if the ads interfered with the time usually alloted for what 
he called the "traditional type of screen advertising" -- promos for upcoming 
movies. 
Malcolm Green, chairman of the National Assn. of Theater Owners, said that 
while deciding whether to accept advertising was up to individual theater 
owners, the issue of television being in competition with the movies was "not 
meaningful." 
"We're having a terrific summer," Green said. "TV is there -- it's a fact of 
life. But movies advertise on TV at least once an hour or more, and there's all 
kinds of programs geared at bringing people movie news." 
Said Screenvision's Szabo: "ABC's . . . competition is NBC and CBS, not 
theaters. Movies certainly advertise on TV, and the two are really 
complimentary advertising mediums." 
(According to the New York-based Television Bureau of Advertising Inc., motion 
picture advertising on television totalled $383 million in 1988, with $183.9 
million of that spent on network ads.) 
Orion's Glenn agreed that the two were not in competition, and was full of 
praise for ABC's ad idea: "They're going to be advertising to a captive 
audience and one that's heretofore unused to advertising (of that sort). It's a 
clever and interesting thing to do. . . . It's very resourceful on their part." 
Glenn did say, however, that he hoped the ad would make clear to viewers that 
it was for a fall TV show and not an upcoming movie. 
So what should moviegoers expect when that ABC ad hits their screens? 
According to ABC's Zakarin: "Viewers won't know it's anything but a trailer for 
a movie until the last three or four seconds. It's as soft a sell as you can 
have. It just says 'coming this fall' and shows the ABC logo. There's no night 
or time announced on the spot -- it's that soft. . . . The spot just makes you 
more aware of both of these shows, their appeals and charms." 
Zakarin said ABC would do follow-up studies on the ad's effectiveness after its 
monthlong run, and said that while "summer seems to be the most natural time to 
do movie screen advertising for TV shows . . . another time we could 
conceivably do this would be at Christmas." 
"But for now," Zakarin said, "we're sort of making this up as we go along." 
