NOT-GUILTY PLEA IN SHOOTING; 
WOMAN ACCUSED OF ATTEMPTED MURDER OF ALLEGED RAPIST 
Elizabeth Gooden, the Los Angeles woman who police say shot a neighbor eight 
times after the district attorney's office refused to prosecute him for 
allegedly raping her, pleaded not guilty Thursday to a charge of attempted 
murder. 
At her arraignment before Los Angeles Municipal Judge Glenette Blackwell, 
Gooden, 26, listened impassively. Similar charges against her brother, LeRoy, 
31, who, according to police, took the gun from Gooden after the shooting 
Tuesday night, were dropped earlier in the day. 
Meanwhile, the victim, Wilson Picquet, 38, a school bus driver, remained in 
serious condition at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. 
Blackwell set bail at $25,000 for Gooden, who is unemployed, and scheduled a 
preliminary hearing in Los Angeles Superior Court for Aug. 8. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Norm Shapiro told the judge that he did not expect a long 
preliminary hearing. 
"It's no secret what happened," he told reporters after the court proceeding, 
pointing out that there were at least three eyewitnesses to the shooting 
outside the apartment building on Coco Avenue in the Crenshaw District where 
Gooden, her brother and Picquet live. 
Shapiro added that, regardless of the motive Gooden may have had for shooting 
Picquet, "this was a premeditated shooting. As far as the law is concerned, 
this is not a justified situation." 
The prosecutor noted that, according to police reports, Gooden was waiting for 
Picquet outside the apartment building when Picquet returned home Tuesday night 
after his release from jail, where he had been held for investigation of rape. 
Witnesses told police that Gooden shot Picquet in the chest at point-blank 
range and, after he fell, shot him seven more times. 
The prosecutor added that the rape allegation "does not excuse what she did." 
Shapiro said that a central issue in the case is whether a victim is justified 
in shooting her attacker, even after days have passed and the authorities have 
intervened. 
Deputy Public Defender Robert J. LaBau, who represented Gooden on Thursday, 
declined to comment on the case or on Gooden's account of what happened. 
Before the shooting, Gooden had expressed frustration and disapointment to 
police and to neighbors over the refusal of the district attorney's office to 
file charges against Picquet, whom Gooden accused of raping her at his 
apartment last Friday morning. 
The district attorney's office concluded that there was not sufficient evidence 
to file the rape charges. 
