RUSH-HOUR AIR: COST IT OUT?; 
DEALING WITH CONGESTION AND POLLUTION 
What price cleaner air and less rush-hour congestion? Would it make sense to 
charge tolls during rush hours, say, to cars with only one passenger? How can 
we know if we don't test the proposition? 
Sure, it's a dangerous question to ask in a region that calls its highways 
freeways. But consider some cost-benefit facts. Californians pay about a penny 
a mile in gas tax. Society pays, one way or another, half again that much per 
mile just for the trail of air pollution that automobiles leave. 
None of this pollution mathematics is new to theoretical economists. But it was 
largely overlooked until environmentalists and smog and transportation planners 
realized that solving the congestion problem would help reduce smog. Idling 
cars and ones that go slow cause more air problems than vehicles that are 
moving efficiently. 
So now the experts are dusting off the notion that the same kind of pricing 
mechanism that rightly discourages companies from selling $5 products for $1 
might serve to persuade commuters to double up, triple up or even delay a 
commute in ways that traditional regulations may not. 
Some of the statistics that underpin the concept of market forces in 
transportation seem solid enough. Others largely result from random curiosity 
among economists and transportation buffs -- and from the understandable desire 
to see if there isn't some viable alternative to the regulatory approach to the 
air quality problem. 
Some people are attracted to price mechanisms because they put market forces in 
the driver's seat instead of impersonal -- and sometimes imperfect -- 
regulatory bureaucracies. Some business leaders are interested in pricing 
mechanisms because it is a world they are familiar with. They understand that 
no company can stay in business spending $5 to build a product it can sell for 
only $1. Government can get away with this sort of behavior longer than a 
manufacturer who is held by the invisible hand of market economics. But not 
even government can do it forever. 
But even if all the pricing statistics were beyond dispute, the approach -- 
which perhaps unavoidably gets reduced to "commuter fees" -- needs testing to 
verify that it is not just another way to make life even more difficult for the 
poor. 
These studies and tests may well be the most important task before the region's 
big transportation and smog control regions -- the Southern California Assn. of 
Governments and the South Coast Air Quality Management District. They should 
get on with it. If not, the Legislature, which has been looking for ways to 
move Southern California toward regional government, should direct the agencies 
to do a joint study of market-oriented approaches and find the funds for them. 
As a bonus, the effort might even provide something of a real-life starter test 
of a regional government approach to air quality. 
