STAR DRUG PROZAC BECOMES LILLY LIABILITY 
Prozac, a depression remedy that has been a star performer for pharmaceuticals 
giant Eli Lilly &amp; Co., has turned into a sudden liability in the wake of 
recent lawsuits targeting the drug. 
Though Indianapolis-based Lilly defends the safety of Prozac, noting that more 
than 2 million people have taken the prescription drug, analysts worry about 
the effect of negative news on a drug that is becoming increasingly important 
to Lilly. 
Two suits filed in the last two weeks blame Prozac for inducing violent 
thoughts in a New York woman, who slashed herself hundreds of times, and in a 
Kentucky man, who shot and killed seven people and wounded 13 others before 
killing himself at a printing plant in Louisville last year. 
As a result, Lilly, whose sales and earnings have been rising partly on the 
strength of Prozac, has been taking a beating on Wall Street. The stock dropped 
$4.375 on Thursday. 
Before the suits hit the headlines, Lilly's stock had been moving up. It closed 
at $88.50 on July 16, the day before the first suit was filed. 
Lilly's shares inched up 87.5 cents in heavy trading Friday to close at $80.50 
on the New York Stock Exchange, while the Dow Jones industrial average fell 
22.28 points. Slightly more than 1.9 million shares traded, making Lilly the 
seventh most actively traded stock on the exchange. 
"I view the lawsuits themselves as a non-event. . . . There really is no 
scientific basis for the complaint. People who are depressed are suicidal 
anyway," said Rita Freedman, an analyst with Provident National Bank in 
Philadelphia. 
However, she said, the issue of concern to Lilly is the possibility of 
additional lawsuits and more "negative publicity" about a drug that is very 
important to the company financially. 
Freedman estimated that sales from the drug have already reached about $385 
million this year, compared to about $350 million for all of last year. 
Analysts expect Prozac sales to top $650 million this year and to hit $1 
billion in 1991. 
"It is indeed nail-biting time (for Lilly) because you just don't know what 
eventually will happen" in the political arena and before a jury, said Viren 
Mehta, partner in Mehta &amp; Isaly, a New York-based pharmaceutical research 
group. 
"But at the moment there is no reason to believe that there is anything wrong 
with the way Prozac works or the way Eli Lilly has marketed Prozac," he said. 
Added Richard R. Stover, an analyst with the Alex. Brown &amp; Sons brokerage 
firm, "There definitely is a concern that patients who can truly benefit from 
the drug could be scared away from continuing to use it, or some physicians may 
be scared away from prescribing it." 
A Lilly spokesman could not be reached for comment Friday, but the company said 
in a statement that the murderer in the Kentucky case, Joseph Wesbecker, "had a 
lengthy history of psychiatric disturbance, including suicide attempts and 
homicidal threats prior to taking Prozac. It would not appear that Prozac 
caused this behavior." 
Since it was introduced in December, 1987, sales of Prozac have soared because 
it has fewer side effects than drugs previously available. It was the subject 
of favorable cover stories in Newsweek and New York magazines, and the National 
Enquirer called it a "wonder drug." 
But there have been complaints, most notably in an article last February in the 
American Journal of Psychiatry. Author Martin Teicher, a research psychiatrist 
at Harvard University, discussed six patients who developed intense and violent 
thoughts of suicide while taking Prozac. 
The Church of Scientology, through its affiliate, the Citizens Commission on 
Human Rights, on Wednesday sent a letter to Rep. John Dingell, chairman of the 
House Energy and Commerce Committee, calling for an investigation of Prozac and 
a recall of the drug. Scientology, whose members often wear shirts reading 
"Psychiatry Kills," has long campaigned against psychiatric drugs. 
A spokesman for Dingell said the committee is not investigating Prozac. 
