BATTLE IS STILL RAGING OVER VITAMIN-MINERAL SUPPLEMENTATION 
Perhaps no other subject arouses as much acrimony among nutritional authorities 
as vitamin and mineral supplementation. 
Firmly entrenched on one side are the skeptics who, like researchers at the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, call supplementation "a questionable and 
potentially harmful practice." On the opposing side stand the apologists, who 
claim that taking megadoses of vitamins and minerals can extend the life span 
and boost the body's immune system. 
Between these two extremes are the many nutritionists and physicians who 
cautiously endorse taking a daily multiple supplement with 100% of the 
Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) as "insurance" against nutritional 
deficiencies. The Food and Nutrition Board, the government agency that sets 
nutritional standards, defines the RDA as the amount of each nutrient necessary 
to keep most people in good health, based on available scientific knowledge. 
"Supplementation may be warranted after age 50 because nutritional needs change 
and because the American fast-food diet makes it difficult to get complete 
nutrition," said Maryanne Painter, a dietitian for Health Care Pharmacies in 
San Diego. "You may be a candidate if you don't consume two servings of milk 
products daily, two servings of protein foods (such as lean red meat, fish and 
poultry), four serving of fruits and vegetables (one-half cup each) and four 
servings of starches, including cereals, breads and rolls. 
Supplements should not provide more than 100% of the RDA, she warned, because 
certain vitamins, such as Vitamins A and D, become toxic in excessively high 
concentrations. High doses of Vitamin A, for example, may cause blurred vision 
and headaches, while excesses of Vitamin D may cause vomiting and diarrhea, 
weight loss and muscular weakness. 
Wholesome Food 
"Rather than megadosing on vitamins to make up for an inadequate diet, I 
recommend eating healthful, wholesome food and using vitamins as an adjunct to 
your diet," Painter said. "If you listen to your body and eat a varied diet 
that incorporates your favorite foods in moderation, as Hippocrates said, 'food 
will be your medicine.' " 
Some nutritionists, however, claim that given our present agricultural and 
food-processing systems, relying strictly on unsupplemented diets can only 
create nutritional deficiencies. 
Getting adequate nutrition from food "was possible 100 or even 50 years ago, 
when all foods were grown on fertile soils, were unrefined, and unprocessed, 
and contained all the nutrients nature intended them to contain," writes Paavo 
Airola, a well-known nutritionist, in "The Holistic Health Lifebook." "But 
today, when soils are depleted, when foods are loaded with residues of hundreds 
of toxic insecticides and other chemicals, the addition of vitamins and food 
supplements to the diet is of vital importance. "Nutritionally inferior and 
poisoned foods of today cause many nutritional deficiencies, derangement in 
body chemistry, and lowered resistance to disease." 
Some nutritional authorities do not fault the food system itself, but people's 
lack of knowledge in balancing meals for adequate nutrition. 
"Satisfying the RDAs at the dinner table is a wonderful goal but unrealistic," 
said Paul Saltman, a University of California biology professor and author of 
"The California Nutrition Book." 
Safety Net 
"Unless you're a superb nutritionist and know how to balance foods to provide 
the essential micronutrients, you need supplements to act as a safety net to 
catch needs that fall through the dietary cracks." 
Unfortunately, government studies of older men and women reveal that more than 
half get less than two-thirds of the RDAs for calories and several vitamins and 
minerals, he said. Common deficiencies of the aging include shortages of 
calcium and Vitamin D necessary to combat osteoporosis, the trace minerals zinc 
and iron, and essential B vitamins, such as thiamine, Folacin, B-6 and B-12. 
"Even if seniors consume 100% of the RDA, the figures established by the 
government may be inappropriate for them," Saltman said. "There is only one set 
of RDAs for all men and women over 50, yet there is substantial evidence that 
people's nutritional needs vary dramatically between 51 and 65 or 75." 
Nutrition-minded seniors intent on getting adequate amounts of key nutrients 
may encounter another problem: absorption. According to David Olson, a 
chiropractor in San Diego, many seniors have trouble absorbing calcium because 
they cannot produce sufficient stomach acid. Older adults also have trouble 
with Vitamin B-12 absorption, putting them at risk for pernicious anemia. 
As the digestive system becomes less efficient in later life, supplementation 
may help offset problems caused by decreased absorption, he said. But people 
also can make life style changes to aid the digestive process. 
Eat Calmly 
"To increase absorption, it's important for people to eat calmly," he said, 
"otherwise digestion is hindered by anxiety. And people should chew their food 
throughly before swallowing, because an enzyme secreted in the mouth, ptyalin, 
begins to break down carbohydrates, facilitating digestion." 
Olson also recommends eating small, frequent meals throughout the day, easing 
the burden imposed on the digestive system. He also cautions taking fiber 
products -- such as oat bran, apple pectin and wheat bran -- apart from meals, 
because fiber blocks the absorption of certain key minerals. 
Seniors who use over-the-counter and prescription medication need to be 
especially conscious of food-drug interactions, which may deplete bodily stores 
of important nutrients, said Jerry Hammond, a pharmacist and president of the 
San Diego County Pharmacists Assn. 
Aspirin, for example, impairs assimilation of Vitamin C, he said. Mineral oils, 
found commonly in laxatives, decrease absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins, 
A, D, E and K. Diuretics deplete bodily stores of calcium, potassium, magnesium 
and zinc. 
"If you take medication that interferes with vitamin intake, a multiple 
supplement may help replenish depleted nutrients," Hammond said. "I recommend a 
supplement with 100% of the RDA, along with a calcium supplement to slow down 
the development of osteoporosis." 
Still, supplements cannot take the place of a well-balanced diet. 
Advised Roslyn Alfin-Slater, professor of nutrition at UCLA's School of Public 
Health: "Eat a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet, get plenty of fruits, 
vegetables and whole grains, increase fiber consumption and drink eight glasses 
of fluid daily. Exercise the body and mind regularly, and in the process be 
sure to enjoy all the food that contributes to your health." 
