Q &amp; A: BOBBY SHORT: GETTING A KICK OUT OF COLE PORTER 
You didn't have to live through the 1930s, '40s and '50s to recognize these 
tunes: "My Heart Belongs to Daddy," "I Love Paris," "Too Darn Hot," "Anything 
Goes," "I Get a Kick Out of You," "Night and Day." They are the witty, 
sophisticated and romantic handiwork of the beloved Cole Porter, who died in 
1964. A contemporary of the Gershwins, Jerome Kern, Richard Rodgers, Lorenz 
Hart and Oscar Hammerstein II, Porter is the subject of the "American Masters" 
documentary, "You're the Top: The Cole Porter Story," airing Monday at 10 p.m. 
on KCET. 
The one-hour special features interviews with performers and artists who knew 
Porter-including Bob Hope, Gene Kelly, Cyd Charrisse, Alfred Drake-more than 20 
performances from his movie musicals and archival footage and photos. 
And who better to host and narrate the documentary than noted cabaret 
performer, Bobby Short, who talked about Porter and his legacy with Susan King. 
Did you ever meet Cole Porter? 
I met him in the late 1940s. I had gone to the Masonic Hall in Los Angeles to 
accompany a young woman who was auditioning for the national company of "Kiss 
Me Kate." She sang for Mr. Porter, who was sitting out front in a very dapper 
up mood in spite of his physical disabilities (a horseback-riding accident in 
1937 left him handicapped) because he had this big hit on his hands. 
After she finished singing the song, he yelled out, "Bobby, what do you think 
of the show?" We never met formally; it was just like that. 
I think he had seen me before because I performed at the time on the Sunset 
Strip in a club called the Cafe Gala, which is now Spago. The Gala was about 
the most sophisticated little club on the West Coast. Porter was a regular. He 
could go there and hear his own songs. 
We became friends right there. I didn't see him again until I came to New York 
in the 1950s, where I saw him repeatedly at parties. He was a very polite 
person and, of course, I appeared in a revival of "Kiss Me Kate" in New York in 
1956. I played the role of Paul, who was the valet to the leading man, and I 
sang "Too Darn Hot." 
What makes Porter's songs so special? 
It was his lifestyle which made him so attractive. He had the most glamorous 
lifestyle. He had enough style, intelligence, integrity and education to make 
it all work. I think whatever you want in this life, if you want it badly 
enough, you can get it. I really think Porter wanted to live life at its 
highest level-socially, that is. 
Was composing easy for him? 
There is evidence that Porter had great difficulty writing songs. When you 
write songs with an express purpose in mind, it is never easy. If you have to 
please a Hollywood studio executive with a song, it's not easy. 
The story about the song "Rosalie" that he wrote is just one example. I think 
he turned in a number of versions before the studio head said, "That's the one 
I want." When you are writing under a deadline for a Broadway show, it can't be 
easy. And if you are a perfectionist like Porter was, it can't be easy. It is 
not easy to please yourself. 
Which Porter songs do you enjoy performing? 
I like Cole Porter's ballads. I think he becomes very pensive in the ballads, 
and his love songs took on a new turn in popular songwriting. Porter made it 
quite plain that love is not always going to have a happy ending. 
Did you ever see the Porter film biography "Night and Day," which starred Cary 
Grant as the composer? 
I never saw the film. I think it was a commercialization of the many high 
points in his life. It had been said that Porter would have liked Fred Astaire 
to have portrayed him. He did have more of a resemblance to Porter than Cary 
Grant. 
I think the thing to remember is that Porter, despite his flirtation with high 
society and fancy living, was a very, very hard worker and came along at the 
time when it must have been difficult for a young man just out of Yale to break 
through the ranks of Tin Pan Alley in New York. 
What new insights into Porter does the documentary reveal? 
It goes quite deeply into his personal life. There is a lot of attention paid 
to the struggles he had after the accident, and the fact that he was indeed 
reclusive when the pain and the disability became too much. In the end, Porter 
lived by himself in the Waldorf Towers and saw only a few of his friends. I 
suppose that is the way most people who grow old and sick wind up. 
It always seems an artist's life is touched with sadness and tragedy. 
The entire pursuit of the arts necessarily makes for a kind of loneliness. If 
you are an artist, and I call myself one in a minor way, you are not really 
happy unless you are practicing your art. In the end, Cole Porter was not 
called upon to practice his art. His last effort was a TV special called 
"Aladdin" which was not particularly notable. I think all of our lives are 
mirrored in the lives of people as celebrated as Cole Porter. Think of all the 
people who end up all alone and ill who have not given the world anything or 
who are not special in anyway at all. 
Despite Porter's success, a lot of critics still don't take his songs 
seriously. 
Back in the 1930s and all through Cole Porter's career, he has had to buck 
criticism. "Night and Day" came in for such criticism, I cannot tell you. 
People thought it sounded like Ravel's "Bolero" or some kind of a chant. 
In the 1930s, he wrote a score for a show called "Jubilee" and it failed 
because the critics thought the songs were so terrible. Out of the show came 
"Begin the Beguine" and "Just One of Those Things." 
I think that Cole Porter's songs hold up very, very well. It's too bad people 
who tend to call themselves critics are so severe. 
