U.S. CUP PLANNERS FACE HARD QUESTIONS FROM WORLD PRESS 
American organizers of the 1994 World Cup got a cool, almost hostile reception 
from the international media today when they held a news conference to discuss 
plans for the tournament. 
Several hundred journalists gathered to hear Scott LeTellier, president of the 
World Cup '94 Organizing Committee; Werner Fricker, its chairman and president 
of the U.S. Soccer Federation, and Henry A. Kissinger, vice chairman of the 
organizing committee. 
Only when Kissinger spoke or was asked questions was the mood one of 
cooperation. Otherwise, most questions carried a confrontational tone. 
A South American broadcaster asked Fricker and LeTellier why the United States 
bothered bidding for the World Cup when soccer isn't a major sport there. 
"The United States is a tremendous soccer participation sport," said LeTellier, 
who worked on the organizing committee for the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics. "At a 
time when many European countries find the number of participants dwindling, 
the contrary is the case in the United States." 
To support that claim, Fricker cited studies that show soccer to be the 
third-most popular participation sport among teen-agers, behind only basketball 
and volleyball and ahead of baseball, softball, football and hockey, and second 
in the under-12 category behind basketball. 
Asked whether empty stadiums could be anticipated in 1994, Fricker said, "We 
will get total commitments, make every effort in every venue, to get a 
tremendous amount of enthusiasm generated. We will have other activities 
planned in communities to supplement (the soccer games)." 
Added LeTellier: "We have wrestled with efforts how to develop the intense 
feeling for the sport that is so evident here in Italy. One unique aspect as 
Americans is that we all came from other countries at some point. There is not 
one country that does not have a strong expatriate community in the United 
States." 
LeTellier pointed to the popularity Brazilians would have in Miami or Poles in 
Chicago, if their teams qualify. What he didn't say was that to get every team 
into areas where they are most popular would require a setup that runs contrary 
to the draw FIFA uses to determine each grouping. Under the current system, 
only the seeded teams automatically are placed in certain cities. 
Television also was on the minds of many. Since NBC already said it won't bid 
for rights and both CBS and ABC are likely to pass, it would appear cable TV 
will be the route organizers must take. 
"TV is a problem," Kissinger said. "But you can't judge by the 2% that this 
World Cup has gotten (in the ratings). TNT, which has televised the games, is 
cable and you have to subscribe and live in an area that can get cable. And it 
was not heavily advertised. 
"I'm confident and hopeful we will get reasonable television coverage. Even if 
not national, we will get local (coverage). I think we can solve this problem, 
but we have a lot of work to do." 
That the United States has no top-level league also troubled several 
questioners. Fricker insisted that a professional league will be developed and 
said international tournaments will be used to upgrade the standard of American 
soccer. 
"We have to do something to get high-quality soccer played in the United 
States," Kissinger said. "That is a way of getting it popular. It must be 
done." 
