IN COMMERCE, LYNWOOD; 
TOXIC BURNERS MAY GET OK TO KEEP OPERATING 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and state health officials are 
considering granting permits to allow two chemical manufacturers in Commerce 
and Lynwood to continue burning hazardous waste in small incinerators they have 
operated for years. 
The Ashland Chemical Co., which manufactures resin for molded plastic products 
such as shower stalls and boat hulls, has been burning liquid and gaseous 
wastes since 1974 at a plant on the 6600 block of East 26th Street in Commerce, 
south of the Santa Ana Freeway and west of Garfield Avenue. 
Cargill Inc. has burned waste gases and water since 1980 in an incinerator at 
its Lynwood plant on the 2800 block of Lynwood Road. Cargill manufactures 
resins that are used in plastic and paint products. 
Both plants burn waste that they generate and do not accept outside waste, 
officials said. 
Permits Required 
The South Coast Air Quality Management District has regulated the plants for 
overall smog emissions. But the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
of 1976 and subsequent amendments require the plants to secure permits from the 
EPA and the state Department of Health Services by Nov. 8 if they are to 
continue burning hazardous waste, officials said. 
Plant officials said it is cheaper to burn the hazardous waste on site rather 
than have it trucked elsewhere for incineration. Ashland plant manager Reid 
Mork said it also avoids some risks. 
"It's more economical and it's a lot safer because you don't have it traveling 
around on the roads," Mork said last week. 
So far, there has been little public opposition to continued operation of the 
incinerators. 
No one spoke in opposition to the permit for the Ashland incinerator during a 
public hearing last Thursday at the South Gate Auditorium. But an aide to 
Assemblywoman Lucille Roybal Allard (D-Los Angeles) submitted a written request 
that a "toxics audit" be made before the permit is issued. Such an audit would 
determine how much incinerator emissions contribute to the overall toxic 
emissions problem in the Los Angeles Basin. 
In an interview, Commerce Councilman Ruben C. Batres said he was not aware of 
any objections by city officials to continued operation of the Ashland 
incinerator. 
Only 2 Complaints 
During a hearing last month, only two Lynwood residents opposed the permit for 
the Cargill incinerator. One complained of odors from the plant and the other 
said she feared that emissions from the incinerator could be harmful. 
Lynwood officials do not oppose continued operation of the incinerator. 
"It's been running since 1980," Lynwood Councilman Robert Henning said in an 
interview. "There have not been any problems in our city in reference to people 
being sick." 
Both incinerators have undergone extensive emissions tests to see if they 
comply with EPA and state standards. 
The companies hired private contractors to perform the tests, which are 
reviewed by the EPA and state Department of Health Services. 
Cargill is in an industrial pocket on the east end of Lynwood, surrounded by 
residential areas. The incinerator, which burns one to two gallons of liquid 
waste per minute, is about four feet in diameter and 13 feet long. 
The firm's waste contains resin and other compounds such as dioxane and 
formaldehyde, two suspected cancer-causing agents. 
To obtain operating permits, the incinerator must meet emissions standards for 
hydrogen chloride, a gaseous acid, and particulates. It must also be able to 
destroy 99.99% of organic toxic compounds such as dioxane. 
Cargill performed a test burn in October, 1988. The plant passed muster for 
hydrogen chloride and particulates but failed to destroy the hazardous 
compounds at the required 99.99% level, according to an EPA report. 
Some modifications were made to the incinerator and another test burn has since 
been performed, officials said. Results indicate that the plant has met the 
99.99% standard, but they are still under review, said Jim Marxen, spokesman 
for the state Department of Health Services. 
A preliminary health risk study indicates that the Cargill incinerator would 
create little additional risk of cancer among area residents. The study 
forecast less than one new case of cancer per million people living near the 
plant for 70 years. 
The Ashland Chemical Co. is surrounded by industry. The nearest residence is 
about half a mile away. 
The Ashland incinerator burns resin, dioxane and formaldehyde. The incinerator 
is about the same size as the Cargill incinerator and burns two gallons of 
liquid waste per minute. 
Inaccuracy Feared 
A test burn at Ashland was conducted by private contractors in September, 1988. 
Results indicated that the incinerator met EPA standards for emissions of 
hydrogen chloride and particulates. But testing for organic hazardous compounds 
may have been inaccurate, and Ashland must test again. 
A health risk study still under review by the EPA and state health officials 
indicates that emissions from the Ashland incinerator would cause less than one 
new case of cancer among a million people living near the plant for 70 years. 
Ashland will probably be granted a conditional permit in November and be 
required to submit the additional test results in the spring, officials said. 
