CRACKING THE 'KOUROS' CASE; 
GETTY GETS FIRST LOOK AT KNOWN FAKE IN ATTEMPT TO AUTHENTICATE PRIZED STATUE 
The J. Paul Getty Museum has launched an extensive examination of its prized 
"Kouros," a 6-foot, 8-inch-tall marble sculpture of a nude young man. Thought 
to be a rare 6th-Century BC Greek statue, the sculpture has been prominently 
displayed as one of the museum's three most valued antiquities, along with a 
marble "Aphrodite" and a bronze "Victorious Athlete." 
But a fake archaic torso, recently discovered in Switzerland, has cast doubt on 
the figure's authenticity, leading the museum to remove the "Kouros" last week 
and purchase the fake for study purposes. The torso arrived in Malibu on 
Thursday, in preparation for an examination that is expected to continue for 
several months and involve experts at the museum, the Getty Conservation 
Institute and independent laboratories. 
Marion True, the Getty's curator of antiquities, will conduct a stylistic 
analysis of the two statues, while antiquities conservator Jerry Podany and 
Getty scientists investigate the stone, surface deposits and other physical 
properties. They hope to arrive at a conclusion about a statue that has already 
been extensively studied but has continued to present puzzling questions to 
scholars. 
"At this point, anything is possible. We just don't know what we will find," 
said Podany, who studied the sculpture before the museum bought it in 1985 and 
conducted further examinations before the statue went on display in 1986. The 
museum reportedly purchased the piece for more than $6 million from a Swiss 
dealer acting on behalf of a private collector. In the new investigation, 
curators, conservators and scientists will weigh every scrap of evidence on 
both sides of the question and "form an opinion based on the weightiest end of 
the two columns," he said. 
"It was disappointing to see the 'Kouros' come down, but beyond that, there's 
real excitement in the opportunity to get close to a more firm truth. We don't 
have the luxury to want it to be resolved one way or the other," Podany said. 
The 1,100-pound marble statue that once stood tall in a distinguished 
collection has been struck down -- at least temporarily -- by an imitation 
archaic Greek torso. Since buying the piece the Getty has learned that it was 
probably made in the early 1980s in Rome and that it was crafted as an 
intentional forgery. It is said to have been unsuccessfully offered to several 
collectors before the Getty got wind of it. 
The Getty has also discovered that the torso is only the central fragment of a 
larger sculpture -- and probably a last ditch effort to pass the piece off as 
the real thing. In earlier incarnations, the torso is known to have had a head, 
but apparently that was lopped off when it was thought to be too obvious a 
forgery. Now that the Getty has gone public with its investigation, True and 
Podany said that they wouldn't be surprised if other parts of the forgery were 
brought to their attention. 
The torso might never have found a respectable home if an anonymous "friend of 
the museum" hadn't seen it and told True about its existence. The call came 
late in April, just as she was leaving for Athens to give a lecture, True said, 
so she quickly made arrangements to see the piece in Switzerland during her 
trip. She wasn't allowed to photograph the sculpture and light was poor in the 
Basel port facility where the torso was stored, but she was sufficiently 
concerned about apparent similarities to send for Podany. 
"I felt like someone had kicked me when I first saw it. I wasn't prepared for 
it, even though the person who told me about it is someone I respect," True 
said. 
Most casual viewers would not understand why True was troubled. The torso is 
roughly two-thirds the scale of the Getty's complete figure and the workmanship 
is comparatively crude. A nasty brown surface -- the result of an attempt to 
artificially age the piece by boiling it in acid -- contrasts sharply with the 
glowing, off-white surface of the "Kouros." 
What True saw beneath the grime were stylistic qualities similar to those of 
the "Kouros." These characteristics were all the more disturbing because they 
seemed to correspond to anomalies in the "Kouros" that have subjected it to 
scholarly debate over the years. 
Looking over the torso shortly after it was unpacked in Malibu, True pointed 
out "narrow, sloping shoulders" that differ from other "Kouros" figures. Both 
sculptures have "insensitively carved" hands with straight cuts separating the 
fingers, they lack a feeling of "internal structure" in the wrist area and the 
carving appears soft in the upper arms, she said. 
While in Athens, True re-examined familiar "Kouros" figures to see if these 
features turned up in pieces that have long been accepted as authentic, but she 
observed that the Getty figure and the torso seemed to have more in common with 
each other than with the statues in Greece. 
After their initial trip to see the torso, True and Podany returned to Malibu 
and presented their findings to the board of directors. In mid-June, they went 
back to Basel with small plaster castings of parts of the "Kouros" that 
included stylistic details and evidence of tool work. They compared castings of 
the hands, collar bone, abdomen and navel, groin area and grooves between the 
arms and the chest with similar parts of the the torso. Podany also took a tiny 
sample of marble from the torso and found that the two sculptures were made of 
the same kind of stone, possibly from the same quarry on the Island of Thasos. 
True's informant had indicated that the two statues might have been created in 
the same studio and possibly from the same block of stone. Though the 
antiquities trade is notoriously subject to implausible rumors, True and Podany 
said that no possibility could be overlooked. In this case, the sample of stone 
lent credence to the theory that the two sculptures were closely connected. 
Persuaded that the museum needed to own the torso to conduct a serious, 
in-house study, Podany and True got the board's permission to buy the piece. 
True made a third trip to Basel last week to arrange for transport. 
Preliminary findings don't appear to bode well for the Getty, but Podany and 
True point out that there are as many differences as similarities between the 
two pieces. True said her concerns were only "visual reactions" that might be 
disproved or mitigated by scientific findings. Perhaps the most persuasive 
evidence in favor of authenticity is that tests conducted five years ago on the 
"Kouros" indicated that the surface crust had been created naturally over a 
long period of time. Scientists know of no way to duplicate that surface 
artificially, but even that conclusion will be reconsidered, Podany said. 
"We don't think a forger could create that surface intentionally, but we have 
to look into the possibility that it was done accidentally. We have tried a lot 
of things, but so far nothing has come close," he said. 
The Getty is just beginning to plan its strategy for examining the sculptures, 
Podany said. Among first steps, he and other scientists will determine the 
elemental composition of the torso's marble, including trace elements, and 
measure the size and orientation of the grain. To do this, he will take tiny 
samples from both sculptures. As in past studies, data will be analyzed at the 
Getty and at two or more independent labs for the sake of comparison and 
accuracy. 
A full-scale, accurate reproduction of the torso will be made in plaster 
because the dark crust is "distracting," Podany said. In addition, the torso's 
surface will be replicated on a similar piece of stone. 
Unwelcome as it may be, the forgery has real historical value, True said. In 
the uncertain field of antiquities, it is "the first piece of concrete 
evidence" that backs up doubts about the "Kouros." "We have to continually try 
to figure out what a forger could or couldn't do and what his motivation might 
be. It's a very treacherous game to play," she said. 
