MICROWAVE . . . : CHOICE OF CHOICE SAUCES HEATS UP COLD TREAT 
Now's the time to rustle up a repertoire of ice cream toppers so that the kids 
can have fun concocting their favorite splits and sundaes. 
And so that you, too, can have an elegant dessert "on ice" -- a Peach Melba, 
for example. It's nothing more than a fresh peach half topped by a scoop of 
vanilla ice cream that's crowned by a blush of Melba Sauce that microwaves to 
perfection -- in an instant -- and can be made ahead of time. 
Because microwaving is a moist method of cooking, all of the just-picked flavor 
of the berries used in the Melba Sauce is preserved. Indeed, it seems to be 
heightened through some feat of culinary alchemy. 
Let the kids lend a hand in microwaving other culinary feats that make 
delicious ice cream toppers such as Hot Fudge Sauce. 
MELBA SAUCE 
2 cups pureed raspberries, strawberries or loganberries 
1/3 cup sugar, about 
1 tablespoon cornstarch 
2 tablespoons cold water 
1 teaspoon lemon juice 
2 tablespoons framboise or Chambord liqueur or red currant jelly 
Mix puree and 1/3 cup sugar in microwave-safe 6-cup measure. Cover with wax 
paper and microwave on HIGH (100% power) 3 minutes. 
Blend cornstarch with water. Whisk cornstarch mixture and lemon juice into 
puree and microwave, uncovered, on HIGH 1 1/2 to 2 minutes until sauce boils 
and thickens slightly. 
Stir in framboise, cool, taste for sweetness and add more sugar, if needed. If 
too thick, thin with small amount of water. Makes 2 cups. 
Note: Use as sauce for Peach Melba or ladle over plain ice cream. 
Variation: For Apricot or Peach Sauce, prepare as directed substituting pureed 
apricots or peaches for berries and peach brandy for framboise. 
HOT FUDGE SAUCE 
1 cup sugar 
1 (5-ounce) can evaporated milk 
1 teaspoon freeze-dried coffee crystals 
Dash salt 
2 (1-ounce) envelopes unsweetened chocolate 
2 tablespoons butter or margarine, at room temperature 
2 teaspoons vanilla 
Cake or ice cream 
Mix sugar, milk, coffee crystals and salt in microwave-safe 6-cup measure. 
Microwave, uncovered, on HIGH (100% power) 2 to 2 1/2 minutes, stirring at half 
time, until bubbling. 
Whisk in chocolate, butter and vanilla, beating until smooth. Serve warm or at 
room temperature over cake or ice cream. Makes about 1 2/3 cups sauce. 
