POLICE USE TIPS IN HUNT FOR DRIVER WHO KILLED OVER TRAFFIC ARGUMENT 
Homicide investigators followed up on public tips Wednesday on cars matching 
the description of the one used by the killer of a La Jolla teen-ager shot in a 
traffic dispute, 
Homicide Sgt. Ed Petrick said he and four other detectives were checking with 
car dealerships and private owners in search of a late model, red Isuzu 
Trooper. 
Kurt Yokes, 15, of the 5400 block of Bahia Lane was shot once in the chest 
Monday by a driver angered by a near-accident with the car in which Yokes was a 
passenger. He was dead on arrival at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla. 
Yokes, a freshman at Mission Bay High School and a newspaper carrier, and two 
older friends were driving home when the Isuzu nearly crashed into them at 
Grand Avenue and Bayard Street in Pacific Beach, police said. After an exchange 
of gestures, a friend of Yokes said to the driver of the Isuzu, "I've seen 
better driving on golf courses," according to Petrick. 
Assailant Was Stranger 
"That was the only thing said, and the other guy did not say a word," Petrick 
said, adding that neither Yokes nor his friends had ever met the man. 
Yokes' friends told police that the killer did not reply and followed their car 
to a home in the 2600 block of Christopher Street. When Yokes and a friend left 
their car to find out why the man had followed them, the killer fired the fatal 
shot, police said. 
Two friends with Yokes in the vehicle, the 18-year-old woman driver and a 
19-year-old man, were not identified for safety reasons. 
The suspect is described as a slender Asian man with black hair that reaches 
shoulder length in the back but is short in front. Police said he wore a white, 
button-down shirt and a black tie, leading them to suspect he may have been a 
customer or an employee of one of the many nightclubs in the area. 
The Isuzu was dirty and also carried a roof rack. It has not been reported 
stolen, according to the police. 
"Somebody knows who this person is," Petrick said. "They may not know it yet, 
but someone should be able to help us." 
