ON THE HOUSE: HOME IMPROVEMENT; 
LEAKY EXHAUST DUCTS WASTE HOT, COLD AIR 
QUESTION: I read in the paper that air infiltration accounts for 40% to 50% of 
the energy wasted on home heating and cooling. How can I close off the fan 
ducts in the bathroom and still have them operational? 
ANSWER: Actually, there is a very good chance that your exhaust fans are 
already infiltration controlled. This is usually accomplished in the fan 
housing with an exhaust-air-pressure controlled "flapper" type damper that 
opens when the fan is operating and closes when the fan is off. Air flow coming 
from the exterior end of the exhaust duct helps the keep the damper closed. 
To find out if a damper exists, remove the exhaust fan cover, dismount the fan 
motor from the housing (usually one or two screws) and inspect the exhaust port 
of the housing. The damper should be located in the first few inches of the 
exhaust port. 
If no damper is found at the fan housing exhaust port or at the exterior of the 
home where the duct for the fan terminates, then certainly one should be added. 
This can usually be accomplished most easily by inserting a damper between the 
exhaust fan housing and the exhaust duct. Dampers are available in various 
diameters from heating and sheet metal products supply stores such as AMFAC 
Mechanical. 
Although duct dampers are an important part of infiltration control, there is 
far more to consider. The potential for leaks between the outside and inside of 
your home is quite high and they can occur in many locations. 
Gaskets can be installed behind electrical plug and switch covers on exterior 
walls for about 15 cents per location. 
Gaskets at doors and windows have a tendency to wear out. Replacements can 
substantially reduce air infiltration. As our home shifts so does the door shoe 
at the bottom of exterior doors. When this shoe is out of adjustment or worn, 
tremendous amounts of unconditioned air can pass unnoticed. 
If your home has a wood floor or an attic, an inspection of these areas should 
be made. Holes in these areas are invisible from within the house and can allow 
air to pass far too freely. Sewer lines, water pipes and heat ducts penetrating 
through wood floors and ceilings are all candidates for spray foam insulation 
at the point of penetration. 
Even if your walls, attic and sub-floors are all completely insulated 
infiltration control is still an extremely important part of making your home 
more energy efficient. 
Pacific Gas &amp; Electric has a wonderful book out called "30 Simple Energy 
Things You Can Do to Save the Earth." On Page 33 it says heating experts 
estimate that 99% of all houses in America with central furnaces or air 
conditioners have duct leaks. The book explains that up to 10% of heating or 
cooling costs can be saved by insulating and tightening up ducts. It lists 35 
other free PG&amp;E publications that deal with energy saving subjects. 
Whom to Call When Screens Need Mending 
Q: Thirty years ago we added a family room with sliding glass door and matching 
screen. Recently, the latch on the screen door broke. I can't find anyone to 
come to my home to install a new latch and lock. Help! I'm tired of batting 
flies and bugs -- not to mention dogs who use their noses to open the screen 
door. 
A: A simple devise such as a broken screen door latch can turn a home into 
something akin to the San Diego Zoo. 
The same company that you call to repair broken windows, replace torn screens 
and adjust or repair sliding glass door rollers, can be hired to fix the latch 
on a sliding (or swinging) screen door. Look under "Screens" in the Yellow 
Pages. Looking under the glass section might confuse the issue, but should be 
kept in mind as an alternative. Many glass companies do not work on screens. 
Or why not call on a local handyman? The cost of the repair is unquestionably 
less than $300, and for that reason a licensed contractor is not required to do 
the work. Check with friends and neighbors for a referral. 
2 Tests Recommended For Smoking Chimney 
Q: We would like your help with a problem fireplace before we re-roof our 
16-year-old one-story house. The chimney is clean, but it smokes. We think it 
isn't drawing properly. The problem has to be the design. It has never worked 
properly. Can it be made taller, or should it be redesigned and rebuilt? Should 
we have a designer take a look at it? 
A: You could make the chimney taller, and it may help, but that's an expensive 
proposition. And, yes you can redesign and rebuild, but doing that would be 
even more expensive. What we need to do here is some testing to find out what 
the flaw in the design is. By the way -- your problem is not at all uncommon. 
You are right. If the chimney is clean (we are assuming that you have checked 
the spark arrester -- and that it is also clean), and the fireplace has always 
smoked, there is undoubtedly a design flaw. We occasionally see unusual weather 
conditions causing smoking at the fireplace, but apparently your problem is 
ongoing, so the weather can't be the snag. 
Two tests will help you determine the source of the problem. Clean the bottom 
of your firebox and place a layer of fire bricks on the bottom. (No mortar is 
needed for the test.) The bricks will effectively raise the base of the 
fireplace nearer to the chimney throat, and may in itself solve the problem. We 
wouldn't suggest trying this with more than two layers unless you have an 
unusually high opening (36 inches or more). 
Don't place and test the second layer of fire brick until you have tested the 
fireplace with the first one. Be sure not to try this test on an extremely 
windy day. High winds will cause even the best of fireplaces to smoke. 
If two layers work better than one, but the problem still isn't completely 
solved, then try the other test. Leave the floor of the firebox at its newly 
elevated level (whichever worked best -- one or two layers), and go up on the 
roof. 
Chip away the mortar at the spark arrester to expose the chimney flue liner. 
The flue liner is cement-like usually oval. Make a template of the liner with a 
sheet of tinfoil or cardboard. Take the template to a brick yard and get enough 
matching flue liner to increase the height of the chimney two feet. 
Stack the new flue liners on top of the fireplace (or one at a time if you wish 
to do two tests), and place a wire mesh screen on top to prevent sparks from 
escaping into your neighborhood. 
