GARDENING; 
IN THE GARDEN; 
VEGETABLE GARDENERS: RELAX, BUT NOT TOO MUCH; 
DURING SUMMER, KEEP UP WITH WATERING, HARVESTING AND WORM-CONTROL CHORES. 
Summer presents a time to relax and enjoy your vegetable garden, especially the 
summer harvest. Red, sun-ripened tomatoes, garden-fresh green beans, shiny 
green, yellow and red peppers, tender young squash, luscious melons with their 
marvelous aroma, succulent sweet corn, crisp cucumbers and glossy purple 
eggplant form a colorful cornucopia of good eating. 
But don't relax too much. Hot weather makes heavy demands on vegetables; they 
need extra care this time of the year. And if you are going on vacation, it is 
absolutely essential to have someone take care of your garden while you're 
away. Here are some suggestions to help you maintain a healthy garden and a 
prolonged harvest. 
Watering: You must never neglect irrigation chores during the summer months. 
Vegetables generally have higher water requirements than ornamentals, and you 
can easily lose vegetable plants that are water-stressed. 
It is best to water early in the morning. Overhead watering is to be 
discouraged as it promotes mildew on many vegetable plants. How much water 
should you apply? Irrigate your plants deeply at least once a week. The 
moisture should penetrate at least 6 inches into the soil; tomatoes require 
much deeper watering. 
Frequent Harvesting 
Keep in mind that vegetables grown in containers require far more frequent 
irrigation. Never let the soil dry out completely as you can lose 
container-grown vegetable plants in a matter of hours if they become 
water-stressed. 
Harvest frequently: Warm-season vegetables mature at an incredibly rapid pace 
during periods of hot weather and require frequent harvesting. Check summer 
squash and cucumbers daily, as oversized fruit will limit new production and 
affect quality. 
Beans, in particular, will produce over longer periods if picked often. Don't 
allow melons to spoil because they are hiding under foliage -- search the 
plants thoroughly. 
Control weeds: Weeds compete with vegetables for moisture and sunshine. The 
expression "grows like a weed" is doubly true during hot weather. Weeding is a 
dull, tedious task, but you must force yourself to keep at it on a weekly 
basis. 
You can help lessen drudgery by using mulches around your vegetable plants. 
Black plastic mulch is especially effective in controlling weed growth. 
Worm Control Needed 
Control worms: Now is the peak season for tomato and cabbage worms. Everyone 
who has grown tomatoes knows what the big ugly tomato hornworm looks like and 
the destruction it can do in a short period of time. Although cabbage and other 
cool-season crops are not in production now, cabbage worms can cause a lot of 
damage to other vegetables, particularly beans. 
You can easily control both tomato and cabbage worms by spraying every 10 days 
with a product containing the biological control Bacillus thuringiensis. The 
products include Dipel, Attack and Thuricide. 
These products will not harm warm-blooded animals, birds, bees or other 
beneficial insects, but are highly effective in destroying harmful 
caterpillars. Don't wait until the insects appear -- spray routinely every 10 
days during the growing season. 
