SUMMIT PLEDGES TO SPUR TRADE TALKS; 
DIPLOMACY: BUSH WINS AGREEMENT TO PUSH FOR AN END TO THE STALEMATE ON 
AGRICULTURE. THE PRESIDENT ALSO ATTACKS ENVIRONMENTAL CRITICS AS 'EXTREMISTS.' 
President Bush on Wednesday won a pledge from leaders of the major industrial 
democracies to end a longstanding deadlock on trade negotiations that U.S. 
officials had feared could plunge the world economy into chaos and recession. 
In a final communique ending the three-day economic summit, the leaders 
declared that the successful outcome of the current trade talks, known as the 
Uruguay Round, "has the highest priority on the international economic agenda." 
U.S. officials concede that reaching agreement on the specific elements of the 
broad trade pact remains a towering challenge, but they insisted it would have 
been hopeless without the priority-setting summit declaration. 
"We had an impasse," U.S. Trade Representative Carla A. Hills said. But with 
the summit statement, she said, trade officials are now under orders to deal 
with issues that the Europeans previously "were not willing to touch with a 
10-foot pole." 
The key to breaking the overall stalemate on removing trade barriers is getting 
agreement on reducing the array of subsidies and protective measures enjoyed by 
farmers throughout the world. Although European and Japanese leaders were -- 
and remain -- reluctant to deal with the issue, Bush argued successfully that 
the subject must be addressed if world trade is to grow and an economic crisis 
avoided. 
"The world looks to these summits for a lead on the larger issues," British 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said. "I believe we have once again provided 
that lead." 
On the sensitive environmental issue of global warming, meanwhile, the Bush 
Administration succeeded in deflecting a bid by European leaders to commit the 
seven major industrial nations to making substantial cutbacks in emissions of 
the so-called greenhouse gases believed responsible for the problem. 
Instead, they made only a bland commitment on environmental issues, proposing a 
new program suggested by West German Helmut Kohl to support Brazil and other 
tropical nations in saving rain forests and beginning efforts to draft a new 
international treaty to protect forests worldwide. 
The Administration contended that stronger action now could endanger economic 
growth. 
Aware, however, that his action would draw a torrent of criticism from 
environmental groups, Bush used a news conference after release of the final 
summit communique to deliver a scathing attack on such critics. 
"Extremists" in the environmental movement, he said, "don't want this country 
to grow. . . . They don't want to look at the human consequences" of the 
protections they seek. 
The Sierra Club, the Wilderness Society, the Environmental Defense Fund and the 
Audubon Society were among the prominent environmental groups that accused Bush 
and other summit leaders of not coming to grips with the global warming 
problem. 
The Sierra Club charged that Bush and Kohl, who sided with the President, made 
a "back-room . . . dirty deal" by agreeing to downplay the need for immediate 
action. 
Environmental activists had hoped the summit would produce a strong statement 
pledging the seven countries to specific reductions in emissions of carbon 
dioxide and other greenhouse gases. They argue that such reductions can be 
achieved largely by improving energy efficiency. 
The emissions are blamed for an apparent slow but ominous warming of the global 
climate that has been found by several scientific studies. 
But Bush and his aides, led by Chief of Staff John H. Sununu, came here 
dead-set against any such pledge. The main source of man-made carbon dioxide 
emissions is the burning of coal, oil, natural gas, wood and other carbon-based 
fuels for energy. Any limits on emissions would stifle U.S. economic growth, 
Bush and Sununu believe. 
Bush aides called the new proposal the President's chief environmental 
initiative for the summit, and several environmental activists here initially 
called it a hopeful sign. But at his news conference, Bush quickly dampened 
their enthusiasm for the idea, saying that his commitment to negotiate 
international forest protections would not affect his policies toward forests 
at home. 
The Administration has deferred action on protecting the remaining virgin 
forests in the Pacific Northwest out of concern for jobs in the timber 
industry, and Bush said he has no plans to change that policy. 
Asked why environmentalists are so opposed to some of his policies despite his 
campaign pledge to be an "environmental President," Bush said: "We cannot 
govern by listening to the loudest voice on the extreme. I'm not going to be 
persuaded that I can get some brownie point by appealing to one of these 
groups. . . . And the attacks that they made on some of my summit partners -- I 
resent them, too." 
The economic summit annually brings together leaders from the seven largest 
industrial democracies -- the United States, Japan, West Germany, France, 
Britain, Italy and Canada -- and also now includes the head of the 12-nation 
European Community. They plan to meet next year in London. 
Bush singled out West Germany's Kohl for special thanks in helping to forge 
compromises on several key areas, but he downplayed suggestions the two of them 
had cut any sort of private deal. 
"The Germans appreciate the fact that we have stood at their side on this 
question of German reunification," Bush said. "But there isn't any quid pro 
quo." 
On the politically charged trade issue, the seven leaders agreed Wednesday to 
provide stronger support from the top for the current talks in Geneva, which 
had threatened to break down as a result of the nasty dispute between the 
United States and Europe over agricultural subsidies. 
The summit leaders issued specific instructions to their bargainers aimed at 
achieving a successful conclusion to the talks by the end of the year. 
"We all know that agriculture has been a major stumbling block," Bush told 
reporters. "What we're trying to do is move the whole thing forward." 
Bush acknowledged that any agreement to cut agricultural subsidies would 
involve some sacrifice on the part of U.S. farmers. 
"It's a two-way street," Bush said. "I expect there would be some political 
opposition because, like many of these countries, we protect. But I am 
convinced . . . if we all reduce barriers and we all make a freer trading 
system, that the United States can compete." 
Agriculture was the most contentious issue that the summit leaders discussed at 
Rice University, with the final compromise achieved after hours of predawn 
bargaining among lower-level negotiators. 
Although U.S. officials embraced the final statement as a significant step 
forward in their effort to achieve fundamental reforms in agricultural trade, 
their main accomplishment was to heighten public awareness of the costly farm 
subsidy programs of the Group of Seven nations. 
The objection to subsidies is that they encourage worldwide surpluses and, 
combined with other measures, make the home-grown products artificially 
competitive in price, at home and abroad. 
European officials defended the subsidies as necessary to preserve the 
livelihood of 12 million small farmers against the future onslaught of 
commodities produced more efficiently in the United States, Canada, Australia 
and a host of less-developed countries such as Chile, Argentina and India. 
Unless the Europeans accept sharp cuts in farm subsidies, U.S. trade officials 
fear that dozens of nations dependent on agricultural exports will walk away 
from the world trade negotiations in Geneva. The talks are aimed at opening the 
door to greater trade not only in agriculture but in sophisticated services, 
investments, computer software, entertainment and other products that are 
crucial to the economic growth of the advanced nations. 
A failure in the trade talks could lead to greater protectionism, spurring a 
possible breakdown of the world economy into rival trading blocs that would 
undermine advances in global prosperity. 
Specifically, the final communique orders trade negotiators to "reduce not only 
internal support but also export subsidies and import protection." 
U.S. officials said this marks the first time that European leaders have 
accepted an express statement about the need to cut export subsidies. 
Some Europeans argued that the United States failed to achieve the breakthrough 
on trade it had sought coming into the summit. 
"There are no substantial new elements in the text," said Nico Wegter, chief 
spokesman on trade for the European Community, which had been particularly 
opposed to action in Houston on the subsidies issue. He also insisted that the 
communique does not single out export subsidies for special treatment. 
But the European Community's president, Jacques Delors, suggested that the 
Europeans may finally stop dragging their feet on the issue. 
"We cannot keep saying, 'No, no, no,' " he said. 
Hills acknowledged that the United States and Europe remain far apart on many 
of the key farm disputes. But the summit statement represents at least an 
evolution in the European position, she argued. 
"If it's not a breakthrough, it's progress," Hills said. 
Meeting in Bush's adopted hometown, the leaders wrapped up their final session 
earlier than scheduled by adopting a wide-ranging final declaration. 
The communique also provided an opening for West Germany and other nations to 
extend large amounts of aid to the Soviet Union. However, it cautioned that the 
Soviets must introduce a market economy and substantially curb their military 
threat to ensure "meaningful and sustained economic assistance" from the 
Western allies. 
It welcomed the impending reunification of Germany, called for aid to Eastern 
Europe in moving toward democracy and free markets and adopted a modest new 
initiative to aid certain Third World debtors. 
RELATED STORIES: A10 
HIGHLIGHTS OF 1990 ECONOMIC SUMMIT 
WORLD TRADE 
Statement: 
"The successful outcome of the Uruguay Round has the highest priority on the 
international economic agenda." 
What was done: 
Ordered negotiators to finish outline of full trade treaty by July 23. That was 
what the United States wanted most in final declaration: a clear statement that 
international trade talks must move forward. 
Bush also won endorsement of framework to guarantee that negotiators will 
consider reductions in domestic farm subsidies, import quotas and export 
subsidies at same time. Europeans had sought to leave export subsidies intact. 
SOVIET AID 
Statement: 
"We welcome the efforts under way in the Soviet Union to liberalize and to 
create a more open, democratic and pluralistic Soviet society and to move 
toward a market-oriented society. These measures deserve our support." 
What was done: 
International study commission formed to determine how much Soviet Union needs 
and what it must do to put economy in order. 
West Germany given green light to aid Moscow as it wishes, but caution urged. 
West Germany and France had wanted major powers to pledge $20 billion in direct 
financial aid to Moscow; Bush had wanted only technical assistance until 
Soviets reform economy and cut defense spending. 
ENVIRONMENT 
Statement: 
"We recognize that strong, growing, market-oriented economies provide the best 
means for successful environmental protection." 
What was done: 
Repeated past summit commitments but reflected Administration's concern that 
strong protective measures could harm economic growth. 
Pledged to "consider the adoption of strategies" for limiting greenhouse gas 
emissions. U.S. officials blocked European suggestions to set 
country-by-country targets for cutting emissions of gases believed to cause 
global warming. 
Endorsed nuclear power, saying it "can play a significant role in reducing the 
growth of greenhouse gas emissions," which come mainly from coal, wood, oil and 
gas. 
Directed World Bank to work with Brazil on planning how to preserve the Amazon 
rain forest, and called for new international pact to protect forests 
everywhere; pact to be completed by 1992. 
THIRD WORLD DEBT 
Statement: 
"The adoption by debtor nations of strong economic reform programs . . . 
remains at the heart of the debt strategy." 
What was done: 
Repeated previous position that best way for Third World debtor nations to spur 
economic growth and escape debt is to develop free-market economies. 
Agreed to reduce or restructure debts that Third World countries owe to 
industrial countries. Provision targets nations such as Jamaica, Bolivia and 
Turkey, which have begun market liberalization plans but face large debt 
burdens. 
Endorsed Bush's new Latin American aid plan. 
