NATION'S CAPITAL / LAGGING LUNCHTIME; 
TONY RESTAURANTS FEEL BITE OF DOWNTURN IN SPENDING FOR MEALS; 
A NEW ADMINISTRATION AND A SLOW ECONOMY ARE AMONG THE REASONS. 
It's lunchtime in the nation's capital, and places like Jean-Pierre -- the 
posh, oh-so-proper restaurant that has long been a favorite of expense-account 
diners like lawyers and lobbyists -- ordinarily are chock-full. Reservations 
are a must. 
But these days, there are plenty of available tables at Jean-Pierre -- and at 
dozens of other top Washington dining-spots -- and Jean-Michel Farret, the 
restaurant's Gallic, debonair maitre d'hotel, has time to sit and lament his 
plight. 
For a variety of reasons, business has fallen off sharply at Washington's 
tonier restaurants over the past several months, and many of them are hurting 
badly. Receipts at Jean-Pierre alone are down 30% to 40% from their levels of 
mid-1989. 
"It's the worst in the 20 years that we have been open," Farret says with a 
sigh. 
In any other city, this downturn might be brushed off as just another business 
slump, but in Washington it is taken as a sign of something really profound -- 
ranking right up there with the demise of the New Right or the opening up of 
Eastern Europe. 
Restaurants -- especially the more-expensive ones -- are important to the 
capital's essential being. If Napoleon's army marched on its stomach, 
Washington's Establishment rolls on its pastry-carts, government and private 
analysts agree. 
Let history here be your restaurant guide: Before he became President, Sen. 
John F. Kennedy (D-Mass.) made the Rive Gauche, a Georgetown restaurant, 
famous. Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger once held court at the 
Sans Souci -- which since has closed. 
And during the early and mid-1980s, top aides to then-President Ronald Reagan 
regularly lunched at the Maison Blanche, which is only a hop-skip-and-a-jump 
from its English-language namesake at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W. 
But those were the salad days. Today, under President Bush, Washingtonians 
literally are tightening their belts. Top government officials all but shun 
higher-priced luncheons. Lobbyists are scaling back. Even the free-spending 
Japanese are on a diet. 
Robert Kinkead, chef-owner at 21 Federal, contends the changeover in the White 
House is at least partly to blame. During the Reagan years, he says, buying big 
lunches for people was the in thing to do -- like merging with a corporate 
rival or leveraging an S&amp;L. 
"Certainly since Bush has been in office, there's been a curtailment of the 
kind of opulent spending that used to go on during the Reagan years," Kinkead 
asserts. "Now people are having to pay the piper for what they were doing back 
then." 
William Urquiola, a table captain at Ristorante Tiberio along Washington's 
business-laden K Street corridor, also cites the Bush Administration's 
stepped-up enforcement of a law prohibiting senior officials from accepting 
lunches from lobbyists and journalists. 
A bureaucrat who has to pay for his own meal isn't likely to want to eat at 
Tiberio's, where lunch for two can cost $100 or more, Urquiola explains. 
Instead, he -- or she -- is likely to start going to less-expensive 
restaurants. 
The weakened economy here -- particularly in Washington's once-red-hot 
real-estate business -- also plays a part. 
Finally, there is a plethora of related reasons -- Mayor Marion Barry's 
narcotics trial and Washington's growing reputation (deserved or not) as 
America's Murder Capital. "Everything's tied in," Kinkead says. 
Of course, there is one way the big, expensive restaurants here might regain 
old customers -- by (shudder) lowering prices, something other businesses do 
routinely when the going gets rough. 
But analysts here say that is going to be difficult for Washington's 
credit-card establishments to do. After all, reducing prices too obviously can 
destroy a restaurant's upscale image. "There's a big difference between dining 
and eating -- eating is a must; dining is not necessary," Farret points out. 
It also might violate one of Washington's oldest dictums: 
"There is no such thing as a free lunch." 
Times Washington Bureau Chief Jack Nelson contributed to this story. 
