VAN DE KAMP PROPOSES BALLOT PLAN TO LIMIT LAWMAKER TERMS, FUNDS 
Bringing his campaign for governor to life after laborious weeks of planning, 
Atty. Gen. John Van de Kamp made a leap for the high ground on government 
ethics Friday, proposing a ballot initiative to limit terms of state 
officeholders and the money that flows to them from special interests. 
He called state government a "swamp" of mighty special-interest influence. To 
clean it up, he said, taxpayers will have to pick up a share of the costs of 
political campaigns for the Legislature, the governorship and other statewide 
offices. 
His gameness in challenging the everyday conduct of government and the 
willingness to force politicians out of their offices after set terms add up to 
the most daring move of Van de Kamp's long and measured political career. 
It also is a step born of necessity. The two-term Democratic attorney general 
and former Los Angeles County district attorney is facing in-depth campaign 
polls that tell him Californians are not looking for status quo leadership in 
the 1990 race for governor but are hungry, as one adviser put it, "for someone 
to turn over the tables." 
This package could do precisely that, putting the two-term Democratic attorney 
general at odds with legislators and others officeholders in and out of his own 
party. 
"This is a campaign about change," he said, as if delighted to have picked the 
fight. 
Important Issue 
The initiative also gives Van de Kamp -- ridiculed by rivals as a 
"John-come-lately" -- something strong to say on an issue destined to play an 
important part in the 1990 gubernatorial campaign debate: public disquiet about 
the integrity of government. 
Major provisions of the ballot proposition as sketched out by Van de Kamp at 
press conferences in Burbank, Sacramento and San Francisco would: 
* Impose California's first-ever limits on the consecutive years a person may 
hold a single office -- 12 years for the Assembly and Senate and eight years 
for statewide constitutional officers. The limits would not be retroactive. 
Instead, the clock would start as of the 1990 elections. 
* Ask candidates for the Legislature and statewide office to accept a ceiling 
on their campaign spending in exchange for public financing of approximately 
25% to 40% of their total political budgets. The exact ceiling on each race and 
the overall costs to taxpayers are still being devised. 
* Enact assorted other changes in ethics laws, including a ban on political 
honorariums and stricter conflict-of-interest restrictions on legislative 
votes. Future attorney generals would be empowered to appoint special 
prosecutors in some corruption cases. In addition, public officials, including 
legislators, would be banned from lobbying state government for a year after 
leaving office. 
"The plain truth is that we have allowed government and politics in California 
to sink into a quicksand of special-interest money," Van de Kamp said, reading 
a prepared statement. 
"Yet, we naively expect public officials to crawl through that swamp on a daily 
basis and come out clean. I'm here today to tell you that if we want clean 
government, it's time to drain the swamp." 
Van de Kamp indicated that he will confer with public interest leaders to iron 
out details of the proposal and give lawmakers in Sacramento one last chance to 
take dramatic action on their own. Then he said he will proceed with a 
signature-gathering drive to obtain the 595,485 valid voter names needed to win 
the measure a slot on the November, 1990, general election ballot. 
Announcement of the ethics initiative came at a time when Van de Kamp's 
campaign, his status as the Establishment favorite for the Democratic 
nomination and his image as a "winner" are being called to question by party 
activists and even some of his own supporters. 
Throughout the spring and summer, Van de Kamp has felt pressure to engage more 
energetically in the 1990 campaign preliminaries. But he resisted, even as 
rivals seemed to be gaining at his expense. 
The attorney general insisted on marshaling and developing an inventory of 
ideas in private consultation with his team of political advisers and at his 
own deliberate pace. Campaign manager Richie Ross quoted the lyrics of a 1960s 
rhythm-and-blues song to explain the virtue of Van de Kamp's slow but sure 
methods: "It's not what you look like when you're doing what you're doing. It's 
what you're doing when you're doing what you're doing." 
Friday's proposal for a ballot initiative was the first of a series of 
announcements resulting from the planning sessions. The package of ideas 
eventually is supposed to provide the framework and rationale for Van de Kamp's 
gubernatorial bid. 
He began the sequence with ethics probably because he has been viewed, both by 
opponents and supporters, as increasingly vulnerable on the issue. This is not 
because of his own ethics, which so far as is known are untarnished, but 
because he is California's chief law enforcement officer at a time when the 
spotlight on government has come to rest on numerous political scandals. Van de 
Kamp, to the dismay of political supporters, has been only a bit player in the 
investigations. 
Both of Van de Kamp's leading rivals have already signaled their own strategies 
that recognize the public's growing doubts about the integrity of government. 
Shaping Campaign 
Dianne Feinstein, the former mayor of San Francisco, is shaping her Democratic 
primary campaign to present herself as an outsider capable of restoring 
people's faith in government. 
As for Van de Kamp's initiative, Feinstein spokeswoman Dee Dee Myers dismissed 
it, saying, "Perhaps John Van de Kamp is hoping the public will forget the FBI 
had to come in and investigate corruption in Sacramento." 
Republican candidate for governor Pete Wilson, in his second term as a U.S. 
senator, frequently draws a parallel between his career 18 years ago and his 
campaign now. Back then, he left a seat in the Legislature to take over as 
mayor of San Diego amid a corruption scandal there. Destiny now calls again, he 
says. 
As for Van De Kamp, Wilson spokesman Otto Bos said: "He is going to have a 
tough time claiming leadership on this since there is nothing, zero, in the 
record. . . . Where's he been? He's really been a John-come-lately. 
"He has shown no reluctance to accept PAC money, special-interest money. He's 
taken gifts and trips from special interests. . . . The only constant has been 
his desire for public funds for campaigns." 
Reaction was predictably icy from state legislators, who were not consulted 
beforehand and who believe the 12-year limit on service is a gratuitous slap at 
them. 
"I just finished 12 years, and I feel better equipped than ever to represent my 
constituents," said Assemblyman Mike Roos (D-Los Angeles), who wore a face as 
long as a loaf of French bread as he watched Van de Kamp's Los Angeles press 
conference. 
Van de Kamp said the limit on legislative terms was the most difficult decision 
he had to make in drafting his proposal. He chose to proceed, he said, because 
"our system of government has hardened into a gridlock of caution, incumbency 
protection and the servicing of special interests. . . . This change is worth 
trying because what we're doing now isn't working." 
Times staff writer Clay Evans in Sacramento contributed to this article. 
