KING-SIZE CAPSULES; 
POWERS DESIGN COMPLETES ITS WORK ON SPACE STATION MODULES 
On a quiet street in West Newport on Monday, two huge white capsules lay on 
their sides like something from a science fiction movie. 
The two modules, 43 feet long and more than 14 feet wide, are full-size 
mock-ups of the living quarters and scientific laboratory for the manned space 
station Freedom, which NASA hopes to have operational by the year 1999. 
The space station mock-ups were designed and built by Powers Design 
International, 828 Production Place, for McDonnell Douglas, one of four 
companies that have been awarded work packages for the space station. The other 
companies -- Boeing Aerospace, Rocketdyne and General Electric -- will be 
building similar mock-ups of various parts of the space station to be used in 
their design and manufacturing work. 
The $16-billion space station would orbit Earth at 1,700 m.p.h., more than 100 
miles up. 
On Monday, as the final touches were being put on the structures in a parking 
lot at Powers Design, company President Robert Powers said his small team of 
designers, along with engineers from McDonnell Douglas, has been working 12- 
and 14-hour days, seven days a week, to meet the contract deadline. 
Lining the inner walls of the capsules are stenciled patterns of computer 
screens and drawers, soon to be covered with yellow stick-up notes from 
engineers and designers with ideas for the real modules. Every inch of space 
around the walls, ceiling and floors will be used for hatches and compartments 
for the eight people who will inhabit the station. 
The modules were to be loaded onto trucks Monday evening and taken to McDonnell 
Douglas' Huntington Beach facility, where they will be reviewed by McDonnell 
Douglas and NASA engineers, and where the public will have an opportunity to 
walk through them. The mock-ups are used by engineers who determine how the 
computer, power and operational systems should be arranged for the space 
station. 
The final modules, which will be just long enough to fit inside the cargo bay 
of the space shuttle, will weigh nearly 70,000 pounds each, and will be 
assembled in space. 
The first pieces for assembly of the space station are due to be launched in 
1995. The station will be used to determine the long-term effects of living 
with zero gravity. 
