PRINCETON-NEWPORT CHIEF DENIES WRONGDOING; 
REGAN SAYS HE BELIEVED STOCK TRADES MADE TO CUT FIRM'S TAXES WERE LEGAL 
The chief partner in a defunct New Jersey brokerage testified Monday that he 
believed that a series of 1984 and 1985 stock trades designed to reduce the 
firm's taxes were "100% legal." 
"I did not commit a crime. I did not cheat on my taxes. I did not engage in a 
conspiracy. I am totally, 100% innocent," said James Sutton Regan, the former 
managing partner of Princeton-Newport Partners LP. 
Regan took the stand as the defense opened its arguments in the first-ever 
securities fraud racketeering case. 
Regan, one of six defendants in the case, testified that Princeton-Newport 
engaged in a series of "tax trades" in 1984 and 1985 to generate short-term 
capital losses it could claim as tax deductions. He said the trades were 
necessitated in part by changes in federal laws. 
"It was my belief that the transactions were entirely legal, 100% legal," Regan 
testified under questioning from his attorney, Theodore Wells. 
Regan, 47, speaking calmly and evenly as he explained various complex tax 
arrangements, described deals in which Princeton-Newport sold blocks of 
securities to other investment firms temporarily to claim losses for tax 
purposes. 
The government alleges that the deals were engineered to create false long-term 
capital gains and short-term capital losses for Princeton-Newport in violation 
of federal tax laws. The indictment last year alleged millions of dollars in 
bogus tax losses. 
But Regan testified that he was aware of federal laws when he ordered the firm 
to conduct so-called "day trades" in 1984 in which it sold blocks of warrants 
to buy stock in ICI Finance N.V. and bought them back the same day. He said all 
the trades were recorded in the company's books. 
He said the deals, which were conducted through Ackroyd &amp; Smithers 
Securities, were subject to market fluctuation and that no prearranged buyback 
price had been set. 
The government alleges the transactions were "parking" arrangements, in which 
securities owned by one party are sold to another with an agreement to 
repurchase them usually at a preset time and price. The government maintains 
that such deals are illegal if designed to skirt federal tax or disclosure 
laws. 
Regan said he had studied federal tax law for more than 10 years and considered 
himself an expert in the field. He also said he had filed more than 15 
supporting legal briefs about sham tax trades in cases involving federal tax 
laws since the mid-1970s and believed that the 1984 and 1985 trades were legal. 
He said he told Princeton-Newport general partner Paul A. Berkman to conduct 
other trades in early 1985 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and Drexel Burnham 
Lambert Inc. 
Some of those trades involved asking Merrill and Drexel to hold stock in 
various companies for at least 31 days before Princeton-Newport could 
repurchase it, in accordance with federal laws, he said. 
"I told him the transactions had to be done within the context of the market," 
he said. "I never told him what the repurchase price had to be." 
Regan added: "This kind of tax planning was common all the time. People would 
do anything possible to avoid long-term losses, anything legally possible." 
He testified that Princeton-Newport made about $300,000 from the 1985 transfers 
because its payment to other firms for holding the securities was lower than 
its return on investments it made with the cash it obtained for them. 
Regan denied any involvement in a deal cited by the government that former 
Drexel trader Bruce Lee Newberg told Princeton-Newport to sell blocks of stock 
in COMB Co. to try to drive down its share price in 1985 before a large Drexel 
bond offering to the firm. 
In addition to Regan, Berkman and Newberg, on trial are Princeton-Newport 
general partners Charles Zarzecki and Jack Z. Rabinowitz, and the firm's 
controller, Steven B. Smotrich. 
The case overlaps the government's 98-count fraud and racketeering indictment 
of former Drexel junk bond financier Michael Milken. Much of the same evidence 
is expected to be introduced at Milken's trial, scheduled to begin next March. 
Princeton-Newport, a small securities firm with offices in Princeton, N.J., and 
Newport Beach, Calif., went out of business after the indictment was brought 
last August. 
