BLYLEVEN TAKES ANOTHER STEP; 
HE PASSES WALTER JOHNSON ON ALL-TIME STRIKEOUT LIST 
In keeping with the Angels' latest method of operation, their pitching held the 
Detroit Tigers in check Sunday at Anaheim Stadium. Well, at least as long as it 
took the Angels to mount yet another dramatic comeback and win in the late 
innings. 
Bert Blyleven starred in the most recent version, passing Walter Johnson on the 
all-time strikeout list. 
With one out in the fifth inning, Blyleven struck out Mike Brumley for the 
3,509th strikeout of his career. Johnson finished with 3,508. 
Blyleven moves to sixth on the all-time list with 3,512. Nolan Ryan, with 4,941 
strikeouts and counting, holds the record. 
"That's nice," said Blyleven, who struck out six before leaving with the score 
tied, 3-3, after seven innings. "That's a personal thing. Passing Walter 
Johnson is a thrill. When I came into the league in 1970, he was the (all-time) 
strikeout leader. 
"I think he got his last strikeout when I first pitched." 
Blyleven, 38, is a kidder. Johnson pitched for the Washington Senators from 
1907-1927. 
Blyleven turned in seven solid innings, giving up three runs, eight hits and 
one walk. 
"Bert got a little tired," Manager Doug Rader said. "His game against Toronto 
(a 1-0 victory on Tuesday) was emotionally draining. He was throwing OK 
(Sunday), but we thought it was the best thing for Bert (to come out)." 
Rader turned the game over to relievers Rich Monteleone and Bob McClure. 
McClure (3-1) picked up the victory. 
Although Blyleven didn't get a decision in the Angels' 5-4 victory over 
Detroit, he helped them stay close. 
And, as Johnny Ray pointed out, "Our pitching keeps us in the ballgames. If we 
can stay close, we feel like we can win." 
This time around, Wally Joyner got hit in the back by a Brad Havens' pitch with 
one out and the bases loaded in the ninth inning to bring home the winning run. 
It was the fourth consecutive victory over the Tigers in the last inning. 
The last time Blyleven pitched, he benefited from Joyner's solo home run in the 
sixth for a 1-0 victory over Toronto. 
"It's exciting as a pitcher," Blyleven said. "You know if you keep it close 
until the seventh, eighth or ninth inning, we have a chance to win (late in the 
game)." 
And certainly, Blyleven has been aided by such strong, if last-minute, support 
this season. 
It's allowed Blyleven, who has a 10-2 record with a 2.32 earned-run average, to 
get off to the fastest start in his 19-year career. 
A year ago, he was a 37-year-old who appeared to in the twilight years of a 
long, distinguished career. He had posted a 10-17 record with a 5.43 ERA with 
the Minnesota Twins. 
But an off-season trade to the Angels has done wonders for him. He's living at 
his Villa Park home year-round now and playing not far from his old high 
school, Santiago in Garden Grove. 
Blyleven has helped rejuvenate the Angels and vice versa. 
His ERA is the lowest in the starting rotation and second best in the American 
League behind Oakland's Mike Moore, who has a 2.12 ERA. 
He's second on the club in victories with 10, complete games (five) and in 
innings pitched (147 2/3). 
All of which has allowed him to continue to pass such all-time greats as 
Johnson. 
Next up for Blyleven is Gaylord Perry's fifth-place standard of 3,534 
strikeouts, which he should pass in the not-too-distant future. 
