SLOWING GROWTH PUTS ECONOMY NEAR RECESSION 
The nation's economy tottered to the brink of recession last quarter, growing 
at an annual rate of only 1.2%, following a revised 1.7% pace during the first 
three months of the year, the Commerce Department reported Friday. 
But analysts said that the economy's actual performance may be even bleaker 
than the overall figures indicate. 
A breakdown of Friday's gross national product statistics showed declines in 
virtually every major sector: Spending by individuals and business shrank at an 
annual rate of 2.2%, net exports plunged sharply, business investment fell at a 
6.1% annual rate and home building plummeted. 
Only an unexpectedly large buildup of unsold inventories on auto lots, in 
warehouses and on retail shelves kept the nation's total output from declining 
between March and June. And analysts say a large accumulation of unsold goods 
often is a prelude to a recession. 
"These numbers make the economy weaker than even some of us bears have been 
saying," said Irwin L. Kellner, economist for Manufacturers Hanover Bank in New 
York. "Inventories are up and sales are down, and there's no sign of things 
getting better out there." 
Allen Sinai, chief economist at the Boston Co., agreed. "All the important 
factors declined, and the inventory swing is the only thing that produced a 
positive statistic," he said. "Without the inventories, the economy in this 
quarter really would be in recession." 
Some analysts suggested that the grim figures on Friday might push the 
independent Federal Reserve Board closer toward a relaxation of money and 
credit policies. The Fed has been under pressure from the White House to push 
interest rates down but so far has demurred. 
At the same time, the GNP price index -- the broadest measure of inflation -- 
eased during the quarter, showing inflation slowing to an annual rate of 4.1% 
during the period, down from a 6.1% pace during the first three months of the 
year. 
Friday's new figures do not yet show the economy in a recession. Before any 
slowdown can qualify for that label, output must decline for two consecutive 
quarters. So far, the economy is continuing to grow, although the pace is 
somewhat slower than previously was believed. 
But revised computations showed the economy grew more slowly during the first 
three months of this year than the department initially reported -- at a 1.7% 
annual rate, rather than a 1.9% pace. 
And revised figures showed the growth rate in late 1989 actually was 0.3%, not 
the 1.1% rate that had been published in the previous report. 
The department made public also an annual revision showing that the economy has 
grown at annual rates of less than 2% in each of the last five quarters -- 
which it said constituted the longest string of very slow growth on record. 
Sinai noted that the string of slow-growth quarters, since March, 1989, is 
unprecedented since World War II. Since the first quarter of 1989, the economy 
has grown, quarterly, at annual rates of 1.6%, 1.7%, 0.3%, 1.7% and 1.2%. 
Even so, Giulio Martini, economist for Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co. of New 
York, took issue with the suggestion that the economy may be on the brink of a 
recession. 
Martini argued in a telephone interview that, because inventories have been 
growing below the long-term trend for several quarters now, the second-quarter 
increase merely constitutes "a correction." 
Excluding agriculture, he noted, business inventories fell at annual rates of 
$29.9 billion at the end of last year and in the first quarter of 1990, and 
they declined $7.8 billion in all of 1989 and $2.2 billion in 1988. 
In 1987, the last year of strong growth before the stock market crash in the 
fourth quarter of that year, inventories rose by $20.7 billion -- all after 
adjustment for inflation. 
Martini suggested that some of the numbers in Friday's report on consumer 
spending seemed unlikely to be an accurate reflection of reality. 
The report, an estimate of growth based in many cases on only two months' 
statistics, suggests that spending on food declined steadily in real terms over 
the last year, even though the nation's population increased. 
