GORBACHEV ASSURES EAST BLOC ON REFORM; 
BUT STRESSES USE OF SOVIET POLICY AS GUIDE AT WARSAW PACT SUMMIT 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev told East Bloc leaders Friday they are 
free to pursue their own views of communism, but suggested his own program of 
economic and social reform as a guide. 
"We are entering a time which requires new policies and new solutions," 
Gorbachev said in a dinner toast after the first day of the Warsaw Pact summit. 
"Each country and each party has its own specifics and can continue its own 
individual road to socialist democracy and progress," he added. 
His host at the banquet was Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu, the most 
vocal critic of Gorbachev's reforms. 
Splits in Alliance 
The alliance's seven members are divided over Gorbachev's new policies, with 
the Soviet Union, Hungary and Poland on the liberal side and Bulgaria, 
Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Romania sticking to the orthodox course. 
Their purposes at this summit are to discuss Western arms-reduction proposals 
and the Warsaw Pact's role in a new world where Gorbachev speaks of a "common 
European home" with no threat or fear of war. 
In his dinner toast, Gorbachev said, "We took new steps today toward European 
security, rapprochement and East-West dialogue." But he added: "There is still 
a war psychosis which we must overcome. We think it is necessary to stress the 
need for a shift from military to political moves" in Europe. 
Ceausescu renewed what he described as the Soviet Bloc's "appeal to NATO to 
give up its policy of nuclear deterrence." 
Neither he nor Gorbachev specifically mentioned what was decided Friday, but 
sources said the alliance has concluded discussion on documents which will call 
for more dialogue with the West on disarmament and lay out a vision of a world 
free of nuclear and chemical weapons. 
NATO Plans Discussed 
Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov told an earlier news 
briefing that Gorbachev and his counterparts discussed NATO proposals for 
reducing conventional forces and how the Soviet Bloc "should change, adapt . . 
. become contemporary." 
"Everybody would agree there are vast changes, in our country, in the world," 
Gerasimov said. "They are talking about the role of the Warsaw Pact in these 
changing conditions." 
Ion Diaconu of the Romanian Foreign Ministry refused comment on a report by the 
Soviet news agency Novosti that the leaders were discussing creation of a 
Warsaw Pact "political commission" to arbitrate disputes between members. 
Diaconu denied reports that Romania had requested a discussion at the summit of 
its dispute with Hungary over Romania's alleged mistreatment of its 1.7 million 
ethnic Hungarians. 
Gerasimov said problems within the bloc were not on the agenda, but "each 
delegation can say a few words about its own problems." 
Gorbachev said in West Germany last month that the Bucharest summit would 
respond to President Bush's proposal May 29 for a joint reduction in U.S. and 
Soviet troops stationed in Europe to 275,000 for each side by 1993, accompanied 
by cuts in combat aircraft and other conventional weapons. 
The Soviet leader said the Bush proposal had increased chances for quick 
agreement at Vienna negotiations on conventional forces. Bush's plan is 
expected to be discussed in September. 
He also is pushing for talks with NATO on reducing tactical, or short-range, 
nuclear weapons in Europe, but the United States wants the issue tied to cuts 
in conventional forces. 
On Thursday, during a visit to Strasbourg, France, Gorbachev again tried to 
push the Western alliance into talks on the short-range weapons, offering the 
possibility of more unilateral cuts in the Kremlin's nuclear arsenal if NATO 
agreed. 
May Offer Recalled 
His last offer to scrap nuclear weapons -- about 500 warheads -- came in May 
during a visit to Moscow by Secretary of State James A. Baker III, while NATO 
was arguing about a joint position on short-range missiles. 
There was unconfirmed speculation in Bucharest that documents released after 
the summit ends tonight might include numbers for the Strasbourg offer. 
Romanian television broadcast scenes of delegations arriving on Thursday. 
Rezsoe Nyers, the Hungarian party chairman, appeared to be the only delegation 
head Ceausescu did not greet with a comradely kiss on the cheek. 
After Gorbachev arrived, reporters asked him what he expected of the summit. 
"I'll tell you when we've finished," he said. 
