REFUGEES' ART REFLECTS OLD AND NEW VIETNAM 
Black ink slashes white silk, and a lost world emerges. 
A water buffalo dips one curved horn into a rice paddy. An ancient woman 
clutches a bowl. A mother comforts her child, touching her cheek to his smaller 
one in a gesture of infinite tenderness. 
These spare brush strokes made Be Ky a celebrity in the Saigon art world at the 
age of 18. A year ago, at the age of 51, she and her husband, Ho Thanh Duc, a 
renowned collagist, left Vietnam, settling recently in Garden Grove. 
The couple has joined a tiny but productive community of Vietnamese artists in 
exile. Many live or paint in Orange County, but their unlikely focal point is a 
gallery in Burbank. It is owned by a young etcher, Nguyen Viet, who has been 
trying to introduce paintings and sculpture by Vietnamese refugees to the 
American market. 
Their works range from traditional brush-and-ink drawings to primitivist 
sketches, modern acrylics and post-modern etching. Some are fierce, like Ho 
Thanh Duc's marbled collages of an anguished Christ. Others are sentimental. 
Yet the artists express common themes: melancholy, nostalgia and transcendence. 
"I don't want (Westerners) to think of Vietnam as just a war-torn country," 
said Nguyen Thi Hop, 46, who layers watercolor onto silk to produce ethereal 
scenes of rural life a century ago. "I want to show them that the other side of 
Vietnam is beautiful and poetic." 
If the art is serene, the artists' lives have not been. 
Be Ky and her husband were both war orphans. At the age of 12, she went to live 
with an abusive artist who recognized her talent and exploited it. 
"I came to his family because I wanted to learn," Be Ky said through an 
interpreter at the Burbank gallery, where her recent paintings are hung. "He 
taught me very little, and I learned a lot from other people. . . . I had to 
hide my paintings from him." 
By 16, her adoptive father had her hawking her ink caricatures on the streets 
of Saigon. "If I earned a lot of money, I brought it home and they were very 
happy. But if the money was little, they would beat me up," she recalled. 
A French art critic came across her sketches and arranged for the 18-year-old 
girl to have a one-woman show at the Alliance Francaise in Saigon in 1957. It 
sold out. But as her fame brought exhibitions in Paris and Tokyo, relations 
with her adoptive father deteriorated. One day, she said, she discovered that 
he had been forging her name on his paintings to bring a higher price for them 
on the street. 
When she confronted him, he struck her across the head, leaving her deaf in one 
ear. Nearly 30 years later, it was that disability that finally convinced 
Vietnamese authorities to allow the couple to leave their homeland for Manila 
in 1989. 
Ho Thanh Duc's father died fighting the Japanese, and his mother abandoned the 
infant to remarry. Duc became a domestic servant. 
An aunt rescued him from the street when he was 11, and by his early 20s he was 
an art student who had decided to concentrate on collage. 
He sold his first collage to an American Army captain for 7,000 dong -- a 
princely sum then equal to a month's pay for a high government official. Better 
yet, "when (the captain) went back to Philadelphia, he sent me oils," Duc said. 
The faces of Christ and Buddha and the drab colors of war figure prominently in 
Duc's art. One series of collages that brought him early fame was made of torn 
fragments of robes given him by Buddhist monks. One robe was said to have 
belonged to a monk who immolated himself. 
The celebrated couple declined offers to leave South Vietnam before the 1975 
communist takeover. By 1977, however, they had changed their minds. "We had no 
freedom to chose our subjects, and we could not produce art under the 
censorship of the government," Duc said. 
A botched attempt to flee by boat brought him a two-year prison sentence. By 
1981, he had obtained a visa for the United States, but he waited eight more 
years for permission to leave. In 1989, the couple revived their careers with 
two joint exhibitions in the Philippines, where Be Ky presented President 
Corazon Aquino with a Madonna sketch. 
Now they have converted their suburban patio to a joint studio. At 50, Duc is 
learning to drive. Be Ky is adjusting to a hearing aid. Her husband jokes that 
he has sewn half his mouth shut to lower his usual volume. He can even whisper 
in her ear. For the first time in their married life, he noted with glee, they 
can keep secrets from their four children. 
Nguyen Khai tried to paint peace. Born in Hue, Vietnam, he studied at the 
National School of Fine Arts in Saigon in the early '60s. On Vietnamese 
lacquer, he painted abstract tableaux of doves, mandolins and women with fluid 
limbs and hair. He helped found an association of young artists, grew famous 
and managed to dodge the draft. 
In 1975, a North Vietnamese official came to visit his studio and explained 
that abstract painting would not be appreciated under the new regime. Khai 
attended re-education lectures, where it was suggested that he abandon 
bourgeois romanticism and tackle subjects from everyday life. 
"They wanted me to draw realistic life in Vietnam, but once I did it, they 
didn't like it, because it was too realistic," said Khai, 50, who fled for 
Indonesia by boat in 1981 and eventually settled in Tustin. 
Since coming to the West, he said, his colors have gotten brighter. 
"I feel more happy, and I feel relieved," he said. "So most of my paintings 
have more movement. And movement expresses freedom. 
"In all my paintings, I don't want to express my sorrow for my country and the 
war," Khai added. "I want to express the beauty of my country. . . . I have 
suffered a lot, but I don't want other people to see what I suffered. I just 
want to bring happiness." 
Khai is virtually unknown outside Vietnam, and commercial success has eluded 
him. Refugee status has compounded the panoply of problems all artists face. 
His work, though, has been shown at UC Irvine, UCLA and several small Orange 
County galleries, and a new show will open Aug. 3 at the Studio Gallery and 
Framing Inc. in Burbank. 
"It is so hard for these people, a lot of them say they want to give up," said 
gallery owner Nguyen Viet, who had a show last December for four Vietnamese 
artists, all boat people. "I keep telling them not to give up." 
In Nguyen Thi Hop's family, "art was something with too much freedom for 
women." When she was accepted into the National Academy of Art in Saigon, she 
had to promise her father she would become an art teacher before he would allow 
her to go. 
Hop married an artist and philosophy teacher, Nguyen Dong. They were interested 
in art, not politics, but after 1975, Dong was not permitted to teach, and they 
were set to drawing labor posters. Their daughter was told to report back on 
her parents' activities. In 1979, they left by boat, and though they were 
robbed by Thai pirates, they survived the trip to Malaysia. 
In the Pulau Bidong refugee camp, a friend finally gave them a roll of 
blueprint paper and a box of wax crayons. They had both been influenced by 
Henri Rousseau; now they used a naif style as a match for their crude materials 
and their primitive surroundings. With their daughter, they drew 30 sketches of 
life in the refugee camp. 
The colorful simplicity of these drawings does not disguise the hardships. 
There is a vista of a denuded hillside where Dong cut and carried logs to build 
his family a crude cabin covered with rice bags. Hop drew the scene near the 
central well, where crowds of women came for water to carry back to their 
shacks. 
A Canadian saw their work. "He asked us if we would sell these drawings in 
Canada, to raise money to help people in the camps," said Dong, now 49. "But 
even though we had no money, nothing, we didn't want to sell. They are 
souvenirs." 
They did lend the drawings for a charity exhibition, though, and hope to 
exhibit them in the United States. After a stint in West Germany, they rejoined 
family members in Gardena and are working as graphic artists for Nguoi Viet 
Daily News, a Vietnamese-language newspaper based in Westminster. 
In a corner of the newspaper's paste-up room, Hop and Dong use their spare 
moments to produce illustrations for cookbooks, novels and children's books, 
the gay colors and rounded figures giving their work an unfettered charm. Their 
fine art is done at home at night. 
Hop, 46, draws placid scenes of robust country women washing or eating fruit, 
of children playing in a dreamland of temples and screened verandas. Light 
radiates from their skin as from Venetian saints. Dong paints idyllic scenes of 
water buffalo, banana trees and fish ponds. 
They paint a Vietnam that existed maybe a century ago, or perhaps never existed 
at all -- a world too gentle for war, a land unscathed by napalm or defoliant. 
"We get the beautiful image of what our country was like before the war from 
our parents or our grandparents," Dong said. "Not from our own experience." 
