DA CHECKS CHARGE THAT SCHOOL BOARD VIOLATED BROWN ACT; 
EDUCATION: AN ACTIVIST COMPLAINS THAT SOME CENTINELA VALLEY UNION HIGH SCHOOL 
DISTRICT MEMBERS CONDUCTED PUBLIC BUSINESS IN PRIVATE. 
The Los Angeles County district attorney's office is evaluating complaints 
alleging that Centinela Valley Union High School District trustees have 
violated laws that require school boards to meet in public. 
The complaints were filed in March and early this month by community activist 
Nancy Marthens, who alleges that the trustees have been making decisions in 
private -- in violation of the state's Ralph M. Brown Act -- since they were 
elected to the school board last November. 
In addition, former board members Ann Birdsall and Aleta Collins said in 
interviews that board President Ruth Morales twice tried to discuss issues in 
private session that legally should have been discussed in public. Although 
Birdsall and Collins mentioned the incidents in public sessions, they said, 
neither of them ever formally complained about the matter. 
Morales and the current trustees, who have been under fire by some parents and 
community activists for the way they have handled allegations of racism in the 
district, deny that they have ever violated open meeting laws and instead claim 
that they are being harassed by ousted board members and others who harbor 
political grudges. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. James Hickey, who handles Brown Act violation complaints, 
said this week: "We're evaluating the material to determine if indeed a 
criminal violation has occurred. We haven't made the final call of whether 
we're going to further investigate." 
Local governing bodies may privately discuss only those issues exempted from 
the Brown Act, including personnel matters, litigation and contract 
negotiations. Intentional violations of the law are considered misdemeanors, 
and elected officials found guilty may be jailed or fined. 
Last year, the Lassen County Board of Supervisors became the first governing 
body ever charged under the 37-year-old Brown Act. However, the charges were 
dismissed in April. 
Because investigators must prove an elected official knowingly violated the 
law's requirements before a criminal case is filed, it is far more common for 
citizens and news organizations to pursue alleged Brown Act violations in civil 
court, Hickey said. There, they may seek an order invalidating an action by a 
governing body or prohibiting future unlawful actions. 
Marthens, who wrote both complaints, said in an interview last week that she 
did not want to spend money to pursue civil remedies until the district 
attorney's office decides whether to file criminal charges. 
In her initial complaint, which was accompanied by a petition signed by 13 
people, including Birdsall, Marthens accused the board of violating the Brown 
Act eight times between Nov. 28, 1989, and Jan. 23, 1990. A supplemental 
complaint filed July 7 alleged additional violations in May. 
Among the complaints are allegations that the board made policy decisions in 
private, sought additional legal services without discussing the issue in 
public, improperly discussed issues that were not previously posted on the 
agenda and refused to describe in sufficient detail items to be discussed in 
closed session. 
For example, the complaint alleges that on Nov. 28, immediately after the three 
new trustees were sworn in, Morales announced the board "would like to become 
more active in the business of the whole school district." Marthens said it was 
unclear when and where the board made that decision, since this was its first 
public meeting. 
Marthens said in her complaint that the board's actions indicate a "conspiracy 
to violate the Brown Act." In a letter to the board dated Jan. 30, which was 
attached to the complaint, Marthens also said trustees have violated "the 
spirit and intent of the law" and "have established a pattern" of violations 
under school board policy, the state Education Code and the state Government 
Code. 
The trustees and their attorney, Larry Frierson, say none of the board's 
actions have violated the Brown Act. 
When the former board was in office, "I remember on numerous occasions finding 
the board members in a threesome, but I never once heard anyone accuse the old 
board of violating the Brown Act," Trustee Pam Sturgeon said. "I breathe, and 
they're telling me I'm violating the Brown Act. The information I'm getting 
from the California School Boards Assn. is we have not violated the Brown Act 
or anything else." 
The association's president, Maureen DiMarco, has been advising school board 
members on several issues facing the district, but spokesman Michael Fallon 
said DiMarco declined to comment about what advice, if any, she or other 
association members have provided regarding the Brown Act. 
In the most recent complaint, Marthens alleged that Sturgeon had polled her 
colleagues on the telephone regarding a letter she wanted to send in response 
to a threatened student walkout in May. Marthens said Sturgeon had told her and 
others of this. Students had staged a series of walkouts in March to protest 
the resignation of a popular black principal and allegations of racism. 
In the May 4 letter, which was addressed to Supt. McKinley Nash, Sturgeon told 
him that he was "directed to instruct the administrative and security staff at 
both schools about their responsibilities in maintaining control and order." 
Sturgeon said in an interview last week that the letter "wasn't a letter of 
direction, but basically a letter reminding him (Nash) of what our policies 
are." She also said she called not to get her colleagues' approval but to let 
them know she had already sent it. 
But Marthens, Birdsall and community activist Virginia Rhodes, all of whom were 
present during the conversation, said in interviews that Sturgeon told them she 
had called her fellow trustees to get a consensus that the letter should be 
sent. 
Under the terms of the Brown Act, Marthens wrote, Sturgeon should have called 
an emergency session to address the threatened walkout and posted a notice of 
the meeting. The board also should have voted in public on whether the letter 
should be written, she said. 
Frierson, the board's attorney, refused to comment directly on Sturgeon's 
letter but said the board has been acting in accordance with the letter of the 
law. 
But former trustees Birdsall and Collins say their experiences on the school 
board gave them reason to be concerned that school business is not being 
discussed in the open. 
During their tenure on the board, Collins and Birdsall said, Morales had twice 
tried to discuss issues during closed sessions that should have been presented 
in public. 
On both occasions, they said, they refused to participate and mentioned the 
incident during the open session. 
Birdsall also said Morales had called her at home twice during her tenure -- 
once in 1985 and once in 1987 -- to poll her on a vote. But in both instances, 
Birdsall said, she refused to discuss the issue on the telephone. 
"She called me to see if I would change my mind on a deal or if I would vote a 
certain way, and I said, 'No, I'm not going to discuss this with you because I 
feel that's a violation of the Brown Act,' " Birdsall said. 
Although the Brown Act does not specifically prohibit polling, phone calls to 
inquire about a vote could be deemed improper if a decision were reached over 
the telephone, said Assistant Atty. Gen. Eugene Hill. 
"There's nothing wrong with calling a person up and saying, 'How are you voting 
on this?' " Hill said. "But to the extent it starts to represent 
decision-making, then you start to get into" Brown Act violations, he said. 
Morales declined to discuss the allegations by Birdsall and Collins. 
Although allegations of Brown Act violations have dogged the board since it was 
seated in November, Marthens was the first person to file a formal complaint. 
The election, in which three challengers replaced three incumbent trustees who 
had been strong supporters of Nash, was considered a major upset. 
The campaign was marked by allegations that white teachers had been harassing 
minority administrators -- charges that exacerbated racial tension in the 
fast-changing district. In 1989, more than half the students were Latino; 14.8% 
were Anglo; 18.4% black, and 8% Asian. In 1980, 45.6% of the students were 
Anglo. 
Tensions came to a head immediately after the election as rumors began 
circulating that the new board members planned to fire Nash and other black 
administrators in the district to satisfy the predominantly Anglo teachers 
union, which had backed two of the challengers. 
The teachers said during the campaign that Nash and Crowe were using 
allegations of racism to deflect legitimate criticisms. On the day of their 
swearing in, the board members -- four of whom are Latino -- denied they had 
any plans for an administrative shake-up. 
But in early March, when Crowe announced he was resigning because of a lack of 
support from the trustees, some people interpreted his action as proof that the 
board planned to dislodge black administrators. His announcement sparked 
massive student walkouts March 5 and 6. 
After months of declining to speak about Crowe's status in the district, the 
board finally voted 3 to 1 last week to reassign him to a teaching position, 
with Sturgeon voting against the reassignment. (One trustee was ill.) 
The political backdrop may be significant because sometimes the Brown Act is 
invoked as a way to satisfy political gripes, Hill said. 
"The extent to which the constituency is satisfied or unsatisfied with the way 
the board operates can find expression in complaints about the Brown Act . . . 
and could be political." 
But Rhodes, who signed the petition requesting a criminal investigation, said 
politics had nothing to do with the allegations. "Things have come out at the 
meetings (that) have not been discussed in public forums," she said. "I think 
they are using their closed sessions for things other than they are allowed to 
use them for." 
Even if the board can show it has fulfilled the minimum standards set out by 
the Brown Act, she said, it has still engaged in practices that have created a 
perception that deals are being made in the back room and that the board is 
trying to avoid public scrutiny. 
Rhodes and Marthens have complained that the school board has not been 
videotaping its meetings, a break with past practice. Sturgeon said the board 
stopped taping meetings because of a breakdown in the equipment. Although the 
board is trying to negotiate an agreement with the city of Lawndale to buy new 
video equipment, critics say the board could have done more in the meantime to 
ensure its meetings were taped. 
Critics have also attacked a decision by the trustees in May to scale back the 
number of board meetings from two a month to one, the minimum required by law. 
The board made that decision after several meetings were disrupted by the 
audience and had to be adjourned early. But some critics said the disruptions 
were caused by the board's own actions and that meeting less frequently was not 
an appropriate response to criticism. 
BACKGROUND 
The Ralph M. Brown Act of 1953, the first in a series of so-called "sunshine" 
laws in California, requires school districts, city councils and other local 
governing bodies to hold their meetings in public. Under the state law, 
citizens have a right to be notified about what actions are to be considered, 
to address their elected officials during meetings and to be present when votes 
are cast. Governing bodies are permitted to meet privately only to discuss 
issues that are exempt from the law, including personnel matters, litigation 
and property negotiations. 
