GOVERNOR TO CUT BUDGET BY $646 MILLION, BUILD RESERVE 
Following up on his promise to set aside more than $1 billion for emergencies, 
Gov. George Deukmejian announced Thursday that he plans to veto $646 million 
from the proposed $50-billion state budget. 
Despite the vetoes, Deukmejian told about 400 members of the Los Angeles World 
Affairs Council, the $49.3-billion budget will increase state spending by 8.7% 
during the fiscal year, which began July 1. 
Deukmejian said he plans to veto $489 million in spending proposed by the 
Legislature just to bring the state's budget reserve back to $1.1 billion. The 
reserve was all but wiped out last year because of unexpected budget pressures. 
Deukmejian said he plans to veto another $157 million from the budget but will 
set that amount aside to restore legislative cuts to prison, tourism, new 
technology, and rural aid programs. 
Signing Today 
A list of the vetoes will be released when Deukmejian signs the budget today. 
Most of the cuts are expected to be in health and welfare programs. 
The governor appeared to be bracing for criticism over his vetoes. 
"Some will argue that I should have settled for a smaller reserve in order to 
fund all the vetoes. They will charge, as they have done every year, that it is 
somehow lacking in compassion to deny extra funds to the affected programs 
while stashing those funds away in reserve," the governor said in a luncheon 
speech at the Biltmore. 
But, Deukmejian argued, in past years the state has "needed virtually every 
dollar in the reserve in order to meet either unexpected expenses or 
unanticipated reductions in revenues." 
Follow Through on Threat 
Deukmejian indicated that he plans to follow through on a threat to 
substantially reduce the $36-million annual budget of the state Office of 
Family Planning, which administers programs providing birth control 
information, advice and other services aimed at eliminating unwanted 
pregnancies. 
Birth control services have support among both Republican and Democratic 
legislators, but probably not enough to override the governor's veto. Veto 
overrides require support by two-thirds of the members of the Assembly and 
Senate. 
Deukmejian said he thinks family planning agencies can find revenue from other 
sources, such as private foundations and grants. The governor also indicated 
that he plans to cut money added to the budget by the Legislature for prenatal 
services for poor women. 
During the speech, Deukmejian appealed to members of the public affairs forum 
to support a proposed constitutional amendment in next June's primary election 
that will substantially rewrite two measures approved in earlier elections -- 
the government spending limit that was passed in 1979 and Proposition 98, the 
school funding initiative approved by voters last year. 
Deukmejian said passage of the constitutional amendment is necessary so that he 
and the Legislature can go forward with plans to raise gasoline taxes and truck 
weight fees to finance a 10-year, $18.5-billion transportation program. The 
program calls for increasing the state gasoline tax by 9 cents a gallon, spread 
out over five years. 
During a question-and-answer session after the speech, Deukmejian, long an 
advocate of tough anti-crime legislation, lamented the fact that a series of 
new stringent sentencing laws has not stemmed the flow of illegal drugs into 
California. 
"We have not yet been successful -- despite all of the drug prevention and drug 
education programs that are undertaken -- to turn off a significant number of 
people from engaging in the use of illegal drugs," Deukmejian said. 
