PEDESTRIAN AND AUTO BRIDGE AT WESTSIDE MALL PASSES HURDLE 
In a major defeat for homeowners opposed to expansion of the Westside Pavilion 
shopping mall, the Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Commission gave preliminary 
approval Thursday to a bridge over Westwood Boulevard that would connect the 
existing mall with a proposed annex. 
The 48-foot-wide bridge -- roughly half the width of a typical freeway -- would 
be the first in the city to carry both traffic and pedestrians over a city 
street as part of a commercial development, Los Angeles officials said. Other 
private bridges in the city, including those at the Bonaventure Hotel and the 
Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza, serve pedestrians only. 
Cluttered Skyline 
"This is a very bad precedent for this city," said Laura Lake of the Westside 
Home Owners Alliance, a coalition of five homeowner groups near the mall that 
wanted a pedestrians-only bridge. Lake and others argued that the traffic link 
is unnecessary and said they fear such bridges, particularly near residential 
neighborhoods, will clutter Los Angeles' skyline. 
In approving the bridge, commissioners followed the advice of city 
transportation officials, several consultants, architect Jon Jerde, City 
Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky and residents from a sixth nearby homeowners group. 
All agreed the bridge offered the best hope of relieving traffic congestion in 
the area by permitting cars to move from the mall to its 105,000-square-foot 
annex without using surface streets. The annex will also provide 1,000 
additional parking spaces. 
"We didn't want this bridge. We didn't go out and say, 'Hey guys, why don't you 
put a bridge in,' " said Terry Tippit of the West of Westwood homeowners group, 
which represents residents east and west of the mall. "But given the problems 
that we've had in this area, we felt it is going to be a plus." 
The bridge has been a source of contention since it was proposed several years 
ago as part of the mall's expansion. Westfield Inc., the developer, originally 
wanted to build a larger bridge that would include retail shops. Strong 
community opposition and Mayor Tom Bradley's insistence that the bridge not 
include shops forced Westfield to scale back the bridge. 
In January, the City Council approved the expansion and the traffic bridge, but 
under city law the Cultural Affairs Commission must also approve proposals to 
build over city streets. On Thursday, the commission voted 6 to 1 to grant 
preliminary approval for the bridge. Westfield must return to the commission 
for final approval once Jerde completes the bridge's design. 
No Signal 
Commissioner Madeleine Landry, who voted for the bridge, cautioned other 
developers not to view the decision as a signal that the commission favors such 
bridges. 
"I don't think we should ever look at this as being a precedent or say we are 
going to do this for every project that comes along," Landry said. 
Decisions by the Cultural Affairs Commission cannot be appealed, but homeowners 
opposed to the project have one more chance to fight it. The City Council later 
this summer will consider Westfield's request for so-called "air rights" to 
build over Westwood Boulevard. But Yaroslavsky, who represents the area, has 
given opponents little hope, saying the air rights issue is a mere technicality 
because the council and mayor have already approved the project. 
