O.C. SWINDLERS DETAIL PHONE SCAMS FOR PANEL 
Two convicted swindlers who ran wildly profitable but fraudulent telephone 
marketing boiler rooms in Orange County told members of Congress on Wednesday 
how their salesmen bilked innocent "mooches" out of millions of dollars in 
phony coin and oil-lease schemes. 
"In the companies I was personally involved with, I saw over $75 million get 
taken down," said a former scam operator, who used the alias John Albright. 
Albright, who is cooperating with federal authorities in other fraud 
investigations, wore a black hood, sat behind screens and testified through a 
voice modulator during his appearance before the consumer affairs subcommittee 
of the House Committee on Government Operations. 
Another con artist, Stephen P. Bederson, testified that he helped run an Irvine 
telephone scam called Midwest Mineral Properties in the late 1980s. 
"The objective was to steal as much money from the victim as possible, within a 
two-month period, before the client started questioning the whereabouts of his 
guaranteed refund," he said. 
The testimony of the telephone swindlers highlighted the first day of 
subcommittee hearings on fraudulent telephone marketing operations. The panel 
is considering possible changes in federal law that would help enforcement 
officials crack down on the scams. 
Centered largely in Southern California and Florida, the fraudulent operations 
cost unsuspecting Americans billions of dollars a year, according to 
investigators. 
Boiler-room artists use telephone banks to sell everything from vitamins and 
vacation packages to investments in precious metals and foreign currencies, 
often without delivering any merchandise. On those occasions when a customer 
does receive something, it often is worth far less than he paid. 
Also testifying Wednesday were law enforcement officials and three victims of 
telemarketing fraud. Two widows, one 84 and the other 90, said they lost life 
savings of $20,000 and $750,000, respectively, in frauds involving investments 
in a movie company and foreign currencies. 
"I worry constantly about a future without any savings," said Grace L. 
Singletary, 84, of Dawson, Ga., who sent off a total of $20,000 to "Chariot 7 
Productions" in California after a man who told her that he was a "native 
Nebraska boy brought up with high morals" persuaded her to invest in a film 
project. 
In addition, small-business owner Orlo Ellison described how office supply 
telemarketers corrupted his bookkeeper with personal gifts and then, with her 
assistance, billed his company $100,000 for merchandise that was actually worth 
about $10,000. 
Southern California, especially Orange County, is the "boiler-room fraud 
capital" of the United States, several law enforcement authorities testified. 
Many scam operators set up shop in Newport Beach and nearby areas simply 
because Orange County is "a nice place to live," Albright explained to the 
panel. 
"The rest of the country is sending billions of dollars to (boiler rooms in) 
Southern California," said David A. Katz, a former assistant U.S. attorney who 
once headed the Southern California Fraud Task Force. "It's a disgrace for the 
rest of the country to put up with it." 
Orange County Deputy Dist. Atty. William L. Overtoom told the panel that the 
county is home to about 200 fraudulent boiler-room operations that ring up 
gross annual sales of up to $1 billion. 
A federal, state and local boiler-room task force in Orange County in the last 
two years has initiated 16 prosecutions, arrested 36 people, won 14 convictions 
and has 30 investigations in progress, he said. 
Nationally, law enforcement officials estimate that at least 85% of existing 
boiler-rooms are not being investigated, Overtoom said. "The primary reason . . 
. is the lack of manpower, economic resources and effective laws," he said. 
Katz, Overtoom and other prosecutors who testified said the federal government 
should consider amending its mail and wire fraud statutes to permit authorities 
to seize, with a court order, the assets of fraudulent telemarketers. The 
concept was endorsed by Rep. C. Christopher Cox (R-Newport Beach), one of the 
subcommittee members. 
Albright and Bederson described in detail how fraudulent telemarketers ply 
their trade. 
They often begin by purchasing names of existing but dormant corporations "off 
the shelf," so they can claim their boiler room has been in existence for five 
or 10 years, without any consumer complaints. 
They told of how inexperienced salesmen called "fronters" use written pitches 
to make initial calls to potential victims, or "mooches." Those "mooches" who 
show an interest then are turned over to more experienced account closers, he 
said. 
Albright, who worked a coin scam, explained how another boiler-room employee 
known as a "reloader" would "find out how deep the customer's pockets were and 
ascertain how long it would take to get as much of that money as possible." 
An average reloader would handle up to 200 accounts and could expect to have a 
weekly income of more than $10,000, Albright testified. 
"We targeted the wealthy and the elderly in our fraud," Bederson said. "We 
found the elderly intent on enlarging their nest egg, their limited income, and 
often interested in generating money for their grandchildren." 
