STUDIO SHOOTING BLAMED ON BUSINESS DEAL 
The man who burst through a Lorimar Studios gate and emptied a shotgun into a 
sound stage before taking his own life had gone to the Culver City lot to 
confront "Dallas" television star Ken Kercheval, his foil in a bitter dispute 
over a popcorn business, police said Wednesday. 
Edward P. Phillips, 43, formerly of Corydon, Ind., apparently blamed Kercheval, 
who acquired full ownership of the popcorn company last year, for cheating him 
out of the business and causing his marriage to fail, investigators and 
associates said. 
Hoping to confront Kercheval, Phillips came to Los Angeles on Monday and drove 
to the Culver City lot in a rented truck Tuesday evening, police said. Unable 
to talk his way past a guard, he rammed through the gate, set fire to the truck 
and opened fire on the sound stage where "Dallas" is filmed. 
When police closed in, Phillips turned the gun on himself. He died from a 
single blast to the chest. The sound stage was empty and no other injuries were 
reported. 
Neither Kercheval, who plays oil tycoon Cliff Barnes, nor other "Dallas" actors 
were on the lot that day. Police later found a practice hand grenade and 
canisters of a poisonous insecticide on the front seat of Phillips' truck. 
Detectives and acquaintances of Phillips who were interviewed Wednesday 
presented a picture of a bitter, distraught man who was disturbed by a string 
of personal and financial losses over recent years: his business, his wife, 
and, ultimately, the legal battles he had mounted to win compensation for his 
lost company. 
"I think he was angry over being Xed out of the business and was intending to 
see Kercheval," said Culver City Police Sgt. Hank Davies. "His marriage broke 
up (and) he had lost his business." 
By several accounts, Phillips blamed much of his ill fortune on Kercheval. 
Kercheval, in a statement issued through a publicist, said he was "shocked and 
astonished" by the suicide incident. The 54-year-old actor said that after he 
bought out Phillips' popcorn business, Phillips "on several occasions exhibited 
irrational behavior that frightened my family and associates." 
However, Kercheval added: "I had no idea this would be the result." 
According to Culver City police, information from former business associates 
and news reports, Kercheval in 1985 bought a third of the Old Capital Popcorn 
Co. from Phillips and his wife at the time, Linda Phillips, for nearly $1 
million. The Phillipses helped Kercheval finance the loan and paid him a 
monthly stipend from company earnings. 
The partnership appeared to go well at first, with Kercheval's presence -- his 
picture was used on cartons of the popcorn -- attracting publicity. They were 
even featured in a segment of TV's "Life Styles of the Rich and Famous." 
But the partnership began to sour. Several bad marketing decisions cut into 
profits and there was friction over hiring. Finally, in April of last year, 
Kercheval and Linda Phillips joined forces to oust Edward Phillips from the 
business. She sued for divorce shortly thereafter. 
Kercheval then agreed to pay the Phillipses $309,000 for their two-thirds share 
in the business -- ultimately obtaining for $1.3 million a company that the 
Phillipses had bought for $2.01 million in 1983. 
"At that time, I didn't care if I lived or died," Phillips told the Louisville 
Courier-Journal newspaper. Phillips later admitted himself to an Ohio hospital 
for three days to recover from depression, the Courier-Journal reported in an 
April 9 chronicle of Old Capital Popcorn's plight. 
Kercheval said all parties agreed to the sale of the firm after "management 
problems" arose. He said he had not seen or spoken to Phillips in at least a 
year. 
Multiple Legal Actions 
Phillips sued Kercheval, Old Capital countersued Phillips and the popcorn firm 
has also been sued by at least two suppliers who claim they were not paid for 
services. 
A former business associate said the relationship between Kercheval and 
Phillips was mismatched and tense from the start. "One was debonair and 
polished, and one was off a farm," said Allan Simmons, hired by Kercheval in 
1987 as sales vice president for the popcorn company. "Can you imagine two guys 
like this as roommates? Wouldn't work." 
Before the popcorn venture, Phillips, who held a degree in farm economics, 
owned a farm equipment dealership. 
Simmons, whom Kercheval fired a year after hiring him, said that although his 
position with the company was in marketing, he wound up "spending as much time 
dealing with their problems as I did getting out there and selling their 
product." 
Simmons said that Kercheval was a "gentle, charitable" man who seemed to change 
at times "into the role of a ruthless businessman. I think he (Kercheval) plays 
the role in real life that he plays on TV sometimes," said Simmons of Aptos, 
Calif. 
The Phillipses, who have three children, made their divorce final in January. 
'It's Just Too Much' 
Linda Phillips, in a telephone interview from Corydon, Ind., told The Times 
that she had spoken to her ex-husband just a few days ago. But she declined to 
comment further: "It's just too much right now," she said. 
Linda Phillips also said that her husband "had been having psychological 
problems for some time in trying to deal with all this (the business losses and 
divorce)," Davies said. "She blamed it on him (Phillips). She said he blamed 
other people for his failures in the business." 
Police believe that since the divorce, Edward Phillips lived with his parents 
in Carroll, Ohio, a small, rural town of 640 inhabitants 20 miles southeast of 
Columbus. His father, a dentist, Dr. E. P. Phillips, told The Times: "We're 
very hurt." 
Police said they were still tracing the weapon he used and the grenade found in 
his car. 
Before crashing into the Lorimar lot, Phillips handed several items to a 
security guard. There were two canisters of a poisonous chemical identified as 
methyl bromide, which is used in fumigants. 
And there was an envelope containing a greeting card with a handwritten note 
addressed to Kercheval and a news article. Its headline read: "Dreams, Feuds, 
Love, Lawsuits -- and Popcorn." 
A TROUBLED SCRIPT 
Reality, fantasy intersect in Hollywood. Stories, Part I, Page 1 and Part II, 
Page 3. 
