CHURCHILL GRANDCHILDREN CAN'T ESCAPE THE SHADOW OF GIANT; 
HISTORY: NONE OF THE 10 MEN AND WOMEN OF SCANT ACCOMPLISHMENT THREATENS TO 
MATCH SIR WINSTON'S STATURE AS A STATESMAN, ORATOR AND HISTORIAN. 
Hurrying back to London after a weekend in the country, Winston Churchill 
ignored the pleas of his grandchildren. 
"Don't go, Grandpa," begged Edwina Sandys and young Winston Churchill, who were 
staying at Chequers, the prime minister's official country residence. 
It was July, 1944, a month after the D-day invasion, the early days of the 
German V-1 "buzz bomb" assault on London. 
As the car drew away, his secretary, Marion Spicer, recorded in his diary that 
the war and the youngsters both weighed on Churchill's mind. 
"What a world to bring children into!" the prime minister said. 
The world has proven hospitable for the 10 grandchildren of Sir Winston Leonard 
Spencer Churchill (1874-1965). It's a place where they can make their marks, 
but they can't escape his long shadow. 
Three have made it into "Who's Who," including two who have followed their 
grandfather and their fathers into Parliament. 
Winston S. Churchill and Nicholas Soames are Conservative Party back-benchers 
-- legislative spear carriers -- in the House of Commons where 50 years ago 
their grandfather summoned Britain to a sacrifice of "blood, toil, tears and 
sweat." 
In a studio on Long Island, Edwina Sandys is hacking away at pieces of the 
Berlin Wall to create a sculpture for Westminster College in Fulton, Mo., where 
Churchill warned the West in 1946 that "an iron curtain has descended across 
the continent." 
The third generation also includes businessmen, a barrister and a society 
journalist. None, as yet, threatens to match their grandfather's eminence as a 
statesman, orator, historian and artist. 
"I don't have his ability, and I know it," says Nicholas Soames, who was 
elected to the House of Commons in 1983. 
"I'm 42. When he was that age, he had already been chancellor of the Exchequer. 
I haven't yet gotten off the back benches." 
Soames, a pal of Prince Charles, has his grandfather's round face and 
monumental physique -- "portly, flamboyant, fun," in the words of Matthew 
Parris, political satirist for The Times of London. 
With some affection, the opposition lawmaker Tony Banks has said that "anyone 
who sees the honorable member for Crawley here on a Friday in his weekend 
clothes cannot but think instantly of Mr. Toad." 
The grandfather, too, spent long years as just another member of Parliament 
between 1929 and 1940 -- a lonely voice urging Britain to face up to the 
monstrousness of Adolf Hitler's Germany. 
"People glibly talk of his finest hour, and most people would have in mind 1940 
and the ensuing wartime years," says the younger Winston Churchill. 
" . . . I think the real trial for him had been the 1930s, when he could count 
his political friends on the fingers of one hand, when he was being reviled in 
the press, on the radio, in Parliament." 
The grandson is not friendless, but has been a back-bench exile since 1978 when 
he defied Conservative Party head Margaret Thatcher, then the opposition 
leader, by voting to end sanctions against the white-minority government of 
Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). 
"I wouldn't see it as wilderness years, because unlike my grandfather I'm 
actually supportive of the government that's in power, my own party. He was 
not," Churchill said recently. 
Churchill, 49, has made his way quietly and surely, unlike his combative 
father, Randolph, the only son among the five children of Winston and 
Clementine Churchill. Randolph Churchill, who died in 1968, was elected to the 
House of Commons only because he once ran unopposed, and he was once dismissed 
by a newspaper columnist as "the pale satellite of another's fame." 
Randolph Churchill was married and divorced twice. Arabella Churchill McLeod, 
the child of his second marriage, lives in western England and directs 
"Children's World," a theater project for handicapped children. 
His sister, Diana Churchill, who committed suicide in 1965, had three children 
by her marriage to the late Duncan Sandys -- Julian Sandys, a barrister; Celia 
Sandys Perkins, an interior decorator who lives in Devon, and Edwina, who lives 
in New York with her husband, Richard Kaplan. 
Another sister, Mary Churchill, now Lady Soames and the only surviving child of 
Sir Winston, had five children by her marriage to the late Christopher Soames 
-- Nicholas; Emma Soames, former editor of "The Tatler"; Charlotte, now Lady 
Peel by virtue of her marriage to Earl Peel; Jeremy Soames, an executive with 
the banking house of N. M. Rothschild; and Rupert Soames, chairman of GPTelecom 
in Paris. 
Sir Winston's actress-daughter, Sarah, died in 1983, leaving no survivors. A 
fifth child, Marigold, died in childhood. 
The stresses reflected in the lives of Churchill's children have been less 
severe for the grandchildren, says Emma Soames. 
"The fact that we're a generation on does make it a lot easier," she says. 
Her brother says family connections are resented by a newer breed of Tory, cut 
in the mold of Margaret Thatcher, the grocer's daughter. "Contrary to what 
Americans think," Soames says, "this isn't a country that is run as a 
hereditary democracy.' 
Young Winston Churchill found the name could be a burden. In "Memories and 
Adventures," published last year, he told of being thrashed by bullies at Eton, 
who would taunt him, "Take this for being a -- -- ! Take this for being a -- -- 
! And take this for being Winston-bloody-Churchill!" 
Born at Chequers, Churchill has most closely followed his grandfather's 
footsteps. Both toured Africa, and wrote books about it. Both were war 
correspondents, the grandfather in the Boer War and the grandson in Vietnam and 
the Middle East. Sir Winston entered Parliament at age 26, his grandson at 30. 
Emma Soames also took up journalism, and at one time had Randolph Churchill's 
old job of writing a column for the Evening Standard. She giggles, proudly, 
about being the first woman journalist labeled a "hackette" by Private Eye, 
London's bitingly satirical magazine. 
Eighteen months ago she was appointed editor of Tatler magazine. From its bare 
and utilitarian offices she chronicled the world of "power, money, glamour, 
style, wit, success. You know -- up!" 
Though born into that world, she says that being Winston Churchill's grandchild 
counts for little in today's equation of power and success. 
"I'm sure it opened a few doors," she said. "But the doors get slammed in your 
face again if you don't deliver the goods. . . . " 
Two weeks after the interview with The Associated Press, Soames was fired and 
the Conde Nast firm appointed a new editor to attempt to revive the magazine's 
flagging circulation. 
As a child, Emma Soames lived at Chartwell Farm, near Churchill's personal 
country home, Chartwell, in the woodlands of Kent, and often saw her 
grandfather. 
"I suppose I must have been 4 or 5, so it's a bit hazy. But I remember him 
using words that I didn't understand, and I used to go to my nanny and say, 
'What does inappropriate mean?' " 
Edwina Sandys says the Berlin Wall work is her first directly inspired by her 
grandfather. 
"It's silly to be too purist about it," she said in a telephone interview. "But 
he was such a famous man. You don't want always to do something connected with 
him, you want your own thing." 
However, she and her sister prepared an exhibition of her grandfather's 
watercolors in Washington in 1983, a tribute to happy days at Churchill's 
country home. 
"He would be painting, and sometimes we would show our drawings," she said. "He 
was doing more painting than we were. 
"He loved color, he loved landscape and was very, very sensitive. Some of the 
landscapes he did show enormous sensitivity to light, light on trees and light 
on water and clouds, which perhaps some people wouldn't realize he had." 
Edwina Sandys got a taste of fame from "Christa," a statue of a crucified woman 
that was condemned by an Episcopal bishop when it was displayed at New York's 
Cathedral of St. John the Divine in 1984. 
"People write to me all the time about Christa, and they want photographs and 
posters and things," she said. The image is now on loan in California. 
"She's sort of out on her own, you know, like a child that's grown up," said 
Sandys, who has two grown sons. "She goes out and gets invited to places." 
Young Winston Churchill says he was influenced a lot by his father and his 
grandfather, "particularly in the causes I've inherited." 
He campaigned for a memorial to victims of the Katyn Forest massacre in Poland, 
carried out by Soviet dictator Josef Stalin, and co-founded Radio Free Kabul on 
behalf of the moujahedeen fighting the Communist government and the Soviet army 
in Afghanistan. 
And, a few months short of his 50th birthday, Churchill says he is still in the 
younger half of the House of Commons. 
During the turbulent 1960s and '70s, his Churchillian views on defense and 
foreign policy, expounded in his book "Defending the West," found an opponent 
in his half sister, Arabella. She supported disarmament, he says, and was very 
much "opting for the alternative lifestyle." 
"The U.S. Navy once made the mistake of inviting her to be the Azalea Queen at 
the rendezvous of the NATO navies at Norfolk, Va., and made the mistake of 
sending her a reply-paid telegram," Churchill says. 
"They got back about six pages of diatribe against this iniquitous warmongering 
organization called NATO, even though it was her grandfather who was largely 
responsible for creating it." 
Now, at least, he laughs heartily at the story. 
