CANDOR IN ALL THINGS NUCLEAR; 
HANFORD COVERUP RAISES ANEW THE CREDIBILITY ISSUE 
The nuclear age dawned with virtually no indication of how deadly some of the 
byproducts of making bombs can be. Time taught the nuclear industry better, and 
even though building safeguards was a sloppier process than it should have 
been, managers and workers learned to respect the lethal power of nuclear 
byproducts. 
So did the federal government in its role as regulator. Unfortunately, 
government still underestimates the danger of either lying to people about 
nuclear accidents and health threats or, just as bad, of hiding what it knows. 
The importance of candor in all things nuclear was emphasized this week with 
the release of data assembled during an unfinished study of leaks of 
radioactive iodine from a plant at Hanford in western Washington state that 
manufactured plutonium for nuclear warheads. 
The data, which was pried loose from secret government files by an 
environmental lawsuit, shows that 13,500 residents in the vicinity of the plant 
were exposed to levels of radioactivity high enough to damage their thyroid 
glands and perhaps cause cancer. The air was contaminated between 1944 and 
1947, and although the government had known this for years, it denied any 
threat to health virtually right up to the moment the results of the study were 
released. 
Energy Secretary James D. Watkins, who has had the good sense to throw open the 
books on the nuclear past since he took over the department, says Hanford's 
only mission now is to clean up the mess it made during the nuclear arms race. 
In fact, residents around Hanford have not been at risk from leakage of 
radioactive iodine for some years. But except for the example Watkins has set 
in recent months, it can hardly be said that residents are at no risk of being 
misled by their government. Washington can ride out almost unlimited numbers of 
dumb decisions as long as its credibility is good. Without credibility, even 
wise decisions can be made to look bad. 
