BAILEY CANYON'S TRAIL TO NOWHERE; 
SIERRA MADRE PLANS TO LINK HIKING PATH TO MT. WILSON ROUTE 
Years ago, many hikers with more enthusiasm than experience would trudge into 
Bailey Canyon, a rugged gorge in the San Gabriel Mountains, only to be rescued 
many hours or days later, lost, cold, hungry and sometimes seriously injured. 
It wasn't until the late 1960s that hikers could find their way in the canyon 
along a trail that was carved by a small group of teen-age boys who called 
themselves the Sierra Madre Mountaineers. 
But the Mountaineers, whose goal was to cut a three-mile zigzag path to Jones 
Peak, a 3,400-foot ridge to the northeast of the canyon, abandoned the task 
when it was two-thirds finished. Today, the map board in Bailey Canyon Park 
labels the final approach to Jones Peak as an "uncompleted trail." But to many 
hikers, "deer path" would be more accurate. 
Sierra Madre officials were notified in May that the California State 
Department of Parks and Recreation has approved a proposal by the city to 
finish the job that the Mountaineers started. 
Planning Phase 
A $50,000 grant will be used to repair the existing trail, complete it to Jones 
Peak and create a new three-mile segment that will link it to the Mt. Wilson 
Trail in Little Santa Anita Canyon. Planning for the project will begin later 
this year. 
"Bailey Canyon was one of the best places for trapping," says Earl Lalone, 64, 
a Sierra Madre native who remembers the canyon from the 1930s and who still 
hikes there. "Up there we would get fox, raccoon, ring-tailed cat and coyote. 
We shipped the pelts to a furrier in Chicago." 
With his three brothers, Lalone was among the original members of the Sierra 
Madre Search and Rescue Team. His son, Chris, was one of the Mountaineers in 
the 1960s. 
Bailey Canyon, one of several smaller canyons that slice into the mountains 
between Eaton Canyon on the west and Little Santa Anita Canyon on the east, was 
a logical place for the Mountaineers to create a path. They had grown up 
listening to their fathers, members of the Sierra Madre Search and Rescue Team, 
describe rescue operations in the mountains. 
And the canyon, which starts at the northern end of Lima Street, was the site 
of a rescue that sparked the formation of the volunteer Search and Rescue Team 
in 1951. 
When their sons came up with the plan to aid hikers in Bailey Canyon with the 
trail, their fathers not only encouraged them but served as advisers, along 
with representatives of the U.S. Forest Service. 
For several years the group got together on weekends and during school 
vacations, putting in hundreds of hours of work cutting switchbacks, or zigzag 
paths, up the east side of the canyon. 
They had completed the trail just beyond a point known as "the promontory," a 
spur of land next to the trail that drops off sharply on three sides, leaving a 
small, flat open area. Knee-high stone walls are the only remains of a cabin 
built there in 1910. Here the proposed trail would have climbed eastward, away 
from Bailey Canyon, zigzagging to the top of the peak. 
But from the site of the cabin the trail fades rapidly. With more than two 
miles completed -- about 2,000 feet of elevation gain -- the workers abandoned 
their project. 
Rae Anderson, whose three sons were members of the Mountaineers, says that as 
the boys became young men, much of their enthusiasm was "diverted to cars and 
girls." To finance their new interests, they found paying summer jobs. 
Fire and Flood Damage 
In October, 1978, a fire swept over the ridge and burned Bailey Canyon almost 
to the stream bed near its mouth. Two months later, heavy rains resulted in 
flooding and, because the ground cover had been reduced to ashes, led to 
devastating erosion of the trail. 
All things considered, the existing trail is in good shape today. Over the past 
decade, local Boy Scouts and other groups have done intermittent sand-bagging 
work to shore up weak spots along the trail's edge. 
Slopes cleared by the 1978 fire have been reclaimed by typical chaparral. The 
canyon is alive again. 
As recently as last summer, the Sierra Madre Police Department required hikers 
to obtain a permit to enter the mountains above town during the peak fire 
season. 
But since Pasadena, Arcadia and the Angeles National Forest, which border 
Sierra Madre, require no permit, Fire Marshal Bill Kramer said Sierra Madre 
will waive the permit requirement on a one-year, experimental basis. 
An advantage to hiking Bailey Canyon is that one does not have to slink across 
back fences or sprint past privately owned beehives to reach the trail. It lies 
entirely on public lands, starting on the edge of Sierra Madre at the end of 
Grove Street. The hiker earns a feeling of accomplishment in the rough terrain 
and is rewarded by lofty overviews of the San Gabriel Valley. 
Hiking purists do not fear that the trail will be clogged by mountain bikes 
after the city's work on the trail is completed. It is narrow and features 
dozens of hairpin turns. It is what riders call "a carry." 
There are disadvantages, too. The present trail does not connect with any 
other. After toiling more than two miles, hikers must turn back or crawl and 
thrash their way over three more miles of manzanita-covered slopes to reach the 
Mt. Wilson Trail. 
Jones Peak Trail is not for couch potatoes. It is steep and, as a veteran hiker 
once said, "as crooked as a dog's hind leg." When the sun is high there is 
little shade. 
The entrance to the canyon is in Bailey Canyon Park, the upper reaches extend 
well into Angeles National Forest. The start of the trail is reached by passing 
to the west of the flood control basin in Bailey Canyon Park and then, at a 
locked gate, bearing to the left into the mouth of the canyon. 
The large buildings with red tile roofs visible on the hillside to the west are 
the Passionist Fathers Monastery and Retreat. 
Winter flooding over the years has eroded the stream banks near the canyon 
entrance, isolating a short nature loop-trail on a bench of land opposite the 
main trail. The trail winds into the canyon through low brush and a scattering 
of sycamore and oak. 
A quarter of a mile beyond the flood control basin, at the foot of a 35-foot 
pine, the trail begins the long ascent to Jones Peak. The slopes are covered by 
thick brush -- mostly manzanita -- and an occasional yucca. The rustling in the 
bushes turns out to be a squirrel, rabbit or scrub jay. Tiny lizards leap away 
at a hiker's approach. 
At the cabin ruins, the trail swings away from Bailey Canyon and enters a 
forest of pine and big cone spruce and then ends in thick brush. 
When completed, the link to the Mt. Wilson Trail will open up new territory for 
hikers. 
Los Angeles Times 
