UNDERSEA WONDER; 
THE TEEMING WATERS OFF MONTEREY AT LAST MAY BECOME A SANCTUARY 
A hundred yards off Lover's Point Park, a trio of sea otters glided through 
thick clumps of pea-green kelp like slalom skiers breezing downhill. 
They slipped past two scuba divers in the 15-foot-deep water, seemingly 
unconcerned about predators, pollution and other dangers serious enough to have 
landed them on the federal threatened species list. 
Environmentalists and marine researchers, however, worry plenty about sea 
otters and countless other species of marine mammals, fish and underwater 
plants that make their home in the Monterey Bay's chilly, deep waters. This 
week, local scientists, politicians and activists expressed relief after 
President George Bush announced that he supports a plan to designate the area a 
national marine sanctuary, protecting a 2,200-square-mile stretch of sea from 
just north of Ano Nuevo to south of Big Sur. 
It is the only area earmarked for permanent protections in Bush's oil-lease 
policy, which included a 10-year drilling ban along 99% of the California 
coast. 
"The Monterey Bay, running from Santa Cruz to the Big Sur coast, is without 
question a national treasure, and it should be preserved as one," said Rep. 
Leon Panetta (D-Monterey), likening the bay's underwater community to national 
parks such as Yellowstone and Yosemite. 
"I think this designation will do that," said Panetta, who in 1986 proposed 
that Congress name the bay a national marine sanctuary. Federal environmental 
officials first suggested the move in 1978, but five years later Monterey Bay 
was pulled off the list of proposed sanctuaries. 
Congress approved the designation for Monterey Bay in 1988, and the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration drew up plans for final approval several 
months ago. Because the sanctuary plan would permanently ban oil drilling in 
the bay, the U.S. Energy and Interior departments objected to the proposal. So 
the Monterey Bay sanctuary plan remained blocked until Bush on Tuesday formally 
approved it as a part of his overall oil lease plan. 
However, the 12-year battle for comprehensive protection of the bay is expected 
to continue in public hearings this fall, when proponents of an expanded 
sanctuary area will argue that full protection of the Monterey Bay won't be 
possible without stretching the boundary north to the edge of the Gulf of the 
Fallones sanctuary off San Francisco, and south another 50 miles beyond Big 
Sur. Some, including a coalition of environmental groups called the Monterey 
Bay Sanctuary Environmental Working Group, favor protecting an area 50% larger 
than the proposed sanctuary. 
"The main reason we want to see the largest boundary possible is to have a 
buffer zone," said Susan Shane, scientific director of the Monterey-based 
Friends of the Sea Otter. "You can't have national parks and have condos right 
at the boundaries." 
After the hearings, Congress will review the final version of the proposal 
before sending a sanctuary manager to work in the area. That review probably 
won't begin before late November, Panetta said. 
The largest submarine canyon in North America slices through Monterey Bay, 
which as outlined would be larger than any of the nation's eight existing 
sanctuaries. Cold water wells up from the mile-deep Monterey Canyon, carrying 
nutrient-rich deep water into shallow areas, providing an abundance of food 
that helps keep the area teeming with salmon, seals, whales and the most 
diverse collection of algae found in North America. It is also home to a number 
of California's estimated 1,800 sea otters, which are on the rebound after 
being hunted to near extinction by the 1950s. Monterey Bay is the largest 
breeding ground for marine mammals in the lower 48 states. 
Monterey Bay is a deep-water environment brought unusually close to shore 
because of the happy coincidence of the canyon's location. It provides 
scientists an unusual opportunity to study relatively unknown marine 
communities far beneath the surface. A number of research institutions operate 
on Monterey Bay, including the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, 
Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station and the Moss Landing Marine Lab. 
The area also is home to the Monterey Bay Aquarium, which attracts an average 
1.7 million visitors each year. The facility features exhibits on the Monterey 
Bay marine community and showcases a rotating exhibit on other types of marine 
life. 
"It's one of a handful of very, very rich areas," said Alan Baldridge, 
librarian and assistant to the director at Hopkins Marine Station in Pacific 
Grove. "It's a rich area both for the scientists and for the fishermen." 
The same waters once fed schools of sardines that kept Cannery Row, made famous 
by the John Steinbeck novel, booming through the first half of the century. 
"Back in the heyday of Cannery Row, we had something in the vicinity of 20 or 
30 canneries, but now there's just one working cannery in the area," said Bob 
Leos, a marine biologist for the state Department of Fish and Game. "The 
sardine industry was a major boost to the local economy. They more or less got 
things going around here." 
Although sardines were nearly depleted by the 1960s, other catches have kept 
the Monterey Bay fishing industry alive. 
More than one-sixth of the state's $13.3-million salmon harvest in 1989 came 
from Monterey Bay's three ports -- Santa Cruz, Moss Landing and Monterey -- 
according to preliminary statistics by the state Department of Fish and Game. 
Fishermen in the area also hauled in about $1.5 million worth of squid, $1.5 
million of swordfish, and $1.8 million of rockfish. 
Fishermen hope the marine sanctuary designation will keep alive for years to 
come the fisheries they depend on for their livelihood. 
"This is very important for a lot of people," first mate Don Elkins said as he 
stood on the deck of the Vast, a 36-foot salmon boat moored in Monterey Harbor. 
"So long as the fish are protected, so are we." 
MONTEREY BAY CHRONOLOGY 
A chronology of events in the campaign to designate Monterey Bay a National 
Marine Sanctuary: 
1972: Congress establishes National Marine Sanctuary program. 
October, 1979: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announces that 
Monterey Bay is an active candidate for the program. 
December, 1983: Citing budgetary reasons, NOAA removes Monterey Bay from its 
list of sanctuary hopefuls. 
November, 1986: Rep. Leon Panetta (D-Monterey) introduces legislation to name 
Monterey Bay a National Marine Sanctuary, but Congress adjourns before 
discussing the proposal. 
January, 1987: Panetta reintroduces the plan. 
November, 1988: Congress approves legislation giving Monterey Bay sanctuary 
status, subject to the approval of federal agencies, who have until December, 
1989 to sign off. 
January, 1990: Federal officials miss the deadline for establishing the 
sanctuary. 
June 26, 1990: President George Bush announces a 10-year ban on oil drilling 
along 99% of the California coast. In doing so, he also approves a 
2,200-square-mile National Marine Sanctuary at Monterey Bay. If the plan is 
approved by Congress after public hearings this fall, it would be the fourth 
such sanctuary on the California coast. 
