PREDATORY AND VORACIOUS, THE 'LITTLE EATING MACHINES' THRIVE IN SANTA CLARA 
RIVER DESPITE A 15-YEAR ERADICATION CAMPAIGN.; 
AFRICAN FROGS REMAIN KINGS OF THE CANYON 
In muddy ponds and gurgling creeks above the Santa Clarita Valley, a small army 
of biologists is waging war against a fat, slimy and voracious enemy -- the 
African clawed frog. 
So far, the frogs are winning. 
"We haven't come up with a solution," said Jim A. St. Amant, a state Department 
of Fish and Game biologist, who has tried to eradicate the pesky frogs for 15 
years. "I'm not optimistic." 
The camouflage-green frogs are decimating the last known population of the 
unarmoured threespine stickleback, a tiny endangered fish found only where the 
Santa Clara River flows through Soledad Canyon. 
The canyon frog colony is the largest known infestation of African clawed frogs 
in Southern California, biologists and state and local water officials say. St. 
Amant said the frogs presumably are the descendants of laboratory escapees or 
failed aquarium pets released by disgusted owners. Their only natural enemies 
in California are biologists. 
Migration Feared 
St. Amant said biologists hope not only to save the three-inch stickleback, but 
to prevent the frog from migrating south into reservoirs and flood-control 
channels, where they could reproduce wildly. "They certainly are prolific as 
the devil," St. Amant said. 
In an incident reminiscent of a science-fiction movie, the Metropolitan Water 
District of Southern California destroyed a million of the frogs that clogged 
the large San Joaquin Reservoir above Newport Beach in 1985. District officials 
committed amphibicide by draining the concrete-lined reservoir -- 100 feet deep 
in places -- and scooping out the frogs with nets. 
Jim Dole, a biology professor from Cal State Northridge, is helping direct the 
latest assault on the frogs, which were brought to the United States from 
southern Africa in the 1940s as laboratory animals. Dole and graduate students 
have trapped and killed thousands of clawed frogs over the past three years, 
trying to assess their numbers and habits in Soledad Canyon. He said they hope 
to compile their findings at the end of the summer. 
"We're trying to trap as many and kill as many as possible," said Cydney 
Henderson, a CSUN graduate student in environmental biology. 
Stickleback defenders hope Dole's research will provide clues on how to stamp 
out the resilient amphibian. So far, the research only shows that thousands of 
frogs are gobbling up sticklebacks in the Soledad Canyon ponds. "I really don't 
have any answers," Dole said. 
'Eating Machines' 
The African clawed frog, or Xenopus laevis, can grow to about eight inches with 
legs extended. They use three tiny black claws on each of their hind legs to 
shred their prey. "They're just little eating machines," said Harvey Fischer, 
curator of reptiles and amphibians at the Los Angeles Zoo. 
It is illegal to sell or own the black-eyed frogs, but they were once sold in 
pet stores, Fischer said. Many disillusioned aquarium owners freed the frogs 
after the hungry amphibians cleaned their tanks of fish, he said. The African 
frogs also devour insects, crustaceans and other frogs -- even other African 
clawed frogs. 
St. Amant discovered the frogs' cannibalistic tendencies when he first 
encountered them in 1974. He plopped tadpoles, adolescents and adults into a 
bucket and drove off to his lab. "I got back and all we had were adults." 
While African clawed frogs will eat anything, it appears nothing will eat 
African clawed frogs. 
The adults are "predator-proof," secreting a poisonous, foul-tasting mucus that 
repels larger fish and animals. Large-mouthed bass have spit them out. 
Researchers say a red fox ate one and had a heart attack. St. Amant said he fed 
one to a snapping turtle and it wouldn't eat for days. 
Tadpoles Vulnerable 
The frogs are only vulnerable while tadpoles, which explains why their 
populations are kept in check in large bodies of water where there are lots of 
predatory fish, said Robin Garcia of the Museum of Natural History in San 
Diego. 
For example, catfish were released into the San Joaquin Reservoir to finish off 
the few survivors of the Orange County frog massacre. But predatory fish cannot 
be released in the Soledad Canyon ponds because they would also devour the 
stickleback, researchers say. 
"It's very difficult to do something that isn't going to affect the fish at the 
same time," Henderson said. Poison, for example, doesn't work. "The frogs jump 
out and it kills the fish," she said. 
In Soledad Canyon, biologists even zapped the frogs with carefully aimed 
electrical currents, said Ken Sasaki, a state fishery biologist who heads the 
stickleback recovery team. But the method didn't work in deep ponds. The 
biologists only electrocuted frogs "dumb enough to get into range," he said. 
Biologists tried draining one pond to vanquish the frogs, but a year later they 
were back. 
Sasaki, St. Amant and about a dozen frog-killers launched an unprecedented 
three-day assault on the Africans last August, catching hundreds in 30 
wire-mesh traps baited with diced beef liver and chicken backs. A second 
large-scale trapping effort was repeated in January. 
Traps Inefficient 
"We finally came to the conclusion that that's not going to work," St. Amant 
said. Each female frog releases thousands of eggs and the traps, while killing 
adults, could not stop the next generation, he said. But Sasaki said the traps 
might be able to at least keep populations of the frog in check. 
Collecting good data on the frogs is difficult because they spend almost all 
their lives hidden underwater, poking their snouts above the surface 
occasionally to breath. Henderson said the frogs have the amazing ability to 
absorb oxygen from the water through their skin. They can stay in submerged 
traps for hours and not drown. 
"A pond could be full of them, and you'll never know it," Sasaki said. 
That was the case on a recent Sunday when Henderson and her son, Jason, 11, and 
her boyfriend, Jose Antonio Montes, drove to Soledad Canyon to collect 27 traps 
she had set in a pond the night before. The still pond, bordered by only a few 
trees, looked lifeless. 
"What could possibly live here?" Henderson asked. 
But Jason and Montes were soon hauling in traps filled with frogs. They dumped 
their catch into a bucket of water and ethyl alcohol where the frogs quickly 
expired. 
65 Caught 
The death toll was 65 frogs -- not a great catch, Henderson said. The last time 
out, they caught about 160. 
Back at the CSUN biology department, Henderson injected the dead frogs with 
alcohol to preserve their innards. She later measures the frogs and saves the 
larger ones for dissection. 
Research is limited to post-mortem examinations because the frogs' great 
fertility prevents biologists from tagging and releasing them back into the 
eight ponds under study, Dole said. Dole said he is allowed by the Fish and 
Game Department to bring back live frogs only in a double-locked container to 
prevent escapes. 
In the future, perhaps a poison can be developed to kill only the frogs, Sasaki 
said. Dole guessed that sterile males could be released to break the breeding 
cycle -- a method used on Mediterranean fruit flies. 
But perhaps, Dole conceded, the research will offer no answers. "It may be a 
waste of time," he said. 
