5 PARIS MUSEUMS CLOSE AFTER ROUND OF PAINTING THEFTS; 
ART: OFFICIALS ARE TIGHTENING SECURITY. INVESTIGATORS SAY IT IS POSSIBLE ALL 
THREE CRIMES WERE COMMITTED BY THE SAME PERSON OR GROUP. 
Five Paris art museums closed their doors to individual visitors Thursday after 
paintings were stolen from three museums -- including a Renoir cut out of its 
frame at the Louvre -- over a span of several hours. 
Jacques Sallois, director of national museums, said security would be tightened 
at the city's major museums, which remained open. Authorities plan to examine 
existing security systems and develop new ones similar to those used in banks. 
The museums closed to individuals are relatively small and focus on the works 
or the collections of a particular individual: the Eugene Delacroix, Gustave 
Moreau, Jean-Jacques Henner, Hebert and Ennery museums. 
From now on, group visits to these museums must be arranged in advance, Sallois 
said. 
Police have complained previously that museum officials were not aggressive 
enough or candid enough in dealing with security. Sallois, who took up his post 
only five weeks ago, vowed this would change, and said art theft would no 
longer be a "taboo subject" for public discussion. 
Sallois' unprecedented announcement came shortly after police said that a third 
museum had suffered a theft during the short time span Wednesday. 
The security risk had been heightened because of a huge increase in visitors to 
French museums following a 10-year government drive to improve facilities and 
provide more space, Sallois said. 
"The flow of visitors is causing problems," he said. "The rise in prices on the 
art market is an additional factor. All of this means we must take a new look 
at security in museums." 
Sallois said he would meet museum directors and their security chiefs in the 
next few days and hoped to appoint a security chief for the entire sector soon. 
He said there was no evidence of negligence on the part of museum guards, 
however, and expressed confidence in the staff. 
Police said it was possible all three thefts were committed by the same person 
or group, moving across the city center from one museum to another. 
According to investigators, the theft revealed on Thursday apparently was the 
first to occur in the series. 
An 1816 work by French landscape painter Paul Huet was lifted off its hook 
Wednesday morning at the Carnavalet Museum, a historical museum in one of the 
oldest sections of Paris. "Les Moulins de la Glaciere" was estimated to be 
worth about $14,500. 
The other two stolen paintings were cut from their frames -- Renoir's "Portrait 
of a Seated Woman" from the Louvre and Ernest Hebert's "Portrait of Monaluccia" 
from the museum named after the artist. 
Both were small-format paintings, a type often chosen by thieves because they 
can be easily concealed. 
"Portrait of a Seated Woman" (1890-1895) is 13 1/2 by 10 1/2 inches. Hebert's 
work, painted about 1870, is 14 by 12 inches. 
The theft of the Renoir was discovered about 2:15 p.m., officials said. The 
Hebert was discovered missing about an hour later. 
All three victimized museums are run by the government. 
Officials gave no estimates of the value of the Renoir and Hebert. Independent 
experts suggested a possible value of $300,000 to $600,000 for the Renoir. 
but said it was impossible to give a precise valuation and noted that Renoir 
had done scores of portraits of women in his later years. 
Louvre director Michel Laclotte said the theft of "Portrait of a Seated Woman" 
appeared to be the work of an "especially clever" professional. 
"The canvas was very thin, the cutting instrument was probably extremely sharp 
and caused so few vibrations that the electronic sensor did not pick them up," 
he said. 
Laclotte led reporters to where the portrait had been hanging -- an isolated 
stairwell leading to the Denon Gallery, on the top floor of the Pavillon de 
Fleurs overlooking the Seine. 
Head painting curator Pierre Rosenberg said the Renoir had been on display in 
the stairwell for several years, due to renovations in other sections of the 
museum, once a royal palace. It was donated to the Louvre in 1961 by French 
collector Victor Lion. 
Rosenberg said Renoir was a "magic name" among art lovers, which could explain 
the theft, the first at the Louvre in more than 10 years. 
