REFUGEE HAS HOPE HIS DAUGHTER IS STILL ALIVE 
The last time Tang Bao Can saw his daughter was during the family's painful 
escape from Vietnam five years ago when she was snatched from his arms by 
pirates. 
But Tang, 44, who now lives in Santa Ana with his wife, Thai Thi Loan, 45, 
remains optimistic that his daughter, Tang Bich Hang, is still alive. 
The couple placed an advertisement in Sunday's Bangkok Post, offering a $7,500 
reward for information leading to her return. Tang also offered $2,500 just for 
proof that his daughter is still alive. 
"I have a good feeling that my daughter is still alive somewhere in Thailand," 
Tang said in a telephone interview from his home Sunday. "I am under the 
impression that the pirates that kidnaped her are not too bad, that they are 
better than others." 
Tang said he "has worked hard to make and save money" and has friends in 
Bangkok ready to offer the reward on a moment's notice. 
"I must wait to become American (U.S.) citizen to visit Bangkok myself. But I 
have friends there who are ready to reward anyone who can bring my daughter 
safely to the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok," Tang said. 
Might Have Been Sold 
"She might have been sold to someone, she might be a wife in Bangkok." 
Tang said his daughter was taken by Thai pirates who boarded their drifting 
boat loaded with refugees on Oct. 26, 1984, in the Gulf of Thailand off 
southern Thailand. 
"They robbed everything and were throwing young men in the sea," Tang said. 
When Tang tried to stop the rape of one of three women attacked by the pirates, 
they seized his daughter, then only 13, and took her away with the three women. 
"I tried to stop them, but they beat me very badly," Tang said. 
The pirates were apparently scared away when a helicopter flew overhead. The 
boat, which originally carried 110 people, drifted to Malaysia. Tang, his wife 
and their son, now 22, eventually reached the United States. 
Tang, who is a manager of an auto parts store, said he reported the abduction 
to the United Nations and the Red Cross. 
"I reported it in Bangkok, in America, everywhere," he said. "They did send me 
reports that they were still looking for my daughter, but no results. The last 
report I got was two years ago. Since then I have heard nothing." 
Orange County and other Southern California Vietnamese community leaders have 
claimed that about 3,500 women have been abducted by pirates and sold into 
prostitution or as slave labor. 
Embassy Advice 
During a 1987 visit to Orange County by Steven J. Kraus, coordinator of the 
Boat Rescue Program at the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok, Kraus suggested that 
Vietnamese community leaders request that U.S. dollars be earmarked to help 
find missing women. 
While Kraus advised families to do all they could to gain information about 
kidnaped relatives, he warned against Vietnamese families spending great sums 
of money to hire investigators to search for missing relatives, especially 
women. 
At the time, Kraus said that he had heard of Vietnamese families spending 
thousands of dollars but that "not one woman" was found. 
Tang's daughter was abducted at a time when fierce attacks by Thai fishing 
vessels often ended in rape, torture and murder. In 1981, for example, 80% of 
all refugee boats arriving in southern Thailand reported being stopped by 
pirates. In the same year, 455 deaths were reported from such attacks, and 360 
people were reported missing and presumed dead, according to the U.S. State 
Department. 
In 1982, the United States joined 11 other countries to fund an anti-piracy 
effort. The percentage of refugee boats that were attacked by pirates dropped 
from 69% that year to 44% in 1986. 
Tang said he believes his daughter may have survived because the pirates who 
boarded their boat that day seemed "more human" than others who had tried to 
waylay the refugee boat three times before. 
"The young man who took my daughter, he treated her very nice," he said. "If 
they were going to kill us, they could have done it right away, but they just 
threw some men out to sea. They only beat me because I tried to hold on to her. 
They seemed more human than the other pirates." 
Tang said he worked for U.S. Army intelligence during the Vietnam War and spent 
five years in "re-education camp" after the Communist takeover in 1975. 
"We came here with nothing, with zero," Tang said. "My friends and relatives in 
America and Thailand are helping me with this. Whoever brings her to the U.S. 
Embassy in Bangkok or can confirm to me that she is alive, they will be paid 
immediately." 
