LOPEZ CLOSURE WOULD STRAIN OTHER DUMPS 
The gate at the Puente Hills landfill, just off the Pomona Freeway, opens 
shortly before 6 every morning to admit a seemingly endless parade of trash 
trucks, dump trucks, long-beds, tractor-trailers and pickups, all laden with 
refuse. 
It is a noisy procession of ugly, utilitarian vehicles, enlivened by an oddity 
here and there. One big refuse truck carries the slogan: "Drugs are Garbage." A 
tree-service truck sputters forward so overloaded with branches and greenery 
that it seems to be lurching toward a mechanical breakdown. A pickup truck, 
dwarfed by the huge trucks alongside, moves forward with a light load: a broken 
stool, old garden hoses and a batch of odds and ends that probably sat for 
years in someone's garage. 
The air carries an odor that, while not overwhelming, remains a constant 
reminder that this is the largest dump in Los Angeles County. 
Puente Hills is also, Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts officials say, 
the second busiest landfill in the nation, handling about 13,200 tons a day and 
trailing only a dump on Staten Island, N.Y., in trash volume. 
It is one of four large landfills in the San Gabriel Valley, any or all of 
which may soon become even busier if the city of Los Angeles is forced to close 
its landfill at Lopez Canyon. 
The city and the state Waste Management Board are disputing how much trash can 
be deposited at that landfill, which handles about 4,000 tons a day. City 
officials say they could be forced to shut down the landfill within a year. 
Even without the addition of Lopez Canyon trash, dumps in the San Gabriel 
Valley handle 26,000 tons of refuse every day, more than half of the trash 
dumped in Los Angeles County. Landfills presently reduce their hours to stay 
within their daily disposal limits. And as dumps continue to fill and close 
early, trucks must travel farther, meaning more air pollution and higher trash 
collection rates. 
Steve Maguin, who oversees Puente Hills and other landfills run by the county 
Sanitation Districts, said trash haulers are using more trucks and sending them 
farther because of the shortage of landfill space. Maguin said early daily 
closure of the Puente Hills landfill is becoming "more and more routine." 
When Puente Hills is closed, most trash trucks head for the Sanitation 
Districts' Spadra landfill in Pomona or the privately owned BKK landfill in 
West Covina. 
Population Growth 
Maguin said the Spadra landfill, which is permitted to receive 18,000 tons of 
trash a week, is beginning to fill up early too, partly because of the overflow 
from Puente Hills and partly because of growth in the east San Gabriel Valley 
area. 
The primary beneficiary of the landfill shortage has been the West Covina 
landfill owned by the BKK Corp. Six years ago, when its landfill was the only 
hazardous waste dump in Southern California, BKK Corp. grossed $23 million a 
year taking in waste that no one else could handle. 
But the revenue dropped abruptly in 1984, when pressure from the public and 
state and federal regulators forced BKK to close its landfill to hazardous 
waste. Reduced to competing with other dumps for household trash, BKK Corp. saw 
its landfill revenue plummet to under $7 million a year. 
But with landfill space for household trash becoming increasingly scarce, the 
BKK landfill is a huge revenue producer again. The city of West Covina, which 
levies a 10% tax on landfill revenue, estimates that the BKK landfill will 
gross $25 million to $30 million this year. 
2nd in Volume 
BKK corporate counsel Ronald Gastelum said the landfill receives 9,500 to 
10,000 tons of trash a day, ranking it just behind Puente Hills in trash volume 
countywide. 
The Sanitation Districts also run the Scholl Canyon landfill, which is owned by 
the city of Glendale and accepts trash only from Glendale, Pasadena, South 
Pasadena, La Canada Flintridge, San Marino and Sierra Madre. It takes about 
2,500 tons of trash a day. 
Maguin said the Sanitation Districts have prohibited Los Angeles from dumping 
trash at the Puente Hills and Spadra landfills, and Scholl Canyon cannot take 
Los Angeles trash. Officials at the privately owned Azusa Land Reclamation Co. 
said they don't have room to take any trash from Los Angeles. That landfill is 
operating at capacity -- 1,500 tons a day. 
The BKK landfill takes some trash from Los Angeles. Gastelum said BKK could not 
handle all of the Los Angeles trash that goes to Lopez Canyon but would "be 
willing to help out on a temporary basis," taking some for six months or so 
while the city searches for alternatives. In return, he said, BKK Corp. would 
like a chance to participate in a recycling program that the city is 
developing. 
Traffic Worries 
West Covina City Manager Herman R. (Bob) Fast said more trash from Los Angeles 
might create traffic problems near the BKK dump. If it does, he said, the city 
would ask BKK Corp. to regulate the hours of disposal to ease congestion. He 
said West Covina has been advised by its attorney that it has no legal right to 
restrict the source of the trash BKK takes. 
Fast said that if BKK increases its trash volume, one benefit to landfill 
opponents might be to advance the dump's closure date by a few months by 
filling the disposal area early. BKK Corp. has an agreement with the city to 
close its West Covina landfill in 1995 or earlier. 
The company is attempting to establish a new dump at Elsmere Canyon near 
Newhall. 
The Elsmere Canyon landfill is one of a number of proposals to provide new dump 
capacity in Los Angeles County. There are also proposals to haul trash by rail 
to remote disposal sites outside the county. 
But, Maguin said, none of the alternatives is likely to occur soon, and the 
landfill shortage may worsen. 
"If Lopez Canyon were to close, that really forces the issue," he said. 
