COURT ACCEPTS ITS FIRST CASE ON 'RIGHT TO DIE' 
The Supreme Court on Monday accepted its first-ever "right-to-die" case, 
agreeing to decide whether a Missouri couple may remove their brain-damaged 
daughter from a life-support system. 
Nancy Cruzan, 31, has been in what doctors describe as a persistent vegetative 
condition since a January, 1983, car crash. 
Her parents, Joe and Joyce Cruzan, want to remove the feeding tube surgically 
implanted in her stomach. Without it, doctors say, she will die of starvation 
or dehydration; with it, she may live for 30 years or more. 
The court said it would review a 4-3 ruling of the Missouri Supreme Court that 
forbade doctors to remove the tube. A decision is expected next year. 
Periods of Wakefulness 
Cruzan is able to breathe on her own and has periods of wakefulness in which 
her eyes move randomly in all directions. Doctors say she is incapable of 
reacting or relating to her environment and can experience no thoughts or 
emotions. 
Her parents said their daughter at one time had said she would not want to be 
kept alive in such a condition. 
But the Missouri Supreme Court said: "We find no principled legal basis which 
permits the co-guardians in this case to choose the death of their ward. The 
state's interest is in the preservation of life, not only Nancy's life but also 
the lives of persons similarly situated yet without the support of a loving 
family. 
"We choose to err on the side of life, respecting the rights of incompetent 
persons who may wish to live despite a severely diminished quality of life." 
The state Supreme Court overturned a judge's ruling that would have allowed the 
Cruzans to order the feeding tube removed. 
State Has Living Will Law 
The Missouri Legislature has enacted a law -- a so-called living will statute 
-- that permits the withdrawal of artificial life-support systems from 
hopelessly ill and injured patients. But the law specifically forbids 
withholding food and water from them. 
The Supreme Court on Monday agreed also to take another look, in its next term, 
at how far states may go to prohibit advertising by lawyers. 
The court said it will hear an appeal by an Illinois lawyer censured for saying 
on his professional letterhead that he is a civil trial specialist certified by 
the National Board of Trial Advocacy, a private organization. 
The Illinois Supreme Court, which disciplines that state's lawyers, last 
February upheld the state rule against advertising oneself as a certified civil 
trial specialist. 
