SHORT-CHANGE ARTISTS 
There is something almost pathetic in the toil of workers along the coast of 
Prince William Sound, going literally from rock to rock to wipe up the crude 
oil residue from the Exxon Valdez spill of four months ago. How many millions 
of rocks have been blighted? But hand to rock, rock by rock -- that is just 
about the only way the mess can be expunged. While the Alaskan coast might be 
stained for years in spite of the effort, the nation owes it to itself to do 
everything possible now to restore the magnificent environment to something of 
its natural state. 
Thus the arrogance of Exxon Corp. officials makes a mockery of the labors of 
10,000 men and women in cleanup support centers and strung out along the coast 
of Prince William Sound. Never mind that Exxon is paying them $18 an hour for 
their work. Many did go to Alaska for the bucks -- not that this is easy work 
by any measure. Many went because they were appalled by this environmental 
disaster and wanted to play some part in wiping out the stain. 
From the beginning, Exxon declared it would stick with the job until it was 
done, no matter the cost. But now the world's largest energy company says it 
will halt work Sept. 15. When spring comes, Exxon says its only commitment is 
to "survey" the situation. This position is not negotiable, the company said. 
That means that if the state and federal governments don't like it, tough. 
Perhaps Exxon is rocked by the cost. Indeed, the memo was disclosed on the same 
day the firm announced it has already spent $600 million on the Exxon Valdez 
affair, will pay out another $250 million and has an additional $400 million 
billed to insurance carriers. The figures were met with some skepticism by 
experts, but even if the outlay is that high, Exxon still expects to make $160 
million in profit during the second quarter of 1989. The summary did not cover 
contingency funds to offset any liability that may emerge from lawsuits that 
have been filed. But it also does not consider aesthetic damage to the 
environment and the loss of wildlife, which includes 28,000 birds and 800 sea 
otters counted to date. 
The hand work obviously cannot go on during the winter, but it should continue 
beyond Sept. 15 if weather permits. Alaskan officials say pollution has been 
removed from less than 25% of the 730 miles of shoreline Exxon promised to 
clean up. Winter storms indeed may scour some of the goo from the beaches, but 
no one can be sure. If it is practical to do more cleanup work next spring, 
Exxon should have crews on the beaches the minute the weather allows. 
Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan Jr. is correct when he says Exxon is 
responsible for full cleanup and mitigation of damages. The notion that Exxon 
should just walk away from the fouled Alaskan beaches is unacceptable. The 
disdain with which it declared its intent is base. If Exxon will not take 
Lujan's word for the government's determination that Exxon finish cleaning up 
its mess, President Bush should get on the telephone and emphasize the message 
in the sort of language that oilmen understand. 
