NEWS ANALYSIS; 
THE RUSH TO GERMAN UNITY PROVES UNSTOPPABLE 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's agreement Monday to accept a reunified Germany 
in the Western alliance is the latest and most dramatic example of the power of 
the idea of German unity. 
Since Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Horn first opened the Iron Curtain last 
September and East Germans began pouring West, it is an idea that has pushed 
aside all in its way. 
When West German Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl insisted one morning last 
February that a German currency union would take years, it required less than 
24 hours for him to bow to the political realities -- and only a few short 
months to implement that very currency union. 
Worries about the power of a united Germany, most visible in the West among the 
French class politique and followers of British Prime Minister Margaret 
Thatcher, were swept aside in the rush to endorse the idea at a European 
Community summit last April. 
In Germany itself, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's talk last November of a loose 
German confederation leading to eventual unification had by March become a call 
for all-German elections by the end of 1991. And these, by the end of last 
month, had been advanced to Dec. 2, 1990. 
When the Parliament elected then holds its first session, Germany will 
effectively be one. 
On Monday, Gorbachev became the latest to jump aside rather than be run over in 
the headlong rush, giving Moscow's blessing to what a year ago would have been 
inconceivable: a united Germany as a full, integrated member of the Atlantic 
Alliance. 
For some, it was as if an electric charge had cut the stuffy summer air in this 
Caucasus spa town as Kohl sat next to his host and calmly went down the list of 
Soviet concessions: NATO membership for a united Germany; withdrawal of Soviet 
forces in a relatively short period from what is now East Germany, while Allied 
troops stay in Berlin; a quick wrap-up of the rights of the World War II 
victorious powers in Germany, including those of the Soviet Union. 
Despite the euphoria on the official Luftwaffe Boeing 707 winging its way 
homeward to Bonn, Monday's agreement was far from a one-sided affair. 
Gorbachev won a commitment from Kohl to limit the size of a future German 
military to 370,000 personnel, roughly one-tenth the Soviet Union's troop 
strength, and renounce nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. 
"This can't be of disadvantage to the Soviet Union," Gorbachev noted. 
It is possible to argue that if anything, the accord on balance actually 
enhances Soviet security in the long term. Some analysts say the withdrawal of 
Soviet forces from East Germany will make little difference to Soviet security. 
Certainly, growing tension between newly democratic East Germans and Soviet 
forces stationed there makes Moscow's continued military presence in the region 
a questionable asset. 
If the terms agreed to by the two leaders become reality -- and initial praise 
from President Bush and some other Western leaders indicate there will be 
little opposition -- they will help outline the shape of a future European 
security order. 
While it will be an order in which Moscow's biggest single military contingent 
at present outside of its borders will eventualy disappear back into the Soviet 
Union, it is also an order in which a future united Germany is committed to a 
modest army. 
It has the earmarks of a formula that reassures Moscow yet allows the two 
Germanys to continue their race toward elections. 
After the news conference announcing the agreement, reporters filing out onto a 
patio spotted West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher and his 
Soviet counterpart, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, sitting together on a two-seater 
garden swing sipping mineral water. 
Both were smiling. 
