AROUND THE SOUTH BAY 
History is murky on the burning question of who invented the telephone 
answering machine. 
But Neal Buglewicz, a former Hermosa Beach inventor and one of the founders of 
Torrance-based PhoneMate, gets a lot of credit for his pioneering efforts in 
coming up with the first marketable machine for use in the home. And although 
his name never appears in history books, the machine he was instrumental in 
developing recently became part of the Smithsonian Institution's collection of 
Americana, and it is now on display in Washington as part of a larger exhibit. 
"In terms of commercial and consumer viability, it was the first" telephone 
answering machine, says Jim Oblak, PhoneMate's director of marketing. 
PhoneMate recently donated the machine to the Smithsonian after learning that 
the museum was planning an exhibit called "Information Age: People, Information 
and Technology." The exhibit opened in May and runs indefinitely. 
Several hundred items are part of the exhibit, from Samuel F. B. Morse's 
telegraph to the electronic bugs uncovered after the Watergate break-in; even a 
smoke detector that contained one of the bugs is displayed. 
"It basically traces the history of electrical communications from the 
telegraph in the 1840s up to the development of the electronic computers and 
the merging of these two technologies," said Bernard Finn, a curator at the 
institution's National Museum of American History. 
As for the telephone answering device in the Smithsonian, it's called the Model 
400. Its precursor was the Model 700, which Buglewicz invented. He and his wife 
assembled it themselves in their garage on Ardmore Avenue in Hermosa Beach. 
"It was essentially two inexpensive tape recorders of the type used in the 
introduction of the old 'Mission Impossible' TV series, whereby Peter Graves 
was given his instructions," Buglewicz said in a letter he faxed from 
Singapore, where he now lives. 
In the late '60s, Buglewicz and some friends formed a company, Tron Tech, to 
market the invention. The company later was renamed PhoneMate. 
As for the Model 400 -- the one in the Smithsonian -- it was introduced in 
1971, according to PhoneMate. Big and bulky by today's standards -- it weighed 
10 pounds -- it was the first machine widely marketable to consumers, according 
to the company. 
Buglewicz long ago left PhoneMate, now a wholly-owned subsidiary of Japan's 
Asahi Corp., and he recently attempted to launch another telephone answering 
machine company in Singapore. However, he said his money -- and luck -- ran 
out, and he has been "goose farming" ever since. 
In other words, he is looking for another golden egg. Tim Waters 
