EX-W. VIRGINIA GOVERNOR SENTENCED TO 5 YEARS, FINED 
Former three-term Gov. Arch A. Moore Jr., convicted of corruption and 
characterized as remorseless by prosecutors, was sentenced Tuesday to five 
years and 10 months in prison and fined $170,000. 
Moore, 67, pleaded guilty to charges of mail fraud, extortion, obstruction of 
justice and filing false income taxes during his 1984 and 1988 campaigns and 
during his third term, from 1985-89. He lost the 1988 reelection bid. 
He was ordered to report to the Federal Correctional Institution near 
Petersburg, Va., by July 31. 
U.S. District Judge Walter Hoffman on Monday had refused to let Moore withdraw 
his guilty pleas. 
"No governor or other public official of that responsibility has ever been 
convicted for election fraud of this scope," Assistant U.S. Atty. Joe Savage 
said before sentencing. 
"Arch Moore is a criminal," he said. "If there is one thing missing from that 
man, it's remorse." 
Moore, a Republican who also was governor from 1969-1977, and a U.S. 
congressman for 12 years, appeared stoic during the sentencing and later 
declined comment. An appeal is pending, said defense attorney William Hundley. 
U.S. Atty. Michael Carey said Moore likely will serve at least 2 1/2 years 
before being considered for parole. 
"I think it sends a very clear message," Carey said. "If you violate the public 
trust, you go to jail." 
Carey's investigation into state government corruption also has netted the 
convictions of five legislators, three lobbyists and a state Senate aide. 
Moore pleaded guilty May 8 to extorting $573,000 from coal operator H. Paul 
Kizer in return for a $2.1-million refund from the state's Black Lung Fund, 
which provides benefits to coal miners. 
Moore also pleaded guilty to trying to block a federal grand jury investigation 
into corruption in his Administration. 
And he admitted filing false income tax returns in 1984 and 1985 and defrauding 
the state of his salary and benefits by funneling $100,000 in illegal cash 
payments into his 1984 campaign, to buy votes. 
Hoffman sentenced Moore to five years for extortion, six months for mail fraud 
and two years each for the tax fraud charges, all concurrent. 
Moore also got 10 months for the obstruction of justice charge, which carries 
that mandatory prison term. 
Hundley said Moore's corruption involved campaign funding violations, not raids 
on the treasury, and added: "I submit he served well and honorably." 
