REGIONAL OUTLOOK; 
AFRICA'S FUTURE RIDING THE TRAIN TO NOWHERE; 
AFTER A PERIOD OF REAL OPTIMISM IN THE 1970S, THE REGION HAS FALLEN FURTHER 
BEHIND THE REST OF THE DEVELOPING WORLD. 
The Tanzania-Zambia Railway could well be a metaphor for Africa's path in the 
1980s. 
Known as Tazara, the 1,100-mile, Chinese-built line linking the copper belt of 
Zambia to this Tanzanian port was turned over to the governments of the two 
abutting countries just before the decade began. Included were 128 new 
locomotives and hundreds of passenger and freight cars to run on the gleaming 
rails. Western countries contributed millions of dollars to maintain the right 
of way and to train railroad staff. 
Today, little more than a decade after its opening, only 39 of the engines 
remain in working order. Another 39 are awaiting repair, and 50 have been 
destroyed by collisions and derailings on the deteriorating line. 
Last year, a Swedish development agency donated 350 new cars to the railway -- 
enough, it has been estimated, to last only seven years at the current rate of 
wreckage. Some of the cars derailed on their maiden journey, the Swedes 
recently complained in a blistering letter to the two governments. 
Like Tazara, whose fate is the result of chronic African maladies of 
inattention, lack of maintenance, and penury, so went most of the continent in 
the 1980s. Development experts describe sub-Saharan Africa as a train running 
downhill to disaster. 
After a period of genuine hope in the 1970s, these experts describe the 1980s 
as the region's lost decade. By almost every measure of human welfare and 
economic health, the area retrogressed during that period, in some cases so 
sharply that Barber Conable, head of the World Bank, remarked recently that 
most Africans today are every bit as poor as they were 30 years ago, at the 
dawn of the continent's era of independence. 
"There was general deterioration in the main macroeconomic indicators, 
widespread disintegration of productive facilities, a rapid worsening in the 
social scene, repeated droughts and accelerating environmental degradation," 
says a U.N. report. "The unending crisis did not affect only the current 
well-being of the average African; it threatened the long-term development 
prospects of the region as a whole." 
The 1980s saw many of Africa's modest gains of the previous 10 or 15 years 
swept off in a windstorm of deteriorating roads, disappearing forest and 
cropland, collapsing schoolhouses, and mushrooming military budgets. 
One can debate which African capital has the biggest potholes on its 
thoroughfares. Efforts to stem deforestation by planting fast-growing 
eucalyptus trees fail because Africans who need wood for fuel cut them down 
faster than they can grow. Ethiopia, which ranks close to rock-bottom in almost 
every measure of welfare and development known to humankind, spends more than 
50% of its budget on weapons to fight a largely stalemated 30-year civil war 
with Eritrean rebels. 
Many fear that the 1990s will be worse. For one thing, the rest of the world is 
losing interest in a place that never seems to get better. 
"The broad international support for helping a continent in distress in the 
1980s has been dissipated now by repeated calls for assistance," says Salim 
Lone, a Kenyan who edits Africa Recovery, a U.N. journal of development news. 
"How long can people accept that Africa is a special place, when the economic 
and political returns from Eastern Europe are infinitely greater?" 
Africa no longer has a geopolitical card to play. Gone are the days when 
Ethiopia and Somalia could play the East and West off against each other by 
switching allegiance between the United States and the Soviet Union. Zaire can 
no longer earn millions in U.S. aid as a staging base for anti-Marxist rebels 
in neighboring Angola, where Cuban troops have been on the other side. 
"In the past, certain places in Africa could compete for attention by turning 
to the East or West," Lone says. "But now East-West amity has stripped the 
continent of whatever strategic value it had before." 
The nearly 40 countries of black Africa south of the Sahara Desert are 
increasingly detached from the rest of the world in economic terms, too. Their 
export crops, such as coffee and tea, are not rare or highly valued. Their 
appetites for foreign industrial goods remain high, but the scarcity of foreign 
currency to buy them means that hospitals and shoe factories alike crumble for 
want of spare parts. 
At the end of the 1970s, the continent had a healthy trade surplus of $29 
billion with the rest of the world. Today, with reduced export income and 
higher import prices, it has a trade deficit of $7.7 billion. Sub-Saharan 
Africa's share of world trade is 1.7%. 
The gross domestic product of the entire region, which has twice the population 
of the United States, is roughly equivalent to that of Belgium. 
There is no question as to who bears the burden of this economic estrangement: 
the poor. Africa has a near-monopoly on the bottom rankings of countries in 
terms of social welfare. Nine of the 10 countries with the lowest life 
expectancies in the world are African. Sierra Leone and Ethiopia have life 
expectancies of 42 years, tied for lowest with Afghanistan. The others are 
Guinea (43); Mali, Angola and Niger (45), and Somalia, Central African Republic 
and Chad (46). 
Nine of the 10 countries with the highest infant mortality rates are also 
African: Mozambique and Angola, both the scenes of civil wars, are tied for the 
worst (172 per 1,000 live births), followed by Mali (168), Sierra Leone and 
Ethiopia (153), Malawi (149), Guinea (146), Burkina Faso (137) and Niger (134). 
Six of the 10 countries with the lowest literacy rates and eight of the 10 
countries with the lowest rate of access to safe water are also in sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
There is little doubt that such unrelieved misery is straining the social 
fabric. The street protests and riots spreading across Africa this year in a 
demand for new political systems are rooted in the poverty afflicting every 
country. 
More than 20 people were killed in five days of street clashes last week in 
Kenya, where the unrest, starting with an informal rally against the country's 
one-party system, was fed by legions of the unemployed and underemployed who 
fill Nairobi and every other African metropolis. 
The geographic characteristics of many of these nations mean they will never be 
rich, or perhaps even self-sufficient. In the roll of dishonor above, it should 
be noted that Mali, Niger, Chad and Somalia are desert countries with 
significant populations of nomadic herders. Burkina Faso, once known as Upper 
Volta, is on the edge of the encroaching desert. Central African Republic and 
Malawi are landlocked. 
A great belt of the continent lies within the so-called intertropical zone, or 
ITZ, the swath of Earth between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn where 
weather patterns are the most unpredictable and crop failures frequent. 
But the record is not much better in the comparatively richly endowed states of 
this region. Zambia, which has vast stretches of arable land, recently had to 
issue ration cards to its huge population of city dwellers because bread and 
wheat were in such short supply. When the government tried to raise prices of 
these staples last month, food riots erupted, taking 23 lives. In Kenya, 
perhaps the biggest success story among African economies, foreign aid amounts 
to 30% of the government budget, which obviously cannot be balanced without it. 
When Ghana gained its independence in 1957 to usher in the continent's 
post-colonial period, it was rich from an annual crop of the world's 
highest-quality cocoa beans and from the gold mines that accounted for its 
colonial-era name of Gold Coast. Two coups and a series of inept economic 
policies followed. Today, foreign investors are trying to resurrect mines that 
have lain unused for 10 years, and the cocoa crop is insignificant. 
Ghana boasts the lowest minimum wage in Africa, and even upper-level civil 
servants can feed their families only once a day. At one point in the 1980s, a 
two-income household in which both workers received minimum wage could afford 
less than 10% of the lowest-cost diet needed to meet minimum nutritional needs. 
Africa's lost decade could not have come at a worse time. The 1990s will see a 
surge in regional trade alliances like the European market, while sub-Saharan 
Africa's 40 countries are still waging border skirmishes and erecting new 
customs barriers that inhibit competitiveness. Regional trade compacts such as 
the East African Community, involving Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, have either 
collapsed or, like the ambitious Economic Community of West African States, 
proven totally ineffective. 
The world technological revolution will pick up its pace as computers and fax 
machines become increasingly indispensable tools of economic growth. These 
machines depend on adequate telephone service, but in Africa fewer than one 
person in 300 has access to a telephone -- half the level of service as Asia's 
and one-sixteenth that in Latin America. 
"These factors can only lead to the further marginalization of Africa in the 
1990s and beyond," warns Adebayo Adedegi, head of the U.N. Economic Commission 
for Africa. 
Africa's inability to emerge from its long decline has provoked a raging debate 
among development experts about the reasons -- and particularly about the 
extent to which Western aid policies themselves should be blamed. Some argue 
that the nature of the aid bureaucracy -- tens of thousands of technocrats and 
administrators paid at Western, not African, wage scales -- overstates the 
amount of actual aid that has flowed into Africa. 
"You talk about billions of dollars going to Africa -- but how much of that 
actually benefits Africans?" remarks one U.N. Development Program official in 
West Africa. "Every European official here costs $100,000 to $150,000 a year to 
support, plus equipment, cars and so on. By the time you're finished, half the 
money in any program is spent." 
Much of what is left has gone into project financing -- the construction of 
demonstration farms, model factories and so on. Africa is littered with the 
rusted and gutted hulks of these well-intentioned but poorly planned edifices. 
In Tanzania, for example, foreign donors in the early 1980s eagerly studied 
statistics on fish landings from rich Lake Victoria and paid for a 
multimillion-dollar fish processing plant on the lake shore in the district of 
Mwanza. The plant had an immense appetite for fish, and Mwanza's fishermen 
obligingly supplied it -- overfishing their portion of the vast lake so 
severely that it became a dead body of water. Today the plant is shuttered and 
crumbling, its lifeblood exploited into extinction. 
African leaders themselves have done little to respond to external challenges, 
30 years after independence and more than a decade after commodity prices 
collapsed. Instead of diversifying, the vast majority of these countries still 
depend on their top three commodity exports for 75% or more of their foreign 
earnings. Generally these are commodities, such as coffee and tea, in which the 
countries compete with each other in already glutted foreign markets. 
The search for new markets is uneven, but often rewarding: Kenya responded to 
the collapse in the prices of coffee and tea by encouraging its small 
horticulture industry. Today the country is the world's fourth-biggest exporter 
of cut flowers. 
African leaders talk incessantly about how the national borders drawn up by the 
former colonial powers institutionalized political tensions by arbitrarily 
dividing some tribes and combining others. 
Thirty years of economic history suggests the problem is not necessarily the 
wrong borders, but too many of them. Many sub-Saharan countries are simply too 
small or too deprived to be self-sufficient. Eleven are landlocked. Thirty-four 
have fewer than 10 million people. The distribution of natural resources is 
uneven: Zambia, with 7.5 million people, has copper and broad swaths of arable 
land -- largely unused -- while in neighboring Malawi, a similar population is 
crowded on one-seventh as much territory and with no mineral deposits at all. 
African leaders complain, quite fairly, that in granting independence their 
European colonial masters left them with inadequate roads and railroads and a 
pitifully small cadre of university-educated leaders. But it is clear now that 
these leaders themselves must shoulder much of the blame for their countries' 
problems. 
One key is the persistence of failed policies. Many African statesmen formed 
their economic ideas in the crucible of anti-colonialism: They reacted against 
not only European politics, but also European free-market economics, which they 
saw as exploitative. Great leaders like Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia and Julius K. 
Nyerere of Tanzania created something called "African socialism," based on what 
they contended was Africans' unique sense of community and self-help. 
Today Zambia and Tanzania are among Africa's most dismal failures. Nyerere's 
catch-phrase, articulated in the "Arusha Declaration" of 1967, was "socialism 
and self-reliance." But after decades of receiving the highest per-capita 
foreign aid in all sub-Saharan Africa, Tanzania is one of the world's least 
self-reliant countries. 
Kaunda, whose frequent emotional, even tearful, public speeches on the evils of 
nuclear proliferation and other scarcely relevant issues have made him a figure 
of worldwide respect, has presided over the collapse of one of Africa's most 
promising lands. Zambia became independent blessed with the best industrial 
base in southern Africa; it has been left a rotting skeleton through the 
mismanagement of state-owned enterprises operating in an environment of 
unbridled corruption. 
"Everyone knows that to run a socialist enterprise you need good management to 
make up for the lack of individual incentives like the profit motive," one 
Scandinavian development official said in discussing the disastrous record of 
state-owned farms in nominally Marxist Ethiopia. "Of course, management skills 
are the one thing most lacking in Africa." 
Wherever the blame lies, the toll of Africa's marginalization is enormous. The 
U.N. Development Program recently noted that "between 1979 and 1985 the number 
of African people below the poverty line increased by almost two-thirds, 
compared with an average increase of one-fifth in the entire developing world." 
The urgency embodied in this figure has, oddly enough, led development 
officials to contemplate how the "quick fixes" of the 1970s and 1980s went 
awry: The manipulations of currency rates and the rapid infusions of aid money 
and project ideas that frequently canceled each other out or duplicated effort 
-- all without helping Africans build and sustain their own institutions. 
Some development experts say what Africa needs may be something approaching 
benign neglect. If the developed world does begin to withdraw attention and 
resources from the embattled continent, one notes, it may finally wean itself 
from the diet of aid. 
"There is a positive side," he says. "It may actually encourage governments to 
adopt policies that will be much more self-reliant and not as dependent on 
outside resources." 
Africa and Third World: Region Falls Behind 
Not only do the nearly 40 countries of black Afric live in a different economic 
world than the industrialized countries; they are slipping behind the rest of 
the THird World by many key measures of development. The burden of the region's 
economic alienation is carried by the poor, such as the displaced villagers, 
below, gathered to collect food aid in Mozambique. 
Access to Health Services 
In percent of population 
Sub-Saharan Arica: 45% 
Middle East/North Africa: 76% 
Asia, Oceania: 66% 
South Asia: 56% 
East, Southeast Asia: 75% 
Latin America, the Caribbean: 61% 
Adult Literacy Rates 
In percent of population 
Sub-Saharan Arica: 48% 
Middle East/North Africa: 54% 
Asia, Oceania: 59% 
South Asia: 41% 
East, Southeast Asia: 71% 
Latin America, the Caribbean: 83% 
Gross National Product 
In U.S. dollars, per capita 
Sub-Saharan Arica: $440 
Middle East/North Africa: 1,780 
Asia, Oceania: 390 
South Asia: 290 
East, Southeast Asia: 470 
Latin America, the Caribbean: 1,790 
Access to Safe Water 
In percent of population 
Sub-Saharan Arica: 37% 
Middle East/North Africa: 69% 
Asia, Oceania: 52% 
South Asia: 54% 
East, Southeast Asia: 48% 
Latin America, the Caribbean: 73% 
Life Expectancy at Birth 
In years 
Sub-Saharan Arica: 51 
Middle East/North Africa: 62 
Asia, Oceania: 64 
South Asia: 58 
East, Southeast Asia: 68 
Latin America, the Caribbean: 67 
