DIGEST: FORMER SIMI VALLEY COACH JOINS CLU FOOTBALL STAFF 
Dave Murphy, a former Simi Valley High football coach, will join Joe Harper's 
Cal Lutheran staff as a part-time assistant and will coach the offensive line. 
Murphy is one of several coaches Harper has hired to fill out his eight-man 
staff. Wayne Quigley, an assistant at Calabasas High; Bob Misko, an assistant 
at Royal High; and Broderick Jackson, an assistant at West Los Angeles College 
also will be part-time assistants, Harper said. 
In six years as Simi Valley coach, Murphy led the school to its only Marmonte 
League football championship. He had a 21-40-1 record and resigned after the 
1989 season. Murphy will share offensive-line responsibilities with Harper. 
Murphy will continue to coach the Simi Valley girls' basketball team and teach 
at the school. 
Cal State Northridge has received an official letter of confirmation from the 
NCAA approving the school's reclassification from Division II to Division I in 
all sports except football. 
The letter from NCAA membership coordinator Shirley Whitacre to Northridge 
President James W. Cleary states that the school's request for reclassification 
has been approved, effective Sept. 1. 
The university also announced that Paul A. Bubb has been hired as director of 
athletic development, effective Aug. 6. 
Bubb, 33, comes to Northridge from Drake University, where he was director of 
athletic development and alumni relations in 1988-89. Before that, he was 
director of development at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, from 
1985-88. 
Emilee Klein, of Studio City, defeated Kelly Ann Kemper of Lewisville, Tex., 5 
and 4, in first-round match play of the 64th Women's Western Golf Association 
Junior Invitational in Austin, Tex. 
Championship flight match play continues through Friday. First-round losers 
fell into the consolation bracket. 
Tom King, the boys' and girls' cross-country and track and field coach at Simi 
Valley High for the past four years, has been hired as the boys' track coach at 
Buena. 
King, 34, will replace Gordon Steward, who retired in June after 24 years at 
Buena. 
