STYLE: MEN SHIFT TO CUSTOM CLOTHIERS 
Roger Torriero glanced at his watch and cut off the business call he had taken 
in his ninth-floor office at Griffin Towers in Santa Ana. It was time to pick 
out a pair of pants. 
Unfurled on his desk were scores of nubby swatches in European wool and French 
silk. Forty minutes later, Torriero, a principal of Griffin/Related Properties, 
had ordered three suits and five shirts from David Rickey &amp; Co. of Costa 
Mesa. 
While retailers bemoan sluggish sales in women's clothing, menswear sales are 
jumping. Over the past two years, sales in nearly every category of menswear 
have increased by 5 to 12% nationwide, according to Ron Arden, menswear 
director for the California Mart in Los Angeles. 
A growing segment of this menswear market is custom-made clothing. According to 
the Custom Tailors and Designers Assn. of America, sales of made-to-measure 
clothing have increased about 10% nationwide over the past two years. 
Although several businesses in the area have offered custom-made suits and 
shirts for years -- including Gentlemen's Choice in Irvine and Newport Custom 
Tailors in Costa Mesa -- few men's boutiques have offered a wide range of 
custom clothes as well as off-the-rack accessories. 
Then last August a swanky custom store opened in South Coast Plaza. Alfred 
Dunhill, a satellite shop for the 82-year-old London clothier firm, sells 
custom-tailored suits, shirts and shoes from its 900-square-foot shop with 
cherry-wood fixtures and brass-lined shelves. Dunhill offers custom wear and 
off-the-rack apparel, including cashmere sport coats, wool coats and leather 
jackets. 
David Rickey &amp; Co., which also opened last August, has emerged as one of 
Southern California's largest custom clothiers. The 2,700-square-foot salon in 
Costa Mesa features custom-made casual clothes, business suits, shirts, pants 
and evening wear in addition to a wide range of pricey accessories: $950 shoes, 
$800 sweaters and ties ranging from $42.50 to $120. 
David Rickey is owned by three young partners -- David Schwartz, David Heil and 
Rickey Lamitie -- who describe the upscale, prestige look of Orange County 
businessmen as stylish but not too high-fashion. 
"It's the high-fashion look toned down a bit," Schwartz, 28, says. "We bring 
the style down a little so it's not too New York or L.A. Orange County has its 
own look." 
In its first year of operation -- the partners began visiting clients shortly 
before the Costa Mesa store was opened -- David Rickey has racked up $2.1 
million in sales and 1,000 customers, according to Schwartz. 
"We are an example of Orange County's coming of age," he says. "It used to be 
if someone successful wanted a wardrobe of clothes on the cutting edge of 
fashion he was leaving the county to get it, going to New York or L.A. or 
Europe. 
"Now he is able to get the finest here (in Orange County)," Schwartz says. 
"Also, five years ago there were not the business and social clubs there are 
now, and with these social clubs come social obligations, which require 
wardrobes. People are starting to see that we do not all wear overalls and pick 
oranges." 
Rickey Lamitie says men are taking tips from their wives. 
"A majority of our clients have large expendable incomes and wives who have 
spent quite a bit on their wardrobes for years," Lamitie, 31, says. "Gradually 
men are doing the same thing." 
Among David Rickey's customers are Thomas Tucker, president of Pennhill Co., 
the Newport Beach developer; Carl Karcher, chairman of the board of Carl's Jr. 
Restaurants; basketball player Magic Johnson; Brandy Birtcher, a partner in the 
Birtcher development firm; Don Christy Jr., president of NADA Appraisal Guides 
in Costa Mesa; Tony Moiso, president of the Santa Margarita Co., and Randy De 
Lano, senior vice president of Mission Viejo Bank. 
De Lano says "everyone has noticed" his new look since he began ordering from 
David Rickey. "It makes my life a lot simpler too. I'm hoping soon they'll just 
make everything except my shoes and underwear." 
Before discovering David Rickey, Don Christy says he slogged through the 
shopping centers. "I was having a lot of things made but was also shopping the 
department stores," he says. "But once you start buying custom, it's hard to go 
back. What they make fits so much better, and you have things you don't see on 
anybody else. That's the part I like the best." 
Customers say one of the biggest draws in going custom is the time saved by not 
having to shop. 
"The saving of time is very, very important," Torriero says. "And the quality 
of services, which include them coming to your office and working with 
predetermined measurements, is essential when you're busy." 
Schwartz says his clients want total wardrobes created with the minimum amount 
of fuss -- no lengthy consultations or fittings. Most of the transactions are 
conducted in the clients' homes or offices, although the store has a roomy 
shopping area and private fitting rooms for those who come in. 
Consultations and initial fittings take about two hours (usually spread over 
two or three visits), and within four to eight weeks the garments are ready. 
"When we started we concentrated on shirts and suits, but in time we realized 
our clients wanted us to handle everything," Schwartz says. "Now we do it all, 
from golf clothes to casual wear to evening wear." 
The majority of the clothes are sewn on the East Coast in European, mostly 
English, fabrics. Schwartz says customers can choose from more than 4,500 
different fabrics. 
Prices range from $400 to $3,000 for suits, $85 to $200 for shirts and $500 to 
$3,000 for evening wear. The lower-priced clothing is generally machine sewn; 
the higher prices are for bench-made (100% hand-sewn garments). 
But the partners say that for many of their customers, money is no object. 
"The majority of the business takes place in the upper range," Lamitie says. 
"The aim was offering the best because to many of our clients the cost was 
unimportant. They would come in and ask for the best they could get. . . . I 
have one customer who spent $108,000 on clothes just in the last six months. 
"What's happening is a lot of men are starting to realize there aren't that 
many things other than cars that they can spoil themselves with," he adds. "But 
they can spoil themselves with clothes." 
