IMMUNITY PLAN FOR TAX EVADERS SAID TO BE USUAL 
A controversial procedure under which tax cheats could pay back taxes and avoid 
criminal prosecution is a long-established part of Internal Revenue Service 
practice nationwide and is well known among attorneys specializing in tax 
disputes, legal experts said Wednesday. 
The informal practice is described in official IRS manuals -- and thus is 
sanctioned by the agency -- and made available to anyone, not just those with 
close relationships with IRS officials, the experts said. 
These views contrast sharply with characterizations made by congressional 
investigators this week probing allegations of misconduct at IRS offices in Los 
Angeles and elsewhere. Investigators contended that these arrangements, 
involving the Los Angeles office in particular, involved favoritism and were 
not approved by national IRS headquarters. 
"It's legal, there's no question about it," said Roger Olsen, a Los Angeles tax 
attorney and former assistant U.S. attorney general in charge of all federal 
tax prosecutions between 1981 and 1987. 
"If you go to tax seminars, the subject is widely disseminated. It's not a 
secret," said Eugene D. Silverman, a Los Angeles tax attorney and a former 
attorney with the IRS and Justice Department. "I strongly feel it should be 
encouraged," he added, noting that the IRS has received millions of dollars in 
tax revenues that it may not otherwise have recovered. 
IRS officials said Wednesday that the practice allows delinquent taxpayers to 
avoid prosecution for failing to file tax returns or other tax violations. It 
does not preclude criminal prosecution if taxpayers obtained income illegally 
or committed other non-tax violations. And the practice does not exempt 
taxpayers from interest and penalties owed, or from civil fraud penalties, and 
therefore is not an amnesty program. 
"What we have here is a need to enforce the law, but also to be able to offer 
people who want to get back into the tax system . . . an opportunity to get 
back," said IRS spokeswoman Ellen Murphy. She added that the agency does not 
know how much in taxes and penalties has been taken in, because the program is 
informal. 
Congressional investigators described Tuesday how Sherman Oaks attorney Richard 
J. Trattner used the practice with the IRS' Los Angeles office. He would offer 
a check for a down payment of a client's taxes and the key to a safe deposit 
box containing the client's unfiled tax returns. If the IRS indicated that it 
was unlikely that the client would be investigated, on the basis of a 
description of the case, Trattner would disclose the client's name and the 
box's location. 
The arrangement for Trattner, a former special agent in the IRS criminal 
investigation division and assistant U.S. attorney, was never officially 
approved by anyone at the IRS Washington office, one investigator said. That 
implied that it was offered as a special favor to him because of his close ties 
to the agency. 
Legal experts interviewed Wednesday said that Trattner's safe deposit box 
method is novel. But they said that grants of immunity to tax evaders are part 
of an informal "voluntary disclosure" policy maintained at the IRS for years. 
The IRS in about 1945 established a formal policy granting immunity to tax 
evaders who voluntarily paid tax liabilities, as long as the government was not 
yet aware of their violations. 
The service abolished the formal policy in 1952 due in part to concerns that 
the IRS was still prosecuting anyway. But the agency has since maintained an 
informal policy allowing district offices to offer immunity on a case-by-case 
basis. The informal policy is discussed in numerous tax guides and is endorsed 
by the American Bar Assn. tax section, Olsen said. 
It also is discussed in the IRS special agents' handbook. The handbook, 
Silverman said, stipulates that the IRS "will carefully consider and weigh the 
voluntary disclosure, along with all other facts and circumstances, in deciding 
whether or not to recommend prosecution." 
Under the policy, attorneys may approach the IRS with offers to pay taxes owed 
by clients. The agency in turn will require that, to get immunity, clients must 
not be under current IRS investigation and must not have obtained income from 
illegal sources, among other things. 
If authorities later discover that clients obtained income through criminal 
activities such as bookmaking, clients could still be prosecuted. 
Also, under a 1974 revision, taxpayers must not have reason to believe that the 
IRS will soon discover their violations. That could occur if, for example, a 
wife negotiating a divorce settlement threatens to report her husband's tax 
violations. 
"What you basically do is describe the facts of your client without revealing 
the identity of your client and ask, on the basis of that, would they accept 
this as a voluntary disclosure and not prosecute," Olsen said. 
"It is a perfectly legal method of assisting taxpayers," said Mark D. Pastor, 
an Encino tax attorney and former law partner with Trattner. 
Trattner, in an interview, said that 30 to 40 clients have paid about $2 
million in back taxes over the past 11 years through the procedure. Some 
derived income from illegal activities -- and thus technically do not qualify 
for immunity, he said. Nonetheless, they are still paying back taxes 
anonymously, as well as filing current returns under their real identities, 
Trattner said. 
"The fact that they made voluntary disclosures would not bar prosecution" for 
those illegal activities, Trattner said. "But for sympathy purposes, it is not 
likely that a judge would get terribly angry if they attempted to straighten 
out their act in good faith and come forward." 
Trattner called the congressional investigations a "kangaroo court charade" for 
implying that his arrangements were the result of special favors. 
However, one Southland tax lawyer said the use of partial payments and a secret 
safe deposit could lead to bribery or other abuses. For instance, cash could be 
left in the safe deposit box as a bribe to the IRS agent. 
Because the practice is discretionary, with no specific IRS procedures, it 
"could be interpreted as corrupt," the attorney said. 
But Trattner, who was not accused of bribery in the congressional hearings, 
said he has never dealt with individual revenue agents. 
Staff writers William K. Knoedelseder Jr. and Kim Murphy contributed to this 
story. 
Related story in Business. 
