SUITE DEALS: ORANGE COUNTY'S MOST EXPENSIVE ROOMS 
THE RITZ-CARLTON,Dana Point 
(714) 240-2000 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $2,000 
Size: 1,840 sq. ft. 
Amenities: two bedrooms; master bedroom includes spa, glassed-in shower, 
separate tub, and marble double vanity; living room with VCR, TV, sofa, chairs, 
wood-burning fireplace, wet bar; study; pantry; service entrance; dining room 
table seats eight; ocean view 
Patrons: movie stars and business executives 
FOUR SEASONS HOTEL,Newport Beach 
(714) 759-0808 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $1,500 
Size: 1,800 sq. ft. 
Amenities: master bedroom with king-size four-poster canopy bed, oversize tub 
and separate shower and dressing area; second bedroom with two twin beds; 
living room with sofa, leather chairs and grand piano; dining room table seats 
12; service pantry; library/study; ocean view 
Patrons: rock stars, movie stars, politicians 
DANA POINT RESORT,Dana Point 
(714) 661-5000 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $1,200 
Size: 1,840 sq. ft. 
Amenities: master bedroom with king-size bed; second bedroom with double; 
parlor with baby grand piano, marble floors; ocean view 
Patrons: business executives 
ANAHEIM MARRIOTT,Anaheim 
(714) 750-8000 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $1,150 
Size: 2,418 sq. ft. 
Amenities: master bedroom with king-size bed, private bath; two additional 
bedrooms, each with two double beds and private bath; 
living room with wet bar, gas fireplace, large-screen TV, couches; dining room 
table seats eight to 10; balcony; city-lights view 
Patrons: President Bush, former President Reagan, entertainment/business 
executives 
ANAHEIM HILTON AND TOWERS,Anaheim 
(714) 750-4321 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $1,050 
Size: 1,800 sq. ft. 
Amenities: master bedroom with king-size bed, sunken marble bath, whirlpool and 
separate shower and dressing area; second bedroom has two double beds; living 
room with wet bar, TV; marble foyer; dining room table seats eight; exercise 
bicycle; personal maid; center pieces designed by hotel florist; maitre d' 
available; city-lights view 
Patrons: Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Chrysler Chairman Lee 
Iacocca, business executives, convention presidents, movie stars and executives 
LE MERIDIEN HOTEL,Irvine 
(714) 476-2001 
Presidential suite (will open July 15) 
Per-night rate: $800 
Size: 1,500 sq. ft. 
Amenities: newly decorated two-bedroom suite on concierge floor; master bedroom 
has king-size canopy bed; second bedroom has two double beds; living room with 
corner sectional, large-screen TV with VCR; dining room table seats eight; gas 
fireplace; concierge and bar open to suite floor of which presidential suite is 
a part; city-lights view 
Patrons: business executives, rock stars, entertainers 
IRVINE MARRIOTT,Irvine 
(714) 553-0100 
Presidential suite 
Per-night rate: $650 
Size: 900 sq. ft. 
Amenities: master bedroom with king-size bed, bath with marble tub, bidet, 
marble make up vanity; oversize guest room with armoire and sitting area; 
living room with couches and easy chairs, full wet bar; pantry; marble foyer 
with double doors; dining room table seats eight; city-lights view 
Patrons: Former President Reagan, business executives 
NEWPORT BEACH MARRIOTT,Newport Beach 
(714) 640-4000 
Presidential suite 
Per night rate: $600 
Size: 1,320 sq. ft. 
Amenities: two stories; king-size bedroom upstairs has private bath with 
separate tub and shower; downstairs has living room with sofas, TV, wet bar, 
dining room table seats six to eight 
Patrons: convention VIPs booked at hotel 
COMPARABLE STAYS WHEN YOU'RE AWAY 
FOUR SEASONS HOTEL, Washington D.C. 
Presidential suite: $1,485 
PLAZA HOTEL, New York City 
Plaza suite: $1,660 
MARK HOPKINS HOTEL, San Francisco 
Royal suite: $1,475 
BALLY'S GRAND CASINO RESORT HOTEL, Las Vegas 
Executive suite: $650 
ADOLPHUS HOTEL, Dallas 
Penthouse suite: $1,450 
CHICAGO HILTON &amp; TOWERS, Chicago 
Towers suite: $735 
BEVERLY HILLS HOTEL, Beverly Hills 
Presidential suite: $3,100 
SHERATON ROYAL HAWAIIAN, Honolulu 
Kamehameha Suite: $1,650 
AND IF YOU'RE REALLY OUT TO IMPRESS . . . 
Consider the Penthouse Suite at San Francisco's Fairmont Hotel. 
After the limousine picks you up at the airport and delivers you to the 
Fairmont, take your private elevator to this eight-room suite. If you want to 
blast around town for a while, store your excess cash in the suite's 
burglar-proof vault and make your way downstairs. The limousine's at your 
disposal. 
If you want to hang around, though, you won't lack for diversions. There are 
four television sets. If you're feeling more civilized, though, pour a brandy 
from the fully stocked bar, grab a snack from the tray of complimentary 
California-grown fruits and slip into the two-story circular library with domed 
ceiling. Or maybe a tour of your digs, with its original art by contemporary 
American artists, would be more enjoyable. Considering you have more than 6,300 
square feet to roam around in, it'll take a minute or two. 
Too contemplative, you say? Nip into the game room, with its Persian-tiled 
walls and stained-glass skylight, or knock out a few tunes on the grand piano 
in the drawing room. 
But you don't want to lavish all this just on yourself, do you? If you bring 
along 20 of your closest friends, you can all partake of several wines and an 
elaborate dinner prepared by the hotel's French or Chinese chefs. 
Seems like a crowd? Not to worry. The dining room accommodates up to 50. And if 
some of your crowd need to improve their table manners, exile them to the full 
eat-in kitchen. It's not a hardship sentence, though, for they too can use the 
special silver and china. 
After dinner, they won't even have to leave the city. There are overnight 
accommodations for 14 in the adjoining Fairmont Tower. Six of them will have to 
make due in your suite's second and third bedrooms, each with two double beds 
and private bath. 
Once the gang's dispatched, take a seat in front of one of the four 
wood-burning fireplaces, inlaid with lapis lazuli and marble, and enjoy the 
feeling. This is, after all, a spot usually home to royalty, diplomats, 
celebrities and top corporate executives. In fact, Secretary of State Edward 
Stettinius used the place as his headquarters when he was helping draft the 
United Nations charter in 1945. And don't forget to take in the killer view of 
the city lights from your private outdoor terrace. 
And so, finally, to bed. In your case, to the master bedroom with its king-size 
bed. The pillows are 100% down, with goose feathers imported exclusively from 
Ireland. Sample the bedside tray of petit fours. And if there's a problem, ring 
the butler or maid; they're available round the clock. 
In the morning, after breakfast in bed for you and your guests, all of them, 
bomb down to the health club for a workout. When you get back, step into your 
private bath with separate shower and marble tub with 24-karat gold-plated 
fixtures. 
By that time, your limousine back to the airport will be ready to leave, even 
if you're not. 
Oh yes, the bill. For your one night, $20,000. 
Reservations: (415) 772-5000. 
Source: Individual hotels 
