DON'T WORRY ABOUT A LACK OF CREATIVITY; 
DECORATING: PROFESSOR SAYS MOST PEOPLE CAN BE CREATIVE AND SHOULD NOT DEPEND 
TOTALLY ON ADVICE OF INTERIOR DECORATORS. 
When you're ready to redecorate, don't put yourself at the total mercy of an 
interior designer -- even if you think you don't have a creative bone in your 
body. 
"Don't say 'I am not creative, so I can't decorate my own home.' Say 'I'm not 
sure, but I will try,' " says Prof. Morris Stein, a psychologist at New York 
University who specializes in human creativity. 
Stein says there is no proof that creativity is an innate quality or a learned 
skill, but it is known that motivation is a powerful stimulus. Therefore, get 
moving; act as if creativity can be increased. It might awaken what is there or 
add to your store. 
Stein says you can get your creative juices flowing by starting with a 
metaphor. Inventors often use metaphors in their quest for something new. The 
metaphor of the human inner ear ultimately led Alexander Graham Bell to the 
telephone. The Wright Brothers studied buzzards before coming up with the 
airplane. 
Some metaphors liken the home to a castle, palace, museum, cave or shell. A 
room suggested by the opulence of a castle is going to be quite different from 
that suggested by a cave, a dark refuge. 
The metaphor of a cave might be translated into a bedroom with low light 
levels, enveloping window coverings and a bed draped in fabric and piled with 
pillows. 
People who spend most of their time and energy away from home might prefer 
impersonal surroundings such as those found in a first-class hotel -- 
comfortable yet easy to care for. 
For some, home is a place where worldly success can be reflected with 
possessions on display, rich fabrics and plenty of room for entertaining. 
Stein made use of a metaphor when he designed his weekend home. "I grew up in a 
tradition in which the kitchen is warmth and family," he says, "so I can feed 
20 people in my kitchen." 
He says the kitchen is the social center of his home. When friends come for 
dinner, they pitch in and help with the cooking because the kitchen encourages 
working together while socializing. 
Creativity is enhanced by knowledge, so in addition to metaphoric thinking, 
Stein advises exploring the marketplace. "Let your looking stimulate you to 
write down ideas," he says. 
Another way to stimulate the imagination, he says, is to change a noun into a 
verb. "Don't think about the bedroom -- a static concept. Instead, think of 
bedrooming, kitchening, dining and instead of a shower, think of the meaning of 
showering." 
For example, if the meaning of showering is rejuvenating, you will naturally be 
led to think of whether controls are in the right place and if there should 
there be more than one shower head. 
Not only should spaces and furnishings support your specific activities, you 
should also try to involve all the senses in your design. Too often, we 
emphasize the visual and auditory senses and minimize touch and smell. Very few 
people pay attention to the kinesthetic sense, which is the body sense that 
operates when you sit in a chair and it feels good, says Stein. 
Stein's views on creativity are shared by Ted Pappas, a decorator from 
Westport, Conn., who has been teaching decorating skills for about 14 years. 
"Everyone has an innate sense of style and design about what they like," Pappas 
says. "Some have to work a little harder and others are more adept, but anyone 
can learn how to decorate a home better." 
As an instructor in adult education courses in interior decorating at the New 
Canaan YMCA, Pappas covers how to lay out a floor plan, window treatments, 
furniture styles, how to combine furniture and accessories from more than one 
period and how to shop. 
To help students understand what he calls their well-formed but unarticulated 
personal tastes, he has them create a picture book of colors, room arrangements 
and furnishings they like. 
"You would be amazed at how different each individual is," he says. "Two people 
may say they like the same style, but their scrapbooks will be very different." 
