THE DAY AFTER -- AN EERIE LANDSCAPE OF DESTRUCTION; 
TUNNEL: A FISSURE SMOKES LIKE A VOLCANIC VENT. A BUSWAY IS BLACKENED. THE 
FREEWAY IS DESERTED. 
Morning light brought into focus a stark scene of destruction Saturday along a 
burned-out stretch of Metro Rail tunnel beneath the Hollywood Freeway. 
The normally bustling highway stood deserted. On a typical weekday, 210,000 
vehicles would pass this point within sight of Union Station, but this weekend 
there was no traffic. Running parallel to the freeway, a blackened stretch of 
the neighboring El Monte busway bore testament to the heat and smoke from the 
fire that raged for the better part of a day. 
Within feet of the eerily silent freeway, the earth had caved in. Where once 
there was solid ground, now there was an elongated fissure, still smoking like 
a volcanic vent. From the streets of the industrial district northeast of 
downtown Los Angeles, one could look at the scene of the cave-in and see 
twisted pipes, broken concrete, vast amounts of sand and hard-hatted engineers 
surveying the damage. 
Little more than a block away, near Ducommun and Center streets, the south 
portal of the subway tunnel displayed the ravages of a fire that burned with 
such heat that it twisted and distorted steel. A six-foot, fire-charred piece 
of metal hung precariously above the mouth of the tunnel. 
Thousands of wood timbers that once lined the interior of the subway tube were 
reduced to ashes like kindling in a fireplace. Smoke still poured from an 
opening above the tube. Firefighters stood by in the summer heat, allowing the 
blaze to burn itself out. 
Meanwhile, powerful pumps worked overtime in a pit where the tunnel ends, 
sucking out pools of chocolate-brown water and mud that are tangible reminders 
of the battle against the flames. 
By contrast, a parallel tunnel with a full concrete lining was untouched. 
As they peered into the opening below, firefighters recalled arriving on the 
scene around 2 a.m. Friday to find the tunnel in flames. The heat was so 
extreme, they said, water from their hoses was boiling on the street above. 
On Saturday, they marveled at the damage and expressed relief that the intense 
heat did not ignite the nearby storage tanks at Unocal's Center Street 
Terminal. 
As they spoke, the morning calm was broken by the groaning of a crane laboring 
to remove parked cars, trucks and trailers whose weight put added burden on the 
crippled tunnel below. 
For blocks around, streets remained closed. At the scene, streams of yellow 
police tape framed the destruction. 
