BUST NETS MAJOR SUSPECT IN DOWNTOWN HEROIN TRADE 
San Diego police Tuesday morning arrested a 30-year-old man they believe is one 
of downtown's biggest heroin traffickers, putting a dent in the local drug 
scene for at least a couple of days. 
"But as word gets out . . . someone else will pick up the ball and run with 
it," said Sgt. Gordon Redding at a press conference. "I'm sure there are some 
dope dealers at 12th and C who couldn't make their connections today." 
Julio Lucero, of the 1400 block of Front Street, is being held at the County 
Jail on suspicion of heroin possession, possession of heroin for sale and an 
outstanding 1988 warrant for dealing heroin. Augustina Perez Moreno, 21, of the 
same Front Street address, is being held on suspicion of possessing of heroin 
and possessing heroin for sale. 
Police seized $2,285 in cash, some syringes and 103 multicolored balloons each 
stuffed with three-tenths of a gram of Mexican brown heroin during their early 
morning raid of the Front Street studio apartment, said Detective Bill Graham. 
The ballons, which are called quarter balloons because they usually sell for 
$25 each, have a street value of about $2,500. 
Police ran a chemical test on the heroin at the station. 
"I think we've got some pretty good stuff here," said Graham, who was involved 
in the arrest. 
Police believe many of the balloons were headed for drug deals in the area on C 
Street between 11th and 12th streets, a place police describe as the one of the 
hottest spots for narcotics activity in San Diego. 
Ironically, when officers from the Fugitive Apprehension Unit forced open the 
door of the Front Street apartment Tuesday morning, they weren't expecting to 
make a drug bust. They had been tracking Lucero because he was a fugitive who 
was wanted on an outstanding 1988 felony warrant. 
"We were looking for him strictly as a fugitive and just sort of popped in 
there at the right time," Redding said. Police said the arrests were made 
without incident, and no weapons were confiscated. 
When police entered the apartment, the heroin balloons were in a clear plastic 
bag in plain view, and, with the help of Nero, a police dog, other heroin 
balloons and cash were sniffed out from their hiding places around the 
apartment, Redding said. 
Police said that finding Lucero was easier than they thought because a Chevy 
Impala registered in his name was parked outside the apartment. 
