THE SEDUCTION BY TV AND MOVIES; 
SCREEN DEALS RAISE HOPES FOR INSTANT FAME,BIG MONEY 
The power a standup comedian possesses is a luxury most people only dream 
about. Apparently so do many of the comics who attended the Second Annual 
Comedy Convention. 
Imagine being the star of your own one-act play in which the subject is your 
life and experience. Nobody else's thumb gets in your autobiographical 
manuscript. Your story isn't strewn on a cutting room floor. 
You hold center stage and an audience's attention for as long as you want. You 
share your brightest observations. Your opinions go uncontested. You vent your 
hostilities and air your perplexities. Think of the pleasure you get when you 
can make another person laugh and multiply it by 100, or 300, or 2000, or a 
national TV audience of millions. 
That's power money can't buy. And if one of your jokes zips 
through the collective psyche of the culture, you've made a bit of history a 
regiment of flacks couldn't concoct for you. That's power too. 
It was surprising and saddening then to discover that few of the comedians who 
showed up at the Second Annual Comedy Convention saw standup that way, or 
seemed to realize that standup comedy and acting are two radically different 
disciplines. 
All those mall jokes and airline jokes and Southern Goober jokes, all the 
standardized patter and kiddie dirt, showed us where the comedy zeitgeist was 
plugged in. Judging by the interest and the nature of the questions the comics 
posed to the seminar panelists, finding a marketable context for 
self-expression and one's point-of-view wasn't the goal; getting a part in a 
sitcom was. 
That's understandable of course, as the audience was reminded of how profitably 
TV and the movies have stood on the efforts of Bill Cosby, Bob Newhart, Billy 
Crystal, Robin Williams, Michael Keaton, numerous Second City and "Saturday 
Night Live" alumni, and most recently, Roseanne Barr and Richard Lewis. And 
that's not to mention how much earlier television, and radio, benefited from a 
score of vaudeville-trained talents, such as Fred Allen and Jack Benny. And 
there are some talents, such as George Burns, Jonathan Winters and Bob Hope, 
who've transcended decades of change. 
The convention's casting and sitcom directors were quick to point out that the 
comedian's personality, and his (or her) ability to control an audience were 
distinct advantages in those likability quotients whose official existence 
everyone denies. Lost in the rush to be the new Roseanne, that is, to have a 
show dropped around you like a tent, was the cautionary note of ABC-TV's Robin 
Nassif: "An actor will usually get chosen over a comedian." 
Various panelists disagreed on how much training a comedian needs (TV director 
Howard Storm said that some people shouldn't study at all: "If Woody Allen had 
studied acting, he wouldn't have done things his way"). Some suggested that 
knowledge of scene-study and cold-reading techniques might be enough. One thing 
was certain; if a comedian bombs onstage, he can come back the next night (or 
even drive to another club). But if he bombs at a casting audition, it may be 
years before he'll be seen again. 
John Bowab was the most emphatic about preparation, perhaps because he comes 
from a theater background. (He was associate producer of "Mame" and "Sweet 
Charity" on Broadway, and has worked with Morton DaCosta, Cyril Ritchard, 
George Abbott, Gene Saks and Bob Fosse. He's director of the production of "The 
Unsinkable Molly Brown," with Debbi Reynolds and Harvey Presnell, which is 
currently on tour.) He's directed numerous sitcoms, including episodes of 
"Soap," "Benson," "It's a Living" and "The Facts of Life," among others. 
In the seminar "From Standup to Sitcom" he despaired of "the comic who wants to 
act but can't use his body" by way of recommending dancing, fencing, karate -- 
anything that lured the performer away from the false security of playing it 
safe. 
Later, after the convention was over, he said, "If someone says 'I want to be 
an actor,' or 'I want to be a comic actor,' I have no problem with that. But if 
someone says, 'I want a sitcom,' they're looking at acting as a quick way to 
fame and fortune. Even if they get a sitcom, they're looking at a short career. 
It should not be the end of ambition. 
"I'm concerned that standup is becoming 
diminished," he added. "It is an art form, the most challenging thing you can 
do. I think that performers who look at it just as a stepping stone are failing 
themselves. But if acting is going to be the choice, you have to understand 
that there is no short route, even though everything today seems capsulized and 
most people think there is. You have to learn how to learn, how to enlarge your 
technical ability and your ability to communicate." 
Bowab understands the impulse to jump from standup comedy to sitcoms as a 
career move. "The competition is fierce; if 40 million people see you on 
television, it certainly means a lot when you face future audiences in the 
clubs." Also, "Newhart and Cosby have done phenomenally well in sitcoms because 
both were able to play characters not far from themselves. The same with 
Roseanne." 
But he's unsympathetic to the comedian's lament that too much time is spent on 
the road, and that a sitcom part represents the easy way out. 
"Don't you think theater people go through the same thing?" he said. "I know 
people who've been in the theater 30 years and are still on the road a lot. 
It's a lonely life too, where you can be out for a year or a year and a half, 
where your life is the plane, the city, the theater, the hotel." 
Noting that Billy Crystal is a theater devotee, and that Robin Williams was a 
Juilliard student, Bowab added, "I say, 'Don't let a day go by without doing 
something. If all you do is wait for an 11 o'clock spot at the Improv, you 
won't make it." Even if one does get lucky, "once you've been chewed up and 
spit out of a sitcom, you're not necessarily going to get another one next 
season. And if you haven't developed as an actor, where are you?" 
