FISCAL STANDOFF MAY AID SCHABARUM INITIATIVE 
Someone finally dared to say the "S-word" out loud on the state Assembly floor. 
The S-word, shorthand for the "Schabarum Initiative," had been only whispered 
around the Capitol as the political equivalent of a nuclear bomb. 
But this week, as Assembly Democrats and Republicans again took to blaming each 
other for the highly publicized failure to pass a new state budget, Assemblyman 
William Baker (R-Danville) turned to Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San 
Francisco) and said the unspeakable: 
"Do you think you won the press war last week? I don't think you won. I don't 
think we won. I think Schabarum won." 
Schabarum is pugnacious Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum, a 
Republican and sponsor of a radical ballot initiative that would strike hard at 
what many elected state office holders hold most dear: incumbency, pensions and 
their own budgets. 
The measure would impose for the first time limits on terms of office -- from 
the governor and to top state officials and legislators. It would also abolish 
the generous retirement program of legislators and enact stiff cutbacks in the 
Legislature's own spending. 
While many in the Legislature regard the Schabarum proposal, Proposition 140, 
as a direct attack upon them, it will be one of two such proposals to go before 
voters on Nov. 6. Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp is sponsoring a similar 
initiative to limit terms of legislators and state officeholders, Proposition 
131. 
The Van de Kamp measure whipped up a firestorm of anger in the Legislature 
earlier as he campaigned unsuccessfully for the Democratic nomination for 
governor. 
State government is approaching the fourth week without a budget because of a 
political standoff between Assembly Democrats and Republican Gov. George 
Deukmejian and his Assembly GOP allies. Many legislators, their staffers, 
lobbyists, political consultants and others have begun voicing concern that the 
deadlock will play into the hands of Schabarum. 
"Whatever the impasse, it helps that initiative because it's just something 
that will strike against the Legislature," said Senate leader David A. Roberti 
(D-Los Angeles). 
On the Republican side, Sen. Ed Davis of Santa Clarita said the "embarrassing" 
deadlock has provided "the greatest campaign propaganda that Pete Schabarum 
could ever imagine." 
For his part, Schabarum, who spent five years in the Assembly before he was 
appointed to the Board of Supervisors by Gov. Ronald Reagan in 1972 and will 
retire this year, viewed the paralysis as a big reason to vote for his 
so-called "Political Reform Act of 1990." 
"It is certainly another example of . . . a major issue that the Legislature 
chooses not to deal with," he said Tuesday. "Therefore, who needs them as they 
are currently constituted? The public needs to get some folks in who are more 
interested in the public business than their own personal survival." 
Did his blame apply to Deukmejian as well, he was asked. "It takes two to 
tango," Schabarum said. 
At the Capitol, Democrats blame Republicans and the governor, and Republicans 
blame Democrats for a "paralysis of leadership." But opinion surveys, including 
a Los Angeles Times poll last winter, show that citizens don't make such clear 
distinctions and hold the Legislature as an institution in very low regard. 
Schabarum and Van de Kamp, who made his "Clean Government Initiative" an early 
theme in his campaign for governor, sought to capitalize on what they saw as 
citizen disenchantment with their elected state representatives. 
There is now no limit on the number of terms a California state legislator may 
serve; senators are elected to four-year terms and Assembly members to two-year 
terms. The Schabarum plan would limit members of the Assembly to three terms 
and senators to two terms starting with the Nov. 6 election. 
Critics maintain that the restricted terms constitute a "lifetime ban" on 
returning to the Assembly or Senate after an incumbent's last term has expired. 
One of the critics is Brown, who said he believes the Schabarum measure is 
aimed at him. "I think Republicans genuinely believe that the (Assembly) 
leadership on the Democratic side of the aisle can't be dislodged through the 
normal electoral process. They are trying anything," Brown said. 
The Van de Kamp plan would limit Assembly members to six successive terms and 
senators to three, for a total of 12 years each. After a one-term break in 
service, a former legislator could run again for the Assembly or Senate. 
Under the Schabarum initiative, the governor and state superintendent of public 
instruction would be restricted to two four-year terms. Other statewide 
officers, such as lieutenant governor, would be restricted to two terms in the 
same office, but could seek other office. 
Another major provision would abolish the legislative retirement program, 
except for previously vested members, and require lawmakers to participate only 
in the federal Social Security retirement, disability and health insurance 
system. 
A third feature would hand the Legislature an estimated 38% cut in the amount 
it can spend. Broken down by member, this would reduce the Legislature's budget 
per year from approximately $1.5 million to $950,000. 
Times staff writer Douglas P. Shuit contributed to this story. 
