GROWERS REAP BENEFITS OF SWITCH TO ORGANIC FARMING 
Bob Cantisano is an organic farmer with a pony tail that reaches the small of 
his back. Everyone calls him Amigo Bob. 
Jack Pandol Sr. is an agribusinessman with thousands of acres of San Joaquin 
Valley farmland and an export operation that sells fruits and vegetables to 
more than 40 countries. He is a prominent Kern County Republican. 
In the past, the two men had little respect for each other's methods of 
farming. But today conventional farmers, spurred by increasing consumer concern 
about pesticides, are devoting acreage to organic agriculture. And organic 
farmers are discovering that large growers are interested in learning their 
methods. 
In January, Pandol Brothers Inc. planted 120 acres of organic table grapes and 
wanted to learn the best methods to fight plant pests and disease without using 
pesticides. 
So Jack Pandol hired Amigo Bob as a consultant. 
Throughout California, the state's largest industrial farms are beginning to 
grow some fruits and vegetables without synthetic chemicals. In the Coachella 
Valley, Sunkist Growers Inc. has devoted 40 acres to organic lemons. In the 
Salinas Valley, the Nunes Company, one of the largest lettuce growers in the 
country, will harvest 45 acres of organic iceberg lettuce next month. In 
Bakersfield, Superior Farms, the largest grape and tree fruit growers in the 
nation, is farming 400 acres of organic grapes. 
For the large growers, the acreage devoted to organic crops still is relatively 
small. But, Pandol said, growers will expand their organic operations if the 
market for pesticide-free produce continues to grow. 
"I used to think organics were for the hippie grower with a few acres," Pandol 
said. "But, lately, more and more people want to buy organic fruit. Some of the 
large growers saw that trend and responded to it. If the demand for organics is 
there, we'll provide the product. If the demand doubles, we'll double our 
acreage." 
Five years ago, California Certified Organic Farmers (CCOF), a trade 
association for alternative agriculture, had no large growers among its 
members. Today, more than 150 of its members are conventional farmers who have 
set aside a portion of their acreage for a variety of organic fruits or 
vegetables. 
Interest among growers has steadily increased during the last year and a half, 
said Bob Scowcroft, executive director of CCOF, based in Santa Cruz. And the 
extensive publicity last February about apples being sprayed with the growth 
regulator Alar "broke a kind of barrier," Scowcroft said, and created a boom 
market for all organic products. 
'Major Players' Interested 
"In the last six months, we've received calls from most of the major players in 
California agriculture," Scowcroft said. "Organic agriculture has definitely 
hit the mainstream." 
Until recently, organic produce was only available in neighborhood natural food 
stores. But now a number of large California supermarket chains, including 
Ralphs, Vons and Raley's, offer organic fruits and vegetables in their produce 
sections. Last year, Lucky Food Centers began selling organic produce in a 
handful of its markets. The program was so successful it spread to more than 
150 Lucky stores in Northern California, and recently the program was expanded 
to about 50 Southern California markets. 
"When organic growing was more of a back yard venture, the supply just wasn't 
there for the large markets," said Charles Collings, president of Raley's Inc., 
which operates 58 supermarkets in Northern California. "But now that the big 
growers have moved into organics, we're assured of a large enough supply to 
make it worth our while." 
As the market for organic foods continues to grow, and prices stay higher than 
conventionally grown products, the danger of fraud increases. According to a 
U.S. Department of Agriculture report: "Organic farming is a production system 
which avoids the use of synthetically compounded fertilizers, pesticides, 
growth regulators," and relies on non-chemical methods to control insects and 
weeds. 
Carrot Packing 
Last year the CCOF discovered a San Diego vegetable packing business that was 
purchasing carrots grown in Mexico with pesticides and then selling them under 
an organic label. After an investigation by the state Department of Health 
Services, the vegetable packers went out of business. 
The CCOF conducts regular inspections of its members' farms but, Scowcroft 
said, more extensive state regulation is needed. State legislation recently was 
proposed by the CCOF requiring regular field inspections by state officials, 
more thorough documentation by organic growers and stronger enforcement 
procedures. 
When Jack Pandol and his partners decided to plant 120 acres of organic grapes 
last January, some neighboring farmers in Kern County were resentful. 
"They thought if we stamped some of our grapes as being clean, it would mean 
that theirs were dirty," Pandol said. "They thought it would be a stigma for 
them." 
But Pandol said he is a businessman as well as a farmer and, if there is a 
market for organic fruit, he has to take that demand seriously. Pandol also 
hopes to learn more about organic farming so he can apply some of the 
techniques to his conventional crops. 
Pesticides are becoming an increasingly larger part of a grower's budget and 
many farmers are trying to reduce their use as a cost-cutting measure. And as 
chemical contamination of ground water and farm worker safety become serious 
concerns, farm communities throughout the country are pushing for reduced 
pesticide use. 
Harvest Next Month 
Pandol Brothers, which farms about 4,000 acres of grapes and other fruit, will 
harvest its organic grapes in August. Next year the company plans to add 
another 400 acres of organic grapes, and will set aside acreage for organic 
almonds and kiwis. The Pandols' consultant, Bob Cantisano, has showed them a 
number of alternative agricultural techniques. 
"We may come from different political or philosophical backgrounds, but our 
goal is the same: to produce pesticide-free food in a clean environment . . . 
and do it profitably," said Cantisano, who recently sold his small organic farm 
and now works as a consultant to about 40 large growers in California. "More 
and more growers are seeing that it can be done." 
Instead of simply spraying their 120 acres of grapes with pesticides, the 
Pandols introduced a number of "beneficial" insects, such as lady bugs and lace 
wings, to gobble up the pests that prey on grapes. Instead of using chemical 
fertilizer, the Pandols spread compost and manure on the fields. They have 
planted cover crops such as buckwheat, cowpea and vetch to raise the nitrogen 
level of the soil and provide a home for insects that feed on destructive pests 
such as Pacific mites. 
The Nunes Company in the Salinas Valley uses enormous vacuums to suck bugs off 
their organic lettuce, said David Nunes, head of the farm's research and 
development department. Nunes is also experimenting with non-toxic, 
biodegradable soap compounds and natural bacteria to control aphids, spider 
mites and white flies. And weeds, once eradicated by herbicides, now have to be 
scratched out of the dirt by teams of farm workers armed with hoes. 
Affects Appearance 
While grape growers have found that their organic crop is comparable in quality 
and yield to their conventionally grown grapes, lettuce has proved to be more 
difficult to grow without chemicals. There is more "scarring" on the organic 
lettuce as a result of insects, Nunes said, and the yield is lower. It costs 
the Nunes Company about twice as much to cultivate its organic crop. 
"We're still experimenting, so we have to be patient," Nunes said. "We don't 
expect to make a profit on our first crop. But eventually we'll lower the cost 
of growing organic, and we hope to get our quality up to the standard of the 
rest of our lettuce." 
The farm plans to expand its organic operation next year, Nunes said. It will 
add another 125 acres of organic lettuce and also begin setting aside acreage 
for organic celery and cauliflower. 
Farmers have to proceed slowly because there is little data available on 
organic agriculture. It may take years of experimentation, many said, before 
they are able to efficiently harvest large crops of organic food. 
Governmental agencies and university agricultural departments have 
traditionally shown little interest in exploring organic agricultural 
techniques, said Joyce Johnston, director of the Kern County Valley Action 
Network, a local environmental group. For example, John R. Block, the Reagan 
Administration's first secretary of agriculture, called organic research a 
"dead end." 
'Biggest Naysayers' 
"Some of the biggest naysayers are the university farm advisers," Johnston 
said. "They've been trained in the chemical school of agriculture for so long 
they refuse to consider any alternatives. There's a real need for scientific 
research on organic growing. But there's very little funding for it, so farmers 
have to learn for themselves by trial and error." 
Most alternative agriculture research has been devoted to the reduction of 
pesticide use, rather than the elimination of all synthetic chemicals, said 
Roberta Cook, an agricultural economics professor at UC Davis. 
"If we went back to farming without any chemicals, we wouldn't be able to feed 
the world," Cook said. "Large-scale growing of organics is still very new. So 
farm advisers aren't going to be out there advocating these methods until 
they've been proven to be successful." 
Because it is more expensive for farmers to grow many types of fruits and 
vegetables without using pesticides, organic produce costs an average of 25% 
more that other produce. And some organic produce does not have the flawless 
appearance consumers have become accustomed to. Some shoppers will purchase the 
product anyway, but large growers are still reluctant to convert vast amounts 
of acreage to organics until they are assured that the market will continue to 
expand. 
Still, most growers are optimistic about the future of the organic market. 
Recently, frozen food companies, food processors, large fruit juice firms and 
baby food companies have begun selling organic products. 
Fear Competition 
The owners of small organic farms have expressed concern that they may soon be 
squeezed out of the market by the industrial farms. But the large growers say 
they are not interested in the traditional markets of the longtime organic 
growers: natural food stores. Growers are interested in mass-producing organic 
produce, they say, and are targeting the chain supermarkets. 
"For years we've tried to use legislation to get farmers to reduce pesticides, 
but all it did was alienate them," Johnston said. "But when the big stores 
created a market for the organics, the farmers responded. . . . Now when I see 
Amigo Bob with his 3-foot pony tail sitting down with the biggest growers in 
the valley, I know our day has come." 
