MEXICO'S HUMAN-RIGHTS IMAGE TAKING A BEATING; 
REFORM: PRESIDENT SALINAS' ECONOMIC PROGRESS HAS NOT BEEN MATCHED BY A MORE 
OPEN POLITICAL SYSTEM -- AND THE WHOLE WORLD IS WATCHING. 
Growing human-rights violations in Mexico have begun to alter foreign 
perceptions of the country and its political system. The abuses have touched 
many sectors of society. Observers and analysts of Mexican society -- including 
this writer -- have suddenly become unwilling participants in Mexican politics. 
The highly favorable foreign view of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari rested 
on a credible -- yet false -- premise. His administration, it was believed, had 
undertaken a bold economic modernization program that, unfortunately, had not 
yet been matched by a similar drive to reform the country's political system. 
In time, though, politics would open up. 
Explanations in the foreign press for this unevenness varied. Some articles 
attributed it to the inertia common to an authoritarian system undergoing 
change. Others cited resistance within the ruling Partido Revolucionario 
Institucional. Still others blamed Salinas' ambition and thirst for power. But 
whatever the reason for the political-economic imbalance, the consensus abroad 
was that it would be worked out with time. 
In fact, the foreign applause for the Mexican administration's economic 
policies was partly blind. If Salinas' program were generating the expected 
results -- price stability, economic growth, greater competitiveness reflected 
in rising exports -- it should produce the liberalizing effects that successful 
economic policies bring. Thus the enigma: If, thanks to a widely praised 
economic program, the economic and social welfare of most Mexicans is 
improving, there is no reason to keep on fearing democracy. If the economy is 
working, why not open up the political system and win across-the-board? Why is 
Salinas stubbornly unwilling to carry out true political reform and banish, 
once and for all, electoral fraud from Mexico? 
Because the economy has not been performing the way it was expected, and thus 
the awaited political effects have not materialized. Any political opening 
would pave the way for an electoral debacle for the ruling party. Therefore, 
there is no true democratization in sight. 
The big problem with Salinas' economic program is that its main justification 
lies more in the failure of previous policies than in its merits. The program 
requires huge amounts of external resources that are simply unavailable, a type 
of entrepreneurial elite that Mexico has never had and something that the 
Mexican president does not have -- time. In the long run, his conservative 
economic program may work; in the short and medium terms, it doesn't look like 
it will. 
Not that all is gloom and doom. There is no economic crisis on the horizon. 
Indeed, the Salinas term is looking more and more like an improved version of 
his predecessor's. Instead of the net zero economic growth during the 
administration of Miguel de la Madrid, the economy is expanding at a rate of 2% 
to 2.5%, roughly the equivalent of population growth. The Mexican economy can 
pay its foreign bills, but only keep pace with population increases. Or if it 
receives a much greater infusion of foreign funding to meet its debt service 
and trade gap, the economy can grow faster than the population. 
In 1989, economic growth barely surpassed that of population growth. This year, 
it will probably fall behind -- not because of error or accident but because of 
a deliberate cooling of the economy by the Salinas administration. It lacks the 
hard currency to finance a higher rate of expansion. The foreign trade figures 
for the first four months of this year were ominous: The trade deficit reached 
$874 million. At that rate, the yearly gap would be nearly $3 billion. 
Meager economic growth and pressures to open up the political system have led 
to an atmosphere of domestic tension and external one-upmanship. The tension at 
home stems from continuing electoral fraud: In every vote, the PRI and the 
government, at all levels, do everything they can to win. They concede defeat 
only when faced with absolutely no alternative. The consequences: attrition, 
disenchantment and discredit not only for the government but also for the 
opposition, particularly the center-left. 
The external one-upmanship is equally apparent. As the economy slows down and 
the influx of foreign funds tapers off, the Salinas administration feels forced 
to make greater concessions to and advances toward its chief benefactor -- the 
United States. It proposes a free-trade agreement without weighing the 
consequences of using strategic economic policy instruments to solve short-term 
cash-flow problems. It pursues increasingly radical, supply-side economic 
policies that shift the government farther and farther from the political 
center. It launches an ill-conceived but much-vaunted war on drugs. 
Tragically, anti-drug cooperation is one of the factors leading to the 
deteriorating human-rights situation in Mexico. As U.S. cooperation in 
obtaining funding becomes more and more decisive, Mexican cooperation in the 
war on drugs becomes ever more necessary. 
In its terrifying report on human rights in Mexico for 1989-90, Americas Watch 
stated: "Disappearances, murder, torture and other violent abuses of human 
rights by the security forces have become institutionalized in Mexico . . . 
This pattern of excessive violence and abuses can only mean either that the 
Mexican government has adopted a policy that consists in tolerating this 
behavior, or that it has lost control over its security and law enforcement 
agencies." 
This is the result of cooperation with the United States at all costs: the 
emergence of security forces that are out of control because of demands made on 
them that they cannot fulfill. The Mexican judicial police -- corrupt, violent 
and dramatically poorly trained -- cannot be transformed overnight into Elliott 
Ness' "Untouchables." 
In the end, the radicalization of the government's program or the Salinas 
administration's extremism has left a vacuum at the center of the political 
spectrum. Many sectors of the opposition and many independent intellectuals 
have begun to build an alternative to the government's program. 
This alternative rests on three premises. The first is the true democratization 
of Mexico in electoral matters and beyond -- in labor unions, political parties 
and associations and, perhaps most of all, in the nation's perversely 
controlled mass media. 
The second is economic in nature. It involves a broad sum of nuances that, 
collectively, amount to a substantively different program. The point is not to 
close the Mexican economy again. Rather, it is, as former Finance Minister 
Jesus Silva Herzog has said, to open it less, more slowly, more selectively. 
Nor is the point to suspend payments on Mexico's still overwhelming foreign 
debt. Rather, it is to negotiate less hurriedly and with other debtors. And no 
one wants to conserve an oversized state sector within the economy. But 
privatization because of ideological reasons or external pressure is not a 
sensible policy, either. 
Then there is Mexico's dramatic social crisis. Mexican society is only now 
beginning to grasp the magnitude of the extraordinary "social debt" contracted 
during the De la Madrid years. With children dying of measles on the streets of 
Mexico City because of lack of vaccine, with real spending on education nearly 
halved in a country where half the population is under age 18, the extent of 
the disaster that Salinas inherited becomes evident. Even today, more than 60% 
of the federal budget is devoted to servicing the domestic and foreign debt. 
Net social spending on the poor is barely being maintained. This is why the 
third leg of an alternative to Salinas' program is social: It implies finding a 
remedy and putting an end to this shameful state of affairs. 
A more balanced foreign view of Mexico will be better for Mexico. Closing one's 
eyes to Mexico's problems or prematurely celebrating fleeting or incomplete 
achievement helps no one. Entering the world means peering out over the horizon 
and being scrutinized from abroad. It's the price of fame and fortune. 
