THE ULTIMATE WORKOUT; 
JANE FONDA'S SPA OFFERS RIGOROUS REGIMEN FOR THE RICH, BUT ITS TWIST IS IT ALSO 
STRETCHES TO HELP THE POOR 
The familiar voice on the answering machine is surprisingly friendly. 
"Hello, this is Jane Fonda. Thank you for calling the Laurel Springs Retreat. 
I'm sorry that no one is available to speak with you at the moment, but I'm 
very pleased you called." 
Then why is it that, while making the drive to Santa Barbara, winding around 
the Santa Ynez Mountains and passing through the rustic gate of her ranch, you 
feel like a trespasser? What if, like Rupert Pupkin in the movie "The King of 
Comedy," you've only imagined this personal invitation onto her property? When 
is someone going to scream, "Go away. Get lost. Scram!"? 
But that won't happen. Not if you're one of the three to six people willing to 
pay $2,500 for the weeklong privilege of, if not actually rubbing shoulders 
with the 51-year-old Goddess of Good Health, then eating her recipes, hiking 
her trails and following her fitness-for-life philosophy as a guest at what 
could be the most exclusive spa in the world -- her 160-acre home here. 
Sure, these days stars seem eager for entrepreneurship, owning as they do 
everything from restaurants (Tom Selleck) and clubs (Billy Idol) to even 
hairdressing salons (Mickey Rourke). And the undisputed queen of them all is 
Fonda, who with her best-selling workout videos, books and Beverly Hills 
studio, has made a bundle from her businesses. 
But nearly all celebrities would draw the line at any venture that interfered 
with their personal privacy. Why didn't Fonda? 
"I didn't do the retreat because I wanted to get rich off it," she states 
firmly. "I knew that if people could receive information about exercise and 
nutrition in the personal way that I have, then their commitment to their 
health would be changed forever. And by taking people out of their environment 
and putting them in a very intense and private situation, which is also 
extremely peaceful and individualized, the experience is even more profound. 
"So I thought, 'I have this house. I have this ranch. Why don't I try to make 
it available to other people?' " 
And why not also fund some social causes and get a tax write-off in the 
process. 
According to Fonda, she and her estranged husband, Assemblyman Tom Hayden 
(D-Santa Monica), purchased the ranch in 1977 to start Camp Laurel Springs, 
their nonprofit summer facility for youngsters of different racial, ethnic and 
socioeconomic backgrounds that includes a program for inner city kids from the 
Los Angeles Unified School District. 
But the camp has become "increasingly difficult to fund" in recent years, 
maintains Fonda, who came up with the idea of underwriting it with a nonprofit 
enterprise in the form of a super-deluxe spa. It opened in November in the 
remote and remodeled redwood lodge known as the Hill House, which Fonda used to 
rent to singer Joe Cocker. 
"Yes, the spa is expensive for most people," concedes Fonda. "But the money 
goes for things they can also feel proud of." 
According to Fonda's projections, "depending how fast we can take off," within 
two years the spa's net proceeds, which go into the Temescal Foundation, will 
be enough not just to support the camp but also research in health, child 
development and education. 
Punishment or Reward? 
At first, the idea of spending the day at Fonda's Laurel Springs Retreat sounds 
more like a punishment than a reward. No doubt, the superathlete, whose "feel 
the burn" philosophy has toned up and tuckered out men and women of all sizes 
and ages, would be expected to organize a regimen more fitting to a medieval 
torture chamber than a Xanadu of rest and relaxation. 
And when reveille -- in the form of a gentle wake-up call -- comes at 6:15 
a.m., your worst fears are confirmed. The very idea of calling it a retreat 
seems like a cruel joke. 
But the punch line is still to come -- a voice explaining sweetly but 
insistently that the 3 1/2-mile hike will start in a matter of minutes and 
you'd better get downstairs pronto. 
At any other resort, turning off the phone, jumping back into bed and catching 
a few more hours of sleep would hardly raise an eyebrow. And even if you did 
get up and go out, you could look forward after the hike to all those lovely 
beauty treatments like mud baths, manicures and makeup lessons that other spas 
offer. Not this one. 
State-of-Art Gym 
Instead, your reward consists of being led to a state-of-the-art gym, hooked up 
to a six-lead EKG machine and put on a treadmill by Dr. Daniel Kosich, the 
program director for Fonda's Workout empire. He conducts a rigorous evaluation 
to assess your cardiovascular fitness, body fat composition, flexibility and 
muscle balance. 
And it's not even 10 a.m. yet! 
"The point of the treadmill is you're going to learn how it feels to exercise 
at your optimum level," Kosich tells his guinea pig, Los Angeles screenwriter 
Susan Lindau. 
"It's so wonderful -- when it stops hurting," she laughs after she finishes her 
Herculean effort and removes the electrodes. "But he said my fitness level was 
above average, and I've never been above average on anything in my life." 
With that, she went on yet another hike. 
In all honesty, life could be worse than to be coddled for a week in this 
Navajo and Nautilus Nirvana furnished cozily by Fonda with Los Angeles 
decorator Barbara Pohlman (they met through singer Linda Ronstadt) -- sleeping 
on linens from the Ralph Lauren Home Collection, dining on Franciscan Desert 
Rose china, feeding on low-fat high-energy gourmet fare, exercising amid 
Rauschenberg lithographs and getting massaged before a panoramic view of the 
Pacific Ocean and Channel Islands. 
It's almost enough to forget all the hiking, biking, twisting and turning that 
your personal trainer puts you through every day. But sharing the misery 
creates an atmosphere of instant intimacy, resulting in nighttime gab sessions 
in front of the 17-foot-high stone fireplace, or in the frothy hot tub under 
the stars. 
Sharing Secrets 
Suddenly, complete strangers are telling each other the gory details of a 
failed marriage, or showing off the cottage-cheese-like cellulite on their 
thighs, or gossiping about the latest promotions and demotions in The Industry. 
Because of Fonda's other career as an actress, the spa gets its fair share of 
show business managers, agents, studio executives and, of course, celebrities. 
Howard Rollins, Sharon Gless, Melanie Griffith and Ally Sheedy have visited. 
But there also have been civilians like the three housewives from Dayton, Ohio, 
who stumbled onto a brief blurb about the spa in USA Today and immediately sent 
in their deposits. 
No matter who's who and who's not, they all seem to get infected with farm 
fever after just a few days at the ranch. 
Soon, like in one of those old episodes of "Green Acres," everyone is on a 
first-name basis with pigs Rosy and Rita, goose Newton, Rosemary the lamb and 
Rene the cow. (One guest even became so attached to the resident dog that she 
followed him down a steep path during a morning hike and ended up breaking her 
arm.) 
While California, and especially Southern California, has a disproportionately 
greater number of spas than the rest of the country, due to both the gentleness 
of its weather and the body-consciousness of its residents, Fonda's spa has 
generated more than average curiosity. For instance, the June issue of House 
and Garden magazine featured a cover article on the retreat, complete with 
achingly beautiful pictures of its inside and out. 
Next Door to Fonda House 
The reason, no doubt, is that the spa just happens to be right next door to 
Fonda's own modest farmhouse. 
And while she's only an infrequent visitor to the ranch, given her movie 
schedule and other activities, Fonda is a presence nevertheless -- from the 
pictures of her in the spa's brochures and recipe collection, to the Adirondack 
furniture and folksy objets d'art that she personally picked out for the lodge 
quarters, to the Jane Fonda Workout T-shirts, towels and water bottles on sale 
in the workout center. 
As a result, the unspoken but clear message of the retreat is: Live like Fonda, 
eat like Fonda, work out like Fonda, and maybe, just maybe, you'll end up 
looking like Fonda. 
Yeah, right. 
But guests have other reasons in mind for coming. When Lindau, a regular at 
Fonda's Beverly Hills studio, first heard about the spa, "I decided to do it 
there and then," she recalls. "And once I set aside the shock of spending the 
money, I decided that the place was perfect. Because it would get me not just 
physically fit, but also psychically fit. And that's what I'm really focusing 
on. My objective here is to do inner and outer work." 
Fonda maintains that her retreat fills a vacuum within the industry -- 
somewhere between the "boot camp approach" and the "pampering places with 
herbal wraps and manicures." What it's not, she emphasizes, is a "reducing 
factory where you can lose 10 pounds in one week." 
Health in the Long Term 
Instead, her spa's schedule is designed to teach guests how to make the 
"long-term investment in their health" through activities that she herself 
likes to do -- hiking, biking, aerobics and weight training in a program of 
cross-training that "helps relieve boredom" -- as well as a series of 
nutritional classes, biochemistry lectures and cooking lessons. 
"The spa is probably a good reflection of Jane's philosophy that fitness is 
achieved over the course of a long period of time and that you should try to be 
a healthier person as you get older," says Kosich, an expert in exercise 
physiology and nutrition who was hired two years ago, soon after Fonda came 
under fire from the medical profession for pushing high-impact aerobics on the 
population. 
But what comes as something of a surprise, considering Fonda's reputation for 
fanaticism when it comes to exercise, is that she puts a premium on down time 
as well. 
That's why the "Blue" bedroom has a window seat for reading, the "Green" 
bedroom a bathtub with a 180-degree view of the mountains and the "Red" bedroom 
a private sun deck, or why guests can zone out in front of the video 
entertainment center or lose themselves in the library books about fantasy and 
fairy tales. Or why extra care is given to such small niceties as garden roses 
in the bud vase by each bed or home-grown pansies on the plates at meals. 
Or why the peacefulness of the place is as soothing as it is eerie. The 
quietude at night is so complete that you can actually hear the moths 
fluttering against the window screens. 
"To be able to relax is really critical," explains Kosich. "So if you have the 
opportunity to come to a place like this where the ambiance and the environment 
helps modify stress, then you have a major advantage in becoming fit." 
Energy Equations 
That night, over a 1,200-calorie dinner of eggplant soup, stone grain rolls and 
mock Cobb salad (made with fruits and vegetables instead of blue cheese and 
bacon), you listen intently while Kosich launches into an elaborate 90-minute 
discussion of things you never heard of: set-point theories, basal metabolic 
rates and energy balancing equations. 
Somehow it all sinks in -- to the point where you can intelligently respond to 
Kosich's quizzing. "What is the number of calories in a gram of fat?" (Nine.) 
"What are the waste products of aerobic exercise?" (Water and CO2.) 
But, more important, you vow to hike four miles every day and never eat another 
candy bar for as long as you live. 
"Do you think we can go over this again in the morning when I'll be fresher?" 
begs Lindau, who is yawning uncontrollably. "But, then, you're probably going 
to take me on an eight-mile hike in the morning, instead." 
"Not that far," Kosich replies, grinning. 
"See, what'd I tell you," Lindau whispers conspiratorially. "These guys are 
trying to kill us." 
"But," concludes Kosich, "that's what you came here for." 
With that, it's lights out. That is, until 6:15 a.m. 
