TREES GO TO ROOT OF URBAN PROBLEMS 
If Joan Milke Flores and Gloria Molina are representative of the L.A. City 
Council's understanding of the importance of trees to our urban environment, 
then we are in serious trouble. 
Trees are more important to all of us than we apparently realize. Few things 
offer us so much for so little. Trees offer shade from hot summer sun and 
harmful radiation due to the ozone depletion problem. Shade can cut cooling 
costs up to 40%. Trees can also lower heating bills by acting as windbreaks. 
Trees help combat "urban heat islands," which is the heat-gain in cities due to 
a concentration of buildings, traffic, and dark, paved surfaces. Up to 10% of 
urban electric demand is spent cooling buildings to compensate for this 
heat-gain. On a more global perspective, trees help reduce the "greenhouse 
effect" by replacing carbon dioxide (spewed into our atmosphere by cars, 
industries, etc.) with oxygen, which we can't live without. 
So dollar for dollar, we need to nourish and love the trees we already have. In 
addition, we need to plant many more of them. We must plan ahead for our oxygen 
supplies and reduction of electricity use which is produced by burning fossil 
fuels. 
The tree counting project is to help this urban area know where the trees are, 
and how to maintain them on a regular basis so they can provide all of the 
benefits enumerated above. An urban forest needs to be well-managed. Good 
management needs data. The tree counting project provides needed data. 
Flores said if the trees in the whole city couldn't be counted, then "they 
shouldn't do any of the city." Molina said, "I think it is more important to 
count police officers than it is to count trees . . ." And in the meantime, the 
city heats up, our oxygen supply needs help, and there is too much carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere. 
I suggest an intensive course for the L.A. City Council in how to increase our 
oxygen supply, how to reduce electric use by greater dependence on a thriving 
and well-nourished urban forest, and how to think beyond mere politics. 
ULA PENDLETON 
Los Angeles 
