EZELL BOWS OUT IN FAVORED ARENA -- THE MEDIA EVENT 
Harold Ezell put in his last appearance Monday as the U.S. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service's Western regional commissioner in a final news 
conference that played like the hundreds of others he had conducted over the 
last 6 1/2 years. 
Ezell was notified Monday morning by the U.S. attorney general's office that 
his pro forma resignation -- made earlier this year to President George Bush -- 
had been accepted as of the close of the business day. The action by Edward S. 
G. Dennis Jr., the acting deputy attorney general, followed last week's ouster 
of INS Commissioner Alan Nelson. 
During his last public appearance for the INS, the high-profile, former 
fast-food executive preached his usual hard-boiled gospel of immigration 
control. But Ezell, 52, also had to fight back tears. 
"We are really committed to the people of the INS because they've been 
terrific," Ezell said in a quavering voice that trailed off. "And, uh, that's 
about it. . . ." 
Quickly regaining his composure, Ezell introduced his temporary successor, 
Robert M. Moschorak, who had been his top aide in charge of the day-to-day 
operations in the region, which includes California, Hawaii, Arizona, Nevada 
and Guam. 
Ezell wanted to stay in his post until November, 1990, the end of the second 
phase of the landmark amnesty program. But David Runkel, the chief spokesman 
for the Justice Department, confirmed in mid-May what many were saying 
privately within the Bush Administration: Ezell's days were numbered. 
Several ranking officials within the Justice Department -- of which the INS is 
part -- said Ezell's attendance last July at a Honolulu party hosted by 
Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos and accounts of his dancing and praying at the 
affair did not help his chances. 
But while Monday's action was not unexpected, staff members said Ezell was 
nevertheless hurt by it. "Somber is the way the office was when he found out 
about it," one INS official said. 
Ezell nevertheless went before the reporters and tried to put the situation in 
perspective. 
"You never come into a deal like this thinking you've been appointed to a 
lifetime on the federal bench," he said. "We've got lots of things to be proud 
of. We have served our country well. I've never worked so hard, made so little 
money and had so much fun." 
He did not miss the opportunity to reiterate his favorite theme -- control of 
the nation's borders. 
"I would have proposed immigration reform in 1982 instead of '86 (when the 
amnesty proposal became law)," he said. "I think that span of time gave us 
nothing more but more illegal immigration without any help to regain control of 
the border. We don't control them now." 
The news conference became Ezell's favorite tool after his appointment in 
March, 1983. He used the conferences -- sometimes as many as half a dozen a 
week -- to promote the agency and the amnesty provision of the 1986 Immigration 
Reform and Control Act. He was not afraid to sing Mexican ranchera songs, even 
though he does not speak Spanish, to ballyhoo the immigration service. 
Sometimes, his publicity schemes fell flat. Several off-the-cuff remarks about 
illegal aliens angered Latino activists. A plan to appear in Las Vegas with a 
trained orangutan went awry when the ape failed to show. But Ezell, ever the 
showman, quickly recovered and recruited an Elvis Presley impersonator to 
promote amnesty. 
On Monday, Ezell said he had suffered "great pain" from accusations that he was 
anti-Latino. "If you speak out strongly, the cheapest shot they can use is to 
say a person is anti-one group or another," he said. 
His temporary replacement, Moschorak, 48, of Anaheim, would like to be Ezell's 
permanent successor. Moschorak praised his former boss for his "progressive 
leadership" of the INS Western region. 
"Mr. Ezell's guidance is one (thing) I certainly personally and professionally 
will remember for a long time," said Moschorak, who has been in the INS for 
nearly 25 years. 
Word of Ezell's ouster upstaged what was to have been the day's main topic 
within INS -- the retirement of Ernest Gustafson, the INS district director in 
Los Angeles. Gustafson, who also praised Ezell, said he will retire from his 
post Sept. 16 but declined to discuss his plans. 
Toward the end of the news conference, Ezell seemed to back away his previous 
disavowal of any plans to seek elective office. "I'm open for public service in 
the future," he said in response to a question. 
"Elective office?" a reporter asked. 
"If that's the opportunity that's right," he replied. 
Then, with a "God bless all of you and thanks a lot," his final news conference 
was over. 
