NEA ADVISERS TO CLOSE MOST OF AUGUST MEETING 
Apparently fearing public disclosure, the advisory board to the National 
Endowment for the Arts plans to meet in closed session for most of an impending 
three-day meeting at which controversy over politically troublesome grants is 
expected. 
The meeting is scheduled for Aug. 3-5 at NEA headquarters in Washington. 
Documents obtained by The Times today indicate the council will hold more than 
half of its announced meetings in private. Members will also attend two closed 
social events -- including a confidential dinner preceding the meeting at which 
significant amounts of NEA business have traditionally been discussed. 
Sources close to the situation say the proportion of private discussions at 
next month's meeting appeared significant, since the council is expected to 
engage in potentially confrontational debate over a decision by NEA Chairman 
John E. Frohnmayer last month to deny fellowship grants to four performance 
artists, after he reportedly polled the advisory group. 
The performers -- who have been dubbed "the NEA Four" by one national artist 
group -- have all demanded formal appeals of the grant rejections. It was 
learned that at least one member of the National Council on the Arts intends to 
attempt a formal reopening of the issue. 
The other potentially troublesome issues that are expected to be included on 
next month's agenda are: 
* An initiative to reconsider a controversial vote taken by the national 
council in May that denied two of three grants to the University of 
Pennsylvania's Institute for Contemporary Art. The institute was the original 
organizer of a controversial endowment-supported show of photographs by the 
late Robert Mapplethorpe. 
* A possible move to reconsider a council vote in May to open grant review 
meetings to the public. 
* A recommendation that two of "the NEA Four" receive grants this year from an 
NEA program that fosters the work of artists working in especially progressive 
art forms and media. 
