VIETNAMESE ARTISTS DEPICT VISIONS OF THEIR HOMELAND IN NEW SETTING 
Black ink slashes white silk, and a lost world emerges. 
A water buffalo dips one curved horn into a rice paddy. An ancient woman 
clutches a bowl. A mother comforts her child, touching her cheek to his smaller 
one in a gesture of infinite tenderness. 
These spare brush strokes made Be Ky a celebrity in the Saigon art world at the 
age of 18. Six months ago, she and her husband Ho Thanh Duc, a renowned 
collagist, joined a tiny but productive community of Vietnamese artists in 
exile in Southern California. 
And now their focal point is a gallery in Burbank. It is owned by a young 
etcher, Nguyen Viet, who has been trying to introduce paintings and sculpture 
by Vietnamese refugees to the American market. 
Their works range from traditional brush-and-ink drawings to primitivist 
sketches, modern acrylics and post-modernist etching. Some are fierce, such as 
Ho Thanh Duc's marbled collages of a anguished Christ. Others are sentimental. 
Yet the artists express common themes: melancholy, nostalgia and transcendence. 
Westerners should not "think of Vietnam as a just a war-torn country," said 
Nguyen Thi Hop, 46, who layers watercolor onto silk to produce ethereal scenes 
of rural life a century ago. "I want to show them that the other side of 
Vietnam is beautiful and poetic." 
If the art is serene, the artists' lives have not been. 
Be Ky and her husband were both war orphans. At the age of 12 she went to live 
with an abusive artist who recognized her talent and exploited it. 
"He taught me very little, and I learned a lot from other people . . ." Be Ky 
said through an interpreter at Studio Gallery and Framing Inc. in Burbank, 
where her recent paintings are hung. "I had to hide my paintings from him." 
By 16, her adoptive father had her hawking her ink caricatures on the streets 
of Saigon. "If I earned a lot of money, I brought it home and they were very 
happy. But if the money was little, they would beat me up." 
A French art critic came across her sketches and arranged a one-woman show for 
the 18-year-old. It sold out. Fame brought more exhibitions in Paris and Tokyo, 
but relations with her adoptive father deteriorated. One day, she said, she 
discovered that he had been forging her name on his paintings to bring a higher 
price for them on the street. 
When she confronted him, he struck her across the head, leaving her deaf in one 
ear. Nearly 30 years later it was that disability that finally persuaded 
Vietnamese authorities to allow the couple to depart for Manila in 1989. 
Ho Tranh Duc's father died fighting the Japanese, and his mother abandoned the 
infant to remarry. Duc became a domestic servant. 
"They more or less sold me from one family to another," he said. "One time 
somebody bought me and used makeup to make me very ugly, and took me out 
begging." 
An aunt rescued him from the street when he was 11. By his late teens, he was 
already fascinated by collage. The French artist George Braque inflamed him, 
but there were also practical concerns. "I didn't have any money to buy paint," 
he said. Instead, he tore paper from " 'Paris Match,' 'Life' magazine, whatever 
had color in it -- even cigarette packs." 
The faces of Christ and Buddha and the drab colors of war figure prominently in 
Duc's art. One series of collages that brought him early fame was made of torn 
fragments of robes given him by Buddhist monks. One robe was said to have 
belonged to a monk who immolated himself in protest. 
The celebrated couple declined offers to leave South Vietnam before the 1975 
communist victory. By 1977, however, they had changed their minds. "We had no 
freedom to choose our subjects, and we could not produce art under the 
censorship of the government," Duc said. 
A botched attempt to flee by boat brought Duc a two-year prison sentence. They 
waited a decade for permission to leave. In 1989, the couple revived their 
careers with two joint exhibitions in the Philippines, where Be Ky presented 
President Corazon Aquino with a Madonna sketch. 
They have settled in Garden Grove, where they have converted their suburban 
patio to a studio. At 50, Duc is learning to drive. Be Ky is adjusting to a 
hearing aide. Her husband jokes that for the first time in their married life 
he can whisper in her ear -- and they can keep secrets from their four 
children. 
Nguyen Khai tried to paint peace. On Vietnamese lacquer he created abstract 
tableaux of doves, mandolins and women with fluid limbs and hair. He helped 
found a union of young artists, did not shun fame, and managed to dodge the 
draft. 
In 1975, a North Vietnamese official came to visit his studio, and explained 
that abstract painting would not be welcomed by the new regime. Khai attended 
re-education lectures, where it was suggested that he abandon bourgeois 
romanticism and tackle subjects from everyday life. 
The new government bought three of Khai's older paintings and hung them in the 
national gallery in Hanoi. But they were displeased by his new oil of a woman 
in a torn blouse. It was intended to depict poverty and misery, Khai said, but 
there wasn't supposed to be misery in the new Vietnam. 
"They wanted me to draw realistic life in Vietnam, but once I did it, they 
didn't like it because it was too realistic," Khai said through an interpreter. 
He was sent to paint scenes of workers in factories, with the results to be 
shown to the political officer in charge. In one painting, Khai showed a 
laborer but failed to detail all of the machinery in the background. 
"They said, 'Don't leave anything out. . . . They wanted to show that they had 
a lot of technology," he said. He used his travel pass to scout for ways to 
leave the country, and fled by boat with his wife and two children in 1981. 
Since coming to the West, his colors have gotten brighter. 
"Most of my paintings have more movement," Khai said. "And movement expresses 
freedom." 
The 50-year old artist is virtually unknown here, and commercial success has 
eluded him. Refugee status has compounded the panoply of artists' usual 
problems. But his work has been shown at UC Irvine and UCLA, and several small 
Orange County galleries, and a new show will open Aug. 3 in Burbank. 
Khai's larger paintings are done on lacquer, with eggshells that must be 
carefully applied, then sanded down, and topped with gold and silver leaf. 
"I recently sold that painting to a Caucasian woman for $3,000," Khai said, 
pointing to a large ocher and gold abstract. "But it took me two months." 
"It is so hard for these people. A lot of them say they want to give up," said 
gallery owner Nguyen Viet. "I keep telling them not to give up." 
Nguyen Thi Hop and Nguyen Dong were trained in fine technique at the National 
Academy of Art in Saigon, but their most vibrant work was done with children's 
crayons. 
The couple fled Vietnam on an overcrowded boat in 1979, survived a parched 
journey and robbery by Thai pirates, and wound up in the Pulau Bidong refugee 
camp in Malaysia. Finally, a friend gave them a roll of blueprint paper and a 
box of wax crayons. 
They had each been influenced by Henri Rousseau; now the naif style seemed to 
match for their crude materials and their primitive surroundings. 
The colorful simplicity of their drawings does not disguise the hardships of 
camp life. Dong drew a vista of a denuded hillside where he had cut and carried 
logs to build them a crude cabin. Hop drew women gathering at the central well 
and hauling water back to their shacks. 
A Canadian saw their work. "He asked us if we would sell these drawings in 
Canada, to raise money to help people in the camps," Dong said. "But even 
though we had no money, nothing, we didn't want to sell. They are souvenirs." 
Now they work as graphic artists for a Vietnamese-language newspaper, and 
illustrate books in their spare time. Gay colors and rounded figures give their 
work an unfettered charm. 
Hop, 46, draws placid scenes of robust country women washing or eating fruit, 
of children playing in temple gardens or screened verandas. Light radiates from 
their skin as from Venetian saints. Dong, 49, paints idyllic scenes of water 
buffalo, banana trees and fish ponds. 
They paint a Vietnam that existed perhaps a century ago, or perhaps never 
existed at all: a world too gentle for war, a land unscathed by napalm or 
defoliant. 
"We get the beautiful image of what our country was like before the war, from 
our parents or our grandparents," Dong said. "Not from our own experience." 
