BILL WOULD REVERSE RULING ON MENTALLY ILL; 
HEALTH: PATIENTS WHO ARE CONFINED AGAINST THEIR WILL WOULD LOSE THE RIGHT TO 
REFUSE CERTAIN DRUGS PRESCRIBED BY THEIR PSYCHIATRISTS. THE MEASURE HAS PASSED 
THE SENATE AND IS PENDING IN THE ASSEMBLY. 
State lawmakers are close to overturning a landmark court decision that gave 
mentally ill patients confined against their will the right to refuse 
antipsychotic drugs ordered by their psychiatrists. 
The court decision required psychiatrists to receive the informed consent of 
their patients before medicating them. Except in an emergency, doctors must 
obtain a judge's order declaring the patient incompetent to participate in his 
own medical decisions. 
But legislation that has cleared the Senate and is pending in the Assembly 
would require only a second opinion from a fellow doctor before psychiatrists 
could force the drugs on their patients. 
The measure is sponsored by the California Alliance for the Mentally Ill, a 
group representing families of the mentally ill. Alliance members, backed by 
psychiatrists and mental hospitals, say that many patients will be left in 
shackles or returned to the streets untreated if their doctors cannot medicate 
them immediately. 
But opponents, including advocates for former patients who say they were 
drugged unnecessarily, contend that the court decision has prompted a healthy 
change in the way psychiatrists relate to their patients. 
At issue is a 1987 appellate court decision that was made final by the state 
Supreme Court last year. 
The case stemmed from the experience of Eleanor Riese, a Bay Area woman who, 
suffering from chronic schizophrenia, admitted herself to St. Mary's Hospital 
and Medical Center in San Francisco in 1985 and agreed to take antipsychotic 
medication. 
After several days in the hospital, Riese complained about the effect of the 
drugs and refused to take any more. At that point, five hospital staff members 
held her down while she was injected with the drug Mellaril. Riese was then 
declared an involuntary patient and forced to take medication until she was 
discharged. 
Riese was the plaintiff in the successful class-action suit filed by patients' 
rights advocates in San Francisco. 
Writing for the state Court of Appeal, Justice J. Anthony Kline said the 
forcible use of powerful mind-altering drugs involves "moral and ethical 
considerations" outside the purview of the medical profession. 
To exempt these decisions from outside review, Kline wrote, would "invest 
physicians with a degree of power over others that cannot be squared with the 
intent of our Legislature and with the great value our society places on the 
autonomy of the individual." 
Hospitals and psychiatrists predicted that the decision would cause chaos as 
patients engaged in a wholesale boycott of medication. But only a relative 
handful of patients around the state who otherwise would have been drugged 
against their will have objected and been found by the courts to be competent 
to resist the medication. 
In Los Angeles County, of more than 10,000 people ordered held in mental 
hospitals since last August, only 233 have filed petitions objecting to their 
medications, according to the county's patients' rights office. Of those, 123 
were found to be competent to make their own decisions. The numbers are similar 
in San Francisco. 
But supporters and opponents of the Riese decision say that statistics alone do 
not tell the whole story. 
Grace McAndrews, executive director of the California Alliance for the Mentally 
Ill, said that, for the sake of due process, some patients who need medication 
but object to it are being restrained in seclusion while they await their 
hearings. 
"What we are doing is condemning these people to a fate equally as awful or 
worse than what was occurring in the back wards of the state hospitals in the 
'40s and '50s," McAndrews said. "This is terrible. It is inhumane and cruel." 
The legislation, introduced by Sen. Robert Presley (D-Riverside), would return 
to psychiatrists almost the same latitude to administer drugs as they had 
before the Riese decision. 
The bill would allow the forcible use of drugs whenever a second psychiatrist 
concurred that the patient lacked the capacity to make his own decisions. Even 
if the patient had the capacity, medication could still be administered if the 
person had been admitted to the hospital as a danger to himself or others. 
Patients who continued to resist drug treatment would be entitled to a judicial 
hearing but could be medicated in the meantime. 
The measure, which passed the Senate on a 23-7 vote, is scheduled for a key 
hearing today in the Assembly Health Committee. 
Presley, the powerful chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and 
Assemblyman Bruce Bronzan (D-Fresno), head of the Health Committee, present a 
formidable team backing the bill. The Alliance for the Mentally Ill, whose 
members tell heart-rending stories about their family members' experiences, 
also carries great weight in the Legislature. 
"We are not trying to coerce," said Dan Weisburd, president of the Alliance, 
whose son has been in and out of 20 mental hospitals in the last 10 years. 
"What we are trying to do is rescue, to free from their psychosis people who 
are in desperate need." 
Opponents argue that the evidence suggests few patients in need of medication 
are being deprived. The vast majority either accept the drugs or are medicated 
without their consent in an emergency. 
"The decision has not proven to be disruptive," said Robert Bunker, a San 
Francisco lawyer who represents patients. "Why gut it before it has had a 
chance to fulfill its promise?" 
Assemblyman Burt Margolin (D-Los Angeles), the bill's chief opponent in the 
Legislature, said too many hospitals and doctors use drugs as a substitute for 
the time-consuming individual attention that their patients deserve. 
"What these hospitals are essentially telling us is that they can't afford to 
spend the time with the patient," Margolin said. "They want a quick-fix, 
rubber-stamp, involuntary medication procedure because they don't have the 
resources to do it." 
Patient advocates contend that the decision's greatest effect has been on those 
patients whose cases never reach the courts. To get their informed consent, 
doctors are talking to them and explaining the need for medication. When they 
leave the hospital, these advocates argue, the patients are more likely to 
continue treatment because they have participated in the decisions. 
"Before Riese, many involuntary patients came in and they were just zapped with 
medication," said Barbara Lurie, director of the patients' rights office in Los 
Angeles County. "Nobody really worked with them. Most patients are very savvy 
about their medication. They know which ones work and which ones don't. But 
often their preferences weren't even listened to." 
The proponents of the Presley bill acknowledge that there were occasional 
abuses before the Riese decision. But they say the pendulum now has swung too 
far in the other direction, taking too much authority away from the doctors who 
are closest to the patient. 
"I want the safeguards there to protect them," Weisburd said. "But the second 
opinion of a psychiatrist is better than the billable hours of an attorney." 
