ROUNDUP; 
TRICKLE'S FIELD DAY LEADS HOCKEY EFFORT 
Goals were the goal for Taylor Trickle and on Sunday, the 18-year-old from 
Camarillo delivered. 
He scored three -- none of which trickled in -- helping the South field hockey 
team blank the North, 5-0. 
Trickle's hat trick was the first such outburst in two days of play at Augsburg 
College, site of play in the U. S. Olympic Festival. 
"I came into the Festival with the goal to score goals," Trickle said, "but I 
never expected to score three in one game." 
Eric Holtz, 29, of Simi Valley, scored the first two goals for the South (2-0). 
South goalkeeper Tom Vano, also of Simi Valley, made nine saves. 
In figure skating, strong long programs enabled Tish Walker, 16, of Thousand 
Oaks, to move up from fifth in singles and the duo of Tristen Vega of Torrance 
and Richard Alexander of Simi Valley to do the same in pairs. 
Which in the end made it all the more frustrating. 
Walker finished fourth, the same as Vega and Alexander -- one place short of a 
medal. 
Walker stirred a capacity crowd of more than 13,000 with an exhilarating 
performance. 
Afterward, that was of some consolation. 
"I was hoping to get a medal and just missed, but I'm still pleased with my 
performance and how I skated," Walker said. "The crowd was great. They really 
gave me inspiration and motivation out there." 
Ditto for Vega and Alexander, who moved into medal contention with a strong 
finishing routine. 
The ladies' singles event was won by Nancy Kerrigan of Stoneham, Mass. Angela 
Deneweth of Westland, Mich., and John Denton of Morro Bay took the gold medal 
in pairs. 
In swimming, Kristine Quance made her festival debut with a performance that 
she won't soon forget. 
Neither, probably, will those who pursued her in the race at the University of 
Minnesota Aquatics Center. 
The 15-year-old from Northridge won a gold medal in the women's 400-meter 
individual medley, defeating second-place Natasha Kohne of Stanton, Calif., by 
well over two seconds. 
Quance won with a time of 4 minutes 56.77 seconds. 
Kohne finished in 4:59.46 and Kelly Leaman of Centerville, Ohio, was third in 
5:02.48. 
In canoeing, Dave and Fred Spaulding, brothers from Ventura, have proven to be 
double trouble on the water at Lake Elmo. 
On Sunday, the Spauldings won their second goal medal as a doubles team in what 
ended up a two-canoe race. 
Spaulding and Spaulding nipped Jim Terrell of El Toro and Wyatt Jones of 
Honolulu, 1:54.65 to 1:54.97, in the 500-meter doubles race. 
They had defeated the same pair on Saturday in the 1,000-meter race. 
Joe Harper of Ventura and Stewart Carr of Indianapolis led the second pack home 
in the 500 and earned the bronze with a time of 2:03.21. 
Harper also placed sixth in the 500-meter singles race with a time of 2:20.52. 
Terrell won the event in 2:06.24. 
In tennis, Natasha Pospich of Woodland Hills advanced to today's second round 
of women's singles play with a 6-0, 3-6, 6-4, victory over Jennifer Poulos of 
Boston. 
Pospich and mixed doubles teammate Chris Pressley of Miami didn't fare as well. 
They dropped a 6-4, 6-2, first-round decision to Keirsten Alley of Melrose, 
Mass., and Jason Marler of Enid, Okla. 
In men's basketball, Lucious Harris' shooting slump continued. 
However, he managed to reach double figures in scoring for the second 
consecutive day, helping the West to a 117-96 victory over the East. 
Harris, who played at Cleveland High, made only four of 12 field-goal attempts 
and was two of four from the free-throw line, finishing with 11 points. 
Dedan Thomas, who played at Antelope Valley College last season, experienced 
similar difficulties, making two of six shots and finishing with four points. 
Shon Tarver, from Santa Clara High, only wished he would have been around to 
take a shot. 
Tarver landed heavily on his back after going for a rebound only four minutes 
into the game. 
He sustained a deep bruise, but X-rays showed no fracture and he attended 
therapy sessions later in the day. 
Tarver, who had 18 points in the West's first game, is listed as questionable 
for today's game against the North. 
In cycling, Katie Beck placed fifth in the women's 50-kilometer road race with 
a time of 1:23.26. Amy Gibson of Boise, Idaho, won the event with a time of 
1:22.29. 
