AFTER A WEEK OFF, BUDGET NEGOTIATORS RETURN TO FACE THE MUSIC -- AND PAIN; 
DEFICIT: EVERYONE IS WAITING FOR THE OTHER GUY TO MAKE THE FIRST MOVE ON TAXES 
AND SPENDING -- BUT TIME TO MAKE A CREDIBLE DEAL IS RUNNING OUT. 
For White House and congressional leaders, trying to cut the mushrooming 
federal deficit has become like grasping for a mirage in a hot desert: The 
closer they get to the details, the tougher it looks to achieve a deal. 
As budget summiteers returned to work after a week-long recess, they repeated 
their concern that their task won't be easy. Despite the boost from President 
George Bush's new-found willingness to support "tax revenue increases," 
successful completion of the budget negotiations will require a meeting of the 
minds on issues that have undercut agreement throughout the 1980s. 
Even if the President and the legislative titans craft a deal, it is far from 
certain that they will be able to force the rank and file to swallow the 
painful potion. 
"I have said all along that the most difficult part of the process is getting a 
majority of each party in the Senate and House" to vote for deficit reduction, 
Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) said last week. Finding 
answers on each of the key components -- tax increases, domestic-spending cuts 
and defense -- will trigger opposition or criticism from many quarters. 
Democrats do not intend to "bail out" the President while he and other 
Republicans attack the medicine, added Mitchell. 
The negotiators, led by Office of Management and Budget Director Richard G. 
Darman and the top Senate and House leaders, have accelerated their pace. They 
have been meeting daily in a tightly packed room in the Capitol a few feet from 
the Senate chamber. 
By most accounts, the summiteers want to agree on at least the outlines of a 
deficit-reduction package before the summer recess, set to start Aug. 3, for at 
least three reasons: Several more weeks will be needed to write and gain 
approval of the nitty-gritty legislative details; Congress will be hard-pressed 
to do much work before the November election; and Congress faces the need to 
make a politically painful increase in the federal debt ceiling before 
lawmakers can leave town. 
The negotiators, for the most part, have not revealed their hand. But comments 
by some of the participants suggest the magnitude of their task. 
"We will need to convince members of the political risk of not doing a deal," 
said a senior Democratic aide. "The President will also have to sell the 
public. This becomes a chicken-and-egg problem." 
Because Bush convened the budget talks in May, Democrats have insisted that he 
is responsible for taking the initiative. Successful, so far, in playing a 
waiting game, the Democrats say that they will not walk out and allow Bush to 
blame them for a failure of the negotiations. But they cannot be idle players, 
if only because they control a majority in the House and Senate and they want 
to protect their previous commitments. 
Nearly all the negotiators say that a serious deal must trim the deficit -- 
expected to surpass $160 billion in fiscal 1991 -- by $50 billion. During the 
next five years, they want about $500-billion cut. 
In the long run, nearly half the budget savings may come from the "peace 
dividend." But even Democratic doves concede that it will be difficult to cut 
the $300-billion Pentagon budget by more than $10 billion in the next year. 
Nearly all sides see the opportunity to raise at least $20 billion in new taxes 
in 1991, perhaps $120 billion over five years. But the details are tricky. In 
part, there are technical disagreements. 
Bush proposed federal user fees or asset sales among the roughly $19 billion of 
new revenues in his original budget. The Administration also assumed that 
Bush's avidly sought cut in the capital-gains-tax rate would yield the Treasury 
$5 billion next year, $2 billion more than calculated by congressional 
number-crunchers. In later years, most experts outside the Administration say 
that the capital-gains cut will reduce federal revenues by billions of dollars. 
The bigger dispute facing budget negotiators on the revenue side is how they 
should increase taxes. Democrats, led by Mitchell and House Majority Leader 
Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.), lately have attacked the regressivity of the 
Reagan-era tax changes for soaking the middle-class and ladling goodies on the 
wealthy. They want to reverse that trend by, for example, raising the top 
income-tax rate from 28% to 33%. Anything less would be "completely 
unacceptable," Mitchell said. 
But 90 of the 176 House Republicans have written Bush, warning him that "a tax 
increase is unacceptable" and that they will not vote for a budget package that 
includes one. Instead, they prefer to increase excise taxes on tobacco and 
alcoholic beverages and, perhaps, a gasoline or other energy tax. 
Cutting the domestic-spending side of the federal budget by as much as $10 
billion will be no easier. So-called discretionary programs, such as education 
or job training, were slashed during the Reagan era. Republicans say that they 
will be happy to avoid an overall increase this year. 
Medicare costs exceed $100 billion and are escalating at double-digit annual 
rates. But objections from the powerful senior-citizens lobby last year led 
Congress to repeal seemingly sensible changes that would have added Medicare 
fees to pay for a "catastrophic-illness" program. 
The biggest domestic program is Social Security, the original "hot button" 
issue. Benefit cuts are unlikely, but negotiators might settle on lowering the 
$25,000 level at which beneficiaries may be taxed. Democrats also might try to 
trim the 7.65% Social Security payroll tax. 
What happens if the budget summit fails to reach agreement this year? The 
budgeteers probably would have to raise the current 1991 deficit ceiling of $64 
billion in order to avoid massive cuts in major programs. Both parties also 
would have to consider the potentially major political implications of such a 
failure. 
Facing these perils, the negotiators have kept an optimistic public outlook. 
They may need that positive attitude to retain their own will power. 
