BAN ON OFFSHORE OIL EXPLORATION FRUSTRATES FIRMS; 
A MORATORIUM WOULD POSTPONE RETURN ON HUGE SUMS ALREADY INVESTED 
The first thing that an oil company sinks into an offshore drilling project 
isn't a metal bit or a seismic probe. It's money. 
Under the best circumstances, a firm can expect to pour millions of dollars and 
seven to 10 years into a project before seeing any production -- or any return 
on its investment. 
For most oil companies, it's a calculated risk of doing business, particularly 
when offshore areas promise the best prospects for replacing ever-dwindling 
domestic supplies of crude. 
But now, a sweeping moratorium on offshore drilling is moving quickly through 
Congress, threatening to throw a major obstacle in the path of industry efforts 
to tap what officials believe is a potential reserve of as much as 7 billion 
barrels of oil. 
For some companies, the law would even further postpone any return on their 
already sizable investments in offshore prospecting. 
Last week, the House passed to the Senate a proposed law that would postpone 
until at least October, 1990, any activity on proposed oil lease sales off the 
California coast. In addition, the measure would ban drilling in areas already 
leased off the coast of Alaska and Florida and would place about 84 million 
acres of the country's outer continental shelf out of the reach of oil 
companies. 
Because the moratorium would delay pre-lease activity in California, oil 
companies would probably not have a chance until 1992 to bid on three potential 
lease sales -- 95 in Southern California, 91 in Northern California and 119 in 
Central California. 
That would place off limits areas where industry officials believe that they 
have the best hope of finding sizable new reserves. 
Last week, some oil company executives argued that a moratorium could cost them 
money by further delaying projects in which they already have invested 
millions. 
Of course, proponents of the moratorium are less than sympathetic to the costs 
that oil companies may incur. 
"Public policy on offshore drilling should be decided on the merits of the 
environmental risk, not what it costs a company if they have to wait a little 
longer to be granted access to it," said Andy Palmer, director of the 
Washington office of the American Oceans Campaign, an environmental advocacy 
group based in Santa Monica. 
Besides, he argued, "if you balance it in the California case, on the 
offsetting side is the billions of dollars in tourist industry, commercial and 
sport fishing that might be placed at risk by this development." 
In any case, oil companies have sizable investments at stake. 
In Alaska, the law would put a stop to exploratory and other drilling in areas 
already leased in the North Aleutian basin area on the edge of Bristol Bay -- 
where Chevron, Mobil, Unocal and several other companies put down $95.4 million 
for the rights to drill for oil. Including other development costs, the 
companies' total investment in the area is more than $100 million, said Alan 
Powers, regional director in Alaska of the federal Minerals Management Service, 
which handles offshore leasing. 
Chevron's share of the rentals and initial investment in the Alaska offshore 
leases amounts to nearly $18 million, said Richard J. Harris, general manager 
of the land department of Chevron U.S.A.'s Western Region. 
"The other cost, of course, is (from) all those people working on that," he 
said. "To be suddenly on hold for a year without knowing whether there will be 
another extension (of the moratorium) for the year makes it difficult to be 
organized or efficient at all in our operations," he said. 
The moratorium would direct the Department of Interior to explore compensating 
the oil companies for their costs and consider buying back the leases. 
In Florida, Unocal Corp. and its partners have invested $20 million in leases 
in the Pulley Ridge area of the eastern Gulf of Mexico, said Unocal spokesman 
Arthur Bentley. 
Mobil Oil Corp. has invested $33.2 million as its share of an investment with 
other partners in leases in the Pulley Ridge area, not including the costs of 
administration or seismic and other tests in preparation for drilling, a 
spokesman said. 
Those investments would be put on hold if the moratorium halts exploratory 
drilling in those areas. 
In California, the moratorium would postpone future lease sales until at least 
October, 1990, but would have no effect on ongoing exploratory or production 
drilling on existing leases, said Barry Toiv, spokesman for Rep. Leon E. 
Panetta (D-Monterey), who drafted the bill. After that, the moratorium could be 
reviewed and extended, he said. 
Industry executives are reluctant to discuss their strategies for putting 
together the highly competitive sealed bids for such lease sales. But they said 
an oil company generally spends several million dollars on geophysical tests 
and other studies to evaluate an area before making a bid. 
Even without a moratorium, all that money and effort could go for naught if the 
bid is inadequate. A moratorium simply complicates the matter -- when a sale is 
delayed, the studies may have to be recast in light of new information. 
"The biggest headache . . . is spending money and effort and time figuring what 
to bid for these leases," said David Adilman, an oil and gas analyst with Data 
Resources Inc./McGraw-Hill in New York. "When there's no lease sale, it's a big 
drain." 
Atlantic Richfield Co. is one of several major oil companies that may be 
interested in bidding on the California leases. 
"The work could still pay off if the moratorium is lifted next year," said Arco 
spokesman Albert Greenstein. "It's not like it's wasted effort at this point. . 
. . It's always a calculated gamble." 
