SPLIT COUNCIL ARGUES OVER COURT ORDER; 
REMAPPING: MAYOR CALLS THE COUNCIL'S ACTION 'RIDICULOUS' AS IT DEBATES OVER A 
DECISION IT HAD BEEN ORDERED TO MAKE BY A FEDERAL COURT. 
Displaying its members' bitter divisions on redistricting, a fractious San 
Diego City Council on Monday accepted a court order delaying its decision until 
next week -- and, in the process, may have taken the first step back into court 
over the volatile topic. 
Monday's council vote and related actions underlined both the acrimony and 
absurdity that have come to surround the decennial effort to redraw the 
boundaries of the city's eight council districts -- a plan that has spent more 
time lately in federal courtrooms than City Hall. 
Monday saw the council engage in a protracted, 80-minute debate before doing 
what a federal magistrate last week ordered it to do -- a discussion that, 
though seemingly innocuous, perhaps touched off a new round of legal 
maneuvering that could begin as soon as today. 
"Have you ever seen anything so ridiculous?" a flustered Mayor Maureen O'Connor 
asked after the hearing. "This is getting crazier as we go along." 
Monday's council hearing had been expected to be simply a brief, routine 
continuance of the redistricting debate until July 23, in accordance with the 
order issued last Thursday by U.S. Magistrate Harry McCue. 
In that order, McCue barred the council from proceeding this week, as planned, 
toward formal adoption of a redistricting plan that has drawn strong criticism 
from Latino activists, some community leaders and several council members since 
its tentative approval by the council last week. 
Beyond postponing council action, McCue's order also warns that, unless the 
council reverses itself and approves an alternative redistricting map developed 
by a citizens' advisory board, further court review of the plan is a certainty. 
Among other things, the plan passed last week dilutes the Latino composition of 
the proposed Latino-majority 8th District, and would dramatically alter the 
configuration of several other districts. 
Although McCue's order left the council with little to do other than to accept 
the week's delay, Monday's meeting was anything but brief and routine. 
The lengthy debate -- punctuated by a few sharp exchanges between O'Connor and 
Councilman Bob Filner -- visibly frustrated some council members, whose chagrin 
was exacerbated by the fact that Monday's eventual unanimous decision was 
tantamount to doing nothing, as ordered by the court. 
"All we're doing is what the judge says we have to do," Councilman Ron Roberts 
said, shaking his head. "That shouldn't take nearly an hour and a half." 
From the perspective of attorneys for the Chicano Federation, the council's 
discussion should not have even occurred and perhaps violated McCue's order, 
which instructed the council to "not proceed in any way regarding the 
redistricting" until July 23. 
During Monday's meeting, the council debated, but rejected, the idea of holding 
a series of public hearings on the redistricting plan -- a proposal offered by 
Council members John Hartley and Linda Bernhardt, both of whom helped pass the 
controversial redistricting plan that Hartley offered last week. 
That discussion, Chicano Federation attorney Patricia Meyer argued, seemed to 
go beyond the scope of McCue's order, as well as raise more serious questions 
about the council's compliance with a settlement of the group's 1988 lawsuit 
challenging the constitutionality of the city's electoral system. 
"It sounds like they talked about a lot more than just a continuance," Meyer 
said. "I'm shocked that they're getting into areas that seem to clearly violate 
the settlement agreement." 
Under the settlement, the city agreed to establish a redistricting advisory 
board and to provide minority groups a meaningful voice in the development of 
the new proposed council boundaries. The council's rejection of the advisory 
board's plan last week in favor of Hartley's proposal -- only hours after the 
latter was publicized -- violated that agreement, the Chicano Federation 
argues. 
Similarly, the federation's attorneys contend that the proposed series of 
council hearings on redistricting would undermine the advisory board's purpose. 
"This call for new City Council-run hearings seems to usurp the advisory 
board's authority, and that goes to the heart of the settlement agreement," 
Meyer said, noting that the citizens' panel held 26 public hearings in 
preparing its proposed map. 
"It sounds like they're trying to come up with game plan No. 2 when game plan 
No. 1 didn't work," added Michael Aguirre, who filed the original suit and is 
Meyer's law partner. 
In response, some council members emphasize that, as its name suggests, the 
advisory board was simply that -- a panel that offered advice, not a mandate. 
"The name says it all," Councilman Wes Pratt said last week. "It's advisory 
only. I'm not going to delegate my legislative prerogative to an advisory 
committee or anyone else. It gave us something to start with, not something we 
had to accept." 
Regardless, Aguirre hinted that, in light of Monday's council action, the case 
could be back in U.S. District here before next Tuesday's scheduled status 
conference. 
"I would not print that we're not going to be taking any steps before then," 
Aguirre said late Monday. "We have some serious concerns about what the 
council's doing." 
In his order, McCue directed the council to reconsider both the advisory 
board's map and Hartley's plan next week. The timetable governing an 
ordinance's effective date, combined with the council's planned recess next 
month, means that, unless the council approves one of the plans next week, it 
could have difficulty meeting the Oct. 1 deadline specified in the settlement 
agreement. 
Though several council members asked city attorneys to approach the Chicano 
Federation and the federal judges involved in the case about a possible 
extension, Aguirre made it clear that one is not likely to be offered. 
Feeling that the five-vote bloc that passed last week's plan is on the verge of 
collapsing -- as evidenced by Hartley's remark that strong public sentiment 
could prompt him to oppose his own plan -- Aguirre hopes the relatively tight 
time frame could work in favor of the advisory board's proposal. 
"There has to be a finality, a deadline in these things," Aguirre said. "Right 
now, we feel like a team that's up a couple of points and would be content to 
let the clock run out." 
