LOFTY VISIONS FOR VENTURA STOP SOMEWHERE SHORT OF GOALS; 
CITY COUNCIL: A STUDY SESSION PRODUCES PARADOXES AND DREAMS -- AND THE DISMAY 
OF ONE MEMBER. 
If Ventura City Councilman Gary Tuttle's vision comes true, in 20 years the 
city will be practically unrecognizable. 
Public transportation would be composed of buses that would arrive at 
residents' doorsteps as easily as home-delivered pizzas. Bicycle lanes would 
take up half the city streets and replace the car as the preferred mode of 
transportation. 
As do Saudi Arabians, Venturans would drink purified seawater instead of the 
fresh water preferred by the rest of the world. Thanks to environmental 
conservation programs, the California condor would be just as common a sight in 
Ventura as the California sea gull. Ventura County would be home not only to a 
four-year university, but to a Tuttle-coached track team that would win the 
national championship. 
Such a scenario may seem far-fetched, but Tuttle told fellow council members 
that it can be accomplished with careful planning, during this council's first 
Visions for Ventura study session held Tuesday at the Clocktower Inn. 
Tuttle's vision failed to provoke much of a reaction. Councilwoman Cathy Bean 
noted that "counting on technology to solve all of our problems is a cop-out." 
With that, the council members moved on to the next subject: the age-old 
paradox of how to stop growth when slow-growth policies make cities attractive 
to prospective newcomers. Nobody could come up with an answer. 
So it went at the Visions session -- government officials outlined paradoxes 
and spelled out dreams but not much else was accomplished. City Manager John 
Baker -- who organized the session to have a better idea of what the council 
members wanted to accomplish during their tenure in office -- said that unless 
the council begins refining visions into goals, there is no real point in 
continuing the meetings. 
Although a previous council held a similar meeting, it was the first time for 
this group of members, and Baker declared the exercise a success. 
"Some of it might be pie-in-the-sky," he said, "but you have to start 
somewhere. Most of the council members said 'there may be no solution to this, 
but at least I can do some dreaming.' " 
But Councilman Jim Monahan decided that he had better things to do Tuesday 
evening than dream: He skipped the Visions session and attended a St. Patrick's 
Day parade meeting instead. 
"I think we should get our heads in the real world and start worrying about the 
issues facing us today," Monahan said. "I think sharing visions is useful if we 
keep it in the realm of reality and plan for the short term where we can have 
an influence." 
Monahan didn't seem too impressed with Tuttle's vision for Ventura's future. "I 
don't know what Gary was smoking," he said. 
Tuttle responded that he doesn't necessarily believe all of his dreams will be 
realized, but that "if good things do happen, it's going to be thanks to people 
with vision, not with closed minds." 
The council agreed to hold another Visions session in the fall, with possibly 
more sessions to follow. 
Times staff writer Santiago O'Donnell contributed to this story. 
