THE BUTCHER: ALL-AMERICAN FRANKFURTER CLEANS UP ITS IMAGE 
I must not let July go by without paying tribute to the meat of the month -- 
the all-American frankfurter. 
No meat in America is more criticized for a supposed lack of quality and for 
"all that awful stuff they put in them" than the frankfurter. 
Let's examine what goes into frankfurters today -- they're really not so awful; 
they are, in fact, pretty wholesome. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations for sausage in the 
frankfurter-bologna category are quite specific and apply to any and all 
products labeled with the terms frankfurter, franks, wieners, Vienna, bologna 
or knockwurst. 
The Water Factor 
They may contain up to 10% added water in the finished product. Water is added 
for several reasons: first, since the meats are run through grinders and 
choppers with high speed blades, there is heat generated within the mixture 
being processed. Water in the form of shaved ice is added to keep the meat at 
the proper temperature during processing. Small amounts of water also are used 
to dissolve curing ingredients and facilitate the even distribution of spices. 
By chemical analysis, even lean T-bone is about 70% water, so don't think 
you're being cheated when you see water listed as an ingredient on a 
frankfurter label. 
Oh yes, there is fat in frankfurters too. But not the huge amounts some of the 
critics of the frankfurter would have you believe. By USDA standards, the total 
fat content of a frankfurter may not exceed 30%. That's the same maximum fat 
content that applies to hamburgers; however, most hamburger is made in retail 
meat markets that do not fall under USDA inspection. 
All frankfurters are made in USDA-inspected meat plants. If you're concerned 
with fat content, you're more apt to find an excess in hamburger than in 
frankfurters. Even a choice chuck roast very probably has more than 30% fat. 
The meat used in making frankfurters is just what the name implies: meat. Back 
in grandmother's day that may have included lips, snouts and ears -- but not 
today. Meat used in the formulation of frankfurters is limited to "skeletal 
meat," the edible part of the animal that is muscle tissue attached to the 
bone. If a frankfurter contains any other than skeletal meat, it must be 
labeled "with byproducts" or "with variety meats." 
Believe the Label 
The traditional frankfurter called for both beef and pork. The recommended 
proportions were usually two parts lean beef to one part of fat pork. These 
days you can find frankfurters that are made of beef only or turkey only or 
even chicken only as well as combinations of beef, pork and poultry. 
But whatever they are made of, the ingredients are listed on the label. If 
extenders such as cereal or soy flour are added, that will be on the label too, 
and by law such extenders or binders cannot exceed 3.5% of the finished 
product. 
As for additives, today's frankfurter has considerably less than the 
frankfurter of old. The nitrite levels in frankfurters have been reduced 
voluntarily by the industry to considerably less than used years ago. Fifty 
years ago it usually was one-quarter ounce of nitrite per 100 pounds of meat, 
three ounces of nitrate per 100 pounds of meat or a combination of the two. 
Today the industry standard is 100 parts per million nitrite. (Nitrate is not 
used at all any more.) 
There are a few companies around the country that are making frankfurters 
without nitrites, but be sure to follow the storage instructions to the letter. 
In addition to providing the frankfurter with its characteristic color and 
flavor, sodium nitrite also inhibits the development of botulinus. There is no 
confirmed evidence that anybody has ever become sick from the sodium nitrite 
contained in a frankfurter, but botulism is deadly. 
