PROS AND CONS OVER LEGISLATION TO OPEN ADOPTION RECORDS 
The Times' editorial "Don't Lift the Curtain of Privacy" (July 6) and "Who Am 
I? -- A Basic Right" by adoptee Jacki Weber (Commentary, July 7) will 
undoubtedly result in a flood of such letters on these two most often argued 
positions. However, anyone who believes the "right of privacy" has been 
mandated to "protect" 135 million adoption-affected persons in the United 
States from a manufactured "stigma of illegitimacy" ought to rethink adoption 
and address yet a third position on the issue -- the legitimacy of adoption 
itself. 
Adoption shifts the burden of the state to private individuals. The majority of 
states sealed adoption records when New Deal social welfare programs were 
emerging following the Depression, for unquestioned transfer of responsibility 
and accountability. Today, the Bush Administration hypes the "adoption option" 
couched in anti-abortion rhetoric while Barbara Bush is honorary chair to the 
National Committee For Adoption, the sealed records lobby of adoption agencies, 
backed by corporate funding. NCFA's own broad estimate of "5-10-million 
adoptees of all ages in the U.S." is the basis for adoption reform groups' 
estimates of "135 million adoption-affected persons," given that every adoptee 
has two sets of parents, grandparents and other immediate relatives including 
siblings. That's a lot of unrequested and unneeded "protection." University 
studies have placed the figure for those desiring openness at closer to 95%, 
not 5%. 
I have filed class actions in California, Connecticut, New York, Missouri (and 
one in the works in Washington, D.C.) on behalf of adoption-affected persons 
attempting to open their own records through bureaucratic labyrinths even in 
urgent medical situations. 
But, in California especially where 70% of all adoptions are "independent" 
(handled by attorneys, private agencies, physicians and "matching centers" 
recruiting pregnant women and adopters from other states at $8-$30,000 per 
transaction) adoption is clearly "big business." Sealed records secrecy and 
even "adult access" compromises (such as AB 3907) assure a neat and tidy 
transaction and the perpetuation of "adoption-related businesses." 
LORI CARANGELO 
Executive Director 
Americans for Open Records 
Palm Desert 
