U.S. PROBE FOCUSES ON ALLEGED SPY PAYMENTS TO BLOCH 
U.S. investigators have begun to unravel a chain of evidence pointing toward 
what they believe are large amounts of money received by suspended State 
Department official Felix S. Bloch for his alleged spying for the Soviet Union, 
officials said Friday. 
At the same time, investigators said the inquiry has been expanded to include 
other diplomatic personnel, particularly those who worked with Bloch during his 
foreign assignments in Austria, East Germany and other countries. 
Examining the activities of colleagues is standard procedures in such 
investigations, but it is being pursued with particular intensity in the Bloch 
case. 
"There is obvious concern that he may have pulled others in with him," said one 
source. 
Another official said, "Under the circumstances, we'd be remiss if we didn't 
look at other possibilities." 
According to officials familiar with the Bloch inquiry, there is as yet no firm 
evidence of involvement by others. But one senior Administration source said: 
"We now believe that he is not the only one (spying for the Soviet Union). 
There are heavy suspicions that there are others, perhaps but not necessarily 
associated with Bloch." 
Bloch, 54, a 30-year Foreign Service officer, has been suspended from his job 
as head of the State Department office that deals with the European Economic 
Community. 
Investigators have said they suspect he supplied sensitive information to the 
Soviets for about 15 years, a period in which he was a diplomatic officer in 
the U.S. Mission in East Germany and later the No. 2 official in the U.S. 
Embassy in Vienna. 
Enough evidence has not been compiled to arrest Bloch, who has been staying at 
his father's apartment in Manhattan and a daughter's home in suburban 
Westchester County, N.Y., since news of the inquiry was disclosed last week. 
However, officials said that they are focusing on financial inducements as 
perhaps the chief motive for his alleged spying activities. 
Sources said investigators are in the initial stages of tracking down foreign 
accounts or assets that could have been used to hide large payments that 
continued over many years. 
"It's a process of looking under rocks for the evidence," said one Bush 
Administration official. "We've begun to find the rocks." 
Bloch has refused to cooperate with the investigation. The New York Times 
reported in its Friday editions that Bloch, after he was allegedly videotaped 
passing a briefcase to a suspected Soviet agent in Paris last month, told FBI 
agents that he had been working with the Soviets for many years and had 
received "a lot of money" from them. The report said he refused to elaborate or 
cooperate further after that brief interview. 
However, a government official with knowledge of the investigation said Friday 
that he does not believe Bloch ever made significant admissions to the agents. 
Investigators said that without a confession from Bloch, tracing money received 
from alleged spying activities could be crucial to making a criminal case 
against him. Even if espionage charges could not be supported, financial 
records could provide enough evidence for a tax evasion case, they said. 
Bloch's 1989 financial disclosure forms filed with the State Department show 
that he and his wife, Lucille, had investments in stock and bond mutual funds 
worth at least $478,000 and perhaps as much as $1.3 million. Government 
disclosure forms require only that assets be reported within certain broad 
ranges, so a more precise estimate of Bloch's net worth is not possible. 
In addition, they have more than $200,000 in equity in a luxury condominium in 
Washington's fashionable Kalorama neighborhood. 
While substantial, the holdings do not appear to be beyond what a senior 
Foreign Service officer from an affluent family might have amassed. Bloch's 
father owned a New York paper exporting business before his retirement. 
As investigators are seeking evidence of other possible assets, several U.S. 
agencies are attempting to determine what confidential information could have 
been passed to the Soviets by someone in Bloch's high-ranking position. 
Federal agencies are being asked to go through their records to see what 
sensitive material passed through Austria between 1980 and 1987 during Bloch's 
assignment in Vienna. 
The State Department, Pentagon and U.S. intelligence agencies specifically have 
been asked by investigators to cull their files for anything specifically 
earmarked for Bloch's office. Senior U.S. sources predicted that the process of 
assembling and evaluating the information could take weeks, if not months. 
Investigators have said that they do not know what might have been in the 
briefcase Bloch passed to the suspected Soviet agent in Paris. 
Times staff writers Ronald J. Ostrow and David Lauter contributed to this 
story. 
