EX-CHIEF OF BIG BROKERAGE CONVICTED IN MEXICO; 
SECURITIES: HE'S THE FIRST FOUND GUILTY OF A CRIME AGAINST THE COUNTRY'S 
SECURITIES LAWS. PROSECUTORS SAY A THREE-YEAR SENTENCE ISN'T STIFF ENOUGH. 
The former chairman of Mexico's second-largest stock brokerage this week became 
the first person convicted of criminally violating the country's securities 
laws, but prosecutors condemned his sentence as too light. 
Eduardo Legorreta, once the chairman of the brokerage Operadora de Bolsa, was 
convicted Tuesday of unregistered trading in Mexican Treasury bills but was 
acquitted of fraud and falsification of documents. He received three years in 
prison, a term that can be commuted in exchange for community service. He was 
also assessed a $4,000 fine. 
Legorreta was one of four prominent stockbrokers arrested 17 months ago on 
charges of illegal trading. He has been in prison since his arrest. The Mexican 
State Department will decide whether the rest of his sentence can be exchanged 
for community service and, if so, which type. 
Before Legorreta and the other three brokers, no individuals had been been 
prosecuted in Mexico for securities law violations. Until Mexico's disastrous 
stock market crash in 1987, irregularities and investor complaints were handled 
as regulatory matters. The crash exposed a number of abuses, and since then 
Mexican securities laws and regulations have been tightened. 
Legoreta faced a maximum sentence of 10 years, and federal prosecutor Amador 
Castro Vega, complaining that the defendant got off easy, said he may appeal. 
But Mexican Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Oscar Espinoza 
Villarreal called the trial "an example of great importance" that demonstrates 
that the nation's stock market regulations will be enforced. 
Jaime Ceballos Martinez, assistant director of Operadora, who was arrested with 
Legorreta, was sentenced Tuesday to 16 months in prison and a $2,000 fine. He 
received credit for time served and was freed this week. 
The fate of the other two suspects hasn't been determined, as far as is 
publicly known. Both are from another brokerage. 
Legorreta's arrest received the most attention because he is a member of a 
prominent family that owned one of Mexico's largest banks before 
nationalization in 1982. His brother, Agustin, is believed to be forming an 
investor group to buy a bank that the government has decided to offer them for 
private ownership. 
The arrests were also interpreted as a political move to balance the jailing 
five weeks earlier of oil workers union leader Joaquin Hernandez Galicia, 
making the government appear evenhanded in its treatment of labor and business. 
The accusations against the brokers stemmed from their actions during and after 
the international crash of October, 1987. The Mexican SEC received more than 
1,200 complaints from investors who claimed that they were cheated during and 
after the crash, when the Mexican market dropped 74% in less than 40 days. 
An arbitrator appointed by the agency had previously awarded $6 million in 
compensation to investors who claimed that they had been defrauded by 
Operadora. The settlements nearly bankrupted the firm, according to sources 
inside the company, but Operadora is now believed to be on sound financial 
footing, with $81 million in equity and $6.5 billion in investments under 
management. 
