U.S., SOVIETS PLAN NEW AFGHAN TALKS; 
WITH REBELS' HOPES FADING, SETTLEMENT WILL BE EXPLORED 
With prospects for a military victory by Afghan resistance groups beginning to 
fade, the United States announced Friday that it will conduct a new round of 
talks on Afghanistan with the Soviet Union to explore the chances for a 
political settlement there. 
The talks, to begin in Stockholm on July 31, will be the first between U.S. and 
Soviet experts on Afghanistan since the Bush Administration took office and the 
Soviet Union completed its withdrawal of troops from the country early this 
year. 
One State Department official said the United States hopes "to once again weigh 
in with the Soviets on how to get the (Soviet-backed regime in Kabul) out of 
control." 
"A political solution would be great," this official said. "However, the 
People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (Kabul's Communist regime) is not in 
on the deal. A resolution is going to have to be one without a PDPA presence." 
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said that during the talks, the U.S. 
delegation also expects to talk with the Soviet Union about developments in 
Iran. The U.S. delegation will be headed by John Kelly, the assistant secretary 
of state for Near East and South Asian affairs. 
In the wake of the death of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini last month, Hashemi 
Rafsanjani, the powerful leader of the Iranian Parliament, visited Moscow and 
concluded a series of agreements upgrading economic cooperation between the two 
countries. 
Ready to Discuss Iran 
"The Soviets have indicated to us that they'd be prepared to answer questions 
about Iran," one U.S. official said. 
After the Soviet Union finished pulling its troops out of Afghanistan on Feb. 
15, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sent a personal message to President 
Bush, urging the United States to help in bringing about a peaceful settlement 
of the conflict between the government in Kabul and the anti-Communist Afghan 
rebels. 
Soviet officials also urged that the United States stop supplying arms to the 
rebels. But Bush turned down the Soviet overtures, saying that -- because the 
Afghan government possessed a huge stockpile of arms left behind by the Soviet 
troops -- it would "not be fair" for the United States to cut off supplies to 
the Afghan resistance. 
At that time, many U.S. officials suggested that the Afghan resistance groups 
were in a strong position to win a military victory over the Kabul government. 
But over the last five months, the rebels have failed in repeated efforts to 
capture the strategic eastern Afghan city of Jalalabad, which lies along the 
main road from Kabul to the border with Pakistan. 
Some U.S. officials have said that the unexpectedly weak performance by the 
Afghan resistance groups on the battlefield is at least partly the result of a 
huge increase in arms shipments from the Soviet Union to the Afghan government. 
But a second factor has been the divisions among the resistance groups. On July 
9, as many as 30 military leaders -- including seven commanders -- of one rebel 
group were ambushed and killed in northern Afghanistan in an attack blamed on a 
rival guerrilla group. 
Asked Friday whether the United States is now reevaluating its policy on 
Afghanistan to take account of the weakening position of the resistance groups, 
one State Department official replied, "There's always a reevaluation of Afghan 
policy." 
