SEPARATE SESSIONS FOR BOYS, GIRLS; 
IRVINE TO SEGREGATE SEX EDUCATION CLASS 
Boys and girls will be segregated during sex education in junior high school 
next year under a trial plan approved by Irvine school officials. 
The Irvine Unified School District Board of Education, responding to a survey 
of parents, voted 5-0 late Tuesday to separate seventh- and eight-grade boys 
and girls for one week of a 12-week health education course. 
About 50 people attended the school board meeting Tuesday night, including four 
parents who told trustees they should honor the wishes of the majority of those 
surveyed who want their children separated by sex. 
Many parents had argued, and the board agreed, that students might feel more 
comfortable discussing some sexual topics separately. 
"We need to protect our children," said parent Barry Hammond. "Sometimes we 
rush them a little too much." 
About two weeks of the health course are devoted to sex education. Students 
will be segregated for a one-week portion dealing with human sexuality and 
sexually transmitted diseases. 
School officials said that separating the sexes will cost about $4,500 for 
extra staff and equipment. The board agreed to review the plan after a year. 
District administrators had recommended that the trustees vote to continue 
teaching sex education in middle school to coeducational classes, even though 
the district's own recent survey shows that a majority of parents favor 
splitting the boys and girls into separate classes. 
They noted that the students overwhelmingly support coeducational sex education 
classes. 
"I really think we ought to hear what (the students) are saying," said Judy 
Cunningham, principal at Rancho San Joaquin Middle School. "We have very mature 
people that we expect a great deal from . . . that we expect to make heavy 
decisions in this particular course. They handle the situation really well." 
In the survey of parents, 57% of those polled said human sexuality should be 
taught in separate classes for boys and girls. But in a separate survey of 800 
middle-school students, 76% said they do not object to being in the same 
classroom as students of the opposite sex. 
The Board of Education commissioned the community survey after several parents 
objected earlier this year to a new required health course for middle-school 
students in which the topics of drugs, AIDS, anorexia and sexual development 
are discussed. 
It was the fact that boys and girls were in the same classroom when the subject 
of human sexuality was discussed that seemed to bother parents the most, 
according to Board of Education President Margie Wakeham. 
"Every time the family life or human sexuality curriculum comes up for review, 
there is concern by the parents," she said. 
Wakeham and board member Helen Cameron favored keeping students together during 
sex education classes and separating them for only one day at the end of the 
course for a question-and-answer session. 
"I think it's a mistake for us educators to make (sex) a mystique that you 
can't talk about," Wakeham said. 
She said she believed students should be informed about human sexuality and 
allowed to ask questions "in the best, most honest, direct way possible." 
But board member Gordon G. Getchel, who led the move to segregate students for 
the week of sex education lessons, said the board should be responsive to 
parents' concerns because the topic -- unlike math or physics -- is one that 
has to do with the values of a family. 
Deputy Supt. Bruce Givner noted that while the survey shows most parents want 
boys and girls taught separately during the human sexuality discussion of the 
12-week course, an overwhelming majority -- 91% -- said they agree that 
information regarding sexuality should be taught as part of a planned 
curriculum in the middle schools. 
Those parents who objected to combining the students for the discussions said 
they felt the students might be uncomfortable asking questions in a mixed 
group. But of those parents whose children have taken the course, only 27% said 
their children felt uncomfortable discussing sensitive topics in a class with 
both boys and girls present. 
Surveys were sent to 3,000 homes, but only 757 responded. The student surveys 
were conducted in the middle schools. 
Givner said the curriculum includes two sections called Stars and Stages, which 
show students how to resist peer pressure in a situation where drugs or sex 
come up, and how to deal with changes in their lives, such as those caused by a 
divorce in the family. 
Givner said that the schools work hard to let parents know what the students 
will hear and see during the course and that they also have the option of 
excluding their child from the portion of the health curriculum dealing with 
human sexuality and sexually transmitted diseases. 
"People have many misperceptions," he said. "They think we're teaching the 
mechanics of sex, which is not the case." 
Sex Education in the Classroom 
The Irvine Unified School District asked the first question of parents and the 
remaining two questions of students. 
1. The teaching of human sexuality should be taught in separate classes for 
boys and girls. 
Strongly Disagree: 11.3% 
Disagree: 15.1% 
Strongly Agree: 34% 
Agree: 23% 
Undecided: 16.6% 
2.Did you feel comfortable discussing human sexuality topics in class with both 
boys and girls present? 
No: 17.2% 
Yes: 82.8% 
3.If you had a choice, would you rather be in a classroom with classmates of 
your same sex rather than a class composed of both boys and girls together? 
Yes: 24% 
76% 
SOURCE: Irvine Unified School District 
