FORMER PALISADES STANDOUT CATCHES THE SPIRIT OF 76ERS 
Derek Strong's four years of hard work at Xavier University were rewarded when 
the Philadelphia 76ers chose the former Palisades High standout in the second 
round of the NBA draft, the 47th selection overall. 
Not bad for a player who was considered a "sleeper" coming out of high school 
and missed his freshman season after failing to meet the NCAA's Proposition 48 
standards. 
"He's a workaholic and puts a lot of time working on his game, in the weight 
room, and does the same with his studies," Xavier Coach Pete Gillen said. "He's 
a very determined person." 
That determination also paid off in the classroom, as Strong received a 
communication arts degree this spring. 
Strong's top basketball moment came in the NCAA Midwest Regionals, when he 
teamed with 6-9 Tyrone Hill (the Golden State Warriors' first-round draft 
choice) to outplay the much-heralded Georgetown duo of 7-2 Dikembe Mutombo and 
6-10 Alonzo Mourning in Xavier's 74-71 upset. Strong led the Musketeers with 19 
points and 12 rebounds. 
"He took the ball right to their big guys," Gillen said. "He was aggressive and 
attacked the basket against Mourning and Mutombo. He really rises to the 
occasion in big games." 
The victory put the Cincinnati school into the NCAA's Sweet 16 for the first 
time. Strong continued his fine postseason play with a season-high 27 points in 
Xavier's next game, a 102-89 loss to Texas. 
Strong's .839 free throw percentage led the 28-5 Musketeers this past season. 
The 6-7 1/2 center was also designated to shoot free throws when opponents were 
called for technical fouls, an honor traditionally bestowed on guards. 
"When he first came to Xavier, Derek didn't shoot the ball well from the 
free-throw line, but the summer after his sophomore season he put a lot of time 
in and got better and better," Gillen said. 
Strong's ability to make free throws was a key in the 76ers' decision to draft 
him. 
"The two things that impressed me the most about Derek is that he rebounds the 
ball in traffic and is an excellent foul shooter, something almost impossible 
to find today in a big player," said Bob Weinhauer, the 76ers' director of 
player personnel. 
Strong concluded his Xavier career as the school's sixth leading rebounder and 
11th scorer. His .573 career field goal percentage was second in school history 
to Hill. 
This past season, Strong averaged 14.2 points and was a second team 
All-Midwestern Collegiate Conference selection. His other honors included being 
named to the 1990 All-MCC Tournament team and the MCC All-Newcomer team after 
his 1987-88 sophomore season. 
"He plays physically, but also has good finesse moves in the post area," Gillen 
said. "He has a terrific shooting touch for a big man. He can really shoot the 
ball from 17, 18 feet out." 
The 76ers project Strong to be a backup to power forward Rick Mahorn. He also 
might get playing time at center. 
"He's going to a good team for him," Gillen said. "It will take Derek time to 
adjust to the NBA, but by his second year, he'll be a solid contributor. He'll 
be one of the 76ers' seven or eight top players." 
Strong was a two-time varsity letter winner at Palisades. As a senior in 
1985-86, he averaged 17 points, 10 rebounds and nine blocks per game to lead 
the Dolphins to a 17-7 record. 
