ZIGGING AND ZAGGING IN THE NAME OF SCIENCE; 
PAIR OF RESEARCH VESSELS READY FOR '89 DOLPHIN COUNT 
The courses plotted for the research vessels David Starr Jordan and McArthur 
seem to be more the meanderings of drunken sailors than routes to be followed 
by members of a reputable scientific expedition. 
Still, early this morning, the two ships will begin a 10,000-mile voyage to 
nowhere. On Dec. 8, they will return to San Diego, having repeatedly 
crisscrossed a 5-million-square-mile patch of ocean off the coast of Central 
and South America. 
The 25 scientists and 51 crew members on board the two vessels will stop for 
provisions and fuel at ports in Mexico, Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and 
Clipperton, a tiny dot of an island that sits 1,800 miles west of the Panama 
Canal. But, after each port, the ships will return to the zigzag course that 
seems torn from a log compiled by the mythical Flying Dutchman. 
Fourth of Six Cruises 
The seemingly chaotic course is actually a carefully plotted sea voyage, the 
fourth of six annual cruises that the National Marine Fisheries Service is 
conducting to count dolphin populations. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration ships are carrying scientists affiliated with the Southwest 
Fisheries Center in La Jolla. 
The zigs and zags built into the course are designed to give scientists an 
annual look at dolphin populations close to shore and in the middle of the vast 
eastern tropical Pacific. 
Congress authorized the population counts to help marine biologists determine 
how many dolphins are being drowned after becoming trapped in nets that 
commercial fishermen set to catch yellowfin tuna. 
Last year, 19,712 dolphins died in the eastern tropical Pacific after being 
snagged by nets set by U. S. fleets. Federal law confines U. S. fishermen to 
the "incidental take" of 20,500 dolphins each year. Foreign countries that 
export tuna to the United States are now required to adopt similar limits. 
The research expedition "is a relatively long cruise," according to Doug 
DeMaster, a Southwest Fisheries marine biologist who is serving as chief 
scientist for the expedition. "It's comparable to the Antarctic cruises, which 
last from spring to the end of summer." 
Each summer, scientists try to follow a course that is "as identical as 
possible" to the previous summer's voyage, DeMaster said. From San Diego, the 
two research ships will head toward southern Mexico, a three-day trip that 
"will let everyone get their sea legs," said DeMaster, who will remain in San 
Diego during the voyage. 
Will Scan for Schools 
The ships will then head toward Central and South America. They will work their 
way to the west, toward the Hawaii. They will then double back and crisscross 
the eastern tropical Pacific. 
Trained observers will use high-powered binoculars to scan the ocean for 
dolphin schools. Scientists aboard a helicopter to be launched from the Jordan 
will verify estimates of school sizes gleaned from shipboard observers. Those 
researchers will also collect physical and biological data that will be used to 
determine how environmental factors affect the distribution of dolphins in the 
Pacific. 
However, scientists affiliated with the Southwest Marine Fisheries won't 
release data gathered during the voyage until after the six-year project is 
completed. "We just won't have enough data to say realistically what the 
populations are," DeMasters said. "The longer the time period, the better the 
reliability." 
With the data accumulated during six years of study, changes in population of 
about 10% per year can be detected, DeMaster said. 
Scientists will also use the four-month cruise to study the genetic composition 
of various kinds of dolphins, as well as their "vocalization patterns." They 
will study the diet of sea turtles and the distribution of flying fish, and 
monitor the population of fish, mammals and birds. 
Aleta Hahn will be cruise leader on the Jordan, and Liz Edwards will be the 
scientific leader on the McArthur. 
