A NEED FOR LESSONS IN HARD WORK 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's campaign to reform the Soviet economy 
is bogging down on the Red Field Collective Farm. 
The battle at Red Field illustrates a problem endemic to the Soviet system as a 
whole: Incentives do not always spur economic change. As Times writer Masha 
Hamilton said in a recent report, Soviet farmers are not racing to start 
private farms. Although Red Field's director has offered employees land and 
equipment to start their own farms and turn their own profits, so far not one 
has seized the opportunity. 
Gorbachev faces an old economic riddle: If you pay workers more, do they work 
more because their time increases in value? Or do they work less because they 
earn the same amount with less effort? Four years into Gorbachev's campaign to 
restructure the Soviet economy, Soviet workers still seem to prefer the latter. 
"I don't wantto have to work on my own land," Anna K. Milyokhin, a Red Field 
milkmaid, said, "and Idon't know anyone who does." 
There are two reasons for reluctance. The first is material: Earning more money 
in the Soviet Union gains one little these days. "Sure, I would make more 
money," Milyokhin explained, "but what would I do with it? There's nothing to 
buy in our stores." Until there is more to buy in the stores, Soviet workers 
will consider time off more valuable than money. 
The second reason is more ingrained, particularly for the agricultural system. 
Russia does not have a tradition of proprietary farming. Even in the last 
century, peasants were organized into communes. Land was redistributed every 
few years, reducing incentives to treat land welland creating an atmosphere 
where individual success was considered self-promotion at the expense of the 
group. In many ways, little has changed. Russians still do not know how to be 
individual farmers and, moreover, there are still important cultural taboos 
against individual enterprise. 
Ironically, many non-Russian republics of the Soviet Union do not have the same 
cultural traits and respond more readily to economic incentives. The 
proliferation of Georgian and Baltic entrepreneurs in Moscow attests to this. 
It seems as if Gorbachev may have to rely on such minorities to teach the 
Russian majority the value of hard work. 
