DISTRICT TO ADD TEACHERS TO BOOST ENGLISH INSTRUCTION 
Responding to state demands and a federal civil rights investigation, the Los 
Nietos School District Governing Board has unanimously agreed to remedy teacher 
shortages and other problems in the district's programs for students who do not 
speak English as a first language. Under the plan, adopted June 26, the 
district will hire or train at least three teachers per year from now to 1994, 
either to conduct classes in Spanish or teach English as a second language. The 
district, whose student population is 90% Latino, now has two teachers 
certified to teach bilingual classes. 
Investigators from the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights 
concluded that the district: 
* Has too few teachers to serve non-English speakers. 
* Lacks proper educational materials for bilingual students. 
* Gives instructors insufficient guidance on teaching non-native speakers. 
* Neglects the reading and writing skills of students who are only fluent as 
speakers. 
* Classifies students as fluent in English before they are fully prepared for 
regular classes. 
About 406 Latino students need immediate language aid in the 2,000-student 
district, which straddles parts of Santa Fe Springs and Whittier and consists 
of three elementary campuses and one middle school. The district now places 
bilingual teaching aides in classes as needed to help teachers communicate with 
students who lack English fluency. 
Adeline Rocha, the school board president, said she knew about problems in the 
district's bilingual program even before the report was finished: "I heard from 
two parents that their children were not being put into the bilingual 
classroom. The parents wanted their children to learn immediately in their 
language, and then move rapidly into learning English as a second language. 
That wasn't happening." 
When news broke about the U.S. civil rights investigation, the district was 
already responding to state officials who had expressed concerns similar to 
those of federal investigators. 
The state review happens every four years. The Office of Civil Rights 
investigation began in response to a complaint filed Dec. 5. It alleged "a 
pattern of discrimination" against Latino students because of a dearth of 
language services. 
Interim Supt. Charles Menzies recalled saying to federal investigators: "I'm 
familiar with other districts. Some of the things that you're telling me we 
need, I know are also needed in other districts." 
But, Menzies said: "They received a complaint about us (not the others). At the 
beginning, we were very defensive, upset. We wanted to know who blew the 
whistle, how dare they say they're afraid to come forward." 
Later, he talked to an administrator who had a similar experience earlier. "She 
made me see it from a positive view," Menzies said. "It got them off the dime, 
and now they have a very good program, one that they're very proud of. 
"If they tell us we need to do it, then we can't ignore them, and we're going 
to do it." 
Because unemployed bilingual teachers are rare, the district will pay 10 of its 
own teachers $19 an hour to learn Spanish this summer. The district has also 
paid the course fee for them. 
Most will probably not know enough Spanish to earn bilingual certificates in 
time to teach classes next fall, he said. 
Menzies said the district's efforts mostly "came about after December. Our 
population hasn't changed. Just our attitude has changed. It's a very positive 
thing." 
The regional Office for Civil Rights, which monitors school districts in 
California, Arizona, Nevada and Hawaii, investigates about 300 complaints a 
year, said John Palomino, regional director. The office is charged with making 
sure that students receive equal educational opportunities, regardless of sex, 
race, color, national origin or handicap. 
About 80% of the investigations turn up problems, investigator Michael Riggin 
said. The most frequent deficiency found is in special-education programs, 
which serve students with mental, emotional or physical handicaps. The No. 2 
source of violations occurs in programs for students with limited 
English-language skills. 
Since 1977, 30 Los Angeles County school districts, including Los Nietos, have 
been investigated and found to offer inadequate language assistance. Each 
district has submitted a plan to address the problem. If they had not, the 
districts could have lost their federal money. 
