JAPAN OFFICIAL GETS LESSON ON WOMEN'S ROLE 
Prime Minister Sosuke Uno's agriculture minister apologized Saturday for saying 
that a woman's place is in the home and that Socialist Party Chairwoman Takako 
Doi is unfit to serve as Japan's prime minister because she is unmarried. 
The minister, Hisao Horinouchi, offered the apology and asked that his remarks 
be withdrawn during a news conference that he gave in Tokyo on orders from Uno, 
whose own sex scandals have become an issue in a campaign for a crucial 
election July 23 for the upper house of Parliament. 
No Reporters Present 
Horinouchi made the offending statements in a campaign speech on behalf of a 
ruling Liberal Democratic Party candidate Friday night in Mie prefecture 
(state). No reporters were present, but women in the audience informed Japanese 
reporters. 
Fragmentary accounts of the speech published Saturday reported that Horinouchi 
said stability and "control" in families has been maintained in Japan "because 
wives have been in the home." 
"In the end, a woman's task is to stay home and take care of her family," he 
said. 
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, he said at another point, is fit to 
serve in politics "because she has a husband and children and has acted as a 
housewife, but Chairwoman Doi doesn't understand that feeling . . . because she 
is single." 
"We must not allow such a person who has never had a family to be a head of the 
state," he added. 
At another point, Horinouchi asked rhetorically, "Can women be of any use in 
politics?" 
The 64-year-old minister made the remarks in the process of criticizing the 
Socialist Party, whose female candidates won surprising victories in a June 
by-election in a traditionally conservative upper house district, and in a 
Tokyo assembly election last Sunday. 
Women Voters' Key Role 
Women voters, angered by the ruling party's imposition of a 3% consumption tax, 
a massive influence-buying scandal, and charges that Uno paid for sex with a 
geisha and a number of bar hostesses, played a key role in both Socialist 
victories. 
"I don't want to believe he said it," commented Ryutaro Hashimoto, secretary 
general of the ruling party, whose majority in the upper house is endangered. 
Doi herself said she was "dumbfounded" by the comments. Horinouchi, she said, 
"still doesn't seem to realize that Liberal Democratic Party politics is so 
corrupt that women can't keep quiet any more." 
She also offered the ruling party a suggestion. 
"The Liberal Democratic Party," she said, "should remember that women are 
everywhere in Japan." 
