FLORENCE LAKE LINK ON PACIFIC CREST TRAIL; 
SIERRA FERRY TAKES HIKERS HITHER TO YON 
When the ferryboat Sierra Queen was launched on this 7,327-foot-high lake in 
time for this Fourth of July holiday, weekend hikers in the High Sierra knew 
summer had finally arrived. 
The Sierra Queen is one of the most remote ferries in the nation and caters 
almost exclusively to backpackers hiking the Mexico-to-Canada Pacific Crest 
Trail and the John Muir Trail. 
From now to the end of September, 3,000 to 4,000 hearty hikers in California's 
spectacular high country will have cruised across this three-mile-long lake on 
the 32-foot Sierra Queen. 
For nearly 70 years there has been ferry service for hikers on Florence Lake. 
There is also a store on the north shore in which to stock up on food and 
supplies and a place to camp nearby in Jackass Meadows. 
The steel-hulled Sierra Queen, which can carry 25 passengers, is the latest in 
a series of ferryboats on the lake since the 1920s. Built in 1963, the boat 
first operated for two years as a State of California buoy tender in San 
Francisco Bay before being brought up here. 
Brought Up on Trailer 
Karl Smith bought the Sierra Queen for $5,000 in 1965 and trailered it up to 
the lake. He ran the Florence Lake store and ferry service from 1947 until he 
died in 1981. His widow, Adeline, now owns it. A daughter and son-in-law, Tom 
and Karla Hurley, manage the store and ferry. 
Smith's original 18 1/2-foot, 10-passenger ferryboat is a planter now standing 
on end in the Florence Lake store. 
Dick Morrison previously owned the ferryboat and store. For years he spent 
winters alone at Florence Lake handcrafting boats while snowed in for up to 
eight months at a stretch. 
Florence Lake is 100 miles northeast of Fresno, the last 21 miles a one-lane 
tortuous drive with scores of blind corners that winds up and down steep 
mountain slopes. 
Rearing up majestically from the south shore of Florence Lake is 11,200-foot 
Mt. Shinn. The lake is embraced by glacier-carved peaks, many crowned with snow 
year round, and by the John Muir Wilderness. It's one of the few places in the 
High Sierra where backpackers on the Pacific Crest and John Muir trails have an 
opportunity to pick up food and supplies. 
There are, however, no phones to the outside. The nearest telephone is 10 miles 
from the lake. Many of the backpackers have been on the trail 10 days to two 
weeks without any contact with the outside world by the time they arrive at 
Florence Lake. 
The two-mile ride on the ferryboat takes 20 minutes and costs $4.75. 
"Backpackers are always a happy bunch, so excited to be in this marvelous 
pristine country away from the crowds and the cities and towns down below," 
said Pat Ferris, skipper of the Sierra Queen. She said she has yet to run 
across a grump on the boat. 
What do the backpackers say they crave most as they sail across the lake to the 
store on the other side, Ferris was asked. "Ice cream. They know or have heard 
the store has several different flavors of ice cream cones available. They 
really wolf up the ice cream." 
