A BEACON ON THE ROAD TO RECOVERY 
Ron Ferrick has been gone for nearly two years now. But along San Pedro's 
gritty Beacon Street, they'll tell you he's still saving lives. 
There's Jim, a tall, handsome kid, who has finally quit the drugs and alcohol 
and has just been accepted by Chapman College. And Louis, who used to be so 
strung out on heroin that he'd shoot up before, during and after each day he 
taught at an elementary school. And Tim the mechanic and Wayne the poet and 
Patrick the draftsman. 
You see, around Beacon House, a place where alcoholics and addicts have been 
getting help for 20 years, they all know the story of how Ron drank himself to 
death. 
But no one at Beacon House who has turned things around thinks about Ron more 
often than Terry DeKraai. The two of them used to run together, panhandle 
together, get so drunk together that life meant nothing without a bottle. 
Sobriety was tough for DeKraai, but he did it. Ron couldn't. Not even after the 
agony of having doctors shove a needle into his belly, so bloated from booze 
that the ex-Marine should have died long before he did. 
"I remember the night they stuck the needle in his stomach," DeKraai says 
painfully. "I thought that would end his drinking." 
It didn't. And one foggy morning, two days after he was last seen by those who 
remember him as a charmer, the best panhandler around, Ron was found dead by 
DeKraai beneath a tree on Beacon Street where the two of them had often passed 
out. 
He was 35. 
"He'd been there for a day or two," DeKraai said. "He's gone now, but he's kept 
a lot of people sober just knowing how he died." 
Ferrick's story, the story of someone who didn't make it, is one they don't 
mind telling around Beacon House, a San Pedro recovery home for addicts and 
alcoholics. After all, they say at Beacon House, life is about failures as well 
as successes. 
And for those who don't seek help, an early death is likely. 
"That's the reality. That's what usually happens," says Beacon House Director 
Mary Proper. "And we don't want to create the false sense of security that once 
they get here, their alcoholism is taken care of." 
If Beacon House is about anything, it is about the reality of overcoming drug 
and alcohol abuse. How hard it is and how long it takes. How others can help, 
but no one can do it for you. 
In 1970, Beacon House opened for those who wanted to do something about their 
problem. From a ramshackle building occupied only by drunks, it has become a 
fixture in San Pedro. 
Over the years, 70% of the estimated 2,000 men, women and teen-agers who have 
entered Beacon House have overcome their addictions, according to program and 
government officals. Referred by agencies or coming in off the streets, those 
who enter Beacon House begin with a 90-day recovery program. After that, where 
they go is up to them, though most stay at least a year, finding jobs and 
renting a room in one of the six nearby homes or apartment houses leased by 
Beacon House. 
And even for those who long ago left Beacon House, it remains a sort of 
touchstone, a place where former residents drop by for coffee or coun seling or 
conversation. A place where those who have moved away still call or send cards 
around Christmas. 
"It's like a family here. You feel wanted and needed and accepted 
unconditionally," says John G., a former resident whose anonymity is in keeping 
with the rules of Alcoholics Anonymous. 
Since it was founded, Beacon House has grown from a single 20-bed recovery home 
to a nonprofit association that houses 100 adults and sometimes their children. 
With an annual budget of $500,000, derived from government grants, donations 
and activities like a thrift store, Beacon House not only provides a safe 
environment for those needing shelter, it offers counseling programs, job 
referrals and education classes. In addition, residents provide community 
services that include regular neighborhood cleanup programs. 
"They do a wonderful job there," said Joy Graham, a senior counselor for the 
state Department of Rehabilitation office in Long Beach. "From the moment a 
person comes in, they have a very planned, very supportive, very sequential way 
of helping people deal with their problem. And they really work at it." 
One measure of Beacon House's success is its selection this month by the 
department's local office as the finest community-based program in the region, 
which encompasses 19 cities and 200 programs. 
Another measure of its success is Terry DeKraai. 
"This place saved my life. I know that," DeKraai says. 
Twenty years ago, he was an All-American receiver on a USC football team that 
included O. J. Simpson. The game and the fame came easy to DeKraai. So did 
alcoholism. 
"I started drinking when I was 15 years old," DeKraai says, remembering how the 
parties just seemed to be a part of the post-game celebrations. But that 
changed over time. "It got to the point where drinking after the game became 
almost more important than the game itself," he says. 
The obsession grew stronger over time. And when DeKraai's football career ended 
at age 23, after two years with the Houston Oilers, the drinking took over his 
life. "I didn't really know what to do after football was over," says DeKraai, 
who had left USC before graduating to join the NFL. 
By the time he reached Beacon House, DeKraai had been married and divorced 
twice. He'd lost every job that came along. He'd also lost hope. 
"I'd hit bottom. I was in the gutter," he says. "I kind of thought it was my 
lot in life to live that way." 
Three years after his arrival, DeKraai is now one of the Beacon House success 
stories. He stopped drinking, went back to college and earned a degree in 
recreational therapy, hoping to work with the emotionally or physically 
disabled. 
Like all those who have gone through Beacon House, DeKraai learned what it's 
like to stay sober and accept responsibility. "Fighting this," he says of his 
drinking, "was the hardest thing I've ever had to do." 
Doing it, DeKraai adds, would never have been possible without the support of 
others at Beacon House, both staff and residents. 
"What makes a program work is not necessarily the dollars, but the commitment," 
says Paula Sawyer, district administrator for the state Department of 
Rehabilitation. 
"That is what creates success, particularly in the area of substance abuse. 
What Beacon House represents is one of those programs that works." 
What makes Beacon House work? 
"It's caring," says Mike Dowling, the impish program director of Beacon House 
who's been there since its inception. 
Back in 1970, a plain-talking Episcopal priest, Arthur Bartlett, grew tired of 
watching drunken sailors gather night after night in the park across the street 
from the Seamen's Church Institute on Beacon Street. 
Bartlett, who was then the institute's director, knew Beacon Street. He'd 
pretty much grown up on the docks, delivering newspapers as a boy in the 1920s. 
He remembered how it had once been dubbed "the toughest street in the world" by 
Ripley's Believe it or Not. It was a street of rowdy sailors and rough bars 
like Shanghai Red's, now gone. 
Over the years, Beacon Street grew tamer. But the alcoholics still gathered 
every night in what they call Wino Park. And Bartlett, desperate for some 
solution, started talking to recovered alcoholics. One of them was Dowling, a 
crusty former merchant seaman from New York City. 
"I remember him asking me, 'What does a drunk need in this town?' " Dowling 
said last week. "And I told him there were a lot of loners around, a lot of 
guys who had nowhere to go but their hotel rooms. And I said if there was only 
a place they could be together to deal with their drinking." 
Several days later, they found that place -- a run-down old house at 1003 
Beacon St. The house was vacant, save for the drunks who would come in from 
time to time looking for a place to sleep. The rent was $126 a month, and 
Bartlett didn't hesitate to pay it. 
Since its founding, Beacon House has seen it all. Children have been born 
there. Couples have married there. People have died there. 
People like Mary K., a 64-year-old recovered alcoholic who moved to Beacon 
House three months before she died from cancer. 
Mary K. was watched around-the-clock by the residents at Beacon House. The 
vigil was a logical extension of the way they look out for each other every 
day. 
"I remember when I first got here, I came to the back door and said I needed 
help. And four guys came out to talk to me," remembers Patrick B. 
At the time, Patrick was just a short walk from his mother's home. But he 
couldn't go there because his mother, hopelessly frustrated by her son's 
alcoholism, had gotten a court order to keep him away. 
"I told the guys I couldn't go home. So they wrote me a note to give her," 
recalls Patrick. He returned the next day and has been sober for two years. 
"The great thing here is that the residents are so involved in every aspect of 
what goes on. They practically run Beacon House," says director Proper, who 
came to the facility in 1985 and heads a staff of five people. 
From the shopping to the cooking to the cleaning, the residents are responsible 
for Beacon House, Proper says. And those chores are never an excuse for 
residents to miss other requirements for staying at Beacon House: counseling 
meetings five days a week, book groups, alcohol education programs, community 
cleanup activities, even working one day a month at the Beacon House thrift 
store. 
"If someone comes here to ask for help, which happens all the time, the 
residents do it. We don't do it," Proper says. "They find out how to help 
someone else, and by doing that, it helps them." 
The approach sounds simple enough, and Proper is among those who believe there 
is nothing mysterious about Beacon House's success. 
"This can happen anyplace. I truly believe that," she says. "I think there are 
a lot of places that do this and a lot more that could." 
Dowling says: "It's not like Beacon House has found something totally unique. 
Yet there is something special about it. And if I had to use a word, I guess it 
would be the love," Adds Bartlett: "In church parlance, we'd call it the Holy 
Spirit. But you can just call it magic." 
