THE REPUBLIC SURVIVES HIGH CRIMES AND ERRORS 
The crimes for which Judge Gerhard Gesell sentenced Oliver L. North probably 
did some short-run damage to the nation's institutions. But the myth that what 
North did was "heroic" could eventually do more. Judge Gesell was therefore 
wise not to add luster to the martyr's crown by giving North jail time. 
North was, in the end, convicted of relatively piddling crimes -- tampering 
with evidence, "deceiving" Congress, taking an illegal gratuity. The Republic 
survived them. 
But as Judge Gesell noted in his superb sentencing statement, Oliver North was 
heir to a theory of executive power which could, in the long run, cause the 
Republic real trouble. Under that theory, largely born of the exigencies of the 
Cold War, dirty jobs occasionally need doing in far-flung places -- a shah 
restored to power in Iran, or some leftist politician toppled in the tropics or 
the jungles. And such jobs simply couldn't wait upon the sluggish processes of 
democratic argument or congressional deliberation. 
That theory had entered a temporary eclipse under Jimmy Carter. But it was 
boldly resurrected by Ronald Reagan's director of the Central Intelligence 
Agency, the late William Casey, a swashbuckler who never recovered from his 
early romance with the Office of Strategic Services. 
Under Casey, covert operations reached a height of brazenness in the 
extra-legal war against the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, a government with 
which the United States maintained the facade of correct diplomatic relations. 
In that project, Oliver North was, so Judge Gesell concluded, essentially an 
errand boy -- "a low-ranking subordinate working to carry out the initiatives 
of a few cynical superiors." Errand boys are accountable for what they do, but 
that accountability must be proportional. 
The long American tradition of military abstention from politics, observed by 
the nation's most illustrious warriors from Washington to Eisenhower, has left 
us unprepared to cope with small-fry Marine colonels who take executive power 
into their own hands. North gave a good imitation of regret at his trial. But 
as a witness before the joint Iran-Contra committees the summer before last, he 
seemed at times to embrace a mild Bonapartism -- a theory that when the stakes 
are high, soldiers must do what effete civilian officials are too irresolute to 
do. 
The effete civilians North mainly bypassed were the members of Congress, and in 
some ways they asked for it. The early congressional response to the war in 
Nicaragua was irresolute and half-baked. Instead of moving vigorously to 
monitor and check initiatives that were pursued in defiance of its will, 
Congress loaded appropriations bills with successive versions of the Boland 
Amendment. 
The Boland Amendment was a sort of advisory to the Reagan Administration that 
it was being naughty and should cease and desist. Indeed, these advisories 
barely made a dent in the official Reagan Administration theory that foreign 
policy is an executive preserve, not to be poached upon by the people's 
representatives. 
In the Administration's view, the Boland Amendment reflected a political clash 
between the White House and Congress over the exercise of war powers. It was 
not constitutionally serious and therefore to be disregarded. 
The truth is that neither branch distinguished itself in the struggle of which 
Oliver North's operation became the centerpiece. North's principal job was to 
raise money from gullible widows and skim arms-sale proceeds to supply the 
Contras. It was another episode in a long history of irregular foreign-policy 
operations in the White House, insufficiently checked by Congress, the 
judiciary or public opinion. 
Judge Gesell's lenient sentence gives North a chance to educate himself. The 
education is needed; for as the judge observed, there is no evidence so far 
that North has reached "full understanding . . . of how the public service has 
been tarnished" by his irregular and illegal activities. To the contrary, 
North's admirers have encouraged him to think of himself as a martyr in the 
Contra cause, a "hero" whose legal ordeal is the politically motivated result 
of press and Democratic vindictiveness. 
If North is confused about constitutional principles, it must be said that his 
confusion is fed by a larger public confusion. Forty-five years of Cold War 
have warped U.S. political institutions. The "long, twilight struggle" 
proclaimed by John F. Kennedy in his famous inaugural address was worth waging. 
But it took its toll. 
It schooled Presidents in defiance of the law, intimidated Congress and 
disposed the American public to excuse almost any project, however ominous or 
counterproductive, that was said to serve the cause of anti-communism. Indeed, 
Oliver North needs an education in "constitutional values," as Judge Gesell 
said. 
But in that need, he is far from alone. 
