CURB ON PHONE, FAX 'JUNK MAIL' OKD BY HOUSE 
Responding to public protest over high tech "junk mail," the House on Monday 
approved a bill to allow telephone customers to block unsolicited 
computer-generated sales pitches and to keep advertising off their fax 
machines. 
The measure, passed by voice vote, was sent to the Senate, where similar 
legislation may be passed before Congress adjourns this fall. The legislation 
is opposed by the Bush Administration as an overly drastic remedy for a "small 
number of complaints," although it has not issued a veto threat. 
Hospitals, police and fire departments and citizens have demanded action to 
stop the tie-up of their phones by commercial messages that refuse to quit even 
when the recipient hangs up the receiver. 
However, telemarketing firms contend that only a few unprincipled operators are 
responsible for abuses and oppose legislation as a restriction on their right 
to communicate with potential customers. 
If enacted, the restrictions could affect as many as 7 million automatically 
dialed telephone commercials each day. 
The House bill would require the Federal Communications Commission to establish 
a national list of telephone customers who object to receiving recorded 
commercials on their phones or advertising on their fax machines. Telemarketing 
firms then would have to obtain the lists, at their own expense, and would be 
barred from sending messages to numbers on it. Telephone solicitation of those 
who did not put their name on the list would not be prohibited, unless they 
have an unlisted number. 
The measure would also ban computer-generated calls to public safety agencies, 
cellular phones and paging devices. 
Automatically dialed calls on behalf of political and charitable organizations 
would be exempted from the proposed restrictions. 
"It's the toughest possible bill we could pass," said Rep. Edward J. Markey 
(D-Mass.), chief sponsor of the measure. 
"Many consumers complain bitterly that, when (the phone) rings to deliver 
unsolicited advertising, it is invading their privacy," he added. "This 
legislation empowers consumers and businesses with the ability to 'just say 
no.' " 
Legislatures in 27 states have considered or passed restrictions on automatic 
dialing of commercials used by more than 180,000 business firms to solicit 
customers. And at least two states recently have approved laws to forbid 
unsolicited ads over fax machines. 
California has no law governing transmission of unsolicited material over fax 
machines. Gov. George Deukmejian vetoed a bill passed by the Legislature last 
year that would have made the practice illegal. 
Many of the nation's estimated 2 million fax machine owners have been inundated 
with increasing numbers of unsolicited ads, known as "junk fax." Recipients are 
forced to underwrite the cost of the advertisements through machine time and 
paper. The unwanted ads often tie up fax machines needed to receive materials 
that the fax owners do want. 
"Businesses dependent on the fax machine to carry vital information have come 
to decry unsolicited advertising that results in costs to and interference with 
business activities," Markey said. 
The House Energy and Commerce Committee, which recommended the federal 
legislation, said that telemarketing firms were able to avoid state laws by 
routing their calls over interstate long-distance lines outside the scope of 
state regulation. 
The Bush Administration said that the FCC and the states already have adequate 
authority to address complaints about "junk fax" and unsolicited telephone ads. 
Compiling a list of persons who object to those practices would impose 
"substantial costs and burdens," according to a statement of Administration 
policy made public by the Office of Management and Budget. 
"It has not been demonstrated that less drastic administrative remedies are 
insufficient," the Administration statement said. 
