LATINO STUDENTS GIVEN BOOST TOWARD COLLEGE; 
FOUNDATION: FINANCIAL AID AND MORAL SUPPORT IS PROVIDED LATINO STUDENTS BY A 
FOUNDATION THAT HOPES RECIPIENTS WILL SOME DAY AID THE COMMUNITY. 
Keven Lippert will be the first person from his family ever to go to college, 
and when he leaves for his first year at UC Berkeley he will take with him 
moral and financial support beyond that of his family. 
Armed with a $500-a-year scholarship for as long as he remains in college and 
the encouragement of his "mentor," Lippert is one of 105 students who will have 
an extra boost toward successfully completing their college careers because of 
the Beca Foundation. 
"Nobody in my family has been to college before, and now I'll have someone to 
go to with questions. More important than the money is the support," said 
Lippert, who graduated from Rancho Buena Vista High School in Vista. 
"Getting the scholarship gives me more support when I need it, especially the 
mentor," said Lippert, referring to Beca's program matching students with 
Latino graduates who help guide them through college's trials and tribulations. 
And Lippert hopes that, by getting through college, he will be able to act as a 
role model for his 13-year-old sister, Jennifer, when she reaches college age. 
A businesslike approach to fund raising has been the trademark of the San 
Marcos-based Beca Foundation, the largest and fastest-growing Latino 
scholarship organization in San Diego County. 
The North County organization, established five years ago by a group of Latino 
business leaders, this year increased fourfold the amount of scholarship money 
it awarded to Latino students, bestowing $115,000 in scholarships. 
That's twice as much as the second-largest such organization. 
"We reorganized, made a business plan and a commitment to open an office and 
hire an executive director. We made an effort to (seek) grants, find corporate 
sponsors, set up a data base and get the word out," said Jon Frandell, a member 
of the foundation's executive board and a vice president of Inland Empire 
National Bank. 
"Getting the word out" resulted in the foundation's largest single donation, 
from Edward and Mary Currivan, who pledged $300,000 last month as part of the 
Alice Newell Joslyn Fund. The $300,000 will be distributed to Beca over several 
years. 
"It served our need and desire for a long time," said Edward Currivan, who had 
considered opening a school for nurses in San Diego. "We've been wanting to 
help the Latinos, and we also feel that there is a great need for them in the 
field of nursing." 
Currivan, whose wife, Mary, is the daughter of Alice Newell Joslyn, said he was 
referred to the Beca Foundation by chance during a conversation with the maitre 
d'hotel of a Carlsbad restaurant while having dinner there. 
At the time, the foundation was not primarily geared toward helping students 
interested in medical careers, but now, because of the Currivans' donation, 
more than half the students who benefit from the organization are pursuing 
medical careers. 
Well represented among the foundation's 40 corporate sponsors are high-tech 
firms, such as Hewlett-Packard, Unisys and Hughes Aircraft, as well as local 
financial institutions such as First National Bank and Escondido National Bank. 
The foundation hopes to address the growing Latino high school dropout rate and 
to try to steer more students into college. 
"Currently, 18% of the population in San Diego is Hispanic, and, in 10 years, 
40% to 50% of the student population will be Hispanic," Frandell said. "About 
45% drop out of high school, of those (who) graduate, only 22% make it to 
college, and only 7% of those graduate." 
Beca, Spanish for "scholarship," began five years ago when it supported 10 
students. Last year, the group gave out 28 scholarships totaling $25,000. 
Most students receiving scholarships, which are based on both need and academic 
performance, are from North County. 
"Our ultimate goal is to try and reach Hispanic students who are at the 
elementary school age to begin to get them thinking on setting their sights on 
something higher than blue-collar jobs and to provide them the opportunity to 
shoot for college as opposed to limiting themselves," said David Ronquillo, one 
of Beca's founders and an attorney based in Escondido. 
Although Beca's success is universally admired among Latino fund-raisers, some 
feel that Beca's success should be the norm rather than the exception. 
Three years ago, Pascual Martinez of the Assn. of Mexican-American Educators 
attempted to begin an umbrella scholarship foundation made up of San Diego 
Latino professional organizations, as opposed to an independent scholarship 
organization, but the effort fell flat. 
"I really found it disturbing that we had our little turf fights," said 
Martinez, whose own organization gave out more than $8,000 in scholarships this 
year. "Everybody wanted the spotlight, and I would have to say that that was 
one of my biggest frustrations." 
"We have rivalries among ourselves that are not necessary if we would only 
focus on the needs of the students," said Martinez, director of the child 
development program at San Diego city schools. 
Beca and the San Diego-based Alba 80 Society, the only other Latino scholarship 
organization in the county that distributes more than $50,000 a year in 
scholarships, have informally divided the county into two. 
"They respect the fact that Alba is in San Diego doing a lot of fine work, and 
we respect the fact that Beca is in North County," said Alba 80 president and 
founder Martha Contreras. 
The 11-year-old independent scholarship organization distributed awards to 43 
students this year, Contreras said, and has expanded its list of activities 
since its inception to include self-esteem programs for junior-high students 
and an ambassador program, in which college students visit high schools and 
junior highs to act as role models for those interested in higher education. 
Alba 80's corporate sponsors include General Foods, Coca-Cola and Big Bear 
supermarkets. 
Beca's scholarships too come with more than just money, including support from 
the Latino professional community in the form of mentors. Every scholarship 
recipient is matched with a mentor to help guide them through college. 
"Being a mentor is a really great experience," said Ed Payan, a Beca mentor for 
a freshman at UCLA and a chemical engineer with Hughes Aircraft in Carlsbad. 
"It lets me share with a student some of the experiences I had when I was in 
college, and the mistakes I made." 
"The original concept was that a lot of kids didn't make it to college because 
of two things: (lack of) financial support and moral support and 
encouragement," Frandell said. 
"What we try to do with the mentor program is say, 'I care that you graduate,' 
and the kids internalize it," said Frandell, attributing the fact that none of 
the foundation's scholarship recipients have dropped out of college to the 
mentor program. 
Beca bases its scholarships on both the students' academic performance in high 
school and their financial need. Students compete for the scholarships after 
submitting applications, which include letters of recommendation and an essay 
on "how your family has influenced you and what if any special attributes you 
would like to pass on to your child." 
One of the requisites for receiving one of the $500- to $2,000-a-year 
scholarships is a willingness to put back resources into the Latino community, 
as the members of Beca have been doing as mentors. 
"One of the main questions in the interview is, 'What are you going to give 
back to the community?' "' Frandell said. "Some of the students interviewed 
were very qualified, but when asked why they want to go to college, it was 
basically because they wanted to drive a Porsche." 
Beca representatives also go to high schools to emphasize the importance of 
high school and college, and the organization now hopes to begin programs to 
educate Latino parents on how the educational system works by establishing 
workshops and publishing pamphlets. 
"The educational system in Mexico works very differently than here in the 
U.S.," Frandell said. "You have to teach (Latino parents) how the educational 
system works, how to go up and meet the teachers and principals, and the basic 
skills of getting involved. Many studies show that, if you look at the 
high-achieving students and go home, you find involved parents." 
