UPSTART DOI RALLIES JAPANESE WOMEN WITH WIT, CHARISMA 
At a New Year's cocktail party early last year, a high-ranking official of the 
Japan Socialist Party was overheard to dismiss words of praise for his party's 
charismatic chairwoman, Takako Doi. 
"She may have charisma power," the man said, "but she's a little short on brain 
power." 
No Socialist -- and few conservatives -- would be caught making such 
disparaging remarks today about Doi, who led her party to a stunning victory 
against Japan's ruling Liberal Democrats in Sunday's election for the upper 
house of Parliament. 
Created Political Machine 
Using the force of her offbeat personality and sharp wit, Doi, 60, has 
transformed the Socialist Party from an ossified collection of organized labor 
bosses and Marxist ideologues into a broad-based political machine that has 
tapped Japan's most undervalued human resource: women. 
In doing so, Doi positioned herself as the first opposition leader in 34 years 
to have a chance at becoming prime minister of Japan. 
That goal may prove ultimately elusive, but what is certain is that Doi has 
arrived as a significant political force. A few female politicians have held 
nominal Cabinet posts since Japan's women acquired the right to vote after 
World War II, but none has wielded genuine clout as Takako Doi has done. 
She took over as leader of the Socialists after their crushing defeat in the 
1986 double parliamentary election -- chosen by men as a feminist figurehead 
who might rejuvenate the party under what was cynically called the "madonna 
strategy." 
But Doi surprised the pundits by acting aggressively to build party support 
through grass-roots organizations of women. The effort paid off with a series 
of recent election gains, culminating in Sunday's voting, which allowed the 
former university professor and constitutional lawyer to fully shed her image 
as a political lightweight and transcend her social status as a woman in Japan. 
"She has become a powerful leader with the emergence of newly elected Socialist 
members of Parliament who are not union-based," said Takashi Inoguchi, a 
political science professor at Tokyo University. "A mass party is being born." 
Doi, a doctor's daughter from the port city of Kobe in western Japan, would 
seem an unlikely person to reshape the male-dominated political landscape in 
Japan. She never married and has been challenging the traditional constraints 
placed on women in Japanese society throughout her seven terms in Parliament. 
As a young woman, Doi found her role model and decided on a career in law after 
seeing Henry Fonda in the film "Young Mr. Lincoln," she said in a speech before 
the Japan Society in New York in 1987. 
"I resolved to become 'Honest Abe,' " she said. 
One of the rare Japanese of the Christian faith, Doi graduated from Doshisha 
University, a prestigious Christian liberal arts college in Kyoto. She later 
taught courses there on Japan's postwar "peace constitution" -- the 
American-drafted document under which Japan renounces the right to wage war. 
"My love for the constitution is so intense," she told the Japan Society, "I 
remained wedded to it and have remained single." 
Since joining the Japan Socialist Party -- because it is dedicated to 
protecting the integrity of the constitution from revision by conservatives -- 
Doi has maintained an unorthodox, sometimes masculine image. 
Obsessed With Pinball 
She has appeared regularly on television, matching wits with celebrities on 
quiz shows and throatily singing ballads on variety programs. Her favorite song 
is "My Way." 
Doi is a baseball fanatic, rooting for the Hanshin Tigers, and she confesses an 
obsession for pachinko, a noisy, low-brow pinball game usually associated with 
the working class and the unemployed. 
Doi is also famous for her fiery attacks on mumbling prime ministers in 
Parliament, where she is a vociferous critic of military spending and 
U.S.-Japanese security ties. 
On the campaign trail, she wears pink suits and mesmerizes women supporters 
with her forceful demeanor. 
A sampling of her campaign rhetoric suggests a revolutionary message that 
appears to be striking a sympathetic chord among Japanese housewives. 
"Japanese women have persevered toward their fathers and their husbands, always 
walking several steps behind men," Doi said on the stump last week. "But the 
time for an end to perseverance has arrived." 
The comparison may seem forced, in view of their radically different outlook on 
the world, but Doi is said to share the qualities of toughness and resoluteness 
with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain. 
Indeed, the Socialist "Iron Lady" dubbed her voice in Japanese for that of 
Thatcher in a television drama about the hijacking of a North Sea oil rig that 
was aired on Japanese television three years ago. 
During the upper-house campaign, Doi skillfully dodged the issue of the 
Socialist Party's defense and security policies, saying the party would 
emphasize continuity rather that change if it took power in a coalition. But 
hemmed in by the party's left wing, which espouses unarmed neutrality, she has 
stopped short of making badly needed clarifications. 
"I feel we have to look at reality," Doi said in an interview before making her 
first overseas trip as party leader two years ago, a highly symbolic visit to 
the United States. "Of course, we're against the U.S.-Japan security treaty, 
but that doesn't mean we can ignore the fact that the treaty is in effect." 
Decries Food Prices 
Doi has decried high food prices as burdensome to Japanese consumers, but in 
the campaign for the upper house she and her party attacked the liberalization 
of agricultural imports. 
The uncertainty of the Socialists' policy game plan has raised jitters in 
Washington and other foreign capitals at the prospect of Doi becoming prime 
minister. However, some political analysts note that whoever becomes prime 
minister would be captive to the onerous obligation of building national 
consensus before undertaking any change in course. 
Much as the Liberal Democrats have failed to carry out their goal of revising 
the constitution during 34 years in power, the Socialists might be forced to 
accept the status quo on defense, indefinitely. 
In her speech before the Japan Society in 1987, Doi attempted to set the tone 
for a new dialogue between Washington and an increasingly pluralistic Japan. 
"In the United States, many people equate socialism with communism, so that 
even our party's name creates some uneasiness in your country," she said. 
"Nevertheless, the U.S. government has found that it can deal constructively 
with a number of West European countries where socialist parties have come to 
power, even when it did not agree with some of their policies." 
Times staff writer Sam Jameson contributed to this story. 
