5 PARIS ART MUSEUMS SHUT DOORS AMID THEFTS 
Five Paris art museums closed their doors today to individual visitors after 
paintings were stolen from three museums, including a Renoir cut out of its 
frame at the Louvre, over a span of several hours. 
Jacques Sallois, director of national museums, said security will be tightened 
at the city's major museums, which remained open. He refused to say what 
measures will be taken. 
The museums closed to individuals are relatively small and focus on the works 
or the collections of a particular individual -- the Eugene Delacroix, Gustave 
Moreau, Jean-Jacques Henner, Hebert and Ennery museums. 
Sallois' unprecedented announcement came shortly after police revealed that a 
third museum had suffered a theft during the short time span Wednesday. 
Police said it was possible all three thefts were committed by the same person 
or group, moving across the city center from one museum to another. 
According to investigators, the theft revealed today apparently was the first 
to occur in the series. 
An 1816 work by French landscape painter Paul Huet was lifted off its hook 
Wednesday morning at the Carnavalet Museum, a historical museum in one of the 
oldest sections of Paris. 
The painting, "Les Moulins de la Glaciere," was estimated to be worth about 
$14,500. 
The other two stolen paintings were cut from their frames -- Renoir's "Portrait 
of a Seated Woman" from the Louvre and Ernest Hebert's "Portrait of Monaluccia" 
from the museum named after the artist. 
Both were small format paintings, a type often chosen by thieves because they 
can be easily concealed. 
"Portrait of a Seated Woman" (1890-1895), measures 13.5 by 10.5 inches. 
Hebert's work, painted about 1870, measures 14 by 12 inches. 
The theft of the Renoir was discovered about 2:15 p.m., officials said. The 
Hebert was discovered missing from the Hebert Museum, across the Seine River on 
the Left Bank, about an hour later. 
All three victimized museums are run by the government. 
Officials gave no estimates of the value of the Renoir and Hebert. Independent 
experts suggested a possible value of $300,000 to $600,000 for the Renoir, but 
said it was impossible to give a precise valuation and noted that Renoir had 
done scores of portraits of women in his later years. 
The Louvre's director, Michel Laclotte, said the theft of "Portrait of a Seated 
Woman" appeared to be the work of an "especially clever" professional. 
"The canvas was very thin, the cutting instrument was probably extremely sharp 
and caused so few vibrations that the electronic sensor did not pick them up," 
he said. 
Laclotte led reporters to the spot where the portrait had been hanging -- an 
isolated stairwell leading to the Denon Gallery, on the top floor of the 
Pavillon de Flore overlooking the Seine. 
Head painting curator Pierre Rosenberg said the Renoir had been on display in 
the stairwell for several years, due to renovations in other sections of the 
museum, once a royal palace. It was donated to the Louvre in 1961 by French 
collector Victor Lion. 
Rosenberg said Renoir is a "magic name" among art lovers, which could explain 
the theft -- the first at the Louvre in more than 10 years. 
Sallois said there is no evidence of negligence on the part of museum guards. 
