CANDIDATE FOR CHAPMAN PRESIDENCY TO VISIT CAMPUS 
The president of Emerson College in Boston is scheduled to tour the Chapman 
College campus in Orange next week as one of three candidates seeking to become 
Chapman's 11th president, the chairman of the college's search committee 
confirmed Thursday. 
Leslie Duryea, a Chapman trustee, said Allen Koenig, president of Emerson since 
1979, will be on campus on Monday and Tuesday as the 128-year-old private 
college continues a search that has taken more than a year. 
Koenig's visit is part of "the normal process of investigating candidates," 
Duryea said, adding that Koenig has not been offered any position. 
Interim President James Doti is the other contender identified by university 
officials to fill the spot vacated when G.T. (Buck) Smith left the post in 
March, 1988, said Pamela Ezell, a college spokeswoman. The other candidate has 
not been identified by the 12-member search committee, Ezell said. 
The new president would oversee a $23-million expansion announced in May, 
including a 200-bed dormitory, an academic building and a student union. 
The college's master plan calls for buildings in some campus areas to reach 
heights of 62 feet, and some nearby residents have complained that high-rise 
buildings would not be in harmony with the neighborhood of Victorian and early 
California-style, one- and two-story homes and businesses. The college has been 
based in the Old Towne district of Orange since 1954. 
The new president also faces financial difficulties in the athletic department, 
which cut six teams in January to save money. Doti supports a move to make 
Chapman, a Division II school, into a Division III school, which does not offer 
athletic scholarships. 
Ezell said most new presidents traditionally have come from outside the 
college. 
"We haven't had too many presidents, so it's hard to really find a trend," she 
said. 
Koenig would not comment on his trip to Orange County. 
Doti was on vacation through Wednesday and could not be reached for comment, 
his secretary said Thursday. The former dean of Chapman's business school has 
been at the college since 1974. 
Koenig also taught mass education while at Emerson, a liberal-arts college with 
a strong focus on communications that has about the same enrollment -- 2,185 
last year -- as Chapman's. 
Before coming to the Boston school, Doti was vice president of Marycrest 
College in Davenport, Iowa, and vice president of university relations at 
Capital University in Columbus, Ohio. 
He is the president of the New England chapter of the National Academy of 
Television Arts and Sciences. He has written about labor relations in the 
broadcast industry and higher education and is a former editor of Educational 
Broadcasting Review. 
Koenig, 50, a Los Angeles native, received a bachelor's degree in sociology and 
telecommunications from USC, a masters's degree in speech communication from 
Stanford University and a doctorate in speech communication from Northwestern 
University in Evanston, Ill. 
