UNLIKE THEIR MEDELLIN BRETHREN, THEY SHUN OPEN VIOLENCE; 
THE CALI CARTEL: COLOMBIA'S GENTLEMEN COCAINE TRAFFICKERS 
Ciudad Jardin, Cali's most exclusive suburb, boasts a dazzling array of walled 
mansions on hillsides entwined with curving streets and blooming with satellite 
dishes. This is the neighborhood of choice for the dons of the Cali cartel, 
Colombia's gentlemen cocaine traffickers. 
Like the more savage and notorious Medellin cartel, the Cali traffickers use 
Colombia as a base for smuggling huge amounts of cocaine into the United 
States. But the Cali cartel prefers whenever possible to avoid the open 
violence, including assassinations of high officials, that has focused world 
attention on the Medellin gangsters. 
"According to the philosophy of the Cali cartel, it is preferable to bribe than 
to kill," said a Colombian investigative reporter. 
The Cali traffickers try to blend peacefully with the wealthy elite in this 
clean and prosperous city of 1.5 million people, seeking respect and security 
through investments and carefully cultivated contacts. 
'Strong Influence' 
"They have 'levers,' as we say here," said a Roman Catholic priest in Cali. 
"They have strong influences in all sectors." 
When murder is required to assert their illicit power, the Cali dons also try 
to use discretion, said Col. Jose Pelaez, chief of Colombia's judicial police. 
"They abduct their victims and make them disappear," he said. 
Thus, the Cali-based cocaine trade has thrived in relative obscurity, drawing 
less attention than the Medellin cartel from both news media and law 
enforcement officials. 
"We definitely know a lot less about the Cali people than we do about the 
Medellin people," said an agent of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. 
But the low profile of the Cali traffickers is deceptive. 
"I think they are very big, maybe not as big as the Medellin people, but I 
think they have been gaining ground steadily," the DEA agent said. 
Perhaps the most famous residents of Ciudad Jardin are brothers Gilberto and 
Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela. Together, they are said to dominate the Cali cartel. 
The two grew up in a poor section of Cali, far from the luxury of Ciudad 
Jardin. As youths, they took low-paying jobs as drugstore clerks. Miguel earned 
a law degree from Cali's prestigious San Buenaventura University, which is run 
by Franciscan priests. Gilberto never finished high school. 
At one point, Gilberto allegedly tried his hand at kidnaping, a lucrative 
industry in Colombia. 
Through the years, the brothers built up an impressive business empire, 
including a national chain of discount drugstores, a pharmaceutical laboratory, 
a radio network, a bank, a Chrysler Corp. agency, a bus fleet, a professional 
soccer team and ranches and other real estate. 
Anti-drug officials say there is no doubt that much of the Rodriguez Orejuelas' 
investment capital has come from cocaine and that millions of dollars in 
trafficking profits have been laundered through their other businesses. 
Gilberto's reputation as an astute strategist has earned him a nickname: The 
Chess Player. Heavy jowled and well dressed at 50, his looks fit the role of 
successful business executive. 
Miguel, 45, is said to be equally shrewd. He enjoys local popularity as vice 
president of Club America, the soccer team controlled by the brothers. 
People in Cali hear and read about the cocaine cartel, but many tend to 
overlook its sinister implications. 
"It is like the Holy Spirit, which exists but isn't seen," said a Cali 
newspaper editor. A senior partner in the Rodriguez Orejuelas' organization is 
Jose Santacruz Londono, 45. He has invested heavily in Cali real estate and 
construction projects and currently is said to be the main financier behind a 
large shopping center being built on a prime Cali site once occupied by Sears, 
Roebuck &amp; Co. 
Called Don Chepe, Santacruz Londono is nearly 6 feet tall and weighs more than 
250 pounds. According to local lore, he once tried to join Cali's exclusive 
Club Colombia but was blackballed, so he built a mansion in Ciudad Jardin that 
resembles the club building. 
Another leading member of the loosely linked Cali Cartel is Francisco Herrera. 
A young man known as Don Pacho, Herrera is the son of Benjamin Herrera Zuleta, 
a pioneer trafficker who began moving cocaine in the early 1970s. 
The father, nicknamed the Black Pope, was convicted this year on 
drug-trafficking charges in Las Vegas. 
Several anti-drug officials admitted in interviews that they have little 
information about other major cartel figures. 
"There are so many we don't know about," lamented a DEA investigator, adding 
that investigative manpower and resources cannot keep up with the cartel's 
burgeoning activities. 
Before Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela was well known, DEA agents documented a 
cocaine trafficking trip he made in 1981 to Los Angeles, where he was later 
indicted in federal court. He also has been indicted on drug-trafficking 
charges in New York, Miami and New Orleans. 
He was arrested in Spain in November, 1984, using a false Venezuelan passport. 
Also arrested was his traveling companion, Jorge Luis Ochoa, a leader of the 
Medellin cartel. 
The United States tried to extradite both Rodriguez Orejuela and Ochoa, but 
competing extradition requests from Colombia were honored by the Spanish judge 
who heard the case. Allegations that the judge took a bribe later sparked a 
scandal in Spain. 
Ochoa was released without trial in Colombia, causing another scandal, but 
Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela was tried on his home turf, Cali, along with 
Santacruz Londono. 
Fernando Navas, who served as prosecutor late in that case, said the charges 
against Rodriguez Orejuela were hastily concocted to keep him from being 
extradited by the United States. 
"That business wounds the dignity of this country," Navas said. He said he 
believes that bribes were paid in the case -- "many bribes, I have no doubt" -- 
but he added that he had no proof. 
The trial judge refused to consider evidence submitted by the DEA from cases in 
New York and Los Angeles. Rodriguez Orejuela and Santacruz Londono were 
acquitted, and the Colombian Supreme Court is now considering a government 
appeal in the Rodriguez Orejuela case. 
Except for the appeal, Rodriguez Orejuela is free of charges in Colombia, as is 
Santacruz Londono. Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela and other major members of the 
Cali cartel have never been charged with trafficking here. 
They circulate freely in Cali, and police leave them alone. 
"We have no arrest order," said Col. Rosso Navarro, metropolitan police chief. 
"If there were proof, we would have moved against them." 
Colombia has invalidated a 1979 extradition treaty with the United States, so 
cartel leaders are currently not threatened by U.S. charges against them. 
Nevertheless, the gentlemen traffickers are not at ease. When they move around 
their city, they do so under heavy security because of a blood feud with the 
Medellin cartel. 
A year and a half of the so-called War of the Cartels has cost dozens of lives 
on both sides. 
According to a police tally, the Medellin cartel has dynamited 47 drugstores in 
the Drogas La Rebaja chain owned by the Rodriguez Orejuelas. In some of the 
bombings, innocent employees and bystanders have been killed. 
Six radio stations in the Grupo Radial Colombiano network have been bombed. A 
friend of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela said the family has sold the radio 
network to broadcast evangelists for $9 million but cannot find a buyer for the 
drugstores. 
"Who would buy them?" the friend asked. 
Investigators and analysts have different theories on the cause of the war 
between the two cartels, which used to cooperate. Some say it is a fight over 
cocaine markets in the United States. Others say it has grown from successive 
betrayals -- members of one cartel informing to law enforcement officials 
against the other. 
But most observers agree that it is a power struggle between two greedy groups 
that are natural rivals in the same immensely profitable business. 
Most of the casualties have been low-ranking cartel soldiers, and little of the 
violence has taken place in Cali, where the hometown traffickers have a tight 
security system with hundreds of bodyguards. But in February, Gilberto 
Rodriguez Orejuela's chief of security was shot to death on a downtown Cali 
street. 
And so the mannerly camouflage of the Cali cartel is coming unraveled. In 
Ciudad Jardin, Spanish for Garden City, there is a disturbing new reminder of 
the cartel's sinister presence: the crumbling ruins of a large corner house 
destroyed by a mysterious bomb several weeks ago. 
