RECYCLING IS GAINING POPULARITY; 
WASTE DISPOSAL: INCREASED PUBLIC AWARENESS, LARGER REFUNDS AND EXPANDED 
CURBSIDE PICKUP HAVE HELPED MAKE RECYCLING 'A NONSTOP INDUSTRY.' 
Five years ago, recycling trash was hailed as an idea whose time had come. 
Today, environmentalists, sanitary engineers, politicians, business managers 
and homeowners agree that recycling is here to stay -- a trend riding on an 
ever-rising crest of public awareness and participation. 
"There's been recycling ever since the Bronze Age," said Mark Ringelberg, a 
spokesman for Westside Recycling of Glendale, a veteran trash management firm. 
"Now, its a nonstop industry." 
In the past six months, recycling appears to have caught on in the foothill 
communities of Glendale and northeast Los Angeles, Ringelberg and others said. 
Business at Westside Recycling has doubled, said Ringelberg -- twice the 
statewide increase in the volume of recycled beverage containers. 
The first fiscal year of a city-sponsored curbside recycling program in 
Glendale ended in June with more than double the amount of contributions 
expected in the most conservative projections. 
A pilot recycling program in neighborhoods of northeast Los Angeles will be 
greatly expanded starting next month because of the success of the program 
there, Los Angeles officials said. 
Even big business has hopped on the bandwagon. "Everywhere we go, we get 
stampeded by people wanting to assist" in company recycling programs, said Kym 
Murphy, corporate vice president of environmental policy for the Walt Disney 
Co. of Burbank, which has 50,000 employees nationwide. "We're just getting 
started." 
Eyeing a steady stream of drivers pulling to the curb of Westside Recycling to 
drop off bags of reusable cans, glass, plastic bottles and newspapers, 
Ringelberg said business has never been better. "We get movie stars to street 
people and everyone in between," he said. 
The increase is partly attributed to a state law that went into effect in 
January, boosting the refund value of recyclable bottles and cans from a penny 
per container to a nickel for two containers. The public conscience also has 
been tweaked by a $4-million statewide campaign and widespread media focus in 
April on the 20th anniversary of Earth Day, officials said. 
"We have a crisis going on in the state with the number of landfills slated to 
close by the end of the century," said Ralph Chandler, who oversees recycling 
operations for the state Department of Conservation. He has called for "an 
aggressive stand" to divert the amount of trash and to extend the life of 
existing landfills. 
Industry officials said Glendale is a leader in taking that stand. The city has 
launched one of the most aggressive programs for curbside recycling in the 
state and has pressured neighboring foothill communities to follow suit. 
More than 4,000 tons of trash were diverted from Glendale's sole landfill -- 
Scholl Canyon -- in the past year because of a citywide curbside recycling 
program, said Steve Zurn, a city administrative analyst. That's more than twice 
the figure projected by city and county engineers before the program began in 
December, 1988. 
At Glendale's request, neighboring communities such as La Crescenta, Montrose 
and Pasadena also have started curbside recycling programs to reduce the amount 
of refuse dumped at Scholl Canyon in an effort to extend the life of the 
landfill. Results have not yet been tabulated, Zurn said. 
Scholl Canyon in April became the first landfill in the state authorized to use 
"green waste" -- grass clippings and other landscape materials -- to cover 
layers of trash at the city's landfill, Zurn said. The compost will speed 
decomposition of trash in the landfill and compact the amount of space required 
for disposal of landscaping materials -- the most voluminous residential waste. 
In northeast Los Angeles, a city-sponsored recycling program started a year ago 
for 15,000 families will soon be expanded to another 24,000 homes in Los Feliz, 
Atwater, Silver Lake, Glassell Park, Echo Park, Highland Park, Mt. Washington 
and other areas, said Angela Franklin of the Los Angeles Bureau of Sanitation. 
About 40% of the residents in those areas participated in a pilot program for 
the past year, she said, contrasted with about 50% citywide. Participation in 
city-sponsored curbside recycling on the Westside was about 60%, Franklin said, 
while participation in a pilot program in the San Fernando Valley was 25%. 
Zurn said 40% of single-family residents in Glendale are now participating in 
the curbside recycling program -- double the amount originally anticipated. The 
city is the first in the state to expand the program not only to single-family 
homes, but to apartment and condominium residents, Zurn said. 
Residents at two-, three- and four-unit apartments can now recycle trash, as 
well as those at 136 buildings in the city with five or more units, Zurn said. 
The city's goal is to extend recycling soon to all of the 1,813 multifamily 
buildings in the city, Zurn said. 
Despite the increase in state refunds for containers turned into recycling 
centers, Glendale officials said participation in the curbside program is 
increasing. "We're using aggressive marketing to bring more public awareness to 
the program," Zurn said. 
Public awareness is also noticeable at the Westside Recycling center at 6449 
San Fernando Road. 
On Monday, a steady stream of cars pulled up, with drivers dropping off their 
recyclable cans, bottles, plastic containers and newspapers. Most patrons are 
regulars, said company spokesman Ringelberg, and are given "gold cards" that 
help speed payment for their deposits and provide a small monetary bonus for 
their contributions. 
Owen Mockler, 4, of Glendale is in charge of his family's conservation efforts. 
He carefully saved soda cans and bottles for a month in a bag in a closet for 
recycling. 
His mother, Joan Mockler, said Owen and his sister Whitney, 2, have learned 
since they moved to California just a few months ago that rapidly depleting 
landfills present a crisis. Owen said he will add the $1.90 he earned from his 
enterprise to his savings account for a college education. 
Andy Jeffery, a janitor at Walt Disney Imagineering in Glendale, brought in 70 
pounds of beverage containers on his regular weekly trek to the recycling 
center Monday. He said Disney workers are eager to contribute to recycling 
efforts. 
Marina Vega of Glendale had a simple reason for bringing containers to the 
center. She said she is out of work and uses the money she gets for depositing 
reuseable containers to buy gas for her automobile. 
"My friends told me about recycling," she said. "They help me pick up trash in 
the neighborhood." 
