ADVENTURE TRAVEL: NATURE GETS TOP BILLING IN YUCATAN'S SIAN KA'AN 
We were floating on our backs in a swift current toward the sea, treading water 
lazily as the canal carried us through a bulrush marsh that stretched as far as 
the eye could see. 
The turquoise shoals of the Caribbean lay six miles east, while an equal 
distance behind us the marsh turned first to mangroves and then to the dense, 
steaming rain forest where our journey had begun. 
In between, the crystalline waters of this remarkable system of lagoons and 
canals, carved into the limestone shelf that forms the entire Yucatan 
Peninsula, carried us along its ancient wetland course -- exactly as it carried 
the Mayan traders who dug the canals a millennium or more ago. 
Rounding a bend, my fantasies of a time warp were shattered by a call from the 
boatmen 30 feet behind us. He was frantically pointing to a spot along the 
canal just ahead of me, flapping his arms and speaking in a rush of Spanish too 
fast for any of us to understand. "Jabiru, jabiru, jabiru!" he seemed to say. 
Jabiru? No comprendo. 
An ear-shattering screech from an overhanging tree not five feet above my head 
provided the answer. Scrambling to stand against the current, we looked up to 
see two huge, gaping, screaming beaks attached to balls of downy brown 
feathers, both leaning out from their nest in a hissing, screaming, spitting 
display of indignation. 
Vaulting into the boat for a camera, we managed to snap off a few shots before 
the current carried us away. The birds, the boatman explained, were very rare 
baby jabiru -- storks -- and the mother has a wingspan of eight to 10 feet 
(hence the flapping of arms). 
Hearing this, we decided that the better part of valor was to put some distance 
between us and the little ones before mom decided to pay us a visit. 
They call it Sian Ka'an -- which is variously translated from the Mayan as 
"Gateway to Heaven" or "Birth of the Sky." What it is is a miracle by any 
definition -- a 1.3-million-acre "biosphere" that contains a richness of 
archeological, cultural and ecological treasures that would have made the 
conquistadors' unfound pot of gold appear silvery pale in comparison. 
More than 30 Mayan archeological sites have been officially identified here, 
including numerous pyramids, temples, canals, highways and entire cities. 
Experts believe some of the best finds might yet remain hidden under the forest 
canopy. 
Some 350 species of birds -- including the endangered stork, a variety of rare 
parrots, keel-billed toucans, ibises, flamingoes, pelicans and great blue 
herons -- call Sian Ka'an home at various times of the year, as do four of the 
world's eight species of endangered sea turtle. 
Sea manatees and spiny lobster thrive along Sian Ka'an's two big coastal bays 
and inside its coral reef, the longest in the Western Hemisphere. And the 
forest and mangrove swamps shelter a menagerie of rare and wondrous wildlife -- 
jaguars, howler monkeys, miniature deer, tapirs, ocelots and crocodiles. 
Unfortunately, of course, the 16th-Century conquistadors did find Sian Ka'an 
and its once magnificent cities. But they lacked the vision to see the real 
treasures here, and they settled for merely conquering, converting and 
infecting the peoples they found before repairing to their fortresses to the 
north. 
For the next 400 years or so, Sian Ka'an and the other centers of Mayan culture 
to the west and the south were left much to their own devices, carrying on 
their ancient, if Christian-influenced, traditions, speaking their own 
language, eking out a miserable but independent existence through subsistence 
agriculture and fishing. 
It wasn't until the early years of this century that the Mexican government 
even attempted to exert its influence in this part of the Yucatan. 
Today, only about a thousand Mayans remain in Sian Ka'an, scattered in tiny, 
inaccessible villages in the dense jungle of the interior and a few coastal 
centers, where they have formed farming and fishing cooperatives. 
But thanks to their own wisdom and the dedicated efforts of environmentalists 
who have won limited protections for Sian Ka'an and other Mayan centers, it now 
appears that these mysterious people and their beautiful, rich land may 
survive, and even accommodate, the latest and most threatening incarnation of 
the conquistadors: the 20th-Century variety known as tourists. 
The threat is real, and it grows closer every day. It comes from the inexorable 
pressure for raw materials, cheap labor and untouched expanses of glittering 
Caribbean beachfront emanating from neighboring Cancun, just 80 miles north of 
the northern boundary of Sian Ka'an. 
The contrasts between the two regions couldn't be greater -- modern versus 
ancient, congestion versus solitude, glass and concrete versus marsh and 
forest, wealth versus poverty. But for all its glitzy artificiality, Cancun is 
no less "alive" than Sian Ka'an, and it is expanding at the rate of 25% to 30% 
a year, consuming thousands of acres of forest and mile after mile of some of 
the most magnificent sandy beach in the world. 
Fifteen years ago, Cancun (appropriately, "nest of serpents" in Mayan) was a 
tiny seaside resort, a mere glint in the eyes of government tourism officials. 
Today it is Mexico's fastest growing city, an instant metropolis of more than 
300,000 permanent residents, most of whom live off the more than 20,000 luxury 
hotel rooms that line its white, talcum-like beaches. 
Already, the so-called "Cancun-to-Tulum corridor," the 80-mile strip of 
developed coast that reaches to the northern edge of Sian Ka'an at the ancient 
Mayan seaport of Tulum, provides more tourist accommodations than any place in 
the entire Caribbean, including all of Puerto Rico, according to the proud 
boast of a government tourist official. 
It attracts an estimated 2 million visitors a year from throughout the world. 
According to worst-case estimates (or best-case, depending on one's 
perspective), as many as 65,000 more hotel rooms will be constructed along the 
corridor during the next three decades. 
Given the tragedies of Mayan history, the people of Sian Ka'an and those who 
would protect it are given to taking worst-case estimates seriously. Which is 
why Mayan farmers and fishermen who have never heard of national parks and who 
have practiced ruinous "slash and burn" agriculture for centuries have suddenly 
become ardent conservationists. 
"For them," said Adela Samper, a representative of a private, nongovernmental 
organization called the Amigos de Sian Ka'an, "conservation isn't an abstract 
or elite idea at all. It's a matter of the life and death of their own 
communities and their way of life." 
In 1986, after years of local and outside environmentalist pressure, the 
government of Mexico declared the entire Sian Ka'an region a Biosphere Reserve, 
thus extending limited but important safeguards against inappropriate 
development. 
The following year, the United Nations included Sian Ka'an in its international 
network of Biosphere Reserves, mandating that "nucleus" regions be set aside 
for unadulterated conservation and limited scientific studies. 
Around those zones, a broader "buffer zone" has been defined in which 
indigenous populations may continue to live and exploit natural and touristic 
resources, but only in a highly regulated manner that emphasizes sustainable 
development. 
The concept, explained Samper, is relatively new to the conservation movement. 
It differs from national parks in that it recognizes that pure conservation is 
often an inappropriate, if not impossible, option in poverty-stricken Third 
World regions where local tribes have a stake in the land that reaches back 
centuries -- or, in the case of Sian Ka'an, millennia. 
"If we were to come in here and tell the people they can't live over there 
anymore, or hunt in that swamp or fish in that bay, they'd just ignore us -- as 
they should," Samper said. "So the idea of a biosphere is to work very closely 
with the local people, to gain their trust and help them find ways to survive 
and even improve their lot without doing further damage to the land." 
At Sian Ka'an, this approach has led to the establishment of a demonstration 
farm that teaches intensive methods of cultivation and crop rotation as an 
alternative to slash-and-burn, and the creation of marketing co-ops in the 
fishing communities, along with strict monitoring and regulation of the lobster 
harvest. 
Last year, an even larger Mayan region, known as Calakmul, was declared a 
biosphere in the southern Yucatan on the Guatemalan border. It adjoins 
Guatemala's first biosphere, and the two may soon be joined by a small 
biosphere candidate in northern Belize. 
Together, they would comprise a much-hoped-for, three-nation "Mayan Peace Park" 
totaling some five million acres . . . twice the size of Yellowstone. 
Advocates of this union of the Mayan biospheres -- a plan known as La Ruta Maya 
-- hope that parts of El Salvador and Honduras will also join in the 
preservation effort. 
They envision a futuristic system of "eco-tourism" for the entire Mayan region 
that would allow thousands of visitors to pass through the fragile forests and 
major archeological sites via a carefully regulated network of guided bus tours 
and monorails that would leave the environment relatively unscathed. 
Until then, unguided tourist incursions into the Mayan reserves remain 
difficult and hazardous at best, given the lack of paved roads or 
accommodations. Even backpacking is out of the question for most of Sian Ka'an, 
where the rain forest is virtually impenetrable. 
That doesn't mean, of course, that the determined bird watcher, amateur 
archeologist, anthropologist, or just plain rabid, must-see-everything tourist 
can't enjoy Sian Ka'an. 
"Part of the biosphere concept is to promote limited tourism for the benefit of 
the reserve itself," said Sampan, noting that the Friends of Sian Ka'an, with 
financial support from the World Wildlife Fund and the Nature Conservancy, even 
has a director of "ecotourism." 
Beginning last year, the organization started conducting one-day tours for up 
to six people at a time through one of the more accessible and archeologically 
significant portions of the reserve -- a tour I will always remember as the Day 
of the Screaming Storks. 
Setting out from Cancun, our group drove for 1 1/2 hours south to Tulum, past 
the expanse of oceanfront luxury resorts. A few miles south of Tulum, at the 
little resort of Chac Mool, we left the paved road and entered the reserve on 
our way to Chunyaxche (Muyil in Spanish), an inland seaport first settled 
around the year AD 1, according to the Tulane University archeologists working 
there with local Mayan helpers. 
Even before reaching the main ruins, we could glimpse through openings in the 
forest the rough outlines of ancient stone structures that have not yet been 
cleared of centuries of overgrowth. 
At the end of the dirt road, we left our van and, after dousing ourselves with 
insect repellent to ward off the mosquitoes, we set off for a short hike down a 
narrow path slashed through the dense forest. 
Recent excavations have revealed centuries-old structures of varying sizes 
spaced about every 25 yards along the pathway. 
No guards were anywhere to be seen, no rangers, no T-shirt concessionaires, no 
officials or even signs of any sort to tell us not to scamper to the top of the 
crumbling pyramid temples and poke our heads into dark recesses, frightening 
Gila monsters and ourselves. We had only our guide from Amigos and our own 
sense of what was appropriate to limit our explorations. 
From Chunyaxche we drove down a narrow rutted road to Muyil Lagoon, a 
freshwater lake that begins the old water route to the sea, some 15 miles east. 
There, at the end of a rickety dock, four Mayan children splashed in the water 
and played in a dugout canoe -- a miniature replica of those their ancestors 
used centuries ago -- while their fathers, our boatmen, patiently waited our 
arrival. 
A quick trip across the lagoon brought us to the entrance to the first of a 
series of Mayan-built canals -- about four feet wide, just enough for the boat 
to pass through. 
These artificial canals, not discovered by Europeans until the 1920s, spill 
finally into Laguna Chunyaxche, a large lake surrounded by marsh and mangrove. 
Crossing it, we entered yet another series of canals, known as Xlahpak, these 
being natural instead of man-made and eight to ten feet wide. 
As we coursed closer to the sea, the current grew stronger, allowing us to shut 
down the outboard and drift, enjoying the silence, interrupted only by the 
occasional cry of herons or excited exclamations over the sighting of a king 
vulture or other exotic bird. 
Suddenly, looming up out of nowhere in the reeds ahead, a 1,000-year-old 
building appeared just 15 feet from the canal. Built of massive carved stones, 
its intricate decorative detail was easily visible from the boat. 
The boatman explained that it was nothing more significant than an ordinary 
guardhouse along a route that once carried thousands of traders from the rich 
Mayan seaports of Guatemala and Belize to the interior settlements at Muyil and 
on to Copa, a major Mayan city far inland. 
Growing hot, a few of us plunged into the canal, drifting for perhaps a mile 
downstream until the noisy complaints of the jabiru sent us scampering back 
into the boat for the remainder of the voyage. 
Finally, the last canal empties into Laguna Boca Paia, actually a long narrow 
bay that opens through a 500-foot-wide barrier reef into the Caribbean. 
Leaving the boat at the lagoon side of the reef, we wandered up a well-worn 
trail to the opposite, ocean-side shore, discovering ourselves smack in the 
middle of a little fishing resort, served by a dirt road that runs the length 
of the reef. 
A half-dozen small, thatched cabanas were tucked under waving palms 100 feet 
from the surf, and as many outboard fishing boats were moored at the dock. 
The road that runs down the 25-mile reef passes maybe a half-dozen such 
resorts, as well as a dozen or more private, beachfront homes, before it ends 
in Punta Allen, a small Mayan fishing port within the reserve that produces 
about 65 tons of U.S.-bound lobster tails each year. 
The properties are private and predate the establishment of the reserve, so 
they're permitted to continue to operate under casual supervision. 
By evening, we were back amid the comforts of Cancun, and entire world removed 
from the "Gateway to Heaven." 
Amigos de Sian Ka'an charges $85 per person for the one-day tour in the 
reserve. Arrangements can be made through most major hotels in Cancun or, 
better, by writing to Amigos de Sian Ka'an, Apartado Postal 770, Cancun 77500, 
Quintana Roo, Mexico. 
