INNOVATION: A PATENT CASE FOR FINANCIAL INVENTIONS 
Suppose Mike Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert had patented the junk bond. What 
would happen to housing prices if Salomon Bros. had the exclusive right to 
trade mortgage-backed securities? What makes a financial innovation any less 
creative than a new piece of software? 
Although too many investment bankers resemble the ego-bloated, empty-suited 
"Masters of the Universe" so artfully skewered in "Bonfire of the Vanities," 
some financial engineers can be as clever and ingenious as their counterparts 
in computing and biotechnology. Financial markets are huge and awash with 
opportunities. The right innovation at the right time can spawn a 
multibillion-dollar market. Synthesize the right security, hybridize for a new 
financial instrument, put a novel twist in that currency swap, and you can make 
millions of dollars in pure profit for your firm. 
But where biotechnology companies such as Genentech and software companies such 
as Lotus Development Corp. have been quick to seek intellectual property 
protection for their innovations -- and sue to guarantee them -- most 
commercial and investment banks haven't given the idea a second thought. Texas 
Instruments will collect hundreds of millions of dollars from Japanese 
companies thanks to its basic semiconductor chip patents. You would think the 
folks at Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley would have had the smarts to patent 
their innovations and reap the royalties from Nomura, Daiwa and Nikko 
Securities. 
The financial service industry "has never focused on patents; they have no 
consciousness or history with patents," says Stephen B. Judlowe, a partner of 
Hopgood, Calimafde, Kalil, Blaustein &amp; Judlowe, a New York law firm 
specializing in intellectual property issues. "Why they haven't done it, I 
certainly have no answer for. The people who manage these sorts of things ought 
to be paying more attention to it." 
Judlowe is particularly surprised because he was instrumental in procuring a 
patent a decade ago for Merrill Lynch's extraordinarily successful Cash 
Management Account system. The patent was so broad that other firms, like Dean 
Witter, actually paid Merrill licensing fees for the right to build their own 
CMAs. However, few other financial service firms followed up. The idea of 
protecting their innovations instead of just marketing them was never a 
priority. Investment banks that launched a novel and unobvious security in the 
1980s knew that a competitor would hit the market with a copycat security a few 
months later. 
That's going to change. As global competition intensifies, as profit margins 
shrink and as these firms increasingly recognize that innovation is valuable in 
its own right, they will increasingly turn to intellectual property protection 
-- patents, copyrights, trademarks, etc. -- to build barriers to market entry. 
In the same way that patent litigation has been reshaping the semiconductor, 
biotechnology and software industries, we will see intellectual property 
protection alter the global flow of capital. It's inevitable, and it will have 
profound implications for the world's financial markets. 
A memo titled "Protecting Innovative Securities: A Competitive Edge," issued 
this month by the Washington law firm Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan, 
blueprints how financial innovators can erect intellectual property thickets to 
guard their new products. Next to the CMA patent, this document is the first 
formal shot across the bow of the financial services sector. If the courts 
offer financial innovations the same protection that they offer, say, a 
biotechnological innovation or a semiconductor chip, then Wall Street and the 
rest of the world's financial markets are potentially in for the biggest set of 
shocks since October, 1987. 
"Patents have the potential for causing the greatest reverberations in the 
financial industry," asserts attorney Peter K. Trzyna in the Sutherland memo. 
"Competitors could well find themselves foreclosed from marketing a product or 
a class of products for 17 years, or perhaps could do so only by paying 
royalties under a license. Courts are not timid about damage awards. Injunctive 
relief could require competitors to repurchase securities products to remove 
them from the market." 
Trzyna and Judlowe argue that you can patent the process by which a new 
security is made. Let's say the firm has a computer system with special 
software that generates this innovative security. If that process is patented, 
under U.S. law, it would be illegal for a Japanese or European financial 
institution to sell such a security in America -- unless the institution did 
all the paperwork by hand. What's more, that computer system could be patented 
in Japan and Europe. The U.S. financial firm could, technically and legally, 
acquire exclusive rights to its innovation if it so desired. 
On a strictly business level, however, what we are likely to see is investment 
banks and commercial banks cross-licensing their innovations around the world. 
And why not? Given the potential sums involved, the risk/reward ratio makes 
sense. What's a few hundred thousand dollars extra when hundreds of millions 
are at stake? 
"There can be extraordinary benefits from pushing the envelope," says patent 
attorney Judlowe. "Anyone who is at the threshold of what's permissible makes 
an error if they don't seek out protection. The bottom line is that someone 
spends an awful lot of money developing these new products so if they don't 
spend the incremental money to try and protect it, I think they're making a 
mistake." 
So what happens if Drexel did hold the junk bond patent? Or Salomon has a 
virtual monopoly on mortgage-backed securities? Injecting intellectual property 
protection would slow the rate of innovation and would ultimately prove to be a 
conservative force. People would be very careful about buying securities issued 
by a monopolist. Conversely, investors might be reluctant to buy securities 
issued by competitors because they wouldn't want the values of their securities 
to be affected by a lawsuit. Investors would no doubt ask to be indemnified. 
At the same time, U.S. firms that have a reputation for innovation would be 
better able to fend off competition from overseas firms that relied on 
imitative strategies and lower costs of capital for their successes. The down 
side, of course, is that we'd have more people in the courts. 
"Financial service companies are under such profitability pressures that they 
would try most anything," says Jon Rotenstreich, president of the financial 
services firm Torchmark. A former Salomon Bros. partner and IBM corporate 
treasurer, Rotenstreich says that "What they should really focus on is 
productivity of basic functions rather than legislate protections for their 
business." 
That may be true. This is a spanking new sapling of intellectual property law; 
it's not clear how big it's going to grow. But when you look at what's going on 
in other innovation-intensive industries and then look at the gigantic sums of 
money involved in trading, hedges and swaps every moment of the day, you'd have 
to be a Pollyanna to think that America's lawyers and bankers won't find a way 
to make money together exploring how to protect their intellectual capital. 
