NEWS ANALYSIS; 
WILSON'S LETTERS ON BEHALF OF THRIFTS BECOME A CAMPAIGN ISSUE; 
POLITICS: MANY LEGISLATORS WHO WROTE REGULATORS TO HELP S&amp;LS ARE NOW BEING 
HAUNTED BY THEIR ACTIONS. 
Just a few years ago, Sen. Pete Wilson's efforts to assist California savings 
and loan executives amounted to business as usual in Washington. Like Wilson, 
many members of Congress routinely wrote letters to federal regulators on 
behalf of home state thrifts. 
But times have changed and earlier standards of conduct for members of Congress 
are now being called into question. 
Across the country, incumbent members of Congress are being forced by their 
political opponents to defend actions -- no matter how small -- that might have 
contributed to the crisis in the nation's savings and loan industry. 
In fact, the political pressures caused by the thrift debacle have grown so 
intense that many politicians -- including some of Wilson's colleagues in the 
Senate -- have returned hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign 
contributions received from savings and loans. This group includes some members 
who have never been directly linked to the thrift scandal. 
"Until recently, the only candidates who got into trouble on this issue were 
those who took specific actions on behalf of savings and loan crooks," said 
Anita Dunn, an official of the Democratic Senate Campaign Committee. "But now 
many incumbents are being asked: What were you doing while this was going on? 
Why didn't anybody stop it?" 
Wilson, who received more than $243,000 in contributions from S&amp;L 
executives over the last 10 years, is being accused by Dianne Feinstein, his 
Democratic opponent for governor, of repeatedly contacting federal regulators 
during the mid-1980s on behalf of newly chartered California thrifts that were 
having trouble getting federal deposit insurance. 
The charges are supported by government records obtained from the Office of 
Thrift Supervision. The documents also show that Wilson contacted federal 
regulators on behalf of other thrifts, including one that has given him more 
than $20,000 in campaign contributions, and four that were seized by federal 
regulators. 
Wilson has said that he did not pressure federal regulators on behalf of the 
thrift industry. According to his aides, Wilson considered his contacts with 
federal regulators to be routine constituent service. 
Otto Bos, Wilson's campaign manager, said the senator was only inquiring about 
the complaints he had received from thrift executives and that he made no 
effort to force federal regulators to change their policies. 
But Bill Carrick, Feinstein's spokesman, said the records demonstrate Wilson 
was "taking an advocacy and lobbying position" on behalf of the thrifts. 
At the time, Wilson's letters to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board were 
remarkable only because the GOP senator -- unlike most members of Congress who 
wrote to the agency -- does not serve on the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban 
Affairs Committee, which oversees the thrift industry. 
Most of Wilson's letters to thrift regulators were pro forma requests for an 
explanation of the complaints his office had received from executives of 
state-chartered savings and loans that were having trouble getting federal 
deposit insurance. 
Edwin J. Gray, who headed the Federal Home Loan Bank Board during the 
mid-1980s, recalls that his agency routinely received letters from members of 
Congress who were passing along such complaints. The agency, now known as the 
Office of Thrift Supervision, still has two massive file cabinets full of such 
letters dating back to the early 1980s. 
But one of Wilson's letters clearly deviated from that pattern. Unlike the 
other letters, it questioned the agency's general policy and did not mention 
any single thrift. Writing to Gray on Oct. 25, 1984, Wilson said that he shared 
concerns expressed by other members of Congress about the difficulty 
California-chartered thrifts were encountering when they applied for federal 
deposit insurance. 
At the time of Wilson's letter, the regulators were observing what one official 
described as a de facto moratorium on issuing federal deposit insurance for 
state-chartered thrifts in California. The moratorium had been imposed by Gray, 
who feared that Lawrence Taggart, then California's savings and loan 
commissioner, was chartering too many new thrifts and thus jeopardizing the 
federal deposit insurance system. 
During one 400-day period, Taggart had approved 200 applications for state 
charters. 
In his letter, Wilson asked Gray whether he could set up a meeting between 
state and federal regulators to iron out the problem. He also inquired whether 
legislation was needed to improve the oversight process. 
Although Gray remembers none of Wilson's other inquiries, he said that he 
recalls receiving the Oct. 25 letter. "My recollection was that I just firmly 
disagreed with him," said Gray, who explained his position in a cordial letter 
to Wilson on Nov. 2. 
According to Gray, Wilson never pursued the complaint. "I never got a call -- 
never heard from him," Gray said. "There was no intervention." 
Gray said that Wilson's action is not comparable to efforts by Sen. Alan 
Cranston (D-Calif.) and four other senators on behalf of Charles H. Keating 
Jr., owner of failed Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan of Irvine. Gray has accused the 
five senators of improperly trying to influence thrift regulators by summoning 
them to Capitol Hill for a meeting about a lengthy government investigation of 
Lincoln. 
But Cranston, like Wilson, argues that his efforts on behalf of Keating were 
nothing more than legitimate constituent service. In addition, Cranston, who 
serves on the Senate Banking Committee, has accused Gray of partisanship in 
criticizing the thrift-related activities of Democrats in Congress while 
dismissing the conduct of Republicans. 
Like Wilson, Gray is a San Diego Republican. Before he took over the agency 
that regulates savings and loans, he served as a close adviser to Ronald 
Reagan, both during his tenure as governor and during the early years of his 
presidency. 
The rush to obtain state thrift charters followed a wave of deregulation at the 
state and federal levels that permitted S&amp;L executives to invest large sums 
of federally insured money in risky business ventures. These changes are at the 
heart of the current crisis, which ultimately could cost taxpayers as much as 
$500 billion. 
Records show that Wilson wrote to Federal Home Loan Bank Board officials on 
eight occasions between October, 1983, and August, 1985, asking the agency to 
review denials of federal insurance to specific state-chartered thrifts. 
The institutions included City Savings &amp; Loan of Westlake Village, Builders 
Savings &amp; Loan of Long Beach, Diamond Savings of Westminster, Shelter 
Island Savings of La Jolla, Great Fortune Savings of Los Angeles, Bay Savings 
&amp; Loan of Monterey and Alta Savings of Concord. 
At least two of the institutions -- Alta and Bay -- already had been denied 
federal insurance and could not operate. 
Most of the thrifts that Wilson tried to assist did not contribute to his 
campaign, according to Federal Election Commission records. He did, however, 
receive a $500 contribution from an executive of City Savings &amp; Loan in 
1988 -- four years after he intervened on behalf of the thrift's application 
for federal insurance. 
Wilson also wrote to federal regulators on April 10, 1984, on behalf of Great 
Western Savings &amp; Loan, which has contributed generously to his campaign. 
He forwarded a Great Western letter -- which complained that the thrift was not 
receiving enough interest on a loan for real estate that the federal government 
seized in connection with illegal drug trafficking. 
Federal Election Commission records show that he has received more than $20,000 
from Great Western's political action committee over the last decade -- $4,300 
in 1982, $2,500 in 1984, $4,000 in 1985, $6,000 in 1986 and $4,000 in 1987. The 
1987 contributions were earmarked for Wilson's 1994 Senate reelection campaign. 
In addition, he has received at least $6,500 in personal contributions from 
Great Western executives during the same period. 
Wilson's letters to the bank board included three on behalf of thrift 
executives whose institutions already had been seized by the federal government 
-- Hacienda Savings &amp; Loan of Oxnard, San Marino Savings &amp; Loan of San 
Marino and Mt. Whitney Savings &amp; Loan of Visalia. 
In addition, he contacted the agency last April on behalf of Santa Barbara 
Savings, which subsequently was seized by the government. In this letter, he 
passed along a complaint that federal regulators had rejected the thrift's 
reorganization plan. 
Wilson has no plans to return any of his campaign contributions from savings 
and loan executives. To do so, his aides have said, would be an admission that 
he did something out of the ordinary. 
Times staff writer Bill Stall in Los Angeles contributed to this story. 
