POWER LINES POSE NO CANCER RISKS, EXPERT SAYS; 
HEALTH: PARENTS HAVE URGED SCHOOL DISTRICTS TO TEST ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS AT 
SCHOOLS NEXT TO HIGH-TENSION WIRES. 
Electromagnetic fields created by high-tension power lines do not pose a health 
risk to nearby residents, according to a prominent scientist who has studied 
the subject. 
The issue has been in county headlines recently, with Tustin residents fighting 
Southern California Edison's plan to build a substation there and Fountain 
Valley parents urging their school district to test electromagnetic fields at 
schools next to power lines. 
"I have not found any convincing evidence that there's a problem," said Dr. 
John C. Bailar, a recent recipient of a prestigious MacArthur Fellowship, 
faculty member of the McGill School of Medicine at Montreal, Canada, and 
consultant to the New England Journal of Medicine and the U.S. Public Health 
Service's Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
"I think there's enough evidence to say it's unlikely there's a health problem 
related to the power lines, and even if we're wrong and there is a health 
problem, then it's small," said Bailar, who was in Anaheim on Tuesday to lead a 
discussion about radiation and health risks as part of the American Statistical 
Assn. convention. 
Pointing to studies that link long-term electromagnetic field exposure with 
higher rates of some forms of cancer, a parent group in Fountain Valley has 
urged school district officials to hire an independent consultant to measure 
the fields. Measurements taken by Southern California Edison have differed 
greatly from those taken by the parent group. 
"Measurements often vary a great deal because the fields vary," said Bailar, 
who organized a conference last year on electromagnetic fields. "A matter of 
several feet or even several inches could make a difference." 
Measuring the fields can be difficult, he added. 
Fountain Valley Supt. Ruben Ingram has said he is not certain that he can 
justify taking money away from education programs to hire a consultant when 
there is no consensus on how to interpret and respond to the results of 
electromagnetic field measurements. School district officials are concerned but 
have been waiting to act until health officials provide advice about possible 
health risks. 
While parents are frustrated by the district's position, Bailar said he thinks 
that the district's reaction is reasonable. 
He said he does not see a need for taking more measurements other than for 
historical purposes on the off-chance that future studies reveal a link between 
the electromagnetic fields and health problems. 
What is really needed, Bailar said, is a large study funded by government, 
power companies and concerned communities, with comment from all interested 
parties so all will accept the results. 
"Even if there is no scientific problem, we now have a public policy problem, 
and it might be worth doing additional study to see whether these concerns are 
justified and to allay the fears of parents and others," Bailar said. 
He said the research, which he estimated would cost more than $1 million, 
should be a large-scale study of people exposed to various levels of 
electromagnetic fields over a long enough time span to determine the frequency 
of serious diseases. 
