SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
IS IT THE DEATH OF US?; 
OXYGEN; 
NEW LIGHT ON THE 'FREE RADICALS' THAT CAUSE AGING. 
When Prometheus stole the flame of eternal life, the enraged Gods banished him 
from Olympus. This robbed him of immortality and condemned humanity to death. 
Now scientists on the cutting edge of longevity research have discovered that 
the spiritual duality that inspired this Greek myth -- the sustaining life 
force is ultimately lethal -- is rooted in reality. When we breathe oxygen, it 
creates highly reactive free radical molecules that go on a deadly rampage 
throughout our bodies. 
"This is the ultimate paradox: oxygen is essential for life yet it forms 
substances that may be killing us," says Paul Hochstein, director of the 
Institute for Toxicology at the USC School of Pharmacy. The Institute, which 
was founded in 1980, is one of the few centers in the world devoted solely to 
the study of free radicals. 
What scientists are learning here and at other research facilities about free 
radicals sheds new light on the understanding of the mechanisms of aging, and 
about many of the debilitating illnesses that accompany aging. This knowledge 
may eventually yield therapies to maximize lifespan and to maintain full mental 
and physical capabilities well into old age, according to some researchers. 
Free radical reactions contribute directly to the physical ravages of age. The 
oxidative damage caused by free radicals "rusts" cells in much the same way as 
oxygen erodes metal, and gradually wears down our bodily organs. These volatile 
molecules may even be the key agents in hastening aging because they break down 
or alter DNA, the master regulator of the cell. 
This also upsets the body's delicate chemical balance and weakens our immune 
system so that we are more susceptible to disease. Free radicals are believed 
to play a major role in causing or aggravating more than 60 of the afflictions 
associated with aging, including cancer, heart disease, high blood pressure, 
rheumatoid arthritis, cataracts, glaucoma, emphysema, Parkinson's disease and 
stroke. 
Free radicals are a by-product of our normal metabolism, though some are 
created by radiation, ozone exposure, cancer-causing chemicals and other 
environmental toxins. These free radicals form briefly when oxygen courses 
through the body and has a chemical reaction with the cells. Free radicals 
cruise through our bodies searching for an electron mate, like heat-seeking 
missiles. When they link up with another molecule, that molecule suddenly has 
an extra electron. To restore its electrical balance, the molecule latches onto 
yet another molecule. This process triggers a toxic chain reaction that wreaks 
havoc at that site in the body. Cells are destroyed or severely damaged, and 
genes are chewed up or reprogrammed. 
Pioneering scientists are now looking for ways to delay, prevent or even 
reverse the physical deterioration that's triggered by these renegade 
molecules. For example, Kelvin Davies, an associate professor at USC and a 
member of the faculty at the Institute, believes that eventually we will be 
able to mobilize the body's natural defenses to halt the degeneration triggered 
by free radicals. 
The British-born biochemist has discovered a class of enzymes that are 
programmed to repair damage caused by free radical reactions. Davies postulated 
the existence of genes that coded for these enzymes based on his observation of 
oxidative damage to cell cultures bombarded with hydrogen peroxide (an unstable 
oxygen molecule). "We hit these cells with lethal doses of hydrogen peroxide 
but it didn't kill them off. So the cells must have some way of removing or 
repairing damage." 
It turned out they do. Some of the body's enzymes function as a repair system 
to fix the damage done by free radicals. Davies discovered one set of enzymes, 
macroxyprotheinase (MOP), salvages injured proteins. Another class of enzymes, 
phopholipases, performs a similar function with cell membranes, while yet a 
third group, nucleases and glycosylases, actually repair the DNA. Initially, 
cells are able to combat this bombardment. "But the cumulative effects of this 
damage over time may diminish the cell's ability to make these repairs," says 
Davies. "This may be what causes some of the physical degeneration of aging." 
In other words, our bodies are ground down from wear and tear, and all the 
debris that collects in our system. 
This discovery provides some intriguing clues into the aging process: it may be 
that the reason some people live to a vital old age is because their internal 
salvage system retains its vigor. 
Researchers are also investigating the role free radicals play in disturbing 
the normal regulatory function of the DNA. Some researchers have found free 
radicals do damage to the DNA, which inhibits the production of the enzyme 
Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP). This enzyme provides fuel for cellular activity. 
The DNA damage also triggers the activation of an enzyme -- Poly-ADP Rebose 
Polymerase -- that might enhance the formation of malignant tumors in cells. 
Scientists have also uncovered a number of natural substances that counteract 
the damage spawned by free radical reactions. The food preservative BHT, and 
common nutrients like selenium, vitamins, A, C, and E, and beta-carotene, have 
been shown to be antioxidants; anti-oxidants disarm free radicals by 
scooping-up their extra electrons before renegade molecules can cause trouble. 
Our bodies also produce enzymes, like superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase, 
gluthathione peroxidase and DT diaphrorase, that neutralize free radicals by 
converting them to harmless chemicals. 
Studies are now in progress to test the disease-fighting potential of these 
free radical inhibitors. The National Institute of Neurological and 
Communicative Disorders and Stroke, for instance, has funded a $10-million 
study to see if vitamin E and deprenyl, a drug that inhibits the formation of 
free radicals, can stem the loss of brain cells in 800 patients who are in the 
early stages of Parkinson's disease. "Based upon previous data," explains 
Gerald Cohen, a professor of neurology at the Mt. Sinai School of Medicine in 
New York and a member of the scientific advisory committee for the Parkinson's 
study, "these two agents used in combination hold out the promise of stopping 
the progression of this crippling disorder." 
Free radical research is also broadening scientists' comprehension of the link 
between cholesterol -- specifically, the "bad" cholesterol known as low density 
lipoprotein (LDL) -- and another major killer, atherosclerosis. "Studies show 
that if LDL is modified by free radicals -- forming a toxic substance called 
cholesterol epoxide -- this altered LDL is much more readily deposited in the 
cell walls," explains Alex Sevanian, an associate professor at USC and a member 
of the faculty at the Institute. "The accumulation of these fat-filled cells in 
the walls of the arteries is one of the hallmarks of the early stages of 
atherosclerosis." 
In a recent experiment that Sevanian conducted in tandem with Judy Berliner, a 
biochemist at UCLA, LDL was deliberately enriched with cholesterol apoxide. 
Sure enough, the transformed LDL penetrated cell membranes like a knife slicing 
through warm butter. "The cause-effect relationship is very compelling," says 
Sevanian. "This free radical reaction may be pivotal in causing 
atherosclerosis, as well as increasing the risk of high blood pressure." 
Free radicals may also be the culprits behind much of the damage that 
accompanies heart attacks and strokes. Numerous studies reveal that when blood 
flow to the heart -- or to other vital organs like the brain, lungs and kidneys 
-- is temporarily stopped, the real destruction occurs after the blood flow has 
been resumed. That's because the rush of oxygen fuels the formation of free 
radicals. 
Hochstein and his colleagues have found that when oxygen flow is restored to 
the heart, the free radicals transform oxygen into hydrogen peroxide. Then the 
hydrogen peroxide converts myoglobin -- which normally transports oxygen to the 
muscles -- into a "toxic enzyme-like substance that damages the heart," 
explains Hochstein. "Not all the damage sustained during a heart attack can be 
attributed to free radical reactions. But they are a key element." 
Researchers are monitoring the effectiveness of antioxidants such as 
beta-carotene and vitamins A, C, and E to combat cancer. "We found that smokers 
who eat leafy green vegetables" -- which are rich in vitamin A and C -- 
"develop lung cancer less often than those who don't," says William Pryor, a 
professor of biochemistry at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge and a 
pioneer in the study of free radicals. "It's conceivable smokers could benefit 
from an antioxidant supplementation regimen." 
Other scientists are investigating the therapeutic possibilities of using 
vitamin C to reverse the damage by sunlight and oxygen that makes our eyes more 
vulnerable to the formation of cataracts. And still others are employing 
antiradical agents to halt the neurological damage triggered by oxygen radicals 
after strokes or injuries to the head and spinal cord, and to curb tissue 
damage in such diseases as emphysema. 
"There's been a renaissance in free radical biology in the past decade," says 
Pryor. "Within the next 10 or so years, (we) will promote a modest extension in 
lifespan -- perhaps five to eight years." 
The " Free Radical " 
1. Oxygen molecules enter the body through eating or breathing. 
2. In normal metabolism, molecule becomes unstable by losing one of its 
electrons to another molecule. Unstable molecule known as "free radical." 
3. "Free radical" latches onto another molecule in the membrane of a cell. 
Molecule travels off and leaves cell with its own "free radical." 
4. After cell membrane has been broken by the chain of "free radical" 
exchanges, cell begins to disintegrate. This damages the genes and can destroy 
the cell. 
