COMPUTER-DRIVEN SALES PITCHES; 
UP TO THEIR EARS IN JUNK, PHONE AND FAX USERS SAY 
It hits the switchboard at the small Colorado hospital like machine gun fire. 
All eight lines on operator Betsy Joyce's panel light up. 
"Hello. Would you please listen to the following important message," the 
disembodied voice says as she answers the first line, then the second and the 
third . . . every line is the same. 
Then the sequence is repeated in the hospital's wards. One after another, a 
computer dials phone numbers sequentially, hitting patient rooms, then 
attacking obstetrics, orthopedics, pediatrics and physicians' offices. Nurses 
scramble down halls trying to answer the calls before a patient jerks out his 
IV tether or sends a heart monitor crashing. 
The periodic sieges at Penrose Community Hospital, an 88-bed facility in 
Colorado Springs, happen every month or so and last for hours, sometimes for 
several days in a row. The recorded ads relentlessly pitch various local 
businesses, including a nearby liquor store. 
"They're awful," Joyce said. "You can't even argue with it. I've listened 
through to the end several times and said (at the beep): 'You're calling a 
hospital' but that doesn't make any difference. . . . There's nothing I can do. 
I have to answer them. You don't dare not answer." 
Before long, Congress may be answering, too, as complaints pour in from 
hospitals like Penrose, other emergency services, ordinary businesses and just 
plain citizens who are tired of having their phones -- and increasingly their 
fax machines -- ringing like fire alarms with unsolicited sales pitches. 
A House committee is expected to vote next month on legislation to restrict 
"junk calls" and "junk fax." Dozens of states, including California, either 
recently have enacted such laws or are considering doing so. 
The surging popularity of auto-dialers and fax machines has created a 
technology-spawned confrontation between retailers who use the increasingly 
efficient -- and intrusive -- marketing devices and those on the receiving end 
of the line. 
"It's an '80s problem," said Steven S. Seltzer, president of Modern 
Communications in Pennsylvania. 
Since the beginning of the year, Seltzer said, a hospital beeper system in 
western Pennsylvania has been tied up at least a half dozen times by an 
auto-dialing computer. 
"In the case of a transplant candidate, that can be critical," he said. "They 
get a beep, and they think they're going to the hospital, but it's a 
telemarketer trying to play a message. Hospitals can't reach doctors. Life 
hangs in the balance." 
But businesses that use auto-dialers and fax machines to market their goods and 
services say that the burgeoning backlash threatens their First Amendment 
rights. They argue that a few bad operators are soiling the whole industry. 
Consumers, on the other hand, complain that their right to be left alone is 
rapidly disappearing. 
"There's a growing level of anger about this," said Chris DePhillips, a 
legislative assistant to Rep. Marge Roukema (R-N.J.), a co-sponsor of the House 
bill. Approved by a subcommittee in July, the measure will be taken up by the 
House Energy and Commerce Committee after Congress returns from its recess in 
September. 
The bill would require the Federal Communications Commission to establish 
standards for automatic dialing systems and fax machines. Calls to hospitals, 
police stations and other emergency services would be illegal. A national 
directory would be compiled listing people who have indicated, perhaps by just 
checking a box on their phone bills, that they don't want to receive 
unsolicited calls or faxes. Violators would be subject to fines of up to 
$10,000 and jail terms of up to a year. 
Similar bills are working their way through the California Legislature. One 
would forbid telephone companies from selling unlisted numbers to 
telemarketers. Another would require a telemarketer to ask permission before 
playing a recorded message. A third would limit unsolicited faxing between the 
hours of 8 p.m. and 8 a.m. and mandate that all telefaxed messages display a 
toll-free number that could be called to halt future transmissions. 
Not Far Enough 
None of these measures goes far enough to satisfy some critics. 
"Whether it's junk fax or junk phone calls . . . we have an absolute right to 
be left alone," said Bob Bulmash, president of Private Citizen, a Chicago-based 
consumer group. "Our right to be left alone is being sapped by technology. Our 
last sanctuary, our home, should be inviolable." 
Bulmash said he recently received a letter of support from an 87-year-old woman 
with arthritis, multiple sclerosis and a heart condition who finds it difficult 
to get to the phone. The woman has an unlisted number, Bulmash said, but even 
that can't shield her from computer-driven sales calls. 
New York consultant Geri Gantman, however, said that the telemarketing 
industry, which generates an estimated $42 billion annually and supports 1.5 
million marketers with computer-assisted dialing systems, has been taking a bad 
rap. 
First, she said, only about one fourth of telemarketing activities involve 
unsolicited calls to people in their homes. And fewer than 1% of those calls 
are made by computers alone, Gantman said, with mostly local companies using 
the random auto-dialers. 
Richard A. Barton, a vice president of the Direct Marketing Assn., calls random 
dialing "a very poor marketing technique." 
"I'm always surprised it gets any response," Barton said. 
He said that much of the trouble is caused by fly-by-night firms that 
indiscriminately use random dialing, the kind of unscrupulous operators who are 
likely to ignore restrictive legislation or fall by the wayside before they can 
be prosecuted. 
State Restrictions 
The Colorado Springs hospital may be a case in point. The state already has 
moved to restrict auto-dialing. Switchboard operator Joyce said that some of 
the messages start by saying: "We notice you're in our neighborhood," before 
touting a local retailer. 
Barton said that most telemarketers are more circumspect. "I don't think you 
have a problem with the big national companies," he said, "other than that 
people don't like to get phone calls." 
Gantman agreed. 
"One of the misconceptions is that telemarketers don't want to know who doesn't 
want to be called," Gantman said. "We do want to know; it makes everyone 
happier." 
To that end, the DMA publishes a quarterly list of about 230,000 people who 
have written to the association asking not to be called. 
Still, she said, "We can't promise they'll get no calls at home." 
The controversy over the unsolicited use of fax machines is just as vexing, 
although it does not affect as many people. 
In May, the president of an Orange County business that sells fax paper decided 
to lobby the governor of Maryland, who was considering signing one of the 
nation's first bills to ban junk fax. 
Steve Ridinger, who advertises by sending facsimile transmissions to more than 
500,000 fax users nationwide, sent messages to about 1,200 Maryland businesses, 
asking them to tear off the bottom half, sign it and then fax the form to Gov. 
William Donald Schaefer in Annapolis. 
One morning, hundreds of faxes spewed forth from the governor's fax machine, 
choking off virtually all other transmissions for six hours. The effort 
certainly was convincing: it persuaded the governor to sign the bill. The 
measure, which took effect July 1, subjects "fax abusers" to $200 fines. 
"It was an incredibly counterproductive lobbying effort," noted David Iannucci, 
the governor's chief legislative officer, who said that the governor had not 
paid much attention to the bill until that morning. "It demonstrated to us the 
problems that businesses are facing." 
But Iannucci said that the message was underscored by the fact that about 20% 
of the faxes had been altered to indicate support for the bill instead of 
opposition. On some of the forms, the message "don't sign this bill" had been 
crossed out and changed to "do," he said. 
One signer, Iannucci recalled, added a postscript that said, in effect: This is 
bunk. Sign the bill. Stop these guys from using my fax machine as their 
printing press. The actual language was not quite so polite. 
"I've never seen that on a mass mailing before. Usually, if people disagree 
with a solicitation, they throw it in the trash," he said. "These people were 
so bothered that they took the time to change it." 
Enough people are bothered by junk fax that more than 20 states are considering 
legislation tougher than the proposed federal law. 
But "free faxers" contend that junk fax is a nonproblem, that some of the 
proposed restrictions would hamper routine business practices, that imposing a 
$1,000 fine for a 3-cent fax transmission is ludicrous and that their free 
speech rights are in danger. 
With technology developed in the 1970s but not widely used until the early 
1980s, fax machines have exploded in popularity and are now standard office 
equipment. Industry observers estimate that by 1991, more than 5 million fax 
machines will be transmitting more than 60 billion pages a year in the United 
States alone. 
"The opportunity to abuse it will only worsen," Rep. Christopher Shays 
(R-Conn.) told a House subcommittee in May. (The congressman's comments were 
later faxed to The Times.) 
"Not only do they get junk mail, but the postage is due, too," said 
congressional aide Mike Connolly, noting that the receiver pays several cents 
for each sheet of fax paper. 
Frequent faxers are understandably nervous. "I have a pro-fax statement I could 
fax you if you request it," said Heather Bante, vice president of Public FAX 
Inc., an Orange County firm that publishes a directory of fax numbers. 
"However, I won't fax it to you unsolicited." 
Bante worries that the rising tide of anti-fax sentiment "risks infringing on 
some of our basic constitutional freedoms." And just because a fax transmission 
is unsolicited, Bante said, "doesn't mean it's unwanted." 
"The last thing we want to do is to send material to people who don't want it," 
said Elliott Segal, a vice president at Mr. Fax in Irvine, the firm behind the 
Maryland lobbying effort and similar attempts to influence legislation in other 
states, including California. 
If the ill-fated lobbying attempts proved nothing else, he said, they showed 
that businesses are concerned. 
"They don't want to see legislation that tells them what is or is not an 
opportunity to them," Segal said. "One man's junk is another man's 
opportunity." 
