UNION MOVES CLOSER TO NEW CONTRACT AT ABC 
A majority of National Assn. of Broadcast Employees and Technicians workers at 
ABC have voted for a new contract offer, the network said Friday, but 
ratification was held up by members of eight units who rejected the four-year 
pact. 
However, union spokesman John Krieger said that NABET hopes to have the matter 
resolved "within a couple of weeks, hopefully sooner" after joint meetings of 
union and management with the dissenting NABET members. 
The union -- which ABC says represents 2,150 full-time workers, the majority of 
them engineers -- said that the engineering contingent narrowly approved ABC's 
contract offer by a vote of 802 to 782. It gave no other vote totals. 
Under NABET's rules, all 19 of the union's units at ABC must approve any new 
contract. ABC said that the balking units represented only about 100 people. 
Included among the units that rejected the contract were two in Los Angeles, 
representing hairstylists and makeup artists and plant maintenance personnel. 
A similar rejection by several dissenting NABET units in 1987 delayed for a few 
days final approval of an NBC-NABET contract after a strike that had lasted 17 
weeks. 
The threat of a strike at ABC this year didn't loom large after the union's old 
contract ended on March 31. Although ABC's first contract offer was rejected, 
no strike vote ever was taken. 
The new contract, under which ABC will be allowed to pink-slip 60 to 70 radio 
engineers, would give union members a 7% lump-sum bonus upon ratification of 
the contract, 3% pay raises in each of the second and third years of the 
contract, and a 4% hike in its fourth year. 
Despite the fact that the contract has not been finally ratified, ABC said in a 
statement that it was "extremely gratified" by the vote. "We've gained some of 
the flexibility we need while providing NABET employees with protections they 
sought," the network said. 
In addition to the ABC television network and radio networks, the contract 
covers eight radio stations and four TV stations owned by ABC/Capital Cities, 
Inc., including KABC-AM (790) and KLOS-FM (95.5), and KABC-TV Channel 7 in Los 
Angeles. 
