DRIVER BURNED TO DEATH, 4 HURT IN CRASH 
A Glendale man burned to death in a five-car pileup Thursday morning that 
injured four other motorists and closed the southbound Golden State Freeway in 
Valencia for nearly two hours, the California Highway Patrol reported. 
Tahmas Tahmassebian, 42, died in the 12:05 a.m. accident in the southbound 
lanes of the freeway near the Lyons Avenue exit, authorities said. 
Officers said the accident occurred when Tahmassebian, driving south, lost 
control of his Mercedes-Benz and crashed into the freeway's center divider. 
About two minutes earlier, a motorist with a car phone had called the CHP and 
reported that the Mercedes was weaving across lanes of the freeway, the CHP 
reported. 
Car Rebounded 
After hitting the center divider, the Mercedes rebounded into the second lane 
of the freeway and came to a stop, Officer Ralph Elvira said. Two other 
southbound cars swerved around it and also stopped, he said. Another car could 
not stop in time and attempted to pass between the stopped cars but hit all 
three, knocking one of them into a passing pickup truck. 
"Cars were going all over the place," Elvira said. 
The Mercedes burst into flames and Tahmassebian apparently burned to death, 
Elvira said. 
All southbound lanes of the freeway were closed while the fire was extinguished 
and the wreckage was cleared. Elvira said traffic backed up two miles before 
the freeway was reopened about 90 minutes after the accident. 
Three drivers and a passenger from the other cars involved in the accident were 
hospitalized. 
Colleen Weeks, 25, of Fresno was in critical condition at Henry Mayo Newhall 
Memorial Hospital in Newhall, and Jerry Gragnani, 40, of Fresno was in stable 
condition at Holy Cross Medical Center in Mission Hills, officials said. 
Gragnani's passenger, Anna Sandoval, 34, of Fresno was treated and released at 
Holy Cross. Francisco Gutierrez, 49, of San Fernando was treated at Henry Mayo 
Newhall for minor injuries, officials said. 
