RENEWAL OF JAPANESE POLITICS NEEDS SHIFTS INSIDE PARTIES 
By voting against the Liberal Democratic Party in the recent upper house 
election, Japanese citizens confirmed that their nation is in fact a democracy. 
Whether or not this LDP defeat will lead to a transformation of the political 
system will depend on how political leaders act in the next several months. At 
least three scenarios are possible. 
One outcome is a fundamental realignment of party politics. For this to happen, 
the Japan Socialist Party will need to change. Takako Doi's party made 
impressive electoral gains by riding a wave of popular dissatisfaction with the 
Liberal Democrats and by mobilizing the support of women. To consolidate this 
support, Doi will have to demonstrate that her party is capable of governing. 
This would involve modifying its foreign-policy position of unarmed neutrality 
and recognizing the U.S.-Japanese alliance. 
The Japan Socialist Party will also have to shed its Marxist doctrines and 
develop a more realistic approach to public-policy issues. While abolishing the 
consumption tax may be popular now, the party will have to develop a sensible 
tax reform plan that will cover the growing costs of social programs. 
Similarly, the party will have to go beyond simply opposing agricultural 
liberalization and develop its own strategy for dealing with the nation's trade 
surplus. 
These steps will be critical in forging a workable coalition with the centrist 
Democratic Socialist Party and Komeito, the Clean Government Party, whose 
cooperation will be necessary if the Socialists want to assume power. 
Although skeptics will question the JSP's ability to transform itself, the 
historic opening posed by the Liberal Democrats' recent setback could compel 
the Socialists to make the change. Doi's statements after the election indicate 
a flexible posture and a keen awareness of the task at hand. Her personal role 
in the party victory should increase her leverage against ideological die-hards 
within the party. 
Furthermore, Rengo, the national federation of private-sector labor unions, 
will facilitate the process of Socialist transformation. It succeeded in 
electing 11 of the 12 candidates it fielded. The federation was formed in 1987 
to overcome the fragmentation of the labor movement and to give workers a 
greater voice in the policy process. This fall Rengo plans to unite with the 
unions representing public employees. Its leadership is committed to bringing 
the opposition parties together to form a united progressive force. 
Now that the Liberal Democratic Party has lost its majority in the upper house, 
a united opposition would force the party to dissolve the more powerful lower 
house later this year and hand the conservatives another electoral defeat. That 
would give birth to Japan's first social democratic government since the late 
1940s. 
Another scenario is that the Socialists miss the current opportunity and the 
Liberal Democrats respond imaginatively instead. If the Socialists fail to 
change, the public will view them as irresponsible and unrealistic, and the 
current boom will soon fade. This would give the Liberal Democrats a chance to 
revitalize the party by putting forth an attractive leadership, by moving 
decisively on political reform and by adopting policies to distribute more 
widely and equitably the fruits of economic success. The probable selection of 
Toshiki Kaifu as party president and prime minister indicates that the Liberal 
Democrats are already moving in this direction. A reinvigorated LDP would then 
be able to sustain its control over the lower house during the next election. 
Such a revival, however, would still mean that the Liberal Democrats would not 
recover a majority in the upper house for at least six years. Consequently, the 
party will have to work with the opposition. This may involve bringing one or 
more of the centrist parties into a coalition government or working with them 
in guiding legislation through the Diet. The Liberal Democrats already have had 
some experience with this. During the 1970s, a razor-thin majority in the Diet 
forced the LDP to cooperate with the opposition parties in getting the budget 
and major bills passed. And from 1983 to 1986, the party formed a coalition 
with the New Liberal Club. 
Finally, there is the possibility that neither the left nor the right will 
respond decisively and Japan will become plagued by weak and unstable 
governments. Although this scenario cannot be ruled out, it is the least likely 
to happen. Ideological polarization has declined over the years, and social 
conflict is well within manageable bounds. The dynamism of the economy makes 
the task of political restructuring easier. At the same time, the challenges 
posed by the international environment are acute enough to persuade Japan's 
political leaders of the need to overcome the current crisis as soon as 
possible. 
What are the implications for U.S.-Japanese relations? While the concerns of 
American officials are understandable, the fluidity in Japanese politics could 
ultimately strengthen the trans-Pacific alliance. A government led by either a 
transformed Japan Socialist Party or a revitalized Liberal Democratic Party 
will be more supportive of consumer and worker interests. This will help 
alleviate bilateral economic tensions by restraining Japan's export drive and 
by making less salient the issue of agricultural liberalization. 
