SAMPLING: A CREATIVE TOOL OR LICENSE TO STEAL?; 
THE TECHNOLOGY 
What exactly is sampling? 
"A sample is a digital recording of a sound, 'an event,' " explained Barry 
Rudolph, a Los Angeles producer/recording engineer who writes for various music 
publications on technical aspects of the industry. "That event -- for example, 
hitting a snare drum -- is held in memory just like computer data." 
The sampler is a digital recorder that records sounds onto computer discs. But 
recording a sample isn't as simple as punching the record button on a regular 
tape recorder. The sampler must have the sound come through a power source like 
a mixing console; someone can't just sling a sampler over his or her shoulder, 
plug in a mike and record the sounds of the real world. 
For optimum sound quality, the pieces of old songs that are commonly used as 
samples should be recorded from CD on a DAT (Digital Audio Tape) recorder, 
played back in the studio and recorded by the sampler there. 
A sampler isn't like a regular recorder in another important respect -- it 
records digital information, not the sound itself. Someone can record music on 
one cassette recorder, pop the cassette tape into a different recorder and have 
the music play back immediately, but sampling doesn't work that way. 
"The only sound a sampler will make," said Mike Leiner of West L.A. Music, "is 
if you drop it on the floor." 
The information contained on the sample remains dormant until it is plugged 
into the array of hi-tech studio equipment that has revolutionized recording 
studios since the advent of the digital era 10 years ago. The key element is 
the MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) system, which connects those 
instruments to one another and to the computers and software systems needed to 
"map out" the samples. 
One of these instruments is the sequencer, which functions as something of a 
traffic cop in the mapping-out process. The musician uses the sequencer to 
assign the various sampled sounds to various keys or sections of a keyboard 
instrument. Then the sounds can be played back, altered in whatever ways the 
musician or producer desires and recorded on to a master tape or 
direct-to-disc. 
"The sample is in a digital code and it can 
be manipulated just like any data," said Rudolph. "You can shorten or lengthen 
it, change the pitch and tonal characteristics, add or subtract sounds to it 
and replay it either like a keyboard synthesizer or have your computer 
sequencer play it." 
Sampling doesn't just involve recording pieces of old songs. Samples can be 
taken of a piece of dialogue from a TV program, a political speech, the crack 
of a baseball bat or a car braking at a stoplight. Sound-effects libraries in 
the motion picture industry are now increasingly composed of samples. The basic 
sounds found on the drum machines so prevalent in contemporary pop are samples. 
In studio session work, a complex backing vocal part can be recorded once, 
sampled and then inserted at the appropriate points later in the song. The 
length of an individual sample is in direct proportion to how much memory the 
sampler has and the bandwidth (the frequency) at which the sound is being 
sampled. It's highly variable, but musicians or producers generally can't 
sample for any great amount of time -- only 12 seconds of stereo sound at the 
currently accepted industry standard -- unless the amount of memory contained 
in the sampler has been augmented. 
That's why bass and drums -- rather than the more complex sounds of a lead 
guitar or saxophone -- are the easiest instruments to sample. Despite the 
limited time available on each disc, drum patterns and bass lines are 
frequently created by a technique known as "looping" -- taking one segment of a 
sample, joining the beginning of the phrase to the end and programming it to 
seamlessly repeat itself. It's impossible for someone to, say, record a few 
bars of Carlos Santana's guitar and be able to construct a reasonable facsimile 
of a Santana solo from that raw data. But the recorded drum sound of Phil 
Collins (a particularly popular sample a few years ago) or Led Zeppelin's John 
Bonham could become part of any musician's arsenal. 
 "In terms of the sound palette that's available to you as a keyboard player, 
it opens up a tremendous spectrum," acknowledged Jeff Lorber, a keyboardist who 
is frequently called on to add musical tracks for dance remixes. Two 
briefcase-size equipment cases jammed with computer disks comprised his 
personal, portable library of samples at a recent remix session for Cheryl 
Lynn's "Every Time I Try to Say Goodbye." 
In the control room at Larrabee Sound Studio in West Hollywood, Lorber's 
fingers dexterously danced across the control keys of his Emulator II sampler 
as he recorded eight snippets of Lynn's vocals from the master tape. The title 
phrase of the song was one selection, but Lorber was searching for phrases that 
showed off the nuances and character in Lynn's voice -- like a low, throaty 
growl or the "Hey" and "Oh, no" ad libs that brought Aretha Franklin to mind. 
Almost immediately, Lorber assigned each sample to a key on one of his keyboard 
instruments -- from then on, that particular vocal part would play whenever he 
pressed that key. He could affect the sound by the force and/or rhythm with 
which he touched the key or physically change the sound by redrawing the 
frequency wave with a light pencil on a computer screen. 
Now re-mix producer Keith Cohen and Lorber were armed with the option to 
strategically insert -- in industry parlance, "fly in" -- those vocal samples 
to add extra flavoring to the revamped Lynn track. Don SnowdenFO Jeff Lorber 
remixes a Cheryl Lynn dance track using a "sampling" 
