AUSTRALIANS PLAY IT SAFE 
There's a passage early in the second act of the Australian Ballet "Giselle" 
where Ulrike Lytton's icy force as Myrta and John Lanchbery's swift, urgent 
conducting momentarily propel the company beyond glazed rectitude into 
something like glory. 
Here, in the allegro ensemble preceding Giselle's entrance from the grave, we 
watch the full potential of 19 women and the full power of "Giselle" as 
Romantic dance-drama mutually realized. It's an achievement that earns the 
Wilis the biggest curtain-call ovation at the Orange County Performing Arts 
Center -- but it also confirms the worst about the evening as a whole. 
In its first Southern California visit in nearly 20 years, the Australian 
Ballet continually demonstrates its good taste and elegant manners, but that's 
pretty much as far as it goes. Once you've savored the beautifully finished 
hands, the immaculately pointed feet and the aristocratic placement -- virtues 
rare in our own ballet companies -- what's left? 
A sense of duty and rigid expressive restraint. Certainly, everyone looked 
ready to dance on Tuesday (opening night of a seven-performance engagement): 
coached and rehearsed to a glossy proficiency very much in the British ballet 
tradition. But, for all its picture-perfect refinement, their dancing proved 
consistently underpowered and even anonymous. 
Working from the same Royal Ballet heritage, the dancers in National Ballet of 
Canada deliver just as impressive stylistic nicetities but also blaze with 
individuality. Dancing releases them into something greater than themselves and 
we're delighted to be invited along. In contrast, the Australians seem to be 
aiming for nothing more than our respect. 
Intelligent and opulent, the four-year-old staging of "Giselle" by artistic 
director Maina Gielgud seems unusual only in a few details: building the 
peasant pas de deux dancers into genuine characters, for example, or having 
Albrecht dance his Act I solo later than usual (he also carries white roses in 
Act II, instead of the customary lilies). 
Otherwise, it may be memorable chiefly for its unyieldingly monochromatic Peter 
Farmer designs. In the relentlessly earth-toned first act, for instance, 
Giselle doesn't wear her traditional blue dress but instead appears in pale 
yellow. 
Lisa Pavane brings to the role a deep understanding of Romantic style, but her 
performance is both technically uneven and dismayingly overcalculated. Each 
reaction, each step, seems a test to be passed and even though Pavane passes 
most of them expertly, Giselle is nowhere to be found. 
In contrast, Greg Horsman (Pavane's husband) sometimes abandons those silken 
Aussie terminations in search of a hotter, riskier attack. His portrayal of 
Albrecht could use sharper definition, but it's always alive and remarkable for 
its selfless generosity. Pavane and Horsman were both coached by the great 
Galina Ulanova and though this Albrecht can't always make his Giselle look 
weightless, his partnering brings out her most sensitive and responsive 
qualities. 
Stuck with a rather flat concept of Hilarion, Steven Heathcote nevertheless 
manages to display glints of star presence and dancing prowess. In the peasant 
pas de deux, a very assured Elizabeth Toohey outclasses her occasionally shaky 
partner, David McAllister. 
To begin the evening, the Australians ventured something Australian for the 
first time on their three-city American tour: "Catalyst," by company member 
Stephen Baynes of Adelaide. Fluently set to Poulenc's Concerto for Two Pianos, 
this three-month-old creation assigns bravura combinations to Horsman and two 
women, contrasting them with lyrical choreography for Pavane and two men. 
Unfortunately, the vocabulary for each group isn't quite distinctive enough to 
make it a major event when Horsman and Pavane finally interact -- but the way 
they lead, manipulate and inspire a 12-member corps becomes very interesting 
indeed. 
"Catalyst" bears a program note about "violent and aggressive" forces 
contending with "serenity and calm." Nonsense. The sweet, buoyant Horsman never 
looks remotely threatening any more than the tensely passive Pavane suggests 
serenity. What we see are principal dancers teaching a corps by personal 
example and instruction: the process of growth within a ballet company used as 
the subject of a classical showpiece. 
It's a big step beyond "Etudes," "Ecole de Ballet" and all those other 
brainless at-the-barre divertissements -- and it manages to make the viewer 
very hopeful about Baynes' own growth and the Australian Ballet's as well. 
More, please. 
