QUICK THINKING SAVED CREW OF CAPSIZED BOAT 
It had been bright and calm, a marvelous day for sailing. Then the boat began 
to list, tipping over farther and farther until it capsized. 
That was the picture painted Saturday by Coast Guard officials who interviewed 
five crew members of the 66-foot sailboat Pandemonium, who were rescued at sea 
300 miles west of San Francisco on Thursday. 
The five arrived in Long Beach late Saturday, shaken but otherwise in good 
condition, Coast Guard Petty Officer Elizabeth Neely said. The crew members 
were Rick Carolus of Newport Beach, skipper John Frisch of Marina del Rey, 
Nancy David of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Graeme Gilchrist of Glasgow, Scotland, 
Grant Sennor, whose address is not known. The boat is owned by William Desmond 
of Los Altos Hills, who was not on board at the time. 
The boat was on its way back to the mainland after competing in the Transpac 
race, which departed Southern California for Hawaii in July. They had been on 
the return trip for 11 days and were a two-day sail away from San Francisco, 
their destination. 
Conditions Were Ideal 
The crew had reported ideal conditions that afternoon, Neely said. 
Carolus and David were on watch at just after 4 p.m. Thursday when the boat 
began to list. Because they believed the motion to be natural, they took no 
action right away, Neely said. By the time the sailors realized the boat was 
capsizing, it was too late. David and Carolus were able to jump into a life 
raft that automatically opened. The other three had been below deck and were 
trapped under water, along with the second life raft. 
Neely said that it was the crew's levelheadedness and some quick thinking by 
Frisch that saved them. 
Frisch dove under the boat and retrieved a flashlight, flares, life jackets and 
a knife, and he was also able to loosen the second life raft for the others to 
board. 
He activated an emergency radio signal, which was picked up by a commercial 
airline pilot who radioed authorities. 
The Coast Guard dispatched a C-130 cargo plane to the area, and the life rafts 
were spotted about 7 p.m. 
A nearby merchant ship, the Green Ocean, which is registered in Panama, was 
enlisted to pick up the wet and weary crew about bout an hour later, Neely 
said. 
"They all have a fair amount of sailing experience and said they didn't panic," 
she said. "When I asked them if the would continue sailing, they indicated it 
was just a freak accident and said yes." 
There was no indication of how or why the keel came off, she said. 
