MEMOIR OF MADNESS; 
WILLIAM STYRON DETAILS THE 'HORROR OF DEPRESSION' IN HIS NEW BOOK 
To those who have been there, lived through it and dared to talk about it, the 
very word seems quite inadequate. Depression suggests an indentation, a rut in 
the road or a hole in the earth. It recalls foul moods, bad days, fights with 
the family, economic decline. 
"It's such a catch-all phrase," said William Styron, the novelist and survivor 
of what he would prefer to call madness -- depression that nearly cost his 
life. For such a major illness, Styron said, depression is "a true wimp of a 
word." 
For as Styron discovered, true depression swallows its victims entirely, 
devours them in one huge gulp, then spirits them to an otherwise unknowable 
nadir. 
"To most of those who have experienced it," Styron writes in "Darkness Visible: 
A Memoir of Madness," a slim volume Random House is publishing this month, "the 
horror of depression is so overwhelming as to be quite beyond expression." 
But if there were a single designation for this disorder, a word or a phrase, 
Styron believes it would be something like brainstorm, meaning not some burst 
of intellectual inspiration, but "a veritable howling tempest in the brain." 
That is how it felt to William Styron, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of 
"Lie Down in Darkness," "The Confessions of Nat Turner," "Sophie's Choice" and 
other books and plays. At his year-round home in Roxbury, Conn., five years 
ago, Styron's family watched helplessly while he moaned and shouted from his 
bed. 
"My head is exploding!" Styron cried. "My head is exploding!" 
The next day, he entered the psychiatric unit of Yale-New Haven Hospital for 
the treatment he believes saved his life. 
White-haired, tall and endowed with the firm physique of a former Marine, 
Styron, 65, can sit on the wide back porch of his white-shingled summer house 
here on the island of Martha's Vineyard and discuss his voyage to a Dantean 
hell with remarkable detachment. 
"I feel I am a witness," Styron said. There was no way not to address what he 
had been through, he said. His experience with depression "demanded to be dealt 
with in my mind." 
Shaded from the summer heat, Styron's torpid golden retriever Tashmoo lies 
placidly at his feet, while Dinah, a wired-for-sound black Labrador, comes 
bouncing in from a swim at Black Point Beach to shake saltwater all over her 
adoring master. 
Styron and his wife Rose, a poet, have owned this waterfront house for 25 
years. There is a carefully tended flower garden, a large and equally 
well-manicured lawn and a view of the harbor, where, hour after hour, ferries 
chug in with new cargoes of summer visitors. 
Styron has his own dock and his own sandy beach. On an island that inch for 
inch boasts as many well-known literary names as the average neighborhood 
bookstore, he is surrounded by good friends and kindred creative souls. Five 
years ago, as he battled the demons of depression, such comforts were of scant 
consolation. 
This is what happened. Five years ago, at 60, Styron's body and mind staged a 
revolt. A legendary drinker, a man who had been able to consume alcohol 
"abundantly, almost mercilessly," Styron became unable to imbibe even the 
slightest quantity of alcoholic spirits. 
"My system became unable to absorb even the slightest amount of alcohol," he 
recalled. "I would drink a little wine at dinner, and then all night I would be 
up going to the bathroom." Soon, Styron said, "even a single drink would make 
me feel rotten." 
In retrospect, Styron thinks the symptoms had actually begun sooner. "I felt 
maybe that previous spring," the spring of 1984, "that I was having a little 
trouble," he said. "I wasn't feeling too hot." 
With his wife, and with their friend Kurt Vonnegut, Styron took a trip to 
Poland. "We were supposed to be doing things with the dissidents," Styron said. 
"But my heart wasn't in it." While Vonnegut and Rose Styron pursued political 
activities, Styron holed up in his hotel room. He felt listless, 
unenthusiastic, unwilling to participate. 
"I felt there was something happening, a slight aberration in my mind-body 
relationship. I felt it would go away." 
But it didn't. With the link to alcohol, the "aberration" was no longer slight. 
"I was not, and I am not, an alcoholic," Styron said. "But I had a huge 
capacity to abuse alcohol -- and I now realize it was abuse. 
"Drinking was built into my behavior pattern," he went on. In "Darkness 
Visible" he elaborates, explaining, "I used alcohol as the magical conduit to 
fantasy and euphoria, and to the enhancement of the imagination." 
But "suddenly," Styron said, "it went away." Just as suddenly, Styron found 
himself faced with trying to "alter the habits of a lifetime." 
Over a beer, a physician whom Styron knew socially offered to write him a 
prescription for medication to help with Styron's sleeplessness. The physician 
had never examined Styron as a patient, and did not ask his weight or age. He 
handed Styron a prescription for a drug called Ativan. 
"The great thing about Ativan," this doctor told Styron, "is that you can take 
as much as you want without ever worrying." 
Styron's mood darkened. His body became stooped, like a very old man. On 
Martha's Vineyard, he responded indifferently to the friends and fellowship he 
had previously treasured. "I felt a kind of numbness," Styron writes, "but more 
particularly, an odd fragility, as if my body had actually become frail." 
With this sense of physical debilitation came "an immense and aching solitude." 
Styron could no longer concentrate. "The act of writing became more and more 
difficult and exhausting, stalled, and then finally ceased," he writes. 
Over and over in his mind he heard a line from Baudelaire, "I have felt the 
wind of the wing of madness." 
More than once, Styron had written scenes of depression into his novels. In 
"Sophie's Choice," the heroine is assaulted in New York, then takes to her room 
for days. She is unable even to lift her window blinds. This was fiction, 
Styron told himself as he wrote it. But now he shudders at how accurately he 
portrayed the depressive state of mind. 
"All that was written out of intuition," Styron said. "I had no idea what a 
depressive mood actually was." While he knew on one terrifying level that his 
own center had lost its bearing, "what astonishes me now is that I had only the 
most rudimentary knowledge of this thing called depression. I had no awareness, 
none at all, of the really pathological meaning of this thing." 
One thing Styron has since learned is that the roots of this disease, 
depression, can run very, very deep. Some cases of clinical depression appear 
to be hereditary. In other cases, they may be linked to childhood traumas. The 
death of a parent in early adolescence seems often to bear on cases of 
depression in adulthood. 
Styron was barely 14 when his mother died of cancer. A year later, his father 
was hospitalized. Styron was not told why, but it now appears his father was 
treated for what was sometimes called "melancholia" -- depression. 
"If I were to accept this theory, and I tend to do so -- although I do not 
accept every psychoanalytic theory that comes along, I would have to say that 
this is a profound idea, the idea of incomplete mourning," Styron said. 
Just 10 years after his mother died, Styron wrote "Lie Down in Darkness." It 
begins with the dead heroine, Peyton Loftis, returning in her coffin by train 
to Virginia. In writing that book, Styron said, "I may have been working out 
some of the aggrieved feelings, the pure grief that I had somehow wanted to 
bury." 
Halfway down his own personal slide, "I began to see that this was plainly 
depression," Styron said. 
For the first time in his life, he sought psychiatric help. But the 
psychiatrist he calls "Dr. Gold" in his book only warned him that 
hospitalization might ruin his reputation, Styron said. 
In his book, "I tried to emphasize over and over that what happened to me 
should not be a touchstone for what might happen to anyone else," Styron said. 
Still, "I do not believe that psychotherapy is of any use for serious 
depression," he said. "I think that by that time, the illness has so 
overwhelmed the brain that sitting there for 50 minutes and talking about 
anything at all is a futile exercise." 
Styron was switched to another kind of mood-equalizing drug, Halcion. With the 
new medication, Styron's suicidal thoughts grew. 
Ultimately it was not drugs, not doctors, but good friends and family who 
helped Styron through the murk of his depression. Every day, Styron's friend 
Art Buchwald, a neighbor on Martha's Vineyard, would call Styron to offer 
encouragement. Buchwald also promised Styron that hospitalization would not 
ruin his career -- that on the contrary, it might save it. 
As he writes in "Darkness Visible," kitchen knives attained a new allure as 
Styron's suicidal feelings increased. He contemplated inadvertent suicide, 
walking in front of a truck, for instance. His conversation reflected his mood. 
"I kept saying, 'I'm finished,' " Styron said. "I kept using the phrase, 'I'm a 
goner.' " 
Seven weeks of hospitalization offered him asylum, Styron said. He was taken 
off Halcion, and his suicidal feelings vanished. 
"The hospital was a place to get out of the horror of this monstrous daily 
routine, which was getting more and more horrible," Styron said. Removed from 
the pressures of daily life, Styron said that in the hospital, he was able to 
partake of "what may be depression's only grudging favor -- its ultimate 
capitulation." 
Styron might never have talked about his experience with depression. But in 
1987, the Italian writer Primo Levi killed himself, joining a long list of 
writers and literary figures who have ended their own lives. One year later, 
Styron became incensed when he read a newspaper account of a symposium about 
Levi, in which the participants seemed almost to blame the Auschwitz survivor 
for taking his own life. 
Two and a half years had passed since his own hospitalization. "Hardly a day 
went by when I hadn't thought about writing something about it," Styron said, 
"I had tried a little fiction," but nothing really worked. 
After the article about Levi, "I sat down, and in one afternoon, about 1 1/2 
hours, I wrote 1,000 words. The words just came tumbling out," Styron said, "as 
if they had a sort of precipitating power behind them." 
Straight from Styron's soul, those 1,000 words ran as an Op-Ed piece in the New 
York Times. Later, Styron expanded his feelings into a 13,000-word essay that 
ran last winter in Vanity Fair. That piece became the basis for "Darkness 
Visible." 
While stressing that he has "no intention of becoming a professional 
depressive," Styron hopes that his book will help broaden understanding about 
the disease. 
"I do not intend this as an exhortation," he said. "I intended it as a personal 
account of a survivor, from which other people will draw, one hopes, 
sustenance." 
Even recalling his own former ignorance about the dimensions of this disorder, 
Styron bridles at the lack of understanding he believes exists about 
depression. 
Not long ago, he was taking some physical therapy for a problem with his arm. 
He and his physical therapist were talking "with some loudness" about 
depression. 
"From another table, we heard a woman say, 'Depression is caused by self-pity,' 
" Styron said. "I came close to murder. It was one of those idiotic statements 
that I just cannot tolerate. 
"I bring up this incident because it is not uncharacteristic of this ailment. 
People who are not educated about depression, to one degree or another, are 
ignorant of what the situation is. No one is really able to respond to it. 
"You need support, and you need treatment. I don't know what can be said, 
except that there has to be a consciousness-raising effort that allows people 
to know what depression is really about." 
Styron is back at work on fiction now, writing longhand and on yellow pads as 
he always does. "Just a short novel" about the Marine Corps and World War II is 
his present project, he said, "nothing omnibus or grand in design or length." 
"Darkness Visible" was a catharsis, Styron said, and it was also a service. 
"In the back of my mind, a voice, my own voice, was saying, 'You are doing a 
disservice to yourself and to other people if you do not get this down. 
"It was a compulsion to write this, and so it was done." Styron looked evenly 
out toward the sea. "And I'm very glad it was done." 
