SCHUUR STEP AWAY FROM THE SHADOWS; 
VOCALIST: THE JAZZ SINGER, WHO HASN'T RELEASED AN ALBUM SINCE 1988, WILL BE 
MORE THAN 100 POUNDS LIGHTER AND EMOTIONALLY CLEARER AT THE COACH HOUSE. 
What a difference a year or two can make. Diane Schuur hasn't released an album 
since 1988, but she has used the free time to create a brand new image. When 
the Washington state-based jazz singer appears at the Coach House in San Juan 
Capistrano tonight, she will look svelte and slim -- more than 100 pounds 
lighter than she was two years ago. 
"I'm a mere shadow of former self," she joked earlier this week. 
But the changes reach well beyond her new silhouette. She has also spent the 
last two years trying to bring order to her professional and personal lives. 
The long hiatus from recording resulted from a nasty dispute with GRP Records 
over the duration of her contract and the quality of promotion for her albums. 
It dragged on until GRP's recent acquisition by MCA Records. 
A new album is scheduled for release early next year. "It takes a new slant for 
me," Schuur says. "I wanted to spread my wings beyond the jazz genre. Not that 
there's anything wrong with jazz, but I wanted to add some R&amp;B and some 
ballads. I love like 'What a Difference a Day Makes' and 'Unforgettable.' We 
were lucky enough to get Andre Fischer -- Natalie Cole's husband -- to produce 
it, and he was excellent, one of the best producers I've had, just full of 
enthusiasm and energy. Just great to work with." 
Schuur has also begun to exorcise some demons that confronted her during her 
rapid rise from Seattle nightclubs to command performances at the White House. 
The star-making machinery, and Schuur's reaction to it, had unhealthy 
consequences for the blind singer. 
"I'm in a 12-step program now," she says, "and it's one of the best things 
that's ever happened to me. I know I'm a compulsive person, and I have to be 
careful that I don't go from one extreme to another. I shouldn't overeat, but 
then I shouldn't under-eat, either, because that's as much a form of compulsive 
acting-out as overeating is." 
Equally important, she says, the program has helped her deal with a tendency to 
beat up on herself: "It's always been much easier for me to say, 'Oh, well, you 
were a bad girl; you screwed up again.' I'm trying to get myself out of that 
way of thinking, and it's had a real positive effect in many parts of my life." 
Schuur's audiences have begun to see and hear some of the tangible 
consequences. She is more open, more communicative and, clearly, more self 
confident. And her singing has become enriched. An often-criticized tendency 
toward shrillness in her upper register has been replaced by a warmer, more 
centered sound. 
"There was a reason for my singing that way," she says. "I was carrying around 
so much weight -- physical weight, emotional weight -- that it was hard to 
project. So I pushed too hard and did the best I could with what I had. Now I'm 
lighter, in a lot of ways. I've still got the power, but now it feels as though 
it's harnessed. 
"I like to think that what I'm doing is finally allowing the vulnerability of 
the little child inside me to come out. And that feels really good." 
