3 BOYS SAVED FROM FLAMES IN APARTMENT 
Two men fought their way through thick smoke to save three terrified boys from 
a burning apartment in Lancaster on Thursday morning after the boys' mother 
went outside and left a candle burning in her bedroom, Los Angeles County Fire 
Department officials said. 
Officials said Wesley White and Chris Willis, neighbors of the family, saved 
the lives of James, Josiah and Philip Halstead, ages 11, 7, and 6. 
$20,000 in Damage 
There were no injuries. 
The fire caused at least $20,000 damage and was blamed on careless use of the 
candle, said Fire Department spokesman Don Kanallakan. 
Social workers Thursday were questioning the boys' mother, Donna Halstead, 34, 
to determine whether to take the boys into protective custody, said Emery 
Bontrager of the county Department of Children's Services. 
Meanwhile, the boys and a sister were left in the care of a grandmother of 
Halstead's boyfriend in Rosamond, Bontrager said. 
The fire broke out around midnight in the apartment building in the 45400 block 
of Cedar Avenue. White, 18, and Willis, 22, who work together at a Lancaster 
tire shop, ran to the scene fearing for the safety of White's newborn, who 
lives with his mother in an apartment next to the Halsteads. 
"The whole neighborhood was standing out here, but nobody was doing anything," 
Willis said. "We had to go in." 
The two said they made their way through thick smoke to the boys' bedroom, 
which was next to the bedroom where the fire had started. "We couldn't see, but 
we could hear them crying and screaming," White said. "They were scared to come 
out." 
Willis pulled one boy out the front door to safety and White, who said he lost 
consciousness briefly from the smoke and was startled awake by falling against 
a hot object, rescued the other two. 
Thanks Rescuers 
A distraught Halstead thanked the two men in front of her gutted apartment 
Thursday as a crowd of neighbors and reporters looked on. 
Halstead said she had checked on the boys and gone out to ask a neighbor for a 
cigarette. "I was just gone about three minutes," she said. "I forgot to blow 
out the candle." 
Halstead said she used candles for light because her electricity had been 
turned off for non-payment. She said she had left a candle burning on a trunk 
near her bed. 
Fire Department Battalion Chief Jerry Peskett said investigators were 
attempting to determine where the fire began, and checking reports that the 
youngest boy had moved the candle from the trunk to his mother's bed. 
Bontrager said the Department of Children's Services has had previous contact 
with the family, but he would not elaborate. 
