ART REVIEW; 
THE GRAINS OF TRUTH IN A BUDDHIST SAND PAINTING 
The Kalachakra Wheel of Time is a sacred sand painting that Tibetan Buddist 
monks have been making since 600 BC. First produced by the Buddha himself as 
part of a religious teaching known as the Kalachakra Tantra, the Wheel of Time 
contains 722 deities, each of which is represented by a specific visual symbol. 
Traditionally executed by two shifts of 16 monks working over four days, this 
magnificent and intricate artwork is simply swept away upon completion. The 
monks believe the best way to preserve its meaning and power is to dismantle 
it. 
Needless to say, you won't find a sand mandala in the permanent collection of 
any local museum because the idea of preservation is at odds with the art form. 
To see a sand mandala is a rare privilege; to see Tibetan monks actually making 
one is another experience altogether. Angelenos can do both at the Museum of 
Natural History, where four monks from the Dalai Lama's Namgyal Monastery in 
Dharamsala, India, will be at work on the Wheel of Time through Aug. 17. 
Presented by the Samaya Foundation in conjunction with the Dalai Lama's visit 
to Los Angeles last month (he came to offer the Kalachakra teachings), the 
Wheel of Time is a vehicle of peace and enlightenment believed to instill 
tranquillity in the hearts of those who view it. If the monks who have been at 
work at the museum since July 6 are any evidence of the mandala's power, it 
inarguably bequeaths tranquillity on those it touches. 
Beginning their day's work with half an hour of chanted prayer, the monks are 
in a state of meditation as they start work on the mandala and quite beautiful 
to watch. Serene and endlessly patient in their labors, they exude a quiet 
contentment rarely seen in the frenzied Western world. 
"Do you enjoy this work?" one monk is asked. 
"Oh yes, very much," he answers beaming, as attempts to teach an 11-year-old 
boy how to handle sand painting tools (the sand painting exhibition also 
includes how-to demonstrations and related videotapes of the Dalai Lama). 
When it first appeared in India in 600 BC, sand painting was done using the 
fingers, but the clever Tibetans improved on that technique when they took up 
the art form in the 11th Century. Devising metal funnels called chakpus, which 
are gently rasped with a second funnel to tap out colored sand, Tibetan monks 
weave their richly colored tapestry out of sand that is, in fact, crushed stone 
dyed with opaque water-based pigment. 
The monks begin by painting the central image of Kalachakra (a manifestation of 
the Buddha) and his consort Vishvamat, then develop the image outward. They sit 
at their work when the mandala is in its early stages, then stand as it nears 
completion. Though the idea of artistic ego is distinctly at odds with Tibetan 
Buddhism, the Wheel of Time varies from one to the next, and there is room 
within this highly revered composition for subtle passages of personal 
expression. 
Seven feet across in its finished form, the mandala is structured as a series 
of concentric circles surrounding a complex network of symbols leading to a 
many chambered palace. The circles protect the palace and represent wisdom, 
space, wind, fire, water and earth, while the innermost circle features a dozen 
gateways (symbolizing body, speech and mind) that lead deeper into the palace. 
Mind is the main passageway to the center of the palace, where the Buddha sits 
on a lotus blossom in a state of perpetual bliss. 
This is only the second time this sacred art form has been seen in the United 
States (the Wheel of Time was completed in New York last summer). The closing 
ritual at the museum begins at 10:30 a.m. on Thursday and will commence with 
prayers requesting the deities to return to their celestial abode. The symbolic 
representations of the deities are then plucked from the mandala by the monks 
who place them in an urn. 
The energy of the mandala is then "cut" and the remaining sand, believed to 
have a special power, is swept into an urn which will be taken to the Santa 
Monica Bay Sand and Sea Club where it will be poured into the ocean for the 
benefit of marine life. The dismantling of the mandala is considered an 
exercise in non-attachment and letting go of the mind self. 
Who among us can't use a little of that? 
