U.S. STILL GLOBAL LEADER, JAPAN PRIME MINISTER SAYS 
Despite Japan's emerging economic power and its recent attainment of "equal 
footing" in a once-subservient relationship with the United States, America 
remains No. 1 where global leadership is concerned, Japanese Prime Minister 
Toshiki Kaifu said Wednesday. 
"No country can replace the United States in its position and role as leader of 
the Free World," Kaifu told the Japan Society of Northern California. 
"We expect that the United States can respond to various problems with 
confidence, and at the same time Japan will do its utmost to continue 
cooperating with and supporting American leadership." 
Kaifu arrived here earlier in the day on the first stop of a 10-day tour of the 
United States, Mexico and Canada. Japanese officials have said the visit is 
aimed primarily at evoking positive feelings among the American public and at 
reassuring the U.S. government that Japan's basic economic and foreign policies 
will remain unchanged amid a climate of domestic political instability. 
Kaifu, whose administration is only three weeks old, is a member of a minor 
faction of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, and his tenure is considered 
uncertain at best. In the past three months his two predecessors were forced to 
resign as the result of bribery and sex scandals, and pressure is mounting on 
Kaifu from party elders who would like to see him dissolve the lower house of 
Parliament and call a general election this fall -- a move that could hasten 
his downfall. 
Few surprises are expected at Kaifu's scheduled meeting with President Bush in 
Washington on Friday, but Japanese officials said they expect the prime 
minister's skills as a communicator to help defuse rising bilateral tension. 
In Wednesday's remarks to an audience of about 1,000, Kaifu emphasized that 
ties between Japan and America are changing dramatically but remain 
fundamentally sound. 
'Association of Partners' 
The bilateral relationship "is no longer the protector-protected, teacher-pupil 
bond it once was," he said. "Especially in its economic aspects, this bond is 
increasingly becoming an association of partners cooperating and occasionally 
competing on an equal footing." 
Japan overtook the United States as the largest donor of foreign aid last year 
after a booming global trade surplus propelled it into the status of the 
world's largest creditor nation, with massive investments in the United States 
and corresponding power in the international financial arena. 
Yet, Kaifu said, there has been too much emphasis on the negative aspects of 
the changing economic relationship. 
"We must avoid failing to see the forest for the trees," he said. "We risk 
being unable to see the comprehensive structure of our sound U.S.-Japan 
relationship if we peer at it through glasses that permit us to focus only on 
such recently played-up controversies as U.S. trade with Japan or Japanese 
investment in the United States." 
Emphasizing the importance of the close military alliance between the two 
countries, Kaifu noted that it was in San Francisco that Japan signed the 
formal World War II peace treaty and also committed itself to a security pact 
with the United States. 
"Japan has chosen to seek its national survival and development through close 
cooperation with the United States," he said. "San Francisco is where Japan 
decided the course of its postwar history. And I believe it was here that we 
made the right choice." 
Growing interdependence in the U.S.-Japan relationship has meant that "friction 
has occasionally arisen between us," he said. "One even gets the impression 
that we are criticizing each other in ever louder voices. To be frank, this is 
not a good development, but in a sense we might call it a natural one." 
