SOLIDARITY AIDE NOMINATED AS POLISH PREMIER 
President Wojciech Jaruzelski on Saturday formally nominated a longtime 
Solidarity adviser, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, as Poland's new prime minister, who 
will put together the first non-Communist government in Eastern Europe since 
the end of World War II. 
The historic step was announced in a four-paragraph statement issued by the 
Polish news agency and climaxed a swift and incisively orchestrated drive by 
Solidarity leader Lech Walesa to wrest the government from Communist control. 
Message to Sejm 
"In the nearest future," the announcement said, "the president will table a 
motion to the Sejm (lower house of Parliament) Speaker on the appointment of 
Tadeusz Mazowiecki to the post of premier and entrusting him with the mission 
of forming a government. In the present situation, the president sees a need to 
create a government enjoying the necessary support of parliamentary floor 
groups and to build it on foundations of broad agreement between Poland's 
political and social forces." 
Mazowiecki, 62, the editor of Solidarity's weekly newspaper, Tygodnik 
Solidarnosc, has been a member of Solidarity's inner circle of advisers since 
the union was born in the Gdansk shipyards in 1980. Walesa's personal choice 
for the job, Mazowiecki met with Jaruzelski for two hours on Friday and said 
afterward he was ready to accept the position. 
His election by the Sejm, probably on Wednesday, is a virtual certainty. 
As a result of a new coalition with the United Peasants' Party and the 
Democratic Party, Solidarity controls 264 seats, a majority in the 460-member 
Sejm. With 103 votes between them, the Peasants and the Democrats on Wednesday 
abandoned a 40-year alliance with the Communists, decisively shifting the 
balance of power. 
Mazowiecki, who told reporters Friday that he intended to spend Saturday 
"walking in the woods," spent the day at a school for the blind run by 
Franciscan nuns, where he was briefly interviewed by Polish television. 
The economy, he said, is "the greatest problem" for Poland. "I think about it, 
but no one has a miraculous answer. I think the most important thing is that 
people think that things can be better. . . . We are capable of doing very 
much. It is not easy, but it is possible if people feel they are on their own. 
. . . The government has to give the feeling that it is creating possibilities, 
not limiting them." 
Mazowiecki, a devout Catholic, was one of Solidarity's leading negotiators in 
the lengthy "round-table" negotiations that began last April. Like many of 
Solidarity's leaders, he was imprisoned during the martial-law crackdown 
imposed by Jaruzelski in December, 1981, and was released after one year. He 
immediately returned to his opposition activities. 
President Jaruzelski on Saturday also accepted the formal resignation of Prime 
Minister Czeslaw Kiszczak, who offered to step aside on Monday after attempting 
unsuccessfully since his appointment Aug. 2 to form a government. 
As the announcement of Mazowiecki's appointment was issued, the Communist 
Party's 230-member Central Committee was meeting in an emergency session to 
formulate a new strategy to deal with a situation that reflected the worst 
fears of party hard-liners, who had fought hard against a yearlong government 
rapprochement with Solidarity. 
The hard-liners, however, appeared in general retreat, while the party's 
younger and more progressive members lobbied for a proposal that would advocate 
a technocratic government of "experts" free from direct links to political 
parties. It was not a proposal likely to generate much enthusiasm from 
Solidarity. 
Wlodzimierz Lozinski, a spokesman for the president, said there is "some 
division" within the Central Committee over the president's action, but 
"generally speaking," there was support for accepting it, since "there is no 
alternative." 
'A Major Breakthrough' 
Solidarity's leadership, in its own executive session in Gdansk, issued a 
statement saying the move "should produce a major breakthrough in Polish public 
life by doing away with the present policy of nomenklatura, " the system in 
which party members are appointed to key positions throughout government and 
industry. 
Indeed, the formation of a Solidarity government appears to spell an end to the 
Leninist principle that insists on the leading role of the Communist Party in 
the affairs of state. The reversal of this cherished Communist idea promises to 
upend power arrangements that have existed in the country since the Communist 
takeover in Poland after World War II. 
Under the agreed upon arrangement, the Communists will retain control of two 
sensitive ministries -- defense and interior -- thus assuring the Soviet Union 
that its security arrangements with Poland remain intact. The Communists also 
expect to play a strong role in foreign affairs, and a bargain may be struck to 
assign a Communist to the position of deputy foreign minister. 
However, it seems assured that all other ministries will be in the hands of 
Solidarity and its new coalition allies. Solidarity sources say that the United 
Peasants' Party could wind up with four or five ministries and the Democratic 
Party with two. 
The key ministries of agriculture, industry, commerce, health, justice, 
transport, communications -- in short, all government departments dealing with 
domestic affairs and economic policy -- are sure to be in the hands of the 
Solidarity coalition. The effects will be sweeping, although, as Solidarity 
activists admit, the changes may be at times confusing, conflicting and perhaps 
even chaotic. 
More Political Reforms 
Solidarity has made clear already that it will press ahead with further 
political reforms. Speaking to a parliamentary caucus last week, one deputy 
said that Solidarity can be expected to move as quickly as possible to bring 
state-run television and radio under the supervision of Parliament, thereby 
cutting out Communist control of the electronic media. It is also expected that 
the Communists who have served as spokesmen for the government will be 
replaced. 
Solidarity has also said it wants to renegotiate the agreements reached with 
the government in April, which called for fully free elections in four years, 
and schedule free elections in two years. 
The decision by Jaruzelski to accept a Solidarity prime minister and what 
amounts to a Solidarity Cabinet can be taken as the ranking achievement so far 
in the career of Walesa -- a career that clearly has still not reached his 
peak. It is generally assumed that Walesa, when the chance comes, will seek 
election as president of Poland, a possibility that no longer seems remote. 
The drive for Solidarity to take the government was Walesa's own idea, one that 
ran counter to the thinking of Solidarity's moderate-leaning brain trust, which 
cautioned that Solidarity is not yet prepared or experienced enough to take 
over a government. 
The notion first began to be discussed after Solidarity's triumph in the June 
elections, in which its candidates swept 99 of 100 seats in the new Senate and 
won all 161 seats for which it could compete in the Sejm. 
No 'Grand Coalition' 
The Communists tried unsuccessfully to coax Solidarity into a "grand 
coalition." They watched ("paralyzed like rabbits," in the scolding phrase of 
Communist Party leader Mieczyslaw F. Rakowski) while Walesa's lieutenants pried 
loose the Peasants and Democratic parties from the Communist coalition. 
After its embarrassing performance in the elections, the Communists' setbacks 
continued. Jaruzelski himself was elected president by the margin of half a 
vote in the Sejm. Gen. Kiszczak's election as prime minister was briefly 
stalled by a premature threat by the Peasants' Party to vote against him. And 
after his election, the threats mounted to vote against any Cabinet he 
nominated. 
At that point, Walesa's campaign -- some of it carefully waged behind the 
backs, or over the heads, of some of Solidarity's more conservative advisers -- 
was on the edge of success. The defections of the two minor parties clinched 
it. 
A key element, however, was out of Walesa's hands: the acceptance of the idea 
by the Soviet Union. Walesa, early last week, pointedly repeated his assurance 
that Solidarity had no intention of withdrawing Poland from its Warsaw Pact 
security commitments to the Soviet Union. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman 
called the statement "sensible" and went on to say that while the Soviet Union 
was watching Polish events with "concern," it had no intention of interfering. 
A Major Turnaround 
Moscow's acceptance of an opposition government in Poland represents a major 
turnaround for the Soviet Union, which has considered Poland a key element (as 
well as a most troublesome one) in the string of East European nations that 
serve as a buffer against the West. 
Diplomats and experienced observers of East European politics believe it is 
inconceivable that Jaruzelski could have taken such a momentous step without 
close consultation with Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. And the 
activities last weekend of Soviet Ambassador Vladimir I. Brovikov, who met with 
Kiszczak, the outgoing prime minister, and the heads of the Peasants and 
Democratic parties, suggest that the Soviets were kept closely informed and 
were passing on their own counsel. 
The implications, for the rest of Communist Europe, are far reaching. The 
Polish experience gives the green light to Hungary, running second in the 
reform sweepstakes, for similar changes, which could follow elections to be 
held there next year. 
Czechoslovakia, however, is likely to be the country where Communist leaders 
will receive the news with the most shock and alarm. The hard-line Czechoslovak 
leaders have dug in their heels against political reform and give little more 
than lip service on issues of economic reform. 
Significantly, the regime in Prague has been increasing its pressure on 
opposition activists, common targets of arrest and police harassment. In recent 
days, the leadership has attempted to forestall planned demonstrations Monday 
(in protest of the 1968 Soviet-led invasion) by circulating rumors that police 
may be issued live ammunition to deal with protesters. 
The hard-line regime in East Germany, which is wedged between Poland and 
affluent, democratic West Germany, also views the momentous changes in Warsaw 
with alarm. Its concern is compounded by the recent flight of large numbers of 
East Germans to the West. 
Enormous Pressure 
The pressures on Solidarity are enormous, now that it enters a new era, clearly 
transformed from a union-based opposition movement to a political party -- even 
though it has not yet accepted that definition of itself. 
Solidarity faces its own internal divisions as well, including disputes over 
how fast to move toward a market economy, steps that could cause steep price 
increases and consequent worker demands for compensatory wage hikes. Walesa 
could find himself in a replay of 1981, when he spent much of his time 
crisscrossing the country in the attempt to get strikers to go back to work. 
It is likely that the Polish public, and even demanding factory workers, will 
give Solidarity a period of grace, but it is not certain how long the patience 
will last. 
"It is an incredible success for our struggle, but let us now see it in 
practice," a delighted Walesa told the Associated Press in a telephone 
interview from Gdansk after Jaruzelski's announcement. "This is just the 
beginning." 
