COLUMN LEFT; 
USE MIGHT IN SERVICE OF RIGHT; 
BUSH HAS DONE THE CORRECT THING IN THE GULF. BUT HE'S WEAKENED BY AMERICA'S 
INCONSISTENCY. 
In the world of so-called Realpolitik, the law is the Golden Rule -- that is, 
he who has the gold, rules. In key countries of the Middle East, the color of 
gold is black. The black gold referred to is oil. 
It is said that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein illegally invaded Kuwait (and 
intended to invade Saudi Arabia) to gain control of up to 45% of the world's 
oil reserves. With control of such a vital raw material, the destiny of modern 
industrial states would be largely in his hands. By manipulating the price and 
availability of oil, he could accrue great wealth and power and maintain a 
death grip on the world's economic well-being. 
By the same token, the United States used its economic and military might to 
maneuver in the world community -- the U.N. Security Council, the Arab League, 
our NATO allies and Japan -- to isolate Iraq. The big kid on the block 
justified his actions in the name of national security and world stability. 
Realpolitik's Golden Rule seems to be operative on both sides. 
Our national interest will be served and the chances for world stability 
enhanced to the degree that we fight for human rights measured by these 
yardsticks: fight for everyone's right to self-determination; fight to 
strengthen and increase the rule of international law; contribute to the 
development of underdeveloped nations, and fight for a fairer distribution of 
the world's resources, income and wealth, applying these principles 
consistently everywhere. 
Bush's actions to date have been prudent, skillful and in proportion. In other 
words, he has fundamentally been right. 
In the final analysis, might may be used as a deterrent from aggression, but 
right must be the justification for acting. Bush is weakened by inconsistency 
in the application of these principles. 
The moral authority of the United States was weakened when we illegally mined 
the harbors in Nicaragua. When the World Court found us guilty of violating 
international law, we ignored its verdict. By contrast, we later wanted to use 
the World Court's decision against Iran in the Persian Gulf crisis. In other 
words, the issue was not international law and right, but might. 
When we locked out the press, paid off allies in the region to "invite" us into 
Grenada and illegally invaded a tiny island nation of 110,000 people without a 
standing army -- using the excuse that American students were at risk and 
Cubans were building an airport to be used as a Soviet military base -- we were 
operating on the principle of might, not right. 
We used the same fundamental principle in Panama, even though the situation was 
complicated and clouded by U.S.-financed elections that were ignored by Gen. 
Manuel A. Noriega. That still did not give us the right to violate the native 
Panamanians' drive for self-determination. We sacrificed the lives of two dozen 
Americans and countless Panamanians in the process. And the Panamanians are 
still suffering because we have not paid them for the destruction of our 
invasion. 
Hussein was wrong when he violated Kuwait's right to self-determination and 
broke international law by invading a sovereign country. He is right, however, 
and gets a strong hearing in the Arab world, when he says that Israel and Syria 
are wrong for invading and occupying Lebanon, and that Israel is wrong for 
occupying the West Bank and Gaza and denying Palestinians their human rights 
and self-determination. 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia should not ignore the message (even though the 
messenger may be flawed) from many of their fellow Arabs about the grave 
disparity between the rich Persian Gulf states and the masses of poor in the 
region. 
Neither should they ignore the structures of their own societies. Much of the 
democratic industrialized world came to their rescue with mixed emotions. They 
came because they needed to protect the oil for their own interests. But they 
were also keenly aware that they were propping up a feudal society in which the 
rights of the common people and women are less than others, and other freedoms 
(of the press, for one) are denied. 
The United States should practice the democratic principles it preaches, even 
as it backs them up with economic and military strength. Then, when we must 
act, we will have the moral authority to gain the backing of the world 
community because we are right, and not just because we have might. 
