RAMS GRAB THEIR BITS AND PIECES OF ROCK 
The Rams, a football team with an owner who has an insatiable quest for 
international adventure, arrived here Sunday morning to begin preparations for 
their third overseas exhibition game in four years. 
Owner Georgia Frontiere did not accompany her team on its charter flight, but 
she is expected to arrive from New York in plenty of time to celebrate the 
events leading to Saturday's game with the Kansas City Chiefs at Olympic 
Stadium. 
Whereas previous trips to London in 1987 and Tokyo last year lacked for 
substance beyond promotional considerations, the Rams have arrived in Berlin 
amid quite an international backdrop. 
The team hotels stand not far beyond the shadows of the Brandenburg Gate, which 
separated West from East Berlin until last Nov. 9, when The Wall came tumbling 
down. 
Naturally, every trip abroad has its inconveniences. Last year in Tokyo, some 
Rams complained privately about having to double up in rooms while their 
opponent and chief rivals, the San Francisco 49ers, enjoyed separate 
accommodations in the same hotel. 
Sunday, the Rams arrived in a city sweltering from an unusual summer heat wave. 
Temperatures are in the 90s. One of the two hotels housing the players is 
without air conditioning, and the single beds in some rooms appear no more than 
cloth draped over a balance beam. 
The worn look on the sweaty face of nose tackle Alvin Wright, 6-foot-2 and 285 
pounds, summed up the situation appropriately. 
Most of the players who had hit the wall, so to speak, somewhere over the 
Atlantic Ocean, were in no condition to chip away at the rapidly-disappearing 
barrier that had divided Berlin since the early '60s. 
Five bleary-eyed Rams, though, put aside sleep and took a quick tour of the 
site of one of the most celebrated and symbolic episodes in recent history: the 
destruction of a wall that started the process toward the reunification of 
Germany. 
Tackle Irv Pankey, guard Duval Love, linebacker Larry Kelm, kicker Mike 
Lansford and fullback Robert Delpino were eager to help dismantle where they 
could. 
The Berlin Wall that once adjoined the Brandenburg Gate has crumbled and become 
thousands of souvenirs. Really, there is scarce visible evidence that it ever 
existed, though pieces can be purchased -- complete with certificates of 
authenticity -- for five German deutschemarks (about $3 U.S. currency) from one 
of several hundred merchants that now compose a human wall of free enterprise. 
Unsatisfied with just purchasing history, the players were driven past 
Potsdamer Platz, site of last week's historic rock concert, to a section of 
secondary wall that still stands. 
Pankey, 6-foot-5 and 280 pounds, rented a chisel and hammer and began chipping 
away. He broke off two particular pieces, one for each of his 14 month old twin 
sons, Keith and Kevin. One day, Pankey said, he'll explain to his sons the 
meaning of two ordinary-looking pieces of concrete and graffiti. 
"In school, when they're studying history, they can stand up in class and they 
can say, 'I got a piece of that wall,' " Pankey said. 
Kelm said it was difficult for him to understand the enormity of recent events 
here. 
"It's very interesting," he said. "But it's hard for me to realize exactly the 
situation. I was never here before, when there was all the tension. I probably 
take it for granted, like it's always been like this." 
Ram Notes 
Ram players who didn't make the trip were unsigned veteran linebacker Kevin 
Greene, safety Michael Stewart, defensive end Doug Reed, and tight end Damone 
Johnson. Tackle Jackie Slater is signed but has not reported. Receiver Aaron 
Cox stayed home to nurse a hamstring injury that is expected to keep him out 
three to six weeks. . . . The Kansas City Chiefs, who also arrived Sunday 
morning, were greeted at the hotel by a Prussian Brass Band in full historical 
regalia. The Chiefs arrived without seven unsigned veterans of their own, one 
signed player who has not reported -- corner Albert Lewis -- and an unsigned 
first-round draft choice, linebacker Percy Snow. Kansas City practiced for 
about an hour after arriving. The Rams and Chiefs will scrimmage Tuesday, 
Wednesday and Thursday. . . . The same plane that dropped off the Rams in West 
Berlin is taking the Raiders back to Los Angeles from London. . . . The Rams 
are not flying back to Los Angeles right after Saturday's game, as originally 
planned. The team will leave Sunday and arrive the same day in Los Angeles at 
1:40 p.m. . . . Hard to believe, but Rams' defensive coordinator Fritz Shurmur 
is not German. He is of Polish, Irish and English descent. 
