COMEBACK RANKS WITH SERIES BESTS 
Woodland Hills West's dramatic, 8-7, win over Gonzales, La., in a third-round 
game of the American Legion World Series ranks among the biggest comebacks in 
recent series play. West trailed, 7-5, entering the bottom of the ninth but 
scored three runs to pull it out, capping a comeback from a four-run deficit in 
a game that ended Saturday at 1:15 a.m. local time. 
It was the biggest come-from-behind rally since Edina, Minn., scored five runs 
in the eighth and ninth innings against defending champion Boyertown, Penn., in 
the 1983 championship game. Edina won, 5-4. 
Since 1983, no team has reversed a decision in the final innings by scoring 
three or more runs. West, which trailed, 6-2, in the bottom of the seventh, 
scored three runs on Bobby Kim's three-run triple. 
By virtue of its win against Gonzales, West was assured a berth in today's 
championship round. The game will be taped by ESPN and aired Tuesday at 10 a.m. 
West's appearance in the title game will mark the 21st time a California entry 
has advanced to the final. In 20 previous games, California teams have won 14 
times, the most recent victory by Santa Monica in 1976. Santa Monica defeated 
Plaines, Ill., 7-6. 
West players continue to rank among the front-runners for individual honors. 
After three games, infielder Del Marine was leading the race for the Louisville 
Slugger Batting Award, which goes to the player with the highest batting 
average in regional and series play. Marine is 16 for 31 (.516). 
Outfielder Carl McFadden, who tied Friday night's game with a two-run double in 
the bottom of the ninth and scored the winning run, leads all players in runs 
batted in with 11 in regional and series play. The leader receives the Irvin L. 
(Click) Cowger Award. 
Marine leads in total bases with 23 in regional and series play. The leader in 
this category receives the Rawlings Big Stick Award. 
Lance Gibson, expected to play in today's final, is second in the running for 
the Bob Feller Award, which goes to the pitcher with the most strikeouts. 
Gibson, who has 29 strikeouts, trails Jeff Thelen of Janesville, Wis., who has 
31. 
