LEGISLATORS SEEK INQUIRY INTO GASOLINE PRICE INCREASES 
Double-digit increases in the price of gasoline at Ventura County pumps angered 
consumers Tuesday and prompted a Republican congressman and a Democratic state 
senator to call for investigations. 
"We do not have an oil shortage at this point; therefore, these price hikes . . 
. are unwarranted," said Rep. Robert J. Lagomarsino (R-Ventura), who called for 
a federal investigation of possible antitrust and price-fixing violations by 
oil companies. 
State Sen. Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara) made a similar appeal for a federal 
and state investigation. 
Hart and Lagomarsino said they do not think the oil supply crisis, prompted by 
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Thursday, is serious enough to warrant changing 
the federal government's ban on offshore oil development along the California 
coast. Without such a policy change, oil officials said, the crisis will not 
provide much of a boon for Ventura County oil producers. 
The county's gasoline retailers, however, have been busy raising prices. 
Self-serve, unleaded regular was selling for $1.29 a gallon at Chevron stations 
in Moorpark and Camarillo on Tuesday, an 8-cent increase since the invasion. 
In the same period, prices have gone up 6 1/2 cents a gallon at an Exxon 
station in Ventura and 5 cents a gallon at a Mobil station in Thousand Oaks and 
at a Unocal station in Fillmore. 
Combined with a 5-cent-a-gallon increase in the state gasoline tax that took 
effect last Wednesday, gasoline prices have risen more than 10% at some 
stations in less than a week. Several station operators said they expect more 
increases in the coming weeks, noting that the price of crude oil has reached 
the highest level in nearly five years. 
"These scumbag oil companies remind me of looters after a disaster," said 
Donald Ricky, a contractor who was filling up at a Shell station in Ventura. 
The price of gasoline there went up 4 cents Sunday and 2 cents more Tuesday 
afternoon. 
"It's the same thing they did in '73 and '79," Ricky said, recalling previous 
oil crises. "They immediately leap at the first opportunity to gouge the 
consumer. I resent it like hell." 
Ricky said he has no choice but to pay the higher prices because he needs his 
truck for business. "I remodel houses," he said. "I can't ride the bus with a 
2-by-4." 
But a Shell spokesman in Houston said the higher prices are justified. 
"Oil is a commodity. It's no different from oranges, soybeans or coffee," 
spokesman H.F. Hutchins said. "This is the way world commodities operate. They 
react to what's going on with the supply situation on an immediate basis. 
"It's not much different from what you see when there's an orange crop freeze 
in Florida or a coffee crop freeze in Costa Rica. Prices rise almost 
immediately in response to those events." 
Hutchins said a $3-per-barrel increase on July 27 by the oil-producing 
countries started the surge in prices. "The combination of that plus dramatic 
events in the Middle East have added a psychology of shortage and uncertainty 
in the market. The prices reflect that uncertainty in supply." 
Not everyone buying gas on Tuesday was upset about the price increases. "I can 
see the oil companies' point of view," said Mike Murray of Ventura. "They feel 
there will be a shortage and they can make profits now. I'm not opposed to 
that." 
But Lagomarsino, echoing charges by other congressmen, accused some oil 
companies of "taking advantage of the crisis in the gulf to make a huge profit 
off the public." He called for U.S. Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh to investigate 
"possible antitrust and price-fixing violations." 
In a joint statement Monday, the Justice, Energy and Transportation departments 
said they would monitor oil prices and vigorously prosecute any companies 
guilty of antitrust violations. 
After attending a meeting of the state Senate Energy Committee on Tuesday, Hart 
said the state and federal governments should "redouble our efforts at 
antitrust enforcement." 
"I think whenever you are in a situation like this there's an easy 
justification to raise prices." 
Hart said he disputed figures presented to the committee by Richard A. Bilas, a 
member of the California Energy Commission. Bilas told the panel that gasoline 
prices had gone up by only 2.4 cents on the average since the invasion. "That 
seemed awfully low, based on personal experience and what constituents say," 
Hart said. 
Hart, who has opposed offshore oil drilling, said that at this point he does 
not expect a change in the federal policy banning lease sales until 1996 along 
the Santa Barbara Channel and until the year 2000 along the rest of the state's 
coastline. 
"It depends how much worse it gets," Hart said. "Those of us who oppose it off 
the Santa Barbara Channel would say there's much more to be gained from energy 
conservation. We just don't have a national energy policy." 
Lagomarsino aide John Doherty said the congressman believes that all parts of 
the state should be treated equally. Lagomarsino has supported offshore 
drilling and was politically embarrassed in June when the Bush Administration 
banned it for the entire decade off most of the California coast but only until 
1996 in the waters off Lagomarsino's district. 
Oil company officials said that unless the crisis leads to more oil development 
off the Southern California coast, it would not provide much of a boost for the 
local oil industry. 
"I don't see a whole lot of change in Ventura County per se," said Fred 
Sarrafian, a Texaco official in Ventura. The company pumps about 9,000 barrels 
a day in the county, mostly from around the Ventura River bed. 
"There could be a substantial change if things result in more offshore oil 
activity," he said. 
Related Stories: A10 
