MIKE PENNER: SAME RAM SCHEDULE: THEY PLAY TOURISTS 
The Rams can't get to the Super Bowl but they can get to East Berlin by 
climbing through a hole in the Berlin Wall. Five of them did it Sunday, proving 
once again that anything in this world is possible as long as Joe Montana 
doesn't play for the other side. 
Of course, by the time the Rams got there, it was more Berlin mall than Berlin 
Wall. "I wish we would've gotten over here earlier," said offensive tackle Irv 
Pankey as he surveyed the swap meet that has set up shop outside Brandenburg 
Gate. Much has happened during the nine months after the liberation of Berlin 
-- most of it good if you own a piece of the rock and are looking to turn a 
profit. 
Want a chunk of the wall? Five deutschemarks (about $3) will get you a plastic 
bag of graffiti-splattered stones, complete with certificate of authenticity. A 
palm-sized slab goes for two deutschemarks. And for three, you can rent a 
hammer and a chisel and take matters into your own hands. 
Since the Soviet guards who once patrolled the wall are now retired, their 
uniforms are up for sale. Spread atop folding tables as far as the eye can see 
are helmets, officers' caps, khaki shirts, medals, pins, coats and trousers -- 
an altogether different type of radical chic. 
Or, if you're more interested in something suitable for framing, a vendor will 
gladly show you something black and white and once read all over the zonal 
border -- signs that scream, with a foreboding air: 
 Sperrgebeit! 
 HALT! 
 The irony behind this curtain is palpable. After 30 years, the Western world's 
darkest symbol of Communist repression has been trampled underfoot by 
capitalistic fervor, where, if you wish to share a piece of history, it's going 
to cost you. 
The death trap has become a tourist trap. Maybe you call it progress. 
Several Rams went along for the ride within hours of the team plane's landing 
at Tegel Airport. The Rams are here for an exhibition game with the Kansas City 
Chiefs, but more than that, they are seeking their place in the sun. London in 
1988. Tokyo in 1989. Berlin in 1990. Searching for some kind of identity, and 
knowing that America's Team has already been taken, Georgia Frontiere has the 
Rams committed to going global. 
As the Lewis and Clark of the NFL's world-conquest program -- Lawrence Taylor 
uber alles -- the Rams know the value of a photo opportunity. So Sunday 
afternoon, five players were rustled together and quickly shuttled off to the 
wall, with a couple of brief stops in front of the cameras along the way. 
First up, Kaiser Wilhelm Church, a landmark in the middle of the financial 
district in West Berlin. This church, shelled during World War II, stands today 
as it did 45 years ago in memory of the bloodshed. The players posed in front 
of it and next to Berlin, a twisting metallic abstract sculpture that is 
supposed to symbolize the relationship between East and West Berlin. 
Art critic Pankey's analysis? 
"Some silver stuff in the middle of the street." 
Next, the bus weaved its way to Brandenburg Gate and a glimpse at the last few 
remnants of the wall. You can buy more than you can see and the hawkers hit 
everyone in the Rams' party, some more than others. 
Pankey decided he had to have a Russian hat, fur-lined and fur-covered, ideal 
for days such as Sunday -- pushing 90 degrees and panting amid the humidity. 
"Amigo!" Pankey shouted at an astonished salesman. "How much for one of those?" 
Thirty-five marks, he was told. 
Pankey pulled off the white baseball cap he was wearing, complete with sharp 
NFL logo. "I'll trade you this for that," Pankey proposed. 
The vendor shook his head. "Is worth one mark," he replied, frowning at 
Pankey's headgear. 
So Pankey shelled out the 35 marks and grinned beneath the black fur for the 
photographers until he walked a few yards and saw the same hats selling at 
another booth for 15 marks. 
Silly American. 
By the time he reached the wall, Pankey was determined to get his money's 
worth. He rented one of the hammer-and-chisel kits and went off to stalk the 
cement. 
"Got to get a good spot," he said. "I'm going to be upset if I don't get a good 
piece of this wall." 
Pankey got more than one. He wanted his twin infant sons, Keith and Kevin, to 
have something besides pine cones and lizards by the time they reach 
show-and-tell age. Then he passed the hammer to his teammates. Fullback Robert 
Delpino took a few whacks. Kicker Mike Lansford and guard Duval Love pounded 
away as well. 
The graffiti is striking and it is telling. There are many references to Pink 
Floyd, the rock group whose concept album, "The Wall," was the inspiration for 
last month's German Woodstock, which brought a crowd of 300,000 to the real 
wall for a live performance of the music. There are lyrics from the Sex 
Pistols' "Holiday In the Sun": "Now there's a reason to be waiting at the 
Berlin Wall." 
Since it was built, Berliners had been waiting for this wall to crumble. 
Now, there are holes in the cement big enough to drive a lineman through. 
Pankey completed the journey, stepping from west to east, and someone asked him 
if the wall takes on a new meaning when viewed from the other side. 
"The wall's down," Pankey answered. "That's the best meaning." 
A few minutes later, the Rams were summoned back to the bus and headed back to 
the team hotel, where beds and treatment for severe jet-lag awaited. Pankey 
looked beat, and he'd been taken at least once, but he figured there are worse 
PR gigs than this. 
"That was a kick in the butt," Pankey said with a grin. "I think I scared the 
hell out of some of the people there. A lot of people just turned around and 
looked at me and kept looking up. They had to catch themselves. It was a new 
experience, I guess." 
A 6-foot-5, 280-pound professional football player in Germany. A newly 
dismantled Berlin Wall. The sightings are for real, even if they do take some 
time to sink in. 
