ONLY IN L.A. 
Remus and Romulus founded Rome. And, now, Silvana and Stefania Maisano, Italy's 
latest set of creative twins, have found Beverly Hills. 
But the Genoese-born sculptors encountered problems -- in fact, a couple of 
them -- trying to install their works in a new complex called Two Rodeo Drive. 
A fountain designed by Silvana flooded Friday (fortunately for the twins, the 
Drought Police weren't in the neighborhood). 
And a pillar designed by Stefania -- the twins usually work on separate art 
pieces -- is being detained by U.S. Customs because the paperwork isn't 
complete. (Oddly enough, a second pillar sailed through.) 
"They're pretty mad," said publicist Alex Auerbach, "particularly about the 
pillar. They can't understand why there's no way to lubricate the Customs 
process with a few dollars." 
Only in L.A. Menu Item of the Week: "California-Mexican roll" at La Cocina 
restaurant in Signal Hill. It's a tortilla filled with chicken, tomato and 
cheese, then cut and wrapped with lettuce to look like sushi. 
"Cop Rock," TV's police musical, is being touted as a revolutionary idea. But 
it's the same old song for the L.A. County Sheriff's Department. 
The only difference is that the sheriff's deputies who perform in the group 
Manhunter don't sing at work, like the stars of "Cop Rock." 
With a repertoire that includes such cop-oriented original tunes as "It's a 
Mystery" and "Driving Fast," Manhunter has played at the Crazy Horse in Santa 
Ana as well as at several anti-drug telethons and benefits. 
Because of the nature of show biz and cop biz, Manhunter's cast has undergone 
changes. 
Guitarist Van Mosley plans to work on his own album. David Leicht, a former 
member, is now a deputy in San Bernardino. 
Leicht wrote "Driving Fast," the story of a wild police pursuit narrated by the 
cop riding shotgun: 
"Had my feet on the dash and we were haulin'," it begins. 
Manhunter plays various styles of music, but "'Driving Fast,"' said Leicht, "is 
definitely rock." 
Now that Disneyland has changed its mind about replacing its robotic Abe 
Lincoln with Kermit the Frog at a park exhibit, the question remains: Where to 
put the loquacious Muppet? 
May we suggest a troubled Disney-operated attraction with a more fitting name. 
How about making Kermit the Frog the host of the Spruce Goose? There'd even be 
room inside for Miss Piggy. 
miscLAny: 
L.A. may be the only U.S. city to have a Beethoven Market. It stocks no 
T-shirts or items honoring the composer, though. It's a Mar Vista grocery store 
on Beethoven Street. 
