3 GET 16-, 20-YEAR, LIFE SENTENCES FOR DEFACING BEIJING PORTRAIT OF MAO 
A Chinese court imposed prison sentences of life, 20 years and 16 years on 
three men who flung ink and paint on the giant portrait of the late ruler Mao 
Zedong in Beijing's Tian An Men Square during anti-government unrest in May. 
The Beijing Evening News said the capital's Intermediate Court found Yu 
Zhijian, Yu Dongyue and Lu Decheng from south China's Hunan Province guilty of 
"counterrevolutionary destruction and counterrevolutionary incitement." 
The prison terms are among the few court sentences Chinese authorities have 
announced since the bloody military crackdown June 3 and 4 and subsequent 
arrests of thousands of anti-government protesters. 
The three pasted "reactionary posters" on the Gate of Heavenly Peace at the 
north end of the giant square before throwing paint-filled eggshells and an ink 
bottle at Mao's portrait May 23, the paper said. 
"They used the turmoil in Beijing as an opportunity to put up reactionary 
posters, make reactionary speeches . . . and brazenly carried out 
counterrevolutionary destruction on Tian An Men Square," it quoted the court as 
saying. 
"Their actions constitute . . . counterrevolutionary destruction and 
counterrevolutionary incitement. They must be severely punished," it added. 
The three, described in earlier reports as a primary schoolteacher, a newspaper 
arts editor and a transport company worker, were seized by student democracy 
activists then filling Tian An Men Square and handed over to police after 
defacing the picture. 
National television showed the three men standing impassively as court 
officials read out their sentences. Yu Zhijian was jailed for life, Yu Dongyue 
for 20 years and Lu 16. 
Mao's portrait has hung since the 1950s from the Gate of Heavenly Peace at the 
entrance to the Forbidden City, the ancient imperial palace complex in the 
center of Beijing. 
A sign reading, "This Was Not Done by Students or the People," appeared below 
the defaced portrait and student leaders condemned the action. 
Authorities quickly replaced the painting with an identical, undamaged one. 
The attack went against the grain of a limited revival of Mao's memory during 
the weeks of unrest, when some workers on protest marches carried his portrait 
in the first such public display of devotion to him in the capital in a decade. 
