THE BIRTH OF A PIE RECIPE: IT STARTED WITH A KISS 
"How do you think up the recipes?" That's a question food writers hear 
frequently. But the usual answer, "Well, it depends," doesn't help much. But 
it's true. So in the interest of greater understanding, here's the story on 
today's offering, a chocolate hazelnut pie. The recipe began at a benefit 
community supper climaxed by a ravishing display of pie -- a 3-foot-wide, 
16-foot-long stretch paved with row after row of strawberry, rhubarb, apple, 
cherry, lemon chiffon, lemon meringue, chocolate fudge, chocolate mousse, 
banana cream, coconut custard, pecan, apple crumb . . . 17 flavors in all, not 
counting the cheesecakes. 
I've had pie on my mind ever since. But what kind of pie? Surely the world 
needs no more recipes for classic fruit pies. (What we need in that department 
are people willing to make them.) I finally decided the pie should be 
chocolate; all the people I know and love and make pie for are chocolate fans. 
And one of the people I love the best is a man who has a special weakness for 
Baci (kisses): bite-size Italian confections that combine bittersweet chocolate 
with roasted hazelnuts in a way that Hershey's would do very well to learn 
from. 
OK, Baci pie it is. But how to make it? None of my favorite chocolate mousse 
fillings can be published now that uncooked eggs are on the out list, so the 
creamy chocolate part will have to come from baked custard and whipped cream. 
The nut layer should be nougat-like, so it's derived from the almond tart that 
Lindsey Shere perfected for Berkeley's renowned Chez Panisse restaurant. 
The crust is basically old-fashioned flaky piecrust, but it's made even richer 
and flakier by being bound with sour cream instead of water, an idea that comes 
from the "counterfeit puff pastry" given in Maida Heatter's "Book of Great 
Desserts." 
All of this is absolutely typical. You get an idea, then you go with what you 
know, borrowing a little here and a little there. Then, if what you're making 
is Baci pie, you eat nothing else for about three days so the calories in a 
single slice don't rise up and kill you dead. 
BACI PIE 
8 ounces hazelnuts (filberts), scant 2 cups 
1/2 cup sugar 
1 1/2 cups whipping cream, preferably not ultra-pasteurized 
2 teaspoons Frangelico or other hazelnut liqueur 
Crust 
4 ounces bittersweet chocolate 
3 egg yolks 
Chocolate Cream 
Spread hazelnuts on shallow pan and toast at 350 degrees 15 minutes or until 
golden. Cool, then rub between palms to remove as much skin as possible. Grind 
nuts into coarse crumbs and set aside. 
Combine sugar with 3/4 cup whipping cream in heavy, non-reactive saucepan. 
Simmer over medium heat, stirring often, until mixture thickens to texture of 
light cream sauce, about 15 minutes. 
Stir in nuts and liqueur. Pour warm filling into Crust, increase oven heat to 
400 degrees and bake 15 to 20 minutes, or until filling is lightly browned and 
almost set. (Will bubble up and then subside.) 
Grind or chop chocolate into fine crumbs, then stir in egg yolks. Heat 
remaining 3/4 cup cream just to boiling point. Pour over chocolate, stirring 
until mixture is smooth. Gently pour chocolate mixture onto pie filling, return 
to oven and reduce heat to 350 degrees. Bake another 12 to 15 minutes or until 
chocolate layer is just set. Cool on rack and chill thoroughly. 
Completely cover top of pie with Chocolate Cream, putting cream through pastry 
tube or swirling decoratively with back of spoon. Serve at once. Makes 1 
(9-inch) pie, or 9 to 12 servings. 
Crust 
1 1/2 cups flour 
3/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon sugar 
3 tablespoons lard or solid shortening 
1/2 cup unsalted butter 
1/3 cup sour cream 
Combine flour, salt and sugar in bowl. Rub in lard with fingers (or use food 
processor) until mixture resembles meal. Cut or process in butter only until 
large lumps about size of baby lima beans form. Add sour cream and stir or 
process as briefly as possible, until dough holds together. 
Form dough into round cake, about 1-inch thick, wrap tightly in plastic wrap 
and chill 3 to 24 hours. 
Roll dough between 2 sheets wax paper to 1/8-inch thickness. Chill. Line oven 
bottom with foil to catch any drips. Press foil onto 9-inch pie pan, shiny side 
down, to obtain shape of pan. Remove foil and set aside. 
Peel wax paper from dough, fit pastry into pan and cover with pre-shaped foil, 
pressing so foil is snug all around. Bake at 375 degrees 20 minutes or until 
set, then remove foil and continue baking until shell is lightly browned, about 
20 minutes longer. Makes 1 (9-inch) crust. 
Chocolate Cream 
3 tablespoons cocoa powder 
3/4 cup whipping cream, preferably not ultra-pasteurized 
1 tablespoon sugar 
1 teaspoon Frangelico or other hazelnut liqueur 
Place cocoa in small, deep bowl and very slowly stir in 1/2 cup whipping cream. 
Cover and chill. At serving time, whip chocolate cream until stiff, then fold 
in sugar and Frangelico. 
