JURY ACQUITS EX-ASSISTANT CITY ATTY. OF LYING TO DMV 
Former Assistant City Atty. Betsy Mogul, wife of an ex-Los Angeles police 
officer charged with two contract murders, was acquitted Thursday in Los 
Angeles Superior Court of a charge of lying on a Department of Motor Vehicle 
form to cheat the state out of taxes. 
Jurors deliberated for about four hours before finding Mogul, 41, not guilty of 
a single perjury count -- a charge that led to her dismissal from her 
$78,000-a-year post. She had been accused of falsely claiming on a DMV form in 
1983 that she bought a Mercedes-Benz car from her father to save about $600 in 
sales tax. 
Mogul testified that she signed the form without reading it at the urging of 
her husband. 
"I just want to say thank God for the jury system," Mogul said after the 
verdict. "Because of the experience I've had since my husband was arrested in 
1986, I have learned that the police and the prosecutors are petty, corrupt and 
venal politicians." 
Husband Investigated 
The charge against Mogul, filed by the district attorney's office in February, 
1987, grew out of an investigation into alleged criminal activities by her 
husband, William Leasure, 42. The LAPD veteran of 18 years is charged with 
arranging two murders in 1980 and 1981 and with being involved in a statewide 
yacht theft ring. Mogul's lawyer, Robert Horner, contended after Thursday's 
verdict that police had sought the perjury charge against Mogul to pressure her 
into testifying against Leasure. 
"The police abuse is staggering," Horner said. "They threatened people. They 
tried to use any kind of force they could to get her terminated, and it worked 
because (City Atty.) Jim (James K.) Hahn is terrified of bad publicity." 
Hahn fired Mogul in January, 1988. Mike Qualls, a city attorney spokesman, said 
at the time that Mogul was discharged "for conduct unbecoming an employee of 
this office" after she had been ordered to stand trial on a perjury charge. 
Horner, now in private practice in Beverly Hills, said he quit a $95,000-a-year 
post as Hahn's chief assistant to defend Mogul, whom he once supervised in the 
city attorney's office. He said Mogul has been virtually unemployed as a lawyer 
since she was fired. 
Action Called Error 
"I would hope that the city attorney would not force her into litigation about 
the job they took away for no reason," Horner said. "I hope that after this 
nightmare Mr. Hahn would rectify the error and give her her job back." 
City attorney's office officials could not be reached for comment. 
Now that she has been acquitted, Mogul said, she plans to "turn my prayers and 
my efforts to seeing that my husband also gets justice. I believe he's 
innocent." 
