COMMINGLING OF TRADE UNIT FUNDS PROBED 
Funds for a city-financed Africa trade group that figures in the investigation 
of Mayor Tom Bradley were commingled in the personal checking account of a 
mayoral aide, city officials revealed Thursday. 
Tony DeGuzman, chief auditor in the city controller's office, said records he 
has obtained and interviews with Juanita St. John, executive director of the 
Task Force for Africa/Los Angeles Relations, indicate that task force funds and 
personal funds were commingled in a checking account belonging to St. John's 
daughter. 
He declined to elaborate, but Deputy City Atty. Michael Guarino identified the 
daughter as Kathy St. John, a staff aide to Bradley. 
According to Guarino, Juanita St. John said in an interview with DeGuzman 
earlier this year "that she had been using her daughter's checking account for 
task force purposes." 
Officials would not indicate how much money they believe passed through Kathy 
St. John's account, or how the funds were used. 
Wants Family's Records 
Guarino said the city is attempting to force Juanita St. John to produce 
records from checking accounts of family members. The records are among those 
"critical to resolving the central question of what has happened to public 
funds placed in her trust," Guarino said. 
The task force has been one focus of a wide-ranging probe of possible conflicts 
of interest between Bradley's public duties and personal business dealings. 
Juanita St. John, who has earned $40,000 annually as director of the task 
force, is a longtime friend and partner with Bradley in a Riverside County real 
estate deal. Chiefly on the strength of Bradley's personal support for the task 
force, the group has received some $400,000 in recent years. 
Bradley has denied any conflict of interest. 
After news reports alleging task force board members benefited from the group's 
activities, the city controller and city attorney began investigating how tax 
money was used. The city, claiming it made repeated efforts to secure task 
force records, filed misdemeanor charges against Juanita St. John for failing 
to provide subpoenaed records showing how $180,000 in city funds were spent. 
Arraignment Delayed 
On Thursday, Juanita St. John's lawyers won a postponement of her arraignment 
on the charges, pending the outcome of a series of challenges they have filed 
to the legality of City Controller Rick Tuttle's subpoena. Municipal Court 
Judge Stephen Marcus rescheduled the arraignment for Sept. 15. Among the 
disputes is whether the city can compel St. John to produce records from 
checking accounts of her immediate family members. 
Richard Hirsch, Juanita St. John's attorney, has argued that is an invasion of 
privacy. 
Hirsch said he could not immediately respond to the commingling allegation, 
which surfaced in court document's filed by Guarino Thursday. 
Hirsch said he had not discussed the matter with his client, but stressed it 
does not mean St. John misused public funds. "This could be a commingling of 
funds that (were) advancements and reimbursements. The question is whether 
everything washes out at the end and is all accounted for, not where it came 
from." 
However, Guarino cited a section of the city's funding contract with the Africa 
task force that required St. John to maintain a separate account and records 
for the use of city funds. 
Kathy St. John could not be reached for comment. Bradley's press spokesman, 
Bill Chandler, declined to comment on the allegation, saying it is "between the 
city attorney and Juanita's lawyers." After checking, Chandler said Bradley and 
top mayoral aides knew nothing about the alleged commingling of task force 
funds. 
Not in Court 
Juanita St. John did not appear in court Thursday. 
However, in a telephone interview with The Times last week, she bitterly denied 
doing anything improper and disputed the city's charges. 
"The task force will owe me money when this is over," St. John said. 
"It was never a question of not" providing records, she said, adding that 
preparations for her daughter's recent wedding delayed her response to city 
auditors' requests. "I'm getting the (remaining records) together." 
She claimed the amount of city funds not accounted for has been overstated. 
Tuttle "may not like the way I do my accounting," she said, but the funds 
unaccounted for "was never over $100,000." 
She said those funds were spent appropriately on "salaries, travel and just 
running the office." 
