MEASURE M BACKERS BELIEVE UEBERROTH COULD BE THE KEY 
He is well known, well respected and credible. And even though he has never 
held elective office or built a highway, Orange County leaders of a proposed 
half-cent transportation sales tax think Laguna Beach resident Peter Ueberroth 
may be just what they need. 
Ueberroth, president of the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee and a 
former commissioner of baseball, brings none of the political baggage to a 
campaign that most business leaders do. He is not a developer, which allows him 
to evade that stigma. And because he holds no elective office, voters can 
hardly toss him out for supporting a tax increase. 
More importantly, "he's a very, very popular person with enormous credibility," 
said Dana Reed, chairman of the Orange County Transportation Commission and 
Measure M's chief backer. "He'd be a tremendous asset to the campaign." 
Reed said Friday that Ueberroth has been asked to play a "very significant" 
role in the effort, perhaps even as campaign chairman. Ueberroth has not yet 
responded, Reed said, adding that even if the former Olympic chairman is too 
busy to serve as chairman, local leaders would still like to involve him 
somehow. Ueberroth was not available for comment. 
Before Measure M backers can launch their push for November, they need to get 
past a vote by county supervisors Tuesday. The board will consider whether to 
put the proposal on the ballot, and though the supervisors' have characterized 
that vote as merely a procedural formality, Measure M opponents are lobbying 
hard to knock the proposed sales tax out of contention. 
Only three supervisors -- Thomas F. Riley, Don R. Roth and Roger R. Stanton -- 
plan to attend Tuesday's session. If any one of them votes against putting the 
measure on the ballot, that will end the effort. 
Meanwhile, Reed has commissioned a pair of Sacramento political consultants to 
draft a campaign strategy, which should be complete this week if the measure 
makes it past the board. 
David Townsend, president of Townsend &amp; Co., one of the firms that is 
drafting the campaign primer, said it is too early to speculate on who might 
lead Orange County's effort, but agreed that it would be helpful to have 
someone "with a lot of credibility in the community." 
Ueberroth seems to fit that bill. He openly supported the previous version of 
Measure M, and a recent poll of county voters found that Ueberroth enjoys a 70% 
favorable rating in Orange County, with only 2% of those questioned expressing 
an unfavorable impression. 
Only President Bush did better on the positive side, racking up a 73% favorable 
rating, and Bush carries an 18% unfavorable rating. Ueberroth's numbers even 
edged out former football running back O.J. Simpson and actress Bette Midler, 
both of whom also have houses in Laguna Beach. 
