COLOMBIA POLICE CHIEF SLAIN AFTER BATTLING DRUG CARTEL; 
HAD SENT GUARDS TO AID JUDGES 
The police chief of Colombia's Antioquia state, who took on the notorious 
Medellin drug cartel on its home territory, was shot to death today in a hail 
of machine-gun fire near his home, authorities said. 
The shooting came a day after judges shut down Colombia's courts indefinitely 
and 50 of Bogota's 55 appeals court judges resigned to demand more government 
protection from ruthless drug lords. 
The provincial police chief, Col. Waldemar Franklin Quintero, was killed and 
his driver wounded when gunmen intercepted their car and riddled it with 
automatic weapons fire, authorities and witnesses said. 
The attack came after Franklin Quintero sent his own bodyguards to protect 
court judges whose lives had been threatened. 
Since assuming his post in January, the colonel had led an active campaign 
against drug traffickers and right-wing death squads. 
Local reporters said he coordinated two helicopter-borne police raids aimed at 
dismantling two big Medellin cocaine cartel complexes, last January and two 
months ago. 
Franklin Quintero had told reporters privately in recent months that he had 
received a stream of death threats. 
Nevertheless, provincial Gov. Helena Herran de Montoya said, he gave up his 
bodyguard force because he "thought it was more important to use this personnel 
in protecting judges." 
Authorities blamed the killing on the Medellin cartel, the world's largest 
cocaine ring, which is believed responsible for about 80% of the cocaine 
smuggled into the United States. 
"They fired without mercy for several minutes at the colonel, who was hit more 
than 100 times," an unidentified witness told Radio Caracol. "His chauffeur was 
seriously injured and taken to a hospital." 
The nation's judges went on strike Thursday to demand increased protection. 
They struck after gunmen hired by drug dealers killed Magistrate Carlos 
Valencia Garcia in Bogota on Wednesday night. That killing also prompted the 50 
magistrates in Bogota's appellate court to hand in their resignations. 
Valencia Garcia, 43, had rejected court motions to exonerate two leaders of the 
Medellin cartel who were accused in the 1987 slaying of a journalist. 
Asked about the strike and Franklin Quintero's slaying, Justice Minister Monica 
de Grieff said: "It's terrifying what is happening in Colombia." 
"The only way to confront this challenge is by fighting together -- the 
government, judges, the armed forces and the citizenry -- to stop the wave of 
violence," she said in Bogota. 
She appealed to the country's more than 4,000 judges and magistrates to end 
their strike so traffickers don't "achieve their goal of halting the 
administration of justice." 
Today's attack was the latest in several drug-related killings in Medellin, 
Colombia's second-largest city and its industrial center. 
In the last month, two officials investigating the activities of cocaine 
kingpin Pablo Escobar Gaviria have been slain. On Thursday night, an armed band 
intercepted a police van carrying 18 people who had been arrested and set them 
free. They included several suspected drug traffickers. 
