FAULKNER BEFOULED; 
WILLIAM FAULKNER AMERICAN WRITER BY FREDERICK R. KARL (WEIDENFELD &amp; 
NICOLSON: $37.50; 1,131 PP., ILLUSTRATED; 1-55584-088-4) 
He was known in Oxford, Miss. as "Count No Count," the town bum. He was a 
scruffy young man in a ragged jacket who drank most of the night and hung 
around the golf course most of the day. He did some house painting, some 
gambling, some wheeling and dealing, but most of his income came from handouts 
from friends and his mother. He was a slight man -- only 5 feet, 5 inches tall 
-- with a bad back. He walked with a limp, and sometimes carried a cane. He was 
subject to hiccup fits that lasted for days, talked in an unintelligible 
mumble, drove around in an old car he'd painted white, and had disastrous luck 
with women. One ex-girl-friend described him as "a fuzzy little animal"; 
everyone in town, she said, knew he was nothing but a "screwball." 
This screwball was William Faulkner in 1920, or rather, it was one side of 
William Faulkner in 1920, for Faulkner was never exactly who he appeared to be 
to any one person at any one time. He was always playing a role. Toward the end 
of their long and disastrous marriage, his wife Estelle decided that there were 
"two Bills. He is so definitely dual . . . Perhaps artists must needs be." 
Frederick R. Karl, in this new and rather nasty biography, contends there were 
more than merely "two Bills"; simple duality was a piece of cake for someone as 
complex as Faulkner. "America's greatest novelist of the twentieth century," 
was also, Karl argues, one of America's greatest con men. He was a parasite, a 
poseur, and a prevaricator; he "desperately wanted to be a great writer, but he 
wanted just as desperately to be an epic hero." To this end he invented a 
glamorous history for himself as a war hero, threw himself into "male 
activities" such as hunting, flying, and horsemanship, played at town tramp as, 
later, he would play at Lord of the Manor. 
"All writers hide," Karl assures us, "but Faulkner hid more. All writers play 
roles, but Faulkner played a great variety of them." 
Some of the "roles" Faulkner played were thrust upon him; some he assumed. He 
came from an alcoholic and violent family; his great-grandfather was murdered, 
and both his grandfather and father were wounded by gunmen. As the oldest of 
four boys, Faulkner had an idyllic childhood, free to wander in the woods on 
his Shetland pony until age 8, when he started school. (He never did think much 
of formal education, and dropped out in the 10th grade.) He went to Canada and 
joined the RAF in 1918, but World War I was almost over and he soon returned to 
Oxford, where he was given a job at the post office. He was a Boy Scout leader 
for a short time (he was eventually fired for drinking) and began to attend a 
few classes at the university. 
He met other writers, among them Sherwood Anderson, who encouraged and 
influenced him. His first novel, "Soldier's Pay," was published in 1925, 
followed by "Mosquitos," "Sartoris," "The Sound and the Fury," "Sanctuary," "As 
I Lay Dying," and "Light in August." During this time Faulkner was also writing 
short stories for magazines in New York and screenplays for Howard Hawks in 
Hollywood. He married his childhood sweetheart in 1929 and spent the last half 
of his life (he died in 1962 at age 65) in a flurry of accomplishment and 
honors; he received the National Book Award twice, won the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1949 and acted as good will ambassador to Japan and Greece. It 
was not all glory; there were personal problems and money problems and drinking 
problems and problems of the heart. Whether all these problems were calculated 
crises that Faulkner handled through "roles" and "poses" remains, however, one 
of the major problems of Karl's book. 
There are others. Karl's biography, which runs, 1,131 pages and weighs almost 2 
1/2 pounds, is burdened with bad writing, pop psychology, glib literary 
criticism, unsubstantiated "scholarship" and a humorless moral outrage that 
rarely flags. His attitude toward his subject soon becomes the real subject of 
"William Faulkner: American Writer," and his attitude is, in a word, negative. 
Karl doesn't like Faulkner, in any of his roles. He doesn't like his looks (we 
are told repeatedly that Faulkner was small, slight, effeminate and 
characterless with "a large beaklike nose" that, Karl marvels, remained "a 
distinctive feature . . . until his death"). Faulkner's writing is described as 
"an obsessional need to put words on paper" and we are warned that during his 
whole life, "Faulkner pecked away at his typewriter, "spewing short stories as 
if programmed," like "an engine chugging along." Faulkner's ability to support 
an enormous extended family is seen "a form of control," his purchase of a 
house and land is seen as a need for "identification," his patience and 
endurance are a response to "self-pity." Telling us that Faulkner showered 
before making love and sneezed into a handkerchief, Karl concludes the writer 
had an "uneasiness about his . . . bodily functions, perhaps a corollary of the 
early years when he was rejected by women and began to form a poor image of 
himself as a man." We are told Faulkner was a lousy pilot, a rotten horseman, 
and in serious need of psychiatric care, "especially in his relationship with 
his mother. That area," Karl broods, "was ripe for picking, although in 
precisely what ways we can only speculate." 
About the only area where Karl is willing to let Faulkner off the hook is, 
oddly, in the area of his drinking. He seems to forgive the drinking as "part 
of some grand mystery" that enabled Faulkner to continue his work: It "may have 
been suicidal for the man, but it was joy and delight for the writer." 
Karl's earnest, sullen, heavy-footed approach has worked well for him in the 
past -- his biography of Joseph Conrad is, to some anyway, a classic. But 
Faulkner is too slippery for him. The only bright bits in the book come from 
Faulkner's own direct quotes, and the only truly interesting thread through the 
narrative is Faulkner's quiet growth as a writer. Underneath all the bluff 
about male bonding and anal control, a picture emerges of a solitary man rising 
at 4 in the morning to face a typewriter, day after day, and this man is no 
"screwball," no "bum," no "Freudian case," nor even a Nobel Prize winner; this 
man is just William Faulkner, and he is infinitely, triumphantly, mysterious. 
