STUDENTS STAGE BOLD PROTEST IN COLOMBIA; 
OUTRAGED BY DRUG VIOLENCE, TENS OF THOUSANDS DEFY CARTELS, MARCH SILENTLY 
THROUGH CAPITAL 
Defying Colombia's powerful and violent cocaine cartels, tens of thousands of 
students marched silently through central Bogota on Friday in a demonstration 
against drug killings and corruption. 
The mass outpouring of students from a dozen universities illustrated a 
widespread feeling of outrage here over a wave of assassinations and a bold 
declaration of war by drug barons against the country's leadership. The 
government of President Virgilio Barco Vargas also has escalated its war 
against the traffickers. 
In a televised address Friday night, Barco urged Colombians to close ranks in a 
"national crusade" against narcotics traffickers, "a crusade that undoubtedly 
will leave us with more blood, pain and suffering, but from which I am sure we 
will emerge victorious." 
'Bring Them to Justice' 
The president said the government's enforcement drive is breaking up networks 
of support for drug traffickers. "We will find the capos, and we will bring 
them to justice," he predicted. 
But he emphasized that the battle against cocaine trafficking cannot be won by 
Colombia alone. 
"Only with a concerted international action and only if the use of narcotics is 
reduced in consumer nations can we definitely win this war," Barco said. 
A hand-lettered banner carried by marchers Friday said, "All Against the 
Mafia." Another declared: "Colombia Does Not Fear Violent Minorities." 
Midday traffic stalled in Bogota, a city of 6 million people, as long 
processions of students converged downtown and then moved slowly along a 
freeway to the main cemetery. Some students wore black armbands, and others 
held red, yellow and green Colombian flags trimmed with black mourning stripes. 
A few carried large posters of Sen. Luis Carlos Galan, a leading candidate for 
the presidential elections next March, who was fatally shot Aug. 18 at an 
outdoor campaign rally. 
"If You Have Consumed Drugs, You Killed Galan," one banner said. "Change Sides 
Now. This Is Our War." 
Galan, especially popular among young Colombians, was an outspoken opponent of 
drug traffickers. The cartels are being blamed for his death and for those of a 
high court judge and a police commander in the same week. 
The judge had issued a ruling against Pablo Escobar, top leader of the Medellin 
cartel, while the officer was commander of national police in Medellin, the 
city where the cartel is based. 
Meanwhile, the Bogota newspaper El Tiempo reported in today's editions that 
army troops raided a fortified house in remote mountains four hours north of 
Bogota that was the headquarters of Medellin cartel chief Gonzalo Rodriguez 
Gacha. 
In the raid Thursday, the army found an arsenal of automatic weapons, and a 
secret room containing documents that included accounting records of Rodriguez 
Gacha's cocaine dealings over the past seven years, El Tiempo said. 
The newspaper said troops also found included lists of properties, front men 
listed as the properties' owners and records of Rodriguez Gacha's relationships 
with other cartel members. 
On a nearby hilltop, they found a communications center with powerful shortwave 
radios, the newspaper said. They also seized secret radio codes. 
Occupants of the house, called a "bunker" by military officials, at first 
resisted with gunfire but soon surrendered. Eight persons were arrested, 
including Rodriguez Gacha's son, Freddy Rodriguez Celades, 17, two of his 
nephews and five bodyguards. 
In Bogota, student leader Oscar Eduardo Gomez said the purpose of Friday's mass 
demonstration was to reject intimidation of Colombian society by drug 
traffickers. 
"They are going to destroy the country," Gomez, 20, said. "They are confronting 
the society. The good guys cannot let themselves be pushed around by the bad 
guys, and they are the bad guys." 
In a show of support for "the good guys," the United States delivered two Bell 
212 helicopters Friday afternoon for use by Colombia's anti-narcotics police. 
"This action represents an immediate, tangible response of the U.S. government 
to President Barco's stepped-up war on the narcotics traffic," said a statement 
by the U.S. Embassy in Bogota. The helicopters were the latest of 17 provided 
by the United States in the past three years, an embassy spokesman said. 
The same day that presidential candidate Galan was killed, Barco signed tough 
decrees providing for the seizure of properties owned by suspected drug 
traffickers and the extradition of traffickers wanted in the United States. 
Since then, police and army troops have raided and seized hundreds of 
properties and detained thousands of persons. A few suspects are being held for 
extradition to the United States, but no one identified as a top-level leader 
has been captured. 
An organization calling itself "the Extraditables" and assumed to be associated 
with the cocaine kingpins issued a declaration of "total and absolute war" 
Thursday against "the government, the industrial and political oligarchy, 
journalists, judges and others." In an apparent show of force, terrorist bombs 
destroyed two political headquarters in Medellin and arsonists set fire to the 
nearby homes of two prominent politicians. 
In the city of Cali, where another major cocaine cartel is based, Judge Omar 
Garces told reporters that "the Extraditables" had sent letters to him and 
other judges threatening to kill 10 judges for every Colombian extradited to 
the United States. Cali judges staged a two-hour protest strike Friday. 
Drug traffickers have been blamed for the assassinations of about 50 Colombian 
judges during the 1980s. 
In Israel, Yair Klein, the retired army colonel who was identified in the 
Israel news media as an Israeli mercenary alleged to have trained a hit squad 
for the cartels, denied involvement with drug traffickers. 
In an interview on Israeli government television Friday, Klein, who had just 
returned from a trip to the United States, said he was training self-defense 
units for banana growers in Colombia. The units are meant to defend farms from 
encroachments by the M-19 guerrilla movement active in the country, he said. 
Times staff writer Daniel Williams, in Jerusalem, contributed to this story. 
