DIGEST: MCGUIRE, SMITH SELECTED FOR TOURING BASEBALL TEAM 
Ryan McGuire of El Camino Real and Agoura's Brian Smith have been named to an 
all-star baseball team that will represent the United States in the Friendship 
Series in South Korea, Aug. 25-Sept. 5. McGuire is a senior first baseman and 
Smith is a senior third baseman. Dmitri Young, a junior third baseman from Rio 
Mesa, has been selected as an alternate. 
Chatsworth High Coach Bob Lofrano will coach the team and helped in its 
selection. The team, sponsored by the U. S. Baseball Federation, will play four 
games against teams representing Japan and South Korea. Before that tournament, 
the team will play in Lodi on Aug. 15-19 against five other all-star teams that 
are grouped by telephone area codes. 
Lofrano also will serve as the general manager of the 818 area-code team that 
will be coached by John Romano of Nogales High. The 818 team is not complete, 
but Lofrano said that former Hart catcher Casey Burrill, former Chatsworth 
infielder Vince Simili, Chatsworth pitcher Reed McMackin and Crespi infielder 
Mark Maurizi have been selected. 
John Bushart, a left-handed pitcher from Thousand Oaks High who has accepted a 
scholarship to attend Cal State Northridge in the fall, will play on a baseball 
team that left today for a two-week tour of the Soviet Union and Northern 
Europe. 
The team, called the Baseball Ambassadors and coached by John Meiers of Arcadia 
High, will play five games at Moscow University, including one against the Red 
Army Sports Club. The team also will conduct clinics and play games in 
Leningrad, U.S.S.R.; Helsinki, Finland; and Stockholm. 
Mitch McMullen of Newhall and Steve deLaveaga, the career scoring leader at Cal 
Lutheran, have earned roster positions on the Lakers' entry in the Southern 
California Summer Professional Basketball League at Loyola Marymount. 
McMullen, a 6-10 center, was a first-team All-American at College of the 
Canyons in 1987 and played the past two seasons at San Diego State. He 
participated in free-agent camps with the Seattle SuperSonics and Denver 
Nuggets earlier this summer. 
DeLaveaga, a 6-foot-4 guard, was a two-time NAIA District 3 Player of the Year 
at Cal Lutheran. 
Paul Steele, former Westlake High boys' tennis coach, has been hired to succeed 
John Siemens as Cal Lutheran men's tennis coach, according to CLU Athletic 
Director Robert Doering. 
The Warriors won consecutive Marmonte League tennis titles in 1986-87 under 
Steele, who was an All-American in tennis at Brigham Young in 1984. Steele also 
has been the head teaching pro at Sunset Hills Country Club in Thousand Oaks 
for the past four years. 
Siemens, who led the Kingsmen to three NAIA District 3 titles in nine years at 
CLU, resigned for personal reasons. 
Paul Stankowski of Oxnard shot a two-under-par 69 to finish a stroke out of the 
lead after the opening round of the 23rd Pacific Coast Golf Assn. Amateur 
Championship on Tuesday at the Olympic Club in San Francisco. 
Robert Willis of Australia shot 68 on the par-71, 6,808-yard Lake Course to 
lead the field. Only five golfers managed to match or break par. 
Other entries from the Valley area included Tony Chieffo of Granada Hills (75), 
Craig Steinberg of Van Nuys (77), Dan Pouliot of Burbank (80), Buz Greene of 
Thousand Oaks (80) and Dave Fernandes of Woodland Hills (82). 
Daiva Tomkus of West Hills was selected to the U. S. National women's 
volleyball team and will train with the national B team until Aug. 11. 
Tomkus, a senior middle blocker at UCLA, is a two-time All-American and the 
1988 Pacific 10 Conference Player of the Year. 
The first international women's pro beach doubles volleyball tournament will be 
held Aug. 11-13 in Fujisawa, Japan, near Tokyo. 
Valley-area participants will include Heather Hafner of Calabasas, a former 
three-time NCAA Division II All-American at Cal State Northridge, and Linda 
Chisholm of Van Nuys. 
