SADDAM HUSSEIN'S ULTIMATE FIFTH COLUMN -- TERRORISTS; 
STRATEGY: THAT OLD GANG OF BOMBERS AND ASSASSINS HAS ATTACHED THEMSELVES TO THE 
IRAQI LEADER AND ARE READY TO DO HIS BIDDING IN EUROPE AND MIDEAST. 
The crisis in the Middle East is like none the United States has ever faced. 
Saddam Hussein has rewritten the rules of modern warfare by taking thousands of 
Western hostages in his ruthless quest for Iraqi Lebensraum -- and then by 
deploying them as human shields. Equally disquieting is the likelihood that the 
Iraqi leader has created the ultimate "fifth column": an international 
terrorist army, arrayed throughout Europe and the Middle East, ready to strike 
at his command. 
Ominiously, there are signs that he is preparing to unleash a campaign of 
international terrorism in hopes of breaking the international quarantine and 
military buildup that has isolated Iraq and is strangling its economy. 
Since the spring, the most radical, hard-line Palestinian terrorist 
organizations have been moving their operational bases to Iraq. One after 
another, familiar faces have turned up in Baghdad: Abul Abbas, the mastermind 
behind the October, 1985, hijacking of the Italian cruise ship, Achille Lauro; 
Abu Nidal, the architect of the brutal machine-gun and hand-grenade attacks on 
the Rome and Vienna airports in December, 1985, and an Istanbul synagogue in 
September, 1986; and Ahmad Jabril, whose followers allegedly placed the bomb 
that brought down Pan Am flight 103 in December, 1988. According to one foreign 
intelligence estimate, there are now some 1,400 international terrorists in 
Iraq -- twice the number of a year ago. 
Last week, Abbas issued a proclamation ordering his men to attack U.S. 
interests around the world, in general, and American forces in Saudi Arabia, in 
particular. "Open fire on the American enemy everywhere," he declared. "Quake 
the earth under the feet of the invaders and collaborators." 
Not to be outdone by a rival's clarion call to battle, Nidal immediately 
followed suit, warning that his organization was preparing to carry out "90 
attacks in 20 countries" against U.S. and Western targets. 
The first evidence of the new alliance between Iraq and the radical 
Palestinians surfaced last May, when the Israeli navy thwarted an attack on Tel 
Aviv by members of Abbas' organization traveling in speedboats. According to 
the surviving terrorists, Libya had provided training and logistical support. 
But it was Iraq that had planned and paid for the attack -- whose targets 
included the beach-front U.S. embassy. 
At the time, intelligence analysts were puzzled by Hussein's motives in wooing 
the terrorists to Baghdad, ascribing his intentions, if at all, to his desire 
to supplant Libya's Col. Moammar Kadafi as international terrorism's chief 
benefactor. In retrospect, however, it appears that Hussein has been building 
an Iraqi-backed, brokered and controlled international terrorist 
infrastructure. With such an infrastructure already in place, he may well have 
created the ultimate "fifth column," which, in a series of sharp, bloody, and 
destructive attacks, may have been the power to shatter the current standoff in 
the gulf by eroding both international and -- perhaps, more importantly -- the 
American public's support for military action against Iraq. 
Hussein certainly remembers that a terrorist campaign orchestrated by Iran in 
Beirut between 1983 and 1984 undermined American support for a U.S. military 
presence in Lebanon and thus led to the collapse of the multinational 
peace-keeping force sent to that country. This lesson must figure prominently 
in his strategy to deal with the U.S.-backed multinational force currently 
deployed in the Gulf. 
International terrorism is perhaps the most cost-effective weapon in Iraq's 
arsenal. Rather than having to expend his military might in direct combat with 
U.S. and allied forces in Saudi Arabia and the gulf, Hussein could covertly 
dispatch his terrorist minions to strike at considerably more vulnerable 
civilian, diplomatic or airline targets throughout Europe and the Middle East. 
His range of potential targets -- and victims -- would be restricted only by 
the reach and numerical strength of his terrorist infrastructure. 
A carefully planned and well-executed Iraqi-backed terrorist campaign could 
also be a decisive weapon to destabilize -- or even destroy -- the governments 
of those Arab countries that oppose Iraq's territorial designs. Hussein could 
thus accomplish with a few men and bombs what it took his army to do in Kuwait. 
At the very least, such a campaign could wear down the resolve of the 
pro-Western countries in the region to continue to support a U.S. military 
presence in Saudi Arabia and trade sanctions against Iraq. 
A chain of terrorist attacks throughout Europe and the Middle East would 
certainly be grist for Hussein's propaganda mill. In each case, the Iraqi 
president would deny any responsibility for or connection to the incident, even 
expressing surprise. But it is easy to imagine Iraqi officials smugly lauding 
such a "spontaneous outburst of anti-Western, anti-imperialist, anit-Zionist 
sentiment" against U.S. and Western interest by Iraq's Arab brethren scattered 
around the world. In light of our past hesitancy to retaliate against 
state-sponsors of international terrorism without incontrovertible evidence 
directly linking them to an attack, this ruse could conceivably enable Iraq to 
escape retribution. 
In the end, if Hussein remains in power and if Iraq retains its military might, 
other renegade regional powers will feel able to deploy thousands of civilian 
hostages as human shields and to deprive diplomats of their traditional 
protected status. Unconventional tactics -- such as international terrorism -- 
will then become institutionalized as instruments of modern warfare. 
