JUNKYARD RULES AIMED AT CAR THEFT BY TOW TRUCK; 
POLICE WANT TO STOP SALE OF STOLEN AUTOS FOR SCRAP 
A rash of auto thefts in which older cars have been towed from San Fernando 
Valley streets and sold for scrap has prompted Los Angeles police to call for 
salvage-yard regulations aimed at preventing destruction of stolen vehicles. 
In the last month, seven people have been arrested in the East Valley on 
suspicion of auto theft for towing cars to salvage yards and selling them 
without the owners' consent. And authorities say at least another dozen 
tow-truck operators have engaged in the practice. 
The police proposal, scheduled to be considered by the Los Angeles Police 
Commission on Tuesday, would require junk dealers citywide to notify police 
about each car they purchase for destruction and to hold the cars intact for 
five days before crushing them. Junk dealers would also have to keep records so 
they could provide police the name of any seller of a vehicle that turned out 
to be stolen. 
"It's been happening for a long time but never on this scale," Detective Glen 
Higgins said of tow-truck operators stealing cars. Higgins is head of the 
Consolidated Effort to Combat Auto Theft, a multi-agency task force set up in 
the Valley last year. 
Tow-Truck Thieves 
Since the salvage yards pay according to weight, the tow-truck thieves have 
targeted large, older-model American autos, which can bring up to $200 each, 
Higgins said. They have also sought out dirty cars or cars that appear to have 
been in accidents since such vehicles are less likely to attract attention as 
they are hauled away, Higgins said. 
People who have seen tow trucks picking up vehicles in their neighborhoods only 
suspect foul play after they hear that their neighbors' cars have been stolen, 
Higgins said. 
Of about 1,500 cars reported stolen each month in the Valley, Higgins said, 10% 
to 15% are older autos in disrepair. These cars frequently belong to low-income 
families who cannot afford to lose what is sometimes their sole means of 
transportation, he said. 
While newer stolen cars are frequently recovered, though usually with parts 
missing, these older autos rarely turn up, except as compact blocks of crushed 
metal at junkyards, Higgins said. 
After four tow-truck operators were arrested in North Hollywood on Aug. 4 on 
suspicion of auto theft, police searched Valley Junk, a San Fernando scrap 
yard, and found the crushed remains of four stolen cars. 
Police said those arrested had been stealing 10 to 12 cars a day from the North 
Hollywood and Pacoima areas and selling them as scrap. 
Although police say they do not believe that junkyards deliberately collaborate 
with such thieves, they add that regulating such businesses is the best way to 
halt the destruction of stolen cars. 
But Valley junkyard operators, who say they would not crush a car they knew was 
stolen, believe that it is unfair to target them for increased regulation. 
"The police want us to do their work for them," said Mike Raspa, manager of 
Valley Junk. 
Raspa said he requires a seller to produce a "junk slip" before he buys a car 
for crushing. But junk slips, which are issued by the state Department of Motor 
Vehicles and authorize a vehicle's destruction, are easily forged, police say. 
Before a junk slip is issued, the DMV requires proof of ownership. 
But ownership papers can be easily obtained by thieves since car owners often 
keep them in the car's glove compartment, police say. 
And to make matters worse, the DMV does not contact police agencies about 
whether a vehicle is stolen before issuing a junk slip, police say. 
Sharon Larkin, weighmaster of San Fernando Crushing in Sun Valley, said her lot 
requires junk slips. But she said the lot is occasionally duped by car thieves. 
"There is definitely a problem," she said. 
Paper Work Unwelcome 
Still, she said, the rules before the Police Commission would create unwelcome 
paper work for the salvage yard's staff. 
And the yard would have insufficient space to store cars intact during the 
mandatory holding period, she said. 
Police have also proposed to the City Council that state legislation be 
requested that would allow authorities to regulate tow-truck operations outside 
the city. 
Now police can conduct unannounced inspections of towing companies in Los 
Angeles but have no jurisdiction over operations based outside the city. 
The seven tow-truck operators arrested in the last month are: 
Jorge Barrocal, 30, of Sherman Oaks; Angel Simones, 28, of North Hollywood, and 
Pacoima residents Douglas Gray, 34; Jorge Cruz, 42; Teri Lynn Anderson, 32; 
Malcolm Pfeferstein, 20, and Ronald Isaacs, 51. 
Barrocal, Simones, Gray and Cruz were arrested in North Hollywood on suspicion 
of auto theft and have been released on $1,500 bail each. 
The district attorney's office has until the end of the month to file charges 
against them, authorities said. 
Preliminary hearings are scheduled Monday in San Fernando Municipal Court for 
Anderson and Pfeferstein, each arrested in Pacoima on suspicion of grand theft 
auto and receiving stolen property. 
Isaacs, charged with five felonies relating to his alleged car thefts, is 
scheduled for a preliminary hearing Aug. 21 in San Fernando Municipal Court. 
Another tow-truck operator, Lee Schurr, 63, of Pacoima, pleaded guilty to one 
count of auto theft in San Fernando Municipal Court on May 12. 
He was sentenced to 120 days in County Jail and four years probation. 
Authorities say Schurr and Isaacs were working together. 
