BOOK REVIEW; 
A GOTHIC TALE OF MURDER IN RURAL AMERICA 
The Story of Annie D. by Susan Taylor Chehak (Houghton Mifflin: $17.95; 206 
pages) 
Set in Nebraska farm country, told in prose as functional and straightforward 
as a silo, "The Story of Annie D." may represent a new subgenre -- the American 
rural Gothic. Smack dab in the Corn Belt, shriveled Wizen River may not seem to 
have much in common with the verdant English moors generally favored by writers 
of such tales, but as Annie D.'s autobiography unfolds by restrained 
indirection and ominous innuendo, a familiar pattern emerges. 
The child of a kindly, tenacious farmer and a discontented, ambitious mother 
who seized her first chance to escape her dreary life, Annie D. grew up 
crocheting doilies and conjugating Latin verbs, accomplishments her mother 
believed would guarantee a marriage more exciting than her own. Unfortunately, 
these city graces scared off the local boys, and Annie didn't marry until the 
advanced age of 27, when Dr. Diettermann, a German refugee, came to her for 
English lessons, and shortly thereafter proposed by sketching a man and woman 
in connubial embrace. 
Annie accepted, and Dr. D. stayed on to practice medicine in the neighborhood. 
Though theirs wasn't exactly a love match, Annie was secure and content. She 
and the doctor lived in town, raised two sons, and had no regrets. The Latin 
lessons had done the trick, not only gaining Annie a husband but supplying her 
with the subheadings that decorate each chapter in the novel. 
Rambling Reminiscences 
For at least two-thirds of its modest length, "The Story of Annie D." seems 
merely an aging woman's rambling reminiscence about her girlhood, her 
satisfying life as Mrs. Diettermann, her ambivalent association with her dear 
friend Phoebe, and her impressions of other townspeople; none of the 
revelations particularly startling. Though there's the usual quota of village 
scandal and tragedy, mostly involving Phoebe's willful daughter Lacey, the days 
in Wizen River pass slowly, past and present all but indistinguishable from 
each other. 
While we know from the beginning that there's been a rape and murder in Wizen 
River's Center Park, the subject is dropped soon after it's mentioned, and the 
reader is encouraged to assume that it was committed by a drug-crazed transient 
who strayed far off course on his way to the coast. Though the chief of police 
is convinced that the victim must have known the killer since there was no 
outcry, the ensuing manhunt seems remarkably cursory. 
Our narrator sadly reports a second and third similar murder, each 
characterized by a bald patch on the victim's head where the killer has snipped 
away a lock of hair, but the focus of the book remains so firmly upon the 
minutiae of small-town life that the murders seem incidental -- merely a 
gruesome reminder that you're no longer safe even several hours by secondary 
road from Omaha, in a town with one cafe, a single movie, and bucolic Center 
Park; a place where everybody knows everyone else and a stranger would be as 
conspicuous as a giraffe. 
Eventually, we learn that Annie's son, Gunar, was killed in Vietnam, and still 
later, discover that her younger boy, Bo, had survived a grisly suicide 
attempt. The reader might have been wondering about Bo, who works as a handy 
man in Center Park and seems not quite right in a number of respects, but the 
failed suicide apparently explains all that, and thus tranquilized, we let 
ourselves be persuaded that the murders were only the stimulus for Annie's 
memoirs of paradise lost. 
When Phoebe's profligate daughter, Lacey, returns to Wizen River with her 
illegitimate son after Phoebe's mysterious fatal automobile accident, the 
leisurely pace abruptly quickens, and long-withheld clues tumble pell-mell over 
one another. Annie D. is so expert at keeping secrets that it would be grossly 
unfair to tip her hand before she's ready to do so herself, but there's nothing 
wrong in telling you that these days, Wizen River is as perilous as Los 
Angeles, though still less smoggy. 
