Q &amp; A 
Q: I'm interested in investing in the stock market using no-load mutual funds. 
Is there a publication on the subject? I'd prefer one that gives a list of the 
best-performing no-load mutual funds and how to contact them. -- St. Louis, Mo. 
A: There are plenty of publications that keep track of the performance of 
no-load funds, which are those requiring no upfront fees. In most cases, they 
give addresses and phone numbers of the funds' managers. 
One is the "Mutual Fund Sourcebook," published by Morningstar Inc., 53 West 
Jackson St., Suite 460, Chicago, Ill., 60604. The cost is $60. Another is 
"Handbook for No-Load Fund Investors," published by No-Load Fund Investor, P.O. 
Box 283, Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, 10706. It costs $42. 
Standard &amp; Poor's, the rating service, and Lipper Analytical Services, a 
New York-based research firm, put out "Mutual Fund Profiles." At $117, it 
contains reviews of the 1,000 largest stock and bond funds. 
Q: About two years ago, I purchased stock in Home Shopping Network at $8 a 
share. I am very disappointed since this stock seems to go nowhere, and the 
company is not paying a dividend. -- Allentown, Pa. 
A: Home Shopping Network was the darling of the 1980s -- one of the stock 
market's impossible success stories. But after its initial success, it got too 
cocky and started expanding into fields in which it didn't have expertise: 
insurance, for instance. 
Today, at under $6 a share, Home Shopping Network's stock is cheaper than those 
cubic zirconium baubles sold on its cable TV shopping show. And a lot of 
investors are wondering why they bothered to invest in such a crazy upstart. 
Dennis Rosenberg of Oppenheimer &amp; Co. still keeps track of Home Shopping 
Network and likes the company. He recently told clients that weakness in the 
stock represented a buying opportunity. 
Rosenberg believes that the company could earn 38 cents a share in the fiscal 
year that ends this August and between 65 cents and 70 cents a share next year. 
That contrasts with a loss of 25 cents in 1989. With this improvement, 
Rosenberg thinks that Home Shopping Network's stock could rise to between $10 
and $12 a share in the next 12 months. 
For the first nine months of its current year, Rosenberg says, Home Shopping 
Network's sales rose 30%. 
There are only four analysts who officially follow Home Shopping Network. Their 
estimate of earnings for the current year recently ranged from 38 cents a share 
to 43 cents a share, according to the computer over at Institutional Brokers 
Estimate System. 
There is one potential problem, however. A Delaware judge last week ruled that 
the Home Shopping Network cheated some bondholders, and it may be forced to 
issue millions of shares of stock to them and pay millions in damages. That, of 
course, isn't good news for a company whose stock has been going backward. Home 
Shopping is expected to appeal. 
Q: We own shares of Fruit of the Loom. The stock seems to stay in the $13-$14 
range. Is this a good stock? -- Golden, Colo. 
A: Lee Tawes of Oppenheimer &amp; Co is one of a few analysts who still follows 
Fruit of the Loom. And he likes the company. 
Even though the underwear industry is suffering its first slowdown in years, 
Tawes says Fruit of the Loom is such a low-cost producer it will continue to 
thrive. He recommends buying the stock and thinks that Fruit's sales will 
increase by a 15% to 20% annual rate. 
Deborah Bronston, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities, also believes that 
longer-term prospects for the company are good. "As Fruit taps the 
international and domestic retail market with its activewear products, sales 
gains could average 13% over the next five years," Bronston recently told 
clients. She thinks that the stock could rise to $16 a share in the next 12 to 
18 months. 
It was recently at about $12. 
Standard &amp; Poor's, the rating service, doesn't share their optimism. As you 
may know, William Farley -- a Chicago takeover specialist -- has owned the 
biggest stake in Fruit of the Loom for some time. S&amp;P recently downgraded 
all of Farley Inc.'s debt, and did the same to Fruit's debt. 
Tawes, for one, believes that S&amp;P overreacted by including Fruit of the 
Loom in the downgrading. He thinks that the company will see its earnings rise 
to $1.70 a share this year (from $1.11 last year). 
This past week, Farley executed a complicated agreement under which he sold his 
Fruit of the Loom stock to a company called Land Free Investment Ltd. 
Q: My aunt passed away and I found a lot of stock certificates. Could you tell 
me if they are worth anything? -- California City 
A: Here's the status of all your aunt's stocks, thanks to the investigative 
work of R. M. Smythe, a New York City company that specializes in tracking down 
obscure securities. La Merced Oil Co. forfeited its charter to do business in 
California in 1925. Revere Oil Co. was shut down by U.S. Postal authorities in 
the 1920s. It was running some sort of scam. 
The copy of the stock certificate you sent me for Clinton Consolidated Mining 
says the company was incorporated in Arizona. Smythe couldn't find any record 
of it in that state, but it did find a company by the same name in Cripple 
Creek, Colo. That company, too, is worthless. 
And, lastly, Arcadia Oil Co., which was located in San Diego, went belly up 
during Calvin Coolidge's administration. JOHN CRUDELE 
