SINGAPORE RECRUITING CHINESE STUDENTS IN U.S.; 
ISLAND HOPES TO TAP INTO SOURCE OF ENGINEERS WHO MAY NOT WANT TO GO HOME 
Seizing what it views as a golden recruitment opportunity in the aftermath of 
China's military crackdown in June, the government of Singapore is eyeing the 
highly skilled pool of Chinese students in the United States. 
Singapore faces a shortage of engineers needed by international companies, and 
officials are hoping some of the students may welcome the chance to work in 
Singapore, rather than going home when their student visas expire. 
The Singapore Economic Development Board in Los Angeles, which in 1987 began 
recruiting engineering graduates from U.S. schools, conducted a recruitment 
campaign in March that drew about 200 applications, 30 of them from Chinese 
nationals, said K. K. Chan, director of the board's Los Angeles office. 
After the June bloodshed in China, the board decided to extend a special 
invitation to Chinese nationals who will soon graduate from U.S. universities. 
"Because of the uncertainties in China, we thought maybe they will be 
interested in working in Singapore," Chan said. "These people who come out 
(from China) are the cream of the country. I would say it's a good target to 
aim at." 
Besides offering good salaries relative to Singapore's cost of living, 
Singapore will expedite immigration applications for the professional recruits, 
he said. Seventy-six percent of Singapore residents are of Chinese ancestry, 
and the development board is hoping that will make the country appealing to 
Chinese nationals looking for a familiar culture. 
The government also has been actively recruiting in Hong Kong, hoping to 
attract professionals there who may be wary of 1997, when Britain's lease 
expires and the colony is to be returned to China. Although 3.25 million Hong 
Kong residents hold British passports, Britain has denied them the right to 
freely emigrate there. 
After Singapore announced in July a program to recruit up to 100,000 Hong Kong 
workers, the response was so great that Hong Kong police had to be called in to 
control unruly crowds of job applicants. 
Singapore is home to nearly 700 international companies with manufacturing 
operations and more than 3,200 companies with service operations, creating a 
constant demand for engineering professionals. While the country's two 
universities, National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological 
Institute, together graduate close to 1,000 engineers a year, the country still 
must recruit 200 to 300 overseas engineers to meet the demand, Chan said. 
High Salaries 
Electrical and mechanical engineers are the most sought after, he said. An 
engineer with a bachelor's degree could expect to be paid about $650 to $900 a 
month while one with a doctorate could receive between $1,500 to $2,000 -- 
salaries that would guarantee extremely comfortable life styles given 
Singapore's cost of living, Chan said. 
(In Singapore, the average salary for beginning production workers such as 
assemblers and mechanics is $236 a month, according to 1988 statistics from the 
Singapore Ministry of Labor. The average for beginning technicians is $300 a 
month.) 
The island republic previously only granted permanent residence to college 
graduates, professionals or business people with capital of at least $500,000. 
It is now recruiting any candidate with a secondary education and five years of 
work experience. 
Singapore's recent "two is enough" family planning campaign "has been too 
successful," Chan said, explaining why the population growth rate has slowed in 
the country of 2.6 million people. The government is now offering tax benefits 
to couples who have a third child, he said. 
Deadline Over 
The government's open invitation to overseas workers is worrying some Singapore 
residents, however, who say the tiny nation is already battling traffic and 
housing problems. 
On Friday, the deadline for U.S. students to submit resumes, the board had 
received more than 100 applications from Chinese nationals studying in this 
country, Chan said. The board will forward the resumes to U.S. and 
international companies in Singapore such as Minnesota Mining &amp; 
Manufacturing, IBM, Texas Instruments, AT&amp;T and Motorola, he said. Company 
representatives will make campus visits this fall to interview applicants, he 
said. 
For Chinese nationals whose U.S. visas are about to expire but who fear 
persecution or political uncertainty if they return to their homeland, the 
prospects of permanent residency in a country outside China could be very 
appealing. 
Yong-ping Zeng, a University of Southern California student who will soon 
graduate, would like to stay in the United States when he graduates, but he 
sent a resume to the development board last week to keep his options open. 
It's not easy getting a job in the United States, he said. "First they require 
you to have a green card, but to get a card you need a job. It's a bad circle." 
But Wang Shiqing, a post-doctoral researcher at UCLA who is not job hunting, 
said even if he were, he would not find Singapore attractive as a place to live 
and work. 
"It's such a small place," Wang said. 
