 ABOUT WINE: COUPLE OF CULT WINERIES GROW WITH DEMAND 
On the 20th anniversary of Woodstock, people asked, "Where were you?" 
Some people ignored Woodstock to scour the countryside looking for cult wines 
-- pleading and cajoling to get their hands on wines like Schramsberg Champagne 
and David Bruce Chardonnay. 
Cult wine once was a big deal with wine lovers. Two decades ago, a handful of 
wineries made tiny quantities of great wines that got word-of-mouth plaudits 
and generated intense competition to get a bottle or a case. 
Today We Gloat 
Today it's different. We gloat over getting a bottle of Dunn Howell Mountain 
Cabernet or Ferrari-Carano Reserve Chardonnay. Diamond Creek recently sold out 
its limited-production Cabernet designated Lake, a wine that carries a $100 
price tag. These are modern-day cult wines. 
But today there are at least lots of cult Chardonnays (Grgich, Chalone, 
Sonoma-Cutrer, Au Bon Climat among them) and dozens of cult Cabernets (Dunn, 
Spotteswood, La Jota, Jordan) and Pinot Noirs (Calera, Chalone, Etude). So it's 
possible to own a cult wine without much difficulty. (Jordan sold almost 80,000 
cases of wine last year.) 
But in the early 1970s, as California wine became an intriguing and exciting 
collectible as well as a grand taste experience, very few wines took on cult 
status, and they were truly limited in production. Stony Hill and Hanzell 
Chardonnays and Joseph Swan Pinot Noirs and Zinfandels were hard to obtain and 
achieved that status. 
Few Thousand Cases 
Among the highest-image wines were those from Schramsberg and David Bruce. 
Finding a bottle on a retail shelf was a serendipitous moment inducing 
euphoria. Neither made more than a few thousand cases. 
It was a bit surprising, then, when I discovered that both Schramsberg and 
David Bruce were celebrating their silver anniversaries; both have been in 
business for a quarter-century. 
And although Swan, Hanzell and Stony Hill wines remain limited in production, 
Bruce and Schramsberg have grown with the demand. One might assume from this 
that quality has been compromised, but I recently went through the two 
wineries' offerings and discovered that both have kept abreast of the latest 
technical changes in the industry, and that both are making wines that if 
anything are better than what they did in the past. Ironically, one helped the 
other improve. 
One fact is true for both wineries. For some years in the 1970s, neither 
improved. As they grew, quality grew erratic. But in the last three years, both 
wineries have stabilized, eliminating wines that were simply off the mark. 
Bruce and Schramsberg have grown more consistent, less erratic than they were a 
decade ago. 
Napa Valley-based Schramsberg, which makes only sparkling wine, has had to 
adapt to a shrinking supply of top-quality Chardonnay and Pinot Noir grapes; 
both varieties are in demand. To cope with this, Jack Davies has developed a 
unique method of payment to growers. 
Price of the Wine 
Using an "evergreen" contract arrangement, Schramsberg pays growers based on a 
formula pegged directly to the price of the wine into which the grower's grapes 
go. Prices are "always higher than the Napa Valley average," said Davies. 
Moreover, Schramsberg continues to experiment, first under wine maker Greg 
Fowler (who came on board in 1980) and now under Alan Tenscher, Fowler's 
successor in 1987. 
Experimentation led to use of malolactic fermentation for small lots of wine 
(converting stronger acid into weak acid, which softens the wine), the dropping 
of sulfur dioxide use during production, and trying small quantities of grapes 
from other regions (such as the central coast and Mendocino) for complexity. 
Handling the Grapes 
The greatest change is in the handling of the grapes. In 1982, Fowler 
discovered that the standard method of dumping grapes into the press wasn't 
gentle enough, and that if he used a suction device -- like a huge vacuum 
cleaner -- he could dump the fruit into the press with less damage. 
"I got the idea from David Bruce," said Fowler, who is now head wine maker for 
Domaine Mumm, across the Napa Valley. "The original idea came from Germany, 
where they use it to unload botrytised grapes. 
"The big drawback is that it's slow, but it gets the fruit into the press with 
a minimum amount of damage to the fruit, without tearing the skins and beating 
up the stems." 
The first wines to see this gentler method were from 1982, and Davies now has 
ready for release a small amount of a great wine from that harvest, and it's a 
wine new to the Schramsberg line. 
The 1982 Blanc de Noirs Late Disgorged ($25) is a marvelously complex, rich 
wine with deep Pinot Noir character and as much Frenchlike elements as I have 
seen in a California wine. The extended time on the yeast, en tirage as the 
French say, is the key to this superb wine. 
Similarly, Schramsberg's 1984 Blanc de Blancs Late Disgorged ($23) is an 
exceptional, deeply complex wine, one of the best I have tasted. 
Champagne Memories 
The latest regular release of Schramsberg Champagne is the 1983 Blanc de Noirs 
($20), which offers a marvelously complex aroma and creaminess in the finish 
that, again, is reminiscent of French Champagne. 
"The 1983 was Jack's first attempt to go to a lighter style, to get the alcohol 
down and to make a more delicate wine," said Fowler. "But we still retained 
strong Pinot character." 
Jack and Jamie Davies are true pioneers of the second wave of Napa Valley wine 
interest. An electronics executive with Ducommun Inc., Jack acquired the old 
facility once owned by Jacob Schram and slowly expanded it into a large, modern 
winery that sits above the caves dug by immigrant laborers in the last century. 
Schramsberg's caves, since enlarged extensively, now hold 2 million bottles of 
wine sitting en tirage. Davies intends to make this aging on the yeast a longer 
process, to give more complexity. 
Heart of the Collection 
More complexity is at the heart of the new collection of David Bruce wines too, 
but for those who recall the days when Bruce wines were termed "monsters," 
these latest wines are actually less dense and more compact. 
Bruce, whose Santa Cruz Mountains winery was founded in 1964, was among the 
first wave of wineries to see the potential to make deeply concentrated wines 
from grapes that ripened to any degree desired. 
Some of the early Bruce Chardonnays closed in on (and topped) 15% alcohol. The 
1971 Bruce Chardonnay, with 15.5% alcohol, was reckoned by some critics to be 
an utter classic. His 1970 Zinfandel, with 17.5% alcohol, was a stunner; a 
Grenache was so dark and opaque that it was considered bizarre and exciting. 
The excitement generated by these massive brutes might have prompted Bruce, a 
dermatologist, to raise his prices excessively. He demurred, though he recalled 
that he did put out his 1969 Chardonnay, a tiny-production wine, at $22. "It 
was a monster," he said. 
The monsters have recently been tamed. With Keith Hohlfeldt as wine maker 
(since 1982), Bruce wines are more mainstream, but they still retain the house 
style that made the man and his liquid famous. 
The Chardonnays are the more exotic wines of the line. Using 100% malolactic 
fermentation to generate big, rich, buttery elements, Hohlfeldt crafts wines of 
breadth and bigness. But they are in much better balance than the wines of the 
past. 
Tasting the 1987 Chardonnay with a California designation ($11) one sees that 
richness in a tighter, leaner package than ever. "We didn't know much about 
acid back then," said Bruce. "So we made wines that were big, with a slightly 
tannic finish, and people didn't seem to mind them." 
The prototype Bruce Chardonnay is the 1986 Estate Bottled Santa Cruz Mountains 
($18), a wine that hearkens back to the old days when butterscotch flavors 
played tag with the fruit elements. (Butterscotch usually won.) 
Oddball Experiments 
Bruce always liked to play around with oddball things, like Grenache, and his 
latest experiment has yielded three wines that retail for $6.50. All are good 
examples of table wine that lean in the direction of the Rhone Valley. 
I enjoyed the 1987 Coteau de Shandon, a white wine that is made up mostly of 
Chenin Blanc, but with some oak-aged Chardonnay for depth. It reminded me of a 
white Hermitage at a fraction of the cost. 
Also enjoyable was a 1987 Vin Rouge that is a blend of Carignane, Petite Sirah 
and Cabernet Pfeffer, the latter adding an intriguingly spicy, peppery note to 
the otherwise tart, deeply flavored wine that has high acid and low tannins. 
The best of the three wines, however, was a pink wine called Vin Gris (federal 
officials rejected a humorous name, Gran Vis). It is a bone-dry rose made 
entirely from Petite Sirah. It is a striking example of Rhone richness in a 
pink wine, reminiscent of the Bandol Rose made famous by importer Kermit Lynch 
(which is more expensive). 
Bruce's fine 1985 Pinot Noir ($18) with spice and depth will be succeeded by an 
exceptional 1986 and a superior 1987. 
In the late 1960s, Bruce says, "I was never aware I was making 'cult' wines. I 
was too busy being a doctor to pay attention to that." 
Schramsberg's first wine, released in 1967, was a nonvintage effort made in 
1965. Soon after the first vintage-dated wine, from 1966, hit store shelves 
about Woodstock time in 1969, retailers began clamoring for more and more. 
Higher Price 
"And they wanted me to raise the price, to slow it down," said Davies. "Well, 
opportunism is one thing, but I hoped to be around for a while." 
Both have survived the two decades since in health better, perhaps, than some 
"Woodstockies." 
Wine of the Week: 1988 Bandiera Chardonnay Carneros" ($6.50) -- For those who 
like the leaner, more Chablis-like styles of Chardonnay, this is a spectacular 
effort. Delicate lemon-scented aroma with a faint touch of slate and an 
attractive floral note. The taste is crisp and fruity, no residual sugar, and 
ends with snap. An exciting wine, better by far than the winery's 1987 version. 
Bandiera also has a companion red wine, 1986 Napa Valley Cabernet Sauvignon 
($6.50) that is another excellent value. Wonderfully herbal fruit, delicate oak 
and a nicely rounded finish for near-term drinking. 
