BUCHWALD JUDGE MAY TELL STUDIO TO OPEN RECORDS; 
FILMS: COURT IS CONSIDERING APPOINTING ITS OWN EXPERT TO INVESTIGATE 
PARAMOUNT'S PROFITABILITY. 
The judge in Art Buchwald's suit against Paramount Pictures said today he may 
order the studio to open all of its financial records to determine how much 
money it must pay Buchwald for the movie "Coming to America." 
Superior Court Judge Harvey A. Schneider said he is also considering appointing 
his own expert to investigate the accounting records and all financial books on 
Paramount's profitability. 
"It's not clear to me that I have all the facts I need on those issues," 
Schneider said as he announced more than 30 tentative views on legal issues in 
the lawsuit that is expected to have an impact on the way Hollywood does 
business. 
He said that he understands that there are internal profit-and-loss statements 
that have not been provided to Buchwald and his writing partner, producer Alain 
Bernheim. 
"I would really like to see these," the judge said. 
Schneider ruled last January that Paramount's hit movie "Coming to America" was 
based on a treatment Buchwald submitted. The studio maintained that the 
Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist's treatment, "King for a Day," was not the 
basis of the film starring Eddie Murphy and Arsenio Hall. 
Today's hearing was to determine how much money Paramount owed Buchwald and 
Bernheim. 
The studio has maintained that the two are owed nothing because the movie has 
not turned a profit although it has taken in more than $270 million at the box 
office. Buchwald claimed in court papers that he and Bernheim are owed between 
$6.9 million and $14.6 million. 
Schneider ordered at least five witnesses, most of them accountants, to testify 
in court Oct. 15 about financial issues he considers critical and so far 
unresolved. 
"The bottom line is I want to take testimony on the profitability of pictures 
at Paramount and the actual accounting as well as the profitability of 'Coming 
to America.' " 
