MISTRIAL DECLARED IN RADER CASE; 
JUROR HOLDS OUT TO FREE ACCUSED KILLER OF VALLEY FAMILY 
A juror holding out for acquittal today forced a mistrial in the prosecution of 
Harvey Rader, a one-time Reseda auto dealer accused of killing a San Fernando 
Valley family of four in 1982. 
But prosecutors vowed to re-try Rader, possibly as soon as next month. 
The mistrial, declared by Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Lorna Parnell, 
prompted a relative of the victims to burst into tears in the courtroom's back 
row. 
Several jurors said after they were dismissed that the lone holdout, who 
avoided reporters, insisted that prosecutors had not presented enough evidence 
against the defendant. 
Bodies Never Found 
Rader, 47, became a suspect shortly after the murders of Sol Salomon, his wife, 
Elaine, and their two children, Michalle, 15, and Mitchell, 9. Their bodies 
were never found and Rader has steadfastly proclaimed his innocence. 
Sol Salomon had a business relationship with Rader that soured, according to 
Los Angeles Deputy Dist. Atty. Lonnie A. Felker, who prosecuted the case. 
Rader was arrested in 1983 after his cousin, Ashley Paulle, told Los Angeles 
authorities that Rader killed the Salomons and that he had been Rader's 
accomplice. 
Paulle told authorities that Rader shot Sol Salomon, beat Elaine to death, 
killed Mitchell with a baseball bat and strangled Michalle. 
Initially, the district attorney's office gave Paulle immunity in return for 
his testimony against Rader. But it later revoked that promise and sought to 
prosecute Paulle as well. 
But a court here later threw out the case against Paulle, ruling that the 
district attorney's office had improperly revoked the immunity promise. 
Remained in London 
Since then, Paulle has returned to his native London and refused to return to 
the United States. 
The jury had deliberated for about three weeks before reaching what the judge 
called "a hopeless" deadlock. 
"A hung jury is not a very satisfactory result," Parnell said, adding, however, 
that she had no other choice. 
"I don't think justice was done in this case," Margaret Malarowitz, mother of 
Elaine Salomon, said outside court. "He (Rader) has no right to walk the 
streets. I'll never stop. I'm going to see that justice will be done." 
In court, Malarowitz had burst into tears after the jury foreman told Parnell 
that the panel of six men and six women had deadlocked at 11-1 in favor of 
conviction. 
Felker was out of town on vacation, but Deputy Dist. Atty. Pamela Ann Ferrero, 
who stood in for him, said a pretrial proceeding in the re-trial has been set 
for Sept. 14. 
Los Angeles Deputy Public Defender Mark Lessem, who defended Rader, said his 
client was "disappointed," adding: "We had hoped to win." 
Rader, a British subject, was returned today to the County Jail, where he has 
been held without bail since his arrest last summer after he completed a 
federal prison term for passport fraud. 
