CAMBODIA ACCORD WOULD HELP TIES, U.S. TELLS HANOI AND BEIJING 
The Bush Administration has told both Vietnam and China that it is ready for 
friendlier relations if the two nations can pressure their Communist allies 
into participating in a balanced political settlement for Cambodia, according 
to a senior U.S. official. 
"It is kind of a bellwether," the official said of the Cambodia peace talks 
going on in Paris. "If we get a positive outcome, it will brighten the overall 
mood. . . . The Vietnamese want to normalize (diplomatic relations) with us. 
The Chinese want to look like good guys." 
The official acknowledged that the United States has very little direct 
influence with the political factions in Cambodia, which include two Communist 
and two non-Communist groups. 
He said Washington has far more leverage with China and Vietnam, which in turn 
carry substantial weight with the two most contentious Cambodian factions, the 
Vietnamese-installed government of Premier Hun Sen and the murderous Khmer 
Rouge who ruled the country from 1975 through 1978. 
Vietnam has long sought better relations with the United States, in part to 
persuade Washington to end its veto of World Bank and other international 
reconstruction loans to Hanoi. China wants to repair its relationship with the 
United States and other Western nations after its violent suppression of a 
pro-democracy movement in June. 
The 20-nation Cambodia conference that began July 30 already has agreed to 
insist on a comprehensive settlement to end a decade of Vietnamese occupation 
and install a coalition government to guide Cambodia from its bloody past to a 
peaceful and nonaligned future. 
But the Cambodian factions have not agreed to cooperate -- or even to refrain 
from shooting at each other. 
From Washington's viewpoint, the key to any settlement is persuading the Hun 
Sen regime and the Khmer Rouge to play a subordinate role in an interim 
government led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former head of state and the 
leader of one of two non-Communist factions. The second non-Communist group is 
headed by former Prime Minister Son Sann. 
Despite their shared Marxist ideology, the Hun Sen government and the Khmer 
Rouge are enemies that have been fighting for decades and have continued their 
squabble at the Paris conference table. 
The senior official said that if an accommodation could be reached between 
Vietnam and China, antagonists in a brief border war in early 1979, it would go 
a long way toward persuading their Cambodian allies. Vietnam provides weapons 
and political support to Hun Sen, while China supplies the Khmer Rouge. 
The official expressed guarded optimism that the Paris talks would produce a 
settlement among the Cambodian factions, although "these people, to a man, have 
been fighting among themselves for three or four decades." 
The Khmer Rouge, under Pol Pot, caused the deaths of an estimated 1 million 
Cambodians by killings, starvation and disease when they controlled the 
country. Vietnam invaded Cambodia in late 1978, driving the Khmer Rouge from 
power and installing the government now led by Hun Sen. Vietnam has promised to 
withdraw its troops by the end of September. If the Cambodian factions are 
unable to reach agreement, the departure of the Vietnamese could produce a 
power vacuum and a renewed civil war. 
Alan D. Romberg, a former State Department official who is now an Asian studies 
fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, said that despite the 
centrifugal forces driving the Cambodian factions apart, pressure is increasing 
on both the Cambodians and their sponsors to reach an accommodation. 
Important Relationship 
"For Vietnam in particular, the relationship with the United States -- which 
includes not just direct relations but also the U.S. green light for 
international financial institutions to participate in reconstruction of the 
country -- is very important to Hanoi," Romberg said. "If the Chinese are 
really convinced that the Vietnamese have withdrawn, they have no interest in 
promoting the Khmer Rouge as a dominant force in Cambodia." 
Romberg noted, however, that China and Vietnam may not be able to force their 
allies to go along with a settlement. 
"I don't think the Khmer Rouge are controlled by any means by China," he said. 
"Hun Sen, while he would be strongly influenced by his relationship with the 
Vietnamese -- if he thought he was being sold out, he would not go along." 
Nevertheless, Romberg said that China probably could prevent the Khmer Rouge 
from regaining total control by halting the supply of weapons and other 
equipment. "Without a continuing flow of weapons and military supplies, the 
Khmer Rouge can cause problems but not, in the end, win," he said. 
Poor Track Record 
George A. Carver, a former deputy director of the CIA, was far less optimistic 
about the possibility of settlement. 
"The guys who have the guns are the Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese," said 
Carver, now a fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in 
Washington. "We would like to think the Chinese will make their proteges 
behave, but their track record is not very good. There is no solution that 
would be equally acceptable in Hanoi and Beijing, so the chances of them 
cutting a sweetheart deal are between negligible and nil. 
"We keep hoping that other people will solve things so we will not have to face 
up to the thorny problems," Carver said, "but I don't think they will." 
