THEY'RE WALKIN'; 
SOME DOWNTOWNERS LIKE THE FUTURISTIC PASSAGEWAYS BUT DISILLUSIONED URBAN 
PLANNERS SAY L.A. MAY GET NO MORE 
Legal secretary Annie Yakutis traverses at least three pedestrian walkways each 
morning as she rushes five blocks from where she parks her car at 2nd and 
Figueroa streets to the law office where she works atop Bunker Hill. 
"The pedways are sort of futuristic," said Yakutis, making the turn with two 
colleagues between pedways crossing Figueroa and 3rd streets. "It brings a 
'Blade Runner' aspect to our daily lives. There is a science fiction element to 
it." 
The relatively few pedestrians who have discovered and use downtown Los 
Angeles' system of 10 elevated public pedways and or concrete foot bridges -- 
scurrying from residence or garages to office, or from office to appointments, 
lunch or shopping -- praise it as convenient, safe, healthful and fun. 
At the same time, they point out minor problems with cleanliness and major 
problems with byzantine design, which attorney Karen Ann Widess says forces a 
pedestrian to "do a lot of upping and downing" in the buildings linking the 
pedways. 
Planners Disappointed 
Users wish the system stretched farther -- but that isn't going to happen, say 
planners who became disillusioned with pedways about the time the first system 
around Bunker Hill was completed. 
Extensive enclosed pedway systems have been successful in eastern cities where 
cold winters make heated passageways attractive -- St. Paul, Minneapolis, 
Atlanta, for instance. Similarly, humid Houston has kept pedestrians happy with 
an air-conditioned system built mostly underground. But extreme temperatures 
pose no problem in Los Angeles' climate, making a pedway system less 
attractive. 
There is a bigger reason to explain planner wariness toward expanding the 
system. 
"In Los Angeles," said John Spalding, director of planning and urban design at 
the Community Redevelopment Agency, "it has been found in certain cases that 
street life can suffer if you force people to go up to a second level pedway 
system." 
The agency's favorite example of the kind of street life it hopes to foster 
throughout downtown happens along Broadway, a teeming shopping district. 
'Street Activity' 
"We find it is more desirable to reactivate the streets or to maintain street 
activity," Spalding said. "We need the interaction between pedestrians and 
vehicles. On Broadway, drivers cruise the streets, see what movie is playing, 
see if their friends are on the street, then park and walk around." 
Private planners agree that elevating pedestrians above streets is a bad idea 
for Los Angeles. Like Spalding, they endorse isolated, privately built 
pedestrian bridges linking a parking garage to a plant or linking separate 
buildings of one establishment, such as the California Mart downtown. But they 
consider any extensive system of public pedways outdated thinking. 
"Downtown, this whole second level for pedestrians, with cars on the first 
level, has just made it very uncomfortable along the ground level," said Elaine 
Carbrey, planner and architect with the Gruen Associates urban planning firm. 
"Some people say you can have it on both levels, but you can't, because there 
is just not that much retail to go around. And it is costly for the developer 
to build in two lobbies in every office building." 
An angry critic of this attitude is Calvin S. Hamilton, Los Angeles' former 
city planner who designed a more extensive downtown pedway system. City 
planners, however, do not currently plan to build more of the walkways. 
"If pedways had been done the way we recommended," he said, "it would have 
created a much better pedestrian environment in the central business district. 
It would certainly have made it easier to walk around, and would have eased the 
traffic congestion." 
Despite their disillusionment with elevated pedways, the current planning 
officials are not about to tear down the 10 that did get built. 
Design Concepts 
The Bunker Hill pedways, Spalding said, were planned 20 years ago for two 
reasons -- to help pedestrians conquer the steep topography of the hill itself, 
and to serve as a feeder system for a mechanized "People Mover." The 
Disneyland-style carts, aborted when the federal government eliminated funding 
in 1981, would have had stations one level above the pedways at the World Trade 
Center, California Plaza, and the 444 S. Flower building. 
Usage of the current pedways has never been measured. 
An informal count indicated that several hundred commuters use the Flower and 
5th Street bridges for daily treks from car to office; while the Figueroa 
pedways are far less traveled. 
While planners debate their merits, the pedways are enthusiastically endorsed 
by those who use them. 
"It's the fastest way between parking in the Arco Plaza Garage and my office in 
Arco Towers. It's a direct line," said attorney Roland G. Simpson as he dashed 
over pedways crossing Flower Street, wrapping around the outside southeast 
corner of the Bonaventure Hotel and crossing 5th Street to Arco Towers. 
"It keeps you out of traffic," added Eric Bader, an accountant walking the same 
route. 
"I ride buses, and I use these little bridges to save time getting to work from 
the bus stop or going out to lunch," said Lauretta Brown, rushing from the 
Bonaventure to her office in the World Trade Center. 
The pedways also are said to be safe. Unlike downtown city sidewalks, the 
pedways appear untraveled by the homeless asking for handouts, or shadier 
characters bent on crime. An expensive pair of sunglasses and two metal 
measuring tapes left on the Security Pacific pedway across Flower one recent 
morning remained there untouched two hours later. 
Connecting through major buildings, the well-lighted pedways inherit an 
unofficial police force among the 24-hour guard stations paid for by each 
business complex. 
Lawrence Taylor, a World Trade Center guard, said one recent midnight that the 
most potentially threatening people he sees wandering along the pedways during 
his Monday-Friday 11:30 p.m. to 8 a.m. graveyard shift are "maybe a few people 
who might be drinking too much" at the nearby hotel lounges. They can be loud, 
he said, but they aren't dangerous. 
On the negative side, a few pedway walkers complain about uncleanliness, 
although the public system remains relatively free of trash, graffiti, and dirt 
that can plague sidewalks. 
"One day last year someone left a cup of ice cream on top of one of these 
railings," said legal assistant Richard Magee, indicating the 3rd Street 
bridge. "And it melted and melted and melted for about a month. Nobody cleans 
up." 
The universal complaint about pedways, however, is that they are difficult to 
use. 
Private planner Carbrey of Gruen Associates said she had never walked the 
downtown pedways at all because she considers them "poorly designed . . . out 
of the way and not easy to find." 
Difficult Course 
To accomplish the goals of planners in the 1960s of moving from 1st to 6th 
without touching a street, the pedestrian must find his way along the unmarked 
public easement through the grounds of the residential Bunker Hill Towers; walk 
through the World Trade Center on its second story; take an escalator up to the 
pedway entering the Bonaventure on the north at its sixth floor; and meander 
around the hotel's round silos to find the south pedway, which signs indicate 
is on the hotel's third floor but is reached by taking outdoor concrete stairs 
down to the second floor. The trip is completed by crossing 5th Street and 
riding down an escalator -- if it is working -- to return to earth by entering 
Arco Plaza at the street level. 
Yakutis said she considers the lack of directions throughout the system merely 
another recreational element of the pedways. 
"It's a lot of fun," she said, "to find out how many different ways you can get 
from Point A to Point B in downtown Los Angeles." 
