DODGERS HANDLE METS, 4-2; 
BASEBALL: VALENZUELA, HOWELL COMBINE FOR VICTORY, USING MURRAY'S 20TH HOMER TO 
BEAT CONE. 
For 14 years, Eddie Murray has been a model of consistency. For the last 
decade, when the New York Mets came to town, Fernando Valenzuela has been a 
model of, well, consistency. 
When the two teamed up Thursday, Murray did what he has done throughout his 
career -- hit a decisive home run -- and Valenzuela did what he has rarely 
done: beat the Mets in Dodger Stadium. 
The Dodgers' 4-2 victory lifted them to within 5 1/2 games of the Cincinnati 
Reds in the West. The loss dropped the Mets four games behind the Pittsburgh 
Pirates in the East. 
Valenzuela (11-10) engaged David Cone in some role reversal before a Dodger 
Stadium crowd of 44,997. Valenzuela cooled off a team that has been a nemesis 
here, a team against which he had a 2-7 lifetime record entering the game. 
Murray's fifth-inning two-run home run broke a 2-2 tie and did in one of the 
league's hottest pitchers. Cone, who was 8-2 in his last 13 starts, fell to 9-7 
despite pitching a complete game and striking out nine. 
When Valenzuela opened the eighth inning by walking Darryl Strawberry, Jay 
Howell pitched the last two innings to earn his 12th save. 
The Dodger pitchers got an assist from an outfield defense that has not been 
considered one of the league's slickest. Kal Daniels made a leaping catch of 
Kevin McReynolds' drive in the fifth inning, going over the left-field wall to 
rob him of a two-run homer. 
And in the eighth, with Strawberry on second, Howard Johnson on first and none 
out, Hubie Brooks made a shoestring grab of Daryl Boston's drive and doubled 
Strawberry off second to snuff the rally. 
"That turned out to be one heck of a play," Dodger Manager Tom Lasorda said. 
"We've been playing much better defense. That makes your pitchers look better, 
when you have defense like that." 
Valenzuela opened the second inning by walking Strawberry and Johnson, and both 
scored on singles by Tim Teufel and Alex Trevino. 
But the Dodgers came back in the bottom of the inning, tying it on run-scoring 
singles by Mike Scioscia and Valenzuela. 
The Mets threatened several more times but left the bases loaded in both the 
fourth and fifth innings and finished with only four hits. 
With a man on, Murray hit an 0-and-1 fastball barely over the right-field wall, 
his 20th home run. Murray has nine home runs and 34 RBIs since the All-Star 
break. 
He has hit 20 or more home runs in all but one of his 14 seasons, a fact that 
didn't seem to impress him. Instead, Murray, who has been the Dodgers' top 
hitter in their surge into contention, bemoaned the runners he has left on 
base. 
"I finally got a fastball. It was a little bit up and I was able to get it five 
feet over (the wall), which is enough," Murray said. "It's just good to win a 
ballgame." 
Lasorda was more impressed with Murray's accomplishment. "That's amazing," he 
said. "He's been playing extremely well, and he's made some fantastic plays 
defensively for us." 
Valenzuela said he wasn't aware of his troubles against the Mets. "I never 
check what I do against some teams," he said. "I don't want to 
(psychologically) change anything." 
Valenzuela did change his pitching pattern midway through the game, he said, 
going for the outside corner after working inside in the early innings. 
Scioscia said Valenzuela "was a little erratic but he made some tremendous 
pitches to get out of trouble." 
"No, I didn't have good stuff," Valenzuela said. "I'm not a power pitcher so I 
have to put the ball in the right spot. But the most important thing is to win 
the game. The team is doing great -- a lot of (close) games we're winning." 
Dodger Notes 
Jim Neidlinger didn't get a decision in Wednesday's 3-2 victory over 
Philadelphia, but he continues to solidify his position in the rotation. He 
lowered his earned-run average to 2.70 and has a strikeout-to-walk margin of 
26-6 in 33 innings. "He's been as consistent as a pitcher can be," said catcher 
Mike Scioscia. "He has the mark of a late bloomer. We found a diamond in the 
rough." 
Scioscia's run-scoring single Thursday gave him 55 RBIs, a career high. He had 
53 in 1985. . . . Kirk Gibson's third-inning stolen base gave him 18 out of 20, 
the best percentage in the National League. . . . Catcher Rick Dempsey 
continues to play while appealing his one-game suspension for Monday's fight 
with Lenny Dykstra. Dempsey expects to meet with NL President Bill White next 
week when the team in is Philadelphia. 
Following an outbreak of injuries, Mets Manager Bud Harrelson has had to juggle 
his lineup to stay in contention with Pittsburgh in the East. Outfielder Mark 
Carreon was lost for the season when he tore a knee ligament in San Diego. He 
will have surgery in Tucson Saturday. It's a similar injury to the one that 
cost Pedro Guerrero most of the 1986 season. . . . Shortstop Kevin Elster is 
also out. Harrelson said he "can live with" Howard Johnson at short, Dave 
Magadan at third and Kelvin Torve at first. "A lot of those moves have been 
made out of necessity," Harrelson said. "Magadan said he can play third every 
day. Howard hasn't hurt us at short." . . . His lineup Thursday included recent 
addition Alex Trevino at catcher, recent callup Darren Reed in the outfield and 
Gregg Jefferies batting leadoff. 
Four Bakersfield Dodgers were named to the California League (Class A) all-star 
team -- catcher Bryan Baar, designated hitter Brett Magnusson, left-handed 
pitcher Jason Brosnan and right-handed pitcher Jamie McAndrew. . . . McAndrew, 
son of former Met pitcher Jim McAndrew, has already been promoted to double-A 
San Antonio. 
