BAJA CALIFORNIA COLUMNIST'S KILLER GETS 27 YEARS 
A Baja California state judge has imposed a near-maximum 27-year prison 
sentence on a former race-track security guard and one-time state police agent 
after convicting him of being the triggerman in the slaying of a prominent 
Tijuana journalist. 
Judge Braulio Gomez Veronica found on Wednesday that Victoriano Medina Moreno, 
38, is guilty in the slaying of Hector Felix Miranda, a columnist who was 
widely known for more than a decade in Baja California under the nom de plume 
of El Gato -- the Cat. 
However, the long-expected ruling failed to curb the controversy and doubts 
surrounding a case that precipitated large protests against the state 
government and still inflames passions in Baja California. Many have maintained 
that a massive cover-up is under way and Medina, while an accomplice in the 
slaying, is a fall guy for higher, politically connected interests. Two 
suspects remain at large. 
Medina has given conflicting versions of his involvement in the crime, first 
signing a confession and subsequently maintaining that he was innocent and that 
police had tortured him into confessing. 
Felix, whose gossipy, often-strident and frequently outrageous column -- Un 
Poco de Algo (A Little of Something) -- lampooned the movers and shakers of the 
border state and Mexico, was gunned down as he drove to work April 20, 1988. A 
gunman pumped two shotgun rounds through the driver's window of the late-model 
sedan as it was stopped or rolled slowly on a rain-slicked street. Felix was 
killed instantly. 
Although there is widespread agreement that Medina was probably an accomplice 
in the slaying, many Mexican journalists, led by Felix's colleagues at the 
muckraking weekly Zeta, have maintained that Medina was probably no more than a 
driver at the scene. Indeed, Gomez noted in his sentencing document that the 
case will remain open until the apprehension of Antonio Vera Palestina, former 
security chief at the Caliente Racetrack in Tijuana, who was Medina's ex-boss. 
Many believe that Vera was the actual triggerman. 
Vera, a former police official in Mexico City, is a fugitive. An arrest warrant 
has also been issued for a third former security official at the race track, 
Emigdio Nevarez, who also remains at large. 
J. Jesus Blancornelas, Felix's longtime partner and co-founder with him of 
Zeta, said he is convinced that the "intellectual author" of the crime has 
never been formally charged. Blancornelas has repeatedly pointed the finger, in 
print, at Jorge Hank Rhon, the president of Caliente, who is one of the richest 
men in Baja. His father, Carlos Hank Gonzalez, is a former mayor of Mexico City 
and is counted among the Mexican power elite. The race track president, a 
frequent target of Felix's barbed pen, employed all three named suspects. 
Both the race track official and the elder Hank, who now is the national 
minister of tourism, a cabinet-level post, have denied any involvement in the 
slaying or in any cover-up. 
