JACK SMITH: VIVE LA DIFFERENCE? WOMEN WORK AS MEN TINKER 
I am not alone in my inquiry into the division of housework between husbands 
and wives, or men and women, if you like. 
Lee Carlson of Fullerton sends me an article from the Caltech News about a 
continuing research into the "technology" of housework by Ruth Schwartz Cowan, 
professor of history at State University of New York, who is on a fellowship 
this year at Caltech. 
Since her prize-winning 1983 book, "The Ironies of Household Technology: From 
the Open Hearth to the Microwave," the subject has been of increasing interest 
to other scholars, researchers and journalists. 
After 12 years of study, Cowan concluded that modern technology moved men out 
of the house, but did not make women's work easier. Men used to gather wood for 
the open hearth, process grain, make tools, brew cider and work in leather. 
Butchering was a communal chore. The industrial revolution ended all that. 
Men left the hearth to earn cash. The cook stove required more diversity of 
food preparation than the "one pot stew." Stoves had to be cleaned daily. 
Cotton fabrics required more washing. The sewing machine meant more work. 
To free themselves, Cowan believes, women must change some of the unwritten 
rules. Some rules -- changing sheets once a week, keeping sinks spotless -- may 
not really be necessary, she says. "Other rules," says the article's author, 
Winifred Veronda, " -- that men who dry dishes or change diapers are 
insufficiently masculine, for example -- ensure that women will continue to do 
more of the housework." 
Cowan concludes that we can best help the working wife "by helping the next 
generation -- and ourselves -- to neutralize both the sexual connotation of 
washing machines and vacuum cleaners and the senseless tyranny of spotless 
shirts and immaculate floors." 
Oddly, Cowan argues that antibiotics have eased the housewife's role as family 
nurse, and have done more than the dishwasher and the washing machine in 
freeing women to enter the work force. 
My wife has called my attention to "It's About Time," an article in the 
magazine France, subtitled "Statistics show what women have known all along -- 
they work more than men." 
The article, by Michel Faure, is based on a study by INSEE, a statistical 
bureau, on how the French spend their time. Though the tone is light, the 
conclusions are similar to those of Cowan. 
INSEE's findings, says Faure, "seem to bear out a sneaking suspicion we've been 
loath to admit: Namely, that when husbands come home after a day of toil, they 
plant their feet beneath the table as did their fathers and their fathers' 
fathers before them, and they ask their still-toiling wives the age-old 
question: 'What's for dinner, honey?' " 
It isn't that men are idle around the house. "When married men deign to lift a 
finger . . . it's not to do just anything. It's to tinker. Because males, well, 
males tinker. To trust tinkering to the delicate and fragile hands of the 
weaker sex would be flirting with disaster. . . . While the valiant tinkerers 
are busy hammering their thumbs . . . their wives are going about their 
'women's work' without a fuss. They are tending children, mending clothes, 
cleaning house, cooking meals and doing laundry. . . ." 
I have no idea why my wife pointed out this article to me, except that it's 
true that I used to come home from work and say "What's for dinner?," meanwhile 
opening myself a beer. I no longer ask that question. I say "What's in the 
micro?" while I check the TV log for a sex and violence movie. 
Actually, I have never been much of a tinkerer. I was always afraid of getting 
shocked or cutting a finger. So I am not the typical husband ferreted out by 
INSEE. 
Caroline Roy, one of INSEE's researchers, emphasized the average Frenchman's 
uselessness around the house: "When he has a woman around -- regardless of 
whether she is his mother or his wife -- an employed man participates little in 
domestic work. The behavior of a husband and father vis-a-vis housework is 
basically the same whether his wife is employed or not, and whether they have 
one, two, three or more children." 
Faure ends with a curious finding by an INSEE sociologist: "Men who live with 
their partners devote more time to their professions than do men who live 
alone." 
"That'll go over real big with our wives," concludes Faure. 
Actually, I think that finding ought to be reassuring to wives. I deduce from 
it that men who do not live with their partners spend a great deal of their 
time prowling. On the other hand, those who have their partners readily 
available -- when they aren't occupied with scrubbing the floor or cleaning the 
sink -- have more time to devote to professional pursuits. 
Alas, Faure concludes: "Rest assured that old customs abide and timeworn 
conventions die hard. So do the differences between the sexes, which persist 
despite all the feminist demands and masculine goodwill, despite all the 
'superwomen' and 'new fathers.' " 
What it seems to mean to me is that Neanderthal women had it better. 
