COMMUNITY GROUPS TO FIRE UP ANTI-SMOKING DRIVE AT STADIUM 
At this weekend's San Diego Chargers-San Francisco 49ers football game, a 
coalition of community groups plans to officially kick off its anti-smoking 
campaign by taking a swipe at a popular tobacco industry symbol. 
The alliance of more than 30 organizations, known as the Tobacco Control 
Coalition, will display its logo, in fireworks, during a display after the game 
-- directly above a huge stadium sign advertising Marlboro cigarettes, a 
spokesman announced at a press conference Thursday. 
"That logo will be displayed right over the top of the Marlboro man," said 
David Burns, the coalition's chairman. 
It will be the first step in a local drive that will encompass a greater scope 
than other anti-smoking movements, Burns said. 
Rather than simply educating people about the health hazards of smoking, Burns 
said, the groups will attack media images and societal attitudes associated 
with the habit. 
Segments of the community will be targeted that statistically are more likely 
to start smoking -- such as children and some ethnic minorities -- or that are 
particularly susceptible to harm from cigarette smoke, such as pregnant women, 
said William Cox, director of the county's Health Services Department. 
The "tobacco-free" coalition includes the local chapters of the American Cancer 
Society, American Heart Assn., American Lung Assn. and the county's health and 
education departments. 
"Smoking is part of the way we cope with stress," Burns said. "It's part of the 
way that we interact with one another. . . . What will happen is that we will 
go after tobacco on a broad front." 
As spectators arrive at Saturday's game, they will receive an anti-smoking 
pledge card and bumper sticker, Cox said. 
The coalition's members hope people will sign the pledge cards and turn them in 
at the stadium's gates -- an act that could be the first step toward quitting, 
Cox said. 
Also, several hundred children who attended anti-smoking educational programs 
in the community will attend the game as guests of the health services 
department, Cox said. 
Funding for the anti-smoking campaign, which totals about $8 million, will come 
from state cigarette tax revenues, Cox said. 
