MOHAWKS, POLICE TEAR DOWN BARRICADES; 
CANADA: THE ACTION IS A STEP TOWARD RESOLVING THE ARMED STANDOFF. MONTREAL 
COMMUTER BRIDGE SHOULD BE REOPENED BY WEEKEND. 
Canadian army troops and masked Mohawks jointly dismantled barricades at a key 
commuter bridge into Montreal on Wednesday, taking a major and unexpected step 
toward resolving an armed standoff that has preoccupied this country for seven 
weeks. 
The sudden army-Indian cooperation came just as the army was scheduled to 
demolish the barricades by itself, using armored personnel carriers fitted with 
bulldozer blades. Because the Mohawks manning the roadblock were heavily armed, 
many Canadians had feared the demolition would trigger a blood bath. 
Authorities said the bridge, which is normally crossed by 60,000 to 70,000 
commuters a day, should be open to normal traffic by the weekend. The Indians' 
blockade had caused major dislocations for suburbanites living across the St. 
Lawrence River from Montreal. In recent days and weeks, they have been venting 
their frustration by burning Indians in effigy, blocking ambulances carrying 
sick Indians to hospitals and pelting unarmed Indians with stones the size of 
grapefruit. 
Such hot-headed acts seem likely to taper off once the bridge is opened, but 
the standoff had not been fully resolved as of Wednesday night. Well-armed 
Mohawks were still manning another barricade on the main road through Oka, a 
pleasant village northwest and across the river from the bridge blockade. This 
remaining barricade first went up last spring and was more heavily fortified in 
June after a botched raid by Quebec provincial policemen in which one officer 
was killed. 
It was that raid that led Indians to protest by setting up the bridge 
blockades. 
Talks between Indian and white negotiators were continuing late into the 
evening, and there was widespread hope that the Oka blockade could also be 
dismantled peacefully, bringing a nonviolent ending to Quebec's lengthy Indian 
standoff. That would be good news not only for the Indians involved but for the 
Canadian armed forces, which are normally used only on United Nations 
peacekeeping missions in international hot spots and which haven't entered into 
combat since the Korean War. 
The Canadian army's nonviolent mission is a source of national pride, and their 
deployment at home has surprised and dismayed the country. As troops set up 
their sandbags and moved armored personnel carriers and even artillery pieces 
into position near the Indian encampments, white Canadian civilians in various 
parts of the country took to the streets to protest. Many feared a shoot-out in 
Quebec that would disrupt Indian-white relations in Canada for years. 
"I was in Texas when Martin Luther King was assassinated, and America was a 
nation scarred after that," said protester Frank Spataro, who feared the same 
thing for Canada. 
Nearby, David Parsons was holding up a large banner that read: "If you like 
South Africa, you'll love Quebec," and he waved it every time an armored 
personnel carrier rolled by. "If one drop of blood is shed here, Quebec and 
Canada will burn," he predicted. 
Indeed, Indians across Canada have already been blocking roads and railroad 
tracks this summer, sympathetic with and inspired by the Mohawks of Quebec. One 
bulldozer-wielding group in Alberta is even trying to redirect a river to flow 
around a large new dam. 
Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has called the armed Mohawks 
"terrorists." He has been careful, however, to distinguish between the armed 
Mohawks who have been manning the barricades -- who hail from a paramilitary 
group called the Warrior Society -- and ordinary, unarmed Mohawks. 
Army officials say the Mohawk Warriors operating around Montreal possess, among 
other things, AK-47 assault rifles, Uzi submachine guns and M-16s, the weapon 
typically issued to American soldiers in Vietnam. The army has also speculated 
that the Warriors have mortars and anti-tank weapons. 
There was no immediate word Wednesday on whether the Warrior Society would have 
to relinquish its weapons now that the barricades in Quebec are coming down. 
The terms of the agreement that led to the dismantling had not yet been made 
public. Earlier, however, Mulroney had promised that the Mohawks of Oka would 
be given control of the development site that had touched off the whole 
controversy when the community proposed to build a golf course on what the 
Indians claim is ancestral land. 
