CAMARENA AFTERMATH: PYRRHIC VICTORY? 
It was doubtless a deeply satisfying victory for the U.S. Justice Department. 
The complex and controversial trial that grew out of the brutal murder of U.S. 
drug agent Enrique Camarena five years ago ended in the conviction of four 
foreign drug traffickers. But it could prove a verdict most Pyrrhic -- one that 
could needlessly hurt relations with Mexico if it is not handled with great 
tact. 
Of special concern is the conviction of Ruben Zuno Arce, a wealthy Mexican 
businessman who helped the drug traffickers who kidnaped Camarena, a Drug 
Enforcement Administration agent based in Guadalajara, and tortured him to 
death. Unlike several other suspects who have been convicted in U.S. and 
Mexican courts in the Camarena case, Zuno Arce is not just another thug. He is 
related to the family of former Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez and 
very much a member of Mexico's political Establishment. 
U.S. drug agents have long suspected that major narcotics traffickers could not 
operate in Mexico without at least the passive cooperation of influential 
Mexicans, but Zuno Arce's conviction marks one of the few times this widely 
shared suspicion has been proved in court. And because Camarena's murder was 
the most egregious example of how this corrupt alliance can work, it took on a 
symbolism far beyond the normal drugs-and-murder investigation; it was 
routinely discussed at the presidential level in both Mexico City and 
Washington. 
And the manner in which Camarena was methodically interrogated and tortured to 
death led other drug agents to pursue the case with near-religious zeal. On 
more than one occasion, they pressed the law to the limit to track down 
suspects and bring them before U.S. courts. Indeed Zuno Arce may yet go free if 
an appeals court rules that federal agents went too far in trying to get him 
convicted. 
For now, Bush Administration officials must not let their satisfaction over 
this moral, as well as legal, victory blind them to the many other important 
issues on the U.S.-Mexican agenda -- not least of which is the need for greater 
cooperation in the continuing war against drug traffickers. Current Mexican 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has done more than any of his predecessors 
to help stem the flow of drugs through Mexico from Colombia and other producing 
countries. He has also begun to crack down on corruption within Mexico's legal 
system. What purpose would it serve to rub official Mexico's noses in the 
verdict? 
The better tribute to "Kiki" Camarena -- and the many other U.S. and Mexican 
policemen who have died in the drug war -- would be to work harder, and more 
cooperatively, to defeat the brutal criminal organizations who plotted their 
deaths. 
