RAFSANJANI CUTS HARD-LINERS OUT OF IRAN CABINET 
Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani moved abruptly Saturday against hard-line 
opposition, dumping his prime political rival as interior minister and bringing 
in new, moderate faces. 
Rafsanjani's refusal to retain Ali Akbar Mohtashemi as the minister in charge 
of police and revolutionary committees came in the face of a parliamentary 
petition to keep him on, according to a report of the Iranian national news 
agency monitored here. 
The report said that 138 parliamentary deputies, a thin majority of the 
270-member assembly, signed the petition to retain Mohtashemi, a strict 
fundamentalist reputed to have firm ties to the Hezbollah (Party of God) 
movement in Lebanon. Hezbollah factions hold the 14 Western hostages there, 
Western intelligence officials say. There was no indication what, if any, 
effect the change would have on the hostages. 
Throughout last spring, in the months before the death of Iran's revolutionary 
leader, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the pragmatic Rafsanjani was locked in 
a rivalry with Mohtashemi and other hard-liners for political power in Iran. 
Passing over the interior minister for reappointment was a bold and potentially 
explosive political move. 
Rafsanjani had already engineered a reorganization of government that gave him 
expanded powers in the presidency to which he was elected July 28. The revamped 
structure also eliminated the position of prime minister, held by another 
rival, Hussein Moussavi, who now, like Mohtashemi, is out of a job. Also passed 
over for reappointment was Security and Intelligence Minister Mohammed 
Mohammedi-Reyshahri. 
According to the news agency report, the deputies' petition pointed out that 
the "presence of powerful personalities in the future Cabinet is inevitable." 
In advocating Mohtashemi's retention, the petition made note of the 
"sensitivity of the arrogant world" -- the United States -- to developments in 
Iran. 
A spokesman for the Moujahedeen opposition, speaking by telephone from Baghdad, 
Iraq, said that the session was stormy, according to the group's reports from 
Tehran. He also said that Iran's new spiritual leader, the Ayatollah Ali 
Khamenei, was consulted on only three of Rafsanjani's appointments and that one 
of those was the interior post. 
According to the Tehran reports, ministerial appointments will have to be 
confirmed by the Parliament, which took on a more hard-line character in the 
last national elections. 
Rafsanjani's choice for interior minister, disclosed after the petition was 
read in Parliament, is Abdullah Nouri, who was once Khomeini's representative 
to the Revolutionary Guards, the elite military units charged with defending 
the government. In the late stages of the eight-year war with Iraq, Rafsanjani 
was acting commander of the guards. 
Nouri is a representative from Esfahan and a Muslim clergyman, and he headed 
the parliamentary planning and budget committee. 
In all, more than half of the Cabinet ministers were dropped in favor of new 
men. Many of Rafsanjani's choices are technocrats, apparently selected to help 
the new president in his avowed No. 1 priority, reviving the war-devastated 
economy. 
