.. . WISH YOU WERE HERE 
It is an epochal chapter in the long history of human exploration. 
At 9 p.m. on the night of Aug. 24, the spacecraft Voyager 2 will pass within 
3,000 miles of the planet Neptune's cloud-enshrouded north pole. At that 
moment, 12 years and 4 days into its historic flight, nearly 3 billion miles 
from its home, the craft will again share with the men who sent it the sights 
no one has ever seen. 
Voyager, the most sophisticated robot ever built, consists of 65,000 different 
parts and a computer so sophisticated that it can heal itself when damage 
threatens its mission. But on that day of man's first encounter with the most 
distant of the outer solar system's great planets, the craft will be so far 
from Earth that, even though they travel at the speed of light, its 
photographic transmissions home will take 4 hours and 6 minutes to reach the 
network of 38 antennas on four continents arrayed to receive them. 
Voyager is the greatest in a series of unmanned space probes whose 
accomplishments are unique in the annals of man's exploration of his physical 
universe. Their journeys over almost unimaginable distances are adventures of 
the human mind, but not of the human body. Theirs are the feats of daring 
intellects and dazzling ingenuity, and not of the body's courage or endurance, 
as all such stories of exploration in far places have been before. 
In the face of their monumental achievement, man -- the creator left behind -- 
also is left to wonder what exactly this new experience is? Is he the prime 
mover or merely the spectator to the machines' first great adventure? 
Those of a romantic bent might argue that while Voyager has stored up 
scientific treasure, it has done little to enrich the human spirit -- that the 
project's triumphal elevation of the machine has degraded mankind from an 
explorer to a consumer of exploration. That, we think, is a narrow, even 
vulgar, view, one that reduces adventure to mere sensation and exploration to a 
kind of trial by combat. 
Voyager, in all its magnificent accomplishment, is but the latest reminder of 
the fact that in all things that really matter, what man's mind can grasp far 
exceeds the reach of his frail body. 
