MAN IN BANK SAVES DEPUTY FROM ATTACKER 
A bank customer in Palmdale became an instant hero Saturday when he jumped into 
a fistfight to save a sheriff's deputy who was being choked by a length of cord 
from his police radio, authorities said. 
The customer, Lee Bibbie of Altadena, enabled veteran Deputy Dennis Bernard to 
free himself from the grasp of a suspected check forger in a fight at a 
Security Pacific bank, Deputy Ronald Thomason of the Antelope Valley/Lancaster 
Sheriff's Department station said. 
The suspect, Cedric A. Brown, 35, of Los Angeles, had pinned Bernard to the 
floor and had tightened the radio cord around his neck for about 30 seconds 
before Bibbie came to the deputy's aid, Thomason said. Brown, identified by 
police as a recent parolee on a drug conviction, was arrested moments later 
when more deputies arrived. He was booked on suspicion of forgery and attempted 
murder of a police officer, Thomason said. 
"Bibbie intervening at that particular time perhaps saved Bernard's life," the 
sheriff's spokesman said. "The fight may have turned out quite differently if 
Bibbie had not intervened. Had (the suspect) been able to choke (the deputy) 
unconscious for just for a second, he would have had time to grab the gun out 
of the holster." 
Police said the incident began when Brown tried to deposit a suspicious check 
for $550 and a bank manager notified the sheriff's station. When Bernard, a 
14-year police veteran, entered the bank, Brown tried to flee, Thomason said. 
Bernard chased Brown and the two ran into a locked door. In the fight that 
followed, the 6-foot, 2-inch suspect allegedly struck the 5-foot, 10-inch 
deputy several times in the face and attempted to take the officer's 
9-millimeter handgun. At one point, Thomason said, the deputy threw the suspect 
onto a desk, but the officer's momentum carried him and the suspect over the 
desktop and onto the floor. 
The suspect landed on top and was able to grab the microphone and cord from 
Bernard's portable police radio, Thomason said. 
"He wrapped it around Bernard's throat and tried to choke him to death," the 
spokesman said. "Bernard had backup (officers) rolling. The backups were maybe 
two, three minutes away. But it only takes two or three seconds for something 
to go tragically wrong." 
Bibbie, who helped to subdue the suspect in the crucial moments before backup 
officers arrived, was not injured. He was believed to be the only customer in 
the bank at the time, and was waiting to open an account because he is moving 
to Palmdale, police said. A manager and two tellers were on duty, Thomason 
said. 
