NEA ADVISORY PANEL OKS GRANTS TO 2 CONTROVERSIAL GALLERIES; 
ARTS: BUT THE COUNCIL PUTS OFF FEDERAL FUNDING FOR TWO PERFORMERS WHO EXPLORE 
SEXUAL TABOOS AND ARE TARGETS OF CONSERVATIVES IN THE OBSCENITY DEBATE. 
The advisory council of the National Endowment for the Arts voted to approve 
$155,000 in grants Saturday to two art galleries that sparked an ongoing 
obscenity debate last year, while postponing a decision on funding for two 
controversial performance artists in a new dispute over conflict of interest by 
NEA grant reviewers. 
However, the actions by the National Council on the Arts appeared to have 
fallen far short of the panel's apparent goal of mollifying NEA critics, both 
on the political right and among artists and arts sympathizers. 
Top staff aides to two key conservative congressmen said any benefit was 
effectively offset by a new focus on longstanding problems of conflict of 
interest in NEA grant-making. 
Observers from the offices of Rep. Dana Rohrabacher (R-Lomita) and Rep. Dick 
Armey (R-Texas) monitored the NEA meeting throughout the day. 
The council delayed voting on federal grants for the two New York performance 
artists, Karen Finley and Holly Hughes, until their work is reconsidered by a 
new panel of their peers. The vote to ask the peer panel to reconsider the 
applications was 10 to 6. 
Technically, the council voted to require a brand new grant review for five 
questioned grants, including those for Finley and Hughes. The new review will 
not be completed until November -- long after the final expected vote on NEA 
bills in Congress this year. 
David Chambers, a Yale School of Drama professor and chairman of the NEA's top 
theater program policy panel, charged that NEA Chairman John E. Frohnmayer 
wanted to "corral anything that might be construed as controversial." 
Council member Harvey Lichtenstein, director of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 
delivered an impassioned defense of Finley, a lightning rod of conservative 
criticism. "There is no way that one can comprehend art by reading about it," 
Lichtenstein said of the controversy, which has been fanned by racy 
descriptions of Finley's stage technique in the press. 
"The only way to experience art is face-to-face," he said. "Yes, she smears 
chocolate on her body. Yes, she puts gelatin in her bra. It was not obscene. It 
was funny. She was professional. She was adept." 
Artists and gay rights groups immediately accused the arts agency of 
manufacturing a "bogus" excuse to sidestep funding for Finley and Hughes. 
An official of one of the art galleries that received new funding said the 
actions of the NEA advisory board -- on which Frohnmayer has the final say -- 
represented a "mixed message" to artists and the nation. 
Votes on the grants came during a tumultuous, daylong meeting here in which gay 
rights and arts freedom demonstrators disrupted the gathering, carrying signs 
and chanting: "NEA do your part! We demand more homo art!" 
More than a dozen demonstrators were removed by police, but no charges were 
filed. About 250 people marched outside. 
Frohnmayer had little better luck in keeping peace on the council as factions 
clashed repeatedly. At one point, arts council member Phyllis Berney asked 
Susan Lubowsky, the NEA official explaining one of the grant proposals, "Is 
there an artist in this particular group who will immediately inflame the 
public?" 
A flustered Lubowsky answered no, but Frohnmayer disclosed that he had 
personally screened the work of 10 artists to be included in the Awards in the 
Visual Arts show, apparently to make sure the selections were devoid of 
controversial work. 
A total of $80,000 went to the Institute for Contemporary Art at the University 
of Pennsylvania, which last year organized a show of work by the late 
photographer Robert Mapplethorpe that resulted in the obscenity prosecution of 
a Cincinnati gallery. The show opened to new controversy in Boston last week. 
The vote reversed a decision taken three months ago, in which the council 
withheld the money in an earlier ill-fated attempt to placate congressional 
opponents of the arts agency. The National Council on the Arts has advisory 
power within the arts endowment. Its votes are not binding on Frohnmayer, but 
are almost never set aside. 
Another $75,000 was voted for the Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art in 
Winston-Salem, N.C., for the 1990 edition of an touring art show. Last year's 
show was a center of controversy because it included a photograph of a crucifix 
immersed in urine. 
Judith Tannenbaum, assistant director of the Institute for Contemporary Art, 
said the mix of grant votes by the 24-member presidentially appointed arts 
council "leaves it really ambiguous" in terms of what political or artistic 
message -- and to whom -- the NEA was attempting to send. 
The conflict-of-interest issue led to the vote to ask a reconsideration of five 
of 52 grants proposed for funding in an NEA program that specializes in 
cutting-edge work. The action had been closely watched because Finley and 
Hughes were recommended for funding despite an earlier move by Frohnmayer to 
cancel grants to the two women and to California performance artists Tim Miller 
and John Fleck. 
Two weeks ago, The Times reported that the five new grants were involved in a 
conflict-of-interest situation long troublesome to the NEA -- in which grant 
review panel members are simultaneously also applicants for money. Frohnmayer 
acknowledged Friday that the situation needed correction and announced a new 
policy curtailing the practice. 
Hughes had been proposed for a $15,000 grant through New York's Downtown Art 
Co. for a production called "No Trace of the Blond," in which grant panel 
member Ellen Sebastian is a collaborator. Finley was involved in a grant under 
which she and musician Jerry Hunt -- a grant panel member -- would create a new 
production. 
Hughes, a lesbian artist who attended Saturday's arts council meeting, 
contended the decision to defer action on grants for her and Finley "is a bogus 
thing. They (Frohnmayer and the NEA) are looking for a reason because they do 
not want to fund openly lesbian, gay art or art that deals with sexual 
politics." 
Staff writer Don Shannon contributed to this story. 
