TENNIS ROUNDUP; 
LUNDGREN STUNS AGASSI, 6-4, 6-0, AT INDIANAPOLIS 
Unseeded Peter Lundgren of Sweden upset second-seeded Andre Agassi, 6-4, 6-0, 
in less than an hour Friday to reach the semifinals of the $1-million U.S. 
Hardcourts tournament in Indianapolis. 
Top-seeded Boris Becker of West Germany, a game away from defeat in the second 
set, won his quarterfinal match when Jim Courier retired in the third set with 
cramps. 
Becker's 4-6, 7-5, 3-1 victory sent him into the semifinals against 
fourth-seeded Jay Berger. 
Courier, seeded eighth, had Becker down, 5-2, in the second set before he held 
serve and broke Courier twice to force a third set. 
In earlier matches, Berger, seeded fourth, beat Kelly Evernden, 5-7, 6-1, 6-3, 
with five service breaks over the final two sets, and No. 14 Richey Reneberg 
upset eighth-seeded Pete Sampras 3-6, 6-1, 7-6 (7-0). 
Agassi managed only one service break against Lundgren, ranked 151st in the 
world. Lundgren raced to a 4-1 lead in the first set before Agassi recovered 
and served a love-game to climb within 5-4. 
The 20-year-old from Las Vegas had a break point in the next game, but he could 
only lunge at Lundgren's forehand winner on the baseline. Then his unforced 
error gave Lundgren the first set in 35 minutes. 
"That was his chance to come back and I won the game. He just went for stupid 
shots. He's such a good player and he should know better," Lundgren said. 
Agassi said he was distracted by an incident that occurred earlier Friday. He 
refused to elaborate, however. 
"He should feel pretty good that he caught me today. Otherwise he would've had 
a game on his hands," said Agassi, who won only four points in the final three 
games. The match lasted 56 minutes. 
Evernden, ranked 78th in the world, had little energy after his 6-2, 6-4 upset 
of fifth-seeded John McEnroe, the defending champion, in Thursday's third 
round. And his exhaustion showed. 
Berger led Evernden 4-3, 30-love on his serve when he committed three 
consecutive unforced errors. Evernden swept seven of the next eight points over 
two games to break Berger and hold serve for a 5-4 lead. He won the set, 7-5. 
Berger broke Evernden three times in the second set, allowing his opponent only 
13 points. The world's 11th-ranked player collected two breaks in the final 
set, and served a 40-love game to win the match. 
Todd Woodbridge of Australia and Derrick Rostagno defeated two of the remaining 
three seeded players to advance to the semifinals of the Volvo International 
tournament, in New Haven, Conn. 
In the other quarterfinal matches, fifth-seeded Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet 
Union beat Cristiano Carati of Italy, 6-2, 6-1, and Todd Woddbridge of 
Australia defeated Bryan Shelton, 7-5, 6-2. 
Woodbridge's powerful forehand led him past 11th-seeded Wally Masur, 7-6 (7-5) 
3-6, 7-5. 
After defeating Masur in a first set tiebreaker, Woodbridge, 19, said he lost 
his concentration after going up 3-2 in the second set. 
After Masur took a 4-1 lead in the third set, Woodbridge fought back, running 
off eight straight points to cut the margin to 4-3. 
He then came back from 0-40 in the final game and ran off five points to win 
the set, 7-5. 
Rostagno scored a 7-5, 6-0 victory over 16th-seeded Christo van Rensburg of 
South Africa. 
