LIZ SMITH: LIZ TAYLOR IS MAKING SCENTS, 'WHITE DIAMONDS' 
IT'S BEEN all quiet on the Elizabeth Taylor front recently, but not to worry -- 
the actress has almost completely recovered from the ravages of that near-fatal 
bout with pneumonia. She and her rough-hewn construction worker love, Larry 
Fortensky, have rented a house in Malibu for the summer, in the exclusive 
Paradise Cove area, near such other biggies as Barry Diller and Jerry 
Weintraub. 
The star has been throwing little barbecues and get-togethers for old and new 
friends, playing the gracious hostess and astounding everybody with her renewed 
health, high spirits and raucous, bawdy good humor. Those who have seen the 
actress recently say she looks absolutely marvelous, plump and radiant. (Some 
longtime Taylor watchers mournfully doubt she will ever again sport the size 
six figure she miraculously maintained for 4 1/2 years. I say, so what!? -- 
just so long as she doesn't run her weight up to the unhealthy level it was 
prior to her illness. Elizabeth has battled poundage her entire adult life -- 
let's give her a rest on this one.) 
Taylor is expected to make no "official" public appearances until the fall when 
she emerges for a round of AIDS fund-raisers. There are also plans for a 
dazzling new perfume launch, late this year or early in 1991. It is to be 
entirely different from her spectacularly successful Passion, the most 
profitable celebrity fragrance ever. Although Taylor's formidable press rep 
Chen Sam says nothing "definite" has happened in this area, I have it on good 
authority that Miz Liz's new scent is to be called "White Diamonds." 
TYNE DALY, fresh (if that is the word) from her long, Tony-winning stage run 
with "Gypsy," returns to the small screen medium that made her a household name 
in "Cagney and Lacey." Tyne will go before the cameras Sept. 5 for an ABC-TV 
movie "The Last To Go," about a couple who are divorcing after 25 years of 
marriage. This is probably not the most pleasant acting chore Tyne has ever 
faced, as her own 20-year-plus marriage to actor Georg Stanford Brown just 
collapsed. 
On the other hand, with the subject so close to the bone, it may provide Tyne 
with a lot of fine scenery chewing and even a catharsis of sorts. 
CAROL KANE can claim the distinction of appearing in the first Miramax movie to 
be released this summer that hasn't received an "X" rating. It's "The Lemon 
Sisters," also starring Diane Keaton, which opens at the end of the month. The 
big guys at Miramax are so impressed with Kane, they plan to build her up and 
develop scripts and projects for her a la Disney's top lady, Bette Midler. 
