PREVIEW; 
EVIL WITCH ADDS MAGIC TO PRODUCTION OF 'PRINCESS AND THE PEA' 
In the fairy tale "The Princess and the Pea," the heroine has it plenty tough. 
A good night's sleep is hard to come by when you are disturbed by a pea beneath 
20 mattresses. 
But in the musical comedy playing for children at the Glendale Centre Theatre, 
the princess has it even tougher. Not only is she as sensitive as ever, she 
also has an evil witch turning her suitors into animals. 
The addition of Wicked Wilhelmina to the story enables producer-director Tim 
Dietlein and his 15-member cast to delight children with characters in animal 
costumes. The witch also serves as another obstacle on the rocky path of true 
love between princess and prince. 
The show, which is staged at Saturday matinees only, opened in April and will 
continue through Oct. 13. Dietlein said the production has been drawing 
enthusiastic crowds of 300 to 350 to the 430-seat theater. 
"Because we're theater-in-the-round, the audience feels very involved," he 
said. "The kids love it, and we've put in some jokes that adults can 
appreciate." 
Dietlein's grandparents founded Glendale Centre Theatre 45 years ago. In 
addition to producing and directing "The Princess and the Pea," he plays one of 
the princess' suitors. 
"I've been acting since I could walk," he said. 
His wife, Marsha, plays the princess. 
Meghan Jones, who portrays the witch, said children between 6 and 10 seem to 
enjoy the show most. 
"But we get everything from babies to grandfathers," she said. 
The show, with about 10 songs and a variety of richly made costumes, lasts an 
hour and 20 minutes and has an intermission. The original fairy tale has been 
tinkered with, but the princess remains as fussy as ever. 
"When the suitors come," Jones said, "she doesn't like any of them. One's too 
aggressive, one's too egotistical, one's just too wimpy." 
Of course, the central fairy tale plot point remains in the play; at a crucial 
juncture the princess must sleep on top of 20 mattresses as a test of her 
sensitivity and thus her royal lineage. 
Dietlein said young audiences love the show for the same reason that he prefers 
producing children's theater to adult plays. 
"You can be more colorful and more broad," he said. "It's just more magical." 
MIKE WYMA 
