YOUTH ORCHESTRA BRINGS GLASNOST TO THE BOWL; 
MUSIC: THE AMERICAN SOVIET YOUTH ORCHESTRA FORGES COMMUNITY FROM A UNIVERSAL 
LANGUAGE. ITS U.S. TOUR BEGINS TONIGHT. 
A firsthand look at life on the international concert circuit for two USC music 
students is teaching them a lot about music -- as well as culture and politics. 
As members of the American Soviet Youth Orchestra, the touring players have had 
to cope with everything from the Lithuanian quest for independence to varying 
conducting styles and last-minute program changes. 
Tonight's Hollywood Bowl program, for instance, has undergone a change in 
conductors, with attendant repertory substitution. "We just try to make the 
best of it," said 24-year-old Sarah Coade of San Diego. 
She and Owen Lee, 21, of Santa Monica, both double bass players, are among 50 
Americans who have teamed up with 50 students of the Moscow State Conservatory 
for the two-month program, which was created in 1988. This year's itinerary 
includes a 29-concert tour through the Soviet Union, Europe and this country. 
The European leg has been completed, and the U.S. tour kicks off with Hollywood 
Bowl concerts tonight and Sunday. 
When the orchestra toured the Soviet Union just about a week after Lithuania 
launched its bid for independence, it proved an eye-opener, Coade said. 
Visiting the Lithuanian city of Kaliningrad, closed to foreigners because of 
its importance as a Soviet naval base, the orchestra was led by a Soviet 
conductor in Soviet repertory. The concertgoers literally sat on their hands to 
keep from applauding. "The next night, though, with Catherine Comet (one of the 
orchestra's two resident conductors, who heads the Grand Rapids Symphony and 
the American Symphony) and no Soviet pieces, the applause was deafening." 
The Americans got a taste of Soviet living standards immediately upon their 
arrival in Moscow in July. The Soviets were segregated from their colleagues 
because citizens are banned from staying in tourist hotels. "We were all 
feeling frustrated," Coade said last week by phone from Hamburg, W. Germany. 
"We only began to feel like one orchestra when we got to Europe." 
But eventually, Coade said, friendships were forged. When they learned that the 
Soviets do not have access to high-quality materials to make and repair 
instruments, the Americans gave them various pieces of equipment. And Coade is 
planning to enlist a Glendale shop in a mass re-hairing of Soviet string 
players' bows during their L.A. stay. 
Each American is paired with a Soviet roommate, resulting in some amusing 
attempts to communicate in French, German and even Spanish. But, Lee said, 
"it's a pretty open, natural environment. Last time there were some offhand 
anti-Semitic comments, and remarks against homosexuals. That hasn't happened 
this time." 
The Americans' ensemble experience has come in handy in dealing with the 
orchestra's changes in conductors. Principal conductor is Leonard Slatkin, 
music director of the St. Louis Symphony. Resident conductors are Comet and 
Leonid Nikolayev, director of the Moscow Conservatory Symphony. 
Deborah McKeon, the youth orchestra's general manager, speaking from Amsterdam, 
said that original co-principal conductor Alexander Lazarev of the Bolshoi 
Theatre Orchestra did not perform with the youth orchestra because he was 
touring with the Bolshoi Opera. "So Leonard Slatkin is doing the (Bowl) 
concerts," McKeon said. Commenting on the repertory changes, Slatkin said, "I 
switched the program to things the orchestra knows. The players arrive tonight 
(Tuesday) in L.A. from Amsterdam and will have only one day to recover from jet 
lag." 
Despite conductor and program vicissitudes, the rigors of traveling and the 
interpersonal conflicts inevitable in any large group, Lee said that this 
year's playing level is superior to the 1988 ensemble. And, said Coade, "the 
best thing about being in this orchestra is the relationship between the 
Americans and the Soviets. Everyone is really working as hard as they can to 
communicate, and to make this work. We don't speak the same native tongue, but 
we do speak music together." 
