COMMENTARY; 
ACCEPTANCE OF HOMOSEXUALS AS 'MINORITIES' IS COMMON -- BUT WRONG 
The proliferation of "gay pride" days across the country -- replete with 
parades, festivals and smiling public officials -- confirms the increasing 
power and political sophistication of a movement that had, until quite 
recently, "dared not speak its name." 
Here in Orange County, homosexual political activism is on an upswing. 
After the Board of Supervisors voted down an unnecessary AIDS discrimination 
ordinance, which would have afforded special status to a behavior-based group, 
homosexuals, militant board members of the Gay and Lesbian Community Services 
Center of Orange County, which receives your tax dollars to encourage and 
support homosexuality, participated in a "die in" to accuse the supervisors of 
being responsible for deaths of AIDS victims. 
The incriminating evidence is that the Board of Supervisors would not grant 
legitimacy to sodomy. Many of these same individuals have disrupted local town 
hall meetings, instigated what KCBS reported as a "near riot" at Santa Ana City 
Council meetings and participated in boisterous pickets, usually shouting down 
an opposing view. 
What has caused such a transformation in public acceptance? Traditional 
liberals, like Thomas Jefferson, regarded homosexual acts as a form of 
"buggery," not unlike bestiality (but worse than bestiality because he thought 
it was more "injurious" to society); modern-day liberals arrange mayoral 
proclamations, set aside public parks and politically bless acts historically 
regarded as a self-destructive perversion. Why? 
The secret lies in an event "gay pride" days celebrate: the Stonewall Riot in 
Greenwich Village in June, 1969. When homosexuals resisted a police raid on the 
Stonewall Bar with rocks and epithets, it sparked more than a short-lived riot 
in the Village. The demonstration became a movement. The "movement" came from a 
powerful political locomotive: the language of civil rights. 
By positioning themselves as a minority, homosexuals skillfully used the 
rhetoric of civil rights ("discrimination") and the widespread public 
legitimacy of the civil rights movement to advance their political agenda. 
As a reverend who endeavored to advance the civil rights movement in 
conservative areas of North Dakota and Delaware in different Presbyterian 
churches that I served, I have found it increasingly curious that many people 
uncritically, indeed reflexively, accept this comparison of homosexuals to 
minorities. To equate a status fixed by genetics (sex, race) or historical 
accident (national origin) with a behavior-based status (a group linked by a 
common preference, say, to commit sodomy) requires serious analysis. 
The impact of homosexual behavior on contemporary culture is increasingly 
clear. This byproduct of the sexual revolution has spawned enormous public 
health problems. The median male homosexual, the Centers of Disease Control 
discovered in the early days of AIDS, has had more than 500 sex partners. A 
small slice of the population (perhaps as small as 1.4%, based on recent 
statistical profiles from major cities and surveys by the National Institute of 
Mental Health) is responsible for the majority of syphilis cases in the 
country. Anal sodomy has been the principal means of transmission of the most 
enormous pandemic this country has ever seen, and one which the Wall Street 
Journal estimates will cost $60 billion next year alone. 
Homosexual practices are so unwholesome that they generate staggeringly 
disproportionate cases of hepatitis A, hepatitis B, venereal disease, parasite 
infections and other exotic ailments to such an alarming degree that one doctor 
in the New York Times Magazine has called the average homosexual "a tropical 
island of exotic diseases." 
The only answer is the mesmerizing impact of a misplaced analogy. The person 
who finds sexual expression in sodomy (or, for that matter, in incest, 
adultery, bestiality or sadomasochism) can define himself as a member of a 
particular "minority" who shares that behavior. But it makes no sense for him 
to claim the same social protections of those who are born black, female or in 
a foreign country. 
A popular celebration of one of the most dangerous behaviors in modern life is 
hardly a constitutional imperative or sound public policy. Nor is it 
compassionate to those who (despite the growing number of the groups like 
Homosexuals Anonymous and the treatment success of both traditional 
psychiatrists and religious groups) continue to do damage to themselves or 
others by leading unnatural and destructive life styles. 
Could it be that the Old and New Testaments, Plato in his "Laws," the great 
majority of major religious tradition of the world and Thomas Jefferson had it 
right -- and modern political trends have it wrong? 
