KITCHEN CABINET: CHOOSING APPLIANCES TO MANAGE THE TRASH 
I miss my trash compactor. 
Yet, had it not been built into the house we moved from, this electric 
appliance would never have made it on my wish list. 
It's been almost eight months since this family of four have tried living 
without the trash machine. (My little boy used to call it the "monster 
stamper.") The test, which seemed more like a sacrifice, is over. The need to 
get a new one has to be fulfilled, to condense each week's peaking heap of 
trash. 
In trash compactor days, life was easier when the garbage handling task was 
done about just once a week, or more when people came over. I don't miss the 
"monster" for the emptying chore when the bag seemed to weigh tons, but the 
majority of the time, that heavy load was handled by the stronger member of the 
family. Miscellaneous trash (which doesn't take long to pile up in most 
households these days) didn't clutter kitchen countertops or the rest of the 
house. Junk mail, dirty wrappers and paper towels, bulky cans, milk cartons and 
bottles -- all got dumped and crushed, day in and day out. There was no arguing 
about having to empty the trash bin under the sink as soon as it was full, 
which now averages at least once a day. 
"You're crazy to put one in, now that people are ripping them out in their 
kitchen remodeling," a decorator friend advised after we moved in to this other 
house, "the smells can get prohibitive." 
Sanitary Habits 
But for a family of four that averages 13 gallons of trash a week, the electric 
compactor is still the most sensible and ecologically beneficial way to go, 
according to kitchen consultants. "The garbage men will love you," one of them 
commented. The great kill-joy -- unpleasant odors, everyone agreed -- can be 
easily avoided if simple sanitation habits are formed. 
"If garbage (or wet trash that belongs in the disposer) happens to be thrown 
into the compactor, it will rot in seven or eight days and naturally smell," 
said Stewart Fair, kitchen design consultant and owner of Kitchens by Stewart 
in Pasadena. "It usually takes a family of two two weeks to fill the compactor 
bin, so they have to be careful not to throw garbage in it. Otherwise the 
basket needs to be taken out and cleaned thoroughly." 
Choosing a trash compactor model is not a difficult matter, as most trash 
compactors work in the same uncomplicated manner, offering similar advantages. 
The toe pedal, for instance, is now offered by newer designs. This helps open 
the drawer when hands are full. Another is a deodorizer compartment for odor 
control; also now, the new drawers slide out for cleaning accessibility. Space 
availability is a popular determining factor; new models have slimmed down yet 
offer great force. Safety is another consideration. Locks are common. "The lock 
prevents a kid from putting a cat or dog inside that bin to see what happens," 
one salesman said. 
No Cabinet Space 
For those who don't have the luxury of extra cabinet space in the kitchen, the 
compact or narrower designs, built in or free-standing, would be a good choice. 
One of them is the Broan Trash Compactor, Model 1050, a 12-inch wide unit that 
is just as powerful, if not more powerful, than some larger units. This trimmed 
model features a patented "double scissors" ram and motor design, which 
transmits a compacting force of 5,000 pounds. 
I like its convenient bag storage with a flip-down door, located just below the 
top surface. An optional solid hardwood cutting board may be ordered for 
free-standing units. Another design element in the Broan model that eliminates 
needless lifting of the bag caddy and full trash bag is the way the door swings 
away to release the entire drawer. 
The Broan compactor comes with interchangeable door panels with two reversible 
panels (in white) that enable you to select any of four colors: almond, 
harvest, black and coffee. 
The built-in 15-inch KitchenAid Trash Compactor is powered by a one-third 
horsepower motor that delivers 2,300 pounds of force to crush trash in 
approximately 27 seconds. To minimize odors, KitchenAid provides an activated 
charcoal air filter and odor control fan with on-and-off switch. The unit is 
also designed with a toe bar opener that allows the drawer to glide smoothly, 
plus an interchangeable front panel pack in almond, white, black and harvest 
wheat. 
A 3,000-pound compacting force to crush trash in 35 seconds maximum is achieved 
by KitchenAid's top of the line built-in or free-standing 18-inch model. An 
upper litter bin lets you load small items while the compactor is operating. 
The trash drawer is larger and the unit includes a storage bag compartment. 
Another compact compactor comes from Thermador/Waste King in a 12-inch built-in 
or free standing model. Thermador is the only manufacturer that has a stainless 
steel line. Their compactor has a ram that's designed to exert approximately 
3,000 pounds of pressure. The unit is also equipped with a custom-controlled 
deodorizer. 
One of the pioneers in the trash compacting field is Whirlpool. One of its 
newer models has a quiet pack sound conditioning feature. The units exert 2,300 
pounds of ram force to compact trash to about 1/4 of its original volume. Other 
features include easy drawer glide by touch-toe pedal, reusable bag caddy, 
automatic anti-jam and solid air freshener compartment. The interchangeable 
panels come in black and almond, or black and white. 
The GE Monogram Compactor is not just narrow (12 inches), but offers design 
flexibility for custom kitchens. In addition to black or white reversible 
control panel, the compactor drawer also accepts custom paneling to blend with 
whatever cabinets you have. Like other models, the Monogram offers safety 
key-locking and door latch features, bag storage area and air freshener cavity. 
 The trash compactors are available at A-1 Appliances, Long Beach, Snyder 
Diamond and most appliance dealers and kitchen cabinet shops in Southern 
California. Depending on size, compactors range in price from about $289 to 
$529. 
