ZIA'S SON BLAMES BHUTTO IN HIS FATHER'S DEATH; 
PAKISTAN: IJAZ UL-HAQ CALLS FOR NEW INVESTIGATION INTO AIR CRASH TWO YEARS AGO 
THAT ALSO COST U.S. ENVOY HIS LIFE. 
Gen. Zia ul-Haq's oldest son today blamed former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto 
and her government for his father's death in a mysterious plane crash two years 
ago. 
At a memorial ceremony marking the anniversary, Ijaz ul-Haq called for a new 
investigation into the Aug. 17, 1988, crash that killed Zia, many of Pakistan's 
top military generals and U.S. Ambassador Arnold L. Raphel. 
An inquiry ruled the crash was sabotage, but a criminal investigation was never 
conducted. 
Ijaz spoke at a news conference as tens of thousands of Pakistanis, reeling 
from 20 turbulent months of democracy, streamed to the grave of the fallen 
dictator to pay tribute. 
Mourners traveled by foot, cart and bus to the giant Faisal Mosque to offer 
prayers. 
"The previous government through criminal negligence covered up any evidence," 
charged Ijaz, who is launching his own political career. "The former prime 
minister and her ministers actually ridiculed the tragedy, provided cover to 
the criminals and shut the door on any investigation." 
He said Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party was responsibile for the crash and 
demanded that President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, head of the military-backed 
caretaker government that replaced Bhutto on Aug. 6, and the army chief of 
staff open a new investigation. 
Bhutto, who in turn blames Zia for her father's execution in 1979, could not be 
immediately reached for comment. 
Bhutto's government was dismissed after being accused of corruption, nepotism 
and ineptitude. Bhutto, whose father was overthrown by Zia in 1977, claims a 
similar coup was staged against her but camouflaged by the constitution. 
Her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was hanged in 1979 on charges of conspiring to 
murder a political enemy who was never killed. 
While in power Bhutto proclaimed her father a martyr for democracy. Ijaz says 
his father was a martyr for Islam. 
Earlier, Ijaz vowed to carry on his father's pan-Islamic dream. 
"The dream is being fulfilled -- Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Turkey," Ijaz 
told an estimated 100,000 people who crowded onto the sprawling grounds of the 
Faisal Mosque and climbed its sloping roof and towering spires for the brief, 
low-key ceremony. 
"A new movement, a new unity will start from here," he said. "I swear by the 
grave of Zia ul-Haq. I will be the first to sacrifice my life." 
Ijaz led a huge procession to the mosque from the neighboring city of 
Rawalpindi, the headquarters of the army that has ruled Pakistan for more than 
half of its 43-year history. 
