WASHINGTON; 
2 MEASURES PROVIDE AMMUNITION IN U.S. CAMPAIGN AGAINST ILLITERACY 
It's time to go back to school. 
The latest report by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee says 23 
million Americans are illiterate. Another 45 million adults read with only 
minimal comprehension. Jonathan Kozol, author of "Illiterate America," 
estimates that the United States ranks 49th among the 158 nations in the United 
Nations in literacy level. And it's getting worse: 
* New York Telephone Co. had to give an entry-level exam to 60,000 people to 
hire just 3,000 because 84% failed the test. 
* Chemical Bank in New York interviews 40 applicants to find one who can be 
trained successfully as a teller. 
* Chrysler Corp. had to incorporate graphics on its assembly line because so 
many workers could not read the words bad hood fit on the button they were 
supposed to push when they detected an ill-fitting body part. 
"If you can't read, write and do basic math, you just cannot be a truly 
productive American. It's just that simple," said Rep. Tom Sawyer (D-Ohio), who 
is the primary sponsor of the "literacy for all Americans act." 
Sawyer made the statement standing behind a low wall of books representing the 
465,000 pages of technical data that an automobile mechanic must be able to 
read to diagnose and repair cars. "This wall between good people and good jobs 
must come down," Sawyer said. 
A worker who lacks basic skills to keep up with change in the increasingly 
complex work environment -- who can't read basic instruction manuals or safety 
instructions -- drops farther and farther behind. And low-level opportunities 
are disappearing. 
"American jobs are placing greater demands on employees," said the Senate Labor 
Committee report. "The average American worker today must have skills at the 
ninth-grade through the 12th-grade levels, not the fourth-grade level typical 
after World War II. And the standards keep rising. The growth occupations have 
increasingly shifted to the service and retail sectors, which require 
high-level problem solving, communication, reading, writing and math skills." 
Without a federal initiative on literacy, these workers will be more vulnerable 
to a shift or advance in the marketplace, be confined to dead-end jobs or 
always be in danger of dislocation. 
President Bush and the nation's governors have embraced a new national policy 
calling for every American to be literate by the year 2000. To that end, two 
major literacy bills are on the verge of final congressional approval this 
fall. 
Sawyer's bill is part of the omnibus "equity and excellence in education act" 
(H.R. 5115) sponsored by Rep. Augustus F. Hawkins (D-Los Angeles). The House 
approved it overwhelmingly. 
Sen. Paul Simon (D-Ill.) sponsored the Senate counterpart, the National 
Literacy Act of 1990 (S. 1310), which passed unanimously. The bills' 
differences will be ironed out in a conference committee this fall. 
The main federal program to fight illiteracy today is the Adult Education Act, 
which is funded at $160 million, less than 1% of the Department of Education's 
budget. Sawyer's bill calls for an additional $250 million, Simon's for an 
additional $230 million. 
The purpose of both bills is to provide federal leadership and focus for an 
issue dominated by fragmented state and local efforts. It would create the 
federal infrastructure to coordinate and strengthen efforts at all levels. And 
it would provide incentives for the private sector to become more involved. 
The bills would create a national center for literacy to write national 
educational goals, develop better teaching methods and tools and train 
teachers. 
But while Simon's bill focuses more on the unemployed person who can't read, 
Sawyer's bill concentrates on the functionally illiterate employed worker. His 
bill would establish a National Workplace Literacy Assistance Collaborative to 
help small and medium-sized businesses and labor organizations implement 
special programs through a system of grants. 
"It's tremendously important to upgrade the skills of today's work force," said 
Harold W. McGraw, president of the Business Council for Effective Literacy, 
"not only in terms of our own profitability and ability to compete 
internationally, but also in terms of giving workers new opportunities. There 
are less and less low-level jobs out there today." 
Bill Would Let U.S. Firms Recruit Aliens 
New employment-based immigration laws could open doors to the U.S. job market 
for foreign recruits while providing money to educate and retrain American 
workers. 
Jobs are going begging in the current economy, said Rep. Bruce A. Morrison 
(D-Conn.), primary sponsor of the "family unity and employment opportunity 
immigration act" (H.R. 4300). 
Instead of the quota system used under current law, Morrison proposes awarding 
visas to people overseas with relatives already in the United States. This 
system would allow employers to recruit workers from abroad. 
Morrison proposes a head tax, of sorts. After attempting to find workers in 
this country, companies would be allowed to recruit immigrants -- for a fee. 
Companies with 200 or more employees would pay $1,000 per worker; companies 
with 50 to 200 employees would pay $500. There would be no fee for companies 
with fewer than 50 employees or for nonprofit organizations. 
The money would go to the American Workers' Educational Trust Fund, which the 
secretary of Labor could use to provide education grants to states. 
"By balancing the benefits to employers who recruit immigrants to fill jobs 
with raising revenues to educate and train American workers for the jobs of the 
future, we will have built a system of employer-based immigration where 
everybody wins -- the immigrant, the employer and the American worker," 
Morrison said. 
The bill, which has passed the House Judiciary Committee, is expected to come 
to the floor for a vote when Congress returns from summer recess. The Bush 
Administration favors similar, although narrower, legislation passed by the 
Senate last year. 
