RADIO DEMOGRAPHICS: WHY NO. 2 IS NO. 1; 
RATINGS: KIIS-FM MAY HAVE FINISHED RUNNER-UP TO KOST-FM IN THE ARBITRON 
RANKINGS, BUT ENDED UP FIRST WITH THE PRIZED 18- TO 34-YEAR-OLD TARGET 
AUDIENCE. 
No. 2 is actually No. 1, and No. 1 is really No. 3. Move No. 3 to No. 4, take 
No. 4 off the Top 12, and bring up No. 5 to the No. 2 spot. 
Confused? 
Those are part of the maneuvers radio executives and advertisers go through 
every three months to determine the real meaning behind the Arbitron ratings. 
When it comes down to programming and advertising revenue, it's the 
demographics that really count, and who is listening to a particular station 
becomes as significant as how many are listening. 
That's why executives at Top 40 station KIIS-FM (102.7) were celebrating when 
the latest Arbitrons were released last month. Even though KIIS ranked No. 2 
behind "soft hits" KOST-FM (103.5) in terms of total audience, it was No. 1 
with people between the ages of 18 and 34, one of the most sought-after 
demographic groups for radio stations. 
KOST-FM was No. 3 with that age group, behind KIIS and rock station KLOS-FM 
(95.5). KLOS ranked No. 5 in the main Arbitron ratings. 
Coming in at No. 4 with 18- to 34-year-olds was "dance music" station KPWR-FM 
(105.9), which was ranked No. 2 among listeners 12 years old and older. KPWR 
had been No. 1 with the 18-34 group last quarter. 
"The drop that we experienced is reflective of how much No. 1 can go back and 
forth," said Duncan Payton, KPWR's promotion director. "I think it's because 
there's so much competition for that age group." 
Lynn Anderson, president and general manager of KIIS, said that KIIS has been 
No. 1 with the 18-34 group for most of the last seven years. 
"It's a demographic that is almost impossible to reach except for radio," she 
said. "Television has a very difficult time reaching this audience. It's an 
active audience, so they're mobile." 
It's this mobility that makes them so attractive to advertisers, Anderson 
added. "Since they're moving more, they have to buy more," she said. "Whether 
they're in school or out of school, their buying needs are great." 
Carey Curelop, program director for KLOS-FM, said, "Years ago, all the stations 
wanted teens to listen to them, and all you heard were commercials about bubble 
gum and cereal. Now those teens have grown up, and no one wants a teen audience 
anymore. They want baby boomers, who need everything -- furniture, washing 
machines, cars." 
The 18-34 audience is on the low end of the 25-54 age group that advertisers 
feel is the most important. Many radio stations feel it's easier to target the 
lower age groups because the 25-54 audience is too broad. 
Advertising dollars for the 18-34 audience could account for about 20% of a 
station's revenue, Anderson said. But more importantly, if a station is 
successful in attracting those people, chances are good that it also will 
attract listeners on either side of that age spectrum. The combined audience 
could increase that revenue to 60%, she said. 
"18-34 is really the core demographic for everything else," Anderson said. 
Because several stations are competing for the key 18-34 audience, the 
individual ratings for the stations have declined, some station officials said. 
That has enabled "soft-hits" KOST-FM to top the overall local Arbitron ratings 
for the last two quarters, they said. 
"We've taken each other down," said Jeff Wyatt, vice president of programming 
for KPWR. "Because of that, KOST-FM has popped to the top of the Arbitrons. 
They play yesterday's hits, but the station has profited because everyone else 
is engaged in the battle of the contemporary hits." 
Howard Neal, general manager of KOST-FM, said that his station mainly targets 
listeners of 25 years old or older. 
Other stations use various strategies to get at the key demographic. 
"We find it's really important to find out what's happening in the streets and 
in the clubs," Wyatt said. "Our personalities are very concerned about their 
lifestyle. We particularly are interested in what female tastes are, and we 
target our approach to what 18-34 females find interesting. That can range from 
the abortion issue to who's on Mr. Blackwell's worst-dressed list." 
KIIS' Anderson said that her station does a lot of research into the wants and 
needs of 18- to 34-year-olds. "We really listen to our audience, and we make 
sure everything that comes out of our station is lifestyle-driven," she said. 
"We have high-profile promotions that have to fit their lifestyles. We give 
away Porsches or vacations to Puerto Vallarta. We have remote broadcasts from 
the site of the Grammys, or the hottest club." 
But according to Bill Summers, president and general manager of KLOS, it all 
comes down to the basics: the music. 
"We've always been dominant in the male demographic between 18-34, and I'm sure 
the music is a key," Summers said. "It's also the personalities like (morning 
drivetime deejays) Mark and Brian. The baby boomers grew up with us and they 
really enjoy us. We're always in the top three when it comes to that, and the 
difference between the top three is not that great." 
Portrait of L.A. Radio 
Age demographic profile: 
23%: 55+ 
32%: 35-54 
36%: 18-34 
9%: 12-17 
Top five radio stations 18-34 age group: 
1. KIIS-FM (102.7) 
2. KLOS-FM (95.5) 
3. KOST-FM (103.5) 
4. KPWR-FM (105.9) 
5. KROQ-FM (106.7) 
Top five radio stations 12 and older: 
1. KOST-FM (103.5) 
2. KIIS-FM (102.7) 
3. KPWR-FM (105.9) 
4. KABC-AM (790) 
5. KLOS-FM (95.5) 
Source: Arbtron 
