NORWAY'S LAPPS STRUGGLE WITH REINDEER BOOM; 
NATURE: THE HERDS ARE THREATENING THE LOCAL ECOLOGY BY EATING TOO MUCH MOSS AND 
OTHER VEGETATION. ONE POSSIBILITY IS A TAX ON THOSE HAVING MORE THAN NEEDED TO 
SUPPORT A FAMILY. 
Norway's Lapps, struggling to maintain their ancient Arctic traditions of 
fishing and reindeer herding, have an unexpected problem -- a reindeer 
population boom. 
"We have too many reindeer," said Kjell Saether, mayor of Karasjok, a town set 
among amid stunted pine and birch trees where temperatures can plunge to 60 
degrees below zero in the permanent winter darkness. 
The Norwegian Lapps, the biggest grouping of a semi-nomadic people who also 
live in Finland, the Soviet Union and Sweden, have around 200,000 reindeer. The 
herds are threatening the local ecology by eating too much moss and other 
vegetation. 
"Maybe there have never been so many. The numbers are too high for nature to 
support," Saether said. "The authorities say there should be around 160,000." 
The reindeer population explosion, partly due to Lapps building up herds in the 
hope of higher prices, is the opposite of problems faced by many others in the 
north of Norway, where fish stocks have plunged and many industries have 
collapsed. 
The Lapps, who speak a language related to Finnish and have lived in the barren 
Arctic for at least 2,000 years, want to avoid a major kill that might further 
depress reindeer prices. 
One possibility is a tax on having more reindeer than needed to support a 
family -- about 400 to 500 animals. 
"Some people herding reindeer have very many reindeer. We've been speaking 
about how to get more equal numbers," said Per Edvard Klemetsen, administrator 
of the Lapps' 39-member Parliament. 
Despite reindeer overpopulation, rivalries among Lapps mean that hundreds of 
reindeer get stolen -- sometimes vanishing over the nearby Finnish border in a 
blizzard in the winter dark. 
Saether said there were reports that 250 stolen reindeer had been recently 
found dead with their ears cut off. 
Reindeer ownership is shown by marks on the ears rather than by brands on the 
body, and it can get confused when herds meet. Slicing off ears is an easy way 
of concealing ownership. 
The Lapps, small, dark-skinned people who prefer to be known as Samis, are also 
trying to expand markets for reindeer. "We've not been clever at marketing," 
Saether said. 
A reindeer costs between $185 and $230. Reindeer meat is a common dish in 
Scandinavia, and dried heart is a Lapp specialty. Hides are sold as rugs or 
blankets, horns are carved into souvenirs such as knife handles. 
Japan buys large amounts of reindeer horn and grinds it into powder. In Japan a 
small amount under the tongue is believed to be an aphrodisiac. 
"I've never tried it," said Saether, wearing a traditional embroidered blue, 
red and gold Sami tunic. 
Even though only 5% to 10% of Lapps are directly involved in traditional 
reindeer herding, often camping out in tents made of hides, the Lapps are 
trying to expand their other activities, such as tourism, farming and fishing. 
In Karasjok, the center of the Lapp culture in Norway, a $6 million center for 
visitors is due to open this summer, with a hotel and stores for local foods 
and handicrafts. About 120,000 people visit Karasjok every year. 
Most Lapps have forsaken traditional tents for the wooden houses typical of 
Norwegians in northern Norway while herdsmen have given up sleds for 
snowmobiles. Most wear jeans and sweaters instead of traditional dress. 
The gradual opening of the Soviet border, a boundary that the Lapps never 
recognized, also means that the Lapps can visit their cousins in the Soviet 
Union -- and perhaps find new markets. Norway's Lapps produce a surplus of farm 
goods. 
The Lapps also want to study pollution from the Soviet Union, especially two 
nickel factories -- which might be more to blame than the reindeer for 
stripping vegetation in the fragile Arctic environment. 
Saether said the Lapps' reindeer largely escaped the effects of the Chernobyl 
nuclear disaster in the Soviet Union in 1986, which sent a cloud of radiation 
farther south over Scandinavia. 
The Lapps say they feel more accepted in Norway after their own Parliament 
opened last year. 
Lapps were not allowed to speak their own language in school until 1950 and did 
not have the right to own land in northern Norway until 1965. Generations of 
missionaries tried, sometimes with violence, to convert them to Christianity. 
Like many in northern Norway, the Lapps receive subsidies. Klemetsen said these 
totalled $5.1 million this year. Lapps reckon that they could probably get by 
without it. 
Their hardiness is legendary. One local joke says that the temperature in 
Karasjok one winter day plunged close to record lows. 
A journalist from Oslo telephoned a Sami woman in Karasjok and asked how cold 
it was. 
"It's 14 degrees below zero," she replied. 
"Only 14? I'd heard it was more than 50 below." 
"Oh well, yes, but that's outdoors." 
