RISING INTEREST RATES THREATEN HOME SALES; 
ECONOMY: EMBARGO ON IRAQI OIL WILL LIKELY BOOST PRICES ON MOST GOODS, INCLUDING 
MORTGAGE RATES. 
Sluggish home sales that had picked up lately as mortgage rates fell are under 
a new threat from rising interest rates resulting from the Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait, analysts said today. 
"The single factor that affects housing nationally is mortgage financing," said 
John A. Tuccillo, chief economist with the National Assn. of Realtors. 
Tuccillo and other economists said today that a worldwide embargo on oil from 
Iraq and occupied Kuwait will result in price increases for most goods, 
including a likely rise in mortgage rates of 0.25 to 0.50 percentage points in 
the near term. 
"If they go up 0.50 now and the thing is resolved in a few weeks, they will go 
down 0.50 and will continue going down," Tuccillo contended. "If the crisis 
lingers on . . . mortgage rates are going to go up and they'll stay up and 
housing's going to be in pretty bad shape." 
Robert Van Order, chief economist with the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or 
Freddie Mac, said a 0.25-percentage-point increase in rates would result in an 
additional mortgage payment of $25 a month on a $100,000 house. 
According to weekly surveys by Freddie Mac, the average cost of a fixed-rate, 
30-year mortgage fell from its 1990 peak of 10.67% in May to 9.84% last Friday. 
The rates do not include add-on fees known as points. 
Realtors President Norman D. Flynn said that when mortgage rates began falling 
in May, buyers resumed house hunting, particularly in areas with relatively 
affordable prices. 
As a result, the Commerce Department reported gains in new home sales during 
May and June after five consecutive monthly declines. 
And the Realtors said sales of existing homes, which represent about 80% of the 
housing market, posted a 1.2% increase in June. It was their first advance in 
seven months. 
But the decline in existing home sales in April and May resulted in a 0.5% drop 
in overall resales during the second quarter compared to the same period of 
1989, the Realtors said today. 
According to their most recent survey, second-quarter resales totaled a 
seasonally adjusted annual rate of 3.68 million units, compared to 3.70 million 
units during the April-June period of last year. Sales dropped 2.7% from the 
first quarter to the second. 
By region, sales were off 14.5% to 650,000 units at an annual rate in the 
Northeast and 3.1% to 620,000 units in the West. Sales gained 4.4% to 1.41 
million units in the South and 4.2% to 990,000 units in the Midwest. 
The Realtors said that in addition to rising mortgage rates, they were 
concerned over the effect of the government's sale of a large volume of 
properties in the Southwest that had been acquired from failed savings and 
loans. 
In their survey, the Realtors found the U.S. median price was $96,200, a 3.4% 
increase over the second quarter of 1990. The median price means half of the 
homes cost more, half less. 
