U.S. TO CONSIDER MORE AID FOR COLOMBIA BATTLE; 
BOGOTA OFFICIAL ASKS $19 MILLION FOR EQUIPMENT TO PROTECT JUDGES FROM ATTACK BY 
DRUG BARONS 
Responding to an urgent appeal from Colombia's embattled justice minister, Bush 
Administration officials agreed Tuesday to consider increasing U.S. aid for 
that South American country's escalating war on the drug cartels, only days 
after a $65-million package of military assistance was offered. 
Administration officials held new talks as Justice Minister Monica de Greiff, 
seemingly unruffled by the drug barons' threats to kill her and her 3-year-old 
son, asked for an additional $19 million to provide metal detectors, armored 
cars and other security equipment to protect judges from terrorist attacks. 
"The law is under siege in Colombia, and we must protect it every way we can," 
De Greiff told a crowded news conference, shielded by extraordinary security, 
in which she broke her public silence during a visit to Washington. 
Bush, vacationing in Maine, said his Administration wants to "cooperate with 
Colombia to the best of our ability." He said details of U.S. aid to Colombia 
are "being worked out." 
De Greiff, responding to persistent rumors that she is afraid to go back to 
Colombia and would seek refuge in the United States, said she has no intention 
of resigning and will return to Bogota next week after completing her talks 
with Justice and State Department officials. 
"I am determined that the integrity of our justice system survive this crisis, 
and I hope to play my full part in ensuring this," the 32-year-old Cabinet 
member said. "As a country and as individuals, we are under enormous pressure. 
Yet we have a job to do, and much rests on our success. 
"I never considered resigning," she added. "The threats are there . . . but I 
am satisfied with my protection right now." 
Drug Enforcement Administration chief John C. Lawn turned over his bulletproof 
limousine to De Greiff for her use while in the United States, a Justice 
Department source said. She is also being protected by a special team of deputy 
U.S. marshals. 
According to Justice Department officials, De Greiff, who seemed relaxed and 
confident in her televised news conference Tuesday, was far more nervous during 
private meetings Monday. 
De Greiff said she would return to Bogota next Wednesday, making her stay 
extraordinarily long for an official visit. Her travel schedule means that she 
will be protected by U.S. security until after Bush makes his long-awaited drug 
policy speech Tuesday. 
Asked why the visit was so long, De Greiff said: "I presented a program today. 
(U.S. officials) have to study it. . . . I don't think one week is too much 
time. I think things are going very well right now." 
Additional $19 Million 
De Greiff said the $19 million she had requested to protect judges and other 
Colombian officials was in addition to the $65 million that Bush promised 
Friday and to the $5 million that Congress appropriated last year. 
U.S. and Colombian officials are still discussing the elements of the 
$65-million military aid package, but the first deliveries should begin this 
week, according to Pentagon spokesman Pete Williams. 
Williams said the equipment to be sent to Colombia includes aircraft, various 
types of weapons and ammunition, protective equipment, maintenance and 
ground-transport equipment, medical supplies, communications gear, spare parts 
and support equipment. 
"Officials of both governments are now analyzing those lists to determine what 
is available, what is suitable, how much it will cost and any impact on U.S. 
(military) readiness by providing equipment," he told a Pentagon briefing. 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, in a television interview early Tuesday, ruled 
out any combat role for U.S. troops who will accompany the equipment to 
Colombia. 
"The Colombians have not requested any American personnel for any combat 
mission," Cheney said. "We aren't sending any American personnel for any kind 
of a combat mission. These are people that will provide technical assistance 
and training, and that's all." 
De Greiff also ruled out any request for U.S. troops. "We have our own armed 
forces," she said, "and they are doing their job." 
She also said Colombia is not interested in a negotiated peace with the 
murderous Medellin cartel. The father of three leaders of the cartel suggested 
talks Tuesday. 
"They have been asking for negotiations for a long time now," De Greiff said. 
"President (Virgilio) Barco (Vargas) has said that this is not a moment for 
negotiations, that things have to be done the way the law says right now. So I 
don't think there are going to be any." 
Meanwhile, Bush met with members of his Cabinet and other top advisers to 
review final plans for his drug policy speech. 
Although the address is likely to concentrate on domestic anti-drug programs, 
the fighting in Colombia has caused Bush and his advisers to increase the 
international component of the package, National Security Adviser Brent 
Scowcroft told reporters at a news conference in Kennebunkport. 
U.S. officials have been hoping for years that Colombia would get tough with 
its drug merchants, who are estimated to control about 80% of the cocaine 
traffic to the United States. But the sudden nature of the crackdown appears to 
have taken the Administration by surprise, requiring officials to do some 
last-minute scrambling to adjust Bush's anti-drug strategy to the new 
realities. 
"We had the strategy in place, then this Colombian thing comes up," Scowcroft 
said. Administration officials have been working to determine "how what we're 
doing now for Colombia fits into what we had planned to do," he added. 
As part of his anti-drug package, Bush had planned to propose about $300 
million in additional aid to drug-producing countries, particularly Colombia, 
Peru and Bolivia. But, Scowcroft said, that figure has already been increased 
by the amount pledged last week to Colombia, and the amount is likely to grow 
further as U.S.-Colombian negotiations continue. 
Also Tuesday, the Justice Department persuaded a Senate committee to cancel a 
scheduled public hearing on the situation in Colombia because of concern that 
it might touch on sensitive matters that could endanger lives or damage the 
government's campaign against the cartel. 
The Senate Judiciary Committee was to have heard testimony today from 
Administration officials and academic experts. 
Interested in Success 
"The concern was that once you started getting into questions at a public 
hearing, sensitive matters might be raised that could have an impact in 
Colombia," Justice Department spokesman David Runkel said. "I think it's in 
everybody's interest to see the current effort in Colombia to arrest people who 
are involved in the drug trade succeed." 
Meanwhile, Justice Department officials scaled back their estimates of when 
Eduardo Martinez Romero, an alleged money launderer for the Medellin cartel, 
would be turned over to U.S. authorities to face trial in Atlanta. 
Over the weekend, Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh had said he expected that Martinez 
would be extradited this week. But on Tuesday, Runkel said, "We hope it will be 
in the next week or two, but we just can't say for sure." 
Extradition proceedings under Barco's emergency decree are complicated, Runkel 
said, and "there may be a desire to have Colombia's Supreme Court rule" on the 
legality of the procedure before anyone is handed over. 
Times staff writers Ronald J. Ostrow, John M. Broder and Douglas Jehl, in 
Washington, contributed to this story. 
TERROR CAMPAIGN -- More bombs exploded in Medellin, home of Colombia's most 
notorious drug cartel. Page 10. 
