JUNIOR OLYMPIAN; 
GIRL, 10, HAS INCREDIBLE SPEED AND POTENTIAL TO RUN IN OLYMPICS IF SHE 
CONTINUES TO IMPROVE WITH AGE 
A pink clip in her hair, Aminah Haddad pounded down the dirt running track at 
Bell High School one recent afternoon at a speed astonishing for her age. She 
left no one in the dust only because she was practicing by herself. 
Aminah, who will not be 11 until next month, believes, as do her coaches, that 
she may be running toward a great future; the Olympics already are on her mind. 
Her best times -- 12.5 seconds in the 100 meters and 26.3 in the 200 -- indeed 
qualify her as a child phenomenon. Many high school athletes can't sprint that 
fast. 
"She has incredible natural speed," said Roger Lipkis, coach of the West Valley 
Eagles, a 250-member youth track club in the San Fernando Valley for which 
Aminah runs. 
But it may be too soon to predict that some day she will dominate her sport. 
"Sometimes it's hard to tell when they are 10 or 11 what their future is," 
Lipkis said. "But at this point (Aminah) is significantly better than most 
10-year-olds. On a local level, in the San Fernando Valley, she is far and away 
the best. On a national level there are kids who can beat her, but most of them 
are 11 years old. I've seen kids who are incredible at 8, 9 and 10 who never 
get any better. When they're 13 you start to see the long-term potential." 
Father Is a Former Runner 
Aminah, whose father is an ex-runner and whose mother used to teach physical 
education, started competing at 7. In three years she was undefeated against 
girls her age in more than 100 meets. It was not until this summer, during top 
national competition, that, to her surprise, she did not always cross the 
finish line first. 
Aminah, who, because she is deaf in one ear, must pay closer attention to the 
starter than her competitors, is also coached by her father. With stopwatch in 
hand, he watched her practice last week on the Bell field near their home. 
"She is getting stronger and bigger, and has the intensity and desire," said 
Gerald Haddad, 44, who like his wife, Chestine, is a native Philadelphian. He 
sometimes runs alongside his 4-foot-10, 87-pound daughter. 
"I can't beat him," Aminah said. 
Haddad said Aminah never tires of practicing and that at this time of the year, 
with the long, arduous track season behind her, she keeps asking him, "Dad, 
when do we start cross-country?" 
Shy around adults, Aminah does not offer long discourses on why she runs. She 
just says, "Because it's fun, and I like the competition." 
Aside from an obsession with track, Aminah is a typical smiling 10-year-old. 
She enjoys playing with her girlfriend, Arlene Ramos, and is still attached to 
her dolls. Fastidious about her appearance, she changes her outfits and hair 
style several times a day. "She likes to be little Miss Perfect," her father 
said. 
During the 1988 Olympics, Aminah sat before her TV and wrote down the marks of 
all the runners. She records her own meet performances on notebook paper 
adorned with hand-drawn hearts. She does aerobics to a Bruce Jenner tape. Carl 
Lewis and Florence Griffith-Joyner are her heroes, although she thinks that 
when she gets older she will do without the kind of flamboyant outfits 
Griffith-Joyner wears. 
'Why Is This So Easy?' 
After winning the 100 meters in the Midget Division (ages 9 and 10) of the 
Hershey National Track Championship at Hershey, Pa., last year, Aminah asked 
her father, "Why is this so easy?" 
Haddad told her, "Because you practice all the time." 
But it was also last summer, at a meet at Bell High, when Aminah lost to a 
12-year-old girl. "We put her in with older runners to give her a perspective 
on the competition," Haddad said. "She cried. She just couldn't understand." 
"I didn't feel too good," Aminah said last week, remembering that moment. 
But it prepared her for the reality of tougher national competition. Early in 
July she finished third in her age division in the 200 meters at the Track 
Athletic Congress National Youth Athletics Championship at the University of 
Texas-Arlington. That remains her biggest thrill . . . "because I had a lot of 
fun there." 
In late July, she finished fourth in the 200 and eighth in the 400 at the Track 
City Classic in Eugene, Ore. During that meet she ran 26.3 in the 200. 
(Her 12.5 in the 100 was run in June at a Junior Olympics qualifying meet at UC 
Irvine.) 
After the Oregon meet, Aminah finished fourth out of more than 5,000 finalists 
in the 200 meters at the Junior Olympics in Spokane, Wash. 
And early this month at the California State Games at Point Loma Nazarene 
College in San Diego, she finished third in the 200. 
"This season was a tremendous experience for her because she had never seen 
competition like that," her father said. "She used to think she could give kids 
a head start and still win." 
Despite her speed, Aminah has yet to acquire the proper running form. "Her 
technique is not good," Lipkis said, and her father added: "We are constantly 
working on her mechanics." 
"I don't swing my arms high enough," Aminah said. 
During the track season, from January to August, Aminah trains with the West 
Valley Eagles twice a week at UCLA, where she has been instructed by former USC 
sprint star Henry Hines, and at Canoga Park High School. She competed in a meet 
every Saturday and often on Sundays. 
"We drive 40 miles to practice and on the other days she says, 'Dad, let's go 
running,' " said Haddad, principal at the private Town and Country Elementary 
School in South Gate. "She's a competitive young lady." 
But trophies do not mean a lot to Aminah, according to her mother. "She's more 
into being part of a team," Chestine said. "When she wins, it's great for the 
moment, then she's back playing. She befriends her competitors, and they comb 
each other's hair." 
Chestine Haddad said her daughter lives up to her Muslim name of 
Aminah-Takreem-Kibibi Haddad, which means reliable trustworthy little lady. "At 
school she completes her assignments and has things in on time . . . she's very 
dependable," said the former teacher at Lynwood High School. 
In the fall, under a Los Angeles school busing program, Aminah will attend 
Oliver W. Holmes Junior High School in Northridge. 
And she will continue to dream about winning the Olympics. 
"She insists she's running in Barcelona," her mother said. 
"I don't think I'll be too young," maintains Aminah, who will be 13 in 1992. 
A more reasonable goal would be the 1996 Games. "If she continues to run well, 
she might have a shot then," Lipkis said. 
Aminah, who said she will not be too disappointed if she has to wait until '96, 
has another goal: To run the 100 in 10.1. The women's record is 10.49. 
Although the words she spoke at the Bell High field that afternoon were few, 
they left no doubt that this is a confident little girl who knows what she 
wants. 
And so she fixed her hair and took off down the track. 
