'MAGLEV' FIRST PHASE COST PUT AT $1 BILLION 
Officials of a business consortium that proposes to build an 80-m.p.h. magnetic 
levitation rail line from Los Angeles International Airport to Palmdale said 
Friday that the first phase of the line, from the airport to Santa Clarita, 
would cost "a little in excess of $1 billion." 
The estimate, from John E. Chiaverini, senior vice president of the Perini 
Corp., represented a change from the consortium's refusal earlier to discuss 
the costs of the project, the first phase of which could be completed by 1997. 
The proposed "maglev" line must first receive the approval of Caltrans, which 
is scheduled Sept. 14 to choose four of eight transportation projects proposed 
by private firms. The projects would receive gifts from the state of right of 
way, but all planning, construction and operating costs would be paid with 
private funds. 
The airport-to-Palmdale line is the only rail project among the eight proposed. 
All of the others involve highway construction. 
An outside expert had estimated this week that the rail line would cost in the 
neighborhood of $2 billion. 
Chiaverini said the consortium of Perini, the HSST Corp. and the Daniel, Mann, 
Johnson &amp; Mendenhall firm had not yet developed, in its detailed proposal 
to the state Department of Transportation, any estimate of what fares would be 
along the first phase through the West Side and the San Fernando Valley into 
the Santa Clarita Valley. 
But he said one part of the proposal suggests that some of the capital for the 
project could come from leasing or selling air space above the trains' 
guideway. It is expected that the guideway would be built mainly along the San 
Diego Freeway. 
The proposal has won the endorsement of Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley, whose 
press secretary, Bill Chandler, said Friday that the mayor is not worried that 
fares will be too high. Any private firm that hopes to make such a service pay 
for itself will have to keep fares low enough to attract large numbers of 
people, Chandler said. 
