POSTSCRIPT: BIRDS AT SPILL NEEDED STUDY, SO SHE FLEW INTO ACTION 
It had been a hectic few months, and by mid-May Marge Gibson was ready for a 
break. Besides rearing a teen-age daughter and managing the chemistry 
laboratory at Orange Coast College, Gibson, 40, had for weeks been caring for 
nearly two dozen hawks, falcons and owls wounded earlier in the year in an 
unprecedented rash of bird shootings in the county. 
The summer, she had hoped, would be less demanding. 
But then came the phone call. It was an official with the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service who wanted Gibson to work as part of a special team being 
assembled in Alaska to assess the impact of the oil spill from the Exxon tanker 
Valdez on the bald eagle population of Prince William Sound. 
Gibson, a specialist in rehabilitating birds of prey, could not resist. This 
would be a chance to study one of Nature's largest and most powerful birds in 
what many experts believe was North America's worst environmental disaster. She 
left her Villa Park home for a 2 1/2-month stint in Alaska, having contracted 
with Exxon through the federal government to head up one of two research teams. 
"It was an incredible opportunity," Gibson said by phone last week from Alaska, 
before she returned home. "It's been hard on my family, being away this long, 
but I couldn't pass it up." 
An estimated 2,500 to 3,000 bald eagles inhabit the sound and surrounding 
backcountry. Indeed, the area is believed to have one of the highest 
concentrations of the species in the world. The bald eagle, whose wingspan can 
reach 7 feet, is a solitary predator, and it can live as long as 30 years in 
the wild. 
Biologists and environmentalists feared that the March 24 spill, which involved 
240,000 barrels of thick North Slope crude oil, would endanger the species. 
Beyond the immediate concern of rescuing oil-soaked birds, officials were 
worried about how much oil the birds had ingested through fish, their primary 
prey, that had been contaminated, and also the effect on their ability to 
reproduce successfully. 
Gibson and her three-member team spent their time there searching the 
oil-stained islands and inlets for bald eagles, capturing them, cleaning them 
and assessing their health. Her team operated out of the port city of Valdez 
(the second team was based in Kodiak, about 250 miles away). The teams managed 
to capture 75 of the birds. 
Gibson said she was at once "exhilarated" by the area's beauty and saddened by 
the sight of the spill. 
"Miles and miles of beaches are coated with black tar," she said. "What took 
thousands of years to take shape was spoiled in a few weeks." 
Exxon officials largely credit Gibson with setting up a blood test to determine 
whether any of the birds' vital organs -- liver, kidney or spleen -- had been 
contaminated with oil. Blood was drawn at the capture site, and after a few 
quick tests, the researchers were able to determine whether an individual bird 
was healthy enough to be released or whether it needed to be taken to a 
wildlife rehabilitation facility in Valdez for observation and treatment. 
"Marge was instrumental in shaping the eagle capture project," said Tom 
Monahan, Exxon's coordinator of wildlife rehabilitation. 
Gibson is one of a small number of people licensed by the California Department 
of Fish and Game to rehabilitate endangered species such as golden eagles and 
peregrine falcons. 
Exxon has spent more than $300,000 on the project, Monahan said. It appears 
that, based on the number of eagles the two teams had trapped through last 
week, the species has weathered the spill in relatively good shape. The "vast 
majority" of birds captured were released, he said. Monahan cautioned, however, 
that it may be several years before a complete assessment of the spill's impact 
can be made. More than 800 miles of beaches were befouled, and local fisheries 
are threatened with years of dislocation. 
Gibson, who returned home this past weekend, agreed: "It is much, much too soon 
to know what long-term effects this may have" on the species. "All we can do is 
hope our work may provide some clues." 
From Valdez, Gibson and her colleagues used float planes or boats to reach 
nesting areas, often staying out a week or longer. The researchers used fish as 
bait to capture the eagles, Gibson said; they did not used any tranquilizers. A 
monofilament line would be tied around a fish, usually a herring, then the fish 
would be tossed into the water near where a bald eagle had been spotted. When 
the bird swooped in after the fish, grabbing it with its talons, the researcher 
would pull the fishing line, pulling it like a noose around the bird. A piece 
of driftwood was attached to the fishing line, so that the bird would only be 
able to rise a few feet above the water when it tried to fly. The researchers 
would then grab the bird, put a hood over its head to calm it down, then 
examine it. 
A primary concern, Gibson said, was whether feathers on the underside carried 
even a trace of oil. A single drop of petroleum can penetrate an egg and kill 
an embryo, so cleaning the underside of an adult eagle was a critical concern. 
Monahan said the rescuers discovered that a simple solution of household dish 
soap and water was most effective in removing oil from birds' feathers. 
Each captured eagle was banded with a silver tag labeled with a number so that 
it could be tracked in the future. 
The long separation from family and friends for a cause such as this was worth 
it, she said. "The bald eagle is such a proud bird," Gibson said. "It is truly 
a treasure worth fighting to save." 
One of the eagles Gibson captured was too crippled to be freed, so Gibson will 
care for it in her rehabilitation center in Villa Park, and she intends to show 
it during lectures. 
"The aim is always to release birds," Gibson said, "but we couldn't safely do 
that with this bird. But at least I'll get a chance to share it with a lot of 
people who otherwise might never see one." 
