EX-REP. SWINDALL GETS A YEAR IN JAIL; 
GEORGIA REPUBLICAN FINED $30,000 FOR LYING TO GRAND JURY 
Former U.S. Rep. Pat Swindall was sentenced to one year in prison today for 
lying to a federal grand jury about a loan he negotiated with an undercover 
agent posing as a drug-money launderer. 
U.S. District Judge Richard C. Freeman also imposed a $30,000 fine plus a $450 
fee against Swindall, who was convicted on nine counts of perjury in June. 
The prison term was 12 months on each count to run concurrently. 
Swindall, a two-term Republican from Atlanta's eastern suburbs, spoke to the 
judge for about half an hour in rambling remarks that frequently touched on 
issues in the trial. But Freeman told him several times that this was not the 
place to retry his case. 
"I stand before you in all humility," he told the judge at one point. Freeman 
interrupted him, saying, "You don't know the meaning of humility, Mr. Swindall. 
I thought you were beginning to learn it, but I'm afraid you're not." 
After the judge imposed the sentence, Swindall smiled and shook hands with his 
attorneys. The judge said the former representative will remain free on his own 
recognizance pending an appeal of the conviction. 
Swindall later told reporters he thought the sentence was proper for someone 
guilty of perjury. 
"I have no complaints whatsoever. The problem I have is not the length of the 
sentence, but whether it should have been imposed at all," he said. 
When U.S. Atty. Robert Barr was asked if the government was satisfied with the 
relatively light sentence, he replied, "It's not really up to us to be 
satisfied. We thought a more lengthy sentence was called for." 
The judge recommended that Swindall serve his sentence at a minimum-security 
federal prison camp in Atlanta. 
Evidence in his trial showed that Swindall repeatedly talked with the 
undercover agent and a political associate as he was seeking $850,000 to finish 
his luxurious Stone Mountain home, even after a time when he told the grand 
jury he had "walked away" from the proposed deal. 
Swindall lost a bid for reelection last year to Democrat Ben Jones while under 
the cloud of his perjury indictment. 
