2 NEW MURDERS SPAWN FEAR OF SERIAL KILLER IN FLORIDA; 
CRIME: THE MUTILATED BODIES OF THREE WOMEN STUDENTS HAD BEEN FOUND EARLIER. 
COLLEGE CAMPUS IS IN AN UPROAR. 
A young man and woman found slain near the University of Florida Tuesday 
morning were linked by police to the mutilation killings of three women 
students earlier this week, touching off a wave of fear that a serial killer is 
stalking the campus. 
"It's clear this part of the country has some maniac on the loose," University 
of Florida President John Lombardi said during a staff meeting. "It reminds us 
of a natural catastrophe. The killer is selecting victims by criteria that are 
not clear to us." 
"We have a serial or lust killer at large," said Gainesville Police Chief 
Wayland Clifton. "We have every reason to believe that all five murders are 
connected and committed by either one or two murderers. 
The bodies of the young man and woman were found together Tuesday morning in an 
apartment near the campus, not far from where the mutilated bodies of two women 
students were discovered Sunday. Another woman had been discovered early 
Monday. News reports said her head had been chopped off. 
The Gainesville Sun reported Tuesday that the mutilations provided police with 
the connections between the first two discoveries. 
"I don't think it takes a rocket scientist to figure out that anybody that 
commits homicide using mutilation is a pretty sick individual, and it's 
somebody we want to get off the streets very badly," said Lt. Spencer Mann, 
Alachua County sheriff's spokesman. 
Gov. Bob Martinez ordered 50 state troopers and Florida Department of Law 
Enforcement agents and two crime labs to Gainesville. FBI agents joined the 
investigators. 
The 34,000-student campus was in an uproar Tuesday, with phone lines jammed and 
some parents arriving to take their children home. 
"Basically I'm just scared," said Susan Zarycki, 18, from Tampa. "I hope 
classes are suspended so we can go home." Anna Bendeck, 23, from Ft. Myers, 
said: "I'm thinking about leaving anyway. What's worrying me? The threat of 
getting killed at night in my apartment." 
Both students said they were demanding more security for their apartment 
complex. "We don't walk alone even during the day. I don't feel safe any more. 
I don't even say hi to people," said Bendeck. 
Art Markley, 59, of Miami, flew to Gainesville to pick up his 20-year-old 
daughter Linda, whom he had just driven to school on Sunday. She had moved into 
an apartment directly across the street from where two women students were 
slain. "Her mother is very upset, crying all night in sympathy for the murdered 
children and in fear for ours," he said. "Imagine bringing a kid up and then 
sending her off to college to be murdered." 
The two latest victims were identified as Tracy Inez Paules and a 23-year-old 
friend, Manuel R. Tobada, both of Miami. Tobada had just been accepted at 
nearby Santa Fe Community College and was planning to study architecture, a 
friend, Eric Dunham, 22, of Sarasota, told the Associated Press. Paules, whose 
age was not available, reportedly was pursuing a law degree. 
On Sunday, authorities found two victims -- freshmen Christina P. Powell, 17, 
of Jacksonville and Sonya Larson, 18, of Deerfield Beach, who had shared a 
townhouse apartment. 
One victim was nude and the other was partly clothed, said police Lt. Sadie 
Darnell. 
Eight hours later, deputies found the body of Christa L. Hoyt, 18, a student at 
Santa Fe Community College and a records clerk at the sheriff's office. 
Deputies checked on her when she failed to report for her midnight shift. 
More than three-fourths of all University of Florida students live off campus. 
On Tuesday, university authorities urged students to lock their doors, travel 
in groups and telephone their anxious parents. 
All nine of the state university's branches have beefed up security, Pat 
Reardon, the chief spokesman for the state university system, told Reuters. 
Reardon said the university was considering setting up a temporary communal 
dorm in an auditorium where frightened students could spend the night. 
Classes were being held as scheduled, but the murders were the main topic of 
conversations, including comparisons to serial killer Ted Bundy. 
"That's what we're all saying. It's another Ted Bundy on the loose," said Jana 
Walters, 18, a freshman from Longwood. 
Bundy was executed in Florida's electric chair on Jan. 24, 1989, after 
murdering dozens of young women, including two Florida State University 
sorority sisters in Tallahassee in a 1978 rampage. The Florida State Prison 
where he died is about 25 miles from here. 
Three University of Florida students who live across the street from the 
apartment complex where the two bodies were found Tuesday said they were going 
home to Key West. 
"We're horrified, we're scared, and we're going home at least temporarily until 
this thing blows over," said Lydia Blanco, 22, who lives with her sister, 
Ileana Blanco, 20, and Lauren Bacle, 19. 
"It's very disconcerting," said student Rob Dye. "I was going to walk home 
myself last night but my best friend convinced me not to. I'm glad I didn't 
walk alone -- and I'm going to stick with friends." 
Joe Colucci said he made the five-hour drive here from his home in Davi to stay 
with his daughter Jennifer, an 18-year-old freshman. 
"I came here to be with my child and protect her as much as possible. If they 
don't catch someone by this weekend, I'm taking her home," he said. 
Dave Krupezaki, 21, a University of Florida student from Miami, said "with what 
happened last year with Tiffany Sessions, everybody is afraid." 
Sessions, a 20-year-old University of Florida student, vanished Feb. 9, 1989, 
after leaving her apartment to go jogging. No trace of her has been found. 
