ANGLO-AMERICAN DISCH; 
YES, LET'S NEW AND SELECTED POEMS BY TOM DISCH (THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY 
PRESS: $16.95, CLOTH; $8.95, PAPER; 112 PP.) 
The cluster of qualities that first strike the reader of Tom Disch's poems -- 
robust skepticism and realism, urbane wit, rueful irony, formal elegance -- has 
not characterized much post-war U.S. poetry. 
By contrast these qualities have been repeatedly found together in post-war 
British poetry. Ever since the Movement -- Philip Larkin, Kingsley Amis, Donald 
Davie (see Page 6), Thomas Gunn -- took control in the early '50s, British 
expectations about poetry have been molded by these characteristics. 
This is not simply a poetic but an attitude to life. As such it does seem 
peculiarly British and is linked to an empiricist attitude, a belief in common 
sense, common decency, a mistrust of systematic thinking, extremism, of 
emotional intensity. So poets who have stepped out of line have often been 
accused, by implication, of being un-British -- this is partly what Larkin 
meant when, asked about Ted Hughes' "Crow," he replied: "Personally, I prefer 
Peter Rabbit." 
So it's surprising to find Disch, an American poet, writing in a Movement way 
-- though not so surprising that, as a result, he has been more warmly received 
in Britain than in the United States. 
This kind of writing has a number of strengths. It's rarely pretentious, or 
obscure, or formless -- all weaknesses to which American poetry is prone. It's 
usually intelligent and readable, and it's often funny. It has many of the 
strengths of the realist novel; it's especially good at narrative, at 
describing character and at reflecting on society -- Hardy is an important 
ancestor. 
In "The Rapist's Villanelle" Disch summons up an upper-middle class, 
cosmopolitan social milieu simply by noting the victim's "hand-knitted sweater 
from the Isle/ Of Skye, (her) apres-ski of bold chartreuse." 
The rapist's state of mind emerges through the way the villanelle form frames 
his words. The lines, "She spent her money with such perfect style" and "I 
couldn't help myself; I had to smile" both appear four times. This repetition 
suggests how, to the rapist, the victim's compulsive shopping and his obsessive 
desire are linked -- become somehow equivalent. 
That the rapist makes this association reveals his cool depravity. This and the 
poem's formal elegance hint at violence lurking below the chic surface -- what 
Harold Pinter has called "the weasel under the cocktail cabinet." 
This is a memorable poem. However, there are narrownesses connected with the 
Movement poetic, most of which arise from the voice adopted by these poets -- 
the hard-headed, no-nonsense way they talk to the reader. They keep telling us 
how tough they are, how unsentimental, that they're relatively without 
illusions, that they don't suffer fools gladly but that they don't have too 
high an opinion of themselves. It's perhaps not a coincidence that most of the 
Movement poets were at Oxford at the same time as Mrs. Thatcher, in a postwar 
period of formative exhaustion and bleakness. 
Consequently, there are a number of cliches associated with poetry influenced 
by the Movement. 
And Disch, despite his different background, is not immune to them. In this 
book, too, there are rueful references to aging, to how bald and/or fat the 
poet is getting; to the terrible historical violence, etc., that you can learn 
about in art galleries; to the habits other people have that bore you -- for 
instance, of showing you their holiday slides; to other things that seem boring 
(e.g. people who "work on a tan") but that -- hang on a minute -- are actually 
interesting (for the sun has an immemorially beneficent influence). 
It's fortunate, then, that Disch has chosen to add something different to his 
basically British style. 
Some of this may simply be a matter of his different temperament -- for example 
he isn't dour like his British models. Life is not for him, as for Larkin, 
"first boredom, then fear." "Yes, Let's" is eponymously positive and charged 
throughout with exuberance, and his "High Purpose in Poetry: A Primer" 
prescribes acceptance of life as the proper attitude in poetry. 
Most important, however, he adds American influences to his British ones, so 
that he is most accurately seen as a hybrid, introducing British influence into 
U.S. poetry, as Thom Gunn, among others, has introduced American influence into 
British poetry. 
At a formal level, this allows Disch to use free-verse techniques to keep a 
poem's loose ends untied in order to suggest an existential asymmetry, the 
jagged edges of experience, avoiding the monolithic four-squareness of stricter 
forms. 
More broadly, it means that realism often encounters modernism in Disch's work. 
This produces some of his most effective poems. And it does seem the case that 
some of the most successful contemporary poems (American and British) occur 
when this encounter takes place -- realist poets struggling with modernism, 
modernist poets impelled to introduce an air of "reality." 
In "The Prisoners of War" the modernist anxiety about language and its 
problematic relationship with experience is employed to enforce a political 
meaning, to show that when a country is annexed and its language suppressed, 
the people of that country live, in a sense, under a curse. For they are 
condemned to find even familiar things inexplicable, because unnameable: 
what can they do now 
but point? At parts of bodies, at what 
they want to eat, at instrument 
 panels, at 
new highways and other areas of 
intense 
 reconstruction 
For these people, political oppression has an analogous effect -- though in a 
frightening, political way -- to that radical defamiliarizing practiced by 
modernist literature: They are disoriented by the shock of the new. 
"Coal Miners" also employs a defamiliarizing strategy, here so extreme it 
becomes surreal. It's a dramatic monologue (this is one of Disch's favorite 
forms) spoken by a white-collar worker whose sentimental socialist outlook 
leads him to idealize the miners; this exposes the gulf between the classes in 
their ways of life and thinking. 
Because the speaker's fantasizing is allowed full rein, the life he evokes is 
bizarre, even otherworldly -- perhaps here Disch's activities as a science 
fiction writer are relevant. Miners, through this monologuist's eyes, become 
heroes -- awesomely in touch with elemental and even mythic forces: 
These small homages to the icons 
of his tragic 
 vigour 
Only allow us less guiltily to 
hypothesize his life 
 Underground: how he attacks the 
spangled earth, 
 Advancing slowly down its major 
arteries impelled 
 By an anger his own unholy 
din every moment renews. 
Incomprehension between the classes is further emphasized when the speaker 
tries to imagine how the miners imagine his white-collar life -- this is 
"reality" twice removed. His imagination caricatures his own life by 
caricaturing a miner's thinking as obsessively subterranean: 
If they could hear us maundering 
 In the fictive caverns of our 
 mirrored bars, 
 They'd only damn our 
 condescending eyes. 
"Condescending" is very precise -- it measures the distance between the miners' 
physical descent and the failed act of empathizing with it. 
Poems like this, then, show how apparently incompatible influences have been 
combined by Disch to produce telling and subtle effects. At his best he writes 
a social poetry that is at least as entertaining as his British influences, and 
as sophisticated as his American ones. 
