PEOPLE: MOVIE SET SCOUT STILL LOOKING FOR DREAM 
Like most kids, Laura (Lolly) Powell, dreamed of being in the movies. 
But now that she's close to the movie-making action, Powell has a different set 
of dreams. 
"If I had a choice, I'd like to be a co-host with (TV talk show host) David 
Letterman," mused the Fullerton woman who gets paid to find filming sites and 
buildings in Orange County for movie-makers. 
She works in the Orange County Film Liaison Office and despite her close 
connection with movie people, Powell finds the movie-making process somewhat 
uninteresting. 
"There's a lot of standing around," said the Pepperdine University graduate who 
majored in sports medicine. "I just want to see the finished product." 
Standing around and being idle is not one of Powell's traits. 
She kept an active life after college including European travel, working as a 
law firm researcher, writing manuals for an automobile advertising association 
and formulating direct mail campaigns for an advertising agency. She also 
worked as a personal trainer in health clubs but said she was more interested 
in putting out the club's newsletter than helping keep people fit. 
As a matter of fact, Powell, 29, would rather be a writer. Part of her job in 
the film office is writing and taking pictures for the county's monthly 
employee newsletter. 
"I like writing and would rather be on the other side of this interview," she 
said. "That may be my future. Seeing something you have written in print or a 
picture you have taken validates what you do." 
Until then, she's making a name for herself with the movie folks. 
"I guess they find themselves comfortable working with me," said Powell who 
often finds herself trying to fill seemingly impossible requests. 
In fact, she's trying to find a building with lots of glass in front and back 
that can be destroyed. 
"They want to film a truck driving through the front door and out the back," 
she said. "It's sometimes hard to convince the building's owner that it can be 
returned to its original condition." 
Powell, who said she is rarely surprised with some of the film requests, which 
include blowing up a building, appears to be filling the bill. 
As of June, the county has issued 16 film permits, just one less than all of 
last year and Powell feels that the number will double this year. 
"It would be my hope it would triple," she said. 
Powell likes to get out on film location. 
"I try to make contact with the people that I deal with," she said, while 
walking through a film setting in front of the Santa Ana Hall of 
Administration. 
Since accepting the film liaison job a year ago, Powell had a more than passing 
interest in her travels through the county. 
At times she has to be aware of location problems such as having a palm tree 
near a spot where the producer wants a Midwestern look. "I'm always looking for 
a site location some film company might use," she said. 
In fact she is putting together a location guide of Orange County sites and has 
developed a network with the various cities in the county for filming 
locations. 
Powell said part of her efforts is not only to keep filmmaking in California, 
but to make Orange County one of its prime locations. 
Acknowledgments -- Fullerton Police Sgt. Joe Klein won three gold medals in 
discus, shot-put and hammer throw in the recent International Law Enforcement 
Olympics in Canada. In winning the discus, the 15-year police veteran, a Yorba 
Linda resident, successfully defended his champion's title won 2 years ago in 
Australia. The games are held every 2 years. 
