PLANNERS SEEK PUBLIC FUNDS FOR RAIL LINE; 
TRANSPORTATION: THE GROUP UNDERESTIMATED RIDERSHIP AND NOW SAYS PRIVATE MONEY 
WON'T BE ENOUGH FOR AN LAX-PALMDALE HIGH-SPEED TRAIN. 
The consortium proposing to build a high-speed rail line between Los Angeles 
International Airport and Palmdale, a $1-billion project that was to be 
privately financed, on Monday asked for financial support from Los Angeles 
County because ridership estimates have been reduced by almost half. 
In response to a request from the consortium, a panel of the Los Angeles County 
Transportation Commission recommended consideration of public funding for the 
proposed 69-mile line. One county official said the potential bill could reach 
$100 million a year. 
The turnabout came after the project's backers reduced ridership projections 
for the line's first segment -- the 36 miles from LAX to Santa Clarita -- from 
100,000 riders a day to about 55,000, with a corresponding drop in expected 
revenues, county officials said. 
John E. Chiaverini, a spokesman for the consortium, acknowledged that there had 
been a reduction in ridership estimates, although he could not confirm the 
precise numbers. He said he could not explain the reason. 
The consortium apparently had earlier overestimated the number of bus riders 
who might make connections with the train, said Linda Bohlinger, director of 
capital planning and programming for the county commission. 
The county transportation panel's meeting Monday produced the first public 
indication that the proposed rail line -- which would use futuristic magnetic 
levitation technology to reach speeds up to 100 m.p.h -- might not be entirely 
privately financed. Its backers are seeking approval for the project under an 
experimental state privatization program for transit projects. 
However, consortium and county officials said the project could still go 
forward with local public funding, because the state requires only that no 
state or federal funds be used. State officials in mid-September are to choose 
up to four such projects out of eight submitted statewide. 
Bohlinger said county officials are willing to consider local funding for the 
project. Based on preliminary projections, the public's obligation could 
approach $100 million a year for up to 15 years, she said. 
Bohlinger said the consortium's own projections showed that public funding for 
the line could amount to one-third to one-half of its total operating and 
construction costs for its first 15 years. Only at that point, she said, was 
the line projected to become self-supporting. 
"The commission and our executive director want to portray the message that 
we're looking at this very positively," Bohlinger said. "They're not dismissing 
this out of hand. They're willing to look at the possibility of the commission 
being financially involved." 
The commission's Finance and Programming Committee voted 5 to 0 Monday to 
explore public funding options, including possible contributions from the 
commission, the city of Los Angeles and the Los Angeles Department of Airports. 
The full commission is set to consider the issue Aug. 22. 
Chiaverini -- a San Francisco-based senior vice president of the Perini Corp. 
of Framingham, Mass., the company leading the consortium proposing the train -- 
confirmed that lowered ridership projections forced the search for possible 
public funding. 
Chiaverini said the consortium still is reviewing the line's ridership 
estimates, and thus its estimated finances could change. But he added, "There's 
a strong possibility that it would require some outside assistance." 
Bohlinger said one scenario could have the consortium build the line but then 
have the commission take control upon its opening in 1997. The commission and 
other public agencies would pay for the construction and for operating costs 
not covered by fares and revenue from related development. 
The commission itself is already $300 million short of the money it needs for 
its 10-year, $9.6-billion rail development program. That includes many other 
projects, including Metro Rail. But Bohlinger said the commission still might 
be able to arrange public funding for the LAX-Palmdale line. 
