ON VIEW: DARE BEATS DRUMS FOR BENEFIT CONCERT 
Structure it right, and you can make $1 million. At least, that's the intent of 
Bruce A. Meyer, president of Geary's and chairman of the Drug Abuse Resistance 
Education fund-raiser Sept. 10. 
He's got a fighting chance; last year's DARE benefit raised $850,000. This year 
it has nabbed the opening night concert by Chicago (80 million albums sold) at 
the Universal Amphitheatre and will couple it with a gala dinner. 
DARE has become such a well-known byword nationally, it's easy to forget it was 
founded right here in Los Angeles by the Los Angeles Police Department and the 
Los Angeles Unified School District. It places a specially trained police 
officer in fifth- and sixth-grade classrooms for a 17-week semester to teach 
students how to refuse drugs and alcohol and follows up with junior and high 
school classes. 
Meyer promises that every dollar contributed to the cause will go straight to 
the classroom to foster drug awareness for both students and parents. Columbia 
Savings Charitable Foundation will underwrite the event. 
STAR-STUDDED: The CEO of Dior, Madame Beatrice Bongibault-Dhjan, is opening the 
first major Dior boutique in America Sept. 12 at the new Two Rodeo Drive 
complex in Beverly Hills, and Wendy Goldberg, Lili Zanuck and Nancy Vreeland 
have been picked to co-host the gala arrival. It should be a social highlight: 
The streets of Rodeo Drive will be lined with 50 top models wearing the best of 
the Dior 1990-91 collection. The New York boutique will open in November. The 
Beverly Hills boutique will mirror the company's Avenue Montaigne Paris 
headquarters with the same canopied beveled glass door and signature dove-gray 
and white colors on Louis XVI-style furniture. After the cocktail opening, 
Madame Bongibault will host a dinner at the Bistro Garden. 
BRAND NEW: With the celebration of the 65th anniversary of the Associates of 
the California Institute of Technology and the upcoming Caltech centennial in 
1991, the board of directors of the Associates has voted to form a new 
membership classification for individuals under 40. Two dynamos -- Gordon 
Pashgian and Joe Regan, both Associates board members -- lead the young group. 
First event is Sept. 22. Members will take their youngsters on a tour of the 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory and follow with hot dogs and hamburgers. 
NEW CHAIR: CONCERN II's big concern is funding children's cancer research in 
the area of immunology. Since 1981 it has raised $1.7 million. Now, members 
announce they'll establish their first research chair at Childrens Hospital of 
Los Angeles (in 1986 they founded the brain tumor research laboratory there). 
Thus, they're gung-ho on their biggest fund-raiser ever Sept. 15 at Cary Grant 
Pavilion at Hollywood Park. Event chairs Barry and Sue Brucker and David and 
Connie Oliver, and a committee including Pam Roberts, Ruthie Katz, Marla 
Duboff, Dan Furie, Nancy Powell and Debbie Hovesepian, have designed a 
futuristic evening of scrip wagering on taped horse races, plus a casino, 
international buffet, dancing and a grand prize trip for two to Scotland. 
CARLA: U.S. Trade Representative Carla A. Hills will be back in her hometown 
here Sept. 6 to address the Los Angeles World Affairs Council on "America's 
Trade Agenda." 
KIDS: The Kids Benefit Committee is introducing its inaugural Christmas and 
holiday card line. The cards are designed by children who are patients at UCLA 
Medical Center and suffer from life-threatening illnesses. Josselyn McAdam, 
benefit chair, and Susan Armistead 
are pushing the effort. Personalizing is also available; order at (213) 
206-6032. 
THE CIRCUIT: Couturiere Pauline Trigere was the center of the Champagne 
reception launching her fall collection at I. Magnin in Beverly Hills last 
week. . . . Metropolitan Associates hosted its final evening of movies and 
picnic suppers last week, raising funds for opera performances for children at 
the Music Center and for in-school performances. Garden hosts this summer have 
been Mary Kay and Boyd Hight, Nadine and Bob Skotheim, Joan and Jim Caillouette 
and Alicia and Ed Clark. . . . Lawrence and Julianne Feuerhelm hosted the 
silvery moon waltz party for National Charity League of San Fernando Valley 
debutantes and their fathers. Now everyone's in step for the Nov. 24 ball at 
the Beverly Wilshire. . . . Bridge aficionados were in quartets led by Marilyn 
Burdge by early morning at the Bel Air Bay Club this week for Angels Attic's 
summer bridge luncheon featuring George Winter and "My Best Bids." 
AT CHECKERS: Maestro Gerard Schwarz of the Seattle Symphony and former head of 
the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra was the focus along with his 125 musicians 
for a cocktail reception at Checkers Hotel hosted by DELOS International Inc., 
the Seattle Symphony's recording company, and Checkers. The Seattle orchestra, 
at the Hollywood Bowl last week for three nights, was welcomed by donors, 
including Don Mullane of BankAmerica Foundation and Eugene R. Wilson, president 
of Arco Foundation. 
