FROM 34 BEDS TO 12 IN 2 YEARS; 
OPTIONS FADING FAST FOR L.A. COUNTY BURN VICTIMS 
A 3-year-old boy was taken to a downtown Los Angeles hospital several weeks ago 
after a street vendor's cart tipped over, drenching him with boiling water. The 
burns on his chest, genitals and hands were so severe he needed to be 
transferred immediately to a burn center for skin grafts and other special 
care. 
But there were no beds available in any of Los Angeles County's three burn 
centers. Or in Orange County. Or at the UC San Diego burn unit in Hillcrest, 
the only burn unit in San Diego County. 
Seven hours after the accident, a burn center in Fresno finally agreed to take 
him, said Dr. Cheryl Lee, an emergency physician at White Memorial Medical 
Center who arranged the transfer. A helicopter finally whisked the boy away, 
leaving his parents behind because there was no room for them on board. 
Los Angeles County's three burn centers have a total of 12 intensive-care beds 
that are currently staffed, down from 34 two years ago, according to a tally by 
officials at the Hospital Council of Southern California. 
Increasingly, all these beds are occupied, forcing local burn victims to be 
flown to other counties or even out of the state for care. 
"We've gotten a lot of calls from major institutions in Los Angeles to transfer 
very major burn cases," said Dr. Steve Zumiga at Valley Medical Center's burn 
unit in Fresno. "I find it unbelievable that the hospitals there can't handle 
them." 
Dr. William D. Davies, founder of the burn center at Torrance Memorial Medical 
Center, said, "It's a daily occurrence that people here in Los Angeles have 
trouble getting placed in a burn center in this county." 
Burn centers throughout the country are in financial trouble, mainly because 
the patients they treat tend to be poor and often lack health insurance. At the 
same time, medical advances have enabled doctors to save patients that only 10 
years ago would have had no chance of survival -- but such highly specialized 
treatment is costly. 
The problem is especially acute in Los Angeles County, where the number of 
uninsured residents -- many newly arrived immigrants -- is growing fast and 
public funding for mental health, trauma care and other health services has 
been slashed. 
Torrance Totters 
In what threatens to make a bad situation even worse, officials at Torrance 
Memorial, a nonprofit community hospital, are considering closing their burn 
unit because of financial losses from treating burn victims who do not have 
health insurance or who have inadequate coverage. These patients, hospital 
officials said, have put the five-bed burn unit in the red, costing the 
hospital about $200,000 during the first five months of this year. 
Two years ago, another private hospital, Brotman Medical Center, closed its 
Michael Jackson Burn Center in Culver City because of financial problems. And 
this year, County-USC Medical Center, which is Los Angeles County's only public 
resource for indigent burn patients, drastically reduced service. Three of its 
seven intensive-care burn beds were eliminated, due largely to the 
unavailability of nurses. 
Increasingly, patients burned in car accidents, household injuries, assaults, 
or on the job cannot get a bed in a local burn center. 
One family involved in a fiery traffic accident was split up when the husband 
was sent to County-USC for care, the wife was sent to Las Vegas and their 
4-year old child was sent to San Bernardino County. 
"Isn't that an awful way to have to deal with the biggest tragedy in a family's 
life?" said Audrey Bahr, chief of the contract program office of the Los 
Angeles County Department of Health Services. "How would you like to be a 
grandmother trying to figure out who to visit?" 
During the first six months of this year, county health officials said there 
was no room at local burn centers for 13% of the patients seeking care there. 
They had to be treated either at non-burn centers or at hospitals outside Los 
Angeles County. 
Hospitals routinely treat burns, but only specially equipped burn centers are 
capable of performing the delicate skin grafts and plastic surgery required in 
the most severe cases. In Los Angeles County, it can take as long as 10 hours 
and require phone calls to more than six hospitals before a patient is placed, 
according to county health emergency care official Darlene Isbell. 
Because so many of the patients needing to be transferred out of Los Angeles 
have little or no medical insurance coverage, the UC Irvine Medical Center burn 
unit will not take them, said Bahr. "We have trouble getting San Diego to take 
them, too." 
"We have received an increasing number of calls from Los Angeles," said Dr. 
John Hansbrough, medical director of the UCSD burn unit. "But we have never had 
to turn away a funded patient" when an out-of-county hospital has requested a 
transfer. 
UCSD's unit, which includes six intensive-care unit beds and eight special care 
beds, has been able to meet the demand generated by San Diego County, according 
to hospital spokeswoman Sheri Smith. 
The worst burn cases end up in the ICU beds. Less-severe burn cases and 
patients who are recovering are treated in the special care beds, Smith said. 
The burn unit on occasion has been used to handle other types of seriously 
injured patients, especially when the UCSD hospital is swamped by trauma 
patients, Smith said. 
Davies recalled a recent accident in which two children were burned over half 
their bodies when a pickup truck and car collided. 
"One kid had insurance," Davies said, and he was accepted at the Southern 
California Burn Center, a private facility at Sherman Oaks Community Hospital, 
the county's third operating burn center with three beds. "The other kid had 
none, and nobody (at any Los Angeles burn center) was able to take care of 
him." Eventually, a bed was found for him at San Bernardino County Medical 
Center's burn unit, Davies said. 
Bahr said that over the July 4 weekend, four burn patients were transferred out 
of Los Angeles County, including a 5-month-old infant burned in a crib fire and 
a 29-year-old man who tried to swallow a firecracker while high on drugs. 
Airlifting burn victims is not medically unsound in most circumstances, doctors 
say. For example, the Army for years has transported burned servicemen to 
specialized centers thousands of miles away. And in many rural areas of the 
country and small cities, patients are commonly helicoptered to regional burn 
centers. 
But it is preferable to avoid helicopter trips. They're not only expensive, but 
separate patients from their families and friends whose support is usually 
vital to their recovery. 
"Personally, I grieve the most for the indigent child," who gets shuttled 
around without his parents, said Davies at Torrance Memorial. He pointed out 
that a 5-year-old girl from Los Angeles, now under his care, was sent to San 
Francisco for initial burn treatment because there were no beds available in 
the Southland. 
"It is a crime that a county like Los Angeles" has so few intensive-care burn 
beds that patients have to be sent as far away as Dallas for treatment, said 
David Langness, vice president of the Hospital Council of Southern California. 
Unlike Los Angeles, other major metropolitan areas usually have enough beds to 
accommodate their burn victims. 
"New York City seems to be pretty well served by the available burn beds," said 
Dr. Cleon W. Goodwin, director of the burn center at New York Hospital-Cornell 
University Medical Center in Manhattan. Rather than flying patients out of town 
for care, he said patients are often flown into New York for treatment at one 
of the three burn centers. 
In Miami, the city's single burn center at Jackson Memorial Hospital is big 
enough to accommodate the vast majority of Dade County's burn victims, said Dr. 
Charles G. Ward, director of the hospital's burn center and immediate past 
president of the American Burn Assn. 
Problem Is Money 
Despite financial strains, the nationwide network of about 120 burn centers 
that sprung up during the late 1960s and early '70s is not collapsing, 
according to Ward. 
"Everyone has the same problem -- funding," he said. "But we haven't seen any 
collapse yet." 
"Most burn centers . . . are aware that you aren't going to balance the books 
by taking care of burn patients. . . . They continue the care as part of their 
obligation to serve the community," Goodwin said. 
Many of the country's biggest burn centers, especially in large urban areas, 
are located in teaching institutions or public hospitals where patient care is 
subsidized. In Miami and New York City, for example, all the critical burn care 
is provided by such institutions. 
But in Los Angeles, the burn center at County-USC has lost beds as the number 
of patients seeking care there has grown. 
"We're moving backwards," said Dr. Bruce Zawocki, director of the County-USC 
burn center, which is plagued by a shortage of critical-care nurses. "My fear 
is that we're turning back the clock about 15 years." 
Health officials estimate a 75% yearly turnover of nurses at County-USC. 
Without nurses, the unit's critical-care beds cannot be filled. 
Generally, County-USC concentrates on providing care for the county's poorest 
burn victims, allowing the county's two privately operated burn centers to care 
for those who have insurance. 
But when County-USC is full, the private hospitals are called upon to accept 
indigents, as well as privately insured patients. 
"We shudder when we get a call," said Ray Alan Rahn, senior vice president at 
Torrance Memorial. "Every time we get a call, it could be a half-million-dollar 
exposure for us. It's really frightening." 
Profit Wiped Out 
Nine of the 31 patients treated at Torrance Memorial's burn center during the 
first five months of 1989, he said, were sent there because County-USC was 
full. The cost of caring for them -- about $200,000 -- wiped out the burn 
center's overall profit, provoking serious consideration of closing the unit 
down, he said. 
In previous years, Rahn said, the burn center has by and large broken even. But 
this year, he said, the center has been hit by increasing numbers of patients 
with little or no insurance coverage. 
He provided a list of 10 instances during 1988 in which the hospital wrote off 
between $18,000 and $200,000 in medical charges incurred by patients with no 
medical insurance or limited coverage through Medi-Cal or Medicare. 
Most of them lived in parts of the county outside of the hospital's general 
service area, Rahn pointed out. 
$134,000 Bill 
One woman lived as far away as Tacoma, Wash. She was driving on a freeway near 
Bakersfield when she was hit by a truck, severely burned, and helicoptered to 
Torrance Memorial. Before she died, Rahn said, she spent 22 days in the 
hospital and ran up a bill of $134,000. She had no health insurance. 
Patients insured through Medi-Cal and Medicare also leave behind staggering 
unpaid bills, Rahn said. Torrance Memorial is reimbursed about $900 a day for 
Medi-Cal patients. 
"That formula is a disaster for us," Rahn said, because the hospital charges 
$4,300 a day for care. 
Hospital officials are now lobbying state health officials for an increase, 
which Rahn described as critical to the burn center's survival. 
BURN CENTERS 
Rising medical costs and an increase in uninsured patients have led to cutbacks 
in care at special burn centers. Los Angeles County officials say the number of 
staffed intensive care unit beds in the county's three burn centers has dropped 
to 12, from 34 two years ago. There are 12 other burn centers in the state, as 
well as one in Las Vegas. 
Three staffed, intensive-care-unit beds for burn patients are located in Los 
Angeles County. 
L.A. COUNTY CENTERS 
1. Sherman Oaks Community Hospital: 3 beds 
2. County-USC Medical Center: 4 beds 
3. Torrance Memoria Medical Center: 5 beds 
