LIONS QUARTERBACKS WARE, PEETE SCRAMBLE 
Andre Ware is making the big bucks, but Rodney Peete appears to have the edge 
in the Detroit Lions quarterback battle and hopes that he'll be rewarded if he 
becomes the starter. 
Peete, a second-year pro out of Southern California, where he was runner-up in 
the Heisman Trophy balloting in 1988, was the Lions' sixth draft pick in 1989. 
He signed a two-year contract worth $250,000, then became the Lions' starting 
quarterback. 
Ware, who won the Heisman Trophy last season at the University of Houston, was 
the Lions' No. 1 draft pick in 1990 and received a $2-million signing bonus to 
go along with a four-year contract worth $4.6 million. 
Now, this is where the fun starts. 
Ware wants Peete's starting job and Peete wants some of Ware's money. 
According to the NFL Players Assn., the average salary for a quarterback last 
season was $638,000. Peete might even settle for that, for now. 
"When I start the season," Peete said, "it would be a nice gesture on their 
part to come to me and say, 'Rodney, we realize you're underpaid and making 
much, much, much less than what the average starting quarterback in the league 
is making. So, we want to get something done.' " 
Peete realizes that when the contract was signed last year, the money he 
received was in accordance with his status as a sixth-round pick. 
But now he has led the Lions to a 3-0 preseason record. He wants to be 
rewarded, although he promised he won't walk out, no matter what. 
"I understand that being a sixth-round pick, you're only going to get so much 
money," he said. "That's the way the system works and I'm just a victim of the 
system. But when it's my turn to be on the other end, hopefully it will work 
out for me." 
Meanwhile Ware, who ended his holdout Monday night, drew a large crowd for his 
first practice session. 
"I think he's way behind," Lions Coach Wayne Fontes said. "He thinks this is 
the same offense he ran in college, but it's only similar. It's not the same. I 
would think right now he's got an uphill battle. It's unfortunate, but he'll 
have to sit a while." 
Fontes said Ware will have to show he is better than Peete if he wants the 
starting job. 
"The best player will play for the Detroit Lions, regardless of position and 
regardless of where they were drafted," Fontes said. "You can put that in big 
print." 
Fontes said Ware will see some action Friday night when the Lions play their 
fourth and final exhibition game at Cincinnati. 
