DEBATING LEGISLATIVE TERM LIMITS 
Atty. Gen. John Van de Kamp has placed a new issue on California's political 
reform agenda. Last month, Van de Kamp announced he would sponsor an initiative 
that would, among other things, limit statewide elected officials to two 
consecutive terms and state legislators to 12 years of consecutive service in 
each house. 
In advocating term limits, Van de Kamp argued that "our system of government 
had hardened into a gridlock of caution, incumbency protection and the 
servicing of special interests." He concluded that the "drastic step" was 
necessary because "what we're doing now isn't working." 
The term-limitation idea is not really drastic or new. We limit Presidents, and 
26 states limit governors, to two terms. 
But no state limits terms of state legislators. Nor does the federal 
Constitution limit congressional terms. Thus, the Van de Kamp proposal is, in 
this respect at least, a radical one. Nevertheless, given certain conditions in 
California politics today, a reasonable case can be made for the imposition of 
such limits. 
At the heart of that case is the reality that political competition is 
virtually extinct at the state level. In the last three legislative campaigns 
(1982, 1984, 1986), only three incumbents seeking reelection lost, and 273 
incumbents won. 
Reductions in electoral competition in turn yield reductions in legislative 
turnover. Electoral safety not only enables incumbents to stay where they are, 
it also discourages them from challenging other equally secure incumbents in 
other offices. While 49 new members entered the Assembly between 1978-82, only 
21 of the current 80 members have been elected in the last six years. Turnover 
rates are even lower in the Senate. 
Such low levels of competition and turnover may result in a loss of electoral 
and legislative vitality and the responsiveness of the Legislature to new ideas 
and changing political styles. 
In addition to the natural advantages (name identification, connections, etc.) 
held by incumbents, there would appear to be two main causes of today's low 
levels of legislative competition and turnover. The power of the Legislature to 
redraw legislative district boundaries generally results in safer seats for 
large numbers -- if not the majority -- of incumbents. During the last 10 to 20 
years, most parts of the state have grown increasingly competitive. 
Gerrymandered district lines can insulate the Legislature from this trend. 
And incumbents, who are able to raise almost unlimited sums from 
special-interest groups, maintain nearly insurmountable fund-raising advantages 
over potential challengers. In the non-election year of 1987, legislative 
candidates raised more than $25 million, 98% of it going to incumbents. During 
the 1988 elections, incumbents outspent all other candidates combined by almost 
5 to 1. Term limitations would address the incumbency-advantage problem. They 
would force more competition and turnover, especially since many incumbents 
would, as they approached their limit in one house, challenge incumbents in 
other races. 
Term limits also have disadvantages. There is value to experience and expertise 
in public office, and limitations that force out numerous high-quality 
lawmakers at the peak of their effectiveness could have undesirable impacts on 
the legislative process. In addition, term limits may increase 
conflict-of-interest pressures on some legislators, especially if the limits 
imposed are too stringent. 
Such a circumstance could reduce the productivity and energy of the 
Legislature, and it may expose many members to the influence of those -- 
special interests and others -- capable of easing a transition from public to 
private life. 
The key element in the case against term limits hinges on the democratic right 
of the electorate to elect whom it chooses, including incumbents. This argument 
has obvious merit. It would be even more compelling in a truly competitive 
political environment. This is not the case in today's California. The 
incumbent's right to seek reelection amounts to a virtual guarantee of 
reelection. Thus, allowing incumbents the right to unlimited terms carries the 
heavy price tag of seriously diminishing opportunities for competition, debate 
and choice. 
The most obvious alternative means of generating competition entail redrawing 
legislative district boundaries and reducing the enormous advantages now 
afforded incumbents by the current mechanisms of campaign financing. Reforms 
such as a ban on non-election-year fund-raising, which reduces incumbents' 
advantages, or public financing, which increases challengers' chances, would 
unquestionably stimulate more political competition. A redistricting plan drawn 
by some entity other than legislative incumbents could also dramatically alter 
the non-competitive environment. 
In the absence of these reforms, term limitations seem more appealing. But such 
limits should allow for reasonably lengthy tenure in office and, and thus, for 
the development of adequate levels of experience and expertise. In addition, a 
term-limits proposal might be strengthened by the inclusion of certain ethics 
reforms, including revolving-door provisions and restrictions on outside earned 
income. These might reduce the conflict-of-interest dilemmas that term 
limitations can engender. 
