MOTOR RACING; 
SCHMITT TRIES TO MAKE POINT STAND UP IN CLOSE RACE TO FINISH 
What is at the moment the closest race in the 36-year history of the NASCAR 
Winston West championship series will return to Saugus Speedway after an 
absence of 12 years Saturday night for a 200-lap main event on the 
one-third-mile paved oval. 
Bill Schmitt, 53, two-time champion from Redding, leads defending champion Roy 
Smith of Canada by 1,325 points to 1,324, with rookie Bill Sedgwick of Van Nuys 
at 1,269 and 61-year-old Hershel McGriff, 1986 champion, at 1,221. 
The closest finish was in 1968, when Scotty Cain edged Ray Elder by two points. 
More recently, Jim Robinson nosed out Derrike Cope by four points in 1984, and 
Schmitt finished five points ahead of the late Tim Williamson in 1979. 
Only two races remain after Saugus, Sept. 24 on the road course at Sears Point, 
and Nov. 5 as part of the Winston Cup's Auto Works 500 at Phoenix International 
Raceway. 
Smith, 45, closed to within a point of Schmitt when he drove his Ford to 
victory in the Coors 200 last Saturday night at Bakersfield's Mesa Marin 
Raceway. Fading brakes in Schmitt's Chevrolet caused him to drop back to third, 
behind Sedgwick, on the last lap. 
The lead changed hands seven times between Smith and Schmitt over the final 81 
laps, before Smith won by 0.6 second in a four-car blanket finish. 
Smith, who won consecutive championships in 1980-82, dropped out of racing for 
four years to work as a commercial fisherman in Victoria, British Columbia, 
then returned to the series in 1987. Last year, he won his fourth championship. 
Only Elder, the racing farmer from Caruthers, Calif., who won six between 1969 
and 1975, has won more. 
Sedgwick, 34, has been the surprise of the season. He finished better than 
fifth only once in 11 previous Winston West races over nine years and was 
better known as the jack man for McGriff's crew in the early '80s and as 
co-crew chief for Roman Calczynski last year when Calczynski won the Southwest 
Tour championship. 
After the first three races of the $1.3-million 11-race season, Sedgwick 
appeared likely to become the first driver to win the championship and become 
rookie of the year in the same season. He won the opener at Madera and repeated 
two races later at Eureka, opening a wide lead, but lost ground when he failed 
to qualify for the first Sears Point race. 
He will be more at home in the 66.6-mile race at Saugus, where he was a 
Saturday night regular in sportsman cars before electing to run the Winston 
West season. 
"It sure doesn't hurt to be running at what we consider our home track," 
Sedgwick said. "They aren't kidding when they call Saugus the action track, and 
I can guarantee the heat of a close championship will provide even more action 
than usual." 
Winston West cars have not raced on the saucer-like oval since 1977, when Jim 
Thirkettle of Sylmar, now on the Southwest Tour, won, with Schmitt third. 
McGriff, who drove in his first NASCAR race in 1950, won a Winston West race at 
Saugus in 1972 -- when Sedgwick was 7. 
When McGriff won last May at Mesa Marin in his Pontiac, it was his 35th Winston 
West checkered flag and snapped an 18-month losing streak. He also was the 
highest West Coast finisher in the Sears Point Winston Cup race last June. 
The 200-lap event will be the longest nonstop race ever held at Saugus. Races 
such as the Saugus 330 always were split into two segments. Because of the 
length, track officials have installed a pit area where cars can refuel or 
change tires. 
Saturday night's program will also include a 40-lap sportsman main event and a 
train race. The starting time has been moved up an hour to 6 p.m. 
SPRINT CARS -- California Racing Assn. drivers will get a bonus Saturday night 
at Ascot Park when they run for points in the Budweiser American Challenge 
Series as well as the season-long Parnelli Jones Firestone series. Brad 
Noffsinger won the first of the three Budweiser races. 
MIDGETS -- Robby Flock and Sleepy Tripp, after a barnstorming trip to United 
States Auto Club races in the Midwest, return home this week for a Jolly 
Ranchers Western States race Sunday night at Ascot Park. Flock and Tripp 
finished 1-2 in Lincoln, Neb., and Flock picked up a second at Denver. 
Three-quarter midgets will share the program. 
OFF-ROAD -- The Pahrump Station Nevada 500, sixth stop on the High Desert 
Racing Assn./SCORE series, is expected to have more than 200 entries when it 
starts Saturday morning in Pahrump, 50 miles west of Las Vegas. Bob Richey, a 
plumbing contractor from Corona who was the overall winner of the Fireworks 
250, will be first off the line at 8 a.m. Drivers will run a 470-mile loop on 
existing dirt roads to Tonopah in central Nevada and back to Pahrump. 
MOTOCROSS -- The Continental Motosport Club will start a three-event Ascot 
Night Challenge series Friday night at the Gardena track. . . . The seventh 
round of the CMC's Dodge Truck summer series will be run Sunday at Glen Helen 
Park in San Bernardino. . . . The American Motorcyclist Assn. national 500cc 
championship race scheduled Oct. 29 at Hollister Hills, in Northern California, 
has been canceled. 
MOTORCYCLES -- Ron Correy of Fullerton will be the lone U.S. rider in the 
Intercontinental Speedway Final, Sunday in Coventry, England, which is a 
semifinal round for the World Final, Sept. 2, at Munich, West Germany. Sam 
Ermolenko, the other U.S. qualifier, is sidelined with injuries. 
The Budweiser speedway series will return to Victorville Saturday night and 
will serve as a tuneup for the United States qualifier on the same track Aug. 
19. . . . Phil Collins and Bobby Schwartz, tied with six wins apiece, will 
continue their battle for Ascot Park speedway supremacy tonight on the South 
Bay Stadium oval. The AMA Castrol Grand Prix for 250cc road racers will be held 
Sunday at Sears Point Raceway with Modesto's John Kocinski, a protege of Kenny 
Roberts, favored to win his third straight race. . . . The American Road Racing 
Assn. will hold a 500-mile enduro Sunday at Willow Springs Raceway. 
DRAG RACING -- The United Sand Assn. will hold its monthly sand drag 
competition Saturday at San Bernardino's Glen Helen Park. . . . The 
Firestone/Center Line bracket points series will continue Saturday night at Los 
Angeles County Raceway in Palmdale. 
STOCK CARS -- Sportsman cars will headline Saturday night's show at Cajon 
Speedway. . . . Ministocks will be featured at San Bernardino's Orange Show 
Speedway. 
