YOUR BODY: A BOOM FOR IN VITRO FERTILIZATION PROGRAMS 
A decade ago, there were just two in vitro fertilization programs in the United 
States to help infertile couples conceive. Today, the American Fertility 
Society reports there are 192 IVF programs across the nation. 
But nowhere, says the society, is the baby-making boom bigger than in Southern 
California, home to at least 18 IVF centers, most based in hospitals or 
universities. 
"If you're suffering from infertility, this is the place to be," said David 
Hill, laboratory director of the Center for Reproductive Medicine at Century 
City Hospital. 
But with the multitude of choices comes a dilemma: how to select the best 
center? 
Often, patients are sent to a particular center by a gynecologist, usually when 
a couple has not conceived after a year of intercourse without birth control. 
Sometimes, couples search for a center on their own. 
Either way, experts agree, couples should prepare themselves for the search as 
seriously as they would prepare for parenthood. 
To make an informed choice, couples should ask many questions about the 
programs they are considering. Here are some basic ones to ask: 
* What are the qualifications of the physicians? "The ideal is to see a 
board-certified reproductive endocrinologist or someone with comparable 
training," said Joyce Zeitz, spokeswoman for the American Fertility Society. 
* Does the center devote full-time to fertility patients? "Timing can be vital 
in infertility treatment," said Zeitz. "You want to be sure someone is 
available for you when you need a particular procedure." It may be 
psychologically easier to go to a specialized fertility center, she added, 
since many infertile women may be uncomfortable sharing a waiting room with 
pregnant patients. 
* What is the range of services? Most IVF centers offer a wide range of 
services, collectively known as assisted reproductive technology, or ART. In 
IVF, for instance, the egg and sperm are combined in the laboratory and 
incubated before the embryos are transferred into the woman's uterus. In 
another procedure, GIFT (Gamete IntraFallopian Transfer) the eggs and sperm are 
transferred to the woman's fallopian tube to allow fertilization to take place 
there. 
* What is the success rate? Experts agree this is the trickiest question and 
consumers need to ask it very specifically -- and in different ways. 
Ask: What is the overall success rate? "The national delivery rate for the IVF 
technique is 12%," said Zeitz. "Reproductively normal couples, in comparison, 
have a 30% chance of conceiving and carrying to term in a single cycle." 
Ask: "How many patients have you treated with my particular problem in my age 
group?," Zeitz suggested. "What are their success rates?" Be aware that many 
factors influence success rates. A woman under 35, for example, whose partner 
has no fertility problems will probably do better than a woman over age 40 
whose partner has sperm problems, Hill said. There is yet another way to ask 
about success rates, said Dr. Arthur Wisot, staff physician at the In Vitro 
Fertilization Center at South Bay Hospital, Redondo Beach, and co-author of 
"New Options for Fertility": "How many pregnancies and live births have you 
achieved in how many tries over one year's time?" 
* Does the program include psychological support services? "This is an 
extremely stressful treatment," said Wisot, "and the couple needs ongoing 
emotional support." 
* What are the fees? Cost is a factor, experts agree, especially since 
insurance often does not reimburse for costs of fertility treatments. But fees 
should not be the overriding factor in the selection process. 
* Where is the center located? Consider how far the center is from work or 
home. "During the first few weeks, there are many tests and procedures," said 
Hill. So, if two centers seem equally efficient, he suggests choosing the 
closer one. 
Choosing an IVF center may one day be easier. Last month, Rep. Ron Wyden (D -- 
Ore.) introduced legislation to regulate the nation's IVF centers. His proposed 
Fertility Clinic Success Rate and Certification Act is under preliminary 
review, according to Wyden's Washington office. 
