FOOD AND COMMON SENSE: THE FIGHT AGAINST OBESITY SHOULD START EARLY 
Being obese is no more fun for children than for adults. Compared to their 
slimmer peers, overweight children have a higher incidence of bone and joint 
problems, breathing difficulties and respiratory infections, as well as a 
greater chance of elevated cholesterol and high blood pressure. If they remain 
obese as adults, they can look forward to a higher risk of hypertension, 
diabetes and osteoarthritis. 
But the most debilitating aspects of obesity for children are social and 
psychological. In a society that values thinness, obese people are virtually a 
despised minority group. Children seeking identity and peer acceptance are 
especially vulnerable to teasing about their appearance, ridicule for 
clumsiness at games and exclusion from group activities. 
Studies have shown that obesity can prejudice ratings at school and acceptance 
to college. Not surprisingly, obese children, like those in recognized minority 
groups, often have poor self-images, a sense of failure and inferiority and a 
passive approach to life. 
Heredity plays a role in obesity. But so does environment, which is subject to 
modification. Extreme as it sounds, the time to begin thinking about obesity 
prevention is when your baby is born. We're not for a moment encouraging the 
potentially dangerous practice of restricting calories for infants or children. 
We are advising, though, that you pay attention to sound principles of diet and 
exercise, beginning at birth. 
Fat babies may or may not become obese children. However, there's a strong 
likelihood that an obese child will become an obese adult. Once the problem 
appears, it's difficult to treat, especially in children. Established eating 
habits are hard to change, and fat cells, once formed, are there for life. 
Fat cells, in fact, are formed and begin to fill with lipid before birth. Obese 
women and women who gain an excessive amount of weight (50 pounds or more) 
during pregnancy have babies with larger than usual reservoirs of fat. The fat 
cells a baby is born with reach adult size during the first year of life. Then 
the number of cells begins to multiply, rising five-fold between a the time a 
child is 1 year old and 22 years old. 
It's not known whether new fat cells go on forming in adulthood if overeating 
requires new energy storage. What is well documented is that small children who 
are consistently overfed will develop an excessive number of fat cells for that 
age. That doesn't mean that a child who's obese at age 2 or 3 will inevitably 
be obese at 22. Even though that child has more fat cells than its peers, it 
has fewer than a thin adult, and may gradually grow out of it. 
At every age, the balance between calories eaten in food and calories expended 
in activity equals weight stability. Part of the input-output equation for 
children is the calories used in growth. 
Efforts to reduce the weight of an obese child must concentrate on stepped-up 
physical activity. Psychological counseling and support and careful reduction 
of calories also are critical. If weight is maintained or weight gain is 
reduced for several months, growth itself will take care of the rest. 
Long-term treatment of childhood obesity is generally no more successful than 
treatment for adults. Prevention is far better, and it can start before the 
baby learns to walk. Pediatricians usually recommend breast-feeding for the 
first four to six months, then slowly introducing baby foods. 
Mother's milk is the best food for infants, and breast-feeding gives the baby 
some control of food intake. With bottle-feeding, the parent is more likely to 
insist that the baby "clean the plate" or to use food as a pacifier. Some 
overfed babies triple their weight in five months, while the general rule is 
that weight should triple in a child's first year. 
At each visit, the pediatrician checks length (later on, height) and weight 
against a growth chart geared to age. If the growth rate has been above the 
50th percentile, and weight is getting out of hand, the doctor will suggest 
several measures. 
First -- and this applies to the whole family -- provide a diet of tasty foods 
that meet nutrient needs and, for the child, provide sufficient calories for 
lean tissue growth. 
Second, avoid using food as a reward or punishment. Don't make children clean 
their plates. The latter is particularly tempting with 1-year-olds, who 
commonly seem "to lose their appetite." Actually, this is a normal response to 
the slowing of the growth rate. 
Third, emphasize physical exercise, whenever possible in the context of family 
activities. Obese children, including fat babies still in the crib, tend to 
move much less than thinner children, although they may eat no more. Play 
active games with babies and toddlers and ration TV sessions for older tots. 
Stressing family activities such as hiking, walking, swimming and bike riding 
will encourage children to use more energy, provide psychological support and 
make regular exercise seem as much a part of life as regular meals. 
Question: I love avocados, but should I worry about cholesterol when I eat 
them? 
Answer: No. Only animal foods contain cholesterol, so avocados have none. 
However, they do have something that sets them apart from all other fruits: 
oil. This translates into extra calories. 
Exactly how much oil you'll get depends on the type of avocado. By law, 
California avocados cannot contain less than 8% fat. At times they might have 
as much as 20% fat, depending on the season. Florida doesn't set standards for 
the amount of fat in its avocados; they also tend to be lower in fat. 
Three ounces of raw Florida avocado would provide approximately 95 calories, 68 
of them from fat. Three ounces of California avocado would have about 153 
calories, 134 of them from fat (and most of the rest from carbohydrate). 
Avocados are believed to be native to Mexico. They weren't grown commercially 
in this country until the turn of the century. 
Q: Does pumpernickel bread have a lot of fiber? 
A: The best answer we can give you is a qualified "sometimes." Most often, the 
answer is probably no. 
Why the discrepancy? The reason is that there are many kinds of pumpernickel. 
If the bread is made mainly from whole-wheat flour, along with dark-rye flour 
and unbolted cornmeal, it will indeed be high in fiber. But some bread that 
goes by the name of pumpernickel is actually made with refined white flour and 
de-germed cornmeal and may have very little fiber -- aside from what's provided 
by any caraway seeds it might contain. 
When we checked five pumpernickel recipes, we were surprised by some of the 
ingredients. Four of the five listed mashed potatoes. One used cocoa, another 
chocolate. At the supermarket, the labels revealed that the most important 
ingredient in several loaves was refined bleached flour. Others used whole 
grains, but it wasn't always clear how much. 
If you're looking for a fiber-rich pumpernickel, one option is to bake it 
yourself, using lots of whole grains. Another is to inquire at local bakeries 
until you find one that prepares pumpernickel using primarily unrefined flour. 
Q: My mother is diabetic. The doctor told her to monitor her blood-sugar 
levels. But my friend's mother, also a diabetic, was advised by her doctor only 
to test her urine. Why was my mother told differently? 
A: We can't comment specifically on your mother's case, but we can tell you in 
general why someone would typically be advised to monitor blood sugar. 
For most diabetics, bringing blood-glucose levels as close as possible to the 
normal, nondiabetic state is a key goal. In controlling the condition, 
blood-glucose values provide a more reliable scoreboard than urine testing. 
According to guidelines set out by the American Diabetes Assn., self-monitoring 
of blood glucose was strongly recommended in three situations: in individuals 
receiving intensive insulin therapy (such as those using injections); in women 
who are -- or are planning to become -- pregnant; and in individuals with 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus who have a tendency toward hypoglycemia and 
who may not exhibit the symptoms that usually follow a drop in insulin levels. 
The association also advocated self-monitoring of blood glucose in several 
other situations. These include routine management of individuals taking 
insulin; those who are "insulin resistant" (meaning that their bodies don't use 
insulin efficiently) and require very large doses; and those in whom blood 
sugar is unusually high or low when sugar appears in the urine. In addition, 
any diabetic patient who, along with his or her physician, is seeking to try to 
gain firmer control over the condition or to make changes in drug therapy might 
be encouraged to monitor blood-glucose levels. 
Q: I have a nickel-lined copper pan that I use for making casseroles. Can the 
nickel migrate into the food and cause poisoning? 
A: No. No evidence exists that nickel (or tin, which is also used as a liner) 
will seep into foods in any significant amounts. Besides, nickel is poorly 
absorbed and readily excreted by the body. There have been no reports of 
toxicity linked to nickel-lined pans. 
Compared to tin, nickel makes a more durable lining. And if an empty tin-lined 
pan is left on direct heat it's more easily destroyed than the hardier nickel. 
