KRISHNAS' LAGUNA BEACH FESTIVAL FALLS IN STEP WITH 'FREEDOM' WALK 
Imagine a sparkling Saturday afternoon in Laguna Beach: a cloudless blue sky, 
waves crashing onto a beach packed with bronzed bodies, a volleyball game in 
progress, and bumper-to-bumper traffic on Coast Highway. 
Then, from a crowded sidewalk up the street, comes the increasingly loud sound 
of jingling, jangling, chanting and drumbeats. Heads turn. Eyebrows lift. 
A pack of bobbing, smiling Hare Krishna devotees comes into view, clad in 
pastel-colored robes of peach and white and green, dodging parking meters and 
handing out brochures to anybody who would take one. 
"This sounds like something we do with the preschool children -- freedom of 
expression of oneself within a group," said Susan Ludeman, who said she runs a 
preschool in Las Vegas and was watching the procession. 
It was the fourth annual Krishna festival at Main Beach Park, a time for 
spreading the good word about vegetarian diets, reincarnation and meditation. 
But it was also a time for politics, a time when the Krishnas are trying to 
cultivate public good-will while they appeal an Orange County court case that 
could force them to sell seven temples, including one in Laguna Beach. (Except 
for one temple in Los Angeles, the other six temples are scattered around the 
country.) 
As part of this public relations campaign, a group of about 30 Krishnas are 
participating in a 1,000-mile "walk for religious freedom" from San Francisco 
to Tijuana, said Tracey Killeen, 25, who joined the movement three years ago in 
Boston. "We're not out here recruiting members." 
The walk began May 29 and is expected to end in Tijuana during the Labor Day 
weekend. 
The Krishnas believe their First Amendment rights have been threatened because 
of a lawsuit that accused the group of kidnaping and brainwashing a 15-year-old 
Cypress girl who left home in 1974 to join the Laguna Beach temple. After Robin 
George returned home in 1977, she and her mother sued the Krishnas and won a 
$32.5-million judgment. The judgment has since been reduced to $9.7 million, 
and the Krishnas may have to sell seven of their temples to pay if the decision 
is upheld by the California Supreme Court. 
The Krishnas are appealing the ruling, Killeen said, "because under the First 
Amendment, we have every right to make this decision to practice Krishna 
consciousness." 
In an effort to explain the Krishna faith, which devotees believe has been 
maligned in the news media, the Laguna Beach temple set up informational 
displays under maroon-and-gold striped tents just south of the lifeguard 
station at Main Beach Park. Visitors perused information on reincarnation, 
vegetarian diets and the history of the Krishna movement, while a four-man band 
on a makeshift stage chanted happily to the beat of cymbals and drums. 
Mary Varnadeaux of Claremont stopped to read a display about the dangers of 
eating meat. 
"I'm just very happy I had fish for lunch," Varnadeaux said. 
The Krishnas also had religious items for sale, including incense, meditation 
beads, copies of the Krishnas' sacred text, the Bhagavad-Gita, and T-shirts. 
Another booth offered free samples of Krishna cooking, including rice, bean and 
vegetable dishes. 
"Come and take a plate, special for you!" the Krishna behind the table urged. 
"No meat, no colors, pure nature." 
Lola Busch of Mission Viejo munched cauliflower fried in sunflower oil while 
she scanned information about vegetarian diets. 
"I'm a 'born-again' Christian," Busch said. "I don't understand it, but it's 
interesting. The food's good." 
The festival was part of the California experience for some tourists, who 
captured chanting Krishna members on videotape and in snapshots. 
"I'm from North Dakota," explained one woman as she photographed the Krishna 
procession from across the street. "It's something new to me." 
But not to Susan Ludeman of Washington, who said, "This is just normal -- what 
you'd expect to see out here." 
