THE GALLERIES: LA CIENEGA AREA 
Drawings have always been the closest link to the working process of an 
artist's mind. Small, portable and made with relatively cheap materials, they 
traditionally have served as a means of "thinking out loud" about images and 
issues. But the rise of conceptual art has made the activity of drawing seem 
less private and preliminary. Today, a drawing is often simply an alternative 
method of making finished art. 
A stunning exhibit of 117 drawings by 112 different hands, "A Decade of 
American Drawing 1980-1989," includes work by just about every major artist 
working in two-dimensional media in the United States as well as many 
lesser-known names. What the show doesn't include, unfortunately, is a 
catalogue with an essay to put all this work into some sort of perspective. 
"Drawing" in this show embraces not only pencil, ink, or charcoal on paper but 
a host of other materials as bizarre -- in this context -- as fabric paint on 
flannel (Robert Gober's "Untitled -- Sleepers"). Richmond Burton paints elegant 
arrangements of lines on canvas and mounts them on paper in "Brooklyn Bridge." 
In "Triangle," Barbara Bloom scribbles triangles and equations (perhaps 
relating to the Greek "golden mean") on the mat surrounding a photograph of 
people looking at antique sculpture in a museum. 
As a group, the familiar artists offer few surprises; rather, their drawings 
encapsulate in miniature -- or, considering the substantial size of some of 
these works -- in humbler materials, the kind of work for which they are 
celebrated. 
Given the absence of dates of similar works in other media by the show's 
artists, however (here's where that essay would come in handy), it's impossible 
to know when -- in the development of an artist's particular line of thought -- 
a drawing came into being. 
It may have been intended to greet the world as a drawing -- regardless of the 
continuing dominance of painting in the hierarchy of art media. But it might 
have been a dry run for a series of similar works on canvas or a method of 
plotting out an installation. Or it might have been an afterthought, a pause to 
reflect before moving on to other themes. 
As it happens, few of the works on view actually suggest the process of 
thinking out a problem. (The exceptions include James Rosenquist's "Study for 
Skull Snap," an image of a skull with an attached dripping spigot and 
mousetrap, Brice Marden's knotted, rhythmic "Cold Mountain Study" and Susan 
Rothenberg's hauntingly ambiguous untitled drawing of a hand and peculiarly 
shaped foot supported by long bamboo splints.) 
The sampling of realist imagery in the exhibit includes nudes by Alfred Leslie 
and Eric Fischl and portraits by William Bailey, David Hockney, David Salle, 
Robert Longo, Alice Neel, Malcolm Morley, Wayne Thiebaud and Larry Rivers. 
Their rationales and working methods, of course, vary wildly. One looks at the 
Salle, for example -- an untitled charcoal drawing of a topless young woman 
pinching her underarm -- and tries to imagine the source from which it was 
probably copied. 
The abstract entries -- by Sean Scully, Agnes Martin, Bill Jensen, Ellsworth 
Kelly, Alan Saret, Elizabeth Murray and a few others -- are relatively few. But 
their ranks do include such unexpected delights as John Chamberlain's tiny 
"Howling Excess," a squirming mass of gold, silver, purple and orange squiggles 
and Cy Twombly's "Untitled (Proteus)," a jagged gasp of irregular strokes of 
oil stick that seems to metamorphose (like the Greek sea god) from vegetable to 
animal form. 
Yet (although a roll call of names may not bear this out) conceptual work in 
its various guises gives the show its most pronounced flavor. 
Peter Halley's road sign words ("Maintain Speed," "Road Ends") cut out of 
pieces of Kodalith, Richard Prince's pairings of New Yorker-style cartoons with 
John Cheever-style anecdotes, John Baldessari's fragmentary images sketched on 
plastic for the 1984 Summer Olympics poster -- these and other works at once 
confound and enlarge one's notion of what a drawing can be. (Daniel Weinberg 
Gallery, 619 and 625 N. Almont Drive, to Aug. 26.) CATHY CURTIS 
