WORDS MAKE AGENDA IN MIDDLE EAST 
The Israeli capture of Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, a military as well as spiritual 
Shiite leader in Lebanon, has triggered renewed international interest in the 
10-year struggle between Iran and the United States. The changing circumstances 
of this struggle vividly illustrate the complex diplomatic terrain of the 
Middle East and one of its most nuanced yet highly effective weapons: words. 
Did Israel capture a "combatant" or kidnap a "hostage"? Should the 300 Shiites 
now held by Israel be viewed as "prisoners of war" or equated with the Western 
"captives" held hostage in Lebanon? How important are semantic choices in the 
Middle East conflict? 
U.S. and Iranian leaders have sought to advance their respective interests by 
conveying political signals through highly nuanced messages while preserving 
flexibility of action. President George Bush and Iran's Hashemi Rafsanjani try 
to convince the other to behave differently without explicitly acknowledging 
any fundamental changes in the basic tenets of their forcefully articulated 
policies. 
Maintaining flexibility is vital for both men, not only in the international 
arena, but with respect to their domestic constituencies. 
Rafsanjani, a "moderate" who has advocated a more pragmatic policy toward the 
West -- including an end to Iranian efforts to export revolution -- still faces 
considerable opposition from radicals who oppose any reconciliation with the 
United States. Hezbollah receives most of its support from those radical 
factions who oppose Rafsanjani's pragmatism. Thus, Rafsanjani proclaims 
simultaneously that while he is prepared to "approach the problem reasonably," 
the United States must end its "bullying, arrogant approach" to the situation. 
Bush is also walking a high wire between domestic critics who favor immediate 
military action and those seeking political initiatives aimed at freeing 
hostages at any cost. To his credit, Bush is demonstrating statesmanship by 
deftly conveying signals of resoluteness and a readiness to use force with 
ambiguous but patient diplomacy. 
These combined efforts have created a tenuous political opportunity that could 
lead to the release of the hostages in Lebanon, peace and economic recovery in 
south Lebanon and the normalization of U.S.-Iranian relations. Notwithstanding 
these hopeful developments, it should remain clear that Iran and its allies are 
at war with the United States. 
There should be no ambiguity regarding the Iranian-backed Shiites' loathing of 
America and their readiness to fight the West in advancing the Shiite cause. 
Their success can be largely attributed to America's failure to act in defense 
of its national interests. 
Instead, America once again finds itself manipulated -- politically and 
emotionally -- with the media delivering the messages of our enemy. In this 
"wartime" environment, decisions by public-opinion-makers to describe Israel's 
abduction of Obeid as a "kidnaping," rather than a legitimate act of 
self-defense, or to identify Israel's Shiite prisoners as "hostages," take on 
considerable political significance. 
Moreover, the rhetorical treatment of particular factions of Shiites in Lebanon 
as an independent, national force, exaggerates their political status in a 
country being ripped apart by Syrian and Iraqi proxies. To Lebanon's Shiite 
community, such rhetoric, whether official or unofficial, is perceived to 
reflect subtle but fundamental shifts in U.S. policy -- extending a form of 
political legitimacy to Hezbollah aspirations, strategy and tactics. 
The accepted use of such charged rhetoric can only register as a victory for 
terrorism and a defeat for Western values and interests. After all, how was 
America's airborne interception of the Achille Lauro hijackers characterized -- 
as legitimate "self defense" or as unlawful "hostage-taking"? 
Not only does such careless or carefully chosen rhetoric legitimize Hezbollah's 
struggle -- by equating Israeli actions with those of lawless terrorists -- it 
exacerbates the already strained relations of Israel, the United States and the 
Western democracies. 
Such strains weaken America's regional position and will make it more difficult 
to arrange some sort of prisoner exchange between Israel and Hezbollah, or to 
persuade Israel to take risks for peace in the broader context of the 
Arab-Israeli conflict. 
Another example of the important role of semantics in the struggles of the 
Middle East is the Palestine Liberation Organization's recent political 
recognition by the U.S. government and the ensuing strains in U.S.-Israeli 
relations. 
The PLO was recognized by the United States government not because it had 
changed its behavior. After all, the PLO maintained it already had renounced 
terrorism. Rather, Washington began an official dialogue with the PLO simply 
because the PLO had finally uttered the "magic words." As far as the U.S. 
government is concerned, the PLO is now a legitimate participant in the 
political dialogues. 
The PLO -- well aware how word choice can alter the process -- picks its terms 
carefully. It selects a word in Arabic to satisfy its domestic constituency but 
the English meaning is far different. In recent weeks, Al Fatah called on its 
constituents "to intensify and escalate armed action and all forms of struggle" 
against Israel. 
Always seeking opportunities to enhance its international standing and achieve 
legitimacy, the PLO recently tried to achieve de facto statehood by asking to 
become a signatory to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the subsequent 
protocols. 
Whether groups other than states can be a signatory is subject to legal debate. 
But PLO semantic objectives are clear: advance the goal of 
"self-determination," the code word for an independent state, and enhance the 
status of Palestinians arrested in the occupied territories by increasing 
international pressure on Israel to treat detainees as "prisoners of war." 
In the current hostage situation, it appears likely that the United States and 
Iran, with Syria playing its "why ask me?" role, will try to inch forward in 
the coming months through a complex set of public and private diplomatic 
initiatives. Israel has offered to exchange the Shiites it holds -- including 
Obeid -- for the Israeli and Western hostages. Hezbollah seems to have said 
implicitly -- although it has also seemingly recanted -- that it will secure 
release of Western hostages if Israel first releases "its hostages." Yet the 
Iranian foreign minister says the Lebanon hostage issue doesn't concern Iran. 
Choice of words and timing are critical to achieve a diplomatic breakthrough. 
While it must be clear that Washington will use force if necessary to give 
teeth to U.S. diplomacy, a carefully conducted war of words may offer the best 
chance of achieving political results. 
Opinion-makers must choose their weapons carefully, however, in advancing or 
describing U.S. interests. As a nation we risk the lives of the hostages, 
unnecessary damage to our relationship with Israel and repeating our 
regrettable penchant for self-inflicted wounds. 
