REDS INSPIRED BY CLOSE SHAVE BEFORE THE GAME 
It took some hair-raising antics and a revamped lineup for the Cincinnati Reds 
to end their eight-game losing streak, 5-2, Tuesday at the expense of the 
Dodgers. 
The six hits the Reds got Tuesday -- two of them by winning pitcher Jose Rijo 
-- may not qualify as a mugging, but the Reds were happy to get it, and willing 
to try drastic measures. 
The Reds, who have led the West from the first day of the season, were one-hit 
by San Francisco's Craig Lefferts on Sunday and two-hit by the Dodgers' Mike 
Morgan Monday. Afterward, Manager Lou Piniella said, "Morgan seems like he had 
good stuff. It seems like I'm saying something like that everyday about every 
pitcher we've faced on this trip." 
After Monday's loss, the Reds let their hair down. Ron Oester's, to be precise. 
Eric Davis shaved the second baseman's head in an attempt to change their luck, 
and teammates rubbed his skull. 
Along with some extra batting practice, Piniella tried a more traditional 
approach, shuffling his lineup. For Tuesday's game, Piniella tried Hal Morris 
leading off, Barry Larkin batting cleanup behind Davis, and Billy Hatcher 
eighth. 
Morris, in his first full season, produced a double and triple and scored 
twice, and Larkin doubled and scored. "I just wanted to change things around a 
little bit," Piniella said. "My first intuition was to bat Rijo eighth. Maybe I 
should've. I like Morris in first. He has a good eye, he can run, he makes 
contact. There's nothing wrong with Morris hitting first." 
Morris, who raised his average to .383, said he doesn't expect to bat leadoff 
often, but doesn't mind. "I like hitting anywhere," he said. "The thing about 
it is, you're only hitting leadoff once (in the game)." 
Rijo, who singled and scored in the third and singled and stole a base in the 
seventh, nominated himself as a possible candidate to bat first. 
"I got a four-game hitting streak, yes indeed. I'm hot," he said. "He might 
think about batting me leadoff next time." 
Piniella expressed more relief that the Reds are headed home after playing San 
Diego today than that the losing streak finally ended. 
"In San Diego, I don't want to see a letdown," he said. "I view (today's) game 
as important or more important than (Tuesday's). It's important to go home on a 
winning note." 
