SKYLINE STILL LEADS THE CLASS IN ALTERNATIVE TEACHING 
It is both a simple and revolutionary idea: non-traditional classrooms in the 
public school system. 
Although the idea is well-established at the Skyline School in Solana Beach, it 
is one that has not been championed in most school districts. 
Four classrooms at Skyline are committed to an alternative education program. 
Children of different ages and abilities are grouped in the same classroom, 
studying in an environment that pays special attention to their individual 
interests and needs. 
Parents work side by side with the teachers to keep the adult-to-pupil ratio 
low. Kids are encouraged to pursue learning at their own pace and may remain 
with the same teacher for several years. 
In Linda LaGrange's primary classroom, seven boys and girls of various ages sit 
at a large table. They are completing and illustrating this sentence. "Animals 
should definitely not wear clothing because . . ." 
"They would be too long," a small girl writes. The last child to finish prints 
laboriously, "Dogs can't wear shoes," under his drawing of a Doberman. 
Nearby, a girl lies on a large piece of paper. Her outline is being traced so 
she can cut it out and create a life-size paper doll of herself. It will be 
displayed on a bulletin board with the words, "ELLA, CHILD OF THE WEEK." 
A little boy in a wheelchair listens as another child demonstrates his Space 
Light Sword during Open Sharing. 
The specialized program at Skyline School was created in 1978 at the urging of 
a group of parents who wanted an alternative to the traditional classroom 
without having to leave the public school system. 
Interest in the program has remained strong in the dozen years it has been 
operating, said Berge Minasian, principal at Skyline School. This past school 
year, there were 96 students in the four alternative classrooms, with students 
from kindergarten through sixth grade. The alternative classrooms coexist at 
Skyline with traditional classrooms. Altogether, there are 553 students at the 
school. 
Participation in the program is voluntary and there is a waiting list to enter 
the program. Within a year or so, though, interested students usually make it 
into the program, Minasian said. For the next school year, class assignments 
have been made already. 
Until recently, the program accepted students from throughout North County. 
When the method of school funding for the district changed, enrollment was 
limited to residents of the Solana Beach School District -- with the exception 
of students already in the program. 
Minasian said the district, which has been recognized nationally for 
educational excellence, does not offer the alternative classes because it 
believes they are better than traditional classes, but because it believes 
parents and students should have choices. 
The right of parents to seek alternative programs at public schools is actually 
guaranteed by state law. The parent or guardian of any pupil may request the 
governing board of a school district to establish an alternative school 
program, participation in which must be voluntary. If parents are interested is 
seeing an alternative program established, Minasian urges them to first speak 
with the local principal about it. Depending on what is recommended, the next 
step might be to contact the district superintendent. Minasian said he also 
would be happy to share his experience in the program with anyone interested in 
establishing one. 
The Skyline program makes two firm requirements of parents: 1) They must come 
and observe the program before signing up their child. 2) They must agree to 
actively participate in the classroom. 
"If parents want enrichment, they have to come," said teacher LaGrange. "One 
teacher can't do it all. Without their help this program wouldn't be here -- I 
would be too tired." 
LaGrange worked with parents to establish the program back in 1978. "We wanted 
our children to develop as individuals. "We didn't want our kids to be labeled. 
Here they can work in small groups -- according to their ability -- not their 
age." 
One thing volunteers help with is in typing and covering the books the children 
write themselves. The young authors love to announce, "I'm ready to publish." 
Thirty self-authored books fill one bookcase. 
"These children are more aware of the diversity of human beings. They 
appreciate each other," LaGrange said. ". . . We are trying to find a place 
where everyone can do well." 
Jane Johns is both a parent and an aide in Ollie Stein's class of children, 
aged 7 to 9. "My daughter has been in the program for five years. She didn't 
feel confident about her reading at first, but she has risen above her 
difficulties. She just devours books now, and she did it on her own," she said. 
"The children enjoy the camaraderie of the mixed-age groups. Everyone helps 
each other. If you can't get it, you don't feel inferior. There's not big 
pressure because you're not as smart as others. Everyone is smart in his own 
way," said Johns, who looks forward to her kindergarten-age son starting the 
program in the fall. 
Leslie Mayo observes the alternative program from the room next door, where she 
tutors Spanish-speaking students. 
She describes a scene from the alternative classroom of 10-to 12-year-olds 
taught by Jim Summers: "When a baby hummingbird fell out of its nest, a child 
took it to the classroom and wrapped it in Kleenex. Since the children all 
wanted to help, Jim said to the class, 'Whoever takes this bird home has to 
wake up every hour and feed it with an eyedropper.' 
"A boy who had an ornithologist living next door volunteered, nursing it until 
it could fly. When he brought it back to school the bird flew around the room, 
perched on a kite -- and flew away." 
In the spring, the students, their families and teachers went camping in the 
Anza Borrego Desert. Mayo said that, before the trip, they pitched a tent at 
the school and took turns sitting inside, planning ahead for what they would 
need. 
"These classes accommodate every style of learning. Each child can fit in, in a 
lot of different ways. Handicapped children who can benefit are mainstreamed 
into the program. All the different races are represented. Parents share 
stories of their cultures," Mayo said. 
On Fridays, there are hootenannies, led by teachers LaGrange and Stein. "The 
learning-disabled and the Spanish-speaking join the group singing American folk 
songs like 'She'll Be Coming Round the Mountain,' while one parent plays the 
banjo and another the piano," Mayo said. "It's very festive, uplifting. . . . A 
wonderful way to end the week." 
