BUDGET TALKS SHOW LITTLE PROGRESS; 
DEFICIT: BOTH SIDES BLAME EACH OTHER FOR THE LACK OF GAINS IN THREE MONTHS OF 
NEGOTIATIONS. AND NOW, CONGRESS IS OFF ON ITS AUGUST BREAK. 
President Bush's high-stakes campaign to reach a budget compromise with 
Democratic leaders has been suspended for Congress' August break, with little 
to show for three months of talks besides political scars on both sides. 
House Republican Whip Newt Gingrich of Georgia contends the budget talks have 
virtually collapsed -- and he blames the Democrats for it. Democrats say 
divisions among Republicans are the primary cause of the impasse. 
"We're fiddling around while Rome burns," Rep. Silvio O. Conte (R-Mass.), one 
of the negotiators, cried in despair over the lack of any real progress in the 
negotiations. 
Even last week's invasion of Kuwait by Iraq may have set back the 
deficit-reduction process -- by making it more difficult for negotiators to 
count on deep cuts in defense spending or to raise taxes on gasoline, 
particularly if oil prices begin to spiral. 
Yet, both the President and key Democratic leaders have refrained from 
declaring the summit sessions a failure, holding out hope even in this election 
year that an elusive, bipartisan deficit-cutting accord can be achieved in 
September. 
The reason: The most likely alternative -- automatic federal spending cuts of 
$100 billion or more that would slash some federal programs by as much as 40% 
on Oct. 1 -- is considered too horrible to contemplate by the Administration 
and congressional negotiators alike. 
Trying to keep hope alive, the bipartisan congressional leaders and Bush agreed 
to set a Sept. 10 deadline for agreement and a speedy timetable for approval of 
a package that would reduce the deficit by $50 billion in the coming fiscal 
year and by an unprecedented five-year cut of $500 billion. 
Acknowledging the lack of progress, Rep. Bill Frenzel (R-Minn.) summed up the 
situation: "We're designing a honeymoon cottage. Unfortunately, the girl hasn't 
said 'yes' yet, so we've got a way to go." 
So far, however, the results offer little basis for optimism. 
One factor behind the inability to reach an accord is the widespread public 
apathy over the deficit -- even though the red-ink figure has climbed from $100 
billion last January to $169 billion in mid-July, without including the cost of 
the massive savings and loan bailout. 
While opinion surveys show some signs of rising public concern, the shift has 
not been enough to galvanize members of Congress into taking the kind of tough 
action that is needed -- such as raising taxes or cutting pet spending 
programs. 
And there has been no domestic or foreign shock to jolt the lawmakers into 
casting their reticence aside. "There is no sense of crisis in the land," said 
Sen. Wyche Fowler Jr. (D-Ga.), one of the negotiators. 
Last May, when Bush convened the budget summit and hinted that he might support 
some limited tax increases, Democrats urged him to go on nationwide television 
to outline the gravity of the problem. 
But the President declined, insisting that he would address the nation only 
when he could endorse a bipartisan agreement to narrow the budget gap. 
Key Democrats contend that without jawboning from the White House to intensify 
pressure on Congress, there is no way they could persuade a majority of 
lawmakers in the House and Senate to support them. Only the President can lead 
on the issue, they say. 
Bush's advisers, however, are worried that he will receive the political blame 
if he becomes identified with painful solutions while the Democrats keep their 
distance on taxes and program cuts. 
The President also is faced with a sizzling revolt in his own ranks after his 
decision to reverse himself and declare that some tax increases might be needed 
to tackle the budget dilemma. 
As a result, Bush has remained ambivalent. In Washington, he meets regularly 
with Democratic leaders and seeks their cooperation. On the campaign trail -- 
in order to keep his conservative followers happy -- he has blasted the 
Democrats as big spenders. 
But the Democrats also have been schizophrenic. While some of their 
negotiators, such as House Budget Committee Chairman Leon E. Panetta (D-Carmel 
Valley), have been eager to engage the Republicans by offering their own budget 
plan, Senate Democrats generally have played a waiting game, expecting to 
improve their bargaining position through delays. 
Still others, such as Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D-W. Va.), chairman of the Senate 
Appropriations Committee, and his House counterpart, Rep. Jamie L. Whitten 
(D-Miss.), seem concerned primarily with holding onto their turf -- and are 
resisting major spending cuts or changes in the process. 
Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) is reported to be the chief 
proponent of a hang-tough posture in the closed-door negotiations, a stand that 
often is echoed publicly by Fowler and Senate Budget Committee Chairman Jim 
Sasser (D-Tenn.). 
Mitchell's reasoning is that the growing size of the deficit, together with 
fast-rising estimates for resolving the S&amp;L crisis, will put added pressure 
on Bush and his Republicans to offer the Democrats a better deal on tax 
increases and other parts of a budget package. 
In contrast, Panetta has been urging Democrats to start putting "real numbers" 
on the bargaining table as the only way to get practical results from the 
stalled negotiations. 
But once the Republicans leaked details of their latest proposal -- which 
called for highly unpopular increases in beer, wine and liquor taxes -- Panetta 
had second thoughts about advancing a high-risk plan of his own. 
"We did not pledge that every time the Republicans slit their wrists, we'll 
slit ours," he said. Democrats also feared that any proposal they made before 
the current recess would be picked apart by special-interest groups before 
negotiators could defend their plan. 
Despite the schism in GOP ranks -- and the Democrats' inability to agree even 
on an opening counteroffer -- negotiators on both sides remain confident that 
it will not take them long to find a way to reach an accord once they achieve 
the political will. 
Bush has suggested shifting the summit talks in late August or early September 
to his tranquil hideaway at Camp David, Md., the same spot that former 
President Jimmy Carter took the leaders of Israel and Egypt to make peace, to 
encourage domestic harmony on the budget. 
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.), one of the key players in the talks, 
has endorsed the idea, and last week Foley renewed his expressions of optimism 
that the two sides will be able to reach an agreement in the next two months. 
To Foley, the real deadline for any accord will be Oct. 1 -- the day that the 
automatic spending cuts mandated under the Gramm-Rudman balanced-budget law 
would take effect if there is no agreement on how to trim the deficit more 
gradually. 
If no deal is possible, however, Congress and the President may finesse the 
issue this year by revamping the deficit targets and again deferring the 
deadline for balancing the budget -- in essence a political cop-out. 
Foley already has hinted that Congress might postpone the Gramm-Rudman deadline 
for a month if the negotiators seemed to be making progress. 
His Republican counterpart, House Minority Leader Robert H. Michel of Illinois, 
agrees that only the threat of an imminent deadline will get Congress moving. 
"You don't get a lot of members' attention around here until you're on the 
precipice," Michel said. 
