GUATEMALA SEEN SLIPPING INTO A HAVEN FOR DRUGS 
Late in the afternoon of Aug. 1, a car carrying two men and a large green 
canvas suitcase was waved through security checkpoints directly onto the tarmac 
of La Aurora airport, where a commercial jet was being loaded for a flight to 
Miami. The men worked for the chief of Guatemala's anti-corruption office -- 
but the suitcase contained 55 pounds of cocaine. 
Acting with the assurance that comes naturally to high-level government 
officials, the men ordered the baggage crew to load the suitcase onto the 
plane. 
However, a nearby airline official alerted members of an American-trained 
anti-drug unit stationed at the airport, who halted the loading, confiscated 
the cocaine and arrested one man. The other escaped. 
On the surface, it was a victory -- albeit a small one -- in the effort to 
prevent Guatemala from slipping into the morass of drug-related corruption and 
violence. 
"It's very scary," said one foreign drug expert, who requested anonymity. "It 
wouldn't take much to buy some of these people (Guatemalan officials). It is 
something that could happen very easily." 
Moreover, a Western diplomat added, "All the elements of Colombia are here: 
violence, instability, an alienated population, poverty." 
In fact, the aftermath of the seizure indicates that Central America's largest 
country already is suffering from the narcotics rot that is engulfing Colombia, 
Peru, Bolivia and Panama. 
American and Guatemalan officials say well over 4,500 acres in the country's 
mountains and jungles are planted in amapola, as the poppies used to produce 
heroin are called here. That figure is twice last year's estimate and continues 
to grow so fast that opium production outstrips the production of marijuana, 
Guatemala's traditional drug crop. The American street value of 
Guatemalan-produced heroin ranges from $2 billion to $5 billion, experts 
estimate. 
"As it stands, 60% of the American demand for heroin could be supplied from 
here," one diplomat observed. 
Beyond the home-grown production of opium, Guatemala is now a major 
transshipment point for South American-produced cocaine destined for the United 
States. 
Each week, up to 1,000 kilograms (2,200 pounds) of cocaine is shipped through 
Guatemala, nearly all to the United States, according to foreign diplomats and 
drug experts. 
And while 4,000 kilos of the drug have been seized here this year by Guatemalan 
police and the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, "obviously most get 
through," conceded one expert, speaking on the condition of anonymity. 
Foreign drug experts say that until now, nearly all the production and shipment 
of Guatemalan cocaine have been controlled by the drug cartels operating out of 
the Colombian cities of Medellin and Cali. "The Colombians know where to invest 
money," one drug specialist said. 
However, he says, Guatemalans increasingly are getting into the business. 
The incident at La Aurora is cited as an example of that growth and as a 
measure of how high the resulting corruption has reached into the government. 
The man arrested was Jose Fernando Minero Navas, a close associate of Col. Hugo 
Francisco Moran Carranza, at the time director of the Administrative Control 
Department, President Vinicio Cerezo's anti-corruption office. 
Although Moran told local journalists that the airport arrest would be 
investigated, he defended Minero Navas as "one of the most efficient employees 
of this office, and I give him total confidence." 
Later, the investigation was stopped, and Moran resigned. But he remains a 
close associate of Cerezo, according to some sources. 
More alarming than the aborted investigation have been the actions taken 
against the Guatemalan police who carried out the arrest and seizure. One was 
shot and killed on the street, while the others received death threats and have 
gone into hiding. 
In spite of the statistics, the seizures and the reputed involvement of ranking 
military and government officials in drug trafficking, some diplomats and 
others say corruption is still limited to individuals and has not yet infested 
national institutions. 
Guatemalan military intelligence officers are described as working fully and 
closely with the local U.S. DEA office, a small, underfinanced operation of 
four Americans who have to cover Belize and El Salvador as well as Guatemala. 
"We have done a lot of things here that couldn't have been done without 
(Guatemalan) military intelligence," said one source, adding, "Military police 
have been very cooperative and really do have an interest in getting to these 
people (drug traffickers)." 
Nonetheless, the signs indicate that the narcotics problem has reached serious 
proportions. 
The same source who praised military intelligence and police cooperation said 
that "the army is very vulnerable to corruption, particularly zone commanders." 
Associate of Candidate 
One commander alleged by Guatemalan sources to be involved is Gen. Roberto 
Matta, a close associate of Alfonso Cabrera Hidalgo, the odds-on favorite to be 
elected president in next year's election and a protege of Gen. Hector 
Alejandro Gramajo, the army chief of staff. 
Although diplomats and drug enforcement experts consider Gramajo a major asset 
in the anti-drug effort, he is expected to support Matta as his successor as 
head of the military. 
Accusations of trafficking have even reached into the highest levels of 
government and politics. Cabrera is the subject of constant rumors and charges 
of involvement in the cocaine business. 
He denies the charges and says a DEA investigation has cleared him, but drug 
agency sources in Washington said Cabrera has not been investigated directly. 
When asked if the potential president was considered clean of any drug 
involvement, one source replied, "We haven't cleared him." 
Even diplomats who say there is no evidence that Cabrera is personally immersed 
in narcotic trafficking said that his image is poor. "He hangs around with 
known rotten apples," one diplomat said. 
And while no one has produced evidence of any connection with cocaine 
trafficking, two Guatemalan police sources and other experts indicated that 
Cabrera used his authority to cover up the drug activity of one of his 
brothers. 
One brother, Vinicio Cabrera, was convicted in 1984 of possession of 10 kilos 
of cocaine when arrested in January of that year at the Miami airport. Cabrera 
acknowledged Vinicio's guilt but says there is no truth to charges that another 
brother, Carlos, was involved in a June, 1988, plot to transship 54 kilos of 
cocaine from Panama to the United States. 
Local and foreign sources say Carlos Cabrera had given a man named Eric A. 
Ralda baggage claim checks to recover two suitcases containing the cocaine. 
Ralda was arrested when he tried to pick up the bags, which had been monitored 
on their flight from Panama. 
The sources said Ralda confessed and implicated Carlos Cabrera, who also 
allegedly was seen by a witness standing on a balcony overlooking the baggage 
claim area when the suitcases arrived. 
According to the sources, Ralda was released two days after his arrest, the 
investigation was canceled and Cerezo's aides deny the incident ever took 
place. 
Sources said the apparent reason for the acceptance by otherwise uninvolved 
government and military officials was to shore up the increasingly unstable 
Cerezo administration. 
"The airport incident took place six weeks after the coup attempt," said one 
congressional deputy, referring to a May 9 attempt by some army units to 
overthrow the Cerezo regime. "There apparently was concern that an 
investigation into the brother of the foreign minister would destroy what 
little support existed for the government, so the investigation was called off 
and, for all intents and purposes, we pretend it didn't happen." 
