OLD COURTHOUSE PASSES ASBESTOS TESTS, WILL REOPEN TODAY 
The old San Fernando Courthouse, closed for two days by fears of airborne 
asbestos, was scheduled to reopen today after tests revealed that the amount of 
the cancer-causing fiber in the courthouse air is within legal limits. 
However, the California Occupational Safety and Health Agency still is 
investigating the asbestos removal work at the courthouse to determine whether 
workers followed legally dictated procedures for removing the deadly fibers two 
months ago. 
Cal-OSHA spokesman Rick Rice said state investigators will interview asbestos 
removal workers to determine if courthouse employees and construction workers 
were exposed to harmful levels of free-floating asbestos when the material was 
removed. 
County officials said more than 1,000 square feet of ceiling plaster containing 
asbestos and about 50 feet of asbestos insulation for hot water pipes were 
removed in April, May and June as part of a courtroom expansion and remodeling 
project still under way. The Times revealed Thursday that the county apparently 
violated the federal Clean Air Act by failing to notify the South Coast Air 
Quality Management District of the asbestos work. 
Closed Friday 
Supervising Judge Gregg Marcus of the Los Angeles Municipal Court closed the 
old courthouse Friday afternoon, ordering that proceedings be held in the new 
courthouse and other buildings, after Cal-OSHA officials announced an 
investigation in response to a complaint from a prosecutor who feared that the 
building was unsafe. 
The building remained closed Monday while the tests were processed. Court 
administrator Fritz Ohlrich said the building would be open for normal use 
today. 
Asbestos, once commonly used as an insulator and building material, can lodge 
in the lungs, causing lung cancer, if inhaled. Most contractors now remove 
asbestos uncovered by remodeling work. However, they must follow stringent 
procedures and meet strict guidelines to prevent fibers from becoming airborne. 
Deputy City Atty. Allan A. Nadir said he contacted Cal-OSHA after reading news 
reports of apparent Clean Air law violations during the asbestos removal work. 
He was already worried, he said, because early last week a county worker warned 
another city attorney to stay away from a certain area of the building because 
of exposed asbestos. 
City attorneys, he said, were never told that asbestos was removed from the 
building. Court proceedings continued there throughout the remodeling work 
despite large fans blowing thick white dust throughout the building, Nadir 
said. He also said attorneys never saw asbestos removal workers, who wear 
conspicuous head-to-toe protective gear, on the site. 
Odd Hours 
Project supervisor Thomas Brown said that although the AQMD was not notified, 
the county obeyed all other federal and state rules governing asbestos work. 
Attorneys and judges probably never saw asbestos workers because the actual 
work was carried out at 4 a.m., on weekends and at other off hours, so as not 
to alarm the public, Brown said. 
County officials said they did notify Cal-OSHA about the project, also required 
by state law. 
However, Cal-OSHA officials have refused to confirm that. Rice said Monday that 
if county officials did not notify Cal-OSHA, they can be cited and that he 
cannot comment on pending citations. 
Air samples taken Friday afternoon by Cal-OSHA investigators showed that it was 
safe to resume working in the building, Rice said, but he refused to comment on 
the test results or whether the asbestos levels were close to the maximum 
allowable. 
He said the Cal-OSHA investigation probably will be completed this week. If the 
interviews reveal that the county did not remove the fibers properly, the 
county could lose the right to conduct asbestos work and would have to hire 
outside contractors. 
Meanwhile, officials of the air district said they were continuing their 
independent investigation. 
