STAGGERING COSTS; 
AIDS CARE: WHO'LL PICK UP THE BILL? 
AIDS researchers at the National Institutes of Health last week trumpeted some 
of the best news yet in their eight-year struggle against the killer syndrome: 
evidence that the drug AZT can delay the development of full-blown AIDS in 
people with early symptoms of the disease. 
Now come the hard economic realities. A full dose of AZT costs $8,000 a year, 
and federal officials estimate that up to 200,000 of this country's 1.5 million 
infected people need it. 
Other AIDS drugs have equally stratospheric prices: aerosolized pentamidine, 
including the cost of administration, can reach $3,000 a year. Analysts say 
high-tech drugs in the pipeline will fetch even more. 
Issue of Economics 
The costs of treatment now are beginning to catch up with medical advances. As 
scientists discover new ways to prolong the lives of people infected with the 
human immunodeficiency virus, the national struggle against AIDS increasingly 
becomes an issue of economics -- and fiscal priorities. 
"The questions grow more urgent with every biomedical advance," said Dr. Philip 
Lee, director of the Institute for Health Policy Studies at UC San Francisco. 
"Who will pay? How much will it cost? Why does it have to cost so much?" 
"The AIDS activist movement has made great strides in streamlining the federal 
drug approval process," added Jean McGuire, executive director of the AIDS 
Action Council in Washington. "If we can extend those gains to reimbursement 
issues and drug pricing, we will have truly made a revolution." 
The estimated costs of a national program to medically monitor and treat those 
infected with HIV before they develop full-blown AIDS are staggering. The total 
annual bill could range from $2.5 billion to $10 billion, according to New York 
health economist Peter Arno in an article prepared for publication next month 
in the Journal of the American Medical Assn. 
Budget Concerns 
By comparison, Medicare's kidney dialysis program for the nation's 110,000 
patients with end-stage renal disease is expected to cost taxpayers $2 billion 
this year, according to the Health Care Financing Administration. But 
budget-conscious legislators are in no mood to create another disease-specific 
entitlement program. 
Neither Congress nor the Administration have included funding in next year's 
budget for a large-scale program for early intervention against the virus. 
Coverage for drugs by private health-care plans is spotty, and some are dodging 
costs by instituting caps or exclusions on reimbursements for AIDS and HIV 
disease. 
In February, for example, Commercial Sales and Service Trust of Los Angeles, 
whose policies provide a maximum lifetime benefit of $1 million, slapped a 
$10,000 cap on AIDS benefits, even for existing policyholders. 
"One year of AZT or a few days in the hospital would eat that up very quickly," 
said one frightened policyholder, a 37-year-old self-employed carpenter who 
tested positive for HIV three years ago and has been covered by the company for 
six years. 
"As more and more insurance companies or employers start to redline, we will 
have created a class of people our society has never faced before: the employed 
uninsurables," said Timothy Westmoreland, counsel to the House subcommittee on 
health and the environment. 
Questions about who will pay for new medical technology predated acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome and go far beyond it. In the 1970s, for example, 
private insurers and government health care programs were forced to decide 
whether, and under what circumstances, to pay for costly organ transplants. 
'Society Benefits' 
By 1985, a survey of major health insurers found that 85% would reimburse for 
heart transplants but only 69% would pay for the costlier and riskier combined 
heart-lung transplant. Experts predict that the conflict between technological 
advancement and health-care cost containment will grow even more difficult to 
resolve in the future. 
Advocates of spending for early intervention against HIV make both humanitarian 
and economic arguments. "Society benefits by keeping these people healthy, 
active, employed and paying taxes," said Dr. David Rogers, elected last 
Thursday as deputy chairman of the new National Commission on AIDS. 
"The alternative to early intervention is to do nothing and wait until we have 
a lot of sick, dying and demented people," Rogers said. With total national 
health care spending of $550 billion annually, he added, "it is nonsense to say 
that we cannot afford it." 
"Early intervention dollars now will save an astronomical sum of money down the 
road in terms of future costs for hospitalization," added Rep. Nancy Pelosi 
(D-San Francisco). 
Still, the debate is pitting advocates of people with HIV disease against 
lobbyists seeking funds to combat cancer, heart disease and other illnesses. 
Some argue that AIDS research and education, budgeted at $1.31 billion for the 
current fiscal year, is already taking too large a slice of the federal health 
research pie. 
Comparable federal research allocations in fiscal 1989 were $1.45 billion for 
cancer, $1.01 billion for heart disease, $267 million for diabetes and $127 
million for Alzheimer's disease. 
Concern for Research Funds 
Besides the current competition for research funds, "down the line, you can 
imagine a competition between the elderly and AIDS patients for health-care 
dollars," said Anthony Pascal, a senior economist with the RAND Corp. 
Within the National Institutes of Health, scientists fret that AIDS research 
dollars will be siphoned away to help pay for patient care. That is precisely 
what happened in March, when $7 million originally earmarked for research was 
diverted to a federal AZT program for people with AIDS. "It is a worrisome 
precedent," said one researcher, noting that the AZT funds are slated to run 
out again in September. 
Other participants in the emerging debate include the state and federal 
governments, private health insurers and pharmaceutical companies, who face 
serious pressures to roll back their prices of expensive AIDS drugs. 
"It is clear that in order to pay for early intervention, we will need to piece 
together funding from a number of sources: Medicare, Medicaid, insurers and 
HMOs," said Steve Morin, an aide to Rep. Pelosi. "Participants will also have 
to pay a portion of the cost." 
Morin said cost estimates of a large-scale early intervention program remain 
highly speculative. "We haven't really tested the market yet. Demand is 
probably high in New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, but early 
intervention is probably a foreign concept in much of the country," he noted. 
"How many people will come in (for testing and treatment)?" Morin asked. "What 
will their needs be? What funding sources are already available?" 
Funding Issues to Fore 
Government payments cover life-extending AIDS drugs in many states, including 
California through the Medi-Cal program. But such coverage requires that 
patients be impoverished to qualify. 
Everywhere there is evidence that questions about funding are coming to the 
fore. Last month, for example, in its first foray outside of biomedical and 
behavioral research, the American Foundation for AIDS Research's board of 
directors earmarked $500,000 for studies of health-care financing and service 
delivery. 
"That's where the AIDS story is going," said David Corkery, the foundation's 
director of communications. 
In Washington, the Health Insurance Assn. of America has established a task 
force of insurance company medical directors to consider reimbursing patients 
for experimental drugs for AIDS and other life-threatening illnesses. 
Most insurers currently do not reimburse patients for such drugs or for 
hospital stays associated with their use. In addition, some balk at paying for 
FDA-licensed drugs unless patients fit into precise criteria set forth by the 
agency or in medical literature. 
Doctors and patient advocates argue that such restrictive reimbursement 
practices exact an inordinately heavy toll on people with AIDS and HIV because 
treatment advances are occurring more rapidly than can be reflected in the 
medical literature. 
Caps Not Condoned 
Jude Payne, policy analyst for the Health Insurance Assn., said private 
insurance companies are treating HIV and AIDS the same way they are treating 
other diseases. 
"People have to be sensitive to the fact that New York and California are ahead 
of the rest of the country in defining standard medical practice for HIV," she 
said. In setting reimbursement policies, she added, the insurers must look at 
the entire nation. 
Payne said the association, which represents 350 private insurers, does not 
condone exclusions or caps on payments for AIDS or HIV. 
Indeed, according to California Department of Insurance attorney Peter Groom, 
such caps and exclusions generally crop up only in self-insured health care 
plans. Such plans, under which employers typically bear the financial risk, are 
beyond the reach of state insurance regulators. 
"These exclusions are cruel and heartless," he said. "They dump people onto the 
public dole." Some civil rights attorneys contend that the exclusions would be 
outlawed if, as expected, Congress enacts legislation supported by the White 
House barring discrimination against disabled people, including those infected 
with HIV. 
However, the legislation would provide little relief against steadily rising 
insurance premiums. "I've seen situations where an employee with AIDS at a 
small company files his first claim and rates triple or quadruple for the rest 
of the company," said Benjamin Schatz, director of the AIDS Civil Rights 
Project of National Gay Rights Advocates. 
To hold costs -- and premiums -- down, some health-policy analysts believe 
Congress should consider ways to reduce prices of drugs for AIDS and other 
life-threatening conditions. 
Orphan Drug Act 
Specifically, they are urging changes in the Orphan Drug Act, which provides 
tax credits and a seven-year exclusive marketing license to companies that 
develop drugs for disorders affecting fewer than 200,000 people. 
Lee of UC San Francisco points to the price of pentamidine, which jumped from 
$24 a vial to $99.45 when its use became clear in preventing pneumocystis 
pneumonia, the most frequent killer of AIDS patients. 
"If you are going to treat HIV-positive individuals (instead of just people 
with AIDS), you've got a world market of 10 million people and a domestic 
market of 1 million," Lee said. 
As the uses for an orphan drug widen, "you've got to ask, 'Can we lower the 
price with competition by re-examining the applicability of the Orphan Drug 
Act?' " Lee said. 
To promote price competition, the Public Citizen Health Research Group and the 
American Public Health Assn. have petitioned the government to issue multiple 
licenses for AIDS drugs developed at public expense. 
"Under the current system, the government is paying twice: the first time for 
the research and the second time for an outrageously priced drug through 
Medicare or Medicaid," said Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, director of the health 
research group. 
But Dr. John C. Petricciani, vice president for medical and regulatory affairs 
of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Assn., warned that tinkering with the law 
could discourage drug makers from pursuing AIDS research. "Price controls," he 
said, "could have a chilling effect on the industry's willingness to take risks 
to develop new drugs." 
