THE MOVIE CHART: FILMS GOING INTO PRODUCTION: 
Biohazard (Concorde). Shooting in L.A. A crew situated on a Saturn space 
station is minding its own business when a deadly, foreign and nasty virus 
makes their lives unbearable. Producer Mike Elliott. Director H. Gallo. 
Screenwriter Catherine Cyran. Stars Catherine Corman, Randy Reinholtz, Chip 
Eston and Mike McDonald. 
Drive (Megagiant Ent.). Shooting in L.A. David Warner, Steve Antin and DeDee 
Pfeiffer (yes, Michelle's li'l sister) star in this internal tale. Warner and 
Antin are commuters -- here on their last trip together -- who discuss 
everything from their lives to the nature of the universe. Executive producer 
Gregory Levy. Producer/director Jefery Levy. Screenwriters C. MacLeod and J. 
Levy. 
Drop Dead Fred (Working Title Films) Shooting in Minneapolis. Phoebe Cates, Rik 
Mayall, Marsha Mason and Carrie Fisher head this examination of a young woman 
and her anarchic, childhood and invisible friend. After losing her husband, job 
and other valuables, the woman is forced back toward the clutches of a 
tyrannical mom, which resurrects the title character no one can see. Executive 
producer Tim Bevan. Producer Paul Webster. Director Ate De Jong. Screenwriters 
Carlos Davis and Anthony Fingleton. Distributor New Line. 
Heaven Is a Playground (Heaven Corp./Aurora Prods.). Shooting in Chicago. It's 
based on Sports Illustrated writer Rick Telander's true account of the intense 
competition among inner-city youths as they vie to catch the eye of NBA 
recruiters. Stars D.B. Sweeney, Richard Jordan, Victor Love and Loyola 
Marymount basketball hero Bo Kimble. Executive producers Larry Edwards, Bill 
Stewart and Doug Cook. Producers Keith Bank and Billy Higgins. 
Director/screenwriter Randall Fried. Also stars Janet Julian with special 
appearances by pro players Maurice Cheeks and Akeem Olajuwon. Spring release. 
Meeting Venus (Enigma Prods.). Shooting in Budapest and Paris. Glenn Close 
stars in this comedy from "Mephisto" and "Colonel Redl" director Istvan Szabo. 
The laughs will stem from the chaos and confusion surrounding the staging of an 
opera with a multinational company in the City of Light. Screenwriters Szabo 
and Michael Hirst. Also stars Niels Arestrup and Erland Josephson. Distributor 
Warner Bros. David Pecchia 
