WATERGATE THEN AND NOW: HOW QUICKLY THEY FORGET 
When Richard M. Nixon waved his last farewell from a White House helicopter 15 
years ago last week, Deborah Gore Dean was still a teen-ager, taking a 
summer-school course at Georgetown University while working part time as a 
hostess in a restaurant. Joseph Strauss was preparing for his first year in 
high school. 
Probably they weren't watching that August night in 1974, as Nixon told a 
stunned and saddened nation he was resigning from the presidency, and didn't 
see him the next morning when he bade a tearful au revoir to his staff. If they 
did watch, they surely didn't listen because Dean and Strauss are both fingered 
today as major figures in the scandal breaking over the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development. They were part of the "brat pack" that recklessly 
scattered millions of government dollars among influential Republican friends. 
As the nation marks the anniversary of Nixon's departure, there is an eerie 
sense in Washington that the wheel has come full circle. Somehow the lessons of 
Watergate, as searing as they seemed at the time, did not sink deeply enough 
into the public psyche. Some people like Deborah Dean were so young they never 
learned -- even though Dean's mother became John N. Mitchell's regular 
companion more than a decade ago. Other people just forgot or decided they were 
above the law. 
How else can you explain why Washington is again steaming with scandal? So far 
this year, the city has seen the first resignation of a Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, who left under darkening clouds; the first rejection of a new 
President's Cabinet nominee, also under fire for his behavior; the criminal 
conviction of a White House national security aide, who almost brought down his 
own President; continuing investigations of bribery in Pentagon programs; 
revelations of gross mismanagement and profiteering at HUD, and passage of a 
massive bill to clean up the scandal-ridden savings-and-loan industry. There 
may be more to come this fall with new fireworks in the HUD affair. 
The cost of these misdeeds goes far beyond the $1,200 likely to be charged 
every taxpayer to clean up the S&amp;Ls. As during Watergate, confidence in the 
integrity of the system is eroding. That's one reason why hefty majorities have 
been telling pollsters that even though they like George Bush, the nation is on 
the "wrong track" and they don't trust Washington. The public will never OK a 
much-needed pay raise for Congress until convinced that Washington has cleaned 
up its act. Why reward thieves? 
To be sure, the legacy of Watergate is not wholly bleak. Some reforms of the 
last 15 years have proved effective. Both the executive and congressional 
branches operate far more openly today, heeding Justice Louis D. Brandeis' 
dictum, "sunlight is the best disinfectant." Some argue that openness has been 
carried to excess, discouraging negotiations on such sensitive subjects as the 
budget -- but by and large, the new approach has served well. So has the 
Freedom of Information Act, with requests for government documents and records 
now routinely granted. Conflict-of-interest rules still need to be tightened 
and clarified for members of Congress, but they are more stringent for 
presidential appointees than in the early 1970s. The large majority of states 
have also strengthened rules for open meetings and conflicts of interest. 
From a White House perspective, one of the most important changes is how 
difficult it now is for a President or his staff to manipulate three of the 
most powerful government agencies for domestic purposes. No longer is the FBI 
in the business of wiretapping or snooping on a President's enemies, as during 
the Nixon years and in previous Democratic and Republican administrations. Tax 
returns are no longer scanned for personal dirt at the Internal Revenue 
Service. And the Central Intelligence Agency is out of national politics. There 
are still occasional misdeeds -- charges of bribery now swirl around some IRS 
agents -- but abuses by the White House have generally been curbed. 
It is arguable that other reforms undertaken in the name of Watergate, as well 
as the Vietnam War, have gone too far. Convinced an "imperial presidency" was 
endangering the nation, Congress began asserting its power during the early 
1970s. It insisted on overseeing and regulating minute details of 
executive-branch policy. 
To carry out this new mission, Congress in the past 15 years has expanded its 
staff from 16,000 to 24,000. But hardly anyone is pleased with the results: 
Cabinet officers are so tied down by their micromasters on Capitol Hill that 
they can't act and Congress is so enmeshed in the chaos of its own making that 
it can't lead. In the case of one reform, the War Powers Act of 1973, even some 
leading congressmen now acknowledge that too much authority is invested in the 
legislature. Sens. Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and John Warner (R-Va.) introduced 
legislation last year allowing the President greater flexibility in committing 
troops to combat. 
Still, the most remarkable feature of U.S. political life 15 years after 
Watergate is how scandal-ridden Washington is once again. Some reforms of the 
post-Watergate era have failed -- especially the attempt to remove the 
influence of money from politics. Driven by the higher costs of campaigning in 
a television age, politicians have connived with special interests to make a 
hash of campaign finance laws. Individual fat cats may no longer bankroll 
politicians, but political-action committees can be even more pernicious in 
their influence. PACs not only exercise influence through direct contributions 
but also work their will indirectly through each party's national campaign 
committees. 
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, for example, built itself a 
war chest by raising money from PACs representing the S&amp;L industry. The 
S&amp;L scandal might never have metastasized to the degree it did had 
Washington politicians not become so beholden to contributors from the thrift 
industry. Both the Reagan Administration and Democratic leaders in Congress 
delayed action on S&amp;L legislation for an unconscionable period because of 
close ties to their S&amp;L friends. 
When Nixon was reelected by a landslide in 1972, private contributions to the 
congressional campaigns totaled less than $100 million. By 1988, private 
contributions for those campaigns ballooned to $476 million. No wonder 
corruption is breaking out again: So much money sloshes through the system that 
people are easily bought. With good reason, pressure is building for public 
financing of congressional campaigns. 
It would be reassuring if the current round of scandals could be cleaned up 
with another round of reforms. But it isn't that simple. Human memory also 
plays a role. Just as Teapot Dome began fading from the nation's consciousness 
within a few years, so too has Watergate. 
Listening to Oliver L. North testify about his hours at the shredding machine 
was like listening to a child who had never heard of John W. Dean. He seemed 
oblivious to the fact that obstruction of justice brought down one President 
and could easily do in another. And how numb to history was Fawn Hall, his 
secretary, as she stuffed confidential documents in her boots so they would 
never be found. Did she not remember the troubles of poor Rose Mary Woods? 
Or consider Deborah Gore Dean. Did it never occur to her that she was leaving a 
paper trail as incriminating as Jeb Stuart Magruder's when she jotted down all 
the HUD projects she wanted to steer toward political cronies? 
Nixon, who lost the most, has remembered Watergate better than anyone. Its pain 
will never leave him. But he hasn't hidden from the world, trying to erase 
people's memory. 
Nixon has worked steadily to rehabilitate himself through his public writings 
and he has come a long way. Others of that day -- H.R. Haldeman, John D. 
Ehrlichman, Charles Colson -- have also worked to repay their debts to society 
and cleanse themselves. Yet even they would argue that each new generation 
needs to relearn the mistakes of Watergate so that they aren't repeated. It 
seems perfectly clear. 
