ANGER BUILDS AGAINST 'MANSIONIZATION'; 
HOUSING: RESPONDING TO RESIDENTS' COMPLAINTS, ARCADIA AND SAN GABRIEL PUT 
TIGHTER LIMITS ON CONSTRUCTION TO AVOID 'MONSTER HOUSES' ON SMALL LOTS. 
The San Gabriel Valley movement against "mansionization" gained momentum this 
week as city councils in Arcadia and San Gabriel tightened building codes to 
further guard against construction of bulky single-family houses that dominate 
their neighborhoods. 
At the urging of angry residents, the Arcadia City Council on Tuesday 
unanimously approved an amendment that will put stricter limits on the height 
and the total square footage of new homes. Depending on the size of the lots, 
single-family houses could not exceed a maximum height of 25 to 30 feet. 
"They're out of place, huge and imposing," said Linda Larew of Arcadia, arguing 
for revisions that would reduce the potential size of houses. 
When an architect who has designed large Arcadia houses addressed the council, 
one woman shouted: "Someone should set a firebomb to one of his houses." 
Feelings were intense in San Gabriel, too. Maddie Petersen said residents of 
single-family neighborhoods such as hers have a right "not to be built on top 
of one another." 
Comments such as these drew enthusiastic applause from audiences in both 
cities. In Arcadia, more than 75 spectators filled the council chambers to 
near-capacity. Although far fewer in number, the San Gabriel advocates of 
controls were firm in expressing their resolve. 
The San Gabriel ordinance cited rising land values as a contributing factor to 
the increase in the "overbuilding" on lots for both single-and multiple-family 
housing. 
In addition to San Gabriel and Arcadia, councils in Glendora, Pasadena, South 
Pasadena and Monterey Park have looked at the issue or plan to do so. 
On Monday, Monterey Park's council will consider whether to enact building 
restrictions. "We got some real big houses going in now," Monterey Park 
Planning Director M. Margo Wheeler said. "I've got one little old lady that 
calls me, crying about a house that's going up in her neighborhood. One of our 
planning commissioners, Joe Rubin, calls them monster houses." 
In addition, the Glendora City Council on Monday referred a staff report on 
large houses to its Planning Commission, suggesting that the commission hold a 
hearing on the issue. 
The staff report on mansionization contained 10 recommendations for further 
restrictions on residential construction. 
In Arcadia's case, this is the third time in two years that the council has 
scaled down the size of single-family houses. The latest changes come just six 
months after the council restricted the size of two-story homes. 
Likewise, San Gabriel on Tuesday revised an ordinance enacted in January. "The 
current ordinance is not quite sufficient," Planning Commissioner Guy Denechaud 
told the council. He said a four-member committee had taken a hard look at 
houses that are "invasive, intrusive and inconsistent" with surrounding houses. 
In recent months the "anti-mansionization" forces in the San Gabriel Valley 
have invoked Arcadia as a good example of what they do not want. 
"One only has to drive through Arcadia to see what we're talking about," San 
Gabriel Planning Commissioner Dennis Williams said. 
Susan Haygood of Arcadia agrees. Living next to a bulky house, she told the 
Arcadia council, makes her feel as if she lives in a fish bowl. 
However, restrictions did not please everyone. Arcadia resident Milton Bade, a 
builder, said: "I'm not happy with the height limitation. I think it should be 
higher, at least 35 feet, because houses would look better, and have a better 
architectural design." 
Other builders and homeowners complained that the new regulations would affect 
plans they have worked on for months. In response, the council agreed that the 
ordinance would become effective in 60 days for applicants with building plans 
already under review by the Planning Department. 
In addition, San Gabriel Councilman Sabino Cici said he was worried about how 
the restrictions might affect a homeowner who wants to remodel. Councilwoman 
Mary Cammarano replied: "If you are looking for a perfect ordinance, there 
isn't one." 
Much of the discussion in San Gabriel focused on how much space should be 
allocated to side yards. One difficulty with the overall issue, Planning 
Commission member Dennis Williams said, is "we can't place 1990s standards on 
1920s lots." 
Glendora community correspondent Brad Haugaard contributed to this report. 
BACKGROUND 
"Mansionization" describes the phenomenon of big houses being built on small 
lots. The trend has increased in the San Gabriel Valley and throughout the 
county as housing prices have risen. In some cases, building codes allowed 
smaller houses to be razed and replaced by bulky structures. In others, an 
existing home is expanded into a "monster house." Some residents complain that 
the big houses harm their neighborhood's character and invade their privacy. 
City councils have responded by tightening codes to allow for more lot space 
around houses. 
