PRESIDENTIAL PANEL TO STUDY AIR TERRORISM 
President Bush announced Friday he is forming a seven-member commission to 
investigate air terrorism, with particular emphasis on the bombing last 
December of Pan Am Flight 103. 
Bush, in an executive order, said the Commission on Aviation Security and 
Terrorism will study the adequacy of security procedures. 
"The commission also shall review options for handling terrorist acts involving 
aviation," Bush's order said. 
The commission will be composed of seven members appointed by the President -- 
including two senators and two members of the House. The chairman of the group 
is to be picked by the President from among the members. 
The panel also will study the issue of public notification of bomb threats, the 
order said. 
Presidential Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said in a statement that 
"ongoing, intensive investigations into all aspects of the destruction of Pan 
Am Flight 103 will not be affected by the commission's work. Rather, the 
commission will focus on the need for additional measures to improve aviation 
security." 
The move was applauded by Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) and 
Minority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.) who had worked with Bush in forming the 
panel. 
"Every American has grieved for the victims of Flight 103 and shared the grief 
of their families. Although the headlines of the tragedy have faded, questions 
still linger," Mitchell said. 
"They involve basic factual questions such as what kind of aviation security 
measures may be necessary under what conditions? What kind of warnings should 
be given to the traveling public? Where, exactly, responsibility should lie 
between airports, airlines, the federal government and foreign governments in 
seeking to protect the security of Americans traveling abroad," Mitchell's 
statement said. 
Dole called Bush's move "a good initiative." 
Flight 103, a Boeing 747, exploded above Lockerbie, Scotland, when a bomb went 
off on Dec. 21, killing 270 people. 
