COUNCIL APPROVES 5-YEAR BAN ON DEMOLITION OF SKID ROW HOTELS 
In a move that advocates for the homeless hailed as a major boost for the 
city's destitute, the Los Angeles City Council on Tuesday unanimously approved 
a tough new five-year ban on the demolition of single-room-occupancy hotels on 
Skid Row. 
The moratorium, which Mayor Tom Bradley has said he will sign into law, allows 
such hotels in the downtown area to be torn down only if the owner constructs 
an equivalent number of equally affordable replacement units. 
"This is a big moment in this town," said a beaming Alice Callaghan, founder of 
the Skid Row Housing Trust, after the council vote. "Eight thousand people 
living in (single-room-occupancy hotels) or on the street will now have 
protection for five years. 
"This will do more to stem the rise of homelessness than anything the city has 
done so far," added Callaghan, director of the Skid Row-based Las Familias del 
Pueblo social service agency. 
The council also agreed in its 12-0 vote to establish a moratorium of up to 
three years on the demolition of such hotels elsewhere in the city. This 
less-restrictive measure includes a similar room-for-room replacement housing 
provision. But it also allows a second exemption under which hotel owners can 
demolish their buildings if they opt to pay the city a $25,000-per-unit fee for 
the construction of replacement housing. 
The new moratoriums replace shorter interim measures in effect since mid-1987. 
At that time, Bradley proposed a one-year demolition ban as a stopgap to 
preserve the city's dwindling low-income housing stock, particularly in Skid 
Row. 
With increased commercial and industrial business in the downtown area, many 
single-room-occupancy hotel owners had begun to demolish their buildings, 
adding significantly to the problem of homelessness in the city's neighborhood 
of last resort. Bradley, in a letter to council members Tuesday, urged approval 
of the extended ban, terming such hotels "the oldest and one of the most 
valuable housing resources for our low-income tenants in the city." 
While officials say the hotels serve a valuable function, they are hardly 
viewed as a housing stock of choice. Some of the 75 downtown hotels are clean 
and quiet. But many others are infested with rodents, roaches and drug dealers. 
Typical rooms, occupied by one or two people, are 10 feet by 12 to 14 feet, 
with a sink and bathing and toilet facilities down the hall. Owners of the 
rooms, which usually rent for between $200 and $300 a month, do not require 
security deposits or the last month's rent up front. Most of the tenants, who 
can rent by the week or the month, are on welfare, Social Security or pensions. 
The lengthy moratorium will provide advocates for the homeless with additional 
time to persuade religious and social service agencies to purchase and fix up 
more Skid Row hotels in a 50-block area east of downtown. 
The Skid Row Housing Trust, dedicated to preserving the housing, has already 
set up a nonprofit organization to purchase and rehabilitate three of the 
hotels. In addition, the Community Redevelopment Agency has created a 
corporation that has purchased a dozen more area hotels for rehabilitation. 
Barbara Zeidman, director of the city's rent stabilization program, said the 
council's action will safeguard 273 buildings and 25,000 tenants citywide. 
"This is the first time the city has asked for replacement housing," Zeidman 
said. "It's a positive disincentive to demolition." 
