BLOODY PAST INFLUENCES DWINDLING UMW; 
COAL STRIKE A FIGHT UNION HAS TO, BUT MAY NOT, WIN 
John Evans felt like he had walked into the devil's den. 
Evans, a beefy home repair contractor with a disdain for labor unions, was 
sitting in one of his favorite bars when he noticed from the conversation that 
he was surrounded by a couple dozen union men -- members of the international 
board of the United Mine Workers, in town for a quarterly convention. 
All of the talk was about the stalemated strike the UMW has been running since 
April against the Pittston Coal Group in Virginia, West Virginia and Kentucky 
over issues ranging from mandatory overtime to pension benefits. 
Although the strike involves only about 1,900 men -- less than 4% of the UMW's 
ranks -- it has become a cause celebre of organized labor. Once again, a union 
with a tradition of hard bargaining is facing corporate demands for concessions 
based on the ever-more-popular contention that global competition makes the old 
rules of the workplace outdated. 
If the miners give in -- as many experts predict they eventually will -- the 
UMW will lose much of its power to make contractual demands of major coal 
companies, and organized labor will have to withstand more public analysis of 
its steady decline. 
The Pittston strike attracted national attention in June and July, when 46,000 
miners at other companies in 10 Eastern states walked off their jobs in 
sympathy, drastically reducing coal production in the eastern half of the 
nation. 
But today the strike is bogged down, attracting few headlines beyond the coal 
country. The sympathy strikers returned to work weeks ago. The Pittston miners 
now stand in isolation, clustering in wooden picket shacks they built at each 
Pittston mine entrance. 
Desperately trying to keep the issue alive, AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland and 
the national presidents of several other major unions plan to get themselves 
arrested today by participating in an anti-Pittston sit-in at a Russell County, 
Va., courthouse, where they will block access to the building. 
Such plans were still being hatched when Evans, who was vaguely aware of the 
miners' soured state of affairs and who is the kind of guy who likes a little 
audacity in his life, got off his bar stool and walked to a table where Bob 
Phalen, president of UMW District 17 in Charleston, W. Va., a region famed for 
its devotion to the union, was sitting with a couple of associates. 
"I want to tell you guys why the public isn't on your side," Evans began, 
drawing several stares of incredulity. 
Evans wanted to tell a story he had heard from somebody else -- how a miner had 
been heard bragging about how he slept on the job and how his union would 
protect him. Obviously, Evans had the wrong audience, but for a reason he 
didn't understand. 
Evans wanted to talk in the present tense, but, in coal strikes, the present 
cannot be separated from the past. 
Debts of Next Generation 
Every coal strike is a history lesson. The struggles of the 99 years of the UMW 
are wordlessly trotted out as debts that the next generation of an ever-smaller 
fraternity of men must pay. Too many uncles and fathers and grandfathers have 
stories to tell. Too many miners -- 100,000, according to the union -- have 
died in the mines in the last century. 
Outside the post office in the isolated little hollow of Matewan, W. Va., for 
example, there is a plaque commemorating what is often regarded as the 
bloodiest struggle of the American labor movement. 
In 1920, a handful of striking miners bent on bringing the UMW into Mingo 
County shot it out with coal company security agents who had come to evict 
strikers from company housing. Ultimately, the struggle moved to Blair 
Mountain, where four battalions of federal troops were called in before an army 
of 10,000 miners agreed to lay down its arms. 
It was with this symbolism in mind two months ago that thousands of Pittston 
strikers and their supporters assembled at Blair Mountain and marched north for 
days to Charleston. 
A Flood of Liquid Waste 
The next county over from Mingo is Logan County. There, at the head of Buffalo 
Creek, someone has hung a wooden grave marker on a slab of land next to the 
entrance to a Pittston coal-processing facility. The grave marker recounts how 
a dam of liquid coal waste maintained by Pittston broke here in 1972 and wiped 
out the entire hollow, leaving 125 people dead and thousands homeless. 
The handwritten grave marker adds one more sentence: 
 Now Pittston wants the survivors. 
This kind of sentiment makes the UMW "more tradition-bound than any union I 
know," said William Miernyk, economics professor emeritus at West Virginia 
University. To any union, so-called contractual "give-backs" are emotional. To 
the UMW, they are treason. 
The Pittston strike grew out of the company's refusal last year to sign a 
national agreement reached between the union and the Bituminous Coal Operators 
Assn., a group of 14 companies that includes some of the country's biggest coal 
producers. 
Demands Special Concessions 
Pittston, the nation's second-leading coal exporter, contends that it needs 
special concessions from the UMW to cut labor costs in order to remain 
profitable in the international coal market. It wants to end prohibitions on 
Sunday work and mandatory overtime, two work rules dear to the union's heart. 
It insists also that it should no longer have to contribute to an industrywide 
trust fund that provides benefits to thousands of Pittston retirees. 
Negotiations are sporadic and unproductive. Pittston accuses the mine workers 
of being inflexible. The union accuses Pittston of being greedy. The two sides 
won't even sit in the same room. Pittston on Friday said it would not negotiate 
for 10 days to protest what it called continued union-sanctioned violence 
against strikebreakers. 
Nearly 3,000 mine workers and family members have been arrested for illegal 
picketing. Pittston is using strikebreakers, tough court restrictions on 
picketing, an expensive private security force and the aid of state troopers to 
continue hauling some coal out of its Virginia mines. 
The company, supported by its parent corporation, the Pittston Co., which owns 
Brinks Home Security and Burlington Air Express, says it can hold out two 
years. Miners, living on $200-a-week strike pay from a $100-million union 
strike fund, say they can, too. 
Management Victory Seen 
"There'll be a settlement, but it will be on management's terms," said Leo 
Troy, a labor economist at Rutgers University. 
"The mine workers live in communities that are extremely devoted to the union," 
Troy said, "but they're looking at a history that isn't going to repeat 
itself." 
To labor and industry observers, Pittston's demand for concessions took 
advantage of a weakened union that is trapped in a downward spiral. In the 
1970s, the UMW had 250,000 members and produced 70% of the nation's coal; 
today, because of layoffs due to improved technology and the growth of 
non-union strip-mining in the West, only about 70,000 union miners remain, 
producing only about a third of the nation's coal. 
No matter how UMW President Richard Trumka responded to Pittston's demands, he 
could not win, Miernyk and Troy said. If the union had avoided a strike by 
making a separate deal with Pittston, other members of the national coal 
operators' association would probably have demanded similar concessions in the 
next contract. 
Can't Call National Strike 
Once the union struck Pittston -- after working 14 months without a contract -- 
the spontaneous sympathy strikes at other companies temporarily put pressure on 
Pittston to return to the bargaining table. But the UMW cannot call a national 
strike to duplicate this pressure; that would violate its contract with the 
coal operators' association. 
In the formative years of the mine workers' union, its president, the legendary 
John L. Lewis, assailed coal bosses as troglodytes -- outdated relics who would 
be dragged into a more enlightened age of better treatment by the union. 
Today, inside Pittston's headquarters on a huge grassy hill in Lebanon, Va., 
Pittston Coal Group's president, Michael Odom, is trying to turn the tables. 
Odom, a boyish-looking 38-year-old Georgia Tech and Harvard Business School 
graduate who holds daily press briefings during the strike and likes to call 
reporters by their first names, contends that the UMW is the dinosaur, a 
prisoner of its past. 
"Everything they're doing is ducking reality," he proclaims. 
Wages are not the issue. Pittston is willing to pay the going rate, about $630 
a week. But the company insists that, to achieve "continuous production," it 
needs to require Sunday work and be able to order overtime as needed. 
Union Seeks Special Clause 
The union, which believes Pittston is systematically transferring coal reserves 
to non-union subsidiaries to slowly reduce its union work force, is demanding a 
"successorship clause," a device many unions seek to guarantee job security. 
The clause, which Pittston will not add, would pledge that, if the coal group 
sold any of its 12 unionized coal companies, the new owner would honor the 
union contract and keep the union work force. 
But the most emotional issue is Pittston's demand to reduce costs by ending its 
participation in retirement and benefit funds jointly maintained by the coal 
producers' association. Pittston wants to install its own pension and health 
plan. The union says Pittston's withdrawal would jeopardize the fund by putting 
additional pressure on the remaining coal companies. 
When its union contract expired early last year, Pittston cut off medical 
benefits to retirees and widows, a decision that was not reversed for more than 
a year. 
"It's like a credit card that expired," a Pittston spokesman said. "Theirs 
expired." 
Such remarks have not been forgotten. 
"They get on us for violence? Hell, that's what I call violence -- what happens 
to these old people laying at home and dying because they don't have money for 
a doctor," said Bernard Evans, a Logan County union organizer. 
Strikers Watch TV 
On a hot, humid day, Evans, a big, bearded man, drove his pickup truck through 
the narrow, meandering roads of his native county, stopping at each picket 
shack, visiting with strikers who wait out the days by watching television or 
whittling or swatting mosquitoes. 
The men, most wearing camouflage fatigues, long ago quit assuming that the 
strike would end early. They were bitter at Pittston -- particularly at Odom, 
its president, who supervised some of the Logan County operations a few years 
ago -- but felt as though they had no other cards to play. This was a last 
gasp. 
"I can wait as long as Odom can," said one miner, Robert Necessary. 
"This isn't just about the UMW. It's about organized labor," said another, 
James Doczi. "Where else can I go?" 
The next night, down in Virginia, was the night that John Evans (no relation to 
Bernard) walked into the bar full of UMW leaders and began to talk about why 
the public wasn't on the miners' side, why people didn't trust unions, why the 
UMW had an image problem. 
Bob Phalen, the Charleston-area district president, a taciturn man, remained 
quiet. But it was late and everyone had drunk several rounds and, eventually, 
one of Phalen's assistants, Danny Wells, an organizer in Logan County, couldn't 
take it. 
He began grilling Evans about whether Evans paid his laborers union wages, 
whether Evans had ever seen a mine, whether he knew what it was like to work in 
a 36-inch-wide hole, whether he knew what it was like to work in water up to 
his waist. 
Finally Phalen spoke up. 
The hell with what the public thinks, he said, using an expletive. Hell, he 
told John Evans, my best friend was killed in a mine. How could the public know 
what that meant? Did the public know what the union had done to make mines 
safer? Did the public know that a miner still gets killed somewhere every week? 
Did the public know how many times miners had struck to keep their Sundays 
free, to guard against unrestricted overtime? Did the public think the miners 
were supposed to give this up without a fight, like so many file clerks? 
The conversation disintegrated into hazy rhetoric until four Canadian miners at 
the next table, overhearing the tumult, began to sing a dirge about a cave-in. 
It ended like this: 
 All the town cries 
 For the 10 men who died in the mine, 
 But all the town sighs 
 For the one man alive in the mine. 
And then, for several moments, nobody said anything. 
