UNREST IN ESTONIA TESTS KREMLIN'S RISKY POLICY 
Galina Rybanskaya, an ethnic Russian, has lived comfortably for 28 years in the 
Baltic republic of Estonia, but now she is troubled as never before by what she 
delicately calls "elements of discrimination." 
Sasha Kopytina, also Russian, married an Estonian and moved to the republic 
just a year ago. "I had planned to stay here all my life, but now I don't know. 
My rights are being restricted," she said. 
Both women, whose comments appeared in the Socialist Industry newspaper over 
the weekend, are among about 50,000 Russians from 40 enterprises who are 
staging a counter-rebellion in the tiny republic on the shores of the Baltic 
and the Gulf of Finland. 
Russians who live in Estonia have been striking for nearly a week to try to 
pressure Moscow to rein in Estonian nationalists. 
The strike, which threatens to seriously disrupt passenger and cargo rail 
traffic originating in the port city of Tallinn, the republic's capital, goes 
to the heart of a national crisis in inter-ethnic relations and presents a 
serious challenge to the Kremlin. 
Risky Bid in Conflicts 
Moscow has permitted some republics greater freedom in a risky bid to defuse 
ethnic conflicts and dissuade the republics' parliaments from voting to secede 
from the Soviet Union, a move theoretically permissible under the Soviet 
constitution. 
Many ethnic Russians -- the majority in the Soviet Union and long secure in 
positions of power throughout the country -- are being forced to relinquish 
control in some outlying republics to local ethnic groups, and they are 
watching warily to see how far the power sharing will go. 
In Estonia, many feel it has gone far enough. The strike is a warning to Moscow 
that the Russians won't sit by passively if they fear their way of life is 
being endangered. 
The Soviet Parliament, responding to demands from the Estonian Popular Front 
movement, agreed last month to grant Estonians freedom from central economic 
planning and the right to make decisions about their own economy. 
Republic authorities have been permitted to fly their previously outlawed flag 
and to make Estonian the republic's official language. 
Bitter Complaints 
Russians have complained bitterly that each of these steps encroaches on their 
rights, and they formed an opposition group of their own, known as 
Inter-Movement, which claims to have 90,000 members in Estonia. 
Inter-Movement spokesmen have argued against putting industrial enterprises 
with a predominantly Russian-speaking labor force under Estonian control. 
They have opposed the language requirement as unreasonable, saying language 
classes are largely unavailable and expensive. 
But the proverbial last straw was a vote last week by the Estonian legislature 
requiring a minimum of two years residency in one district or five in the 
republic in order to vote. 
The Estonian Popular Front hopes the new law will enable it to keep Russians 
out of positions of power and install independent-minded Estonians instead. 
"We'll never agree to this," strike committee spokesman Mikhail Lysenko, an 
ethnic Russian, was quoted as saying in Socialist Industry's Sunday edition. 
120,000 Non-Estonians 
He said the regulations would disenfranchise about 120,000 non-Estonians, 
primarily Russians, who are living in the republic on short-term work 
contracts. 
Just over 25% of the republic's population of 1.5 million is Russian and about 
65% is Estonian, with the rest made up of other ethnic minorities. 
Soviet Justice Minister Vinyamin F. Yakovlev has said the Estonian voting law 
is unconstitutional. But the Estonian Parliament defiantly declared last 
November that its local laws take precedence over national laws, and republic 
authorities are not likely to back down willingly. 
The Estonians, for their part, have said the Russians' strike is illegal, and 
officials in the republic have imposed fines on strike leaders. But the ethnic 
Russians have refused to negotiate with the Estonian leadership and have 
instead sent a delegation to Moscow. 
Western analysts say that ethnic minorities outside of Estonia will be watching 
carefully to see how the Kremlin handles the Russian rebellion in the Baltics. 
Pretext to Crush Rebellion 
The Kremlin could use the Russian rebellion as a pretext to crush the Estonian 
independence movement, one Western analyst said, but he added that may simply 
add fuel to ethnic protests in other republics. 
"There is no question that the Russians have in many cases acted like 
occupiers. They've been oblivious to the cultures and desires of other ethnic 
groups," the analyst said. 
Estonians don't seem to want to share power, a senior Western diplomat noted. 
They instead have tried to shut out the Russians, and Moscow is concerned that 
the election law "may be the first step on a slippery slope," said the 
diplomat. 
The fear, the diplomat said, is that Estonians could next enact residency 
requirements, preventing Russians from even living in the republic. 
Ethnic hostility in Estonia is likely to intensify next week when 
demonstrations are expected to mark the 50th anniversary of the Soviet 
nonaggression pact with Nazi Germany. 
The pact, signed on Aug. 23, 1939, included secret protocols that led to the 
incorporation into the Soviet Union of then-independent Estonia and its Baltic 
neighbors, Latvia and Lithuania. 
Leaders in the Baltic republics argue that the secret protocols were illegal 
and should be declared null and void, and Soviet sources say a government 
commission studying the pact, whose findings have not yet been released, will 
concur. 
