LOOKS: A MAN'S EYES; 
EVEN MACHO TYPES ARE ENHANCING LASHES, PLUCKING BROWS, CONCEALING BAGS 
WHEN ERNEST Hemingway first met Scott Fitzgerald in a Paris bar in 1925, he was 
struck by his rival's boyish good looks. Fitzgerald, he later wrote, had a 
delicate mouth and "excited and friendly eyes." 
In fact, throughout Fitzgerald's life, people remarked on his eyes. When he was 
a boy, they were described variously as green, blue or gray. And a Princeton 
friend remembered him as "the handsomest boy I've ever seen. He had yellow hair 
and lavender eyes." 
Unfortunately, not all men are blessed with such mesmerizing features -- 
especially since many women say that a man's eyes are what they notice first. 
But eye-care specialists and grooming professionals say there are many things a 
man can do to enhance his eyes. 
Makeup artist Mark Richard, whose clients have included Kirk Douglas and Robert 
Stack, thinks that if a man is being photographed for a wedding or a corporate 
brochure, he shouldn't hesitate to apply a little concealer to camouflage dark 
circles under his eyes. 
But even a man who would never wear cosmetics, Richard says, should make sure 
that his eyes are well-groomed. "I'd start with what I call elephant-hair 
eyebrows," he says of the coarse hairs that sprout as a man gets older. 
"They're not only unflattering but aging." To get rid of them, he suggests, 
stroke each brow inward, toward the bridge of the nose, and then clip any stray 
hairs left standing. 
And, he says, "it's true what your mother told you: Eyes that look too close 
together make a man look as if he can't be trusted." So a man whose brows run 
together may want to consider plucking them with tweezers, asking his 
haircutter to do it or having them waxed. 
Eyebrow waxing is available at numerous hair and skin-care salons. Catherine 
Wood is an independent facialist who works at the Cristophe salon in Beverly 
Hills and charges $12 to wax a man's brows. 
Wood also dyes eyelashes ($18) and uses a collagen pack to alleviate dryness 
around the eyes. "It's a sponge saturated with collagen liquid that I lay 
around the eyes at the end of a massage," she says. "It's $15 extra on top of a 
facial, which costs $60." While Wood acknowledges that "crow's-feet can look 
good on men," such lines can disturb some people's self-esteem. Hence, more and 
more cosmetics manufacturers are offering eye creams formulated to minimize 
wrinkles. Kiehl's Since 1851 is a venerable New York company whose products are 
available at selected retailers (Neiman Marcus and Fred Segal) and by mail. 
Among its products is Ultra Protection Moisturizing Eye Gel, with a sun 
protection factor of 18 (about $30). 
Klaus Heidegger, spokesman for men's division of Kiehl's, says that any man who 
engages in an outdoor sport should use at least a moisturizer, especially 
around the eyes, if he wants to forestall wrinkling. "Runners sweat," he says, 
"so they need to apply it more." Kiehl's also makes a water-resistant Mt. 
Everest '88 Expedition Sunscreen with an SPF of 18 (around $14), which 
Heidegger says is particularly good for skiing and sailing. 
Other activities can also take their toll on a man's eyes. As he got older, the 
alcoholic Fitzgerald's eyes appeared bloodshot and bleary. But Dr. Peter 
McDonnell, an ophthalmologist at the Doheny Eye Institute at USC, says that "as 
part of the aging process, your eyes are a little less clear. You get little 
broken blood vessels in other parts of your body as well, but the conjunctiva 
(the mucous membrane that covers the front of the eyeball) being so thin, they 
show up in your eyes more." 
McDonnell says that "some conjunctival changes -- raised spots, yellowish maybe 
-- are caused by ultraviolet-light exposure. So there seems to be a good 
rationale for wearing UV-absorbing sunglasses. And the effect seems to be 
cumulative, so the earlier you start using them, the better -- driving, skiing, 
on the beach, sailing." 
But if a man's eyes are merely betraying fatigue or overindulgence, McDonnell 
says, eye drops and other simple measures can help. "Some people find comfort 
with a cool washcloth," he says. "Coolness constricts blood vessels and can be 
soothing. It decreases swelling." 
Meanwhile, Richard insists that more men than one would ever suspect are using 
makeup to give Mother Nature a hand. At many beauty supply stores, he says, a 
man can buy black hair pomade and use a smear of it to darken and add luster to 
his lashes. 
