INTELLIGENCE IGNORANCE 
At almost the same moment that the Senate was voting for a $305-billion 
military budget in 1990, President Bush was candidly acknowledging to reporters 
that "we're dealing with less than a full deck" when it comes to knowing what's 
going on in Lebanon. The Senate's action and Bush's lament again underscore one 
of the harsher truths about the limits and possibilities of national security 
efforts. Hundreds of billions are each year devoted to defense and billions 
more to the intelligence services, but for all this mighty endeavor the United 
States still finds itself baffled and frustrated as it tries to respond to the 
barbarism of a handful of fanatics. Those who remember the Iran hostage crisis 
of a decade ago will recognize the bleak familiarity of those feelings. 
Ignorance about the adversaries the United States now faces in Lebanon -- about 
who they are and how they can best be dealt with -- may well be irremediable, 
given the seemingly impenetrable clannishness of the most extreme of Lebanon's 
anti-American factions. The broader shortage of good tactical intelligence 
about Lebanon and other Third World countries is less excusable. For decades, 
the focus of U.S. intelligence efforts has been on technical 
information-gathering, especially with regard to the Soviet Union and its 
allies. The results have been impressive, in some cases remarkable. But one 
consequence of this heavy emphasis -- which disturbed many intelligence 
specialists even as it was occurring -- has been that human intelligence 
efforts in areas of lesser importance, like Lebanon, have been slighted. 
The United States used to be able to count on informers within the Palestine 
Liberation Organization and on close cooperation with Israeli intelligence to 
keep up with who was who and what was what in Lebanon. But Iran's revolution in 
1979 and Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982 changed the picture greatly by 
encouraging the emergence of the long-neglected Lebanese Shiite minority as a 
major political force. The Hezbollah, the most pro-Iran and anti-Western of the 
Shiite groups, is composed mainly of people who are related to or otherwise 
know each other. Organizations can often be penetrated by intelligence 
services; families and cliques are another matter. It is the solidarity and 
secretiveness of Hezbollah that now make intelligence-gathering in Lebanon so 
hard. 
The outrages that have been committed in Lebanon -- the original seizure of 
hostages and the apparent murder of Lt. Col. William R. Higgins -- cry out for 
an effective response. The key word here remains effective. Everyone wishes 
something could be done. What is still lacking, as the President conceded this 
week, are the essential facts to decide what should be done. Ignorance adds to 
the frustration. It also points up the need to fill existing political 
intelligence gaps -- and by no means in Lebanon only -- as quickly and to the 
fullest extent possible. 
