FRIZZELLE GETS IT AT HOME FOR VOTES AGAINST OIL SPILL BILL; 
POLITICS: ASSEMBLYMAN DEFENDS POSITION AMID HEAVY FIRE FROM HUNTINGTON BEACH 
OFFICIALS AND ENVIRONMENTALISTS. HE INSISTS LAW JUST WOULDN'T BE WORKABLE. 
At odds with the sentiments of hometown officials, Assemblyman Nolan Frizzelle 
(R-Huntington Beach) has opposed major environmental legislation requiring oil 
companies to help pay for better response to disastrous tanker spills like the 
one that fouled beaches in his own district in February. 
As a member of the Assembly's Natural Resources Committee, Frizzelle last week 
voted against a bill by state Sen. Barry Keene (D-Benicia) that would make oil 
companies ante up $150 million to pay for improved cleanup efforts after a 
spill. Frizzelle was on the losing side of an 8-3 committee vote in favor of 
the measure, which gained urgency this year after the Huntington Beach spill. 
Huntington Beach officials, who say they support the Keene bill, were unaware 
of Frizzelle's vote and intend to ask him to reconsider. And Orange County 
environmentalists, some of whom worked to save imperiled birds after the 
Huntington Beach disaster, expressed shock that Frizzelle would oppose stronger 
controls. 
"It strikes me as unbelievable that someone representing this district would 
not recognize the need to protect us from oil spills, which would likely happen 
here some day," said Victor Leipzig, a college biology instructor and executive 
director of the Bolsa Chica Conservancy. "It obviously doesn't make any sense 
at all." 
Frizzelle defended his vote, saying he supports tougher oil spill legislation 
but voted against Keene's measure because of how it would assess fees against 
petroleum producers and leave cleanup crews open to potential lawsuits. 
"I'm not going to vote for anything that's not workable, no matter what 
Huntington Beach thinks, no matter what the environmentalists think and no 
matter what the oil companies think," Frizzelle said. "This bill is not 
workable for them but they just don't know it yet." 
Campaign reports show that Frizzelle has accepted $3,950 in campaign 
contributions from oil producers in the past two years. 
According to LegiTech, a computer tracking firm in Sacramento, those 
contributing included large oil producers with plenty at stake in the current 
oil spill legislation: Texaco ($500); Shell Oil Co. ($1,000); Chevron Corp. 
($500); Atlantic Richfield ($900); and the Independent Oil Producers Political 
Fund ($500). 
Frizzelle's objections are similar to those of Gov. George Deukmejian, who has 
written to Keene and threatened to veto what environmentalists are calling 
landmark legislation. Deukmejian wants the oil spill fund scaled down to $30 
million and is also troubled by the liability issue. 
After months of hardball negotiations among environmentalists, oil companies 
and legislators, the Keene bill has become one of the primary vehicles in the 
Legislature for bolstering the state's oil spill plan. The bill gained 
immediate momentum after the ill-fated tanker American Trader settled on its 
own anchor and spilled 399,000 gallons of crude off the Orange County coast. 
Keene's complex measure establishes the office of an oil spill "czar," 
responsible for directing on-site spill response by state, industry, private 
and volunteer cleanup crews. The czar would have power to assess fines against 
any oil producer that fails to have in writing a comprehensive emergency spill 
plan. The cost of recovery and cleanup after a spill would be billed to the 
responsible oil company, such as British Petroleum in the Huntington Beach 
incident. 
In addition, the bill requires oil companies to pay a 25-cent tax for each 
barrel of oil they import to or produce in California. The money would stock a 
$150-million trust fund that would help underwrite quick response and pay for 
wildlife rehabilitation. The tax could be raised to $1 a barrel for any 
extraordinary expenses that require the temporary loan of state money. 
One of the more controversial amendments, however, has to do with who would be 
subject to a lawsuit if cleanup efforts were found to damage private property. 
Originally, Keene made the oil company that spilled the crude liable for those 
kinds of cleanup mishaps. 
But the amendment would protect the on-site workers for only 60 days -- a 
crucial change that would leave professional cleanup crews open to lawsuits 
while working on spills that take longer than two months to mop up. The 
amendment exempts volunteers, but holds industry-backed response teams liable 
for damages they may cause while working "orphan" spills, or those mishaps 
committed by small petroleum companies with limited financial resources. 
Deukmejian and other critics of the amendment say it is at cross purposes with 
the whole idea of ensuring a quick response, since worries of lawsuits will 
force cleanup crews to think twice before coming to the rescue. 
Frizzelle agrees. 
"There is nobody who would dare to move, without first checking with their 
attorney, without first checking the degree of liability," he said. The 
additional legal costs, he added, would be picked up by oil companies and 
passed onto the consumer. 
"I believe whenever we put chains on people who clean it (a spill) up, they 
simply are not going to do it or they are going to charge so much for the price 
of their services, the price of gasoline is going to bear a brunt of having to 
pay for it," he said. 
Aside from liability, Frizzelle said, he objects to how the Keene measure would 
raise the money for the $150-million spill trust fund. Instead of taking the 
money from oil companies up front, he wants the fees tacked on further along in 
the production process when the oil is sold out of refineries to retailers. 
The idea would not only relieve oil companies of paying the tax directly, 
Frizzelle said, it would also save consumers money at the pumps. There is great 
temptation for producers and refiners to take an extra cut of the new tax as it 
is passed along the line, he said. 
"Every time it changes hands, there is an uppage, over and above the cost of 
the fees, so by the time it translates to the consumer, you almost double the 
cap for the fees," Frizzelle said. 
During committee deliberations on Wednesday, Frizzelle also voted against 
language in the Keene bill calling for the state to give first consideration to 
protecting the coast during spill preparation and response. Frizzelle wanted 
those environmental considerations balanced against how much the efforts would 
cost oil companies for new technology. 
Frizzelle said he fought the stronger environmental language because it was 
vague. 
"Environmentalists love this kind of thing because they can change this in 
midstream," he said. "A major corporation has to have something predictable. 
They have to have something that is definable, that they know they have to 
measure up to. They're willing to do it, they're happy to do it and they want 
to do it." 
Those kind of ambiguities and questions over liability, Frizzelle says, has 
created a "bureaucratic monster" and a "boondoggle" that will cost consumers 
disproportionately at the gas pump for the protection it will provide. 
Informed of Frizzelle's votes last week, Huntington Beach Mayor Thomas J. Mays 
said he, most council members and other city officials have been working for 
passage of tougher oil spill legislation. They've sent the fire chief to 
Washington and talked to some Sacramento legislators, but not Frizzelle. 
"I think we just need to do a little more intense lobbying of local 
legislators," said Mays, himself a candidate for Assembly in November. 
"Unless the legislators hear from their constituents, they don't know," said 
Mays, who added that he will call Frizzelle to discuss the votes. "They go on 
their gut feel. It's as much our responsibilities as a community to let our 
legislators know how we feel on certain issues." 
Leipzig, who teaches biology at Cypress College, said supporting strong oil 
spill legislation would reap economic benefits for coastal cities such as 
Huntington Beach. 
"You don't have to be an environmentalist to recognize that an oil spill is 
damaging to our community," he said. "We suffered environmental damage, but we 
suffered just as much economic damage. Our community is, in part, strongly 
dependent on our tourist industry, which was completely shut down in the month 
of February, not to mention the costs incurred by the city." 
Lorraine Faber, past president of the environmental group Amigos de Bolsa 
Chica, said Frizzelle "should have to explain himself to the electorate" for 
last week's votes. 
"This appears to be another case of the Orange County cavemen," Faber said, 
referring to the term Democratic legislators in Sacramento use to describe 
their conservative colleagues from Orange County. "I guess maybe a soft way of 
putting it is misrepresenting their constituents' interests. He's failed in his 
responsibility to those who care about our coastline." 
THE OIL SPILL FALLOUT 
 About 6 1/2 months after the county's shoreline was blackened with crude oil, 
few effects are evident. Biologists are still studying marine life, lawyers are 
still collecting evidence -- and more tankers than ever are using the 
Huntington Beach terminal, although they are observing new precautions and 
carrying smaller loads. 
ENVIRONMENTAL: Orange County's wetlands were spared, but tiny marine creatures 
that lived in the Huntington Beach sand were killed, as were thousands of 
grunion and millions of their eggs and also at least 700 birds. State 
biologists say the grunion already are spawning safely again and that the 
shrimp, clam and other tiny sand-dwelling species will be at their normal 
populations within five years. The long-term effects on birds have not been 
determined. 
ECONOMIC: The city of Huntington Beach says it spent about $528,000 on the 
cleanup, including overtime for police and firefighters and use of sand graders 
and other equipment and materials. The city has received a partial payment of 
$250,000 from American Trading Transportation, owner of the tanker that spilled 
the oil, and the city plans to seek more money in a lawsuit filed by the state. 
City officials said tourism this summer has not suffered, although they worry 
the city's image has been permanently tarnished. 
PROSECUTION: The state attorney general's office is still gathering evidence in 
preparation for prosecuting one or all of the parties involved: British 
Petroleum, American Trading Transportation and Golden West Refining. The 
attorneys plan to seek at least $8 million in connection with violations of 
state water-pollution laws, and they also hope to collect an unidentified extra 
amount in damages and for reimbursement of costs to the city, county and state. 
The prosecutor has refused comment on the investigation. 
POLITICAL: Most political observers believe that the spill galvanized once 
laid-back Huntington Beach into becoming militant about protecting its 
environment. Residents have vehemently opposed malathion spraying, and an 
initiative to restrict sales and leases of beach and parkland qualified for the 
ballot. Slow-growth forces in the city hope to tap that environmental sentiment 
into City Council victories in the November election. 
TANKER TRAFFIC: About 12 tankers have used the mooring since the spill. Ships 
have been restricted to smaller drafts because they must maintain a 6-foot 
cushion between anchor and ocean floor. That means the largest tanker has a 
draft of about 37 feet, depending on the sea conditions; the American Trader, 
by contrast, had a 43-foot draft when it ran aground. Because each ship must 
carry less cargo, more tankers than in the past are using the terminal -- about 
three a month, contrasted with about two before. 
