INJURIES CAN'T KEEP VETERAN VOLLEYBALL PLAYER OFF SANDY COURT 
Jon Stevenson was home. It was the Manhattan Beach Open, down the street from 
his alma mater, Mira Costa High School, and the back yard of childhood friend 
Mike Dodd, where he was introduced to volleyball. 
Years later, it was Manhattan where Stevenson and Dodd made the big time, 
earning their AAA rating -- the highest level in beach volleyball -- with a 
third-place finish in the open in 1980. 
But now another nine years had passed and a 32-year-old Stevenson was sure he 
was going to die on the hallowed sand courts below the Manhattan Beach Pier. A 
broken ankle in the off-season, a torn stomach muscle and, now, a recurring 
back injury had escorted the dreaded R word into his psyche. 
Retirement. 
"I was determined to do well at Manhattan," said Stevenson, who was playing 
with 21-year-old Kent Steffes, a defector from the UCLA volleyball program, in 
the prestigious event. "My back felt good. It seemed cleared up, so I trained 
and trained. But I over-trained, and the injury came back (in the event's early 
rounds). 
"I just barely was able to finish. And here was Kent looking at me like, 'Hey, 
this is Jon Stevenson? The guy who won all those tournaments?' And I just 
wanted to get off the court.' " 
But Stevenson stuck around and, going into this weekend's USA Championship 
tournament at Hermosa Beach Pier, he has finished in the top four in seven 
consecutive events. The string was highlighted Aug. 12-13 when Stevenson and 
Steffes won the $100,000 Orange County Open in Seal Beach. 
It was the first pro victory for Steffes, whose work on the beach circuit 
prompted the National Collegiate 
Athletic Assn. to declare him ineligible to play for UCLA. "But I think I was 
just as elated about winning Seal Beach as he was," Stevenson said. 
It felt a lot like last year, he said. Teamed with the 6-foot-5 Pat Powers, 
Stevenson earned more than $100,000 in 1988. Powers and Stevenson won six 
tournaments, trailing only the perennially dominant teams of Sinjin Smith-Randy 
Stoklos and Tim Hovland-Mike Dodd. 
But for Powers -- like Stevenson -- injuries were devastating. He had rotator 
cuff surgery in the off-season and wasn't able to join the tour until the 
Venice Open in late May. 
"That first tournament, he just played on a lot of heart," Stevenson said. "He 
couldn't even lift his arm, but we won our pool anyway." 
The next week, Powers sat out and Stevenson played his first tournament with 
Steffes. The pair took third in the Santa Cruz Open, but Stevenson was already 
obligated to play with Powers in Boulder, Colo., two weekends later. 
"I just said, 'Sorry Kent,' and went back with Pat," he said. "Then I got 
hurt." 
Stevenson's back injury, coupled with Powers' frustration over the slow pace of 
his own recovery, eventually put a strain on the partnership. 
"We wanted so desperately to get back to where we were last year," Stevenson 
said. "He was such an awesome player. At courtside, jaws would drop. He's just 
an animal. But early this year, I think his lack of ability to do certain 
things you have to do to win took a toll on him. 
"Now Pat is very close to where he was last year. But it was tough for us to 
play together. He had his injuries and I had mine." 
So Stevenson went back to Steffes and, eventually, the winner's circle. 
"For me, it was really gratifying to win with Kent," he said. "It was not only 
the first win for a player with a promising future, but it means that I've won 
with three guys -- Kent, Pat and John Hanley. It's another piece of evidence 
that I can win with different people." 
It's also another piece of evidence that Stevenson can overcome adversity. 
Disadvantage No. 1 was painfully apparent when he walked into his first class 
at Mira Costa High. As a freshman, he was 5-foot-2. 
"I was always a little bit smaller, but I was also a little quicker," he said. 
Stevenson was still a standout point guard on the Mira Costa basketball team -- 
he grew to 5-11 before he graduated -- but in those early days he and an even 
shorter friend would entertain themselves taking Super-8 movies of each other 
slam dunking on 8-foot elementary school baskets. 
Stevenson went to Brigham Young University to play basketball but eventually 
fell in love with beach volleyball and transferred to UC Santa Barbara, where 
he was an All-American indoor player and honor student. 
At 6-feet, he was still relatively small for the beach game when he came out of 
school and played those first three tournaments with Dodd in 1980. But after 
getting the third-place finish in the Manhattan Beach Open, Dodd and Stevenson 
knocked off the top-seeded team of Smith and Karch Kiraly to gain a second in 
the World Championships a week later. 
Stevenson had arrived. 
"Some people knew who I was in Santa Barbara, but I was out of nowhere down 
here," he recalled. 
In 1984, in one of the highlights of his career, Stevenson and Hanley were the 
top point getters on the tour. But the next year Stevenson was again confronted 
by adversity. 
The pro tour introduced the "blocking over" rule, which allowed players to 
reach over the net to block a spiked ball. The rule was perceived as making 
beach volleyball exclusively a big man's game, and it did drive out some of the 
smaller players. But in the fifth season of the rule, Stevenson not only 
remains but has enjoyed more success. 
"Before 1985, I had won nine tournaments," he said. "And since then, I have won 
14. So I don't think (the rule) has hurt me too much." 
Stevenson has tried to make up for the height difference by trying to out-train 
opponents: "I've always placed a high emphasis on training to be competitive 
with the bigger guys." 
So it's ironic that it was training that indirectly led to his next brush with 
adversity. Over the winter, he slipped on a quarter at the gym and broke his 
ankle. 
"It was a freak accident," Stevenson said. "I did my best to stick with my 
(rehabilitation) schedule. But I was doing jumps when I shouldn't have been 
doing them yet when I hurt my stomach." 
Despite what he later learned was a torn stomach muscle, he accepted an 
invitation to play in an international beach tournament in Brazil in late 
February. There he irritated the injury and was forced to sit out the next two 
tournaments. And later the stomach tear led to the back injury. 
"A guy like me, I don't want to sit on the court all day and play games to 
train," Stevenson said. "Instead, I enjoy lifting weights and other kinds of 
training. But when you're doing things like jump-training, you leave yourself 
open to injury a little more. So once I hurt my ankle, I was doomed." 
Stevenson says he's healthy and enjoying life as Steffes' teammate. But the 
partnership is less of the teacher-student situation than it appears. Steffes, 
a 6-foot-3 Pacific Palisades product, is not simply a star of the future who's 
waiting for his chance to take over, according to Stevenson. 
"The way I look at it is, in a way, he's taking over now," he said. "He just 
won a $100,000 tournament at 21. He's impressed me a lot. He's handled his 
success well. When I first met him, I could tell he was beyond his years in 
savvy. 
"There are some things I've taught him, sure. But you'd be surprised how even a 
partnership this is." 
Stevenson, who still lives in Manhattan Beach, has done his share of teaching. 
He regularly writes a column on technique for Volleyball Monthly as an 
associate editor, and he has written a textbook on the beach game called "Hot 
Sand." 
But now, Stevenson has branched out into another medium. He is working as 
technical consultant for a feature film on beach volleyball, "Side Out," that 
is in production. 
