COUNCIL MOVES TO SUBPOENA COUNTY'S MALATHION TEST DATA; 
PUBLIC HEALTH: URINE SAMPLES WERE TAKEN FROM 70 PEOPLE IN SPRAYING ZONES IN 
MAY. WACHS ALLEGES THAT OFFICIAL HAS REFUSED TO PROVIDE DOCUMENTS RELATED TO 
THE STUDY. 
The Los Angeles City Council on Tuesday issued a subpoena to force a county 
health official to produce all documents pertaining to urine samples taken in 
May from 70 people in Los Angeles and Orange counties who said they became ill 
immediately after their neighborhoods were sprayed with the pesticide 
malathion. 
Results of those tests are due in a month and are expected to provide the first 
precise measurements of how much malathion has been absorbed by people in the 
spray zones, state and county health officials said. 
The issue of the urine tests arose Tuesday when Los Angeles City Councilman 
Joel Wachs made a motion to try to compel Dr. Paul Papanek, chief of the county 
Health Department's toxics epidemiology program, to hand over documents about 
the study, as well as all "vital information regarding the health effects of 
malathion spraying." 
Papanek called Wachs "irresponsibly ignorant" and vehemently denied that his 
office has withheld any information. He said there is no need for a subpoena to 
read the background documents, which he said have been available for any member 
of the council to read. 
The council voted 11 to 1 to issue the subpoena, but it also decided to give 
Papanek a final opportunity to turn over the information voluntarily -- and 
under oath -- before enforcing the subpoena. Wachs wants Papanek to appear, 
with the documents, before the council's Arts, Health and Humanities Committee, 
which is conducting its own study of the effects of malathion spraying. 
Wachs alleged that Papanek has refused to reveal information about the study, 
believed to be the first -- and only -- urine testing done during the recent 
campaign to battle the Mediterranean fruit fly with regular doses of malathion. 
Though the campaign has virtually ended -- the last spraying in Los Angeles 
County took place July 23 -- there is continued concern among some residents 
and government officials over the health effects of repeated exposure to the 
pesticide. Wachs said that more than 2 million pounds of malathion-laced bait 
has been sprayed over Southern California since January. 
Papanek said the 70 residents who submitted urine samples were selected from 
more than 1,800 who have called health authorities to complain about symptoms 
ranging from headaches to rashes that they say cropped up within hours of the 
spraying. 
He said public health nurses were sent to collect the samples, which were 
frozen and shipped to the California Department of Health Service's Hazardous 
Materials Laboratory in Berkeley. 
A state research scientist at the laboratory said a "lack of resources" kept 
health officials from taking more samples. 
The samples were taken in May and some city officials have questioned why no 
results have been released 90 days later. 
"We've been trying to get this information for the longest time but we can't 
get it voluntarily," Wachs said in an interview. "There are a lot of questions 
to ask about this: Who did they sample? How did they do it? When did they do 
it?" 
Health officials involved in testing the urine samples said the delay was 
unavoidable. Before analyzing the samples, research scientists had to invent a 
method of detecting evidence of malathion exposure in human urine. 
"We've done this before," said William Draper, a research scientist at the lab. 
"That is, we've taken samples and not known what the heck we were going to do 
with them." 
In an interview, Papanek said the urine testing is being done to support the 
state's contention that the amount of malathion absorbed by the body after 
spraying does not pose a health threat. 
