GLOBAL WARMING EFFECT; 
RISING SEA SEEPING INTO COAST PLANS 
It still seems more science fiction than fact -- the prediction that global 
warming will cause ocean levels to rise and inundate coastal areas around the 
world. 
And even though it may be more than a decade before the theory can be proven, a 
small but growing band of planners, politicians and environmentalists isn't 
willing to wait. Already, they are preparing for the flood. 
Against the din of skeptical developers and engineers, these regulators have 
already begun to incorporate sea-level rise into coastal planning in Maine, 
Massachusetts, Maryland, Florida, North and South Carolina, Louisiana, Oregon, 
Washington and other states -- but nowhere more than in California. 
Bay at City's Door 
Sandra Marker, mayor of Corte Madera, runs a city already fighting back the 
waters of San Francisco Bay. To her, the threat is real and, on the time scale 
of public works, imminent. "Our projections indicate that we have to do 
something within 10 years," Marker says. 
Likewise, Signal Landmark, a large Southern California landholder, is including 
ocean rise in plans for its 1,600-acre Bolsa Chica project, a marshland 
restoration and housing development that could cost as much as $2 billion. 
"It's like looking at the earthquake potential of an area," Carl Neuhausen, the 
company's vice president for planning, says. 
Even unconvinced developers such as Donald P. Warren, president of Redwood 
Shores Inc., which owns 3,000 acres on the shores of San Francisco Bay, take 
planners' concern about sea-level rise seriously. Warren has already pondered a 
round number for the higher dikes his development might eventually need: about 
$3 million. 
'Greenhouse' Side Effect 
A dramatic, if gradual, rising of sea level could be one of the most calamitous 
effects of the predicted warming of Earth from heat trapped by greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere. These gases, released since the first industrial smokestacks 
pushed skyward, include carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and 
chlorofluorocarbons. Their effect in the upper atmosphere has been compared to 
closed windows in a car left out in the sun. 
Like any other material, oceans expand; water rises as it is warmed. Estimates 
deemed plausible by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency range from 2 to 7 
feet of rise around U.S. shores by the year 2100, just from this great 
swelling. In a worst-case scenario, one or more major sheets of polar ice could 
melt rapidly and cause seas to rise higher still. 
Coastal management decisions -- from the building plot of a bungalow to 
nationwide strategies for wetlands preservation -- are now based on time spans 
ranging from 30 to 100 years. Yet planners worry that rapid ocean rise is not 
yet being anticipated. 
Inexpensive, long-range planning now, planners say, would involve relatively 
minor inconvenience and would be well worth the effort, compared to the costly, 
destructive, ad-hoc defenses likely to be thrown up if the big waves arrive. 
Recently, the White House Council on Environmental Quality agreed, warning that 
government may have to adjust for global warming "even before all the 
uncertainties are known." 
Still, serious planning for global warming can seem like so much hot air to 
many understandably dubious politicians, developers and civil engineers, who 
are being told again -- as in the on-again, off-again energy crisis -- that 
disaster is just around the corner. 
When a staffer recently presented a draft report on sea-level rise to the 
California Coastal Commission, he described a future in which dikes might be 
thrown up at Malibu and the sand could disappear from Will Rogers State Beach. 
Realtor's Nightmare 
"I'd hate to have to tell some guy who wants to build a house in Malibu . . . 
that we think the ocean's going to come in your front window," protested 
Commissioner Steve MacElvaine of Morro Bay, who called for a more careful 
review of the scientific evidence. 
"We don't have enough resources for work we need to do today," complained 
Dorill Wright of Ventura County, "let alone to deal with something being 
studied by others that could happen 100 years from now." 
The trouble is, many scientists believe that higher sea levels could be here a 
lot sooner than that. They say that the first flooding of Corte Madera and 
other low-lying developments in California could come within the next 10 years. 
In April, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, as well as 
two University of Toronto scientists, independently announced that the world's 
oceans have been warming and rising twice as fast as previously observed -- a 
confirmation of the greenhouse theory, though still not proof of it. 
Further complicating matters, no one knows how high the waters might go. 
Jeffrey Haltiner, a San Francisco coastal engineer advising Corte Madera, said 
of the bales of technical reports on global warming being released worldwide: 
"You see numbers all over the place. They seem to be revising them all the time 
-- but they seem to be revising them upward." 
Skeptics say it is too soon to base policy on shifting predictions, but many in 
the public-regulations game around the country sense a need for urgency. 
"Every time we make (construction) permit decisions, it's a 40- to 50-year 
decision at least," said state Coastal Commissioner Madelyn Glickfeld of 
Malibu. "To not be concerned about things that are 40, 50 years in the future 
is very shortsighted." 
Few areas have yet looked to that future as soberly as communities in 
California. 
Orange County Rule 
 -- Since 1985, Orange County has required developers to assume in their 
engineering plans that the level of the Pacific is rising. 
 -- The San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, which 
oversees development within 100 feet of the bay, began in March to require that 
plans for structures from pier restaurants to waterfront condos allow for 
rising water. 
 -- Laguna Beach now allows seawalls only as a last resort against erosion. A 
recent study raised concern that future barriers, including those that might be 
thrown up to protect hotels and homes from a rising sea, could also destroy 
beaches. Seawalls have lately been found to encourage the movement of sand in 
front of them and, by protecting cliffs from erosion, to discourage formation 
of new sand. 
 -- Corte Madera has factored sea-level rise into its $8-million plan for dike 
renovations. 
 -- Foster City, much of which lies below the water level of adjacent San 
Francisco Bay, may also have to raise its levees. If it does, the city plans to 
add enough height for the next 100 years of projected sea level rise. 
 -- Sometime next year, the California Coastal Commission is expected to 
reconsider a sea-rise policy, Peter Douglas, the executive director, said. 
 -- The district engineer of the Marin County Flood Control and Water 
Conservation District said that his office is drafting new codes to raise by 
two feet the minimum floor level of shoreline buildings above the water, in 
direct reaction to the possibility of sea-level rise. 
No one knows how much any of this eventually will cost. Even on a nationwide 
scale, financial projections are scarce. Yet a rising sea could be expensive. 
Based on a modest three-foot rise, EPA cost estimates run as high as $111 
billion over the next century for efforts to save only the densely developed 
areas of the American shoreline, or about a sixth of the area that would be 
flooded. 
Such an enormous effort would still abandon thousands of private homes on 
shores outside those areas. Environmentalists aren't likely to accept another 
cost of this strategy, either. Because of the way shorelines work, the dikes 
and levees needed for such an all-out battle to hold back the sea could destroy 
as much as 70% of America's coastal wetlands. 
How likely is an ocean rise? 
The sea has been lifting, in fact, in a grand, natural cycle since the last ice 
age peaked, about 15,000 years ago. Yet this should bother only the most 
long-range worrier. In the past 100 years the oceans have risen a mere 4 to 6 
inches. 
What concerns most scientists is the prediction that global warming, which most 
now believe is real, could greatly accelerate this rate. In that case, the sea 
will expand and rise, overflowing coastlines around the world and drowning 
low-lying areas such as the Marshall Islands (including Bikini and Eniwetok 
atolls, the former atom-bomb test sites) in the Pacific. 
Californians at first would likely experience infrequent but massive storm 
surges, when the effects of sea-level rise, an El Nino condition and a winter 
storm converged. Eventually, in most scientists' scenarios, they could see a 
doubling or tripling of the size of San Francisco Bay, bulldozed rock seawalls 
along the Southern California beaches, a landward migration of development and 
a northward migration of people from Mexico and Central America -- people the 
United Nations already has dubbed "ecological refugees." 
1 Billion Homeless 
Recently, in fact, the United Nations warned that over the next 60 years, 
rising oceans could flood the settlements of 1 billion people. The study, by 
the U.N. Environment Program, advised nations to begin now to curtail coastal 
development, and to be ready to assist the owners of existing shore-based 
businesses and homes as their lands must be abandoned. 
As EPA Administrator William K. Reilly announced unhappily on a recent trip to 
Los Angeles: "The world, I am afraid, is not yet ready for this." 
Yet it could be, with a little planning, said James G. Titus, the EPA's project 
manager for sea-level rise. Anyone researching the subject sooner or later 
hears of Titus, who is both respected for his science and known variously as 
Mr. Sea-Level Rise, the Guru of Sea-Level Rise or simply as a true believer. 
Skeptics on global warming commonly blame the true-believer scientists and 
environmentalists for stirring up debate -- and worse, more government 
regulation -- over a mere theory. 
"If we don't plan now," Titus said, "people will develop the coast on the 
assumption that they can stay there forever. Then, as sea level rises, and you 
either evacuate or defend the coast, people will instinctively erect bulkheads 
and levees to protect their investment." 
In fact, many developers and engineers currently dismiss any sea-level concern 
by saying they will build protective seawalls if and when they have to. 
Titus and other scientists say that over time, most of these defenses will have 
to be abandoned, yet by then the seawalls will have thwarted the ability of 
wetlands and beaches to adapt slowly and move inland. So there would be not 
only a lot of unhappy developers and homeowners, but a lot of lost beaches and 
wetlands, too. 
Many scientists and environmentalists want planned abandonment of shore 
developments as the ocean rises, and they think this hot-potato policy decision 
should be considered soon. 
Titus believes the first step is to put people on notice that sea-level rise 
could happen. Formal wording could be included in property deeds, for example, 
spelling out that a house would likely have to be moved or abandoned in 30 or 
50 years. 
Then, when the time comes, instead of the panic of imminent catastrophe, 
"People will go relatively quietly," Titus predicts. 
Planning would also ensure fairness to developers, he continues, with more 
optimism than most. Without uniform rules, it doesn't pay a builder to make 
costly plan adjustments just to assure that a house won't be threatened by 
rising water before the owner pays off the mortgage -- especially since 
practically no buyers yet even ask about sea-level rise. 
"Government planning," Titus said, "would eliminate the competitive 
disadvantage of being far-sighted." 
The real issue, Titus believes, is not whether the sea level will rise, but 
planning for the risk. 
"If you're building a hazardous waste site, or a septic tank, under the beach, 
something that could become a real nuisance," Titus said, using an extreme 
example, "maybe even a 1% chance of a rise in sea level would motivate you to 
change the decision." 
Meanwhile, the skeptics remain unmoved. 
To developers such as Lewis (Tig) Tarlton of San Francisco, ocean rise is just 
more gloom-and-doom from environmental Cassandras, the "sky-is-falling, 
sea-is-rising group." 
"Chicken Little, and the world is falling down," rails Charles R. Roberts about 
planners' fears. Roberts is chief engineer for the Port of Oakland, having 
spent 39 years in the field. "And I haven't seen the sea level rise in that 
half century . . . . It's a trend to talk about sea level." 
In Malibu, Robert Rubenstein of Malibu Realty said: "No one really seems to 
care" about such disasters in Malibu. "When the floods hit, they just build 
again. My clients, they get another deal for a (motion) picture, they come back 
and buy another house." 
