CHIEF DISCUSSES SHOOTINGS BY SAN DIEGO POLICE 
Police Chief Bob Burgreen on Wednesday said preliminary results of an extensive 
internal investigation into the San Diego Police Department's use of deadly 
force do not suggest that changes in policy and procedure are in order. 
Burgreen's comments on the investigation came two days after an undercover 
police officer shot and killed John Joseph Kelley, 30, while attempting to 
arrest him in the parking lot of a Mission Valley restaurant. The shooting 
marked the seventh time this year that San Diego police have shot and killed a 
suspect who was being arrested. 
"I have made no conclusions at this point as to what if anything needs to be 
done," Burgreen told members of the Citizen's Advisory Board on 
Police/Community Relations. "I want to protect our officers . . . but, at the 
same time, I want to make sure that our officers are acting appropriately in 
this critical area (of) the use of force." 
Burgreen said he and other top police officials are "personally participating" 
in the "time-consuming" investigation into policies and procedures that guide 
police officers in the use of deadly force. The investigation won't be 
completed until late this year, Burgreen said. 
During the course of the investigation, Burgreen and other top police officials 
will ride along with officers to determine if policies and procedures are being 
followed, or if those guidelines need to be revised. 
The officials "will actually be sitting in on classes and reviewing what is 
being taught," Burgreen said. "We will be visiting other police agencies . . . 
looking at their policies, at their training . . . and lastly, (officials) will 
be reviewing what is going on on the streets in actual practice." 
Burgreen on Wednesday said a "parallel review by (the advisory board) would be 
in the public interest at this time." After the meeting, Burgreen said board 
members "have an open door . . . I think it's within their authority and 
jurisdiction . . . they have an open invitation from me . . . nothing will be 
kept from them." 
As part of its review, the Police Department is sending officers to Los 
Angeles, Dallas and Phoenix to study deadly-force policies. 
Burgreen defended the use of deadly force in San Diego, which, in recent years, 
has led the nation in the number of police officers killed while on duty. 
"Eleven officers in 11 years were murdered," Burgreen said. 
But, although Burgreen is intent on giving his officers the right to protect 
themselves, he said the history of police killings "does not alleviate the need 
for our officers to act under appropriate policy . . . and to be held 
accountable" if policy violations are occurring. "I'm very anxious to do what 
we can to remedy some problems" that might exist, Burgreen said. 
On Oct. 5, Burgreen will make a preliminary report to the San Diego City 
Council. Burgreen said he "will not be waiting for the whole package to make 
changes. . . . Any changes that are needed will be implemented as they are 
identified." 
In a related matter, Burgreen on Wednesday made public a letter he sent to 
county grand jury foreman Reno J. Testolin on Aug. 2. The letter acknowledged 
that the Police Department violated its own evidence rules when officers 
improperly stored a Rolodex seized during the highly publicized investigation 
of Karen Wilkening, who, prosecutors said, ran a high-class call-girl ring out 
of a Linda Vista condominium. 
Although Burgreen's letter defended the department's rules and procedures, he 
acknowledged that, "unfortunately, in the case in question, those guidelines 
were not followed. These policies have been restated in order to assure total 
compliance by all members of the department." The policies include proper 
management of evidence and execution of search warrants, as well as several 
management policies. 
In the letter, Burgreen responded to seven recommendations made by the grand 
jury in the wake of Wilkening's trial. Burgreen said he had "reviewed these 
recommendations and is in full agreement with the grand jury." The letter 
included descriptions of the department's responses, "which have been taken to 
ensure future compliance with these recommendations." 
