ROAR HERALDS NIGHT-LANDING PRACTICE 
Neighborhoods around the Marine Corps Air Station at El Toro will experience 
increased noise during the evening this week as fighter aircraft practice 
simulated night carrier landings, base officials announced. 
FA-18 Hornet jets based at El Toro hold night practice sessions several times a 
year, Maj. Jim McClain said. The fighters will be landing on a runway lighted 
and marked like the deck of an aircraft carrier from 8:30 to 10:30 p.m. through 
Wednesday. 
Carrier landing practice is particularly bad for those with sensitive ears 
because "there is a two- to three-hour period of constant roar with no break," 
Lt. Col. Gary Albin said. 
Albin defended the exercises as essential preparation for young pilots who next 
must land on aircraft carriers at sea. 
"It's just like the boat but without the pitch and roll," Albin said. 
The Marines selected El Toro as a landing strip in 1942 in part because it was 
close enough to the ocean that pilots could practice carrier landings at sea. 
At that time, the air station was in an isolated rural area and planes were 
powered by less noisy propellers. 
Today, the thunderous screams of low-flying Marine Corps jets reverberate in 
the closely packed housing tracts around the base. The air station receives 
about 500 noise complaints a year, Albin said. 
He said complaints come from Laguna Hills, Turtle Rock in Irvine, Modjeska in 
the foothills to the east, and other areas around the base. 
In the carrier simulation exercise each pilot makes five to eight 
"touch-and-go" landings at the air field. 
After taking off toward Saddleback Mountain on east-west Runway 7 and flying 
out over the ocean, the jets come in over Laguna Hills and the Leisure World 
community, flying low over the Santa Ana Freeway on approach to north-south 
Runway 34. 
But instead of stopping, the planes touch down on the runway and immediately 
take off again, turning left toward Jeffrey Road, making a circle over the 
freeways and the Wild Rivers theme park before coming back to land on Runway 34 
again. 
McClain said the jet noise will affect the local neighborhoods in east Irvine, 
Laguna Hills and El Toro. 
Individuals who wish to file a noise complaint with the El Toro Air Station 
should call the operations duty officer at (714) 726-3830 for fixed-wing 
aircraft or (714) 726-7884 for helicopters, Albin said. 
