'MY LIFE IS OVER,' VICTIM OF ATTACK BY GRIZZLY THOUGHT 
Don Coverston distinctly remembers the grizzly bear trying to pull his head 
off. 
"Both paws were on my shoulders and the teeth were biting into my head," he 
said. "I remember these grinding sounds, like rocks rubbing together. I 
remember thinking: 'Oh hell, this is really it. My life is over.' " 
It was only the beginning. During the next few hours, after surviving two 
attacks by the bear, Coverston dragged himself through thick woods, falling 
down at almost every step and terrified that the animal would attack again. He 
waded a swift, icy, waist-deep river and finally reached the only highway 
within miles. 
Bleeding from dozens of wounds, unable to see out of one eye and on the verge 
of shock, he fell to his knees and flagged down a car. His first question to 
the stunned motorists was: "Are my ears still on?" 
Coverston, 32, was eventually rushed by helicopter to the nearest hospital, 
more than 150 miles away, where he underwent 9 1/2 hours of surgery that 
required between 1,500 and 2,000 stitches. 
Now, recuperating in his hospital room in Fairbanks, Coverston talks in 
painful, halting bursts. He said he feels like a human jigsaw puzzle. 
Alaska has between 30,000 and 40,000 grizzly bears, according to recent 
government estimates. That is at least 30 times as many as the rest of the 
states combined, and encounters with them are not uncommon. 
Grizzlies have been spotted on jogging trails in Anchorage, the state's largest 
city, and they are frequently seen at a distance by visitors to national parks. 
But attacks are rare -- usually only two or three statewide each summer. 
Coverston's was one of the worst in recent years. 
It happened on Aug. 5. Coverston, an aircraft electrician with the National 
Guard and a part-time college business student, had driven from his parents' 
home near Anchorage to 14 remote acres he has leased from the state near Denali 
National Park, halfway between Anchorage and Fairbanks. 
The land is a couple of miles off the Parks Highway, a two-lane ribbon that 
slices through dense boreal forest, mountains and treeless alpine tundra. The 
closest settlement, Cantwell, is 20 miles away. 
Grew Up on Kodiak Island 
Coverston, who grew up hunting and fishing in the wilderness of Kodiak Island, 
hopes to build a little cabin on the land some day. 
Earlier that Saturday, he had seen bear tracks. Usually, when he is in the 
woods, Coverston carries a .357-caliber handgun for protection. But, this time, 
he took only a small camp ax to clear the thick alder brush that grows on the 
trail. 
"I knew better than to go into the woods alone, and I knew better than to go in 
unarmed," Coverston said, especially after seeing the tracks. "I'm not sure 
what I was thinking." 
Saw Bear Charging 
About an hour into the woods, he heard crackling in the brush behind him, he 
said. He turned. A bear was perhaps 20 feet away and charging. 
"I yelled at it. I yelled, 'Get the hell out of here! What the hell do you 
think you're doing?' I figured my only defense was to scare it off." 
Like many Alaska grizzlies, the animal had a sun-bleached, almost blond coat, 
he said, and was not especially big by grizzly standards. On all fours, 
Coverston said, it came to about waist height. Coverston stands 5 feet, 10 
inches and weighs 160 pounds. 
"I took a few steps the other way and it kept coming. I took this little hand 
ax and tried to kill it," he said, laughing. He threw the ax and it hit the 
bear's head, but just bounced off. 
Remembers Screaming 
"The next thing I remember, I'm down on the ground," he said, speaking quickly. 
"I remember my skin being torn and I remember being bit and screaming at the 
top of my lungs. I was trying to get away . . . I got on my hands and knees and 
the bear picked me up by the neck and shook me." 
Abruptly, he said, the bear dropped him and retreated into the brush. A moment 
later, it came charging back. He said that the animal went "right for my head," 
pushing his shoulders with claws and pulling on his scalp with its teeth. Blood 
filled Coverston's eyes. 
Finally, he decided to stop fighting and play dead. It worked. The animal 
dropped him, he said, disappeared into the woods and did not come back. 
"I lay there and decided I was alive," he said. With dusk approaching, he 
stumbled to his feet and began slowly making his way back to the road. 
"In a way, I almost didn't want to make it 'cause I knew my head and neck were 
pretty bad." he said. At one point, he said, he tried to reposition his scalp 
with his hands and hold it in place with his baseball cap. 
Doctors later found that the bear had sliced his neck from ear to ear and only 
narrowly missed his spinal cord and jugular vein. Although it did not damage 
his eyeball, a claw or tooth poked a hole two inches deep in the corner of his 
right eye, and he suffered bite and scratch wounds on his scalp, back, legs, 
hands and torso. 
Dr. William Wennen, the plastic surgeon at Fairbanks Memorial Hospital who 
worked on Coverston, said, "I've had other (bear attacks) that were 
significantly worse, (but) he's probably one of the luckiest ones I've ever 
seen. Any one of his injuries could have killed him if they'd been a little 
lower, or higher, or a little to the left or a little to the right." 
Coverston was amazed to find that his skull wasn't fractured and no other bones 
were broken. "I was so lucky," he said. Still, he said, the pain is sometimes 
severe, and he sleeps sitting in a chair because of his neck injuries. He 
passes the time visiting with his parents and friends. He will remain in the 
hospital at least several more days. 
Larry Van Dale, a wildlife biologist for the state Department of Fish and Game 
who has studied Alaska bears for years, said the attack, although rare, 
followed the pattern of most others. 
"You almost never see someone killed by a grizzly bear up here," Van Dale said. 
"The reason a bear attacks is because it sees a threat. When someone's moving 
or yelling, it sees a threat. When the person stops, it's not a threat any 
more, and it'll leave. We always say: 'When it happens, play dead.' " 
According to a state study, since the turn of the century 105 people have been 
reported injured by grizzly and black bears in Alaska, 20 of them fatally. 
Coverston said friends have talked about returning to the site "and bringing me 
back a bear skin rug." But he has no desire for revenge. He says he still wants 
to build a cabin on that property some day. 
"It's always been a joke. People find out I grew up in Kodiak (known for its 
huge bears) and they say, 'Have you ever shot a bear?' Why would you shoot a 
bear? It's never interested me. I tell 'em me and the bears have an agreement 
-- I don't mess with them and they don't mess with me. 
"Well, this one broke the contract. Next time, it's: 'Hey buddy, I'm getting 
you before you get me.' " 
David Hulen, a reporter for the Anchorage Daily News, wrote this story for The 
Times. 
