THE OIL SPILL 5 MONTHS LATER; 
ALASKA'S WOUNDS APPEAR TO BE SLOWLY ON THE MEND 
Five months ago, Prince William Sound was a caldron awash with nearly 11 
million gallons of crude oil from the stricken tanker Exxon Valdez. 
Its blackened shores were littered with dead and dying birds. Eventually 30,000 
sea birds and 127 bald eagles died. At least a thousand otters were dying of 
hypothermia as oil matted down the luxuriant hair that insulates them from the 
icy waters, or of acute poisoning after ingesting the oil as they groomed 
themselves. 
Today, that picture may be changing for the better. 
Tidal action and strong currents have swept the waters free of most surface 
oil, which is good news for the birds and otters. 
There are strong indications that concentrations of oil mixed in the water 
itself may be negligible, which would be good news for fish. 
"We're at the point where we've seen all the acute effects," said Parmely (Hap) 
Prichard of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
For many, however, Alaska remains a Paradise Lost. 
On more than 1,300 miles around Prince William Sound, the Gulf of Alaska, the 
lower Cook Inlet and parts of Kodiak Island, black stains mark the high tide 
line like a bathtub ring. 
Oily residue stubbornly clings to rocks and boulders, even on beaches cleaned 
by Exxon, which marshaled a small navy and 11,000 cleanup workers at a cost 
expected to reach $1.2 billion. Pockets of crude are as easy to find as kicking 
over a rock or slipping a hand into a crevasse. 
"It's definitely not restored to its original condition and to tell you the 
truth, we'll never get it back to its original state until nature does its 
work," said Cmdr. Gary Reiter of the U.S. Coast Guard, which oversees Exxon's 
cleanup operations. 
On five islands in Prince William Sound that are prime nesting areas for bald 
eagles, not a single bald eagle chick was born this year, a U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service survey found. On Knight Island, all but 11 of 118 nests were 
barren. On Naked Island, all but two out of 20 were empty. 
"We don't see the sea lions we used to see. The sea otters are a lot fewer -- 
which I'm happy about," said Al Johnson of Homer Ocean Charters, who, like most 
fishermen, considers otters a nuisance and competitors for his catch. 
Scientists also worry about the toll to marine life over the long haul from 
chronic exposure to relatively low levels of toxic compounds. 
No one knows, for example, what will happen to the state's economically vital 
salmon and herring fisheries. Millions of salmon fry were released shortly 
after the spill. Only when they return home to spawn over the next several 
years will experts know how well the fish survived the apocalypse. Most of the 
salmon season was shut down this year. 
Exxon spokesman Everett McGehee ventured: "We really think from the information 
in our studies that fish have not been affected to any large (degree)." 
Sketchiest Idea 
Scientists at this point have only the sketchiest idea of the oil's impact on 
other marine life. Much will depend on the amount of oily contaminants that 
have found their way into the sediments on the ocean floor and intertidal areas 
-- either from the cleanup operations or natural runoff and tidal action -- 
where varieties of marine life live, including sea worms, crabs and clams. 
What is known is that the oil struck capriciously, hitting some areas hard 
while bypassing others. Some clam beds have been devastated by the spill and it 
will probably be years before they recover. Only now, for example, are clam 
beds hit by the catastrophic 1964 earthquake returning to normal. 
"The shoreline dropped from inches to feet and in some of the places where 
shoreline dropped several feet or more we're just now starting to see the 
animals resettle those areas," said biologist Jim Hemming of Dames &amp; Moore, 
a Los Angeles-based engineering and environmental consulting firm under 
contract to Exxon. 
Similarly, "Some shorelines are just horrible (as a result of the spill). There 
are oil deposits in the sediments and lots of oil on the surface," said chief 
scientist Erich Gundlach of the Alaska Department of Environmental 
Conservation. 
Hemming added: "There's no question that on heavily oiled shorelines especially 
there's obvious mortality. Our big interest in those cases is how long does it 
take to recover." Researchers are also interested in learning whether recovery 
takes even longer after shoreline cleaning has driven contaminated sediments 
deeper into intertidal areas, he said. 
Expected to Die 
More bald eagles are expected to die in the months ahead after the salmon runs 
end and eagles resume preying on sea birds that may continue to get mired in 
oil. 
"Even if they are lightly oiled, the eagle can spot a (stressed) bird quicker 
than you can spot a Model-T in a parking lot full of Cadillacs. When that 
happens he's going to go down and pick it up. That's why the eagles got into 
trouble this year," said Jim Scott, an Anchorage veterinarian and an authority 
on bald eagles and other birds of prey. 
"I think we're going to fight problems from this for a long time," Scott said. 
But, there are encouraging signs. 
For the oiled otters that survived the first two weeks of trauma, the prognosis 
is good. By the end of this month, all of the remaining 25 captured otters in 
Valdez will be returned to the wild. Those that have been released are doing 
well. 
"They're swimming really well," said Randall Davis of the Sea World Research 
Institute in San Diego, who led the otter recovery effort here that so far has 
cost Exxon $14 million. That works out to $40,000 for each of the 350 animals 
picked up and treated. Some 922 dead otters were recovered, a number believed 
to represent a small percentage of those actually killed. The otter population 
in the Sound is estimated at between 8,000 and 10,000. 
Early fears have proven unfounded that captured otters would be tamed, and when 
released back to the wild would endanger themselves by swimming too close to 
humans. 
"We were all concerned. We thought they would be fat and lazy. But they're 
diving and retrieving their own food. They seem to be acting in every way like 
(wild) sea otters," said Terrie Williams, a research physiologist working with 
Davis in the recovery effort. She added that the otters, some of which have 
been fitted with radio transmitters, are avoiding boats. 
Much Unknown 
But Davis, like other scientists, said much remains unknown. "There may be 
long-term effects. Oil is toxic at high concentrations. It is carcinogenic at 
lower concentrations," he said. 
How quickly the environment recovers will depend in large part on whether oil 
continues to find its way into sediments. 
"We think that very little of the oil sank during the early part of the spill," 
said Jacqueline Michel, a member of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration's scientific support team at Valdez. 
But she said there is a "big concern" that as the winter storms arrive and 
runoffs from streams and rivers into Prince William Sound pick up, they will 
carry oily particles still on the shoreline into the intertidal zone -- the 
area between high and low tides -- and to the ocean floor. 
Of greatest concern are the bays and inlets that are protected from the brunt 
of the storms because the contaminated sediments would be less likely to be 
dispersed once they settle. 
Toxic compounds attached to sediments could pose a long-term risk to crabs, 
lobsters and clams, as well as pink and chum salmon which in their early stages 
of development feed off tiny bottom-dwelling shrimp-like creatures and other 
crustaceans. 
Evidence from other spills points to chromosomal damage, resulting in 
mutations. Reproduction can be damaged as well. Petroleum compounds and whole 
oils are known to interfere with fish and bird eggs at very low concentrations. 
Exxon plans to shut down cleanup operations Sept. 15 for the winter, when 
weather and storm conditions would make the efforts dangerous, leaving behind a 
small crew to handle any cleanup emergencies. The oil company, which hopes 
Alaska's fierce winter storms will scour the shoreline, has promised that it 
will return next year to finish the job if so directed by the Coast Guard. 
But, there appears to be mounting scientific evidence for not resuming certain 
kinds of cleanup methods, especially those involving the use of high pressure 
hoses to direct streams of 140-degree water at oily shorelines. 
Shorelines Sterilized 
Government scientists from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, NOAA and 
the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation said the tactic has 
sterilized shorelines, killing microorganisms. The hosing of all kinds has also 
also washed toxic oily sediments further into intertidal zones, upsetting the 
natural biosphere. 
"It appears now after the cleaning occurred there's a substantial change for 
the worse," ventured David Kennedy, scientific support coordinator in Valdez 
with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
"We're seeing large plumes of sediment redeposited in sub-tidal (below the low 
tide line) areas. You can't help but have some negative impact," he said. NOAA 
is an arm of the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
The cleanup has spawned a number of other environmental problems as well. The 
oily waste and debris that has been collected has itself become a controversy. 
Exxon has imported incinerators to burn the waste. Other wastes have been 
shipped out of state, a fact that has underscored the point that Alaska has 
been ill equipped to deal with toxic wastes. 
Controversy also continues over the use of kerosene-based oil dispersant, known 
as Corexit 9580, on shore to break up thick layers of oil. Until now, the use 
of such dispersants has been restricted to the open ocean because of their 
toxicity. NOAA and the state have recommended against its further use. Exxon 
used it on three sites on Smith Island covering 25,000 square feet of beach. 
But, the state said it thinned the oil so well that it flowed into the water 
and could not be skimmed, while also loading more toxics into the sound. 
Meanwhile, there are promising signs that nature may succeed where Exxon has 
failed, especially if it is given a boost. 
The EPA has endorsed a so-called "bioremediation" effort in which fertilizer is 
applied to oiled shorelines to speed the growth of oil eating bacteria, which 
are naturally present. The fertilizers of nitrogen and phosphorus help the 
bacteria more readily synthesize the carbon found in the oil. The bacteria 
consume 50% to 60% of the carbon and leave a relatively nontoxic asphalt 
residue behind. 
Camp David Dinner 
EPA Administrator William K. Reilly is so enthused he recounted a dinner 
recently at Camp David with President Bush and quoted the President as having 
asked: "Bill, are those bugs eating as fast and as much as you hoped?" 
They are. Instead of taking upwards of 10 years to rid the shorelines of the 
oil's most toxic components, it may take just three to five years. 
"It looks promising. Our scientists are encouraged," Reilly said. 
"The real beauty of this is we have so much natural degradation of oil. A lot 
of us didn't expect that," Prichard said. 
The bacteria can easily get to all the nooks and crannies that Exxon missed. 
Prichard of the EPA said that only 17% of the oil has been removed from 
shorelines by physical processes. 
There has been a slight increase in algae after two weeks from the nutrients in 
the fertilizers, but the increase is not significant, according to Fran Kremer, 
a senior environmental engineer with the EPA who has been monitoring test plots 
on several Prince William Sound islands. 
Because of the chance of oxygen-depleting algae blooms in the water, the 
bioremediation technique is not permitted in areas where flushing by currents 
is minimal. 
There is one other drawback. Bioremediation is less effective on heavily oiled 
shorelines because the bacteria are active only on the surface of the oil where 
oxygen and water are present. 
In a real sense, the cleanup operation is writing the book on how to respond to 
massive spills in Arctic waters. 
Immediately after the spill Exxon rushed in scientific teams to strategic 
points along the Alaskan shoreline to grab samples of water and marine life 
before the oil arrived. The information is being used as a starting point to 
determine the impacts after the oil hit those same areas. 
"Up until now we've had a fair number of spills. But we've never been able to 
tool up fast enough to study them and learn from them. Fortunately on this one 
we got out early enough to start getting some answers," Hemming said. 
Kelp Growth 
Based on the "before and after" samples taken here, Hemming said there is 
evidence that the growth of kelp has been retarded by the spill. But no firm 
conclusions can be made yet. He said last year's unusually severe Alaskan 
winter may also be a factor. 
Scientists have also learned how much oil it takes to kill an otter from damage 
to the mammal's lungs, liver and other internal organs. Otters with hydrocarbon 
concentrations in their blood of more than 200 parts per million eventually 
died. Those with less than 200 p.p.m, lived. 
"The first two weeks were critical to an effective response. Unless something 
is in place, your (rescue) effort is blunted," Davis said. 
But, it is a hard way to learn. 
"We know it's going to occur again. We saw it this summer with three other 
spills," Williams said. 
"People need to stay mad. They need to be reminded how chaotic it was here. 
They need to be ready. We need to keep the presure up. They need to change 
things or we're going to see it all over again," Williams said. 
