UC TEAM TRACES 'CIRCUIT' PROBLEMS OF SCHIZOPHRENICS 
University of California scientists have created maps of an area deep in the 
brains of schizophrenics showing that the "circuitry" connecting key internal 
structures is haywire. The findings may reshape the study of the disorder, the 
researchers said Tuesday. 
"The previous thinking has been, 'Where is the hole in the brain' " that causes 
schizophrenia, said UC Irvine professor of psychiatry Monte S. Buchsbaum, who 
led the 12-member research team from UC institutions. 
The new thinking, based on the team's data, is that there is no single "black 
hole" or abnormality in a schizophrenic's brain, Buchsbaum said in an 
interview. 
Rather, the circuitry among key brain structures -- the thalamus, cortex and 
basal ganglia -- and among sensory organs transmitting taste, touch, hearing or 
vision may be "connected improperly" and fail to communicate correctly, he 
said. 
Buchsbaum and several collaborators plan to present their research formally on 
Sept. 13 to 4,000 neuroscientists at the 17th Congress Collegium Internationale 
Neuro-psychopharmacologicum in Japan. They offered a preview Tuesday to 
reporters and to financial backers of UCI's 6-year-old Brain Imaging Center, 
where the research was conducted. The results amplify studies reported in June 
in The Times. 
The researchers found that: 
* The brain circuitry of a schizophrenic is markedly different from that of a 
normal adult, but each can be quantified and described with detailed charts, 
much like a road maps. 
* Brain metabolism in the schizophrenic's basal ganglia -- a structure at the 
center of the brain that affects motor function as well as visual and emotional 
response -- is significantly less active than in a normal adult. 
* Both schizophrenics and adults with depressive illness have low metabolism 
rates in the basal ganglia and temporal lobes. But in other areas of the brain, 
these mentally ill adults show contrasting results. For instance, in the 
hippocampus, which is thought to control memory, depressives show a high rate 
of brain activity, but schizophrenics show a low rate of activity. 
Buchsbaum suggested that as a schizophrenic's impaired circuitry is studied in 
more detail, eventually the right drug or combination of drugs may be used to 
repair the abnormal links in the brain. 
Dr. Lewis L. Judd, director of the National Institute of Mental Health, which 
spent nearly $1 million on this project, said the team's brain circuitry 
finding is "a new observation that will now require confirmation by other 
laboratories." 
Judd called Buchsbaum's project "a very important study" that confirms research 
in some areas and breaks new ground in others. 
Schizophrenia, a devastating and incurable mental illness, affects 2% of 
Americans -- 5 million people across the country, about 46,000 in Orange 
County. Considered an incapacitating and lifelong disease, schizophrenia 
usually begins in adolescence and is characterized by disordered thinking, 
apathy and, frequently, hallucinations. 
For decades, researchers have looked for its cause. Doctors, who once blamed 
upbringing and social conditions, have since the 1960s focused on brain 
abnormalities. 
With new imaging technology in the 1980s called PETscan (Positron Emission 
Tomography), which measures brain metabolism after an injection of radioactive 
glucose, scientists can study what part of the brain might cause schizophrenia, 
as well as what chemicals might treat it. 
But the question for the 1990s is not just what abnormal brain structure or 
chemical causes schizophrenia but, Buchsbaum said: "What is the circuit and how 
is the circuitry abnormal? . . . The circuitry story will be presented for the 
first time in Japan." 
Buchsbaum, who used to work at the National Institute of Mental Health, was one 
of the world's pioneers in the use of PETscans. With this study of 18 
schizophrenics, he claims another first: offering results from the largest 
PETscan study ever of "never-medicated" schizophrenics. 
(The issue of no medication is important because some researchers have 
suggested that medication used to treat schizophrenics may alter brain 
structures.) 
The study contrasted PETscan studies showing brain metabolism from 18 
schizophrenics with those from 22 normal adults, as well as 39 depressed 
adults. 
As Buchsbaum's team mapped the brain activity of normal adults and that of 
schizophrenics, they noticed, for instance, that in normal adults, activity 
between inner brain structures called the putamen and caudate are connected. 
But in schizophrenics, their data showed, those gray masses -- deep in the 
brain and thought to control motor coordination and possibly also emotion -- 
were not connected. 
