MOVIES OF THE WEEK 
Pennies From Heaven (Channel 5 Sunday at 6 p.m.) is the musical as an art film, 
a work of fantasy so stylized and sophisticated as to be rightly described as 
experimental. Steve Martin lip-syncs his way through the Depression-era 
standards as a breezy Chicago sheet-music salesman who falls on hard times -- 
and in love with demure schoolteacher Bernadette Peters. Directed by Herbert 
Ross and written by Dennis Potter, Pennies From Heaven is the story of this 
couple's struggle to find a little happiness and joy in a bleak world far 
removed from the bright promises held out by all those songs so beloved by 
Martin. 
In the 1987 Heat (Channel 13 Sunday at 6 p.m.), Burt Reynolds is a believable 
tough guy, a hard-core gambler and low-rent bodyguard, but the film is just 
another bumpy, tedious ride through seamy Vegas streets. 
When Hitchcock's psychological mystery Marnie (Channel 5 Sunday at 8 p.m.) was 
released 25 years ago, it was not highly acclaimed by most critics yet even 
then it had its defenders. Tippi Hedren stars as a compulsive thief, and Sean 
Connery is her boss, who struggles to understand her. 
The Hanging Tree (Channel 13 Sunday at 8 p.m.), a highly regarded 1959 Western, 
stars Gary Cooper as a doctor who nurses a young blind woman, played 
impressively by Maria Schell. 
Talk about mixing genres: Nick Knight (CBS Sunday at 9 p.m.) is a new TV movie 
starring Rick Springfield as a police detective who also happens to be a 
vampire. 
Irreconcilable Differences (NBC Sunday at 9 p.m.) is one of the wittiest 
Hollywood movies of the '80s. Ryan O'Neal and Shelley Long star as a struggling 
director and his screenwriter-wife whose lives spin out of control when O'Neal 
finally gets his big break to such an extent that their daughter (Drew 
Barrymore) sues them for divorce. 
The Spy Who Loved Me (ABC Sunday at 9 p.m.), the 10th James Bond film, achieved 
a kind of perfection of preposterousness. Not only one, but two nuclear subs 
(one British, one Russian) have disappeared without a trace. Giving chase are 
both 007 (Roger Moore) and Soviet Agent XXX (Barbara Bach), which leads them to 
the underwater palace of supervillain Curt Jurgens. 
Originally a nine-hour British TV miniseries, Tony Palmer's ponderous Wagner 
(Channel 13 Monday and Tuesday at 8 p.m.) is shown as a two-part biography with 
Richard Burton in the title role as the German composer. 
Nightmare at Bitter Creek (CBS Tuesday at 9 p.m.), a 1988 TV movie, is a cut 
above the usual "ordinary people in mortal danger" shoot-'em-up fare. Four 
women on horseback -- Lindsay Wagner, Constance McCashin, Joanna Cassidy and 
Janne Mortil -- and their alcoholic mountain guide (Tom Skerritt) are marked 
for death when they inadvertently stray into the path of fugitive white 
supremacists. In the middle of all the mayhem Skerritt's shaky hero and Wagner, 
bruised from a recent divorce, make a believable emotional connection. 
House Calls (Channel 13 Wednesday at 8 p.m.) is a quite enjoyable kind of 
live-action cartoon for grown-ups: farcical, mildly risque and quick-stepping 
in its broader-than-life way. As a widowed doctor, Walter Matthau is a joy to 
watch as he rages like a dyspeptic moose. Glenda Jackson plays a woman of 
fierce independence and strong opinions with whom he collides. 
Midnight Lace (Channel 13 Thursday at 8 p.m.) is that set-in-London 1960 
thriller more notable for its cast -- Doris Day, Rex Harrison, John Gavin, 
Myrna Loy, Roddy McDowall and Herbert Marshall -- and for its decor than for 
its credibility. 
Harold and Maude (Channel 13 Friday at 8 p.m.) is that lovely 1972 cult 
classic, written by Colin Higgins, directed by Hal Ashby and starring Bud Cort 
as a suicidal 20-year-old rescued by Ruth Gordon's 79-year-old swinger. 
Hitchcock's 1936 Secret Agent (Channel 24 Friday at 9:30 p.m.) is an odd, 
offbeat blend of humor and terror. Madeleine Carroll and John Gielgud play 
secret agents who pose as man and wife while on assignment to kill enemy spies. 
Robert Young and Lilli Palmer co-star. 
