HOSPITAL SAYS UCI INTERNAL INVESTIGATION OF ITS DOCTORS FINDS NO MEDI-CAL FRAUD 
An internal probe of UCI Medical Center doctors suspected of illegally billing 
Medi-Cal for prescribing research drugs to patients has found "no evidence of 
fraud or misconduct," a hospital spokeswoman said Friday. 
Karen Young, a UCI Medical Center spokesperson, said the investigation found no 
evidence to substantiate charges that doctors illegally billed Medi-Cal for 
research drugs, falsely labeled drugs or kept two sets of medical records to 
hide the practice from Medi-Cal, which does not pay for research. 
Research drugs were prescribed to Medi-Cal patients, Young said, but they were 
never charged to the Medi-Cal program. 
Young did not know what effect, if any, the hospital's audit will have on a 
separate investigation of similar charges by the state attorney general's 
bureau of Medi-Cal fraud and patient abuse. But a spokesman in the attorney 
general's office said that despite the hospital's findings, the inquiry into 
alleged Medi-Cal fraud and falsification of records at UCI Medical Center will 
continue. 
"Their results will have no impact at all. We're still going to proceed with 
our preliminary investigation," said Christopher Rodriguez, the attorney 
general's investigator in charge. 
Complaints that helped launch the hospital's internal probe were made in 
February by two UCI psychiatrists and an administrator for the psychiatric 
department. Letters written by them, copies of which were obtained by The 
Times, were sent to Dr. William E. Bunney, who later requested the audit, and 
Dr. Donald B. Summers, the chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of UCI's 
department of psychiatry and human behavior. 
The letters indicated that ethical and legal concerns about the alleged 
practices had been raised months earlier. The concern, according to sources, 
was that the practice of administering the research drug Zacopride to patients 
would jeopardize Medi-Cal funding for those patients' treatment. 
Andrew Yeilding, director of internal audits, was quoted by Young as saying 
they interviewed doctors that prescribed the research drug as part of their 
treatment but that Medi-Cal was never billed for the prescriptions. 
"That was all according to standard procedure," Young said. "(Yeilding) pointed 
out it would be kind of crazy to do something like that because it could 
jeopardize the funding." 
The research compounds given to patients allegedly were falsely labeled Haldol, 
an anti-schizophrenic drug that is approved for use by Medi-Cal, sources had 
said. 
Haldol is a brand name for the drug haloperidol, a tranquilizer used in the 
treatment of psychotic disorders, severe behavior problems in children, and the 
short-term treatment of hyperactivity in children, according to the Physician's 
Desk Reference on prescription drugs. 
But one employee in the psychiatric unit said that last September he noticed an 
unusual drug, Haldol-R, on a patient's chart. When asked, he was told it stood 
for the research drug, Zacopride, and that the hospital staff "had changed the 
name" on the patient's records. 
Young said a hospital investigator found that "no one falsely labeled 
anything," and that the hospital's performance had conformed with state 
regulations. 
"There weren't two sets of medical records. There was one set of medical 
records and one set of research records but Yeilding said the practice conforms 
with state law," Young said. 
The detail is not minor, because the inquiries come at a time when the 
financially troubled UCI Medical Center is negotiating a new contract with 
state Medi-Cal authorities. Hospital officials are seeking higher reimbursement 
rates for treating Medi-Cal patients to help stem a nearly $12-million deficit 
the medical center reported for the year ending June 30. 
The internal audit is part of a much larger review now being conducted by the 
hospital, Young said. The larger audit should be completed in two months. 
