U.S. YACHT RACING JUNIOR SAILING CHAMPIONSHIP; 
TWIST WINS ONE RACE TO KEEP LEAD 
Jory Twist of the host Newport Harbor Yacht Club held on to first place in the 
four-person Etchells 22 class Wednesday despite a seventh-place finish in the 
first of two races at the U.S. Yacht Racing Union/Rolex Junior Sailing 
Championships off Newport Beach. 
Brisk afternoon winds enabled Twist, Orange County's only entry, to win the 
second race, giving him three first-place finishes in the first six races of 
the Sears Trophy competition. He holds a 2 1/4-point lead over second-place 
Scott Elting of Houston Yacht Club and a 3 1/2-point lead over Meg Gaillard of 
American Yacht Club in Rye, N.Y. 
Gaillard, whose consistent sailing in the past five races has advanced her from 
last to third place, is one of two female skippers in the competition. 
In the Flying Junior class, Bill Hardesty of Mission Bay Yacht Club in San 
Diego retained the lead by finishing 5 1/2 points ahead of Jesse Andrews of 
American Yacht Club. 
In the Laser class, David Houser of Mission Bay Yacht Club regained first place 
overall from Mike Hare of Houston Yacht Club by 1 1/2 points. But the top 
sailor of the day was Brett Davis of St. Petersburg Yacht Club in Florida, who 
finished first in both of Wednesday's races. 
Houser said he regained the lead because "I was finally consistent." 
A protest is pending in the Laser class, but it will not affect Wednesday's 
leaders. William Warren of Toms River Yacht Club in New Jersey and Jonathan 
Tueting of Winnetka (Ill.) Yacht Club, who were at the back of the fleet after 
five races, are the skippers involved. 
The start of Wednesday's competition was delayed when a last-minute wind shift 
forced officials to reset the course. Winds varied from 8 to 10 knots in the 
morning and 10 to 15 knots in the afternoon. The sea was flat until an 
afternoon breeze produced a one- to two-foot chop. A two-knot current favored 
boats on windward tacks. 
Races continue through Friday, when the winners will be determined based upon a 
round-robin, low-point scoring system. Winners will become part of the 1990 
U.S. Junior sailing team. 
