SMART AND LUCKY, BUT HE LOST; 
ADLAI STEVENSON HIS LIFE AND LEGACY BY PORTER MCKEEVER (WILLIAM MORROW: $25; 
544 PP.) 
Counseling the precariously perched politicians of his age, Niccolo Machiavelli 
explained that their success depended upon two qualities: virtu and fortuna, or 
skill and opportunity. These ingredients are no less vital to success today. 
Where politicians must navigate an uncertain world of elections and others' 
ambitions, none can succeed without a fair measure of both. 
Some careers, of course, have been more endowed with opportunity than others. 
Walter Mondale bounded up the career ladder by being appointed to fill 
vacancies of unexpired terms. At the other extreme is Lyndon Johnson, who left 
little to chance. But without John Kennedy's death, L.B.J. may never have 
succeeded in throwing off the yoke of being a Southern politician and winning 
the Democratic nomination on his own. The individual doses of virtu and fortuna 
that make each career unique offer a basis for political biography. 
This "first one-volume, popular biography of Adlai Stevenson" by friend and 
associate Porter McKeever is less interested in unraveling the forces that 
propelled the career of this unusual politician than in telling one more 
admiring, personal story. This is unfortunate since Stevenson's ascent in 
politics proved, at least to this reader, to be more interesting than his 
private life. It was as though fortuna had to collar Stevenson and cast him 
upon the public stage. 
Stevenson's initial launching into politics as a gubernatorial candidate in 
Illinois in 1948 followed a pattern repeated four years later in his nomination 
to the presidency. In both instances, he was wooed by party leaders for an 
office he did not seek. What precisely made Stevenson so attractive for the 
governor's race to Chicago boss Jacob Arvey is not altogether clear from the 
facts presented here. Perhaps, being the namesake of a grandfather who served 
as vice president sufficed to make young Adlai candidate material. (We know 
from long-term friend George Ball that Stevenson occasionally entertained such 
thoughts, but more revealing, Ball considered these ruminations idle fantasy.) 
President Truman had a more concrete basis for enthusiasm in 1952. Stevenson 
had not joined the loud chorus of Democratic leaders urging Truman to step down 
in 1948. Moreover, he had run ahead of the President in Illinois that year, 
thereby demonstrating his vote-getting potential in an important swing state. 
None of these facts would have mattered much, however, had the circumstances 
for Democrats been more favorable. In both instances, Stevenson became the 
choice of leaders who had few alternatives. Their party was facing repudiation 
at the polls, and more seasoned politicians with greater career investments at 
risk had already passed up the "opportunity" to lead the party into near 
certain defeat. Arvey and Truman needed someone who would be willing to make 
the gamble, which meant someone with little to lose. Moreover, these leaders 
sought a candidate from outside their immediate orbit, an individual who would 
not suffer from association with the incumbent Administration. Stevenson 
satisfied both criteria. 
One can appreciate his indecisiveness and reluctance. He understood as much as 
anyone the probable outcome in November. "I'll be damned if I want to be a 
caretaker for the party," he declared to a friend. But in the end, of course, 
he accepted the nominations in 1948 and 1952 that more established politicians 
spurned. Whatever his ambivalence, Stevenson could simply not afford to pass up 
these opportunities. 
Was his upward ascent based solely on circumstance, and once nominated, did he 
serve merely as a sacrificial lamb? No on both counts for the same reason. This 
political neophyte had one extraordinary skill -- the gift of rhetoric -- that 
distinguishes him from other "also rans." Writing his own material, he 
typically spoke with intelligence and inspiration, equal to the best -- and 
more memorable -- efforts of John Kennedy's speech writers. In both 1948 and 
1952, in fact, a speech helped him make a strong first impression on those who 
were asked to nominate a man they did not know. The more famous of the two 
instances, well told here, is the apparently unanticipated, tumultuous response 
to Stevenson's welcoming address at the 1952 Democratic Convention in Chicago. 
After the speech with its 27 interruptions for extended applause and 
demonstrations, most observers on the scene conceded that Stevenson had locked 
up the presidential nomination. 
An equally impressive display of Stevenson's forensic prowess occurred four 
years earlier, when Arvey had him make a few remarks to an assemblage of nearly 
30 state party leaders who controlled the party's gubernatorial nomination. 
Reading from hastily jotted notes, Stevenson delivered his first campaign 
speech. To these "veterans of Illinois' grimy battlefields," he urged reform in 
a manner that would have befitted Oliver Wendell Holmes: 
"How else can we insure the survival of our free institutions when the winds 
begin to blow? If the people are cynical, suspicious and abused, if their 
confidence in their heritage is undermined by corruption, greed, excessive 
partisanship, we cannot be sure they will withstand or even identify the 
demagogues and false prophets of a better way who always march in the forefront 
of reaction . . . when the winds blow, and blow they surely will if we stumble 
much further down this path of inflation . . . and corrosive, insensitive 
materialism." 
"He's got class," judged one ward committeeman. "We can go with him." Over the 
next decade, a generation of party faithful would hear Stevenson and agree. 
In the end, Stevenson's singular virtu failed to yield victory. Television 
proved an unfriendly medium: He was clearly uncomfortable in front of the 
camera, and he complained to producers that television made him look like a 
gargoyle. And, of course, standing in his way was Eisenhower, whose formidable 
presence had made it possible for him to receive the party nomination in the 
first place. 
McKeever's sympathetic portrait proceeds at a steady pace. Rarely does it pause 
to reflect. Instead of probing his subject's intellectual development, we are 
presented with perhaps too many excerpts from speeches and magazine articles. 
Similarly, the author makes little attempt to assess Stevenson's widely claimed 
impact on the next generation of Democratic party activists and leaders. A 
quarter of a century after his departure Adlai Stevenson still awaits his 
historical appraisal. 
