CRITIC AT LARGE: A DIRECTOR'S LEGACY FROM TRUFFAUT 
"Francois Truffaut," said the French director Claude Miller during a recent 
visit to Los Angeles, "was there as a friendly ghost watching over us." 
A year before he died, in 1984 at the tragically young age of 52, Truffaut and 
Claude de Givray had completed a 35-page treatment of "The Little Thief," about 
a truant teen-age girl who is for all the world a sister in spirit to Antoine 
Doinel, the hero of Truffaut's "The 400 Blows." ("Little Thief" opens Friday at 
the Royal.) 
Realizing he would not live to make the film, Truffaut asked his friend, the 
producer-director Claude Berri ("The Two of Us"), to do it. But Berri, 
preparing "Jean de Florette," could not and, after Truffaut's death, he turned 
to Miller. 
Thus Miller had the assignment, at once enviable, daunting and melancholy, of 
making Francois Truffaut's last film. The choice made sense; Miller had worked 
closely with Truffaut for a decade, as his production manager on several films. 
"In 1967 I was working as an assistant director to Jean-Luc Godard on 'Two Or 
Three Things I Know About Her,' " Miller said through an interpreter. "Suzanne 
Schiffman was the script girl on the film and she and I got along. Later she 
asked me if I wanted to work with Truffaut on 'Stolen Kisses.' 
"I surely did. For 10 years I was with him on every film, from 'Stolen Kisses' 
to 'The Story of Adele H.' 'The Wild Child,' 'Day for Night,' 'Two English 
Girls,' all of them." 
Miller last chatted with Truffaut only two months before he died. "Even then he 
only wanted to talk about cinema." 
Janine Castang, the troubled girl who is the little thief, was to have been a 
character in "The 400 Blows," Miller says. "But Truffaut realized he had too 
much material already, and he put her aside, intending to make her story 
later." 
The story treatment Miller inherited included, he says, all the characters, a 
well-described analysis of her psychology and the chronology of the story. 
Miller co-authored the shooting script with Luc Beraud and Annie Miller, his 
wife. 
"Truffaut didn't say everything he had to say about youth in '400 Blows,' " 
Miller believes. "Janine was intended to expose more things about Truffaut 
himself. One area in particular that was not exposed in '400 Blows' was 
sexuality, and he wanted to explore that through Janine in 'The Little Thief.' 
" 
"The 400 Blows," Truffaut's first feature after two attention-getting and 
still-shown short films, was a remarkable autobiographical document, reflecting 
the turmoil of Truffaut's own troubled youth, which included a term in reform 
school for theft. 
Antoine Doinel, played by Jean-Pierre Leaud from age 12, was followed through a 
short film ("Love at Twenty") and three features ("Stolen Kisses," "Bed and 
Board" and "Love On the Run"), a sequence without exact counterpart in film 
history, and reflecting Truffaut's own arrival at a secure manhood after the 
terrors of childhood. 
"The boy and the girl are both revolting against the world at large, and 
especially against the world of adults. They both want to experience everything 
for the first time, including love and friendship." 
One story element not in the treatment but added by Miller (and evidently OKd 
by the friendly hovering ghost) is Janine's discovery of photography. "The 
whole photography thing is an homage to Francois," Miller says. "At 17 he had 
been in all kinds of trouble but he was saved by his love of cinema." 
What made "The Little Thief" workable was the actress Miller knew was available 
to play her. Charlotte Gainsbourg, born into show business as the daughter of 
actress Jane Birkin and singer Serge Gainsbourg, had worked for Miller when she 
was only 14, in a film called "L'Effrontee." She was 17 when she filmed "The 
Little Thief," and she has already received extraordinary reviews. 
"Perhaps one of the reasons Truffaut didn't make 'The Little Thief' himself 
earlier in his career is that he didn't know Charlotte, that is, he didn't know 
an actress who could do Janine. After we did 'L'Effrontee' three years ago, she 
became part of the family. She was there when we were working on the script. We 
discussed the character with her. That's why I said yes to Claude (Berri) in 
the first place. I knew she could do it." 
Miller adds: "I can't remember whether it was Capra or Hitchcock who said the 
three most important things about a film are, first, the script, second, the 
script, and third, the script. But it is true," Miller says, "and with 
Francois' treatment and his spirit to guide you" -- he pauses eloquently. 
Like "The 400 Blows," "The Little Thief" is open-ended, a cliffhanger even. But 
Miller says he is optimistic about Janine. "At 16 or 17 you have your whole 
life ahead of you, as Truffaut did. And all those experiences, although as bad 
as they are, are good for your overall learning of life. That which doesn't 
kill you makes you stronger, as someone says." 
It is tantalizing to think of future glimpses of Janine -- in her own 
equivalents of "Stolen Kisses" and "Bed and Board." But Miller says it cannot 
be. 
"We did have the right to do the film based on Truffaut's treatment. We don't 
have the right to continue because the characters are not our own. We are not 
entitled." 
It is sad but unarguable. What Janine might have made of her adult life and 
whether (to dream very romantically indeed) her path might one day have crossed 
Antoine Doinel's is a secret Truffaut has carried off with him. 
