MALL DEVELOPER ASSAILS LATEST CARWASH TACTIC 
The developer of a proposed Studio City mini-mall Monday denounced the latest 
efforts by a Los Angeles city councilman and residents to force him to delay or 
alter his project so a popular carwash, gas station and restaurant would be 
preserved. 
Ira Smedra called the tactics harassment by a small contingent of residents who 
don't want him to demolish the three businesses on the northeast corner of 
Ventura and Laurel Canyon boulevards. 
Last month, the residents group, Save Our Corner, unsuccessfully tried to have 
the 28-year-old carwash and the adjoining gas station and restaurant declared 
cultural monuments. The Los Angeles Cultural Heritage Commission refused to 
award the designation, clearing the way for Smedra to remove the three 
structures within 90 days and build the mall. 
But City Councilman Joel Wachs introduced a motion last week to force Smedra to 
prepare an environmental impact report on the proposed $15-million mall 
project. 
Smedra said he especially was angered by Wachs' action. 
"It's really unfortunate that this is happening," Smedra said. "And it's only a 
small group of homeowners who are doing this. There are a lot of people in that 
area who have said they want me to get rid of that atrocity and build something 
nice." 
Wachs today is expected to ask the full council to order Smedra to do the 
report. He has said the mall would have a substantial impact on traffic and 
would harm the aesthetics of the area. 
If the City Council approves Wachs' request, the project could be delayed for 
six months to a year. 
Ira Handelman, a spokesman for the developer, said Smedra had already evaluated 
the impact of the project. "We have already taken care of all the concerns," he 
said, adding that Smedra had completed reports on traffic and other 
environmental issues. 
"This is nothing other than a delay tactic that will cost Mr. Smedra a lot of 
money," he said. "It's unnecessary." 
While commending Wachs on his efforts to save the carwash, the residents' group 
Monday called for the city to purchase the corner and build a parking lot for 
businesses along Ventura Boulevard. 
"We don't need another shopping center; we need parking," said resident Jack 
McGrath as he and several members of the group stood beside the carwash. He 
said the city should pay for the parking lot out of funds collected from 
parking meters in Studio City. The lot would cost an estimated $8.3 million, 
McGrath said. 
"We've been waiting since 1958 for something to be done with this money," 
McGrath said. "And we've gotten nothing back for our nickels, dimes and 
quarters." 
Another member of the group, Walter McIntyre, said 70 out 250 retail businesses 
that have been built between Fulton and Vineland avenues are vacant. "This 
center would just add to the glut," he said. 
The group said the lot could be financed by raising the meter rate from 25 
cents to 50 cents an hour and by extending the hours of meter operation by four 
hours. 
