THE MERCHANT MARINE AND THE IRAQ EMBARGO 
Contacted by telephone in New Jersey, John McPhee commented to a Times reporter 
on the implications of the Persian Gulf crisis for the American merchant marine 
and vice versa. 
"It's suddenly become very easy to get a job," he said. His book, "Looking for 
a Ship" (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux), deals extensively with recent 
competition among merchant seamen for scarce work. Because of the American 
military buildup in the Persian Gulf, "Every available ship has been pressed 
into service," and work is no longer scarce. 
But if work is suddenly abundant on the merchant fleet, it remains true that 
the fleet itself is a shadow of what it once was. "During the past 10 or 15 
years, the fleet has shrunk by 85%," and at the present moment, "No ship is 
under construction in any shipyard in the United States, none at all, none 
whatsoever." 
Shipbuilding is down worldwide, McPhee says. Though the Koreans and the Germans 
have continued some shipbuilding and the Japanese may not be completely out of 
the business, the Scandinavians, he says, to name a one-time shipbuilding 
giant, have quit the game altogether. That the United States has done the same, 
McPhee implies, may yet be cause for national regret. 
McPhee's book reports the astonishing fact (see adjoining review) that most 
merchant ships are, by design, defenseless against piracy. Even a small, armed 
boarding party can steal whatever cargo it wishes. The skeleton crews that man 
the gigantic cargo vessels have no alternative but to stand by and watch the 
theft take place. 
What then of American forces seeking to blockade Iraq? Would small armed 
boarding parties be enough to force merchant ships bound for that country to 
change course, return to harbor, etc.? McPhee thinks that the answer is quite 
possibly yes. Our memory of World War II, he says, is of cargo ships sunk, not 
of cargo ships seized. But much may change in a new era of essentially unarmed 
merchant shipping. Jack Miles 
