IRAN'S NEW PRESIDENT FACES MAJOR ECONOMIC HEADACHE; 
NATION LACKS RESOURCES TO REBUILD AFTER IRAQI WAR BUT ISLAM FROWNS ON FOREIGN 
LOANS 
Battered and bled by a grinding, eight-year war and constricted by the politics 
of religion, the economy of Iran presents Hashemi Rafsanjani with the toughest 
challenge of his new presidency. 
The day after his Aug. 3 inauguration, Rafsanjani announced in a sermon in 
Tehran that he has a crash program with long- and short-term policies to revive 
limping factories, restore the petroleum industry, provide work for the jobless 
and put goods on the empty shelves. 
"Within one year," the 55-year-old clergyman-politician declared, the 
government "will prepare the necessary facilities for all of our existing 
factories to reach their full capacities." They are currently operating at 20% 
to 30% of capacity. 
Immediately, he said, the government will move "to improve the lives of the 
deprived people . . . for whom it is not fair to live another decade in 
austerity." And, he added confidently: "I am sure the Majlis (Iran's 
Parliament) will cooperate in this matter." 
Foreign Loans Required 
There's the rub. Before and after his July 28 election, Rafsanjani dropped loud 
hints that he would turn to the West for help. Iran's slogan of independence is 
"neither East nor West," but even before his election the pragmatic president 
had gone East, nailing down a series of development and military deals in 
Moscow. 
A similar approach to the West will require foreign loans. Economic analysts 
figure that Iran will need at least $100 billion above current revenue to meet 
its development goals over the next 10 years. And borrowing abroad is repugnant 
under the Islamic code of Iran. 
The Majlis, with a strong contingent of strict fundamentalists, will test 
Rafsanjani's persuasive powers when it takes up the government's five-year 
economic plan in the weeks ahead. Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashemi 
bluntly laid out the hard-line, xenophobic view in an interview with the Tehran 
Times: "Iranians would rather observe a fast than surrender to creditors who 
want to impose terms and conditions on us." 
So far, under a decade of revolutionary Islamic rule, Mohtashemi's attitude has 
prevailed: By the government's unusual method of calculating what it owes, Iran 
has long-term foreign debts of little more than $500 million. 
Soaring Inflation 
So what is the problem in a developing country that ranks among the world's top 
oil producers, carries a foreign debt that looks like pocket change compared to 
Brazil's and Mexico's and has a private sector with capital to invest if it had 
the confidence? Plenty. 
* Inflation is soaring. The government puts it as 23%, but outside analysts 
estimate that it is double that. Shopkeepers have been ordered to fix and tag 
the prices of the few goods they have for sale, but higher offers bring items 
out from under the counter. Civil servants have not had a raise in 10 years. 
* The currency is out of whack. Recent visitors to Tehran say black market 
dealers were giving 1,400 rials to $1, while the official dollar rate was 73 
rials. Coupon books for subsidized goods for the poor, once issued monthly, 
have been distributed bimonthly at best. 
* Petroleum facilities were badly damaged by Iraqi bombing in the war that 
ended last August, crippling an industry already punished by the oil price 
collapse of 1985. Overall, war damage to the Iranian economy has been estimated 
at $100 billion. 
* Unemployment is 15% to 20% by unofficial estimates, not bad considering the 
devastation of the war. But, as is the case in other developing countries, 
population and urbanization bombs are ticking in Iran. Economics Minister Javad 
Iravani recently disclosed that the population growth rate is 3.9%, compared to 
2.4% before the 1979 revolution that overthrew the Shah. 
* Power plants were heavily hit in the fighting, and blackouts are common in 
Tehran. 
Now, after the long and enervating war and the tense political struggle for 
succession to the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranians are looking to 
Rafsanjani, who won 94% of the presidential vote against a token opposition 
candidate, to fulfill his campaign promises of economic progress. 
"The war's over. Public expectations are rising," Vahe Petrossian, who covers 
Iran for the respected Middle East Economic Digest, explained in an interview 
in his London offices. "He (Rafsanjani) has to initiate policy. He has to show 
some authority." 
Loans From Soviets 
The question of foreign loans will top the docket. Iravani, the economics 
minister, told the Tehran monthly journal Iqtesad that Iran should rely as much 
as possible on domestic capital but added: "We must deal realistically with 
borrowing from foreign sources far from political ballyhoo." He estimated 
Iran's present foreign reserves at $6 billion to $7 billion, including gold. 
In May, Soviet Railways Minister Nikolai Konarev was in Tehran to discuss a 
Soviet offer of $1.9 billion in credits to finance joint industrial projects. 
The friendly interest rate, he said, would be 1.5%. Iravani said the total 
economic package approved by Rafsanjani in Moscow involved a $2-billion Iranian 
debt to the Soviets, which will be paid back by shipments of natural gas. 
The Economist Intelligence Unit, a London-based publication, estimates that the 
current Iranian budget totals about $4 billion in foreign "borrowings," 
including $2.4 billion in credits for supplies tied to specific industrial 
projects and the rest in short-term financing. The credits, never termed loans, 
have been arranged with European banks and are drawn against future oil 
deliveries. The political disguise of the term leaves the official foreign debt 
at the $500 million mark. 
Restoring Oil Production 
Deals pinned down by the Iranians with China and other countries involve barter 
for Iranian petroleum products, the bulwark of an export economy that otherwise 
leans on a high-priced assortment of Oriental carpets, pistachio nuts and 
caviar. Non-oil exports declined 11% in the year ending last March, totaling 
less than $1 billion, according to published reports. 
Direct trade with the United States appears to be politically out of the 
picture for now, although Petrossian said some British-based American companies 
are interested in industrial projects in Iran. 
Petroleum revenue for this year is expected to reach $11 billion, with Iranian 
production expected to fill the quota set by the Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries. Restoration of oil facilities was the top priority of 
industrial planners, who put 6,000 workers to the task of repairing the 
war-wrecked refinery at Abadan and got the first export shipment out in early 
May. 
With $11 billion or $12 billion in annual foreign exchange revenue, plus some 
visible or invisible borrowing, Rafsanjani will be hard pressed to stretch his 
resources to cover the need. 
Heino Kopietz, an Iran specialist with the International Institute of Strategic 
Studies in London, said in an interview that the government will spend $4 
billion to $5 billion this year -- and for years ahead -- to rebuild its 
military, which remains at full personnel strength but is under-equipped in the 
face of a war halted only by a truce. "The military cannot stand naked," 
Kopietz remarked, "and they see the Iraqis loading up again." 
With the demands for rearmament, rebuilding industry and importation of 
required raw materials, there is little or nothing left to alleviate the 
immediate needs of the Iranian people. They may have to wait for the engine of 
the economy to get going again. Such politically explosive questions as land 
redistribution will probably be put in abeyance. 
'What Is Practicable' 
Central Bank Governor Majid Qassemi told a recent Tehran news conference that 
the government would spend $4.8 billion during the current year on imported 
food and consumer goods but did not disclose how that target could be achieved 
in the face of industrial and military demands. Rafsanjani has been more 
cautious. 
"I have a series of hopes for the future of the country that may or may not 
square with the potentials at hand," Iran's official news agency quoted the new 
president as saying last month. "I will try to realize what is practicable." 
The Tehran Times, a Rafsanjani supporter, advised in an editorial: "We would be 
doing Rafsanjani a disservice if we do not temper with wise moderation a 
too-exaggerated hope in what he can accomplish by an excessive adulation of 
him. . . . To overreach ourselves in expecting miracles -- which of course have 
their proper place in the scheme of things -- would be to hurt him." 
