PRO FOOTBALL ROUNDUP; 
CARDINALS PUT LOMAX ON INJURED RESERVE 
Neil Lomax, hobbled by an arthritic hip that forced the Phoenix Cardinals to 
place him on the injured reserve list Tuesday making him ineligible to play 
this season, wants to give the NFL another try. 
"I don't want to leave the Phoenix Cardinals right now. I want to play again. 
That's my gut feeling. That's what my heart tells me," the two-time Pro Bowl 
quarterback said after the move as clubs had to get down to the 60 man roster 
limit. "The last three weeks, I've felt better than I ever have. I'm going to 
continue to work and get stronger." 
Lomax, 30, has been hobbled with degenerative arthritis in his left hip since 
the 1988 exhibition season. The nine-year pro was selected to the Pro Bowl in 
1984 and 1987. 
"I'll do whatever they want me to do -- help on the sidelines, help (offensive 
coordinator) Jim Shofner in the game plan, help in the passing game, work with 
the young quarterbacks . . . Maybe this is an opportunity to pass along what 
I've learned in my years in the league," Lomax said. 
He has thrown for 22,771 yards and 136 touchdowns for the Cardinals and is in 
the second year of a four-year, $5.7 million contract that pays him $1.3 
million this season. All the money is guaranteed. 
Gary Hogeboom, a 10-year pro who was signed to a four-year, $3.27 million 
contract last March as an unrestricted free agent, will be the starters 
Quarterback Doug Williams and running back Kelvin Bryant were placed on the 
non-football injury list by the Washington Redskins, who also cut 13 players, 
including rookie quarterback Jeff Graham from Cal State Long Beach. 
Williams damaged a nerve in his back while running on a treadmill during the 
offseason. He underwent back surgery last week and now must miss at least six 
weeks of the season as a result of being placed on the non-football injury 
list. Bryant, who has been injured in each of his previous three seasons with 
Washington, suffered a sprained cervical spine in an auto accident in July. He 
has yet to practice with the team this summer. 
The Seattle Seahawks released 17 players, including quarterback Bruce Mathison. 
Strong safety Joey Browner ended his holdout and reported to the Minnesota 
Vikings' camp. 
The Dallas Cowboys obtained defensive tackle Dean Hamel in a trade with the 
Washington Redskins for an undisclosed draft choice. Hamel is a fifth-year 
veteran who played in 60 games for Washington, starting 17. 
The San Francisco 49ers waived eight players, including six-year fullback Larry 
Moriarty, and placed two on injured reserve. 
Napoleon McCallum, in the U.S. Navy since playing for the Los Angeles Raiders 
in 1986, was placed on the "reserve-military" list, which allows the San Diego 
Chargers to activate him at any time but prevents him from practicing with the 
team. 
The Chargers also traded punter Ralf Mojsiejenko to the Washington Redskins in 
exchange for a 1990 draft choice. 
In other moves, the Chargers waived safety Michael Brooks, kicker Steve DeLine, 
receiver Brian Bedford, running back Ronnie Williams and tight end Pat Davis. 
