U.S. SEEKS 9 DRUG KINGPINS WHO ARE FACING CHARGES IN CALIFORNIA 
Federal authorities in Washington and California said Thursday that they would 
like to extradite at least nine Colombians, including reputed Medellin cartel 
drug baron Pablo Escobar, to the United States to face drug charges if the 
suspects are captured. 
All are wanted for prosecution in Los Angeles, San Francisco or Sacramento on 
previous drug indictments or because they escaped from federal prisons in this 
area after being convicted on drug charges elsewhere, the officials said. All 
have lived in Colombia, but federal authorities said they could not determine 
their current whereabouts. 
In Los Angeles, U.S. Atty. Gary A. Feess said a federal grand jury here 
indicted Escobar and Hugo Obando Ochoa, also a suspected member of the cartel, 
on Sept. 14, 1987. Along with numerous other defendants, they were charged with 
conspiracy to possess and distribute cocaine; conspiracy to defraud the United 
States; unlawful use of communication facilities for narcotics trafficking 
activities, and money laundering. 
The indictments were issued after an undercover "sting" called Operation 
Pisces, a money laundering investigation conducted in Los Angeles and other 
cities. Jesus Anibal Zapata, a leader of the Medellin drug cartel, was 
convicted last April in federal court here on 14 charges stemming from the 
Pisces investigation and was sentenced to life in prison without parole. Other 
defendants also have been convicted in the case. 
Feess said his office also would like to prosecute Reinaldo Mafla Rios, a 
suspected member of the Cali drug cartel, who was indicted here in 1987, and 
charged with conspiracy to possess and distribute cocaine, money laundering and 
other offenses. 
In Washington, Justice Department sources said they would like to extradite to 
Los Angeles Juan Luis Mangas, who escaped from the federal prison camp at 
Lompoc in 1982, just after beginning a five-year sentence for possessing and 
distributing cocaine. 
In addition, the Justice Department would like to extradite four Colombians to 
San Francisco: Hernando Arana, Enrique Otoya Tobon, Carlos Ignacio Escallon 
Villa and Lenin Francisco Molano. 
Arana and Otoya Tobon have been fugitives for seven years after they were 
indicted in a major cocaine case that also involved a plot to assassinate U.S. 
District Judge Robert Aguilar of San Jose. The lead defendant in the case, 
Roberto Gomez Soto, a Cuban national, is serving a life sentence for drug 
trafficking and conspiring to murder Aguilar. 
Also wanted in California is Irma Jaramillo, convicted of drug trafficking in 
1981. He fled the country in 1984 after an alleged parole violation, according 
to drug agents. 
Times staff writers Ronald J. Ostrow, in Washington, and Daniel Weintraub, in 
Sacramento, contributed to this story. 
