RECREATION; 
FINISHING SCHOOL; 
STONEY POINT IN CHATSWORTH PROVIDES CLIMBERS WHO WANT A PIECE OF THE ROCK WITH 
AN ACCESSIBLE DAYTIME TRAINING GROUND FOR ADVANCED MANEUVERS AND ARTISTIC 
EXPRESSION 
It's nearly sunset at Stoney Point, a boulder-strewA. city park in northern 
Chatsworth that's popular with rock climbers and rock heads. In the last few 
minutes of daylight, before the rock heads slink in and begin another evening 
of hard drinking and environmental destruction, a handful of rock climbers get 
in a few more ascents on a massive sandstone boulder named Turlock. 
One of the climbers is Mike Rubin, a Tarzana chiropractor who calls himself 
"the Rock Doc." Rubin is attempting a tricky maneuver on what's known as the 
"flake," a wide lip about halfway up the rock. As he edges his Boreal Fire 
sneakers onto a thin shelf, he loses his grip and utters the dreaded O word: 
"Oooooops," he says as he begins to fall. 
Fortunately, the Rock Doc has three things going for him: 1) he's insured; 2) 
Rachel Weil is holding the other end of the rope he's attached to, and 3) he's 
only five feet off the ground. 
Rubin is just discovering rock climbing, a sport that takes itself seriously as 
an art. A rock climber will tell you that most other forms of climbing are to 
rock climbing what street fighting is to tai chi. Rock climbers talk of 
"solving problems" and "elegant solutions" and making the climb look 
effortless, as though they were walking on level ground instead of defying 
gravity on a vertical wall. 
Rock climbers go off on the weekends to idyllic climbing sites in the Sierra, 
far away from city life. But during the week they come to Chatsworth to 
practice at the Eton of rock climbing. Stoney Point is considered one of the 
world's best places to work out, a gym for climbers, because it offers a 
variety of challenges, most only a few feet above the ground. 
But even its otherworldly appearance -- boulders piled on top of boulders -- 
isn't enough to make climbers forget they're in the city. Aside from heavy 
traffic on Topanga Canyon Boulevard and trails littered with wine cooler 
bottles, there is graffiti on even the most inaccessible rocks, which raises 
the question: Do they teach climbing at graffiti school? 
"This is not what rock climbing is all about," says Weil, a climbing instructor 
who lives in Northridge, as she gazes at the splattered rock walls that look 
like freeway underpasses. "But this is where we go to meet friends and train 
and get a pump." 
Rubin is pretty pumped up after being lowered to earth by Weil. He gets right 
back on Turlock and starts toward the top, which is about 15 feet above him. 
"If you get stuck and want advice, let me know," Weil tells him. "If not, 
you're on your own." Rubin tiptoes unsteadily. "Try not to get your legs spread 
out," she says. "Trust your right foot." 
Straining and looking a little ungainly, Rubin manages to pull himself up on 
the flake and then scrambles triumphantly to the top. "Air's a little thin up 
here," he says with a smile. Weil then retraces his route, without the aid of a 
rope, and walks up easily, her form perfect. "She's ballet on the rock," says 
Rubin, who is trading out chiropractic adjustments for climbing lessons. 
While Weil works with Rubin, a couple of experienced climbers are not only 
walking up Turlock but also around it. Jan McCollum, Weil's boyfriend, is 
practicing his traversing technique. A climber for 16 years, McCollum has done 
a lot of big climbs in the Sierra, something he was able to do only because he 
learned all the right moves on Turlock. 
"I've been on this rock thousands of times," says McCollum, who wears blue 
slipper-like climbing shoes. "But the only way you can boulder the same place 
all the time is to make a game out of it. If everyone else goes left to right, 
you go right to left. Or you make a route harder by taking a hold off of it." 
The other veteran on Turlock, Steve Root, is a Kentuckian who moved to 
Chatsworth last year to be near Stoney Point. "I love this place," says Root, 
who wants to be a climbing guide. "It's tremendous to train here because you 
can train year-round. The locals kind of put it down -- sandstone is not the 
best rock -- but everyone is glad it's here." 
A soft twilight descends on Stoney Point. A couple of young women come down a 
trail from the upper reaches of the park and decide to finish their day on 
Turlock. Pascale Dubois and Kiki Delmas are Frenchwomen living in Pasadena. 
Neither climbed until they moved to this country last September. 
Delmas, a free-lance photographer, takes an easy route up Turlock and attaches 
a carabineer to a bolt anchored on top. Then she lowers a rope to Dubois, who 
ties a follow-through figure-eight and straps herself into a waist harness. 
Dubois, an engineer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, tried to do the flake the 
second day she ever climbed and didn't make it. But she has practiced hard and 
now makes the climb look simple. 
After scurrying down, she says in French-heavy English, "It eez such a great 
feeling to hold on to such a leeetle peez of zee rock." Then she goes and 
watches Delmas do a difficult under-cling maneuver on a section of Turlock 
that's beyond vertical. 
It's time to pack up and forget about crack jamming until tomorrow. Weil, 27, 
walks out of the park with her mother Bev, who was there to watch her climb. 
"Here I don't mind watching her because it's low," Mrs. Weil says. Not like 
Yosemite two years ago, when she couldn't bear to watch her daughter play on 
the rock walls at Tuolumne Meadows. "With binoculars it was OK, but not in too 
close," she says. And her basic rule for Rachel: "Don't tell me beforehand 
you're going climbing." 
Rachel laughs. "Mom actually deals very well with my rock climbing," she says. 
"It's difficult for any parent because it's a risk sport. But the risk is 
calculated and relatively safe. Most accidents could have been avoided." 
Which is why rock climbers don't linger in the park after dark. As Rachel and 
her mother walk to their cars, they hear a series of long, bloodcurdling howls 
from the top of the highest boulder. The rock heads have arrived. 
