CRISIS IN THE PERSIAN GULF; 
CRUDE RISES, BUT PUMP PRICES DIP 
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's call for an Arab uprising against the United 
States frayed oil market nerves Friday and boosted crude prices. Gasoline 
prices at the pump, meanwhile, appeared to drop slightly Friday. 
In the oil market, traders remained cautious and appeared unwilling to take 
risky positions ahead of an uncertain weekend. As a result, energy prices 
closed off their highs for the day. 
West Texas Intermediate for September delivery, the U.S. benchmark crude, rose 
56 cents to close at $26.23 a barrel after trading as high as $26.60. Unleaded 
gasoline rose 3.03 cents to 79.45 cents a gallon. 
"It doesn't look like Hussein is backing down at all, but we are in a trading 
range here," said Tom Bentz, director of trading at United Energy Inc. 
Hussein called for Arabs to rally together against foreign intervention and 
urged Egyptians to bar foreign ships from passing through the Suez Canal, a 
vital link between the Mediterranean Sea and the Persian Gulf. He also lashed 
out at Arab leaders who opened their lands to U.S. troops. 
Traders said players bid up the market at the opening and in the first hour in 
anticipation of developments out of the Arab summit in Cairo and in reaction to 
Hussein's speech. 
Bentz added that strong buying in oil products, particularly gasoline, helped 
lift crude prices. He said gasoline looked strong because, given consumer fears 
of gasoline lines, it seemed a surer thing than crude. 
Distant-month contracts of gasoline and heating oil were up the daily limit of 
2 cents a gallon, while comparable crude contracts were up only moderately. 
Volume was described as light. 
Meanwhile, the American Automobile Assn., in its daily survey of gasoline 
stations, said the average price for self-serve, unleaded fuel dipped 
nationwide by 0.3 cent to $1.25 per gallon -- the first decline since Iraq's 
Aug. 2 invasion. 
AAA also said there are "adequate gasoline supplies to meet all current travel 
needs as well as those over the upcoming Labor Day holiday unless conditions 
significantly worsen in the Middle East." 
In Los Angeles, Arco Products Co. President George Babikian released his 
promised white paper contending that oil companies are being unfairly accused 
of gouging consumers. 
Gasoline price hikes were coming anyway, Babikian said Friday, because of 
higher crude oil prices on the spot market -- up from $15.50 a barrel in 
mid-June to $20 by the end of July, before the Mideast crisis. He said that 
contrary to popular belief, oil price changes in the spot market affect 
gasoline prices within days, not weeks. About 47% of the oil used by U.S. 
refiners is subject to such "nearly instantaneous" change, he said. 
Then when spot prices go up, said Babikian, even refiners who do not buy on the 
spot market feel compelled to raise their prices too, to avoid customer runs on 
their low-priced gas and the risk of depleting their own gasoline supplies. 
"Many of the price increases made were defensive," Babikian said. 
Crude oil price hikes came again quickly after Aug. 2 from the "shock of the 
invasion," according to the Arco position paper, as well as low gasoline 
inventories. Particularly on the West Coast, noted Babikian, virtually every 
oil company was doing refinery maintenance work during the 2nd quarter. 
Even so, wholesale and retail prices haven't increased as much as prices on the 
spot market, Babikian noted. He counseled consumers to avoid panic, 
particularly topping off their auto gas tanks, since U.S. reserves are now high 
and, unlike the earlier gas crisis, government price controls have not been 
imposed. Babikian blamed price-control mechanisms for soaring prices at the 
pump during the last oil crisis. 
