VIOLENT DEATH NOT NEW TO POSTMAN; 
SISTER OF MAN IN RAMPAGE KILLED FATHER IN MID-1950S 
John Merlin Taylor, the mail carrier who went on a shooting rampage Thursday at 
the Orange Glen postal station, was touched by another tragedy more than 30 
years ago -- the night his father reportedly came home drunk, beat the boy's 
mother and then was shot to death by the boy's sister. 
Taylor, who was on life support Friday night at Palomar Medical Center after 
being declared brain dead, was a teen-ager at the time his father was killed in 
the mid-1950s, in the family's small farm home in central Missouri, according 
to several longtime family acquaintances. 
But what effect, if any, the earlier tragedy may have had on his decision 
Thursday morning to shoot his wife, then kill two co-workers and wound a third 
is uncertain. Two of Taylor's brothers and a sister declined to discuss the 
incident Friday. 
Meanwhile, his relatives and co-workers here suggested in stronger terms Friday 
that the man who was described as a "model employee" was growing disillusioned 
with his work, and that stress, rather than personal problems, might be to 
blame for the Thursday morning bloodshed. 
But Escondido Police Lt. Danny Starr said investigators may remain forever 
baffled by Taylor's motive and may have to write it off as "a tragedy that 
can't be explained." 
Starr said Taylor, 52, may have believed that he was under investigation by 
postal authorities for mail theft -- even though there was no such inquiry. 
"One of his co-workers told one of our investigators that Taylor thought they 
were trying to fire him for mail theft, but we checked with the Post Office, 
and they said there absolutely was no such investigation," Starr said. 
Starr said investigators continued Friday to talk to relatives and co-workers, 
and that, although all have offered speculation, there are no new leads. 
"We're getting little bits and pieces of what people think might have been the 
problem, but nothing has hit us in the face that would explain why he went off 
the deep end," Starr said. 
"Unfortunately, the person who could tell us is Taylor. . . . His close friends 
or his wife might have been privy to something, but he took them with him. 
That's made it tough for us." 
Attention also focused on Taylor's alleged violent behavior against his former 
wife, Mary, who divorced Taylor in 1977. 
Documents filed in Vista Superior Court quoted Mary Taylor as saying she wanted 
to end her marriage because her husband was "extraordinarily violent, 
frequently drinks to excess, has threatened (her) life on many occasions and . 
. . physically struck, battered and beat (her) to the ground." 
But Ramon D. Asedo, the attorney who represented John Taylor in the divorce, 
disputed the allegations of drinking and beating. 
"There was no showing of physical violence," Asedo said Friday. "It was an 
extremely quiet, placid and pleasant separation. There was no real drinking or 
abuse, and that petition is just the kind of typical garbage we lawyers put in 
there." 
Taylor's father, a farmer and heavy-machine operator, was a heavy drinker and 
wife abuser, according to several family acquaintances who live near the Taylor 
hometown of Mokane, Mo. 
"I've known the Taylor boys all my life. It's a big family," said James St. 
George Tucker, past president of the Kingdom of Callaway Historical Society, 
which serves Mokane. 
The daughter, whose name was not known Friday, was exonerated in the shooting, 
Tucker said, mainly because Joseph Taylor had a "long history of abuse and 
drinking, of hitting his wife mainly, but the kids too." 
Mokane Mayor Howard (Glen) Paul, who grew up down the block from the Taylors, 
said the shooting "had an effect here, and everybody here remembers it." 
It was not immediately known whether John Taylor was at home the night his 
father was killed, and two brothers and a sister still living in the Mokane 
area declined to talk about their brother or the shooting. But other sources in 
Mokane recalled that, soon after his father's death, young John Taylor 
graduated from high school and joined the Marine Corps in 1955. He later 
settled in the San Diego area, the only member of his family to leave Missouri, 
and joined the Postal Service in March, 1964. 
On Friday, his previous wife, Mary Taylor, and her five children by that 
marriage, declined comment. "We ask for your understanding, patience and 
empathy at this very difficult time for our family," the family said in a 
prepared statement that was read at Palomar Medical Center. 
Thursday's shooting rampage began five blocks from Mary Taylor's home, where 
her former husband shot his wife, Liesbeth, twice in the head as she lay in 
bed. 
One of John Taylor's three stepchildren said Friday that the postal carrier had 
been complaining increasingly about the aches and pains from his job. 
"He was complaining about his back, his heels, his shoulder hurting," said Mike 
McMullen, 22. 
After killing his wife, Taylor, dressed in his postal uniform, then drove to 
the Orange Glen postal station about half a mile away, where he shot and killed 
two co-workers with whom he would share a cup of coffee and a smoke most 
mornings before work at a loading-dock picnic table. Taylor then went inside 
and wounded a third employee before shooting himself in the head. 
Killed were Ron Williams, 56, of Escondido, and Richard Berni, 38, of San 
Marcos. Paul DeRisi was shot in the arm, and a fourth co-worker was injured 
when she fell while fleeing the building, in the 1700 block of East Valley 
Parkway. 
McMullen discounted suggestions by neighbors that his mother and stepfather 
were experiencing marital difficulties. "They were very happy," said McMullen, 
who lives nearby in Escondido. "They were going to be leaving soon for a 
vacation back to Missouri to visit his (Taylor's) mom." 
Edward Dunne, vice president of the postal union local in Escondido, dismissed 
contentions that the shooting could be attributed solely to any personal 
problems Taylor was having. Dunne also countered arguments by postal officials 
that a recent series of suicides and shootings by postal employees are not the 
result of high stress on the job. 
"I really take exception to that," he said. "It may be true that something in 
their personal life triggers it. But the very fact that they go to the post 
office to do these terrible, tragic acts, where they take out other postal 
employees or a supervisor, or take their own lives, makes a very powerful 
statement. 
U. S. Rep. Jim Bates (D-San Diego) said Friday that he had asked the House Post 
Office and Civil Service Committee to open an inquiry into the recent series of 
shootings and suicides and their relationship to work stress. 
