U.S. SENDING SUPPLIES FROM EMIRATES AIR BASE; 
BUILDUP: DEFENSE SECRETARY DICK CHENEY PRAISES THE LATEST GULF COUNTRY TO OPEN 
ITS DOORS TO OUTSIDE FORCES. 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney on Monday announced that U.S. Air Force planes 
have begun operating out of a base in the United Arab Emirates, and he praised 
the "strong commitment" of the Emirates, the latest Persian Gulf country to 
open its doors to outside forces in the military confrontation with Iraq. 
The touring Pentagon leader said that C-130 cargo planes are using Bateen Air 
Base to ferry supplies to American troops in Saudi Arabia. 
The Emirates, a confederation of seven small oil sheikdoms, announced Sunday 
that it had agreed to host "some Arab and friendly forces" in the face of the 
threat to its big neighbor and alliance partner, Saudi Arabia. 
"That reveals the strong commitment of the men and women of this country to 
defend their way of life and to rally behind their leadership at this time," 
Cheney said. 
The C-130s had, in fact, begun operations from Bateen five days ago, American 
military officers told reporters traveling with Cheney. "But I don't think 
anybody knows how long they'll be here," said Col. Dave Mason, commander of the 
314th Tactical Airlift Squadron, who has 16 C-130s and 575 airmen in a unit 
flown to the Emirates from Little Rock Air Force Base in Arkansas. 
Cheney told reporters aboard his plane on a four-day tour of the crisis region 
that the American commitment is "long-term" and that he could not speculate on 
what the size of the force will be "one or two years from now." 
The impression that U.S. military units will be in the Persian Gulf on an 
open-ended deployment to safeguard oil production vital to the industrialized 
world has been supported by gulf officials in private conversations over the 
last few weeks. 
The Saudis requested Western support in the face of an Iraqi threat to their 
oil fields after Iraqi strongman Saddam Hussein's Aug. 2 invasion of Saudi 
Arabia's neighbor Kuwait. Following the Saudis' lead, the normally cautious 
Arab states on the west coast of the gulf, one by one, joined the defense. 
British airplanes flew to Oman in the first days of the crisis. Last week, 
Bahrain approved open use of its airfields by British jets. 
All the small countries, bound in alliance to Saudi Arabia under the Gulf 
Cooperation Council, supported the deployment of the first foreign forces on 
Saudi soil. 
Officials in Bahrain and other gulf states say their governments are now 
prepared for a long-term strategy to repel any aggression. 
"We have to be very realistic," one said, discarding the notion that the gulf 
states can provide their own security. "The whole world agrees that there is a 
danger to the international economic system" if the Persian Gulf is unstable. 
"The principle will be here for a long time. The Americans will be here, and 
the British will supplement them," the official added. 
In this crisis, the Emirates were the first to act. When the Iraqi army first 
threatened Kuwait in late July, in an oil-production dispute that also involved 
the Emirates, President Bush sent two KC-135 refueling tankers to the gulf for 
exercises with the Emirates' minuscule air force of French-made Mirage 
fighters. 
Now, the 314th Squadron has set up shop in the desert heat. The airmen are 
housed in 50 air-conditioned trailers provided by the Emirates' central 
government in Abu Dhabi. Col. Mason, the commander, said his planes were 
ferrying food, ammunition and weapons from Bateen Air Base to the growing force 
of American Marines and paratroopers on the ground in Saudi Arabia. 
"The total size of the final deployment will depend on future developments," 
said Cheney, who left the Emirates for stops Monday in Oman, a sultanate just 
outside the Persian Gulf, and the Saudi city of Jidda, on the Red Sea coast. 
"I'm especially pleased that U.S. forces are among those accepted by the UAE in 
defense of the gulf," he declared after meeting with the Emirates' president, 
Sheik Zayed ibn Sultan al Nuhayan. 
"It's a measure of the seriousness of the situation and shows how deeply 
concerned they are about Saddam Hussein. They want to cooperate with the United 
States and other forces in the region." 
He made no disclosure of U.S. deployments beyond the airlift squadron. The 
Emirates' acceptance of foreign forces specifically mentioned the possibility 
of Arab units joining a multinational defense. 
The Emirates government, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said, "has agreed to 
receiving some Arab and friendly forces as a contribution towards Arab and 
international efforts to defend the region." 
Two days earlier, Bahraini officials had announced their approval of use of 
airfields on the small island nation by British forces. 
On Aug. 7, less than a week after Iraqi tanks and troops poured across the 
Kuwaiti frontier and occupied the oil sheikdom, President Bush ordered U.S. 
troops and warplanes onto Saudi Arabian soil at the request of King Fahd, whose 
country was threatened by Iraqi armor driving south from Kuwait city. 
The first American planes began arriving in Saudi Arabia's Eastern province the 
next day, marking the first foreign deployment in the gulf states. Britain sent 
in a squadron of Tornado fighters and flew a squadron of Jaguar warplanes to 
Oman. 
American naval forces had been operating in the international waters of the 
gulf for years, demonstrating the right of free passage. In the 1980-88 war 
between Iran and Iraq, American warplanes flew cover over Navy ships escorting 
Kuwaiti oil tankers reflagged under the Stars and Stripes to qualify them for 
American protection. 
The strategy kept Kuwaiti oil moving to world markets but was marked by tragedy 
in 1987 when an Iraqi Exocet missile hit the frigate Stark, killing 37 U.S. 
sailors. Baghdad said the attack was an accident. 
The next year, a missile fired by the guided missile cruiser Vincennes felled 
an Iranian airliner, killing all 290 aboard. Vincennes' officers said the plane 
was mistaken for an attacking warplane. 
Since the Iran-Iraq truce that ended the war in 1988, Washington has kept a 
presence in the gulf in the form of an eight-ship task force. 
Arab countries, including those in the gulf, have traditionally insisted that 
Arab disputes should be left to them. But the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait has 
changed the tune along the oil-rich waterway. 
"The political existence of the Middle East as we know it is now in jeopardy," 
said a key official in one gulf state. "Others dream of Arab unity. But it is 
not even a dream. It's a fiction. It's completely destroyed." 
