U.S. FEARS CHAOS, URGES U.N. ACTION ON LIBERIA; 
CIVIL WAR: POLICY IS REVERSED AMID CONCERN THAT THOUSANDS OF REFUGEES WILL 
STARVE OR BE KILLED. 
The Bush Administration reversed policy Tuesday and asked the United Nations to 
intervene to stop Liberia's slide into chaos, and officials warned of the 
prospect of widespread slaughter in the capital and possible starvation among 
thousands of refugees. 
Two days after government troops reportedly massacred several hundred people 
seeking shelter in a church, U.S. officials said that about 33,000 refugees 
have taken asylum at U.S. installations across Liberia, including two major 
U.S. communications facilities. 
"We have not been able to supply food to those seeking refuge at our 
facilities," one State Department official said, noting that food supplies for 
the 500,000 residents of the capital, Monrovia, were severely depleted because 
fighting had cut off deliveries for weeks. 
Aid is "urgent," said another U.S. official. "These people are going to 
starve." 
Fighting in Monrovia remained heavy Tuesday, according to a joint pool report 
filed by Western journalists in Liberia. Rebel forces initially won control of 
several sections of the city, only to be partly forced back by a government 
counterattack, the report said. 
"We will continue to fight until the last soldiers of the Liberian army die," 
President Samuel K. Doe said in a telephone interview with the British 
Broadcasting Corp. The vow was the first public statement in more than a month 
from the 38-year-old former sergeant, who has been staging a last defense from 
his heavily fortified seaside mansion. 
When fighting in Liberia began in December, the Administration took a hands-off 
stance, reasoning that none of the warring factions merited American support. 
In recent days, however, the United States has been drawn more closely into 
efforts to end the fighting. 
U.S. involvement in Liberia involves both practical and symbolic 
considerations. On the practical side are two hard-to-replace American 
communications stations in the small West African nation, one operated by the 
Voice of America, the other used to transmit CIA and State Department 
communications throughout Africa. 
On the symbolic side, said Pauline Baker, an African policy expert at the 
Carnegie Endowment in Washington, Liberia has become "a test of the legacy of 
the U.S. presence in Africa." Liberia was founded in 1847 by freed slaves 
resettled from the United States. The dollar is the local currency, the capital 
is named after a U.S. president and the local militia wears uniforms modeled 
after those of New York City police. 
During the 1980s, the United States poured more than $500 million in aid into 
Liberia. Much of that money disappeared because of corruption, and much of what 
did go into improving the nation's economy has now been destroyed by war. 
About 400 Americans remain in Liberia, according to U.S. officials. In 
addition, several thousand Liberian citizens carry U.S. passports. Many are 
"Americo-Liberian" descendants of the freed slaves, who dominated the nation's 
politics until Doe took over in a coup a decade ago. 
As the fighting continued Tuesday, forces loyal to one of the country's two 
rebel armies won control of Mamba Point, the city neighborhood where the U.S. 
Embassy and several other foreign missions are located, American officials said 
in Washington. 
But late in the day, about 500 soldiers loyal to Doe, advancing under the 
protection of their last remaining tank, staged a counterattack, retaking 
control of government buildings that rebels had seized earlier, according to 
the joint pool report. Heavy fighting was reported near the embassies, but no 
U.S. personnel were reported injured, Assistant Secretary of State Herman Cohen 
told reporters. 
Cohen said the Administration is "actively consulting with other members of the 
(U.N.) Security Council with the objective of having a Security Council meeting 
on Liberia, which we hope will involve the United Nations in trying to arrange 
a cease-fire." The Security Council could meet as early as today to consider 
options ranging from a cease-fire call to creation of a U.N. peacekeeping force 
to separate the three rival armies. 
As recently as Monday, Administration officials had publicly rejected the idea 
of U.N. involvement in Liberia, saying that the move would be 
counterproductive. U.S. analysts had hoped that the warring factions would be 
able to reach a peace settlement or that the arrival of rebel forces in 
Monrovia earlier this month would rapidly bring a close to fighting. 
But officials now concede that their analysis was wrong. "Something's got to be 
done at this point," one White House official said, noting that divisions 
between two rebel forces with different ethnic bases have turned the fighting 
into a three-cornered war of increasing ferocity likely to continue even if Doe 
can be dislodged. 
"Forces on both sides, government and the rebel side, are continuing to commit 
atrocities," Cohen said. The massacre at the Lutheran church late Sunday was 
only the latest in a series of attacks on civilians as the fighting has become 
an outlet for widespread bloodletting between rival ethnic groups. 
One of the rebel armies is headed by Charles Taylor, an Americo-Liberian 
educated in the United States but accused by his opponents of links to Libya. 
The other is led by Prince Johnson, whose support comes mostly from Liberia's 
Gio and Mano tribes. Both men once served in Doe's government. Doe, for his 
part, draws most of his support from fellow members of the Krahn tribe. 
Besides the atrocities, Cohen said, Liberians are starving. "It's very 
important that the fighting stop so that the international community can engage 
in a massive humanitarian rescue effort," he said. 
Rebel forces have made "a special effort" to supply food to refugees seeking 
shelter at U.S. facilities, Cohen said. But American officials are increasingly 
concerned that food, water and sanitation facilities are inadequate for the 
refugees, who began pouring into three U.S.-held areas of the country about 10 
days ago. 
