2 REBEL FORCES ADVANCE AGAINST DOE IN LIBERIA 
Competing Liberian rebel groups advanced on two fronts against President Samuel 
K. Doe's executive mansion Friday, and one group claimed it narrowly missed 
killing him in an ambush. 
Rebels led by Prince Johnson fortified positions in Monrovia's city center 
while men under command of his rival, Charles Taylor, advanced in the capital's 
eastern suburbs. 
Both groups were maneuvering in a last-ditch bid to topple Doe before West 
African peacekeepers arrive to impose a cease-fire. 
Johnson claimed his men narrowly missed assassinating Doe on Thursday when they 
ambushed his car less than a mile from the mansion, the report said. 
"I saw Doe with my own eyes," said a rebel who gave his name as Battlefield. He 
said he fired at Doe's blue Peugeot near the Defense Ministry. 
Doe on Thursday accused U.S. Marines of trying to assassinate him, but the 
State Department in Washington denied the charge. 
Journalists saw Taylor's soldiers push through Monrovia's eastern suburbs 
toward the fortress-like mansion where the besieged president is clinging to 
power. 
Johnson also was quoted as saying his men had beaten back an attack by 100 
Taylor rebels on his rear flank near Monrovia Free Port. 
"If Taylor brings 50 million men, I don't care," Johnson said. "If they are not 
tactically trained, they run away." 
Taylor, whose 10,000 fighters represent the largest army in the country, is 
opposed to intervention by the West African force. 
The peacekeepers, meanwhile, were mobilizing in five countries. They planned to 
sail into Monrovia from neighboring Sierra Leone, but no date for their arrival 
has been announced. Nigerian forces were expected to leave for Sierra Leone 
today. 
In Monrovia's Congo Town suburb on Friday, two rockets hit St. Joseph's 
Catholic Hospital, according to a radio communication from relief workers. It 
was not known if anyone was hurt. 
More than 100 ambulatory patients fled the hospital, according to a spokesman 
for a European relief agency. 
Doctors in Monrovia said Taylor has ordered everyone to leave the hospital. 
