'GARBOLOGIST'S LIFE IS IN THE PITS; 
ENVIRONMENT: ARCHEOLOGIST BILL RATHJE EXCAVATES LANDFILLS, NOT RUINS, AND CALLS 
PLASTIC THE 'GREAT SATAN.' 
Bill Rathje is an archeologist, but not one to be found excavating ancient 
Mayan civilizations, Egyptian tombs or East Indian artifacts. 
He prefers to dig up more current, less glamorous ruins, what he calls "the 
pimples on Mother Nature's face." 
A more accurate term for Rathje might be "garbologist" because he has been 
digging up garbage in landfills nationwide for three years. 
Rathje says he has seen it all -- all of America's fast-food waste, disposable 
diapers, Styrofoam cups, plastic soda bottles, cans full of paint, broken 
furniture and assorted other oddments. 
Conducting his Garbage Project, Rathje said, he has learned that people often 
mount campaigns against the least threatening environmental scourges and ignore 
more serious threats to landfills bursting at their clay-lined seams. 
Rathje, a professor at the University of Arizona, recently addressed 
waste-management companies and First Analysis Corp., a Chicago research firm 
that focuses on the environmental industry. 
He called plastics "the Great Satan" but said Americans should be more aware of 
materials such as paper and construction and demolition waste that take far too 
much valuable landfill space. 
"Landfills close down not because they're too heavy but because there's too 
much volume," he said. Volume? The only man-made structure larger than Staten 
Island's Fresh Kills landfill is the Great Wall of China, Rathje said, and at 
2.3 billion cubic feet and counting, the landfill will be bigger than the wall 
by 1991. 
Despite what many people think, Rathje said, plastics have taken up no more 
than 12 to 13% of landfill space since 1975, although production of plastic 
packaging and products is booming. 
The difference is that plastics are becoming increasingly lighter, he said, 
noting that a plastic milk jug now weighs about 45% less than in the early 
1970s. Plastic grocery bags, 2-liter soft-drink containers, laundry detergent 
jugs and even glass are lighter. 
A glass bottle unearthed in a 1950s landfill often is whole and unbroken, 
whereas lighter-weight glass in current landfills is in pieces, he said. 
Diapers, which account for 1.8% of volume in landfills, are not the 
bacteria-producing waste that people suspect, Rathje said. Rather, newly added 
super-absorbent material contains all leachable toxic materials in landfills. 
"But since they're super absorbent, they're going to come in heavier and 
smellier anyway," he said. 
Paper that filled 40% of landfill space in 1970 now fills 55%, and that 
percentage is growing. Newspapers, office wastepaper and especially telephone 
books are the culprits. Dig a trench in a landfill, Rathje said, and one can 
see phone books layered like a cake. Lacking light, air and space in a packed 
landfill, they do not deteriorate. 
"Each two-volume set of Yellow Pages distributed in Phoenix last year, which 
will be thrown out this year, weighed 8.63 pounds, for a total of 6,000 tons of 
wastepaper, and that's only one city," Rathje said. "The phone companies even 
throw out their old books and put everything on microfilm." 
Calculating exactly how much garbage Americans generate is an "imprecise 
exercise," and numbers may vary, said Marge Franklin, president of Franklin 
Associates Ltd., an environmental engineering and research firm in Prairie 
Village, Kan. 
According to a Franklin Associates report this year for the Environmental 
Protection Agency, paper accounted for 34% and plastic 20% of landfill volume 
nationally in 1988, a slight difference from Rathje's figures, based on 
excavations at nine landfills nationwide. 
"The difference is that one method is computed systematically, and Rathje's is 
empirical," said Sam Hartwell, a research associate at the Natural Resources 
Defense Council in New York. "Volumes may be over or underestimated because of 
many variables, but a more important finding of Rathje's is that, even though 
something like plastic and paper may be labeled biodegradable, they're really 
not once they get in a landfill because they can be dug up years later still 
intact." 
To probe a landfill, Rathje uses a bucket auger with a 110-foot pole. At the 
pole's base is a bucket four feet high and three feet wide with steel teeth to 
grab a cookie-cutter portion of garbage. The first time Rathje used the device, 
he said, it bit through part of a car, engine and all. 
The Garbage Project employs standard archeological procedure when the bucket 
dumps its first mouthful. The temperature is taken -- garbage usually is 
between 90 and 104 degrees Fahrenheit because of the depth -- and it is 
weighed. A sample is bagged and mailed to laboratories, universities and 
government agencies that study decomposition traits and bacteria. 
The time when garbage was dumped usually can be ascertained quickly, Rathje 
noted, by checking the dates on about two dozen clean newspapers found in 
virtually every load. Other items are not so easily recognized. 
On one dig, Rathje said, he thought he had gone "back on some 'Star Trek' time 
warp and was dealing with hand axes from North Africa about a million years 
ago." Analyzed, the two round, dark, rock-like objects were found to be kaiser 
rolls. Newspapers found nearby were dated 1952. The most abundant and intact 
food found in landfills, Rathje said, is the hot dog, adding, "There's 
something to say for all those preservatives." 
