COVINA POLICE UNION NOT SATISFIED WITH CHIEF'S CONCESSIONS 
While a recent report by Police Chief John Lentz addressed some of their 
concerns, members of the police union say promised changes aren't enough to 
improve departmental morale. 
In a 28-page report released last week, Lentz agreed to make some of the 
changes the Police Assn. of Covina had requested in the department's promotion, 
training and assignment policies. 
But the chief hasn't allayed the union's concerns on standardizing assignment 
procedures and increasing staffing, said Officer Vic Lupu, president of the 
association. 
The 60-member union, which complained that staff morale has plummeted during 
the five years Lentz has been chief, asked the City Council in early July to 
intervene. Lentz and City Manager John Thomson met with the council in closed 
session Aug. 7 to present the report responding to union concerns. 
Will Ask for Input 
In his point-by-point response, Lentz agreed to review the department's 
training needs and to standardize procedures for making special assignments. He 
also said that he would ask for input from sergeants when evaluating officers 
for promotions. 
"On the face of it, it looks like there's an attempt to work on some problem 
areas," Lupu said. But he said the chief's promise to standardize procedures 
for making assignments isn't enough. 
"Our worry is he makes the qualifications fit the person he wants," Lupu said. 
He said the union wants all special assignment listings to be posted. 
Lentz declined to follow other union recommendations, such as designating the 
number and types of beats assigned for each of the day's three watches. 
Describing staff scheduling as a "management prerogative" under an agreement 
with the union, Lentz retained overlapping shifts, which the union said may 
reduce safety for patrol officers. 
More than half of the chief's report focused on conditions the union said 
contributed to low morale. Responding to criticism that "participative 
management is almost non-existent," Lentz said he has reinstituted monthly 
staff meetings that include participation by sergeants, who are union members. 
Lentz said he is also reviewing the officers' requests to eliminate daily logs 
in which they must list all their activities. He said new computer software the 
department may buy would simplify the daily log, as well as crime reporting 
forms that officers must submit. 
Mayor Encouraged 
Mayor Bob Low said he is encouraged by the chief's efforts to address the 
union's concerns. "I think Chief Lentz and John Thomson made an honest effort 
to respond to the questions raised," he said. "I think to the extent that it 
will break down barriers, we'll all be winners." 
Richard Levine, attorney for the police union, declined to comment because he 
said he had not seen a copy of the report. 
