STILL CRUISING AFTER ALL THESE YEARS; 
OXNARD: ON SUNDAY NIGHTS, SAVIERS ROAD BECOMES THE PLACE TO SEE AND BE SEEN IN 
CARS AND MINI-TRUCKS. AND THE ACTIVITIES ARE NEARLY TROUBLE-FREE. 
It is a scene played out every Sunday night on a mile-long strip of Saviers 
Road in Oxnard: 
Bumper to bumper, convertibles with shiny spoke-rim wheels and customized 
mini-trucks with expensive stereo systems roll slowly up and down the street. 
The thundering sounds of thrumming mufflers, roaring engines and car stereos 
blasting out funky raps blend across the night air. 
Low-rider sedans, so close to the ground they seem to hug the street, are 
packed with spirited, mostly Latino, teen-agers. 
The sleek automobiles have been polished to a shiny splendor just for this 
evening. The object here is to see and be seen, to flirt and rap with the other 
regulars. 
Whether on Saviers Road, A Street or Cooper Road, cruising is part of Oxnard's 
history. It has been around since before many of today's cruisers were even 
born. 
However, in sharp contrast to cities such as Los Angeles and Hollywood, where 
cruising has been banned because of noise, traffic and gang violence, cruising 
in Oxnard has been nearly trouble-free, police said. 
In fact, hard-core cruisers who get hassled by police in nearby cities are 
turning up on Saviers Road. 
"The cruisers are very well-mannered," said Oxnard Police Sgt. Denny Phillips, 
who has overseen police patrols of Saviers Road for the last six months. "I've 
seen cruising here for years. We've got cruisers who come from as far as Santa 
Maria. I talked to one from Victorville." 
Even the most vocal critics of cruising in Oxnard are not looking to end the 
weekly event -- they just want to put some controls on the noise and litter. 
"I don't want to close down cruising," said Jean Joneson, who has written to 
the police chief and complained to the City Council about noise generated by 
the cruisers. "I used to do this myself when I was younger." 
Joneson, who lives on Iris Street about a block from the cruising strip, said 
the noise from the engines and car stereos routinely rattles her windows until 
late at night. 
However, she said that when her two teen-age daughters are old enough, she will 
not prohibit them from cruising. "My kids are going to be old enough to 
cruise," she said. "But my kids are going to do it by the rules, and they are 
going to be in by 10." 
Cruising -- a California tradition that is both a social event and a 
celebration of the automobile -- attracts 300 to 500 youngsters to Saviers 
every Sunday night. On holidays, such as the Fourth of July or Labor Day, the 
strip can attract twice that number. 
Regulars on Saviers said people can cruise in any car, but the nicer, the 
shinier, the flashier the car, the greater the attention. 
The cruisers begin to show up on Saviers about 9 p.m. At a speed usually not 
exceeding 15 m.p.h., the cars drive up Saviers, make a U-turn on Yucca Street, 
drive back down the road and cut another U-turn on Iris Street. They repeat the 
route until about 1 a.m., when most cruisers head home. 
For William Ellis, Saviers is the place to show off his 1982 Toyota mini-truck. 
Ellis, a 20-year-old Camarillo resident who works at an automobile dealership, 
has spent about $5,000 on chrome, black and gold-flecked paint, upholstery and 
other customizing. 
"You should see the looks I get when I'm not with a woman," he said, gesturing 
to his girlfriend in the front seat. 
However, Ellis said his biggest expense is the 37 tickets he has received in 
the last three years. Most are "fix-it" tickets for his customized hydraulic 
system, which allows Ellis to jack up his truck at the flick of a switch. 
Ellis said he usually removes the hydraulics to clear the citation from his 
driving record and then reinstalls the system for the next night of cruising. 
The process costs him $400 to $500 each time in fines and labor, he said. 
"It's the only hobby I have, and I get hassled for it by the police," he said. 
"It really ticks me off." 
When he came to Oxnard in 1963, Phillips said cruising took place Friday night 
on A Street. But the 1970s construction of the Plaza Mall narrowed A Street, he 
said, and forced cruisers to move to Cooper Road near La Colonia, a gritty, 
mostly Latino neighborhood in northeast Oxnard. Bottle-throwing and other 
violence on the street then drove the cruisers to Saviers Road, he said. 
Although cruising on Saviers has been mostly trouble-free, Phillips said the 
Oxnard Police Department has reorganized patrol shifts so that at least five 
units are assigned to Saviers between 9 p.m. and 1 a.m. 
"They are very well-mannered and well-behaved. In the last six months, I've had 
no back talk," he said of the cruisers. "The regulars know the rules. They 
don't loiter, park or drink." 
There has been almost no violence or drinking in the last six months, Phillips 
said. Most of the 70 to 80 tickets issued on Saviers in the last year have been 
for mechanical violations or stereos that are too loud. 
Fire engines and ambulances know to avoid Saviers on Sunday night, he said. And 
cruisers leave the right-hand shoulder of the street clear for the police, 
Phillips said. 
In April, police decided to see how many residents in the neighborhood 
surrounding Saviers had problems with cruisers. Police, using a computer with 
an automatic telephone dialing program, randomly called 185 houses. 
Of the 90 residents who responded, only 35 said cruising was a problem, Senior 
Crime Analyst David Keith said. Most of the residents who complained said 
traffic congestion was the biggest problem, while a smaller percentage said 
noise and litter were a problem, he said. 
e Saviers cruising route is mostly lined with restaurants, clothing stores, 
barbershops and automobile supply companies -- many of which are closed on 
Sunday night. 
The businesses that are open, such as the McDonald's near Hughes Drive, act as 
a pit stop for the parade of sleek and polished road machines. 
Earl Barron, who has been a security guard at McDonald's on Saviers for 22 
years, said he has seen it all. Usually the cruisers are well-mannered and 
cause no problems, he said. But sometimes gang members or cruisers from out of 
town will try to stir up trouble, Barron said. 
Still, the extra traffic that Sunday-night cruising attracts to the restaurant 
does not necessarily mean more business. 
"Usually all they do is buy a small Coke and leave," Barron said. 
To most of the regular cruisers, the obvious question is still unanswered: Why 
Saviers and why Sunday night? 
"It's just always been that way and always will be, I guess," said Mitch 
Barrios, vice president of City Life Car Club, one of the oldest car clubs in 
the county. 
Cruising has become a family tradition for Barrios, a 30-year-old courier for a 
medical company, who said he has been a regular cruiser in Oxnard since he was 
15. 
On a recent Sunday night, he drove to Saviers in a friend's 1972 gold-flecked 
Chevy Impala with his wife, Leticia, and his 17-year-old sister, Veronica. His 
two children were at home with a sitter. 
"Cruising is here to stay," Barrios said. "It's been here for years and nobody 
is going to get rid of it, no matter what they do." 
For Veronica Barrios, a recent high school graduate who wears her brown hair 
curly and piled high, cruising on Saviers is a chance to gossip with friends 
and meet boys. 
She said her strategy is to wave or smile to the boys in the nicest cars. If 
they seem to be interested, she said, she'll flash out her phone number with 
her fingers. 
"Saviers is exciting," she said. "The best. The very best." 
