BERNIE BIRNBAUM: A 'SECRET WEAPON' AT CBS 
In 1962, Dan Rather, just up from Texas, was sitting in a CBS office, the new 
guy sweating out his big break. A short, rotund man with a cigar the size of a 
trench mortar happened by. 
"He looked in, looked at me, stuck out his hand and said, 'I'm Bernie 
Birnbaum,' " Rather recalled. 
Thus did the man who would be anchor meet the man who would be his first 
producer. 
Bernie Birnbaum. Native of Brooklyn. World War II combat cameraman. Rhodes 
Scholar. And a one-time photographer of Italian starlets who called him Mr. 
Pencil because he used a pencil, not his hands, to pose them. 
Described by Charles Kuralt as "one of the secret weapons of CBS," Birnbaum has 
worked for CBS News since 1950, first as a lighting director, then as a film 
editor, then as a writer and producer. 
His journalist's credo: "Give everybody an even break." His assessment of his 
work: "I'm the picture man . . . they learn from me how important the picture 
is." 
You never see him on TV, though. He's one of the behind-the-scenes guys, a 
sturdy CBS legend who has survived wars, hostile Southern sheriffs, management 
shoot-outs and even the March Massacre of 1987, when 215 CBS News staffers got 
axed in a budget-cutting move. 
Ironically, it was because of the threat of an even larger layoff that he 
joined CBS after his postwar days in Italy as a publicity photographer of 
starlets and actors in Italian and American epics. 
He was in Hollywood then, seeking employment at a studio. A director friend, 
Clarence Brown, told him he probably could land him a job, but that there soon 
would be perhaps 1,500 layoffs in the film business. 
"This is a dead-end industry," director Brown told photographer Birnbaum. He 
urged him to cast his lot with television, whose increasing audiences were 
decreasing those for films and causing the layoffs. 
Recalls Birnbaum: "I said, 'Television? What's that?' " 
A friend pointed him to New York, where he hooked on with CBS as a lighting 
director of shows being broadcast -- on an experimental basis -- in the living 
color that TV viewers now take for granted. 
Later he became a film editor in the news division, working with the likes of 
the late Charles Collingwood; Shad Northshield, an ex-newspaperman from Chicago 
who later would create and run what now is "CBS Sunday Morning"; and Kuralt, 
who anchors that broadcast. 
Birnbaum first worked with Rather in Texas on the story of the Billy Sol Estes 
soybean scandal, then the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963 in 
Dallas, then the civil rights marches in the South. 
His first dealings with the man who became the "CBS Evening News" anchor were 
uneasy. The Texan from hardscrabble origins distrusted New York types, felt 
they tended to be Ivy Leaguers afflicted with superiority complexes. 
"I told him it wasn't all that way," Birnbaum said. "I told him I didn't go to 
Harvard or Yale, that I went to City College (of New York) at night before the 
war and to New York University after it on the GI Bill." 
They got along fine after that. 
"Bernie really took me under his wing," Rather said. "He gave me very good 
counsel and advice on any number of things." In addition to being "the ultimate 
professional," Rather said, Birnbaum "holds one record that ought to be in the 
Guinness book. He has saved and made more careers, and never breathed a word of 
it, than any man who has worked in television news. 
"A correspondent gets drunk and can't finish his script, no problem. Bernie 
does it. A tape editor's wife hits him with a frying pan and he can't show up 
for work. No problem. Bernie edits. 
"I've seen whole hours that were total disasters a half day before air. Bernie 
says, 'Listen, get me a writer, an editor, time in a room and we'll get this 
mother on the air.' And he does." 
Kuralt said that Birnbaum also has the ability to "gain the trust of anybody 
because he genuinely is interested" and is himself trustworthy. Kuralt first 
met Birnbaum in 1960 on a series called "Eyewitness." Kuralt was the anchor and 
Birnbaum was a field producer who always, as Kuralt recalls it, seemed in 
constant motion: 
"He thought nothing of going off to Laos for a day or two, then coming back and 
covering the New Orleans school integration story." 
As with Rather, theirs is a mutual admiration society. The Kurault-Birnbaum 
dossier includes Vietnam, four "On the Road" retrospectives that Birnbaum put 
together, the short-lived "American Parade" and "Crossroads" series and the 
producer's occasional work for "CBS Sunday Morning." 
"Kuralt's a goddamn genius," Birnbaum submits. "He writes to pictures, which 
very few people do now." 
The producer will be 69 in October, but has slowed only slightly -- and then 
only on doctors' orders to take two months off this summer and take it easy at 
his home in suburban Larchmont, N.Y. 
In recent years, he has worked on CBS special reports. This year, he produced 
three one-hour videocassettes of CBS News material -- including one based on 
Kuralt's 1976 expedition to all 50 states -- that CBS will sell both to 
video-rental stores and via its mail-order videocassette business. 
Birnbaum doesn't wonder what might have happened had he stuck it out in 
Hollywood instead of joining CBS in New York 39 years ago. 
"Naw, I think I've had more fun this way," he said. "And the important thing is 
that you keep in touch with people." 
He means people whose stories he helped report, people like former Army Sgt. 
William Floyd, who lost a leg to a booby trap in Vietnam when Birnbaum and 
Kuralt were there in 1965, filming a special on Christmas in Vietnam. 
In a memorable 20-years-later special, the two revisited Floyd in Florida. 
"He still sends me Christmas cards," Birnbaum said. "Those things you never 
forget. And I had a chance to be close to some of the great moments of history. 
. . . 
"I'm proud I always can say I could go back all the time, go to every story I 
ever did and be welcome. Because I gave everybody an even break." 
