UC TENURE: A FOREST OF DEADWOOD 
State Superintendent of Public Instruction Bill Honig asked last month whether 
California was getting its money's worth from University of California faculty 
who teach as few as six hours per week. He complained about the faculty member 
who says, "I'll do my research and you leave me alone." Honig argued, "That's 
not good enough. The people of the state are paying the bill . . . and they 
deserve a better accounting." 
Honig is right, but the situation is worse than he may realize. Many UC full 
professors do not teach as many as six hours per week, year-round. Typically, 
they teach six hours during two quarters, three hours during a third quarter 
and zero hours during the fourth (summer) quarter. Those who do maintain a 
heavy schedule of research, I hasten to add, are fully employed even at that 
modest level of teaching. Yet many professors do no research at all during time 
bought for them by the taxpayers. 
Honig questions the quality of UC research: "You look at the published stuff 
some of these guys do and you wonder if it's all that valuable." For the 
moment, forget quality and only consider quantity. During nearly seven years as 
an editor with the University of California Press, I had abundant contact with 
the best of the UC faculty; a perennial topic in their conversation was 
"deadwood" -- the distressingly large number of their colleagues who did no 
research but, in effect, took state money and ran. 
I am not talking about the most senior or junior professors, who, for good and 
different reasons, might be less than abundantly productive. I am talking about 
people in their prime who "haven't published anything in years," to use a 
phrase heard with alarming frequency. 
Deadwood is a drag on academic competitiveness. It is also, obviously, an 
affront to elementary ethics. The amount of teaching required of a UC full 
professor simply does not constitute full-time employment. Any tenured 
professor who does his teaching and stops there is a thief. What else do you 
call someone who takes money for work and then doesn't do it? 
In any other walk of life, someone who -- over the years -- failed to discharge 
a major portion of his or her responsibilities would be fired. UC professors 
who fail to do research are not fired. What protects them is tenure, that 
munificent guarantee of lifetime employment bestowed on the fortunate after 
only six years' probation. 
But if tenure prevents dismissal, it does not prevent another corrective 
response. Once a tenured professor at a research university is clearly doing no 
significant research, that professor should be stripped of full-time pay for de 
facto part-time work and be required to teach full time. 
This "punishment" would scarcely be cruel or unusual if the teaching load were 
pegged at the level required of faculty at the Cal State system -- 12 hours of 
teaching (plus three of advising) per week. 
Nor would such change create the "two-class faculty" of teachers and 
researchers that one Berkeley dean has warned Honig about. Such a division, in 
fact, already exists. Just ask professors who work long hours on research how 
they feel about those colleagues who, with perfect impunity, go golfing 
instead. 
The proposed reform would address the most notorious consequences of the status 
quo: the ever-rising cost of higher education. At California State University, 
Long Beach, where enrollment is 33,700, according to "The College Blue Book," 
full-time faculty numbers 950. At UCLA, where enrollment is 33,167 (same 
source), full-time faculty numbers 2,100. If UCLA faculty time not actually 
spent on research were claimed for teaching, that university would need fewer 
faculty. Alternatively, it could enroll more students without hiring new 
faculty. 
The "punishment" of extra teaching would not end the research career of any 
serious professor. One early discovery at UC Press was the outstanding research 
being done in various parts of the Cal State system, the supposed "teaching 
system" of the state. A given department on a given Cal State campus might well 
rival its UC counterpart. Shift the comparison to the level of individual 
professors, and all old bets were off. 
During the 1970s, many UC departments began to be "tenured in" -- all members 
holding lifetime employment, all still too young to die or retire. Bright new 
Ph.D.s from the best universities turned perforce to the less prestigious Cal 
State campuses, bringing their research plans with them. An acquiring editor 
interested in publishing the best new work, no matter who was doing it, could 
find plenty of possibilities at the erstwhile teaching campuses. 
The teaching load on those campuses is heavy. It does interfere with -- but 
does not preclude -- research. At Cal State San Diego, for example, an English 
professor with a research project may request three hours of "assigned time" to 
work on it, bringing classroom hours down to nine per week. Not all such 
requests are approved, though most are; nor do all professors make such 
requests. In one exceptional case, a professor was recently granted six hours 
of "assigned time." 
The Cal State San Diego approach to research accountability contrasts sharply 
with the usual UC approach -- granting a senior professor a 50%-75% reduction 
of the benchmark 12 hours of teaching per week, whether reducation is requested 
or not. A tenured UC professor is, in effect, presumed to have this much 
research in progress. The professor who has quietly set research aside in favor 
of real-estate investing or horse breeding may eventually pay the price in slow 
promotion or smaller raises, but not in increased teaching. 
If there is a natural symbiosis between teaching and research, as spokespersons 
for research universities rightly claim, then purely in the interest of 
teaching, the state would do well to allocate more of its research money to the 
Cal State system. By the same token, once it becomes clear that a given UC 
professor either cannot or will not do significant research, the state is 
surely within its rights to double that person's teaching load. The UC faculty 
clubs play host each day to a number of living, breathing, serenely aging 
tenure mistakes. Everyone knows them. Behind their backs, some laugh at them 
and more complain about them. Here is a way to make them less expensive. 
Honig is right to question the proposed expansion (from nine campuses to 12) of 
the UC system. California has experienced no explosion of demand for new 
university research. If it had, the proper response would be research 
institutes -- without gymnasiums, dormitories, student health center, student 
union and other student services. What the state faces is an explosion of 
demand for the kind of high-quality university education the UC system manages 
to offer at a relatively low price. 
The demand, in other words, is for extra teaching. Then why overlook surplus 
capacity already in place? The state could redeploy the unused, paid-for time 
of dormant UC research faculty in the form of new hours of university teaching. 
If there is such a thing as found money, there may also be such a thing as 
found time. 
