POISONS AND PRECARIOUS BALANCE; 
ONE POLLUTION MAY PROTECT AGAINST ANOTHER 
Hold on to your hats, or at least your sunglasses: Acid rain may be preventing 
global warming. 
Sulfur dioxide, the power-plant byproduct that is the chief cause of acid rain, 
is colorless when it leaves the smokestack, but turns bright white as it 
interacts with the atmosphere. New research has raised the possibility that the 
whitening effect of sulfates from this pollution increases the albedo 
(reflectivity) of the Earth's cloud layer, causing more solar energy to be 
mirrored back into space. This would cool the atmosphere somewhat. 
Maybe it is no coincidence that during the very decades when artificial 
greenhouse gas emissions have dramatically increased without -- so far at least 
-- triggering a runaway world heat wave, sulfur emissions have skyrocketed too, 
keeping the planet's temperature in a kind of zany equilibrium. But consider: 
Congress is finally hitching up its pants to do something about acid rain. 
Several pending legislative proposals, including one sponsored by President 
George Bush, call for sharp reductions. There's no sign, however, of Washington 
preparing to face the music on the greenhouse effect. Slowing its advance would 
involve serious reductions in fossil fuel use coupled with other measures far 
more expensive and disruptive to the industrial world's auto-oriented life 
styles than controlling sulfur dioxide. Thus without progress against global 
warming, progress against acid rain could actually backfire. 
This possible relationship between sulfur and the greenhouse effect is 
unproved; it's strictly theory and may turn out to be wrong. But it illustrates 
the strange interrelations that can spring up when we tamper with the vastness 
of nature. 
The environment is not a machine but a living system. Like the body, it has 
some ability to adapt in response to chemical intrusions and, like the body, 
may even come to depend on substances that would otherwise be considered 
poisons. In the same manner that toxic pharmaceuticals are sometimes 
administered to counter the effects of disease microbes and other unwanted 
presences in the body, deliberate pollution may be sent chasing after the 
careless kind. 
Currently, in several Scandinavian countries, lakes are being "limed" -- bombed 
with tons of pulverized limestone -- to control the pH caused by acid rain. 
There are proposals to do this in the United States. Better to have lakes 
flavored than acidic, one supposes, but who knows what effect the lime will 
have, in turn? 
Another speculative theory on why global warming has been held in check is 
that, coming into the postwar industrial boom period, the world's oceans were 
by coincidence relatively cool. Oceans are weather moderators: The enormous 
mass of water in the sea tends to "store" temperature differences the same way 
rocks are used to store heat or cold in solar homes. If the atmosphere is 
relatively cool for some period, the sea will tend to soak that up and remain 
cool for years or decades after the weather warms -- moderating that warming 
downward. Ocean absorption of greenhouse heat may then have worked in 
opposition to global warming during recent decades. 
This effect holds, however, only until the relative coolness of the sea is used 
up. The principal evidence that oceans may be warming somewhat is recent 
variations in El Nino and other major current systems: Ocean currents are 
driven partly by temperature gradients. If indeed the sea has been forestalling 
global warming, then we're living on borrowed time -- because even if in 
decades to come humanity brings its greenhouse gas emissions under control, by 
then the oceans will have become relatively warm and will for many years exert 
the side effect of steaming up an atmosphere that would otherwise cool. 
Today the most important and scientifically irrefutable interplay of pollutants 
involves ozone. The public is continually being told that higher levels of 
ozone in smog is bad, really bad. At the same time the public is told that 
lower levels of ozone in the stratosphere is bad, really bad. Here's the 
distinction. 
Ozone is a special molecular form of oxygen. In nature it is found only in the 
stratosphere and the vicinity of lightning -- but some pollutants, principally 
from cars and trucks, cause ozone artificially. Close to the ground, where 
people breathe it, ozone is a hazard because unlike normal oxygen, it degrades 
lung tissue. But high up in the stratosphere where it's never inhaled, ozone is 
a safeguard of terrestrial life, because it screens solar and cosmic 
ultraviolet radiation far more effectively than normal oxygen. Such radiation 
can cause skin cancer, birth defects and other problems. 
If the ozone being manufactured above our cities by smog pollutants could 
somehow be piped up to the stratosphere, two problems would be solved at once. 
Patent applications being accepted. Meanwhile, here's the maddening part. 
Chloroflurocarbons (CFCs), the pollutants principally responsible for depleting 
the ozone layer, are mainly emitted in big cities -- the same places where 
ozone is a health hazard. If only CFCs would attack the ozone in smog, another 
zany equilibrium might be established. 
Unfortunately CFCs are not converted into anti-ozone agents until they drift up 
into the stratosphere and are chemically altered by solar and cosmic rays. Some 
chemists have even suggested modifying CFCs so that their transformation into 
ozone-eaters would occur in low-altitude air, creating a pollutant-based 
counterbalance to smog. Unfortunately this idea would have the side effect of 
filling urban air with chlorine, a powerful caustic. Instead, the United States 
and most Western nations have signed an agreement to cut CFC manufacture 50% by 
the turn of the century, and Bush has endorsed upgrading the agreement into an 
outright ban. This issue may become moot in the United States because E.I. du 
Pont de Nemours &amp; Co., the principal manufacturer of CFCs, has announced it 
will voluntarily phase out the compounds. 
Du Pont made this commitment in part because its chemists invented a new 
substance that can replace CFCs in air conditioners and refrigeration 
equipment, the leading CFC use. Unfortunately Du Pont's creation has a 
problematic side effect. It is less efficient than CFCs -- meaning cars with 
air conditioners operating will burn more gasoline, while municipal power 
plants will consume more coal and other fuels to generate more electricity for 
cooling homes and office buildings, increasing the emission of gases with 
greenhouse effects. And, as the climate warms, it means even more fuel use for 
air conditioning, which in turn would amplify the greenhouse effect, which in 
turn . . . . 
As for zany side effects: How about a few good words for smog? Filthy air is 
not without its compensations. Studies are beginning to show that people who 
live in such badly polluted cities as Los Angeles have lower rates of skin 
cancer, blindness and certain birth defects than those who live healthful lives 
on the farm or the pristine outback -- because cosmic rays can't get through 
the smog any more than anything else can. This "portable ozone layer" effect, 
assuming it can be upheld by further research, would suggest that as 
stratospheric ozone depletion advances it may actually become healthier to tan 
yourself on Venice Beach, safely snuggled under the friendly Los Angeles smog 
dome, than in some dangerously clean place such as Hawaii or Australia. 
Assuming, that is, you bring your own breathing apparatus. 
Another equilibrium question concerns deforestation. Most ecologists believe 
that it's bad to cut or burn forests because trees, like any vegetation, 
subtract carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The typical ecologist would say, 
in fact, that few things are better for the Earth and its inhabitants than 
preserving the maximum acreage of forest. Recent research suggests, however, 
that under some circumstances trees are a source of hydrocarbon pollutants that 
cause smog. How it pains to think that Ronald Reagan's "killer trees" wisecrack 
might have been right. Or at least, like so many of his anecdotes, sorta kinda 
right. 
There's even a line of thought holding that logging forests is great for the 
environment, assuming each cleared area is promptly replanted. Young, growing 
trees withdraw carbon dioxide faster than mature ones. Moreover, it is possible 
that wooded stands are a net minus for the greenhouse effect compared to, say, 
using the same land for farming. Forests, being dark in color, have a low 
albedo, and so may contribute to the retention of solar warmth. Ideally one 
zany arrangement for combating global warming would call for forests to be 
continuously logged and replanted with some type of genetically engineered tree 
that grows frantically fast and has white leaves, making the brave new forest 
look, from space, like a giant daisy. 
There's no indication that radon prevents heart disease, that dioxin 
contamination is what is stopping the killer bees or any such link that would 
make pollution actually sound good. But as the 22nd-Century scientist said of 
Woody Allen's request for sprouts and carrot juice in the movie "Sleeper" -- 
"Didn't they know about hot fudge back then? The benefits of deep-fat frying?" 
-- the damage done by pollution may not stop at the obvious. There may be many 
more undiscovered -- and unwanted -- side effects. 
