NATURE MAY SUFFER MOST IN STATE'S LONG DROUGHT; 
ENVIRONMENT: THE FOUR-YEAR DRY SPELL HAS EXACTED A HEAVY TOLL ON FORESTS, 
RIVERS AND WILDLIFE. 
California's drought has taken a massive environmental toll in dead trees and 
wildfires, in devastated salmon and striped bass runs, and in deer lost to a 
bacterial disease that thrives in shrinking watering holes, state officials 
said Monday. 
While cities have gotten by through conservation efforts and farmers are making 
do by pumping ground water, officials have been surprised by the drought's toll 
in forests and rivers. 
"We are just beginning to see the most dramatic impacts of the drought," said 
Dick Daniel, assistant chief of the state Department of Fish and Game's 
environmental services division. 
The damage to fisheries is a result of the reduction of flow from mountain 
reservoirs into the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta, the huge estuary where 
the state and U.S. governments divvy up water for their aqueducts. The delta is 
inland from San Francisco Bay. 
When too little water is released from the dams, the river water becomes too 
warm for salmon to spawn. Under a special arrangement, cold deep water will be 
released from Shasta Dam in an effort to save 484 salmon known to have survived 
the winter run up the Sacramento River -- the last of what once was a historic 
spawning run. But there is no cold water available for other rivers. 
"On the American River this year we are expecting near-total loss of the 
fall-run Chinook salmon," Daniel said. 
When the water temperature reached an extreme high of 78 degrees in a hatchery 
on the American River last week, more than 3,000 pounds of trout were lost and 
a like amount released into the river in an effort to save them, Daniel said. 
An attempt will be made to rescue some fish from the American, San Joaquin and 
Stanislaus rivers later this summer. If they survive the tricky procedure of 
being trapped, transported to a hatchery and artificially spawned, their eggs 
will be replanted in the river when the water temperature drops in fall. 
Striped bass, popular game fish that breed in the delta, are more plentiful 
than salmon, but officials are alarmed because the stripers are being found in 
their lowest numbers ever. 
"We don't know if the striped bass will recover," Daniel said. 
Deer are dying from the spread of blue tongue disease, which is caused by 
bacteria that build up in shrinking watering holes. Exact numbers for the deer 
loss are not known, he said, but hunters are finding carcasses and a scarcity 
of deer in the Coast Range and the Sierra Nevada. 
Deer also have suffered from a loss of acorns, a favorite food. The poor health 
of does has led to fewer fawns surviving this year, Daniel said. 
Scarcity of food in the wilds also has brought a rash of mountain lion reports 
in settled areas -- a lion believed to have traveled from Fresno County was 
trapped in a yard last week in Rancho Cordova, a Sacramento suburb -- and led 
to dozens of clashes between bears and humans. 
"The number of incidents with bears has gone way up," Daniel said. 
Drought is nothing new to California wildlife, officials stress. If a species 
evolved here, it did so through periodic cycles of dry weather -- the last 
comparable one lasting six years from 1929 to 1934. But this drought is 
different because the state now has about 29 million residents who have a claim 
on the available water. Many also live in suburbs and towns built on what were 
recently wildlands where deer and mountain lions ranged, Daniel said. 
With more people living in the hills, the fire danger to homes has also 
increased since previous droughts. 
The fire toll for the year stands at 304,900 acres burned and 873 structures 
destroyed. Three firefighters have died. It has been the state's worst fire 
year since 1987 -- the worst in history -- when 11 firefighters were killed and 
740,000 acres scorched. 
Foresters estimate that the trees -- mostly firs and pines -- killed by the 
bark beetles that thrive in drought hold the equivalent of 12 billion board 
feet of lumber. That is more wood than California normally uses for 
construction in a year, said Karen Terrill, spokeswoman for the state 
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. 
Millions of trees are affected. Brown trees are especially visible at lower 
elevations in the southern half of the Sierra Nevada, where the climate has 
been driest, and in the Tahoe National Forest. "It's almost 50-50 (between live 
and dead trees) in parts of that forest," Terrill said. 
Tropical storms in May and June removed 1990 from the list of epic dry years. 
Nonetheless, this will be the 12th-driest year this century for California's 
milestone water basin -- the Sacramento River Basin -- and an even more 
historic dry period in areas such as Santa Barbara, where one of two municipal 
reservoirs has gone dry. 
Even as state officials were tallying the ravages of the four-year drought, 
they also were turning to historical records to predict that the dry spell will 
probably not continue. 
"The historical odds are 9 in 10 that there will be more runoff next year," 
said Maurice Roos, chief hydrologist for the state Department of Water 
Resources. 
Virtually the same odds were held for last winter when, nonetheless, the 
state's rain and snowfall were below normal for the fourth year, the longest 
dry stretch since the 1930s. 
