IRAN OFFERS HELP IN HOSTAGE CRISIS; 
RAFSANJANI SAYS U.S. MUST SWAY ISRAEL AND AVOID MILITARY MOVES 
Making a direct offer to Washington, Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani said 
Friday that he is ready to help resolve the hostage crisis in Lebanon and 
cautioned that American military might is not the answer. 
Rafsanjani, speaking at a Tehran University prayer service, also demanded that 
the Bush Administration pressure Israel to free a Lebanese Shiite Muslim 
clergyman whose abduction eight days ago sparked the current tensions. 
But the emphasis of Rafsanjani's remarks appeared designed to cool a situation 
that has led to U.S. Navy deployments in the Mideast, although the White House 
has largely played down its military options this week. 
'Reasonable Solutions' 
"I tell the White House, the problem of Lebanon has solutions, the freeing of 
the hostages has solutions, reasonable, prudent solutions," he told his 
university audience in the Iranian capital. The speech, broadcast on Tehran 
radio, was monitored here in Nicosia. 
Washington's military moves appeared a top concern of the new president, 
speaking at his first Friday prayer session since being inaugurated Thursday as 
revolutionary Iran's fourth president and as the political successor to the 
late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. 
"These bullyings, arrogant approaches and tyranny will not solve the problems," 
the 55-year-old clergyman-politician declared. "Come, let us approach the 
problem reasonably." 
He added: "We too will help solve the problems there, so the people of the 
region can live in peace and harmony." 
Early today, official Algiers Radio reported that progress in the hostage 
crisis was made in Beirut on Friday in talks in which Khaled Hasnawi, Algeria's 
ambassador to Lebanon, was involved, according to a dispatch from Associated 
Press. 
The Algerian broadcast said that Hasnawi met with U.N. envoy Marrack Goulding 
and with Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, spiritual leader of the Shiite Hezbollah 
(Party of God) organization, in talks involving all hostages, whether 
"Lebanese, Palestinians, Americans, Europeans or Israelis." 
Progress Reported 
"Progress in this mediation was accomplished Friday," Algiers Radio said 
without elaborating. 
In Washington, Iran is regarded as the key outside influence, for both ill and 
good, in the hostage crisis in Lebanon. The militant Shiite groups that this 
week announced the execution of one American hostage, Marine Lt. Col. William 
R. Higgins, and threatened the life of a second, Joseph J. Cicippio, are 
factions of the pro-Iranian Hezbollah, nurtured by Khomeini's Iran since the 
early 1980s. 
But national security analysts in Washington have told The Times that Iranian 
authorities also played a role in persuading the captors of Cicippio to suspend 
his execution. They said that key Hezbollah leaders were summoned to Syria on 
Thursday and told at a meeting at the Iranian Embassy in Damascus to spare the 
American's life. Hours later, Cicippio's captors said they were "freezing" 
plans for his execution. 
Sees Arrogant U.S. Policy 
Although Rafsanjani's remarks indicated a willingness to talk with -- or even 
deal with -- the country still known in Iran as the "Great Satan," he sharply 
criticized what he called the arrogance of American policy in the Middle East. 
"How stupid you are. . . ," he said of the government in Washington. "You have 
been to Lebanon once, and you saw how the Lebanese kicked you out." This was an 
apparent reference to the U.S. peacekeeping force that was withdrawn after a 
truck bomb was driven into a Marine barracks in October, 1983, killing 241 
American servicemen. 
Now a civil war is "raining shells on Lebanon," he said. "What can your fleet 
do to top that? Is there any place in Lebanon not hit by a shell already?" 
The Iranian president, faced with rebuilding an economy ravaged by an 
eight-year war with neighboring Iraq, appeared to straddle the fence of Middle 
East politics: opening the door a bit on the hostage crisis while firmly 
supporting Lebanese Shiites in their struggle against Israel. 
Rafsanjani said, "If the arrogant world is interested, the way to solve (this) 
is to tell Israel to release Sheik (Abdel Karim) Obeid," the abducted 
clergyman. 
"If (Washington) responds by saying that Obeid's abduction has nothing to do 
with us and that we cannot put pressure on Israel, this isn't acceptable to 
us," he concluded, indicating that the fate of Obeid may be tied to that of the 
14 Western hostages held in Lebanon, including eight Americans. 
Rafsanjani has repeatedly offered to help obtain the release of U.S. hostages 
in Lebanon if Washington helps free three Iranians believed by Tehran to be 
held by right-wing Lebanese militias. He did not mention this condition Friday, 
however. 
In suspending the execution Thursday night, Cicippio's captor, the 
Revolutionary Justice Organization, demanded the release of Obeid and a number 
of Lebanese and Palestinian prisoners held by the Israelis. The group's 
communique, delivered to news agencies in Beirut, did not specifically tie the 
release of Obeid to the threatened killing of Cicippio, however. The former 
acting comptroller of American University of Beirut has been held hostage for 
nearly three years. 
On Monday, another Hezbollah faction, the Organization of the Oppressed on 
Earth, announced it had hanged Higgins, who had been held captive for more than 
17 months. Its demand also had been the release of Obeid, whom the Israelis say 
was a key Hezbollah leader in southern Lebanon. 
Cicippio's captors said they would give Red Cross representatives a list of the 
prisoners whom they want released along with Obeid. Red Cross officials in 
Beirut said Friday that they were prepared to transmit the lists to Israeli 
authorities but that they had received nothing yet. 
In Israel, meanwhile, officials said they felt the current crisis was easing. 
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir expressed hope that the Muslim militants would 
provide specifics of their demands and consulted with other top Israeli 
officials on a response to the Revolutionary Justice Organization. 
Cicippio's captors demanded Obeid's freedom and that of other prisoners held by 
Israel but did not suggest a prisoner swap. The Israelis have a standing offer 
to exchange Obeid and a number of Lebanese prisoners for three Israeli soldiers 
held in Lebanon and the foreign hostages. 
"They want to prepare a list of prisoners," Defense Ministry spokesman Eitan 
Haber said. "We do too." 
The Red Cross or some other mediator apparently would handle the details, at 
least initially. In Beirut, a Hezbollah leader, Sheik Naim Qassem, told 
Associated Press that there had been no direct or indirect contacts with the 
Israelis. 
