MOTOR RACING; 
SHELBY, ASTON MARTIN TO RELIVE HISTORIC WIN 
Thirty years ago, Carroll Shelby and Roy Salvadori drove an Aston Martin to 
victory in the 24 Hours of LeMans. 
This weekend, at Laguna Seca Raceway on the Monterey Peninsula, Shelby, 
Salvadori and the Aston Martin will be reunited as part of the 16th annual 
Monterey Historic Automobile Races. 
In celebration of its LeMans win, Aston Martin is building a replica of the 
LeMans pit area in the paddock at Laguna Seca, complete with all three of its 
cars and drivers who were there. 
"That was the biggest win of my career," Shelby said before leaving his Bel Air 
home for the reunion. "You know, back then, LeMans way overshadowed the 
Indianapolis 500, world-wide. Winning LeMans at that time was as good as it 
could get. 
"The only tragic thing about our get-together is that we lost John Wyer last 
April." 
Wyer, who lived in Scottsdale, Ariz., was the team manager for Sir David Brown, 
Aston Martin's founder. Brown, 86, will be at Laguna Seca. 
Only five DBR1 models, which finished first and second in 1959 at LeMans, were 
built, and four of them -- including the winning one -- will be on the track at 
Laguna Seca. 
Paul Frere of Belgium and Maurice Trintignant of France, who drove the 
second-place car, will also be on hand, as will Stirling Moss and Jack Fairman 
of England, who were unable to finish the race in a third Aston Martin. 
"This is probably the last time the whole group will be together," Shelby said. 
"A lot of us are getting up there (in years), and Sir David is 86, so it's 
going to be pretty emotional." 
Moss will be right at home. He won the Pacific Grand Prix at Laguna Seca in 
1960 and 1961 in a Lotus-Climax 19. 
Others who will drive the assortment of Aston Martins, some of which are valued 
in excess of $5 million, include former world champion Phil Hill of Santa 
Monica, Innes Ireland and Tony Brooks of England -- all either teammates or 
rivals of Shelby when he drove as part of Aston Martin's Formula One effort. 
"I'm looking forward to seeing Salvadori again," Shelby said. "I'll remind him 
that he ruined the brakes in the first hour, and we had to drive 23 hours with 
warped calipers. But we won." 
Shelby, 66, who later gained fame as creator of the Ford-AC Cobra, is building 
Shelby CSX cars and Shelby Dakota pickups at his factory in Whittier. The CSX 
is a Dodge Shadow with a hopped-up engine, plastic wheels and a new-type 
turbocharger designed to eliminate lag time. 
Besides 11 factory-owned Aston Martins, there will be close to 30 privately 
owned ones entered in the three days of racing on the historic hillside road 
circuit. The oldest is a 1925 Grand Prix car brought from Japan by Tetsuya 
Takahashi. 
Although Aston Martin is the featured marque, the main event Sunday will be a 
race for 1966 to 1983 Formula One cars. Pete Lovely of Tacoma, Wash., who won 
the first race at Laguna Seca in a Ferrari when the track opened in November 
1957, will drive a 1969 Lotus 49B. George Follmer, a former Trans-Am and Can-Am 
champion from Montclair, will drive a 1973 Shadow, a car he helped develop. 
The record entry of 350 drivers will be competing on a new layout. The historic 
races have been staged on Laguna Seca's original 1.9-mile course for the last 
15 years, but this weekend, they will use the 2.214-mile Grand Prix loop that 
was built last fall so that the track could be used by the United States Grand 
Prix for motorcycles. 
STOCK CARS -- Bill Sedgwick's win last Saturday night in the Winston West 200 
at Saugus Speedway clinched the series' rookie-of-the-year award for the Van 
Nuys driver. Sedgwick, 34, beat Hershel McGriff, 61, by five car lengths. 
McGriff earlier set a track record of 72.860 m.p.h. in qualifying. Sedgwick, 
driving a Chevrolet Monte Carlo, became the first rookie to win three races in 
a single season. He previously won at Madera and Eureka. Defending series 
champion Roy Smith's third-place finish enabled him to pass Bill Schmitt for 
the series lead, 1,489 points to 1,485, with two events remaining, Sears Point 
on Oct. 1 and Phoenix on Nov. 5. . . . Saugus will celebrate Trucker's Night 
Saturday as the track resumes its weekly sportsman series. . . . Sportsman cars 
will also be featured Saturday night at Orange Show and Cajon Speedways. . . . 
Five NASCAR divisions will compete Sunday night at Ascot Park in the Curb 
Motorsports Winston Racing Series. 
SPRINT CARS -- California Racing Assn. leader Jerry Meyer, who expanded his 
margin over Rip Williams and Ron Shuman last week by winning his sixth main 
event in the Parnelli Jones Firestone series, will be back Saturday night at 
Ascot Park, looking for a seventh win. The victory last week was car owner 
Bruce Bromme's 139th CRA victory. 
SPEEDWAY CYCLES -- Speedway USA in Victorville will hold the fourth round of 
qualifying for the United States Speedway championship Saturday night. Races 
Sept. 7 at Ascot and Sept. 8 at Costa Mesa will set the 16-rider field for the 
U.S. Nationals on Oct. 7 at Costa Mesa. . . . Ronnie Correy of Fullerton 
finished 11th in the Intercontinental Finals last Sunday in England to gain the 
final qualifying spot as the only American rider in the Sept. 2 World Finals at 
Munich, West Germany. 
LAND SPEED -- The 41st running of the Bonneville Nationals, sanctioned by the 
SoCal Timing Assn., will start Sunday and run for a week on the Bonneville Salt 
Flats. The main target is the 409.27 m.p.h. record for a piston-driven machine, 
established by Bob Summers of Ontario in the Summers Brothers streamliner in 
1965. Among the 300 entries are Jim Lattin of Pomona, president of Bonneville 
Nationals, Inc., drag racing's Don Garlits and motorcycling's Don Vesco. 
MOTOCROSS -- The eighth round of the Continental Motosport Club's Dodge Truck 
California summer series will be held Sunday at Sunrise Park in Adelanto. The 
series will end Aug. 27 at Carlsbad Raceway. . . . CMC riders will hold their 
weekly meeting Friday night program at Ascot Park. 
DRAG RACING -- Jet dragsters, alcohol funny cars and top gas dragsters will run 
Saturday at Los Angeles County Raceway in Palmdale. 
OFF-ROAD -- Young Robby Gordon's domination of the Nevada 500 race was so 
complete that he brought his Ford pickup home nearly one hour ahead of 
runner-up Danny Letner's Porsche-powered two-seat desert buggy in the 441-mile 
race. Gordon finished in 7 hours 58 minutes, Letner in 8 hours 41 minutes. It 
was the second overall win for Gordon, who also won the Baja Internacional. 
HOSPITAL REPORT -- Indy-car driver Phil Krueger, 38, remained unconscious in 
Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis, where his condition is listed as serious. 
Krueger, who went to high school in Tustin, has not regained consciousness 
since his car hit the wall Aug. 6 during the Marlboro 500 at Michigan 
International Speedway. He also suffered broken ribs and a broken left arm. 
NECROLOGY -- Ole Bardahl, whose Miss Bardahl hydroplanes won six national 
championships, five Gold Cups and two world championships, died of emphysema 
last week in Seattle, his hometown since 1922. Bardahl, 87, also sponsored cars 
for 21 years in the Indianapolis 500. Four times they finished third, twice 
driven by Rodger Ward and once each by Jimmy Davies and Bobby Unser, the last 
time in 1969. 
