DIVIDED LOYALTIES TEAR AT EX-IRAQIS IN SAN DIEGO 
For many of the 8,000 Christian Iraqis who have settled in San Diego over the 
years, these are excruciating times: Their adopted country and their homeland 
may be poised to do battle. 
Over newspapers and television news in their living rooms, over the backgammon 
boards at the social hall, over the cash registers at their markets and gas 
stations, and in the pews of their church in El Cajon, these Chaldeans are 
frightened and anxious, trying to balance their civic loyalty to the United 
States with their ingrained love for their homeland. 
"We are feeling hurt for both sides," says the Rev. Michael Bazzi, pastor of 
St. Peter Chaldean Catholic Church, which with 3,500 families is the focal 
point for the largest Chaldean community in the United States except for 
Detroit. They are most heavily concentrated in El Cajon, La Mesa, Spring Valley 
and East San Diego. (Chaldeans are Eastern rite Christians, and Chaldea is a 
region of the valley between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Iraq. Most 
Iraqis are Muslims.) 
Like Bazzi, the Chaldeans talk tactfully and cautiously, weighing their words 
for fairness and wary that their thoughts might be misconstrued and turned 
against them, as they assess, both intellectually and emotionally, the events 
unfolding in the Persian Gulf. 
"We are Americans, but my relatives are there, in Iraq," Bazzi said. "Anything 
I say, I will be hurting one side or the other. 
"We are praying. What else can we do?" he asked. "We have people in our 
community going to Saudi Arabia (as American troops), fighting their cousins 
across the border. 
"So what is there to say? Our cousins, our friends, our people are now in 
trouble, yet the Americans are also our people. We are troubled." 
San Diego's Chaldean community is relatively tightly knit. Although they 
dominate no one corner of San Diego's community, and although the names of 
their businesses and retail stores give no hint of the owners' heritage, they 
are proud of their cultural identity. 
Many say they spend such long hours to make a success of their businesses, 
working 16 hours a day, seven days a week, that they don't have time to 
socialize with one another. 
Others do, meeting at their private El Cajon club, where on Friday nights they 
wear their own Western clothing but enjoy the strains of Middle Eastern music 
and delight in the authentically dressed belly dancer. 
"We tell our members they can wear Arab clothing, but they wear regular Western 
clothes," said Sam Hirmez, who owns a San Diego convenience market and is 
president of the 350-member Chaldean American Assn., a social club. 
But they are reluctant to abandon their heritage. Middle Eastern dinners are 
served at the club, and backgammon is enjoyed among the regulars. At nearby 
Cuyamaca Community College, a course is taught in Chaldean culture and 
language. 
Detroit was the first and most popular settling area for Chaldeans emigrating 
from Iraq, given its employment base and the opportunity for non-English 
speaking Chaldeans to find work on the assembly lines. But some looked directly 
to California and settled in the quiet town of San Diego in the early 1950s, 
and as Detroit's economy and crime problem worsened, many have relocated to San 
Diego. 
As a whole, the local Chaldean community shrugs off what prejudice they say 
they feel here against them. There's the infrequent crank phone call, the 
offhanded remark in a store, even the occasional caller to a radio talk show -- 
like the one on Friday who suggested that local Iraqis be sent to their 
homeland and be allowed to return as long as they brought captive Americans 
with them. 
Many of them worry that Americans do not understand that they are not Arabs, 
but are Aramaic-speaking Christians who were natives of Iraq but who fled to 
America, especially in the 1950s, in search of political freedom and economic 
prosperity. They are, Chaldeans realize, caught in the middle of pitched 
emotions. 
On Thursday, for instance, California state Sen. Wadie P. Deddeh (D-Bonita) -- 
a native of Iraq who emigrated to the United States in 1947 -- told his 
legislative colleagues in Sacramento that he backs President Bush's military 
actions in the Middle East. But he urged the President not to create "further 
enmity toward the United States in that part of the world." 
Other Chaldeans are less supportive of the White House. 
"For the last two years, the world was going toward peace. Then all of a 
sudden, here's a big mess which could have been avoided by diplomatic channels, 
by politics, by peaceful means," said one Chaldean businessman who refused to 
identify himself. "Yeah, the Iraqi president started it, but the reaction by 
the United States was abnormal. They magnified the problem. They make it sound 
like Iraq is some huge, great country, but they only have a few airplanes to be 
defeated." 
Whatever their leanings, it is clear that the Middle Eastern crisis has 
permeated Chaldean daily life, dominating conversations. 
"Everybody is sad," said Hirmez, the social club president. "I've been here 
since 1969. This, the U.S.A., is my country. But my second country is Iraq. I 
lived there all my life until I came here. 
"I want to see peace. I don't want to see any life in jeopardy, to see anybody 
dead, because of this invasion (of Kuwait). I pray for peace." 
