BOXING / EARL GUSTKEY; 
MANDATORY TITLE DEFENSE WON'T UPSET TYSON'S TIMETABLE 
A few things were left unsaid during Don King's monologue Thursday night at the 
Beverly Hills Hotel, where he filled in the names on Mike Tyson's boxing 
calendar and lauded a Japanese automaker for signing the heavyweight champion 
to make commercials. 
King, Tyson's promoter, said Tyson's next five opponents, in probable order, 
would be Michael Dokes, Buster Douglas, Razor Ruddock, George Foreman and 
Evander Holyfield. He also said Tyson would be paid in "seven figures" by the 
automaker. 
What he didn't say was that the arrangement was set up by Tyson's now-estranged 
manager, Bill Cayton. 
Also left unsaid was that Tyson has a mandatory defense of his World Boxing 
Assn. championship coming up, a defense that must be signed for by Nov. 25. 
The WBA "requires" its champions to fight the top-ranked contenders within one 
year. The WBA's No. 1 challenger is Holyfield. So what happens if Tyson fights 
Dokes, No. 10, and Buster Douglas, No. 8, instead? 
Hey, no sweat. Remember, this is pro boxing, folks. Because nearly everyone in 
the business considers the ratings a joke anyway -- for example, the World 
Boxing Council does not rank Michael Nunn, the International Boxing Federation 
champion, among the world's top 30 middleweights. 
All King has to do is make one phone call and, presto! Mandatory defense 
postponed. Indefinitely. When you control the heavyweight champion, hearts and 
minds follow. 
Also left unsaid: King wants to promote Tyson-Holyfield by himself, not with 
Dan Duva, who is Holyfield's promoter. He is hoping that Holyfield and his 
manager, Ken Sanders, will tire of waiting for the big fight and leave Duva for 
King. 
All this is yet another argument for the creation of a strong boxing 
commission, one that would yank this kind of manipulative power from the hands 
of promoters. 
In a perfect world, a champion fights the No. 1 guy or he's stripped of his 
championship, period. 
Actually, both King and Duva eventually might regret not putting this one 
together as quickly as possible. Jim Jacobs, Tyson's late co-manager, once 
talked about timing in moving a fighter into big-money fights. 
"In pro boxing, the idea is to maximize your opportunities," he said. 
"When you know your fighter is ready for that career-making fight that you've 
been moving him toward, then you get him that fight as soon as you can get it. 
Remember, strange things happen. Someone could get run over by a bus." 
Dick Mastro, longtime Southland boxing statistician, has accused promoter Don 
Chargin and the Forum of promoting main events with fighters bearing phony 
records. 
The fighters in question, Santos Moreno and Sergio Perez, both are from Mexico. 
They lost to Los Angeles area boxers Hector Lopez and Paul Gonzales on the same 
day, July 31. 
"I'll offer $500 to anyone who can produce evidence that Santos Moreno had a 
47-17 record when he fought Lopez and I'll offer $500 to anyone who presents 
proof that Sergio Perez was 19-9-1 when he fought Gonzales," Mastro said. 
"In fact, I can't find a Sergio Perez anywhere in my records. It hurts me, to 
see phony records issued by promoters and to see the press use them," he said. 
Mastro for years has kept records of Southland boxers. So does Dean Lohuis, who 
charts the careers of about 2,500 pro boxers. He disputes Mastro's claims. 
"It is true that with some Mexican fighters, it's hard to verify records, but 
just because Dick Mastro misses some results is no reason to throw the word 
phony around. 
"I've got results for 56 Moreno fights, and 19 of them were held in the U.S. 
This one is not difficult. He's a legitimate, 10-round main-event fighter. 
There are two Santos Morenos in my records, and Dick might be confusing him 
with the Santos Moreno who did lose a lot of fights." 
Rob Lynch of the California Athletic Commission said Mexican boxers are 
required to present a Mexican boxing license with a certified record of recent 
bouts attached to it when signing for a California fight. 
"Both those guys seemed to have their paper work in order, both had their 
pictures on their licenses, and we had no reason to question their 
backgrounds," he said. 
No one in Reno seems worried about the Texas judge who granted a temporary 
restraining order to halt the Michael Nunn-Iran Barkley middleweight fight Aug. 
14. 
Al Boulden, a former trainer for Barkely, is seeking $47,000 he says Barkley 
owes him, plus $50,000 he would earn for the Nunn fight. State District judge 
Jack O'Neill granted the order Thursday. 
"These kinds of things happen in boxing all the time," said Dan Goossen, Nunn's 
manager. "The worst thing that happens is that the fight goes on and Barkley's 
purse is frozen, until he solves his problem with this guy." 
Boxing Notes 
How is it possible that Frankie Duarte qualifies for a WBC super-bantamweight 
title fight against Daniel Zaragoza at the Forum Aug. 31? Duarte has as much 
business in a championship fight as Richard Simmons. Duarte is ranked 16th 
among WBC bantamweights, which is a gift. He's also 35. In his most recent 
fights, he has struggled to beat three club fighters, whose records are 
25-21-1, 18-13-3 and 9-10-1. For shame, Jerry Buss! 
Remember the dreaded Dutchman, Rogelio Tuur? He's the featherweight who iced 
America's Kelcie Banks with one right hand at the Seoul Olympics. He made his 
pro debut at Madison Square Garden recently and scored a first-round knockout. 
