HALL RESIGNATION ENDS GLYNDEBOURNE CONFLICT; 
MUSIC: HE WAS AMONG ADVOCATES OF CLASSIC OPERA PITTED AGAINST COMPANY MEMBERS 
WILLING TO EXPERIMENT. 
Sir Peter Hall's weekend resignation as artistic director of Glyndebourne 
Festival Opera has finally ended the bitter backstage bickering that has 
dominated conversation among Britain's opera followers all summer. 
Sources close to the company say advocates of classic opera, including Hall, 
were pitted against those in the company willing to experiment with new works 
and radical re-staging of traditional operas. 
A crisis came in May with a highly unconventional Glyndebourne production of 
Mozart's "Die Zauberflote," from Peter Sellars, the director of stage and the 
Los Angeles Festival. 
Sellars, 32, cut all the opera's original spoken dialogue, and set it in 
contemporary times -- at an L.A. freeway interchange -- with a cast of 
characters that included beachboys. Reviews were mixed. For the first time in 
the memory of Glyndebourne, a sedate but prestigious festival held in the 
grounds of a magnificent country house, sections of the audience booed. 
Hall, 59, complained bitterly that he had not been consulted about Sellars' 
production. He said he discovered the decision to omit dialogue two days before 
opening night. 
He has been Glyndebourne's artistic director since 1984, and has directed 16 
operas there since 1970 -- including traditional but acclaimed productions of 
Mozart's "Le Nozze di Figaro," "Don Giovanni" and "Cosi fan Tutte." 
One of the preeminent names in British performing arts, Hall founded the Royal 
Shakespeare Company in 1960, and succeeded Sir Laurence Olivier as director of 
Britain's National Theatre in 1973, a post he held for 15 years. He has now 
formed his own production company, and before the controversy had planned to 
quit Glyndebourne after the 1991 season. 
Hall has pulled back from many of his other opera commitments. The Los Angeles 
Music Center Opera announced Monday that Hall was replaced by David Pountney as 
director of "Elektra" "in order to devote all his energies to his new theater 
company." 
In his statement, Hall said: "Glyndebourne failed to consult me on an important 
artistic matter for which I am seen to be partially publicly responsible." 
He had tendered his resignation June 11, and was only making it public now to 
correct "erroneous reports." 
"I was not told that all the dialogue had been cut from (the production) until 
two days before the opening night, and then only in passing. I believe that as 
artistic director of Glyndebourne, I should have been party to this crucial 
decision which changed the structure, meaning and rhythm of the work, and is as 
fundamental as re-orchestrating the music." 
Hall said of Sellars: "I have admired (his) work in the past and two years ago 
readily endorsed the idea that he should direct 'Die Zauberflote.' I did not 
finally like the production, but that is no reason to resign or fail to support 
an agreed experiment. 
"Not to be consulted on so fundamental as matter as the late removal of 
dialogue, however, shows that Glyndebourne now attaches little importance to my 
artistic opinion. I find myself unable to be part of an opera house that puts 
me in the position of endorsing something I knew nothing about." 
Hall is now directing a theatrical production for the Chichester Festival and 
was not available to comment. But he stressed he did not regret appointing 
Sellars. "I'm particularly concerned, having spent my life protecting people 
who want to do nutty things, that it might be thought I'm in any way hostile to 
(him)," he told the London Sunday Telegraph. 
Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, Sellars said nothing passed directly between the two 
protagonists: "We're very friendly. I've known him for quite a while and he's 
always been very generous. When the production opened with giant controversy, 
he defended it. 
"I gather that Peter had actually wanted to resign for some time, and if this 
came to hand more readily than other excuses, fine. I suspect he may not be 
replaced. From what I understand, it's a position that has come to be 
irrelevant, which seems to be the basis of his complaint." 
Hall has successfully straddled the worlds of theater and opera. After leaving 
the National Theatre, he formed his own Peter Hall Company last year and 
promptly staged two hits which made the transatlantic jump to Broadway: 
"Orpheus Descending" with Vanessa Redgrave and "The Merchant of Venice" with 
Dustin Hoffman. Ibsen's "Wild Duck" is now playing in London's West End to good 
reviews and audiences. 
In an interview earlier this year with Times theater writer Sylvie Drake, Hall 
said: "If somebody said you can't do both (opera and theater) . . . I would do 
theater. But I would do it with a great pang. . . . Everything about my life is 
that I've been able to go from opera to theater and back again. It's like going 
from one mistress to another. It's having two. I do love that." 
With the Los Angeles Music Center Opera, he staged his "Salome" in 1986 
(remounted in 1989) and "Marriage of Figaro" earlier this year. 
Ironically, the internal wrangling at Glyndebourne became public only days 
after Hall gave a candid and widely discussed interview to BBC radio, in which 
he admitted being tough and bullying. "I think some people think I'm terribly 
thick-skinned, arrogant, self-contained and not at all easily hurt," he added. 
"I am, my doctor tells me, an adrenaline addict. My system needs . . . and 
produces a lot of adrenalin, therefore I love stress." He added his workaholic 
lifestyle had contributed to the end of his three marriages, one to actress 
Leslie Caron, and another to American soprano Maria Ewing. 
Despite the controversy over Hall's departure, Sellars' relationship with 
Glyndebourne remains sound. He is set to direct another controversial opera, 
"The Death of Klinghoffer" by American minimalist composer John Adams, which 
deals with the 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking. And his "Zauberflote" will be 
performed by Glyndebourne's touring company this fall, and will return to the 
festival next year. 
"I was extremely flattered that a little thing of mine would be at the center 
of such a brouhaha," Sellars said. "It's ironic, because this ("Die 
Zauberflote") is the sweetest possible thing, all about brotherly love, things 
that nobody could possibly object to." 
Times staff writer John Henken contributed to this article. 
