BECHTEL GETS NOD FOR RAIL LINE TO VEGAS; 
TRANSPORTATION: TRAIN WOULD USE MAGNETIC LEVITATION SYSTEM AND AVERAGE 212 
M.P.H. IF ALL APPROVALS ARE GRANTED, ITS FIRST RUN COULD BE IN 1997. 
A business consortium led by the Bechtel Corp. was designated Tuesday as the 
franchisee to build a privately funded 265-mile high-speed magnetic levitation 
rail line that would carry passengers between Anaheim and Las Vegas at an 
average speed of 212 m.p.h. 
The unanimous vote by the California-Nevada Super Speed Train Commission is 
subject to at least a two-month negotiation of a formal franchise agreement. 
That would be followed by an extensive Bechtel financial feasibility study, a 
lengthy environmental impact review and formal votes by both the California and 
Nevada legislatures. 
Even if everything goes according to plan, the line would not be ready until 
1997. It would apparently still be the first long-distance "maglev" line in 
service in the world and perhaps the precursor to a new system of surface 
transportation with worldwide applications. 
In a magnetic levitation system, trains riding on a slight cushion of air are 
propelled along a guideway by electromagnetic forces. The technology to be used 
in this system has been developed by Transrapid of West Germany and is being 
tested on a 20-mile looping German track. 
According to specifications released Tuesday by commission Executive Director 
Paul Taylor, the eight-car, 800-passenger trains envisioned for the Anaheim-Las 
Vegas service would have a design speed of 310 m.p.h. and a maximum service 
speed of 265 m.p.h. Through urban portions of the route, mainly in Orange 
County, the train would go about 180 m.p.h., and through the Cajon Pass perhaps 
125 m.p.h., bringing the average nonstop speed to 212 m.p.h. 
This works out to a 75-minute nonstop one-way trip, or a 91-minute trip should 
the train make three stops. Proposed alternative routes would pass through 
Corona, Ontario, Victor Valley and Barstow, or Riverside and Colton in place of 
Ontario. 
It is not expected that the train would make all possible stops in any single 
run. According to Taylor, this would not be a major problem because of the high 
number of trains. 
Taylor said that on peak days, 52 trains would be scheduled, and during some 
hours one train every 15 minutes. Minimum service would be 25 trains a day. 
Fares would be $115 for full fare and an $80.48 discounted fare, but would be 
adjusted for inflation. Bechtel has been saying the system would cost $5 
billion, but Taylor's report indicated that as much as $7.8 billion in private 
financing would be needed. 
Possible future spurs are envisioned by Bechtel to Palm Springs, Santa Ana and 
Palmdale. A separate business group recently proposed a slower, 80-m.p.h. 
maglev service, using Japanese technology, connecting in Palmdale on to Los 
Angeles International Airport. 
This consortium, led by the Perini Corp., has indicated that it would need a 
public cash subsidy of up to $100 million a year. The only government 
contribution the Bechtel group is asking for is a donation of rights-of-way, 
generally along the Riverside Freeway and Interstate 15. 
The Palmdale-Los Angeles Airport line -- unlike the Anaheim-Las Vegas line -- 
requires initial approval next month by the California Department of 
Transportation, as part of a separate state program to encourage privately 
funded road and rail projects. Caltrans can approve only four of the eight 
proposals submitted to it. 
Taylor sounded a note of caution on the Las Vegas line, saying that several 
consultants retained by the commission viewed the Bechtel proposal as vague in 
certain areas. He expressed hope that it would be made much more specific by 
the time the franchise agreement is completed. 
Taylor expressed concern that Bechtel had not described the exact state of 
present maglev technology and noted that West Germany had not yet certified it 
for passenger service. 
Commission Chairman Arnie Adamsen of Las Vegas responded that he and two other 
commissioners had traveled to Germany last week and rode the train on an 
endurance run of 1 1/2 hours at speeds of 220 m.p.h. He said they had observed 
a run of 250 m.p.h. 
LAX-PALMDALE LINE: Backers of the proposed LAX-Palmdale rail line were told not 
to expect much public aid. B8 
