REDISTRICTING DELAYED INDEFINITELY BY COURT; 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT: PANEL OF FEDERAL APPEALS JUDGES PUTS ELECTION FOR 1ST 
DISTRICT SUPERVISOR ON HOLD. 
A federal appeals court on Thursday indefinitely blocked a dramatic 
reapportionment of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors and postponed 
the November election to replace incumbent Supervisor Pete Schabarum. 
In deciding to extend a stay they issued last week, the three-judge panel of 
the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals wrote that the historic voting rights 
case raises "difficult and close legal questions" and that the status quo 
should remain pending the outcome of appeals. 
A U.S. District Court earlier this month had found that the Board of 
Supervisors intentionally discriminated against Latinos in the drawing of 
district boundaries. The lower court threw out the results of the June primary 
election, drew new district lines to create a Latino-majority district and set 
a special election for November. 
But the appeals court last week temporarily stayed the District Court decision 
and, after hearing oral arguments Thursday morning, the appeals court 
indefinitely extended its stay. 
Latino groups, who brought the suit and were backed by the U.S. Justice 
Department, had expected that the court-ordered reapportionment would lead to 
the election of the first Latino supervisor in county history. The supervisors 
bitterly criticized the reapportionment and had appealed the District Court 
decision. 
The 2-1 appeals court ruling was seen as a surprise by all parties and angered 
the winners of the June primary election in the 1st District who had hoped to 
meet in a November runoff. 
The appeals court ordered that there be neither a runoff between June primary 
victors Sarah Flores and Gregory O'Brien, nor a special election in a redrawn 
1st District in November. 
"Rather the equities favor maintaining the status quo" pending the outcome of 
the county's appeal, wrote Judges Robert R. Beezer and Alex Kozinski. 
"Accordingly, the county shall hold no election for supervisor, District 1, 
pending further order of this court." 
Judge Dorothy Nelson dissented, saying she would have denied the county's stay 
request. 
The court will hear arguments on the county's appeal in October and could rule 
any time after that. 
County attorney John McDermott said, "I'm thrilled. Our primary concern was 
that there not be irreversible change in the status quo until the merits of the 
case could be reviewed. . . . We would have preferred that the Sarah Flores 
election go forward, but this is a middle ground that is fair" to all parties. 
Supervisor Mike Antonovich, who attended the hearing, called the ruling a 
"mixed blessing." He said he is encouraged by the tone of the judges who 
appeared to have a better understanding of what's at stake for voters than the 
district court judge, who he accused of "ideological manipulation" of the 
electoral process. 
Supervisor Schabarum said he thought the ruling is appropriate, adding, "It 
appears to me the appellate court is attempting to sort out the extraordinary 
mischief" done in the district court. 
Richard Fajardo, an attorney for the Mexican American Legal Defense and 
Educational Fund, a plaintiff, said he is considering seeking a review of the 
decision by a larger, 11-judge panel of the 9th Circuit or appealing to Supreme 
Court Justice Sandra Day O'Conner. 
"It seems as if they spread the benefits and the hurt around," he said. 
John R. Dunne, assistant attorney general for civil rights, made a rare trip 
from Washington to argue for a new primary in November in a redrawn 1st 
District. Supervisor Deane Dana also attended the hearing, as did Flores. 
Dunne urged the judges to allow a November election in the new, predominantly 
Latino district to remedy the "egregious wrong that has been suffered by the 
Hispanic community so long." 
Attorneys for the Board of Supervisors had asked the appeals court to allow the 
Flores-O'Brien runoff to proceed and to stay implementation of a redistricting 
plan pending the outcome of the county's appeal of the lower court ruling that 
reapportioned the district. 
U.S. District Judge David V. Kenyon approved the redistricting plan on Aug. 3, 
finding that the Board of Supervisors had diluted Latino voting power by 
splitting the community among three supervisorial districts. 
If the reapportionment is upheld, Latinos would comprise 51% of the voters and 
71% of the population in the new 1st District. Latinos now comprise 25% of the 
voters in the district, while 49% of its population is Latino. 
The possibility of indefinitely postponing the November election was raised for 
the first time by Judge Kozinski from the bench Thursday. 
Kozinski suggested that holding no election until the appeal is decided would 
prevent candidates from wasting time and money to win an election that could be 
nullified. 
Flores called the ruling "shocking and deeply disappointing" but vowed to run 
no matter when an election is held. 
O'Brien said the ruling was "disturbingly ambiguous. . . . It doesn't give 
anybody enough to go on." 
"They only cancel elections in places like Nicaragua," said O'Brien. 
Until he gets a clarification and some idea of when an election might be held, 
O'Brien said he will continue his campaign. "I'll be back in the (campaign) 
office tomorrow, and I expect everyone else to be here too." 
McDermott said the ruling, if upheld, would allow Schabarum, who has said he 
plans to retire at the end of his term on Dec. 3, to stay in office until a 
successor could be appointed or elected. If Schabarum resigned, his seat could 
remain vacant or the governor could appoint a successor who would serve until 
an election could be held. 
Supervisor Schabarum, who hinted last week that he might run in the new 
district, would only say, "I'm on until replaced." 
Supervisor Deane Dana said, "I would hope Mr. Schabarum would retire and allow 
the governor to make an appointment, but I don't think (Schabarum) will." Dana 
said he is certain that Governor George Deukmejian would appoint Flores to fill 
any unexpired term. 
McDermott said a date for the election to choose Schabarum's successor would 
depend on how long it takes the appeals court to decide on the county's appeal. 
"It is hard to predict how long it will take to get an opinion out," McDermott 
said. "It could be three or four months." 
McDermott had argued that it is too late to prepare for a November election in 
a new district without jeopardizing the entire November election, including 
balloting for governor. 
He urged the judges to resolve the legal questions raised by the historic case 
"before you interfere in the local electoral process" and let Flores meet 
O'Brien. 
Thomas Bourke, an attorney for Flores, argued that it would be unfair to call 
off the November runoff when Flores stands a chance of becoming the first 
Latina and the first woman elected to the board. 
"Now, after she has mortgaged her house to run, after she mobilized $400,000 of 
support and successfully ran the primary race through completion, she is told 
to start over," Bourke said. 
O'Brien too said that he must soon make a decision about continuing with the 
campaign or going back to work. "At some point my resources will be tapped 
out," said O'Brien who has taken a leave of absence from his Superior Court 
post to run for supervisor. 
In papers filed with the appeals court, the Justice Department had talked about 
that problem: "Clearly, both candidates ran this year knowing full well that 
the 1981 redistricting plan was under legal attack and could be invalidated. . 
. . The inconvenience to these two individuals is hardly harm sufficient to 
forestall the long-overdue grant of constitutionally protected voting rights to 
citizens of Los Angeles County." 
