46 INDICTED IN FUTURES FRAUD PROBE; 
CHICAGO CHARGES INCLUDE RACKETEERING, FALSE TAX RETURNS 
A federal grand jury today indicted 46 commodity traders and brokers in the 
government's 2 1/2-year investigation into alleged fraud in Chicago's futures 
markets. 
Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh announced at a news conference that charges include 
racketeering, mail fraud, commodities fraud and the filing of false tax returns 
and lying to federal agents. 
The charges follow an undercover investigation by the FBI of traders at the 
Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the world's two 
largest futures exchanges. The landmark investigation first came to light in 
January. 
According to published reports, as many as 20 traders have agreed to plead 
guilty to fraud charges and will testify for the government against their 
colleagues to avoid stiffer penalties and long, expensive trials. 
The investigation centered on various alleged trading violations at the 
exchanges, including conspiracy to skim customer accounts and hide the profits 
from the Internal Revenue Service. 
FBI agents impersonated traders in several trading pits, including the soybean 
and Treasury bond trading pits at the CBT and the CME's Japanese yen, Swiss 
franc and Standard &amp; Poor's 500 futures pits. Agents secretly tape-recorded 
conversations and participated in illegal trades. 
Those charged were 19 traders from the soybean pit, three in the bond pit, 
three in the Swiss franc pit and 21 in the yen pit. 
Also present for the announcement of the indictments were FBI Director William 
S. Sessions, Commodity Futures Trading Commission Chairman Wendy Gramm and U.S. 
Atty. Anton Valukas, whose office led the investigation. 
Valukas said traders broke the law and the rules of the exchange by arranging 
deals with one another before and after the pits opened for trading. 
He said the federal investigation will continue beyond the current indictments. 
"This is an ongoing investigation. It is not a concluded investigation. This is 
the first step in what we will be doing in connection with these matters," 
Valukas said. 
