ON BOTH SIDES OF SURROGATE PARENTING; 
CHILDBIRTH: A MOTHER WHO ONCE CARRIED A BABY FOR ANOTHER COUPLE NOW ASSISTS 
OTHERS IN FINDING SURROGATE MOTHERS. WHEN SHE BECAME UNABLE TO CONCEIVE, SHE 
EMBARKED ON AN EMOTIONAL ROLLER COASTER WHEN HER CHILD WOUND UP IN ANOTHER 
WOMB. 
Kathy Wyckoff figured she knew all there was to know about surrogate parenting. 
She was a surrogate mother herself nine years ago, an experience that led her 
to found a surrogate brokerage business here. Since then, she has matched 
infertile couples with surrogates, completing more than 50 successful births. 
But then, Wyckoff and her husband, Tom Olivor, wanted their own child. By now 
unable to conceive, they decided to hire an experienced surrogate they knew 
from her company. Suddenly, Wyckoff found herself on the other side, as anxious 
as all her would-be parents at not being able to control the pregnancy of their 
unborn child. 
"I had no idea," she said. "Being the couple is so much more difficult than 
being the surrogate." 
Olivor, too, said he was on an emotional roller coaster until their surrogate, 
an unmarried Long Beach woman, delivered a healthy baby and they brought him 
home last week. "We took turns going crazy," he said. 
Since 1975, an estimated 4,000 babies have been born in surrogate arrangements 
in the United States, about half of them through a handful of professionally 
supervised programs, like Wyckoff's, the Center for Reproductive Alternatives. 
Most come off without a hitch: Less than 1% of surrogates change their mind and 
want to keep the child. 
Though rare, each contested case represents a contracting couple's worst 
nightmare come true. In the well-publicized Baby M case, New Jersey surrogate 
Mary Beth Whitehead changed her mind and was eventually awarded visitation 
rights; three years ago, a Chula Vista couple agreed to share custody with 
their Mexican surrogate. 
And most recently, Anna Johnson, an Orange County surrogate, sued the couple 
who hired her because they allegedly did not give her sufficient support during 
her pregnancy. However, it is the first contested case in which the surrogate, 
impregnated through in vitro fertilization, has no genetic link to the unborn 
child. 
Such cases also spur consideration of public policy for what is becoming an 
increasingly popular alternative means of procreation. 
Many states have considered legislation on surrogation, and 16 have passed 
statutes, some providing misdemeanor penalties for engaging in a contract. 
According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, those which have 
banned surrogation or declared contracts unenforceable are: Arizona, Florida, 
Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, North Dakota, Utah and 
Washington. 
Meanwhile, brokers report an increase in what is known as gestational 
surrogation, as in the Johnson case. And they report many calls from 
"do-it-yourselfers" -- couples, like the pair who hired Anna Johnson, who have 
found their own surrogate and are seeking further directions on how to proceed. 
To Wyckoff, who runs a relatively small operation -- 10 cases a year -- out of 
her home, such cases also serve to illuminate the pitfalls of unregulated 
surrogate arrangements made by individuals without the benefit of programs like 
hers, which screen participants for compatibility and supply long-term 
psychological support. 
Wyckoff first became involved in surrogation 10 years ago as a married mother 
of three in the Midwest. She knew a couple who were desperately trying to have 
children but could not. Sympathetic, she tried to help them by researching 
alternatives. Catholics, like herself, they rejected surrogation as immoral. 
But Wyckoff said: "The more I found out, the more I knew this was the right 
thing to do." 
Rather than giving "the gift of life," she said she wanted to give the "gift of 
parenthood." 
She contacted a doctor in the Midwest who ran the only known program at the 
time. It required anonymity, provided no counseling and offered no choice to 
couples or surrogates, she said. Even her labor was induced. 
Later, when an infertile couple she had met in the clinic asked her to help 
them meet a surrogate and make the arrangements, she agreed, and subsequent 
referrals marked the beginning of her business. 
She relocated to California, after a divorce in 1984 and remarriage to Olivor, 
an architect. 
After five years, they decided they wanted children of their own. But 
complications from endometriosis, and later an ectopic pregnancy, forced 
Wyckoff to undergo a hysterectomy after which she could not conceive. 
By this time, her business was so well established she had repeat customers and 
repeat surrogates. Many of them, like Susie, had become personal friends who 
formed the core social life for Wyckoff, 36, and Olivor, 47. 
They had particularly admired Susie, a 28-year-old Navy merchandiser, for her 
strength and independence. She had given birth to healthy children twice 
before, once to a son who was adopted, and once to a daughter for a couple in 
the program. They asked her if she would be artificially inseminated. She 
agreed. 
"It doesn't seem unusual to us," Olivor said. "In 1980, it was a radical thing 
to do. In 1990, it's not that radical a procedure." 
Following the procedure she prescribes for her clients, they each obtained 
lawyers, signed contracts stipulating that Wyckoff would adopt the child later, 
and attended psychological counseling sessions before the insemination. 
Over the duration of the pregnancy and two months after delivery, they will pay 
her about $13,000, following state guidelines for adoptions. The total cost to 
couples in the program ranges from $27,000 to $29,000. 
During her pregnancy, Susie kept on working and used the extra money for trips 
and a new car, she said. 
Wyckoff and Olivor said they tried to hide their anxiety from her in the belief 
that she would produce a calm child if she remained calm herself. 
However, Olivor said switching from observer to participant was "emotionally 
wrenching." At one point, Olivor, also a fallen-away Catholic, said he was 
certain a handicapped child would be God's punishment for having been involved 
in surrogation. "That's how crazy it got." 
Wyckoff was equally unnerved over the lack of control and often wondered if she 
shouldn't have gone through another program other than her own. For instance, 
there was the question of whether the other surrogates would be jealous that 
the "Mother Superior" had played favorites by choosing one of them, a fear that 
didn't materialize, Wyckoff said. Moreover, there was the nagging feeling that 
she had just been consistently "lucky" in arranging 57 successful births. What 
if this would be the one time something went wrong? 
Wyckoff coached Susie during the brief delivery and cut the umbilical cord. She 
and Tom stayed at the hospital overnight and drove her home the next day. They 
stayed a half hour and left with the child. Later they sent a bouquet of 
balloons. 
For Susie, who does not want to raise children of her own, it was basically a 
job, albeit a special one. "I kept that kind of an attitude," she said. "I 
never got attached to the baby. Never thought, what if he was mine." 
"Some of us are made to be moms, and some of us are made to do this." 
She said she will probably be a surrogate for another couple in the program in 
February. 
"They've had some major hard luck. . . . I've been lucky enough to get pregnant 
the first time, have healthy 8-pound babies, lots of hair. Good babies." 
Indirectly, she's also doing it for Wyckoff, whom she considers almost like a 
sister. "I see how Kathy feels the more time she spends with a couple and 
there's no baby. I know I could step in and say, 'OK, I don't mind being 
pregnant,' and everybody would be happy. Then that look would leave her eye. 
All gets right with the world." 
But she thinks she will quit the program when she's 30. "I don't want to be 
having kids the rest of my life." 
Rocking the sleeping baby named Michael, Wyckoff said her sympathies 
unquestioningly lie with the Calverts, the biological parents of the child 
being carried by Anna Johnson. "I understood Mary Beth Whitehead and her desire 
to keep the baby. But it's hard for me to understand where Anna Johnson is 
coming from." 
In her program, surrogate candidates are screened for genetic history, mental 
illness and chemical dependency -- and personality characteristics compatible 
with Wyckoff's. Once accepted, they attend group sessions to help one another 
deal with thoughts of keeping the child and accept that the baby will belong to 
the contracting couple. "I'd never have a surrogate in a program without 
ongoing psychological counseling and the camaraderie of other surrogates. It's 
essential." 
Even though her own surrogate said she did not need counseling after the birth, 
Wyckoff said she insisted, as always, "so they can resolve even the slightest 
thing said or done, so it won't come back to haunt them." 
She and her husband see a big problem with the "do-it-yourselfers." 
"Do-it-yourself surrogacy is like wanting to go to Hawaii. You buy a yacht, and 
ask the broker, 'Which way to Hawaii?' He points and says, 'That way,' " Olivor 
said. "It's that kind of adventure." 
"It's that dangerous," Wyckoff added. 
These days, surrogation is more socially acceptable than when she started out, 
Wyckoff said. Whereas it was difficult to find mental-health or health-care 
providers 10 years ago, she has no problems today. 
However, the industry, such as it is, has yet to organize. There are fewer than 
10 successful brokers in the United States. Many fail because they don't have 
the credentials, or are too intent on making money, she said. 
When practitioners met two years ago in Denver to devise professional 
guidelines, the meeting fell apart because of disagreements, Wyckoff said. 
For instance, some, like Wyckoff, wanted to limit surrogates to those with a 
history of non-complicated childbirths, a proposal others called 
discriminatory. 
Even the successful programs aren't necessarily alike, she said. Some insist on 
anonymity, some use balloon payments at the end. 
Wyckoff said she continues to design her own business on the Golden Rule. "I 
try to treat the surrogate, and now the couples, as I'd like to be treated." 
