THE WORLD AT HER FEET; 
BEST-SELLING AUTHOR BARBARA TAYLOR BRADFORD LIVES THE GLAMOROUS LIFESTYLE OF 
HER CHARACTERS 
Facing her well-stocked closet, Barbara Taylor Bradford is caught in a small, 
pleasurable dilemma: What to wear for the evening's dinner party -- the 
elegantly tailored dress designed by a Paris couturier, or the flirtatious 
red-skirted ensemble by her favorite New York designer? 
The multimillion-dollar author is deliberating over this embarrassment of 
riches in the living room of her bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel. 
On the occasion of her latest best seller, her publisher, Random House, has 
flown her here on a VIP publicity trip. Her husband, producer Robert Bradford, 
who has transformed all but one of her novels into television miniseries, has 
jetted out to be by her side. Her personal publicist is on hand. And a press 
packet has been prepared, extolling her books' vital statistics: more than 30 
million copies sold in English-language editions and publication in 34 
countries. 
A household word in England, the British author of romance novels is also 
building her name -- and her fortune -- in the United States, where she has 
lived for more than 26 years. In an industry dominated by deep-pocketed 
corporations, Bradford is a guaranteed money-maker with whom publishers are 
making record-setting mega-deals. 
Her present book, "The Women in His Life," jumped into the No. 1 slot on 
British best-seller lists mere days behind the novel's June publication date. 
In a review of the book, the British newspaper the Evening Standard, noted, 
"While 'The Women in His Life' lacks the page-turning intensity of, for 
instance, 'A Woman of Substance,' the tightly knit plot is splendidly 
sustained." 
Appearing in bookstores last Thursday in the United States, the work is the 
first product of a $10-million three-book contract, engineered by literary 
agent Morton Janklow. Janklow, who represents such authors as Jackie Collins, 
Judith Krantz and Danielle Steele, named his take-it-or-leave-it price to the 
publishers -- "no negotiations," Bradford says. And that was for U.S. and 
Canadian rights only. 
"The rest of the world is mine," Bradford says with a smile. 
The author is sitting on the bungalow's peach brocade couch (her favorite 
color) in a room fresh with flowers. At 57, Bradford is a handsome woman, 
coiffed and dressed with impeccable English order. Living the world-scale 
glamour her novels portray ("I write about places I know"), she unabashedly 
loves clothes, fine antiques, handsome men and expensive hotels. 
Her style is chit-chatty (she has a small chipped tooth, a wonderful Romanian 
manicurist and plans to redecorate her kitchen and dining room next year) and 
alternately decisive, in the manner of Margaret Thatcher, whom she much 
admires. Her conversation is heavily referenced with the names of the rich and 
powerful: her friend Hannah Pakula, director Alan Pakula's wife, who wrote 
about Elena Ceausescu in Vanity Fair; Queen Elizabeth's cousin, Lord Lichfield, 
who took her portrait, bedecked in emeralds, for her new novel's dust jacket; 
publishing magnate Rupert Murdoch and his wife, Anna; Spanish singer Julio 
Iglesias and, last but not least, the loyal steed of her world travels, the 
Concorde. (It bore her home from London two years ago when her fluffy white 
bichon frise, Gemmy, became temporarily paralyzed.) 
She and and her husband have just returned from a vacation in St. 
Jean-Cap-Ferrat on France's Cote d'Azur, which followed a three-week 
promotional tour through Britain. Relaxed, Bradford is again ready to talk 
about "The Women in His Life." 
The set piece of the room's coffee table, the book shimmers in its red jacket, 
with the author's name in "lapis royal blue purple," as Bradford describes it. 
She set out to re-create the colors from the packaging and graphics of Giorgio 
Beverly Hills' perfume Red, she says. 
" 'I want it to be packaged like cosmetics,' I told (Random House publisher) 
Joni Evans. 'I want it to have that look that somebody wants to reach for it.' 
Packaging is so important in selling perfume." 
But the principal reason that her books sell well is, as she states, "that I'm 
a brand name. When a book comes out, they grab it." 
The story now up for grabs is a departure from her panoramic sagas centered on 
strong-willed women, which began with her blockbuster, "A Woman of Substance," 
published in 1979. In "The Women in His Life," Bradford tells the tale of 
Maximilian West as his life sweeps by those of his mother, his nanny, and a 
trio of wives. A beautiful billionaire corporate raider, West is "power 
personified," a man who dashes about a world staged with marble mansions, women 
ready for seduction and corporations ripe for takeover. In a "This Is Your 
Life" ending, West comes to his senses, pleading in a post-epiphanic cri de 
coeur, "No more champagne"; he takes brandy instead. 
Nonetheless, the book's subject matter accurately reflects the author's 
interests. "I think finance is fascinating," Bradford says. "That's why I made 
'Maxim' a tycoon. Business and money interest me. Not money in the sense of 
something to spend, but as a monetary unit, a tool of industry." 
Utilizing historical drama, the book's action progresses from Kristallnacht, 
the first of the Nazi pogroms, on Nov. 9, 1938, to the dismantling of the 
Berlin Wall 51 years later. At its most informative, the novel recounts 
resistance to Hitler in Germany's upper social ranks and West's (shortened from 
Westheim) childhood escape from the country, which is loosely based on 
Bradford's husband's experiences as a German Jew fleeing Berlin. 
A supporter of a strong Germany functioning within a European political 
framework, Bradford declares, "They've spent 45 years trying to expiate their 
crime. The Nazis only wanted power for the sake of having power; they didn't 
want it for economics. Germany is going to be the most dominant country in 
Europe, but not necessarily warlike." 
With the major exception of a nurturing nanny (Bradford's mother was a nanny 
before she married), the novel is less supportive of women, often depicting 
them as frivolous, (two New York working women are shown as egregious new-rich 
hustlers) and it assumes an ethical allegiance to the monied class. 
"The book has no message," Bradford says, adding: "It's a book people can read 
quite easily. I work very hard to make it easy to read, without descending into 
an infantile prose style." 
As for literature in general, she says, "You tell me someone who's writing 
literature today and I'll go buy the book." 
Examples are given. 
"But how many people read them?" she ask. 
Bradford's own desire to be a novelist began when she was a child growing up in 
Leeds, in the industrial north of England. The daughter of a machinery 
engineer, she says she was both spoiled and driven to make a success of 
herself. She sold her first short story at the age of 12 and later bypassed 
college to get on with a career as a journalist, working for a year as fashion 
editor of Woman's Own, a popular women's magazine, and interviewing celebrities 
for the large-circulation evening paper, the London Evening News. 
After her marriage, she moved to New York in 1964, and for 12 years wrote a 
syndicated newspaper column on interior design. Following four attempts at 
writing suspense novels, she turned to the saga, finding immediate success with 
"A Woman of Substance." In this best seller, Bradford's heroine, Emma Harte, 
rises from poverty in a small Yorkshire town to become the head of an 
international merchandising empire and one of the world's wealthiest women. 
Bradford resents press correlations of her frequently termed "rags-to-Vuitton" 
rise with that of Emma Harte. She says she "loathes" a profile published 
recently in the Sunday Times, which mentions "childhood deprivation" and 
describes her father as a "wooden-legged" former soldier. "His leg was made of 
aluminum," Bradford corrects, saying: "I come from an ordinary middle-class 
family." 
Like Harte, however, she admits she is a workhorse who starts at sunup and puts 
in 12-hour days in her office, which is decorated like a library, she says. Two 
walls of books contain such favorite novelists as Irwin Shaw and James Clavell, 
as well as Charles Dickens, the Bronte sisters and a biography of Winston 
Churchill. Her typing table is custom-made to blend with her Victorian desk; 
the walls are pale yellow, the carpet fir green, the sofa and ballon curtains 
done in flowered chintz, she says. 
She will be returning to their New York apartment ("47th floor overlooking the 
East River"), while her husband is off to Hong Kong to begin filming a TV 
miniseries of "To Be the Best," the last novel in the Harte trilogy. Before 
beginning her next book in the fall, Bradford plans to take the rest of the 
summer off. 
There will be time for lunch dates with pals such as Fran Weissler (Broadway 
producer with her husband, Barry, of "Gypsy" and "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof," she 
notes) at restaurants such Le Cirque, the Russian Tea Room, and, she says after 
a second's consideration, "maybe some little place." 
