IRAN NEWS SAYS IRISH HOSTAGE WILL BE FREED 
The official Iranian news agency reported today that a European hostage held in 
Lebanon would be freed soon. 
The Islamic Republic News Agency, quoting an "informed source," said the 
hostage to be freed was likely to be Brian Keenan, an Irish national held since 
April, 1986. 
IRNA, monitored in Nicosia, did not name the source but correspondents in both 
its Beirut and Damascus office said the report was accurate. They said they did 
not know specifically when the release would take place. 
The news agency carried a similar report on an imminent release in July, which 
proved false. 
In Beirut, a source close to the Syrian command, speaking on condition of 
anonymity, said the Syrian government was notified two days ago of the decision 
to free a European hostage, probably Keenan. 
He said arrangements have since been discussed on where, when and how the 
release will take place. 
The source said he believes the hostage will be handed to the Syrian 
authorities somewhere in Lebanon and will be delivered by the Foreign Ministry 
in Damascus to the Irish ambassador there. 
In Dublin, the Department of Foreign Affairs said, "We are aware of the report 
and would point to its speculative nature." 
Gerben Meihuizen, the Dutch ambassador to Syria, said he had "no confirmation" 
of the report. The Netherlands handles Irish interests in Damascus while their 
non-resident ambassador, Declan Connolly, is based in Riyadh. 
A source at the ministry of information in Damascus said they had no immediate 
information about the release. 
Keenan's family in Northern Ireland reacted cautiously to the report. 
Keenan, 39, was kidnaped on April 11, 1986, in West Beirut while walking to his 
job as an English teacher at the American University in Beirut. 
Fourteen Westerners are believed held by extremist Muslim groups in Lebanon. In 
addition to Keenan, they include six Americans, four Britons, two West Germans 
and an Italian. The longest-held is Terry Anderson, chief Middle East 
correspondent of the Associated Press, who was abducted March 16, 1985. 
Two Swiss Red Cross workers were released separately earlier this month. 
