FUTURE OF RAINBOW COALITION, NOT ETHICS PROBE, SHAPES TOM BRADLEY'S L.A. 
Los Angeles, which once was touted by city leaders as the "white spot of the 
nation" for its squeaky clean politics, now has earned the dubious distinction 
as the nation's "white-out" spot. Last week's allegation of a bungled cover-up 
by the city treasurer's office (the gang that couldn't white-out straight) to 
conceal Mayor Tom Bradley's alleged role in a controversial city bank deposit 
is only the latest in a litany of financial scandals rocking City Hall. The 
record over the past several years reveals an apparent ethical hemorrhaging -- 
charges of mismanagement and nepotism in the General Services Department, 
claims of influence-peddling by some former Bradley aides-turned-lobbyists, 
and, most serious of all, allegations of conflict of interest against Bradley 
himself in his dealings as a paid adviser to Far East National Bank. 
Once dubbed the Teflon Mayor, Bradley finally appears to be losing his 
protective coating. The City Council, prodded by press revelations, is no 
longer automatically mayor-friendly. Council President John Ferraro and Finance 
and Revenue Committee Chairman Zev Yaroslavsky, both of whom have had their 
mayoral ambitions frustrated by Bradley's formidable re-election machine, have 
taken the lead on the council investigation into charges that Bradley sought 
special treatment for business associates. Even some staunch Bradley allies now 
concede the need for a full-fledged independent investigation of the mayor's 
troubled financial dealings. 
With daily revelations of Bradley's mounting difficulties, Los Angeles may soon 
face the difficult political crossroads that insiders thought would be delayed 
until the 1993 election: the prospects of life in the post-Bradley era. The 
current controversy involves far more than the mayor's tangled financial 
relationships. Weighing in the balance are the larger accomplishments and 
failures of his 16-year Administration. 
First, the notable accomplishments. Under Bradley, Los Angeles has emerged as 
the nation's premier city for liberal, ethnic coalition politics. In 1973, a 
black/Jewish alliance elected Bradley, wresting power from the conservative Sam 
Yorty regime. Since then, Latinos and Asians have joined the Bradley alliance 
as junior partners. 
The city's long-lasting liberal rainbow coalition is remarkable in light of the 
experience of other big cities. In New York, Mayor Ed Koch has fractured the 
1960sliberal alliance of Jews, blacks and Latinos that killed efforts to 
maintain the corrupt Tammany Hall. That alliance elected reformer John Lindsay 
as mayor in 1965. In Chicago, the alliance of blacks, Latinos and white 
liberals that elected black reformer Harold Washington mayor in 1983 proved to 
be short-lived. This year, a victorious Richard M. Daley, son of the late 
mayor, drew disaffected white liberals and Latinos into his camp. 
The Bradley achievement of ethnic inclusion is even more remarkable in light of 
Los Angeles' entrenched WASP power structure. A staunchly conservative downtown 
business Establishment firmly ruled the city from the late 19th Century into 
the 1960s, waging a successful century-long campaign against liberals, 
Democrats, minorities and organized labor. Like Daniel in the lions's den, 
Bradley soothed the skeptical business community with an ambitious plan for 
downtown redevelopment. Soon the Establishment applied for full partnership in 
the Bradley coalition. 
To succeed in liberalizing the city's politics, Bradley also had to combat Los 
Angeles' decentralized governmental structure that had placed an inordinate 
amount of power in the hands of conservative City Council members and unelected 
administrators. The mayor carefully placed his liberal proteges on the council, 
enlisting them as allies in an attack on the entrenched city bureaucracy. 
The fruits of Bradley's campaign to place power in the hands of elected 
officials were manifold -- an aggressive strategy to secure federal grants both 
to rebuild the decaying downtown area and to deliver needed social services to 
the city's minority groups; the appointment of minorities and women to top 
administrative posts; increased minority hiring in municipal employment and 
contracting, and greater civilian control over the police. Despite his 
impassive demeanor and seemingly cautious style, the mayor quietly yet 
courageously captured and transformed a hostile city government. Los Angeles 
will never be the same again because of Tom Bradley. 
However, these impressive accomplishments have to be balanced against the 
arguable failures of the Bradley era. To many critics, the mayor's growth 
policies have produced class polarization and ethnic Balkanization. Developers 
have been pitted against neighborhood residents, rich pitted against poor and 
ethnic groups turned against one another as federal funding has dried up. 
Whether Bradley survives the current crisis, demographic and economic trends 
threaten Los Angeles' version of the rainbow coalition. The Latino and Asian 
populations, today's junior partners, are rapidly growing while the black and 
Jewish populations, its senior partners, have leveled off. At the same time, 
the city's class and ethnic dividing lines are hardening. Jews and Asians are 
riding the waves of Pacific Rim prosperity while many blacks and Latinos 
constitute a growing underclass trapped by a low-paying service economy. The 
game of ethnic musical chairs will accelerate as Latinos and Asians seek a 
greater voice in the city's affairs. 
The financial scandal dominating today's local political headlines obscures 
these underlying fissures in the city's governing ethnic alliance, first 
revealed in the mayor's surprisingly narrow 1989 reelection victory. For 
Bradley, his possible successors and the city's voters, the big, long-term 
question is not so much about financial mismanagement in City Hall but the 
survivability of the rainbow coalition that brought the city its most 
noteworthy success. 
