'TOP GUN' TURNS HIS SIGHTS ON AN UNRUFFLED BATES; 
ELECTIONS: DUKE CUNNINGHAM MAY BE THE CONGRESSMAN'S STRONGEST CHALLENGE FOR THE 
44TH DISTRICT SINCE BATES CAME TO OFFICE, BUT THAT MAY MEAN LITTLE WHEN 
NOVEMBER ROLLS AROUND. 
Like the highly decorated Navy fighter pilot he once was, Republican 
congressional candidate Randall (Duke) Cunningham often lapses into the 
swaggering, cocky vernacular of his former job to describe his campaign for 
what he hopes will be his new profession. 
Cunningham dismisses his opponent, Rep. Jim Bates (D-San Diego), as "just 
another MiG, and an unethical one." When the two debate, Cunningham predicts, 
he will "shoot down" Bates, "knock him right out of the sky." 
Asked about the formidable challenge of opposing a four-term incumbent whose 
party holds a more than 3-2 voter registration edge, Cunningham smiles wryly 
and says, "I've come through tougher missions and beaten bigger odds." In 
short, Cunningham views Bates as "a pretty easy target" in their 44th 
Congressional District race. 
Bates, however, exudes confidence that he, not Cunningham, will be the "Top 
Gun" in this political battle. Toughened by a bruising June primary campaign 
dominated by debate over Bates' sanction by the House Ethics Committee on 
sexual harassment charges, the former county supervisor and San Diego City 
Council member feels he has already survived his toughest challenge of this 
political year. 
"If voters wanted to trade me in, they would have done it in the primary," 
Bates said. "It'll be a tough race, but I'm not sure it's going to be as tough 
as the last couple ones." 
Though Bates' southern San Diego district was specifically crafted to be "Repub 
lican-proof" by the state legislators who drew its boundaries, the combination 
of candidate and circumstance has caused Cunningham to be widely seen as 
potentially the strongest challenger to face Bates since he won the newly 
created seat in 1982. 
One of the most decorated Navy pilots in the Vietnam War -- where he became an 
ace by shooting down five enemy planes -- the 48-year-old Cunningham also 
served as director of Miramar Naval Air Station's "Top Gun" fighter pilot 
school, the inspiration for the popular film of the same name. In 1983, 
Cunningham attracted international headlines when he accompanied an 11-year-old 
California pilot on a trip duplicating Charles Lindbergh's New York-to-Paris 
flight. 
A staunch conservative who says he represents "the traditional values lacking 
in Jim Bates," Cunningham capitalized on his celebrity at candidate forums 
during last spring's primary by distributing photos of himself in his flight 
jacket. A Cunningham brochure also showed him with "Top Gun" star Tom Cruise -- 
a photo later pulled when Cruise's agent objected. 
Calling Cunningham "one of the better candidates we have around the country," 
Ed Rollins, co-chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, 
describes the 44th District race as among the top two dozen congressional 
contests nationwide. 
Party leaders' interest in the race was piqued by the five-candidate primary 
scramble for the GOP nomination, a prize that, as one also-ran's campaign 
manager noted, "normally . . . is worth about as much as a case of smallpox." 
Evidence that national GOP leaders believe that Cunningham has a credible 
chance can also be found in the fact that a number of high-profile party 
officials will visit San Diego on his behalf -- the type of commitment rarely 
made in a heavily Democratic district where general elections typically are 
races in name only. 
U.S. Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp and Michigan Rep. Guy 
Vander Jagt, the NRCC's chairman, appeared at Cunningham fund-raisers here last 
week. Vice President Dan Quayle is scheduled to do the same later in the 
campaign, and Cunningham aides are negotiating with former President Reagan 
over dates for another major fund-raiser -- events aimed at raising a $400,000 
campaign budget. 
Comforted by the district's demographics, Democratic officials have categorized 
Bates' bid for a fifth two-year term as a "third-tier" campaign -- a seemingly 
secure race that will be closely monitored in the event that late special 
assistance is needed. Bates, who hopes to raise about $300,000, benefited from 
a fund-raising visit from House Speaker Thomas Foley here earlier this summer, 
and expects Democratic Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri to also 
make a local appearance. 
Beyond Cunningham's name recognition and assiduously self-promoted "right 
stuff" image, the GOP's hopes hinge largely on the prospect of a voter backlash 
over Bates' ethical woes -- a possibility that failed to materialize in the two 
races since the charges surfaced late in his 1988 reelection campaign. 
Last year, the House ethics panel rebuked Bates over two female staffers' 
complaints that he sexually harassed them via suggestive remarks and gestures, 
and expected aides in his Washington congressional office to solicit campaign 
contributions, a violation of House rules. 
In sending a "letter of reproval" -- the lightest possible punishment -- to 
Bates, the ethics panel ordered him to write personal apologies to the two 
women. Bates also agreed to hire a professional consulting firm to develop 
sensitivity training for him and others in his office concerning attitudes 
toward female employees. 
Although the allegations attracted wide press coverage in the closing weeks of 
the 1988 race, Bates turned back Republican Rob Butterfield by a convincing 
60%-37% margin. His challenger in June's Democratic primary, lawyer Byron 
Georgiou, built his uphill campaign around the same issue -- running on the 
slogan "The Democrat We Can Respect" -- but also was trounced, 63%-37%. 
Bolstered by those two lopsided victories, Bates characterizes the incident as 
"old news" with rapidly declining political impact. As he has from the outset, 
Bates attributes the controversy to "some kidding and flirting around," arguing 
that, technically, he was not found guilty, since the reproval letter precluded 
any action by the full House. 
"It gets less important with each election," said Bates, a scrappy, streetwise 
campaigner. "I don't know how many times in how many campaigns it can be 
brought up, but I'm sure (Cunningham) will try. But if it hasn't changed 
people's minds by now, it never will." 
While saying that he does not plan to emphasize the issue, Cunningham pulls no 
rhetorical punches when asked about the topic, which he contends will play a 
significant role in the election's outcome -- the past two races 
notwithstanding. 
"This guy is a sexual pervert who's guilty as sin," Cunningham said. "These 
women were violated. I don't need to bring that up because, by now, everybody 
knows what a jerk this guy is. He's a disgrace, unfit for any public office." 
In choosing between Bates and Cunningham, voters can look to stark contrasts in 
the two men's personal backgrounds, political philosophies and positions on 
major issues. Two minor candidates -- Libertarian John Wallner and Peace and 
Freedom Party member Donna White -- will also appear on the ballot in the 44th 
District, which covers downtown and southern San Diego, extending from Linda 
Vista south to Otay, and also includes Lemon Grove, National City and Chula 
Vista. 
While most of Bates' adult life has been spent in public office, Cunningham 
spent most of his in the military, although he was a high school coach and 
teacher before entering the Navy and now heads a small company that markets 
aviation products. 
Fiscally conservative but a moderate to liberal on most social issues, Bates 
has compiled a strong environmental record and played a much-publicized role in 
exposing military procurement excesses. In contrast, Cunningham hews to a 
rigidly conservative line on most issues, illustrated by his opposition to 
abortion and gun control, two of many measures on which he differs with Bates. 
As highlights of his 7 1/2-year congressional record, Bates points to his 
efforts to tighten military purchasing practices; his sponsorship of key health 
and environmental legislation, and helping to secure funding for expansion of 
the San Diego Trolley, to address the border sewage problem and for other local 
problems. 
Proud of his heavy emphasis on constituent services, Bates, whose local office 
is open six days a week and who routinely puts in 12-hour days, has taken to 
half-seriously billing himself as "America's hardest-working congressman." 
Critics, however, contend that his emphasis on resolving constituents' problems 
with the federal bureaucracy has minimized Bates' legislative achievements, an 
argument Cunningham underlines by sniping, "A congressman has to do more . . . 
than find lost Social Security checks." 
But that attention to what some dismiss as the unglamorous minutiae of his job 
has long been Bates' major political asset. Even in non-election years, the 
49-year-old Bates returns to San Diego on most weekends, spending hours 
politicking door-to-door and attending endless community events. 
"He's done a great job solidifying his base," conceded primary loser Georgiou. 
Cunningham, meanwhile, stresses in his public appearances that he would like to 
be known as "the education congressman" -- a variation of the theme used by 
George Bush in 1988 -- and also cites drug control as a major objective. A 
frequent speaker in schools in the "Say No to Drugs" program, Cunningham also 
helped Rep. Duncan Hunter (R-Coronado) draft legislation authorizing the use of 
military forces in controlling illegal drug trafficking. 
"If you want to compare records, look at the fact that . . . I've never failed 
at anything, whether it was as a coach or teacher or at Top Gun or the 
Pentagon," Cunningham said. "That tells you a lot more than how someone voted 
on this or that. Anyone can push a button. I got things done." 
While he hopes to keep Bates on the defensive, Cunningham has had to put out 
several political brush fires of his own. 
A former Del Mar resident who moved to an apartment in Chula Vista to enter the 
race, Cunningham now lives in Mission Valley -- though Bates questions, as did 
Cunningham's primary challengers, whether he will remain in the 44th District 
if he loses in November. Cunningham, however, says that his Del Mar house is 
for sale and that he plans to make his permanent home in the 44th District, 
regardless of the election's outcome. 
During the primary, Cunningham also was embarrassed by an opponent's revelation 
that he did not vote between 1966 and 1988. Pointing out that Cunningham was in 
Vietnam during part of that time, one of his brochures -- responding to what 
some of his aides saw as an attack on his patriotism -- noted that he "voted 
for all of us with his blood." 
Cunningham also was roundly denounced for a mailer that attacked his major 
primary opponent, Joseph Ghougassian, an Egyptian-born Armenian who served as 
U.S. ambassador to Qatar from 1985 through 1989. Beneath sketches of Libyan 
leader Moammar Kadafi, a Saudi Arabian prince and an oil barrel dripping 
dollars, the mailer accused Ghougassian of being "bought and paid for" by Arab 
oil interests. 
After Ghougassian called the mailer "blatant racism" and another GOP candidate 
described it as a "racist, KKK-type attack," national Republican strategist 
Rollins issued a stern public rebuke of his own. In apologizing, Cunningham 
said the brochure was not an attack on Ghougassian's ethnicity, but rather was 
simply intended to point out that he had received campaign donations from 
several Mideast businessmen and oil company representatives. 
Cunningham hopes to use more recent events in the Middle East, however, to 
boost his candidacy. Believing that the tensions in the Persian Gulf play to 
his strength, he has used the crisis between the United States and Iraq to 
further distinguish his own record from Bates' "defense-bashing." 
"I can tell you every weapon (Iraqi President Saddam) Hussein has, their range, 
their tactics and our tactics," Cunningham said. "I know which weapons systems 
we should or shouldn't be developing. . . . All Bates wants to do is cut and 
then cut some more, without any real knowledge of what problems that causes. If 
we get into it over there, Jim Bates, by cutting back on defense, is going to 
be directly responsible for losing American lives." 
But Rick Taylor, Bates' campaign consultant, argues that, if the Iraqi crisis 
casts a major shadow over the race, the Democratic incumbent will be well 
positioned to address the broader questions posed by it, thanks largely to his 
disclosure of the military procurement gaffes. 
"Cunningham's experience might be useful out in the desert, but in Congress I 
want the guy who's cut out the $675 ashtrays so we can spend the money 
efficiently," Taylor said. 
Similarly unimpressed with Cunningham's rhetoric, Bates dismisses his GOP 
opponent as someone who "might be happier in an F-14 than in Congress" and a 
"blank check for the military." 
"He sounds pretty one-dimensional, doesn't he?" Bates said. "Maybe he ought to 
think about running for secretary of defense instead." 
