WOO BLASTS PLANS FOR FORMER BOOKSTORE SITE 
Los Angeles City Councilman Michael Woo and some Sherman Oaks homeowners have 
been demanding for weeks to see what a developer plans to build on the site of 
the Scene of the Crime bookstore and the eclectic group of neighboring stores 
whose loss they mourn. 
They have finally found out. 
And they aren't pleased. 
The developer unveiled plans for a $15-million, three-story, 85,000-square-foot 
retail and office complex with two levels of underground parking to replace the 
46-year-old row of stores on Ventura Boulevard. 
Woo said Friday that the project is unacceptable, calling it too tall and "too 
sterile in a glassy-steely way" for Sherman Oaks. 
He also said he was unhappy with the developer, Jacky Gamiel of Jama 
Construction Corp. Woo said that the builder had not acted in good-faith toward 
his office or residents and that he would do his best to hold up the project 
until it is revised. 
"If there are any discretionary approvals needed, I will say no until we get a 
building that satisfies the community," Woo said. 
Benjamin M. Reznik, an attorney for the developer, said he had tried to meet 
with community leaders but that they refused. He also said the project met all 
city codes and was compatible with the adjoining residential community. 
"If we're within the confines of very limited restrictions and the homeowners 
still oppose us, we've got to ask why," Reznik said. "They ought to communicate 
with us. We think it's a positive, attractive addition to the boulevard. We 
don't have a problem with them recommending an alternative design, but I'm sure 
a lot of people will like this one." 
Judy McCurdy of the Sherman Oaks Homeowners Assn. said her group was still 
studying the plans and would schedule a meeting with Reznik in the next few 
weeks. 
"The developer did build to the letter of the law, and he took into account 
nine of the concerns of homeowners," McCurdy said. "He's done nothing to 
mitigate traffic. He's built something he knows will be problematic for 
homeowners." 
The building, to be located in the 13600 block of Ventura Boulevard, would be 
pedestrian-oriented with a large courtyard, seating areas and fountains, Reznik 
said. Much of the building would be constructed of granite, he added. 
"This will be a quality project in a prestigious location," he said. 
Reznik said the complex would be designed so that traffic it generates would be 
concentrated on Ventura Boulevard. "The cars will go right into the project, 
and we will have so much parking that there will be no spillover into the 
residential neighborhoods," he said. 
"There are no tenants planned at this time," Reznik said. "The developer has 
not had time to solicit anyone." 
Gamiel evicted the bookstore and other tenants of the one-story storefronts 
this year. The remaining business -- Mary's Lamb restaurant -- is scheduled to 
close Sept. 3 and move to 10820 Ventura Blvd. in October. 
Woo has called for an environmental impact report on the project, saying it is 
an "out-of-scale development." Los Angeles officials are also withholding 
action on Gamiel's application for a permit to tear down the empty stores. 
Reznik said the developer will sue the city if the demolition permit is not 
granted. 
