TENNIS SAN DIEGO TOURNAMENT; 
FAIRBANK-NIDEFFER FINALLY FALTERS 
The psychological see-saw Ros Fairbank-Nideffer of Escondido has been riding 
all week tottered back and forth, then finally knocked her off Thursday. 
The beneficiary was Barbara Paulus, and the Austrian went on to defeat 
Fairbank-Nideffer, 7-5, 6-3, in a quarterfinal of the $225,000 Great American 
Bank Tennis Tournament at the San Diego Tennis &amp; Racquet Club. 
It has been an suspenseful week for Fairbank-Nideffer. One day, she was psyched 
to play a first-round match against Martina Navratilova -- before Navratilova 
withdrew because of an ankle injury -- and the next day, she orchestrated a 
comeback victory against hometown rival Angelica Gavaldon. 
Less than 24 hours later, she fell apart against Paulus, playing what she said 
was a match she wouldn't have paid to see. 
"I felt I could get back (in it) because the match had been so awful," 
Fairbank-Nideffer said. "At that point, I found myself thinking, 'This is 
terrible. I wouldn't pay a dime to be watching this match.' Both of us were 
making terrible errors." 
Fairbank-Nideffer double-faulted three consecutive times to close out the 
match. 
Paulus agreed that it wasn't tennis at its best. 
"I played well, but I've had many better matches," she said. 
In the featured evening match, fourth-seeded Manuela Maleeva of Bulgaria 
defeated Ann Grossman, 7-5, 6-1. 
"Basically, I ran out of gas. I think that's what it came down to," said 
Grossman, who played three consecutive days. "If I had a day off, I definitely 
would have been stronger in the second set." 
Earlier, third-seeded Zina Garrison of Houston routed Nathalie Herreman of 
France, 6-2, 6-1. 
Joining semifinalists Maleeva-Fragniere and Paulus, who will play Saturday, and 
quarterfinalist Garrison are Terry Phelps, Nathalie Tauziat of France and 
top-seeded Steffi Graf. 
"I really think I have good chances," Maleeva said. "I think because I'm 
aggressive, I've been hitting the ball really well, I'm confident. I'm happy 
with the way I'm playing all week." 
Maleeva's sister, Katerina Maleeva, might have some advice after playing and 
losing to Graf in the final of the Canadian Open Sunday in Montreal. 
"We haven't talked yet about (a possible meeting with Graf)," she said. "We've 
talked about her match, we always talk, but I'm sure she'll give me some 
advice." 
Tennis Notes 
Terry Phelps, who can be seen here at the pool as often as on the tennis 
courts, meets Zina Garrison in tonight's featured match. An avid football fan 
and friend of quarterback Tony Eason of the New York Jets, Phelps has snagged 
tickets for Saturday night's San Diego Charger-Dallas Cowboy game. The 
semifinals are scheduled for 12:30 p.m. and 6:30 Saturday. 
