BETTING THE SYSTEMS: PICKING WINNERS LIKE EXAMINING GEMS, JEWELER FINDS 
On June 28 at Hollywood Park, Speaking Part, running a six-furlong sprint 
against fillies and mares for 4-year-olds and up, started out fourth in a 
12-horse field after breaking from the No. 2 post position. Speaking Part moved 
up to third at the quarter-pole and took over second at the half-mile position. 
By the stretch, the horse was in front by a head. Extending her lead, Speaking 
Part won by three-quarters of a length. 
When the mutuels were posted on the totalizator board, the "Gem" wasn't even at 
the track, although he had his first winner of the day. The horse paid $32.40 
to win, and system backers were off to a good start after losing the first 
race. 
The Gem never gets to the track until the eighth race, after closing his store, 
which he has had for many years, in the Jewelry Mart building in downtown Los 
Angeles. 
Being meticulous and precise, the Gem first conducts whatever business enters 
his shop, whether it's designing pieces of jewelry or selling items he buys 
from other designers. A creative type, artistic in nature, the Gem would rather 
design rings, pins and bracelets and enter them in various national and 
international competitions than actually sell them to his customers. 
In fact, despite the huge sums of money his creative pieces would bring, the 
Gem gives many of them to his wife to wear, and that way keeps them in his 
possession, instead of selling them to his rich customers, many of whom travel 
to his shop from all over California. 
The Gem's system is a simple one, which he designed after studying the local 
newspaper's horse-racing pages. What he does is bet a money-progression system 
to win on the nine top horses chosen by one of the local newspaper 
handicappers. With a progression of $5-10-15-20-25-30-35-40-45, the Gem needs 
$225 a day for his betting. 
On June 28, the Gem was betting on the picks of Pat Ray, who is one of the 
handicappers listed in the Consensus box published on racing days in the Sports 
Section of The Times and who was the leading money winner among those listed. 
Ray had a loser the first race when his pick, Wildly Irish, going off the 
favorite, ran sixth in a nine-horse route. After losing $5, the Gem's friend 
bet $10 on Speaking Part, which returned $162. After deducting the $15 bet on 
the first two races, the Gem was ahead $147. 
The third race turned out to be another good bet for the Gem when Ray's top 
choice, Intrepidness, ran in a six-furlong sprint against 3-year-olds. Breaking 
slowly from the No. 3 post position, Intrepidness settled into sixth at the 
start, beating only two horses out of the starting gate. 
Gaining his rhythm by the quarter-pole, Intrepidness moved up to fourth by the 
half-mile and at that point made a bold move, taking a one-length lead into the 
stretch, where he pulled away to win by two lengths. With the horse paying 
$10.40 for every $2 bet, the Gem received $78, profiting by $63 on the race and 
$210 overall. 
The fourth race turned out to be Ray's and the Gem's third consecutive victory. 
Quite Regal took the lead at the three-quarter pole, opened up four lengths in 
the stretch and coasted to a 6 1/2-length win in a 1 1/16-mile race. Being the 
favorite, the horse paid $4.60, bringing the Gem $46 for his $20 bet and profit 
for the day hit $236. 
When Fraulein Maria came in sixth in the fifth race, the Gem lost $25, cutting 
his winnings to $211. However, in the sixth race, Free Love, running 5 1/2 
furlongs, started out second, entered the stretch 1 1/2 lengths in front of the 
11-horse field, and easily finished first by 3 1/2 lengths, paying $5.40 to 
win. For his $30 wager, the Gem received $81, made $51, and increased his total 
winnings to $262. 
Orrefor ran last in the seventh race and although the Gem dropped $35, he was 
still ahead a hefty $227 for the day. Arriving at the track just before the 
start of the eighth race, the Gem watched Ray's selection, Flirty, take the 
lead at the beginning of a 1 1/16-mile route on the turf. Flirty opened up 1 
1/2 lengths at the quarter-pole, maintained her position entering the stretch 
and held off the fast-closing second-place horse to win by a head. 
Racing as an entry with the second-place finisher, Flirty ended up the favorite 
in the race paying $4.60 to win. The $40 bet resulted in a return of $92 and a 
profit of $52. Now the Gem was ahead $279 with only one more race to go. 
Since the bet for the ninth would only be $45, the Gem knew he couldn't lose 
for the day. He calmly plunked his money down on Ray's choice, 
Excellentperformer, and watched as the nag made a move to third entering the 
stretch. In the stretch, however, the horse tired and ended up fourth. Despite 
the loss, the Gem left the track with a $234 profit. 
Another good day for the Gem was on July 5, when Ray again hit five firsts, 
winning the second, third, fifth, seventh and ninth races. What made the day's 
betting more satisfying than most days was winning the ninth race, when No 
Money, No Honey raced a mile against six other horses. The nag ran second 
through most of the race until the stretch where she passed the tiring Bigger 
Ability and raced to a half-length victory. 
No Money, No Honey paid $7.20 and the Gem received $162 for his $45 wager. With 
a profit of $117, the Gem left the track ahead $178.50 for the day. 
The Gem concedes that despite his good fortune in choosing a hot handicapper 
most of the time, betting on the horses is similar to identifying a good gem. 
By just looking at a gem, it is almost impossible to see if the inside is 
flawed. However, when one looks through a magnifying glass, then the flaws 
stand out. 
The same is true of a horse, he says. If one just looks at the animal, there is 
no way of seeing the heart inside. However, in the case of the horse, it is the 
magnified competition that brings out the heart. 
