NEW YORK JAZZ FEST SALUTES PIANIST BUD POWELL 
"Bouncin' with Bud," an evening of music by the pianist Bud Powell, which built 
from the ethereal to the fast and furious, was a delightful revelation. 
Saturday night's concert at Alice Tully Hall was the second of six in this 
season's Classical Jazz at Lincoln Center series. 
The evening was all music, without spoken information about Powell, the most 
important piano architect of early be-bop. Powell died at 41 in 1966. Judging 
from the enthusiasm of the audience, they knew all about Powell and were 
thrilled to be hearing his infrequently played compositions. Anybody present 
who didn't know Powell's music was shown a new and wide world of music. 
The evening began with two tunes played by pianist Barry Harris, who is the 
foremost player of the music of Thelonious Monk, Tadd Dameron and Powell. 
"Oblivion" and "Dusk in Saudi" were introspective, as delicate as a daydream 
wafting through blue skies, ruminations on emotions long since calmed. 
Then pianist Tommy Flanagan, whose graceful but authoritative style was 
influenced by Powell, came on to play a brief set, the lilting "Celia," fast, 
cheery and emphatic "So Sorry Please" and "Bouncin' with Bud," where long 
phrases, which make one smile with their joy, revealed Powell's amazing melodic 
gift. 
Pianist Walter Davis Jr. played the percussive solo "Glass Enclosure," which 
shows Powell's classical training. Both the writing and playing style evoked 
stern, angry 20th-Century Russian composers. 
Davis introduced alto saxophonist Jackie McLean and said proudly that Powell 
called them his disciples. They played "I'll Keep Loving You," where the piano 
plays background chords. Then they were joined by bassist Ray Drummond and 
drummer Kenny Washington for "Bud's Sure Thing," with scorching solos for 
everybody. 
Powell intended to write for a band but never did so. Davis, trombonist Slide 
Hampton and tenor saxophonist Jimmy Heath arranged two tunes each -- bright, 
brassy and beautiful -- for a distinguished 10-piece band for this concert. 
Players were trumpeters Art Farmer and Earl Gardner, Hampton, French horn 
player John Clark, tuba player Bob Stewart, McLean, Heath, Drummond and 
Washington, with Harris and Davis taking turns on piano. 
They played the spinning "Parisien Thoroughfare"; "Strictly Confidential"; 
"Hallucination," roiling with inner rhythms then sliding into dissonance; "Time 
Waits," with its slow, sad introduction leading into milder dissonance; "Dance 
of the Infidels," with solos for French horn, trombone and tuba, and "Tempis 
Fugit," full of urgent jazz spirit and feel. 
Harris forgot his reading glasses and was loaned a pair by a man in the front 
row. 
The eminently solid concert ended with more audience participation -- a 
standing ovation. 
