IT'S ALL IN HOW YOU SLICE IT; 
MARKETING: IN THE LATEST ROUND OF NUTRITION LABELING, MANUFACTURERS ARE BEING 
URGED TO EASE CONSUMER CONFUSION BY BEING CONSISTENT ABOUT SIZE OF SERVINGS. 
A 12-ounce can of diet soda contains two servings, according to the label. One 
brand of juice, packed in a box with one straw, provides 1.4 servings, says the 
package. And some pints of frozen yogurt contain 5 1/3 servings while others 
serve four. 
In an effort to bring sense and consistency to food labels, the Food and Drug 
Administration last month proposed standardized serving sizes for 159 product 
categories, ranging from caviar to coffee cake. The announcement was made as 
part of the agency's proposed overhaul of food labels, the centerpiece of which 
includes mandatory disclosure of nutrition information on all food packages. 
That nutrition information -- which includes a listing of calories, fat and 
sodium -- can fluctuate with the serving size. And that's what concerns FDA. 
Currently, serving sizes are left to the manufacturer's discretion, which has 
lead to discrepancies in nutritional data among different brands, said F. 
Edward Scarbrough, acting director of the FDA's Office of Nutrition and Food 
Sciences. "There appears to be a tendency for some manufacturers to manipulate 
serving sizes to make nutritional claims, such as 'low sodium' or 'low 
calorie,' " he said. 
That practice, he said, was a "big consumer issue" when FDA held public 
hearings around the country about food labeling proposals. 
One troublesome product raised by consumers, Scarbrough said, was 12-ounce diet 
soft drinks that list the serving size at two, even though the cans appear to 
be intended for one person. By listing the serving at six ounces, or half a 
can, soda makers can claim that their products are "very low sodium," according 
to the FDA's definition of the term. If the serving size were doubled to a 
whole can, the amount of sodium would be too large to be called "very low." 
James Finkelstein, spokesman for the National Soft Drink Assn., denies that the 
industrywide practice is deceptive. 
The FDA is proposing that the serving size for carbonated beverages be set at 
12 ounces, as was common practice in the late 1970s. 
An FDA study released last year found that almost half of 44 product categories 
evaluated between 1979 and 1986 had been reduced in size. Aside from diet 
sodas, servings of some brands of soup, crackers and cake mixes have been 
reduced, and a serving of bread went from two slices to one. The study 
concluded that at least some of these adjustments were most likely precipitated 
by growing consumer concern with overconsumption of calories, salt or fat. 
Ironically, this concern is completely different from the one that led some 
food companies in the 1970s to enlarge their serving sizes. When voluntary 
nutrition labeling was first instituted in 1973, deficiencies of vitamins, 
minerals and essential nutrients were a health concern. 
FDA's standardized serving sizes are derived from U.S. Department of 
Agriculture surveys of what people actually eat. The proposed serving sizes are 
based on 4,000 foods tracked by USDA in a 1977-78 nationwide consumption 
survey, the most recent and complete data compiled by the federal government. 
Scarbrough said that the serving size section of the agency's labeling overhaul 
was the most difficult, in part because of the diversity of opinion about what 
serving sizes should designate. 
"You can choose serving sizes that are recommended, or you can chose those that 
are actually eaten," Scarbrough said, adding that FDA chose what is actually 
eaten because "it is more in line with truth-in-labeling." 
There are others who believe that the specific serving size doesn't really 
matter since it is so subjective and that as long as it is consistent, 
consumers can make product comparisons. 
Kathy Knuth, spokeswoman for Kraft-General Foods, said that when it comes to 
serving sizes for salad dressings, "the important thing is that everyone should 
use the same measure." Currently, a serving of salad dressing is listed on most 
labels as one tablespoon. Based on actual food consumption patterns, FDA is 
proposing that the measurement be increased to two tablespoons. 
One tablespoon was originally chosen because "it's simpler and easier," said 
Jane MacDonald, manager of technical services for the Assn. for Sauces and 
Dressings. MacDonald said the trade association also objects to FDA's 
assignment of a one tablespoon serving size for mayonnaise, steak sauce, 
Worcestershire sauce and soy sauce and a two tablespoon serving size for salad 
dressings, barbecue and tartar sauces. "There are just so many uses for 
dressings and sauces that it's difficult to say, 'These fall into the one 
tablespoon category, these fall into two tablespoons,' " she said. 
The International Ice Cream Assn. objects to FDA's proposed six-ounce serving 
size for ice cream, ice milk, frozen yogurt and sherbet. "We think the proposal 
is not good because the frozen dessert industry historically has had a 
four-ounce serving size," said Tom Balmer, director of special programs for the 
Washington-based trade group. "It's more in line with traditional Dixie cups, 
and the majority of ice cream scoopers sold in the country deliver a four-ounce 
serving per scoop." 
