SACRAMENTO FILE: HAYDEN'S VDT BILL PASSED, BUT FOES WILL SEEK RECONSIDERATION 
Legislation to require video display terminals in the workplace to meet 
specified design and ergonomic standards has been passed by the Assembly 
without a vote to spare. 
A 41-31 vote, the bare majority needed, was cast on the bill (AB 955), 
sponsored by Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica). It had passed the Senate 
by 25 to 6. Next stop for the measure is Gov. George Deukmejian's desk, but 
opponents temporarily blocked that by serving notice that they will seek 
reconsideration of the Assembly vote. 
Hayden argues that stress and other health problems associated with the use of 
VDTs are the fastest-growing category of employee disability claims in recent 
years. 
GOVERNOR 
Bills Vetoed 
Worker Safety: AB 4006 by Assemblyman Sal Cannella (D-Modesto) to increase by 
50% the maximum criminal fines and civil penalties that can be imposed on 
employers for worker safety violations. 
Voters: AB 2689 by Assemblyman Jack O'Connell (D-Carpinteria) to require high 
school students who are 18 years or older to be given an opportunity to 
register to vote as part of their civics class. 
ASSEMBLY 
Floor Action 
Umbrellas: Sent to the governor on a 43-17 vote a bill (AB 4166) by Assemblyman 
Trice Harvey (R-Bakersfield) to grant a sales tax exemption for materials to be 
used in an art project called "The Umbrellas" by the artist Christo. He plans 
to line 1.8 miles of Interstate 5 in the Tejon Pass area of Kern and Los 
Angeles counties with 1,700 yellow umbrellas each 20 feet high and 28 feet 
wide. Harvey argues that increased tourism would offset the $90,000 revenue 
loss. 
Stalking: Sent to the governor on a 66-1 vote a bill (SB 2184) by Sen. Edward 
Royce (R-Anaheim) to create a new crime of stalking, defined as following or 
disturbing the peace of another with the intent of making that person fear 
death or serious injury. 
Minivans: Sent to the governor on a 42-28 vote a bill (AB 3998) by Assemblyman 
Johan Klehs (D-Castro Valley) to require automobile dealers to affix notices to 
new minivans disclosing whether they comply with federal motor vehicle safety 
standards. 
Petition Circulators: Sent to the governor on a 58-11 vote a bill (AB 3148) by 
Assemblyman Stan Statham (R-Oak Run) to require ballot initiative circulators 
to give their name and their employer's name before asking a voter to sign for 
qualification purposes. 
Cranes: Sent to the governor on a 48-19 vote a bill (AB 2537) by Assemblyman 
John Burton (D-San Francisco) to establish a state crane operator licensing 
board. 
Bill Introductions 
Middle East: AJR 109 by Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) expresses the 
support of the Legislature for the action of President Bush and Congress in 
deploying U.S. armed forces to the Middle East. 
SENATE 
Floor Action 
Rail Transit: Sent to the governor on a 37-0 vote a bill (SB 1307) by Sen. John 
Garamendi (D-Walnut Grove) calling for a study of the feasibility of a 
high-speed rail network that would connect Los Angeles, San Diego, San 
Bernardino, Riverside and Orange counties. 
Driver Training: Passed and returned to the Assembly for concurrence in 
amendments on a 22-12 vote a bill (AB 296) by Assemblyman Richard Floyd 
(D-Carson) to suspend driver training requirements for minors if state money 
isn't forthcoming to reimburse the schools on Jan. 1. 
Capital Fact 
The golden poppy was selected as the official state flower of California by the 
1903 Legislature. 
