SALVATION ARMY MAY JOIN PROJECT ON HOMELESS 
Advocates for the homeless suffered a major defeat this week in efforts to 
build a housing project outside the Ventura city limits, but immediately turned 
to the Salvation Army to discuss the possibility of building a shelter 
downtown. 
The possibility that Project Understanding and the Salvation Army might join 
forces was raised just 24 hours after the Ventura City Council rejected a 
proposal to build a transitional housing project on county land two miles north 
of the city. 
Almost in shock at the surprise City Council action -- taken after city 
officials balked at meeting county requirements that they guarantee water to 
the project for 60 years -- Project Understanding officials at first denounced 
the council vote as a "devastating setback" for the homeless in Ven tura. 
Pat Driskell, executive director of Project Understanding, telephoned Salvation 
Army Capt. Ed Patterson on Tuesday, however, after being informed by local 
Salvation Army board members that the organization might be willing to add its 
resources to the hunt for a local shelter. 
Under a tentative plan to be discussed by Driskell and Patterson in coming 
weeks, the Salvation Army might provide space for some housing units for the 
homeless at its Community Center at 155 S. Oak St. in downtown Ventura. 
Project Understanding's contribution to the joint project would include 
construction costs, to come from a $200,000 grant already provided by the City 
Council on condition that the poverty agency find a suitable site in the next 
year. 
The Salvation Army, which had unsuccessfully bid for that grant earlier this 
year, emphasized this week that any future involvement with Project 
Understanding is at a preliminary stage and must be approved by the Salvation 
Army's state leadership. 
Nonetheless, Patterson said, his organization could initially provide about 10 
beds for the homeless at its present location and could expand that after 
moving next year into a new site in East Ventura at Henderson and Petit roads 
if a decision is made to join Project Understanding. 
"The most important factor in joining with Project Understanding would be the 
cooperation of agencies that would be produced," Pat terson said. "Second is 
the fact that they have the money, while we have the building. Third would be 
the opportunity of pooling our resources in this effort. 
"We have to hash this over internally first," Patterson added. "If we were to 
go ahead, we could start with a 10-bed capacity by building onto our present 
location, and gradually expand when we move. I would say ultimately we could 
provide transitional housing for maybe 10 families and 10 to 15 single men and 
women." 
Although any possible site for the homeless remains subject to City Council 
approval, initial reaction from council members to the prospect of the 
Salvation Army's involvement in the effort was favorable. 
Has 'Most Experience' 
Mayor Jim Monahan, who favored the Salvation Army over Project Understanding 
when the council was first debating the matter, said the Salvation Army has the 
most experience in operating homeless facilities, and he voiced some support 
for an Oak Street site. 
"No matter where you go, you are going to have some opposition," Monahan said. 
"But I think a shelter can work there. I'm not going to rubber-stamp whatever 
they want, but they are probably the best-equipped group to do this sort of 
thing." 
Also praising the prospect of a joint venture was Councilman Richard Francis, 
who stunned Project Understanding officials Monday by leading the council 
turn-around on the issue of build ing a housing project just off Ventura Avenue 
at Bard Lane. 
"I love the idea of Project Understanding working with the Salvation Army," 
Francis said. "Project Understanding has a great track record of genuine 
concern for the poor, but they are naive politically. The Salvation Army has 
more political acumen and probably could pull it off." 
Francis, one of the council's most vocal supporters of Project Understanding's 
earlier efforts to find a site for the homeless somewhere in the Ventura area, 
introduced the council motion killing the proposed county site after the issue 
of a 60-year guarantee of city water for the project was raised during a 
meeting last week called by Ventura County Supervisor Susan La cey. 
Proposal Described 
Project Understanding had proposed building about 100 units of transitional 
housing on 4.5 acres of a decaying lemon orchard on the city's outskirts. The 
land would have been donated to the group by developer Richard Komorowski on 
condition that the City Council give him the right to build 77 houses on an 
adjoining 21 acres. 
Though several council members had voiced unhappiness with Komorowski's 
handling of the proposal -- the developer at first had of fered 25 acres to 
Project Understanding and proposed building 25 homes -- the council was leaning 
toward support of the project until county officials raised the water issue. 
County officials specifically objected to the language of the city's so-called 
"will-serve" letters, routinely submitted to the county for projects outside 
the city limits, promising a supply of city water only as long as there is not 
some emergency situation requiring that water be preserved for city residents 
exclusively. 
Supervisor Lacey, who later said she was surprised that the issue became a 
reason for dropping the project, said her only purpose in calling the meeting 
was to alert city officials that the county felt a stronger pledge of water 
services was necessary. 
Firm Promise Surmised 
The reaction of city staff officials and council members, however, was that the 
city was being told essentially that no project would be approved in the county 
without a firm promise of city water. Their decision was that no exception 
should be made for any project, including one for the homeless. 
"Water was the issue," Francis said. "I wish there were other ways to approach 
the problem. The only way we could have promised water to that project was if 
we could have annexed the area as part of the city, and that is impossible 
because there is an oil field between us and them -- and the oil company 
doesn't want to be part of the city." 
He added: "I'm not here to change long-term city policies. We have a serious 
water crunch in Ventura. As important as it is to find someplace for the 
homeless, the water issue takes precedence. We just can't promise water to 
people outside the city that eventually may be desperately needed by people who 
are actual residents." 
