WEST BONES UP ON HITTING IN MYSTIC MEETING 
Sometime about 11 p.m. on a dark and quiet Sunday here, the Woodland Hills West 
American Legion baseball team gathered in a circle on Borman Field. 
If you find that strange, you don't know the half of it. 
It's what they were doing that was really strange. 
"We were getting the hex off of our bats," explained first baseman Ryan 
McGuire, who called the impromptu meeting. 
But just settling for that explanation wouldn't be right either. The complete 
story goes something like this: 
After two games in the state tournament here, Woodland Hills had scraped 
together just nine runs in 18 innings -- well below average for the 
heavy-hitting team. McGuire figured something drastic had to be done to the 
bats if the team was to come up with two big wins on Monday against San Leandro 
and Napa. 
"I went down to the restaurant in town," McGuire said, "and asked them if they 
had a spare steak bone lying around, for my dog, I said, and they said no. So I 
asked them for a chicken bone, or anything and they said they didn't have 
anything. So, I went to the store and bought a (plastic) doggie bone." 
Still baffled? Catcher Bobby Kim was, too. 
"Someone said that Ryan wanted to have a meeting outside," Kim said. "We didn't 
know why." 
Once outside and all alone on the empty field, the players gathered in a circle 
and held hands, with their bats on the ground. McGuire went around the circle 
with the store-bought doggie bone and rubbed each bat. 
The ploy was reminiscent of a scene in the motion picture "Bull Durham," in 
which one player rubbed a cross made of chicken bones to get the hex off of his 
bat. 
Meanwhile, as McGuire rubbed the bats, the scene grew stranger when Kim 
suddenly burst into a Korean prayer to further rid the team of the evil hitting 
spirits. When Kim finished, Jeff Marks followed with a similarly unexpected 
Jewish prayer, with the same intentions. 
All the while, the players held hands and stared at the sky. 
"It looked like a cult out there," Ricky Banuelos said. 
Before dismissing this incident in the boys-will-be-boys file, consider the 
words of outfielder Jason Cohen. 
"It worked," Cohen insisted. "It really worked." 
A check of the numbers: In the three games after the ritual, Woodland Hills 
compiled 40 runs, 47 hits and five home runs, including two grand slams. 
Needless to say, the bone, which hung faithfully on a rope in the Woodland 
Hills dugout, will be making the trip to Idaho. 
