PARTNERS OF GAYS TO RECEIVE CITY MEDICAL BENEFITS 
Laguna Beach on Tuesday became the first city in Orange County and one of only 
a handful in the nation to grant medical benefits to unmarried partners of city 
employees, including gays and lesbians. 
Under the new policy, approved unanimously by the City Council, unmarried 
couples will be eligible for medical and dental coverage already extended to 
spouses of city employees. 
"We know today in Southern California and the nation that the American family 
is changing and the city of Laguna Beach is responding to that change," said 
Councilman Robert F. Gentry, who proposed the policy. 
Gentry, who is gay, said the new policy attempts to treat all city employees 
more fairly: "I'm a city employee and I know that I'm treated differently than 
other employees," he said. "It's an issue of basic equity in the workplace." 
Local gay rights advocates praised the city's action. 
"It's good news," said Anaheim attorney and gay rights advocate John Doran. "We 
believe both local and state governments have to realize that family units 
include lesbian and gay couples, unmarried heterosexual couples, single parents 
with children . . . these policies have to reflect the family unit as it is 
really structured in America." 
Laguna Beach joins three other California cities -- Berkeley, West Hollywood 
and Santa Cruz -- and the city of Seattle in adopting so-called domestic 
partner laws that extend medical or other benefits to unmarried couples. Los 
Angeles recently extended its employee leave program to include domestic 
partners. 
To become eligible under the new policy, a couple will have to sign an 
affidavit stating they have lived together for at least six months, intend to 
live together indefinitely, are not related by blood, are mentally competent 
and will notify the city if circumstances of the relationship change. 
A Time magazine-Cable News Network poll conducted last November found that 54% 
of Americans thought that homosexual couples should be permitted to receive 
medical benefits from a partner's policy. 
But the concept of granting unmarried couples spousal benefits remains 
controversial. 
San Francisco voters, for example, defeated a measure that would have required 
employers to recognize unmarried couples. 
Congressman William E. Dannemeyer (R-Fullerton) and other conservative leaders 
called Laguna Beach's action an attack on marriage and the traditional family. 
"The traditional family in American society is one man and one woman in an 
institution called marriage, that is the basis of civilization," Dannemeyer 
said. 
Policies similar to the one adopted in Laguna Beach form "one of the 
battlegrounds in the cultural war going on in the 1990s," he added. "The 
council in Laguna Beach has said to God, 'step aside, we have other plans for 
people in this community.' " 
The Rev. Louis Sheldon, who heads the Orange County-based Traditional Values 
Coalition, said he had received "a lot of phone calls," from Laguna Beach 
residents angered by the council's action but declined to say whether he will 
mount a challenge to the policy. 
"I have no comment on that," Sheldon said. "But I believe it will go down to 
defeat one way or another. It is truly a biased-related policy to advocate and 
promote the (homosexual) lifestyle." 
City officials said they had no estimate of how many of the city's 220 
employees would take advantage of the new policy. Nor were any cost estimates 
immediately available. 
Personnel director Philip Hoffman said the city contributes $173 dollars per 
employee per month under the city's health plan. Gentry said other cities that 
have extended their insurance policies have not experienced a significant 
change. 
Gentry also said the city had not evaluated what impact the policy might have 
in treating patients who contract the HIV or AIDS virus in the city, or whether 
extension of medical benefits to gay partners might result in higher medical 
costs for the city. 
"I don't think this policy will have an effect on the delivery of health care 
to AIDS patients," Gentry said. "In some ways this could save the city money. 
If two employees in a domestic relationship would now be covered as a family, 
it would be less costly." 
