DRUG LORDS 'MARKED MEN,' THORNBURGH SAYS 
There have been "sightings" outside of Colombia of some of that country's top 
12 drug kingpins sought by the United States for prosecution, and they "are 
marked men around the world," Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh said Sunday. 
"It may be awhile" before any of the leaders are apprehended, Thornburgh said 
on the CBS interview program "Face the Nation." But he said that Colombia is 
expected to deliver to U.S. authorities this week Eduardo Martinez Romero, an 
alleged money launderer for the Medellin drug cartel. If the expectation 
becomes reality, he will be the first Colombian handed over for U.S. 
prosecution since Colombian President Virgilio Barco Vargas restored 
extradition under an emergency decree. 
Martinez, who unwittingly led federal undercover agents to a Los Angeles 
money-laundering operation last spring, is wanted for trial on related charges 
in Atlanta. 
Appearing with Thornburgh on the television show, Sen. Joseph R. Biden Jr. 
(D-Del.), Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, called for the formation of 
international SWAT teams to apprehend drug cartel leaders when they travel 
outside Colombia. 
'Many of Them Have Fled' 
"Obviously, many of them -- if not all of them -- have fled Colombia now," 
Biden said. 
Federal law enforcement sources familiar with the Colombian situation said that 
they do not share Biden's certainty that the cartel leaders have fled their 
homeland, contending that the vast resources under the traffickers' control 
have enabled them to avoid capture inside Colombia in earlier crackdowns. 
"Any time you raise the profile" of the drug traffickers, as Barco's crackdown 
did, "you encourage snitches (informants) and ordinary citizens to provide 
information, and this is what's been happening," one source said. "Now this all 
has to be sifted through." 
Thornburgh and Biden agreed that extradition to the United States for 
prosecution is the action that the Colombian traffickers most fear. "They 
apparently will go to any length to avoid being brought to an American 
courtroom," Biden said. 
Extraditing Martinez this week, as Thornburgh predicted, would mark a 
significant accomplishment, because conditions attached to Barco's extradition 
decree require the approval of more than six Colombian Cabinet ministers and 
give the subject of the order the opportunity to appeal. 
Would Be Given Asylum 
Thornburgh said that, if reports are true in Colombia that the beleaguered 
nation's new justice minister, Monica de Greiff, has resigned or plans to 
resign next month after returning from a trip to the United States, she would 
be given asylum here "as other refugees from terrorism and the kind of violence 
that affects Colombia have always been." 
After the TV show, Thornburgh said that he had not met with De Greiff, who took 
the post July 16 and who, according to news reports in Colombia, left for 
Washington on Friday. She was scheduled to meet with U.S. officials here this 
week to discuss extradition details and U.S. aid to help protect her country's 
judges, prosecutors and police from attack by the cartel forces. 
Efforts to reach her Sunday through U.S. officials and Colombian diplomats in 
Washington were unsuccessful. An Administration official who spoke late Sunday 
to the Associated Press said that De Greiff is in the United States, but the 
official refused to say whether she had resigned her Cabinet post. 
Thornburgh said earlier that De Greiff's resignation "would not be surprising . 
. . because of the tragic record of violence and intimidation that has almost 
effectively neutralized law enforcement" in Colombia. 
The State Department issued a travel warning Saturday night, asking Americans 
to postpone trips to Colombia. It said that the crackdown on narcotics 
traffickers "could raise the level of violence in some areas, and American 
citizens -- even though not specifically targeted -- could find themselves 
caught up in random violence." 
No Specifications 
Both Thornburgh and William J. Bennett, director of the White House Office of 
Drug Control Policy, who appeared on NBC's "Meet the Press," declined to 
specify how President Bush proposes to finance the stepped-up war on drugs that 
he will announce Sept. 5. 
But Biden called for enacting a "sin tax" on cigarettes, beer, wine and liquor 
to pay for the multibillion-dollar effort, rather than diverting funds from 
other government programs, as the Administration has indicated it will propose. 
Biden contended that upping the taxes by a nickel on a six-pack of beer, six 
cents on a bottle of wine, 40 cents on a gallon of liquor and two cents on a 
pack of cigarettes "would pay for the entire drug effort and the entire drug 
bill we didn't pay for last year." 
The comments by Biden, who has been conducting a series of Judiciary Committee 
hearings on the performance of the government's anti-narcotics program, 
indicate that Senate Democrats will seek to influence the shape of the 
government's expanded efforts, especially in the light of polls showing that 
drugs have become the leading domestic problem. 
Bennett, who submitted the proposals from which Bush shaped the drug package, 
said that it will call "for the redeployment and reapportioning of funds from 
different accounts and moving funds into this effort on drugs." 
"For the moment, other things may have to wait so that we can take this 
initiative," Bennett said. 
Pressed on the question of raising taxes to meet the drug threat, despite 
Bush's campaign pledge of no tax increases, Bennett said that he would not be 
reluctant, noting that "crack is worse than taxes." But he added that he does 
not think it will be necessary to raise taxes because "there are things on the 
table that we're paying for that just don't have the priority" that drugs 
command. 
