HOT PROPERTY: WHEN MEG MET DINAH . . . SOLD! 
MEG RYAN, who co-stars with Billy Crystal in the Rob Reiner movie "When Harry 
Met Sally . . . ," has sold the Hollywood Hills home she bought about a year 
ago to DINAH MANOFF, who is in the cast of the television show "Empty Nest." 
Ryan remodeled the 42-year-old house, which public records indicate she bought 
for $362,000 and sold for $630,000. 
The two-story house has three bedrooms, two baths and a fireplace in 1,974 
square feet. 
ROSEANNE BARR, star of the hit TV sitcom "Roseanne," has leased a country-style 
house with a pool and a tennis court in the Beverly Hills Post Office area. The 
asking rent was $20,000 a month. Stan Herman &amp; Associates, Beverly Hills, 
had the rental listing. 
DAVID McHUGH, who composed the music for the movies "Mr. North" and "Three 
Fugitives," just purchased a home in Mandeville Canyon near Tom Selleck's for 
$1.92 million. 
McHugh's new residence is a rustic Connecticut-style farmhouse on slightly more 
than 3 acres. 
Theodora Kinder of Fred Sands' Santa Monica office handled the listing and the 
sale. 
LIBERACE'S home for many years, on an acre-sized knoll above Sunset Strip, is 
for sale at $3.75 million. 
The late entertainer updated the 12,000-square-foot mansion, built in the '30s, 
when he owned it in the '50s and '60s. 
It has been described as being in "move-in condition," but its listing agent, 
Bruce Nelson of Asher Dann &amp; Associates, said: 
"Because of its view, it is one of the great sites in town, and someone could 
easily take the house off the property." 
For Liberace fans, there are such reminders of him in the house, however, as an 
organ and some chandeliers, which are included along with other furnishings in 
the asking price. The current owners are moving to the beach. 
ERROL FLYNN'S former home, where the late actor installed one-way mirrors in a 
bedroom ceiling to spy on his famous guests, was torn down recently to make way 
for a 14,000-square-foot mansion, but owners of the Mulholland Drive property 
didn't get that far. 
After razing the Flynn house, the owners, who bought the place from the Ricky 
Nelson estate, landscaped the 3-acre site but never started construction. 
"They had planned to live there but decided to stay where they are," said a 
spokeswoman for Fred Sands Estates, which has the listing. 
The property -- with a pool, a tennis court and an English garden -- is for 
sale at $4.85 million, including plans, through Joe Babajian, Judy Cycon, Ginna 
Schenck and Ernestine Fields of Fred Sands Estates, Sherman Oaks. 
Tennis courts, pools and even gyms are now considered standard by upscale home 
buyers, according to a survey completed the other day by Stan Herman &amp; 
Associates. Upscale in this survey means anyone who pays $5 million or more. 
His-and-her bathrooms are also on the list of items deemed "not impressive" to 
the upscale buyer, said Stephen Shapiro, who is Herman's partner. 
Among the impressive features, which the survey labels "most sought-after," 
are: 
Recording studios, projection rooms, tanning parlors, catering kitchens, 
putting greens, waterfalls, motorized chandeliers, indoor lap pools and a floor 
space of at least 10,000 square feet. 
The survey applies to homes in the area that realtors call The Platinum 
Triangle: Bel-Air, Beverly Hills and Holmby Hills. 
Comedian/actor JOHN BYNER and his singer/actress wife Cassandra have listed 
Tovu Island in Fiji, which they've owned for five years, at $4 million. 
"The island has a home and three boats on it," said Lisa Seagram of Stan Herman 
&amp; Associates, who has the listing. "And he dug out the harbor there 
himself. But it's a little far away, and he's a busy guy. 
"They want to turn their island into a house here. It is about the same price 
as a house in the flats (of Beverly Hills)." The Byners have been renting in 
the Los Angeles area. 
CURTIS HENDRIX, long active in East Coast real estate, is "basically relocating 
here," said a Los Angeles spokesman for the entrepreneur. 
Hendrix, who formed a partnership last January to acquire the Sanwa Bank 
Building in downtown Los Angeles (at a cost, including redesign plans, of $135 
million), has put his three East Coast residences, valued at a total of $14 
million, on the market. (These include homes in West Hampton, Long Island; Boca 
Raton, Fla., and a historical mansion in Manhattan's exclusive Grammercy Park.) 
He is looking for a Malibu mansion in the $6-million range. (He already bought 
a $4-million home, once owned by the late Yul Brynner, in Holmby Hills.) 
In a prepared statement, Hendrix said: 
"Relocation of my personal residences to California is based purely on my 
choice of life style and reflects no change in my investment objectives. Our 
companies will continue their bi-coastal direction." 
Hendrix has bought and sold more than 3 million square feet of offices and more 
than 20,000 apartments. 
