IT'S MOSCOW'S WEAPONS FIGHTING LEBANON'S WAR, SO MOSCOW MUST STEP IN 
In the summer of 1982, as Israeli troops and artillery laid siege to Beirut, 
the international community wasted no time in demanding that the United States 
act to restrain its ally. Now, seven years later, with Syrian troops inflicting 
what is by all accounts a much more devastating horror on Beirut, world opinion 
should act with equal haste and call to account Syria's paymaster, the Soviet 
Union. 
Whatever view one takes of the current conflict in Lebanon, which pits Syria 
and its Muslim proxies against the Christian forces of Lt. Gen. Michel Aoun, 
one thing is indisputable: No outside power -- not the United States, not the 
United Nations, not the Arab League, not Israel, not France -- has more 
leverage to achieve an immediate cease-fire than the Soviet Union. 
Syria's military is almost totally dependent on arms and funding from the 
Soviet Union. Before Mikhail S. Gorbachev's rise to power in 1985, Moscow 
supplied Syria with about $3 billion worth of weapons annually. Since 1985, 
with the advent of Soviet "new thinking" and Syria's economic collapse, a 
greater austerity has been introduced to the relationship, though Soviet arms 
continue to flow to Syria at the impressive rate of $1 billion per year. 
Syria's military dependence on Moscow represents the Kremlin's most significant 
lever of influence on the fighting in Lebanon, but not its only one. The 
Soviets are also the main arms supplier and superpower patron of Iraq, whose 
massive weapons transfers to Lebanon's Christian forces have buttressed the 
ill-considered belligerency of Gen. Aoun. As it does with Syria, Moscow 
maintains a so-called treaty of friendship and cooperation with Iraq, a 
long-term political/military agreement that borders on a formal alliance. 
In short, the carnage in Beirut is being carried out almost entirely on behalf 
of parties that are, in one form or another, allied with and armed by the 
Soviet Union. Under the circumstances, Moscow's unique responsibility to play a 
leadership role in efforts to halt the bloodshed cannot be overlooked. 
This is not to say that the United States has done everything in its power to 
alleviate Lebanon's suffering. It has not. But given Moscow's ties to Syria, 
and the fact that the war is being waged with Soviet weapons, the Kremlin has 
both a greater capability and moral duty to affect the situation. 
Nor is it to say that the Soviets have been unhelpful in recent attempts to end 
the fighting. Quite the contrary. In May, the Soviet Union joined the United 
States in a statement that urged all of Lebanon's warring factions to agree to 
an immediate cease-fire. In July, a similar call was issued by Gorbachev and 
French President Francois Mitterrand. Moscow backed the mediation efforts of 
the Arab League (which failed) as well as last week's Security Council 
cease-fire appeal, which produced at least a pause in the combat. And a month 
ago, the Kremlin saw fit to send a deputy foreign minister to Damascus and 
Baghdad on a mission of quiet diplomacy aimed at de-escalating the crisis. 
Consistent with the changes that he has wrought in Soviet foreign policy more 
generally, Gorbachev's actions in Lebanon have clearly been in support of 
efforts to ameliorate the conflict. But alas, to date, these have been the 
actions that one would expect from a medium-size power. They have not been the 
actions of a superpower whose military and political weight with the main 
combatant in Lebanon's civil war, Syria, far outstrips that of any other 
possible mediator. Even more to the point, they have not been the actions of a 
superpower that claims a responsibility equal to the United States' for 
maintaining and enhancing international peace and stability. 
With all other attempts to stem the fighting in Lebanon having foundered, and 
with Syria posed to impose a final solution on Christian East Beirut, the 
international community should now call on the Soviet Union to step up to the 
challenge of world leadership. Moscow must be urged to act, forcefully and 
without delay, by bringing the full weight of its political leverage to bear on 
Syria to agree to a cessation of hostilities. 
This is no more than the United States was asked to do vis-a-vis Israel in 
1982. Today, when the Soviet Union is demonstrating itself to be a far more 
responsible international actor, it would be a shame if a double standard were 
employed and less was expected of the Kremlin when its ally flouts 
international sensibilities. 
Seven years go, President Ronald Reagan telephoned Israeli Prime Minister 
Menachem Begin and demanded that the Israeli assault on Beirut be brought to a 
stop. President Gorbachev should now be urged to place a similar call to 
Damascus. Lebanon's survival depends on it. 
