BALLOT PROPOSALS THAT CITY IGNORED RETURN TO HAUNT IT 
Opening the door to a possible delay of next month's San Diego City Council 
races, a federal judge Monday issued a ruling that clears the way for the 
Chicano Federation to seek a postponement of the city's first-ever 
district-only election. 
Saying it appears that "the city made a promise . . . and didn't keep it" with 
regard to placing proposed election changes on this November's ballot, U. S. 
District Judge John S. Rhoades agreed to permit the Chicano Federation to 
broaden its 20-month-old lawsuit aimed at altering the city's electoral system. 
A hearing on those amendments to the lawsuit has been scheduled for Aug. 28, 
when Rhoades will decide whether he has the authority to order the city to 
place the election changes sought by the Chicano Federation on the November 
ballot. 
If the judge sides with the Chicano Federation on that legal question, the 
group will probably then ask that the Sept. 19 council election be postponed 
until June, 1990, on the grounds that the election system now in place is 
unconstitutional. Rhoades also pointedly told the city's attorneys that, even 
if he allows the race to proceed, he could later declare it invalid and order a 
new election. 
'Itself to Blame' 
"If the judge does push back the election to next June, the City Council has 
only itself to blame," Chicano Federation Chairman Jess Haro said after 
Monday's two-hour hearing, adding that his group prefers that timetable. "The 
city could have taken care of these problems much earlier. But it didn't, and 
that's why it's in this position." 
Filed in January, 1988, the Chicano Federation lawsuit contended that the 
two-tiered council election system then in place -- district primaries, 
followed by citywide runoffs between the two top vote-getters in each district 
-- unconstitutionally diluted the impact of Latino votes. 
San Diego voters' narrow approval of a district-only election initiative in 
November accomplished one of the suit's major objectives by eliminating the 
at-large runoffs, which many political activists argued minimized minority 
candidates' chances of being elected. 
While the city's lawyers argue that the impending switch to district-only 
council elections essentially renders the lawsuit moot, Chicano Federation 
attorney Patricia Meyer stressed to Rhoades on Monday that the suit seeks 
additional remedies designed to enhance minority political clout. In 
particular, the group favors expansion of the number of council seats and the 
creation of an independent board to draw district lines, a politically 
sensitive job now handled by the City Council. 
"The adoption of a district system solved only part of the problem," Meyer 
said. "By itself, it doesn't rectify the system's inequities." 
Reneged on Agreement? 
A key point of contention in Monday's hearing was whether the city reneged on 
an agreement aimed at settling the questions raised in the Chicano Federation 
lawsuit at the ballot box rather than in the courtroom. 
During a meeting last year with Magistrate Harry McCue, Mayor Maureen O'Connor 
and retired Justice Ed Butler, then chairman of the city's Charter Review 
Commission, pledged that any election changes proposed by the panel would be 
placed on the 1989 ballot, according to Meyer. That pledge was little more that 
a reiteration of an April, 1988, council resolution promising that "all 
recommendations made by the commission shall be placed directly on the ballot." 
Combined with the district-election initiative, that approach held out the 
possibility that voters might approve the changes sought by the Chicano 
Federation, precluding the need for a lengthy, costly lawsuit. 
Based on that agreement, McCue put the case on hold until after last November's 
vote on Proposition E, the district-election measure. 
However, in June, the council, contrary to its earlier resolution, refused to 
place the review panel's proposed charter changes, which included an expansion 
of the council from eight to 10 seats and an impartial redistricting board, on 
the ballot. In so doing, Meyer argued, the city voided the agreement on which 
the lawsuit had been stayed, forcing the issue back into court. 
In response, John McDermott, an attorney hired by the city to defend it in the 
lawsuit, offered a two-pronged argument. The 1988 council resolution pledging 
to forward the proposed charter changes to voters was "totally independent of 
this case," McDermott said. Furthermore, McDermott claimed that it was McCue's 
"own idea" to stay the case; the decision was not directly based, he said, on 
any promises made by O'Connor and Butler. 
Although the council resolution specifically stated that the panel's 
recommendations "shall" be placed on the ballot, McDermott said the city 
interpreted that to mean that any such proposals "would come back to the 
council for a ministerial decision." Adding yet another wrinkle to his defense, 
McDermott also characterized the resolution as simply a legislative act that 
could be altered through later action, not a legally binding contract. 
'Didn't Keep' Promise 
Clearly unpersuaded, Rhoades told McDermott that, after carefully reading the 
council resolution, "I can't even get close to what you're saying." 
"Shall means shall, not will or maybe or might," Rhoades said. "I have a very 
hard time accepting your explanation, Mr. McDermott. The city made a promise to 
someone and didn't keep it." 
As a result of Rhoades' ruling, the lawsuit's plaintiffs will be expanded to 
add blacks to Latinos as the primary groups allegedly harmed by the city's 
election system. The judge's decision also permits Meyer to raise additional 
legal arguments -- notably, the contention that, even under a strictly district 
system, San Diego's electoral process violates the one-man, one-vote principle. 
Because of population disparities among the eight districts, votes in larger 
districts are, statistically, if not politically, worth less than votes in 
smaller districts, Meyer argued. The 4th and 8th council districts, which have 
the highest concentrations of minority voters in the city, also are among the 
most populous districts, exacerbating that problem, she added. 
Therefore, permitting next month's elections in four council districts to 
proceed would result in the victors being selected through a legally flawed 
system, Meyer said. 
Although the city acknowledges that, because of growth and other factors, some 
districts are numerically larger than others, it argues that the differences 
are within federal standards -- a contention that Meyer disputes. 
"Are the districts . . . imbalanced? You bet," McDermott said. "Is that a 
reason for (postponing) an election that is weeks away? No." 
The final answer to that question, however, will be made by Rhoades later this 
month. 
From Dismay to I Told You So 
At City Hall, Rhoades' ruling drew predominantly negative reactions among 
council members, with most expressing doubt that the judge will, in fact, 
produce the worst-case scenario by halting next month's election. 
Councilman Ed Struiksma, for example, argued that an eleventh-hour postponement 
would be unfair to the candidates in the four odd-numbered districts at stake 
in next month's primary. 
Noting that candidates already have made significant investments of time and 
money in their campaigns, Struiksma said: "It would be virtually impossible to 
stop the political process at its current juncture." 
Reiterating a point made by the city's lawyers, Councilwoman Gloria McColl 
pointed out that, because elections are scheduled to be held in only half of 
the council districts this fall, the city would have to spend up to $500,000 
more to hold a citywide race if Rhoades orders the Chicano Federation's 
preferred electoral changes on the November ballot. 
"If the judge would like to come up with the money to put it on the ballot, I'd 
be happy to reconsider it," McColl said. "We're trying to build courts and 
jails. If that judge thinks a special election is more important than courts 
and jails, I want to hear about it." 
Mayor O'Connor, meanwhile, displayed an I-told-you-so attitude about the 
potential legal-electoral quandary now facing the city, noting that she was one 
of only three council members to vote to place the Charter Review Commission's 
recommendations on the ballot. 
Times staff writer Leonard Bernstein contributed to this report. 
