BUSH SEES COLOMBIAN CRISIS AS BEST CHANCE TO STEM COCAINE TIDE 
President Bush and his senior advisers consider the situation in Colombia "the 
best hope we've had" for stemming the tide of cocaine flowing to the United 
States from Central America. 
"What we have here is a crisis precipitated by the most brazen kind of 
terrorist activity and not to really seize the opportunity to do something 
about it would be crazy," one senior official said. 
It is not clear, however, whether the $65-million emergency aid package Bush 
announced Friday -- essentially an accelerated version of what he already had 
planned to unveil in a long-scheduled drug speech on Sept. 5 -- will be enough 
to defeat the well-equipped and -financed international drug cartels based in 
Colombia. 
A host of factors, including the sensitivity of Latin American nations to U.S. 
intervention and the longstanding reluctance of the Pentagon to plunge into the 
war on drugs, have led the Administration to stop short of an all-out effort, 
in the view of some outside experts. 
'The Best Hope' 
And specialists both inside the government and out agree that the present 
"window of opportunity" may not remain open long. Expressing concern that 
Colombian leaders may waver in the face of the cartels' violent attacks, one 
senior Bush adviser said, "I hope they won't bend, because if they can sustain 
their current campaign against the cartels it's the best hope we've had" to 
bring the cocaine traffic under control. 
U.S. intelligence sources said that among leading political figures in Colombia 
there already has been talk that the government may eventually have to relax 
its crackdown and seek a negotiated compromise with the cartels if it cannot 
defeat them quickly and stop the wave of violence. 
The Administration's aid package does represent a substantial increase from the 
current aid level of $29.6 million a year, which is itself almost twice as 
large as the $15 million in assistance Washington provided to Colombia the 
previous year. And the bulk of the new equipment in Bush's plan will be 
delivered quickly, beginning within a few days. 
Ann B. Wrobleski, former assistant secretary of state for international 
narcotics matters, said the equipment pledged by the Administration fills 
significant gaps in the arsenal available to the Colombian government to battle 
the cocaine cartel. 
A 'Fairer' Fight 
"The Colombian security forces are among the best-equipped and best-led in 
Latin America to go up against the narcos, but they have been short on the kind 
of heavy equipment and the kind of firepower the President is giving them," she 
said. "It's got to make the fight a little fairer." 
At the same time, the aid package appears to stop short of the maximum effort 
the United States could make to underwrite an all-out assault on the cartels, 
especially an assault that struck all of their operations together. 
The military hardware the Administration will send to Colombia was drawn from a 
list of available equipment provided the White House on Thursday by the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff. 
The Pentagon, reflecting its longstanding ambivalence about involving military 
forces in the anti-drug effort, pointedly made no recommendations about which 
parts of the hardware would make the most effective tools in the drug fight. 
"The first premise was that all of this stuff was going to be operated by 
indigenous forces," said a senior defense official, referring to the Colombian 
military. "We're helping. We're not going to do their work for them." 
An active-duty U.S. Army colonel, who served as a defense attache in Latin 
America in the early 1980s, said that the Joint Chiefs' approach to the 
Colombia crisis was marked by "half-measures that won't work." 
'Very Unimaginative' 
"They're trying to have a risk-free operation, but there's no such animal," he 
said. 
And a recently retired Army specialist in counterterrorism and special 
operations called the Bush aid package "a very unimaginative approach." He 
suggested committing the Pentagon's most sophisticated intelligence-gathering 
gear, from AWACS surveillance planes to electronic eavesdroping ships, in order 
to have up-to-the-minute information on activities of the drug operations. 
He said, however, that a more effective response would almost certainly have to 
include U.S. forces in order to attack enough targets to cripple the drug 
barons. 
Colombian President Virgilio Barco Vargas already has ruled out accepting the 
support of U.S. troops, which Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh recently said the 
Administration would consider if requested by Colombian authorities. 
Barco, interviewed on ABC's "Prime Time Live" program Thursday night, said that 
Colombia needs more equipment to fight the cartels because more than 80% of the 
cocaine seized globally is taken in his country, and Colombia "is the most 
effective place to stop the supply of cocaine." 
On the same program, Ernesto Samper, who has replaced the assassinated Luis 
Carlos Galan as a leading Liberal Party presidential candidate, raised the 
possibility that Colombian authorities may consider negotiating with the 
cartels as an alternative to miliary confrontation. 
Little Leeway Seen 
"We have only three months, no more than three months, to stop the 
traffickers," Samper said. "If we can, we must find another way." And 
negotiations, he said, is "one of the ways." 
But a senior U.S. intelligence official, pointing out that negotiations between 
Colombian authorities and the cartels in the past had been to no avail, said 
the United States must press Colombia to keep the pressure on the cartels. 
"This is one democracy that is really trying to do something about the drug 
problem, and we can't let them down," he said. "And I don't think we will." 
One encouraging sign, said the official, is that the government's sweeping 
crackdown in the wake of Galan's death apparently took the cartels by complete 
surprise. He said that indicates that the cartels' influence in the government, 
generally secured through bribes and intimidation, had waned and that officials 
had been able to develop and implement a contingency plan of action against the 
cartels without their advance knowledge. 
Privately and publicly, Administration officials have emphasized that they 
believe the crackdown Barco authorized is the most effective ever mounted 
against the cartels. 
Times staff writers John M. Broder and Norman Kempster contributed to this 
story. 
