FREED HOSTAGE URGES TALKS TO HELP OTHERS; 
LEBANON: BRIAN KEENAN CALLS HIS ORDEAL "A . . . SLIDE INTO THE BOWELS OF 
ULTIMATE DESPAIR." 
Brian Keenan, who spent 4 1/2 years as a hostage in Lebanon, today called for 
negotiations to release others from a captivity he recalled as "a silent 
screaming slide into the bowels of ultimate despair." 
"It's time to talk. It's obviously time to talk. There is a willingness. Why 
not talk?" Keenan said at a news conference. 
Keenan, a native of Belfast, Northern Ireland, was released by his captors last 
week and handed over to Irish authorities in Damascus, Syria, on Saturday. He 
was released from the private Mater Hospital in Dublin this morning. 
Speaking slowly, sometimes pausing to avoid crying, Keenan talked at length 
about life in captivity. 
"Hostage is crucifying aloneness. There's a silent screaming slide into the 
bowels of ultimate despair," he said, reading from a handwritten statement. 
"Hostage is a man hanging by his fingernails over the edge of chaos and feeling 
his fingers slowly straightening." 
"Tiny, tiny cells, constant blindfolds, prolonged days in the dark, sometimes 
weeks without light, create kinds of insanity that drive men deep, deep into 
themselves," Keenan said. 
Keenan, who was teaching English in Beirut when he was kidnaped April 11, 1986, 
spoke with particular affection of British journalist John McCarthy, with whom 
he was held. 
"Other people one begins to look at with strange mistrustful apprehension, but 
the irrepressible wit that is the golden kernel of John coped ultimately and 
always emerged," he said. 
Jill Morrell, McCarthy's friend who was seated behind Keenan, broke into a 
bright smile as Keenan talked about his fellow captive. 
Keenan described American hostage Terry Anderson, the chief Middle East 
correspondent of the Associated Press, as "a bulky and belligerent 
newspaperman" with a voracious appetite for intellectual conversations. 
Thomas Sutherland, a Scottish-born American who was acting dean of agriculture 
at the American University of Beirut, gave the other hostages long lectures on 
genetics, animal husbandry and his beloved 27-year-old Volvo car, Keenan said. 
Keenan said Anderson suffered from a digestive ailment and was often in pain, 
but he took it stoically "for in truth all pain and illness was generally 
dismissed by our keepers, though they would eventually supply us with some form 
of antibiotics." 
