MAGELLAN HAS JPL SCRATCHING FOR ANSWERS 
To perplexed scientists Thursday, the Magellan spacecraft looked a little like 
a wayward waif, trying to ingratiate itself with an angry parent. Computer data 
sent back by the troubled Venus Radar Mapper revealed that after it lost 
contact with ground controllers Tuesday night, it fired its small jets over and 
over, trying to compensate for various problems, real or imagined. 
"It got in trouble nine times," said Steve Wall, a scientist at the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. "Or at least 
it thought it was in trouble." 
As a result, the spacecraft burned a "tremendous amount" of fuel -- more than 
five pounds -- as it went through nine different maneuvers. That loss of fuel 
poses some concern for engineers at the Pasadena lab, who expect the craft to 
remain in orbit around Venus for up to two years, but Wall said Magellan still 
has plenty of fuel aboard for the remainder of its assignment. 
"It's not an immediate problem," he said. The craft, which carries a radar 
camera capable of peering through the dense clouds that hide the surface of the 
planet, had 293 pounds of fuel aboard when it was launched toward Venus from 
the space shuttle last year. 
What appeared to be the biggest problem Thursday was figuring out what went 
wrong after the spacecraft reached Venus. Magellan has broken communications 
with controllers twice since it went into orbit around the Earth's sister 
planet earlier this month -- on Aug. 16 for 14 hours, and again on Tuesday for 
17 hours. 
Engineers had hoped that they were dealing with a single problem that caused 
both shutdowns, but Wall said Thursday that does not appear to be the case. 
The most recent loss of communications, during which Magellan went through nine 
separate maneuvers, had "a lot of different earmarks" than the earlier one, 
Wall said. 
That suggests that the spacecraft, cornerstone of a $750-million Venus mission, 
may have more than one problem. 
Engineers and scientists at JPL met all day Thursday, sorting through 
information that Magellan is sending back "very slowly," Wall said. 
The good news was that the spacecraft itself seems to be healthy. 
The bad news was that no one could figure out why it breaks its communications 
link with the Earth and assumes a "safe mode" designed to ensure that its solar 
energy panels point toward the sun and its antenna sweeps past the Earth 
periodically, making it possible for engineers at JPL to regain control. 
Officials said they will take whatever time is needed to be sure they 
understand Magellan's problems before ordering the spacecraft to begin its 
comprehensive mapping of Venus. They had planned to begin that this weekend, 
but that is likely to slide several days because of the continued problems with 
the craft. 
