CATHOLIC BISHOPS' REACTION TO SUPREME COURT RULING; 
LEGISLATURES URGED TO RESTRICT ABORTIONS 
Roman Catholic bishops have called on state legislatures to restrict abortions 
and cautioned abortion opponents about the dangers of internal political 
bickering. 
In a lengthy statement issued by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops' 
Committee for Pro-life Activities, the hierarchy also said the abortion debate 
is being diverted from the issue of the "humanity of the unborn child" to 
questions of a woman's privacy and personal autonomy. 
The statement, "An Opportunity to Defend Life," is the church's first major 
analysis of the abortion situation following the U.S. Supreme Court's July 3 
ruling upholding a series of state restrictions on legal abortion while 
ostensibly leaving untouched the key 1973 decision legalizing most abortions. 
"The new direction taken by the court is cause for hope," said the committee, 
headed by Cardinal Joseph Bernardin of Chicago. "There is promise in the 
court's invitation to states to establish new legislative limits on abortion." 
At the same time, however, the bishops noted that the court "did not fully 
recognize the right to life of unborn children," and said the church must press 
its argument that "the evil of abortion begins with the humanity of the unborn 
child." 
'Central Truth' 
"This central truth is often obscured in the current debate, where abortion is 
presented solely as an exercise of personal autonomy or as a conflict between 
state prerogatives and the individual right of privacy," the bishops' statement 
said. 
In the area of public policy, the bishops said the opportunities opened up for 
states to restrict abortion by the court's Webster ruling "are limited and 
complex." 
But it urged legislators to push for short-term goals such as placing limits on 
direct and indirect government funding of abortion, parental notification laws 
and efforts to delay and make "hasty" abortions more difficult to obtain. 
"We are committed to establishing constitutional protection for the unborn 
child to the maximum degree possible," the bishops said. "Therefore, we urge 
legislators, especially Catholics, to help build a consensus in our society in 
support of the unborn child's right to life." 
The bishops also took note of the deep divisions that have sometimes hampered 
the anti-abortion movement's efforts. The bishops, led by Bernardin, have 
sought to place their opposition to legal abortion in a context of "respect for 
life" that also includes opposition to the death penalty, support for 
anti-poverty social welfare programs and opposition to the U.S. nuclear arms 
buildup. 
Strategy Rejected 
Conservative abortion opponents, however, reject the bishops' strategy of 
making abortion a part of such a "seamless garment." 
"The movement in support of abortion on demand is united in its agenda," the 
bishops' statement said. "Pro-life Americans must not give their adversaries an 
easy victory by launching attacks on each other over questions of political 
strategy." 
The bishops also warned that the post-Webster debate could lead to a new wave 
of anti-Catholicism in the nation. 
"Anti-Catholic sentiment has never been entirely absent from the pro-abortion 
campaign," the bishops said, "but abortion rights advocates apparently seek to 
revivify it now that the efforts of Catholics and other pro-life citizens have 
begun to bear fruit." 
But the bishops said they "do not intend to be ruled out of this or any social 
debate by spurious interpretations of the 1st Amendment" that claim that the 
church is seeking to establish and impose its theological views of the fetus on 
the rest of the nation. 
