COMMUNITY; 
EDITOR ALBERTO DIAZ EULOGIZED AS A MAN WHO CARED, HELPED OTHERS 
Al Diaz was a typical community newspaper editor. 
He doled out advice to politicos and strangers who sought it. He expressed 
outrage through his columns when he thought that his community was getting a 
raw deal. He occasionally dipped into his own pockets to help out a reader with 
a hard-luck story. And he encouraged young Chicanos, who never thought that 
they could make it into journalism, to give it a try. 
It was no wonder that Alberto C. Diaz, who died July 28, was dubbed "Mr. East 
L.A." in the 1950s by others who marveled at his knowledge and involvement of 
the area. 
"He explained East Los Angeles to itself and to the outside world," said Felix 
Gutierrez, a newly appointed dean at USC. Gutierrez, a former journalism 
educator, called Diaz an important influence in his own media career and said, 
"He helped me get my first scholarship when I entered college." 
Such was the tenor of the tributes to Diaz, who died of heart failure and 
complications from Parkinson's disease. Diaz, 72, was the longtime editor and 
publisher of two Eastside weekly newspapers -- the Belvedere Citizen and the 
Eastside Journal. 
Diaz was affectionately recalled as a man who deeply cared for his community at 
a time when the overwhelmingly Mexican-American area carried little political 
or economic clout. 
"People would come into his office with some problem," said David Barron, a 
communications representative for Southern California Edison Co., who got his 
start in the media under Diaz's tutelage. "He'd make a few calls and get things 
squared away." 
Diaz did more than that for countless hundreds over the years from his office 
on East 1st Street. 
"His big thing was the annual Christmas party that he helped put on," said 
Sarah Dorado, a former colleague and current classified advertising manager for 
the two newspapers. "He always looked forward to it. He loved kids." 
Diaz turned out to be a valuable source for politicians, other newspapermen and 
others who wanted to understand the Eastside. 
"All the politicians running for office came through to see him -- John 
Kennedy, Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon," Barron said. 
But his insights were, perhaps, on best display in his column, called "The 
Beachcomber." 
"Everybody waited for his column to come out and figure out what was really 
going on in East L.A.," said longtime Eastside leader Sal Lopez, who met Diaz 
while the two were students at Garfield High School in the mid-1930s. "He would 
cover the good and the bad." 
In the 1960s, while political dissent over the Vietnam War divided the country, 
Gutierrez said Diaz gave coverage to those who opposed the war even though he 
disagreed with them. 
Diaz, whose chronicling of Eastside life spanned more than 40 years, received 
numerous honors and appointments. He was a former president of the Belvedere 
Rotary Club and the Greater Los Angeles Press Club. In 1962, he was named to 
the state Recreation Commission and two years later to the state Athletic 
Commission. 
He was recognized by the California Chicano News Media Assn. in 1983 for being 
among the first prominent Latino figures in Los Angeles journalism. But perhaps 
his greatest honor was in 1981, when county supervisors renamed a portion of 
Belvedere Park after him -- the Alberto C. Diaz Plaza. 
In later years, Diaz, who is survived by his wife, mother, a brother, three 
sons and three grandchildren, was slowed by diabetes and other afflictions. He 
was blind at the time of his death. 
"But he used to say, 'I may be blind but I haven't lost my vision,' " Gutierrez 
said. 
