FROM MEAN STREETS TO STAGE CENTER; 
YOUTH IN VENICE'S OAKWOOD GHETTO BASE PRODUCTIONS OF THE PEARL WHITE THEATRE ON 
THEIR OWN EXPERIENCES 
The sudden violence was all too typical for hot Westside nights. Shoreline 
Crips, wearing trademark blue bandannas and trench coats, were stomping and 
beating their rivals with lethal precision. 
Blood erupted from shattered mouths. An onlooker shouted, "Stop it!" 
The gang members were performing in a play titled "Boredom" in an auditorium at 
Santa Monica Hospital. The realistic blood was courtesy of the show's sponsor, 
actor Beau Bridges, who watched the action along with an audience of students, 
police, doctors, social workers, nurses and, in the auditorium's last row, the 
Rolling 60s -- deadly foes of the Shoreline Crips. 
The Rolling 60s did not applaud. Instead, their hands came together in gang 
signs, challenging the on-stage Crips to real combat. But the performers 
ignored the challenge and improvised a rap dance in response to the taunts. 
"Instantaneously, they turned the anger into music and dance," said director 
Melvyn Hayward. "I was never so proud of anything in my life." 
 -- -- 
"One time!" 
On a recent evening, this warning cry, street slang for police, alerted a 
cluster of crack dealers and users to flee an alley off Washington Boulevard in 
Venice. A squad car glided by, and those who fled soon returned. Music echoed 
faintly from the Venice Teen Post. At the nearby Pearl White Theatre for the 
Performing Arts, a storefront on Westminster Avenue, two 13 year-olds -- David 
Boyd and Sean Jones -- parked their bicycles and called out to Hayward. 
"Melvyn!? Can we bring our bikes in?" 
Hayward, co-director of the theater where Venice youth are encouraged to write, 
sing, dance and act in productions based on their experiences, signaled for the 
teen-agers to come in. Then the burly 40-year-old, dressed in torn sweats, 
resumed his passionate explanation of how "Boredom," which had been staged just 
a few weeks before in Santa Monica, was created. 
"Our themes are community related: AIDS, drug abuse, curfew, gangbanging, the 
police. We always do them first for our community and our performances are 
always free. We rehearse three or four months. I know I take a lot from the 
kids, but then they give so much back to the community. And when the community 
sees them, people start feeling self respect." 
During the course of an interview, Hayward used the word "respect" many times. 
"People out there, they respect the Pearl White Theatre. They don't smoke in 
here, they don't drink in here, they don't come in loaded." 
The Pearl White Theatre for the Performing Arts is an imposing title for the 
narrow, cluttered storefront on the edge of Venice's Oakwood ghetto. The slab 
concrete floor is covered by two shag carpets. Third-hand furniture, sports 
trophies and photographs of Martin Luther King Jr. and Jesse Jackson help make 
it a home to local youth. The number of teen-agers who participate varies from 
production to production. 
"We don't have any money," Hayward said. "Everything we got was donated. Here 
we are a theater group, and we don't even have a camera. We pay for our own 
lights, plumbing. We got mismatched broken furniture. We use beat-up P.A. 
systems. No microphones. We don't have anything. The only thing we have is us." 
Hayward and his actors rehearse in the storefront, but the plays are staged at 
various schools and institutions -- Cal State Los Angeles, Venice High School, 
Santa Monica Hospital -- that invite the company to perform. 
Despite the unpretentious style and crude furnishings, the Pearl White Theatre 
is as accomplished as the average community theater. Hayward and his 
co-director, former gang member Robert Shipp, are creating a new play, "Youth 
and Police," and preparing a performance for today's sixth annual Venice Summer 
Arts and Crafts Festival, from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on West Washington Boulevard 
between Venice Boulevard and Westminster. 
The company, which is open to anyone who walks in off the street, even has a 
theatrical angel. Co-founder Beau Bridges, who attended Venice High School, 
donates equipment and rent money and attends performances. He also has acted in 
and directed company productions. 
Bridges says he's kept a low profile "because I wanted the young people to have 
a body of work that would speak for themselves. I've stayed away from public 
relations because I think young people who are not aware of the media can get 
swept away by it. I wanted it to be a community-oriented organization that 
could generate its own power." 
Said Hayward, "Beau don't try to chump us. Beau is real. For a white dude he's 
a coldblooded dude. We call him Bo Diddley. He is real and he love us with his 
heart." 
Among the company's "graduates" are Mark Booker, who appeared in "Colors," and 
John Bay who acted in "Weeds." 
"There is so much beautiful talent in this community," Hayward said, "and I aim 
to find it and let it shine." 
During the day, Hayward works as a youth counselor at the Didi Hirsch Community 
Mental Health Center in Culver City. But he's most eloquent about the Pearl 
White Theatre. 
"We ain't gonna ever use no professional actors," he said. "In Venice we're on 
a stage everyday. We use what we got: ourselves. We get kids right out of the 
community who have had these things happen to them. And that way we get first 
hand information." 
The productions are meant to be therapeutic and educational. For example, 
Hayward said, when a curfew was being enforced in Venice, many of the 
neighborhood children didn't understand the law. Because some were raising 
themselves while avoiding drug-addicted parents, it made sense to stay out as 
late as possible. The streets, he said, were safer than home. 
"So we did a skit on curfew with the police department," Hayward said, adding 
that officers served as consultants to the production. "I even played one of 
the officers. This explained to the kids what it is the police are talking 
about when they say curfew." 
It also illustrated to the police why the children might disregard the curfew. 
Capt. John Wilbanks, commander of the LAPD's Pacific area, which takes in 
Venice, said that "generally the program is a real positive thing." 
 -- -- 
Hayward says the Pearl White storefront space gives kids a place to "hang" 
besides Oakwood's crack-dealing corner of 5th Street and Broadway Avenue. 
"This is a community, an extended family," he said. "Everybody knows everybody. 
"All you hear about on the radio and read in the newspapers is crime. But a lot 
of positive things happen here. Pearl White, 
that's the most powerful person in Venice. I don't care if you meet a million 
people, you ain't met no one until you've met Pearl White." 
White, 70, is responsible for many community programs in Oakwood. While 
recovering from cancer in her mid-30s, White says she "dedicated myself to 
working for others. I guess I figured I didn't have much time left." 
White helped organize Venice's first Neighborhood Watch programs and met 
Hayward while working as a volunteer counselor at the Venice Drug Coalition. 
The theater that bears her name was started in 1978. (Hayward joined the group 
in 1982.) 
White continues to work with the theater and, in fact, played the title role in 
a holiday play called "Merry Christmas Sarah," saying: "They just put me in 
there even though I never had an acting lesson in my life." 
But White and her friends can't get around as they once did, which is where 
Hayward comes in. "Melvyn is our legs -- we can't get around like Melvyn." 
Ironically, Hayward does it all without a driver's license. Indeed, he has 
never driven in his life, preferring to pedal throughout the Oakwood community 
on a bicycle. "I could parachute for the 82nd Airborne and play football for 
Santa Monica Junior College, but my knees start knocking the moment I get 
behind the wheel of a car," he said. 
Hayward "networks" the bureaucratic jungle as easily as he maneuvers the 
streets of Oakwood. He works with various organizations including the Los 
Angeles Police Commission and county Supervisor Deane Dana's office. Marjorie 
Alatorre of the Venice Chamber of Commerce said: "Melvyn is trying to change 
the negative attitudes in the community. He's extremely dedicated to saving our 
kids. He's street smart and a very good role model." 
Hayward said: "You got to have a good relationship with the police. I work with 
all the people in the community. The police get mad cause I work with the ones 
they're after, but somebody got to deal with them, somebody got to reach them 
before they either get killed or end up killing one of the police officers. 
When people give up on you in the Oakwood area, I'm always around." 
Pacing the rehearsal room, he turned to 13-year-old Sean Jones and said, "I'm 
telling you, Sean, you can do anything you want to do. You can follow the one 
that's doing the wrong stuff or you can follow the right man. I always ran by 
myself." 
"I come in here because it's something to do," Sean said. "Sometimes we talk 
and sometimes we sit around and work on a play. Now we're working on a gang 
play and a play about jobs." 
Hayward grins and says: "I'm a big 40-year-old kid. The Lord guides my light. 
There seems to be a shield around me. People trust me, that's the key. I don't 
try to tell them how to run their life. I try to help them when they're at 
their lowest point. That's what you should do -- help a man when he's down." 
