DOW PAYS FINE OVER STATE CITATIONS; 
FIRM LACKED PERMITS TO BURN, STORE HAZARDOUS WASTES 
Dow Chemical Co. USA has paid a $117,000 fine after being cited for breaking 
state health laws by burning and storing hazardous waste at its Torrance 
polystyrene manufacturing plant. 
The March 31 citation also charged Dow with 11 other violations, including 
failure to label hazardous waste containers properly and failure to make 
emergency arrangements with Torrance Police and Fire departments. 
The bulk of the fine was for treating hazardous waste without the proper permit 
and for the storage of wastes in Torrance that came from a Dow facility in Long 
Beach, officials said. 
Fred Smalling, Dow manager of safety and environmental affairs, said the 
company maintains that its permit did allow burning of waste, but Dow has paid 
the fine rather than get entangled in litigation. 
"At no time do we feel that we improperly handled our hazardous waste or 
endangered the surrounding public," he said. 
2 Major Violations 
State Department of Health Services spokesman Jim Marxen said the violations 
did not directly threaten public health. He said the two major violations 
involved failure to have the proper permits for what Dow was doing. 
With the approval of the state Department of Health Services, Dow is continuing 
to burn waste at its Torrance plant in the 300 block of Crenshaw Boulevard 
while applying for a permit that specifically allows incinerating some of the 
wastes produced there. 
The incineration issue concerns hydrocarbon wastes, including styrene, 
partially polymerized styrene and ethyl benzene, which are produced during the 
manufacturing of polystyrene. Smalling said the plant makes "several hundred 
million pounds" of polystyrene a year, commonly used in packing material and 
food containers. 
He said the waste from the polystyrene process, which can be as much as 576,000 
pounds a year, has been burned to heat a plant boiler ever since the Department 
of Health Services issued a permit to Dow in 1983 covering the processes at the 
plant. The permit states that "recovered hydrocarbons" would be used as boiler 
fuel. 
Wastes Burned 
But during an inspection on Feb. 16, 1989, health services inspector Teena 
Suzuki noticed that the wastes were burned. Suzuki said she considered Dow's 
burning of the waste chemicals "a form of treatment," for which Dow did not 
have a permit. She cited Dow for it. 
Passed Inspection 
However, Smalling said that the plant passed a health services inspection in 
1987 without any similar citation and that it has complied with limitations on 
air pollution imposed by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. 
Suzuki said Dow officials had pointed to the earlier inspection and the 
language of the 1983 permit when informed that a citation was going to be 
issued. 
Marxen said treatment must be specifically addressed in a permit. "If Dow had 
wanted treatment, and we had agreed to treatment, it would have said 
'treatment.' We have nothing against the boiler unit" but it needs a treatment 
permit and the inspections that would follow, he said. 
Asked why the Department of Health Services had not cited Dow after its 1987 
inspection, Suzuki said: "Some inspectors will see things that others don't." 
She added that the 1983 permit may have been faulty in including the language 
that Dow cited as authority to burn hazardous waste. 
The storage issue arises because Dow's permit only allows the company to store 
hazardous waste at the Torrance facility that is generated there. 
Material Shipped 
Smalling acknowledged that Dow had been storing hazardous waste generated at a 
Dow bulk liquid storage terminal in Long Beach. That material was not burned in 
Torrance but was shipped, along with other waste chemicals from the Torrance 
operation, to Louisiana or Texas where Dow has incinerator plants. 
The hazardous waste from the Long Beach facility consisted mainly of used 
filter cartridges, samples, styrene, ethyl benzene, partially polymerized 
styrene, acetone and methylene chloride. 
Smalling said Dow used the Torrance plant for storage because "the Long Beach 
terminal is an arm of this operation. We looked at it as a satellite site." 
Suzuki said: "They misinterpreted the permit on the storage." 
Smalling said Dow now sends waste directly from the Long Beach terminal to its 
incineration plants in Louisiana and Texas. 
"In the interests of resolving the problem and getting on with correcting any 
deficiencies we may have had and assuring that the public health and welfare is 
maintained in the most efficient manner, we are going ahead with the 
corrections," Smalling said. 
Health agency officials said Dow was cited for the 11 other infractions because 
Dow failed to keep adequate records or file with local public safety officials 
information that would enable them to handle an emergency at the plant. 
