ROSE ACCUSER ADMITS GIVING INFORMATION TO FEDS ON TAX EVASION 
One of Pete Rose's chief accusers in baseball's gambling probe said today that 
he has given federal investigators testimony directly linking the Cincinnati 
manager to a conspiracy to evade income taxes. 
Paul G. Janszen, his voice cracking at times and tears welling in his eyes 
during a news conference, repeated many of the allegations against Rose, who is 
accused of betting on his own team. 
For the first time, Janszen acknowledged providing FBI and Internal Revenue 
Service agents information that could subject Rose to an indictment for 
allegedly conspiring to defraud the U.S. government. 
Meanwhile, in Columbus, Ohio, legal maneuvering continued as baseball's lawyers 
asked a federal judge to compel Rose lawyer Roger J. Makley to answer questions 
regarding Rose's legal defense. 
Janszen, who claims to have run Rose's bets to bookmakers: 
* Said he saw documents indicating that Rose bet on baseball throughout the 
1988 season. 
* Denied he prompted baseball's investigation, saying he was contacted by the 
commissioner's office after someone else gave information. 
* Repeated that Rose never, to Janszen's knowledge, became involved in cocaine 
deals, despite allegedly asking how much he could make on them. 
* Repeated that Reds pitcher John Franco knew about Rose's debts with a Staten 
Island bookmaker nicknamed Val. 
* Said other Reds players, whom he would not identify, knew of Rose's alleged 
gambling before charges became public. 
* Said Rose lawyer Rueven J. Katz knew of the alleged gambling problems as 
early as March, 1988. 
Janszen served four months in a halfway house after pleading guilty to 
falsifying his 1985 federal income tax return and failing to report income from 
steroid sales. 
"I don't know if he'll ever understand it, but in a weird way, I feel I'm 
helping him," Janszen said. "If I have one regret, that regret is that I was 
not man enough to walk up to Pete Rose . . . to say to him: 'That's it. No 
more.' " 
'Not Gonna Get Me' 
Janszen said that each time he brought up the dangers to Rose, the Reds manager 
said: "They're not gonna get me. They can't get me. I have good attorneys." 
Rose has said that when he learned Janszen was involved in drug-dealing, he 
stopped associating with him. Janszen denied that, saying: "Pete Rose knew that 
from the beginning." 
Janszen, who began cooperating with the government in March, 1988, and with 
baseball this February, claimed Rose's alleged gambling was well known in the 
Reds clubhouse. 
"There's a lot of players who probably knew, and I knew of some that had direct 
knowledge of what was going on," he said. "It's kind of difficult for them to 
step forward, don't you think, to take Paul Janszen's side against the Reds." 
