COLUMN LEFT; 
NEGOTIATION IS THE PATH OF COURAGE; 
BUSH'S HARD STANCE MAY TAKE A STAGGERING, UNNECESSARY TOLL. 
Judged by his public actions -- and there has been not the slightest intimation 
of any differing private diplomacy -- President Bush has launched his country 
on a path of folly and peril. 
It was easy to see why he rushed with such eagerness into this vast deployment 
of national resources. Aside from the gulf crisis itself, the savings and loan 
scandal was exploding, with First Son Neil Bush a conspicuous part of the 
political fallout. The economy was sliding into recession, with 10 years' worth 
of fiscal imprudence waiting to be exploited by the Democrats. Bush's own 
standing in the polls was beginning to plunge. 
So the President leaped ahead of the entirely proper and well-handled move to 
establish U.N. sanctions against Saddam Hussein's seizure of Kuwait, and 
hijacked the crisis. Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney was sent speeding to 
Saudi Arabia. He flourished satellite photographs at King Fahd, showing Iraqi 
tanks rolling toward the Saudi border. But a Pentagon source familiar with 
Cheney's materials says the satellite photos vouchsafed the king were slightly 
out of date. Photographs of more recent vintage revealed that the Iraqi tanks 
had stopped short of the border and were digging in. There was no indication 
that Hussein was embarked on an attack on Saudi Arabia. 
By this time, however, Bush seemed to be studying no history but the wartime 
speeches of Churchill and Eisenhower. Twice the number of Marines that landed 
at Inchon have been dispatched to the region, and staggering loads of supplies 
freighted eastward. 
What has been the consequence thus far? It is not clear how much damage has 
been done to Iraq, but the economies of the advanced industrial nations are 
reeling. The West is essentially blockading itself; the soaring price of oil 
and threat of war are dragging fragile economies down. 
An attack by the United States on Iraqi-occupied Kuwait would turn disaster 
into catastrophe. Refugee Kuwaitis say that Iraqi military engineers have wired 
dozens of public buildings with explosives. What was not destroyed by U.S. 
bombs and artillery would be reduced to rubble by the Iraqis themselves. In 
order to "save" cheap energy, Bush would have smashed any prospect of stable 
oil prices for a long time to come. The world could slump into long-term 
economic depression. This is aside from the human toll. Iraq is not Grenada or 
Panama. Already U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia are suffering from heat 
prostration. The fine Saudi sand is ruinous to machinery. U.S. carriers dare 
not venture into the exposed upper gulf. There are the makings of a prolonged 
and bloody military engagement. 
Such are the very obvious consequences of the present U.S. stance, whose aim, 
as journalists of Bush's entourage are stressing, is to deal Hussein a punitive 
and hopefully fatal blow. Any thought of engaging diplomatically with Hussein 
is shoved aside. 
Bush's strategy is not only profoundly foolish but entirely unnecessary. It has 
been clear for nearly two weeks that Saddam Hussein is well aware of his 
miscalculation in grabbing Kuwait and would like a face-saving means of 
retreat. His own negotiating proposal is that an Iraqi pull-out from Kuwait be 
linked to other territorial and political conflicts in the Middle East. He was 
referring to Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the annexation 
of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, as well as to Syria's occupation of 
Lebanon. 
Even though Secretary of State James A. Baker III seems to have disappeared 
from view, it cannot be beyond the wit of U.S. diplomacy to demand of Hussein 
that he immediately withdraw his forces from Kuwait, appending to this demand 
some generalized language about the possibility of future free elections in 
Kuwait and a conference on longstanding points at issue in the region. Hussein 
would jump at the chance to get out of the hole he has landed himself in. 
It's obvious who is alarmed by the prospect of any such conference. At least 
since 1973, Israel and its supporters in the United States have campaigned 
against such a conclave. Men such as Henry Kissinger, William Safire and A.M. 
Rosenthal -- all particularly identified with Israel's interests -- are today 
rabid in their calls for swift military action against Iraq. As a 
counterweight, conservatives such as Patrick Buchanan have flatly denounced 
Bush's strategy as folly. Aside from Zbigniev Brzezinski's sensible calls for 
prudence, the old Cold-War liberals have been foursquare for war. A Tonkin Gulf 
incident is just around the corner. 
In these tense days, a courageous course is not to tub-thump for war but to 
negotiate a settlement and watch the Iraqi tanks roll peaceably back to 
Baghdad. 
