CHRYSLER PLANS SMALL PRICE INCREASE ON ITS '91 MODELS 
Chrysler Corp.'s 1991 cars, Jeeps and minivans will cost a modest 0.9% more 
than this year's vehicles, a smaller increase than is expected by the other two 
Big Three auto makers, an executive said Thursday. 
But Chrysler wants to wean buyers from such incentives as cash rebates and 
low-interest financing that have added more than $1,000 to the company's cost 
for each of its cars and trucks. 
Last week, Ford Motor Co. said average prices for its 1991 cars would be 3.2% 
higher than current models. Prices for Ford's 1991 trucks will rise an average 
of 3.6%. 
General Motors Corp. has not released prices for the full line of its 1991 
vehicles. 
Chrysler will lower by $1,100 the sticker price on the Dodge Monaco LE. The 
Dodge Dynasty will cost $560 more than this year. 
All the comparisons involve comparably equipped vehicles. Popular optional 
equipment on one model year's vehicles often is included as standard equipment 
on later models. That boosts the price and makes year-to-year comparisons 
difficult. 
Also muddying year-to-year comparisons is padding the auto maker builds into 
prices for incentives. 
"We've allowed allowances for rebates and incentives in the '91 prices," 
Chrysler Motors Chairman Bennett Bidwell said Thursday. "We would hope to 
de-escalate the use of incentives." 
"We're trying to put ourselves in a very competitive price position versus the 
rest of the industry to increase our market share," Bidwell said. 
However, he added, "No one, certainly not Chrysler, is going to turn this 
parade around." 
During the past several years, each of the Big Three has offered a variety of 
incentives, mostly cash rebates and low-interest financing, to help sell its 
vehicles. 
The cost of incentives comes directly out of profits. During the past two 
weeks, each of the Big Three has blamed incentives for driving down their 
second-quarter earnings. 
Chrysler reported it made $180 million during the period, 47.2% less than last 
year. Chairman Lee A. Iacocca said profit would have been up if Chrysler had 
avoided paying consumers to buy cars and trucks. 
GM, which reported a 40% profit decline, and Ford, whose profit fell 45%, said 
they also were hurt by the cost of incentives, as well as by economic problems 
in Brazil. 
GM won't say precisely how much it spent on incentives during the quarter. Ford 
put its average cost at $1,050 per vehicle. 
Like its competitors, Chrysler boosted prices on its 1990 models earlier this 
year. Chrysler's tentative prices announced Thursday were 1.3% higher than 1990 
prices before the earlier increase. 
