SUMMER SQUALL IS 'VERY SHARP' FOR $300,000 DERBY 
Preakness winner Summer Squall rested this summer and is rated by trainers as 
"very sharp now" for Monday's $300,000 Pennsylvania Derby. 
Summer Squall is the pre-race favorite against 12 3-year-old challengers and is 
eager to add to his $1.3 million earnings with his ninth victory. 
"I'm looking for a win," said W. Cothran Campbell, who manages the bay colt for 
a 28-person partnership. "He'll be ready to go a mile and an eighth first time 
out." 
Others in the race are Blackhawk's Ghost, Challenge My Duty, Chas' Whim, Dr. 
Bobby A., It's Always You, Mr. Nasty, My Other Brother, Runaway Stream, Senator 
To Be, Sports View, Tees Prospect and Zalipour. 
Kentucky-bred Summer Squall was shipped here from Saratoga, N.Y., on Monday and 
has been tuning up for the Pennsylvania Derby on Labor Day since then. 
"The horse has had the summer off, but he's very sharp now," Campbell said. "He 
has grown some and gained weight. We couldn't be more pleased with the colt. He 
has trained beautifully at Saratoga. 
"Summer Squall is an exciting horse to watch, and we're anxious to run him in 
Pennsylvania after being off since mid-May." 
Trainer Neil Howard also said the horse is ready and eager after overcoming a 
hairline fracture to his cannon bone, which he suffered last year. At one 
point, there was concern that Summer Squall's career was in jeopardy. 
This year, after winning the Jim Beam and Blue Grass Stakes, he finished second 
to Unbridled in the Kentucky Derby, running what Howard called "a good race." 
"He got a head in front at the quarter pole, but as he turned into the stretch, 
the roar of the Derby crowd started him," Howard said. "He lost his 
concentration, and it took him until the wire to start running again. 
"After the Derby he trained like he was on a mission. We couldn't hold him on 
the ground at Pimlico. He was sitting perfect in the Preakness until the 
quarter pole. Then, it got tight at the head of the stretch, and the tighter it 
got the better he liked it." 
