DESIGNERS RESORT TO THE '60S; 
FASHION: SILHOUETTES FOR THE 1991 SEASON RECALL FLOATING TRAPEZE, EMPIRE-WAIST 
DRESSES. EVEN UNITARDS ARE GIVEN A '60S FLAVOR BY WIDE, HIP-HUGGER BELTS. 
Los Angeles women's wear designers are loosening up for the 1991 resort season. 
That much was apparent in fashion shows hosted last weekend by the California 
Mart, the wholesale shopping center in downtown Los Angeles. 
Except for a few skinny little suits, mummy-tight clothes are being edged out 
by swinging '60s-shaped ensembles. Trapeze, A-line and baby-doll shapes are in. 
Women who wax nostalgic for the decade might also welcome the return of dresses 
and suits with geometric graphics, Pucci-like prints or hippy flowers. 
More baby boomer reveries of their wonder years take the shape of teased 
hairdos. Chin-length bobs, long-haired flips and Audrey Hepburnesque, 
restrained beehives are back. So are false eyelashes, heavy eye liner and 
frosted pink lips. 
At several shows, silhouettes recalled floating trapeze and Empire-waist 
dresses; flyaway vests; short, James Bond trench coats, and Hugh Hefneresque 
pajama sets. Newer were the very '90s unitards and body suits given a '60s 
flavor by wide, hip-hugging belts. O-rings, plastic rings centered at the 
breast bone to anchor fabric, are also popping up. Designers Magia, Hot Lava 
and Saelee are among those using them for their cruise/resort wear. 
Flashes of bare skin, free of '60s-nostalgic tattoos, crop up everywhere. Upper 
arms are bare to the shoulder in every designer's collection. Halter tops, as 
well as circular and triangular cutouts across the bodice, are featured on 
jackets and tops. 
Hoda Meysami seems particularly fond of circular shapes. In her very '60s 
signature collection, Meysami appliques huge navy, brown and white polka dots 
on her trapeze dresses. 
Knitwear -- especially the Lycra/spandex fabric blends popular this summer -- 
takes a back seat to wovens, except for a smattering of Pucci-like prints shown 
by Hot Lava and Roberto Robledo. These look as if they've been lifted out of a 
"Laugh In" rerun. Linen, crepe, chiffon, cotton and other floating fabrics take 
on fluid shapes with Marie Antoinette-like fichu collars on jackets. 
Some of the most wearable looks in the new resort collections are the Audrey 
Hepburn-inspired dresses and suits. Sleeveless linen chemise styles that graze 
the knee round out almost every resort collection. Among the best are the wispy 
confections of Holly Sharp, who uses muted shades of butter, rose and mint. 
Cynthia Steffe, the only New York designer featured Sunday night at the 
Biltmore, also showcases chemises. Hers are less fitted and shorter (mid-thigh) 
than most other chemises shown but were fresh nonetheless. 
Perhaps the newest revived look is the baby doll, worn as either a top over 
leggings or as a dress with bare legs and teamed with platform-heel shoes. The 
baby doll look is made of lingerie-sheer chiffon prints or more modest solids. 
Junior boutiques are already carrying baby doll tops this summer, but not 
everyone is sure the look is destined for a long life. 
Vanessa Klopmeyer, market representative for Directives West, a store buying 
service, calls it a "questionable trend at best." 
The retro tribute to a past decade also showcased relevant details. Dainty 
covered buttons, minimalist shapes with darts, "op art" printed scarves and 
hat-and-glove ensembles are just a few of the accessory must-haves for fashion 
plates. 
Small bags with straps short enough to swing flirtatiously are another 
must-have. Triple-strand pearls, slightly smaller than those worn by First Lady 
Barbara Bush, are an au courant extra. 
Interestingly, denim didn't make an appearance during the Mart's resort shows. 
Likewise, all but designer Roberto Robledo left bell bottoms inside the '60s 
time capsule. 
Most of these resort collections will be in stores by Thanksgiving. The term 
resort -- used interchangeably with "cruise" by swimwear companies and "spa" by 
New York's young spirited designer, Isaac Mizrahi -- once signified clothing 
created exclusively for winter vacations, purchased primarily by the jet set 
and sold out of stores long before most people even thought about their spring 
or summer wardrobe. 
For some, resort will forever suggest the well-to-do. But lately, the clothes 
have become more directional, giving strong hints of where fashion is going for 
the spring-summer season that follows. 
What the models wore down the runway in last weekend's shows was far more 
fashion-forward than the once-predictable array of nautical looks associated 
with winter vacations in warm climates. 
Designers like Mizrahi say they use resort lines to flesh out concepts for 
future seasons. "Stores are not only able to tell what will sell during the 
spring, they will also be able to tell what their customer wants for summer," 
Klopmeyer says. "What they will find here are creative, individual designers 
who are not afraid to do their own thing." 
The most individual definition of the term "resort" comes from designer Tina 
Hagen. She sees it as a time of creative cleansing. 
"The season is a way to put the heaviness of fall behind you," says Hagen, "so 
you can concentrate on fun and the newness it will bring for spring." 
