BRACING FOR AN OIL SHOCK; 
OIL COMPANIES ; 
NATION'S FIRMS SCRAMBLE AMID BAN ON IMPORTS 
President Bush's order banning imports of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil threw the U.S. 
oil industry into turmoil Friday, and refiners were scrambling to figure out 
just how the order would affect their operations. 
* For some oil companies, the embargo meant a frantic search for alternative 
supplies of crude oil on world markets as oil prices shot up on spot markets. 
* For others, it meant cutting operations until supplies could be found. 
* For still others, it meant hurried negotiations with U.S. Customs Service and 
Treasury Department officials to determine if and how they could take delivery 
of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude already sailing to U.S. ports. 
Some company executives gnashed their teeth at former oilman George Bush for 
putting them in this position, political considerations aside. "The Executive 
Order says things that are very counterproductive to American interests," said 
one executive, who asked not to be identified. 
But analysts said oil companies should be able to find all the oil they need 
eventually, as long as the United States remains alone in its import ban. 
Supply disruptions should be short-lived and small scale, though companies will 
unquestionably pay more for their oil than they did a week ago -- price 
increases that are already finding their way to the gasoline pump. 
Late Friday, the U.S. Customs Service issued guidelines that appeared to 
resolve a big question. Oil companies can take delivery of Iraqi and Kuwaiti 
oil that was loaded before Thursday and on its way to the United States -- as 
long as it gets here before Oct. 1. Payments for such oil must go not to Iraq 
or Kuwait but to a special government-controlled account. 
Meanwhile, foreign-owned U.S. oil companies such as BP America Inc. (owned by 
British Petroleum) and Shell Oil Co. (owned by Royal Dutch/Shell) could 
conceivably continue buying Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil through their operations 
outside the United States and use other oil supplies for U.S. operations. 
Other companies could simply swap supplies on the open market or seek 
alternative oil from nations with excess oil production capacity, such as 
Venezuela and perhaps Nigeria. 
It is not clear, however, whether those nations would be willing to violate the 
quotas set by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries last month. And 
the nations with the largest excess capacity, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab 
Emirates, may think twice about expanding their production because they are 
under the threat of Iraqi military action themselves, analysts pointed out. 
The spot crude oil price for West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark U.S. grade, 
was up more than $1 on Friday to between $24.40 and $24.50 per barrel. 
The largest U.S. users of Iraqi crude are Exxon Corp., Coastal Corp., Shell, 
Fina Oil &amp; Chemical Co., Mobil Corp., Lyondell Petrochemical Co., Chevron 
Corp., Ashland Oil Inc. and Marathon Oil Co., according to industry sources and 
the consulting firm of Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton in San Francisco. 
Even for the largest users, Iraqi crude oil accounts for only a small 
percentage of their total supplies of crude; Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil make up less 
than 10% of total U.S. oil imports. 
On Thursday, U.S. Customs officials seized a tanker with 312,000 barrels of 
Iraqi crude destined for Coastal, which operates seven refineries in the 
country. That oil remains in custody while Coastal negotiates with Customs 
officials. 
But Coastal spokeswoman Barbara Johnson in Houston said the company had ample 
supplies from other nations as well as inventories that could cover any 
shortfall caused by the embargo in the short term. 
Lyondell of Houston, which is 49% owned by Atlantic Richfield Co., was caught 
by surprise in the middle of unloading an oil tanker filled with 525,000 
barrels of Iraqi crude. Crews had removed about two-thirds of the cargo, 
destined for Lyondell's Houston refinery, when Bush's order was announced. 
Customs officials seized the cargo then released it after negotiations with 
Lyondell led them to conclude that the cargo was no longer Iraqi property. 
Lyondell has since scaled back oil use at its refinery to 250,000 barrels a day 
from 290,000 barrels a day in expectation that it will not be able to take 
delivery of several tanker loads of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude still on the open 
sea. 
But, spokesman David Harpole said, "we have gone to the spot market and have 
been able to pick up the additional crude we need, and oil supplies do seem to 
be plentiful." 
Some Iraqi shipments have already completed their transatlantic crossing but 
have not made deliveries yet to avoid seizure. "We do know of several ships off 
U.S. territorial waters" in the Gulf of Mexico, said Donna De La Torre, a 
spokeswoman for Customs in Houston. 
On Friday, the Eastern Trust, a tanker carrying 1.9 million barrels of Iraqi 
crude oil, sat in waters just off Pascagoula, Miss., where Chevron has a 
refinery. 
If Chevron cannot take delivery, "We will have to shuffle some of our crude 
slates (mix of crude used by refineries) around and slow the refinery down as 
well," said Bruce Frolich, vice president of supply and distribution, for 
Chevron U.S.A. 
The nearest replacement supplies, either from the Middle East or from Mexico, 
would take at least a couple of weeks to arrive. "It's a timing situation," 
Frolich said. 
