DISPUTE OVER CITY COUNCIL REDISTRICTING REMAINS IN A STANDOFF; 
POLITICS: A FEDERAL MAGISTRATE'S EFFORT TO PROMOTE A COMPROMISE BETWEEN 2 CAMPS 
PROMPTS LITTLE MOVEMENT. 
A federal magistrate continued Wednesday to prod the two sides in San Diego's 
redistricting battle toward a possible compromise, while plans for further 
hearings on the volatile subject advanced on other fronts. 
Repeating what has become a familiar story line, there were developments -- 
though little substantive progress -- both in federal court and at City Hall 
Wednesday concerning the protracted political-legal dispute over the plan to 
redraw council district boundaries. 
At a 90-minute closed session in his chambers, U.S. Magistrate Harry McCue met 
with eight lawyers involved in the case in an attempt to focus their clients' 
debate and to search for common ground to avoid a costly, lengthy legal 
showdown. 
But, with the two sides being badly divided on several crucial points -- 
notably, whether the City Council has violated a previous legal agreement in 
its handling of the redistricting decision -- at least one city attorney 
characterized McCue's persistent efforts as well-intentioned but fruitless. 
"He tried to find a common thread running through everyone's thinking, but 
there just isn't one," said Jack Katz, a senior chief deputy city attorney. 
"When our position is that there hasn't been a breach of the settlement but the 
other side says there has been, it's difficult to find any common ground." 
Hoping to narrow the expanding debate, McCue instructed attorneys for the 
Chicano Federation of San Diego County, who vehemently oppose a redistricting 
plan tentatively approved by the council last month, to prepare a written 
summary of what they see as the central legal questions in the dispute. 
Though McCue set no specific dates for future hearings, that synopsis, expected 
to be prepared within several days, presumably will set the stage for 
additional negotiations in a case that has careened between City Hall and 
courtrooms for the past month. 
As he has from the start, Chicano Federation attorney Michael Aguirre 
reiterated after Wednesday's meeting that the essential legal question is 
whether the redistricting plan approved in concept by a 5-4 council vote 
significantly dilutes minority voting rights from that of an alternative map 
proposed by a council-appointed citizens' advisory board. 
Proposed by Councilman John Hartley, the plan tentatively passed by the council 
would reduce the Latino population in the 8th District from the advisory 
board's proposed 52.2% to 51% -- a numerically minor but politically 
significant reduction, according to Aguirre. 
In changing the advisory panel's plan, Hartley's proposal would eliminate 
nearly 2,000 blacks and 600 Latinos from the 8th District while adding roughly 
2,500 white voters, Aguirre said. Terming that change "outcome determinative," 
Aguirre argues that the revised composition of the 8th District would 
significantly lessen the chances of a Latino candidate winning there -- 
particularly given Latino voters' traditionally lower turnout. 
However, 8th District Councilman Bob Filner and other supporters of Hartley's 
map contend that the impact of that numerical reduction would be offset in part 
by the plan's retention of Balboa Park and downtown in the district -- areas 
that would be removed under the advisory board's proposal. Hartley's plan, they 
argue, not only maintains a Latino-majority district, but also would make the 
district more politically potent, thereby maximizing Latino clout. 
During Wednesday's discussion, Aguirre repeated his rejection of that argument. 
"They're telling us they're going to give us more by giving us less," Aguirre 
said. "But the price tag for more political clout . . . is a change that makes 
it less likely for Latino voters' choice to be elected. Basically, we just 
don't trust them anymore. We'd rather take our chances with the advisory board 
map." 
The advisory board was an outgrowth of the Chicano Federation's 1988 lawsuit 
challenging the constitutionality of the city's electoral system. Under an 
agreement that settled the first phase of that suit, the council agreed to 
establish an advisory board to assist it with its decennial redistricting task. 
By rejecting the advisory board's map in favor of Hartley's plan, which was 
publicized only hours before its approval, the council violated both the spirit 
and the letter of the settlement agreement, Aguirre contends. As a result, 
Aguirre has asked the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals to impose the advisory 
board's map on the city, arguing that doing so is necessary to protect 
minorities' voting rights. 
Describing that interpretation as premature at best, city attorneys -- as well 
as private lawyers who have been hired by some individual council members -- 
emphasize that the council has not yet taken definitive action on 
redistricting. Until a plan is formally approved, its impact on Latinos' voting 
rights and adherence to -- or violation of -- last year's settlement agreement 
cannot be determined, they contend. 
Amid the continued, largely repetitive legal maneuvering, city officials also 
announced Wednesday that the advisory board will be reconvened next Monday 
night to give it an opportunity to review the proposed changes to its 
redistricting plan. The scheduling of that hearing came in response to a 
council vote Tuesday asking the panel, which officially completed its work in 
June when it forwarded its proposal to the council, to reassemble once more to 
comment on proposed amendments to Hartley's plan and its own map. 
Not surprisingly for a case in which legalities often blur political realities, 
next Monday's planned meeting is seen as both politically and legally 
problematical by at least some board members -- creating the prospect of a 
partial boycott. 
With the city attorney's office defending the council majority -- and, by 
extension, the Hartley plan -- several board members question whether city 
attorneys can continue to advise the board. Given the case's litigious history, 
board members said Wednesday they would be reluctant to get reinvolved until 
that matter is clarified. 
Some board members also; said they are skeptical about why they have been asked 
to give their advice again in light of the council's rejection of their 
original proposal. 
"What I wonder is whether this is an attempt to use the board to try to 
legitimize the Hartley plan," said board member Dan Greenblat. "Under the 
circumstances, you'd have to be a little suspicious." 
