CONFEREES OK BILL ASSISTING AIDS PATIENTS 
House and Senate negotiators announced an agreement Wednesday on new AIDS 
legislation that for the first time would provide significant federal 
assistance for the clinical care of AIDS patients. 
The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act of 1990, named after 
the late Indiana teen-ager who crusaded against AIDS discrimination after he 
contracted the disease through treatment for hemophilia, is expected to quickly 
pass the House and Senate. The House may vote on the bill as early as Friday. 
The legislation authorizes the government to spend up to $875 million in the 
fiscal year that begins Oct. 1 on four new AIDS programs that would help 
states, cities and private health care facilities diagnose and treat those who 
have the disease. 
In contrast, most of the $1.7 billion that the Bush Administration is seeking 
for AIDS spending in the next fiscal year would be set aside for research and 
education. The Ryan White measure would provide funding over and above the 
Administration request. 
"Cities and states are struggling to keep their health systems from collapsing 
and they deserve federal aid," said Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), a member 
of the conference committee and co-author of the Senate version of the bill. 
"This is the first time that the federal government is directing money toward 
the whole range of services that go along with the care that is going to be 
needed," said Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles), a member of the conference 
committee and author of the legislation passed by the House. 
"The most significant issue for the future of this epidemic is treatment," said 
Thomas B. Stoddard, executive director of the Lambda Legal Defense and 
Education Fund, the nation's largest gay rights organization. 
"Even the most promising developments in the laboratory will have no 
significance if our health care systems can't deliver them to the people most 
in need," Stoddard said. "This bill at least begins to address that problem." 
Both the House and Senate earlier had approved by wide margins different 
versions of the AIDS relief measure, despite Administration opposition. Waxman 
said he believes that President Bush will sign the legislation because of the 
overwhelming support it has received in Congress. 
A White House official, who asked not to be identified, agreed that a veto is 
unlikely. However, the official said that Congress will be hard pressed to find 
all the money needed to pay for the programs authorized by the Ryan White 
legislation. 
The "disaster relief" portion of the bill would provide up to $275 million in 
aid to those cities that have been hardest hit by the 10-year AIDS epidemic. As 
of June 30, more than 139,760 Americans had developed AIDS, and 85,430 had 
died. 
To qualify for federal aid, a community would have to be in a metropolitan area 
with more than 2,000 reported cases of AIDS, or an incidence of at least 25 
AIDS cases per 10,000 people. West Coast cities that would be expected to 
receive grants under the program are Los Angeles, San Francisco and San Diego. 
A second program would authorize another $275 million in grants to states, 
using a formula based on the number of reported cases over the previous two 
years. 
In addition, $305 million would be set aside for grants to states or private 
clinics to provide early intervention services, including testing for the human 
immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, patient counseling and prescription of 
drugs that have been shown to delay the onset of the disease. 
The legislation also would authorize $20 million for a special research project 
to benefit children with AIDS. 
