THEATER / MARK I. PINSKY: CULTURE CLASH: LATINO SATIRE ON A 'MISSION' 
Amid the piety and the protests, about the only thing missing so far from the 
emotional campaign to elevate Father Junipero Serra to sainthood has been a 
sense of humor. 
No more. In a biting, multimedia revue called "The Mission," three young Latino 
comedians calling themselves Culture Clash are taking an irreverent look at the 
18th-Century Franciscan who founded Mission San Juan Capistrano and eight 
others in the state. 
The group characterizes the play as a brown -- rather than a black -- comedy, 
and true to the spirit of Lenny Bruce, there is something to offend just about 
everyone in "The Mission," starting with the opening narration. 
As Herbert Siguenza, dressed in a Franciscan habit and posed like one of the 
many Serra statues, is bathed in a small pool of light, a disembodied voice 
solemnly intones the achievements of the "Apostle of California" beatified last 
fall by Pope John Paul II. Then the kicker: 
"One man . . . one vision . . . one million Indios wiped out by murder, disease 
and torture. And at least five known cases of the dreaded jock itch. Father 
Serra loved his little savages. No Indian was buried before his time." 
Siguenza, as Serra, then steps down from his pedestal and recalls the 
beatification in Rome, admitting, "Yes, I'm feeling a little smug about the 
whole affair, and why not? . . . One day they will name hospitals and schools 
for me. One day they will construct a stupid statue of me on Highway 280." 
The controversy over Serra's status has focused on how much personal 
responsibility Serra had for the suffering of California Indians under the 
mission system he established. Serra's defenders say that he did the best he 
could and that he should not be judged by contemporary standards. But Indian 
scholars charge that there were those in the church -- even before Serra's time 
-- who believed that native cultures did not have to be crushed in order to 
bring Christianity, and that forceful conversion and corporal punishment were 
wrong. 
Rick Salinas, playing one of Serra's Indian charges, tires of the priest's 
mistreatment and decides to take peyote and travel to the future to warn his 
descendants against canonizing Serra. Salinas emerges 200 years later in San 
Francisco's Mission district as a member of Culture Clash, which is struggling 
to make it in the entertainment mainstream without abandoning its heritage. 
For the remainder of the evening, Culture Clash takes a withering look at the 
way European and Anglo civilization has influenced -- often diluting and 
sometimes destroying -- American Indian cultures. Stereotypes and ethnic 
prejudices are favorite topics, and Culture Clash manages to touch most if not 
all of the bases, up to and including "official language" campaigns and Anglo 
resentment over undocumented workers winning the lottery. 
But they also look inward. Before the night is over, those who also take hits 
-- some of them loving -- include Edward James Olmos, Fernando Valenzuela, Rita 
Moreno, Jerry Garcia, Carlos Castaneda, Cesar Chavez, Freddy Fender, Erik 
Estrada, Richie Valens, Linda Ronstadt's mariachi band, Che Guevara, Al Pacino 
in "Scarface," Carlos Santana, Jackson Browne, Holly Near, Los Lobos, Bertolt 
Brecht's "fourth wall," the San Francisco Mime Troupe and Barry Manilow. 
"The Mission" is a low-budget show, produced in association with El Teatro 
Campesino, which began as a guerrilla theater group during the Delano farm 
workers strike. Culture Clash is now a part of El Teatro Campesino, largely 
through the recommendation of Luis Valdez, El Teatro's artistic director and 
the director of "La Bamba." Valdez calls Culture Clash "the cutting edge of 
fresh, new, Latino comic genius." 
"The Mission" was honed and reshaped during lab productions at El Teatro 
Campesino's headquarters in San Juan Bautista and in high schools and colleges 
in the Los Angeles area. Playing Los Angeles this fall with its newly polished 
version of "The Mission" is a major goal, Salinas said. 
Meanwhile, the troupe is playing to audiences of 50 people a night in the 
Asian-American Theatre Center, a small San Francisco theater above a pizzeria. 
But Culture Clash appears to be nearing a breakthrough. It has taped an 
eight-minute segment for public television, scheduled for inclusion this fall 
in a nationally televised series, "Comedy Tonight." Last week, Culture Clash 
was featured on National Public Radio's "Morning Edition." Profiles of the 
group are scheduled for California and Mother Jones magazines. 
Frequently scatological, the material is uneven and occasionally still rough 
around the edges. In an instant it can go from being silly, juvenile and 
parochial to being subtle, sophisticated and worldly. Culture Clash's humor is 
angry and often political, but not doctrinaire. While most of the satire is 
directed at the dominant European culture, the Left and the counterculture come 
in for their share of jibes. "Politically correct" humor and commitment to La 
Communidad are targets -- "I was a Chicano before you were!" shouts Richard 
Montoya at one point -- and one bit, involving a three-headed, Latin American 
folk singer, is priceless. 
Serra is not completely forgotten when the action shifts to the present. A 
brilliant sketch has Siguenza, this time as a member of Culture Clash, taking a 
regular job when his comedy career is stalled. Like several members of the 
group in "Ghostbusters II," Siguenza has been reduced to entertaining at kids' 
parties. So, again dressed as Serra, he takes a job at "Taqueria Serra," where 
he does a hilarious variation of Abbot and Costello's "Who's on First" routine 
about how Anglos choose Mexican restaurants. 
Some of the best bits of the evening are Latino versions of better-known 
efforts. A series of blackout auditions for white producers is similar to the 
one involving black actors in the film "Hollywood Shuffle." A plot to kidnap 
Julio Iglesias -- Siguenza does a dead-on impression -- in order to win a shot 
on national television, kicking off the "Father Serra Camino Real Tour," is 
right out of the "King of Comedy." But, given the universal nature of prejudice 
and ambition, these bits still work well. 
The troupe also spoofs several well-known public service announcements on 
television, like the ubiquitous anti-drug message featuring eggs in a frying 
pan. Using story boards, Montoya explains, "This is your brains. . . . This is 
your brains on drugs. . . . This is your brains on drugs with chorizos." 
Siguenza gives a Latin twist to the famous United Negro College appeal, the one 
which recently tripped up Dan Quayle, by complaining that "a Mayan is a 
terrible thing to waste." 
Peppered with such wordplay, the evening is sometimes reminiscent of the old 
"Firesign Theater." At one point, Montoya warns Salinas of the pointlessness of 
trying to prevent the canonization, slipping into a spoken and then sung 
version of "Que Serra, Serra." At another point, the troupe, as tough gang 
members, begins a menacing chant of "Colors!" which segues to a cheerful 
rendition of "De Colores." 
The gang material is the most original of the evening, and Culture Clash 
members say it travels the best when the group plays urban areas outside 
California, where audiences are unfamiliar with Father Serra. Salinas, Montoya 
and Siguenza -- all raised in middle-class homes -- pull off the extremely 
difficult task of spoofing the deadly serious phenomenon without approving of 
its effects or denigrating the individuals who are caught up in it. Montoya 
said that even gang members have told them how much they like the material 
because it so accurately satirized people they recognize. 
The 5-year-old group's members, all of whom live in San Francisco's Mission 
district, range in age from late 20s to early 30s and in education from a year 
in college to two degrees. Salinas and Siguenza are the children of Salvadoran 
immigrants. Montoya is the son of the poet Jose Montoya. 
In an interview, members acknowledged that that they chose the Serra sainthood 
issue primarily as a vehicle to showcase the group's more contemporary work, at 
a time when the San Francisco newspapers were full of the controversy in the 
wake of Pope John Paul II's visit to San Francisco and Carmel, where Serra 
founded another famous mission and where he is buried. 
"It just seemed like the perfect thing for Culture Clash," said Siguenza, 
"because it was a culture clash -- the Spaniards coming into indigenous 
California." 
After carefully reading all the pros and cons of the complex sainthood issue, 
Salinas said cheerfully, "We chose the con." 
