THE BUTCHER: THE KEY TO BETTER FOOD LABELING -- KEEP IT SIMPLE 
There is ever increasing evidence linking diet and health. We are, it seems 
very clearly, what we eat. 
The Food and Drug Administration, in an attempt to make it easier for consumers 
to keep something of a handle on what they are eating, is preparing to require 
major changes in nutrition information on labels of packaged foods. 
"If we're going to say to consumers you can modify your diet and change your 
health, there needs to be a label that can be used," said Dr. Frank Young, the 
FDA commissioner. "I believe the time has come for food labeling reform." 
I could not agree more. Food labeling in this country is confusing, 
contradictory and out of control. Something should be done. There ought to be a 
law. Maybe the new regulations proposed by the FDA will help. 
Young said that regulators will look at five areas in which food labels can be 
made more useful and understandable for consumers. Those areas are nutrition 
labeling, ingredient labeling, label format, food description and health 
claims. 
By September, the FDA hopes to announce a schedule for hearings to discuss 
proposed changes. The earliest any new labeling rules would take effect is in 
1991, so there is time enough for all of us to give some thought and help the 
FDA come up with something logical in food labeling. 
Personally, I have thought about this a great deal throughout the years, and I 
would like to propose that the new labeling laws for all food products be kept 
as simple and accurate as possible. In my opinion, simple basic logic seems 
often to elude lawmakers. That's the main reason today's food labeling is, in a 
word, crazy. 
One important change that I think would help: It should be illegal to list on 
the label of any product any ingredient, animal, vegetable, mineral, chemical 
or nutritional, that is not in the product. That's very simple, isn't it? And 
very logical. It would be totally illogical, indeed impossible, to list on any 
label all of the ingredients that are not in a product -- no label in the world 
is that big. 
It should therefore, I think, be mandatory that a company list on the label of 
any product only those ingredients that are in the product. To do otherwise is, 
if not dishonest, at least intentionally misleading. 
Questioning Labels 
At a recent food show, I was struck by the number of products that were 
prominently labeled "No Cholesterol." Everything from pasta products to fruit 
preserves, from gourmet jelly beans to pinto beans were boldly labeled "No 
Cholesterol." 
It finally got to me and I had to confront the situation. "Why do you have 
these beans labeled with a sticker that says they have 'No Cholesterol'?" I 
asked one bean peddler. 
"Because they contain no cholesterol," she replied, looking at me with eyebrows 
raised as if I had just asked the stupidest question. 
"But, I don't think any beans have cholesterol, do they?" I said. 
"I don't know," the bean peddler replied. "All I know is these beans don't have 
and we think people should know that." 
"How about sodium and saturated fat? People are concerned about those things 
too. Are any of those things in these beans?" I asked. "And arsenic. Is there 
any arsenic in your beans, or cyanide. If there are none of those awful things 
in your beans, don't you think people should know? Don't you think you should 
list those on your label too? 'No Cholesterol, No Arsenic, No Cyanide, No. . . 
.' 
"Are you trying to make trouble?" the bean peddler interrupted. 
"No ma'am," I said, "I'm only trying to make sense." 
