CUTTING FUNDS FOR THOSE WHO HELP ILLEGAL ALIENS 
What has happened to Costa Mesa's leadership? As a resident for 22 years, I saw 
Costa Mesa as a city of creativity and compassion in dealing with typical 
problems facing all cities in Orange County. Now, with the leadership of Mayor 
Peter Buffa, Costa Mesa is seen by many as racist. With its decision to stop 
granting federal funds to any agency that serves "illegals," Costa Mesa has 
taken another step backward. 
Councilman Orville Amburgey, in his continual drive to try to push SOS out of 
the city, sponsored an ordinance that affects a lot more than those helped by 
SOS. Many think Amburgey bit off more than he can chew. 
All agencies that receive funds are now required by the city to check those 
they serve for legal status. That includes organizations that serve only 
children, the Lions Club, which sponsors an annual fish fry, and even the 
Newport Mesa Unified School District, which received $65,521, as stated in the 
Times chart of grant recipients. That means that Costa Mesa has ordered the 
district to check the legal status of every 5- to 18-year-old child that enters 
school, an issue that constitutionally has already been challenged. 
Imagine the new bureaucracy created for all the agencies. Perhaps we should 
have Buffa, Amburgey and Glasgow IDs before anyone can come in. 
SOS rightly refused to adhere to such a ridiculous and inhumane policy, and it 
can afford to turn down its city grant, which is just a trickle in its flow of 
annual donations. But can other, smaller agencies afford the cut? Local 
agencies should wake up to the fact that Amburgey's personal attack on SOS has 
caught them in the line of fire, and they should unite in opposition against 
this new city ordinance. And all registered voters should remember these 
councilmen who constantly interfered with the running of private service 
organizations and who opened a dark hole in Costa Mesa's caring past. 
And don't forget Buffa. The fearless leader who slyly sits back and agrees to 
all this nonsense. We all know Amburgey and his clone, Glasgow, will never 
change. But what motivates the major? 
Those in Newport Beach should remember, too, in case Buffa ever seeks higher 
office. 
MARY CAPPELLINI 
Newport Beach 
