CHARITY SCORECARD 
* At the Crosby Golf Tournament, held June 1-4 at the Bermuda Run Country Club 
in North Carolina, actor Ed Marinaro of "Hill Street Blues" won $20,000 for the 
charity of his choice and designated Big Brothers of Greater Los Angeles as the 
recipient. The team was sponsored by Dunavant Enterprises. Big Brothers will 
use the contribution towards the recruitment of more Big Brother volunteers to 
assist fatherless boys in Los Angeles. 
* The Diamond Circle for the City of Hope's "Think Pink" themed black-tie event 
on July 8 at the Le Bel Age Hotel netted upwards of $1 million for the medical 
center's Familian Children's and Bone Marrow Transplantation Center. Presidents 
Elaine Marmel and Barbara Katz were co-chairs. 
* California Medical Center's Fifth Annual Pro-Celebrity Paddle Tennis 
Tournament and Calypso Carnival held July 22 at the California Yacht Club 
netted more than $40,000 for the hospital's Rebirth Program for drug-addicted 
newborn babies. Angela Visser, Miss Universe 1989, was celebrity chair and 
Shirley Jones and Marty Ingels were Calypso Carnival dinner co-chairs and 
auctioneers. 
* The Dream Street Foundation party on July 25, held at the home of Billy 
Grubman and honoring "Phantom of the Opera" star Michael Crawford for his work 
with children throughout the world, received an anonymous gift of $10,000 for 
the foundation. The money will be used to help underwrite operational expenses 
for Dream Street, a summer camp co-founded by Bill and Patty Grubman for 
children with life-threatening illnesses. 
* Laugh PAC '89 (Professionals Against Cancer) held its first Comedy Night 
fund-raiser on July 26 at The New Improv in Santa Monica and netted $5,000 for 
the American Cancer Society. John Arnstein was chair. Laugh PAC '89, a new 
group, has raised a total of $23,000 for ACS. 
* The National Gay Rights Advocates held a "Phantom of the Opera" benefit on 
July 28 with a party following the event and netted $100,000. A portion of the 
money will be used towards an anti-violence project. 
