AN INARTISTIC THEFT; 
LEAVING PART OF SCULPTURE BEHIND MAKES LOOT WORTHLESS; 
CRIME: 'THE WATER GODS,' THREE-PIECE WORK FROM A BEVERLY HILLS PARK, WAS 
APPRAISED AT $250,000. BUT DEALERS SAY THE STOLEN PIECES HAVE NO VALUE OF THEIR 
OWN. 
They pulled and twisted the statue of the girl, but it just wouldn't come 
loose. As a result, the thieves who stole two of three bronze figures at a 
Beverly Hills park this week now possess some impressive, but virtually 
worthless, art works. 
The three-piece sculpture, "The Water Gods," by the well-known Mexican sculptor 
Victor Salmones, was independently appraised recently at $250,000. But without 
the girl called "Rain," art dealers say, the stolen pieces depicting the boys 
"River" and "Sea" have no real value. 
"We'll just sit and wait for awhile," said Babbs Shoemaker, director of the 
Victor Salmones gallery in Beverly Hills. "Maybe we'll find them in a dump or 
something. How else are they going to hide them?" 
The heist from Maltz Park on Sunset Boulevard has baffled police and puzzled 
art dealers. Beverly Hills police say the sculptures were probably removed from 
their pedestals sometime Saturday or Sunday night. The statues were discovered 
missing by a park official Monday morning. 
It remains unclear exactly how the sculptures were taken from their bolted 
stands, which surround a water fountain in the small corner park, or how they 
were carted off. Police say each sculpture weighs at least 150 pounds. 
"The girl alone takes three men to lift," said Travis Hansson, vice president 
of the late artist's gallery on Wilshire Boulevard. "So I would guess there 
were at least that many involved." 
Beverly Hills Police Lt. Robert Curtis said detectives don't know if the heist 
was the work of art thieves, but gallery officials doubted that it was an act 
of vandalism. Two other Salmones sculptures were stolen from public buildings 
in Texas during the last few years, but there appears to be no connection 
between the thefts except that the works were all on public display, gallery 
officials said. 
Salmones, whose bronze figures are in public buildings in 42 countries around 
the world, lent "The Water Gods" to the city before he died of cancer last 
year. Shoemaker said that in addition to the artworks "Force" in the UCLA 
Sculpture Garden and "Aquarius" at Metromedia Square in Hollywood, there are at 
least 50 Salmones pieces in collections in Southern California -- including 
that of Beverly Hills City Councilman Maxwell Salter. 
Salmones' associate, E. G. McGrath, flew in from Acapulco on Wednesday to 
assess the damage to the Maltz Park sculpture. The thieves broke part of the 
foot on the "Rain" statue and bent it at a sharp angle in their attempt to tear 
the piece from its metal bolt. 
"Either it was a random art theft or a collector may have commissioned the 
theft," McGrath said, "because whoever took it sure went to an awful lot of 
trouble." 
Shoemaker said he is hopeful that when word of the theft gets out, the thieves 
will realize they made a mistake and return it. But police are skeptical the 
sculptures will turn up anywhere soon. 
"These sculptures are pretty distinctive," Curtis said. "I doubt if you'll see 
it in the Rose Bowl swap meet or anything like that." 
