S.D. RESERVES AMONG FIRST CALLED TO DUTY; 
MILITARY: ABOUT 800 MEDICAL PERSONNEL FROM THROUGHOUT THE WEST WILL REPLACE 
REGULAR-DUTY STAFFERS WHO HAVE BEEN SENT TO THE MIDEAST. 
About 300 San Diego reservists were called to duty Saturday as the secretary of 
the Navy ordered more than 800 medical personnel to report to military 
hospitals from San Diego to Bremerton, Wash., to replace doctors, nurses and 
technicians who have been deployed to bases and medical ships in the tense 
Persian Gulf region. 
The call-ups follow President Bush's decision last Wednesday to authorize the 
use of the so-called "weekend warriors." More than 49,000 armed forces 
reservists are expected to be involved by Oct. 1. 
Meanwhile, the Navy also placed on standby two sophisticated reserve units 
specializing in the electronic surveillance of seaports, as well as four 
sea-lift details. Those units joined three other supply-oriented reserve units 
that were placed on standby Friday. They include a San Diego Army group 
specializing in the supply and purification of water and two National Guard 
trucking units. 
The quick activation of medical and supply reservists had been anticipated 
since Wednesday when Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney outlined the military's 
immediate needs. But the notification of two Mobile Inshore Undersea Warfare 
(MIUW) units represented something of a surprise. 
The MIUW units -- one based in Long Beach, the other in San Francisco -- are 
trained in the operation of sophisticated radio and sonar equipment for the 
monitoring of harbor activity. 
"They're in essence a harbor defense unit," said Lt. Cmdr. Bill Gay of the 
Navy's regional reserve headquarters in San Diego. Their mission, he said, is 
to conduct both surface and subsurface surveillance for the protection of 
ports, harbors, anchorages and "offshore economic assets." 
"These units are self-supporting and can be rapidly deployed," Gay said. 
It was not clear on Saturday where the MIUW units may be deployed if definitive 
orders to activate come. The four sea-lift units put on standby Saturday 
include two in Alameda, one in Santa Barbara and one in Pomona. 
Gay said that about 500 medical reservists had been called up in a Navy reserve 
region that includes Southern California, Arizona and southern Nevada. In 
Northern California, 380 medical reservists had been activated, a Navy 
spokesman in San Francisco said. 
Across the state, the call-up abruptly disrupted lives, bringing to some a 
welcome new challenge and to others an unwanted detour. 
Child-care arrangements were being hastily made. Work left undone at civilian 
jobs was to be left hanging. 
"I can't believe this is happening," said Petty Officer 3rd Class Pam Slayton, 
fighting back tears as she clutched her orders at the Naval and Marine Corps 
Reserve Center on Stadium Way north of downtown Los Angeles. 
Slayton, a 31-year-old corpsman, is to report for duty at Camp Pendleton. Her 
husband, who is on active duty with the Navy, was transferred five days ago 
from Long Beach to Bremerton, Wash. 
Slayton, who in her civilian life is a computer technician for Southern 
California Gas Co., had been hoping to move to Bremerton -- and switch reserve 
units -- to be with her husband. Now the immediate concern is who will take 
care of their two children, ages 5 and 7. They can't go to Camp Pendleton with 
her Wednesday because she will be in barracks, Slayton said. 
"I don't know who'll take care of them -- relatives, my mom, somebody," she 
said. 
She said she joined the reserves several years ago to get benefits while going 
to technical school, adding, "I guess it's time to pay the Navy back." 
But Petty Officer 3rd Class Kenneth Pacis, also a corpsman in the same unit as 
Slayton, said he reported to the center Saturday "ready and willing to go." 
The 24-year-old Downey resident said he "got kinda nervous when he arrived home 
from a Dodger game Friday night to find a message from a roommate informing him 
that the Navy had called him up." 
"I didn't sleep too well," he said, "But I calmed down when I learned we were 
not going overseas, at least not for now." 
A recent graduate of UCLA, Pacis said he had just last week secured a 
management job but had not yet started. "I guess I'll be letting that job go," 
he said. "When this is over, I'll have to start over." 
In San Diego, reservists from six different units began reporting to the San 
Diego Naval and Marine Corps Reserve Center for duty at 7:30 a.m. Saturday. 
Many of the approximately 300 will see duty at the Navy Hospital in San Diego's 
Balboa Park, where doctors, nurses and others are needed because regular-duty 
staffers have been sent to the Mideast, Gay said. 
Reservists reporting Saturday received an orientation, had their duffel bags 
checked for proper supplies and were given medical exams, ID cards and their 
orders. Then they could go home until reporting to the naval hospital in 
mid-week, Gay said. 
But not every person in every unit activated in San Diego or elsewhere is being 
called up, Gay said. Rather, the call-up is to fill needs for specific skills. 
Naval reservist Frank Drdek, a vice president at Hawthorne Machinery in San 
Diego, noted that his own personnel mobilization specialty would be activated 
only in a general call-up of reserves -- a step he considers unlikely. 
"Even in Vietnam, when we did have a call-up it was still selected reserve 
call-up -- pilots, construction battalion people to do the airstrips, 
intelligence, medical, cargo handlers," Drdek said. "So in this kind of 
situation with Iraq it's going to be even more limited." 
Doctors assigned to the Naval Reserve Center in Tustin who were called to 
active duty "really want to go" and "really want to support their country," 
said Lt. Cmdr. M. K. Carlock, commanding officer of the reserve medical unit. 
Lt. Cmdr. (Res) Edward H. Bestard, a San Clemente orthopedic surgeon who 
received orders to report to Tustin early Saturday, said he was told the 
hospital there was "almost empty." 
"There's almost nobody left, I heard," Bestard said after he completed his 
orders to report to the seaside base on Wednesday morning. 
But the physicians will not report to the hospital until the middle of next 
week. "They don't have to be in the bus tomorrow morning or anything like 
that," he said. 
Lt. Cmdr. Barbara Henk, an AIDS nurse at the UC Davis Medical Center, was among 
the reservists who reported to duty in Sacramento. Henk, who will be assigned 
to Bremerton, had no complaints about going because "I agree with President 
Bush that this is what we need to do." 
But the 35-year-old Roseville nurse said things will be difficult at home for 
her husband, Robert, a lawyer, and daughters, ages 2 and 5. The 5-year-old 
cried when told her mother was leaving, Henk said, and her husband is a "little 
anxious. He'll have to pay the bills and do all the things I used to do." 
At the Treasure Island Naval Station in the Bay Area, the bulk of 13 reserve 
units called to active duty on Saturday will report to Oak Knoll Naval Hospital 
in Oakland. 
"I thought it was a prank call," said a 40-year-old physician, who got the call 
to report at 4:20 a.m. Saturday. 
The doctor, a commander who asked that her name not be used, said her orders 
require that she be on duty for at least 90 days. But she noted that she could 
be called upon to serve much longer. 
She had set about referring patients to other doctors and will be giving up her 
civilian salary while she works at Oak Knoll. She said her biggest worry was 
paying the bills. Her husband's salary as a university teacher will not 
suffice. 
"We are going to have to be up front with our mortgage creditor," the doctor 
said. 
Contributing to this story were Times staff writers Linda Roach Monroe and Mark 
Stencel in San Diego, Dan Morain in San Francisco, Jerry Gillam in Sacramento, 
Jim Gomez in Tustin, Kevin Roderick and Shari Roan in Los Angeles and Ken Weiss 
in Ventura. 
HOME FRONT:S.D. reservists called to active duty react to their new status and 
the changes itbrings. B1 
