RAIDERS MAY EXIT BY SAME DOOR THEY ENTERED 
Ironically, the very legal decision loudly applauded in Los Angeles because it 
enabled the Raiders to move south seven years ago from Oakland has opened the 
way for the team to seek yet another new home. 
By limiting the power of National Football League owners to block team moves 
from city to city, the decision left all teams much freer to relocate. At the 
same time, it encouraged the kind of bidding war now going on among four cities 
-- Oakland, Sacramento, Los Angeles and Irwindale -- for the Raider franchise. 
Maxwell Blecher, the attorney who represented the Los Angeles Coliseum 
Commission in the suit to allow the Raiders to move, remarks now, of the 
result: 
"It enhanced the value of every pro franchise. People are now laying money at 
(Raiders owner) Al Davis' feet, and he's quite open in saying that he'll go to 
the place that best lures him." 
Certainly, there are signs of resistance to giving him everything he might 
want, and nowhere more than in Los Angeles, where even some of Davis' biggest 
boosters are distancing themselves a bit. 
Asked, for instance, what Mayor Tom Bradley's attitude is to the negotiations, 
Deputy Mayor Mike Gage said a week ago, "We want to keep the Raiders, but we 
don't want to be raped." Some city councilmen have cautioned against allowing 
public money to be used to make any cash payments to Davis, and there have been 
pledges by the Coliseum's private business managers that it won't be. 
In Oakland, as well, the use of public money in the proposed deal remains 
controversial. 
But this resistance occurs against a backdrop of ever bigger offers -- like the 
ones that brought new teams to Indianapolis and Phoenix in recent years -- by 
cities seeking to lure NFL teams to a new home. 
The suit that brought the Raiders to Los Angeles has even worked out to the 
financial benefit of the league, according to Frank Rothman, the attorney who 
represented the NFL in the court proceedings. 
Rothman points out: "Now, the NFL takes the position that when a franchise is 
moved from one city to another, if the new city is worth more as a property 
than the franchise given up, then the NFL is entitled to be compensated. All of 
these cities that do not have NFL teams are expansion opportunities that have 
economic value, and they belong to the NFL." 
Out of this concept comes the "franchise fee," and cities desiring NFL 
franchises are often told they must pay such a fee, amounting to $30 million or 
more in cash. But just whether this will be paid to the owners bringing in the 
team or the NFL as a whole, remains a matter of negotiation. Most of the time, 
it has gone to the owners. 
Apparently, no one is readier to take credit for the turn of events than Davis 
himself. 
Irving Azoff of MCA Inc., one of the Los Angeles Coliseum private managers 
attempting to keep the Raiders in the Coliseum, says Davis tells how other 
owners frequently compliment him, saying: 
"You invented the franchise fee. You improved the value of every NFL franchise 
by $50 million." 
And this may be an understatement considering that in the present bidding for 
the Raiders, Davis has been offered stadium projects and cash inducements 
totaling more than $150 million each in Irwindale, Sacramento and Los Angeles, 
and a reported $82 million in Oakland for what would amount only to a stadium 
expansion plus a "franchise fee" for moving back to the city. 
"This is not something that's bad," Davis' attorney, Joseph Alioto, commented 
last week. "It's a free enterprise system now. Anybody has a right to move to 
improve his situation. Prior to our case, the NFL was like a cartel. But since, 
there have been some marvelous deals. Indianapolis is perhaps the best example, 
with its 10-year guarantee to fully reimburse the Colts for anything less than 
full attendance. 
Of course, the Raider-Coliseum lawsuit ruling against the NFL is not the only 
factor that has enhanced the value of league franchises. 
A close observer of professional football who asked not to be identified points 
out that the NFL has not expanded in 15 years and that, at most, only two 
expansion teams are contemplated now, at an uncertain date in the future. 
The restriction of the number of available franchises has worked to drive up 
the prices of existing franchises, he asserted, as cities without pro football 
teams that desire them bid ever higher for them. 
In the most recent bidding war, Davis has proven an adept strategist. He sits 
back and waits for competing cities to make ever more lucrative offers for his 
team. Just this last weekend, the San Francisco Examiner reported that 
Sacramento interests had increased their cash inducement from $35 million to 
$50 million in an effort to outdo Oakland. 
Negotiating Tactic 
"Davis knows how to keep his mouth shut," says one local sports journalist who 
has dealt with him a long time. "Like (the late) Carroll Rosenbloom (of the Los 
Angeles Rams), when he negotiates, he never makes a proposal." 
At the same time, Saturday night's extremely low attendance of only 31,135 at 
the Raiders' first exhibition game in the Coliseum, and the team's 37-7 
shellacking at the hands of the San Francisco 49ers, may put pressure on Davis 
to come to a quicker decision. As long as reports proliferate that the team may 
move, attendance and interest in Los Angeles, and the morale of the team, are 
likely to suffer. 
Marshall Grossman, the attorney representing the Los Angeles Coliseum 
Commission in its pending $57-million breach-of-contract lawsuit against the 
Raiders, nonetheless remarks: "Davis seems to have a history of out-negotiating 
whoever is on the other side. . . . He was successful in that with Irwindale. 
He got $10 million in his pants pocket from them before the financing for that 
deal was arranged." 
Now, it appears likely that Irwindale may never come up with adequate financing 
for its proposed stadium, and the Raiders owner in those circumstances is 
likely to keep the $10 million. 
The chore of the Coliseum Commission, Grossman declares, "is to try to keep 
Davis (as a tenant) and not give away the store to him. 
"But that becomes very difficult in today's environment, where money is simply 
thrown at these professional teams. . . . Davis is simply playing everyone off 
against another, doing it very skillfully. When he sees what everybody is 
offering, he will pick the proposal that is best for the Raiders. As long as 
the bidding continues to go up, there's no reason for him to pick." 
Could Explain Inaction 
Grossman's theory, if correct, explains why Davis has not chosen among bidders 
yet, despite frequent press reports that he is on the verge of moving north and 
has refused to say publicly when he will make up his mind. 
Despite last week's new break in Los Angeles Coliseum-Raider negotiations, and 
reported negotiating hang-ups in his dealings with both Sacramento and 
Irwindale, the chairman of the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, George Vukasin, 
was extremely cautious last week in predicting when Davis may make up his mind 
on the Oakland offer. 
Asked if an announcement of a Raider move back to Oakland might be made Aug. 
26, when the Raiders are scheduled to play an exhibition game in Oakland 
against the Houston Oilers, their first return to the Oakland Coliseum since 
the 1981 season, Vukasin said: 
"Anything's conceivable, but I anticipate they will take a sufficient time to 
fully review the document (a tentative agreement) we have submitted to them, 
and to look at alternatives they have of playing elsewhere." 
The Oakland official said he has invited Davis and his wife to speak at a 
dinner being given in Oakland the night before the exhibition game that will 
honor six former Raider players who are in football's Hall of Fame, but that so 
far no reply has been received. 
In any case, Vukasin added, "I would expect that the L.A. Raiders probably 
would remain in Los Angeles to the end of their contract (with the Coliseum)." 
That would put off any move to the 1992 season. 
Davis, as has been the case for months, was "unavailable for comment" on what 
he will do. 
Quite aside from which bidder offers the most, however, Davis will probably be 
asking himself which party is most likely to make good on its promises. 
Purported Promises 
The Raiders owner frequently points to promises that he contends were made to 
him in 1980, 1981 and 1982 as proof that the Coliseum failed to perform for 
him. He says these broken promises are what led to his break with the Coliseum 
Commission two years ago. (A Los Angeles Superior Court judge has questioned 
whether oral promises were made to Davis about Coliseum renovation by Los 
Angeles and has declared in any case that they would not be binding.) 
More recently, Davis has found that Irwindale encountered all kinds of 
obstacles in performing on its 1987 memorandum of agreement with the team, with 
a changing lineup of city officials frequently seeking to renegotiate the 
terms. 
Even now, Irwindale has a financing offer on the table, but sources acquainted 
with it say it is contingent on so many things that Davis is dubious about its 
acceptability. 
"They've got a big Japanese land development company involved, and they hope to 
get the land for the stadium and other planned developments for $50 million," 
remarks a businessman who is conversant with the proposal. "I don't think 
they're going to ever get it for close to that. And condemnation would take a 
long, long time at least. And this is just the land. The $125-million loan for 
the stadium construction, and the cash advances to Davis, are extra." 
In Sacramento, Gregg Lukenbill, a partner in the Sacramento Kings basketball 
franchise, has spearheaded plans to build a stadium for Davis, but he and his 
associates reportedly want a share in the ownership of the team that Davis and 
his Raider partners are reluctant to give. 
In Oakland, initial City Council reaction to a proposed $32-million cash 
payment to the Raiders as a "franchise fee" was negative, and concern has been 
expressed by some officials about a report that part of the offer would put up 
public money for any shortfall in ticket sales necessary to sell out the 
stadium for Raider games. 
Efforts at Secrecy 
Since the skepticism emerged, those Oakland officials negotiating with the 
Raiders have done their best to keep the details of their latest offer secret. 
"It is totally inappropriate to negotiate in the press or to discuss any 
negotiations until they're finalized," Vukasin said last week. 
Complicating matters, the owners of the San Francisco 49ers have demanded they 
be compensated if the Raiders move back into the Bay Area. But Alioto said last 
week he has already informed the 49ers no compensation would be paid. 
In Los Angeles, Azoff, the Coliseum private management official, has talked of 
assembling $155 million in private money to underwrite the offer to be made to 
Davis, assuming that negotiations resume. 
Last week, when the talks were broken off as a result of inability of the 
parties to agree on keeping their discussions from being used in court 
proceedings on a Coliseum Commission lawsuit against the team, Azoff was openly 
discouraged. "We're down to desperate time," he remarked. 
There are questions about whether Los Angeles can deliver on the offer it is 
planning to make. Can private funding be found? Will an environmental impact 
report be required on the Coliseum renovation? Would preservationists try to 
block the project, which would demolish all but the historic east peristyle of 
the present Coliseum facility, the host to the 1932 and 1984 Olympic Games? 
Would there be community opposition? These factors might result in considerable 
delays. 
