JUDAS MEMBER ONCE RECORDED HIDDEN MESSAGE 
A member of the British rock group Judas Priest told a judge that he once 
recorded a hidden message in one of his songs but not in the album "Stained 
Class," which a lawsuit claims encouraged two young men to commit suicide. 
Rob Halford, 39, a member of the heavy metal group, testified Tuesday in Washoe 
District Court that he intentionally placed a hidden message in the song "Love 
Bites," which was recorded about seven years after "Stained Class." 
Halford said he had hoped that the message, which can be understood only when 
the record is played backwards, would "enhance its value." 
Judas Priest and CBS Records are defendants in a suit filed by the parents of 
Raymond Eugene Belknap, 20, and James Vance, 18, who shot themselves in 1985 
after an afternoon of drinking beer, smoking marijuana and listening to 
"Stained Class." 
The plaintiffs, seeking at least $500,000 in damages, contend that the band and 
record company should be held liable for the two young men's deaths. The 
parents say the album contained the subliminal message "do it, do it," which 
prompted the two young men to kill themselves. 
But Halford told Judge Jerry Carr Whitehead, who is hearing the case without a 
jury, that Judas Priest did not put the words "do it, do it" into their 
"Stained Class" album, recorded in 1978. 
While on the stand, Halford sang portions of "Better by You, Better Than Me," 
adding that the sound some may believe is "do it" is just his inhaling his 
breath. 
Under cross-examination by plaintiffs' attorney Ken McKenna, Halford admitted 
placing a reversed message in "Love Bites." 
He said the phrase "in the dead of the night, love bites" was intentionally 
reversed on the recording. When played forward, the listener can only hear 
garble; but if played backwards, the phrase can be heard, he said. 
Defense attorneys contend that Belknap and Vance were troubled youths and the 
Judas Priest album was not responsible for their suicides. 
