CLOAKED IN HER OWN SECRECY; 
CHANEL A WOMAN OF HER OWN BY AXEL MADSEN (HENRY HOLT: $19.95; 364 PP.; 
0-8050-0961-2) 
Few fashion designers have left a legacy as permanent, as rich or as imitated 
as that of Gabrielle (Coco) Chanel. Her creations -- exquisite little black 
dresses, collarless jackets trimmed with gold buttons and braid, black-tipped 
spectator pumps, quilted handbags, the understated floral notes of Chanel No. 5 
-- remain benchmarks of superb, elegant taste. 
Dark, thin, pretty Gabrielle Chanel rose from nowhere to become the reigning 
priestess of streamlined high-fashion for almost 60 years. 329) But for all her 
fame and fortune, her string of impressive lovers and her powerful influence on 
style, she died a lonely woman -- determined to take to the grave as much of 
her story as she could. 
"She made up things," Axel Madsen says immediately. "She reinvented her 
childhood. . . . After she became rich, she paid off her brothers to pretend 
they didn't exist." 
Above all, she was ashamed of her initial poverty and the fact that her 
parents, itinerant market peddlers, were unmarried when she was born. During 
her life she would claim she was raised by old-maid aunts. But in reality, 
after her mother died and her father disappeared, 12-year-old Chanel and her 
two sisters were placed in an orphanage. 
When she was 21, working as a seamstress and residing in the military town of 
Moulins, Chanel met Etienne Balsan, a rich bachelor with a passion for 
racehorses. She spent six years as mistress of his estate, Royallieu, where she 
learned to ride, to mix with society and to set herself apart. Instead of 
wearing ready-made millinery, she bought straw boaters, intended for 
schoolboys, and trimmed them with ribbons and lace. Soon she was making hats 
for other women in her circle. 
At Royallieu, she was introduced to Arthur (Boy) Capel, a wealthy Englishman 
who became the love of her life. After they ran off to Paris together, Chanel 
opened the millinery shop of her dreams -- thanks to Balsan (a truly good 
sport), who lent her an apartment for the venture, and to Capel, who helped 
finance it. 
Next came a boutique on Rue Cambon, the street where Chanel Inc. can be found 
today, followed by another in Deauville. There, Madsen says, "she invented 
sports clothes" and became the first designer to turn wool jersey -- considered 
too lifeless for anything but underwear -- into chic sportswear. 
Step by step, her professional life soared. But long-lasting love eluded her. 
(She would always maintain she had never wanted to marry and lose her 
independence.) Boy Capel wed an English aristocrat and died in an automobile 
accident while in France and planning to see Chanel one more time. The Duke of 
Westminster, her lover for 10 years, also left her for an English aristocrat -- 
one who could bear him a child, which Chanel could not. Her friends gossiped 
that she would marry Paul Iribe, but the artist and set designer collapsed and 
died on her tennis court in the middle of a game. 
Chanel's whole life was a tough game of chance in which she won more often than 
she lost. For years, the deal she struck with Pierre and Paul Wertheimer for 
Chanel No. 5 was the bane of her existence, but it eventually proved a godsend: 
The Wertheimers bankrolled her return to fashion in 1954 after a 15-year 
absence. The French spurned the collection, calling it passe, but when it 
received rave reviews in America, Chanel's career was reborn. Even her alleged 
collaboration with the Nazis during World War II was swept under the carpet 
because she supposedly knew too many British secrets to go on trial. Her 
suspected collaboration was tied to a wartime romance with German diplomat Hans 
Gunther von Dincklage ("Spatz" to his friends) and her insistance on living at 
the Ritz Hotel along with the occupying Germans. 
Her escapades and her pals -- such as Colette, Cocteau, Diaghilev and 
Stravinsky -- were never short on glamour and intrigue. Yet Madsen paints a 
dull, confusing picture. On page after page, the reader finds little more than 
a jumbled band of colorless stick figures, borrowed heavily from previous 
biographers, such as Paul Morand. 
If, as Madsen often repeats, Chanel was determined to remain a mystery; if she 
sent away in abject confusion even those to whom she chose to tell some of her 
story, why does he try his hand nearly 20 years after her death? With nothing 
fresh to contribute, he has woven an awkward, ill-fitting tale of a woman who 
devoted her life to magnificently constructed garments -- and to secrecy. 
