DEMOCRATS SEE PATH TO LEVERAGE ON TAXES 
The era of fiscal paralysis will either end next year or the federal budget 
will become a complete fraud. 
Congress will soon put the final touches on the 1990 fiscal budget, which 
begins Oct. 1. The 1990 budget is likely to be the last one in which Congress 
and the Administration can meet budget targets of the Gramm-Rudman law through 
a combination of gimmicks, nickle-and-dime revenue raisers and relatively 
painless spending cuts. 
The next budget year -- 1991 -- is supposed to be within $100 billion of 
balance, according to the Gramm-Rudman law. But most experts project that the 
1991 deficit will be as much as $160 billion. And that's assuming no recession. 
A $60-billion gap is serious money, even in Washington. The Gramm-Rudman law 
provides that if the budget misses its targets, spending shall be automatically 
cut, half from military outlays and half from domestic programs. 
Until now, the Reagan and Bush Administrations have played a very effective 
game of chicken with the Democratic Congress. In budget battles of recent 
years, Congress has always blinked first and gone along with something close to 
the Administration blueprint, rather than risk triggering automatic 
Gramm-Rudman cuts. 
Presidents Reagan and Bush have been forced to take smaller military outlays 
than they wanted, but they have been able to set spending priorities and keep 
the pledge of no new taxes. Democrats willing to risk triggering automatic cuts 
have been tactically isolated within their own party. 
Next year, this scenario changes -- for three reasons. 
First, a $60-billion gap is too big to make up through fudging. 
Second, President Bush, unlike President Reagan, wants to spend some money. 
There is broad public support for more spending on drug eradication, 
environmental cleanup, education, not to mention money that will be spent one 
way or another on AIDS. 
And third, there is a growing sentiment in Democratic ranks that it's time to 
call the Administration's bluff. 
The present budget paralysis was created in 1981, when the original Reagan 
"supply-side" tax cut failed to generate the revenues it promised. Instead, it 
locked the government into a cycle of permanent deficits. 
Cynics assumed that starving government was the real goal all along, and a 
number of Reagan's strategists have admitted as much. Whether or not it was 
Reagan's goal, the tactic has worked brilliantly. For almost a decade, 
Democrats have chafed under a steadily tightening fiscal noose. 
Until now, Democrats in Congress have resisted playing serious chicken with the 
budget. They have not been able to agree on tactics. They have been intimidated 
by the Administration's threat to paint them as the tax-and-spend party. And 
they have assumed that letting the Gramm-Rudman formula substitute for hard 
legislative work would be seen as a congressional failure. 
But all of this is changing. It is beginning to occur to prominent Democrats 
that the threat of automatic Gramm-Rudman cuts of $30 billion from defense and 
$30 billion from domestic spending would force George Bush to rescind his 
no-new-taxes pledge. 
The alternative is either to give up on issues that Bush really cares about, or 
to make recent budget subterfuges universal and simply place every new spending 
program off budget and take the government deeper into debt. 
That is what the Administration did with the savings-and-loan bailout, and that 
is what drug czar William J. Bennett hopes to do to finance his war on drugs. 
But two can play this game. If we can have plentiful off-budget spending to 
bail out banks, or to crack down on crack, then why not off-budget spending for 
housing, or child care, or universal health insurance? 
The Democrats would be far better advised to insist on real budget discipline 
by letting the Gramm-Rudman law do its work. They should offer their own set of 
taxing and spending priorities, with necessary new spending financed by 
restoring a progressive tax code. Raising the top tax rate to its 1987 level of 
38% would do most of the job, and it would not touch the pocketbooks of most 
taxpayers. 
If the Bush Administration failed to meet Congress halfway, then reducing 
defense spending by $30 billion and living with another $30 billion in domestic 
cuts would become George Bush's problem. Being an 
education-environment-drug-eradicator President would be out of the question. 
And the generals would suddenly become the Democrats' allies, lobbying for 
taxes rather than cuts in defense spending. 
The voters, I suspect, would like to see the budget paralysis end, even at the 
price of some new taxes. And they might enjoy seeing the Democrats get up off 
the mat. 
