SOLIDARITY EDITOR WILL BE PREMIER; 
MAZOWIECKI, A LONGTIME ACTIVIST, EXPECTS FORMAL SELECTION TODAY 
In a dramatic reversal of 45 years of Communist rule in Poland, President 
Wojciech Jaruzelski is expected today to offer the post of prime minister to 
newspaper editor Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a longtime opposition activist and a key 
Solidarity adviser. 
Mazowiecki, 62, known as a soft-spoken conciliator among his Solidarity 
colleagues, met for two hours with Jaruzelski on Friday and afterward told 
reporters that he expected a formal offer of the post from the president. 
"I am ready to accept it," he said. 
There was no certainty about when the announcement might come, but a 
presidential television message is scheduled for 6 p.m. today, following a 
meeting of the Communist Party's Central Committee. Political observers assume 
that Jaruzelski will discuss his move with the party's leadership before making 
it public. 
"We had long talks with the president, which were very fundamental, concerning 
all important issues," Mazowiecki said. "I think there will be solutions very 
soon." 
Mazowiecki (pronounced mah-zoe-vee-ET-skee) spoke in his customarily calm 
manner with a crowd of journalists trailing him through the parliament building 
as he arrived for a meeting with Solidarity's leadership. He was asked when he 
expected to name a government. 
"I wish I knew that myself," said the editor of the Weekly Solidarity 
newspaper. "There is great social impatience, but this is to be a government 
formed on a completely new principle, and I need some time." 
The new principle is the nearest approach to a parliamentary democracy in 
Eastern Europe since the region was politically colonized by Soviet dictator 
Josef Stalin at the end of World War II. 
The acceptance by Jaruzelski of Solidarity leader Lech Walesa's plan for a 
government led by Solidarity appears to spell the end of another principle 
dearly held by Communists: the leading role of the Communist Party in the 
affairs of the state. 
"This is definitely the final nail in the coffin of the leading role of the 
Communist Party," said Janusz Onyskiewicz, the Solidarity spokesman. "This is 
the end of the whole concept." 
In Kennebunkport, Me., where President Bush is spending a summer vacation, 
White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater held out the possibility that 
greater U.S. assistance for Poland might follow a change in the government 
there. 
No Added U.S. Aid Now 
But for the time being, he said, "it is really premature" to think about 
increasing U.S. aid to Poland beyond the approximately $100 million that Bush 
pledged during a visit there last month. 
"We don't have a lot of money to offer," Fitzwater said, referring to the 
federal budget deficit. But, he said, "It is something we would have to 
consider down the road." 
Beyond expressing encouragement for a shift to a non-Communist government, as 
officials have done in the past, the White House spokesman declined to comment 
on the prospects for change in Warsaw, saying formal White House reaction would 
await an official announcement there. 
Among the parade of Communist officials calling on Jaruzelski on Friday was 
Mieczyslaw F. Rakowski, the new Communist Party chief, who has lately been 
exhorting rank-and-file Communists to respond boldly to what he calls "a 
struggle for power" in Poland. 
However, it seemed unlikely that Rakowski or other party hard-liners would be 
able to derail the Mazowiecki nomination. Under Polish law, Jaruzelski, who 
recently stepped aside as Communist Party leader to assume his duties as 
president, must submit his nomination for prime minister to the Sejm, or lower 
house of Parliament, for approval. 
With Solidarity's forces in the Parliament augmented by two new coalition 
partners, the United Peasants' Party and the Democratic Party, the election of 
a Solidarity candidate is virtually assured. The Solidarity alliance now 
controls the Sejm by 264 to 196. 
It was Walesa and his envoy Jaroslaw Kaszynski, a Solidarity deputy in the 
Sejm, who negotiated the coalition with the United Peasants and the Democrats, 
persuading the two minor parties -- with 103 votes between them -- to abandon a 
40-year-old partnership with the Communists and come over to the Solidarity 
side. 
The switch by the two parties was the keystone in Walesa's shrewdly calculated 
drive to back the Communists into a corner with his campaign for a 
Solidarity-led government -- a move he decided on himself, even though his key 
advisers had been saying for months that Solidarity was not ready to form a 
government. 
Amid mounting speculation over whether there should be a Solidarity government 
-- and whether Walesa himself, with his enormous prestige in the country, would 
head it -- the designated prime minister, Czeslaw Kiszczak, was unable to 
recruit a Cabinet. He announced Monday that he was ready to give up the 
attempt, which was the point at which Walesa's forces came together. 
Walesa's comments throughout the last 10 days suggested that he would be 
willing to serve as prime minister, but Solidarity members say it is now clear 
that he had no intention of taking the post. But by keeping open the 
possibility, he ensured that the drive for the coalition would be accepted both 
by Solidarity's Sejm deputies and by the United Peasants and Democrats. 
Walesa met Thursday with Jaruzelski, who accepted Walesa's plan along with his 
choice for prime minister. 
Solidarity officials said after the meeting that two other names beside 
Mazowiecki's were mentioned: Jacek Kuron, a blunt-spoken and sometimes 
controversial opposition activist, and Bronislaw Geremek, a cerebral professor 
of medieval history who heads Solidarity's Sejm delegation. But Mazowiecki, 
insiders say, was the choice Walesa conveyed to Jaruzelski. 
Skilled Mediator 
Among Mazowiecki's qualifications for the job, colleagues say, are his skills 
as a mediator and a thoughtful tactician. However, some colleagues say that 
Mazowiecki was more suitable to Walesa than Geremek, whose bolder style and 
ambitions could one day conflict with the Nobel Peace Prize winner's. 
Mazowiecki has been a close adviser to Walesa for years, and his credentials as 
an opposition activist are impeccable. Unlike both Kuron and Geremek, who were 
once members of the Communist Party, Mazowiecki, closely associated with the 
Roman Catholic Church, has never been a member of the party. 
He joined Solidarity at the outset, circulating a petition among intellectuals 
in support of the shipyard strikers in Gdansk in August, 1980. After the 
martial-law crackdown in 1981, he was jailed for a year. But he was back in the 
shipyard, at Walesa's side, in the strikes of April, 1988, the first walkouts 
by the union since its banning in 1982. 
"There are huge troubles," Mazowiecki said Friday. "But I believe we can 
overcome them. If I didn't believe, I would never have taken this up. I am a 
believer, and I believe that Providence takes care of us." 
He said he had hope that "people will feel things can be better." 
History, he said, "has shown in several moments that Poles can strive for new 
solutions, unusual and innovative ones. I hope that such a psychological moment 
is arriving now, that people will feel that there is a situation in which our 
future depends on us." 
Times staff writer James Gerstenzang, in Kennebunkport, contributed to this 
story. 
THE MARCH TOWARD POWER 
Key events in the history of Poland's free trade union movement: 
Aug. 14, 1980 -- Lech Walesa leads workers in occupation of Lenin Shipyard in 
Baltic port of Gdansk amid strikes over meat price increases. 
Aug. 31 -- Gdansk strikers and government sign accord allowing free trade 
unions and the right to strike. 
Dec. 13, 1981 -- Communist leader Wojciech Jaruzelski declares martial law, 
interns thousands of Solidarity figures, including Walesa. 
Oct. 8, 1982 -- Parliament passes bill officially dissolving trade unions, 
including Solidarity. 
July 22, 1983 -- Jaruzelski lifts martial law. 
Oct. 5 -- Walesa is awarded Nobel Peace Prize. 
Sept. 11, 1986 -- Government amnesty frees 225 political prisoners, including 
Solidarity leaders jailed for clandestine activities. 
April, 1988 -- Government price increases spark beginning of first major labor 
unrest since martial law. 
Feb. 6, 1989 -- Solidarity starts talks with Communist authorities aimed at 
pulling Poland out of economic and political crisis. 
April 5 -- Solidarity and government negotiators sign agreement to amend 1982 
trade union law to legalize Solidarity. 
June 4 and 18 -- In first partly free elections for Parliament in 42 years, 
Solidarity wins 260 of the 261 seats it sought. 
July 19 -- National Assembly elects Jaruzelski president of Poland by narrowest 
possible margin. 
July 25 -- Walesa meets Jaruzelski and proposes creation of a Solidarity 
government. 
Aug. 2 -- Czeslaw Kiszczak is appointed prime minister. 
Aug. 7 -- Walesa calls for Kiszczak to make way for non-Communist government 
grouping Solidarity with two small parties. 
Aug. 14 -- Kiszczak abandons efforts to create Communist-led "grand coalition" 
government with Solidarity as junior member. 
Aug. 15 -- Walesa says Communists can keep Defense and Interior ministries in a 
Solidarity-led government. 
Aug. 16 -- United Peasants' and Democratic parties bolt coalition with 
Communists to join coalition with Solidarity. 
POLAND'S TOP TWO JOBS 
A comparison of powers and duties of president and prime minister: 
PRESIDENT 
Office of presidency was restored this year after 37-year absence. Former 
Communist Party leader Wojciech Jaruzelski now holds the office. Chosen by 
joint vote of Sejm and Senate, president serves six-year term as head of state 
and may run once for reelection. President also: 
 -- Is commander in chief of armed forces, may declare state of war or state of 
emergency when he judges that security threat exists and may rule for up to 
three months without consent of Parliament. 
 -- Must ratify international agreements; appoints and recalls ambassadors; may 
veto legislation passed by Parliament, subject to two-thirds majority override. 
 -- May dissolve Parliament and call new elections in limited circumstances, 
e.g., if Parliament fails to choose government or pass budget within three 
months of being seated, or if Parliament passes laws curtailing president's 
powers. 
PRIME MINISTER 
Prime minister is head of government, serving for four-year term of Sejm, lower 
house of Parliament, unless recalled by president and voted out of office by 
majority of Sejm. This official is nominated by president and elected by simple 
majority of Sejm. Prime minister also: 
 -- Assembles Cabinet to direct government's activities and runs ministries 
that control Poland's state-sector-dominated economy. Cabinet must be approved 
by lower house. 
 -- Is responsible for day-to-day actions of government; drafts and proposes 
laws to Parliament, as well as annual budgets and national plans for economy. 
 -- Leads weekly Cabinet meetings and controls all important government 
personnel decisions. 
Source: Associated Press 
SOLIDARITY'S MAN: Key union adviser "a moralist, not a politician." Page 8 
