GOV. DEUKMEJIAN, LEGISLATORS END BUDGET IMPASSE 
Gov. Deukmejian, in his economic and social shortsightedness, has leaped off 
the path of common sense and landed -- blue pencil and all -- in lame-duck 
history. Although it is unfair to blame all of California's ills on a single 
professional bureaucrat, he has added to the state's problems, not its 
solutions. The tardy budget on which he so viciously fought the Legislature is 
a clear indication of the governor's true legacy. 
Who suffers? -- the poor, our children, our future. For example, Deukmejian 
vindictively knifed educational programs aimed at keeping our kids away from 
crime, in school, off of drugs and off of the street. He virtually eliminated a 
well-respected testing program (California Assessment Program) which helps 
educators gauge their performance -- and the "new assessment program" he is 
calling for will take unnecessary time and millions of dollars to put into 
place. 
Instead of spending much-needed money on training programs that assist people 
off of welfare, he has cut funding for such programs, as well as welfare 
benefits. $61 million was cut from the community mental health system. Both of 
these systems alleviate the homelessness dilemma. Yet, again, our governor has 
deemed it wise to add to the ranks of homeless people by strangling the 
programs aimed at keeping individuals off of our community sidewalks. 
What leads people to drugs and crime: insufficient education and opportunity, 
poverty and abuse -- all of which, sooner or later, cause taxpayers a great 
deal more money spent on discipline than prevention. By cutting juvenile 
justice programs and the Child Abuse Prevention Training Act's funding, our 
governor may have balanced this year's state budget, but his decisions will 
cost Californians unnecessary dysfunctional years and billions in future 
cleanup costs. Deukmejian is leaving this state with a miserable legacy and, in 
my opinion, is not leaving office soon enough. 
BRIAN YABLON 
Los Angeles 
