NOTEBOOK: GOODBY L.A. OLE; HELLO ATLAS 
Mario Tamayo, co-founder of the once super-hot Cha Cha Cha in far southeastern 
Hollywood and also of Cafe Mambo nearby, has a new, large-scale project in the 
works: By mid-October, he will open the Atlas Bar &amp; Grill, where L.A. Ole 
now stands in the Wilshire District's ornate Pellissier Building -- better 
known as the Wiltern. (L.A. Ole remains open, doing business as usual, through 
Aug. 29.) 
Tamayo says that the Atlas, which he will run in partnership with the Ratkovich 
Co., owners of the building and of other renovated landmark properties around 
Los Angeles (including the soon-to-open Chapman Market not far from the 
Wiltern), will feature "transcontinental cuisine." That means, he explains "an 
eclectic sort of menu, sort of Californian, but with Latin and Asian flavors." 
Victoria Granof, formerly in the kitchen at Trumps, among other restaurants, 
will be executive chef. Designer Ron Meyer is doing the interior. 
Though the Atlas will be primarily a restaurant, Tamayo adds, he also plans to 
present music and comedy performances on an occasional basis. 
"In Los Angeles," he says, "going out to dinner is the whole evening to most 
people, and most people don't go to clubs afterwards -- so I thought I would 
add that element of entertainment here. I want to make the Atlas a really fun 
sort of venue, with a bit of wit to it -- not a place that will take itself too 
seriously." 
Meanwhile, says Tamayo, who gave up operation of Cha Cha Cha by court order 
after a dispute with his one-time partner, chef Toribio Prado, he will continue 
running Cafe Mambo and his clothing store, Modern Objects. "I own and operate 
both of them," he says. "I also own but don't operate Cha Cha Cha, and I'm not 
sure what will happen there. We are still in litigation." 
VIKING FAREWELL?: Another of L.A.'s old classic restaurants, Scandia on Sunset 
Strip, has closed -- at least temporarily. The venerable Danish/Continental 
establishment, once one of the best restaurants in town, has locked its doors 
and left a message on its phone machine saying that it will reopen after Labor 
Day. Sources in the industry, however, say magazine publisher, Robert Petersen, 
plans to sell the restaurant he's owned for more than a decade. More 
conservative Scandia watchers say the restaurant, at the very least, will 
undergo a substantial management change. 
CLAWS: "Lobster is never really cheap," says Hans Rockenwagner, proprietor of 
Rockenwagner's in Venice, "but it is most reasonable at this time of year." 
With that in mind, Rockenwagner is now offering, in addition to the regular 
menu, a small menu devoted exclusively to lobster dishes. Among the items 
served are lobster lasagna with a "checkerboard" of pasta, and lobster salad 
with avocado, home-cured tomatoes and spicy walnuts. The lobster menu will 
crawl, er, run until early September at least . . . Meanwhile, also in 
celebration of the current seasonal plentitude of lobster, the Bistrot Terrasse 
at Le Meridien hotel in Newport Beach presents a weekly Maine Lobster Cookout 
every Sunday from 4:30 p.m. The cost is $22 per person, including a grilled 
one-and-a-half pound lobster, Caesar salad, baked potato and corn on the cob. 
HOT STUFF: If you're a spur-of-the-moment kind of chili fan, you'll probably 
want to head right over to the Perkins Palace parking lot in Old Town Pasadena 
for the Pasadena Chili Cook-Off and Antique Car Show '89 -- held today from 11 
a.m. to 4 p.m. Among the participants will be such restaurants as Roxxi, the 
Rose City Diner, the Crocodile Cafe and Johnny Reb's, plus the Pasadena Fire 
Department, Bristol Farms markets and chili expert Layne Wootten. Tickets are 
$7 each, with proceeds going to the Guadalupe Home for Boys. . . . 
FOR THE RECORD: The UCLA Extension Division of Culinary Arts Open House, to be 
held next Saturday, the 26th, begins at 10 a.m., not 10 p.m. as noted in this 
column last Sunday. Call (213) 206-8120 for details. 
