IN ARAB VIEW, IT'S NOT JUST KUWAIT BUT BUSH'S ENMITY TOWARD HUSSEIN; 
GULF CRISIS: KUWAIT PRODUCES SOME UNUSUAL ARAB WORLD ALLIANCES, AMID 
INDICATIONS THAT THE ARAB-WEST SPLIT WILL BECOME EVEN MORE ANTAGONISTIC. 
It will be many days yet before anyone can project the consequences of the 
U.S.-Iraq crisis. But the event has had such a shock effect that even now we 
may hazard guesses about the post-Kuwait Arab World. 
That world, more than ever fragmented by the pressures of the current crisis, 
is rightly or wrongly united on one point -- that the cause of the crisis is 
not just Kuwait but the passion of George Bush to be rid of Saddam Hussein. 
There is today more pure, unalloyed hatred of the United States among Arabs 
than at any time in the 30 years that this correspondent has been reporting on 
the area. 
Even in the past fortnight it has become a cliche to say that "things are never 
going to be the same again" in the Middle East, for it was already recognized, 
before any bullets started flying, that this crisis would have consequences 
wider and deeper than those of Suez. In the next few years the division between 
the Arabs and the West is going to be still more angry and antagonistic, 
perhaps partly because in many countries there is an internal split between the 
rulers and the ruled. The pro-Western rulers uphold international law but the 
ruled say that if Iraq committed aggression it was doing the "right" thing in 
getting rid of a non-representative monarchical regime, but in the wrong way -- 
that the ruling Al Sabah family should have been thrown out by the Kuwaiti 
people. 
This unfeeling indifference to the fall of the house of Al Sabah is an 
expression of a surprising degree of hostility, now openly expressed, between 
the "Gulfis" and the other Arabs: In sartorial terms, between the men of the 
safari jacket and the men of the nightshirts. In the view of the former, the 
gulf system of monarchical states is one of the principal things that is never 
going to be the same again. If one of these states -- the most "advanced" and 
decent and liberal -- can be swept aside, then all the others can be 
challenged: From now on they are living on borrowed time. If the Al Sabah 
family is restored, it would quite soon have to yield its absolute power to an 
elected parliament or face people-power. 
The interstate systems of the Arab World have been tested and found wanting. 
The Gulf Cooperation Council and the Arab Cooperation Council have been unable 
to do anything positive. Surprisingly, the Arab League has gained some credit 
because it did pass a resolution that took a stand -- but at the price of 
setting aside the provision of its charter that all important decisions should 
be unanimous. After this precedent, no future decisions of the league are ever 
going to be unanimous, because the Kuwait crisis has forced governments to 
stand up and be counted with some strange results: Moderate pro-Western Tunisia 
turned out to be an angry radical, which was also more or less true of the 
United Yemens and Somalia, while professionally anti-Western Syria aligned 
itself with Egypt and Saudi Arabia. 
Apart from the gulf emirates, the regimes that are going to be the most 
vulnerable because of their policy in the crisis are Egypt and Saudi Arabia. 
Despite the extra security provisions that have been taken in Egypt, there was 
the extraordinary spectacle of Egyptians lining up in front of the Iraqi 
Embassy in Cairo to volunteer for service with Iraq and, therefore, possibly 
against the Egyptian contingent defending Saudi Arabia. 
The Saudi claim to be the custodian of Islam's Holy Places has been demolished 
because that government brought into the Holy Land thousands of the men of the 
cross, the neo-Christian Crusaders. They are led, at this moment, by George 
Bush, on holiday in Maine. It is because of this fanatical aspect that the 
eventual gainers from the current situation, apart from Israel, will be Islamic 
fundamentalists everywhere, not least in Saudi Arabia and not just in the Arab 
World. 
The current coalition between the secular Arab nationalists and fundamentalists 
is as powerful as it is unprecedented, because hitherto the fundamentalists 
have backed the conservative, pro-Western regimes. 
Because of this imposed shift in opinion, the leadership of Yasser Arafat 
within the Palestine Liberation Organization, seriously questioned and even 
challenged, has been strengthened by his pro-Iraqi stand. And this internal 
cohesion largely makes up for the loss of the PLO's Saudi paymasters and its 
loss of credibility in the West. 
And what of Iraq? Iraq means Saddam Hussein. As of now he is in a no-lose 
situation. If he "wins," in whatever fashion, he will emerge as a greater Arab 
hero even than Gamal Abdel Nasser -- almost as great as Saladin, the 
12th-Century sultan of Egypt and Syria who, like Hussein, was also a native of 
Tikrit on the Tigris. If he loses he will be a martyr, because he will not fail 
by stepping down, resigning or going into voluntary exile. He will have to be 
killed, either in an internal coup or by military action. The manner of his 
death will decide his place in Iraqi history. 
What can be safely predicted is that his death will be followed by a civil war, 
a struggle for power between the armed militia of the Baath Party and the 
regular army. The party and Hussein personally have never trusted the soldiers 
-- which is why there have been frequent purges of the senior ranks. The latest 
attempt against Hussein was in early June and was reportedly financed by 
Kuwait's Al Sabah family, which could explain why Hussein is so determined they 
should not return. On the day of the attack into Kuwait, the army and the civil 
administration of Iraq were brought under the direct control of the Baath 
Party. 
In a shoot-out, the army should have the firepower to defeat the party, 
provided the generals act together. If a general or a cabal of generals come 
out on top, they will retain the essentials of Hussein's policy because these 
are popular in Iraq -- Arab nationalist opposition to Israel, a mixed economy, 
a more relaxed policy on human rights and a greater concentration on internal 
problems. 
Along with Israel and the Islamic fundamentalists -- indeed as one of the 
fundamentalists -- Iran could emerge as one of the beneficiaries of the crisis. 
It has already benefited from Hussein's concessions, made under U.S. military 
pressure, on the shared control of the Shatt-al-Arab waterway and the exchange 
of territory with Iraq. 
Even though the moderates in Iran want friendship with the West, and Iran has 
condemned Iraq for invading Kuwait, the supporters of the "imam's line" in 
Tehran are still strong enough to declare that monarchies are anti-Islamic and 
that Western military power, especially that of the United States, must be 
removed from the gulf. If Iran maintains that firm line, while at the same time 
breaking sanctions to help Iraq with food imports, which has been hinted at, 
then Iran would get the best of both worlds. 
Jordan, traditionally moderate and pro-Western, now seems to be facing an 
excruciating situation, allied to the bete noire of the West and threatened by 
the West with economic ruin and starvation. Yet the bases of King Hussein's 
power, internally, are solid. The population, both Jordanian and Palestinian, 
is completely with him, not forgetting the newly emerged power of the 
fundamentalists; the army's loyalty is solid. So he does not really have to 
face any political dangers -- only economic hardship and deprivation. 
Trying to discern the future, one sees the Middle East, however the Kuwait 
crisis is settled, as a miserable and nasty place. The economies of many 
countries will be either badly damaged or ruined -- Sudan, Egypt, Lebanon, 
Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait and even those gulf states not directly involved, because 
if the foreign workers there, essential for keeping their economies and 
administrations going, take fright and run for home, daily life will grind to a 
halt. The countries with injured economies will be looking for compensation, 
and so a two-tiered protectorate system will come into existence. 
At the lower, financial level, Kuwait will pay Turkey, Saudi Arabia will 
continue subsidizing Morocco and Syria and the United States will go on paying 
Egypt. And at a higher level, the moneybags themselves will be under the 
politico-military protection of the United States. The peoples of the area will 
be either vengefully cocky -- if Iraq prevails -- or resentfully sullen -- if 
it does not. And whatever happens, the Middle East peace process will be far 
over the horizon. 
