COZYING UP TO RAFSANJANI BY THE WEST MAY JUST UNDERMINE IRANIAN 'MODERATE' 
The clumsy and inopportune efforts of Western governments and the Western media 
to cast Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani in the role of the "moderate," 
"pragmatic," Anwar Sadat-like leader of Iran have helped produce the militant 
counterattack that led to his humiliation before the Majlis last Tuesday. 
Instead of the honorific formality of presenting himself as the newly elected 
president along with his Cabinet to the Parliament, he was there informed by 
outgoing President Ali Khamenei that, according to the constitution, he would 
have to wait till October before he could step up -- and only after Khamenei 
stepped down. Rafsanjani tried to rush things, because in Iran's presently 
volatile politics six or seven weeks is an age, and he was initially rebuffed 
by his antagonists. Only two days later, on the 17th, did Rafsanjani contrive 
to get Khamenei to resign so that he himself could be sworn in. 
Predictions of a power struggle after the death of the Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomenei were belied by what seemed a smooth transition of power; but in fact 
the struggle went on, just below the surface, in the arcane underworld of 
mullahdom. Now it has burst into the open. 
Last Wednesday, Rafsanjani was succeeded as Speaker of the Majlis by his 
deputy, Mehdi Karrubi, who, as it happens, is a leading militant and a close 
friend of Ahmed Khomeini, one of Rafsanjani's main challengers. Khomeini, son 
of the late ayatollah, is the rabble-rouser who led rioting Iranian pilgrims in 
Mecca in 1987, when 400 people were killed. 
The very bases of Rafsanjani's position are under challenge. He lacks solid 
political legitimacy because almost half the electorate did not vote in the 
presidential election, which was openly rigged. And he also lacks spiritual 
charisma, being a very different sort of person from the usual senior Shiite 
cleric. Rafsanjani, before entering politics under Khomeini, was a full-time 
and successful millionaire trader, managing his family's pistachio-nut 
business. It is inevitable that other ambitious Iranians, whether mullahs or 
civilian politicians, should question why this particular turbaned 
wheeler-dealer should be the leader of Iran. 
On the one hand, Rafsanjani revealed his pro-Western tilt when he proclaimed 
that he was ready to help obtain the release of the hostages held in Lebanon. 
And for very practical reasons: He is desperate to obtain Western financial and 
technical assistance in the rebuilding of Iran's war-wrecked economy. 
On the other hand, the militants have been warning Rafsanjani not to depart 
from "the line of the imam," which remained tough and anti-Western right to the 
end of Khomeini's life. A few days ago, Iran's largest newspaper, Keyhan, 
asserted that the purity of revolutionary principles was more important than 
money. 
The West is not helping Rafsanjani in his power struggle by prematurely and 
overeagerly praising him for his "helpfulness" and ascribing to him powers for 
speeding the release of the hostages in Lebanon which he does not actually 
possess. 
The militants in Iran are led, among others, by Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, the 
minister of the interior, who felt strong enough to throw down the gauntlet to 
Rafsanjani in a recent speech from Khomeini's graveside that denounced those 
who would conciliate the United States and Israel. The day before the Majlis 
session, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei directly answered Rafsanjani's pro-Western tilt 
when he delivered a comprehensive and angry assault on the United States as the 
ally of Israel. 
In the struggle with the fundamentalists, Rafsanjani is in an infinitely weaker 
position than was Sadat vis-a-vis his fundamentalists. Egypt was, and is, a 
secular state and the Egyptian Muslim activists, after their suppression by 
President Gamal Abdel Nasser, were small groups working underground, able to 
obtain arms and explosives only with difficulty. In contrast, Iran for the past 
10 years has been a full-fledged and militant Islamic state with anti-Western 
fundamentalism as the political mainstream. This was backed with all the power 
and charisma of the imam and has been accepted not just by scores or hundreds 
or thousands of people but by hundreds of thousands, even millions, of devout 
believers as their religious and political creed. 
In Egypt, the militants were on the outside attacking the Establishment; in 
Iran a militant Establishment will have to make a 180-degree turn if it is to 
accept Rafsanjani's pro-Western, anti-militant policies. 
There is as much adversarial factionalism down the chain of command from Tehran 
to the Shiite groups in Lebanon holding the hostages as there is at the top 
layer of political power in Tehran itself. Thus, some personalities in Tehran 
have their own especially close personal links with certain factions and 
leaders in Hezbollah, the Party of God, in Lebanon; in turn, the Hezbollah 
leaders have their special connections with one or another hostage-holding 
group and these may be based, variously, in the suburbs of Beirut, in the Bekaa 
Valley or in southern Lebanon; groups have differing interests and objectives 
depending on their geographic location. 
Thus the Shiites in southern Lebanon are not as involved in the hostage issue 
as those based in Beirut or the Bekaa. So any order from Rafsanjani has to 
follow a tortuous path to its ultimate recipient in Lebanon. This is further 
complicated by the fact that on the ground in Lebanon, most of what may be 
called Shiite territory is controlled by the Amal organization, which is 
pro-Syrian, anti-Hezbollah and not especially friendly with Tehran. For 
example, when Sheik Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, the spiritual mentor of 
Hezbollah in Beirut, made a "helpful" statement on the hostages Aug. 11, he was 
at the same time contradicted by Sheik Sobhi Tufaili, addressing 50,000 Shiites 
at Baalbek in the Bekaa Valley. 
These splits and differences within the Iran-Lebanon Shiite structure have to 
be combined with geography: Iran is far removed from Lebanon, with the links 
between them passing exclusively through Syria, which has its own 
intergovernmental differences with Tehran. Moreover, there is a gut feeling of 
alienation between the non-Arab, Farsi-speaking Iranian Revolutionary Guards 
and the Semitic, Arabic-speaking "terrorists"; the Iranians have not endeared 
themselves to the local population by their crude and arrogant behavior. 
This complex of negative factors makes one wonder, when the West confidently 
backs Rafsanjani as a person who will deliver up the hostages, whether it has 
the least idea of the actual situation in Lebanon, or whether it is simply 
whistling in the dark to keep its courage up. The West seems to have learned 
nothing from its Sadat experience, when it embraced him to death. 
