TV REVIEWS; 
TNT'S 'LAST ELEPHANT' HAS WRENCHING EFFECT 
Ivory ornaments are slaughtered elephants. That's the theme -- and the 
wrenching visual impact -- of the strongly cast fictional film, "The Last 
Elephant" (TNT cable today at 5 p.m., 7 p.m., 9 p.m. and 11 p.m., with encore 
broadcasts Tuesday and next weekend). 
Shot in Nairobi and the wildlife bush country of Kenya, with Joseph Sargent 
directing a cast featuring John Lithgow, Isabella Rossellini and James Earl 
Jones, the production is the National Audubon Society's first effort to expand 
its environmental message beyond the documentary format. 
As an entertainment, with murderous poachers, corrupt ivory traffickers and a 
cynical, alcoholic adventure novelist (Lithgow) who finds mystery and purpose 
in Africa, "The Last Elephant" is a radical departure for Audubon Society 
Productions. 
And a smart leap: You won't watch the staged but realistic massacre of a herd 
of elephants by ax-wielding, AK-47-bearing poachers from neighboring Somalia 
and Burundi and easily slip on ivory jewelry or feel the same way about the 
ivories on a piano. 
The movie doesn't pound you with facts, but there's an urgency here: bloody 
mutilation has cut the African elephant population in half in the last decade 
and in Kenya the number of elephants has plummeted from 70,000 to 18,000. 
In Richard Guttman and Bill Bozzone's script, from a story by Bradley T. 
Winter, the dialogue is brushed with telling images. "If man allows the beast 
to die, man's spirit will die of loneliness" becomes an unusually poignant line 
because it's translated from Swahili and uttered by an aging Masai tribal chief 
(not an actor). 
Elsewhere, the writers deftly dramatize thematic points. Jones, playing a 
Nairobi police inspector, has such a great voice that he can, of course, make 
any line of dialogue tremble. Gazing at an elephant family of sisters, 
grandmothers, babies, he asks, "When will they learn to distrust us?" 
Rossellini's field researcher remarks more bluntly, "Elephants are cursed 
fugitives in their own territory." 
Forgetting the story's conventional, action-filled, romance-filled ending, the 
film's import is that it recalls arguably the greatest narrative prose ever 
written about the elephant (and collapsing colonial empires): George Orwell's 
unforgettable autobiographical essay (from his Burmese days), "Shooting the 
Elephant."Ray Loynd 
