MUSIC REVIEW; 
SECOND CONCERT AT LA JOLLA SUMMERFEST '90 
SummerFest Artistic Director Heiichiro Ohyama proved again Sunday that inspired 
cronyism produces the strongest chamber music performances. 
At the second public concert in SummerFest '90 in Sherwood Auditorium at the 
San Diego Museum of Contemporary Art here, Ohyama, again surrounded by a 
distinguished group of gifted, high-achieving and musically affectionate 
cronies, put together a sensible -- if hardly provocative -- program consisting 
of Mozart's Piano Trio in G, K. 564, Ravel's Introduction and Allegro and 
Dvorak's Piano quartet in E-flat, Opus 87. 
Because of the character of the pieces, the evening moved steadily from 
Mozartean containment to Dvorakian climax. 
The Quartet, played passionately by a tight ensemble of obviously close 
colleagues, made all its dramatic points in a sometimes overwrought reading, 
one that might have been more effective at lower dynamic levels -- the 
acoustics in Sherwood Hall are clear enough to project even the most 
understated musical rhetoric, after all. 
Still, with such serious artists as pianist David Golub, violinist Gyorgy Pauk, 
violist Toby Hoffman and cellist Gary Hoffmancqb, to ask for a lesser 
commitment is practically insulting. If this piece emerged almost embarrassing 
in its emotional stridency, what was needed in the first place was restraint on 
the part of the composer. 
Restraint without wimpiness marked the buoyant and articulate performance of 
the famous Ravel piece accomplished by harpist Deborah Hoffman, assisted by 
violinists Julie Rosenfeld and Cho-Liang Lin, flutist Carol Wincenc, 
clarinetist David Peck and Hoffman's brothers, violist Toby and cellist Gary. 
The second evening of the fifth SummerFest series began with an elegant but 
well-spoken account of the Mozart Trio, a reading special in its balance of 
forward thrust and relaxed lyricism, played by violinist Pauk, cellist Ronald 
Leonard and pianist Emanuel Ax. It was a reminder that the finest chamber 
performances combine personal response with selfless execution. DANIEL CARIAGA 
