A NEW VOICE; 
ROBIN HARRIS' DOWN HOME EDGE HAS LAUNCHED HIM FROM THE COMEDY ACT THEATRE TO 
'DO THE RIGHT THING' AND BEYOND 
The entertainment industry -- particularly the comedy part -- is so rife with 
recycled product and self-cannibalism that a genuinely new talent presents an 
almost startling freshness and an instant prize. That has to be one of the 
reasons for the success of Roseanne Barr; it certainly underlies the eager rush 
to make the most of comedian Robin Harris. 
Before this summer, Harris, who emcees a lineup of comedians twice a week at a 
club called the Comedy Act Theatre, was one of the unheralded pleasures of the 
black community. A somewhat portly, tough-looking 35-year-old with angry 
bloodshot eyes, he makes none of the standard comedic efforts to ingratiate 
himself to his audience. Instead, he works like someone who genuinely doesn't 
give a damn, an unconscionable gossip pillorying anyone who catches his eye. 
It isn't only the black working-class young that dresses up to make the scene 
at the club. Black celebrities, heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, and any number 
of professional athletes show up regularly at the Comedy Act to be verbally 
frisked by Harris and snared in his spotlight. Members of the Los Angeles 
Lakers often show up to cool out after a home game. Harris often greets Earvin 
Johnson with the line, "Come on down here to the colored section, Magic." 
Harris' put-upon, playing-the-dozens manner conceals an underlying affection, 
the kind of spirited kidding that goes on when you've come home after being 
away for some time. 
But the secret is out now as a different cognoscenti has gotten wind of Robin 
Harris, and things may never be the same as he begins to take on the glossy 
patina of stardom. 
In the summer of '89, he's swinging into the fast lane in overdrive. Spike Lee 
cast him as Sweet Dick Willie, the center of the Greek chorus of street 
signifiers in "Do the Right Thing," and for as long as he was onscreen he 
commanded the movie with his characteristic mix of jive ("Mike Tyson ain't 
nothin'. If I fought Tyson I'd drop him like a bad habit.") and plaintive, 
sardonic wisdom. 
He had the forceful ease of the true natural, and everyone took notice. Lee 
immediately recast him in his new movie, "Love Supreme." Harris is wrapping up 
a major role in another feature film called "House Party," written and directed 
by Reggie Hudlin. He's about to cut a comedy album for Polygram Records. He 
showcased at The Roxy in July. And now the attendant TV heavies, mindful of 
what an adrenal rush a strong comedic personality can bring to prime time 
ratings have come courting. Harris' agent says he's met with NBC's Brandon 
Tartikoff, CBS's Barbara Corday, Fox's Lillah McCarthy, and Kim Fleary and Stu 
Bloomberg at ABC. 
Instant, easy laughter erupts from Harris' club audience as he shocks it with 
self-recognition. His roughness is the expression of a deeper unspoken 
intimacy. He's family. He knows all about the black working class, and the 
struggle to keep body and soul together in the community, and the sexual 
flashpoints and stresses between men and women. He understands the 
pressure-cooker feel of inner-city life, and how quickly its expression can hit 
the sizzle of the media wire that feeds the culture at large. 
To enter the club late, or leave early, or stand up for any reason or -- worst 
of all -- to have to make one's way to the stage-right stairs leading to the 
bathroom, is to invite the scourge of Harris' scrutiny, accompanied by a sharp 
spotlight that pins his hapless subjects like deer caught in headlights. 
"Look at that (expletive) hat, man. It black because she been wearin' it so 
long." 
"You can tell the woman who has a job by the way she walks. You can tell a 
virgin, too. Virgins walk like penguins." 
"You look good, honey. But that guy with you is ugly." 
"Like that suit, brother. It might come back in style." 
Harris' tone is so freighted with emphasis that it makes what he says sound 
more vituperative than it actually is. "Hey, you don't look a woman no way." 
"Y'all been to County Hospital? Get yourself some income! Get yourself 
somewhere!" 
Recently Spike Lee came to the Comedy Act with saxophonist Branford Marsalis 
and actress Olivia Brown of "Miami Vice," and stepped out in the street for a 
few minutes to talk about Harris. 
"Robbie Weems is my casting director. She said, 'Spike, you gotta see Robin 
Harris.' I did, and was amazed at his talent. I gave him a lot of latitude to 
make Sweet Dick funny -- I couldn't write that character as funny as Robin 
could. He has a sophisticated country wit. He was born in Chicago and raised in 
L.A., but he reaches way back to Mississippi. His humor is steeped in black 
humor, like Pigmeat Markham and Richard Pryor. He's folks." 
Lee had stepped out just after Harris had re-enacted a scene where a white cop 
stops him in a car late one night. "Cop say, 'You got a gun in the car?' 'No, 
it's home with the dope.' " Lee worked his way back to the table to hear Harris 
say: "Rich people are not moody. They always happy. Stocks up, niggahs down, 
great!" Then, to a young man man standing by the stairs: "Whaddayou think of 
Spike Lee?" 
"Who?" the man asked. 
"Spike Lee." 
"Where?" 
"Right there," said Harris, pointing. 
"You jivin'." 
"Who you think that is, Mr. Magoo?" 
The crowd laughed. "How you doin' in your new movie?" Harris asked Lee. 
"All right," Lee mumbled. 
"Your voice is awful low," Harris said, challengingly. Lee was not comfortable 
with the attention and hunkered down. 
Harris' attention shifted to Atlanta Hawks star forward Dominique Wilkins, who 
had come to the club with teammate Spud Webb. Both were in town to play in an 
upcoming benefit basketball game at the Inglewood Forum hosted by Magic 
Johnson. 
"Where you at, Dominique?" Harris asked. "Smile, I'll find you." After the 
spotlight caught Wilkins, Harris said: "Michael Jordan be there? Who gonna 
guard him?" Pause. "Not you." The crowd laughed again. 
"I'll never forget the time I played Dominique," Harris mused. "I was at the 
Clippers game. They were short some players. I had my sneakers. Coach called me 
outta the stands to play. I got 18 points, 15 rebounds, 12 assists. Coach said, 
'Can you come back next week?' 'Hell, no! I got somethin' to do.' " 
The pressures on Harris have been such that the day after the show he flew to 
Chicago to be among family and found himself reluctant to return, which meant 
his schedule had become even more compressed when at last he did. By the 
following week's end, he was going on three hours of sleep a night. 
"I got a lot of criticism for my act," he said over a prime rib dinner ("well 
done," he told the waiter when ordering. "Like me"). "They say, 'You gonna get 
your ass kicked.' But in all the time I been doin' this, I apologized maybe 
three times. I like to talk stuff people like to hear but are afraid to say." 
Harris is at an interesting point in his career at the moment, a seasoned 
performer on the verge of hitting it big but unaware as yet of the subtle traps 
of celebrity. He's cocky, anxious, unguarded, self-absorbed, restless and 
mindful that the changes in his life are becoming palpably swift and harder to 
control. 
"I don't wanna get out of touch with my buddies," he said. "I see some change. 
They look at me different. Like a friend says, 'Can I have your autograph?' I 
think, 'He should not have it. He's known me all the time.' " 
He added, "Everybody's on my bandwagon now. People say to me, 'You gonna 
change?' 'Damn right I'm gonna change! I'm movin' from the ghetto to La Brea.' 
I just moved back home with my wife, Exetta. I had problems. Times I'd be 
studyin', I'd be fussin', know what I mean? I can be stronger now. I'm just 
like everybody else who has a family and has to drive 40 miles to work. I have 
to take everything in stride. 
"To me, that's what Richard Pryor's lost. Once in a while I'll ride the bus 
just to get the feel, the craziness. Like the fancy lady who say, 'What's that 
scent I'm wearing? Black Knight. Fifteen dollars an ounce.' Lady sittin' next 
to her, not so fancy, passes some gas. 'Pinto beans,' she say. 'Fifteen cents a 
pound.' " Harris grinned, having lured his listener into the joke. 
Talking about his patched-up marriage, he says: "A lotta women come 'round to 
show biz people because they smell success. I told my wife, 'You better get 
your act together. You were with me when I had no money. If anybody deserves 
it, you do.' " 
Harris was born in Chicago. His family moved to Los Angeles when he was 8. "My 
father worked for the Ford Motor Co. and was gettin' laid off a lot. I have a 
younger brother, Michael, who's totally opposite from me. He's a medical 
administrator. We're a close family. I ask my mother for advice on show 
business. She may tell me something I don't want to hear, but when people were 
sayin' 'Don't give up that day job,' she said, 'Go ahead, give it up.' " 
Harris attended Manual Arts High School and then went to Ottawa University in 
Kansas on a track scholarship (he's 5'9" and now weighs more than 200 pounds, 
but at one point he was svelte enough to run a 4:18 mile). He graduated, but 
the culture shock was formidable and the unquiet image of a girl friend gave 
him no peace. 
"I never knew what I wanted to do," he recalls. "Everybody had somethin'. Good 
jobs. Somethin'. I just had nothin'. I was so in love with my girl friend. I 
was ready to get married. I didn't know how to handle it. That's why I have the 
joke, 'You took the best years of my life.' 'That's right, I wanna make sure 
you have nothin' left.' I couldn't sleep. I kept hopin' we'd get together 
again. Know what? We did. By then she had a couple of kids." Harris shrugged. 
The thrill had gone, and in retrospect all that pain and misery seemed futile, 
particularly now that he's married to someone else. 
"Nobody can understand who says 'Forget it.' How can you forget somebody? I 
know what people go through who go out with a thousand women and still be 
messed up. But it made me stronger for this business." 
After Harris got out of school, he scuffled around. "Everything that happens is 
a learning experience. I wanted to prove Robin Harris was about somethin'. I 
was workin' penny ante jobs. I was playin' basketball in Poinsettia Park with a 
lot of guys who were in show business. I had a feelin' I could do somethin' in 
the entertainment field. But what?" 
He realized that what he had all along was the talent to make people laugh ("I 
may've had a two-bit job in the bank, but everybody wanted to sit with me at 
lunch"). He had one good night at the Comedy Store in 1980, and then lost his 
touch (a common occurence among comedians). He grew frustrated and was ready to 
quit. Then he met the ventriloquist Richard Sanfield, of Richard &amp; Willie. 
"He took me under his wing," Harris said. " 'Hold an attitude,' he told me. 'In 
order to be a good comedian you got to read the papers, make it interesting to 
the audience. You don't have to dream up crazy bits. You gotta do somethin' the 
other comics won't do. Build a foundation. Make 'em know who Robin is. They 
like you because you talk about 'em, so talk about 'em and make 'em mind. Keep 
it down home.' " 
Harris credits the blues and rhythm 'n' blues as influences, as well as 
basketball. "Comedy is like bein' intimidating on the court. I don't get 
intimidated by anybody. I was playin' in a league and was scorin' 35 points one 
night when a big guy blocked my shot. 'Oooh,' everybody said. 'He blocked your 
shot.' 'Hey, he a big man, that's what he's supposed to do,' I said. I gotta 
have that competitive edge. Black comics think they can just lay back because 
Eddie Murphy, Richard Pryor and Redd Foxx have made it. But I'm out there." 
Harris wasn't partial to the standard comedy club circuit. When a good comedian 
is cooking he works on an improvisational edge, and he wasn't feeling the right 
kind of heat in white clubs. Instead, for five years he played black venues 
such as the Page 4, the Parisian Room, and Mr. Woody's on Manchester Boulevard. 
Then, about four years ago, he met a young entrepreneur named Michael Williams, 
who was talking about starting a new club. 
"There was a big void in black clubs in comedy," Williams said recently. "I'd 
go to the Comedy Store and feel that I wasn't getting my money's worth. I 
sensed the need for a place that had good black entertainment. I was introduced 
to Robin. I saw he was the talent I needed to help me get started." The result 
was the Comedy Act Theatre, which has been going strong since its opening. 
"He's grown tremendously," Williams said of Harris. "He's gone from being a 
pure stand-up to an overall entertainer. He creates a relationship with the 
audience, an atmosphere everyone wants to get into. He's not a cold type of 
performer. What he does is intimate." 
Williams recalled one night when Harris' fearlessness as an insult comic was 
put to the test: Mike Tyson was in the audience. "He's taken advantage of Mike 
Tyson so many times," Williams said, chuckling. "One night he was sayin' Tyson 
can't fight. Then he said: 'I told you about Robin Givens. I used to go with 
her. She and her mother tried to move into my apartment on Central Avenue.' 
Tyson was 20. He'd just won the fight that unified the heavyweight championship 
and had drunk a lot of champagne. He got up and approached the stage. Everyone 
watched. Nobody knew what he was gonna do, including Robin. But Tyson said, 'I 
just wanna hug you.' " (Tyson and Harris are now close friends.) 
"People say, 'You ain't goin' anywhere doin' that black club in Crenshaw,' " 
Harris mused, before ticking off the projects he's done and the things he has 
upcoming. All the club has done is give him a place to find himself, and to 
keep his vantage point sharpened with skepticism. He senses the metamorphosis 
that success exerts on character. About Arsenio Hall he says, "I don't like the 
way he kisses up to everybody." And of Eddie Murphy he observes, "He was 
encouraging to me, but Eddie wants all his people to entertain him all the 
time, like court jesters." 
"It's hard to be a man," Harris said. "It's hard to be what you never were 
before. One time I got fired from a job. I had tears in my eyes. But they dried 
up. I said: 'What'd you expect? You got to make the preparation.' The more I 
study, the more my phone rings. Comedy is my office, where I'm the boss. But I 
never want to be where my friends are afraid to come up and speak to me, to say 
'You ain't God. You just in show business.' " 
