FDA TO SEEK MORE POWER TO PUNISH DRUG COMPANIES FOR BRIBERY, FRAUD 
The Food and Drug Administration, grappling to contain a burgeoning scandal 
within its generic drugs division, announced Friday that it will ask Congress 
for increased authority to punish drug manufacturers that commit bribery, 
falsify data or engage in other improper activities to gain speedy drug 
approval. 
The agency said also that it planned to intensify its surveillance of generic 
drug manufacturers and broaden its current investigation of generic companies 
to include inspecting laboratories that perform pre-market testing under 
contract to the generic companies. 
"I emphasize that we have no evidence that the safety or effectiveness of 
generic drugs has been compromised," Health and Human Services Secretary Louis 
W. Sullivan said in a written statement. "Nevertheless, the Food and Drug 
Administration has launched extensive reviews of generic drug firms and 
products, and will continue until we can fully confirm the overall quality and 
safety of generic drugs." 
Low-Priced Copies 
The action was taken amid a widening federal investigation of the generic drug 
industry, which produces almost one-third of the prescription drugs made in the 
United States. Generic drugs are low-priced copies of brand-name prescription 
drugs whose patents have expired. The industry was reported to have sales 
totaling $3.4 billion last year. 
The probe has yielded disclosures that several companies have bribed FDA 
officials to obtain faster approval for their products and that others have 
fraudulently submitted drug samples to the government for examination. 
The department did not specify the procedures it would seek from lawmakers. But 
HHS and congressional sources said that among the proposals under consideration 
was the power to deny companies all future federal approval of their drugs if 
their employees are found to have offered bribes or commited other offenses. 
The same sources said the FDA was also considering requesting authority to 
impose substantial civil monetary penalties on companies that submit 
applications found to be fraudulent. Further, these sources said, the agency 
would seek to suspend or withdraw an already approved drug from the market if a 
company was found to have been "tainted by improper activities" in getting that 
drug approved. 
Lack of Power Cited 
FDA officials have said that they have no power now to stop the marketing of 
drugs in such instances. 
FDA officials said the agency would create a new office of generic drugs, with 
new management and additional resources, and would establish an independent 
ombudsman directly under the FDA commissioner who would mediate grievances from 
the generic companies. 
On Wednesday, the FDA announced that it would seize samples of the 30 
top-selling generic drugs and examine them to be sure their formulations 
matched those that received federal approval. 
"If unsafe or ineffective drugs are discovered, FDA will move rapidly to have 
them removed from commercial distribution," Sullivan said. "If a company is 
found to have submitted false data, FDA will seek to remove all drug products 
that have been implicated. 
"And, if evidence points to widespread manufacturing deficiencies, FDA will 
move to block the marketing of all drugs produced in the manufacturing facility 
until the deficiencies have been fully corrected." 
Two Investigations 
The generics industry has been under investigation by the U.S. attorney in 
Baltimore and the House Energy and Commerce oversight subcommittee. 
Three FDA chemists in the agency's generics division pleaded guilty to 
accepting illegal gifts from firms producing generics, and they have since left 
the agency. 
There are about 350 companies nationwide that produce generics, but the vast 
majority of generic drugs are produced by several dozen of those firms. 
"Everyone in FDA, including myself, is deeply dismayed and outraged, as I am 
sure consumers are, by the highly unethical conduct displayed by a small number 
of generic drug companies, and by three agency employees who have now 
resigned," FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said in a written statement. "Their 
corrupt behavior has jeopardized the public trust and called into question the 
integrity of the system." 
Initiatives Welcomed 
Rep. John D. Dingell (D-Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce 
Committee and chairman of its oversight subcommittee, welcomed the FDA's latest 
initiatives. 
"When the promised legislative proposals are developed," Dingell said, "they 
will receive appropriate consideration. But, before we can be confident of any 
comprehensive solution, we will need to have a fuller understanding of the 
dimensions of the problem." 
To that end, he said, the subcommittee will continue to pursue its 
investigation. 
