SURFING SALT CREEK BEACH PRO/AM; 
ARCHBOLD TURNS LIFE AROUND, WINS TITLE 
Earlier this year, Matt Archbold's lifestyle was as radical and unpredictable 
as the waves he surfed each day. 
Speeding through life's fast lane, Archbold landed in a San Clemente jail last 
spring and later in a rehabilitation clinic to fight a drug and alcohol habit. 
Only 21, Archbold's surfing career appeared to be over. 
But less than five months later, his recovery has come full circle. He edged 
friend and fellow San Clemente surfer Dino Andino to win the Laguna Sportswear 
pro-am competition Sunday at Salt Creek Beach. 
Archbold earned $7,400 for the victory; Andino earned $3,400 and took over 
first place in the point standings with his finish. Ted Robinson of Manhattan 
Beach, who was third, won $2,500 and fourth-place finisher Vince De La Pena 
earned $2,200. 
"It seems like everything is going right for me," Archbold said. "I want to 
keep it up and not let myself down." 
Archbold knows all about letdowns. He just wasn't ready to deal with them. 
But in April, when Archbold was arrested for driving under the influence, he 
realized his life was being wiped out. 
While sitting in an eight-foot by 10-foot cell, Archbold did a lot of thinking. 
He thought about his family, the friends he lost and the surfing contests he 
couldn't compete in because he was hungover. He thought about his dependency on 
alcohol and cocaine, and how it cost him his major sponsorship on the pro tour. 
"I took a long look at myself and decided I didn't like myself," Archbold said. 
So Archbold checked into the Betty Ford Clinic. He learned to deal with his 
problems, and his dependency. 
He checked out of the clinic early in the summer and rejoined the Professional 
Surfing Assn. of America tour. He finished seventh in his first event back, at 
Oceanside in June. Then he reached the finals at San Clemente in July, where he 
placed fourth. 
Then came the victory at Salt Creek. 
"I'm thankful that I pulled through everything," Archbold said. "My family and 
my girlfriend have been behind me." 
Archbold appears to have his problems behind him. At least that's what Andino 
says. 
"I'm stoked for him," Andino said. "He's different now in every way, mentally, 
physically. He was more to himself before. We drifted apart as friends. But now 
he's much more open with everyone." 
And especially with himself. 
Although he finished second for the second consecutive event, Andino didn't go 
home disappointed. Andino passed Charlie Kuhn of Indian Harbor, Fla., for the 
lead in the point standings and has a 297-point lead over Kuhn, who was 
eliminated in the quarterfinals Sunday. 
The points title has eluded Andino the last two seasons, with him placing 
second to Mike Lambresi of Oceanside both times. With only four events on the 
11-stop tour remaining this year, Andino hopes he has the championship in his 
grasp. 
"It feels good to be in the lead," Andino said, "but it ain't by much. I've got 
my focus back and my head's on right (after a slow start this season)." 
Mike Stewart, a native of Anaheim now living in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, won his 
third title this season in the bodyboarding division, holding off Harry 
Antipala of Kalaheo, Hawaii, in the finals. 
Stewart, a three-time U.S. champion, extended his lead over Hawaii's Ben 
Severson to 598 points in the overall standings. 
"The race is still close," Stewart said. "The last contest at San Clemente, I 
thought I did well but I got beat by Ben." 
After struggling with small one- and two-foot waves all through the event, the 
competitors enjoyed three- and five-foot waves for Sunday's finals. 
"I had talked to (surf forecaster) Sean Collins on Saturday and he told me 
there was a swell coming up," Stewart said. "It helped to know what was going 
to happen in advance. I always want to catch the best waves I can, so I knew I 
could wait for the better ones today." 
Surfing notes 
Besides earning $7,400 in prize money, Matt Archbold won an additional $200 for 
riding the top wave of the finals. . . . By finishing second in her 
bodyboarding quarterfinal heat, Stephanie Pettersen of Haleiwa, Hawaii, became 
the first woman to advance to the semifinals of an event on the Professional 
Surfing Assn. of America tour. Pettersen finished third in her semifinal and 
failed to reach the finals. . . . The next stop on the PSAA tour starts 
Wednesday in Malibu. 
Results 
Surfing 
FINAL -- 1. Matt Archbold (San Clemente). 2. Dino Andino (San Clemente). 3. Ted 
Robinson (Manhattan Beach). 4. Vince De La Pena (Laguna Niguel). 
Semifinals (Top two advanced to final) 
Heat 1 -- 1. De La Pena. 2. Robinson. 3. David Eggers (San Diego). 4. Paul Barr 
(Carlsbad). Heat 2 -- 1. Archbold. 2. Andino. 3. Sean Mattison (Carlsbad). 4. 
Todd Chesser (San Diego). 
Quarterfinals (Top two advanced to semifinals) 
Heat 1 -- 1. Robinson. 2. Barr. 3. Pat O'Connell (Laguna Niguel). 4. Scott 
Farnsworth (Huntington Beach). Heat 2 -- 1. De La Pena. 2. Eggers. 3. Charlie 
Kuhn (Indian Harbor, Fla.). 4. Richie Rudolph (Cocoa Beach, Fla.) Heat 3 -- 1. 
Andino. 2. Archbold. 3. Juah Ashton (Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico). 4. Hans Hagen 
(Laguna Beach). Heat 4 -- 1. Mattison. 2. Chesser. 3. Todd Miller (Costa Mesa). 
4. Adam Replogle (Soquel). 
Bodyboarding 
FINAL -- 1. Mike Stewart (Kailua-Kona, Hawaii). 2. Harry Antipala (Kalaheo, 
Hawaii). 3. Kyle Maligro (Kalaheo, Hawaii). 4. Jason Brown (Kalaheo, Hawaii). 
