STATE LACKS MANPOWER TO FIGHT COCAINE DEALERS, ATTY. GEN. SAYS 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp said Wednesday that state narcotics agents know 
of more than 5,000 suspected Colombian cocaine traffickers in Los Angeles, San 
Francisco and Sacramento counties alone, but that they don't have the manpower 
to deal with what he called "the No. 1 organized crime threat in California." 
Van de Kamp, also a Democratic candidate for governor, made the remarks at a 
conference of California organized crime and anti-terrorism specialists. He 
praised local drug agencies for their efforts against well-organized Colombian 
cocaine cartels but said identification of traffickers does not mean they will 
be caught. 
"We are trying to fight a big-league drug problem with a little-league 
enforcement team," Van de Kamp said. 
The attorney general said he will direct "every penny and every agent" 
available to the state at the Colombian cocaine network, but said more federal 
help is needed. 
"We haven't been quiet, we have just been ignored," he said. 
State narcotics enforcement officials echoed the concern that suspected 
Colombian traffickers are operating freely. 
"The irony is that we know who they are, but we don't have the resources to get 
them. We have to show in court they are dealing beyond a doubt and it is hard 
to get informants -- the traffickers are pretty violent folks," said Tom 
Gorman, assistant chief for the state narcotics enforcement bureau. 
The attorney general said a federal crackdown on cocaine in South Florida has 
caused an exodus of traffickers to the "promised land" of California. He called 
on Bush Administration Drug Czar William Bennett to come up with a 
comprehensive national plan that will prevent drug traffickers from simply 
relocating when federal pressure is applied. 
"I have been disappointed in the President's policies in the war against 
cocaine," Van de Kamp said after the speech. "I hope he starts thinking of it 
as a federal problem." 
Van de Kamp said that Bennett, who will unveil the Bush Administration's 
strategy in the drug war Sept. 5, should establish a Southern California drug 
task force such as the one created in Florida in 1982. He said the number of 
federal drug agents in the state should be doubled. 
The federal Drug Enforcement Agency in Los Angeles County now has 83 agents, 
compared to 341 in Miami and 314 in New York, Van de Kamp said. Nearly half of 
all the cocaine coming into the country moves through California, according to 
the federal agency. 
Van de Kamp also asked the federal government to cooperate in converting unused 
military property into desert prison camps for drug offenders. 
