WOULD-BE EMIGRES JAM OFFICES; 
EMBARRASSED BONN CLOSES ITS MISSION IN EAST BERLIN 
West Germany closed the doors of its diplomatic mission in East Berlin on 
Tuesday in an effort to deal with about 130 East Germans who have crowded in, 
hoping to get emigration documents. 
The East Germans have refused to leave the five-story building and are sleeping 
on mattresses on the floor. 
The situation has embarrassed the Bonn government and angered East German 
authorities, who have charged that relations between the two countries could be 
jeopardized by the mission's sheltering of East Germans. 
East German officials said that allowing East German visitors into the West 
German offices in East Berlin constitutes "crude interference in the sovereign 
affairs" of the Communist state. 
In Bonn, Rudolf Seiters, an official of the chancellor's office, said that his 
government has a duty to offer humanitarian aid to those who seek it. He added, 
however, that it is not officially encouraging East Germans to emigrate. 
"No one is interested in depopulating East Germany," Seiters said, "but it is 
quite clear that East Germany must reform if it wants to resolve the problem of 
the ever-growing number of people wishing to emigrate." 
A parallel to the situation in East Berlin was taking place at West German 
embassies in Budapest, Warsaw and Prague, where vacationing East Germans have 
sought advice, shelter and asylum. Many are camped out in the buildings. 
West German officials, who said the mission will be closed until further 
notice, have made it clear to all would-be emigrants that it cannot issue 
travel documents because the governments of East Germany, Hungary, Poland and 
Czechoslovakia will not recognize them. 
They said that if West Germany were to issue West German passports or travel 
documents, it would be subjecting the East Germans to criminal charges of 
possessing illegal documents. They are telling the East Germans to go home and 
apply officially through East German channels. 
"We do not expel them from our embassies," a West German official said. "In a 
few hours or days, most realize they must leave, since there is no point in 
remaining inside our buildings." 
The situation in East Germany has been aggravated in recent weeks, diplomats 
here said, by continuing repression in East Germany while the Soviet Union, 
Poland and Hungary are taking a more liberal attitude. 
Many East Germans have fled to the West through Hungary since the Hungarian 
government decided in May to remove the wire fences along its border with 
Austria. Hundreds of East Germans, after obtaining permission to vacation in 
Hungary, have then slipped across the border into Austria. 
The West Germans, for fear of embarrassing Hungary and angering East Germany, 
have declined to make public the number of East Germans who have come West. 
Long Wait for Approval 
Some East Germans have been allowed to emigrate, but only after applying 
officially through their government and waiting for months or years for 
approval. In the past year, officials here said, the East German government has 
approved a higher number of applications than in the past. 
West German sources say that at least 2,500 East Germans are in jail for trying 
to escape to the West. 
If an East German succeeds in getting to the West, the West Germans will issue 
him or her a passport and grant citizenship, because Bonn has never legally 
recognized the division of Germany. 
But East Germans generally face weeks in a refugee camp here waiting for work 
and housing. 
