AST TO STEP UP SALES EFFORTS, EXPAND MARKET IN AFRICA 
AST Research Inc., an Irvine personal computer manufacturer that has 
aggressively pursued business opportunities in the Soviet Union, Japan and 
other foreign markets, on Monday announced plans to step up sales efforts in 
Africa. 
AST said it has created a separate African sales region to be managed from its 
Irvine headquarters, and that it plans to open its first sales office on the 
continent by 1993. The company named Javed Khan to head the new sales 
operation. 
AST plans to target multinational corporations, government and international 
agencies, and educational institutions in Africa, said Khan, who joined AST in 
1985 and has been responsible for recruiting distributors in Africa. 
Last year, AST sold only $500,000 in computers to the African nations of Ghana, 
Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria, Tanzania and Zaire. It plans to start sales 
efforts in Botswana, Cameroon, the Ivory Coast, Uganda and Zimbabwe. 
The personal computer industry has largely ignored Africa as a potential 
market, said Steve Lair, an analyst with Dataquest Inc., a San Jose market 
researcher. He said that a general lack of financial resources, high illiteracy 
rates and diverse languages pose special problems in the African market. 
Nevertheless, Khan said AST believes that by making inroads into the African 
market now, it will be in a position "to set the pace for the modernization of 
the businesses in this region." 
AST plans to develop computer applications to meet the specific needs and 
resources of African countries, Khan said. "These (markets) are very price 
sensitive," he said. "Our machines and products will have to be priced in such 
a way that they will be affordable to the general population and businesses." 
AST had sales of $533.8 million for its fiscal year ended June, 1990, about 36% 
of which came from the international market. 
Recently, the Irvine firm has stepped up sales efforts in the Soviet Union and 
China. This year, it became the first U.S. company to announce plans to market 
a computer in Japan that is compatible with industry standard machines made by 
Japan's NEC Corp. 
