BOOK REVIEW; 
PALE TALE SUFFERS LUCKLESS ENDING 
The heroine of this wan novel -- "Catching the Light," by Susan L. Pope -- is 
so blond and fair-skinned that "folks in North Osprey who didn't know better 
called Damaris Bishop albino," despite her intensely blue eyes. 
Even folks who do know better might reasonably decide that Damaris' physical 
pallor could be meant as a metaphor for her oddly affectless personality, since 
events that would precipitate passionate reaction in most people seem to leave 
Damaris virtually untouched. In many ways, she's exactly like the beach glass 
she collects -- bland and smooth; the color leached out, all jagged edges worn 
away. 
Damaris was orphaned at the age of 3 when her parents were killed while on 
their way to an exhibit of glassworks. Left with her paternal grandparents by 
her glass-blower father and art-teacher mother, she has been dutifully brought 
up by them, a circumstance that sets her apart from her contemporaries. We're 
told she's rebellious, although even her rebellions seem curiously mild, like 
leaving a picnic without permission or hiding out in the back yard. When she's 
a junior in high school, her revolt takes a somewhat more dramatic turn: She 
falls in love with a temporary resident of the town, a young man from a barren 
island off the coast of Maine who has taken a job with the same elderly glass 
blower who taught her father the craft. 
Logan Perth is darkly handsome, artistic and extremely reticent; qualities 
Damaris finds irresistible. She trails him around the Cape Cod village, peers 
through the glassworks windows to watch him work, and eventually inveigles him 
out to her favorite marsh, the picturesque spot where her father proposed to 
her mother. There, she and Logan share wine, sandwiches and their DNA in what 
must be the most low-key love scene in contemporary fiction. 
"It certainly is romantic," he says, drawing her close. 
A few weeks later, Damaris discovers she's pregnant. She tells her grandfather, 
but chooses not to confide in Logan, who returns to his Penobscot Bay island 
unaware that the picnic on the marsh has had so significant an outcome. 
Life in her grandparents' farmhouse becomes untenable after Damaris refuses 
either to inform Logan or enter a Boston home for unwed mothers. Although this 
is 1960 and not a century earlier, her grandfather actually says: "Never cross 
my threshold again. The crossing of thresholds . . . that's reserved for 
brides." 
Confronted with this ultimatum, Damaris drops out of high school and moves into 
Logan's old room at Josie Santos' boarding house, paying a tiny rent and 
helping out with the chores. She soon makes herself indispensable, while Josie, 
a warm-hearted Portuguese widow, supplies the understanding and support the 
Bishops couldn't offer. 
After an uneventful pregnancy, Damaris has an adorable little boy, who quickly 
becomes the darling of all the elderly residents. One of these, an ancient poet 
with a few secrets of her own, takes a special fancy to our heroine and decides 
Logan must know about his son. She writes to the father, and as a result, 
Damaris is invited by Logan to bring the baby to the island, a plan she 
acquiesces to as calmly as she's done everything else. 
The place is more wretched and primitive than she could possibly have imagined, 
and after her child almost dies of pneumonia, her passivity is replaced by 
determination. In short order, she returns to civilization, acquires a true, if 
somewhat eccentric, friend, and embarks upon a genetically determined career, 
one in which she, like the author, will need all the luck she can get. 
CATCHING THE LIGHT by Susan L. Pope Viking $18.95, 226 pages 
Next: Carolyn See reviews "A Bed by the Window" by M. Scott Peck (Bantam 
Books). 
