RANDY LEWIS: CENSORS COULD MAKE U.S. THE LAND OF BLAND 
Recent news items: 
* RENO -- Members of British heavy-metal group Judas Priest testify in a trial 
in which they are accused of planting subliminal messages in songs that 
allegedly triggered the self-inflicted deaths of two fans. 
* PHOENIX -- A supermarket chain pulls copies of "The Little Mermaid" home 
video from its shelves because a customer complains of finding a phallic symbol 
in the cover artwork. 
* KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- Two newspapers refuse to run this week's Doonesbury comic 
strips because they show a female character wearing nothing but rope and a 
bucket and spouting provocative language. 
Any of these stories should be enough to send a thinking adult away shaking his 
or her head in disbelief. 
Yet, even taken together, they represent only a smattering of cases where 
citizens, in their zeal to do the right thing, seem intent on turning America 
the Beautiful into the land of the bland, the home of the straitjacketed. 
Take the case of the poor "Little Mermaid." She was sitting on shelves in video 
stores and supermarkets around the country, minding her own business, when that 
woman in Phoenix complained that she had found a (gasp) phallic symbol on the 
underwater castle on the cover. The woman insisted that the video be withdrawn, 
so as not to pollute innocent minds. (Speaking of which, what was she doing 
searching for phalluses in Disney cartoons?) And, instead of shrugging off the 
complaint as a case of someone with too much time on her hands, the store's 
management knuckled under. 
Then there are the two Midwest newspapers -- one in Indiana and one in Missouri 
(the, ahem, "Show Me" state) -- that pulled the plug on Doonesbury's commentary 
on the ruckus over the National Endowment for the Arts and artistic censorship. 
The editors who decided against running the strips claimed they weren't 
appropriate to the comics, which appeal to readers of all ages. 
I hope they don't take a hard look at the "Love Is . . . " strip, which 
features young male and female characters wearing no clothes. Sometimes 
together. And they are always talking about love. This appears every day. 
Heave. Grunt. Pant. 
Probably the most amazing story, though, is the one about the families suing 
CBS Records and Judas Priest because two youths killed themselves after a heavy 
session of drinking, smoking pot and listening to Judas Priest's 1978 "Stained 
Class" album. 
The plaintiffs are out to prove that 1) there were subliminal messages saying 
"Do it" implanted on the album and that 2) these messages caused the two boys 
to take their own lives. (One died instantly; the other lived, horribly 
disfigured, for three years after the suicide attempt and then died of related 
complications.) 
"Whether the judge rules in our favor or not, I feel like we've already won," 
one mother said. "This case has brought so much public attention to the issue. 
The problems with heavy-metal music are finally out in the open. Bands are 
beginning to be censored, and I'm happy about it." 
It's hard to fault parents for grieving over a child's suicide, or for 
desperately feeling the need to place blame -- but not when they start grasping 
at straws. And certainly not when attorneys set their sights on a likely victim 
(i.e., one with loads of money) and swim hungrily in for the kill. 
According to court records, one of these boys came from a home where his mother 
had been married four times; where, as a youth, he was physically abused by his 
stepfather and reportedly was whipped with a belt. Both youths dropped out of 
school in the 10th grade and both used alcohol, marijuana, amphetamines and 
cocaine, among other substances. 
Yet at least one of the mothers still blames the music, saying, "Heavy metal 
changed his personality. When James started listening to Judas Priest, he lost 
all respect for authority." This even though, 12 years earlier, at the age of 
8, respectful young James, according to testimony, tried to choke that selfsame 
mother while she was driving him home from school. And that was five years 
before Judas Priest was ever heard from on record. 
Respect for authority that large could be lost in the space between a bee's 
teeth. 
I suppose if this kid had spent his teen years watching the ballet, those 
physical and emotional blows would have just bounced right off him, and he'd be 
just fine today. 
Texas rocker Joe Ely wrote a song a few years ago called "Dig All Night" in 
which he pinpointed this creeping virus of finger-pointing and the chronic 
shortage of personal responsibility infecting our society: 
 I'm sitting here wondering: 
 The world's gone to hell. 
 Can we blame someone else 
 For the trouble we're in? 
 In a big easy chair 
 At the world we stare 
 As the world caves in 
 And it ain't no wonder 
 Why we don't get a break. 
 It's so easy to find 
 Someone else's mistake. 
 The ripples can be felt right here in our own neighborhoods, from worrywarts 
who perceive threats from rap bands and theater producers to city councils that 
enact laws to fashion a world in which nothing ever offends anyone anywhere. 
The notion of learning to handle life's daily irritations apparently has given 
way to efforts to eliminate them all. 
Somewhere along the dusty road to cultural maturity, we seem to have lost our 
grip on the all-important tolerance upon which this country was founded. In 
most of these examples, it's equally clear that we've mislaid any sense of 
humor. 
Heaven forbid the time has come when we should look to Michael Jackson as a 
role model, but as long as we're quoting song lyrics, maybe we'd be better off 
spending more time trying to grasp the meaning of The Buckled One's hit "Man in 
the Mirror" than looking for pornography in Disney videos or suicide 
instructions in Judas Priest records: 
If you wanna make the world a better place, 
 Take a look at yourself and then make a change. 
