ACROBATIC INMATE PROVES JAIL ESCAPABLE 
Officials who designed the newest maximum security jail at the Peter J. 
Pitchess Honor Rancho in Castaic said it was virtually escape proof. 
But on Sunday, Rodolfo Corona, a 22-year-old inmate awaiting a preliminary 
hearing on robbery and kidnaping charges, proved that the structure, known as 
the North Facility, is not the inescapable fortress that planners hoped when it 
opened in 1987. 
His escape -- the first from the facility -- also demonstrated an acrobatic 
talent not found among most other inmates, or, for that matter, among most 
mortals, jail officials said. 
Other inmates told officials after the escape that Corona, who stood 5 feet, 8 
inches tall, had the agility of a circus performer or professional gymnast. 
During recreation breaks, he would mount a set of handlebars secured 5 feet 
above the ground, balancing his body in the air by the strength of his arms. 
'Almost a Human Fly' 
"This guy is an acrobat and a half," said Capt. John Thurman, commander of 
North Facility. "He's almost a human fly." 
Corona, who remained at large, displayed a knack for trickery long before his 
escape, said Los Angeles Police Detective Lou Gutierrez, who was in charge of 
the criminal investigation that led to Corona's arrest in Panorama City on June 
1. 
Gutierrez said that on at least 20 occasions, Corona robbed undocumented aliens 
living in Hollywood and the Rampart area near downtown Los Angeles of a total 
of more than $10,000. Showing a security badge and saying he was a police 
officer, Corona allegedly told the victims that they were suspected of 
narcotics trafficking and then drove them in his car to their apartments or 
houses, where he ordered them to give him jewelry and cash that he claimed 
would be used as "evidence," Gutierrez said. 
Sometimes, he made off with their possessions while they remained locked inside 
a room, Gutierrez said. On other occasions, he used a handgun or threatened to 
turn in victims to immigration officials, the detective said. 
'Real Cool' 
"He's got experience beyond his years," Gutierrez said. "He's real cool. The 
victims would say, 'God, I thought he was a policeman, just the way he acted." 
Jail officials say Corona, who was exercising with other inmates in a courtyard 
recreation area about 3:30 p.m., first climbed atop the frame of an observation 
window that extends from a 20-foot wall about eight feet from the ground. 
Guards periodically look out the window to monitor inmates in the recreation 
yard, but none were looking while Corona struggled to keep his balance on the 
sloping window ledge, Thurman said. 
From his perch on the window, Corona apparently used a pin from a weightlifting 
device to pry a hole into the wire mesh that covers the courtyard, Thurman 
said. He repeatedly twisted the wire links until they broke, cutting a 
two-foot-long hole through which he escaped onto the roof, authorities said. 
After the escape, officials installed metal plating to replace the wire mesh, 
Thurman said. 
Once on the roof, Corona walked to the north side of the facility and jumped to 
the ground. Thurman speculated that Corona may have first jumped onto an 
overhang above a loading area, then jumped another 15 feet to the ground. 
His escape had already taken him farther than any inmate in the facility's 
history, but another, perhaps greater challenge, lay ahead. 
Somehow eluding a guard who routinely patrols the grounds, Corona walked 
another 100 yards to the 20-foot-high main fence enclosing the facility. He 
scaled the one section of the fence that does not have escape-deterrent screen 
wire along the top three feet. 
Then he slipped through a loop in the razor wire, leaving behind part of his 
orange jail shirt and some blood from a cut. At that point, he had just one 
small barbed-wire fence to scale at the edge of the jail compound. Once over 
it, Corona probably headed north toward Tapia Canyon Road and freedom, Thurman 
said. 
The escape is the third in less than a month from the Pitchess Honor Rancho. 
The others were from a lightly guarded minimum-security jail in the three-jail 
Pitchess compound. The other two escapees were caught July 21, one day after 
they fled. 
Thurman said he believes that Corona mapped his escape route while sitting on 
sheriff's buses that on three occasions took him from the jail to downtown Los 
Angeles for court appearances. 
"He knew what he was doing," Thurman said. "There's no doubt in my mind." 
Gutierrez said he was not surprised that Corona tried to escape. He faced more 
than 30 years in prison if convicted on all 17 counts against him, Gutierrez 
said. 
Authorities believe that Corona, himself an undocumented alien, may have fled 
to his native Mexico. If Corona is ever captured, Thurman joked, he secretly 
hopes that the inmate will not be returned to the North Facility: He wants 
Sunday's escape to be the only one. 
"You see in the movies where people scale walls and you say, 'that's nonsense,' 
" Thurman said. "I'm a true believer now." 
