ART IN THE AGE OF ANIMOSITY; 
A PAIR OF EXHIBITIONS IN LA JOLLA JUST POSSIBLY MIGHT OFFEND EVERYBODY 
Two exhibitions at the La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art bring shadowed 
thoughts to the bright beachside town. One show is the 1989 edition of Awards 
in the Visual Arts, that regional U.S. survey that last year included a 
now-notorious photograph by Andres Serrano provocatively titled "Piss Christ." 
As every reader of culture columns now knows, that photograph, along with the 
elegant, sometimes kinky, oeuvre of the late Robert Mapplethorpe, is the 
centerpiece of a political controversy that threatens the independence -- if 
not the very existence -- of the National Endowment for the Arts. Lawmakers 
including the influential Sen. Jesse Helms (Rep.-N.C.) have proposed 
legislation to prevent the endowment from backing art they regard as offensive, 
thus rekindling all the usual fears of official censorship and all the familiar 
arguments about whether or not tax dollars ought to be used to foster art that 
most Americans neither like nor understand. 
If this ominous fuss were not under way, there would be no reason to look at 
the AVA exhibition or the accompanying installation by British conceptual 
artist Richard Long as anything other than the aesthetic events they in fact 
represent. (Both run to Oct. 15.) Neither Long nor any of the 10 artists 
selected by the AVA appear to be out to scandalize anyone, but in the present 
climate of touchy self-righteousness it is impossible to look at any of this 
work without imagining people who would find every bit of it an occasion for 
indignation. The worst thing about an atmosphere of official coercion is a 
created paranoia that distracts from one's own reality -- a kind of invasion of 
artistic privacy. The best thing it spawns are opportunities for rueful humor. 
Long, born in Bristol in 1945, is presently artist-in-residence at the museum. 
His work has long been familiar on the international circuit, where it shows up 
in summer extravaganzas from Kassel to Venice. This year he was one of the few 
bright, apt spots in the sprawling, disastrous "Magicians of the Earth" at 
Paris' Pompidou Center. It is no trouble to conjure up a host of folks to wax 
huffy at his art. Here it consists -- characteristically -- of two circles of 
massed stones about 12 feet across, two wall compositions painted with 
terra-cotta slip applied by hand (one doughnut circle, one long rectangle) and 
two compositions of listed words. Long's natural predators are, of course, 
those legions of citizens who know on sight that this sort of thing is not art. 
Of course they are right, except for one crucial caveat, which is that stone 
circles, mud smears and lists are not necessarily art. Neither, for that 
matter, are huge canvases bursting with cupids, naked goddesses and armored 
heroes. Artworks become art only when they transcend the simple facts of their 
existence, and they can do that only when they blend with the sensibility of 
the viewer. It's chemistry in the same way love is chemistry and just as 
fraught with anxiety over ambiguities of meaning and authenticity. 
Long's wordworks paint an image of him as an aesthetic nomad seeking art in 
primitive nature. One uses arrows to diagram wind direction during 20 days when 
the artist walked 560 miles across Spain and Portugal; the other is called 
"Early Morning Senses" and consists of a list of words he associated with 
strolls on tropical Frigate Island in the Indian Ocean -- words like Sun / Damp 
Dust / Cock Crows / Guano / Coco Plum. The pieces seem to want to be poetry but 
they are too skeletal for me. 
On the other hand, his slip painting of a circle the size of a crane tire is 
magisterial. It appears to spin on account of splatters off its edges. Subtle 
handling of scrubby surface lends an illusion of dimensional solidity. Besides, 
it's sheerly beautiful with drawing as inevitable as Oriental ink splash 
pictures. 
Long's stone circles appear randomly arranged but he must have done something 
right because they transform themselves, evoking Stonehenge and Zen Gardens at 
once. One is made of buff-colored Utah sandstone marbled with pink which seems 
to change from a desert landscape to a sea of flower petals. The other -- in 
dark Baja La Cresta granite -- metamorphoses from a forbidding mountain range 
into a lake of molten bronze. The whole jells into an aesthetic that finds the 
magic of art in human reverence for nature. Corporations that pollute the 
environment should either flee from it like a vampire from a cross or patronize 
it to polish up their image. 
Long's work would surely set off the old it-looks-too-easy-I-could-do-it-myself 
reaction in his imagined detractors. In reality, of course, it's much tougher 
than it looks, apparent effortlessness being a mark of mastery. 
By contrast, virtually all the AVA work is still struggling for Long's kind of 
seamless integration. Although one feels very protective of the AVA in its 
current travail, the truth is that its mandate -- scouring 10 regions of the 
country for worthy talent -- sometimes turns up art that has not quite as yet 
found itself or is possessed by the kind of cranky self-defeating individuality 
associated with provincialism. (In this regard it is probably significant to 
note that Serrano did not get in the soup over his murky image of a plastic 
crucifix in an ambiguous liquid but over its title, which was either 
questionably naive or an invitation to trouble.) 
None of which is grounds for shooting the messenger. Shows like AVA are 
artistic forums. Debate over their content is crucially appropriate because it 
vivifies the work -- but only as long as the wrangle remains in the realm of 
intellectual discussion where it belongs. Taking real legislative action 
against these fantasies is wacky. 
Picketing would be OK. 
At Germany's Documenta exhibition, citizens -- usually excluded artists -- 
often picket the survey in pious political accents: Why are these East German 
Commies included? Why Ignore the Good Old Boys for these International Fops? 
It makes a nice carnival atmosphere, shows the art is taken seriously and is 
completely harmless. 
Maybe the National Rifle Assn. should picket the AVA exhibition. James Drake 
from El Paso shows painted copies of Goya, Delacroix and Boucher mounted on 
steel plates and juxtaposed with model rifles associating sexual and religious 
repression with violence and violence with firearms, which are, of course, in 
reality only used for target practice. 
The aerospace industry might demonstrate against the effrontery of Charles 
Wilson who hails from Evanston, Ill. He makes fragments of aircraft out of wire 
or plexiglass and puts them with neon signs -- like "Berlin Desire" -- which 
suggest that airplanes are used in nuclear war. My own placard will read, 
"Looks Too Much Like Bruce Nauman." 
The works of Paul Kos, Roy Fondaw and Patrick T. Dougherty were not fully 
installed during an exhibition preview. Fondaw appears politically neutral 
unless there is an Ant-Funk Society. Dougherty makes sculpture by 
wrapping live foliage. The work looks pro-environment so The Society for the 
Destruction of the Amazon Rain Forest should be on alert. One of Kos' pieces 
incorporates a bell and an image of the Virgin of Guadalupe so atheists can 
charge it with unfairly promoting religion. There must also be people who are 
incensed by virginity. 
Speaking of religion, the drawings and sculpture of Anne McCoy deal with 
spiritual beliefs so old we call them myths. Huge drawings in colored pencil 
depict -- among other things -- a fish-headed god in a classical landscape 
where fetuses sleep in floating wombs. The meaning of this image is so superbly 
unclear that both pro-choice and anti-abortion forces could probably find 
reason to hate it. 
Well, you get the idea. We live in an ambiance that appears to seek occasions 
for hostility, causing art to be perceived in ways that utterly miss the point. 
David Hammons shows scruffy fetish sculptures that employ cast-off black sheet 
rubber to bring together the traditions of African tribal art with urban 
American junk sculpture. 
Ed Fraga makes dingy, naive reliquary paintings desperately dreaming of sweet 
magic in Detroit. Jo Anne Callis is trying to turn black-and-white photography 
into a Post-Modernist stew of Expressionism and Neo-Classicism. Eric Levine's 
abstract sculpture is a particularly keen blend of geometry and organic 
surprise. 
It's just art. What good is it if there is no reason to haul it into court? 
