CONFLICTING IMAGES CATCH HENDERSON'S STYLE, SUBSTANCE 
Getting a reading on the uneven, almost-schizophrenic personality Rickey 
Henderson wears publicly is a task comparable to trying to have a baseball at 
second base before the game's steals king-to-be arrives with his headfirst 
lunge of calculated fury. 
Henderson provides few hints to his true character, though every catcher in the 
American League knows he has supreme confidence in his abilities. During 
virtually every at-bat he offers clenched-teeth pledges that, he says, go 
something like: "I'm gonna get on and steal second and third, and make you look 
real bad. And there ain't nothing you can do about it." 
The Oakland Athletics' moody, multifaceted and often-misunderstood outfielder 
rarely is viewed in shades of gray. He has alternately worn the hats of villian 
and hero during his sometimes-glorious, sometimes-stormy 12 years in the major 
leagues. At 31, he is in the midst of his finest season and closing in on 
baseball's career stolen base record -- and perhaps the American League's most 
valuable player award as well. 
Which is the most accurate depiction of Rickey Henderson? 
a Is it the apparent malcontent who groused this season that he's underpaid at 
more than $3 million a year, of whose reputation A's officials were so wary 
that they consulted extensively with several of their club's veteran players 
before trading for him in June 1989? Is it the primping, preening prima donna 
who has been accused of failing to play through minor injuries, admits he 
doesn't think it's necessary to run out every ground ball full tilt and first 
unveiled his trademark "snatch catch" at the dubious moment of the final out of 
a no-hitter by Mike Warren in 1983? 
Or is it the fiercely loyal kid at heart who vehemently defends his former New 
York Yankees boss, George Steinbrenner, and can't talk about his most beloved 
manager, the late Billy Martin, without choking on the words, misty-eyed? 
With this version goes Oakland Manager Tony La Russa's favorite Henderson tale: 
La Russa brought Henderson into his office one day after the A's acquired him 
last year. The manager interrupted Henderson's patching-up speech about former 
conflicts between the two, telling Henderson he wanted to earn his respect. 
After Henderson concluded one of the most torrid postseasons in memory and the 
A's swept the San Francisco Giants in the World Series, Henderson made it a 
point to seek out La Russa during the postgame celebration and let him know 
respect had been earned. "It's mutual," La Russa said here this week. "You hear 
a lot of innuendo about Rickey Henderson, but the guy I know is a consummate 
professional and a good human being." 
BACKING UP THE TALK 
La Russa likes to say Henderson would be elected mayor of the A's if such a 
post existed. And indeed, the Henderson portrait painted by his current 
teammates is flattering. 
"He's been a perfect fit here," said third baseman Carney Lansford, one of two 
A's whose tenure with the team dates back to the first of Henderson's two 
stints here. "He plays hard every day. He's intense. He plays hurt. To me, he's 
a different guy than he was when he was here before. I think it's maturity. He 
was our spark plug from the moment he stepped into this clubhouse (last 
season)." 
Henderson insists he's indifferent about his image, but he can't resist 
launching into occasional tirades about expectations that increase 
disproportionately with each accomplishment. "What do people want from me?" he 
asked. "I give what I have, which usually is a lot, and the critics out there 
still aren't satisfied." 
He can be outlandish, as when he suggested the A's perhaps should have a 
Lamborghini awaiting him as a gift when he breaks Lou Brock's stolen base 
record. He can be surly, as is the case when he's asked to respond to charges 
he doesn't play hurt. 
But always, he's productive. He's batting an AL-best .330 with 21 home runs, 44 
RBI and the league's second-highest slugging percentage at .592. He has 49 
stolen bases in 55 attempts, leaving him one short of achieving the 50-steal 
mark for the 10th time. Only Brock, who swiped 50 or more 12 times in 18 
seasons, has done so more often. 
He's had five years of 16 or more homers -- including a high of 28 -- and six 
with 80 or more steals, topped by a record 130 in 1982. He has a major-league 
record 44 home runs leading off games, four of them this year. 
He's 19 stolen bases short of surpassing Brock for the top spot among 
baseball's all-time steals leaders, and he'll break the record in about 1,000 
fewer games. He has said he can reach 1,200 to 1,500 steals; Brock got 938. 
He is the most annoying, occupying, disruptive force in the game. A convincing 
case can be made that he's among the best leadoff hitters baseball has seen; 
certainly, he's the finest of his era. He also may be the best defensive left 
fielder today. 
And he is the leading mogul of style on the team that loves to swagger -- 
exuding charisma with everything from his neon batting glove to his stalling, 
mind-game rituals at the plate to his nonchalant patrolling of the outfield. 
Scoring from second base on a routine groundout is a once-per-season feat, and 
Baltimore Orioles Manager Frank Robinson promises he won't soon forget the time 
Henderson tagged up and raced home from third on a popout to shortstop Cal 
Ripken. "He's the ultimate pest," Robinson said as his team dropped two of 
three to the A's here this week, though Henderson missed the final two games 
because he strained his left hamstring running to first on a groundout Tuesday. 
The A's know they have grown so dependent upon Henderson that they can ill 
afford to lose him for an extended period. He adds the dimension La Russa calls 
"Rickey Runs"-the ability to score on a walk, two steals and a groundout or fly 
ball. The A's are resisting putting him on the 15-day disabled list now for 
fear he'll be ready to play a few days earlier and they'll miss out on his 
services unnecessarily. 
It is a stature he carries proudly. "It's nice to be appreciated," he said. "I 
feel like I'm respected for what I do here. That hasn't always been the case 
for me." 
EMOTIONAL STRENGTH 
Riches and adulation did not come easily to Henderson. He was born in Chicago, 
the youngest of five sons and two daughters raised by his mother and 
grandmother. The family lived in Arkansas from when Rickey was 2 until he was 
7, then settled in a working-class neighborhood in Oakland. He grew up playing 
baseball with A's teammate Dave Stewart and Detroit Tigers outfielder Lloyd 
Moseby. 
Henderson never knew his father, who left his mother when he was 2. A lifelong 
curiosity culminated in 1979, when he hired private detectives to find his 
father, who was a truck driver. Shortly after the detectives located the elder 
Henderson, he died in a traffic accident. They reported that to Henderson's 
mother, Bobbie, who couldn't bring herself to tell Rickey until more than a 
year later. 
Yet Henderson says he never lacked for support. His base-stealing proficiency 
was rooted in his mother's protective nature, for she never believed he had 
been playing baseball on the sandlots unless he came home dirty. So Henderson 
learned how to stain himself, lest he face the wrath of punishment for 
suspected carousing on the street. 
The knack was nurtured further by a kind-hearted high school counselor who 
offered a quarter for every base he stole -- a front for providing him with 
enough money to buy lunch every day, Henderson says. "I never lacked for strong 
people in my life," he said. "I was always looked after and provided for, with 
generosity and understanding instead of with money." 
Henderson was an all-city running back in football, with power and 4.3-second 
speed in the 40-yard dash that drew scholarship offers from major schools. He 
was set to go to Arizona State on a football scholarship when the A's drafted 
him and his mother persuaded him, despite his objections, to opt for baseball. 
He skyrocketed through the minors with his imposing raw ability and the 
base-running tutorials of his rookie league manager, Tom Trebelhorn. Now the 
manager of the Milwaukee Brewers, Trebelhorn added technique to speed, and 
Henderson learned to become a student of base-stealing. He has since borrowed 
from the methods of Brock, Davey Lopes and others, and he now says physical 
skills are secondary to cunning. 
"I steal bases with my mind as much as with my legs," he said. "It's me against 
the pitcher out there. If I get the jump I want, the catcher doesn't have any 
chance. ... That's why I like to mess with (the catchers). ... I taunt them, 
tell them they couldn't throw me out if I walked over to second. But that's 
just for fun. Really, my rivalry is with the pitchers." 
BUDDING CAREER 
His most carefree seasons were his early years with the A's, days of "Billy 
Ball" under Martin that consisted of few restrictions on his running or 
behavior. When Martin was killed in a traffic accident on Henderson's birthday, 
Christmas Day, the former pupil said he was devastated. 
Martin had played the biggest part in bringing Henderson -- with pitcher Bert 
Bradley -- to the Yankees in a 1985 trade for Jay Howell, Jose Rijo, Eric 
Plunk, Tim Birtsas and Stan Javier. 
His Yankees years were mostly fruitful, as he became one of the game's most 
feared players. But he often felt unduly reined, he said, and the situation 
there began to sour in 1987 when he missed 67 games with a torn hamstring. 
Manager Lou Piniella and almost everyone else associated with the Yankees -- 
except for Martin -- didn't believe Henderson was hurt. 
By the time he was traded back here last year for Luis Polonia, Greg Cadaret 
and (again) Plunk, New York officials were proclaiming him past his prime and 
uninterested in performing to his potential. Henderson vetoed a proposed deal 
with the Giants, and the Yankees conceded they probably didn't get equal value 
in dealing him to Oakland. The A's trepidations about him were alleviated 
almost immediately. 
After hitting .247 the first 2 1/2 months of the season for New York, Henderson 
batted .294 for Oakland as the A's pulled away from the California Angels down 
the stretch. Then he made the postseason his personal showcase, subduing 
Toronto with a six-for-15, seven-walk, eight-steal performance and pestering 
San Francisco with a .474 average in the World Series. 
"When I'm healthy, I feel I'm unstoppable," said Henderson, who has played much 
of this year with a sore hip. "The problem is, people never know when you're 
not healthy. In New York, I always had managers telling me, 'Your 80 percent is 
better than other people's 100 percent.' So I gave the 80 I had in me. But then 
I'd be criticized because it wasn't 100 percent, when only a few people knew 
that I wasn't physically capable of that at the time." 
So, finally, which is the real Henderson? Even now, it depends upon whom you 
ask. There still are those players and scouts around the league who accuse him 
of being lazy, showy and more unnerving to his team than others. 
Clearly, though, that is not the prevailing opinion on the Henderson of 1990. 
He says he'll probably seek to renegotiate his just-signed, four-year contract 
after the season, but any unhappiness about his salary hasn't showed in his 
play. And his antics are more for entertainment than anything else anyway, La 
Russa contends, adding that the substance underneath makes all of it 
worthwhile. "He breaks up the monotony," La Russa said. 
"I'll always have people tearing me down," Henderson said. "I don't let it 
bother me anymore. I just try to be myself. You can take it or leave it. I 
think the guys in this clubhouse will take me as I am." 
