AMERICAN LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
ORIOLE LEAD DOWN TO ONE AFTER A DOUBLE DEFEAT BY RED SOX 
The 7 1/2-game lead the Baltimore Orioles had in the American League East when 
they headed West less than two weeks ago is almost gone. 
The margin fell to a game Tuesday at Boston when they lost a day-night 
doubleheader. In the first game Ellis Burks, just off the disabled list, 
snapped a seventh-inning tie with a double and the Red Sox won, 5-3. 
Nick Esasky hit a three-run home run in the second game to lead the Red Sox to 
a 6-2 victory. 
Since July 20, when the Orioles opened a 14-game trip in Oakland, the Red Sox 
are only 8-6. However, they have gained seven games to pull within a game 
because the Orioles are 1-13 in their last 14 games. 
The Orioles, who lost their last home game before the trip, play the Red Sox 
again tonight, so they could be out of the lead when they head home. 
Everyone has closed in on the collapsing Orioles. The Yankees, who have lost 11 
of their last 14, are in sixth place, but only five games out of first. 
In the last nine games, the Orioles' starting pitchers have an earned-run 
average of 7.60. The hitters went into a slump even earlier. 
"It didn't happen overnight, " Manager Frank Robinson said, "but it's been in a 
very short period of time. It's tough to believe we're playing the way we've 
been playing. 
"Every game I think we're going back to the way we're capable of playing. Then 
after each game we come back and say, 'Well maybe the next one.' It's not going 
to go away until we make it go away." 
Burks, who had shoulder surgery in mid-June, learned Monday night in Toledo, 
where he was undergoing rehabilitation, that he had been activated. He was 
elated to get back. 
"I arrived a couple of hours before the day game," he said. "But I was ready. 
I'm a little tired, but I'm excited about being in a pennant race." 
Reliever Rob Murphy won the opener, and Wes Gardner gave up five hits in 7 2/3 
innings in the second game to improve his record to 3-6. Lee Smith got a save 
in each game. 
Oakland 2, Chicago 0 -- With the Angels losing again at Seattle, the Athletics 
moved back into first place in the West. 
Curt Young, who had failed in seven consecutive starts, and three relievers 
combined for a six-hitter at Oakland. Young (3-8) gave up four hits in six 
innings to win for the first time since May 28. 
Dennis Eckersley pitched the ninth for his 19th save in 21 opportunities. 
Felix Jose doubled in a run in the second inning off Greg Hibbard. In the 
eighth, Carney Lansford singled in the other run as the Athletics won for the 
10th time in the last 13 games. 
Milwaukee 4, Cleveland 2 -- Robin Yount continues to carry the Brewers into the 
thick of the Eastern Division race. 
With the Brewers trailing, 2-1, in the eighth inning at Milwaukee, Yount, who 
has hit safely in 21 of his last 22 games, rammed a two-run double and the 
Brewers won for the 10th time in 13 games. From 12 games back they have closed 
to within 2 1/2. 
Joe Carter, snapping out of a three-for-29 slump, hit his 21st homer in the 
seventh to give the Indians their 2-1 lead. 
Kansas City 2, Toronto 1 -- Count right-hander Bret Saberhagen as one who 
thinks Toronto's SkyDome is out of this universe. 
After pitching a three-hitter for his eighth win in his last nine decisions, 
Saberhagen (11-5) said: "This place is great. It's like something out of 2001." 
In his last five games at the old park Saberhagen was a loser. 
Minnesota 5, New York 4 -- The pitching problems continue for the Yankees. 
Walt Terrell had another rough outing at New York. One of the many pitchers the 
Yankees have acquired from the San Diego Padres, the veteran right-hander was 
out after 6 1/3 innings. 
Terrell gave up a two-run home run to Randy Bush that put the Twins ahead to 
stay. It was the Yankees' 11th loss in the last 14 games. 
Don Mattingly provided most of the Yankee offense. He hit his 14th home run, 
singled twice and drove in three runs. 
Texas 4, Detroit 3 -- When the Rangers acquired Harold Baines they were 
criticized for adding a hitter instead needed pitching. 
Manager Bobby Valentine's answer was that the Rangers needed a designated 
hitter. 
Their new designated hitter came through with a flourish at Detroit. With one 
out in the ninth inning and the Tigers leading, 3-2, Cecil Espy fouled off nine 
pitches, then hammered a double off the right-field wall. 
Baines hit the next pitch into the second deck for his 14th home run, his first 
as a Ranger, to win the game. DAN HAFNER 
