DRUG LORDS VOW WAR ON COLOMBIA; 
4 NEW BOMBINGS BLAMED ON CARTELS; GOVERNMENT INTENSIFIES CRACKDOWN 
With a renewed wave of terror, bombings and death threats, Colombia's fugitive 
drug lords declared "total and absolute war" on the country's political and 
business leadership Thursday, ominously targeting even the families of those 
who resist them. 
"We prefer a tomb in Colombia to a jail in the United States," the drug lords 
declared in an inflammatory communique left early Thursday at the site of one 
of four new bombing targets. 
One man died in blasts at the Medellin headquarters of Colombia's two leading 
political parties. Another man was injured in one of three other attacks in and 
near Medellin that left the homes of two prominent politicians in flames and 
another pockmarked by bullets. Police said the attacks and the bombings in the 
early morning hours appeared to be coordinated. 
On Thursday evening the government issued a series of new decrees aimed at 
pressing an official offensive against the drug traffickers. Included in the 
decrees are measures for destroying unauthorized private airstrips and 
disposing of property confiscated from suspected traffickers. 
'All Who Have Persecuted' 
The earlier statement from the drug lords said: "We declare total and absolute 
war on the government, the industrial and political oligarchy, the journalists 
who have attacked and outraged us, the judges who have sold themselves to the 
government, high court extraditing judges and presidential and sectorial 
(social, business and labor) associations, and all who have persecuted and 
attacked us." 
It was signed "The Extraditables," a group that has been identified in the past 
as the top leadership of the notorious Medellin drug cartel, all of them wanted 
men in the United States. 
Their warning added that "we will not respect the families of those who have 
not respected our families." 
"These people are serious," said a leading Colombian newspaper editor who asked 
to remain unnamed because of the direct threat contained in the drug lords' 
message. "This is the most serious thing I have seen in my life," he added, 
noting that more than a dozen journalists and hundreds of government officials 
have been killed by cartel hit squads here in recent years. 
Revulsion After Assassinations 
Colombia's current crackdown against the drug cartels was begun against a 
background of national revulsion following the assassinations last week of an 
appeals court judge, a police chief and a leading presidential candidate who 
had vowed to combat narcotics trafficking. 
Minutes after the murder Friday of presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan as 
he was about to begin a campaign speech, President Virgilio Barco Vargas issued 
emergency decrees allowing extradition of drug suspects to the United States 
and confiscation of their property. Since then, police and military units have 
conducted more than 300 raids, detaining more than 10,000 people and seizing an 
estimated $200 million worth of drug suspects' property. 
A Defense Ministry spokesman said Thursday that the "great majority" of those 
detained have been released without charges after questioning. 
Under one of Thursday's additional decrees, owners will be required to 
personally claim seized properties and prove that they were acquired with 
legitimate funds within 10 days. It is unlikely that suspected traffickers will 
emerge from hiding to make their claims. 
If they do not, their properties will be turned over to government agencies for 
redistribution, according to the decree. Farms and ranches will be broken up 
and distributed to landless peasants, urban properties will go to a family 
welfare agency, cash and automobiles will be given to a judicial fund to 
improve court working conditions, and planes and boats will be turned over to 
the armed forces. 
Another decree requires provincial officials to inventory private airstrips. 
Unauthorized landing strips, often used for cocaine trafficking, will be 
destroyed. 
The decree also requires distributors of aviation fuel to report to the 
government on their customers. 
Under Colombian law, the country's Supreme Court is required to review the 
decrees and rule on their constitutionality within 40 days. One of Thursday's 
decrees provides special protection for justices conducting the review. 
An American narcotics expert involved in the government crackdown said 
Thursday's bombings and threats fit the pattern of Medellin cartel behavior. 
'They Are Cornered' 
"We're not surprised," he said. "They are cornered, and their only hope is to 
intimidate and bend the will of the government. 
"They have been very good at following through on what they say they will do," 
he said, adding his hope "that the government stands tall to this challenge." 
"I'm very confident that if they (the government) can stay in there, they are 
going to win this war," the drug expert said. 
The U.S. Embassy in Bogota, which normally operates under tight security 
measures, appeared Thursday to have heightened its alert. About 100 U.S. 
officials are attached to the embassy, and about two dozen agents of the Drug 
Enforcement Administration work in this country. 
Passer-by Dies 
The early morning wave of terror in Medellin, an industrial city of 2 million 
that has long been the headquarters of the biggest drug cartel, began with 
shattering explosions at the headquarters of Galan's faction of the ruling 
Liberal Party and the opposition Conservative Party. 
Liberal Party office manager Gustavo Garcia said that a passer-by was killed in 
a blast that took the roof off the one-story concrete-and-brick building and 
shattered windows throughout the downtown business block. 
At about the same time, the vacation homes just outside Medellin of former 
Finance Minister Edgard Gutierrez of the Liberal Party and Sen. Ignacio Velez 
Escobar of the Conservative Party were burned down. A third home, that of 
prominent industrialist Augusto Lopez Valencia, a top official of the 
Bavaria-Bouverie industrial conglomerate, was assaulted and shot up by a gang 
of about 10 armed men, according to a police spokesman. 
Police also found and defused two suitcase bombs, each containing 22 pounds of 
explosives, at the Medellin stations of the nation's two top radio networks, 
Caracol and RCN, owned by families that are among Colombia's wealthiest. 
The Medellin drug lords are known to be hostile to the old-money families of 
the industrial city in which they have made their headquarters. Their 
communique warning of attacks against the oligarchy was left with the suitcase 
bomb at the Caracol radio station, police said. 
Destruction Vowed 
"We will burn and destroy the industry's properties and mansions of the 
oligarchy," said the threatening statement of the drug lords. 
A European diplomat said the warning to "the oligarchy" was clearly meant to 
scare the country's dominant upper classes so that they will press for a 
relaxation of the Barco government's crackdown on the traffickers. 
"They are the target," the diplomat said. "The cartel is saying, 'If you are 
going to play ball with Barco, we're going to hit you.' " 
Whereabouts Unknown 
Meanwhile, the whereabouts of the major drug lords remained a mystery. The 
three top Medellin drug traffickers -- Pablo Escobar, estimated to worth more 
than $3 billion; Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha and Jorge Ochoa -- are believed to be 
in hiding somewhere in Colombia, despite reports that they may have fled to 
Panama, according to the American drug expert. 
Panamanian President Manuel Solis Palma branded the reports as "false and 
tendentious" in a letter to Barco on Thursday. 
"We're getting a lot of information of their being in many places," the drug 
expert said. "But my gut feeling is that Escobar is still here in Colombia. 
"My educated guess is they prefer to stay in areas where they feel some sense 
of control, they feel secure. They know if they make a mistake in a third 
country, their chances of being extradited are significant." 
The drug expert said that the American legal documents necessary to extradite 
Eduardo Martinez Romero, so-called finance minister of the Medellin cartel, who 
remains the top drug figure arrested since Saturday, are expected to arrive in 
Bogota today, in plenty of time to continue holding him until he can be sent to 
the United States. 
Under Barco's emergency decree, Martinez would have been eligible for release 
early next week if the U.S. documents failed to arrive on time, the expert 
said. 
He added that two other drug figures whom he described as "Class 1, in the same 
class as Pablo Escobar," also face quick extradition. They are Ana Beatriz 
Rodriguez Tamayo and Bernardo Londono Quintero, both under indictment in the 
United States. 
In their threatening communique Thursday, the drug lords sought to portray 
themselves as peace-loving nationalists who had sought in vain to find accord 
with the government but had been persecuted by "anti-nationalists." 
'Will Continue Our Struggle' 
"We will not lower our flag, and we will continue our struggle and our total 
war against the anti-nationalists and the sellers of the motherland," their 
statement said. 
"We have been asking the government for peace since the talks in Panama in 
1984, when violence could have been avoided," the statement said. It apparently 
referred to a 1984 meeting between cartel representatives and former President 
Alfonso Lopez Michelsen in Panama during which they proposed repatriating $2 
billion a year in return for a blanket amnesty from the government. 
"The only reply we have received from the government has been repression -- the 
arbitrary searches, unjust arrests of our families, the plundering of our 
homes," said the declaration. 
Meanwhile, Israel's government sought to distance itself from actions of 
Israeli citizens in Colombia reported to have trained assassination teams. 
No Permit Was Given 
The Defense Ministry announced that a firm linked with drug lords in Colombia 
had never received a permit from the government to sell arms or give training 
to anyone in Colombia. 
The firm, Hod Hahanit, a Tel Aviv company that specializes in security and 
military know-how, approached the Defense Ministry a year ago to ask permission 
to do business in Colombia but was turned down, according to the a Defense 
Ministry announcement. It was not clear why permission was withheld. 
The announcement went on to say that another, unidentified firm violated 
Defense Ministry controls and worked for clients in Colombia. 
In Israel, companies selling weapons or giving military training abroad must be 
licensed by the Defense Ministry. There are an estimated 800 such firms 
operating in scores of countries. 
The operator of Hod Hahanit has been identified as Yair Klein, a retired 
Israeli army colonel. Government radio said he was expected to return to the 
country from a trip abroad next week. Government sources in Tel Aviv said that 
between 10 and 12 emloyees of the company had been in Colombia recently and 
left during the past few days. 
American television broadcast videotape purporting to show Israeli mercenaries 
training "hit teams" of Colombian drug dealers. Colombian newspapers reported 
that foreigners, including Israelis, may have carried out the recent 
assassination of Luis Carlos Galan, a presidential candidate campaigning 
against the drug trade. 
Times staff writer Daniel Williams, in Jerusalem, contributed to this story. 
