RULING UPHELD ON POMONA ELECTIONS; 
APPEALS COURT BACKS DECISION THAT SYSTEM DOESN'T DILUTE MINORITY VOTE 
A federal appeals court has upheld a district judge's ruling that Pomona's 
at-large election system doesn't discriminate against blacks and Latinos. 
The court upheld U.S. District Judge James M. Ideman's decision that the 
plaintiffs in the case failed to meet standards established in a U.S. Supreme 
Court decision as necessary to prove an at-large system dilutes the minority 
vote. 
The suit, filed in 1985 by the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational 
Fund and San Antonio-based Southwest Voter Registration Education Project, 
alleged at-large elections for the city's five council seats prevented minority 
candidates from winning. A federal court judge ruled for the city in 1986, and 
the civil rights groups appealed the decision. 
Tomas Ursua, who was elected to the council in March but lost a council 
election in 1985, was one of three unsuccessful candidates who sued. 
Plaintiffs in the case said they were "shocked" and "surprised" by the ruling 
Thursday. They said they won't know what further action they will take until 
they see the court's opinion. 
Andrew Hernandez, president of the San Antonio group, said the ruling by the 
U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals is "ironic in light of the Watsonville case" 
and ignores "the fact that there is a history of discrimination and a polarized 
vote. Minorities have a difficult time at the local level." The Latino 
community in the city of Watsonville, Calif., recently won a case in which they 
alleged at-large elections shut them out of city government. 
But the court held that the Pomona plaintiffs had not demonstrated that 
minorities were politically cohesive and sufficiently concentrated so that 
minority districts could be drawn or that an Anglo voting bloc had consistently 
defeated minority candidates, criteria established by the 1986 U.S. Supreme 
Court decision in Thornburg vs. Gingles. 
Minorities constitute about half of Pomona's 120,000 population. In the city's 
101-year history, no blacks and only four Latinos have been elected to the City 
Council. Two of the Latinos, Ursua and Nell Soto, are on the council now. 
Neither was available for comment immediately after the decision. 
In the past, the two have said a large turnout by the city's black and Latino 
voters made their victories possible. But, said MALDEF attorney Richard Larson, 
the "occasional election of minorities in at-large elections does not detract 
from the fact that at-large violates a fair voting system." 
He added that if the city switched to district elections, there would be enough 
Latinos to fill two districts. 
Pomona Deputy District Atty. Bill Curley lauded the court's decision, saying it 
proves that "at this point we can assume we've got a non-discriminatory 
system." But he conceded that with Pomona's large minority population, 
districts "certainly could be crafted to ensure minority representation," and 
that the City Council had discussed changing the elections process. 
