DRUG IS FOUND TO DELAY PROGRESSION OF PARKINSON'S 
Scientists have demonstrated for the first time that a drug treatment can delay 
the brain-destroying progression of Parkinson's disease. 
In a California trial involving 54 patients, the drug, called deprenyl, nearly 
doubled the time that elapsed between the onset of Parkinson's and the need for 
therapy with the most commonly used drug, L-dopa, researchers from the 
California Parkinson's Foundation in San Jose report in today's issue of the 
journal Science. 
L-dopa does not slow the normally fatal disease, which usually strikes people 
over the age of 50, but it does alleviate its symptoms, which include disabling 
tremors and rigidity of the limbs and, in at least 30% of the cases, mental 
impairment. 
Combined with earlier anecdotal reports suggesting that deprenyl prolongs the 
lives of Parkinson's victims, the research suggests that powerful relief will 
soon be available for Parkinson's victims, who number over 1 million in the 
United States alone. Deprenyl is scheduled to be marketed as a prescription 
drug next month. 
But the discovery has implications even beyond that. Two other conditions 
associated with aging, Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(Lou Gehrig's disease), also involve inexorable degeneration of brain cells, 
and physicians have not been able to slow their progression either. 
The fact that disease progression has been slowed in Parkinson's "raises the 
hope that you can do it with the others as well," said neurologist J. William 
Langston, the principal investigator of the new study. 
The new results are "very important," said neurologist Stanley Fahn of the 
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, co-chairman of a larger 
study of deprenyl -- called DATATOP -- that is now under way at 28 clinical 
centers throughout the country. 
Langston's study served as a pilot program for DATATOP. Results from the larger 
study are not expected until late 1990 at the earliest, and Fahn refused to 
comment on them. But rumors circulating in the neurological community suggest 
that those results will support Langston's findings. 
And Langston's results could have an immediate impact on treatment of 
Parkinson's in this country. Six weeks ago, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration approved marketing of deprenyl for use in combination with 
L-dopa for treating patients late in the course of Parkinson's. Somerset 
Pharmaceuticals of Denville, N.J., will begin marketing the drug as Eldepryl in 
mid-September, and once they do, physicians -- as they may with any drug -- 
will be free to prescribe it for any use they see fit. 
Fahn noted that it is "inevitable" that large numbers of neurologists will 
"jump on it (deprenyl)" for their patients in the early stages of the disease. 
Parkinson's disease results from the death of cells in the substantia nigra 
portion of the brain that secrete the neural transmitter dopamine, which plays 
a key role in the control of muscle movement. The disease's cause is unknown, 
but growing numbers of neurologists believe that it is produced by chemicals in 
the environment that poison the dopamine-secreting cells. 
As production of dopamine is slowed, the victims lose control of their limbs 
until they eventually become completely disabled. L-dopa is used in therapy 
because it is converted into dopamine in the brain, increasing the brain's 
dopamine supply. But it is effective, on average, for only about six years, 
after which symptoms worsen. 
Some researchers have attempted to cure Parkinson's by transplanting 
dopamine-secreting cells from the adrenal glands or from fetuses into the 
brains of victims. But those procedures have been attempted on only about 300 
patients and there is still no consensus on their value. 
In contrast, deprenyl could be used with virtually every Parkinson's patient. 
For their study, Langston and neurologist James W. Tetrud recruited 54 patients 
who had recently been found to have Parkinson's disease. Half were given 
twice-daily doses of deprenyl and half were given a placebo -- a sugar pill 
with no effect. The patients were monitored until either they had been in the 
study for three years or their condition became severe enough to require 
L-dopa. 
They found that the average time before L-dopa was required was 312 days in the 
placebo group and 549 days in the deprenyl group. 
Langston and Tetrud also rated the patients' neurological condition on five 
separate scales. They found that, based on these scales, disease progression 
was slowed by 40% to 83% per year. 
"The clinical observations suggest that the disease is progressing more slowly 
. . . and that's compelling evidence, but it is not proof," Langston said in an 
interview. "To prove it, we would have to demonstrate that nerve cells are 
surviving over time, (a procedure) that is not currently possible in living 
humans." 
At the end of the study, the patients were taken off deprenyl for a month to 
ensure that the apparent slowdown in disease progression was due to the 
preservation of nerve cells and not simply to relief of symptoms. The drug 
therapy was then restarted and the researchers will continue to monitor the 
patients to determine whether the drug continues its effects for longer 
periods. 
Ironically, deprenyl has been used in Europe for about 15 years to treat 
patients who have begun to develop tolerance for the effects of L-dopa. In one 
key study, pharmacologist Moussa B.H. Youdim of the Technion-Israel Institute 
of Technology found that combined use of L-dopa and deprenyl substantially 
increased the survival of Parkinson's victims. 
But that study was viewed with "a great deal of skepticism," according to UCLA 
neurologist Charles H. Markham, because it was an uncontrolled study on an 
unusual group of Parkinson's patients. Langston's results, however, would seem 
to provide strong support for Youdim's conclusions. 
The $10-million DATATOP study has a design similar to Langston and Tetrud's but 
involves 800 patients. Some of those patients are also receiving Vitamin E as 
well as deprenyl, however, to determine whether Vitamin E can also slow the 
disease, as animal experiments have suggested. 
If the DATATOP results confirm Langston and Tetrud's, Fahn said, researchers 
will almost certainly begin studying the long-term combined effects of L-dopa 
and deprenyl to determine if people will in fact live longer. 
PARKINSON'S DRUG 
Parkinson's disease is caused by the death of cells in the substantia nigra at 
the base of the brain that release a hormone necessary for controlling muscle 
movements. Mounting evidence indicates that metabolites of environmental 
chemicals, such as pesticides, can kill the cells, causing the disease. The 
drug deprenyl delays the progression of Parkinson's by blocking conversion of 
the chemicals into their toxic form. 
