DRUG SEEMS TO BLOCK USERS' COCAINE NEED 
A pain-killing drug dramatically reduces the craving for both cocaine and 
heroin and may become an extremely potent tool in the fight against drug abuse, 
Harvard scientists report today in a paper published in the journal Science. 
Although researchers now use antidepressants to help wean cocaine addicts from 
their addiction, there is now no medication that effectively blocks the craving 
for cocaine, which is regularly used by as many as 3 million Americans. 
The Harvard researchers report that buprenorphine, a drug that is already being 
studied for use in treating heroin addiction, almost completely halts 
self-administration of cocaine by rhesus monkeys, which are widely used as a 
model for human drug addiction. 
Anecdotal evidence of scattered human use has suggested that the drug may be 
equally effective in people and researchers are quickly organizing controlled 
studies. The dual action of the drug may be particularly valuable because 70% 
of heroin abusers are also addicted to cocaine, frequently injecting them 
together in a concoction called a "speedball." 
Researchers are also enthusiastic about buprenorphine because it does not 
appear to be addictive and seems to produce no adverse side effects. 
Buprenorphine is one of the first fruits of a new, $25-million program by the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse to develop anti-cocaine drugs. Two other 
promising new drugs are also being studied in humans, and as many as 28 are 
undergoing animal testing. 
"This is exactly the kind of drug we set out to find," said Dr. Marvin Snyder, 
director of preclinical research at the National Institute on Drug Abuse. 
"This may be a real breakthrough," added Dr. Forrest S. Tennant Jr., a 
psychiatrist who operates Community Health Projects Inc. in West Covina. "But 
we have to keep in mind that, unlike heroin abuse or alcohol abuse or smoking, 
which can be treated with a single drug, cocaine addiction will probably have 
to be treated with a variety of agents." 
Buprenorphine is now used as an intravenous painkiller during surgery. 
Researchers have recognized for several years that it has potential for 
treating heroin addiction. Dr. Thomas Kosten, a psychiatrist at the Yale 
University School of Medicine, has been studying it in addicts for that purpose 
for three years, comparing it to methadone, an addictive substitute for heroin 
that does not produce a "high." 
"We observed that it not only decreased heroin use, but that it also markedly 
decreased cocaine abuse," Kosten said. Although cocaine abuse was not part of 
the controlled study, "We found that people receiving buprenorphine used about 
(one-eighth as much) cocaine as those on methadone." 
When six methadone-maintenance patients who were using cocaine heavily were 
switched to buprenorphine, "five stopped completely and one had a 60% 
reduction," Kosten said. 
Kosten and his colleagues at Yale have been conducting a controlled study of 
buprenorphine for cocaine abuse for six months, but they do not expect to have 
results for at least another year. 
"I'm quite excited about the animal study because it tells us we are on the 
right track," Kosten said. 
The new study was conducted by Nancy K. Mello, a psychologist, and Dr. Jack H. 
Mendelson, a psychiatrist, at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., where they 
operate Harvard's Alcohol and Drug Abuse Research Center. 
Mello, Mendelson and their colleagues fitted six rhesus monkeys with an 
implanted tube that allowed the animals to infuse themselves with cocaine by 
pulling on a lever. "It's important that we don't give cocaine to the monkeys. 
They administer it themselves," Mendelson said in a telephone interview. "There 
is no reward for using it and no punishment if they don't." 
The monkeys had a second implanted tube that allowed the researchers to infuse 
either a salt solution or a solution of buprenorphine. When the salt solution 
was infused, the monkeys typically administered an average of 30 cocaine 
injections per day, an amount per body weight comparable to that consumed by 
human heavy abusers. 
Administration of buprenorphine caused the monkeys to simply lose interest in 
cocaine. By the end of 30 days of treatment, the monkeys were injecting 
cocaine, on average, only about twice daily. The researchers are not sure how 
the drug reduces the craving for cocaine. 
Significantly, Mendelson said, buprenorphine did not alter the animals' 
behavior or their consumption of food. 
Two other medications called flupenthixol and carbamazapine also show great 
promise in reducing cocaine craving. Flupenthixol, which has been used in 
Europe for about 10 years as an antidepressant, is not available yet in the 
United States. 
Dr. Frank Gawin, a psychiatrist at Yale, tried it on 10 cocaine users in the 
Bahamas who had not responded to other treatments and observed a dramatic 
reduction in cocaine use. The Yale group hopes to begin clinical trials with 
the medication within a month if they can get permission from the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration. 
Dr. Charles P. O'Brien, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania, has 
had similar, preliminary results with an anti-epileptic drug called 
carbamazapine, and he is beginning more rigorous double-blind studies in which 
neither the physicians nor their patients know what medication the drug abusers 
are receiving. 
Researchers are also looking at new ways to administer the anti-cocaine drugs 
to ensure that patients continue to take them. One promising approach involves 
"depots," biodegradable plastic pellets that would be injected under the skin 
and slowly release the medications over a period of weeks. The depots would 
eliminate the abuser's need for a daily trip to a clinic to receive treatment, 
a factor that many feel has deterred abusers from seeking treatment. 
Mendelson and others cautioned that medications alone will be insufficient in 
curing cocaine abuse. "There's no magic bullet for curing drug abuse," he said. 
Psychotherapy and social counseling will also be necessary. 
Medications such as buprenorphine, he said, will simply provide a "window of 
opportunity" that will allow time for other therapies to take effect. 
