BASEBALL NOTES; 
POLONIA CONVICTED ON SEX CHARGE, WILL BE SENTENCED AFTER SEASON 
New York Yankee outfielder Luis Polonia was convicted in Milwaukee Monday of 
having sexual intercourse with a 15-year-old girl, but the judge postponed 
sentencing until after the baseball season. 
Polonia, 24, pleaded no contest to the misdemeanor charge that he had sex with 
the girl at a downtown hotel last Wednesday. Milwaukee County Circuit Judge 
Thomas Doherty then found him guilty. 
Doherty said in an interview after the hearing that he delayed sentencing until 
Oct. 2 to provide ample time for a presentence report to be completed. "The 
baseball season was not a factor," he said. 
The regular baseball season ends Oct. 1. Polonia's bail was continued at $5,000 
and prosecutors said he will not have to return to Milwaukee until the next 
hearing. 
Under Wisconsin law, an adult may not have intercourse with a child under age 
16 even if the child consents. The charge carries a maximum penalty of nine 
months in jail and $10,000 in fines. 
Polonia is a citizen of the Dominican Republic, but Ronald Swan, a U.S. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service agent in Milwaukee, said the player 
could not be deported because of the conviction. 
The criminal complaint said the girl told authorities she and Polonia had 
intercourse twice, once before the girl's mother called the hotel and talked to 
the player and once after the phone call. 
The complaint said the girl told authorities that, after Polonia answered the 
phone call, he asked her "if she was a minor and she indicated she was and she 
believes she may have told him that she was 16 years old." 
The complaint said Polonia told authorities he was told earlier that the girl 
was 19. 
Tests on right-hander Dwight Gooden's shoulder muscle tear show improvement, 
but the injury is not completely healed, New York Mets' General Manager Frank 
Cashen said. 
Cashen said the pitcher will continue to throw on the sidelines and in the 
bullpen. Gooden will undergo additional testing in two to three weeks to 
determine if there has been any improvement. 
Gooden (9-4) has been on the disabled list since July 3 after sustaining a torn 
subcapularis muscle in his right shoulder directly above his arm pit. 
A deal to sell the Seattle Mariners to a pair of Indianapolis businessmen "will 
work out sometime this week or it won't work out at all," owner George Argyros 
says. 
Argyros and the other two principals in the proposed sale -- Jeff Smulyan and 
Michael Browning -- all stayed in the same downtown Seattle hotel Sunday night, 
but didn't meet or see each other. 
"There are a lot of changes that need to be made, points to be straightened 
out, and we spent our own time doing that tonight," Argyros said Sunday. "I 
won't say I'm happy with the deal or unhappy with it. It is complex." 
Argyros also confirmed he could receive "close" to $76.1 million, the 
reappraisal price of the Mariners figured in June. He paid $13.1 million for 
the franchise in 1981. 
Don't look for Nolan Ryan to go into any wild celebration if he gets his 
5,000th strikeout victim tonight against the Oakland Athletics at Arlington, 
Tex. 
"I'll do nothing," Ryan said. "My idea is we have a game to win and I don't 
want it to be a distraction. I'll just take the ball home and put it with the 
rest of 'em." 
Ryan has kept all the baseballs from his five no-hitters and strikeouts in 
increments of 500. 
"I just give them to Ruth (his wife) and she marks on them what happened," Ryan 
said. 
For fans, the memories will come at a higher price. Ticket agencies are getting 
up to $200 for a $10 ticket to the game. 
"It's been crazy. They just want anything -- nosebleeds, field box," said 
Danielle Koot of First Row Tickets in Dallas. "At first, we estimated it would 
be big. But it's more than that. It's huge. Not many people are caring how much 
the price is." 
Ryan, 42, needs six strikeouts against the A's to reach 5,000. 
