ORGANIZING STILL A LABOR OF LOVE 
A decade ago, when Ken-Seaton Msemaji and Fahari Jeffers organized a union to 
represent domestic workers, their friends and supporters applauded the idea but 
wondered if the veteran labor organizers had finally taken on an impossible 
task. 
With help from the United Farm Workers union and Catholic church groups, the 
couple organized a small nucleus from a largely invisible work force, composed 
mainly of poorly educated minority women who earned minimum wage. Throughout 
the history of the U.S. labor movement, nobody had ever succeeded in organizing 
housekeepers into a union. 
But Jeffers and Msemaji were determined, and they began their venture in San 
Diego, a conservative city not known as a labor stronghold. In April, 1979, the 
couple and 150 members founded the United Domestic Workers union at a 
convention in Southeast San Diego. 
"Cesar (Chavez) planted the seed in 1976 . . . He was looking for someone to 
organize domestic workers," said Msemaji, 44, who was an activist with a black 
community group that at the time was helping the UFW with a statewide farm 
workers initiative. 
Msemaji and Jeffers, 35, threw themselves into the effort to organize the union 
with the same fervor that drove them to adopt 16 children, many of them 
undocumented aliens, in the following years. Fourteen of the couple's adopted 
children are Latino and two are black. 
"Our struggle to put the union together and form our family kind of paralleled 
each other," Msemaji said. "When we started both, we didn't have any money and 
nobody thought we could do it . . . We became a union and a family under 
unusual circumstances." 
Started Recruiting in 1978 
With help from the UFW, which sent several organizers to help the fledgling 
union, the UDW began recruiting members in 1978. Many of the first members were 
recruited at dawn, as they rode to work on city buses, and at San Ysidro, where 
organizers met Mexican women who crossed the border for housekeeping jobs on 
the U.S. side. 
Today, while the independent union's membership is still largely minority 
women, about 33% of its membership is made up of white housekeepers. 
"Most people thought it was an impossible thing to do . . . Originally, we 
envisioned forming a union for maids and housecleaners. After a while, we 
realized that in order to organize them, we had to have a stronger base of 
support," Msemaji said. 
In order to build a support base from which to grow, the UDW began focusing on 
home attendants from the government-funded In Home Support Services program. 
The IHSS program, designed to provide home care for the aged and disabled poor 
who cannot afford convalescent care, is financed by the state and administered 
by the counties. 
However, Jeffers, who is also an attorney, admitted that the first results were 
more humbling than encouraging. The union's first election in September, 1979, 
at a local nursing home, was lost by one vote. It was more than a year later, 
in November, 1980, before the UDW signed its first collective bargaining 
agreement, covering 2,000 home attendant workers contracted by San Diego 
County. 
Nine years later, the union's membership has grown modestly to 5,000 workers -- 
there are about 130,000 home attendants in the state -- but its influence has 
been felt throughout California. Currently, its paid membership is composed 
exclusively of workers who work for companies that contract with California 
counties for in-home care for aged and disabled people. The overwhelming 
majority of home attendants in California are "private providers," who do not 
have union representation. 
In addition to fighting for workers' rights, Jeffers is also fighting a more 
personal battle with a debilitating disease. Jeffers suffers from myasthenia 
gravis, a disease of the muscles that strikes its victims in the form of mild 
twitches and which can make chewing, swallowing and breathing difficult. 
The disease has hospitalized Jeffers on several occasions, but she refuses to 
be conquered by it. 
"It's not a disease that has a cure. It's a constant threat, but I can overcome 
it," she said. 
Home attendants represented by the UDW earn about $5 an hour, but their 
benefits include paid vacations and a health plan. In comparison, private 
providers usually earn minimum wage -- $4.25 an hour -- without benefits. 
Although the UDW's roots are planted firmly in the progressive labor movement, 
the union has been able to survive in an era that has sent many unions reeling 
largely because of Jeffers and Msemaji's insistence on developing bipartisan 
support on issues. 
Diverse Group of Supporters 
Through the years, UDW supporters have included politicians of diverse 
political views, such as Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco), 
Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica), Assembly Minority Leader Ross Johnson 
(R-Fullerton), Sen. Larry Stirling (R-San Diego) and conservative San Diego 
businessman James C. Schmidt, vice chairman of the board of Great American 
Bank. 
"They have a constituency base that is naturally Democratic, yet they're in a 
special circumstance in terms of supporting privatization, which historically 
has been identified with Republican policy," said Assemblyman Steve Peace 
(D-Chula Vista). "They appeal to Republicans who like to see jobs stay in the 
private sector and Democrats who like to see jobs going to people who are more 
often identified as a Democratic constituency." 
Earlier this year, Jeffers and Msemaji's Republican supporters were 
instrumental in persuading Gov. George Deukmejian to block a $64-million cut 
proposed by his staff in the state's $575-million in-home support program. Had 
the cuts been made, an estimated 5,000 contract workers, many of them UDW 
members, would have lost their jobs. It was the single biggest threat that the 
union has faced to date, Jeffers said. 
Deukmejian's advisers had argued that the state could save $64 million if it 
did away with contract workers and hired private providers who are paid 
directly by the counties. In addition to the savings, Deukmejian's aides said 
that private providers could do the job more effectively. 
"In all probability, that would've meant the end of the union . . . We had to 
persuade our legislators in Sacramento, and the governor's closest political 
allies, that contract workers are more cost effective," Jeffers said. 
The UDW mobilized statewide support to save the contract program, and 
consequently, the union. Former Republican Congressman Clair W. Burgener's 
letter to the governor was typical of the political support received by the 
union on the issue. 
"It would be detrimental to our economy to have more than 5,000 people, many of 
whom choose work over welfare, lose their jobs, and to have the more than 
20,000 elderly people for whom they provide care, end up in more costly 
institutions," Burgener wrote. 
Stirling said that he was impressed by Msemaji's and Jeffers' ability to work 
both sides of the aisle. 
"At the beginning, it surprised me that they were that politically 
sophisticated. But after knowing them for a while and, on reflection, my 
surprise was due to my lack of knowledge about them and not theirs. They are an 
extraordinary couple," Stirling said. 
Heap Praise on Couple 
Msemaji's and Jeffers' supporters lavish praise on the couple and the union. 
While praise for the pair and their organizing activities are to be expected 
from their liberal supporters, some of their biggest backers are conservative 
businessmen, not the type who would usually support labor unions. 
"I've known Ken for some time and am very impressed with him," said Great 
American's Schmidt. "The fact that he runs a very cost-effective operation and 
members of the union provide a very needed service impresses me . . . Support 
for him and the union is almost universal." 
"Their bottom line is the workers," Peace said. "Ken and Fahari are people who 
have been through it all. They are union leaders who are truly not motivated by 
money. They have a very modest life style." 
Both Jeffers and Msemaji are very private people, who, according to their 
supporters seldom talk about themselves. Msemaji appeared embarrassed when 
asked about the children he and his wife have adopted. 
"They are all good kids. They needed somebody's help when we came along, and 
I'm thankful to God that we were able to help. I'm not going to tell you that 
having a family this large is easy, because it's not. But Fahari and I have 
never regretted the move we made," Msemaji said. 
The couple is also devoutly religious. Msemaji, who was raised in Watts, is a 
lifelong Roman Catholic, and Jeffers, a self-described Navy brat who was born 
at the old Naval Hospital in San Diego, was baptized a Catholic last month. 
"Our ties to the church, both in our professional and private lives, are very 
strong. This union could not have succeeded without the help that we received 
from the church early on. Besides Cesar Chavez, they were the only ones who 
believed in us when nobody else did," Jeffers said. 
