MUSIC AND DANCE NEWS: GALWAY AWAITING NEWS ON STOLEN FLUTES 
"I've not heard a thing," says the familiar voice in that unmistakable brogue. 
On the phone from Lucerne, Switzerland, James Galway refers to the theft of 
five gold flutes from his luggage the day he returned home to Switzerland from 
his summer tour of the United States late last month. 
Though the Irish flutist has since offered a reward -- 10% of the value of the 
instruments (500,000 Swiss francs or $303,350 American, with no questions 
asked) -- he has gotten no response. 
Four of them were custom-produced by the Japanese flute maker Muramatsu. These 
four have hand-engraved ornamentation, and three are decorated with diamond 
studs at the head of the instrument. The fifth flute is the handiwork of the 
Boston craftsman Dana Sheridan, whom Galway calls "one of the best of the young 
American flute makers." 
Because of their uniqueness, the 49-year-old musician says, these instruments 
cannot safely be bought or sold publicly. 
"And, because they are an alloy, only 14 karat, they would not be worth much if 
melted down. Whoever took them must be an idiot. His only hope, probably, is to 
negotiate with me and the insurance company." 
Galway said the flutes were in an inexpensive black nylon bag to disguise the 
valuable flutes inside. When he and his wife, Jeannie, arrived at the Lucerne 
train station July 26, they were met by family members and carried their 
luggage -- with the flutes -- in two hand trolleys. When they arrived home, the 
black bag was missing. 
Galway said he reported the loss to the police but "I won't prosecute." 
In the meantime, Galway says, he has "one of my old favorites, from the distant 
past, actually, the flute I played on at my debut at Hollywood Bowl," for 
practice. 
And next week, he announces, "Mr. Muramatsu has promised to deliver three new 
gold flutes to me. How's that for service?" 
What if the stolen flutes re-appear? 
"Mr. Muramatsu can sell them." 
BRIEFLY: Before their appearance at "Black Choreographers" festivals in San 
Francisco and Los Angeles in October and November, the modern dance company 
Donald Byrd/The Group gives performances in Budapest, Hungary, and Budva, 
Yugoslavia. The 12-dancer troupe, with artistic director Byrd and auxiliary 
personnel, leaves for Eastern Europe today. On its way back to New York, it 
will give performances in The Hague and Amsterdam. . . . At the four pops 
concerts to be conducted by Murry Sidlin Aug. 30-Sept. 2 at Hospitality Point, 
the San Diego Symphony will play programs selected -- on the spot -- by 
audiences attending the concerts. Each concert concludes with fireworks. . . . 
Twelve positions, including principal percussion for one season only, have been 
announced by the Inland Empire Symphony. Auditions will be held Sept. 15-17, 
but applications must be received by Sept. 4. Write John Gates, personnel 
manager, Inland Empire Symphony auditions, 362 W. Court St., San Bernardino 
92041. Positions are: concertmaster, principal viola, principal flute, 
principal percussion (1989-90 only), section violin (five positions), section 
viola (two positions) and section bass (one position). 
PEOPLE: Mstislav Rostropovich has joined the campaign to save the elephants. 
The cellist and music director of the National Symphony will give a recital in 
the Concert Hall of the John F. Kennedy Center in Washington Sept. 18, with 
proceeds benefiting elephant conservation projects of the Animal Welfare 
Institute and the African Wildlife Foundation. . . . Composer/conductor 
Victoria Bond, who is music director of the Roanoke (Va.) Symphony, is writing 
a cantata based on the one-man theater piece, "Thoreau Tonight," and using the 
words of pioneer environmentalist Henry David Thoreau. . . . Gregory Osborne, a 
principal of the National Ballet of Canada, has left the company to pursue 
free-lance work. During 1989-90, Osborne will make solo guest appearances with 
the San Francisco Ballet and the Royal Danish Ballet. He will also return to 
his former home company for performances of "Swan Lake," "Giselle" and 
"Voluntaries." . . . Musicologist Michael Steinberg has joined the staff of the 
Minnesota Orchestra as artistic adviser to music director Edo de Waart. Until 
recently, Steinberg held a comparable post at the San Francisco Symphony. 
