EXXON'S ENVIRONMENTALIST DIRECTOR GETS MIXED REVIEW 
Exxon Corp. elected a well-regarded marine scientist to its board Wednesday -- 
fulfilling a promise that it would add a director with an environmental 
background -- but the appointment drew mixed reviews from environmental groups 
who had favored a stronger advocate. 
John H. Steele, 62, a senior scientist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institution in Massachusetts and president of its governing body, was elected 
to a one-year stint on Exxon's board, bringing its total membership to 15. He 
also was named to a new public issues committee formed in the wake of the March 
oil spill in Alaska. 
"My job will be to comment and to advise the board on (environmental) issues 
and on more general aspects," Steele said in an interview. But he rejected 
categorization as an environmental advocate: "I think the term environmentalist 
has too many political implications. . . . I have not been involved in advocacy 
on either side of these issues." 
Some Groups Object 
Some environmental groups objected strongly to Steele's appointment. "We're mad 
as hell," said Brent Blackwelder, vice president of the Friends of the Earth 
and Environmental Policy Institute. "It's an outrage to citizens who had 
expressed concerns about the Exxon oil spill . . . and it's not what we 
understood by the appointment of an environmentalist to the board." 
But Exxon spokesman William D. Smith defended Steele's appointment and denied 
the suggestion that Exxon had backed off its earlier promise. 
"No one on the board has a particular constituency, and each is expected to 
bring specific experiences to a breadth of issues brought to the board," he 
said. 
Others praised the choice. "Dr. Steele is a distinguished professional, a 
world-class environmentalist, head of an institution with a commanding 
international reputation. . . . I don't think anyone can object to this 
appointment," said New York City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, who represents 
several city pension funds with heavy investments in Exxon. 
Exxon's choice had been watched closely in part as a harbinger of future 
corporate appointments. The world's largest public oil company was fulfilling a 
promise made at its May shareholders meeting at the urging of Goldin and with 
the backing of California State Controller Gray Davis, a trustee of two 
California pension funds with large Exxon holdings. 
Goldin and Davis subsequently urged six other major oil companies to add a 
director with an environmental background and to create public issues 
committees. 
Steele's appointment came as a surprise to those who had expected the naming of 
a more prominent environmental advocate. The Woods Hole laboratory is perhaps 
best known in recent years as the base for researchers who found and explored 
the sunken wreckage of the Titanic. 
In July, Blackwelder, writing on behalf of 14 public interest and environmental 
groups, had sent a letter to Exxon Chairman Lawrence G. Rawl nominating former 
Wisconsin governor and one-time Sen. Gaylord Nelson of the Wilderness Society 
for the slot. 
He said the environmental groups, representing more than 500,000 individual 
Exxon shareholders, would now oppose Steele's reelection at next year's 
shareholders' meeting and would nominate Nelson instead. 
Other names that had emerged as possible board candidates included Jay Hair, 
president of the National Wildlife Federation; Russell E. Train, chairman of 
the World Wildlife Fund, and Alice Rivlin, chair of the Wilderness Society. 
Background in Mathematics 
Other environmentalists were more guarded than Blackwelder about Steele's 
appointment, though most expressed disappointment. "We don't want to prejudge 
him," said Sharon Newsome, a vice president of the National Wildlife 
Federation. "As a director of Woods Hole, he will have an important perspective 
that will be very useful to the Exxon board. . . . The one question we would 
have, and our hope, is that he would also be a good advocate on a broader array 
of environmental issues." 
"I never had a lot of confidence that Exxon would appoint someone to their 
board who was going to be a burr under their saddle," added Tim Mahoney, head 
of the Sierra Club's Alaska coalition. "Frankly, I'm not sure whether a strong 
environmental advocate would have been able to do much on the Exxon board, 
except be a gadfly." 
Steele, who expects to visit the site of the oil spill in two weeks, said his 
background was in mathematics and that his current expertise was in the 
dynamics of marine ecosystems. Six months ago, he retired from active 
administration of the Woods Hole laboratory. 
"I think that environmental issues are no longer externalities in the business 
of a large company like Exxon," Steele said. "They must be considered as an 
integral part of doing business." 
In the past, Steele has chaired a committee of the Congressional Office of 
Technology Assessment charged with looking into technical problems of offshore 
oil drilling, he said. 
Exxon, through its educational foundation, has contributed money to Woods Hole 
research, he said. He declined to discuss figures. 
Steele was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, and he worked for 26 years at the 
Marine Laboratory in Aberdeen, Scotland. He joined Woods Hole in 1977 as 
director. 
He is currently a member of the board of the University Corporation for 
Atmospheric Research, the Arctic Research Commission and the National 
Geographic Society's committee for research and exploration. 
