MUSIC REVIEW; 
PASSIONATE, STUNNING FINISH TO SUMMERFEST 
SummerFest '90 artistic director Heiichiro Ohyama saved his best surprises for 
the festival's final concert Tuesday night. The Colorado String Quartet offered 
stunning performances of two rarely played pieces, Mozart's First String 
Quartet, K. 80, and Alberto Ginastera's Second String Quartet. And violinist 
Mark Peskanov made his only festival appearance in the Tchaikovsky Piano Trio 
in A Minor. 
Celebrity night it was not, but passionate music making took center stage. 
Peskanov and cellist Gary Hoffman let out all the stops for the Tchaikovsky, 
throwing themselves into a robust, Old World performance that ignored the 
fashionable politesse of many current chamber music performances. When 
Peskanov, for example, stretched a rubato out of one of his emotion-drenched 
melodies, the motivation came from his inner depths. 
Hoffman matched Peskanov's big, rosiny sound, although that timbre was 180 
degrees removed from the pointed, supple tone he had produced the previous 
evening in two Mozart piano quartets. Yet for all this muscle, when it came to 
rapid figuration, each string player sailed through with lucid definition. 
Pianist Andre-Michel Schub handled the bravura piano part with such commanding 
facility, clarity and intelligence that it seems positively churlish to 
complain that his effort nevertheless appeared deficient. But in the company of 
these two string players, more sense of abandon and a deeper touch -- even some 
old-fashioned heavy pedaling -- was required. On the other hand, perhaps 
Schub's holding back was wise -- otherwise the Sherwood Auditorium stage might 
have experienced a nuclear meltdown. 
Tuesday's performance by the Colorado Quartet revealed just how far this 
ensemble has grown since its local debut in 1986. The players brought buoyant 
rhythms and polish to Mozart's effervescent early opus that proved all the more 
impressive when followed by a gutsy reading of Ginastera's fiery 1958 opus. In 
both style and form, the Ginastera Second String Quartet is one of the few 
worthy heirs to Bartok's six-quartet canon. It even boasts a middle movement 
bristling with those eerie special effects Bartok chose for his "night music" 
passages. 
The Colorado String Quartet demonstrated an uncommon equilibrium that allowed 
the players to pummel Ginastera's driving ostinatos without impairing their 
sonic unity or ensemble cohesion. Despite this admirable internal balance, 
first violinist Julie Rosenfeld and violist Francesca Martin should be singled 
out for their voluptuous, lyrical solo flights. 
