NEIGHBORS OF POND BUGGED BY MOSQUITOES; 
PESTS: A RECENT APPLICATION OF INSECTICIDE HAS BROUGHT SOME RELIEF. NOW 
OFFICIALS ARE STUDYING LOWERING THE WATER LEVEL TO FURTHER REDUCE THE HAZARD. 
The orange and blue can of insect repellent stood alone on a shelf in the 
Chatsworth Lake Market, a monument to a potentially perilous problem along the 
shores of the Chatsworth Reservoir. 
The problem is mosquitoes. Swarms of the pesky insects have transformed the 
two-acre reservoir from a bucolic pond into a buzzing nightmare. Nearby 
residents, fearful of mosquito attacks, said they have been cloistered behind 
closed doors most of the summer. 
"You literally could not go outside at night," resident Christina Stroh said as 
she played Wednesday with her 21-month-old daughter in their back yard. "It was 
that bad." 
Residents said a recent insecticide application, the result of numerous angry 
calls to state officials, appears to have killed off the worst of the 
infestation. They hope that a decision this week by the Los Angeles Department 
of Water and Power to lower the reservoir's water level will further reduce the 
hazard. 
Stroh and others with small children have been particularly worried because the 
mosquitoes swarming around their houses could be carrying the potentially fatal 
St. Louis encephalitis virus, which causes inflammation of the brain and spinal 
chord. Symptoms can range from flulike conditions to more rare manifestations, 
including paralysis, coma and even death. 
On Wednesday, the Southeast Mosquito Abatement District mailed about 700 
trapped mosquitoes packed in dry ice to a state laboratory in Berkeley, where 
they will be tested for the virus, said Jacquie Spoehel, an entomological 
assistant with the district. 
Although one mosquito with the virus was trapped in June in the Sepulveda 
Basin, no diseased insects have been found near the Chatsworth Reservoir. 
Also Wednesday, the DWP unsuccessfully tried to bring in equipment to lower the 
pond's water level. Spokeswoman Dorothy Jensen said the DWP must clear an 
access road to make room for the oversized pump truck. 
DWP workers will also chop down tall tule brushes along the shore that provide 
an ideal breeding ground for mosquitoes. 
The actions come none too soon for those living nearby in new tract houses on 
winding streets. 
"A month ago, it was really bad," said Gabrielle Vanderpool, who said she 
suffered from painful dime-sized welts on her arms. "You couldn't go outside 
without getting attacked. Even inside the house, we had to lock ourselves in 
our bedrooms." 
The insects were especially menacing to Norma Ortiz, whose two young children 
are allergic to their bites. "If we came outside, we'd all be wrapped in 
towels," she said. 
Last week, a woman at the market carried a baby girl covered with mosquito 
bites, store manager Denise Gentile said. "The poor kid looked like she had the 
measles," Gentile said. 
Several residents who recently moved to the area said they would have moved 
elsewhere had they known about the infestation. Some have coped by hoarding bug 
spray. 
"We keep it under the barbecue and everywhere," Oriz said. "That's the first 
thing guests say -- 'Where's the Off?' " 
Others, such as Jeff Adams, have adopted more creative defensive techniques. On 
a friend's recommendation, Adams swallows Vitamin B daily. "It's just something 
in your blood that gives off this scent and they don't go near you," he said. 
The infestation is acute this year because silt from surrounding construction 
sites has raised the water level to the leaves of the tule bushes. Fish, which 
normally control the mosquito population, cannot easily snap up insects that 
settle on the leaves. 
