SPELLING OUT THE AMERICAN WAY; 
IMMIGRANTS LEARN MORE THAN ENGLISH AT SCHOOL DISTRICT'S 'NEWCOMER CENTERS' 
Yellow square, yo-yo, semitrailer truck and window cleaner may not be typical 
words for a high-school spelling bee, but this was neither a typical bee nor 
were these typical high-school students. 
The nine sweaty-palmed teen-agers took turns stepping to the mike and then, 
haltingly, uttered letters upon command. 
Shoes was the command. "Esch, aytch, ohh, eee, ezz," was the reply. 
"Rhinoceros," another student was told. "Aarrr, hetch. . . ." he began. 
It was the final spelling bee at the Newcomer Center, and the contestants, all 
recent immigrants to the United States, spelled with a variety of accents the 
practical words they had learned. 
Accent on Success 
The center for ninth- through 11th-graders, housed at Crenshaw High School, and 
a companion program in Bel-Air for younger children were opened by the Los 
Angeles Unified School District. They aim not only to supply students with 
no-nonsense vocabularies but also to orient them to this country and provide 
psychological support and career advice. After a year at the centers, the 
students will move on to regular schools. 
"We want boys and girls to feel good about themselves, because if they do, 
they'll feel more successful," said Juliette Thompson, principal of Bellagio 
Road Newcomer School for Grades 4 through 8. "When they finish at our school, 
they will be able to go into any school . . . and operate successfully." 
Thrust into a regular school, children new to America are often ostracized, she 
said. "Even if they step out onto the playground, (if) they don't know the 
rules, how to play the games . . . they're quickly isolated. They stand under 
the tree, by the side, in back and don't feel comfortable." 
Students are eligible to attend the centers if their English is limited and 
they are new to the United States or to its schools. Most of the students are 
from Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua. But others are from such 
places as South Korea, the Philippines, China, Armenia and Bolivia. Some have 
been in this country for only a few days; others had lived in Los Angeles for 
more than a year without enrolling in school, said Michael Bujazan, coordinator 
of the district's Student Guidance, Assessment and Placement Center, which 
places the students in the newcomer centers. Students with limited English 
skills from northeast Los Angeles, parts of Hollywood, and other sections of 
the city are sent to the guidance center for testing and placement. 
'High-Powered Orientation' 
The district has tried to help immigrant students with six-week crash courses 
in American culture and English, as well as English-as-a-Second-Language and 
bilingual classes at many schools, but these programs cannot keep up with the 
need, administrators said. An estimated 62,000 students, or more than 10% of 
the district's total, are immigrants who have attended U.S. schools less than 
three years. The crash courses barely make a dent: for the 1989-90 school year 
they will only serve a fifth of these students. 
The newcomer centers have a maximum enrollment of 450 students. But the centers 
are more comprehensive than other district programs for immigrants, said Maria 
Olmos, administrator of the center at Crenshaw High. With a slew of bilingual 
teachers, aides, psychologists and counselors, the purpose is "strictly 
high-powered orientation," she said. 
More immigrants are arriving in the district every day. The guidance center 
tests more than 30 new students daily. They are given options of attending 
their neighborhood schools if the schools are not overcrowded, being bused 
elsewhere, and if they qualify, joining the newcomer centers. About 85% of them 
are eligible for the centers and 99% would be if the centers were open to all 
grades rather than only grades 4 through 11, Bujazan said. 
Because of the 450-student cap, the program at Crenshaw High is being limited 
mainly to residents of central Los Angeles, the area in the district receiving 
the most immigrants, said Gloria Sierra of the district's Office of Bilingual 
and ESL Instruction. Crenshaw High was selected as a site largely because it 
had the available space, administrators said. The Bellagio school, which is 
taking children mostly from northeast Los Angeles and parts of Hollywood and 
central Los Angeles, had been unused since 1984. Most of the students are bused 
to the centers. 
Rising Enrollment 
Partly because of articles in Korean- and Chinese-language newspapers, 
enrollment at the Crenshaw center shot up from 101, when it opened its 
half-day, summer session on July 3, to about 225 students from 12 countries by 
the time it closed last Friday. The center, on the second floor of the high 
school, re-opens for a full-day schedule Sept. 12. The Bellagio school opened 
Friday with 225 students from eight nations, Thompson said. 
Proposed two years ago by former school board member Alan Gershman, the centers 
each have annual budgets of more than $526,000 for counselors, interpreter 
aides, a psychologist, a nurse, and other support personnel, Sierra said. In 
developing the centers, district officials visited school programs for 
newcomers in San Francisco and Long Beach. 
Many of the teachers are immigrants. At the Crenshaw center, Bob Mei, who came 
from China last year, said he knows that his Chinese students are used to "just 
(sitting) straight, (listening) to the teacher solo," but here, they learn they 
have to speak up in class. Guillermo Pasillas has photos of Mexican actors 
Cantinflas and Lucia Mendez on the bulletin board. Pasillas said he empathizes 
with his 31 Latino students because when he arrived in this country from Mexico 
at age 9, "I had to learn, sink or swim." 
While the spelling bee continued, other classes at the Crenshaw center played 
soccer or read stories in Spanish. LaVerne Fisher's class played a version of 
bingo with names of fruits and vegetables, in preparation for a field trip to a 
supermarket. 
In the room decorated with charts of U.S. coins, the Pledge of Allegiance and 
students' drawings of flags and maps of their native countries, teacher's 
assistant Eva Ramos held up placards of beets and pumpkins. Students wrote down 
the names in squares on their papers. Later, those who know more English read 
from "Unusual Stories From Many Lands," while the rest copied the names of more 
foods. 
Several students in Pasillas' class, instructed to paint something, have 
depicted their war-torn homelands with stick-figure civilians under a hail of 
bombs or bullets. Jose Lopez, 16, drew a brown eye crying and a man shooting at 
a bull's-eye. In Salvadoran cities, he said, the military comes to campuses 
after school to "recruit" boys -- and if the military doesn't pick them up, 
"then the other side, the guerrillas, get them," he said through an 
interpreter. He pointed to his painting of an arrow-pierced heart dripping with 
blood, explaining that that is "what they leave behind." 
One 15-year-old boy and his mother, in fleeing Guatemala three weeks ago, had 
guns put to their heads at the Guatemalan border, said center psychologist 
Bradley Pilon. Then their money was taken by Mexicans who threatened to turn 
them in to authorities. After crossing into the United States with the help of 
coyotes, people who sneak immigrants across the border for a fee, they were 
locked in a house several days until the coyotes were paid. The mother now 
sells bags of oranges at a freeway entrance, Pilon said. 
Under such conditions, adjusting to life here can be difficult, Pilon said. A 
fight erupted one day and he wondered if it was because the students are "more 
on edge." 
Haven From the Streets 
Octavio Rivera, who came by himself from Mexico City two years ago, says he's 
bored at school. He would rather work than go to class, but finding a job has 
become harder, he said through an interpeter at La Posada, an East Los Angeles 
boys home run by Our Lady Queen of Angels Church. 
Before living at the home, Rivera, 17, lived on the streets. He was stabbed in 
the hand by a robber and worked as a day laborer. School is just a way to kill 
time, he said, adding that as soon as he can earn some money, he wants to 
return to Mexico "and never again put my feet in the U.S." 
But many students don't mind reviewing spelling lists and flash cards of 
animals, acting out skits about friendship and singing "She'll Be Coming Round 
the Mountain." They see this as part of their ticket to success. Spelling bee 
finalist Jesus Flores, who studied spelling lists but tripped up on nails, said 
in English: "I want to be somebody someday -- a medical doctor." He added that 
he's thrilled that he's starting to speak English. 
About 90% of the students say that coming to this country was worthwhile 
because of the educational opportunities, Pilon said. In case they start to 
doubt that, the center is ready to tout the benefits of schooling. "A high 
school education doesn't mean anything in this country in terms of pay," Pilon 
said. If a youngster just wants a job, he or she "might as well drop out now. 
But it does mean something in terms of future opportunities (to attend 
college)," he said. Scholarships are to be given to four students from the 
center who enter college, Olmos said. 
Most of the students are eager learners, their teachers say. Luis Rafael Bat 
scribbles down, phonetically, English phrases that he hears outside of class, 
and then brings them to teacher Pasillas for translation. His steno pad is 
filled: "Juen Quen Ay Si Yu Agen" (when can I see you again); "five tauson," 
(five thousand); "Evry Dey Yu Luk Peri-err," (every day you look prettier). 
They are also quickly forming opinions about living in this country. Bat, 15, 
who was wearing a "Venice Beach"-inscribed tank-top and black Nike shorts, 
feels a special affinity to the Batman craze because of his surname. He signs 
his papers with a bat drawing. "He likes to capitalize on American culture," 
Pasillas said. Fisher's students are allowed to play music tapes of their 
choice as a reward -- and their favorite is rap music. Jesus Flores, who came 
from Mexico in 1987, appreciates that "in the United States, the police do not 
just have the right to break into your house." 
Learning About Bias 
But Jose Tista, a 16-year-old Guatemalan who lives at La Posada, said that 
outside of class, he feels discriminated against by Latinos who speak fluent 
English and are longtime U.S. residents. "The law says that nobody should be 
discriminated against because of color or what kind of person you are," he said 
through an interpreter. But he is put down by Mexican-Americans who know that 
he doesn't know much English. 
In class, Tista said, it's different because everyone is a new immigrant. 
Fisher said she is struck by the students' cooperation. "They help each other," 
she said, adding that students in her honors English classes at other schools 
"don't share their answers or their expertise. They're grade-hungry." 
Fisher's class and three others have all Spanish-speaking students, but in some 
classes, the students are drawn from opposite ends of the globe. 
In Mei's class of youths from China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, South Korea, Honduras, 
Mexico and El Salvador, everybody chips in to buy cakes on classmates' 
birthdays. Karen Ng, who emerged as one of center's five spelling bee champs, 
said she uses Cantonese, Spanish and English to communicate with her fellow 
students. 
"I've learned Spanish from my classmates: 'Good morning,' 'How are you,' 
'friend' . . . and 'Shut up,' " she said, adding that she wants to major in 
Spanish and economics in college. 
Plans for September 
In September, the potpourri expands with the return of the regular Crenshaw 
students, but administrators don't foresee any problems. The newcomer students 
will be taking their own set curriculum of orientation, introduction to U.S. 
heritage, math and language arts -- taught in English with the help of 
bilingual aides, in Spanish and in Mandarin -- as well as ESL and art, Olmos 
said. But they will join the Crenshaw student body for lunch and physical 
education, she said. Olmos also wants to start tutoring, a buddy system and a 
folkloric dance group from among the two student populations. 
The center's students have been encouraged to jump into the mainstream. Junior 
Tanya Acosta, a star on Crenshaw's track team, assured Fisher's students in 
Spanish that they had nothing to worry about, explaining that she came from 
Guadalajara a year ago. The blacks and other members on the track team accepted 
her even though she was the only Latina. 
"At the beginning, we didn't talk a lot -- they said, 'Hi, how are you?' and I 
didn't understand what they were saying, so I didn't answer," Acosta recalled. 
Fisher's class giggled nervously. 
But soon, she said, she had no problems making friends. "On the team, I learned 
a lot of English." 
The newcomer students, Fisher said, "never think they have the right to join a 
club, do sports, or to be a cheerleader. 
"They don't think they're ready to do it, because they don't know enough 
English. But you don't have to know English" to start, she said. 
Said Mei, who calls students at home to see if they have questions about their 
lessons: "In one year, they'll really be different." 
