WAXING ENTHUSIASTIC OVER TUSSAUD'S ROCK 'N' ROLL CIRCUS; 
NOSTALGIA: OPENED LESS THAN A YEAR AGO IN LONDON, THE ROCK MUSEUM FEATURES 
ROBOTIC FIGURES OF ROCK STARS SCULPTED IN WAX. EACH EXHIBIT IS ACCOMPANIED BY 
MUSIC AND COMMENT. 
A wax replica of Johnny Rotten is poised in a glass booth, hands gripping the 
silver stem of a microphone, its face twisted and contorted with a bit of 
spittle evident on the teeth. 
"Look at Johnny Rotten," says a voice from overhead. "Look at him sneer at you. 
Look at him tell you your life is built on hypocrisy and lies." The unseen 
narrator reels off some facts about Rotten and his fellow Sex Pistols. 
"Just look at him," the voice sneers, finally. "He doesn't like you at all." 
Ouch. 
Nothing in the Rock Circus prepares visitors for the sting of learning that 
Rotten never liked them. But at least that is the only painful moment during a 
tour of the combination wax museum-robotics show-Rock Hall of Fame. That is, 
unless you consider it painful to watch a Bob Dylan robot in Ray-Bans strumming 
its way through "The Times They Are A-Changin'." 
Created by the Tussaud's Group, the same company behind Mme. Tussaud's 
Waxworks, Rock Circus features dozens of sculpted rock stars. Each figure is 
accompanied by a snatch of music and a dash of narrated comment. 
On an upper floor of the exhibit is a staged "animatronic" show that offers a 
Disneyesque view of rock history. Picture a Janis Joplin robot sitting on a 
park bench talking about the Summer of Love, singing "Me and Bobby McGee" and 
introducing a David Bowie robot. 
The idea of it certainly sounds kitschy. When credible musicians are displayed 
in such an overtly touristy way, one expects the result to be disappointing. 
Waxing nostalgic about rock 'n' roll is one thing. Turning rock 'n' roll 
nostalgia into wax is something else. 
Yet the Rock Circus generally manages to stay interesting, if not compelling. 
The craftsmanship of the wax figures is extraordinary. And although the 
commentary accompanying each display will not enlighten anyone with a basic 
knowledge of pop history, it can be surprisingly acerbic for a tourist haunt. 
Opened less than a year ago in the historic London Pavillion at Piccadilly 
Circus, the $18-million rock 'n' roll display is probably the most grandiose 
tourist attraction ever devoted exclusively to pop music. 
It wasn't without careful research that The Tussaud's Group decided there was a 
market for wax figures of Jimi Hendrix, Aretha Franklin and Robert Plant. 
The company, which also draws visitors to its castle and amusement park, was 
looking for a new venture in the early 1980s. "Like all good businessmen, we 
decided to ask the public what interested them," says Martin King, general 
manager of Rock Circus. 
The company organized focus groups of Britons and foreigners -- Americans, 
Scandinavians, French, Australians and Germans -- and tossed ideas at them. The 
three main concepts Tussaud's was considering were an historical exhibit about 
London, the lives of the contemporary rich and famous and something they called 
"The Pop Experience." 
What the Tussaud's researchers discovered was unequivocal, says King. "The 
impression is that people come to England to learn about the kings and queens," 
he says. "But what we found is that they much preferred to see Elvis the King, 
and Freddy Mercury of Queen." 
The company is renowned for its wax figures, so the machinery already was in 
place to create a gallery of stationary rockers. But creating the "audio 
animatronic" figures -- the rock robots -- was daunting. 
Deciding which stars should be represented in the Rock Circus was left to King, 
Tussaud's executive Ian Hanson and rock writer Paul Gambaccini. "It's the 
ultimate party game," says King. He said the first 85% of the choices were 
obvious and easy. "The real areas of dispute were the final 15%." 
Rock enthusiasts will inevitably quibble at some of the choices. Americans may 
be baffled by the inclusion of Lonnie Donegan, the '50s British skiffle star 
who hit briefly in the United States with "Rock Island Line" and "Does Your 
Chewing Gum Lose Its Flavor (on the Bedpost Overnight)?" 
And many people will be surprised to find there is not even a wax figure, let 
alone a robot, of Jim Morrison. 
So far, the gamble to invest heavily in a rock 'n' roll attraction appears to 
be paying off. King estimates that up to 750,000 rock fans will see the exhibit 
this year -- a reasonably good showing by local standards. By comparison, 
Madame Tussaud's, the most popular tourist attraction in Great Britain, draws 
2.7 million visitors a year. 
The Rock Circus has no trouble attracting attention to itself; figures of Jimi 
Hendrix, Buddy Holly and Elton John stand outside on the balcony facing 
Piccadilly Circus, looking down on the pedestrians like royalty. 
Inside, visitors are first sent over to have their picture taken with a 
sculpted David Bowie. "There's no obligation" to buy the photograph later, an 
employee repeats for each new arrival. 
Everyone gets a headset, which is keyed by electronic doodads overhead to 
provide the appropriate narration and music for each exhibit. Then on to the 
show. 
In the main room, a rotating, circular stage shows a very '70s Elton John 
performing "Bennie and the Jets," Little Richard singing "Tutti Frutti" and 
Stevie Wonder with "I Just Called to Say I Love You." All of a sudden -- boom! 
-- Elvis Presly pops up from the center and sings "Glory Hallelujah." 
Many of the stars immortalized in wax posed for the Tussaud sculptors and 
donated personal items to make their display more realistic. 
Tussaud's sculptor Stuart Williamson was one of the artists involved in 
capturing Eric Clapton. The guitarist came to the Tussaud studio several times 
to pose with his guitar. At one point he played an old blues number for the 
artists. "It was like a private concert for us," says an appreciative 
Williamson. 
The sculptor went to Los Angeles to do Little Richard and to Frankfurt to get 
Sting, who was on tour. Johnny Rotten came into the Tussaud's studio several 
times and allowed the artists to make a cast of his rotten teeth. 
After a tour through the wax figures, visitors are sent to the grand finale, 
the robot show. The performance begins and ends with the theme from "Sergeant 
Pepper's Lonely Heart's Club Band," with Beatles replicas standing onstage 
looking like they were peeled from that album's cover. 
In between Beatle numbers, a Madonna robot sings "Like a Virgin," Bruce 
Springsteen does "Born in the U.S.A." and Bob Dylan plays "The Times They Are 
A-Changin'." 
The performance begs a question: Does the existence of a guitar-strumming Bob 
Dylan robot as a centerpiece to a multimillion dollar tourist attraction say 
something good, or something bad, about the evolution of rock 'n' roll? 
The show ends and the Rock Circus visitors are sent into a gift shop where they 
find pictures of themselves with David Bowie. 
There's no obligation to buy one, but most of them do. 
