THE COUSTEAU WATCH: DOLPHINS: UNWITTING LURE FOR INDUSTRIAL FISHERMEN 
Along rivers throughout the South American rain forest, the rare pink 
freshwater dolphin has traditionally been considered magical, capable of 
changing at will into human form to seduce people into amorous adventures. 
Supposedly helpless to resist the charms of the supple dolphin come-to-land, 
men and women sometimes explain away romantic infidelities with a wry, "The 
dolphin made me do it." 
It is easy for us to admire dolphins because they are sleek, lustrous, keenly 
intelligent. Whether it was this affinity that gave birth to the popular lore 
of transformation, no one knows. But clearly the legend brings the animals 
esteem -- in this region that celebrates their mythical properties, they are 
rarely hunted. 
However, dolphins are used to locate schools of fish, especially in the dry 
season when receding water levels in the river pack fish tightly together. A 
fisherman watches from a high tree near shore, and when he spots dolphins 
arching through the water surface, he signals other fishermen waiting below in 
canoes. These fishermen paddle madly into the river and toss a ring of netting 
into the splashing waters, hoping to snare some of the fish on which the 
dolphins have been feeding. Any dolphins caught in the nets are gently released 
by the fishermen, who show the care of a parent attending a sick child. 
On this small scale -- one boat, a handful of men and a subsistence level of 
fishing -- dolphins escape a premature death. But not when the scene changes to 
industrial tuna fishing in the warm Pacific. For years, we have been wrestling 
with the grisly problem of yellowfin tuna fleets that kill ocean-going dolphins 
by inadvertently catching them in purse-seine nets. Official U.S. statistics 
estimate that nearly 2 million dolphins were killed by fishing fleets in these 
waters between 1972 and 1988. 
For reasons that are still unclear, various species of salt-water dolphins 
travel with schools of yellowfin (light) tuna. Taking advantage of this 
association, fleets use dolphins as living sonar to locate tuna swimming well 
below the surface. Once sighted, the tuna -- and thus the dolphins -- are 
herded together, sometimes by the use of explosives. Then the fishermen toss 
their nets, tightening them in a circle to trap the tuna and, sadly, many 
dolphins. 
Dolphins that are not maimed by the explosions can easily drown if they are not 
quickly freed to reach the surface, because they are air-breathing mammals. 
The worldwide killing of dolphins in this process gave impetus to passage in 
the United States of the Marine Mammal Protection Act in 1972. 
Originally, the MMPA -- which regulated all ships flying a U.S. flag as well as 
all ships in U.S. waters -- intended to reduce the "incidental kill or 
incidental serious injury of marine mammals permitted in the course of 
commercial fishing operations . . . to insignificant levels approaching a zero 
mortality and serious injury rate." But in the intervening years, lobbying by 
the tuna industry, combined with changing political priorities in the United 
States, weakened the MMPA. 
During the same period, the tuna industry began to rely more heavily on ships 
flying other national flags. I've seen such ships at work in Mexico, Panama and 
Costa Rica. When the MMPA was re-authorized in 1988, it at least required that 
by 1990 any ship exporting tuna to the United States limit its rate of dolphin 
killed per ton of tuna fished. 
The tuna industry says it is doing everything possible to prevent dolphin 
kills, but this claim cannot be verified. Indeed, new techniques were 
introduced in the 1970s that had begun to reduce dolphin casualties, and the 
re-authorized MMPA calls for placing observers aboard all U.S.-flagged boats, 
as well as other controls, such as a ban on setting nets after sundown, which 
is when much dolphin mortality takes place. Foreign fleets must implement a 
"comparable" program of controls. 
Some environmentalists remain unsatisfied with the situation, however, and are 
calling for a boycott of canned tuna -- even albacore and bonito that are not 
involved in dolphin deaths. 
I believe that very few fishermen in any country have a desire to slaughter 
dolphins. And the fishing industry remains the key player in forging any 
satisfactory solution. 
Dolphins do not feed on yellowfin tuna, and yet the two are drawn together in a 
mysterious relationship that may influence their mutual survival. Perhaps only 
respect for the dolphin -- etched in the myth of the South American rain forest 
-- will stop us from turning this positive association into a deadly trap. 
