MANDELA WANTS TROOPS TO HALT TRIBAL FIGHTING 
Nelson Mandela on Thursday urged the government to use troops to stop violence 
in black townships, where Zulu and Xhosa war bands clashed for the 12th day 
with spears, axes and knives. Police said four people died. 
President Frederik W. de Klerk said the government would announce new moves 
today to stop the tribal fighting, in which 500 people have been killed. He 
said the moves would include additional restrictions on the ownership of 
weapons, but he did not elaborate. 
Mandela, second in command of the African National Congress, said the 
government should place soldiers and police officers around migrant workers' 
hostels in the townships where much of the violence has occurred. When asked if 
the violence was easing, Mandela said, "I don't think so. I think it's too 
early to say that." 
There have been troops in the townships since last weekend. Mandela suggested 
that soldiers and policemen be kept around the migrant workers' hostels to 
prevent fighting between hostel residents and others in the townships. 
That is being done to some extent already, but not at all hostels and not 
around the clock. 
Earlier, a spokesman for the ANC said the group could soon begin peace talks 
with the conservative Zulu-based Inkatha movement. Supporters of the two groups 
are the main combatants in the fighting. 
In the Kagiso township west of Johannesburg, hundreds of heavily armed Xhosas 
said they wanted to destroy a migrant workers' hostel occupied by Zulus. 
"I don't care if I die! We just want to fight with the Zulus!" screamed an 
enraged Xhosa armed with a butcher knife. 
The two sides fought with spears, axes and clubs, and police fired tear gas to 
drive them apart. Roaming gangs of Zulus with red headbands looted and burned 
several deserted homes, while Xhosas burned houses belonging to Zulu residents. 
Police spokeswoman Lt. Henriette Bester said four people died, including a 
woman shot by police officers who were trying to stop a crowd from damaging and 
looting houses. 
