ERMA BOMBECK: FOR MOMS, NOTHING'S OUT OF THE QUESTION 
The other night I climbed into bed and had just closed my eyes when my husband 
asked, "Is my light going to bother you?" 
Every night of our married life he has asked this question, and every night of 
our married life I have replied, "Not unless I plan on sleeping." It's not 
important that I sleep with No. 30 sunblock on my eyelids. What is important 
here is that somewhere between civility and habit, we know the answers to most 
questions before we ask them. 
My kids always like to remind me that when they were growing up, one of my 
favorite banalities was, "Are you going to go through life with a finger up 
your nose?" As my daughter points out, "Not only was it a stupid question, but 
you stood there insisting on an answer, like we had to think about it." 
Why do we do it? Why do I stand in the emergency ward of a hospital and ask, 
"Would you take a personal check?" Get real! They'd take my car in trade if 
they thought I couldn't pay the bill any other way. 
Waiters who stand at your table and ask, "Could I tempt you with dessert this 
evening?" know the answer before they ask the question. But first, they have to 
wait until everyone at the table looks at everyone else with just the right 
amount of hesitation before someone whines, "Why don't you bring us a whole 
cake and four forks . . . just to taste." 
"You don't really want to see our home movies, do you?" is another given. I 
don't know why people ask it. Nor can I figure out the speaker who asks, "Will 
you forgive me for digressing for a moment?" Especially if he is digressing at 
an hour when you should be undressing and going to bed! 
Everyone is guilty at one time or another of throwing out questions that beg to 
be ignored, but mothers seem to have a market on the supply. "Do you want a 
spanking or do you want to go to bed?" "Are you going to let a little dog like 
that scare you?" "Do you want Mommy to go away and never come back?" "Don't you 
want to save some of the pizza for your brother?" "Didn't anyone see the dog 
scratching on the door to get out?" "Wasn't there any change?" 
It's possible we live in hope that someone, someday, will give us the answer we 
want to hear. Then it's possible we just love to hear ourselves talk. You know 
what I'm saying? 
