NORTH WOULD GET PRISON TERM UNDER NEW RULES, ARTICLE SAYS 
Had federal sentencing guidelines been applied to Oliver L. North's Iran-Contra 
case, the recommended punishment would have been a prison term of at least 21 
months, according to a published analysis. 
North, convicted last spring of committing three felonies when working at the 
White House in 1986, was fined, put on probation and ordered to do community 
service -- but was sentenced to no jail time. 
The guidelines, which recommend ranges of possible sentences to judges, were 
not applied to the North case because they cover only federal crimes committed 
after Nov. 1, 1987. 
If North's actions had occurred after that date, calculations under the 
guidelines "would produce a sentence range of 21-27 months in prison on the low 
end, and a range of 46-57 months in prison on the high end," an article by the 
editors of the Federal Sentencing Reporter concluded. 
The nonprofit publication is circulated among federal judges, probation 
officers, law professors and attorneys. 
North was convicted of aiding and abetting obstruction of Congress, destroying 
government documents and accepting an illegal gratuity. 
The length of a recommended sentence under the guidelines in the North case 
would depend partly on a judge's decision as to whether the former White House 
aide had substantially interfered with the administration of justice, the 
article said. 
Other factors in determining the severity of punishment would be the value 
assigned to classified documents that North destroyed, whether he was a major 
or minor participant in the crime of aiding the obstruction of Congress and 
whether he was considered to be in a high-level decision-making capacity, the 
article said. 
If North's had been a guidelines case, U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell 
still could have imposed no jail time but the prosecution would have been able 
to appeal such a decision. 
Before North's sentencing, prosecutors recommended an unspecified jail term, 
Mary Belcher, a spokeswoman in the office of independent counsel Lawrence E. 
Walsh, noted when asked to comment on the new analysis. North's attorney, 
Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., was out of his office and unavailable for comment, a 
secretary said. 
At the sentencing, Gesell told North that he lacked a "full understanding . . . 
of how the public service has been tarnished" and that "jail would only harden 
your misconceptions." The judge said that community service may leave North 
more conscious of values that, at times, "you and your associates appear to 
have overlooked in the elite isolation of the White House." 
