PARLIAMENT APPROVES ALL OF RAFSANJANI'S CHOICES; 
IRAN HARD-LINERS LOSE AS CABINET OKD 
Iran's centrist president, Hashemi Rafsanjani, on Tuesday won parliamentary 
approval of all 22 ministers in his new Cabinet, half of them new, despite 
opposition from a hard-line bloc. 
Rafsanjani, who has successfully confronted or outmaneuvered radical opponents 
in a series of political triumphs, got the ministers he wanted -- technocrats, 
political moderates and others who are committed to his top priority, restoring 
the war-battered economy of Iran. A sprinkling of hard-liners was included by 
the politically astute president. 
Never before under the Islamic Republic, founded by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomeini a decade ago, had an Iranian Cabinet been approved without exception. 
The closest to rejection in Tuesday's voting, which followed three days of 
sometimes sharp debate in the Majlis, or Parliament, was the nomination of 
Housing and Urban Affairs Minister Serajeddin Kazeruni, a holdover, who was 
approved by a vote of 145 to 97. 
The new Cabinet has been more noteworthy for who was not named to it, primarily 
former Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, who led the political opposition 
to Rafsanjani even before Khomeini's death in early June. 
Most recently, the 55-year-old president and the interior minister he dumped 
differed on the hostage crisis in Lebanon, with Rafsanjani assuming a far more 
moderate tone. Mohtashemi was instrumental in the formation of the pro-Iranian 
Hezbollah movement in Lebanon, an umbrella group whose factions are accused of 
holding the 14 Western hostages, including eight Americans. 
In introducing his nominees as the debate started Sunday, the president gave 
the ousted Mohtashemi a backhanded compliment. 
"I am completely satisfied with Mohtashemi despite foreign media propaganda to 
the contrary. He is a close friend of mine," Rafsanjani remarked to the 
parliamentary deputies. However, he added, explaining his nomination of 
Abdullah Nouri to run the powerful ministry, "Under present conditions, I think 
Nouri is most fit and will act in a more planned way. . . . He is an organizer, 
a realist and a planner." 
Liaison With Guards 
The 39-year-old Nouri, like Mohtashemi a clergyman, was appointed by Khomeini 
as his personal representative to the Revolutionary Guards, the zealous, 
volunteer paramilitary corps dedicated to preserving the Islamic Republic. 
Rafsanjani stood firm in the face of criticism that many of his ministers are 
inexperienced or -- worse yet in the eyes of hard-liners -- foreign educated. 
As the debate closed Tuesday, he scolded the hard-line bloc. "If I didn't know 
you," Rafsanjani said, "my suspicion would arise that the aim was to paralyze 
the Cabinet." 
Elevated to the senior Shiite Muslim rank of ayatollah with his election a 
month ago, Rafsanjani has taken control of a greatly strengthened presidency. 
The position previously carried influence that varied depending on who filled 
it. Administrative power lay in the hands of a prime minister, who directed the 
ministers. On the ballot with the presidency July 28 was a series of 
constitutional revisions, one of which eliminated the position of prime 
minister. 
The last man to fill that post, Hussein Moussavi, lost his job when the ballot 
issue was approved, and Rafsanjani has not given him a new post. The two men 
were rivals for power when Rafsanjani was Speaker of Parliament, a position he 
turned into a seat of power with his smooth political manipulation. 
The parliamentary debate on Rafsanjani's choices was carried live on Tehran 
Radio, and speakers used the forum to send messages to the electorate. For 
instance, the new parliamentary Speaker, Mehdi Karrubi, a radical in the 
Iranian spectrum -- meaning a hard-line adherent of Khomeini's religiously 
fundamentalist, revolutionary and anti-Western policies -- endorsed the new 
ministers but warned that Parliament will watch their performance closely. 
Anticipating hard-line rejection of his foreign-trained nominees, Rafsanjani 
began the debate Sunday by noting: "Studying at American universities was not 
and is not a negative point. Many (Iranians) who studied abroad have provided 
valuable services to this country." 
The American-trained men in the Cabinet include: 
 -- Finance Minister Mohsen Nourbakhsh, 41, an economics graduate of UC Davis 
and former governor of the central bank. 
 -- Iraj Fazel, 50, the new health minister and one-time education minister, 
who headed the medical team that operated on Khomeini's cancerous stomach just 
before the aged ayatollah's death. Fazel, a surgeon, took his medical training 
in the United States. 
 -- Mohammed Ali Nafaji, 38, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, who retains the education portfolio. 
