MANDELA, DE KLERK SEEK TO HALT ETHNIC SLAYINGS; 
SOUTH AFRICA: ANC PLEADS WITH BLACKS TO 'STOP SLAUGHTERING ONE ANOTHER.' SIX 
KILLED IN ATTACK ON COMMUTER TRAIN. FIGHTING SPREADS TO SOWETO. 
Nelson Mandela and President Frederik W. de Klerk, facing a serious challenge 
to their peace process, met Thursday to explore ways of ending ethnic clashes 
that have taken more than 150 lives since Monday in black townships near 
Johannesburg. 
After the meeting in Pretoria, Mandela's African National Congress issued an 
impassioned plea for blacks to "stop slaughtering one another" because "every 
black life lost prolongs the period of our suffering." 
The killing, which began with clashes between Zulus and Xhosas in three 
townships southeast of Johannesburg, spread Thursday to Soweto, South Africa's 
largest black township. Scores of men armed with machetes and knives attacked a 
commuter train and killed six people. 
Later, mobs carrying weapons ranging from axes to AK-47 rifles rampaged through 
Soweto's streets, and the day's death toll rose to at least 10. More than 120 
were injured. Hundreds of police officers and army troops sought to impose 
themselves between the warring factions, using tear gas and shotguns to break 
up the crowds. 
At one point, the police designated a bridge as no-man's-land between two angry 
mobs as civic leaders held impromptu peace talks. The groups dispersed, but 
scattered confrontations erupted throughout the day in Soweto, a township of 
2.2 million people. 
"It's frightening, I've never seen anything like it," Belede Mazwai, a Xhosa 
mother of three, said Thursday night as a gang of Zulus with guns and spears 
ran past her home in a middle-class section of Soweto. "I just want out of this 
place. The whole thing is collapsing." 
Soweto police were inundated with calls from worried residents Thursday night, 
and a police dispatcher told many callers that he did not have enough officers 
to send to their neighborhoods. 
Late Thursday, Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok and a regional police 
commander met in Soweto with Mandela and a delegation of residents in an effort 
to halt the violence. There was no indication that any specific measures were 
discussed or whether any plan had emerged from the earlier meeting between 
Mandela and De Klerk. 
"I'm certain we're going to curb this violence," Brigadier Leon Mellet, 
spokesman for the Law and Order Ministry, said in a televised interview. "We're 
getting more men on the ground, but we need to get the warring parties together 
so we can end this violence." 
Mellet said the police believe that the week's trouble began with "a simple 
fight" in a men's hostel in Tokoza township, where a Zulu resident killed a 
Xhosa over a woman. Then, he said, ethnic animosities, rarely seen in urban 
centers, were stirred by rumors, leading to violence. 
The escalating unrest has presented a major challenge to the government as well 
as the ANC and its rival, Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi's Zulu-based Inkatha 
movement. Although the ANC is a multiracial organization, Mandela is a Xhosa 
and the ANC is perceived by some to be led primarily by Xhosas. 
Buthelezi blames the trouble on Mandela's refusal to meet with him. The ANC 
says the violence has been caused by attempts by Buthelezi's Inkatha movement 
to force non-Zulus to join its ranks. 
Political analysts say the fighting is an outgrowth of three years of clashes 
between supporters of Inkatha and the ANC in Buthelezi's home base of Natal 
Province. More than 3,000 people have died in that feud, which has most 
frequently been a battle over scarce resources between middle-class blacks who 
support the ANC and those in squalid squatter settlements who support Inkatha. 
Much of the fighting in Johannesburg-area townships has started in 
poverty-stricken squatter camps and overcrowded hostels, to which tens of 
thousands of single men, many of them Zulus, have moved from rural areas in 
search of work in Johannesburg. 
Leaders of the far-right Conservative Party said Thursday that the fighting 
supports their theory that ethnic groups in South Africa cannot live together 
peacefully. 
In its statement Thursday, the ANC pleaded for calm in the townships. It said 
that "the blood of black people is flowing like rivers." 
"Why do we butcher one another like beasts?" the ANC asked. It blamed the 
trouble on "a few misguided individuals calling on us to fight against one 
another." 
The ANC noted that, although blacks have political differences, speak different 
languages and come from different parts of the country, they should unite in 
their desire for better education, housing and jobs. 
"We can and must debate, yes," the ANC said. "But butchering one another will 
not take anyone anywhere." 
