'SKY BUMS' GIVE THEMSELVES A LOFTY GOAL; 
CRIME PREVENTION: HANG GLIDERS WILL TRY TO PHOTOGRAPH ARSONISTS AND OTHER 
LAWBREAKERS. 
To join the Southland's newest crime watch group, you have to jump off a 
mountain, soar through the air and operate a camera thousands of feet above the 
ground. 
That's no problem for "sky bums" from the Sylmar Hang Gliding Assn., who have 
launched their anti-crime effort in the skies above Angeles National Forest. 
The group of 200 aerial snitches say they frequently see illegal dumping and 
maverick skeet shooters and a lot of parked cars with no apparent purpose in 
the San Gabriel Mountains above Sylmar. 
"I hate to see couches and stoves dumped up here because it's such a beautiful 
area," Robert Laukka, 28, of Thousand Oaks said Friday as he prepared to leap 
off wind-swept Kagel Mountain, his sleuthing camera strapped to the frame of 
his glider. 
Brush fires in the forest are common, and they create an inconvenience for hang 
gliders because the National Park Service usually shuts down launch pads near 
the fires. 
"Watching out for arsonists will save us sky bums a lot of grief," said Bob 
Lafay, 56, of Tujunga, who made his 1,217th hang-gliding flight from Kagel 
Mountain on Friday. 
The hang gliders decided to capitalize on their bird's-eye view in the hopes 
that their presence will deter criminals from such activities as dumping stolen 
cars over the sides of cliffs and shooting guns illegally in the forest, said 
Rome Dodson, spokesman for the Sylmar association. Last week, three men in a 
white pickup truck were observed shooting at an abandoned car by the side of 
the 2 1/2-mile dirt road leading to the launch site. 
"If our watch stops one person from doing something wrong, it will be worth 
it," Dodson said. 
Firefighters and law enforcement officers said the idea of such a group is, 
well, lofty. With lightweight, disposable cameras, the snoops will swoop as 
close as 10 feet -- when wind conditions allow -- to photograph cars in 
isolated spots. 
The hang gliders will keep records of the vehicles that they see, and, in the 
event of fires, will report the information to rangers or the police on 
hand-held radios or telephones. 
"I personally think it is a very good idea," said Jim Sanchez, chief of the Los 
Angeles County Fire Department's air operations. "Whatever these folks can do, 
we appreciate it." 
Ninety-three fires have burned this summer in the 690,000-acre Angeles National 
Forest, which stretches from the Sylmar area to San Bernardino, said Jim Stump, 
deputy fire management officer for the forest. Twenty were started by 
arsonists, none of whom were apprehended, he said. 
"It's been a bad year in terms of number of fires started, but we've been lucky 
only 1,735 acres have burned," Stump said. "Every little bit the hang gliders 
can do helps." 
However, Deputy Chief Paul Blackburn, head of the Los Angeles County Fire 
Department's Prevention and Conservation Bureau, warned that like any crime 
watch group, the hang gliders need guidance from law enforcement agencies. 
"They need direction," Blackburn said. "Some of those arsonists may be 
dangerous, so they shouldn't try to catch anyone themselves." 
Members of the Sylmar club say there is no chance of that. One of the reasons 
they started the watch group, they say, is to change the image of hang gliders 
as danger-loving and foolhardy. 
"It's safer than most sports," said Dodson, as he prepared to race down a ramp 
and throw himself off the side of the mountain. 
