INDIAN GROUP SLAMS CASTING OF LOU PHILLIPS IN NAVAJO ROLE 
A Hollywood watchdog group for American Indians has questioned Robert Redford's 
decision not to cast an Indian actor in the leading role of a Navajo policeman 
in Redford's new film. 
Lou Diamond Phillips has been selected to play Jim Chee in a film based on New 
Mexico author Tony Hillerman's novel, "The Dark Wind." Redford plans to begin 
filming on the Navajo and Hopi reservations Sept. 10. 
"That's true Hollywood," said Ray Baldwin Louis, a high school drama teacher in 
Crystal, N.M.. "They've been coming out here for years promising to cast 
Navajos in leading roles. But they always end up with an Italian or a 
foreign-born." 
Bonnie Paradise, director of the watchdog group the American Indian Registry 
for the Performing Arts in Hollywood said she will meet with Redford and 
Phillips within the next three weeks. 
"Mr. Redford has bought the (rights to several) books from Mr. Hillerman and 
knowing there are other films down the line that follow the same story line, we 
are concerned," she said. Chee appears in many of Hillerman's mysteries. 
Paradise said Phillips claims that he is part Indian but has not given the 
registry any documentation as requested. 
A publicity packet for "Young Guns II," in which Phillips played a Mexican 
Indian, said he is part Cherokee, Filipino, Scottish-Irish, Hawaiian and 
Hispanic. Phillips also played an American Indian in the 1989 movie 
"Renegades." 
Earlier this month, Actors' Equity voted to bar white actor Jonathan Pryce from 
playing the part of a Eurasian pimp in the U.S. production of "Miss Saigon," 
now on the London stage. But after the producer canceled the production, which 
has the largest advance ticket sales in Broadway history, the union's executive 
council reversed itself. 
Sammye Meadows, the Native American liaison for Dark Wind Productions, said 
Phillips was offered the contract two weeks ago. His agent said contract 
negotiations remained incomplete Thursday. 
"We would have really liked to have a Navajo actor play Jim Chee," Meadows 
said. "We spent enormous amounts of money traveling to powwows. . . . We didn't 
find the actor." 
