CZECH CAR MAKER LOOKS WEST FOR PARTNER IN OVERHAUL; 
MODERNIZATION: STATE-RUN SKODA FACILITIES ARE PLAGUED BY DECADES OF NEGLECT, 
BUT DEMOCRATIC REFORMS HAVE SPURRED EFFORTS TO LURE WESTERN AUTO COMPANIES TO 
INVEST. 
Over eight decades of car building in this dreary industrial town northeast of 
Prague could soon undergo dramatic change as Skoda seeks a Western partner to 
boost modernization efforts and transform the state-run concern into a publicly 
owned company. 
Such an alliance has been under discussion with numerous Japanese and European 
car makers, as well as General Motors Europe, since democratic reforms last 
November began the process of liberating Czechoslovakia from 42 years of 
Communist rule. 
Skoda's sprawling but aging complex about 35 miles from Prague is considered by 
many Western car makers to be a jewel in the rough, despite the lack of any 
substantial economic reforms. 
"On one hand, we have world-class design and assembly here," said Jiri 
Danhelka, press secretary for the auto maker, adding that just last year Skoda 
scrapped its decades-old rear engine design and began producing its first 
front-drive sedan, the Favorit. 
Next year, Skoda also plans to introduce a larger, front-drive sedan and wagon 
called the Forman. It also is under pressure to develop a new engine to meet 
stricter emission standards in 1992 if it is to continue exports to about 30 
countries, one of the largest outside markets being Great Britain. 
"But the government has not provided enough money for needed improvements," 
Denhelka said, noting that this is the main reason for a joint venture, which 
could eventually double Skoda's output and help satisfy pent-up demand for cars 
in both Czechoslovakia and Eastern Europe. 
"Some auto makers see us as the best auto plant in Eastern Europe, so we can 
choose our partner," Danhelka said, adding that Skoda will most probably 
announce an alliance later this year. "We are not at the mercy of anybody." 
Suitors include BMW and Volkswagen, Fiat, Renault and PSA, Subaru and 
Mitsubishi. GM of Europe is also talking with Skoda, although it is unlikely 
that the two will reach any agreement, sources said. 
There are conditions attached to any such alliance, however. 
"We want to maintain final production in Mlada Boleslav and preserve the Skoda 
name," Danhelka said. "Another condition is the creation of social conditions 
as they exist in major Western countries," although he said the Czech 
government is likely to retain an interest in the company. 
Skoda also "wants to preserve jobs for Czechs," Denhelka said. But the company 
appears unconcerned about the fate of 2,000 Vietnamese and Cuban workers 
employed at Skoda as partial loan repayments from those countries. 
Suitors also may be interested in Skoda's skilled work force, taking advantage 
of lower labor rates here when compared with other Western countries, he 
conceded. 
Danhelka insists that Skoda "is a modern plant and not a museum," as evidenced 
by more than 100 West German robotic welders and a modern, final-assembly area 
that puts to rest notions that Czechoslovakia, once a forerunner in industrial 
excellence, is firmly in the Stone Age when it comes to making cars. 
But a recent tour of the Skoda works revealed years of economic neglect, as 
well as the last vestiges of Communist rule. Any Western auto maker is likely 
to start anew instead of modernizing Skoda's hodgepodge of facilities, many of 
which were last renovated during the 1960s. 
Many facilities are in dire need of structural repairs. Some still have meshed 
fences that once enclosed prisoner auto workers. The paint shop is over 30 
years old, and there are virtually no safety or environmental controls in 
place. 
Workers may be justified in fearing that added automation under such a 
partnership could jeopardize their livelihoods, even if production is doubled. 
Industry analysts say Skoda's current work force of 16,500 at Mlada Boleslav is 
about three times the level needed to produce the current rate of 190,000 cars 
a year. 
The parting of the Iron Curtain, as well as the elimination of European trade 
barriers in 1992, will undoubtedly mean changes for Skoda. It has enjoyed an 
85% share of the Czech market, in which there is a four-month wait for its 
cars. 
"It will certainly create new competition," Denhelka said. "Skoda had a virtual 
monopoly on the home market and that should not have been. . . . We must 
realize that quality and growth comes only from competition." 
