ON VIEW: A TOAST TO A WORLDLY MAN AND HIS DEEDS 
Victor Carter has been president of the United Way and the Jewish Federation 
Council of Greater Los Angeles. He's also been honored by three nations: the 
Third Order of the Imperial Treasury from Emperor Hirohito of Japan, a special 
award from Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia and the Prime Minister's Gold 
Medal from Israel. 
Tonight, he and his wife, Adrea, will be honorees at the inaugural Benefactors' 
Ball of the American Friends of Tel Aviv University at the Century Plaza. 
Carter is former national president of the Friends and former chairman of the 
organization's international board of governors. 
SUCCESS: When is success really success? When the chairmen feel that inner 
glow. The glows were radiating at the Vista del Mar Associates' Dinner alfresco 
and "The Phantom of the Opera." "We have a half million in sales, a net of 
$350,000 for sure," associates president Margot Bamberger said. 
What amazed her and event co-chairwomen Suzanne Sidy and Betty Sigoloff was 
that the $500 seats outsold the $200 and $300 ones, and that, of course, 
presented a hefty seating problem for Lois Harwin and Peekie Schaefer. At 
dinner, in fact, it was "committee-hold-back." Suzanne Sidy graciously went 
without dinner, which was served on the Music Center plaza under colorful 
banner swirls. 
Arline and Henry Gluck brought their daughter, Tracey. Sue and Martin Kozberg 
were accompanied by their newlywed daughter, Nancy Paul Sadwick, and her 
husband, David Sadwick. Vista del Mar and Reiss Davis medical director Lionel 
Margolin and his wife, Andrea, director of Reiss Davis, touched bases with 
chief executive officer Jerry Zaslaw. And Ann Gottschalk, former Associates 
president (as was her late mother, Helen Fels), reminded that the Associates 
group is 50 years old. 
CELEBRATION: Two hundred of the Music Center's most loyal -- those volunteers 
most instrumental in the success of "Campaign '89" -- will be treated to a big 
thank you Wednesday. They'll dine and then see "Phantom of the Opera." Prime 
tributes go to campaign chairman William A. Carter, Music Center chairman J. J. 
Pinola, campaign vice-chairmen John E. Bryson and Roger A. Kozberg; Music 
Center president Esther Wachtell; board of governors members John F. 
Grundhofer, James P. Miscoll, Nancy Olson Livingston, Maurice J. DeWald, who 
helped meet the $14 million goal -- with kindness from 25,000 donors. 
WALKING SMART: Picture charity and fashion together: London designer Zandra 
Rhodes will paint Beverly Hills hot pink and Beverly Hills Mayor Maxwell Salter 
will bestow a proclamation upon Friends of ChildHelp when the sassy couturiere 
premieres her oils and watercolors on Oct. 26. Beverly Hills dynamo Ellen 
Byrens worked out the details in London recently and expects a huge crowd at 
Dyansen Gallery on Rodeo Drive . . . 
SHARE (Share Happily and Reap Endlessly) officers and directors will be guests 
of I. Magnin Tuesday afternoon for the champagne reception and fall preview 
honoring designer Vicky Tiel. Pam Korman is new chair of SHARE, Joan Kardashian 
president and Jane Greer Lasker secretary. They'll be joined by new board 
members Joanna Carson, Roni Sue Malin and Shirley Turteltaub -- all most 
certainly planning to keep up the good record -- a gift of $1 million recently 
to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center for the SHARE Disability Center . . . 
And Bullock's Westwood and Wings of ChildHelp USA are a duo staging a champagne 
breakfast and fall fashion festival Aug. 20, say Norma Kaz and president Pat 
Kirianoff. 
TRAVEL WINDS: Penny and Julian von Kalinowski and their crowd paid respects at 
Wimbledon, had a private visit to the Queen's Gallery at Buckingham Palace, 
lunched with Sir Edward and Lady Tomkins at Winslow Hall and took in the Royal 
Regatta. 
Penny touches ground in time to chair the Los Angeles Master Chorale's first 
sing at downtown's new hostelry, Checkers, and to lend a hostess hand to the 
British American Chamber of Commerce do -- both in September. . . . 
A Hancock Park quartet -- Barbara Washburn, Patte Barham and Boyne and Connie 
Crocker -- were with their USC classmate Madame Rene Bondoux (nee Virginia 
Mitchell) at her chateau near Paris for the French bicentennial. 
RED LETTERS: Those Metropolitan Associates are at it with their summer film 
festival. The format: sit on a blanket, rub on insect repellent, picnic, watch 
an oldie movie. Kittie and Bill Ballard and Alice and Joe Coulombe host 
Saturday, Olive and Alex Varga and Doris and Norm Newell on Aug. 26. Earlier, 
Joan and Jim Caillouette and Hildegard and Michael Lindsay welcomed the film 
devotees. . . . 
Cowboy formal (clean jeans) is the dictate for "A Taste of Texas" under the 
stars Saturday. A Texas-style mesquite barbecue, auction and country music will 
benefit the Permanent Charities Committee of the Entertainment Industries at 
MCA/Universal Studio. It 's a kickoff for Ben Johnson's Pro Celebrity Rodeo 
next Sunday at the Los Angeles Equestrian Center. Daniel E. Slusser is new 
committee chairman. 
KUDOS: To Sandra and Sheldon Ausman, Joanne and Montgomery Fisher, Frank 
Hathaway, Phyllis Hennigan, James Montgomery Mary Jane and George Moody, Pam 
and Peter Mullin, Nadine and William Tilley -- among those honored at a 
reception for their contributions to the Gene Autry Western Heritage Museum. . 
. . 
To Ellie Goldman, Lynne Alschuler, Sue Bunzel, Anne Edgerton and Rabbi Allen 
Freehling, new board members of Planned Parenthood World Population. . . . 
To Mary Tabakin, new president of the Michael Burke Foundation. . . . 
To David Ehrnstein, "Spirit of Life" recipient from City of Hope Aides. . . . 
To Sister Regina Clare Salazar, accepting $300,000 from Daniel Freeman Memorial 
Hospital auxiliary and guild at a Bel-Air Bay Club luncheon. 
