EX-RAM EKERN KILLED IN CRASH; 
NFL: THE LINEBACKER, WHO RETIRED AFTER THE 1988 SEASON, IS FOUND DEAD NEAR HIS 
OVERTURNED CAR IN THE MOJAVE DESERT. POLICE SAID HE HAD RUN OFF THE ROAD. 
Former Rams linebacker Carl Ekern was killed in a single-vehicle traffic 
accident in the Mojave Desert early today, the California Highway Patrol 
reported. 
A passer-by found Ekern's vehicle overturned alongside U.S. 395 about 4 a.m., 
CHP Officer Chris Geiger said. 
Ekern, 36, had been thrown from the car and apparently died of head injuries, 
Geiger added. 
The investigating officer said the northbound car had run off the highway at an 
unknown speed sometime during the night, then over-corrected across both lanes 
and struck a small dirt berm. 
"At that point, the vehicle became airborne and rolled several times," Geiger 
said. "During that time, he (Ekern) was ejected and received what appeared to 
be fatal head injuries." 
The accident occurred about 125 miles northeast of Los Angeles in Kern County, 
seven miles south of Ridgecrest. 
Ekern lived in Fountain Valley. 
Ekern was selected in the fifth-round of the 1976 draft and played for the Rams 
until retiring after the 1988 season. He became a starter in 1981 and was 
selected to the Pro Bowl in 1986. 
A three-year starter at San Jose State, Ekern was named the Pacific Coast 
Athletic Assn.'s player of the year as a senior. 
Ekern had been a Ram starter at inside linebacker from 1981 until his 
retirement last year. 
He led the team in tackles three times and was named to the Pro Bowl in 1986. 
Although not blessed with great size and speed, Ekern proved durable in the 
NFL. 
"He's not big, fast, strong and he's not a great athlete, Rams defensive 
coordinator Fritz Shurmer once said. "He's just a a gifted football player." 
And the smartest player he has ever known, Shurmer said. 
Ekern made up for physical liabilities by succeeding in the classroom. He was 
methodical in his approach to the game, studying films astutely. 
"So many guys look at film and don't know what they're seeing," Shurmer said. 
"It's like they're watching like a fan." 
He said Ekern knew what to look for, how a back lined up so he could cheat in 
his alignment. 
The night before every game, Ekern wrote summary reports about his opponent. 
Ekern served as the Rams' elected representative to the NFL Players Assn. 
