BUYOUTS R US: DUTCH ACQUIRE FAO SCHWARZ 
After five years of reinvigoration in the hands of a small group of investors, 
FAO Schwarz, the venerable purveyor of $4,500 life-sized stuffed giraffes and 
other luxury toys, said Tuesday that it had been sold to a Dutch retailing 
concern. 
The Dutch firm, NV Koninklijke Bijenkorf Beheer (KBB), declined to disclose the 
purchase price. The selling group included Peter C. Morse, the chairman; Peter 
L. Harris, chief executive, and other investors and executives of the toy store 
who acquired it in 1985. FAO Schwarz said it expects its 1990 sales to exceed 
$50 million, up from $20 million in 1984. 
The transaction is at least the fifth sale of FAO Schwarz and the second to 
European owners since the firm's founding family sold it in 1963. 
Morse is expected to step down as chairman. But Harris and his management team 
are to remain, KBB said. In an interview, Harris refused to discuss terms of 
the sale. But, he said, "there would have been no reason to sell it if there 
wasn't a significant profit for the investors." 
Originally opened in Baltimore in 1862, FAO Schwarz, on Fifth Avenue, was for 
decades best known for being the most prestigious toy store in New York. It now 
also has a flagship store in San Francisco and 15 other outlets around the 
country, including one that opened less than two weeks ago in Beverly Hills and 
one in Orange County's South Coast Plaza. Additional stores are expected to 
open in Chicago, Boston and, eventually, Tokyo. 
The firm's growth stagnated in the early 1980s, and its share of the toy retail 
market plummeted as it continued to concentrate on expensive luxury toys. 
Customers were intimidated by the high prices, and the toy market was 
increasingly dominated by mass retailers such as Toys R Us and discount outlets 
such as K mart Corp. 
But the group headed by Morse, a Philadelphia investment banker, and Harris, a 
Californian who is a former president of the Gemco retail chain, broadened FAO 
Schwarz's inventory to include a wider selection of lower-priced items, 
redesigned the stores, re-established a mail order catalogue and moved the New 
York store from its home of 50 years to roomier and more modern quarters in the 
General Motors building on Fifth Avenue. 
The store's new home featured a one-minute shopping section -- where shoppers 
in a hurry could pick up already-wrapped gifts -- a hair salon for kids and 
plenty of display room for lower-priced, mass-market toys such as Barbie and GI 
Joe. There was room, as well, for FAO Schwarz's traditional fare -- life-sized 
stuffed animals, $500 rocking horses and toy sports cars that cost more than 
some real cars. The store also sought to provide an outlet for new, smaller 
entrepreneurial toy makers. 
KBB, a publicly traded company, had sales in 1989 of $1.67 billion and a profit 
of $43 million. KBB said FAO Schwarz is its first acquisition in the United 
States. It owns several retail chains made up of over 1,200 stores in Holland, 
Germany and Belgium, including the six-store upscale chain of De Bijenkorf 
department stores in Holland and M&amp;S Mode, a women's clothing retailer with 
more than 200 shops. 
Arie Maas, chairman of KBB, said in a written statement that "FAO Schwarz is 
the pre-eminent retailer of fine toys in the world, and we are committed to 
building on FAO's tradition of excellence." KBB said its strategy "is to 
acquire highly focused chains of specialty stores." 
Times staff writer Jennifer N. Toth contributed to this story. 
FACTS ABOUT FAO SCHWARZ 
*Founded in 1862. 
*Most expensive toys include a $6,000 toy Jaguar automobile for children and a 
14-foot-tall stuffed giraffe, around $4,500. 
*The store has been featured in a number of movies, recently including "Baby 
Boom" with Diane Keaton and "Big," where Tom Hanks and Robert Loggia dance a 
soft-shoe routine on an outsize keyboard. Most of its 17 stores have the 
"walking pianos." 
*Its flagship store at Fifth Avenue and 59th Street in Manhattan is a major 
tourist attraction and features a number of specialty shopping areas, including 
the Grandma Shop, stocked with high-priced children's clothes and toys; Toys of 
Extinction, stuffed dinosaurs and the like; Watts Current, electronic gadgetry 
for children; Cheap Thrills, toys under $20. 
*FAO Schwarz has been mentioned in 114 novels published so far this year. 
*It runs First Children's Bank, an FDIC-insured institution to help children 
learn about banking. It offers checking and savings accounts, credit cards and 
certificates of deposit for college educations. 
*San Francisco store features a miniature city, including a drive-in theater 
with a 2-inch by 1 1/2-inch movie screen playing Godzilla. 
*The cover of this year's FAO Schwarz catalogue, which will be released in two 
weeks, will feature the work of Peanuts cartoonist Charles Schulz. 
*FAO Schwarz is the first U.S. purchase for the Dutch retailer NV Koninklijke 
Bijenkorf Beheer. The name (pronounced roughly CONIN-click BAY-in-korf BE-here) 
means Royal Beehive Group. 
*The two Southern California stores are in Beverly Hills and at South Coast 
Plaza in Costa Mesa. 
