MADE KEY CONCESSION; 
HAMMER PARDON TURNED ON THE ISSUE OF INNOCENCE 
Two weeks ago, in his first exercise of that most royal of all presidential 
prerogatives, George Bush conferred "full and unconditional" pardons on nine 
Americans with criminal records. 
Eight were felons, convicted of everything from tax evasion and illegal 
possession of firearms to fraudulent land grabs and kickback schemes. They were 
more than happy to admit, and lavishly repent, their crimes in exchange for the 
restoration of their civil rights. One, for example, a security guard, won back 
his right to tote a gun. 
For these eight, the presidential pardons process had been relatively 
straightforward, inexpensive and benign. Most simply filled out a free, 
four-page Justice Department form, provided character references, then went 
home to wait it out while the FBI sifted through their lives. 
But for the ninth, Los Angeles industrialist and philanthropist Dr. Armand 
Hammer, the experience had been a long and frustrating ordeal. He was 91 years 
old and no felon. He had never lost his civil rights. Instead, he had been 
trying to rid his record of three 13-year-old misdemeanors. And he wasn't 
lavishly repenting anything. 
In the end, despite Hammer's protestations of innocence, his pardon read the 
same as all the others. And he wouldn't have gotten even that had he not made a 
key concession. 
The case of Hammer's pardon for making $54,000 in illegal contributions to 
Richard M. Nixon's 1972 campaign is a classic reminder that, when it comes to 
pardons, the system does not bend unless the President says so. The pardoning 
power, an utterly discretionary bit of imperial largess written into the 
Constitution amid the checks and balances, belongs to him alone. 
Some, like Jimmy Carter -- who pardoned World War II traitor Iva (Tokyo Rose) 
Toguri and, posthumously, Dr. Samuel A. Mudd, who treated President Abraham 
Lincoln's assassin -- are relatively generous with that largess. Others, like 
Ronald Reagan -- who awarded Hammer a National Medal for the Arts and made him 
chairman of the President's Cancer Panel but did not pardon him -- are less 
forgiving. 
In Hammer's case, say officials of the Reagan and Bush administrations, the 
pardon was stalled not by presidential indifference but by the nature of the 
request itself -- and Hammer's refusal to change it. 
For what Hammer had been seeking -- but didn't get -- was not just a 
garden-variety presidential pardon but one based on a finding of innocence -- 
in effect, an executive decree that he was never guilty in the first place. 
Virtually Unheard Of 
Such a pardon is virtually unheard of, so unprecedented that Hammer's own 
attorneys cite only two examples of it in the last 50 years and U.S. Pardons 
Atty. David C. Stephenson, a 20-year veteran of the office, says he can't 
recall details of either case. 
But, the officials say, it explains why George Bush acted when Ronald Reagan 
would not -- even though Reagan, in his last days in office, pardoned New York 
Yankees owner George Steinbrenner on felony charges of making illegal 
contributions to the same Nixon campaign. 
"Steinbrenner," notes a Bush White House legal official, "was willing to accept 
an ordinary pardon." 
Armand Hammer did not back down easily. He is a man, as one of his friends 
says, "who is unaccustomed to taking no for an answer" or, as a critic says, 
whose "chutzpah knows no bounds." 
Hammer, Occidental Petroleum founder, art patron and self-styled emissary of 
East-West relations, has been protesting his innocence almost since the day he 
entered a guilty plea in 1975 and then again in 1976. His determination to 
"clear my name" has been so well publicized that, by now, it is as central to 
Hammer's image as his search for a cure for cancer and his 45-minute meeting 72 
years ago with V. I. Lenin. 
Charity Donations 
Associates say one reason for Hammer's obsession is that he has long been 
convinced that the misdemeanors account for his failure to win a Nobel prize, 
despite nominations. Over the years, he has contributed millions of dollars to 
medical research, to the arts, education and countless other worthy causes the 
world over. 
"Dr. Hammer is a totally selfless man, the kind of man who is too good for most 
people to believe," says his Philadelphia attorney, Bruce W. Kauffman. "He 
contributes at least 90% of his income to service of mankind. I'm just so 
grateful to President Bush, that he acted so responsibly, so humanely, so well, 
with such statesmanship." 
Kauffman has been one of Hammer's leading attorneys since he plunged into the 
formal pardons process in 1984. Kauffman had once been appointed by Bush's 
attorney general, former Pennsylvania Gov. Dick Thornburgh, to fill a two-year 
vacancy on the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, leading to speculation that the 
connection might have given Hammer's petition a new boost. 
But like any other supplicant, Hammer filed an application and letters of 
character reference -- along with a thick, slick legal brief arguing his case 
-- with Pardons Atty. Stephenson, a little-known public official who controls 
the first phase of the process. 
With around 300 requests annually, it is up to Stephenson to make the first 
cut. The only real rules are that you show remorse and demonstrate an exemplary 
life style for at least five years after the crime -- and then submit to a 
background investigation by the FBI. 
This is, of course, expensive. And because it costs the government thousands of 
dollars to process each petition, misdemeanor offenses are almost routinely 
rejected as too trivial to bother with. Stephenson made an exception for 
Hammer, he says, "because of his outstanding record of service to mankind." 
Repeated Defense 
In his interviews with Stephenson, Hammer repeated a defense he has made in his 
autobiographies, through his lawyers and in interviews through the years. 
(Hammer would not comment for this article.) 
He insists that he made the 1972 contribution in good faith, before a new 
campaign disclosure law went into effect. He blames his courier, former Montana 
Gov. Tim Babcock, who pleaded guilty to a related charge, for misdirecting the 
money and then lying about it. And he says the only reason he entered a guilty 
plea was because his lawyers pressured him into it. 
In fact, only days after admitting guilt in a plea bargain in U.S. District 
Court in Washington in 1975, Hammer lamented his innocence to his parole 
officer. When the presiding judge heard about it, he ordered Hammer back into 
court. Hammer fell ill, proceedings were moved to Los Angeles due to his health 
and, five months later, accompanied by an army of doctors, he was wheeled into 
court and pleaded guilty a second time. He was sentenced to a year's probation 
and fined $3,000. 
Hammer has since insisted that he uncovered "new evidence" that exonerates him. 
He points in particular to a snatch of taped conversation with Nixon prior to 
the campaign deadline, in which Hammer mentions his contribution. Hammer also 
says $39,000 of his money was never even applied to the campaign, so it 
technically was not even a campaign contribution. And, finally, he contends he 
was a victim of a double standard applied by Watergate prosectors in 
interpreting the laws. 
Stephenson was persuaded. Although he will not publicly confirm it, his 
superiors say he recommended in favor of Hammer's extraordinary request. 
But Stephenson is only the first stop on the way to the White House. From his 
office, pardon petitions are reviewed by the associate attorney general (then 
Stephen S. Trott, now a judge on the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals) and 
sometimes by the attorney general himself (then Edwin Meese III) before being 
sent to White House counsel and finally to the President. 
Formally, Hammer's petition never made it past the second stop. 
Called 'Incredible' 
"It was incredible," recalls a former Justice Department official from the 
Reagan years. "We were ready to give him a pardon on regular grounds -- for 
showing remorse, leading an exemplary life, all that. We were unanimous in our 
opinion that he deserved that. 
"But Hammer said no, he didn't want that. He wanted the U.S. government to 
declare him innocent, and there was simply no evidence to support that . . . . 
He appealed it to Meese, to everybody under the sun." 
Another former top-level official in the Reagan Justice Department contends 
that, "in all fairness," Hammer never should have been convicted. "But we 
decided there really were no new grounds for an innocence pardon, no dramatic 
new evidence," he said. "Besides, you just can't resolve legal issues in a 
pardon. That isn't their purpose. They are statements of forgiveness." 
(In fact, history is studded with examples of people who actually rejected a 
pardon rather than concede guilt.) 
That was in 1987. By then, Hammer's formal petition had been in the system for 
three years -- which is not unusual. It takes at least that long for ordinary 
applications, mainly because of the time-consuming background investigations. 
At present, Stephenson has a backlog of about 700 petitions. 
But Armand Hammer wasn't getting any younger. Traditional Christmas pardons 
were announced, random lists were released now and then, birthdays came and 
went. Armand Hammer called his attorneys constantly for news, one day from 
Moscow, from Afghanistan the next, from London, Beijing, Los Angeles. 
His attorneys made emotional pleas for the pardon based on his age. "We had so 
hoped," says Kauffman, "that Reagan would grant him the pardon in time for his 
90th birthday." 
Fired Attorney 
In his increasing displeasure, Hammer fired his Washington attorney, a former 
Justice Department official himself, on grounds that he should have managed, 
with his firsthand knowledge of the process and the players, to produce better 
results. But Hammer's old friend Kauffman and his colleague, Paul S. Diamond, 
couldn't make it happen either. 
Finally, in May, Hammer sent a three-paragraph letter to Deputy Associate Atty. 
Gen. Cary H. Copeland. "I am herewith changing my request for a pardon based on 
innocence to one seeking a conventional pardon," he wrote. 
Three months later, Bush gave it to him. 
To Hammer's attorneys, it remains a shame that such a distinguished man should 
have been subjected to the grinding pardons process in the first place. Earlier 
this year, for example, Justice Department security guards refused to admit 
Hammer into the building because he had no picture identification. 
"They made us sit in the lobby for 15 minutes until somebody came for us," 
recalls Diamond. "I mean, what did they think this 90-year-old man was going to 
do? But Dr. Hammer was good-natured about it." Diamond calls the pardons 
process "a great leveler." 
Historically, most presidents have used the pardon power sparingly, even in 
high-profile petitions. According to Stephenson, almost 90% of routine requests 
are rejected. 
Lyndon B. Johnson was the most generous President in the last 30 years, issuing 
1,241 in five years. Nixon doled out 863 in six years, Gerald R. Ford 382 in 
two (including his controversial preemptive pardon of Nixon). Excluding his 
blanket amnesty to Vietnam draft resisters, Carter gave out 543 in his one 
term. 
The stingiest was Ronald Reagan, who granted only 393 pardons during his eight 
years in office. (Not that Reagan was shy about using the pardon when his sense 
of injustice was aroused. He had barely unpacked at the White House before he 
issued unsolicited pardons to two FBI agents convicted of illegal break-ins 
during the early 1970s at the homes of families and friends of suspected 
members of the radical Weather Underground. Reagan said the agents had acted 
not with "criminal intent" but on "high principle" to fight terrorism.) 
But those involved in Hammer's original guilty plea say, if anything, he got 
better treatment that the average petitioner. 
"He shouldn't have been treated any differently than thousands of other 
white-collar criminals," says former assistant Watergate prosecutor Thomas 
McBride, now at 
Stanford Law School. "There were no new, extenuating circumstances in his case. 
Even his (charitable) giving has always been tainted by self-interest." 
"He pleaded guilty, so I have to assume he was guilty," says former Watergate 
prosecutor Henry Ruth. "My view of the pardon process is that it should be 
given only in extraordinary circumstances, and I haven't heard of any in either 
Hammer's or Steinbrenner's cases. But they happen to be rich, powerful people, 
so I guess that's why they get them." 
Although it is standard procedure for prosecutors and judges to be consulted 
before pardons are granted, Ruth was not, nor was federal Judge Lawrence 
Lydick. Charles Ruff, the final prosecutor in Hammer's case and now a Tucson 
attorney, was consulted but, sources say, would neither oppose nor support any 
kind of pardon. 
The day of his pardon, Hammer issued a statement expressing his gratitude for 
"President Bush's action in clearing my name." Beyond that, he refused public 
comment. His attorneys are less restrained. 
"You see, an ordinary pardon requires that you admit guilt and show remorse," 
Kauffman said. "And Dr. Hammer has certainly never done that. He is innocent, 
and he has not admitted he did anything wrong. So this is a sort of hybrid 
pardon, somewhere in the middle." 
As for the May letter, Kauffman says: "We just decided not to get hung up on 
words, on the innocence thing. A pardon is a pardon." 
Kauffman's partner, Diamond, was even more effusive. 
"Listen, this is a singular event in U.S. pardon history," he crows. "You look 
at those applications. Everybody else pardoned has to admit guilt, say they're 
sorry in no uncertain terms. And we didn't. He didn't. Just look at that letter 
he wrote, he doesn't say he's sorry he violated any law. He says he's sorry 
that it was perceived as a violation of the law. This is a complete victory as 
far as I'm concerned." 
In his May letter, Hammer contended that he would not have pleaded guilty "but 
for a series of extenuating circumstances." He added: 
"I understand that in the eyes of the law I now stand convicted of three 
misdemeanor offenses. I have a profound respect for the law of the United 
States and have always scrupulously sought to conform my conduct to those laws 
in all respects. I sincerely regret that my record appears otherwise, even in 
some technical aspect." 
The Bush White House sees it otherwise. "The President has accepted Armand 
Hammer's acknowledgment of guilt, and his years of service to the community. 
And it was made very very clear to Dr. Hammer that he had to express remorse," 
says the White House legal official. "Oh, he tried to do it in an ambiguous 
way, of course, sort of cutesy. But he did it." 
