STATE LAWYERS GET ON THEIR OWN CASE; 
CALIFORNIA BAR PUSHES A COMMENDABLE ANTI-DRUG, ANTI-MISCONDUCT PROGRAM 
It is estimated that substance abuse is the cause of half of all misconduct 
cases handled by the State Bar of California. Faced with that frightening fact, 
its president, Alan Rothenberg, and his colleagues are backing a bill now 
before the state Senate to institute innovative programs for policing unethical 
behavior. 
"If you figure that one out of 10 Americans has a substance abuse problem and 
there are 122,000 lawyers in the California bar, then as many as 12,000 may 
have a problem," reasons Rothenberg. "Even if it's only 5%, that's 6,100 
lawyers and that's too many." 
If Sacramento signs off on the proposed increase in dues charged to bar 
members, the professional association can step up chemical dependency 
counseling referrals and provide insurance to cover the cost of treatment, 
among other innovations. 
Also to be financed by the fee hike is a network of volunteer mentors who will 
help foundering attorneys nip potential ethical breaches in the bud. This 
first-tier disciplinary program would include continuing education on ethical 
concerns such as substance abuse and conflicts of interest, and on daily 
sources of stress such as office management and client-attorney relations. 
The proposed bill would not only work to prevent misconduct cases, it would 
also put muscle into the bar's in-house efforts to police the legal profession: 
The changes would for the first time allow the bar to reveal the names of 
attorneys under investigation if there is a compelling reason to publicize a 
case. 
Attorneys are realizing that they might save themselves time, money and bitter 
frustration through stepped-up in-house policing of a profession the public 
often perceives as inflexible and intractable. Resolutely implemented, the 
California attorneys' ideas could go a long way toward boosting their public 
image and conducting themselves more professionally, providing a model for 
other organizations that need to stop acting solely in their own defense. 
