NO HEROES IN ULSTERWORLD; 
THE WILD COLONIAL BOY BY JAMES HYNES (ATHENEUM: $18.95; 356 PP.) 
Jimmy Coogan, renegade battalion commander of the Irish Republican Army, is the 
first person we meet in James Hynes' exciting and very well written first 
novel, a tightly-wound chronicle of the continuing troubles in contemporary 
Ireland. 
Coogan, a 15-year veteran of guerrilla warfare, is a Provo leader without any 
men, following a shoot-out three months ago between his unit and a 
"suspiciously lucky" British patrol. Furious with the IRA chief of staff he 
thinks is about to sell out the movement by taking a seat in Parliament, Coogan 
is planning an unauthorized terrorist strike, "something spectacular" in 
England to spoil the chances of any politician's compromise. 
Driving alone past the flinty farms and open moorland north of Belfast, with 
ten pounds of Czech plastic explosives stuffed in an Adidas carryall, Jimmy 
Coogan is an outraged banner headline waiting to happen. 
But Coogan needs help. Sought by the Provos and shunned by the locals, his only 
ally is Maire Donovan, the Sinn Fein city councilor for West Belfast to whom he 
is secretly married. An outspoken public figure, Maire is in no position to 
participate in her husband's scheme to get the explosives into the sympathetic 
hands of the London Brigade. The wanted Coogan dare not try to carry the 
plastique into England himself. Where is the unknown innocent Coogan can use as 
an accomplice? 
Enter Brian Donovan, Maire's American cousin. Amiable, at loose ends, coasting 
on charm and good intentions, young Donovan has been deputized at the last 
moment to bring his dying grandfather's $10,000 from Detroit to Ulster and the 
Provos' pension fund. To Jimmy Coogan, Brian sounds the perfect choice to tote 
explosives past border guards. 
Maire is not so sure. "Americans are like children," she tells Coogan. "They 
come here like tourists to see a bit of aggro, get their thrill, and go home. 
It's like . . . Disneyland to them. Ulsterworld." When she encounters her 
cousin, he is even more unsuitable than she'd feared, seeming "less a foreigner 
than someone from another planet entirely." 
Still, she arranges for Brian and Coogan to meet. Coogan sugarcoats his request 
with reassuring falsehoods. The apolitical American, following momentum and 
impulse, is drawn in. 
There are no real heroes in this taut thriller. Nearly everyone's actions are 
compromised by obsession, ambition or willful ignorance. Coogan is not averse 
to causing a bloody IRA schism to turn things the way he wants. Joe Brody, the 
seeming moderate Coogan is opposed to, shops his enemies to "trigger-happy" 
British troops. 
Maire Donovan is caught between her husband's plotting and her own better 
judgment, and the incriminating Polaroid she takes of her cousin to insure his 
loyalty eventually causes all kinds of grief. Brian's fumbling efforts to do 
the right thing are spoiled by his failure to confront hard realities; his 
less-than-complete honesty with Clare, a sweet and even more innocent American 
abroad, leads them both to the edge of disaster. 
Brian at least means well. Much more distasteful are the ethical twists and 
turns made by Tim McGuire, the obese free-lance journalist Coogan bullies into 
assisting him. "Here he had the story of a lifetime," McGuire reflects after 
Coogan lets him in on his discontent, "and he couldn't print it. . . . He 
believed in the Republican movement . . . and if he printed what Jimmy Coogan 
had just told him, he'd be siding with those who wanted to bring it down . . . 
" Besides, McGuire asks himself, what if Coogan fails and Brody wins? "Then I'd 
be out in the cold forever, he thought, reviled as Jimmy Coogan's publicist, 
the end of my career in the North . . . " Better all the way around to betray 
Coogan, McGuire decides. 
If Hynes offers no unequivocal good guys, what he does deliver is a terrific 
read, filled with believable and memorable characters who are as dimensional 
and full of surprises as the folks you meet in real life. They charm, they 
startle, and often they make you laugh. 
The tension that builds throughout the book is leavened by wry humor, with 
Maire seeming to have the best lines. (She also gets perhaps the most powerful 
scene in the novel, an unexpected and flesh-chilling Gaelic wail of grief.) 
With this impressive debut, novelist Hynes stakes a fair claim to part of that 
morally complex modern political terrain mapped out by the likes of Graham 
Greene, Joseph Conrad and Robert Stone. His characters meet fates that seem 
appropriate and even inevitable, while the larger issues remain realistically 
unresolved. 
A brief exchange occuring halfway through the book seems emblematic of a 
struggle that seems to know no end. 
"Are we winning, Joe?" an old Belfast Brigade vet asks Joe Brody. 
"No," Brody answers, "but we're not losing either." 
"Oh, aye," the old man concludes, "that'll have to do for now." 
