FAMILY'S 200-YEAR GRIP ON GOVERNMENT BROKEN 
For more than 200 years, a single family has dominated the government of 
Kuwait, the tiny Arab sheikdom at the head of the Persian Gulf. 
That unbroken hegemony reflects the political flexibility of the family, the 
Sabahs, one of the longest-ruling of all the Arab dynasties. Legend even says 
that it was precisely their superior diplomatic skills that earned the original 
Sabah settlers the right -- in bargaining with other families -- to control the 
government. 
It also reflects the tenacity of a family that eventually built one small port 
city into an oil kingdom with one of the highest per capita incomes in the 
world. 
From its beginning, Kuwait was built on commerce -- a foundation that was only 
strengthened when rich deposits of oil were discovered after World War I. 
Before the era of oil, the region hardly seemed a prize. Flat, empty desert 
land, it is so dry that today residents are forced to depend on purified 
seawater. But when three families of the Bani Utub tribe arrived in the region 
in the mid-18th Century, it was already a crossroads for traders from Syria, 
Iraq and Persia. Seagoing European nations also called at the port of Kuwait. 
The families decided to take advantage of the trading opportunities. 
The original three families founded an unusual state, based on a division of 
labor among them. In a pact, they agreed to give one family control of commerce 
and the second seafaring trades. 
The Sabahs, considered to be the most diplomatic of the families, were granted 
administration of the state -- power they held in unbroken succession until 
Thursday, when Iraqi troops overran the country and sent the emir fleeing to 
Saudi Arabia. 
This division of labor worked well for many years. The Sabahs, dependent on the 
merchant families for income, were careful not to alienate them. They also had 
good relations with the nomads. 
But all of that began to change with the discovery of oil in the early 1930s. 
Oil exports provided the ruling family with an independent -- and seemingly 
unlimited -- source of income. The Sabahs found that they no longer needed to 
court the merchants and the desert nomads, and began appointing family members 
to jobs throughout the government. 
As they turned inward, the Sabahs also made themselves more dependent on the 
outside world. 
Because of its geographical vulnerability, Kuwaiti foreign policy has always 
tended to play competing powers against each other, including the Soviet Union 
and the United States. 
Domestically, the country has experienced increased tension between different 
parts of Kuwaiti society. The oil boom attracted thousands of new immigrants, 
who now make up 60% of the population despite the fact that they have no legal 
rights under the Kuwaiti constitution. Reflecting the country's conservative 
brand of Sunni Islam, women also are not allowed to vote. 
Since last December, a pro-democracy movement has been pressing the Sabahs for 
change. Dissidents won a compromise this spring when the family allowed 
elections for a new National Council, a body that began meeting this summer. 
Nonetheless, for all their faults and despite rising demands for change, the 
Sabahs retained surprising popularity. 
"If the emir were to return tomorrow," predicted Jill Crystal, a specialist in 
Kuwaiti politics, "he would have no trouble regaining control over the 
country." 
