SEWAGE: SCRIPPS TAKES DIFFERENT TACK ON OUTFALL 
The Scripps Institution of Oceanography has objected to a proposed 
sewage-treatment plant in Sorrento Valley because the plant might include an 
ocean outfall pipe that would discharge treated waste water near a relatively 
pristine tract of ocean close to the prestigious institution. 
"It is vital to our operation" that nearby ocean waters "remain natural and 
unpolluted," Scripps Director Edward A. Frieman wrote in an April letter to San 
Diego sewage treatment officials detailing the institution's concerns about an 
encroachment in an area Scripps scientists have used for research projects for 
almost 70 years. 
Some environmentalists say that Frieman's objection to the Sorrento Valley pipe 
contradicts claims made by individual Scripps scientists that the treated waste 
water pumped out through a Point Loma outfall pipe is actually a healthy 
addition to the ocean. 
A Back-Yard Issue 
Frieman's letter, for example, has drawn fire from Richard McManus, a Cardiff 
resident who in 1986 formed People for a Clean Ocean, a citizens' group that 
supports secondary sewage treatment for waste water pumped into the ocean. 
McManus on Thursday charged that Scripps "took a stand" on the growing 
controversy over pumping treated sewage into the ocean only because "it was in 
their own back yard." 
But Scripps "won't make a stand" in the ongoing debate over whether the Point 
Loma sewage treatment plant, which now offers advanced primary treatment, 
should be forced to add multibillion-dollar secondary treatment technology for 
San Diego's sewage, McManus said. 
In response, Frieman said that Scripps has intentionally remained neutral in 
the debate over the need for secondary treatment at Point Loma. Those Scripps 
scientists who have publicly opposed secondary treatment as expensive and 
unnecessary "have chosen to speak out as citizens, which they have an 
absolutely perfect right to do," Frieman said. "But, by in large," he said, 
"Scripps does not take positions on political issues." 
Frieman said his letter "was referring to pollution as anything that would 
cause a change in the state of that mass of water. . . . But I wasn't speaking 
of pollution in the negative sense . . . in terms of whether (an outfall) would 
produce harmful bacteria or pollution in that sense." 
Frieman on Thursday maintained that his letter was driven by researchers' fears 
that an ocean outfall pipe would hinder Scripps' research in nearby ocean water 
that has remained relatively free of man-made intrusions since the institution 
was founded in 1929. "We've got some of the longest continuous records that I 
know about anywhere in California," Frieman said. 
'An Issue of Context' 
Frieman suggested that McManus might have been misled by the letter, which was 
not intended to address the controversy over secondary treatment at Point Loma. 
"Maybe it wasn't the best choice of words," said Frieman, who maintained that 
the letter did not attempt to address political questions generated by debate 
over the need for secondary treatment the federal Environmental Protection 
Agency has required of San Diego. 
"It's an issue of context," Frieman said. "I was speaking in the research 
context, not in the context of a societal or political issue." 
"They're backstepping and sidestepping," McManus complained. With the proposed 
Sorrento Valley sewage treatment plant, he said, "they took the position that, 
yes, there is an impact from these outfalls." Frieman said, continued McManus, 
that "we don't want one in our back yard." 
Frieman also wrote that a proposed outfall pipe north of Scripps' La Jolla 
campus would adversely affect the quality of nearly 2 million gallons of sea 
water that Scripps and the nearby Southwest Marine Fisheries center pump each 
day into laboratories and aquariums. 
"The water must be as pure and unpolluted as possible to ensure the health of 
the marine life we keep" in those facilities, according to Frieman's letter. 
Scripps scientists have argued that water quality and marine life at the mouth 
of the Point Loma outfall pipe would not benefit from the expensive secondary 
treatment equipment now required by the EPA. The scientists maintain the Point 
Loma plant's advanced primary treatment is sufficiently protecting the ocean, 
and that federal regulators should grant San Diego an exemption from the 
expensive secondary treatment requirement. 
Scripps' concern over the location of a nearby outfall pipe has fallen off 
dramatically since April because the city plan calls for construction of a 
pipeline that would carry treated waste water from Sorrento Valley directly to 
Point Loma, where it would be released through an existing outfall pipe. 
Fallback Plan 
The Sorrento Valley plant was included in a recently unveiled, $2.5-billion 
city plan that includes construction of six satellite treatment plants that 
would reclaim waste water for use in watering landscaped areas. Only not used 
for watering projects would be pumped into the ocean. 
Although the city would prefer to pipe excess effluent to the Point Loma plant, 
a fallback plan calls for construction of a pipe extending into the ocean from 
a point to the north of Scripps' waterfront grounds. 
Under the fallback plan, the outfall pipe would be several miles to the north 
of the research area. But ocean currents and the ocean floor's topography would 
combine to carry effluent into the research area, according to Frieman's 
letter. 
Ocean currents have kept treated sewage from existing outfall pipes in San 
Diego County away from research instruments situated in the "Scripps Coastal 
Reserve" that extends a mile out to sea from the Scripps campus. The reserve 
extends south to include the La Jolla Underwater Park. 
Frieman wrote the letter to express researchers' concern that the introduction 
of treated sewage would affect Scripps' physical, chemical and biological 
research into the marine environment. 
'Obvious Hypocrisy' 
Although Frieman defended his letter, Paul Dayton, a marine ecologist at 
Scripps who has argued against the need for secondary treatment at Point Loma, 
acknowledged that "on the face of it, there seems to be an obvious hypocrisy." 
"It sounds hypocritical, but this is the only area in Southern California where 
there's not a pipe real close by," Dayton said. "It gets to be a societal 
question of whether (the coastal reserve) has a value to society that exceeds" 
the costs of protecting it from the impact of an ocean outfall. 
"There is a sense in California that the (waters offshore from Scripps) should 
be protected against encroachment," said Edward Goldberg, a highly regarded 
Scripps scientist who has opposed upgrading Point Loma's treatment plant to 
include secondary treatment. 
"What we have here are the best scientific and technical information 
available," Goldberg said. "We transfer that to those who create and make 
public policy. We're not politicians, we're scientists." 
