HIGH DRUG COSTS AND MEDICARE 
Rep. Fortney H. Stark (D-Oakland) would like to see Americans receive a "fair 
deal" for their Medicare dollar. We agree. Too bad he didn't extend the same 
deal to EPOGEN and its manufacturer, Amgen. 
In his Aug. 2 column, "A Miracle Drug for Some but a Tax Drain for All," Stark 
charges that Amgen will reap untold profits from Medicare for its drug EPOGEN, 
a revolutionary treatment for the anemia suffered by kidney dialysis patients. 
We cannot understand why Stark is vilifying EPOGEN, which he, along with 
leading nephrologists, calls "a miracle drug." 
First, Stark appears to confuse revenues with profits. It is true that industry 
analysts projected annual revenues exceeding $100 million for this product. Not 
all of that money will reach Amgen, of course, because other manufacturers 
expect to enter the market soon. Stark's estimate for the cost of EPOGEN is 
less than the cost of packaging this breakthrough product. More importantly, 
Amgen's revenues will be spent largely on research and development. 
In fact, Amgen ranks first of all American companies in the amount it spends on 
research and development both per employee and as a percent of revenue, 
according to a recent survey in Business Week. 
Second, Stark knows that Amgen didn't "extort" anything from anyone. Medicare 
didn't roll over and play dead. Representatives from the Health Care Financing 
Administration (HCFA) and the company participated in spirited discussions that 
lasted nearly a year. In the end HCFA established a reimbursement rate the 
government found to be equitable. (The U.S. price for EPOGEN is more than 30% 
less than in Europe.) 
Third, Stark implies that EPOGEN is not more valuable than gold. A gram of 
EPOGEN can provide a week's worth of treatment for 8,000 patients and eliminate 
1,000 blood transfusions. Does that make EPOGEN better than pure gold? We say 
yes, as do dialysis patients. 
Amgen is just as concerned as Stark about the rising cost of health care. That 
is why we presented all of this information to his staff and to Sen. David 
Pryor (D-Ark.) at his hearings on drug pricing. That is why we worked closely 
with HCFA. It is difficult to understand Stark's alarm, and to fathom why he 
feels a need to belittle the company and the achievement of making EPOGEN a 
reality. 
GORDON M. BINDER 
Amgen Chief Executive Officer 
Thousand Oaks 
