BILL, SOUTH GATE'S MELLOW POLICE DOG, RETIRES AFTER 5 YEARS OF HOT PURSUITS 
When he joined the South Gate Police Department five years ago, there was some 
doubt that Bill, the German shepherd, was suited for police work. 
After all, there were a few occasions when he showed no aggression, simply 
walking away from suspects. 
And there was the time the 85-pound dog was chased by a goose. 
"Some of the administrators wanted to get rid of him," said Police Officer 
Frank LaVigne, the dog's handler. 
But that is all behind Bill now. 
Years of Chases 
After extra hours of training by LaVigne, the dog proved his worth during more 
than five years of chasing criminals. In more than 100 searches for suspects, 
Bill was successful in 65 of them, police officials said. 
So earlier this month, when the 9-year-old dog retired, he got his retirement 
party, just like all other Police Department retirees. 
Top police officials, including Police Chief Ron George, and LaVigne were there 
to help celebrate. 
The dog, who is suffering from arthritic-type problems in his joints, received 
his share of presents. 
There was a 12-by-18-inch white cake. Bill had several pieces. And he was given 
a city fire hydrant. Bill rarely passed a hydrant he did not make use of during 
his career, LaVigne said. However, he did manage to resist the bright yellow 
fire hydrant during retirement ceremonies Thursday at the South Gate 
Auditorium. 
Reflecting on the five years he and Bill spent together on the streets, LaVigne 
said, "Bill was mellow until he needed to be aggressive." 
Bill was smart and tough, LaVigne said. 
LaVigne remembered the time, about three years ago, when Bill found a car-theft 
suspect after other officers had given up the search. 
Bill kept barking and scratching at a garage that police had locked after 
searching it, LaVigne said. 
The garage was searched again and the suspect was found hiding in a cabinet, 
LaVigne said. 
The suspect had somehow sneaked inside after the police made their initial 
search, LaVigne said. 
LaVigne also recalled the time, despite a cut paw, when Bill was able to hold 
onto a man trying to flee after beating up a woman. The man had cut Bill's paw 
with a large iron chain. Bill needed stitches to close the wound. 
"He was exceptional. He knew when to switch it on and when to switch it off," 
Sgt. Ralph Carter said. 
During his retirement party, Bill showed his friendly side by playing with the 
three small LaVigne children. 
Later, he demonstrated his aggressiveness when LaVigne commanded him to tackle 
a police officer who was pretending to be a fleeing criminal. 
Bill will spend his retirement years with the LaVigne family at their Moreno 
Valley home in Riverside County. 
Bought in Riverside 
All of the dogs that serve in the department's K-9 program are bought from the 
Adlerhorst Police Dog Handler's School in Riverside. 
The dogs and their handlers receive training at the kennel, which provides dogs 
for many police departments, according to Pip Reaver. Reaver and her husband, 
David, own and manage the dog school. 
The dogs, which are imported from Germany and Holland, are taught to use their 
noses in finding suspects, she said. 
Lt. Russell Beecher, who is in charge of the South Gate police K-9 program, 
said the dogs are also taught only to attack a fleeing suspect or one that is 
threatening the officer or the animal. 
The City Council recently budgeted $7,300 to pay for training Officer Ron Inman 
and Waldo, the dog who will replace Bill. 
Waldo joins two other dogs in the South Gate K-9 program, Cliff and Boris. 
