AT ONE SCHOOL THAT WORKS, MONEY MIGHT WORK WONDERS 
California's leadership continues to debate the level of funding for our 
schools. Los Angeles officials continue to debate whether and where to open new 
schools. In the background, there seems to be a perception that our inner-city 
public schools are a wasteland, that they are dangerous places where little 
learning goes on, and that nothing can be done. A recent visit to Huntington 
Park High School offers evidence that our schools are not lost, and that an old 
solution -- money -- would have a positive impact. 
The trip was taken with, among others, William Lambert, governmental relations 
director of United Teachers-Los Angeles. The visit was not announced to the 
administration in advance. 
Huntington High is south of downtown L.A. It is in an old, decaying, industrial 
and residential area, although it is surrounded by new and well-maintained 
single-family homes, a HUD development. The student body is nearly all Latino. 
It is a year-round school and was in full session during the August visit. 
Huntington does not comport with the stereotypical portrait of the inner-city 
school. True, two armed police officers patrol the campus. A sign that says 
"Keep Our Schools Clean" is covered with graffiti. The dropout rate is 
extraordinarily high. In one wing of the school, no English is spoken by the 
any of the students in the halls. 
The halls, however, are not the domain of uncontrolled toughs. Neither gangs 
nor drugs are evident. Other than the markings on the sign, graffiti is not a 
problem. Students seem to be listening and working. Teachers appear in control. 
What the school does suffer from is intense overcrowding. In all, Huntington 
handles about 3,600 kids. Due to the year-round format, 2,400 kids attend at 
any time. The format, however, only eases the overcrowding. Kids are stuffed in 
every nook and cranny. A math class is taught in the light machine shop; kids 
with textbooks sit surrounded by machinery. Another is taught in the gym. A 
special education course is taught in the auditorium dressing room. Three 
remedial classes simultaneously are conducted in the cafeteria; there are no 
dividers between the classes. Kids eat lunch on tables placed on a blocked-off 
street. On rainy days, they are forced inside -- on stairways, in the halls, 
wherever. 
The overcrowding only will get worse. About 3,000 students are enrolled at 
Miles Elementary School, which feeds into Huntington. 
Huntington also suffers from physical decay and poor maintenance. There is an 
aerial photograph of the school circa 1925 in the principal's office. It was an 
impressive facility then, with its distinctive facade rising up over acres of 
unspoiled land. 
Years of neglect have had their impact, and the current pressure on the 
facility only adds to the problem. Because the students attend 17 fewer days, 
school days are longer. At night, the school is an adult education facility for 
2,400. On Saturdays, the school is the venue for an immigrant education 
program. It is in constant use, which strains the facility and makes it 
inaccessible for maintenance. 
As a result, the paint and the buildings are chipping and wearing away. Live 
sockets are broken and exposed. Air conditioning does not work; classes are 
conducted in 100-degree heat, with old fans blowing hot air. Light fixtures are 
broken or missing bulbs; one teacher pointed out that the lights even fail to 
power the solar calculators that students use. The machines used in the 
technical classes are vintage 1940. Kids who must enter a highly competitive 
high-tech marketplace are being taught on yesterday's equipment. 
Teachers' facilities make the faculty feel like unwelcome visitors. The 110 
teachers present at any time have two "lounges." One is about 12 feet by 20; 
with its garage-sale couches, faded paint, ancient bathroom stall and dim 
lighting, it resembles a tenement hotel room. The other lounge is slightly 
larger, but has the same discarded furniture interior. "These couches were 
donated by parents," a teacher said. "The old ones had rats." One of the school 
wings is equipped with a single faculty bathroom, which contains one toilet 
that does not flush. 
But the school does not present an intractable problem. When the manifestations 
are drugs and gangs and students that do not listen and teachers that have 
given up, the problems defy short-term solution and, arguably, more money may 
change little. But when students are listening, and teachers have not yet given 
up, and the problems involve too many students and toilets that do not flush 
and air conditioners that do not cool and learning math in dark classrooms 
surrounded by outdated machines, these are things that new and better 
facilities can cure. 
The opportunity to expand at Huntington is gone. Why did the district not 
expand when adjacent land was vacant? "Stupidity," said Lambert. "Instead, 
homes were built, which brings in more kids." 
But the school can be improved, and new schools can be built in other places. 
As Huntington's vice principal said at the end of the visit: "Give us a little 
help. It's basically called money." 
