ANC HALTS ALL ARMED STRUGGLE; 
SOUTH AFRICA: THE REBEL GROUP ACTS TO CLEAR THE WAY FOR TALKS ON POWER-SHARING 
BETWEEN THE BLACK MAJORITY AND THE WHITE MINORITY. 
The African National Congress early today suspended its 30-year-old armed 
struggle against the white minority-led government of South Africa in an 
agreement that both sides described as "a milestone on the road to true peace 
and prosperity in our country." 
The historic declaration by the government and the country's primary guerrilla 
movement, coming at the end of a 14-hour meeting in Pretoria, cleared the ANC's 
remaining obstacles to formal negotiations. 
"The way is now open to proceed towards negotiations on a new constitution," 
the two sides said in a joint statement. They added that "exploratory talks" on 
ways of launching those negotiations will be held soon. 
The ANC-government accord set in motion a plan for the phased release of 
political prisoners and indemnity for returning exiles. Under that plan, the 
first prisoner releases will begin on Sept. 1 and indemnity declarations will 
begin on Oct. 1. The entire process will be completed by April 30, 1991. 
The government also agreed to give "immediate consideration" to repealing all 
provisions of the Internal Security Act that make it a crime to further the 
aims of a Communist organization as well as those provisions that create a 
category of "listed" people and prohibit the publication of their statements or 
writings. 
It also said it will continue reviewing legislation "to ensure free political 
activity" and will introduce amendments to security legislation at the next 
session of Parliament in February, 1991. 
The agreement, revealed early this morning at a joint news conference by 
President Frederik W. de Klerk and ANC Deputy President Nelson Mandela, brought 
to an end a guerrilla war, launched in 1960 by Mandela, that has claimed 
hundreds of lives, injured thousands and caused millions of dollars in property 
damage. 
"There will be no infiltrations of men and arms into South Africa, and any 
activity related to military action will be suspended," Mandela said. "And we 
hope to be able to communicate with our people and inform them of what we've 
decided." 
Mandela called the ANC's move "a significant concession." 
Under the agreement, a working group of ANC and government representatives will 
be established to deal with any disagreements over the guerrilla war 
suspension. 
The ANC's armed struggle has been mostly dormant in recent months, but the 
government has maintained that the ANC's continuing commitment to its military 
strategy has caused an increase in violence in South Africa's black townships. 
The two five-man teams from the ANC and the government expressed "serious 
concern about the general level of violence, intimidation and unrest in the 
country, especially in Natal (province)," their joint statement said. And both 
sides agreed to take steps to stabilize the situation "in line with the spirit 
of mutual trust . . . among the leaders involved." 
One of the most violent regions is Natal, in eastern South Africa, where 
supporters of the ANC have been battling followers of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu 
Gatsha Buthelezi. Three years of factional fighting there have claimed some 
3,000 lives. 
The government agreed today to consider lifting the state of emergency in Natal 
province "as early as possible." 
"We feel there will hopefully be a fundamental change in the situation on the 
ground" as a result of the agreement, De Klerk said. Although the ANC says the 
fighting in Natal is not being directed by its armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe 
(Spear of the Nation), some analysts believe the ANC's previous refusal to 
suspend the armed struggle has fueled the fighting, especially among young 
radicals in the ANC. 
"We think what has happened today forms an important turning point, which will 
in all probability result in a much more peaceful situation in South Africa," 
De Klerk said. 
The ANC and the government disagreed strongly, however, on the activities of 
the South African police in quelling anti-apartheid protest in the country. 
More than 125 activists have been killed in police action, much of it aimed at 
halting protest marches, since the ANC and other organizations were unbanned in 
February. 
De Klerk said the "police should at all times deal with violence in an 
evenhanded manner," and he added that the government would investigate ANC 
allegations of police brutality. 
"We are not satisfied with the reply of the state president," Mandela countered 
at the news conference. "The actions of the police indicate to us that the 
government has not succeeded in curtailing police action. We feel quite 
dissatisfied with the way the state is dealing with peaceful protest. 
"There is something wrong. The government has either lost control over the 
police or the police are doing what the government wants," Mandela said. He 
added, however, that "the ANC accepts the government's assurances" that it will 
investigate instances of police misbehavior. 
Many of those police clashes with demonstrators have followed ANC-organized 
protests. Mandela said the ANC is not abandoning its strategy of mass protest 
actions, which have included consumer boycotts and marches. 
But, he said, the new accord provides channels of communication between the ANC 
and the government "that can be used to defuse any situation that calls for 
mass action." 
Although they hailed their agreement as the first real step toward peace in 
South Africa, the government-ANC statement alluded to the fact that other 
parties, including Buthelezi's Inkatha movement, left-wing black organizations 
and right-wing whites, must now become involved in the process to keep it 
moving ahead. 
"We do not pretend to be the only parties involved in the process of shaping 
the new South Africa," their statement said. "All of us can henceforth walk 
that road in consultation and cooperation with each other. We call upon all 
those who have not yet committed themselves to peaceful negotiations to do so 
now." 
The most important ANC precondition for constitutional negotiations was the 
freedom of political prisoners and the return of exiles without fear of 
prosecution. 
Human rights organizations estimate that there are 2,500 to 3,000 people in 
South African prisons on convictions for politically motivated crimes, and more 
than 1,600 people currently are on trial for political offenses. The government 
has estimated that there are fewer than 400 political prisoners. 
Among the estimated 35,000 political exiles living outside South Africa, at 
least 6,000 are soldiers in the ANC's military wing, and several thousand 
others are involved in activities that might subject them to prosecution upon 
their return. 
The ANC-government agreement acknowledges De Klerk's power to pardon prisoners 
and grant indemnity to those activists, including exiles, who may be liable to 
prosecution or are now undergoing trial. But both sides agree that De Klerk 
will appoint a panel, by Aug. 31, to identify "political" prisoners on a 
case-by-case basis. 
The accord establishes broad guidelines for that panel's decision-making, 
suggesting, for example, that the definition of a political crime could range 
from purely political offenses such as treason to common crimes, including 
murder. In the case of common crimes, the ANC-government agreement urges the 
panel to consider several circumstances, including the motive of the offender, 
the context in which the offense was committed and the nature of the political 
objective. 
BACKGROUND 
The African National Congress has undergone radical changes since it was 
launched in 1912 as the South African Native National Congress, a small group 
led by traditional chiefs. It was primarily a pressure group promoting the 
interests of black Africans by using legal means, such as petitions to the 
government. It began to resemble a mass liberation movement in the 1940s, when 
it adopted a constitution calling for universal suffrage. A Youth League was 
formed in 1943, attracting more radical blacks such as Nelson Mandela and 
Walter Sisulu, and the young radicals took control of the ANC in 1949. The 
shooting of unarmed demonstrators by police at Sharpeville in 1960 and the 
outlawing of the ANC the following year forced the organization to review its 
nonviolent strategy. 
