PERSPECTIVE ON THE WORLD ECONOMY; 
HELP THE SOVIETS PUMP THE OIL WE NEED 
The new status of American-Soviet relations offers the United States a way out 
of our over-dependence on Middle East oil as well as a means of helping the 
Soviet Union out of its economic chaos. 
The Soviet Union is the world's largest oil exporter. Production from existing 
fields could be substantially increased if Western drilling and refining 
techniques were made available. In addition, while "proven" Soviet oil reserves 
are not as great as those in the Middle East, some geological experts believe 
that far greater reserves will yet be discovered. 
The Bush Administration has shown a reluctance to join Germany and other 
Western European countries in helping the Soviet Union out of its grave 
economic crisis. But if aid to Moscow were presented as a way of making us less 
dependent on Middle East oil, it would likely be accepted both in Congress and 
the nation. Actually, the aid would be minimal -- primarily loans for purchase 
of drilling and refining equipment as a part of arrangements guaranteeing sales 
of oil to the United States. Some Western oil companies are interested, though 
they are understandably cautious about involving themselves in a country whose 
future appears so uncertain. 
A deal would be eagerly welcomed in Moscow. Soviet oil production actually 
decreased by 8% in the last two years, due largely to inadequate drilling 
machinery and absence of Western oil technology. At the same time, the Soviet 
Union has more oil available for export than previously because the Soviets 
insist on being paid in hard currency, and their traditional customers in 
Eastern European don't have it. 
The Soviets must find hard-currency customers like the United States. For lack 
of hard currency, the Soviet government has warned it may not be able to import 
enough grain to feed its people. 
Eliminating our oil dependence on the Middle East would put us in an enormously 
better position economically, and, given the current crisis, would ease 
pressure to take military action that could have disastrous consequences. In 
short, a deal for Soviet oil is a natural. 
