ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
HOSPITAL WELCOMES BACK QUADS 
Brianna, Jeffrey, Vincent and Whitney Miner are not alone. Not only do the four 
have the special bond of being quadruplets, but they also share the miracle of 
their lives with the more than 100 medical professionals who helped bring them 
into the world. 
Surrounded by pink and blue balloons and crepe paper, the infants celebrated 
six months of life Thursday at the hospital where they were born to Al and 
Karen Miner as a result of a new form of artificial insemination called GIFT -- 
Gamete Intra-Fallopian Transfer. They are the first quadruplets born in Orange 
County after use of this technique and only the second in California.167772160 
Dozens of nurses and doctors who helped deliver and care for the babies were on 
hand to cuddle the infants and share chocolate cake and fruit punch. They all 
displayed the same proud smiles as the parents -- cooing and gasping when the 
babies drooled or smiled. For the Miners, Thursday was just another day to 
enjoy their well-behaved family. 
"Sometimes we just sit back and say, 'Can you believe it? Look how miraculous 
you guys are,' " said Karen Miner, a former elementary school teacher in 
Fullerton. She said the babies are even-tempered and do not cry very much. 
Indeed, they did not fuss much at all during their two-hour party at UCI 
Medical Center, though dozens of people held and played with them. 
Miner, 33, gave birth to the quadruplets Feb. 10, about eight weeks premature. 
She said they decided to celebrate the six-month mark a week late so Dr. Manuel 
Porto, who performed the Cesarean section on Miner, could attend. 
At the time of their birth, three of the babies were in good health. Jeffrey 
had fluid in his lungs and was on a respirator for four days. Now, Jeffrey is 
the second biggest of the bunch, Miner said, and growing stronger every day. 
When asked right after the birth how it felt to be the father of quadruplets, 
Al Miner responded, "I don't know if the reality has struck me yet. Ask me in 
six months." 
When asked Thursday, Al Miner said: "Actually, it's been relatively easy. Well, 
easy isn't the right word. The babies are very good babies -- as babies go." 
The GIFT technique has been used in Orange County for about three or four 
years, Porto said. The process involves placing sperm and unfertilized eggs in 
a woman's Fallopian tubes to let conception occur where it naturally would. 
Ten doctors and a team of about 100 were on hand when Miner delivered her 
children. Set up in four color-coded teams, the groups took care of the babies 
as each one was born. For some of them, the experience will always be special. 
"It's so natural and it is so rare," said Dr. Jack Sills, the neonatologist who 
cared for the children while they were in the hospital after their birth. "It's 
really special -- not only to be there when they are very ill but when they are 
like this. It is just wonderful." LUCY CHABOT 
