RECTIFYING A TOXIC MISTAKE 
A sponsor of Proposition 65, the 1986 Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement 
Act, says that voter approval of the complex, controversial measure created a 
year of panic followed by a year of acceptance. The major remaining resistance 
comes from the national food industry, says David Roe of the Environmental 
Defense Fund. And now Roe and his allies are enjoying a major legal victory 
over that foe. 
The victory was well-deserved. The grocers' attempt to circumvent the law by 
creating a toll-free telephone information center clearly was not within the 
Proposition 65 requirement that products carry a "clear and reasonable" label 
if they contained significant amounts of suspected carcinogen or a substance 
likely to cause birth defects. It certainly was not within the spirit of the 
law, which is to give consumers the information they need to make rational 
decisions about the relative risk of the items they ingest or use in daily 
life. 
Shoppers calling the Ingredient Communication Council hot line could not get a 
list of all products coming under Proposition 65. Rather, they had to ask about 
each specific product and then be told whether it contained any suspect 
chemicals. 
What sort of warning would suffice? It is unclear, but a store might post a 
symbol in a prominent place and note that any item so marked was covered under 
Proposition 65. This would not be as unwieldy as Proposition 65 critics 
contend. All food and drug items certified by the federal government are exempt 
from labeling for the time being. That leaves only about 500 items, including 
some 300 brands of tobacco products and shoe polish, Roe said. 
And is Proposition 65 achieving some of the goals the sponsors sought? Yes 
indeed. Roe cited the fact that lead solder no longer is used in the 
manufacturer of food product cans that are in use in California. Proposition 65 
still is a very cumbersome law, but it can be reasonably effective if it is 
reasonably interpreted and reasonably enforced. 
