LATIN PRESIDENTS AGREE ON DISBANDING CONTRAS 
The presidents of five Central American countries, ignoring direct appeals from 
President Bush to go slow, agreed in principle Sunday to start dismantling the 
U.S.-backed Nicaraguan rebel army within weeks. 
"The presidents have reached a consensus that this plan should go forward right 
away," President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua said during a break in the talks in 
this Caribbean banana port. 
Other presidents withheld comment and kept meeting to complete details of an 
updated regional peace accord, but senior Costa Rican and Salvadoran aides 
confirmed the decision. 
Quick Start to Disarmament 
John Biehl, a close adviser to President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, 
said the process of disarming Nicaraguan rebel troops would start "almost 
immediately," as soon as a commission is set up by the United Nations and the 
Organization of American States and dispatched to the Contra bases in Honduras 
to supervise the plan. 
The disarmed rebels would be repatriated to Nicaragua if they wished or 
relocated in third countries. How long this process would take is still under 
discussion, Biehl said, but the issue is expected to be settled before today's 
scheduled conclusion of the three-day summit. 
The tentative agreement, if signed today, would apparently defeat a White House 
effort to keep the idled, 11,000-member Contra army intact in its bases until 
after Ortega's Sandinista government holds national elections next Feb. 25. 
It would also bring pressure on the U.S. Congress to divert what is left of the 
Contras' current $47.9 million non-lethal aid package to the exclusive purpose 
of assisting their return to civilian life. 
Bush telephoned Arias and presidents Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador, Vinicio 
Cerezo Arevalo of Guatemala and Jose Azcona Hoyo of Honduras last week to press 
his view that a large Contra army is the only way to hold Ortega to his promise 
that the election will be fair. 
But some Central American officials said that Bush's publicized appeal was 
probably aimed more at soothing his right-wing critics at home than swaying his 
allies in the region. 
"Nobody here was convinced that Mr. Bush wants to continue supporting the 
Contras," one official said. "Everybody knows that the Contras are finished as 
a fighting force." 
Rebel bands began fighting in Nicaragua a year after the Sandinistas seized 
power in a 1979 guerrilla uprising. They have received U.S. aid and direction 
since late 1981. 
The movement has been steadily weakened by peace accords signed at three 
previous regional summits over the past two years. Most rebel troops withdrew 
to Honduras last year after their U.S. military aid was cut off and a 
cease-fire pact signed with the Sandinistas in March, 1988, broke down over the 
issue of democratic reforms. 
Under the last summit accord, signed six months ago, the five presidents agreed 
to draft, at the current meeting, a plan for closing the Contra camps in 
exchange for free elections in Nicaragua nine months ahead of schedule. 
Dramatic Gesture 
With that trade-off topping the agenda here, Ortega strengthened his hand with 
a dramatic gesture in Nicaragua on the eve of the summit. 
In an all-night session with 22 anti-Sandinista parties that was televised live 
in his country, he achieved a landmark agreement on political and electoral 
reforms to ensure a fair campaign. 
Among Ortega's concessions were a suspension of military conscription during 
the six-month campaign period, abolition of Sandinista police powers to conduct 
arbitrary arrests and summary trials, and a series of technical reforms making 
it easier for opposition parties to monitor the February vote. 
Opposition politicians in Nicaragua hailed the accord as a vindication of the 
Contra cause and urged Central American leaders to adopt a plan to dissolve the 
insurgency. 
"The agreement reached in Nicaragua was absolutely decisive," Biehl said. "It 
cleared away 90% of the agenda here." 
Ortega arrived here Saturday and handed a copy of the 40-point agreement to 
Azcona, saying the electoral guarantees "remove all pretexts" for allowing 
armed Contras to remain on Honduran soil. 
Push for Deadline 
In the meeting here, Ortega pushed for a 90-day deadline for disarming the 
rebels and closing the camps. 
He won qualified support from Arias, who won the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize for 
starting the regional peace process and who helped set up the negotiations that 
produced the election reforms. 
Arias said that dismantling the Contras should be gradual "but not conditional 
on the Nicaraguan elections." 
At first it appeared that Azcona and Cristiani might block the peace plan. 
The Honduran leader said the electoral agreement in Nicaragua was "not enough." 
He offered his own plan for a lengthy inspection by international observers of 
political conditions in Nicaragua before disarmament could start. 
But that plan was largely abandoned, with Azcona's acquiescence, when other 
presidents failed to back it, Central American officials said. 
Impatient With Administration 
The United States has long depended on Honduras to carry U.S. views in Central 
America. But Azcona has become impatient over the Bush Administration's failure 
to come up with its own plan for getting the Contras out of his country, 
fearing that they will dissolve into uncontrolled armed bands. 
He was also reported to be uncertain whether Washington's withholding of $70 
million in promised economic aid was meant to force him to make an unpopular 
currency devaluation or to keep the Contras around -- either of which would 
damage his party's candidate in Honduras' scheduled November elections. 
"Azcona doesn't want to be remembered as the president who stuck Honduras with 
the Contras," an official of another Central American country said in 
explaining the unanimous backing for an early demobilization. 
Like Azcona, Arias will leave office early next year and was eager to see the 
Nicaraguan conflict settled by then. 
Cristiani's new right-wing government in El Salvador, however, had threatened 
to complicate a peace accord by insisting that leftist guerrillas in his 
country be disbanded in tandem with the Contras. 
But other presidents rejected any linkage in resolving the two very different 
guerrilla conflicts. They were reported near an agreement to call for peace 
talks in El Salvador -- the first in nearly two years -- as an unrelated item 
of the final summit accord. 
