THERE'S NO FREE RIDE ON A PRIVATE TRAIN; 
SOME STICKY QUESTIONS ABOUT HIGH-SPEED LINE BETWEEN LAS VEGAS AND ANAHEIM 
In its enthusiasm this week to flag through Bechtel Corp.'s proposal to build a 
high-speed magnetic levitation rail line between Las Vegas and Anaheim, the 
California-Nevada Super Speed Train Commission left some important questions 
unanswered. The answers will have fundamental implications for the region's 
overall transportation picture. 
One place where the buck will stop down the track is the Legislature, which 
must also approve the plan. Sacramento should remember one lesson of history: 
that the public has often been asked to bail out failed private railroads in 
the past. Legislators must be very clear about how much that risk exists in the 
bullet- train project. 
And how much confidence should anyone have in the German train that Bechtel 
wants to build when it still is in the test phase? Commission Executive 
Director Paul Taylor pointed out to the unanimous commission that several 
consultants had described the Bechtel proposal as vague, lacking even a 
description of the exact state of present technology. There was even confusion 
over the cost: Bechtel said $5 billion, while Taylor's report indicated as much 
as $7.8 billion. 
The biggest unknown remains the problem of public financing. Although Bechtel 
bills this as a private project, it wants rights of way along the route, and is 
already on record as saying that it might need a cash boost from benefit 
assessment districts to help cover construction costs and loan interest. So 
just how public will this private train be? 
Then there's the Palmdale-Los Angeles International Airport line, which is 
another private venture that is much clearer about its intention to tap into 
the public coffers. The Perini Corp. has indicated that it would need a public 
cash subsidy of up to $100 million a year, and the state is being asked to give 
initial approval next month to that proposal. 
One thing to watch is how the prospect of building one train might be used to 
advocate public expenditures to build another. Palmdale already is envisioned 
by Bechtel as a possible spur from the Anaheim-Las Vegas line. It wouldn't be 
too hard to argue that with some public assistance, we could have this 
elaborate network serving many points. Each step in the approval process for 
various "private" proposals could inch the public along towards a costly 
overall involvement and subsidy. 
The dream of millions of tourists riding a bullet train between Anaheim and Las 
Vegas is fine for the entrepreneurs. But let them pay for it, and let the 
public beware. 
