ROBINSON: NO SLATER TRADE SET; 
FOOTBALL: RAMS' CAPTAIN IS STAYING OUT OF TRAINING CAMP IN ATTEMPT TO FORCE 
CONTRACT RENEGOTIATION. 
Ram tackle Jackie Slater, who is in the 10th day of his holdout in an effort to 
get his contract renegotiated, reportedly has asked the Rams to trade him. 
The 14-year veteran, who is a six-time Pro Bowl selection and a team captain, 
was scheduled to make a reported $550,000 this season. He is being fined the 
NFL maximum of $1,500 a day for failing to report. 
"We've had conversations, but if he's demanded to be traded, he's demanded it 
to someone else," Coach John Robinson said, responding to an article in the 
Orange County Register that quoted Slater as saying he had asked Ram management 
to trade him last Monday. 
"Jackie has a dispute and it's in the best interests of everyone if we work it 
out," Robinson said. "And that's all I have to say about it." 
Slater, 36, ranks fifth on the Rams' all-time list for games played and has 
said he wants to play two more seasons. 
Slater, who acts as his own agent, could not be reached for comment Friday. 
The Rams practiced at UC Irvine Friday morning and then finished packing for 
today's flight to Berlin, where they will play an exhibition game against the 
Kansas City Chiefs next Saturday. 
Robinson said the workout marked the end of the "brutal phase" of training camp 
and indicated that he was pleased with the team's progress. 
"This has been the time when we like to take the team as close to the edge of 
exhaustion and collapse as you can, and I think we've done that," Robinson 
said. "I feel good about it." 
Ram Notes 
Neal Allen, Damone Johnson's agent, said that the Rams don't seem to be in a 
hurry to sign the veteran tight end. "They made their offer last Thursday and 
we haven't talked since," Allen said. "I assume we'll resume negotiations after 
the Berlin trip. We'll get it done, it's just a matter of time." It could be a 
long time. The Rams offered a two-year deal worth $575,000. Allen says Johnson 
wants $1.1 million for two years. 
