BONUS PAY FOR PRINCIPALS TO GET TAX HIKE ALLEGED; 
ELECTION: INVESTIGATORS SAY CAPISTRANO TRUSTEES OKD A SECRET INCENTIVE PLAN TO 
BUILD UP VOTE ON MEASURE A. 
The Capistrano Unified School District approved a secret "bonus incentive plan" 
for its school principals who could produce in their areas the necessary 
two-thirds vote needed to approve a special tax, county prosecutors alleged in 
court Friday. 
Prosecutors also produced documents showing that district officials kept the 
bonus plan hidden from them during an investigation last year into possible 
misuse of public funds in promoting Measure A, the May, 1989, districtwide 
ballot initiative. However, no charges have been filed in the case. 
Measure A, which would have raised property taxes for new school construction, 
failed to get the required two-thirds vote it needed for passage, despite heavy 
political backing from the school district. The vote tally was 52.2% in favor 
to 47.8% opposed. 
Superior Court Judge Richard L. Weatherspoon on Friday ordered the Capistrano 
district to turn over to prosecutors all files related to its closed-door 
sessions for the first half of 1989. The judge also denied a request from the 
school district's attorneys that all court records on the case be sealed from 
public view "because of the sensitive nature of the material." 
The records show that in September, 1989, district officials turned over to 
county prosecutors minutes of the March 6, 1989, closed-door session in which a 
consultant was hired for the Measure A special tax election. But it was not 
until February, 1990, after a persistent inquiry from Deputy Dist. Atty. 
Wallace J. Wade and his investigators, that a new set of minutes was sent to 
prosecutors. 
The new set of minutes included the bonus payment plan, which was not detailed 
in minutes previously released to prosecutors. Wade said his office is 
investigating the discrepancy between the two documents. 
The Capistrano district, the fifth largest in the county, covers San Juan 
Capistrano, Capistrano Beach, Mission Viejo, Laguna Niguel, San Clemente and 
Dana Point. 
Wade said his office is not yet prepared to say whether the bonus plan was 
illegal. But he cited a state Education Code statute that prohibits "change in 
compensation" to school employees for purposes of influencing the outcome of an 
election. 
"There is a general rule (in the state Education Code) that public funds should 
not be used for political purposes," Wade said. "When we get a set of minutes 
that show one thing and a new set of minutes five months later showing bonuses 
we had not been told about, it certainly makes us want to take a hard look at 
what's going on." 
Annette B. Gude, president of the district's Board of Trustees, said Friday 
that the trustees had been advised by lawyers that the bonus plan was legal. 
"We were told (the principals) could get involved because it was something to 
benefit the schools," said Gude, who was not the board president at the time 
the bonus plan was approved. 
According to court documents, the plan was approved at a closed-door session in 
which neither the minutes nor the votes taken were made public. Gude said the 
agenda for the closed session was cleared by district lawyers prior to the 
meeting. 
Wade disagreed in court papers. "In the opinion of the district attorney's 
office, the school board met on at least (these) closed-door-session items 
improperly," he wrote. 
District papers turned over to prosecutors also showed that school district 
Supt. Jerome R. Thornsley wrote to the trustees at the time: "If the board 
approves (the incentives), there would be strong admonishment (to the 
principals) not to make it a matter of public record." 
Thornsley also sought approval from the trustees to tell the school principals 
"that should the incentive-pay issue become public and cause any problem prior 
to the election, the follow-through would simply not take place (final board 
approval of the plan)," according to the court documents. 
He added, "This would put the responsibility on each principal to keep the 
matter confidential." 
Thornsley was unavailable Friday for comment. 
Wade said his office began investigating the election after some citizens 
complained about school officials pressuring them to vote yes on Measure A. 
Gude said some principals did receive bonuses, but only for encouraging parents 
to vote in the election. 
"Some principals worked very hard and put in extra time, and we felt they 
needed to be rewarded," Gude said. "The stress was: It's important for you to 
go out and vote." Gude denied that principals were instructed to urge parents 
to vote yes. 
However, the school district's minutes from a March 6 closed-door session state 
that the trustees voted "unanimously to authorize the superintendent to 
recommend (principals) for incentive stipends during 1989 as a result of (them) 
achieving 66 2/3 'yes' votes in their areas." 
Although the minutes do not specify the amount of the bonuses, district 
documents reveal that Thornsley recommended to the trustees that they either 
pay 5% of a principal's annual salary or a flat fee of $2,500. Salaries of 
school principals countywide last year ranged from $38,300 to $65,400, 
according to the County Department of Education. 
Wade said his investigation will try to determine whether the bonuses and fees 
paid to a consulting firm hired to promote the measure were legal. 
Investigators also will look into possible civil or criminal violations under 
the state's Ralph M. Brown Act, which requires that trustees make public the 
results of voting held in closed session. 
"We aren't saying at this point that anyone has done anything criminally 
wrong," Wade said. "It certainly appears there were some kind of violations of 
the Brown Act. But we're still investigating." 
Michael McShane, a Sacramento attorney hired to represent the district, accused 
Wade in court papers of "pestering" the district for 17 months "in hopes of 
finding some evidence to support his theories." McShane called Wade's inquiry 
"a fishing expedition" and said there was no wrongdoing by district officials. 
District President Gude said Friday that "all of this is just driving us up the 
wall. So far, they haven't charged us with anything. We keep saying, 'If you've 
got something, charge us with it.' " 
Sheila Benecke, chairwoman of a political action committee formed to campaign 
for Measure A, said the PAC was formed because she understood that school 
employees could not work for the measure during regular working hours. But in 
the off-hours, she said, principals "have the right . . . to encourage people 
to vote yes." 
However, the issue is not the principals' right to campaign, Wade said. The 
issue is whether the trustees had the right to spend public money to get them 
to do it. 
Wade said that his investigation would not be taking so long had the district 
cooperated in the beginning. He pointed out in court papers that for months 
Thornsley and the district trustees refused to even be questioned on the issue. 
In June, the school district's lawyers informed Wade that they would not 
voluntarily turn over to his office the minutes and other memos related to 
closed-door sessions that he requested. Wade, in turn, sought a court order for 
those documents Friday. 
While the bonuses may draw the most attention, the district attorney's 
investigation goes to the general question of whether the district should have 
campaigned for the passage of Measure A. 
In a letter to the state Fair Political Practices Commission, Thornsley 
insisted that the literature and other district efforts were only designed to 
get out the vote, not support a 'yes' vote. 
But Wade said the literature contradicts that intention. He noted that the FPPC 
wrote back to Thornsley saying that most of the district's money spent on the 
election should have been reported as political funds, which the district then 
filed. 
