FANCIFUL TO BELIEVE THE U.N. MIGHT HELP?; 
IN THIS VERY RISKY ATMOSPHERE, ANYTHING IS WORTH TRYING 
It is easy to underestimate the United Nations, and until very recently it was 
quite safe to do so. More often than not, this underperforming world 
bureaucracy has been a source of infuriation rather than inspiration. If the UN 
has achieved a level of esteem in the eyes of many Americans not much higher 
than, say, a failed savings and loan, it has done so through virtue of its own 
ineptitude. 
Few problems could pass through its portals without coming out the other side 
virtually unchanged and unimproved. Even the Office of U.N. secretary general, 
which in the hands of a courageous man like Dag Hammarskjold had been shown to 
have considerable potential, lost its luster under the administrations of 
smaller-than-life figures like U Thant and Kurt Waldheim -- who reminded the 
world anew of his limitations when he surfaced this weekend in the Iraq crisis. 
Predictably, Waldheim cut a deal for Austrian hostages with Saddam Hussein. 
But the winds of change may be sweeping over the U.N., too, what with the 
waning of 45 years of polarization between Moscow and Washington. The world 
body has been on a bit of a roll lately -- with the Security Council voting to 
approve the use of minimum force to back up U.N.-approved sanctions against 
Iraq and with the Middle East peace mission planned for later this week by 
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar. 
THE MISSION: Even if its odds of success are at best 1,000-to-1, this is a 
mission that deserves to have been launched -- and which, if there is any 
justice, needs desperately to succeed. For the risks of escalation in an armed 
clash between the forces in the Persian Gulf are great. That many innocent 
Iraqis, Kuwaitis and Western hostages -- not to mention soldiers -- would be 
killed is a given. What's uncertain is where a conflagration would stop: the 
region, sometimes ferociously anti-American, not to mention anti-Israel, is a 
powder keg. 
The support of the American people for the defense of Saudi Arabia is 
impressive. So is the world consensus against Hussein. President Bush on Monday 
was right to say that "there is no flexibility on Iraq getting out of Kuwait." 
But that goal is best achieved through world pressure -- diplomatic and 
economic -- as well as the multinational military buildup. 
THE SETTLEMENT: The contours of a negotiated settlement aren't that hard to 
envision. While it was appropriate for President Bush at this stage to insist 
that "there is no room for compromise or negotiation" on an Iraqi withdrawal, 
the timetable for, and the modalities of, a retreat by Hussein's army to Iraqi 
territory are appropriate issues for diplomacy. So is the future shape of the 
government of Kuwait. And it is not inconceivable that an end to the embargo 
and security guarantees might be given Baghdad in return for disarmament of its 
chemical-weapons arsenal and other concessions. 
But, as the military buildup on both sides continues, power shifts -- as 
inevitable as sand falling through an hourglass -- to the warriors. And it's 
possible that Saddam Hussein, caught in the eerie psychosis of the tyrant who 
has gone too far out on the limb of ambition and ego, is incapable of 
recognizing what is best for Iraq. 
THE HOPE: The world has needed a more active peacekeeping role from the 
heretofore low-profile secretary general, and now there's a chance it will get 
one. Better late than never. But as Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev told the 
Egyptian foreign minister Monday, "The countdown is quickening." Is Saddam 
Hussein beyond talking to? Maybe. But it is just possible that a man who almost 
overnight upended an eight-year-war with Iran may also be a man who can quickly 
fold his hand in a crisis but 26 days old. Perez de Cuellar should stay in the 
Middle East as long as it takes to find out if Saddam will listen to reason. 
