BASE HELPS THOSE LEFT IN WAKE OF MIDEAST CRISIS 
Amid the sudden mobilization for the Middle East crisis, Camp Pendleton is 
working swiftly to help military families left behind to cope with their 
emotional and financial problems. 
A network of support groups has been set up for wives of Marines, making sure 
no families go without enough food, and striving to help children understand 
why their father has abruptly left. 
A special workbook for children, "Daddy's Days Away," featuring a 
camouflage-colored cover, is being circulated. The book explains that the 
father is away defending the country and urges children to talk about their 
feelings. 
Dealing with emotions is one of the main purposes of support groups being 
created by the base's Family Service Center. The Armed Services YMCA has 
already set up a family center on base for wives anxious to hear of their 
husbands' whereabouts and safety. 
Since Marines usually know six months in advance about a normal deployment, the 
quick departure of Marines late last week -- the exact number of troops sent to 
the Middle East hasn't been disclosed -- stunned many families. 
"There are some high emotions there," said Dianne Riddick, deployment 
coordinator for the Family Service Center. Still, she's impressed with how 
strong Marine wives are in dealing with their husbands' potentially dangerous 
mission. 
"I really encourage them to try not to worry too much, they can't change the 
situation," she said. 
But besides helping wives cope with anxiety and the pressure of running a 
household alone, the Family Service Center, the Red Cross and the Navy Relief 
Society are also offering assistance for a variety of practical problems. 
Some families, especially those of lower enlisted men, are suffering financial 
hardships. Often, the monthly food allowance for Marines is suspended when they 
go on campaign, and although the money is intended for the Marine, the funds 
are typically used to help feed dependents. 
Roxann Bronson of the Navy Relief Society, said, "We definitely will not allow 
anybody to go hungry." The society offers bags of food plus grants and 
no-interest loans to struggling families. 
A 73-page survival booklet given out by the Center offers wives advice on 
everything from where to find activities, how to place an overseas telephone 
call and how to keep a household budget. 
It also outlines the four basic emotional stages of separation -- protest 
against the deployment, despair, detachment, and the return adjustment. 
Camp Pendleton's deployment program is five years old. Riddick wishes something 
like it existed back during the Vietnam War, when her husband served in the 
military. 
"When Walt went to Vietnam, there was nothing," she said. 
