$71-MILLION RESTITUTION SET IN FRAUD CASE 
A Los Angeles federal court judge Monday imposed a 15-year prison sentence on 
David A. Feldman of Palos Verdes, convicted of a massive bank fraud, and 
ordered him to pay $70.7 million in restitution to Bank of America. 
Federal prosecutors said they believed that the restitution award is the 
largest imposed in a bank fraud case. It was unclear, however, whether Feldman 
has the resources to make restitution. 
U.S. District Judge Dickran M. Tevrizian imposed the stiff sentence on Feldman, 
50, who was convicted of three counts of felony mail fraud in June. 
The judge issued stinging criticism of Feldman, who graduated near the top of 
his class at West Point. "The only thing he has demonstrated to me is that he 
has no conscience," Tevrizian said. 
Feldman and two others were indicted in May, 1989, in connection with a scheme 
to sell more than $144 million in mortgage loans to 20 banks and savings and 
loans, all of which operate outside California. Feldman controlled National 
Mortgage Equity Corp., which allegedly made false representations and concealed 
material facts in selling mortgage-backed securities to financial institutions. 
Feldman assured financial institutions their investments were protected against 
defaults in various ways, including independent underwriting of borrowers' 
ability to pay and of the value of the real property securing the loans. 
However, Feldman and his co-defendants concealed the fact that there was no 
independent underwriting because the brokers, insurance firms and borrowers all 
were controlled by the same persons. 
Feldman, according to court documents, diverted millions in investor funds 
through fictitious borrowers to a bonding firm, Glacier General Assurance, to 
enable it to pay off its obligations on prior defaulted loans. 
Feldman also used NMEC investors' money to purchase apartment complexes in 
Houston for a firm owned by co-defendant Kent B. Rogers of Huntington Beach. 
Prosecutors charged that Feldman gave Rogers $24 million of investors' money 
for construction loans without placing controls on Rogers' use of the funds to 
refurbish and convert the Texas apartments to condominiums. Rogers pleaded 
guilty and awaits sentencing. 
Most investors' losses were covered by Bank of America, which acted as an 
escrow agent and trustee for all but three of the mortgage pools, according to 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Leslie A. Swain and California Deputy Atty. Gen. Sharon 
McCaslin. The bank has sought to recover its losses through civil litigation. 
Bank senior counsel John C. Fauvre estimated the losses at $117.7 million. 
Tevrizian denied Feldman bail pending appeal. Prosecutors said he will spend 
the next 60 days at Metropolitan Detention Center in downtown Los Angeles and 
then be assigned to another prison. Prosecutors recommended that prison 
officials keep an especially close watch on Feldman, noting that he perpetrated 
some of his crimes while serving a prison term for an earlier fraud conviction. 
