REGIONAL REPORT; 
OIL FIELD RESURRECTION; 
ENERGY: THE MIDEAST CRISIS PRESENTS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SMALLER, INDEPENDENT 
FIRMS TO REGAIN SHARE. MANY ONCE-CAPPED OPERATIONS ARE PUMPING AGAIN. 
The Persian Gulf tension that catapulted oil prices into orbit has yet to send 
drills grinding into the California earth, but oil producers are thinking about 
renewed drilling and are resurrecting wells idled by a plunge in crude oil 
prices five years ago. 
The price of California crude, a thick grade that requires more refining and in 
normal times fetches $5 to $9 a barrel less than Texas crude, has more than 
doubled since the beginning of August. However, California producers are 
awaiting signs that the higher prices will be sustained before committing new 
dollars to tapping the state's tar-like reserves. 
"There is considerable uncertainty among producers about whether prices will 
remain at the current levels," said Chris Hall, president of Drilling &amp; 
Production Co., a Torrance company with about 70 active wells. "Having 
exhausted much of their capital reserve over the last five years, companies 
have to be reasonably certain current price levels will continue before they 
will risk any capital investment." 
Walloped by a steep slide in oil prices in 1985 and 1986, producers say prices 
must hover around today's levels for three to six months before they renew 
large-scale drilling, exploration and advanced recovery techniques. 
A 42-gallon barrel from the Kern River field in the San Joaquin Valley, 
California's most prolific reserve and one of the nation's five largest, sold 
for about $22 last week, compared to $9 before Iraq overran Kuwait. 
"It's likened to you getting a 10% raise for two weeks," said Carol Currie, 
spokeswoman for the California Independent Petroleum Assn. in Yorba Linda. "Are 
you going to run out and buy a swimming pool?" 
Another problem is that lenders are acting cautious. Banks that financed oil 
exploration and production 10 or 15 years ago were badly burned when prices 
fell in the 1980s. They do not appear eager to commit themselves again. 
But producers are scrambling to revive wells that fell victim to California 
crude prices, which plummeted from about $21 a barrel in 1985 to as low as $7 a 
barrel in 1986. Prices had peaked at $26 a barrel in 1981. 
Facing recovery costs of $8 to $10 a barrel, oil producers idled marginal 
wells, abandoned more expensive secondary recovery methods using water and 
steam, and shelved exploration plans. Many slashed payrolls and became more 
familiar with red ink than black crude. 
"Producers have been in the survival mode for the last five years," said Hall, 
who described the period as "hell." 
Hall, whose company draws about 300 barrels a day of crude from Kern County 
reserves, closed about a sixth of his wells after prices skidded in 1985-86. He 
cut wages 20% and slashed staff by about a third. 
The ill effects reverberated through the oil industry of California, which 
produces about a sixth of the crude pumped in the United States and is the 
fourth-largest oil-producing state. 
After peaking in 1985 at around 1.15 million barrels a day, the state's 
production fell sharply in subsequent years, sliding to about 1 million barrels 
a day last year. By March, the most recent month for which figures are 
available, California production had fallen to about 968,000 barrels daily. 
As production declined, the number of idled wells increased. By March, more 
than 40% of the state's 70,000-plus wells sat idle, up from about 30% in 1985. 
But the surge in prices, if lasting, could reverse the decline, observers said. 
And the independent producers, more agile than integrated giants such as 
Chevron or Shell Oil, probably will benefit first as they beat larger 
competitors to the oil fields. 
"We can actually operate a little more economically than the majors, and 
decisions are made with fewer people," explained Terry Smith, general manager 
of Tidelands Oil Production Co. in Long Beach. "We have morning staff meetings 
when we can plan the day's activities or the following day's activities and 
start work the next day." 
By last week, Tidelands, an independent company that produces about 10,000 
barrels a day -- mostly from the Long Beach Harbor area -- had scrambled to 
restart 10 wells and was preparing about eight more. Still, about 30% of its 
640 wells were inactive, Smith said. 
Larger companies, although restricted by the need for longer-range planning, 
had also reacted by last week. Chevron, California's second-largest producer, 
said it will spend $20 million by year-end to drill new wells and update others 
in its California fields. The effort, designed after the Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait on Aug. 2, is part of a $100-million nationwide program to boost 
production. 
Prospects of a quick recovery for independents and majors, however, are dimmed 
by an infrastructure already straining under renewed demand. After atrophying 
for the past five years, it can't provide enough drilling equipment or revive 
shut-down wells fast enough. 
"You don't just all of a sudden start throwing oil rigs out there," a Chevron 
spokesman said. 
Experienced oil workers also are scarce. 
"We've been trying to hire, but there are just no qualified people," said 
Tideland's Smith, whose company pared its payroll from 350 employees in 1985 to 
250 today. "We would like to be running three more crews on our rigs, but we 
cannot find qualified people to fill the positions." 
Sustained high oil prices could prove a savior for independents such as 
Tideland, which have lost chunks of market share to the majors in the past 
decade. Although the big, integrated companies could subsidize lagging 
production during a downturn with everything from refining jet fuel to selling 
candy bars at service stations, the independents have been captive to depressed 
well prices. 
That has left the independents providing less than 20% of the state's 
production, down from about a third in 1981. But the surge in oil prices is 
likely to help the smaller companies, at least in the short term. 
"For a long time, a lot of our producers were either breaking even or in the 
red," said Currie, the spokeswoman for California independents. "The increase 
in prices is allowing them to pay their bills." 
CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCTION 
Average daily production, in thousands of 42-gallon barrels 
August average: 967,867 
Source: Conservation Committee of California Oil Procueders 
CALIFORNIA CRUDE OIL PRICES, Los Angeles Times 
Price of Midway Sunset crude oil in dollars per 42-gallon barrel 
August average: $16,226 
Source: Drilling &amp; Production Co. 
