DEAL MAKERS HUDDLE TO SALVAGE DEVELOPMENTS; 
CULVER CITY: AT STAKE ARE THE CONTROVERSIAL MARINA PLACE MALL AND THE CHANNEL 
GATEWAY RESIDENTIAL AND OFFICE PROJECT. THEY ARE WORTH HALF A BILLION DOLLARS. 
A back-room deal is in the works to settle a bitter border battle between 
Culver City and Los Angeles that has threatened to stop the massive Marina 
Place shopping mall and the Channel Gateway developments dead in their tracks. 
At stake in the border fight is more than half a billion dollars worth of real 
estate development that could transform the look and feel of Venice 
neighborhoods and worsen traffic on congested Lincoln Boulevard. 
The package deal, being negotiated out of public view by developers of both 
projects and representatives of both cities, is aimed at avoiding a courtroom 
confrontation that could tie up the two developments for years. 
According to a typewritten outline of the possible settlement, it would provide 
for developers of the $160-million Marina Place mall, proposed for a site at 
Culver City's western tip, to eliminate a traffic-generating six-screen theater 
complex, to reduce the number of liquor licenses, to pay for additional street 
and traffic signal improvements, and to finance a beach shuttle to reduce 
prospects for gridlock on neighboring streets. 
But none of those concessions would take place unless the city of Los Angeles 
agrees to to drop a lawsuit against the shopping center project and Culver City 
promises not to file suit against the $400-million Channel Gateway residential 
and office project. 
The settlement talks, which negotiators say are not final, dramatically 
illustrate the steadfast determination of developers to move ahead with their 
projects before the remaining traffic capacity in the Venice-Marina del Rey 
area is used up. 
One important player was apparently not a party to the negotiations: Los 
Angeles City Councilwoman Ruth Galanter, who represents the Los Angeles 
neighborhoods that virtually surround the Marina Place site and whose strident 
opposition to the 1-million-square-foot project prompted Los Angeles' decision 
to file suit to block its construction. 
Galanter said in an interview Wednesday that the outline of a settlement is 
unacceptable to her. 
"A regional shopping center is not what the Westside needs, particularly close 
to Lincoln Boulevard and to the beach," Galanter said. "It's the wrong land use 
in the wrong place. . . . I think it's a bad idea and will continue to object 
to it." 
Although she is a strong supporter of the Channel Gateway project and a key 
participant in winning its approval at the city and state levels, Galanter 
claimed not to know that settlement talks were under way between the developers 
and the two cities. 
In fact, Galanter said she had not seen the outline of the settlement until she 
was given a copy Tuesday by Los Angeles City Council President John Ferraro. 
The push for negotiations came from politically well-connected Los Angeles 
developer Jerome Snyder, whose Channel Gateway project was likely to become the 
next pawn in the chess match between cities. 
"I put this package together and I negotiated it," Snyder said in a telephone 
interview Wednesday while on vacation in France. 
Although delays are costly on any large project, Snyder said he feels added 
urgency with respect to Channel Gateway because the project is designed to 
contain 544 apartment units financed by $67 million in tax-exempt bonds. The 
bond financing, made available because Snyder has agreed to set aside 20% of 
the apartments for rental to low-income tenants, is contingent on the 
apartments being completed by August, 1992, a deadline that would be all but 
impossible to meet if Culver City sues to block the project. 
Only days after the California Coastal Commission granted final approval of the 
project earlier this month, bulldozers and earthmovers began working to ready 
the 16-acre site on Lincoln Boulevard for construction crews. In addition to 
the apartments, the development at the western end of the Marina Expressway 
also includes 512 luxury condominiums in two 16-story high-rises, a 
300,000-square-foot office tower and parking for 3,460 cars. 
Snyder said he began searching for a solution to the legal brinkmanship after a 
meeting in June in Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley's office in which Culver City 
Councilman Paul Jacobs warned that Channel Gateway would be held hostage if Los 
Angeles failed to drop its lawsuit against Marina Place. 
For weeks, Snyder said he has been working behind the scenes, talking to Los 
Angeles and Culver City officials, and representatives of Melvin Simon &amp; 
Associates, who are the developers of the Marina Place project along with the 
Prudential Insurance Co. of America. 
Ironically, Snyder said it was Galanter who provided the framework of the 
settlement. 
"All the objections to the project, I heard from her, chapter and verse -- the 
theaters, traffic mitigation, liquor licenses, the height of the buildings," 
Snyder said. "She also complained to me that they were not doing anything for 
low-cost housing." 
Snyder said he took Galanter's objections to Melvin Simon. He recalled that 
Simon's representatives asked him, "What the hell can we do to get this crazy 
woman off our back?" Snyder said he replied, "Try being a goddamn responsible 
developer." 
Although his account of the wording of the conversation differed, Barry 
Lindsey, senior vice president of Melvin Simon &amp; Associates, confirmed 
Wednesday that the agreement is "something we worked out jointly with Jerry 
Snyder." 
In accord with Galanter's demands, the draft calls for major changes in Marina 
Place: eliminating the movie theaters entirely, reducing to 12 from 16 the 
number of liquor licenses and spending an additional $1 million in improvements 
to ease traffic congestion, including the establishment of a shuttle bus for 
use in the Venice and Marina del Rey areas. The pact also includes $210,000 to 
landscape Venice and Washington boulevards from Lincoln Boulevard to the beach. 
"If that's what it's going to take, we can take that sacrifice," Lindsey said. 
"We have an investment in a piece of property. We're not going to go away. . . 
. We would like to start building." 
Both Snyder and Lindsey say they do not know where the deal stands, but they 
indicated that the disclosure of the proposed terms this week through 
distribution of the typewritten outline had muddied the picture considerably. 
Snyder said he wants Bradley -- who earlier this year took part in a protest 
demonstration at the Marina Place site -- to take the lead on settling the 
conflict. 
"This is something I wanted to see the mayor carry," Snyder said. "I've kept 
him abreast of what's going on from the very beginning." 
A spokesman for Bradley said Wednesday that the mayor has not endorsed the 
plan. 
However, Galanter's support is deemed crucial. Snyder said he doubts that the 
Los Angeles City Council would "overrule Ruth in her own district." 
Snyder said he "kept her out of it" during the negotiations "so she could say 
she didn't know anything about it. . . . I didn't want her to be in the middle 
of it." 
He said his hope is to "get her on board by getting her constituents to agree 
it's a good deal." 
Of particular concern in this regard is a group of Venice community activists 
who have filed their own suit against Marina Place. 
Debra Bowen, attorney for the community group, expressed little enthusiasm for 
the proposed compromise in an interview this week. If anything, she said, the 
private deal will probably stiffen the Venice community's resolve to fight the 
shopping mall in their back yards. 
"It will generate a tremendous amount of anger, and people tend to act when 
they are angry," Bowen said. 
BACKGROUND 
Intense development pressure along Lincoln Boulevard near Marina del Rey has 
sparked a race between Los Angeles and Culver City to approve large-scale 
projects in the congested area before the boulevard's remaining capacity to 
handle traffic there is gone. When Culver City approved plans early this year 
for Marina Place, a large shopping mall at the city's western tip that 
threatened to inundate adjoining neighborhoods with traffic and air pollution, 
Los Angeles sued to stop construction. In retaliation, Culver City has 
threatened a suit to stymie Channel Gateway, a major high-rise development 
three blocks away. Faced with the prospect of legal gridlock that could hold up 
both projects for years, the developers are trying to negotiate a compromise. 
