AIDS GROUPS URGE FIRM TO LOWER AZT PRICE 
Charging that the stratospheric cost of the drug AZT "must be measured not only 
in dollars but in lives," a broad coalition of AIDS organizations Wednesday 
called on manufacturer Burroughs Wellcome Co. to substantially lower the drug's 
price. 
The organizations said the urgency of their call was underscored by two 
factors: the expiration of an emergency federal subsidy program for AZT at the 
end of September and the release of data earlier this month confirming the 
efficacy of AZT in delaying progression of the human immunodeficiency virus in 
hundreds of thousands of people with no symptoms or early symptoms of AIDS. 
AZT, whose trade name is Retrovir, costs $8,000 to $10,000 per year for dosage 
recommended for full-blown AIDS, making it one of the most expensive 
prescription drugs ever produced. Even the lower dosage that was shown to be 
effective in cases of early HIV infection costs $3,500 to $4,000 a year. 
The call for lower prices was initiated by San Francisco-based Project Inform 
co-founder Martin Delaney and was joined by 16 groups, ranging from the 
mainstream American Foundation for AIDS Research to the militant AIDS Coalition 
to Unleash Power. 
The new evidence that AZT can delay the development of full-blown AIDS "offers 
dramatic promise of buying precious time for the majority of those infected 
with HIV," the joint statement said. But the promise would be hollow if the 
drug's high cost "limits it use among the needy and discourages support by 
third-party payers." 
Specifically, the groups argued, a substantial cut in the drug's price will be 
necessary if Congress is to be persuaded to authorize and fund continued 
subsidies of the drug. 
"We're not questioning Burroughs Wellcome's right to a reasonable profit," said 
Dr. Neil Schram, a Los Angeles physician who is head of the American Assn. of 
Physicians for Human Rights AIDS Task Force. "But there is a difference between 
a reasonable profit and an unconscionable profit." 
Wednesday's statement was the third time in a week that Burroughs has come in 
for sharp criticism for its pricing of the life-extending therapy, which is the 
only antiviral drug for HIV approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Last Thursday, in an unusual bit of jawboning, National Institutes of Health 
AIDS research chief Dr. Anthony S. Fauci urged the physicians at the group's 
convention in San Francisco to apply "pressure" to bring the cost of the drug 
down. On Monday, the New York Times printed a sharply worded editorial titled 
"AZT's Inhuman Cost." 
Burroughs, a subsidiary of a British firm that is 75% owned by a charitable 
foundation, cut the price of AZT by 20% in December of 1987 but since then has 
consistently defended its price. 
"The price of our marketed products like Retrovir pays for current and future 
research and development," said spokeswoman Kathy Bartlett in a telephone 
interview from the company's Research Triangle, N.C., headquarters. 
Still, she added, "we review the prices of all our products on an ongoing 
basis." AZT confronts the company "with a number of unknowns," Bartlett said. 
"It's very unclear how many new patients may start taking the drug as a result 
of the new data." 
She also noted that the manufacture of AZT is "a difficult and multi-step 
process that takes place over a period of months." 
$200 Million in Sales 
Burroughs' worldwide sales of AZT jumped to more than $200 million in the 
fiscal year that ends today, from $159 million in fiscal 1988. The brokerage 
firm of Wertheim Schroder predicts that this will climb to $1 billion by 1992, 
even assuming a 20% price cut and lower doses. 
Burroughs does not make available profits on individual drugs, although 
securities analysts estimate that Burroughs' gross profit margin on AZT -- its 
profit before marketing, research, and administrative expenses -- is about 80%. 
"The next move will be a 20% price cut," predicted Samuel D. Isaly, a partner 
in the New York health care consulting firm of Mehta &amp; Isaly. "It is in 
their financial and economic interest to lower the price," he added, since a 
lower price would spur demand for the drug. 
Isaly noted that maintenance therapy for other chronic conditions, such as 
arthritis or high blood pressure, costs consumers between $500 and $1,000 a 
year. 
The AIDS organizations, in their statement, said a lower price for AZT "is not 
only morally appropriate but economically justified." They noted that Burroughs 
initially cited its need to quickly recoup its investment on AZT in case a 
better antiviral came along and killed the market for the drug. 
"Three years later, this has not occurred," the statement said, and new 
antivirals for use against HIV are at least a year away from marketing 
approval. 
