ABORTION LAW SPLIT IMPERILS GERMAN TALKS; 
REUNIFICATION: IN THE EAST, THE PROCEDURE IS AVAILABLE ON DEMAND EARLY IN 
PREGNANCY. BONN APPLIES RESTRICTIONS. 
Differences on the sensitive issue of abortion law in united Germany threatened 
Monday to torpedo negotiations on a treaty setting out the political conditions 
for unification, which is scheduled for Oct. 3. 
Because any agreement at this stage is likely to be only temporary, these 
differences, mainly in West Germany, mean that abortion will almost certainly 
be one of the hotly debated moral issues in the post-unity years. 
Other differences are still to be resolved in the treaty talks, but the 
abortion issue is the most problematic, according to some of the people 
involved. 
After a marathon session broke up early Monday, leaders of the major West 
German parties agreed to meet again today. They hope to complete the 
negotiations by the end of the week. 
The problem centers on how to reconcile East Germany's liberal law, under which 
abortion is provided on demand in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, with the 
West German law, which permits abortions only on limited social and medical 
grounds. 
All parties agree that both laws should remain in force, at least for a time, 
but they disagree sharply on how. 
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats, under the influence 
of the Protestant and Roman Catholic churches, wants the law applied on the 
basis of a woman's legal residence, and many West German women believe this to 
be highly discriminatory. 
They say that a woman in Hamburg, in what is now West Germany, who went to 
Dresden, in what is now East Germany, for an abortion could be subject to 
criminal prosecution when she got home, although a woman living in Dresden 
could have an abortion legally. 
Christian Democrats admit that there are contradictions in their stand but 
argue that any other compromise would dilute the strength of the law as it 
applies in what is now West Germany. 
West German Social Democrats, who are the main opposition party, take a harsh 
view of the Christian Democratic position. 
The Social Democrats propose that both laws continue to stand in the regions 
where they now apply, regardless of where an abortion patient lives. 
"This is what the majority of women want, it is what the majority in the (West 
German) Bundestag want, it is what a majority in the (East German) Volkskammer 
want," said Oskar Lafontaine, the Social Democrats' candidate for chancellor. 
The Social Democrats have said they will veto the unity treaty if Kohl insists 
on including the residence rule. 
The Christian Democrats have drawn no such line. 
Failure to approve the treaty would not stop unification, but it would make the 
process messy. Instead of a formal, bilateral accord on the conditions for 
merger, there would be a hastily drawn West German law on such matters as 
finance, education and property. 
Such a bill would need only a simple majority, but it would add to the 
impression that the unification process has become more of a West German 
takeover. 
The East Germans want to keep their liberal abortion law. 
There is widespread agreement that a united Germany needs a complete overhaul 
of the abortion legislation. 
In East Germany, abortion on demand has become commonplace, but the question of 
health risk has been raised. About 73,000 abortions were performed last year, 
in a country of 16 million people. 
In West Germany, a country with four times as many people, the number of legal 
abortions was roughly the same. 
