BOOKS OFFER A GLIMPSE OF MEDIEVAL LIFE; 
ART: THE GETTY EXHIBIT OF VIVIDLY COLORED ILLUMINATIONS, SOME DATING FROM THE 
12TH CENTURY, DEPICTS HUNTING, NATURE, JOUSTING AND CHESS. 
Think of illuminated manuscripts, and you think of monks piously bending their 
tonsures over religious texts. 
But this summer, visitors to the J. Paul Getty Museum who can tear themselves 
away from Van Gogh's "Irises" can glimpse a very different kind of treasure: 
examples of illuminated manuscripts that deal not with religious concerns, but 
with such secular preoccupations as how to win when betting on a chess match. 
Ranee Katzenstein, assistant curator of manuscripts, helped organize the 
exhibit, which runs through Sept. 30. A Harvard Ph.D. who wrote her 
dissertation on Venetian manuscripts, Katzenstein chose leaves from 18 
illustrated books for the exhibit, the earliest dating from the 12th Century, 
the most recent a calligraphy manual from the 16th Century. 
As Katzenstein points out, the majority of medieval books were religious in 
nature. But the Getty exhibit documents some of the more worldly interests of 
the people who made and bought books before and shortly after Gutenberg's 
invention of movable type in the 15th Century. 
"You get a real sense of people from their books, especially if you can open 
their books and see what they've highlighted and underlined," Katzenstein said. 
Among the interests reflected in the hand-written and hand-illustrated books on 
exhibit: hunting, history, literature, the law, nature, jousting and chess. 
The book of chess problems, dating from the late 1300s, is organized according 
to how many moves are required to win each game because it was the custom in 
northern France, where the book was produced, to bet on that number, 
Katzenstein said. The volume is called "Bonus socius," a reference to the 
author's description of himself in the introduction as "a good companion" -- at 
least at the gaming table. 
If the books consisted of nothing but text, they would be invaluable, but they 
are doubly so because they are illustrated. The small paintings that are part 
and parcel of the works are picture postcards from a world that no longer 
exists. As a result, she said, "we can see how the 14th Century played chess." 
Thanks to the illustrations in a 12th-Century treatise on canon law, we can 
also see that medieval Frenchmen sometimes wore soft shoes with filigree 
designs and pointed toes. From the painting of a pair of elephants in a 
13th-Century French bestiary, we can be fairly certain the artist never saw one 
in the flesh -- the fanciful pachyderms look like black haystacks with trunks. 
To protect the manuscripts, whose colors are more vivid than most old movies, 
the lights in the exhibit hall are kept low. 
"Some of the best preserved medieval paintings are in books because they were 
kept closed," she said. Like their religious counterparts, many of the secular 
manuscripts gleam with gold leaf or paint. Some also feature ultramarine blue, 
a pigment made by crushing lapis lazuli, which was as costly as gold. All but 
one of the books shown was written on vellum, parchment made from animal skin. 
Because of its beauty and durability, vellum remained popular for lavish 
literary productions even after paper became widely available in Europe in the 
14th Century. 
The illustrations vary enormously in sophistication. Some are almost 
cartoon-like. A 13th-Century creature with an animal's head and human legs 
looks like a Maurice Sendak beast in "Where the Wild Things Are." In some 
paintings, people and objects are as flat as in the tapestries that were being 
produced in the same period. 
Some of the illuminations are extraordinarily beautiful. Among the most 
exquisite are the watercolors of flowers, insects, animals, nuts -- even a 
cooked lobster -- that Georg Hoefnagel did in the late 16th Century for a model 
book of calligraphy by Georg Bocskay. 
According to Katzenstein, Hoefnagel was a pivotal figure in Netherlandish art 
-- the last great Flemish illuminator and one of the first and most influential 
artists in the emerging field of still-life easel painting. The manuscript, a 
superb work of calligraphy illuminated with genius, "is one of our treasures," 
Katzenstein said. 
Also hauntingly beautiful is the view of soldiers marching into a city at 
night, painted by an artist known as the Master of the White Initials in a copy 
of Jean Froissart's "Chroniques." The book was made in Bruges at the end of the 
15th Century, probably for King Edward IV of England, when that Flemish city 
was a major artistic center. 
According to Katzenstein, the powerful often commissioned and collected books 
that glorified the deeds of their ancestors, and the Froissart includes a 
lengthy account of the exploits of Edward's Plantagenet ancestor Richard II. 
When the oldest book in the exhibit was made, learning -- and books -- were 
concentrated in the great monasteries of Europe. Later, universities began to 
supplant the monasteries as intellectual centers. By the 14th Century wealthy 
individuals were amassing large private libraries. "There is a whole shift, 
documented in a small way in the exhibit, in who has access to information," 
Katzenstein said. 
Although the exhibit spotlights secular matters, there is no clear-cut 
distinction between the worldly and the other-worldly in the earliest 
manuscripts, Katzenstein said. She points to a painting from a 13th-Century 
French bestiary that shows two fishermen who have built a campfire on the back 
of a whale, thinking it was an island. The whale symbolizes Satan, always ready 
to trick the unwary. "It is a characteristic of the Middle Ages that you 
moralize the natural world," she said. "Everything is a reflection of the 
divine order." 
The distinction between church and secular law was similarly blurred. On 
display is the only known copy of the "Vidal Mayor," a collection of the laws 
of Aragon in northeastern Spain compiled in the 13th Century. Besides detailing 
the laws on felling trees and other mundane matters, the code also contains 
laws of great theological import such as those on the conversion of Jews and 
Moors. 
Just as the religious values of the Middle Ages are reflected in the exhibit, 
so are the humanistic values of the Renaissance, Katzenstein said. By the 15th 
Century, wealthy scholars, particularly in Italy, were commissioning classical 
Greek and Roman works (ironically, many pagan texts were rediscovered in 
monastic libraries). 
Renaissance book-lovers liked more than the ideas and language of the Greeks 
and Romans, Katzenstein said. They also liked the clear, rounded script in 
which many of these rediscovered classics were written. This rounded writing 
style, which actually dates from the post-classical 8th and 9th centuries, not 
from Greek or Roman times, drove spiky, hard-to-read Gothic script out of 
fashion, she said. 
Evident in a 15th-Century Florentine manuscript, this script is the direct 
ancestor of how we write today. 
