POP FACES: LOVE AND ROCKETS' DAVID J RECHARGES WITH SOLO PROJECT 
"Therapy." 
That's the simple explanation Love and Rockets member David J gave for the 
existence of his new solo album, "Songs From Another Season," essentially a 
series of diary-like songs written and recorded over the past two years. One 
listen to the song "Stranded Trans-Atlantic Hotel Nearly Famous Blues" confirms 
his need to vent some frustrations. 
"That was written on the last Love and Rockets tour, in a hotel room somewhere 
in America," he said, speaking by phone from his home near London. "I can't 
even remember where, which is part of the syndrome. I wasn't (happy) at the 
time." 
Theoretically, that time should have been one of elation for the 
singer-bassist. Love and Rockets, consisting of J and his fellow former Bauhaus 
members Daniel Ash and Kevin Haskins (J's brother), had risen above its cult 
status, headlining major concert halls in the wake of its American Top 10 
single "So Alive." Instead, he found himself depressed to be far away from his 
wife and young son (to whom he was merely "the man on the phone"), while 
enthusiastic but bothersome fans camped outside his door. 
The 33-year-old musician is aware that some -- including those loyal fans -- 
may be a bit put off by what they might interpret as self-pity from a musician 
in what many would consider an enviable situation. 
"I suppose there is a certain amount of that in it," he admitted. "But it's 
saying, 'Go away, but sweethearts, come back another day,' because I know I 
need that (attention)." 
Part of the therapeutic process will include going back on tour to support the 
solo album, but on a much more casual basis than with Love and Rockets. 
Accompanied by guitarist Max Eider and accordionist Owen Jones (both of whom 
were part of the Jazz Butcher's band with J in the mid-'80s), J will stick to 
small clubs, including McCabe's on Sept. 4, Bogart's on Sept. 5 and the Roxy on 
Sept. 6. The idea is to renew a sense of freshness in the music-making process 
in preparation for when and if -- yes, if -- Love and Rockets gets back 
together. 
"It's very much up in the air at the moment," he said, noting that Ash and 
Haskins are both doing various side projects now. "We decided to have a 
sabbatical for a year, and that's coming to an end and it looks like it's going 
to continue into the next year. The idea is we'll get back together when we're 
really hungry to do it. We want to feel like a young band going in to record 
our first album." 
