O.C. POP BEAT: CHRISTIAN ROCKERS GO BEYOND PULPIT; 
THREE ORANGE COUNTY BANDS RELEASE NEW ALBUMS THAT, TO VARYING EXTENTS, REACH 
OUT BEYOND A CIRCLE OF CONFIRMED BELIEVERS. 
Individualism is the indispensable ingredient of good rock music. A strong, 
proud, independent streak that challenges dogma and received wisdom, declaring 
the right to think and speak for oneself, to hold and express a personal vision 
-- that is the rocker's greatest gift, and it is rock's greatest claim to being 
a popular art form, rather than merely a form that is popular. Rock is -- or 
ought to be -- the performer's diary, and the audience's bulletin board: lived 
experience, set to a backbeat. 
When rock labels itself as specifically "Christian" in outlook, essence and 
substance, it comes up against a strong, probably insurmountable pressure to 
compromise the above artistic ideals in favor of religious ones. 
With "Christian rock," the need to proclaim a set of beliefs is apt to limit 
the rocker's ability to test extreme ideas and forms of expression. The 
performer also may feel obligated to say a great deal about God, while 
subordinating his or her own experience, ideas, and expressive voice. The work 
of the "Christian rocker" becomes evangelism by other means, a way of girding 
confirmed believers' faith and winning new adherents. Undoubtedly, "Christian 
rock" has value as a religious activity. But it is of little interest to lovers 
of rock who want to experience the music's physical and emotional impact 
without being proselytized. 
At the same time, spirituality and religious feeling have inspired some of the 
finest rock music. Bob Dylan (the universalist Dylan of "John Wesley Harding," 
"I Shall Be Released" and "Father of Night," rather than the cranky sectarian 
of "Slow Train Coming" and "Saved"), Van Morrison, Prince -- all of these have 
managed to depict spiritual experience in ways that are unconventional, highly 
individualistic and loath to proselytize. There is no dogma binding the Van 
Morrison of "In the Garden," or the Pete Townshend of "And I Moved," two songs 
that portray divine encounters as moments of transcendent sexual intimacy. The 
themes are religious, but the vision and expression are the singer's own. 
Three Orange County rock acts that have been identified with the Christian rock 
movement have new albums out that, to varying extents, reach out beyond a 
circle of Christian believers. 
Stryper, the best-known and best-selling Christian hard-rock act, seems to have 
recognized how confining it is to work within the quotation marks of "Christian 
rock." 
While still informed by Christian principles, Stryper has decided it no longer 
needs to thump the Bible at every turn. Amen to that. 
Mike Stand, singer of the Altar Boys, has never been a mouthpiece for religious 
dogma, but his second solo album suffers from a malady that afflicts 
songwriters of all persuasions: an inability to dig down deep for the specific 
details that can turn broad, abstract notions into vivid slices of experience. 
Rick Elias and the Confessions arrive with a superb debut album that merges 
Elias' Christian convictions with a true rocker's insistence on thinking and 
doing things in a way that is uniquely his own. 
** 1/2 
STRYPER 
"Against the Law" (Enigma) 
If ever a band needed to be born again, it was the Stryper of 1988's awful "In 
God We Trust" album. Slick and gutless, the sound was closer to warmed-over 
Boston than to credible heavy metal. Lyrically, meanwhile, the band was glued 
to the most wooden pro-Jesus sloganeering imaginable. 
"Against the Law" is Stryper's assertion that it ought to be able to talk about 
life in terms other than the language of the pulpit. It's also Stryper's 
re-assertion that it is a metal band, not some gussied up, unconvincing hybrid. 
The reborn Stryper doesn't exactly brim over with imagination: "Against the 
Law" falls solidly within heavy metal's sonic conventions, although it at least 
dips into several different ones. 
The album includes a pop-metal power ballad, some Aerosmith-style heavy boogie, 
galloping speed-metal, and a hard-hitting, but not cohesive, funk-metal cover 
of the Earth, Wind &amp; Fire song, "Shining Star." 
Michael Sweet's rangy voice spearheads big, sing-along choruses, the rhythm 
section rumbles hard enough to make heads bang, and the guitars, while anchored 
to the too-familiar metal whine-and-wail style, at least avoid that style's 
worst excesses. 
Though avoiding specifically Christian imagery, Stryper continues to contradict 
metal's typically heathen values. That remains the band's most interesting 
facet in songs like "Not That Kind of Guy," which gives a disdainful brushoff 
to the sort of libidinous groupie who most hard rockers pray will come knocking 
at the stage door. 
While the lyrics trumpet steadfast restraint, the music maintains a hot, sexual 
pulse that embodies the temptation at hand. 
** 1/2 
MIKE STAND 
"Simple Expression" (Alarma) 
The problem here is that Stand's subject probably defies simple expression. In 
song after song, he tries to give voice to something that is beyond words -- 
the yearning to be in touch with God. Stand chronicles his reach for divine 
contact in a way far too personal to serve dogmatic purposes. But it's also far 
too abstract to be deeply communicative. 
Too often, Stand slips into a sort of religio-philosophical jargon that is 
inflated, hard to decipher, and ultimately distancing. 
We encounter vague combinations of portent-filled words: imminence change, 
reformation regeneration, condition change. Even when the diction is more 
natural, most of Stand's material remains self-consciously lofty and 
conceptual. As the album goes on, we want to know more about this 
seeker-after-God, but Stand isn't interested in telling us about himself, or 
his earthly, day-to-day surroundings. 
What worldly troubles and flaws have spurred this single-minded quest to be 
made spiritually whole? There is no inkling here. 
Along with the sameness of theme, Stand overstocks the album with chiming 
anthems built on a Byrds-style massing of Rickenbacker guitars. Stand has an 
appealingly husky, fervently straining voice that recalls Jackson Browne, full 
of conviction that conveys the depth of his longing. The emotional core is 
there, but the details, the flesh of art, are missing. 
The album has its moments. All of the ballads are pretty and evocative, with 
Stand's emotionalism served well by stark arrangements. 
Toward the end of the album, Stand begins to mix things up. "Great Things 
Happen," with its bright, mid-tempo jangle, is followed by "I Melt Into You," 
which throbs with a raw, punk-influenced forcefulness. The song carries the 
album's most vivid impression -- but only an impression -- of the worldly pain 
Stand is trying to transcend. 
Only in one song, "Time Pressing Dance," does Stand introduce characters other 
than himself (and God). The portraits are sketchy, and the idea -- time slips 
away from us -- is conventional. But it puts Stand on the helpful tack of 
looking toward worldly embodiments of spiritual questions. 
*** 1/2 
RICK ELIAS AND THE CONFESSIONS 
"Rick Elias and the Confessions" (Alarma) 
Elias is a veteran Southern California rocker who is making his album debut, 
and it's a striking one. On the one hand, we get rock's rebellious spirit in 
angry, undiluted form: Elias is fed up with the negligence, impotence and 
hand-me-down solutions of societal and religious authorities, and he is 
determined to search for his own answers. On the other hand, we get a yearning 
for divine love that's deep and abashed and worthy of the best spiritually 
informed rock. 
"Don't ask me to sing like a caged pet canary, when I'm burning for freedom, 
not just sanctuary," Elias spits at one point in a trenchant R&amp;B-tinged 
rasp. This is clearly a restless soul whose search for answers isn't about to 
be bound by any limits imposed from outside. 
Elias' lyrics take swipes at the limiting forces found in religion and 
materialism alike. The Dylanesque "Streets of Rome" rejects the safe, tidy, 
suburban acquisitiveness; "Riot (Comin' On)," one of several persuasive 
Mellancamp-cum-Stones thumpers on the album, is a defiantly ticked-off song in 
which Elias, no fan of donation-seeking televangelists, tells self-anointed 
sages to put up or shut up: "Come on all you saints and wise men, come show the 
way if you can, come show us who you really are." 
At key junctures, Elias gives us a good idea who he is and why he is searching 
for spiritual answers. Allusions to hard, bitter times full of self-disgust and 
selfishness dominate "Without One Word," a clenched, gutsy acoustic ballad that 
is unrelenting in its depiction of a confused, out-of-control soul. While Elias 
grapples with spiritual concepts -- some of his songs are out-and-out prayers 
-- his music is coated with the sweat and grime of lived experience. 
Whether the song calls for a straight rock 'n' roll kick, or the more lush, 
textured sound of a number like the lustrous "Someday," Elias and his band 
sound completely assured (Elias produced this album, and also co-produced 
Stand's album). 
It's telling that when Elias sings of his moment of redemption in the opening 
song, "Confession of Love," he fuses Christian imagery with an allusion from 
the pages of rock history. 
"Well I came to the end of that deadman's street / With a heart full of soul 
where a tomb used to be," he sings, linking the title of a Yardbirds classic 
with the Christian notion of a tomb transcended. 
At the end of the song, Elias can't help breaking jubilantly into one of the 
most raucous and profane vocal riffs from rock's annals, the "yeah, yeah, yeah, 
whoooo!" from the Rolling Stones' "Brown Sugar." Amen to that, too. 
