LISTEN: WILL ZSAGA OF YOU-KNOW-WHO EVER END? 
Just when you thought you'd heard the last of Zsa Zsa Gabor's ordeal, here 
comes another volley. To whit: The floral dress she was wearing on the day she 
was arrested is for sale at The Address, a shop in Santa Monica that 
specializes in new and used clothing. The brilliant pink-and-yellow floral 
print, full-skirted dress has a sleeveless black bodice and a matching floral 
print bolero jacket. The asking price for this moment of history is $500. Store 
owner Maureen Clavin says all proceeds will be donated to the Pediatric AIDS 
Foundation. "SCENES" AT TWO MALLS: The Beverly Center has been chosen as one of 
two mall locations for the film "Scenes From a Mall," starring Bette Midler and 
Woody Allen. The comedy/drama will begin shooting at the Bev Center in the 
middle of the month. The other location is the Stamford Town Center in 
Connecticut. The malls were chosen for their architecture, interior design and 
unusual array of stores after a review of 100 shopping centers. 
SERIOUS SHOPPERS: At 6:45 on Monday morning, fashion mavens began queuing up 
outside Loehmann's Beverly Hills store for its Fashion Preview for Fall '90. 
Few of the 140 in line were there for the free coffee and orange juice; they 
arrived by dawn's early light to receive tickets to the store's famed Back 
Room, where designer fashions marked down as much as 60% awaited them. 
BIGGER AND BETTER IN A BABY BLUE BOX: Tiffany and Co. recently heralded its 
new, larger store, scheduled to open in September at Two Rodeo Drive, with a 
posh outdoor breakfast for some of its best customers. Rosemarie Stack, Lee 
Minnelli and Cesar Romero were among those admiring the unabashed baubles on 
display. So extravagant was the gem show that dessert -- petit fours made to 
resemble tiny, Tiffany-blue packages -- prompted one guest to quip, "That looks 
like a ruby ring should be inside." 
ON THE FELT AT FRED'S: The pool table at Fred Hayman's Beverly Hills store had 
more actresses than eight balls rolling around it last week. Mimi Rogers (the 
soon-to-be ex-Mrs. Tom Cruise) was seen slithering around the pockets for a 
movie magazine photo shoot, while Melanie Mayron (of "thirtysomething") was 
photographed for a women's magazine. Six members of the Fragrance Council posed 
on the felt for an upcoming London newspaper feature. Eileen Ford sent her 
Super Models of the Year to the store for a video taping to be seen in an 
upcoming television special, and Fred himself was under the lights as he 
wrapped up his "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous" segment with Robin Leach. 
Then the Hayman name was seen throughout the nation when Zsa Zsa Gabor wore his 
logo-imprinted togs for her round-trip to the El Segundo jail, where she spent 
last weekend. Gabor arrived in a Hayman T-shirt on Friday and exited in the 
retailer's long-sleeved brilliant yellow sweat shirt on Monday. The Zsaga 
continues. 
