HAWTHORNE GIVES FINAL APPROVAL TO $200-MILLION CLOVERLEAF PROJECT 
As part of its effort to revitalize the blighted southwest corner of the city, 
the Hawthorne City Council has unanimously approved plans for a $200-million 
redevelopment project. 
The developer, Cloverleaf South Bay Ltd., was given final approval Monday to 
build up to three hotels, 465 condominiums, a retail center, restaurants, a 
child-care center and a health club on a 28-acre site south of Rosecrans Avenue 
and west of the San Diego Freeway. 
The site for the Cloverleaf project is a hodgepodge of land uses, with 25 
residences and about 40 commercial and industrial properties. City officials 
said it will take about a year to acquire the land from 60 property owners in 
the redevelopment area. They said the project is targeted for completion in 
1993. 
Before making their decision, council members listened to more than two hours 
of testimony from about 20 residents, business owners and attorneys 
representing property owners in the project area. About 100 people crowded the 
council chambers. 
Opinions Divided 
Testimony on the project was evenly split, with half the speakers saying the 
project will breathe new life into a run-down neighborhood and the other half 
saying it is too dense and will create traffic problems. 
Kathy Lawson, a resident of the nearby Holly Glen neighborhood, said she 
supports the project because it will improve Hawthorne's image and eliminate an 
area she called an eyesore. 
But Carol Mayer, another Holly Glen resident, said she has collected signatures 
from about 500 residents who oppose the project because they fear it will cause 
traffic problems. 
Bud Cormier, assistant director of redevelopment, told the council that the 
Cloverleaf project is a "very well-balanced, mixed-use project" and would have 
an "overwhelmingly positive" effect on the city. 
Tax Income Expected 
The project would also be a major source of revenue for the city, he said. The 
developer has been given the option of building either two or three hotels, 
depending on market conditions. If three hotels are built, the city's income 
from hotel and sales taxes is expected to average nearly $1.5 million a year 
during the first five years, according to a city report. With two hotels, the 
annual revenues would be about $850,000. 
In addition, Cloverleaf has agreed to pay the city $500,000 for administrative 
costs at a rate of $100,000 per year for five years. Cloverleaf will also 
contribute $1.5 million for improvements in the city's Police and Fire 
departments. 
To acquire the site, Cloverleaf will produce a $46-million letter of credit, 
which the city will use to purchase the properties and relocate businesses and 
residents. Half of that amount will go toward the cost of the site. The other 
half will be returned to the developer through city subsidies of property, 
sales and bed taxes over 10 years. 
In reaction to a speaker who accused the city of failing to study all the 
financial and environmental ramifications of the project, Cormier said: "This 
is a solid project. This project has been analyzed upward, downward and 
sideways." 
Other Plans Fell Through 
Although some residents fear increased traffic problems, Redevelopment 
Assistant Beth Garrow said in an interview that the Cloverleaf project is 
expected to generate considerably less traffic than two previous proposals for 
the site. The plans by two other developers, which have fallen through for 
various reasons, primarily contained office space and would have created a 
considerable amount of peak-hour traffic, she said. 
The so-called "urban village" is designed so that people can live, work, shop 
and play in their own neighborhood, keeping them off nearby overburdened 
streets and freeways, she said. In the Cloverleaf project, traffic from 
residents, hotel guests and shoppers would be spread throughout the day, Garrow 
said. 
Still, the project will increase traffic on adjacent streets by an estimated 
11,820 vehicle trip per day, a city environmental report says. The site 
currently generates about 6,660 trips per day. 
Cloverleaf Vice President Rex Swanson said Monday that Cloverleaf has agreed to 
contribute $1.2 million toward traffic mitigation measures, such as widening 
streets and adding turn lanes. 
Traffic Tie-Ups 
Without such measures, the report said, the project can cause traffic tie-ups 
at the intersections of Rosecrans Avenue and Aviation Boulevard, Aviation and 
Compton boulevards, and Inglewood Avenue and Compton Boulevard. 
The report also studied the impact of several projects within a one-mile 
radius, including the 38-acre Mattel redevelopment project, which would 
increase daily vehicle trips by 17,570. 
The Mattel project, which would create 500,000 square feet of office space, 
restaurants, a hotel and retail space on a site next to the San Diego Freeway, 
was challenged last week in a lawsuit by the city of Lawndale. 
The suit charges that Hawthorne did not properly assess the cumulative 
environmental effects of the Mattel project and other major developments 
planned for the area. Garrow said Lawndale failed to express its concerns 
during the 45 days allotted for responses to the environmental impact report on 
the Mattel project. 
However, Garrow said both Lawndale and Hawthorne officials are willing to 
discuss the matter, and she said she hopes the dispute can be settled out of 
court. 
In a separate action Monday, the Hawthorne council voted unanimously to rezone 
80 acres near the intersection of the 405 Freeway and Rosecrans, including the 
sites for the Mattel and Cloverleaf projects. The new zoning would allow a 
mixture of commercial and other uses including condominiums, restaurants and 
hotels. 
