FAMILY TORN AFTER DAUGHTER GIVES CHILD UP FOR ADOPTION 
Loretta Andrew says she has always been a peacemaker, not a fighter. 
But for the past four months, Andrew and her husband William have been 
embroiled in an unusual and bitter adoption dispute that pits the Shadow Hills 
couple against their 18-year-old daughter, Cindy. 
The case centers on Cindy Andrew's 1 1/2-year-old child, Griffin Michael 
Andrew. After she gave the boy up for adoption in April, her parents joined 
forces with the child's father, Michael Joseph Turner, in an attempt to get 
legal custody of him. 
Turner, 20, and Cindy Andrew never married. Cindy was able to give the boy up 
for adoption without Turner's approval because Turner never sought to establish 
legally that he is the boy's father. 
The battle began when Cindy Andrew took Griffin from her parents' house, where 
they had been living, and asked an adoption agency to place her son with a new 
family. Cindy's parents said she did not tell them or Turner of her plans. 
On the same day, they said, Andrew moved in with her new boyfriend, who owns a 
video store and lives with his parents in Shadow Hills. 
Loretta Andrew, 40, said she was hysterical when she learned that her daughter 
had put the child up for adoption. "All she would tell us was, 'You'll get over 
it.' I thought, 'Oh boy, is she mistaken.' " 
The Andrews are backing Turner in a paternity suit he filed to establish that 
he is Griffin's father. The purpose of the lawsuit, in which the Andrews have 
agreed to testify on Turner's behalf, is to enable Turner to legally adopt 
Griffin. 
Cindy Andrew and the adoptive parents, meanwhile, have petitioned in court to 
deny Turner's parental rights. The lawsuits, pending in Glendale Municipal 
Court, will determine whether the adoptive parents will be able to retain 
custody of the child. The next hearing in the matter is Aug. 28. 
Both Cindy Andrew and the adoptive parents, whose identity has been kept 
secret, declined through their attorneys to comment. The attorneys would not 
answer questions about the case. 
The Los Angeles County Department of Children's Services has not approved 
Griffin's adoption by the couple. A waiting period during which the agency 
investigates proposed adoptive parents is routine, and the lawsuits have 
stalled the process. 
'We Love Her' 
"I don't know how it got to this point," William Andrew, a brakeman for Union 
Pacific Railroad, said about the legal battle over his grandson. "Cindy is our 
daughter and we love her . . . but under the circumstances, we can't just act 
like nothing has happened." 
Loretta Andrew, a secretary for a construction company, said she is afraid that 
her daughter does not understand the consequences of her decision. "I don't 
think she realizes how much she will miss her son down the road. Now she might 
say, 'Gosh, my Mom and Dad love Griffin more than me.' But it's because of her 
that we love him, and she can't see that." 
Both Turner and the Andrews said they are still unsure about Cindy's motive for 
giving her child up for adoption. "It just happened out of the dark," Turner 
said. 
Turner said Cindy Andrew had asked him months before she took the child if he 
would sign papers giving up his legal rights to Griffin, but he refused. "I was 
leaning toward the idea of letting her parents adopt the baby," he said. 
In fact, Cindy Andrew asked her parents when Griffin was 4 months old if they 
would take full responsibility for the child and they agreed, Loretta Andrew 
said. She said she talked with her daughter about making the arrangement legal, 
but Cindy said that would not be necessary. 
'I Was His Mother' 
"From the time the baby was 4 months old to the time he was 15 months old, I 
had full control," Loretta Andrew said. "I fed him. I bathed him. I took him to 
the doctor. . . . I was his mother." 
William Andrew said his daughter might have been unhappy that her mother took 
over responsibility of raising her son. "Everybody was happy with the situation 
the way it was," he said. "The only person . . . unhappy was Cindy. I think she 
felt guilty. She would come home and see her mom taking care of Griffin. She 
didn't want the responsibility, and she thought this was a way out, by giving 
Griffin up for adoption." 
Loretta Andrew said that when her daughter became pregnant, she and Cindy 
discussed adoption but decided against it. 
The mother said the subject was brought up again about four months after the 
baby was born. "I said, 'Cindy, it's too late. You made your decision,' " she 
said. 
The Andrews said their daughter began talking about adoption about the same 
time that she began seeing her new boyfriend. 
Fishing Trip 
Two weeks before she took Griffin, Cindy Andrew asked her mother if she and her 
boyfriend could take the boy on a fishing trip. Loretta Andrew said that when 
the day of the trip arrived, she dressed the toddler and helped them get ready 
to go. 
That was the last time she saw her grandson, Andrew said. When she returned 
from a shopping trip that day, Andrew found a note her daughter had left 
telling her about the adoption. 
"I was just stunned," Andrew said. "We called a child-abuse hot line, the 
police, everybody we could think of." 
She and Turner went to an attorney. "We've gotten closer through all this 
because we have a common goal: to get Griffin back," she said. 
She said that although Turner never provided financial support for the boy, he 
has visited him regularly and has established a close bond with the child. 
"Griffin knew who his Dad was," Andrew said. "You can't deny a father his 
rights because he didn't pay any money. He wasn't asked to pay. I never asked 
the mother to pay anything as well." 
Father Bought House 
Turner, who installs security alarm systems, said he recently purchased a house 
in North Hollywood and feels confident that he can take care of his son. 
"Financially, I can afford it," Turner said. "I can't see how anybody in their 
right mind could take a child away from a family that loves him and can take 
care of him." 
Loretta Andrew said she hoped that she would be able to share custody of 
Griffin with Turner, an arrangement Turner said he would accept. If Turner is 
not granted custody, Andrew said, she would file her own adoption petition. 
In the meantime, the Andrews and Turner said the hardest part is not knowing 
where Griffin is and not being able to visit him. Loretta Andrew said she hopes 
that her daughter will realize soon that Griffin belongs with his family. 
"My hope is to get Griffin back and that someday -- it won't be soon -- Cindy 
will say, 'Thank you' for fighting for him," Loretta Andrew said. "That is my 
hope. But in reality, I don't know." 
