THERAPY SHOWS PROMISE IN BLOCKING ONSET OF DIABETES; 
HEALTH: PRELIMINARY STUDIES SUGGEST POTENT DRUG MAY PREVENT OR DELAY FOR YEARS 
THE TYPE I FORM OF THE DISEASE. 
Diabetes specialists around the country are beginning human trials of a new 
treatment that may be the most important advance in the disease since the 
advent of insulin therapy. 
For the first time, physicians are identifying youths who are at high risk of 
developing juvenile-onset diabetes and treating them in hopes of preventing -- 
or at least delaying for many years -- the onset of the disease. 
In the most promising of the trials, physicians are treating the prospective 
diabetics with a potent drug that suppresses the immune system. Preliminary 
data suggests that, in many cases, this will halt the "autoimmune" attack on 
the pancreas that causes the disease. 
The stakes are high. Between 750,000 and 1 million Americans suffer from 
juvenile-onset diabetes, also known as insulin-dependent or Type I diabetes, 
according to the American Diabetes Assn., and 13,000 to 15,000 new cases are 
diagnosed each year. Most people contract Type I diabetes during childhood, but 
a small percentage develop it as adults. 
Although insulin injections can control the overt symptoms -- such as excessive 
thirst, urination and coma -- most diabetics eventually develop serious 
complications, including kidney damage, nerve damage in the arms and legs and 
vision loss. Treatment for diabetes and its complications costs the United 
States about $20.4 billion each year. 
Even if the new therapy could only delay the onset of diabetes, it would offer 
patients several more years of life free of these disabling complications. And 
should it prevent the disease, the patients would be free of those 
complications indefinitely, researchers say, although they would have to 
undergo the new therapy for the rest of their lives. 
"This is an extraordinarily promising avenue for study," said Robert E. 
Silverman, head of the diabetes branch at the National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases in Bethesda, Md. "I don't want to overstate 
its significance, but this could really be hot stuff." 
The trials, to be conducted at the University of Florida Health Science Center, 
the Joslin Diabetes Center at Harvard Medical School, Denver Children's 
Hospital and the University of Washington in Seattle, represent "an exciting 
possibility," added Richard Kahn, medical director of the American Diabetes 
Assn. 
The new therapy has been found effective in extensive studies on laboratory 
animals. The best evidence that it will work in humans is seen in the 
experience of Peggy Polopolus, 21, who began the therapy in a pilot project 
five years ago. At that time, physicians at the University of Florida Health 
Science Center predicted she would develop Type I diabetes within six months. 
She still has not contracted the disease. 
Polopolus is being treated with a powerful drug called Imuran. The drug 
suppresses the immune system in much the same way it does to prevent the 
rejection of transplanted organs. 
Researchers caution that little is known about Imuran's long-term effects, but 
they are enthusiastic about its prospects. "If it (the therapy) works, a child 
of 10 might be on it for 60 years, and that's a long time," Kahn said. "We 
don't know what the drug will do to them, but we do know what is going to 
happen to them if they develop diabetes, and that could be much worse." 
The new approach to therapy is based on the growing recognition that Type I 
diabetes is an autoimmune disease in which the body attacks its own tissues -- 
in this case, the insulin-secreting beta cells of the pancreas. 
Insulin helps most of the body's cells take up biological fuels, especially the 
sugar glucose. In the absence of insulin, the glucose accumulates to high 
levels in the blood. Then the kidneys overwork themselves to filter excess 
glucose into urine. 
Meanwhile, body cells starve in a sea of plenty, and thus must break down their 
own stores of fat and protein for energy. During this breakdown, acidic 
byproducts called ketones build up in the blood. Combined with the dehydration, 
these ketones induce coma and death. 
Type I diabetes can be treated with daily injections of insulin. These allow 
the patients to live a predominantly normal life. But because the injections 
are given only two to four times per day, at most, levels of glucose in the 
blood vary widely, and these variations are thought to cause the complications 
of diabetes. 
Scientists do not yet know why the immune system attacks the beta cells, but 
both genetics and viral infections are thought to be involved. 
Diabetes specialists once thought that the destruction of the beta cells was a 
fairly rapid process, occurring perhaps over a matter of a few months. Now, 
however, it is clear that the process can take as long as seven years, and that 
the onset of diabetes itself does not occur until at least 80% of the beta 
cells in the pancreas have been destroyed. 
Hence, if that destructive process can be detected, it might be possible to 
arrest it before too much damage is done. 
The key seems to lie in certain antibodies whose normal function is to fight 
disease; diabetes victims, however, are plagued with antibodies that attack 
their own bodies. In the last 15 years, researchers have discovered three 
different antibodies that can indicate destruction of beta cells: 
* Islet-cell autoantibody is thought to be directed against a fat molecule 
found in the interior of islet cells. 
* Antibodies against insulin, present in virtually all patients who have 
received insulin therapy, are believed to exist years before the onset of 
disease. 
* The most recently identified and potentially most important antibody works 
against an unidentified protein, 64-K, which appears to be present in only the 
membrane of beta cells. Pathologist Mark A. Atkinson of the University of 
Florida has found that this antibody can be detected in humans as many as seven 
years before diabetes symptoms occur. 
If elevated concentrations of all three antibodies are present in a person's 
blood, Kahn said, then "it's a virtual certainty that person will develop 
diabetes within three years." 
For several years, researchers at various medical centers have been treating 
newly diagnosed type I diabetics with the immune-suppressing drug cyclosporine 
-- the same drug that has revolutionized organ transplants during the last 
decade -- in an effort to retard development of the disease. The treatments 
typically delay the patient's need for insulin from six months to two years, 
but no longer. 
"The problem is that by the time these patients had symptoms of diabetes, they 
had lost most of their insulin-producing islet cells," said Florida 
endocrinologist William Riley. Furthermore, cyclosporine has a number of 
serious side effects, including liver damage and an increased incidence of 
cancer. 
In an article in the current issue of the journal Diabetes Care, 
endocrinologist Rebecca Lipton and her colleagues at the University of 
Pittsburgh conclude that the benefits from such therapy are too low to justify 
the risk. "Further use of the immuno-suppressive agent cyclosporine cannot be 
justified," they wrote. 
The approach must therefore be to treat children before they actually develop 
the symptoms of diabetes and to use a drug that has fewer side effects than 
cyclosporine, said Florida pathologist Noel Maclaren. 
The tests for antibodies identify potential diabetics, and the drug of choice 
is Imuran, which has been used for a quarter-century as an anti-rejection drug 
and for a somewhat shorter time as a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. It is 
less effective than cyclosporine at blocking rejection, but it has fewer side 
effects. 
Peggy Polopolus, who now works for an advertising agency in New York City, was 
the first patient Riley and Maclaren treated with Imuran. Peggy was 14 when her 
younger sister, Eleni, developed Type I diabetes. The Florida researchers were 
then screening large numbers of diabetics' relatives to study the reliability 
of antibody testing. They found that islet cell autoantibodies were present in 
Peggy, but at low levels. 
Because her grandfather had also had Type I diabetes and two aunts had the 
less-severe but more common form of diabetes known as Type II, the researchers 
continued watching her. (Type I diabetes has long been known to run in 
families. Siblings of diabetes patients have as much as an 11% risk of 
developing the condition -- much higher than the overall population risk of 16 
cases per 100,000.) 
About a year later, her blood-sugar levels starting climbing and her insulin 
levels started falling. Riley put her on Imuran, and she has been taking two 
50-milligram tablets every day since. 
Polopolus said the Imuran therapy has not had any adverse effects on her. "I've 
had colds every once in a while, but I was prone to getting colds anyway." She 
did develop mononucleosis during college, but Riley believes that was unrelated 
to Imuran use. 
Most important, her blood-sugar level, which was above normal when she began 
the regimen, dropped back into the normal range and has stayed there ever 
since. Polopolus believes she has been "incredibly lucky" to be spared the 
insulin injections that her sister must take. 
Riley, Maclaren and their colleagues treated one other patient, an 8-year-old 
girl who had more beta-cell damage than Polopolus when she began the therapy. 
The onset of her disease was delayed for four years. After beginning her 
therapy, however, the researchers decided not to treat any more patients until 
they had accumulated more information on the predictive value of the 
antibodies. 
"We were too far ahead of ourselves," Riley said. "We couldn't convince other 
people we had the data." 
Now, based on several studies in which Imuran prevented development of diabetes 
in rodents, they believe they have the data, and other researchers agree. In 
April, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 
convened in Washington to consider theirs and other research. That conference 
concluded that the time was ripe to begin wider clinical trials. 
Researchers at the four medical centers plan to screen 8,000 to 10,000 close 
relatives of patients with Type I diabetes. The initial screening will be for 
islet cell autoantibodies. Individuals who test positive will then be studied 
for insulin antibodies and impaired insulin secretion. Those who test positive 
for these characteristics will be enrolled in the study. Those who do not will 
be re-examined every six months. 
As many as 80% of those who are positive for these tests are expected to 
develop diabetes within five years without treatment. The accuracy could be 
improved, Riley said, if they tested for anti-64-K antibodies, but that test is 
still too expensive and cumbersome. But he predicts it will be used within a 
year or so. 
From this testing, the four centers expect to identify 75 to 80 children who 
are at high risk. These will be treated with Imuran and monitored for as long 
as necessary. The first patient identified began Imuran treatment in Florida 
four weeks ago. 
Meanwhile, researchers at Harvard are attempting a different approach. Tests in 
animals have shown that administering insulin to potential diabetics before the 
pancreas is severely damaged can interfere with the immune attack, even block 
it completely. During the therapy, called "beta-cell rest," the pancreas 
sharply reduces its insulin production. Furthermore, the proteins on the 
surface of beta cells that are attacked by the immune system disappear, halting 
the attack, said Harvard endocrinologist Richard Jackson. 
Two children have so far been enrolled in the study -- 16-year-old Sean Finley 
of Alexandria, La., and 9-year-old John Moore of Indianapolis. Each takes two 
doses of insulin per day that total about one-quarter the normal daily dose for 
a diabetic. Every nine months, they fly to Boston for a week of intensive 
intravenous insulin therapy that attempts to shut off the pancreas completely. 
The hope is that, even though the boys have to take insulin daily, the pancreas 
will continue to function well enough to prevent the wide swings in blood-sugar 
concentration that cause the complications of diabetes. Sean has been in the 
program 18 months and John for 12 months with no apparent decline in pancreatic 
function. Each was expected to develop diabetes within three years of 
diagnosis, so it is too soon to tell if the treatment is successful. 
The Harvard group hopes to enroll three to five more patients in the trial, but 
endocrinologist George Eisenbarth conceded that most pre-diabetics the group 
identifies will be enrolled in the Imuran trial because it seems more 
promising. 
If the clinical trials prove successful, the next stage will expand the 
procedure to larger population groups. Even though relatives of diabetics have 
a high risk of developing the disease, they nonetheless represent a small 
minority of all Type I diabetes victims. 
Eventually, the entire population under age 25 would have to be screened, an 
exceptionally daunting prospect. And because the age of onset varies, children 
would have to be screened periodically in order to detect the first signs. 
That task would be simplified if researchers could identify a gene that would 
be highly predictive of diabetes risk. But that possibility is in the distant 
future, and researchers are now concentrating only on the first stages. The 
therapies, Maclaren said, "are certainly going to work. The questions we are 
going to have to settle are for how long, how well and at what cost?" 
"And even if we are only able to delay onset for a number of years," added 
endocrinologist David M. Kipnis of Washington University in St. Louis, "that's 
a real accomplishment." 
