THEY'RE LEFT-HANDED COMPLEMENTS; 
LEFTIES PLAYING A BIG ROLE IN WATER POLO TOURNAMENT 
In a world where right means correct and right-handers have the last consumer 
word, left-handers are making themselves heard. 
The positive attributes of the left-handed are noted on shirts, bumper stickers 
and other novelty items. Speciality shops cater to left-handers. 
And at the U.S. Senior Men's National Water Polo Championship at UC San Diego's 
Canyon View Pool, lefties also are making some noise. 
Of the 103 players participating on eight teams Saturday, only 13 are 
left-handed. But after four games, which whittled the field in the round-robin 
tournament to four for today's finals, four of the top six scorers were 
left-handed. 
"Each good team has at least one," said Dante Dettamanti, assistant national 
and Stanford team coach. Stanford, with two lefties -- 1988 Olympian Craig 
Klass and ambidextrous Eric Blum -- advanced to today's championship rounds 
with a 9-7 victory over Newport B and a 7-5 upset of previously undefeated and 
top-seeded Newport A. 
"You like to have them on your team," Dettamanti said. "It's an advantage. They 
throw the defenders off." 
What they were throwing on this day were goals. 
"It's a significant advantage," said Harvard Academy Coach Richard Corso, who 
with four lefties has an unusually high number on his team. 
"They balance the front-court offense and the power play. They're important in 
picks and screens, anywhere." 
The surviving lefties going into today's final competition are those of Malibu 
(4-0), Geoff Clark and goalie Craig Wilson; Stanford (3-1), Klass and Blum, and 
Beach (3-1), Nick Baba and James Makshanoff. Newport A (3-1) has none. 
The absence of a left-hander on Newport A -- packed with nine national team 
members and three former Olympians -- dispels any notion that being left-handed 
alone is enough. 
"They have to be good," Dettamanti said. "If you have to choose between a weak 
left-handed player and a strong right-handed player, then you always go with 
the strong right-hander." 
Malibu's Clark, the leading scorer on Australia's 1988 Olympic team, is the 
second-leading scorer (14 goals in four games) in this tournament. Malibu 
advanced to the final four with an 8-5 victory over Harvard Academy and a 11-9 
victory over Golden Bear. 
"Everyone knows all the best players in the world are left-handed," said Clark 
with a smile. "Everyone's expecting you to shoot from the other side. You're 
just not used to it." 
Even the left-handed players don't like playing against other lefties. 
"I myself don't like (guarding a left-hander)," said Clark, a sophomore at 
Pepperdine. "Everything's harder against them. The timing's different, the 
angles are different." 
Said Bruin Polo's Alexis Rousseau, who scored 12 goals here: "Even me, I'm not 
used to them. Sometimes it's surprising to be playing against them and have to 
stop and think, 'oh, they're left-handed.' " 
According to coaches and players, lefties are most effective on offense in a 
six-on-five situation, when a penalty has left the defense short a player. 
"When you're a man up, that's when you use him the most, because of 
positioning," Dettamanti said. "You pass along the outside, always moving the 
goalie and the defense around. Left-handers can catch and shoot the ball 
immediately." 
Said Corso: "Right-handers have to stop and shoot across their bodies. Lefties 
don't." 
And Clark has discovered that being left-handed has helped open the door to 
athletics. 
"I've had a lot of break since I was young because I was left-handed," he said. 
"It's given me a lot of opportunities. Sportsmen aren't exactly encouraged to 
change (hands)." 
Besides, left-handers can add character to a team. 
"Left-handers are a little unorthodox, a little off, anyway," Dettamanti said. 
"In swimming, the breast-strokers are a little off. Left-handers are the same 
way." 
