GARDEN NEWS: GARDENING; 
HOME-GROWN ALPINE STRAWBERRIES TASTE AS GOOD AS ALL OUTDOORS; 
PARTIAL SUN, OCCASIONAL FERTILIZER AND REGULAR WATERING WILL RESULT IN A LAVISH 
HARVEST. 
If you've ever eaten wild strawberries fresh from a mountain meadow, dripping 
with juice and sun-ripened, you'll never forget the exhilarating flavor. If you 
haven't, you can grow your own Alpine strawberries in garden or container and 
savor their unique taste. 
Alpine strawberries are quite different from standard strawberries in flavor, 
size and in growing requirements. Known in Europe as wild strawberries, they 
are a very expensive gourmet treat and are served in Europe's finest 
restaurants. They are much smaller than regular strawberries, and their flavor 
is closer to that of a raspberry than that of a typical strawberry. 
Unlike their strawberry cousins, Alpine strawberries do not require an area of 
the garden that receives full sun. Four or five hours of sun per day is ample, 
and they do poorly in hot sections of the garden. 
Landscaping Tool 
Not only are Alpine strawberries a culinary delight, but they also are a most 
attractive landscaping item. Their foliage is a lighter shade of green than 
standard strawberries, and they form bushy 10-inch plants that are covered with 
pretty, white blossoms and deep-red or yellow fruit. 
When the berries form, they have a wild-fruit aroma that is absent in regular 
strawberries. They also differ from standard strawberries in that they don't 
form runners. They are beautiful plants to grow as borders in flower beds. 
The fruit of Alpine strawberries is slimmer, more pointed and only about a 
third the size of typical strawberries. Once established, Alpine strawberries 
will bear year round, with the heaviest crop in the spring. 
Alpine strawberries can be grown from seeds or transplants. However, they are 
very expensive when sold as transplants. One mail-order seed firm offers 25 
plants for $26.95. If you use seeds, more varieties are available to you. 
You can sometimes locate seeds for Alpine strawberries in local nurseries. If 
not, Burpee Seeds, 300 Park Ave., Warminster, Pa. 18991, offers seeds for two 
superior Alpine strawberry varieties. 
Alexandria produces a profusion of beautiful white blossoms and a bountiful 
crop of small, pointed red berries on bushy 10-inch plants. It is an old, 
reliable variety. Ruegen Improved is a newer variety with slightly larger 
berries, which are produced prolifically. 
Any Time of Year 
Alpine strawberries are perennials, but their production falters after the 
fourth year, when they should be replaced. 
In our Southland climate, you can start seeds for Alpine strawberries at any 
time of the year. When you receive your seeds, plant them in pots indoors in a 
sunny window for subsequent transplanting into your garden. 
After the plants have grown to a height of 3 inches, they are ready to be 
planted outdoors. Before you transplant the plants, harden them by exposing 
them to the outdoors gradually -- a few hours each day for one week. 
Plants should be transplanted into a soil that has been enriched with organic 
material and a dressing of a general-purpose vegetable fertilizer. The plants 
should be spaced 6 inches apart and watered when transplanted. Then they should 
be irrigated on a weekly basis and given a side dressing of a fruit or 
vegetable fertilizer every four months. 
Alpine strawberries make a very attractive addition to a patio or balcony when 
they're grown in containers. If you go the container route, use a commercial 
potting-soil mix or make your own. 
Mix one-third builder's sand with one-third peat moss and one-third compost or 
well-aged manure. A time-released fertilizer should be added, and container 
strawberries should be fed a liquid fertilizer monthly. 
Plant in Containers 
You can plant one dozen Alpine strawberry plants in a large container such as a 
half whiskey barrel. Make certain that there are adequate drainage holes in the 
containers. Just about any type of container is suitable. 
A large container known as a strawberry pyramid can be purchased at some garden 
centers and from mail-order seed companies. It is circular and consists of 
three rings made of aluminum. The bottom ring is 6 feet in diameter, with two 
smaller rings stacked on top in pyramid fashion. 
Each band is 5 inches deep, and the pyramid contains a built-in sprayer that 
will connect to your garden hose. The pyramid will hold up to 50 plants. 
The fruit is ready for harvest when it has an intense wild-fruit fragrance. You 
won't have to bother about stems when you're picking, because the fruit 
separates from the calyx with very little effort when it is fully ripe. 
Forget about saving excess seeds from Alpine strawberries because they lose 
their germination potential very rapidly. 
