GRAND JURY ACCUSES 7 OF LINKS TO ILLEGAL ALIEN SMUGGLING RING 
A federal grand jury Thursday indicted a Carlsbad motel operator, five Los 
Angeles men and a Mexican man on charges of running an alien-smuggling ring 
from a motel that helped whisk about 600 people per month to Santa Ana and Los 
Angeles. 
The manager of the Travel Inn Motel, Bharat Thakkar, 28, of Carlsbad, was 
charged with conspiring to smuggle aliens and two counts of harboring aliens, 
Assistant U.S. Atty. George C. Aguilar said. Thakkar was released on $15,000 
bail, Aguilar said. 
The six others, all of whom are in custody, were indicted on charges that 
ranged from conspiracy to transporting aliens, Aguilar said. 
Each count in the four-count indictment carries up to five years in prison and 
a maximum $250,000 fine. 
Though prosecutors contend the scheme moved hundreds of people monthly, Aguilar 
said it was not large-scale. "It was a tedious but extensive operation" that 
involved "a few people in a van here, a few people in a car there," he said. 
Federal agents had been watching the motel for about four months, even raiding 
it once in mid-May and finding 71 illegal aliens in two motel rooms, Aguilar 
said. The immigrants were charged $250 to $300 to go to "drop houses" in Santa 
Ana and Los Angeles, he said. 
According to the indictment, Thakkar agreed to rent motel rooms to Leandro 
Duran-Correa, 45, of Los Angeles, and Rodrigo Pineda-Solorio, 32, of Los 
Angeles. 
Duran-Correa and two other Los Angeles men -- Jose Angel Hernandez-Amaya, 35, 
and Brigido Rios-Castro, 31 -- transported illegal immigrants from the 
U.S.-Mexican border, the indictment charged. 
Another Los Angeles man, Ricardo Rodriguez-Hernandez, Angel Tenorio-Rojas, 27, 
of Morelos, Mexico, were charged with taking part in the conspiracy, according 
to the indictment. 
Thakkar, Tenorio-Rojas and Pineda-Solorio were arrested Aug. 10, Aguilar said. 
Hernandez-Amaya, Duran-Correa and Rios-Castro were arrested Aug. 1, he said. 
Rodriguez-Hernandez is serving a misdemeanor sentence in Texas for an unrelated 
illegal immigration conviction, Aguilar said. He is scheduled to be arraigned 
in San Diego later this month. 
