TV REVIEWS ; 
TWO NOT SO GENTLE VIEWS OF FIDEL CASTRO'S CUBA 
For most people -- Cubans included -- Fidel Castro is Cuba. What happens when 
he dies? 
This is the overwhelming question left in the viewer's mind by both hourlong 
films that make up "Castro's Cuba: Two Views" (tonight at 9 on Channels 28 and 
15, and 8 p.m. on Channel 50). 
It emerges in Jorge Ulla's and master cinematographer Nestor Almendros' "Nobody 
Listened" from images of the bitter faces of Castro's former comrades, free 
after decades behind bars and smelling blood. It's no less clear in Saul 
Landau's "The Uncompromising Revolution," which shows Castro's aging face and 
graying beard, symbol of how the winds of global change may have passed him, 
and Cuba, by. 
Landau is an old friend of Castro's -- he always calls him "Fidel," a leftover 
from the halcyon '60s when the worldwide Left had a love affair with Cuba's 
anti-Yanqui revolution. So Landau doesn't ask his friend about death, but, 
gently, about retirement. Castro doesn't return the gentility; he rips the 
microphone off and ends the interview. 
Cuban exiles Ulla and Almendros, had they been able to interview Castro, 
wouldn't have been so gentle. But the differences between the two films have 
been overtouted in the advance publicity: Both works show a promising national 
birth called "The New Cuba" gone corrupt. Indeed, Landau's left credentials 
allow him to get inside the country's workings far deeper than "Nobody 
Listened," and expose a Cuba in deep, internal breakdown. 
As Landau travels with Castro on a pre-arranged tour of model industries and 
institutions (a pre-arrangement that Landau lets us in on), it's clear that 
Cuba isn't working very well. Workers look bored. The lights go out in an 
optics factory just as the "commander-in-chief" arrives, and no one knows how 
to work the back-up generator. (This in a country on a crash program for 
nuclear power.) Workers building a huge medical center tell Castro that the 
winches they're using are no good; never has this master of media control 
looked so chagrined on-camera. 
All of this makes Landau wonder if Cubans can live up to Castro's dream of a 
pure communist society. Landau knows they can't until Castro, the father 
figure, the ultimate caudillo, is gone. And even then, he's not so sure. 
Ulla and Almendros are concerned less with Cuba's fate than with the victims of 
Cuba's own gulag archipelago of prisons and labor camps dotting the island. 
While Castro denies to Landau that any Cubans have been "disappeared," Ulla and 
Almendros document cases to the contrary. A long line of survivors of prison 
and torture testify to a barbarous system of "rehabilitation": Convicts 
unwilling to bend to the state live in feces-laden squalor. Human-rights 
activists consider Cuba an outlaw nation. 
"Nobody Listened" is a dark contemplation of what happens when power is 
ruthlessly grasped. It is sad, but it is also crudely propagandistic in a way 
Landau's film never is. While one is an understandably angry harangue, the 
other is the disappointed letter of an ex-lover. Castro won't be pleased with 
either. ROBERT KOEHLER 
