HIGH-SPEED RAIL BACKERS SEEK HELP; 
TRANSIT: CONSORTIUM APPEALS TO COUNTY AFTER RIDERSHIP PROJECTIONS ARE CUT IN 
HALF. LINE IS TO RUN FROM LAX TO PALMDALE. 
The consortium proposing to build a high-speed rail line between Los Angeles 
International Airport and Palmdale, a $1-billion project that was to be 
privately financed, Monday asked for financial support from the county because 
ridership estimates have been reduced by almost half. 
In response to a request from the consortium, a panel of the Los Angeles County 
Transportation Commission on Monday recommended consideration of public funding 
for the proposed 69-mile line. One county official said the potential bill 
could reach $100 million a year. 
The turnabout came after the project's backers reduced ridership projections 
for the line's first segment -- the 36 miles from Los Angeles Airport to Santa 
Clarita -- from 100,000 riders a day to about 55,000, with a corresponding drop 
in expected revenues, county officials said. 
John E. Chiaverini, a spokesman for the consortium, acknowledged the reduction 
in ridership estimates, although he could not confirm the precise numbers. 
The consortium apparently had earlier overestimated the number of bus riders 
who might make connections with the train, said Linda Bohlinger, director of 
capital planning and programming for the commission. 
The transportation panel's meeting Monday produced the first public indication 
that the proposed rail line -- which would use futuristic magnetic levitation 
technology to reach speeds up to 100 m.p.h -- might not be entirely privately 
financed. Its backers are seeking approval for the project under an 
experimental state privatization program for transit projects. 
However, consortium and county officials said the project could still go 
forward with local public funding, because the state requires only that no 
state or federal funds be used. State officials in mid-September are to choose 
up to four such projects out of eight submitted statewide. 
Bohlinger said county officials are willing to consider local funding. Based on 
preliminary projections, the public's obligation could approach $100 million a 
year for up to 15 years, she said. 
Bohlinger said the consortium's own projections showed that public funding 
could amount to one-third to one-half of the line's total operating and 
construction costs for the first 15 years. Only at that point, she said, was 
the line projected to become self-supporting. 
"The commission and our executive director want to portray the message that 
we're looking at this very positively," Bohlinger said. "They're not dismissing 
this out of hand. They're willing to look at the possibility of the commission 
being financially involved." 
The commission's Finance and Programming Committee voted 5 to 0 Monday to 
explore public funding options, including possible contributions from the 
commission, the city of Los Angeles and the city's Department of Airports. 
