STEINBRENNER SELECTS HIS SON; 
YANKEES: OWNER'S SUCCESSOR IS SUBJECT TO APPROVAL OF TEAM'S PARTNERSHIP AND 
OTHER MAJOR LEAGUE OWNERS. 
He wasn't at his job on the horse farm in Ocala, Fla., nor at a nearby high 
school where he used to coach the soccer team. 
Instead, one day after his father was forced to give up control of the New York 
Yankees, Hank Steinbrenner was "en route somewhere" according to a fellow 
employee at the Kinsman Stud Farm, a 860-acre business owned by Hank's father, 
George Steinbrenner. 
But that route became more specific Tuesday afternoon, when Steinbrenner chose 
his 33-year-old son to take control of the Yankees. 
"For some years now I have been preparing to turn over the operation of the 
Yankees to my sons and sons-in-law," Steinbrenner said in a prepared statement. 
"My son Hank, subject to league approval, will become general partner at this 
time." 
Monday, baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent permanently removed Steinbrenner from 
control of the team for his involvement with a gambler, Howard Spira. 
Steinbrenner can only be involved in major decisions for the team, specifically 
negotiating television and lease contracts, and can have no involvement in 
day-to-day activities or any player transactions effective Aug. 20. 
Vincent, however, has stipulated in his ruling that the new general partner can 
be a member of Steinbrenner's family, subject to approval by the Yankee 
partnership and major league club owners. No further approval from Vincent is 
needed. 
But the baseball business won't be new to the young Steinbrenner. In 1986, his 
father brought him to New York from Florida to learn the team operations. Hank 
Steinbrenner spent a lot of time with then-Yankee General Manager Clyde King. 
"He is a bright young man, sharp fellow, with great retention and he learned 
quickly," said King, who also managed the Yankees and is now a special adviser. 
"I was surprised he knew a lot about baseball -- the history of game. He read 
box scores every day and knew the players and averages. 
"And he was an athlete, though he's too modest to tell you that. One day I 
remember he went down and took some swings with Woody Woodward, who was my 
assistant at the time. Woody hit one out of Yankee Stadium, and I think Hank 
did, too." 
Steinbrenner attended Culver Academy, a military school near South Bend, Ind., 
which his father also attended. He then went to Central Methodist College in 
Fayette, Mo., where he majored in history and political science and played on 
the soccer team. 
He is currently living in Ocala, where he runs the horse farm and last season 
coached the Vanguard High soccer team. But recently Hank Steinbrenner talked 
about moving to Tampa to work at his father's other company, American Ship 
Building. 
"We talked about Hank coming back this year to coach soccer, but he said he was 
not sure because he may be moving to Tampa to work with his father's business," 
said Ken Vianello, principal of Vanguard High. "But now, well, unless he wants 
to run my soccer team instead of the New York Yankees -- there would be less 
pressure, that's for sure." 
Hank Steinbrenner, should he be approved by two-thirds of the 19 partners in 
the organization's partnership and by major league baseball, will have his work 
cut out for him. 
The Yankees currently have the worst record in baseball. The team is last or 
close to it in every statistical category in the American League and headed for 
100 or more losses for the first time since 1912. 
Since 1983, they have used 157 players. Only Don Mattingly and Dave Righetti 
remain from the 1986 spring roster. And the 1980s was the first decade since 
Babe Ruth's acquisition in 1920 that the Yankees did not win a World Series. 
Since George Steinbrenner purchased the club in 1973 there have been 18 
managerial changes, 12 general managers and 23 pitching coaches. And things 
haven't been much better off the field. At least 20 Yankee scouts quit between 
1983-87. 
Hank Steinbrenner has apparently already been involved in some major team 
decisions. In 1986, Hank was said to have been a major factor in the signing of 
Lou Piniella as manager. And his honesty about the business was recognized 
quickly by those who worked with him. 
"What do you think would really help this team?" King asked Hank a few years 
ago. 
"Get rid of my father," Hank said. 
Should Hank Steinbrenner become the general partner, his father will not be 
allowed to ask him how his work is going. In the stipulations of Vincent's 
ruling, Vincent banned the Yankee owner from any involvement with the team, 
including talking to anybody in the Yankee organization about the team or 
baseball. Violations of the ruling could result in further penalties for 
Steinbrenner and the person he talks to. 
Steinbrenner's attorney, Stephen Kaufman, said he was confident Hank would be 
approved as general partner. Barry Halper, one of the most active limited 
partners, agreed. "I'm sure it will be Hank unless Hank doesn't want it," he 
said. 
STEINBRENNER RESTRICTIONS 
Details of the restrictions on New York Yankees and their principal owner: 
WHAT HE CAN DO 
He may participate in major financial decisions of the Yankees. Player 
signings, free-agent contracts and hiring and firing the manager are not be 
considered major decisions. 
He may request permission in writing to attend a limited number of major league 
games beginning next season. 
WHAT HE CAN'T DO 
He may not attend, vote or participate in major league meetings. He may not 
make personnel decisions. He may not own 50% or more of the team's stock. 
WHAT YANKEES MUST DO 
For five years, they must seek the approval of the American League president 
for the hiring, firing, promotion, demotion or reassignment of any officer of 
the club; any court litigation or arbitration (other than salary) against a 
major league player or the retention of outside counsel or private 
investigators for any matter relating to a major league player. 
