URBAN BEEKEEPING STIRS A SWARM OF CONTROVERSY; 
BUT THEIR ROLE IN NEUTRALIZING 'KILLER BEES' MAY TAKE THE STING OUT OF 
APICULTURE FOES 
Fran Baron received an anxious telephone call some weeks ago from a woman 
living next to a wooded area of San Francisco's scenic Army post, the Presidio. 
"Mr. Baron, there's a swarm of bees in the park and the SPCA told me to call 
you to see if you could remove it." 
No problem, replied Baron, who donned overalls, gloves and a straw hat with 
netting over it. Carrying a cardboard box with a piece of khaki cloth attached 
to one side, Baron, 67, approached the swarm buzzing under a bottlebrush tree 
and shook the limb above it, expertly guiding the 10,000 bees into his box. 
Then he covered the box with the cloth, carried the bees home and added them to 
his two hives. 
Bee Phobia 
Snaring a swarm for a nervous citizen was a relatively simple act for the 
10-year beekeeper, who is used to people's fears about bees. These fears can 
sometimes cause people to want to deprive him of his hives, and even push for 
laws to ban beekeeping. 
Ironically, however, it is Baron, along with the hundreds of other beekeepers 
in San Francisco, who might be called on some day to perform a major public 
service: helping the city shoo away swarms of Africanized bees. 
Africanized or "killer" bees -- introduced to Brazil from Africa in 1957 -- 
have been slowly working their way north through South and Central America. 
Experts expect them to enter the United States through Texas and possibly make 
their way to California in three to five years. 
Though they rarely kill and are no more venomous than other bees, Africanized 
bees are more easily disturbed by people and animals than domestic, or 
European, bees, according to Howell Daly, an entomology professor at UC 
Berkeley. When threatened, Africanized bees have been known to attack in swarms 
and engage in a frenzy of stinging that can last up to 30 minutes, he said. 
Urban Provocations 
It will be especially important to keep Africanized bees away from cities where 
they are most likely to be provoked, said Stanley Williams, a biology professor 
at San Francisco State University. Scientists say they are relying greatly in 
this effort on the urban beekeepers and their hives of domestic bees, because 
it will be harder for the invaders to take root where other bees already exist. 
"Urban colonies are the big hope," Williams said. "By having well-established 
communities with such gentle bees, it will greatly impair the establishment of 
the killer bees." 
Beekeepers also can help by artificially inseminating the queen bees in their 
hives, thus denying the opportunity of the invaders to breed with domestic 
bees, the experts say. Each hive has one queen that mates only once in her 
lifetime. By artificially inseminating the queen, beekeepers will eliminate the 
chance of her pairing with an Africanized bee. 
If beekeepers can keep Africanized bees out of their hives, chances are slimmer 
that the aggressive bees will establish colonies on their own, because there is 
only so much pollen to go around. Without pollen, which is used to feed young 
bees, the colonies cannot survive, Williams said. 
"If they can't reproduce, it will slow down the establishment of Africanized 
bees and they will move outside the city," he said. 
$50-Million Industry 
In rural areas of the state, there no doubt will be invasions of Africanized 
bees into domestic colonies, particularly commercial colonies, bee experts say. 
Commercial bees are used to pollinate crops, produce honey and make queens, 
generating $50 million a year in agricultural income in California, according 
to Eric Musson, a bee expert at UC Davis. Musson and others say there should be 
no serious economic consequences by the introduction of the Africanized bees 
into these commercial colonies. 
Scientists also say the specter of advancing swarms of Africanized bees should 
be no cause for panic. They point out that people in Central and South America 
have co-existed with Africanized bees for years. They "are not marauders," said 
Norman Gary, a UC Davis entomology professor. "They're not out to kill people 
and animals." 
"It doesn't stand to reason (to call them) killer bees," added Leonore Bravo, a 
13-year San Francisco beekeeper. "The population of Africa wouldn't be left." 
About 350 people have died from stings of Africanized bees in Central and South 
America over the past 30 years, Musson said. Although several stray colonies of 
Africanized bees, believed to have come from a truckload of imported cargo, 
were found near Bakersfield in 1985, no one in the United States is known to 
have died from the sting of Africanized bees. 
Although the experts say the urban beekeepers are the main hope of keeping 
Africanized bees out of cities, beekeepers have traditionally struggled with a 
public relations problem. They tend to "have difficulty," says Daly, with those 
who want to outlaw domestic bee hives in urban areas. 
As beekeepers know, beehives are widely regarded as lairs of a harmful enemy 
rather than homes to friendly defenders. Because bees swarm and sting, people 
who fear them often do not want them nearby, particularly in the close quarters 
of urban living. 
As San Francisco has shown, it can take just one person's complaint to threaten 
continued beekeeping. In July, City Supervisor Jim Gonzales proposed an 
ordinance outlawing residential beekeeping after a constituent complained that 
she was afraid to go outside because of her neighbor's beehives. Blackberry 
bushes in her back yard went unattended, she said, because the bees frightened 
away gardeners she tried to hire. 
Although the ordinance failed, Gonzales said he plans to reintroduce it in 
September. If it passes, San Francisco will join Los Angeles and several other 
cities that impose restrictions on beekeeping. The Los Angeles law confines 
beekeeping to property that is widely separated from the nearest neighbor. 
An outright ban "because of one person's fear seems to be an overreaction," 
said Richard Avanzino, San Francisco SPCA president. 
"It's absurd," said Williams of San Francisco State. To ban bees "would be like 
passing an ordinance against flowers," he said. 
About 10 people a year in the United States die from bee stings, said Musson of 
UC Davis. The latest fatal attack in California took place last month in a 
Fresno County cantaloupe patch when Mary Gaxiola, 66, drove a truck into a 
group of hives and died from 136 bee stings. 
Local beekeepers said they occasionally get stung, adding that people can 
unwittingly provoke bees by operating power gardening tools too close to the 
hive or walking in a bee's flight path. 
But scientists and local apiculturists -- the formal name for beekeepers -- 
argue that bees have value that far outweighs their danger. Besides being able 
to ward off future swarms of Africanized bees, domestic bees produce honey and 
pollinate plants and fruit trees. A bee ban, says Williams, would significantly 
alter the environment. 
"They're so precious, so important to humankind that we try to protect them as 
much as possible," said Louis Dubay, who holds the title of San Francisco's 
honorary beekeeper, bestowed by a mayor some years ago. Dubay, 81, famed for 
working with bees with his bare hands, isn't alone in his enthusiasm for bees. 
Statewide, California boasts at least 10,000 hobby beekeepers and about 20 
beekeeping organizations, including the California State Beekeepers Assn., 
which has nearly 300 members, Musson said. 
