OUTTAKES: CINEFILE 
The producers are calling it "Die Hard Meets the Dead Poets Society." Louis 
Gossett Jr., Wil Wheaton, Sean Astin, Keith Coogan, Denholm Elliott, Mason 
Adams, Michael Champion, Andrew Divoff and Lee Ermey star in "Toy Soldiers," a 
suspense-drama from Island Pictures/Tri-Star in which terrorists take over an 
elite boys prep school and demand the release of the head terrorist's father, a 
Colombian drug lord. Screenwriter Dan Petrie Jr. makes his directorial debut 
from his own script, based on a novel by William Kennedy (not the Albany 
novelist). Mark Burg and Chris Zarpas, the new management team at Island, will 
executive produce while Jack Freedman and Patricia Herskovic produce. 
Production gets underway Sept. 5 in Virginia. 
Two movies featuring down-and-out writers moving into strange new digs head for 
the cameras. In Sotela Pictures' "Let Sleeping Dogs Lie," Dylan McDermott, Joan 
Chen, Sharon Stone and Ted Sizemore star in a suspense tale of a burned-out 
writer moving into a Hollywood Hills home where a horrible multiple murder had 
taken place. Peter Finch (son of the late actor) directs from a script he wrote 
with Yolande Turner. Production begins locally Sept. 10. Paul Mason executive 
produces. 
Then, in Avenue Pictures' "Honeysuckle Cottage," Val Kilmer will play a 
struggling author who moves into the Gothic home of his aunt, the late author 
of best-selling Gothic romance novels. Here his life takes a new turn. 
Christopher Guest directs for producers Neal Moritz and Karen Murphy. 
Production begins mid-October, the location as yet undecided. 
Damon Wayans of Fox Broadcasting's "In Living Color" has been cast opposite 
Bruce Willis in "The Last Boy Scout," Shane Black's tale of gambling and 
corruption in pro football, which Joel Silver is producing for the Geffen Co. 
and Warners. A January start is planned. 
Bill Campbell has landed the much sought-after starring role in "The 
Rocketeer," Gordon Co./Walt Disney Pictures' film adaptation of the famed 
comic-book character. Danny Bilson and Paul De Meo wrote the script. Joe 
Johnston rolls cameras in Northern California in mid-September for producers 
Lawrence Gordon, Charles Gordon and Lloyd Levin. 
Glenn Ford will star as a police captain in American International's "Raw 
Nerve," a psychological thriller getting underway Aug. 27 in Mobile, Ala. Rita 
Aras produces and David Prior directs from a script he wrote with Lawrence 
Simeone. 
Largo Entertainment plans to pair "Little Vera" star Natalya Negoda and Frank 
Whaley in its mystery drama, "Icons." 
Meanwhile, Jared Chandler, who just finished re-shoots on Paramount's "Flight 
of the Intruder," joins Patrick Swayze, Keanu Reeves, Gary Busey and Lori Petty 
in Largo's action-thriller "Riders on the Storm," currently filming in Southern 
California. Chandler plays an FBI agent. Kathryn Bigelow directs. 
Felicity Waterman, who just completed her starring role in "Lena's Holiday" for 
Crown, joins Christopher Atkins in Quest Studios' "Fire, Ice and My Wife," a 
relationship comedy which Atkins wrote. Director-producer Hugh Parks launches 
production in November. 
Correction: Producer-director George Vouros' name was misspelled in last week's 
item about his production of "Medea" starring Eartha Kitt. Kirk Honeycutt 
