EX-EDUCATION CHIEF BACKED AS JAPAN PRIME MINISTER 
Toshiki Kaifu, a former education minister and an official of the smallest 
faction in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, emerged Wednesday as the likely 
successor to Prime Minister Sosuke Uno. 
With assurances of support from most of the party's five factions, Kaifu, 58, 
announced that he will be a candidate in Tuesday's election for party 
president. The winner will be elected prime minister by the lower house of 
Parliament, where the Liberal Democrats have a 39-seat majority. 
Kaifu made his announcement after the leader of his faction, Toshio Komoto, a 
former deputy prime minister who twice before had sought the post of prime 
minister, withdrew his name. 
Komoto, seated beside Kaifu, said the 31 members of his faction have informed 
him that the party's representatives in Parliament favor a youthful leader to 
guide the beleaguered party through what promises to be a crucial, uphill 
battle in a forthcoming election for the lower house. Komoto is 78. 
Kaifu also has the support of the 113-member faction controlled by former Prime 
Minister Noboru Takeshita and the 88-member faction of former Foreign Minister 
Shintaro Abe. 
Thus, he was assured, even before announcing his candidacy, of getting more 
than 50% of the votes to be cast in the party caucus. After Komoto's 
announcement, Kiichi Miyazawa, leader of the party's third-largest faction, 
which controls 19% of the caucus votes, added his endorsement. 
Political analysts said the overwhelming support for Kaifu gave him "a 99% 
guarantee" of victory. 
Candidates will submit their applications for the party presidency at a meeting 
Saturday, and the election is scheduled to take place at a party caucus 
Tuesday. Voting Tuesday will be the 405 Liberal Democratic members of both 
houses of Parliament and one party representative from each of Japan's 47 
prefectures -- a total of 452. 
First Formal Candidate 
The announcement by Kaifu (pronounced Kigh-foo) made him the first formal 
candidate. Japanese newspapers reported that Shintaro Ishihara, a hawkish 
novelist-turned-politician, might also be a candidate. 
Kaifu was a close associate of the late Prime Minister Takeo Miki, the "Mr. 
Clean" of Liberal Democratic politics in the years since World War II, and this 
has given him a corruption-free image. 
Yet Kaifu conceded Wednesday that he, like all the party's first-echelon 
leaders, had received political contributions from Recruit Co., the information 
and real estate conglomerate at the center of the scandal that brought down 
Takeshita and put Uno in his place. 
But unlike the front-line leaders, all of whom the party disqualified from 
holding office, Kaifu said he had made no windfall profits from transactions in 
Recruit stock. 
Kaifu said the company gave him 14.4 million yen ($105,726) between 1983 and 
1987 in contributions for political activities. He said the contributions were 
all reported to the authorities, as required by law, and amounted to "only a 
small portion" of the 200 million to 300 million yen ($1.5 million to $2.2 
million) he said he has received in total contributions in recent years. 
"At the time I received the (Recruit) contributions, that company was not known 
as a firm that was creating a social problem," Kaifu said. He said he has 
received no contributions from Recruit since its influence-buying activities 
were exposed last year. 
Kaifu's emergence as the likely successor to Uno appeared to reflect the 
desperation of the Liberal Democrats. In May, after Takeshita assumed 
responsibility for the Recruit scandal and announced his resignation, he said 
no consideration would be given to any of the party's "youth corps" as prime 
minister. Instead, he designated as his successor Uno, 66, whose 1985 affair 
with a geisha was exposed three days after Uno took office June 2. 
Voter disenchantment with the Liberal Democrats -- rooted in the Recruit 
scandal as well as a broken promise not to enact a consumption tax -- led to a 
setback in the July 23 election for the upper house of Parliament. The Liberal 
Democrats fell 17 seats short of a majority, the first time since the party was 
formed 34 years ago that it had lost control of either house of Parliament. 
As the votes were being counted, Uno announced his intention to resign as prime 
minister. 
Fresh Face Needed 
A surge of popularity for Takako Doi, chairwoman of the Socialist Party, 
increased the number of Socialist seats in the upper house by 63% and made it 
imperative that the Liberal Democrats choose a leader with a fresh appearance. 
Kaifu's good looks and his ability as an orator -- he won a national debating 
contest as a student at Waseda University -- were cited as reasons for choosing 
him to deal with the "Doi boom." 
Elections for the powerful lower house of Parliament must take place by next 
July but are expected to be called as early as this fall, and the Liberal 
Democrats face a make-or-break situation. 
The Liberal Democrats' setback in the upper house meant that they can no longer 
enact legislation unilaterally; a loss in the lower house could deprive them of 
the power to elect their leader unilaterally as prime minister. 
'Crisis for the Party' 
In recommending Kaifu, Komoto said the upper house defeat constituted "a crisis 
for the party and a crisis for Japan." 
Kaifu pledged to make political reform his No. 1 priority. He pointed to his 
faction's record of advocating political ethics and his own work with a ruling 
party reform committee. 
In addition, he said he would be willing to revise the unpopular consumption 
tax, which analysts cited as the main cause for the Liberal Democrats' setback 
in the upper house. But he asked for more time "to organize my thinking" on the 
matter. 
