IN A FIRST, GROUPS PITCH PRIVATELY FUNDED ROADS, RAIL LINES; 
TRANSIT: CALTRANS WILL SELECT FOUR OF EIGHT PROPOSALS, GRANTING RIGHTS OF WAY 
BUT LEAVING CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE WORK TO THE WINNING COMPANIES. 
In the first bids of their kind in California, eight private business groups 
Wednesday submitted proposals to Caltrans for road or rail projects to which 
the state would contribute only the rights of way, and all construction and 
maintenance would be paid for privately. 
The proposals, of which Caltrans will select four for franchises next month, 
range from an 80-m.p.h. magnetically powered rail line from Los Angeles 
International Airport to Palmdale, to an array of toll highways in Orange, San 
Diego and other counties. 
An aura of secrecy surrounded many details of the proposals after officers of 
some of the private firms said they had been warned by Caltrans against saying 
how much their projects would cost or what tolls or fares would eventually be 
charged the public. 
Caltrans Director Robert K. Best later denied this. He said Caltrans wanted to 
be cautious about releasing details of the projects for proprietary reasons 
affecting the various businesses involved, and to avoid public pressure during 
its selection process. But, he said, each firm was free to say what it wanted 
about its proposal. 
In Los Angeles, officials of a consortium including the Perini Corp., the firm 
of Daniel, Mann, Johnson &amp; Mendenhall and the HSST Corp. insisted, however, 
that Caltrans had told them not to say how much their magnetic-levitation rail 
system would cost or give other specific details. 
The result was that when Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley and other area officials 
appeared at a San Fernando Valley news conference to endorse what is the only 
Los Angeles County project being proposed, they had to admit they were 
supporting it without being told what it would cost, how much the fares would 
be or what freeway disruptions might result from the construction process. 
These were the projects proposed Wednesday, as described by the various firms, 
under legislation enacted last year to facilitate privatization of road and 
rail projects to supplement publicly funded freeways and other transportation 
systems: 
The Perini-led consortium would build the magnetic rail line, using Japanese 
magnetic-levitation technology, to Santa Clarita by 1997 and extend later to 
Palmdale and a possible connection with the proposed Anaheim-to-Las Vegas 
high-speed magnetic line. That line, however, is supposed to use German 
technology, which would necessitate a change of trains in Palmdale. 
Intermediate stops in the initial Santa Clarita phase would be at Jefferson 
Boulevard, Wilshire Boulevard, Victory Boulevard and Chatsworth Street. 
The California Toll Road Development Group, composed of Parsons Municipal 
Services Inc., two French companies and an Australian company, would build a 
$1.2-billion, 90-mile toll road from Fremont to Vacaville in Northern 
California. 
The California Private Transportation Corp., consisting of CRSS Commercial 
Group Inc., Citicorp and several other firms, would construct extra toll lanes 
for private vehicular traffic along the Riverside Freeway from the Riverside 
County line to the Route 55 interchange in Orange County. 
PrivaCAL, a joint venture of the Bechtel Corp., D. J. Smith Associates Inc. and 
William R. Gray &amp; Co., would build a toll road in San Diego County from 
California 54 in southeast San Diego to California 905 close to the Mexican 
border through a region now being developed. 
California Transportation Ventures Inc., including Parsons Brinckerhoff 
Development Group Inc., Fluor Daniel Inc., GIE Transroute of France and 
Prudential-Bache Capital Funding, has a competing proposal for a San Diego toll 
road, but a spokesman for the group would not disclose exactly what route it 
would follow. Caltrans indicated it would largely follow the route PrivaCAL 
wants to use. 
The Perot Group Consortium, composed of Greiner Engineering Inc. and seven 
other companies, would extend the 57 Freeway in Orange County in a toll road 
southwest along the Santa Ana River bed. 
Transportation Systems Associates, including T. Y. Lin International, 
Morrison-Knudsen Engineers, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co. Inc. and GTM 
International of France, would build a two-mile $125-million Embarcadero 
expressway in San Francisco, either on the surface or below it, to replace the 
earthquake-damaged Embarcadero Freeway, which is now closed. Company officials 
said that unlike the other proposals, theirs would not be a toll road. 
Construction costs would be redeemed by selling airspace above the expressway. 
Enserch Corp., with Ebasco Services Inc. and six other companies affiliated, 
would build a toll road from California 126 at the Los Angeles County line, 
running southwest in Ventura County to Tapo Canyon Road, with a second phase to 
carry the project to the 118 Freeway west of the Simi Valley. 
Caltrans Director Best said he wants to avoid as much as possible popular 
agitation for or against the proposals while his agency decides which four to 
accept. 
He said that there would be plenty of time for public discussion later during 
environmental studies and that all projects would be subject to the later final 
approval of Caltrans. 
Even before Best spoke in a telephone interview, Mayor Bradley and Assemblyman 
Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) tried to exert pressure on behalf of the Perini rail 
proposal through the San Fernando Valley, declaring at the news conference that 
Caltrans should definitely accept the only project proposed from the state's 
most-populous county. 
Bradley proclaimed himself a big supporter of so-called maglev technology, 
under which a train runs on a cushion of air, powered by electromagnetic 
currents. He said he had seen it run on test tracks and viewed it as unique. 
The original legislation, sponsored by Assemblyman William P. Baker 
(R-Danville), requires Caltrans to select among the four approved projects at 
least one Northern California and one Southern California proposal. It then has 
a choice of the others. 
