2.7% GROWTH IN QUARTER QUELLS RECESSION FEARS 
The nation's economy grew at a healthy annual rate of 2.7% in the spring, 
substantially faster than the 1.7% growth rate reported a month ago for the 
second quarter, the Commerce Department said Tuesday. 
The strong upward revision, which was largely expected by financial markets and 
economists, not only laid fears of recession to rest but it put within easy 
reach Administration forecasts of 2.9% growth for the whole year. 
The economic growth rate was 3.7% for the first three months of 1989. For the 
first half of the year, the economy grew at an annual rate of about 3.2%. 
However, the Commerce Department said in an associated report that after-tax 
corporate profits fell by a steep 6.4% from April through June for the second 
consecutive quarterly decline. That was a clear indication that businesses, 
especially in manufacturing, were unable to pass along labor and material cost 
increases, and it provided a worrisome signal of either future inflation or of 
a continued squeeze on industrial profitability. 
Economists greeted the revised economic growth estimate soberly. They noted 
that much of the improvement was caused by higher-than-expected consumer 
spending, a factor that may deter the Federal Reserve Board from any further 
steps to ease interest rates. 
"This was almost entirely consumer spending, but we had begun to see that from 
the retail sales reports from late spring," said Bruce Steinberg of the Merrill 
Lynch investment house in New York. "The economy in late spring turned out to 
be a lot stronger than anybody expected, exactly at the time when the Fed was 
busily easing. Now, it's likely that the Fed will delay any further action for 
quite a while." 
David Wyss of Data Resources Inc., a consulting firm in Lexington, Mass., 
called the revised economic growth rate "about what we expected, but with a lot 
more consumer spending than we first thought. There was also stronger 
investment, which is unambiguously good news. But the strong orientation toward 
consumption is not the preferred composition. It means the Fed will have a hard 
time easing any more." 
Lynn Reaser, of First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles, added: "These numbers 
are no basis for further easing by the Fed." 
Nevertheless, Reaser said, First Interstate is still looking for a marked 
slowdown for the rest of 1989 -- 1% growth in the current quarter and a decline 
in economic activity in the year's final three months. 
The upside of that prediction, she said, is a belief that "inflation has peaked 
for the year and for this business cycle." 
Higher Inflation Plateau 
Various inflation measures in Tuesday's report were essentially unchanged from 
the earlier report, suggesting that inflation has hit a plateau higher this 
year than last, but not drastically so. 
But some economists warned that more inflation is in the offing. The drop in 
corporate profits will probably force businesses to raise their prices later 
on, said Giulio Martini of the New York brokerage house of Sanford C. Bernstein 
&amp; Co. 
"With two quarters of declining profits, you have the problem of a margin 
squeeze: They can't pass labor cost increases through," Martini said. "That 
means a building pressure for higher inflation next year." 
The Commerce Department's latest estimate of the economy in the second quarter 
pegged the total size of the nation's economic output at $4.134 trillion in 
annual terms. It said the economy grew by an annual rate of $27.2 billion in 
1982 dollars, compared with growth of $17.1 billion estimated a month ago. 
Of the $10.1 billion in new-found growth, a whopping $7.1 billion was accounted 
for by higher consumer spending. The Commerce Department said that consumer 
spending grew at a 2.2% rate in the second quarter, another sign that Americans 
still would rather spend than save. 
The nation's trade position, as reflected in the economic report, remained 
about the same as it had appeared a month earlier. The overall trade deficit, 
including financial transactions and services as well as trade in merchandise, 
improved at an annual rate of $2.5 billion, from $55 billion in the first three 
months of 1989 to $52.5 billion in the second three months. 
