THE PETE ROSE DECISION; 
ROSE INVESTIGATION CHRONOLOGY 
Feb. 20 -- Pete Rose is summoned to meet in New York with baseball Commissioner 
Peter Ueberroth, National League President Bart Giamatti, Executive Vice 
President Edwin Durso and incoming Deputy Commissioner Francis Vincent Jr. 
Attorneys Reuven Katz and Robert Pitcairn Jr. also attend. 
Feb. 22 -- Published reports say the Feb. 20 meeting concerned gambling 
allegations against Rose. 
March 20 -- The commissioner's office releases a statement saying it is 
investigating "serious allegations against Rose," with Washington attorney John 
Dowd heading the inquiry. 
March 21 -- Sports Illustrated reports Rose has ties to baseball betting. Chris 
Beyersdoerfer, Michael Fry, Thomas Gioiosa and Paul Janszen are identified as 
either having taken bets from Rose or having knowledge of them. 
March 24 -- The Cincinnati Post reports Rose's debts totaled nearly $500,000 
when he left the Reds in 1978 to sign with the Philadelphia Phillies as a free 
agent. 
March 25 -- Rose speaks for the first time about the reports, denying 
allegations he flashed betting signals during games. He declines to say whether 
he bet on baseball. 
March 27 -- Dowd says the investigation probably will last several more weeks. 
March 30 -- The Cincinnati Enquirer reports baseball investigated gambling 
allegations against Rose in the late 1970s. 
April 1 -- The Dayton Daily News reports that Internal Revenue Service 
investigators seized betting slips from Ron Peters on Aug. 17, 1988, one day 
after FBI agents obtained court permission to search Peters' car for drugs. 
April 5 -- The Cleveland Plain Dealer reports that a man listed in court 
documents by the code name "G-1" and identified by sources as Rose bet between 
$8,000 and $16,000 daily on baseball games during the 1987 season. Gioiosa is 
indicted in federal court in Cincinnati on one count of conspiracy to 
distribute cocaine, two counts of tax evasion and two counts of conspiracy to 
defraud the IRS. 
April 18 -- Giamatti sends a letter to U.S. District Judge Carl Rubin, who is 
to sentence Peters, stating that Peters has been "candid, forthright and 
truthful" with baseball investigators and provided critical testimony about 
Rose. 
April 21 -- Rubin says that he resents the commissioner entering a "vendetta" 
against Rose. Assistant U.S. Attorney Robert Brichler says Rose is being 
investigated by a grand jury on tax matters and says Peters has told federal 
investigators he took bets over a period of two years from Rose that could 
exceed $1 million. 
April 24 -- A transcript of the April 21 conference is released, along with 
Giamatti's letter. 
April 26 -- The New York Times reports Rubin said "the press has tried, 
convicted and executed Pete Rose" and criticizes Giamatti's investigation for 
taking too long. 
May 3 -- Commissioner's spokesman Rich Levin says Dowd will submit his report 
during the week beginning May 8. A grand jury in Cincinnati begins hearing 
evidence concerning Rose. 
May 9 -- Giamatti receives from Dowd a 225-page report, including seven volumes 
of exhibits. 
May 11 -- Giamatti sets May 25 hearing and has report delivered to Rose's 
attorneys. Giamatti reveals that 40 witnesses testified and confirms that Rose 
testified for two days. 
May 19 -- Rose's lawyers ask for a 30-day postponement of May 25 hearing, 
citing need for additional preparation time. 
May 22 -- Giamatti grants postponement request and reschedules hearing for June 
26. 
June 19 -- Rose sues Giamatti in Hamilton County Common Pleas Court, seeking to 
stop the hearing and prevent Giamatti from deciding the case. The lawsuit 
reveals that Peters has accused Rose of betting on Red games. 
June 20 -- Judge Norbert A. Nadel sets hearing for June 22 on Rose's request 
for a temporary restraining order. 
June 22 -- Dowd reveals during hearing that evidence shows Rose bet on major 
league baseball games, including Red games, during 1985, 1986 and 1987. The New 
York Times reports the FBI has determined Rose's handwriting is on betting 
slips seized from Peters. 
June 26 -- Nadel decides Giamatti has "prejudged Rose" and grants a two-week 
temporary restraining order keeping the commissioner from going ahead with his 
hearing. 
June 27 -- Giamatti appeals Nadel's ruling to 1st Ohio District Court of 
Appeals; Nadel orders investigative report released. 
June 28 -- 1st Ohio District Court of Appeals rejects Giamatti's appeal. 
July 3 -- Giamatti files "notice of removal" with U.S. District Court in 
Cincinnati, automatically removing the case from state court system until a 
federal hearing; case is assigned to U.S. District Judge John Holschuh in 
Columbus, Ohio. 
July 5 -- Rose's lawyers file motion asking Holschuh to send the case back to 
Hamilton County. 
July 31 -- Holschuh rejects Rose's motion to remand the case to Hamilton 
County. 
Aug. 3 -- Rose appeals Holschuh's decision to keep the case in federal court. 
Aug. 17 -- Federal appeals court says jurisdiction of Rose's case belongs in 
federal court in Columbus. 
Aug. 18 -- Holschuh schedules arguments Aug. 28 on Rose's request for a 
preliminary injunction that would indefinitely remove Giamatti from the case. 
Aug. 23 -- Giamatti calls news conference for Aug. 24. 
