CENTER GIVES DEAF STUDENTS SOME HIGH-TECH HELP 
Deaf students returning to Cal State Northridge this semester are getting 
high-tech help with note taking. 
An experimental classroom with a built-in projection screen, fashioned after 
one at Gallaudet University in Washington, now allows deaf students to see a 
close-up image of a speaker while simultaneously reading remarks captioned at 
the bottom of the screen. 
"This changes the way deaf people will receive information," said Victor 
Galloway, director of the National Center on Deafness at CSUN. "It helps 
students in a classroom who are able to lip-read but who may be seated too far 
away. It also eliminates the need for an interpreter, since a court reporter 
simply types as the person speaks and it is transferred onto the screen." 
The classroom, however, isn't the only thing that is new on campus. Six months 
ago, the National Center on Deafness moved out of the cramped bungalow it had 
occupied for 27 years and into the spacious, new Jeanne M. Chisholm Hall. The 
move, students and faculty say, brought more than just an increase in breathing 
room. 
New Facility 
Housed now in a two-story, $2.7-million facility that includes state-of-the-art 
equipment, the National Center on Deafness, many people believe, has finally 
gotten the respect it deserves. 
"We have the largest support program for mainstreaming deaf students at any 
four-year college in the world, and yet the students here always wondered why 
the program was put in a temporary building," Galloway said. "When we moved 
into Chisholm Hall, it was a validation for them. Their self-image went way 
up." 
Those emotions, Galloway said, were not unlike sentiments expressed in March of 
last year by students at Gallaudet, the only liberal arts university in the 
world exclusively for deaf students. After 124 years of being run by a hearing 
administration, students, faculty and alumni there demanded -- and finally got 
-- a deaf president. 
"It was a major victory for deaf people everywhere," Galloway, who is deaf, 
said through his interpreter. "It symbolized the abilities of deaf people, as 
well as the changing way that deaf people are being perceived in the hearing 
community." 
It was not surprising then, that Gallaudet's first deaf president, I. King 
Jordan, was asked to be the featured speaker at the Jeanne Chisholm Hall open 
house last Saturday. The event was scheduled to coincide with International 
Deaf Awareness Week, which begins Monday. 
After the event, an awards banquet was scheduled for nationally recognized 
individuals who have made significant contributions in the field of deafness. 
Award recipients include Dr. Bernard Bragg, the deaf actor and mime whose work 
on stage and the PBS television series "The Quiet Man" is credited with paving 
the way for other deaf actors; U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), whose experiences 
with a deaf brother led to his sponsorship of several bills, including the 
recently passed Americans With Disabilities Act; Gary Olsen, executive director 
of the National Assn. of the Deaf; Ray Jones, past director of the CSUN center, 
and Julius Wiggins, publisher of The Silent News, a bimonthly newspaper by and 
for the deaf with a circulation of 150,000. 
The 18,500-square-foot Jeanne Chisholm Hall, built in brick with an open patio 
for studying or socializing, was completely funded through a donation to the 
university from former San Fernando Valley resident Grace Petri in memory of 
her younger sister. It is home to the center and the university's department of 
communicative disorders. 
Hearing Tests 
In addition to providing the university's 215 hearing-impaired students with 
interpreting, note-taking, tutoring and counseling services, the center also 
has an audiology lab for hearing tests and one of the largest collections in 
the country of books and captioned videocassettes relating to deafness. 
Petri, 87, who lives in Palm Springs, didn't originally set out to help the 
university's deaf population, said Dorena Knepper, CSUN governmental and public 
affairs director. She was really more interested in doing something for the 
disabled in memory of her sister," Knepper said. "But she asked us, 'Well, what 
do you need?' We showed her the bungalow" that housed the center. 
Petri's affection for Chisholm, who died in 1978, appears to have gone far 
deeper than many sisterly bonds. For several decades, the two sisters worked as 
business partners in construction and industrial development, a field populated 
mostly by men. That partnership was largely responsible for the construction of 
Valley Presbyterian Hospital in Van Nuys, of which Chisholm was a co-founder. 
Founded Council 
In addition to her involvement in philanthropic groups such as the Salvation 
Army and the YWCA, Chisholm also founded the Welfare Planning Council of the 
San Fernando Valley and helped found the local branch of the United Way. 
"She was a remarkable person, a wonderful woman to everybody," said Petri, who 
in recent years has lost much of her hearing. "She was so well known in the 
Valley and did so many things. I wanted a memorial to her." 
Petri, who has shunned publicity and initially stipulated that her donation 
remain anonymous, paused for a moment. 
"It is a beautiful building and it will do a lot of good," she said. "I think 
my sister would be quite happy." 
