ORANGE COUNTY DIGEST: SANTA ANA; 
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATIONS PLANNED 
Santa Ana residents will celebrate the independence of Mexico and other Central 
American countries Sunday with the county's first Fiesta de Independencia 
Parade. 
Mexico celebrates its independence from Spain on Saturday, but the parade was 
scheduled for Sunday because of traffic reasons, said Roger Kooi, the city's 
downtown development manager. Kooi said the celebration also honors Guatemala, 
Costa Rica, El Salvador and Puerto Rico. 
"There isn't anything like this in Orange County," said City Councilman Miguel 
A. Pulido, adding that the nearest area with an official parade is East Los 
Angeles, which will conduct its event today. 
The parade is part of a weekend street fair sponsored by Santa Ana merchants 
that has been held for the past four years, Kooi said. 
The parade is scheduled to include floats, bands and clowns. A main feature 
will be a group of a dozen stunt motorcyclists, most of whom come from Mexico 
City. 
Raul Velasco, a talk-show host from Mexico City featured on the Spanish 
International Network, will be the parade's grand marshal, Pulido said. 
Pulido said organizers hope the parade will remove some misconceptions about 
independence day celebrations in Latin American countries. 
"There's misinformation as to what that means," he said. "A lot of folks think 
that Cinco de Mayo (May 5) is independence day." That holiday celebrates the 
Mexican military victory at Puebla over a French expeditionary force in 1862. 
The parade will begin at 1 p.m. on Sunday. Participants will begin lining up at 
noon. 
The parade will start at 15th and Main streets and travel south to 3rd Street. 
The festival will run from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. today and 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. on 
Saturday and Sunday. It will take place on 4th Street between Broadway and 
French Avenue. The festival will include concession stands, music and clowns. A 
special ceremony, called El Grito (cry of independence), featuring local civic 
leaders, will be held at 6:30 p.m. today.John Wayne AirportFAA Awards $950,000 
to Improve Security 
The Federal Aviation Administration has awarded the county $950,000 to pay for 
security improvements at John Wayne Airport. 
The grant will be used for radio communications, card reader and video 
surveillance systems. 
"They were persuaded by the county's need," Rep. C. Christopher Cox (R-Newport 
Beach) said Thursday. "This will spare the expense to county residents." 
Cox is one of two Republicans who sit on the House Subcommittee on Government 
Activities and Transportation, which will begin hearings Sept. 25 on aviation 
security in response to the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in Lockerbie, 
Scotland, in December, 1988. 
"Generally we are updating airline security across the country," Cox said. 
The county will also receive $3.25 million this fiscal year to pay for airport 
improvements including roadways, taxiways, and aircraft rescue and firefighting 
vehicles. That money is part of $10 million budgeted for the airport through 
1992, but will be delivered earlier than expected. 
