MATER DEI TO BE INVESTIGATED ON SPARKS MATTER; 
HIGH SCHOOLS: SOUTHERN SECTION QUESTIONS QUICK ENROLLMENT OF TRANSFERS FROM 
MONTCLAIR PREP. 
Four days after football players Derek and Leland Sparks transferred from Van 
Nuys Montclair Prep to Santa Ana Mater Dei High, Stan Thomas, commissioner of 
the CIF Southern Section, said Thursday he is investigating the Mater Dei 
athletic program. 
Thomas said he questioned how two non-Catholics could get into Mater Dei, a 
Catholic high school, at the last minute. 
"It would appear Mater Dei is giving special treatment to athletes," Thomas 
said. "I'm concerned with why they let these athletes in." 
The Sparks, who are cousins, withdrew from Montclair Prep last Tuesday, 
contacted Mater Dei Wednesday and enrolled Monday. Derek practiced with the 
football team all week. 
Thomas said Mater Dei's history played a role in prompting the investigation. 
The school was put on probation without sanctions by the Southern Section for 
the 1988-89 school year for illegal inducements in the transfer of Corona del 
Mar quarterback Dan O'Neil. 
"All I can say is that Derek and Leland didn't receive any preferential 
treatment here," said Lyle Porter, Mater Dei's first-year principal. "If two 
non-athletes would have come in at the same time as Derek and Leland, we would 
have made the same considerations for their admission." 
The Mater Dei investigation comes a day after the Southern Section Executive 
Committee ordered an investigation of the Montclair Prep athletic program. 
While Thomas and three members of the executive committee listened to an appeal 
Wednesday concerning a fifth year of eligibility for Leland Sparks, testimony 
from Jerome and Eric Sparks -- uncles of Derek and Leland -- persuaded the 
committee to investigate Montclair Prep. 
Jerome and Eric Sparks accused the Montclair coaching staff and Vernon Simpson, 
principal, of grade tampering, recruiting inducements and supplying false 
information on eligibility guidelines. Leland was granted a fifth year, 
provided he qualifies academically. 
Unhappy when Leland's eligibility had been denied two hours before Montclair 
Prep's season opener against Farrington High in Honolulu, Jerome Sparks ook the 
players to Mater Dei. The cousins are living in Santa Ana with June Sparks, 
Derek's mother, who recently moved from Wharton, Tex. 
Porter said according to transcripts, some of which are unofficial, Leland is a 
C-plus student and Derek is a B-minus, which academically qualifies them for 
admission into Mater Dei. 
He added that no members of the athletic staff had input into their admission. 
