ONLY IN L.A. PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
Writer Ben Stein filed a lawsuit in L.A. Tuesday, claiming that a Carl's Jr. 
commercial used a schoolteacher character he created in the movie "Ferris 
Bueller's Day Off." 
Stein described the vocal style of the character in the movie as "monotonous, 
nasal, repetitive, nerdy and slightly insane. . . ." 
He thinks this was the first teacher to sound that way? 
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory is often in the news for directing such 
exploratory missions as the current photo-shoot of Venus by the Magellan 
spacecraft. 
But some people still have the wrong idea about JPL. They assume the Pasadena 
agency's name refers to jet aircraft, rather than to jet propulsion (the 
process by which rockets are powered). 
"A while back we got an indignant letter from a woman in Orange County," said 
George Alexander, a JPL spokesman. "She had felt a sonic boom and phoned the 
police and they told here it was probably made by a couple of jets. So she 
wrote us and said, 'You scared my dogs. Why can't you do things more quietly?' 
" 
Moving from Venusians to Venetians: A workshop on "Writing About Sex," 
scheduled to begin earlier this month, has been reset for 8 p.m. next Wednesday 
at the Beyond Baroque arts center in Venice. Just a slight case of classes 
interruptus. 
Naturally, the subject of sex brings us to headaches. 
A collection of paintings, photographs and prints illustrating headaches will 
throb at the Santa Monica Public Library Oct. 1-26. 
The artists said they drew on their own personal suffering. John Crowley, for 
instance, attributed the inspiration for his painting (see photo) to a migraine 
that lasted three weeks. 
We're always stricken when we eat ice cream too fast. 
For those of you who'd like to tell the bus company where to go: 
The RTD says that Sunday is the deadline for entries in "People Moving L.A. in 
the '90s," its public contest aimed at speeding up transportation in the 
region. 
RTD Board President Nick Patsaouras said a panel of experts will forward the 
best 90 ideas to the agency responsible for implementation. 
And what will the winners receive for relieving L.A. of its massive traffic 
congestion, clearing up L.A.'s smoggy skies and saving commuters thousands of 
hours? 
A transit T-shirt and one RTD monthly pass. 
A phone caller to the Saudi Arabian Consulate in Beverly Hills reports that, 
while he was on hold, he heard the strains of "Home, Home on the Range." 
 miscelLAny: 
The Viking's Table in West L.A. is a Chinese restaurant. 
