SOME RENTERS NOT AT HOME WITH COMPLEX CHANGES; 
HOUSING: RENOVATIONS AND RENT INCREASES AT 548-UNIT LOMA PALISADES APARTMENT 
COMPLEX ARE DISPLACING MANY LONGTIME TENANTS. 
Eighty-year-old Leonard Henneveld admits that when millionaire Ernest Rady and 
his partners first bought the Loma Palisades apartments in July, he paid little 
attention. After 17 years in the sprawling Point Loma complex, the retired 
accountant figured it would take more than a new landlord to upset his life. 
Then the rent went up 10% -- from $600 to $660 for a two-bedroom unit and up to 
$680 for a three-bedroom. As part of a landscaping plan, Rady's management 
company, American Assets Inc., poisoned the grass, turning it brown. Seventy of 
Henneveld's neighbors were told they would have to move out to make way for 
renovations. 
And then, to Henneveld's amazement, a crew ripped the roof off the second-story 
unit he and his ailing wife share, showering their possessions with gravel and 
dirt. Henneveld made "a scene" in the management office and was recompensed 
eight days' rent for the roofing fallout. But still, he has decided to move 
out. 
"First, I decided, 'I won't pay a dime (in rent).' But I won't make a scene 
about it anymore. I have to think of my own heart," he said, explaining that he 
plans to move by the end of this month. "The new owners don't care. It's an 
investment object, not a home." 
Henneveld is not alone. On recent weekends, the 30-year-old property -- what 
some called Point Loma's last truly affordable housing -- has been dotted with 
moving vans and yard sales. Local liquor stores have noted a run on cardboard 
packing boxes, and Barnard Elementary School, many of whose students live in 
the 548-unit complex, has seen a decline in enrollment. 
"Some of our families who have been with us for some time have indicated that 
they can't afford the rent hike and they won't be able to continue," said 
Principal Pat McGann, who says the school has fewer kindergartners and 
first-graders this year than in the past. "We are monitoring it very 
carefully." 
A few residents even believe that the rent hike, which took effect Sept. 1, 
played a part in the Aug. 28 suicide of Lester Finkelstein, a 62-year-old 
grandfather and seven-year resident who drowned himself in one of the Loma 
Palisades pools. While he left no note, his roommate, Scott Rohter, says he is 
convinced that fear of homelessness made him do it. 
"My roommate was down to his last few bucks," said Rohter, who is leading a 
one-man rent strike, hanging a banner off his balcony that reads, "Rent Strike, 
Not Rent Hike." "He didn't want to be homeless and he was ashamed of having to 
borrow money from his family." 
Rady, a minority owner of the Padres, a director of Western Financial Savings 
Bank and chairman of the Insurance Company of the West, did not return 
telephone calls last week. But officials at American Assets, which manages 
2,100 apartments countywide, firmly rejected the suggestion that they are 
ushering in an era of heartlessness at Loma Palisades. The repairs they are 
making are essential, they say, and even after the increase, rents remain lower 
than other apartments in the area. 
"Change is difficult. And certainly some people that currently live there 
(will) not be able to continue to live there," said Allen Garrett, an American 
Assets vice president who himself lived in Loma Palisades 23 years ago, when it 
was what he called still a "lovely, first-class garden-style apartment 
complex." 
"But due to the previous management's lack of care for the property, it has 
turned into an eyesore -- and could turn into a ghetto if something wasn't done 
about it," he said. "It is within a number of years or months before minor 
problems start turning into very major problems." 
"We assure you, it is all going to be worthwhile," Mike Austin, the complex's 
new resident manager, wrote to Henneveld and his neighbors last week in a memo 
commanding that they close the windows and doors in their non-air-conditioned 
apartments so workmen could water-blast the exterior paint. "Loma Palisades is 
going to be (once again) the place to live." 
But several tenants -- among them single mothers, retirees and military 
personnel -- lament that as Loma Palisades becomes the place to live, they will 
no longer be the tenants who live there. Most acknowledge that the dingy 
apartments could use improvement. But new roofs, remodeled kitchens, spiffier 
lawns and fresh paint will mean little, they say, to those who cannot afford to 
stay and enjoy them. 
Rosalie Gilliland, a bartender and single mother of four, contends that is part 
of the new management's plan -- to clear out the current tenants to make way 
for upper-income residents. 
"They're blaming the condition of the building on the tenants -- and equating 
tenants who make more money with a better quality of tenant," she said, adding 
that since she was told to expect her 30-day "notice to vacate" just before 
Christmas, she, too, has been looking for new lodgings. "It's becoming more and 
more clear: We're not wanted here, folks. They're doing everything to drive us 
out." 
Garrett denies this, saying that American Assets is doing "everything possible" 
to accommodate those people who already call Loma Palisades home. He admits, 
however, that the rents will likely go up again before the renovation process 
is over. Eventually, Garrett said, the company plans to charge $710 and up for 
a two-bedroom and $830 or more for a three-bedroom apartment. 
Whatever the intent of such a hike, Gilliland says, the result will be the 
same: She will be priced out of Loma Palisades. 
Even before the rent went up, Gilliland was skimping to make ends meet. In 
July, she put a deposit on a two-bedroom unit and told management she wanted to 
switch to a three-bedroom when one opened up. Anticipating how crowded things 
would be, she sent her youngest child to live with her sister -- just until she 
could save a little to move into the bigger unit. 
But when she picked up her keys on Aug. 1, she learned that new owners were 
raising the rents and that she would soon be asked to move out. With the moving 
van idling outside, she says she had little choice but to move in. But now, she 
is running out of hope. 
"I'm living paycheck to paycheck. All the money I have goes right into 
survival," she said, adding that she lives in fear of unexpected expenses, like 
her car breaking down. "Now, with the three-bedroom at $800 and up, I have no 
hope in hell of getting my baby back." 
Not everyone is so desperate. Many tenants are choosing to stay and move into 
the renovated units as they open. Those who can afford to pay more say the 
improvements will come not a moment too soon. 
"It was going to crumble the way things were going," said Queenie Murphy, who 
has lived at Loma Palisades since 1960. "I'm sorry for people who can't pay the 
higher rent. But if we're going to upgrade and renovate so we can be proud of 
how we live, then you have to, naturally, pay more. Let them get after the 
government to build more low-cost housing." 
When some residents came door-to-door trying to organize a tenant organization, 
Murphy says she gave $10. But she does not support those who bash the new 
management. 
"I feel for them. It could happen to me," she said. "But attacking men who want 
to invest money -- that's not right. They are not the ones to be attacked for 
improving the neighborhood. I think the new people have done all they can do. 
They've been cooperative, they've been humane. They've gotten rid of some of 
the undesirables, which I am happy about." 
Gilliland feels that while she doesn't have much money, she should still be 
considered desirable. 
"I'm a good tenant. I pay my rent. I don't let my children destroy the 
property," she said. "But this is tight for me. At $60 (more), I could probably 
hang on. But at $110 and up, there's no way." 
Especially for Gilliland and others whose bare-bones budgets are barely 
balanced, the first edition of the Loma Palisades newsletter was hard to 
stomach. Published by the new owners, the September issue offers tenants 
cheerful suggestions about water conservation -- not to mention an opportunity 
to "get rich on us" by winning $50 for each new tenant referred. 
"Loma Palisades isn't just an apartment building, it's an apartment community, 
and we want everyone to be part of it," the newsletter said, urging residents 
to submit their birthdays, wedding anniversaries and baby announcements for 
publication. Tenants who pay their rent on or before Oct. 1, it said, will be 
eligible to win $100 -- "You could be the next BIG WINNER," the newsletter 
promised. 
And then there were the "PROVEN STRESS REDUCERS," a short list that included 
these helpful hints: "Get up fifteen minutes earlier in the morning. That way, 
when something goes wrong (and doesn't it always) you'll have more time to deal 
with it . . . Prepare for the morning the evening before . . . Don't rely on 
your memory . . . Always carry a small pad of paper and a pencil or pen." 
"Stress reduction? Ha! If they want that, why did they raise the rents? It's 
laughable," said a woman in her 70s who asked that her name not be used because 
she is moving out and, after more than 20 years as a tenant, wants to get her 
security deposit back. 
Garrett says he feels for such people, but wishes they would consider his side. 
"The landlord is always caught in a vise. We're caught in the middle because 
we're the new guy, and thus the bad guy," he said. "Not only do we not want to 
manage substandard properties, but by law we can't. . . . If somebody didn't 
step into this property, the county of San Diego would (soon) be saying, 'You 
cannot rent the units.' 
"Candidly, I'm very empathetic. But especially when you have senior citizens 
who are living in apartment units that are huge, on a cost-per-square-foot 
basis these are some of the lowest rents in the county," Garrett said, noting 
that Loma Palisades units range from 950 to 1,200 square feet. "Usually senior 
citizens are looking for places that are a little smaller." 
If they weren't already, they say they are now. Nanette Scherzer, a 57-year-old 
widow who has lived at Loma Palisades for 11 years, just finished moving from 
her two-bedroom apartment into a less expensive one-bedroom unit in another 
complex. 
Scherzer didn't want to leave the home she shared with her late husband. When 
he died three years ago, she recalls, the old management offered her a job in 
the rental office -- a gesture of kindness that she has not forgotten. 
The new management left a different impression. When she told them she could 
not afford the rent hike, she says, they "said, 'Why don't you get a roommate?' 
I said, 'I don't like roommates.' " 
With a fixed income of less than $1,000 a month, she had no choice. She hired a 
moving company, said goodby to her neighbors and piece by piece, sold off 
treasured possessions that will not fit in her new 600-square-foot home. 
Once she unpacks, she will return her cardboard boxes to Loma Palisades -- 
they're hard to find these days, she says. 
"I'll empty them and pass them on to someone else," she said. 
