SURVEY FINDS THE SIX KINDS OF SUPERMARKET SHOPPERS -- WHICH ARE YOU?; 
THE CHANGING NATURE OF FOOD PURCHASER 
Heidi Young unloads her grocery cart, full of Stouffer's frozen dinners, onto 
the conveyor belt and sighs. "I work a long week, and I don't like to spend a 
lot of time shopping," she says. 
Or cooking, for that matter. "When I get home, I don't have the energy and 
inclination." So it's either frozen dinners or fresh entrees prepared in the 
supermarket. 
Three checkout counters down from Young at an Alexandria, Va., Safeway is 
Charlotte Hall, who after 52 years of marriage admits she is tired of cooking. 
With her four children all gone from home, Hall and her husband "just don't eat 
a lot like we used to. We have a lot of frozen dinners or eat out." 
In the express lane, however, is John Kicak, a retired engineer and an avid 
shopper. Kicak stops in his local supermarkets for fresh vegetables and 
last-minute items, but for the everyday products, he goes to the store that has 
the best prices -- usually the warehouse supermarket down the street or a 
discount warehouse club miles away. 
"Why should I pay 99 cents for a roll of paper towels (at a traditional 
supermarket) when I can get them (at a warehouse club) for 76 cents?" Kicak 
asks. 
A Traditional Customer 
For years, Kicak has been the supermarket's traditional customer -- a 
bargain-seeker who likes to cook. But today, with two-wage-earner families and 
chockablock schedules, Kicak is one of a declining breed of shoppers. 
Consumers like Hall and Young, on the other hand, belong to a burgeoning group 
of Americans who are looking for shortcuts in both cooking and shopping -- and 
are willing to pay more for these conveniences. 
Supermarkets, seeing these consumers spending an increasing amount of money at 
convenience stores, takeout-food counters and restaurants, are introducing new 
services, from full-service banks to travel agencies and dry cleaning, to keep 
these reluctant shoppers coming to their stores. In the years ahead, even 
baby-sitting, home repair and poodle washes are possible. 
"The supermarket will become home to a surprising number of new departments," 
says Willard Bishop, president of the supermarket-consulting firm Willard 
Bishop Consulting Ltd. 
Behind the innovations is the evolving consumer as delineated in a recent 
survey by the consulting firm Booz-Allen &amp; Hamilton Inc. for the Coca-Cola 
Retailing Research Council, which studies major issues and problems confronted 
by wholesalers and retailers. 
Six Distinct Groups 
The study found six distinct groups of supermarket shoppers: 
 -- Avid Shoppers: Active cooks and shoppers, avid shoppers are usually bargain 
seekers like Kicak. "They cook dinner nearly every day, eating out only on 
special occasions," the study says. So it's no surprise that they spend more 
time shopping than other consumers and are not loyal to any particular store, 
preferring instead to shop at the store that offers the best prices that 
particular day. 
Avid shoppers have traditionally been the supermarket's core customers, 
accounting today for 26% of all consumers, or almost one of every four 
shoppers. But by the year 2000 the number of avid shoppers is expected to drop 
to one of every five shoppers, or 20%. 
 -- Hurried Shoppers: Mostly working mothers, hurried shoppers are busy 
consumers who are looking for shortcuts in shopping and cooking. "These mothers 
consider a healthful family dinner desirable but dislike cooking and lack the 
time during the day to prepare meals regularly," the study finds. 
However, eating out is difficult with children, so these shoppers are willing 
to spend more money than the avid shopper, buying a lot of takeout, frozen or 
prepared food. This is important, because the group will spend a 
disproportionately large amount of money on food even while dropping from 17% 
of today's consumers to 15% in 2000. 
 -- Unfettered Shoppers: Mostly older consumers, unfettered shoppers' children 
have grown up and left home. "Dinner is less complicated now," the study says. 
Simpler meals are made when they eat at home, but frequently these consumers 
eat out or take out. 
Yet, these shoppers are increasingly conscious about what they eat, monitoring 
their cholesterol and salt intake. With the aging population, this group of 
shoppers is growing the fastest. Accounting for 13% of the shoppers today, this 
group is expected to reach 16% by the year 2000. 
 -- Kitchen Strangers: Whether married, single or divorced, kitchen strangers 
are those shoppers in households without children. "The kitchen stranger rarely 
cooks dinner, eating out for breakfast, lunch or dinner -- sometimes all 
three," the study finds. 
A Low-Priority Chore 
Needless to say, cooking is a major inconvenience, and shopping is a 
low-priority chore. These shoppers now total 20% of U.S. households and are 
expected to grow to 22% by the end of the century. 
 -- Kitchen Birds: Generally very old consumers, kitchen birds include many 
widowed women and people living alone. These consumers shop and cook very 
little and tend to eat lightly. Now accounting for 6% of U.S. households, this 
group is expected to grow marginally -- to 7% -- by the end of the next decade. 
 -- Constrained Shoppers: Lacking in money and transportation, constrained 
shoppers are limited in their selection of groceries and supermarkets. "They 
typically walk to and from the supermarket, and they buy very little non-food 
merchandise there," according to the study. 
Given their tight budgets and spending power far below their absolute numbers, 
these shoppers probably will continue to be overlooked by most supermarkets. 
Generally located in urban areas, they make up about 18% of all U.S. households 
and are expected to total about 20% by 2000. 
With reluctant shoppers (the hurried and unfettered, kitchen strangers and 
birds) rising in number and spending power, supermarkets realize that 
convenience is critical. So it's no wonder that many chains are trying to turn 
their stores into the ultimate one-stop shopping center, seeking to provide 
more than just food, drugs, videotapes, photo processing and flowers. 
In many stores around the country, full-service banks are being set up where 
shoppers not only can deposit money and cash checks, but also can buy 
certificates of deposits, obtain small loans and, in some cases, store 
valuables in safe deposit boxes. 
Beyond banks, stores are setting up special service centers to take care of 
other daily business. Jewel-Osco of Florida, for example, has set up a center 
where shoppers can send express mail and use telephone facsimile machines. 
Taken to the Cleaners 
Meanwhile, the Midwestern Hy-Vee Food Stores Inc. has in-store shoe-repair 
shops and also takes in laundry -- which is then sent to a local cleaner. 
"It is big business and growing," says Ron Pearson, Hy-Vee President. 
Additionally, about a dozen of its 150 supermarkets will house small travel 
agencies by the end of the year. "We're also looking at insurance," Pearson 
says. 
Supermarkets also are exploring ways to get shoppers in and out more easily. 
Kroger Co., for example, has set up separate cash registers at both its salad 
bars and deli stands so takeout customers need stand in only one line at the 
store and not join the so-called express lines. 
In California, Vons Grocery Co. has gone further, setting up a convenience 
store -- with its own check-out system -- inside a regular grocery store. The 
Vons Express Store stocks the same items found in 7-Eleven-type stores but 
sells them at the regular supermarket price, which is typically about 20% below 
convenience-store prices. 
In addition to convenience, supermarkets also are paying greater attention to 
nutrition. One Washington state chain, Mega Food, for example, is creating a 
nutrition club, called Future Perfect, whose centerpiece is prepared meals low 
in cholesterol and salt. 
To enter the 18-month program that will begin this fall, consumers pay a $300 
initiation fee for a complete body work-up that includes an analysis of body 
fat and metabolic rate. Then a dietary program is designed for each individual, 
outlining daily food requirements and weekly exercise programs. 
To meet the dietary goals, consumers can buy prepared meals that were designed 
by a dietitian at the store -- either daily or twice a week. The meals, also 
available to non-club members, include chicken piccata with fettuccine and 
broccoli, barbecue kebabs with rice and beef, tomato and basil salad with a 
whole-wheat roll. Prices for lunch range from $2.50 to $2.90; dinner, from $5 
to $6. 
Stores Scrambling 
Many other nontraditional supermarket programs are likely to be introduced in 
the years ahead as stores scramble to keep as customers the time-pressed, 
unenthusiastic cooks. 
For example, the Booz-Allen study predicts that stores may set up a specialty 
pet shop with "all-natural pet food, gourmet pet food, frozen, imported pet 
food in a freezer case. Not just leashes and flea collars, but puppy sweaters, 
scratching posts, goldfish tanks. The widest collection of puppy toys. A 
knowledgeable nutritionist on Monday afternoons." 
The shop is a natural, Booz-Allen vice presidents Susan Engel and Barbara Cohen 
conclude, because three out of four families with children and two out of three 
working women have pets -- in other words, some of the very reluctant shoppers 
supermarkets want to keep attracting. 
Pearson, who is studying the pet-shop concept, believes even more unusual 
services are in the offing, such as window washing, plumbing and maid service. 
"Survey after survey shows that supermarkets are some of the most trusted 
people in the community," says Pearson. "Therefore, if you are a good 
businessman in the community and have built up trust, you should be able to 
provide other services, like home repair and window washing. Just book through 
me and I will guarantee an honest, competent person. I see that coming." 
Cohen also predicts that baby-sitting may come in the not-too-distant future. 
Given the labor shortage, supermarkets may be forced to offer day care just to 
find and keep employees. "Once they provide it for employees, it's only a 
logical extension to offer it to customers as well." 
Whether it is baby-sitting, home repair or nutrition clubs, it is certain that 
the landscape of each and every supermarket will be changing dramatically in 
the years ahead. 
As Pearson says, "it's a revolving business, and the formats are constantly 
changing. Maybe not every one of these ideas will be on target, but some 
certainly will be." 
