SILBERMAN GETS 46 MONTHS IN FEDERAL PRISON 
Richard T. Silberman, one-time governor's aide and wealthy financier, was 
sentenced Monday to 46 months in federal prison and said he was sorry that he 
laundered cash he believed was drug money. 
In imposing sentence, U.S. District Judge J. Lawrence Irving said it was 
gratifying to hear Silberman express remorse for the first time in the complex 
case. 
But it mattered more, Irving said, that Silberman, who "had achieved more than 
most men could ever have dreamed of," had turned to crime, betraying himself, 
his wife -- San Diego County Supervisor Susan Golding -- and family and his 
community. 
"It boggles my mind," Irving said. 
Irving chose precisely the prison sentence that prosecutors had recommended 
following a plea bargain struck last month in which Silberman pleaded guilty to 
a sole felony conspiracy count. Silberman was convicted in June after a 
two-month trial on another felony count -- a technical currency violation -- 
and could have drawn a total of 15 years in prison. 
Prosecutors also had recommended a $75,000 fine. But Irving put off that 
decision, saying he needed the details of Silberman's up-to-date financial 
status, adding he knew only that Silberman said he was ruined financially, with 
a negative net worth of $1.8 million. 
Silberman, 61, who was a top aide to Edmund G. Brown Jr. when he was governor, 
had been charged originally with seven felony counts in an alleged scheme to 
launder $300,000 in cash that an undercover FBI agent had portrayed as 
Colombian drug profits. He stood impassively at a podium Monday as Irving 
imposed sentence. 
Just before being sentenced, Silberman said that, in "this hour of my deep 
remorse," he was "extremely sorry for the crime I have committed." 
Golding called the case a "tragedy of a very human nature. The only thing I can 
say is that when someone you love is in trouble, you do the best to stand by 
them." 
She confirmed that Silberman was nearly $2 million in debt. "I'm living on my 
salary," she said. "Dick doesn't have a salary." 
Golding also said, "My house has been on sale for a long time. That's no 
secret." 
Four other men also have been charged in the complex case, two of whom already 
have pleaded guilty to a single felony count. The two others -- including 
reputed mobster Chris Petti, 63, of San Diego -- are due to stand trial Oct. 3. 
Jack Norman Myers, a Malibu investment banker accused of being a courier in the 
alleged scheme, was also due to have been sentenced Monday. But Irving pushed 
that sentencing back to Nov. 19 -- presumably after the trial for Petti and 
Darryl Nakatsuka, 43, of Los Angeles, a security guard also accused of being a 
courier. 
Prosecutors have indicated they don't intend to call Silberman to testify 
against Petti or Nakatsuka. 
Silberman had been a key player in statewide Democratic politics since the 
mid-1970s, serving as Brown's chief of staff and, among other positions, as 
Brown's secretary of the Business and Transportation Agency. 
Silberman's son, Craig, works for California Assembly Speaker Willie Brown 
(D-San Francisco) in San Diego. 
Silberman also had achieved great wealth in business, particularly in banking 
and fast-food ventures. He was a general partner during early years of growth 
at the Jack in the Box restaurant chain. 
However, his most recent venture, a San Diego-based gold-mining firm, Yuba 
Natural Resources, consistently had trouble paying its bills, prosecutors said. 
Silberman was arrested April 7, 1989, at a Mission Bay hotel and, according to 
the FBI, he confessed to laundering the $300,000 and said he was searching for 
funds to save his financially troubled mining firm. 
According to FBI notes of the alleged confession, Silberman also offered upon 
arrest to implicate California Assembly Speaker Willie Brown, Chula Vista 
Councilman David Malcolm and several prominent businessmen in wrongdoing. 
Brown, Malcolm and the others have denied any wrongdoing. 
Upon his arrest, prosecutors contended, Silberman already had done two 
laundering deals, using cash supplied by undercover FBI Agent Peter Ahearn -- 
who was posing as Pete Carmassi, a front man for Colombian drug lords -- and 
was negotiating with Ahearn to do a third. 
He had been introduced to Ahearn after first contacting Petti, whom he knew 
from a barber shop both men frequented, prosecutors said. 
The first deal was a November, 1988, exchange of $100,000 for stock in a 
subsidiary of Silberman's Yuba Natural Resources. The second was a February, 
1989, swap of $200,000 for U.S. Treasury bonds. 
If convicted on all counts, Silberman could have drawn 75 years in prison. 
But after the two-month trial, Silberman was convicted only of a technical 
charge of structuring a transaction to avoid the paperwork that federal law 
requires for any cash transaction over $10,000. He faced 10 years in prison on 
that count. 
The jury deadlocked, heavily for conviction, on several other charges, 
including two counts of money laundering and a sole count of conspiring to 
launder money. 
On Aug. 24, Silberman accepted a plea bargain and pleaded guilty to the 
conspiracy count, saying he had conspired to violate the same technical 
currency law. He could have drawn five years in prison for that charge. 
Contradicting his trial testimony, Silberman admitted in the plea bargain that 
he believed he was laundering drug money. He said he had conspired to violate 
the currency law by structuring a deal so that thousands of dollars he believed 
to be drug proceeds were broken into smaller sums, then sent overseas to a bank 
account whose number he supplied. 
As part of the plea bargain, Silberman also agreed to drop an appeal of the 
sole count on which he was convicted at the trial. 
In exchange, prosecutors were spared the burden of a second trial, promised to 
dismiss four other charges against Silberman and agreed to recommend to Irving 
that Silberman serve a prison term of 41 to 51 months. Assistant U.S. Atty. 
Charles F. Gorder, the lead prosecutor in the case, also said he would urge no 
more than a 46-month term. 
Federal investigators actually recommended more time in prison, up to 63 
months, according to legal papers filed last week in the San Diego federal 
courthouse. 
But Irving said Monday that 46 months was appropriate. He said that he at first 
had considered leniency because of Silberman's many "contributions to the 
community." But he said he dismissed that notion when considering the 
discrepancy between Silberman's trial testimony and the plea bargain. 
"The system expects and demands you be truthful," Irving said. "You were not. 
The system can not tolerate people coming into court and being untruthful." 
Irving said he would recommend that Silberman be assigned to a minimum-level 
prison camp. He also said he would suggest to prison officials that Silberman 
be assigned to the facility at Nellis Air Force Base, near Las Vegas, since 
that would make it easier for visits by plane from San Diego. 
The judge said he was likely to decide in the next few days whether to fine 
Silberman. But he said he was inclined simply to make Silberman pay the 
financial costs of incarceration, which he termed "substantial." 
Neither Gorder nor lead defense lawyer James J. Brosnahan of San Francisco knew 
Monday what those costs might total. 
The plea bargain calls for Silberman to pay the government $5,500, the money 
prosecutors contend Silberman earned on the second of the two deals, the bond 
deal. In papers filed last week, Gorder contended that Silberman personally 
pocketed about $75,000 on the first deal, the stock deal, warranting a $75,000 
fine. 
Under new federal sentencing rules that abolished parole, convicted criminals 
must serve 85% of a sentence. Silberman will be free in just over 39 months 
from June 28, when he first went to jail, or October, 1993, Gorder said. 
Irving made no mention at the sentencing hearing of Silberman's suicide 
attempt. 
Last February, fearing he could not get a fair trial before Irving, Silberman 
fled to a Las Vegas hotel and attempted suicide by taking an overdose of pills 
-- including tablets that had been prescribed for a family dog, according to 
legal papers filed last week. 
