SMALL LEADS NOTRE DAME TO EASY WIN AT ALEMANY 
Notre Dame High fans were treated to a Small wonder Friday night at Alemany 
High. 
An Errol Small wonder, to be exact. 
The Notre Dame tailback ripped through the Alemany defense in a big way, 
scoring on runs of 43, seven and 89 yards as the Knights cruised to a 28-7 
nonleague victory. 
He also conducted a defensive clinic, intercepting two passes. 
Small, who was ranked among the top 22 players in the Southland in a recent 
poll of college recruiting services, attributed most of his success to the 
weighty Notre Dame line, although he did admit to some personal improvements 
over last season. 
"I'm stronger, I'm faster and I'm definitely more focused," said Small, who 
finished with 197 yards in 14 carries -- an average of 14 yards a carry. 
The Indians' defense, too, was focused -- but Small was just a blur. 
"We had guys on him but he just ran through the tackles," said Alemany Coach 
Pat Blackburn, whose team held Notre Dame to 22 yards rushing en route to a 
17-7 win over the Knights last season. "I think he's going to do it to 
everybody." 
It appeared as if Alemany might get back into the game when sophomore Terry 
Barnum scored on a 12-yard run with 3:45 left in the third quarter to trim the 
deficit to 21-7. 
On the first play of the following drive Small fumbled. Brian Brison recovered 
and returned the ball 14 yards to the Notre Dame 36. 
A fourth-down pass from Alemany's Joey Rosselli to Bill Markowitz at the 
Knights' 15-yard line fell short, however, and Notre Dame took over with 10 
minutes to play. 
The Knights were unable to move the ball and Alemany got one more chance. 
But two plays later, Rosselli threw his fourth interception -- this by Mike 
Greenfield. 
On the following play, Small charged through the line, stumbled through the 
secondary, regained his balance and ran 89 yards for the clinching touchdown. 
Although he labeled it the best game of his career, Small started slowly, 
gaining 18 yards in his first four carries. Then, with 4:05 remaining in the 
first quarter and the Knights leading, 7-0, he struck, taking a pitch from 
quarterback Greg Andrachick and racing untouched 43 yards down the right 
sideline for a touchdown. 
Early in the second quarter, Small broke loose early and rambled 75 yards for 
an apparent touchdown. The play was nullified by a holding penalty, however. 
With 7:07 remaining in the first half, Andrachick connected with Guillermo 
Eguez on a 40-yard pass to the Alemany 7-yard line. Small scored on the 
following play to give the Knights a 21-0 halftime lead. 
Notre Dame scored first with 8:06 to play in the first quarter when Andrachick 
lofted a 31-yard pass to Kirk Miller. 
Andrachick threw only three passes but completed two for 71 yards. 
Chris Afarian was four for four on extra-point attempts for Notre Dame. 
Rosselli, a left-handed senior, completed 17 of 29 passes for 190 yards. 
Barnum, playing in his first varsity game after scoring 28 touchdowns last 
season for the freshman team, led Alemany rushers with 76 yards in 12 carries. 
Fellow sophomore Brison had 46 yards in six carries. 
