DAVID NELSON / SOCIETY: MAZUR ROAST AN EVENING OF S.D. FIRSTS 
At the "Women Together" benefit at the San Diego Omni, there was some debate 
among the 350 guests whether the chubby-cheeked toddler whose photo appeared on 
the invitation cover was gurgling "Is this wonderful or what?" or "It's to die 
or!" 
Both expressions have been virtually patented by Maggie Mazur, who at the time 
the circa-1930 photograph was taken was known more formally as Margherita Hunt 
of Passaic, N.J. Since then, the civic volunteer, political mover and shaker 
and professional fund-raiser has become known as one of the more tireless 
workers in San Diego public life, a reputation that landed her in more than a 
little hot water at the Omni benefit. 
The Aug. 24 event offered an evening of firsts. Catholic Charities, Episcopal 
Community Services and the YWCA joined in an unprecedented coalition to host 
"Women Together" to aid their programs for homeless and battered women, and 
Mazur, who agreed to be "roasted" for the cause, became the first San Diego 
woman to undergo the sometimes grueling treatment. 
Mazur was in many ways the ideal candidate for a roast, since she has been 
involved with many organizations, most of which booked tables as a gesture of 
respect. The Old Globe Theatre was well represented, for example; after the 
1978 arson fire that destroyed the theater, Mazur inaugurated her "Dump the 
Plump" program, in which supporters pledged dollar amounts for each pound she 
lost. The Old Globe earned $23,000 from the ploy. 
Political pals from both major parties also offered support, and the program 
contained many coy references to Mazur's ejection from the Republican Central 
Committee after she managed the successful City Council campaign waged in 1983 
by Democrat William Jones. 
Mazur's husband, Dr. John Mazur, was quick to note the cross-section of the 
community that turned out. 
"What's interesting about tonight is the circles that are intersecting here," 
he said. "At least 30 different groups are present, and, while they don't 
necessarily know one another, they all know Maggie. She's excited and very 
pleased, and I'm overwhelmed." 
Maggie Mazur herself seemed overwhelmed. Rather than joining the guests during 
the cocktail reception, she camped in her hotel suite until most of the guests 
had been ushered into the ballroom, then swept through the foyer (dressed not 
shyly in a gold lame skirt and a blouson that blossomed with silver roses) in 
an uncharacteristic fit of nerves. Pausing just long enough to greet a few 
well-wishers before joining her family at the head table, Mazur admitted, "I'm 
not ready for this." 
If Mazur professed herself unready to be roasted, various pals announced 
themselves eager to witness the basting. "I came because I hope to hear bad, 
nasty things about Margherita," Janet Gallison said. "That's what a roast is 
for. We're all here to get even, because, at one time or another, Maggie has 
roped every last one of her friends into one or another of her ventures." 
The ballroom centerpieces, simple arrangements of fresh fruit and vegetables 
that were to be delivered the following day to agencies that assist the 
homeless, did much to explain Mazur's acceptance of the dubious honor of 
serving as the roast du jour. Sue Young, chairwoman of the event, said proceeds 
will be divided among such groups as the House of Rachel and Julian's Anchorage 
shelters for homeless women, and the YWCA'S battered women's services program. 
"We'll probably clear $25,000 to share among the agencies," said Young, adding, 
"I realize that's a drop in the bucket, but it's a beginning for what I call 
'the invisible among the invisible,' or single homeless women. They're the most 
preyed-upon group in our society. Maggie was brave to accept the challenge of 
being our roastee, but that's what our benefit is all about -- it's women 
helping women." 
Young allowed that men, who made up half the attendance, did play a role in the 
evening's success. "Of course, we had to get the men involved, and they 
responded eagerly," she said. 
Mazur's oldest son, Steven Hunt Mazur, shared master of ceremonies duties with 
Judy Miller and kicked off the roast with a cheerful comment on the veracity of 
his mother's famous Christmas letters. 
"My mother is a great liar," he said. "I could join a Satanic cult tomorrow, 
and Mom would write her friends that 'Steve got closer to religion this year.' 
" 
Not all the roasters were unkind, although a few, including City Councilwoman 
Abbe Wolfsheimer, got in their licks. 
"Maggie is the only person I know who ever flunked her manicure," Wolfsheimer 
said. "And who but Maggie would volunteer to hatch the mayor's Soviet eggs?" 
The roster of roasters also included Barbara Riley, who was Mazur's classmate 
at Dunbarton College in Washington; legendary Old Globe supporter Delza Martin; 
Dr. John Stevens, who was present at the first turkey dinner Mazur cooked ("To 
this day I don't know what I ate," he said) and Dr. John Mazur, who said he 
came to "toast and boast, but not to roast." 
Maggie Mazur responded to the jibes gently enough, and pointed to some of her 
accomplishments by introducing the five of her six children who attended. Her 
final remark carried a barb, however. She said to the audience, "I love you 
all, even Republicans." 
The guest list included Melesse and Bob Traylor, Kay and David Porter, Betty 
Miller, Dolores and John Ford, the Rev. Patricia Backman, Sister Raymonda 
DuVall, Lucia and Doug Smalheer, Elizabeth and Glenn Allison, Dixie and Ken 
Unruh, Lucy Goldman, Paulette Gibson, Jeanne and Art Rivkin, Deborah Szekely, 
Jill and Jack Walsh, Kay and John Upton and Konnie and Stewart Dadmun. 
Dr. Anita Figueredo, the first woman surgeon to be granted operating privileges 
at a San Diego hospital and a nationally known oncologist, was guest of honor 
at "Aegean Odyssey," given Aug. 22 in the Sheraton Harbor Island's Champagne 
Ballroom as the 13th annual fashion luncheon to be presented by the La Jolla 
League of the American Cancer Society. 
The event attracted nearly 1,000 guests, an astonishing figure for an indoor 
show (Capriccio presented the fashions) and a neat record for the La Jolla 
League. 
We'll come close to doubling what we earned last year," co-chairwoman Dr. Carol 
Summerhays said. "This is partly because we're honoring Dr. Figueredo, and 
partly because so many of us have lost family and friends to cancer. If today 
is a big success, it is because it's a labor of love." The event was expected 
to earn more than $50,000 for cancer research and treatment programs. 
The committee included co-chairwoman Kara Kobey-Canogullari; Karin Camp, Donna 
Wolosin, Lynn Greenlee, Dorothy Andrews, Karen Kaye, Meredith Montross, 
Alexander Bende, Marcia Maisell, Candy Schumann, Lana Meredith, Marianne 
Minihane, Penny Clarke, Irene Cooper, Lorena Mier and Henrietta Bilhorn. 
