REPUTED COCAINE RING MONEY MAN PLEADS INNOCENT 
The reputed finance chief of the Medellin cocaine cartel pleaded innocent to 
money laundering today and was jailed without bond after prosecutors argued he 
might flee the country no matter how high his bail. 
Eduardo Martinez Romero -- the first of Colombia's "Extraditables" brought to 
the United States for trial in a drug crackdown launched last month -- entered 
the plea before U.S. Magistrate Joel M. Feldman. Martinez, 36, was extradited 
under heavy guard Thursday. 
Martinez is accused of helping launder $1.2 billion in drug profits through 
U.S. banks for the Medellin cartel, which is believed to supply 80% of the 
cocaine in the United States. It is based in the Colombian city of Medellin. 
Martinez is among the so-called "Extraditables," a list of drug figures wanted 
in the United States. 
He could receive 30 years in prison under Colombian law or life under U.S. law. 
Defense attorney Ed Garland said it is not clear which law applies. 
The magistrate today agreed with Assistant U.S. Atty. Wilmer Parker III that 
Martinez might flee if freed on bail. 
Escaped Arrest in Panama 
"Colombia is hardly the only country in the world where Mr. Martinez could live 
and live quite comfortably with the millions of dollars to which he has 
access," the prosecutor said. Parker noted that Martinez escaped an arrest 
attempt in Panama in March shortly after his indictment. 
Garland and co-counsel Oscar Rodriguez of Miami told the magistrate that their 
client has a graduate degree in marketing from a Colombian university, has been 
married 15 years, has four children and has held legitimate jobs at Medellin 
banks. 
"He has never come to the United States other than to bring his children to 
Disney World on a vacation," Rodriguez said. 
Garland asked the magistrate to put Martinez under a form of house arrest. He 
also argued that Martinez was accused only of laundering drug money, a 
"financial transaction" not serious enough to keep him without bail. 
But the magistrate disagreed. "It is well recognized that money is what oils 
the machine that allows these unlawful activities such as cocaine distributing 
. . . to go on," he said. "It is a very serious offense." 
Held in Solitary Confinement 
Rodriguez said Martinez is being held in solitary confinement at an undisclosed 
location. The hearing was postponed to today after Martinez said last week that 
he speaks only Spanish and did not fully understand the charges. 
Weldon Kennedy, agent in charge of the FBI office in Atlanta, has said agents 
are on "an increased state of alert" against any retaliation from the cartel. 
Latin America's drug barons have carried out bombings and shootings in Colombia 
in recent weeks. 
Drug traffickers are said to fear extradition to the United States because they 
believe they will not be able to escape conviction and prison. 
Martinez was indicted in March as a result of a 2 1/2-year investigation dubbed 
Operation Polar Cap. The investigation resulted in charges against 127 people 
and two Latin American banks. Martinez is reputed to be the cartel's 
coordinator of a complex, competitive business that has laundered at least $15 
billion. 
