PRO FOOTBALL; 
COWBOYS' INEXPERIENCE WASN'T AIKMAN'S FAULT 
Although the new season is barely six weeks old, counting from the first 
exhibition games, it seems clear that as a pro quarterback, Troy Aikman is a 
rare specimen. 
In his first few appearances with the Dallas Cowboys, Aikman, the $11-million 
rookie from UCLA, has shown himself to be a new kind of big, powerful passer. 
He has been playing Fran Tarkenton's game with Terry Bradshaw's arm. 
A Hall of Famer, Tarkenton was a 1970s master of short-pass football. He seldom 
threw a bomb when the game was on the line for the Minnesota Vikings. 
Bradshaw seldom threw anything else as the winning quarterback four times on 
1970s Super Bowl teams. During a brilliant career with the Pittsburgh Steelers, 
Bradshaw became the National Football League's model mid-to-long-range passer. 
He had a gun, as they say, and most guys with a gun use it. Which is what makes 
Aikman different. 
Aikman doesn't roll out as consistently as Tarkenton did, but he focuses on the 
same short-zone opportunities. 
On most plays, other passers read from long to middle to short. By contrast, 
Aikman apparently reads short first. 
"I take what they give me," he always says, and, usually, most defenses feel 
compelled to give up something short while protecting their rears. 
A superb athlete who can handle himself in the rush and throw the ball 
straight, Aikman has come into the pros with an attitude that is wholly 
different from that of John Elway, say, or Vinny Testaverde. 
Big plays have always been Elway's goal. Most great passers have that as a 
goal. What Aikman has demonstrated so far is that there's another way: You can 
fit in, right off, doing very little very well. 
Aikman's little game was good enough to win in New Orleans Sunday -- as it was 
all last month. His problem is that he's on an inexperienced team with 
promising but inexperienced coaching. 
New Orleans General Manager Jim Finks, commenting on the most widely discussed 
new quarterback in years, said after Sunday's game that worrying about Aikman 
spoiled the Saints' summer. 
"It takes two things -- the physical qualifications and mental toughness -- to 
play (Aikman's) position in this league," said Finks, a former NFL quarterback 
himself. "And, physically, this guy has everything you look for in a 
quarterback. 
"Only time will tell if any youngster has mental toughness, but Aikman 
impressed us (Sunday). Despite the heavy rush, he never once lost his poise." 
The Saints' best defensive player, free safety Dave Waymer, said after 
intercepting one of Aikman's passes in the second quarter: "I guess I'll be the 
answer in Trivial Pursuit. I'm the first guy to get the Million Dollar Man." 
Still, Waymer didn't really get him. Both of Aikman's interceptions were thrown 
on nothing-to-lose plays at the end of a 21-0 half and a 28-0 game. Luck is 
always decisive on long "Hail Mary" passes. The Rams connected, Aikman didn't. 
After the first of pro football's 16 weeks, it seems probable that the league's 
next champion will be an NFC team, thus extending a five-year tradition. 
AFC title favorites lost all four of their opening-day games to high-ranking 
NFC opponents. 
The chart: 
Chicago 17, Cincinnati 14; San Francisco 30, Indianapolis 24; Minnesota 38, 
Houston 7; Philadelphia 31, Seattle 7. 
The losers were all on the AFC's consensus preseason list of five Super Bowl 
contenders, along with Buffalo, which, on the game's last play Sunday, edged 
unimpressive Miami of the same conference, 27-24. 
The stunner was Minnesota's big game against Houston in a matchup of the clubs 
that presumably lead the two conferences in quantity of gifted players. 
"We weren't flat," said Houston quarterback Warren Moon. "They just didn't give 
us any time to throw the football." 
Moon absorbed seven sacks as Minnesota led in first downs, 29-11, rushing first 
downs, 13-4, and net yards, 343-104. 
Minnesota averaged 5.4 yards a snap to Houston's 1.9. 
By the end of the season, the AFC may well win the interconference series 
again, as it does almost every year. But at the top, it's an NFC league. 
Pat Bowlen, Denver Broncos owner, has concluded that it will be a better league 
when Pete Rozelle steps down as commissioner. 
"The (NFL's) head office (in New York) needs to be overhauled and streamlined, 
and brought into the modern era," Bowlen said the other day. "They've been 
living in the Middle Ages back there. 
"Pete has tried to keep control of every department personally. That just isn't 
possible anymore. As a business operation, the league is 20 years out of sync." 
Bowlen noted "the recent improvement in NFL Properties," the league's 
merchandising section, which last year came under a new overseer, owner Norman 
Braman of the Philadelphia Eagles. 
"Since Braman took over, Properties has tripled its profitability," Bowlen 
said. "What we need is a league with modern management in all departments. 
"Physically, the head office looks like a rabbit warren. You can't run a modern 
league with one (commissioner)." 
Bowlen was one of the NFL's 11 dissident owners who declined last summer to 
vote for Finks as commissioner. And because Bowlen's views are typical of the 
variety of opinions in pro ball today, Rozelle said he has hired a management 
consulting firm to develop an NFL consensus on specific changes wanted. The 
firm is Booz Allen. 
"The (consultants) will interview all 28 owners and report back with their 
suggestions," said league spokesman Joe Browne. 
It has been nearly six months since Rozelle announced his retirement -- 
effective with the election of his successor -- and Bowlen said the new search 
committee is still interviewing candidates. 
"I think we'll have a new commissioner soon after they make their three, four 
or five recommendations," the Denver owner said. "My preference is not to wait 
until after the season. After one of these Sunday games, I think we should all 
get in a room somewhere, and stay until some (candidate) gets the (19 
necessary) votes. 
"I'm not impressed to read that some owners want to stay with their teams 
instead of working on a new commissioner," Bowlen said, possibly referring to 
the Raiders' Al Davis, among others. "If you don't want to come to the meeting, 
send an assistant (to vote). I'll be there, and I think most of the other 
(owners) will be there." 
