RESTAURANT REVIEW VICTORIA PUB; 
TASTY CRUMBLE; 
ROSE CURTAINS, UPHOLSTERED CHAIRS AND PANELING GIVE THE VENTURA RESTAURANT A 
SUBDUED ELEGANCE. 
When I first heard about the Victoria Pub, I pictured waitresses in saucy 
costumes slinging tankards of beer to boisterous customers. Then, when I called 
to ask about reservations, I was assured by the cheerful British voice on the 
phone that the bar served "pub grub" at all hours. I almost stayed home. 
But I'd invited my mother to have dinner with the kids and my husband, and she 
loved the idea of an English restaurant. I'm glad we went with her instincts. 
The restaurant does have something of a theme quality to it, but it also has a 
measure of authenticity and earnestness that I found appealing. 
The bar is patterned after an English pub, and judging from the liveliness of 
the crowd, it has succeeded in becoming a "neighborhood" social scene -- in 
spite of being located right in the middle of a shopping center. There's even a 
dart room where the competition is quite intense. (Bring your own darts, but 
remember, Monday is league night.) 
The restaurant has an entirely different mood from the bar. With heavy rose 
curtains, upholstered chairs and wood paneling everywhere, it has the subdued 
elegance of an English gentlemen's club. And the menu is as English as the 
ambience. 
I fell in love with the sounds of the kiddie menu: "Captain Pigwash fish 
fingers," "small bangers with bubbles" and "crumble of the day." 
The adult fare, however, was somewhat harder to judge. The salad, for instance, 
tasted quite peculiar, as if the vinegar had been left out. Was this 
authentically English and therefore acceptable? The vegetables, on the other 
hand, were beautifully cooked. Aren't the English supposed to overcook their 
vegetables? 
Smoked salmon with wheat toast and dill mayonnaise was lovely, and the Brie 
baked in puff pastry and served with jam and fresh fruit was singularly 
satisfying. The soups were marvelous. A carrot soup with coriander and the 
pleasant texture of pureed carrots was delicious. And a chicken soup with 
mushrooms was exquisitely flavored with a touch of sherry. 
Steak and onion pie, while not quite a pie (it had a layer of puff pastry 
perched on top) was a decent meal of beef chunks in dark gravy with mashed 
potatoes and vegetables on the side. This and the Cornish pasty would certainly 
satisfy one's appetite for good, plain, honest food. 
Chicken Piccadilly was a potent, Caribbean-inspired dish with a sweet sauce 
full of banana bites, corn bits and rum-flavored cream. Beef salad consisted of 
thin rolls of sliced cold roast beef on a bed of crisp salad and vegetables. I 
really liked the salad that came with the beef, although it floated on a lake 
of soy sauce. 
My mother ordered the best meal of all. She had the Somerset lamb, a perfectly 
cooked, generous portion of lamb -- a steak, not a chop -- with a hearty mint 
sauce on the side. And just to prove it hadn't been a fluke, she also ordered 
the best dessert -- out of a lineup of very good ones. She had the crumble of 
the day, a fresh fruit cobbler, which happened to be rhubarb -- her favorite. 
Hot, slightly tart fruit covered with sweet, crunchy "crumbles" in a bowl of 
cream. She finished with an excellent pot of tea, then insisted that her skill 
in ordering well was the result of a trip to London. I think she was just 
lucky, but I'm taking her back to the restaurant next time I go. 
WHERE AND WHEN 
Victoria Pub and Restaurant, 1413F S. Victoria Ave., Ventura; 650-0060. Open 
seven days for lunch 11 a.m.-3 p.m., dinner 5 to 9:30 p.m. Pub is open until 2 
a.m. Full bar. Parking lot. American Express, MasterCard, Visa accepted. Dinner 
for two, food only, $25-$60. 
