HOLY CUBS!; 
CHICAGO CARRIES ON, CARRIES TEAM ON ITS BIG SHOULDERS AFTER NL EAST IS WON 
Odds are that Pablo Picasso wasn't much of a Chicago Cubs fan, but Wednesday 
the huge Picasso statue that stands guard over the Loop's Civic Center plaza 
was sporting a huge, blue Cub cap with a big red C in the middle. 
Someone also put a Cub jersey on the statue of Nathan Hale in front of the 
Chicago Tribune building. And the streets were suddenly awash in Cub jerseys, 
buttons, banners and banter. 
"WE'RE IN," declared the banner headline in the Chicago Sun-Times, and anybody 
who had to ask who the We referred to surely must have been a foreigner, 
extra-terrestrial or worse. It was the Cubs, the break-your-heart, 
swoon-in-June, they'll-find-a-way-to-blow-it-somehow Chicago Cubs. 
Not this year, however. Or at least not so far this year. The Cubs, who 
stumbled through spring training and began the season a reasonably good bet to 
finish in their customary spot near the bottom of the standings, clinched the 
National League's East Division title Tuesday night with a 3-2 victory over the 
Expos in Montreal. 
Chicago went wild. Within minutes of Tuesday's last pitch, thousands of 
shrieking fans poured into the streets near Wrigley Field. Police chased them 
off after about an hour's worth of singing, chanting and drinking, but the 
party was just starting. 
Although the team was still in Montreal for another game, the city held a huge 
noontime pep rally in the civic center plaza that featured local sports and 
media stars and, of course, politicians eager to bask in the glow of a winner. 
More than 5,000 fans roared approval as Mayor Richard M. Daley painted a big 
black X next to the word division on a huge banner that also had spots reserved 
for future marks next to the words pennant and World championship. 
"Today, we are all Cubs fans," declared Daley, who grew up in the shadow of 
Comiskey Park, home of the White Sox -- who figure to finish last in the 
American League's Western Division and are definitely the second team in this 
second city. 
To outsiders, such hoopla might seem a bit premature. After all, the Cubs still 
have to beat the Western Division champions, probably the San Francisco Giants, 
just to get into the World Series. But Cub fans are a special breed, steeped in 
pessimism and inured to adversity. No matter how well the team is doing, the 
average Cub follower knows that failure is just around the corner. 
The team hasn't won a World Series since 1908 and hasn't even played in one 
since a few weeks after the Hiroshima bomb was dropped. The Cubs did win the 
division title in 1984, but then blew a two-game lead and lost the playoffs to 
the San Diego Padres. 
Chicagoans are still muttering about 1969, the infamous year the Cubs built a 
huge lead going into the closing weeks and still managed to drop the division 
title to the Amazin' Mets. 
With such a dubious record behind them, Cub fans can't afford to pass up a 
reason to cheer. 
"I didn't think they would make it this far," said Dave Livingston, 22, who 
turned out for Wednesday's rally. " . . . All the way!" he chanted. 
Another fan, Rob Pierson, 27, drove more than 20 miles from his suburban home 
to join in the postgame revelry outside Wrigley Field Tuesday night, and he was 
on hand for Wednesday's celebration as well. 
"We're it!" he screamed, in a hoarse voice. 
Cub fever also triggered a run on Cub memorabilia Wednesday as customers 
flooded sporting goods shops and other stores to snap up T-shirts, caps and 
other products with the team insignia on them. Long lines formed outside the 
two official Cub stores in the Chicago area. 
Michael Wisniewski, merchandising manager for the shops as well as for 
concession stands at the ballpark, said the stores sold more than 20,000 
shirts, sweaters and other garments, 5,000 caps and another 5,000 pennants 
Wednesday. 
"I ordered 20,000 garments to take us through the first two games," he said. 
"It didn't last the first day." 
Anticipating the impossible, fans placed more than 28 million calls over the 
weekend to a special phone line as they tried to order playoff and World Series 
tickets. The dialing deluge jammed circuits in northern Illinois for hours. 
Chris Kadota, waiting patiently in line to buy a Cub cap, said he personally 
accounted for 500 of those calls -- and never got through. But then Cub fans 
know how to live with disappointment. 
Chris Blumentha knows. The die-hard Cub fan, an art student, said she is 
willing to pay up to $100 for a ticket to get into a playoff game. Even at that 
price, she said, it will be worth it. 
"I might never see this again," she said. 
