U.S. AIDE SEES OPTIONS FOR SOVIET EMIGRES 
Bush Administration officials conceded Wednesday that Washington lacks the 
money to process and resettle all of the Soviet emigres seeking refugee status 
in the United States, and one of the officials suggested that some might want 
to go to Israel or return to the Soviet Union. 
Jewish applicants who are turned away by the U.S. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service "can always go to Israel or return to Russia," said 
Jewel S. Lafontant, the State Department's coordinator for refugee affairs. 
About 4,200 would-be Soviet emigres, mostly Jewish, currently are languishing 
in Rome and Vienna because their applications for refugee status have been 
rejected by the INS. Another 40,000 fleeing Soviet citizens are backed up in 
the two cities waiting to begin lengthy applications for refugee status, 
according to U.S. Jewish groups. 
Lawmakers blamed the delays on a controversial policy change that stripped 
Soviet Jews of automatic refugee status last year and instituted case-by-case 
reviews. 
Lafontant's comments drew criticism from several House members, who charged 
that U.S. budget constraints and Washington's improving relations with the 
Soviet Union might lead the United States to turn its back on Soviet Jews. 
"Despite glasnost (openness), the Soviet Union has not exorcised 400 years of 
anti-Semitism," said Rep. Bruce A. Morrison (D-Conn.), chairman of the House 
Judiciary subcommittee on immigration, refugees and international law. "To pass 
this over lightly in suggesting that they can return home is the kind of 
attitude that got us into this mess in the first place." 
The exchanges came as the State Department, formally unveiling its proposed 
refugee policy for the coming year, said it will grant entry to a total of 
125,000 refugees. 
Within that limit, the department proposes to admit 50,000 Soviet refugees, 
including Jews and evangelical Christians. But the limit falls far short of the 
120,000 Soviet citizens that American Jewish groups believe may apply for 
refugee status next year. 
The Jewish groups, citing the large proportion of Soviet Jews in the projected 
refugee total, have not criticized the limits. But they have asked that 
Washington restore "presumptive refugee status" to Soviet Jews who apply for 
emigration in place of the case-by-case reviews. 
But rather than abandon reviews, Administration officials plan to conduct more 
of them in Moscow instead of in Vienna or Rome to give applicants a reasonable 
idea of where they stand in the process. 
