THE NEW VIEW FROM THE TOP AT MCA RECORDS 
Al Teller, who took over last week from Irving Azoff as the chairman of the MCA 
Music Entertainment Group, sat in his Universal City office after his 
appointment and spoke wistfully about the coming of the 1990s and the possible 
effect on some of pop's legendary figures. 
 He reminisced about loving such artists as Bob Dylan, the Rolling Stones and 
the Beatles so much two decades ago that he charged scores of albums at the 
student store while attending the Harvard School of Business. But Teller (shown 
in the MCA Records offices at right) wonders now if the return this year of 
many of these artists isn't a last hurrah -- at least as major record sellers. 
 "I think (this return) is great for all of us who grew up with them, but when 
1990 finally comes, it (may be) the final nail in the '60s," the bearded Teller 
said, sitting at his desk in a corner office. 
 "I'm not for a moment denigrating their talent or their ability to continue to 
make great music. I'm talking about their role in the industry as sellers of 
huge numbers of albums. Every generation wants to discover its own heroes." 
 In his new position, Teller, 45, stands as one of the industry's key players 
in the search for those new heroes. A New York native who is married with a 
15-year-old son, Teller started in the record business 20 years ago as 
assistant to the president of CBS Records Division. He later served briefly as 
president of United Artists Records and Windsong Records before returning in 
1981 to long-time industry leader CBS Records, where he was eventually named 
president. 
 Leaving CBS early last year in what he describes only as a "difference of 
opinion" with CBS Records head Walter Yetnikoff, Teller was named president and 
chief operating officer of the MCA record group which had become an industry 
force once more under Azoff's leadership. 
 Since Teller's arrival, the record division -- which grossed $661 million in 
1988 -- has had an especially impressive year, registering at one point last 
summer, the top three positions on Billboard magazine's album sales chart. 
While Azoff was still at MCA, it was difficult for outsiders to know who was 
running the show. But now that Azoff has resigned to form his own music-related 
company, it's clearly Teller's operation. 
 In an interview about his plans for MCA Records, Teller spoke in a rapid, 
forceful, confident manner: 
Question: What did you bring philosophically from CBS to MCA? 
Answer: I think there was a sense of tradition at CBS . . . that it was the 
Tiffany of the record business, totally committed to great talent. Everything 
we did was in service of and for our artists. I think that is still the only 
way to run a record company. 
Q: But what about the reality of making a profit? 
A: Part of the trick of running one of these companies is to strike the 
appropriate balance. . . . I still, however, subscribe completely to the idea 
of pursuing the best, most unique talent you can find and not worrying about 
how you are going to get the records on the radio. You can deal with radio (and 
marketing) later. Don't let the business mechanisms dictate what your artistic 
vision should be. 
Q: In coming to MCA, were you concerned about working for such a strong, 
high-profiled individual as Azoff? 
A: I've worked for a lot of high profile people . . . Clive Davis, Walter 
Yetnikoff, Jerry Weintraub. This is a high profile business. I thought the idea 
of coming here and helping build the company to the next level was exciting and 
offered me a chance to get closer to the street. A big part of running CBS was 
administrative, and frankly, I didn't go into the music business to be an 
administrator. I'm pleased at the way things have gone. We've had tremendous 
success over the last 12 months, highlighted, I guess, by the weeks we had 
albums one, two and three in Billboard. 
Q: You're referring to the Bobby Brown, Fine Young Cannibals and Tom Petty 
albums. Could you use the Brown album as an example to show us your role in 
motivating the company? 
A: After we worked out a deal last year, I asked Irving to send me all the 
albums and all the videos so I could get a sense of what was going on at the 
company. The Brown album completely floored me. It was already up to about 
300,000 or 400,000 units at the time, but I thought we could go a lot further. 
When I came out here from New York and had my first marketing meeting, I said, 
"I believe we can sell 5 million copies of the album. Let's figure out how to 
do it." We had numerous meetings and laid out a solid, one-year campaign. 
When we had the opportunity of doing the "Ghostbusters II" sound track, the 
first person we thought of (for the album) was Bobby. The idea was to take time 
out from releasing singles from his own album to release a Bobby single from 
the film. This would give him a chance to reach a whole different audience. His 
album is about 5 1/2 million now. 
Part of what I am supposed to do is stimulate (the staff's) thinking -- try to 
give everyone a general sense of direction. I don't mean taking an album that 
you think will sell only 12 copies and say, 'We are going to sell 10 million of 
it.' But it is important to set an (ambitious) vision because everybody gets 
excited and (the project) becomes a mission. 
Q: Do you feel MCA's standing in the industry is strong enough for you to 
compete with any label for new talent? Have MCA's legal problems had any 
(adverse) effect on signing new acts? 
A: (In an interview after resigning, Azoff complained about having spent months 
embroiled in a federal investigation and legal actions that grew out of the 
record company's involvement with Salvatore Pisello, who represented MCA in the 
sale of discount records early during Azoff's tenure. Pisello was subsequently 
convicted of income tax evasion and was identified in a government prosecutor's 
sentencing memorandum as having long-standing ties to organized crime groups. 
No MCA executive was ever charged in the probe, and Pisello has denied the 
claims of organized crime ties.) 
I absolutely feel we are competitive with anybody because any astute manager is 
going to be looking for enthusiasm and commitment. This company has all the 
resources, financial and otherwise, necessary. I'm very optimistic about our 
future. We are already a premier label for black music and for country music, 
and we are being very aggressive in bringing the rest of our line up to that 
level. Our A &amp; R people are being very aggressive, signing a lot of good, 
young rock bands. (Regarding the legal matters) It's a total non-issue. All we 
have been talking to our artists and managers about is making music . . . and 
making careers. 
Q: Does it make more sense for MCA Records to sign established, big-name acts 
at high prices or concentrate on building new talent? 
A: There was a time when it was considered a badge of courage if you could 
steal a superstar from another label, but to me, that was more a macho exercise 
than a practical (business) move. You can probably come up with some reasons 
why it would be appropriate at a particular place and time to go after a 
veteran act -- maybe you are a new label and you want to make a splash and show 
you are a major player. But ultimately the success or failure of a record 
company is going to be its ability to find and break new talent. Overpaying for 
a veteran artist is a major mistake. 
Q: How do you go about finding the "next great thing?" 
A: At the risk of making a generalization in a business where generalizations 
tend to become disastrous traps, the "next great thing" is usually something 
that is very different from the current great thing. That's because it has got 
to be a radical shift -- a left turn or a right turn -- and not just another 
notch in (the same) direction. 
Q: Do you think the '80s produced as many lasting superstars as the '60s and 
'70s? 
A: My guess is there will be fewer true superstars to emerge from the '80s. One 
reason is video. I don't want to denigrate music video. I'm still a fan of them 
if they are used properly, but there is no free lunch with any of this and 
perhaps one of the handicaps of music videos is they have lessened the 
(motivation for young bands to be great live acts). 
If you go back to the covered wagon days of the '60s and '70s, part of breaking 
an artist was touring that artist, club to club, city to city, so people could 
see the artist and spread the word. Now that (exposure) is done primarily 
through videos and that is a highly controlled environment. With videos, you 
can redo the song and edit it, etc. That's why artists have been able to come 
from being unknown to selling 2, 3 million copies without having to go through 
the important step of playing and winning fans live. 
Q: What about musical trends in the '90s? Think rap will continue to grow as an 
influence? 
A: Rap is the only new pop musical form to emerge in the '80s and it will 
continue to be important in the '90s and beyond. 
Q: Did you think it was just a fad at first? 
A: Quite the opposite. It was my belief in the importance of rap that led to 
the signing in 1983 of the Def Jam (distribution deal which gave CBS a major 
foothold in the rap scene, including such acts the Beastie Boys and LL Cool J). 
It was considered a shocking signing at the time because rap was still 
considered an inner-city, ghetto phenomenon, with no crossover potential 
whatsoever. But if you happened to be in New York and walking down the street, 
you heard rap everywhere and kids were getting off on it. It didn't make sense 
to assume that it was going to somehow stay bottled up in the black, inner-city 
community forever. So I was determined to get into that . . . even though I 
heard people talking about the deal as "Teller's Folly." 
This is a business of judgments and if you can't step up to the plate and take 
a whack at something you believe in, then you shouldn't be in this game. . . . 
you're not a player. 
