'INTERVENING IN ULSTER' 
I am surprised that a newspaper that supported the more stringent Sullivan 
Principles in South Africa opposes the more modest McBride Principles 
("Intervening in Ulster," editorial, Sept. 6), which merely attempt to place 
Roman Catholics in Northern Ireland on a level playing field. 
Institutionalized religious discrimination and oppression against Roman 
Catholics are the root causes of the ongoing political instability in Northern 
Ireland. The McBride Principles combat job discrimination, the largest 
roadblock to ending unemployment and instability in Northern Ireland. After 20 
years of civil rights activism, unemployment among Catholics remains 2 1/2 
times greater than that of Protestants. 
Your point that my legislation is "potentially dangerous" is absurd. This bill 
is based on moral persuasion and corporate responsibility, not coercion. The 
measure merely requests that our state's pension fund managers, when investing 
in U.S. firms doing business in Northern Ireland, determine those firms' 
compliance to the McBride Principles of non-discrimination. I fail to see the 
potential danger of this request. 
The McBride Principles do not demand hiring quotas, as you incorrectly state, 
and the measure has stood the test of legality in both U.S. and British courts. 
You tend to make light of the employer's responsibility for workers' safety 
traveling to and from jobs. First of all, that provision concerns safe travel 
to and from their job after they enter the factory gates on the way to the 
workplace, where much Protestant violence against Roman Catholics has taken 
place. 
Your statement that the enactment of the McBride Principles will deter 
investment in Northern Ireland is not true. The McBride Principles did not 
become operative until 1986, yet new investment stopped in 1982 as a result of 
violence and instability. 
You also buy into the British red herring of somehow making the McBride 
Principles a pro-IRA measure. In fact, the supporters of the McBride Principles 
are Charles Haughey, prime minister of Ireland, Cardinal O'Fiach, Catholic 
primate of Ireland, the British Labor Party, every major academic institution 
in Ireland, every women's group, every grass-roots and working class Catholic 
organization in Northern Ireland. 
I hope the governor ignores these desperate claims and reads instead the many 
letters of support from Irish-Americans and others throughout the state. 
JOHN L. BURTON 
Assemblyman 
D-San Francisco 
