HEARINGS ON CREDIT PRIVACY BEGIN TODAY 
For years, Orange-based TRW Credit Data and a handful of other credit reporting 
giants have earned a good living generating detailed reports on the ability of 
millions of Americans to pay their bills. 
More recently, however, the credit companies and their parent firms have found 
a new way to turn a profit by selling sophisticated mailing lists and related 
services drawing, in part, on credit information stored in their massive data 
banks. 
It is not an innovation that pleases everyone. 
A congressional subcommittee, in a hearing today, will be examining the 
19-year-old federal credit privacy law and the degree to which TRW and its 
competitors keep faith with both its letter and spirit. 
'War Already Lost' 
"Credit information is being used for secondary purposes -- purposes different 
from the one for which the information was gathered," said Robert Ellis Smith, 
publisher of the Washington-based Privacy Journal, which covers the credit 
reporting industry. "This violates the intent of the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act." 
Selling credit data for use in direct-mail marketing efforts "is a privacy 
intrusion," said Janlori Goldman, Washington staff attorney for the American 
Civil Liberties Union. "That is where we think the act needs to be 
strengthened." 
"The war (for) privacy has already been lost," added Steve Hamm, past president 
of the National Assn. of Consumer Agency Administrators and administrator of 
the South Carolina Department of Consumer Affairs. 
The consumer affairs subcommittee of the House Banking, Finance and Urban 
Affairs Committee is particularly interested in the issue of using credit 
information to generate mailing lists and consumer profiles, one staff member 
said. 
So far, the Federal Trade Commission, which is responsible for enforcing the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act, has found no grounds to halt the practice. 
'Not Discussed Directly' 
"It's something that is not discussed directly in the act at all," said the 
staff member, who asked not to be named. "I think it's a growing concern of 
people." 
Along with TRW, other major credit reporting services that sell information to 
be used in direct-mail solicitations are Equifax Inc. of Atlanta and Trans 
Union Corp. of Chicago. Together, the firms maintain some 400 million credit 
files on about 180 million Americans. All three will be represented at the 
congressional hearing. 
A spokesman for TRW said the company has gone to extraordinary lengths to 
protect the privacy of the 150 million or so Americans on which it maintains 
credit files. 
"I believe we are absolutely the industry leader . . . in protecting privacy," 
Michael M. Van Buskirk, vice president of TRW Information Systems Group, said 
in a telephone interview from his Orange County office. 
