NEW TYPE OF SUPERCONDUCTING MATERIAL FOUND; 
RESEARCH: HITACHI SAYS ITS NON-COPPER MEDIUM MAY BE CHEAPER TO PRODUCE THAN 
OTHER METHODS UNDER CONSIDERATION. 
Five researchers at a Hitachi Ltd. laboratory just outside Tokyo have 
discovered a new class of superconductor materials that could help bring the 
revolutionary technology closer to commercial production, the company announced 
Wednesday. 
The new material, a ceramic that includes vanadium and strontium, would 
probably be cheaper to produce and use than copper-based materials being 
researched, said Shinpei Matsuda, head of Hitachi's superconductor research 
effort. 
Superconductors, which transmit energy without resistance, have the potential 
for opening the door to a new generation of products ranging from 
super-efficient generators to levitating trains. 
But for most applications, the material must first be converted to wire at a 
reasonable cost. Laboratories around the world are spending hundreds of 
millions of dollars a year to overcome that obstacle. 
It's no simple task. Most new classes of superconductors are ceramics and too 
brittle to be turned directly into wire. Because the copper in the compounds 
reacts with lesser metals, the ceramic must be sheathed in silver to be given 
the malleability of wire. 
Hitachi solved that problem by eliminating copper from the compound. The 
resulting material can be packed into hollow copper wire, offering the 
potential for vastly reducing the cost of the wire. 
The new material also has the advantage of operating at a higher temperature. 
It becomes a superconductor after being cooled to minus 143 degrees Celsius. 
The best superconductors developed to date must be cooled to a temperature of 
minus 151 degrees Celsius before the electricity passes without resistance, 
Hitachi said. 
Shoji Tanaka, director of a government-backed superconductivity research 
consortium, called Hitachi's announcement "premature." 
"I would have liked to have seen them establish their data a little better 
before publishing their results," Tanaka said. 
Hitachi's research results, which were submitted Tuesday to the Japanese 
Journal of Applied Physics for publication, are preliminary, Matsuda admitted. 
"We have a runner on first. We need several hits before we can bring him home," 
he said. 
So far, the company has been able to manufacture the substance only in small 
quantities. Consequently, Matsuda said, the company has been unable to 
determine either the exact chemical composition of the material or the size of 
the current it can carry. 
Inability to carry a sizable current would make the material impractical for 
most commercial applications. Even if the material proves too difficult to 
manufacture in large quantities, Matsuda said, the discovery would help 
scientists unravel the mysteries surrounding why certain materials act as 
superconductors by providing a whole new set of data. 
Matsuda said the company's new materials team tested thousands of materials for 
superconducting properties before discovering the new compound. 
The team is part of a larger, 48-man group formed in 1987 soon after 
International Business Machines reignited interest in superconductors by 
announcing that it had discovered materials that become superconductors at far 
higher temperatures than previously thought possible. 
