ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: SANTA ANA; 
SURROGATE SAYS SHE'LL EXPAND CUSTODY SUIT 
Surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson, who is fighting for shared custody of the 
child she bore for an infertile couple, says she will expand her unique lawsuit 
to contend that her 3-year-old daughter is the newborn boy's sister and thus 
has a right to spend time with him. 
The lawsuit Johnson filed Aug. 13 is a landmark in its own right because she is 
the first surrogate mother to seek custody of a child to whom she is not 
related genetically. But the expanded version she plans to file on Tuesday 
ventures into new legal territory: siblings' rights. 
Richard C. Gilbert, Johnson's lawyer, said he has revised the original lawsuit 
to add a new claim on behalf of Johnson's daughter, Erica. The suit asks a 
Superior Court judge to award Johnson custody of -- or at least access to -- 
the baby boy she bore on Sept. 19 on the grounds that Erica "deserves access to 
her brother," Gilbert said. 
"Erica cries for her brother," Gilbert said. "She has a right to be part of her 
brother's life." 
Robert Walmsley, an attorney for Mark and Crispina Calvert, who hired Johnson 
to carry their embryo, said that there are no established "siblings' rights" in 
the law. He dubbed Gilbert's argument "creative" but said he doubts it will 
succeed. 
"It's just a smokescreen, something he's doing to create sympathy for his 
client, rather than to focus on the real legal issues," Walmsley said. "The 
real issue is whether Anna Johnson has any parental rights. I think it's 
appalling for him to yank her child (Erica) into this." 
Blood tests have established beyond a 99% certainty that the Calverts are the 
baby's genetic parents and have ruled out Johnson as biologically related to 
the child. DNA tests are expected to confirm those results. 
Gilbert's new theory extends his argument that Johnson has parental rights over 
the child. He contends that she is the child's mother because she carried and 
delivered him. Gilbert said he uses the same reasoning to conclude that 
Johnson's first child, Erica, and the new baby boy, whom they call Matthew, are 
related. 
The Calverts argue that they are the only legal parents of the child because 
they donated the genetic material that formed him. 
The baby, whom the Calverts call Christopher Michael, is living temporarily 
with the Calverts. 
At a hearing Oct. 9, Superior Court Judge Richard N. Parslow Jr. is expected to 
decide whether the infant has two parents -- the Calverts -- or three, 
including Johnson as a mother. CATHERINE GEWERTZ 
