SHATTERED LIVES; 
JAILED TEENS' PARENTS SEARCH FOR ANSWERS IN WAKE OF TRAGEDY 
Their parents could understand if they had spotted a pattern. Likedrug abuse. 
Or hard-core gang involvement. Or the persistent psychological and emotional 
problems that often accompany such erratic behavior. 
But, since Jonathan Arrington, Hubert Phillips and Khalil Mohammed did not seem 
to belong to any of those categories, since they came from decent homes and 
loving families, it is difficult to explain the events two weeks ago that 
landed two of them in jail and left another dead. 
How could they, their parents ask, have done what they've been accused of: rob 
two convenience stores in Escondido and a Vista cab driver; steal a car; lead a 
speeding convoy of police cars wailing down Interstate 5; and discuss a suicide 
pact that police believe Mohammed followed? 
"I haven't figured it out," said Bob Phillips, the deputy district attorney who 
is prosecuting the teen-agers. "It's all pretty senseless. You look at the 
backgrounds, and these are kids who had options. They weren't stuck in ghettos. 
They had the availability of scholarships. It makes you wonder what went 
wrong." 
What went wrong has weighed heavily on those who still are sifting for clues 
involving the teen-agers. Educators don't know what happened. Parents are 
baffled. Coaches are confused. 
Johnathan Arrington, who is an assistant high school principal used to dealing 
daily with other students' problems, has trouble accepting his own son's 
dilemma. Charlie Phillips, Hubert's father, has so far refused to visit his son 
in jail. 
Sultana Mohammed, Khalil's mother, cannot believe she has just buried her 
17-year-old son. 
Phillips, 19, a first-team All-Metro Conference running back who had a 
football scholarship at the University of New Mexico, is in the South Bay jail, 
held on $100,000 bail. Arrington, 19, a standout defensive back at Southwest 
High who won a scholarship to his father's alma mater, Tuskegee Institute in 
Alabama, is in the County Jail in Vista, held on $105,000 bail. 
Each is charged with three counts of armed robbery and one count of stealing a 
car. Phillips also is charged with failing to yield to the police caravan. 
Another of the boys' friends, Raul Olave, 18, is in County Jail downtown, held 
on $10,000 bail. He and Arrington are charged with robbing two convenience 
stores in Chula Vista. He also is charged with Arrington and Phillips with 
robbing someone of $20 at an automatic teller machine in National City, court 
records show. 
The four teen-agers came from similar backgrounds, and all lived within 5 miles 
of one another and Southwest High School, which they all attended. Their 
parents, hard-working and middle class, said their sons lacked for nothing. Not 
an education. Not clothing or food. Not their full support. Delores Vazquez, 
Olave's mother, had hoped to see her son in college this fall. 
The teen-agers were frequent visitors to each other's homes, often appearing as 
last-minute dinner guests. They excelled together on the football field. More 
than anything, though, they were the closest of companions, racing through the 
streets in Arrington's gray Ford Festiva. 
But hanging around together has meant trouble. In January, 1989, someone fired 
a bullet at Mohammed while he sat in Arrington's car outside Sweetwater High 
School in National City, Arrington's father, Johnathan, said. The bullet hit 
Arrington in the back of the head, but did not enter his skull. Arrington rode 
straight to Scripps Memorial Hospital for treatment. 
Last July, police said, Olave and Arrington, over two days, robbed the Chula 
Vista convenience stores but came away empty-handed. The next day, they grabbed 
$20 from a man at an automated teller machine, police said. 
And, two weeks ago, police said, a frantic freeway chase began in Vista and 
ended 50 miles away on the front lawn of Southwest High School, when their car 
hit a water main. Arrington darted from behind the wheel, and Phillips 
scrambled out of the passenger seat, police said. As they were getting out and 
preparing to run, they both heard a shot, their parents said. In the back seat, 
Mohammed was dead, an apparent suicide, police said. 
Police said they found Arrington hiding in the bushes nearby. Phillips made it 
home, but a large number of police officers turned up that same night and 
escorted him to jail. 
San Diego police are investigating whether Arrington and Phillips were involved 
in a series of hotel robberies along freeways between downtown San Diego and 
Mira Mesa. At one hotel, an off-duty Huntington Beach police officer was 
seriously wounded. No charges have been brought in those cases. 
Asked what had gone wrong, each of the parents had a different opinion. None is 
certain he has the correct answer. 
Arrington said his son, who excelled in high school track and football, let the 
pressure of his friends influence him. 
"Jonathan had a problem all his life being placed in a gifted class, and he 
arranged to misbehave," Arrington said. "It seems like it's more attractive 
nowadays to be an undesirable person. Since he has not been a problem child his 
whole life, I think he feels a need to show the kids who have been in trouble 
that he can be a bad kid too." 
Arrington, a vice principal at Twain Continuation High School in Linda Vista, 
said he admired Jonathan's friends and wouldn't have let them into his house if 
he believed they had been a bad influence. 
Because he deals with problem students every day in school, Arrington said he 
feels all the more helpless that he could not prevent his son's actions. And he 
is deeply hurt by Jonathan's arrest. 
"We've never had a problem with alcohol. Never had a problem with drugs," he 
said. "Nobody in my family has ever been in jail. I know very few people in any 
way who have been arrested or in trouble with the police. If I knew my son was 
having these types of problems, I would have taken care of it myself." 
The Ford Festiva, a gift from his parents, was Jonathan's bad-luck charm, his 
father said. Although his father warned him that he was not to transport his 
friends, Jonathan's buddies always persuaded him. His father even had a 
suggestion: "Get a girlfriend. Ride a girlfriend in your car, and the guys will 
be too embarrassed to get in." 
The night of the high-speed chase, Arrington was in a different car: a white 
sedan that police say he stole. 
According to prosecutors and police, Hubert Phillips sat in the passenger seat 
during the chase. 
Phillips, who flunked out of the University of New Mexico and lost his 
scholarship for disciplinary problems, had been an above-average student in 
school and outstanding on the football field, gaining 1,165 yards his senior 
year. 
His senior year also brought bad grades and a lack of motivation. His football 
coach, Carl Parrick, said Phillips maintained a 3.0 grade point average through 
his junior year. He did so poorly his senior year that he barely managed to 
keep it about 2.0, the minimum he needed to stay in the football program. 
His father, Charlie Phillips, a 25-year employee of Rohr Industries, which 
develops airplane engine prototypes in Chula Vista, is lost when asked to 
explain his son's recent string of problems. 
"If I could answer why he did what he did, I would patent it and sell it to 
every parent in the world," he said. 
Phillips had three assignments when he left San Diego for the Albuquerque 
campus, his father said: "To keep his nose clean, get an education and carry 
the pigskin." 
At New Mexico, Phillips was redshirted during the fall and suspended by spring 
for discipline problems, according to Greg Remington, the school's sports 
information director. 
Those close to him at the university said Phillips developed a problem with 
alcohol, couldn't get to class on time, slept late, fought with others and lost 
his ambition. Despite his problems, nobody could believe Phillips would land in 
jail. 
"He was not a gang guy," said one person at the campus who watched Phillips. 
"He just wasn't motivated. He was more of a follower than a leader." 
Charlie Phillips strongly disputes that his son had a problem with alcohol. 
"Hubert never had a drinking problem," he said. "I went to the campus for a 
visit, and I saw that everyone went to parties and stuff. You're 18 years old, 
and you're leaving home for the first time, and parties are going on. Of 
course, you'll be participating. But Hubert knew right from wrong. He was not a 
dumb kid." 
Phillips has not yet visited his son in the South Bay jail and has talked to 
him on the telephone only once. 
"Don't you think I could put up $10,000 to get him out of jail if I wanted to?" 
he asked. "I'm something of a disciplinarian." 
Phillips and Arrington are angry about allegations by deputy district attorney 
Phillips that Mohammed killed himself in a suicide agreement that their sons 
had discussed. 
Phillips: "That's asinine. A farce. Never, ever, ever in a thousand years would 
Hubert commit suicide." 
Arrington: "Jonathan had no reason to commit suicide. Jonathan had every reason 
to live. If he had been missing something in life, like love, or a home, or 
food, if we turned him down for any reason, I could understand. I've talked to 
every kid around. Nobody has heard Jonathan talk like that." 
Prosecutor Phillips said the suicide pact is fact. 
"We've got information that it's true, and it was something they talked about," 
he said. "If I got into any more of it, I would be giving out evidence that is 
to come out at trial." 
Arrington and Phillips also both have a hard time believing that Khalil 
Mohammed was a gang member, as police have asserted, and say their sons never 
were in a gang. 
Both were wary of Mohammed because of his brilliant mind and charisma, a leader 
who could get others to do his bidding. But they both personally liked him and 
often invited him to dinner at their homes. 
"We always heard he was a gang member," Phillips said. "But I never saw any 
colors or any hat pulled down over his eyes." 
San Diego police tell a different story. 
Mohammed formed a multiracial gang of blacks, Hispanics and Filipinos called 
"Four Corners of the World" which got involved in territorial fights with other 
gangs, according to Sgt. Art Palmer of the Police Department's southern 
division. 
"Paco," as he was called, was the natural leader of the group because of his 
large physical build and charm, Palmer said. Palmer said the gang was not into 
drive-by shootings but rather an occasional rumble. 
"I have nothing that leads me to think he would have become another John 
Dillinger," Palmer said. "He was more the leader that would get something 
started and not be there when it happened." 
The boy's mother, Sultanta Mohammed, is enraged by such talk. 
"The police have made him out to be a gang member. My son was not a gang 
member," she said last week. "It's a vicious lie! He was a good boy who went 
wrong. He was troubled." 
She will not say much more. Sultana said she has told police that they should 
not have spread rumors about her son. 
"They told all the parents that my son was in a gang, or for their kids to be 
careful and stay away," she said. "Those other boys are responsible for their 
own actions." 
Upset by her son's death and the publicity it has generated, she looks worn. 
"I'm going through a lot right now. Enough is enough," she said. "My son's 
dead. Nobody's going to get the story straight." 
Khalil's brother, Sultan, was so disillusioned with his younger brother that he 
kept his distance, according to Bill Kinney, head coach at Southwestern College 
in Chula Vista, where Sultan plays football. 
"I know he was opposed to his brother's group of guys," Kinney said. "He said, 
'Coach, we haven't been close for a number of years. I tried to be a big 
brother to him, but he won't listen to me.' He said his brother had been out of 
control for a number of years." 
Sultan declined a request to be interviewed. 
Delores Vazquez has told her son Raul Olave that Mohammed's death should not be 
in vain. 
When she thinks of her son, a high school graduate who had enrolled this fall 
at Southwestern, possibly robbing or stealing, she shakes her head. 
"I think he was hanging with the wrong crowd," she said. "Individually, they 
were fine, nice boys. Together, they weren't good for each other." 
At Southwest High, Principal Alan Goycochea had only been on the job four days 
at the South San Diego school when the high-speed chase ended up on the lawn 
near his office. 
New to the job, Goycochea doesn't personally know any of the young men. 
"One teacher wrote to me, 'We have a real sense of loss that we just can't 
explain,' " Goycochea said. "A teacher who said, 'Here's a youngster I worked 
with. Here's someone I helped prepare for college and helped with SATs. They 
all had ambition.' " 
"Like most good teachers, they have a sense of 'Where did we go wrong?' " he 
said. "But I would say that we all choose for ourselves. We make difficult 
decisions every day, and there are consequences to every decision we make. In 
this case, these kids made some very bad decisions." 
