EMMY'S FASHION STATEMENT; 
SOME THINGS OLD, SOME THINGS BORROWED, SOME THINGS NEW 
Second Hand Rose would have been proud of the number of vintage, borrowed and 
home-sewn gowns that distinguished the 41st annual Emmy Awards. 
The attendees, in general, were better dressed this year than in years past. 
Most were no doubt grateful that the weekend's clouds dissipated and raincoats 
weren't needed. The usual supply of bridesmaid gowns and tarty, tasteless togs 
were in relatively short supply. 
Only one fashion disaster occurred. Daphne Reid, who stars with her husband, 
Tim Reid, in the new CBS series "Snoops," was among the first to arrive. Her 
long, glittering emerald-green gown with a diamond back cutout was a stunner, 
but she fell victim to the incident every woman dreads: Another woman showed up 
in the same gown hours later. 
Mel Harris of ABC's "thirtysomething" wore a black French lace gown from the 
'40s that she purchased at Framm's. Harris said co-star Patricia Wettig 
introduced her to the store. Wettig, who arrived with co-star and husband Ken 
Olin, also purchased her vintage beaded butterscotch dress at Framm's, but the 
two didn't buy them together. 
Another fan of historic chic is Dana Delany, who stars in ABC's "China Beach." 
Delany wore a very sexy form-fitting black dress with chiffon sleeves by the 
late Giorgio Sant'Angelo. Though it was new, not all of her personal clothing 
is. 
Newly slender Susan Ruttan of NBC's "L.A. Law" sketched her bronze-and-black 
short dress wrapped with a black net shawl and had friend Dovie Hein make it 
for her. Ruttan, who has lost "thirtysomething" pounds and has tinted her hair 
a deeper shade of red, looked radiant. 
A friend also made NBC "Golden Girls" Rue McClanahan's black velvet dress with 
a matching jacket trimmed in gold. 
Faith Ford, who plays beauty-queen-turned-reporter Corky Sherwood on CBS' 
"Murphy Brown," said she helped design her burgundy velvet gown along with the 
show's costumer Bill Hargate. 
Fashion plate Candice Bergen, a.k.a. "Murphy Brown" on the CBS television 
series, wore an au courant animal print full-length gown designed by Bill 
Blass. Anjelica Huston also went with her animal instinct in a sexy, leopard 
printed number. 
"thirtysomething's" Melanie Mayron almost had on a gold strapless mini topped 
with a black long-sleeve jacket. Because the dress kept slipping down, Mayron 
commented on the air that she hoped it would stay up. 
Irreverent designer Franco Moschino was the choice of Diane Lane, who appeared 
in "Lonesome Dove." Lane wore a black slim suit with witty buttons. 
Joanna Frank of NBC's "L.A. Law" wore a gold Ungaro jacket and a black dress 
that she borrowed from her mother. She arrived with husband and co-star Alan 
Rachins. 
Robert Duvall opted for Western chic in keeping with his part in CBS' "Lonesome 
Dove." Duvall wore a brown tuxedo with a black leather tie designed and made by 
Manuel, who is based in the San Fernando Valley. 
The ever-bizarre Tracey Ullman continues to patronize English designers. The 
variety show star wore a black David Fielding dress with a witty headpiece. 
Ullman said Fielding shipped the dress to her from London. 
"It's a loaner. Put that in," she quipped. 
Jasmine Guy glided up the steps in a white silk short dress with hemline 
flounces. Guy, who plays the snippy Whitley in the NBC sitcom "Different 
World," said her character's fashion taste bears little resemblance to that of 
her own. 
"We have totally different tastes. My character is more of an Anne Klein kind 
of girl, but my tastes run a little funkier," she said. 
Jill Eikenberry, another member of NBC's "L.A. Law" cast, arrived with 
husband/co-star Michael Tucker in a gown from favorite designer Bob Mackie. 
Tucker, who favors unusual tuxedo shirts, wore a white shirt with interesting 
pleat treatments by Hugo Boss, whose suits are often featured on the hourlong 
drama. 
Ron Perlman of NBC's "Beauty and the Beast" arrived dressed in his usual 
romantic mode with an elegant Gianni Versace ensemble, distinguished by a cream 
tuxedo shirt worn without a tie. 
Loretta Swit was a regular lady in red in her floor-length gown, which she 
purchased at Fred Hayman Beverly Hills. Swit agreed that in past years she has 
worn the de rigueur black but wanted something "a little livelier" this year. 
Perhaps the most dramatic fashion selection was the black and gold gown worn by 
Betty White of NBC's "Golden Girls." 
"I got it at Elizabeth Arden," she said. "It grabbed me while I was having my 
hair done." 
