2 PLO RADICALS JOIN IN THREAT TO 'STRIKE U.S. INTERESTS'; 
JORDAN: ACTION IS URGED IF GIS ATTACK IRAQ. KING HUSSEIN MEETS THE PAIR, WHO 
HAVE LONG BACKED TERRORISM. 
Jordan's King Hussein met with two old rivals from the Palestine Liberation 
Organization shortly before they joined other pro-Iraqi groups Monday in a call 
to "strike American interests everywhere" if U.S. troops attack Iraq. 
Hussein met with George Habash and Nayef Hawatmeh, who head Marxist factions of 
the PLO and have a long history of supporting international terrorism. The 
Jordanian government announced the meeting Monday and said it took place late 
Sunday. 
Habash and Hawatmeh were expelled from Jordan 20 years ago when King Hussein 
ordered his army to clear PLO militias from his country on grounds that they 
were preparing to overthrow him. 
The meeting with Hussein, which was not reported by the Jordanian press, 
reflects the lengths to which the Jordanian monarch has gone to keep up with 
public sentiment in favor of Iraq in the Persian Gulf crisis. 
Habash and Hawatmeh took center stage at the three-day Conference of Arab 
Popular Movements, which issued a statement calling for attacks against 
American interests. 
The statement also expressed support for the holy war proposed by Iraq's 
President Saddam Hussein and appealed for Arabs to unite in an effort to break 
the embargo on trade with Iraq. 
The delegates, representing political parties, guerrilla groups and labor 
unions, said they will challenge the embargo by shipping food and medicine to 
Iraq by sea. 
In order to plan the "strike against American interests everywhere and by all 
means at the same moment an American military attack is launched against Iraq," 
the delegates agreed to establish a permanent committee with headquarters in 
Jordan. 
In the Middle East, the term "strike against" is often used as a synonym for 
terror. Such a call, issued in King Hussein's capital, is likely to further 
erode his reputation in the West as a moderate. He is already viewed with 
displeasure in some Western capitals because of his early support for Iraq's 
Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait. 
King Hussein has since tried to present himself as a neutral broker between 
Iraq's President Hussein and the rest of the world, but his diplomatic effort 
has accomplished virtually nothing, despite personal visits to capitals in the 
Middle East, North Africa and Europe. 
Since returning to Jordan 12 days ago, the king has stayed largely out of 
public view and has resigned himself to staying on the sidelines while events 
take their course, officials say. 
In his diplomatic travels, King Hussein sought to promote an Iraqi withdrawal 
from Kuwait in exchange for a U.S. withdrawal from Saudi Arabia. He is said to 
have been received coldly in Iraq, the last stop on his trip. 
Iraq contends that it has a historic right to Kuwait, but Washington and most 
of the rest of the international community are insisting on the unconditional 
withdrawal of Iraqi troops and restoration of the deposed royal family in 
Kuwait. 
King Hussein's present attitude is in sharp contrast to his earlier energetic 
promotion of an "Arab solution" to the conflict. A senior Jordanian official, 
asked to comment on this, replied: "What can the king tell the people? Things 
have got out of hand." 
A former Jordanian official said: "I would say that the king will now sit back 
and wait. There is not much that can be done given the positions of both 
sides." 
The PLO has supported Iraq in hopes that the crisis over Kuwait will have a 
positive effect on the Palestinian desire for an independent Palestinian state 
in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. At least half of Jordan's 3 
million people consider themselves Palestinians. 
It was Palestinian support for Iraq that led King Hussein to permit Habash and 
Hawatmeh to return to this country, if only for the three days of the 
conference. And the visiting Palestinians have been careful not to tread on 
Jordanian sensibilities. 
"Mistakes will not recur," said Hawatmeh, who heads the Democratic Front for 
the Liberation of Palestine, a small PLO faction. 
Habash heads the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Both groups 
regard terror as a key weapon in battling Israel. 
Palestinians commemorate the expulsion of the PLO from Jordan as Black 
September. The banishment was a step in a PLO odyssey that took it to Lebanon 
and then, after Israel's invasion of Lebanon, to countries scattered across the 
Arab world. Recently it has found a welcome home in Iraq. 
In the past year, Jordan has given space to an array of PLO factions to carry 
on political activity. The opening followed food riots that shook the regime 
and prompted King Hussein to try to broaden his popular support. 
But democratization, his advisers told him, is one thing and a PLO presence led 
by old enemies of the regime is another. They insisted that neither Hawatmeh 
nor Habash be permitted to take up residence in Jordan. 
Across the Jordan River in Israel, officials have watched the budding PLO 
presence in Amman with suspicion. Some Israeli politicians have blamed 
occasional border incidents involving Jordanian soldiers on the king's new 
tolerance. 
Israeli officials have also warned that King Hussein's rule is being made 
unstable by the Palestinian rush to support Iraq. 
