SURROGATE TOLD TO STOP DAILY VISITS; 
RULING: A SUPERIOR COURT JUDGE LIMITS ANNA L. JOHNSON'S VISITS WITH HER BIRTH 
BABY AFTER FINDING THAT HER PRESENCE IN THE CALVERT HOUSEHOLD CAUSED TENSION. 
Surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson lost the right Thursday to daily visits with 
the baby she bore for an infertile couple after a judge found that the tension 
during visits to the couple's home was harmful to the infant. 
Superior Court Judge Richard N. Parslow Jr. also said that Mark and Crispina 
Calvert, the couple who hired Johnson for $10,000 to carry their embryo, could 
keep the little boy until another hearing in the landmark case on Oct. 9. 
Johnson may continue her monitored visits to their home, but the judge limited 
the visits to twice a week. 
"Lord willing, this is the beginning of the end," Mark Calvert said. 
Johnson's lawyer, Richard C. Gilbert, who had pledged to ask the state appeals 
court to place the baby with Johnson, said Thursday he would wait instead for 
the outcome of the next hearing. Johnson has been visiting the baby daily since 
Saturday, the day after she agreed the infant could stay temporarily with the 
Calverts. 
Parslow reduced the number of visits Thursday after the baby's court-appointed 
guardian, William G. Steiner, testified that the child would be better off if 
Johnson did not visit every day because of the strained relations between 
Johnson and the Calverts. 
"I believe the tensions in the household are being transferred to the baby," 
Steiner said. 
Steiner, executive director of a foundation that raises money to help abused 
and neglected children, said that he believes Johnson "does feel a special 
relationship with this child and that relationship has to be recognized and 
understood." But for the time being, he said, the stress created by her visits 
must be minimized for the sake of the child, who was born on Sept. 19. 
Attorneys in the case are already looking to the Oct. 9 hearing as pivotal in 
the unique test-tube triangle dispute. That is when Parslow will be asked to 
step into uncharted legal waters and decide who the baby's legal parents are. 
Johnson, 29, backed out of the surrogate birth contract, claiming that the 
Calverts neglected her during pregnancy. She is the first surrogate mother to 
seek custody of a child who has no genetic relationship to her. In the famed 
Baby M case, the birth mother's own egg was inseminated, so she was 
biologically related to the baby. 
When Parslow took the bench Thursday, he summarized the Johnson-Calvert case 
briefly, noting that this child has "arguably, three parents," since the birth 
mother and the genetic mother are not the same woman. 
Gilbert took that as an encouraging sign. He has argued that Johnson has 
parental rights over the child simply by virtue of carrying and delivering him. 
The Calverts contend that they are the only ones who can legally call 
themselves parents, since Johnson provided no genetic material. 
Christian R. Van Deusen, one of the Calverts' lawyers, said that if Johnson is 
held to be a legal parent, it would be difficult to decide the scope of her 
rights. 
"Does that mean she gets visits? Does she get constant input in the child's 
life? Does it mean she is just entitled to periodic reports, like, 'Hi, he's 
doing fine, he's playing Little League?' " he said. 
Harold F. LaFlamme, the baby's court-appointed lawyer, said even more profound 
civil rights questions would be broached if the judge rules that all three 
adults have parental rights. 
"I'd be very concerned with the rights of the birth mother during pregnancy, as 
well as those of the genetic parents after the birth," he said. "Would it mean 
that the genetic parents get to dictate what a surrogate mother eats and drinks 
during pregnancy, or whether she takes drugs, or if she can travel? What if she 
wants an abortion? Would they have the power to stop her?" 
LaFlamme wondered aloud if a three-parent ruling would mean that the surrogate 
mother could wield intrusive power over the lives of the genetic parents, 
demanding a role in such decisions as where they live, whether the child is 
circumcised or whether he attends private school. 
"The whole world will be looking to see if you can bifurcate motherhood," 
LaFlamme said. "The question comes down to this: Is providing the genetic 
material enough to confer motherhood on someone, or is carrying and delivering 
a child enough to confer it, or both, meaning that the child has two mothers?" 
Gilbert put it simply: 
"The judge can look reality squarely in the face and recognize that this child 
has three biological parents, or he can turn his head." 
Gilbert said that Johnson is confident that "the day will come" when she is 
recognized as the infant's mother, either through a court ruling or through 
legislation she hopes will be enacted in Sacramento. 
Steiner advocated a quick resolution to the dispute. He said that on Saturday 
night, the first night the baby spent with the Calverts, Crispina Calvert 
"slept next to the baby with her hand on his back." He said that kind of 
uncertainty and stress must be ended to create a secure environment for the 
infant. 
