MORE THAN 1,600 ARTWORKS SEIZED; 
SUSPECTED FAKES CONFISCATED IN RAIDS ON GALLERIES, HOMES 
It is believed to be one of the largest confiscations ever of suspected 
fraudulent art, Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said Thursday after 
detectives seized more than 1,600 art prints and other works in a series of 
raids touched off by the arrest of an art dealer trying to peddle a phony 
Renoir. 
Officers, with help from the district attorney's office and the FBI, searched 
eight outlets of the Upstairs Gallery art store chain in West Los Angeles, the 
San Fernando Valley, Beverly Hills and Costa Mesa. The vast bulk of the seized 
works came from the firm's warehouse in Huntington Beach, officers said. 
The raids began Wednesday night with the arrest of a Manhattan Beach art dealer 
who allegedly tried to sell a fake Renoir for $3.2 million to an undercover 
police officer posing as a Japanese businessman during a meeting in the Little 
Toyko section of downtown Los Angeles. The dealer, a French national named 
Frank De Marigny, 38, was arrested and booked for investigation of grand theft. 
He was held at the Parker Center jail in lieu of $1 million bail. 
Nightlong Operations 
After the arrest, officers fanned out to the galleries. The search and seizure 
operations lasted through daybreak Thursday. 
The 10 search locations included De Marigny's beachfront home, where officers 
recovered several paintings and an assault rifle, and the Marina del Rey 
residence of another person, who was not arrested. 
The massive haul turned a property storage room at police headquarters into a 
virtual art gallery, with lithographs stacked to the rafters. Other suspected 
phony works attributed to such prominent artists as Marc Chagall, Joan Miro and 
Rufino Tamayo were displayed to the media as Gates hailed the work of the 
search teams. 
"These intrepid enforcers of the law saved people who are art lovers a great 
deal of money" by making the confiscations, the chief said. 
Overall, officers seized 1,687 lithographs believed to be fraudulent, with 
about 1,200 of them taken from the Huntington Beach warehouse, said Detective 
Bill Martin, the department's art sleuth. 
Some of the alleged fakes retailed in art galleries at upwards of $50,000 each, 
with a total value of about $15 million. 
Martin said he believes that the overnight raids may have netted the most 
suspected fraudulent lithographs ever seized. 
Neither Gates nor Martin could estimate how many unsuspecting art buyers may 
have already purchased phony prints, saying only that rising demand for art in 
general has led to millions of dollars of fraud. 
Won't Explain Relationship 
Also, they said they could not explain the relationship of independent dealer 
De Marigny to the Upstairs Gallery chain without jeopardizing the continuing 
investigation. Gates said detectives were still checking to see whether anyone 
in the firm's management is linked to the alleged fraud. 
A spokeswoman for the Upstairs Gallery said an internal investigation was under 
way to determine whether the firm was duped into buying fake art. 
"As far as this company is aware, all of the prints which the company purchased 
from its sources are believed to be authentic," said Patricia White, the firm's 
vice president. 
Gates said the case began when detectives found out that De Marigny was 
offering the painting "Young Girl With Daisies" by French impressionist Pierre 
Auguste Renoir for sale. Investigators immediately were aware that the painting 
was a fake because the real one hangs at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New 
York. 
De Marigny also uses an alias of Frank Orval, and has a clean criminal record, 
police said. 
De Marigny lives in a posh house on The Strand in Manhattan Beach, drives a 
Rolls-Royce and a Ferrari and is known by art insiders as "Prince Frank," said 
Dale Sekovich, an investigator for the Federal Trade Commission who has 
monitored the case. 
Although the FTC was not conducting its own investigation into the Upstairs 
Gallery confiscations, Sekovich said the commission has the power to initiate a 
civil lawsuit to try to gain restitution for victims of art fraud. 
Martin said some of the allegedly phony artwork seized in the raids appears 
linked to a Claremont man, criminally charged in August, who was deemed by a 
district attorney's office spokeswoman to be "one of the largest art forgers on 
the West Coast, if not the United States." 
The alleged forger, Anthony Gene Tetro, 39, faces 45 felony counts for 
allegedly fabricating and distributing lithographs of the works of well-known 
painters. Martin said he was free on bail awaiting court proceedings in his 
case. 
Police initiated their investigation of Tetro's activities after Japanese 
artist Hiro Yamagata recognized a miniature watercolor being sold under his 
name as a fake on a stroll through a Beverly Hills gallery. 
