HEDGECOCK STICKS TO HIS STORY WHILE TESTIFYING FOR HUNTER 
Insisting that he had only "totally proper" personal and political financial 
dealings with Nancy Hoover Hunter, former San Diego Mayor Roger Hedgecock told 
a U. S. District Court jury Tuesday that a campaign consulting firm funded by 
Hunter was a legitimate business, not a device to funnel illegal contributions 
to his 1983 mayoral race. 
Repeating testimony from his 1985 trial, Hedgecock testified in Hunter's fraud 
and tax-evasion trial that Hunter bankrolled the consulting firm, started by a 
mutual friend, Tom Shepard, in the early 1980s as a routine business 
investment. 
Showing flashes of his trademark combativeness as he stuck to a story that he 
has told frequently inside and outside courtrooms for 4 1/2 years, Hedgecock 
contended that, contrary to prosecutors' allegations, Tom Shepard &amp; 
Associates was not merely a sham operation established primarily to illegally 
finance his mayoral race. 
"Was there any discussion with Nancy Hoover or Tom Shepard about funneling 
money to your campaign?" Hunter defense attorney Richard 
Marmaro asked Hedgecock. 
"No, never," Hedgecock answered. 
Hunter, the former J. David &amp; Co. executive who, like Shepard, was one of 
Hedgecock's closest allies during a political career that ended with his 1985 
felony conviction, is being tried on 197 counts of fraud and tax evasion 
stemming from her involvement with the now-defunct La Jolla investment firm. 
The firm's namesake and Hunter's former live-in companion, J. David (Jerry) 
Dominelli, is serving a 20-year prison sentence after pleading guilty to 
charges of bilking investors out of more than $80 million through an elaborate 
Ponzi scheme in which clients were lured to the firm through phony records and 
the promise of fabulous returns on their money. 
Called as a defense witness, Hedgecock is one of the means by which Hunter's 
attorneys hope to rebut prosecutors' contention that Hunter improperly took a 
tax deduction for her investment in Shepard's firm when, in fact, she knew it 
to be nothing more than a ruse to disguise tens of thousands of dollars in 
illegal contributions to his 1983 campaign. 
Paradoxically, however, by hoping to score points through Hedgecock's 
testimony, the defense was forced to rely on someone who has been found guilty 
of conspiracy charges that both Hunter and Shepard -- as well as Dominelli -- 
pleaded guilty to in 1986 plea-bargain deals. Thus, Hedgecock's denial Tuesday 
of wrongdoing in his tangled financial and political relationship with the 
three is contradicted by his own verdict -- which he argues was tainted by a 
bailiff's jury tampering -- and three guilty pleas. 
Similar Testimony 
During his 1 1/2 hours on the stand before U. S. District Judge Earl Gilliam, 
Hedgecock delivered testimony similar to that which he gave in his first 1985 
trial, which ended in a mistrial with the jury deadlocked, 11 to 1, in favor of 
his conviction on conspiracy and perjury charges. Hedgecock did not testify in 
his second trial, in which he was convicted of 13 felony counts stemming from 
charges that he falsified financial disclosure statements to conceal illegal J. 
David contributions funneled to his campaign via Shepard's firm. 
Now a radio talk-show host, Hedgecock is free pending appeal of his one-year 
jail sentence -- an appeal in which an appellate panel's order for a full court 
hearing on the jury-tampering allegations figures prominently. 
Describing what he knew of Shepard's firm's formative period, Hedgecock said 
that, in December, 1981, Shepard, who then served on Hedgecock's county 
supervisorial staff, told him that he planned to leave to start a consulting 
firm to be funded by Hunter. Noting that he and Hunter had had a falling out 
after she left her husband to live with Dominelli, Hedgecock stressed that he 
had no conversations with Hunter about that deal, adding that he relied solely 
on Shepard's characterization of the matter. 
In August, 1982, Hedgecock's campaign committee signed a contract with Shepard 
for what then was an exploratory potential race for mayor -- a contest that 
hinged on a vacancy being created by then-Mayor Pete Wilson's victory in the 
November, 1982, U. S. Senate election. At the time, Hedgecock said he believed 
that Shepard's firm had other clients. 
"Did you have any reason to believe that Tom Shepard &amp; Associates was 
anything other than a legitimate political consulting firm?" defense attorney 
Marmaro asked. 
"No -- I thought it was legitimate," Hedgecock said. 
During his cross-examination by Assistant U. S. Atty. Stephen Clark, Hedgecock 
visibly enjoyed the verbal jousting that led to several acerbic observations 
from both sides, managing along the way to get in a few digs against some 
longtime foes -- in particular, the San Diego Union and Tribune newspapers, 
which he contends have treated him unfairly for years. 
Clark, however, drew first blood by beginning his questioning of Hedgecock by 
asking: "Are you the same Roger Hedgecock who was convicted in Superior Court 
in October, 1985?" Hedgecock responded affirmatively, hastening to add that the 
case is on appeal. 
A Letter of Praise 
The first of several light moments came when prosecutors sought to document the 
warmth and closeness of Hedgecock's relationship with Hunter in an effort to 
undermine his credibility. 
To that end, Clark produced a letter sent by Hedgecock to Hunter in the early 
1980s in which he said that a story about her that appeared in the San Diego 
Tribune "looked great." Dismissing the letter as "one of hundreds" written 
weekly for him by his staff, Hedgecock generated loud laughter among courtroom 
spectators by adding: "I don't recall writing it, and I wouldn't have been so 
lavish in my praise of the local paper." 
On various occasions, Clark sought a yes or no answer from Hedgecock, only to 
receive a longer explanation that frustrated the prosecutor's attempt to pin 
down the former mayor. Once, for example, Clark inquired whether Hedgecock was 
aware in the early 1980s that Hunter was wildly spending hundreds of thousands 
of dollars on things such as houses and exotic cars, only to have Hedgecock 
answer: "I was aware Nancy was a benefactor of a number of organizations in the 
community." 
"So the answer to my question is yes?" Clark said. 
"The answer is the answer I gave you," Hedgecock snapped. 
Clark also pressed Hedgecock for now-familiar details on his personal financial 
dealings with Hunter, including a controversial oral-agreement loan that 
Hedgecock used to remodel his South Mission Hills house shortly after being 
elected mayor in May, 1983. That loan, which Hedgecock repaid with interest 
started out at $50,000, but as expenses grew, it reached $130,000. 
As he did in his own trial, Hedgecock insisted that, to the best of his 
knowledge, Hunter used her personal funds for the loan, not -- as was shown 
during his trial -- J. David corporate revenue. When asked about the lack of 
conventional documentation of the loan's terms, Hedgecock said: "She's not an 
institution or savings and loan. This was a personal loan . . . between 
friends." 
Trying to reinforce prosecutors' view of Tom Shepard &amp; Associates as little 
more than a laundering operation for illegal political contributions, Clark 
pointed to Hedgecock campaign expenses that were paid with J. David funds. In 
each case, however, Hedgecock insisted that he had assumed that his campaign 
committee had paid the bills or was unaware of the specifics. 
