DEL MAR; 
WHILE STEVENS IS AWAY, SOLIS MAKES HAY, WINNING ON BEYOND PERFECTION 
Gary Stevens wasn't the only jockey who benefited from Golden Pheasant's upset 
victory in the Arlington Million. 
So did Alex Solis. 
With Stevens busy providing Charlie Whittingham with his third Million success 
in Illinois, Solis inherited the mount on Beyond Perfection in the $290,400 Del 
Mar Debutante. 
The way the 2-year-old Quack filly ran Sunday, Solis and agent Craig O'Bryan 
will also be happy to know it's wasn't a one-shot deal. Trainer Jack Van Berg 
said he will stick with Solis. 
Almost three weeks after being beaten by 4 1/2 lengths by Lite Light in the 
seven-furlong Sorrento Stakes, Beyond Perfection turned things around in a big 
way. 
Never looking like a loser at any stage, the 3-1 third choice took the lead 
from the start and at the end of her 1:34 4/5 mile had beaten Lite Light, the 
9-5 favorite, by nine lengths. The final time was a Debutante record, eclipsing 
one-fifth a mark shared by Table Hands and last year's winner, Rue De Palm. 
Impressive in her July 15 debut at Hollywood Park, Beyond Perfection put up no 
resistance when challenged by Lite Light in the Sorrento. But when Lite Light 
made a mild run at her Sunday, Beyond Perfection found another gear. "She just 
ran away from me," said Russell Baze, Lite Light's jockey. "She didn't put up 
that kind of defense last time. It was no contest today." 
Van Berg, who has found winners hard to come by in Southern California -- the 
Debutante was his first victory in 23 starts at Del Mar -- didn't lose faith in 
the filly, a Kentucky-bred owned by John Franks. 
"She got upset in her last race here, she was nervous and rank on the 
backside," he said. "We took some time and schooled her. She gallops faster in 
the morning than most horses can run. 
"The first time Gary Stevens rode her he said when this filly gets a route of 
ground she'll be a top filly. Alex was never on her back before today. I told 
him what to do and he did everything perfect. This filly has shown as much as 
any I've had my hands on, maybe more." 
Purchased by Franks at the Barretts Sale in Pomona for $32,000 several months 
earlier, Beyond Perfection won't be back to try the boys in the Del Mar 
Futurity a week from Wednesday. 
"She's going to get some time," said Van Berg. "We'll take her back to 
Hollywood Park and decide what's next. We want to go to the Breeders' Cup with 
her. The further she goes, the better she'll be; she keeps loping along." 
Unsettled before the Sorrento, Beyond Perfection was a model of decorum Sunday. 
"She went to the gate real quiet and was very calm," said Solis. "(Van Berg) 
just told me to try to get her to relax and that she'd be tough. 
"She just galloped around out there. She does everything right and she can 
really run. She has some kind of a stride on her." 
Title Bought, the 5-2 second choice, was third, 2 1/2 lengths behind Lite 
Light. Nice Assay was fourth, then came Alyfair, Gold Fleece and Brazen, who 
was some 24 lengths behind the winner. 
Fly Till Dawn will try to repeat his Eddie Read Handicap upset when he takes on 
11 rivals in today's $300,000 Del Mar Handicap. 
Against a field which is made up primarily of allowance horses, the 4-year-old 
Swing Till Dawn colt will be a lot shorter price than the 13-1 he was three 
weeks ago when beating Arlington Million winner Golden Pheasant, Classic Fame 
and five others in the Grade I Read. 
Fly Till Dawn also doesn't figure to get the same kind of easy lead he did Aug. 
12 -- he went 48 3/5 and 1:12 2/5 en route to the 1:48 1/5 final time -- 
because of Royal Reach, who has gone wire-to-wire in three of his last four 
turf starts. There's also a distance question for Darrell Vienna's gray colt. 
The Del Mar Handicap is 1 3/8 miles, a quarter mile longer than the Read. 
Runner-up to Petite Ile in Hollywood Park's Sunset Handicap, Live The Dream is 
the 118-pound highweight for trainer Charlie Whittingham. The Northern Baby 
colt has won five of 16 on turf, but his best work has come at Hollypark. Alex 
Solis rides Live The Dream, who worked a mile in 1:39 3/5 over the course nine 
days ago. 
Horse Racing Notes 
Golden Pheasant returned $14 at Del Mar for his Arlington Million victory, 
compared to $15.20 at Arlington Park. . . . Beyond Perfection's victory was 
worth $110,000 to owner John Franks. . . . Supplemented for $10,000, Beyond 
Perfection was the fifth consecutive supplementary entrant to win the 
Debutante, joining Arewehavingfunyet, Brave Raj, Lost Kitty, Lea Lucinda and 
Rue De Palm. . . . Cee's Tizzy was one of nine 3-year-olds entered in 
Wednesday's $75,000-added El Cajon Stakes at 1 1/16 miles on the main track. A 
gray son of Relaunch, Cee's Tizzy stretched out for the first time in an 
allowance race Aug. 19 and ran a mile in 1:33 2/5, winning by nearly three 
lengths under Eddie Delahoussaye. If he is a starter -- trainer John Russell is 
also considering the Del Mar Budweiser Breeders' Cup Sunday -- Cee's Tizzy will 
face Oh Wow, Warcraft, Prudent Leader, Hawaiian Pass, Asia, Shinko Wine, Toby 
Jug and Bel Air Paster. 
ARLINGTON MILLION: Golden Pheasant scores victory for Gretzky, McNall and 
Whittingham. C18 
