DEVELOPERS DEFEND PORTER RANCH BENEFITS 
William Barth's Sept. 2 commentary criticizing the city's approval of the 
Porter Ranch plan claims that development requires tremendous increases in 
public service and infrastructure costs that far outweigh increases in tax 
revenues. While this may be the case with other developments, it is not true of 
Porter Ranch. 
Porter Ranch Development Co. is paying for all of the infrastructure within the 
specific plan area, such as roads, sewers, utilities, parks, etc. Outside the 
specific plan we are providing more than $50 million in transportation 
infrastructure improvements throughout the entire northwest San Fernando 
Valley. 
These "hard" infrastructure costs are in addition to millions of dollars in 
permit fees, sewer fees, water hookups, etc. the company will be required to 
pay. These benefits go to the city of Los Angeles before any increases in tax 
revenue are taken into account. In Porter Ranch's case, full build-out will 
produce about $38 million -- in today's dollars -- annually in new tax revenue. 
These new revenues will more than cover many "soft" infrastructure costs, such 
as police and public health services. 
Porter Ranch Development Co. is donating land for a municipal building, a 
library and a fire station. We are building the fire station and furnishing all 
of the equipment, including fire trucks, to the city free of charge. 
Barth claims that the jobs created to fulfill the city's jobs/housing balance 
requirement will not match the income needed to live in Porter Ranch. But 
official figures show an almost exact statistical correlation between projected 
income levels of residents and projected income levels for the jobs created. 
Barth says there will be more car trips and pollution because of the project. 
On the contrary, auto trips would be longer and pollution worse without the 
plan. Not only will Porter Ranch provide jobs and shopping closer to residents 
but the mitigations required by the plan will result in improved traffic 
conditions. The South Coast Air Quality Management District says the project 
will not affect the region's air quality goals. 
Barth's allegations can be refuted by a simple review of the public records. 
However, what is most disturbing is outlandish claim that Porter Ranch 
Development Co. improperly influenced City Council approval with political 
contributions. We respond to donation requests from numerous community groups, 
political committees and charitable organizations. 
Nathan Shapell, Irving Feintech 
Partners, 
Porter Ranch Development Co. 
Beverly Hills 
