WORLD BANK COMMITS FUNDS TO ENVIRONMENT 
The World Bank, long criticized for funding environmentally damaging projects, 
today announced increased lending to population-control projects and forestry 
development to help combat global atmospheric warming. 
Bank President Barber Conable told a conference on the environment that the 
bank "is committed to environmental issues and, what is more, this commitment 
does not detract at all from our primary mission of global development." 
The American president of the leading institution for funding Third World 
development spoke at the opening of a conference called to address how to raise 
living standards in poor countries while preserving the environment. 
Sponsored by Japan 
Sponsored by the Japanese government and the U.N. Environment Program, the 
conference has drawn dozens of officials and experts from many countries and 
international organizations. 
At the end of the conference Wednesday they are expected to issue 
recommendations on ways to combat the main problem on the agenda: global 
warming. Scientists warn that the so-called greenhouse effect could scorch 
parts of the Earth and raise sea levels unless checked. 
Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, whose country is under 
environmentalists' attack as the biggest importer of tropical forest products, 
pledged increased assistance to research on sustainable development of tropical 
forests. 
Kaifu, welcoming the conferees, said Japan intends to raise its foreign 
environmental aid to $2.25 billion in three years. 
'Positive Vigor' 
"Japan is ready to take on global environmental issues with positive vigor," he 
said, reporting that he discussed such issues in depth during his 
just-completed series of summit meetings in the United States, Canada and 
Mexico. 
Conable said the world's population, currently about 5 billion, will grow to 6 
billion by the year 2000, adding to the use of fossil fuels that is blamed for 
the greenhouse effect and atmospheric warming. 
He announced that the bank is establishing a gas development unit to promote 
use of natural gas because it is the least polluting of fossil fuels. 
"I am also pleased to announce a tripling of our lending to forestry in the 
next few years," Conable said. 
On population-control projects, he said lending has amounted to over $500 
million in the last five years and that level will increase to more than $800 
million in the 1990-92 period. 
