POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
A JOKER IN THE DECK; 
RICHARD THOMPSON ADDS FARCE TO ACOUSTIC SHOW 
Richard Thompson's talent has always been aces. Now he seems to have added a 
joker or two to his hand as well. 
The British folk-rocker's solo acoustic show at the Coach House Wednesday night 
was a wonderful, two-hour grab bag of strong new songs, familiar pleasures and 
uncanny surprises. 
The familiar pleasures -- familiar, at least, to the cult of fans who know him 
as one of rock's richest one-stop repositories for singing, songwriting and 
guitar-playing excellence -- included Thompson's assured weave of tragedy and 
pathos, ire and droll wit, a regard for rock's traditional roots, and a 
willingness to explore beyond their bounds. The joker in the deck was a 
seemingly new-found knack for farce. 
Thompson always has been a pretty funny guy when he wants to be, especially on 
stage. But his sense of humor typically has been dry and ironic, his musical 
jokes the sort that draw a grin or a chuckle, but not a roar. This time, 
Thompson used a new tune of his own and a couple of borrowed ones to provoke 
belly laughs. 
The show's first farcical installment was "Now That I Am Dead," written by John 
French for French, Frith, Kaiser and Thompson, a side-project consortium that 
allows Thompson to indulge some of his more offbeat passions. French, who knows 
a thing or two about offbeat passions from his days as Captain Beefheart's 
drummer, may have written the song with Thompson in mind. It's about a rocker 
who, after a lifetime of commercial neglect, finally wins wealth and fame. 
Unfortunately, this turnabout is posthumous. Thompson, who knows all about 
commercial neglect, played the dead star's role with wicked glee. Putting on a 
Vincent Price monster-mash vibrato punctuated by ghoulish cackles, he sang a 
succession of comic verses along the lines of "Now that I am boxed, they say my 
music rocks -- it's taken on a new appeal." 
Better, because it was even stranger, was Thompson's own "Psycho Street." The 
song depicted a very British neighborhood populated with lunatics and perverts 
beyond even David Lynch's ken: "A man sticks his neighbor's cat on the barbecue 
and turns on the gas and says: 'Are you going to talk, or am I going to get 
nasty?' " 
More than the lyrics, which were the product of a fertile mind testing the 
limits of its power of warped imagining, the music made this song a 
delightfully crazed novelty. Thompson delivered the verses with a donnish, 
"Masterpiece Theater" intonation that echoed Viv Stanshall's approach with the 
Bonzo Dog Band (that great, eccentric British humor-rock band of the 1960s that 
later spun off into the Rutles and various Monty Python productions). The 
chorus to "Psycho Street" was a jaunty, vaudevillian thing seemingly tailored 
for a barbershop quartet. Appended to all of that was some demonic, punkish 
guitar flailing and howling. It was a singular piece of music, to say the 
least. 
To show that he also can mine tradition for broad laughs, Thompson closed with 
a Louis Jordan song, "Don't Roll Those Bloodshot Eyes at Me," redone rockabilly 
style with a punch line in every verse. 
A feisty audience that was full of wisecracks and song requests helped loosen 
Thompson up to the point where the show took on a delightfully uncharted 
feeling. Asked to play the Who's "Substitute," a song he has done live in the 
past, Thompson instead embarked on a jokey, finger-snapping, a cappella 
rendition of "My Generation." Then, caught up in the spirit, he picked up his 
guitar and gave the old anthem a proper rocking -- and followed it for good 
measure with a burning, clenched "Substitute." 
Such antics gave the night a special, heady flavor, but Thompson, always more 
the tragedian than the comic, did not stint on emotional gravity. Running 
through his work is a deep sense that life is an agonizing business full of 
horrors and rife with moral outrages ranging from romantic betrayals to the 
exploitative rigging of whole social and economic systems. He painted those 
dark shades vividly, depicting the broken outcasts of "Down Where the Drunkards 
Roll" and wallowing in the utter hopelessness of "The End of the Rainbow." 
Thompson was especially strong and eloquent on "Wall of Death" with its 
determination to face and embrace life's most dangerous and precarious 
situations. 
The high quality of the five new, unrecorded songs Thompson included in his 
23-song set indicate that, at 41, he has suffered no creative let-up. The 
concert began with two excellent new numbers, "I Misunderstood," a fine lover's 
plaint, and "1952 Vincent Black Lightning," in which a fleet, springy, 
bluegrass-tinged guitar propelled the vibrant tale of a doomed outlaw biker -- 
a sort of "Bonnie and Clyde" on two wheels. 
As always, Thompson's guitar work was little short of astonishing. Few other 
rock guitarists can achieve the churning, obsessive quality with which he 
colored "Shoot Out the Lights" and "When the Spell is Broken." He accomplished 
it with lurching rhythmic shifts, sudden notes bent and held to the point of 
stress fracture, and inexorable, hammering bass figures like the Indian war 
dance thrum of "When the Spell is Broken" -- all harnessed for strictly 
expressive purposes, not mere show. The solo in "Down Where the Drunkards Roll" 
was a lovely display of lyricism, while the blazing country licks at the end of 
"Valerie" were propulsion personified. Thompson made his guitar sound like a 
train rumbling nearer and nearer, with whistles blowing. It was a fitting 
evocation from a rocker who, 22 years after his debut with Fairport Convention, 
still has his creative engines stoked and burning. 
