U.S. TO SEEK SLAVE CASE TESTIMONY IN MEXICO; 
CRIMES: UNDER PROSECUTORS' PROPOSAL, FORMER EMPLOYEES OF SOMIS RANCHER EDWIN M. 
IVES WOULD BE BUSED FROM REMOTE VILLAGES TO THE MEXICAN CAPITAL. 
Federal prosecutors on Monday will ask to take most of the testimony in the 
slavery trial of Somis flower rancher Edwin M. Ives in Mexico City so his 
former employees can be bused from rural Indian villages to testify. 
If U.S. District Court Judge Consuelo Marshall grants the request, it will mark 
the first time that testimony used at an U.S. trial is given primarily in a 
foreign country, attorneys said. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Carol Gillam has asked Marshall to allow the testimony of 
67 people to be taken in the Mexican capital to avoid the cost of flying 
witnesses to Los Angeles and to encourage them to testify. 
"We have no way to compel these people to come up here," Gillam said in an 
interview Thursday. 
The witnesses are mostly Zapotec and Mixtec Indians who live in villages so 
rural that Spanish is a second language. 
Prosecutors allege that they were smuggled to Ives' 50-acre Somis compound 
during the 1980s, forced to work for about $1 per hour and to buy food and 
sundries at inflated prices from a company store. Ives, 54, six ranch overseers 
and an alleged smuggler are charged in a 15-count indictment alleging civil 
rights and labor violations. 
In other federal cases, one or two witnesses who have refused to come to this 
country have been questioned under oath abroad, Gillam said, "but never in 
these numbers. Of course, there's never been a case like this, so we'll be 
doing a lot of things that have never been done before." 
The Ives prosecution is the most far-reaching slavery case ever filed by the 
United States, Gillam has said. 
Robert M. Talcott, an Ives attorney, said he will oppose the prosecution's 
motion on Monday. 
Out-of-court testimony "is absolutely unheard of on the scale that's being 
proposed here," he said. "It's almost a joke. They are doing this because they 
are trying to hide something." 
Many of the 67 witnesses to be called in Mexico are also listed as defense 
witnesses, Talcott said. And in interviews with his investigators, they support 
Ives' contention that he has done nothing wrong, the lawyer said. 
Talcott said the request is an attempt by the government to maintain control 
over unsophisticated witnesses who could undermine the prosecution's case. 
"We have been told that these are exceedingly naive, impressionable villagers, 
and everything that has been done by the government appears to ensure that no 
rays of light will ever reach them," Talcott said. 
He said Mexican government officials, perhaps even Mexican police, will pick up 
the villagers, transport them to Mexico City and provide them with room and 
board before they testify. 
"It places a chill on their testimony," and raises questions about their 
independence, he said. If they lie on the stand, no perjury charges can be 
brought against them because they will not be within the jurisdiction of a 
federal court, he said. 
Gillam disagreed. She said the witnesses will not be assisted by the Mexican 
government, but by representatives of the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City. 
"There will be no police involved," she said. 
If Judge Marshall consents, federal prosecutors and eight attorneys for Ives 
and the other defendants will question witnesses in Mexico during November and 
the first two weeks of December. 
Most witnesses will brought in small buses over dirt roads to Mexico City, a 
journey of about 11 hours in good weather, Gillam said. Their questioning will 
be videotaped and Marshall will edit inadmissible comments from the tape before 
it is shown to a jury during the trial, which is scheduled for March. 
Talcott said the job of reviewing and editing the tapes places a mind-boggling 
burden on the judge. 
The foreign testimony is also likely to be very expensive. 
Talcott has asked the judge to order the prosecution to pay for the defense's 
travel and hotel rooms in Mexico City. Defendants also have a right to observe 
the testimony and could seek reimbursement for travel expenses, he said. 
