CALIFORNIA &amp; CO.: IN A MATURING WINE INDUSTRY, DISTRIBUTION IS EVERYTHING 
A decade ago, this valley's future looked as unlimited as its vine-studded 
horizon. New wineries were sprouting almost as fast as vineyards were 
expanding. 
The yuppie generation had selected California Chardonnay as its beverage de 
rigueur. And the wine business talked of Americans adopting the habits of the 
French, even sipping vin ordinaire with their french fries. 
But as the 1990 grape harvest begins here, so does an era of reduced 
expectations. U.S. wine consumption has dropped slightly in each of the past 
two years. Sales of jug wines and coolers are down. The only significant growth 
has been in premium wines, but that's mostly due to people trading up to more 
expensive labels -- -- not buying more wine. Liquor distributors have been 
consolidating, making it much more difficult and expensive for smaller wineries 
to get their product to market. 
Meantime, an ocean of Chardonnay is about to flood the market, the result of 
vines planted several years ago before people quit drinking as much wine. 
Consumers should soon see lower prices on some high-quality wines. 
The industry's pessimists read all this and predict consolidations, 
bankruptcies and forced sales of wineries that are unable to compete under the 
tougher circumstances. There is ominous evidence that this is already 
beginning. 
But the optimists say as long as California continues to improve the quality of 
its wine -- and over the past 20 years it has come to rival the French -- sales 
and profits will take care of themselves; there may be ups and downs, but the 
world will always buy quality, they say. 
Either way, the reality of cutthroat competition in a maturing industry has 
supplanted the fantasy of genteel life in a Napa Valley vineyard. 
The rhetoric used these days by wine industry experts hits you like a splash of 
sparkling water. "Contrary to the hopes of many vintners and despite 
substantial investments by major consumer goods companies in the 1970s and 
early 1980s, wine has not become an everyday part of American life," industry 
analyst Jean-Michel Valette of Hambrecht &amp; Quist wrote in a report last 
month. "It is still consumed primarily on special occasions or when dining out 
-- times when the package is being consumed just as much as the contents. Jug 
wines simply do not fulfill a growing number of consumers' image-based needs." 
Two decades ago, California had little pretense of competing with the world's 
best wine producers. It made mostly good-quality bulk wines, the kind sold in 
jugs at relatively low prices. But, with the help of research done by 
agriculture experts at UC Davis, the quality of California grapes and wines 
improved dramatically. 
Money from banks and investors started to pour into the industry. Premium 
wineries in the Napa Valley became a prestige investment, and the price of Napa 
vineyards soared; the number of wineries in the state skyrocketed past 800. 
And, because of liberal tax laws that permitted big investment writeoffs, it 
was possible for a gentleman farmer to operate a small winery and live the good 
life. How much wine he produced wasn't too important, nor was his market share 
or his distribution network. 
In time, California wines appeared on and even dominated wine lists at fine 
restaurants. The money to be made in premium California wines became apparent, 
and even major U.S. corporations, including Coca-Cola, bought in. Most are gone 
now. 
"In the early 1980s, people fell in love with the wine business, and they knew 
they could write (their costs) off," said Jon A. Fredrikson, a San Francisco 
wine industry consultant. But the investment writeoffs mostly ended with tax 
reform in the mid-1980s, about the time the number of distributors began to 
shrink. 
Distributors are the wholesalers who go to stores and restaurants and sell 
wine. A decline in their number makes it tougher for wineries with fewer brands 
and smaller production to find distributors willing to market their goods. 
"You need multiple brands and at least 200,000 cases a year to make it today," 
said Donald D. Bade, president of Santa Rosa-based Vintech Wine Group, which is 
forming a "collection" of investor-owned premium wineries with a common 
marketing and distribution network. By comparison, many of the small wineries 
that started a decade ago used to be content turning out 25,000 cases a year, 
or perhaps even less. 
Bade predicts that some small wineries will close over the next several years 
after searching fruitlessly for distributors or investment partners. "Three 
years ago we had a hard time finding any wineries for sale," he said. "Now 
hardly a week goes by that we don't hear from somebody interested in selling 
out." 
Fredrikson, too, has been hearing lately from wineries that need capital to 
expand production to meet the new economics of the Napa Valley. "It's a 
maturing business," he said. 
Jug wine producers consolidated long ago, leaving giant E. &amp; J. Gallo far 
above all the others. And the low-end premium winemakers -- those that sell 
products for $3 to $7 per bottle -- also did so several years ago, leaving 
Gallo, Sebastiani, Sutter Home, Glen Ellen and Wine World Estates the clear 
leaders. Now the consolidation will spread even to producers of more expensive 
wines, according to Valette and others. 
This sobering maturity for the young California premium wine business has been 
forced on it by cold reality: Americans aren't French or Italian, and they 
don't drink as much wine. It no longer appears as if they will substantially 
increase their consumption -- no matter how sophisticated they become about 
appellations, varieties and aging. That's hard for some wine enthusiasts to 
accept, but it's what has driven some investors from the business already. 
Of course, U.S. industries have "matured" for generations. Makers of better 
mousetraps have been acquired by those that offer them access to capital and 
help with distribution. The end result is fewer mousetrap makers. It's as 
American as apple pie, or in this case Napa Valley Chardonnay. 
The ultimate irony may be that, while the big American firms that dabbled in 
California wine a decade ago got fainthearted when increased consumption failed 
to materialize, some of the biggest acquirers and consolidators of the state's 
premium wineries recently have been European food and liquor conglomerates. 
Switzerland's Nestle, for instance, bought Wine World Estates. Great Britain's 
Grand Metropolitan owns Heublein Fine Wines, and Allied-Lyons, also of Great 
Britain, owns Wine Alliance. 
The wine business in Europe "matured" long ago. There is virtually no more land 
available for expansion; vineyards here seem like a bargain, and even the 
Europeans admit that California wines are now comparable to their own. 
European winemakers learned long ago what the Napa Valley is just now learning: 
Quality being about equal, he who has distribution has everything. 
TRADING UP 
While U.S. wine consumption has been flat . . . 
Annual U.S. wine consumption, in gallons per capita 
1889: 0.61 
1914: 0.53 
1934: 0.26 
1945: 0.71 
1960: 0.91 
1970: 1.31 
1980: 2.13 
1990: 2.11 
. . . Market share of California premium wines has jumped. 
California premiums: 4% 
Imports: 25% 
Other: 6% 
California jug wines: 65% 
Other: 4% 
Imports: 17% 
California premiums: 22% 
California jug wines: 57% 
Source: Gomberg, Fredrikson &amp; Associates 
