YOUR BODY: PERSONAL HEALTH; 
NONSURGICAL ALTERNATIVE TO FACE LIFTS 
Why get a face lift to look younger, reasoned Nana Weinberg, when simple 
implants to plump up the cheeks might do the job for now. So the 48-year-old 
Los Angeles architect opted for a new and controversial anti-aging procedure 
called submalar augmentation. 
Offered by a growing number of physicians, cheek implants are quicker and 
cheaper than traditional face lifts. The small, teardrop-shaped silastic 
implants are inserted through the mouth during a simple 45-minute office 
procedure, and the bandages are removed within three days. A face lift 
operation, on the other hand, can take hours, and swelling can persist for a 
week or more afterwards. Fees for California face lifts that can cost as much 
as $4,200 are three times the implant fees. 
The implants work by restoring the facial fullness that wanes with age as 
underlying fat in the cheekbone area shrinks, says Dr. William A. Binder, a Los 
Angeles facial, plastic and reconstructive surgeon who just published a report 
of the new procedure in the Archives of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck 
Surgery. The fat loss usually becomes evident after age 35. "That's the time," 
says the plastic surgeon, "when patients begin complaining, 'I look old, 
depressed and sad.' " 
Binder sees the implant procedure as an alternative to face lifts for younger 
patients between the ages of 35 and 50 and as an adjunct for older patients. 
Weinberg, for instance, followed up the implant with a face lift a few years 
later. 
But some of Binder's colleagues strongly disagree that the implants can ever 
take the place of traditional face lifts. "I don't believe it's an alternative 
at all to a face lift because they only fill out the middle of the face," says 
Dr. Edward O. Terino, an Agoura Hills plastic surgeon who has inserted implants 
similar to those used by Binder for more than a decade. "But it can be a 
valuable adjunct to face lift." 
Whether implants are adjuncts or alternatives, there can be problems. In 
Binder's study, 5 of his 78 patients ended up with asymmetrical implants that 
required adjustment. Two patients got abscesses that were resolved by drainage 
and antibiotics; three had reduced lip movement that returned to normal within 
a month; and some had numbness of the upper lip, but sensation returned within 
three months. 
Even when the implants are inserted without a hitch, they can't always solve 
the "great expectation" problem. Explains Binder with a sigh: "Everyone wants 
to look like Kim Basinger." 
Drinking to Excess 
Downing a couple of alcoholic drinks a day might help prevent heart disease, 
several studies suggest. But if you exceed two drinks, you may risk a double 
whammy disadvantage. The excess alcohol is likely to increase blood pressure 
and decrease your absorption of dietary calcium that may help lower pressure. 
That's the conclusion of a study released today and published in this month's 
Circulation, an American Heart Assn. journal. 
"For the average person, bad things start happening physiologically at more 
than two drinks a day," says Dr. Michael H. Criqui, professor of medicine and 
professor of community and family medicine at the University of California San 
Diego School of Medicine. He studied the effects of alcohol in more than 7,000 
men, discovering that higher calcium consumption is associated with lower blood 
pressures among nondrinkers and light drinkers. But those who drank two or more 
drinks per day did not seem to enjoy the blood pressure-lowering effects of 
calcium. 
Another expert, Dr. Arthur Klatsky, chief of cardiology at Kaiser Permanente, 
Oakland, sees the new study as an extension of some of his own cardiac 
research. "We've done two different studies showing that those who drink three 
or more drinks a day are more likely to have high blood pressure." And several 
studies suggest that 1000 milligrams of calcium a day -- about that found in 
three glasses of milk -- can help lower blood pressure. 
Criqui's advice: Don't exceed two drinks of beer, wine or mixed liquor daily. 
And don't consider two drinks a requirement. The study isn't meant to encourage 
drinking, he says, nor to persuade those drinking less than two per day to hike 
intake. 
Advice to Parents 
For most parents, the situation is familiar. You're worried about your child's 
vocabulary, attention span or some other developmental milestones, but you 
wonder if it's important enough to mention to the pediatrician. 
Speak up, suggest Vanderbilt University researchers who found parents anxious 
about their child's development usually have valid concerns, even if they lack 
medical knowledge. 
The researchers asked 100 families seeking pediatric care to describe concerns 
about their children's development while their offspring took a developmental 
screening test. Eighty percent of the children who failed the screening tests 
had parents who expressed concerns about their development in the same areas. 
In comparison, 94% of the kids who passed the screening had parents without 
developmental concerns. 
This study proves parents don't need to rely on formal knowledge to assess 
development, explains William MacLean, a pediatric psychologist and one of the 
authors of the study just published in the American Journal of Diseases of 
Children. What was their most frequently used measuring stick? Comparisons with 
other children. 
"Parents should not be afraid to bring up their concerns with pediatricians," 
says MacLean, noting that several studies have found parents reluctant to 
discuss "nonmedical" issues with their children's doctors, fearing they are not 
correct or that they will take too much of the busy doctor's time. 
"Most parents are good observers, even if they are not medically 
sophisticated," adds Dr. Diane Henderson, a pediatrician and developmental 
specialist at Childrens Hospital, Los Angeles. "I've been trying to teach 
residents the importance of listening to parental concerns for years. Now I 
have a study to back me up." 
Trauma Folklore 
It's well-known folklore among emergency room doctors: when the moon is full, 
the waiting room will overflow with victims of trauma and violence. Not so, 
find three Pittsburgh doctors who reviewed the records of nearly 1,500 trauma 
victims admitted to Allegheny General Hospital during a calendar year. They 
discovered, in fact, admissions were slightly higher on waning moon days (a 
mean of 3.98 patients a day) than on full moon days (3.58 patients per day). 
Fewer helicopter transfers of trauma patients occurred on full moon days, too, 
found the researchers, who published their report recently in the Annals of 
Emergency Medicine. 
The full moon may even have a protective effect against violence, suggest the 
researchers. A brighter night sky, for instance, might deter crime by better 
illumination of roadways. "That's speculation of course," says co-author Dr. 
Wendy Coates. 
