CENSUS DASHES LATINO HOPES FOR SEAT ON ENLARGED COUNCIL 
Latino leaders said they are disappointed over unexpectedly low population 
totals reported for the city last week. 
The Latino community had hoped that preliminary census data would show a 
population of more than 100,000, which would result in the expansion of the 
City Council and give Latinos a better chance of winning a council seat for the 
first time, leaders said. 
Under terms of the Compton City Charter, the five-member council must be 
expanded to seven members when the city's population reaches 100,000. 
However, preliminary census data released last week shows that the population 
count fell far short of the necessary 100,000. The U.S. Census Bureau put 
Compton's total population at 86,999, up 7% from the 1980 figure of 81,286. 
"That can't be, because, if you look at the school district, it's growing," 
said veteran Latino activist Joseph Ochoa. "I'm pretty sure we've got to be 
over 100,000." 
Pedro Pallon, a local bakery owner and founding member of the Latino Chamber of 
Commerce, said: "I was very disappointed. We were counting on 100,000 at least. 
I think there's been an undercount, definitely." 
There is a heavy concentration of Latinos in Compton's northeast corner, as 
well as along its eastern edge, and Latinos believe that they might be able to 
mount a winning council campaign from there. 
Council members are elected at large, although they are required to be 
residents of the district from which they are running. Ideally, Latino leaders 
would like to force a charter change that requires council members to be 
elected by the residents of a district. For such a change to take place, 
however, the city voters would have to approve a charter change. 
The Census Bureau has not yet announced the racial breakdown in city 
populations, but there is little doubt that the city's Latino population has 
mushroomed during the last decade. 
Last year, for the first time, Latino youngsters reached a majority in the 
Compton schools. They represented 50.3% of the enrollment, compared to only 
about 33% five years ago. 
In the city, various estimates from census tracking research firms put the 
overall Latino population at about 33% to 35%, up about 10% to 12% from 1980. 
However, the Compton Unified School District takes in large tracts of 
county-controlled areas that are not within city boundaries, and the county 
areas are heavily Latino. 
In response to its growing Latino population, Compton has hired some 
Spanish-speaking workers in order to communicate with all its residents. The 
Police Department, for example, had to hire Spanish-speaking dispatchers in 
order to take emergency calls. 
Latinos, however, have been agitating for more Latino hiring in the school 
district and the city and demanding that both adopt affirmative action hiring 
plans. 
Ochoa and Pallon said they had no plans to challenge the census data and will 
wait to see what action the city itself takes over the lower-than-expected 
count. 
In an ironic twist, the city may use its growing Latino population as evidence 
when it challenges the federal count. There is no doubt that the Latino 
population has grown over the last 10 years, Councilwoman Patricia A. Moore 
said Tuesday. 
Maybe, Moore suggested, many Latinos are recent immigrants and were afraid to 
respond to the census questionnaire. 
City officials say they also were stunned by the low census figures and will 
challenge them. The process is known as the post census local review and gives 
cities an opportunity to present evidence that the Census Bureau figures are 
wrong. 
"The state Department of Finance has had us up over 93,000 for about three 
years," city planner Barbara Kilroy said. 
Much of the state and federal money, such as gasoline and sales tax revenues, 
that cities receive is based on population. If Compton cannot prove that it has 
the 93,000 people attributed to it by the state Department of Finance, then the 
city could lose some funding, said Jerry Gadt, city planning manager. He is in 
charge of preparing the city's challenge to the Census Bureau. 
Gadt said he is poring over tax records from the county assessor's office in 
hopes of showing that the number of dwellings in Compton has risen. The 
household figures, Gadt said, are one measure used to challenge Census Bureau 
population figures. 
City Manager Howard Caldwell said: "I understand they have been undercounting 
all over the state. We have enough data here to show that they severely 
undercounted our population (increase) over the 10-year period." 
Caldwell said that the city sells water to all the households and that his 
staff is compiling data to show that the number of households has risen 
steadily over the last decade. He also said that billings from the city's 
sanitation contractor will show that the number of households in the city has 
risen. 
