U.N. TO COMMIT FUNDS FOR 'CHILDREN'S VACCINE' SEARCH; 
HEALTH: WORLD ORGANIZATION SEEKS A SINGLE-DOSE IMMUNIZATION AGAINST ALL MAJOR 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES. 
The United Nations is expected to announce today that it will commit $150 
million to begin development of a universal "children's vaccine" that would 
provide protection against all major childhood infectious diseases with a 
single dose. 
"We have taken a giant step toward harnessing the biotechnology revolution for 
the child survival revolution," said James P. Grant, executive director of the 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), one of three U.N. agencies sponsoring 
the project. The others are the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United 
Nations Development Programme. 
"We can now begin to redirect our . . . objectives to protecting children 
against killer diseases with vaccines designed to meet the rigorous delivery 
requirements of the developing world," Grant said in a statement. 
Officials from the three agencies, which were scheduled to announce the program 
in New York today, predicted that the combined vaccine could save the lives of 
at least 8 million children in the developing world who die annually from these 
diseases, as well as prevent some 900 million episodes of severe illness. 
International health experts have long believed that vaccine immunization 
programs represent the most cost-effective way to protect the world's children 
from the major killers, which include polio, measles, tuberculosis, whooping 
cough, tetanus and diphtheria. But the programs are constrained by the need to 
administer multiple injections and follow-up booster shots, causing costs to 
increase and participation to fall off. 
Despite the limitations, vaccination programs already have achieved a 
remarkable degree of success. In 1974, for example, only 5% of children in the 
developing world received vaccines for the major diseases, said Dr. Barry 
Bloom, a professor of microbiology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in 
the Bronx. By 1990, however, the figure had jumped to 60% to 70%, "which is an 
extraordinary achievement," he said. 
"The vaccines have made an enormous impact," said Bloom, who also serves as a 
consultant to the U.N. agencies. "Two million lives are saved each year that 
would have been lost in 1974. But we know we're going to have great trouble -- 
even with existing vaccines -- getting from where we are now to all kids. 
That's why we need new kinds of vaccines." 
A "dream" children's vaccine would be designed to overcome the two biggest 
obstacles to successful immunization: It would require no refrigeration and 
would minimize a child's contacts with the health delivery system, Bloom said. 
"It would be a single-dose vaccine that contains all the substances required to 
protect children against the major infectious diseases, that is given once 
orally and that would remain stable without refrigeration," Bloom said. 
Most vaccines require refrigeration, a problem in the hot climates of many 
developing nations, and also require booster shots. With existing vaccines, 
complete immunization against the six major diseases now requires between seven 
and 14 contacts between a child and health providers, Bloom said. 
For example, DPT, the combination vaccine that protects against diphtheria, 
pertussis (whooping cough) and tetanus, requires an initial shot followed at 
separate intervals by two boosters. 
"For each booster in the Third World, about 15% of the kids drop out," Bloom 
said. 
He noted that only 14% of the expense of vaccinating a child is the cost of the 
vaccine itself. "The rest is the cost of getting it out there," he said. 
U.N. officials characterized a universal children's vaccine as "a distant but 
achievable goal," and would not predict when one might be available. Bloom 
speculated that such a vaccine could be developed within a decade, particularly 
as a result of advances in genetic and molecular engineering. 
Work is under way on vaccine technology that can deliver booster shots with 
only one injection. The technique is called microencapsulation and involves 
administering antigens -- substances that produce antibodies and provide 
immunity -- in a biodegradable, "time released" delivery system. 
Such a one-shot, controlled-release vaccine is now being developed for neonatal 
tetanus, which afflicts children in developing countries at the time of birth 
and kills an estimated 750,000 newborns annually. Currently, immunization for 
tetanus requires three injections. 
U.N. officials said that another priority will be to develop vaccines for 
diseases for which vaccines are now lacking. 
Such diseases include rotavirus, which kills 800,000 children annually from 
acute diarrhea; respiratory syncytial virus, an infectious disease of the lower 
respiratory tract that accounts for 40% of all acute respiratory infections in 
children under the age of 1; meningococcal meningitis, which afflicts between 
600,000 and 1 million children annually, with a mortality rate of 20%, and 
dengue, a viral disease spread by mosquitoes that infects 30 million to 60 
million people every year. 
"New and improved vaccines will help us to save millions of young lives by 
extending the effective reach of preventive medicine," Grant said. 
