CHOLESTEROL MYTH MAKING 
Regarding your Sept. 7 piece about the Atlantic's article on "The Cholesterol 
Myth" (by Garry Abrams), Thomas Moore is not alone in challenging popular 
thinking. On March 28, a maverick scientist from New Zealand also made waves in 
the tranquil waters of Los Angeles cardiology circles. He lectured to a group 
of eminent heart specialists at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center on "Atherosclerosis 
and the Cholesterol Myth." Atherosclerosis is the more correct term for what is 
commonly known as arteriosclerosis or "hardening of the arteries." 
The speaker, William E. Stehbens, is a professor of pathology at the University 
of Otago in Wellington, New Zealand. He is no novice in the cardiac research 
field and is dedicated to finding the true cause of atherosclerosis. 
He contends with much supporting evidence that there is no scientific basis for 
assuming that a diet that will lower low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) 
and that raises high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) can favorably alter 
the process of atherosclerosis. 
One of the sharpest arrows in his quiver is directed at the evidence used to 
evaluate the effects of heart disease therapy. It has long been known that 
statistics obtained from death certificate records are so notoriously 
inaccurate as to be meaningless. A humorous but macabre example is the 
exceptionally high incidence of brain hemorrhage recorded as the cause of death 
in Japan. Because of a cultural quirk, death from brain hemorrhage connotes a 
person of considerable intellect, while to die of heart disease implies a 
mundane existence. The resultant lopsided statistical picture is meaningless 
scientifically. 
Stehbens takes on with a vengeance those scientists who indicate that the lipid 
hypothesis has already been proven. He is especially incensed at the 
unchallenging way in which this has been accepted not only by newspapers, 
television and radio, but by scientific journals as well. 
Other imaginative scientists are currently investigating ways of directly 
affecting the atherosclerosis changes responsible for heart disease other than 
by changing the blood cholesterol level. These do hold out hope for concrete 
methods of preventing coronary artery disease. 
DR. ALEX G. SHULMAN 
Fellow, 
American College of Surgeons 
Los Angeles 
