IN SMOKER DEATH CASE, FAMILY WINS BUT GETS NO AWARD 
In a stunning verdict Monday night, a jury here found American Tobacco Co. 
liable for the lung cancer death of a longtime smoker but awarded zero damages 
to his family. 
The decision, seen as a victory for the tobacco industry in its fight to 
discourage smoker death lawsuits, shocked the lawyers, Wall Street consultants 
and reporters who packed the courtroom in the 150-year-old courthouse. 
The jury deliberated 5 1/2 hours before rendering its verdict on the wrongful 
death claim brought by the family of Nathan H. Horton, a carpenter and 
contractor who died in 1987 at age 50 after smoking American's Pall Mall brand 
for more than 30 years. 
"It's sort of a baffling decision," said a litigation consultant for a Wall 
Street investment firm, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "It sounds like 
it's continuing to protect the industry." 
Immediately after the verdict was read by Circuit Judge Eugene Bogen, lawyers 
for American Tobacco asked him to "reform" the verdict, contending that since 
no damages were due to plaintiffs, judgment should be entered for the tobacco 
company. 
Lawyers for the Hortons, who had been seeking punitive damages of $15 million, 
moved for Bogen to award at least nominal damages or to set a new trial on the 
issue of damages alone. 
Bogen said he would take both motions under advisement and left the courtroom 
without further comment. 
The verdict came just before 7 p.m. on a 9-3 vote. It was uncertain whether the 
three dissenters had favored a clear judgment for American or a damage award 
for the Hortons. 
Reached at home Monday night, jury foreman David G. Roach said the verdict was 
a compromise between jurors who were about evenly split between plaintiffs and 
defendants. "It was a very high likelihood of a hung jury," said Roach, 41, 
deputy director of computing and information systems at the University of 
Mississippi. "This was a verdict that nine out of 12 could accept." 
The outcome could prove discouraging to plaintiffs' lawyers since it shows they 
must contend not only with the tobacco industry's high-powered legal defense 
but with the hostility of jurors toward smokers who ignore health warnings yet 
seek damages for smoking-related disease. 
Kurt Feuerman, a tobacco analyst at Morgan Stanley &amp; Co., Monday night 
called the verdict "very positive" for the industry "because it basically 
confirms the industry's long-term record" of defeating smoker death claims. 
Richard Daynard, a law professor at Northeastern University in Boston and 
chairman of the Tobacco Products Liability Project, which encourages lawsuits 
against tobacco companies, said: "The upside of this is that the tobacco 
companies, even in the Deep South, even with six smokers on the jury, can't 
come up with a verdict anymore. The downside is, we're still waiting for our 
verdict." 
The number of smoker death claims against the industry has dwindled from about 
120 two years ago to about 55 today. 
The jury of eight women and four men included six smokers, of whom five 
reportedly stated on jury questionnaires that they could kick the habit if they 
tried. That was seen as a negative for plaintiffs, who said Horton had tried 
but was unable to quit smoking. 
Monday's verdict actually makes it three trials out of the last five that the 
industry failed to win. Still, the tobacco companies' 35-year record of never 
paying a nickel to a customer who contracted smoking-related disease remains 
intact. 
In June, 1988, a federal jury in Newark, N.J., awarded $400,000 damages in a 
smoker death case, but the verdict was overturned on appeal last January and a 
new trial is pending. 
In January, 1988, the first Horton trial ended in a hung jury when bitterly 
divided jurors, split 7-5 in American's favor, refused to continue deliberating 
with each other. 
Lawyers for American declined comment after the verdict in the retrial Monday. 
Horton attorney Don Barrett, obviously disappointed, said: "The longest journey 
must begin with a single step. That's all I have to say." 
