FESTIVAL '90; 
ART REVIEWS; 
ENLARGING THE CULTURAL VOCABULARY; 
DIVERSITY: ARTISTS MAY DRAW ON THEIR OWN HERITAGE, BUT INCREASINGLY THEY ARE 
DEEPLY AFFECTED BY THE CONCEPTUAL MOVEMENTS AND VOCABULARY OF WESTERN ART. 
The Los Angeles Festival's emphasis on cultural diversity serves to remind us 
how culturally mixed the vocabulary of contemporary visual art has become. The 
festival, with its mandate to focus on the arts of the Southland's various 
ethnic groups, combined with the afterglow of the Museum of Contemporary Art's 
just-closed "A Primal Spirit," has made it abundantly clear that the work of 
contemporary visual artists cannot justifiably be roped off into isolated 
cultural communities. The artists may indeed base their work on their own 
heritage, but increasingly they are deeply affected by the conceptual movements 
and vocabulary of Western art that makes them participants in the 
globe-trotting '90s' "internationalization" of art. 
"Voices From the African-American Community," curated by Josine Ianco-Starrels, 
presents five male black artists enmeshed in their community and heritage yet 
speaking with the cosmopolitan tongue of the new decade. 
Some of the show's strongest work is by two photographers. Dennis Olanzo 
Callwood's boldly graphic black-and-white photographs of closely cropped black 
legs, hands and faces have the straightforward emotional bluntness of all 
documentary photography. Carefully composed into a vaguely abstract harmony of 
shapes, these images are compelling encounters with an unexpected reservoir of 
silence. Willie Middlebrook's greatly enlarged silver prints unite innovative 
darkroom techniques with emotion laden portraiture. These tender images of 
family and friends emerge from their dripping, liquid grounds to gingerly avoid 
schmaltz by the strength of their scale and careful manipulation of the image 
by the artist. 
Charles Dickson's off-the-wall humor moves unencumbered between primitive and 
modern art. It is responsible for the wild-wheeled chariot "Bongo Kongo: 
Mobilization of the Spirit" and the color-spewing, formalized nonsense of 
"Tabernacle." Dickson is an enigma to be watched. 
Paintings by Frank Williams are less interesting. Their penchant for idealized, 
emotional self-portraits painted in acid, artificial color hits you over the 
head with messages of confinement and alienation. Only in the triptych pastels 
"Rhythm" does that sense of strangeness link up with something really deep. The 
combination of three disparate images allows the landscape and human 
vulnerability to undergo a ritual transformation into something foreign, 
ominous and ancient. Mathew Thomas' pigment- and clay-encrusted paintings 
easily get bogged down in their thick surface explorations and all the visual 
references to Zen emptiness and religious icons. Not until the surface becomes 
a literal ground for strangely shaped totemic forms suspended in front of the 
painting does the rich color and the painting's form begin to vibrate into 
something wonderfully alive. (Long Beach Art Assn. Gallery, 447 Long Beach 
Blvd., to Sept. 24.) 
Urban Debris: California painter Raymond Saunders is a world-traveling black 
artist whose work internalizes the cultures and imagery of the cities where he 
immerses himself. He collects pieces of signage, bits of old wrapping paper or 
other fragments of urban debris. He slaps this clutter onto large, black, 
painted grounds that read like old blackboards, newly asphalted streets or 
cosmopolitan billboards. Then he unites the whole with a loose structure of 
marks, hand lettering, graffiti or calligraphic splashes of bright, pure color. 
Even though the elements are spread around the black canvas panels like idle 
thoughts in the middle of the night, they maintain an intriguing sense of 
internal order. 
If Saunders' paintings refer to his world travels, they are also right at home 
patching together concepts of abstraction and representation in a single image. 
In this freewheeling kind of formal exploration of painting's limits, Saunders 
goes several directions at once. On one hand, the paintings muse about issues. 
When that issue is the art world, as it is in one untitled painting, Saunders 
can present tiny, perfectly lovely, chalk rendered images of "primary form" 
eggs tumbled against the quiet cynicism of paint-by-numbers realism and 
elementary school hopscotch games of get-it-right advancement. 
But in "Sameness in Etcetera" the artist shows that he can be intellectually 
formal by involving the painting's surface in a broad explosion of radiant 
color while intentional and random marks do battle for dominance. (Santa Monica 
College Art Gallery, 1900 Pico Blvd., to Oct. 27.) 
Sound and Vision: East meets West in an exhibit of the same name at the Woman's 
Building, where Japanese artist Mineko Grimmer presents two of her 
always-appealing sound sculptures made with wooden boxes and dripping pyramids 
of frozen pebbles. As her structures go, these are particularly simple 
constructions relying on a single bar of brass or two strands of metal guitar 
wire to generate sound from the falling pebbles. But the addition of a strong 
side light on each shallow water-filled box means that the back wall is awash 
with moving reflections as the water is disturbed by each icy drip or pebble 
drop. It's a lovely animated display that makes full use of the subtle visual 
elements for which the artist is known. 
Also showing are the small but haunting gouache on paper paintings of Hilary 
Baker. Reminiscent of Ed Ruscha's recent prints of contemporary icons, these 
linear drawings float mundane items like power lines, tractors and fences in a 
colored atmosphere of isolation and containment. As images of a rural America, 
these drawings are nondescript, thin to the point of being invisible and laced 
with a sense of desolation and holocaust. (The Woman's Building, 1727 N. Spring 
St., to Sept. 29.) 
