HE'S HAPPY WITH WHAT HE LEFT IN BALTIMORE 
It has been almost two years since Edward Bennett Williams, the late owner of 
the Baltimore Orioles, swept out his front office. 
For most of those two years, Hank Peters, the chief victim of Williams' purge, 
has been trying to turn the Cleveland Indians into a pennant contender. 
But Peters can't help wondering a little what might have been had he remained 
the chief operating officer of the Orioles. 
"Too many years there we had to win today and say the heck with tomorrow," the 
Cleveland president reflected. 
"That's the way the circumstances were with the owner. That's the way he wanted 
it and that's the way it was done. If he were still there, I think the policies 
would still be the same." 
As does everyone else in baseball, Peters salutes the achievements of the 
current Orioles and says, "They should be very proud of themselves. They have 
far exceeded everybody's expectations, including their own. It's great for the 
club, and the fans have been tremendous." 
But, even if the Orioles win the American League East, he seriously doubts the 
shock waves will continue in 1990. 
"You have to ask yourself, 'Can they repeat this next year?' And you have to 
say to yourself, 'No way,' " he said. "They're having one of those dream years. 
Unfortunately, the ability to keep it up is questionable." 
Many of the components of the surprising Orioles were collected by Peters and 
his farm director, Tom Giordano, who is in the Dominican Republic on a scouting 
trip and was unavailable for comment. 
Bob Milacki. Pete Harnisch. Jeff Ballard. The Ripken brothers. Craig 
Worthington. Larry Sheets. All farm system products from the former regime. 
"I don't want to take anything away from Roland (Hemond)," said Peters. "He has 
done an excellent job of making a lot of minor deals to get pieces, but 
directly or indirectly, almost every player they have is a result of what was 
already there," said Peters. "It's nice to know that maybe what we were doing 
wasn't all wrong. 
"You look at Keith Moreland for Brian Dubois, Dave Johnson for Carl Nichols, 
Mark Williamson in the Terry Kennedy trade (for Storm Davis). All those guys 
that were traded were in the system. 
"The list goes on an on. Now, all of a sudden everybody wants these players we 
had." 
Williams wanted action. Peters wanted patience. The friction soon became 
unbearable for both and Peters said he "was relieved to be relieved" when he 
was dismissed the day after the 1987 season ended. 
"A huge element in all of this (the Orioles' big turnaround) is luck," said 
Peters. "We're not all that smart. Some guys in baseball border on journeymen 
and then all of a sudden, they break through. 
"Brad Komminsk is like that for us. He was rated the best prospect in the 
minors and never made it (with Atlanta). We sign him as a minor-league free 
agent and he's hitting over .290 and playing a great center field. 
"There is a great amount of luck involved in moves. Sometimes, it smiles on you 
as it has the Orioles." 
The Indians' problems center on a too-long infertile farm system and, "'If you 
don't have a flow,' as Ed Williams would say, 'you're not going to be any 
good,"' said Peters. 
And, at the major-league level, the Indians have suffered from sub-par 
offensive years by several of their regulars, including Cory Snyder, Andy 
Allanson and Oddibe McDowell (before he was dealt to Atlanta). 
They are next-to-last in the league in batting average and battling feeble 
Detroit for last in runs scored. Respectable pitching and defense simply 
haven't been enough. 
Indians Manager Doc Edwards believes the secret of the Orioles' success lies in 
the outfielders' ability to chase down drives that used to fall for doubles and 
triples. 
"And everything they do (player moves) turns to gold," he said. "I said back in 
spring training they were going to be a hell of a lot better. The outfield 
speed is the big difference. Defensive RBIs are hard to come by and they get 
them." 
Indians pitching coach Mark Wiley left Baltimore about a month after the purge 
although he was invited back to Cal Ripken's staff. He worked with a number of 
the current Orioles pitchers in the minors. 
He agrees with Edwards that the defense "can make pitchers look terrible and 
they're running down everything now. 
