TROPHY DASH; 
FANN AND BRIDEWELL, CANDIDATES FOR DIVISION II AWARD, WILL MATCH TALENTS WHEN 
NORTHRIDGE PLAYS UC DAVIS 
Walter Payton, Neil Lomax, Ken O'Brien and John Stallworth didn't receive their 
share of recognition when they played NCAA Division II college football. 
Neither did Harlon Hill, a wide receiver from Florence State (Ala.) Teachers 
College. But like the others he made the transition to the National Football 
League. 
In 1986, in an effort to honor players from smaller programs, the Harlon Hill 
Trophy -- the Division II equivalent of the Heisman -- was established. 
Two leading candidates for the award, Cal State Northridge tailback Albert Fann 
and UC Davis quarterback Jeff Bridewell, will meet tonight at 7 in a Western 
Football Conference game at North Campus Stadium. 
Although both players downplay their desire to win the Harlon Hill, the battle 
between two of the nation's best Division II players is likely to intrigue 
fans. 
Like Payton, Lomax, O'Brien, and Stallworth before them, Fann and Bridewell 
have the talent to play in Division I. 
Fann stuck by a commitment to Coach Bob Burt and his neighborhood university 
after satisfying classroom requirements and renewing the interest of Division I 
recruiters who had feared that he would not qualify academically under 
Proposition 48. 
Bridewell, a late bloomer, did not start at Napa Vintage High until his senior 
year. 
"If you don't start your junior year in high school it is hard to justify a 
Division I scholarship unless you are just outstanding your senior year," 
Bridewell said. 
While Fann has started since his freshman year at CSUN and has rolled up 3,390 
yards in 706 carries -- he is 183 yards shy of the school career mark -- 
Bridewell's path to Harlon Hill candidacy has taken several turns. 
The 6-foot-5, 220-pound quarterback redshirted his first year, then suffered a 
broken wrist his second year and received a hardship redshirt. He was a backup 
in his third year and was limited to four appearances and 100 yards passing. 
In 1988, Bridewell's fourth season, he started and threw for 405 yards the 
first three games. Unexpectedly, he was benched for the rest of the season with 
the exception of a few mop-up stints. 
Confused and disappointed, he considered transferring. 
"I went so far as to talk to coaches at other schools," he said. "I thought 
about it and decided that if worse comes to worst at least I have my 
education." 
Fortunately, for Bridewell, Bob Foster took over the Davis program the next 
season and restored Bridewell's status as a starter. 
"Everything's been going great since the coaching change," Bridewell said. 
"I really didn't think it could get this good. I was hoping it could. When I 
was really down, I was thinking that it could go from the very bottom to the 
very top." 
Bridewell threw for 2,731 yards in 1989 with a 63.3% completion rate. 
"The way our offense is designed, if you run our offense right, you should have 
a high completion rate and you should throw for a reasonable number of yards," 
Bridewell said. "It is just me executing the offense." 
Bridewell attributes a paucity of interceptions -- 13 in parts of four seasons 
-- to his sixth-year status. 
"The best thing about me is that I know my limitations," he said. "I don't 
force the ball. I only make the plays I am capable of making." 
He ranks fifth nationally in passing efficiency and sixth in total offense. 
In contrast, Fann has been slowed by a hamstring pull. Through three games he 
has gained 218 yards rushing and 197 yards in kickoff returns. 
"People say that (opponents) are stacking defenses against me, but our offense 
just hasn't clicked yet," said Fann, whose hamstring has improved. 
"It takes time to grow and I think we are getting toward that. This is the time 
when I usually pick it up every year." 
