COMPETITION, NOT LIMITATION, IS THE ANSWER; 
TERM LIMITS: THE CONSEQUENCE WILL BE INCREASED STAFF POWER -- A CURE WORSE THAN 
THE DISEASE. 
In 1978, the vote on Proposition 13, California's tax-limitation initiative, 
ushered in a revolt against big government that shaped the politics of the 
'80s. Today, Oklahoma will vote on an initiative to limit terms in office, 
which may signal a revolt that shakes up the politics of the '90s. 
The initiative is a product -- and symptom -- of growing public disillusionment 
with politics as usual. Polls indicate overwhelming public support for the 
measure, which would put a 12-year limit on service in the state House and 
Senate. Similar measures will be on the California and Colorado ballots in 
November. Supporters of these measures are talking about pushing such proposals 
in a dozen other states by 1992 and are aiming at limiting congressional tenure 
as well. Democrats, whose party controls Congress, seem just as eager as 
Republicans to shuffle the deck. 
While the support is broad and nonpartisan, the impetus for term limitation 
comes from people in the business world -- both mavericks and Establishment 
types -- who are frustrated in their desire to cut spending and regulation by 
government. 
Republican state Sen. Terry Considine is the sponsor of the Colorado 
initiative. An entrepreneur, he has served in the Legislature for three years, 
just long enough to convince him that no one should serve more than eight. 
Although he has been a GOP activist and fund-raiser for many years, his 
motivation cannot be dismissed as purely partisan. As he points out, his party 
has a solid hold on both houses of the Colorado Legislature. 
Considine says he is convinced that term limits will encourage better people to 
seek office and pave the way for passage of other reforms -- including steps to 
make legislative and congressional districts more competitive and reduce 
incumbents' advantages in financing their campaigns. 
I think that he and the other term-limitation people have got the cart before 
the horse. What we need are competitive elections, not arbitrary limits on 
service. The unintended consequence of term limits will be to increase the 
power of unelected officials -- legislative staffs and executive branch 
bureaucrats. Their expertise will become even more influential when the elected 
officials are all short-timers, and their arrogance will grow. 
But that kind of argument is not going to slow this freight train. The 
incumbents at both state and national levels are too obviously guilty of 
feathering their own nests for the public to see that it really has a stake in 
keeping some of them on the job for more than a few years. The incumbents have 
drawn districts that protect them from challenge. They have collected 
extravagant campaign contributions from the lobbyists who must come to them for 
help. And they have expanded the perquisites of office -- their 
taxpayer-financed staffs and communications -- to such a level that they are 
virtually guaranteed reelection as long as they want the job. 
No one can defend a system in which 98% of the incumbents who seek reelection 
to Congress win year after year. No one can defend the Colorado status quo 
where, Considine says, no incumbent elected governor has lost since 1962 and no 
incumbent state senator has been defeated in eight years. 
If the incumbents don't recognize the need to permit their challengers to 
compete on more equal terms, their tenure will almost certainly be reduced by 
arbitrary term limits. And those term limits will eliminate the able and 
talented right along with the phonies and the hacks. 
And this country will be the loser. 
