WAITING TO SURFACE IN THEIR ROCK WORLD; 
MUSIC: IN A NORTH COUNTY GARAGE, TWO YOUNG BRITISH MUSICIANS WITH TIES TO 
WELL-KNOWN PERFORMERS ARE DOING WHAT THEY LOVE BEST -- AND WAITING FOR THEIR 
BREAK. 
The setting could be an establishing shot in a rock 'n' roll documentary. On a 
residential alley just off a fast-food boulevard in North County stands a 
weathered, white-washed shack. Inside, two young musicians are paying sweaty 
dues in pursuit of the elusive grail of a recording contract. Blasts of 
amplified guitar and drums provide a rude, intermittent counterpoint to the 
passive hiss of nearby traffic. When they stop playing, everything is quiet. 
That quintessentially American scene has its counterparts in a thousand 
neighborhoods. But this isn't just another garage band working off youthful 
energy while imagining themselves before a sea of Bic lighters in a sold-out 
arena. 
Guitarist-vocalist Rue Phillips, 27, is a transplanted Briton whose rock resume 
includes work with Ozzy Osbourne, Jack Bruce, a former bassist for Cream, and 
Black Sabbath's Bill Ward. 
London-born drummer Kofi Baker is the 21-year-old son of Ginger Baker, drummer 
for the legendary '60s band, Cream. 
From first impressions, the two would seem unlikely collaborators. Phillips, 
who commutes to rehearsal from his home in Seal Beach, is upbeat, friendly, 
optimistic. He favors the "classic" '70s rock of Led Zeppelin, Billy Joel and 
Elton John, and, accordingly, he tries to write songs that will appeal to the 
rock mainstream. 
By comparison, Baker is serious and withdrawn. The fact that he left a fiancee, 
family and friends, and steady work in London drumming for Steve Marriott, to 
toil in this musty, cramped garage with Phillips stirs his natural pessimism; 
Baker can always find the dark cloud surrounding the silver lining. 
As contentious as the team is, it was more so in a former incarnation. A year 
ago, Phillips and Baker were rehearsing in England as two-thirds of a trio that 
included Malcolm Bruce, the son of Cream bassist Jack Bruce. Mac Falk, of the 
Solana Beach-based Falk and Morrow Talent, was their manager, and he had 
Atlantic Records poised to sign them to a recording contract. But, at the 
eleventh hour, the teen-age Bruce backed out, citing, among other things, 
unpreparedness for the big-time spotlight. 
"It was just as well that he left," says Phillips. "We were afraid people would 
only be interested in us because of the Son-of-Cream angle. And anyway, Malcolm 
and Ko didn't get along very well." 
In a re-creation of the hostilities that characterized their fathers' 
relationship during Cream's heyday, the younger Bruce and Baker quarreled 
constantly. During a particularly rancorous exchange, Kofi Baker took a swing 
at Malcolm Bruce and missed, instead hitting the wall and shattering a bone in 
his hand. He balked at inactivity, however, and played several gigs with his 
hand wrapped in a soft cast. "Still got a scar from that," says Baker in a 
barely penetrable Cockney accent as he proffers a fist for inspection. 
Months later, Falk salvaged the project and began recording Baker and Phillips 
as a duo. These days, Falk is concentrating on producing the musicians' studio 
demos, leaving the business dealings to the potentially powerful management 
team of former Atlantic Records vice president John Carter and Chase Williams, 
who also manages Jack Mack and the Heart Attack. Reportedly, several record 
companies have expressed interest in the twosome, which calls itself 
Commonwealth. 
Baker likes jazz and African music, and his contributions to the team effort 
are complex rhythms that would seem to counter Phillips' striving for 
accessibility. But one soon learns that the Baker-Phillips polarity is an 
essential component in the dynamic of their creative relationship. 
"I think a certain amount of madness goes with genius, you know?" chirps 
Phillips in defense of his partner's contrary tendencies. Phillips is the 
portrait of the rock 'n' roll pirate as he sips coffee in a fast-food emporium 
around the corner from the garage. With his open waistcoat, American Indian 
chest ornaments, skin-tight pants and boots, Phillips contrasts not only with 
the goose-necking locals in their T-shirts and shorts, but also with the 
shirtless, sweat-pants clad Baker. 
"Ko is an amazing player," he continues, "and we're always battling because all 
he cares about is creating intricate rhythms, while I try to keep things fairly 
straightforward so people will like our songs. I like to think of me and Ko as 
the positive and negative on a battery. When you put them together they create 
real sparks. The combination can move mountains." He smiles conspiratorially. 
"It's very powerful." 
The songs on Commonwealth's demo validate that interest. Phillips is a 
versatile vocalist and a keen song architect capable of combining melodic line 
and rock-solid structure into a harmonious whole. The material exhibits those 
characteristics of invention and idiosyncratic subtlety that appeal to the 
discriminating musician, but without sacrificing the visceral directness of 
hard rock. The balance struck between Baker's complex drumming and Phillips's 
pop sense is effective and invigorating. 
In its pairing of floating vocal harmonies over a rumbling rhythm track, 
"Rhymes and Reasons" recalls such early Cream tunes as "I Feel Free." The 
suggestion causes Baker to start. 
"That's very strange," he says. "Me dad never played three over four on any 
Cream song." As is his penchant, Kofi Baker has reduced the song's varied 
elements to an equation of multiple-meter rhythms. A minute later, he excuses 
himself and returns to the garage and his beloved drums. 
Baker has spent his six weeks in Southern California practicing on his kit and 
precious little else. He sleeps on the sofa in Falk's home and plays drums 
every day from mid-morning until late at night, breaking only for food. He 
takes most of his meals at Kentucky Fried Chicken because it's handy and 
expeditious. That he insists on spending most of his waking hours in this 
sweatbox is testimony to the single-mindedness of the aspiring virtuoso. There 
are no windows in the garage, and, with the door closed on a sweltering summer 
day, the temperature inside can soar above 100 stifling degrees. 
One approaches the subject of Baker's lineage with caution. Ginger Baker walked 
out on his wife and family when Kofi was 9. The kid thereafter took up the 
drums on his own initiative and became so good that, as a teen-ager, he was 
playing the jazz clubs in London with such British stalwarts as saxophonist 
Dick Heckstall-Smith. 
"In the last 15 years, I've seen me dad maybe two or three times," says Baker. 
"He might have made a general suggestion or two, but otherwise he's never 
taught me a thing about drums." For both personal and professional reasons, 
then, Kofi is understandably sensitive to misconceptions about the roles that 
his famous father and Cream have played in his career. 
Associations, however, are just as understandably unavoidable. As Cream's 
rhythmic helmsman, the elder Baker forever altered the lot of the rock drummer, 
who traditionally was little more than an anonymous timekeeper. Baker 
popularized a playing style in which his feet were as active as his hands in 
creating sophisticated rhythms. His extended solos inspired generations of rock 
drummers to pursue virtuosity on the instrument. 
Kofi's practice kit resembles his father's in its incorporation of twin kick 
drums, but mention of the similarity elicits a mild reproach. "I don't know 
what use the second kick drum is," he says. "It's a waste, actually; I can do 
everything with one foot that can be done with two." With that, Baker launches 
into a jaw-slackening demonstration of manual and pedal dexterity -- during 
which, at one point, each hand and each foot is playing in a different 
time-signature. At 21, the boy appears to have surpassed the father's technical 
mastery. 
"Ko played at a party in L.A. not long ago," laughs Phillips. "Ginger was 
there, and, after Ko played I asked him what he thought. He said, "If he wasn't 
me own son, I'd step on his goddamn hands!" 
Phillips plays a tape of some songs the two had recently recorded during 
rehearsal. The newer material sounds even more ambitious than the original 
demo, and in discussing its strengths the duo is soon at odds over various 
aspects of the arrangement. To an observer, it appears that their quest for a 
record deal is the duo's only consistent common ground. But even in that 
regard, they are motivated by entirely different muses. 
"My life's goal is to write a 'classic' song, something that people will listen 
to for years," states Phillips. 
For someone of his prodigious skills, Baker's demands are less lofty. "All I 
need," he says, "is a soundproof room and me drum kit, and I'd be happy for the 
rest of me life." 
