CURRENTS: A GUIDE TO THE BEST OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA; 
NOSTALGIA; 
CLASSICS FOR A NEW GENERATION 
THE SIGN OUT FRONT is the first and best clue to what you'll find inside 
Pasadena's Starlight Roof -- Classic American Music and Video: "Sorry, we do 
not sell rock 'n' roll, rap, heavy metal . . . no X-rated, no truck-crashing. 
We do sell big bands, shows and sound tracks and all the great films of 
Hollywood's Golden Era." Walking into Starlight Roof is like venturing back to 
an earlier time -- a past you can return to when you get home after purchasing 
audio cassettes, CDs and videotapes. Small but well-stocked, Starlight Roof is 
a cinephile's dream, a pre-rock 'n' roll haven. 
Why are no slasher movies represented? No head-banging music? "Essentially, 
it's what I like, with some variation," says owner John Cooper, who opened 
Starlight Roof in 1988 after 20 years in music and video retailing. "I stock 
things that I don't object to. I started with music, then branched into films." 
There is a strong musical mix: audio cassettes include works of such celebrated 
entertainers as Louis Prima, Carmen Miranda, Louis Armstrong and Harry James. 
The video selection is divided into such subdrama categories as "Women in 
Love," "Women in Danger," "Women in General" and the catchall "Politics, Social 
Issues, Men vs. Women, Whatever's Left." A small sampling: the 1925 "Wizard of 
Oz," with Oliver Hardy, and classic films ranging from the early silents 
through '50s camp, including a number of hard-to-find B movies. 
"A lot of younger people come in who appreciate older movies and tapes," says 
Cooper, who enjoys sharing his knowledge with a new generation. "That's great; 
they get a whole new slant on listening to music or watching films." 
So a trip to Starlight Roof may be just the thing the next time you're faced 
with the 73rd sequel to "Friday the 13th." Prices range from $9.95 for Orson 
Welles' "The Third Man" to $59.98 for "Pete Kelly's Blues," a musical starring 
strait-laced "Dragnet" cop Jack Webb. 
 Starlight Roof -- Classic American Music and Video, 641 E. Colorado Blvd., 
Pasadena; (818) 568-2945. 
MARTIN ZIMMERMAN 
