HOME BUILDER J.M. PETERS HAS FIRST LOSS IN 3 YEARS; 
HOUSING: COMPANY SOLD ONLY 79 HOMES IN SECOND QUARTER, DOWN 75.5% SINCE LAST 
YEAR. SALES OF NEW AND RESALE HOMES HAVE BEEN DROPPING STEADILY IN SOUTHERN 
CALIFORNIA FOR MONTHS. 
High-price home builder J.M. Peters Co. reported Thursday its first loss since 
going public in 1987 and said it sold only 79 homes in the second quarter, down 
75.5% from the same period last year. 
Peters reported a loss of $451,000 for the three months ended Aug. 31, 
contrasted with net earnings of $3.5 million for the second quarter of its 
fiscal 1990. A year ago, the company sold 322 homes in the quarter. 
The company's poor performance reflects the sharp slowdown in the Southern 
California housing market. The slump is clear in permits sought by builders. In 
July, only 569 construction permits were issued in Orange County -- the lowest 
monthly total since 1982. 
"The financial results are reflective of the continued downturn in sales for 
single family move-up market housing in most areas of Southern California," the 
company said in a prepared statement. 
Industry analysts said that sales of new and resale homes have been dropping 
steadily in Southern California for months, a buyer reaction to high prices and 
growing consumer concern about the national and regional economies. The crisis 
in Iraq has shaken consumer confidence further as recession and inflation fears 
rose. 
Peters is one of the county's best-known home builders and one of only a 
handful of publicly traded residential developers in the nation. The company 
specializes in luxury "move-up market" tract homes in the $350,000 to $500,000 
price range, which makes it particularly vulnerable in bad economic times. 
Its sales revenue from escrows that closed in the second quarter plunged nearly 
10% to $51.1 million from $56.6 million a year earlier. The company said it was 
hurt by increased finance and marketing costs on homes and land in various 
stages of development. 
Peters is not the only builder with problems. Neil Dimick, Costa Mesa-based 
national director of real estate services for the international accounting and 
consulting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche, said the industry -- which has been 
struggling for much of the year -- sustained a tremendous blow in August when 
Iraq seized Kuwait and set the world teetering on the brink of war and economic 
chaos. 
He said builders and subcontractors have been laying off workers for most of 
the past month, and estimated that Southland construction payrolls are down 
about 15% since mid-August. 
But Dimick said he believes home builders will fare better in the current 
economic crunch than in the recession of the early 1980s because there are 
fewer homes built and standing empty now than a decade ago. 
That, he said, is because most builders had seen the warning signs and began 
cutting production months ago. The cutback showed up dramatically in July when 
the Construction Industry Research Board reported a large statewide drop in 
residential building permits. Dimick said he believes the number of permits 
issued in August will also be well below the norm. 
"What Peters hit is the same wall most other builders, except those doing 
entry-level homes, have hit," Dimick said. "Because it is public and has to 
report its finances, Peters has visibility. 
"But I know 10 other builders in as bad or worse shape that aren't public. 
There are a lot of boards of directors meeting these days to try to decide how 
to get rid of homes." 
People have quit buying homes because they no longer are confident of the 
economic future, said Barbara Allen, housing analyst for Kidder, Peabody &amp; 
Co. in New York. Allen on Thursday downgraded her recommendation on Peters 
stock from "hold" to "sell." 
The company's stock price, which had been edging upward in recent weeks, 
dropped 62.5 cents a share Thursday, down 16% to $3.25 a share as word of the 
quarterly loss spread. 
Allen said she now believes there is a good chance Peters might post its 
first-ever annual loss when its current fiscal year ends Feb. 28. 
She said she believes the U.S. economy plunged into recession in the middle of 
the second quarter and that things are worsening, particularly for home 
builders, whose high-ticket products are at the top of the list of things 
people quit buying in a recession. 
"It appears, in talking to most of the companies that I follow, that July and 
August were really bad months, and (Iraqi President Saddam) Hussein didn't 
help," Allen said. "The Middle East situation made the number of home sale 
cancellations go way up because of buyers' uncertainty." 
She said officials at Peters have told her the company had one more 
cancellation than sale during the past four weeks, for "net sales of minus one 
home." 
As of the end of the quarter, Peters said it had a backlog of 197 homes 
contracted for but not yet out of escrow, down 64.3% from a backlog of 552 
homes at the end of its fiscal 1990 second quarter. 
Value of the company's backlog of orders as of Aug. 31 was $70.9 million, down 
70% from $236.8 million a year earlier. 
Reflecting the industrywide drive to move properties by slashing prices, Peters 
said its gross profit margin on housing sales in the second quarter fell to 
14.8% from 19.7% a year earlier. 
The average price of a home in Peters' Aug. 31 inventory was $359,898, down 
from an average of $428,985 the previous year. 
