IMF FACES ROLE CRISIS AS LEADERS MEET 
The annual report of the International Monetary Fund has never been a real 
spellbinder, but this year its authors may have outdone themselves: The volume 
is so lackluster that even veteran IMF watchers had difficulty spotting 
anything new. 
Inadvertently, perhaps, the lapse may be symbolic. Only a few years ago, the 
152-country IMF was a major force in global economic policy-making, at the 
center of efforts to manage the global debt problem. 
But today, critics say the fund seems to be decidedly on the sidelines and 
searching for a role. The arrears on its loans to developing countries are 
mounting. Its managing director, Michel Camdessus, a former French treasury 
official, is under fire. 
"They really don't have nearly as much role as they had in 1983, '84 and '85," 
said Roger M. Kubarych, a former Federal Reserve Board policy analyst now with 
Henry Kaufman &amp; Co., a New York economic consulting firm. "Should they play 
a larger role? I don't think they can make a very convincing case." 
The outcome is important because the IMF, as the world's premier international 
economic organization, is charged with overseeing the world economy and 
managing the global debt situation. If it is not functioning at its peak, those 
aims are set back. 
Now the 45-year-old IMF, whose four-day annual meeting here beginning Monday 
will be attended by finance ministers from around the world, is facing some 
major decisions that are certain to affect its role for years to come. 
Contending that the fund needs more resources, Camdessus has mounted a vigorous 
campaign to persuade the IMF's 152 member governments to finance a doubling of 
the institution's overall lending pool, which has remained unchanged at $120 
billion since 1983. 
The managing director argued at a press conference last week that the doubling 
is needed "in order to give confidence to our members that if they come with 
good policies, the support of the international community will be behind them. 
The fund is a monetary institution. It has to have sufficient liquidity" to do 
its job. 
But the United States, which is by far the IMF's largest donor and thus has the 
most say about any increase, is dead set against a doubling of the IMF's 
resources and is seeking to delay the decision at least until the end of the 
year. 
The Bush Administration asserts that the IMF has all the money that it needs to 
meet current demands and has not spelled out adequately what it might do with 
the additional funds. And it says Congress would not accept Camdessus' proposal 
even if the Administration pushed it. 
The IMF "hasn't been performing well enough to justify a 100% increase," said 
Henry R. Nau, a former National Security Council strategist now at George 
Washington University. Camdessus' proposal, he asserted, "is way out of line." 
Dissatisfaction Runs Deep 
To critics, the most recent evidence of the IMF's shortcomings showed up during 
last summer's negotiations between Mexico and commercial banks over how to 
restructure and possibly reduce that country's $107-billion foreign debt. 
Jacques de Larosiere, the IMF's managing director from 1978 to 1987, was a key 
player in hammering out such accords, often making the difference when the two 
sides could not get together on loan packages. But this year, the U.S. managed 
the talks alone. The IMF stepped in only at a late stage and did not play a 
significant role. 
And the dissatisfaction with the IMF runs far deeper than that. Those familiar 
with the IMF's role in negotiations with other countries say that its 
management is no longer exerting the kind of bold leadership that it once did 
on economic reforms by Third World countries. 
Commercial banks complain that the IMF has "run away" by refusing to offer 
debtors the same sort of debt-reduction packages on its own loans that it is 
urging private banks to provide. The IMF now receives more in loan repayments 
from debtors than it makes in new loans. 
Moreover, Camdessus' penchant for pursuing his own agenda on major issues has 
alienated U.S. officials, who, as representatives of the IMF's largest and most 
powerful donor, have been used to having a far larger say in IMF policy-making. 
At the 1987 seven-nation economic summit in Toronto, Camdessus enraged James A. 
Baker III, then the U.S. treasury secretary, by openly backing a new joint 
Japanese-French Third World debt plan that was at odds with Baker's desire to 
stick with the status quo. 
Turf Battle 
That same year, he made an end run around Baker and other finance ministers to 
seek approval directly from heads of government for a new IMF lending pool 
designed especially for sub-Saharan African countries, many of which are tied 
to France politically. 
And last year, when the United States asked the World Bank to finance a 
critical loan to Argentina, Camdessus launched a bitter turf fight with that 
sister institution. Only after months of negotiations and a formal "concordat" 
between the two did that battle end. 
This year, he is flouting the Bush Administration again by campaigning hard for 
a bigger -- and far earlier -- boost in lending resources than Washington has 
said it would back. 
He also is mounting a surprise -- some call it quixotic -- attempt to persuade 
the industrialized countries to go along with issuing a new round of "special 
drawing rights," a form of paper reserves that critics say would unnecessarily 
boost global liquidity with little real gain. 
"Every time they try to make the SDR come back in one form or another and it is 
vetoed, it comes across as a blow to the prestige of the fund," said Rimmer de 
Vries, chief international economist for Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. 
Perhaps as a result, the IMF has been virtually shut out of what is supposed to 
be one of its most important roles -- trying to get the United States and other 
big industrialized countries to keep their own economic houses in order. 
Although Camdessus is still invited to meetings of the Group of Seven -- 
finance ministers and central bankers of the United States, West Germany, 
Japan, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- it is mostly for cameo appearances. 
In effect, the G-7, as the group is known informally, has taken over the 
watchdog role for itself. 
Criticisms Dismissed 
"The fund does not have any significant or major role in the G-7 process," said 
Alan J. Stoga, international economics specialist at Kissinger Associates, a 
New York consulting firm. "There are serious questions as to what is the fund's 
role. Why is it there?" 
A senior U.S. policy-maker argued that until the IMF has the political clout to 
prod countries such as West Germany and Japan to reduce their trade surpluses 
as America moves to trim its trade deficit, "it really isn't in the ballgame." 
Camdessus himself dismisses such criticisms as unwarranted -- and just part of 
the job. "None of the gentlemen sitting around the table (of the IMF's 
executive board) is 100% happy with what we do," he told reporters last week. 
"But we live by consensus -- and that means you have to try to satisfy the 
largest number of people." 
IMF officials point out privately that much of what critics have complained 
about in recent months has either evaporated or turned out in Camdessus' favor. 
For example, the French-Japanese Third World debt plan, which the United States 
opposed so vigorously in 1987, has since been embraced by the Bush 
Administration in the global debt plan proposed last March by Treasury 
Secretary Nicholas F. Brady. 
Fund officials note that although the arrears problem is a serious one, there 
are fewer countries in arrears today than there were two years ago. And some 
argue that Camdessus was right in refusing to go along with an IMF program for 
Argentina in 1988. 
The managing director also is unimpressed with suggestions that the IMF should 
seek to carve out a new role. "What the fund has to do is to continue 
implementing" its current programs, he said. 
Tired of the Battle 
Pedro-Pablo Kuczynski, co-chairman of the investment bank First Boston 
International, noted that although Camdessus may not seem as bold as de 
Larosiere, he is operating in far different circumstances. 
"At the start of the debt crisis, when things were more hopeful, it was much 
easier for the fund to take a more aggressive role," Kuczynski said. Today, he 
said, both creditors and borrowers are tired of the battle. 
Besides, he added, banks are better able now to cope with potential defaults by 
Third World countries, and that has lifted the threat of a financial crisis 
that gave the IMF more leverage in the early 1980s. 
George Washington University's Nau noted that de Larosiere's success stemmed 
partly from the fact that he had strong backing from Paul A. Volcker, then 
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. The current chairman, Alan Greenspan, is 
less eager to plunge into crisis management. 
This week's meetings of finance ministers will be critical for the fund. 
Besides the question of how much and how quickly to increase its lending 
resources, the IMF must face another pressing problem: Many of its borrowers 
cannot pay back their loans. 
The latest figures show that the amount of loans that are in arrears this year 
has mushroomed to nearly $4 billion or about 10% of the money that the 
organization has loaned to developing countries. Efforts to persuade countries 
to resume payments have been mixed. 
This week's battle over the size of the IMF's lending pool will be crucial to 
determine the future course of the controversial organization. 
Morgan Guaranty's de Vries cautions against underestimating the IMF's staying 
power. "There's no question that the IMF is going into a declining phase," he 
said, "but I wouldn't write it off." 
