L.A. JURIES DON'T MIRROR POPULACE, OFFICIAL SAYS 
The official in charge of assembling jurors for Los Angeles courts said juries 
here do not adequately reflect community diversity. 
"We are doing well in terms of (reflecting diversity) in race, gender and 
ethnicity," said Raymond F. Arce, senior director of special operations for the 
Superior Court, "but not well with respect to age and economic status." 
Arce said the system is drawing more and more heavily from the ranks of the 
middle-aged and from the ranks of government, public utility and large 
manufacturing firms. He said it is drawing less heavily from the young and old, 
and from those who work in trades, as unskilled laborers, or for small firms. 
In Orange County, however, Jury Commissioner Alan Slater said juries in the 
county do reflect the community, which tends to be on the older side. 
"There may be times when one panel of jurors does not meet the cross section of 
the whole community. But that does not mean the whole selection process is 
flawed. We have been extremely fair," Slater said. 
But in Los Angeles, the trend, the official said, is "a little bit frightening" 
in light of the long-standing public policy that jurors should reflect as many 
different points of view in the community as possible. 
It is most evident in the longest trials, lasting half a year or more, where 
panels tend to be dominated by government employees -- particularly, for 
reasons that are not clear, postal workers. In the Night Stalker case, for 
example, Arce said 24 jurors and alternates were selected and of them eight 
worked for the Postal Service, seven worked for other government agencies and 
four worked for utilities. 
Arce said he fears that the trend toward loss of different perspectives could 
spread to more routine cases as the number of small employers who do not pay 
their employees for jury service grows. 
The reason for the skewing in the longest trials is that government agencies 
and some of the largest firms pay employees their salaries for as long as a 
trial lasts. Most private firms won't pay at all, however, and those that do 
typically pay for only up to 10 days -- the traditional minimum length of jury 
service. Prospective jurors who say they cannot afford to serve on the $5 a day 
the county pays are routinely excused. 
As a result, Arce said, "if it weren't for the fact that . . . government, 
aerospace, insurance companies (and large manufacturers) . . . were . . . 
subsidizing the system, there would be a serious breakdown." 
Arce said he fears that workers for these employers could also wind up 
dominating shorter, more routine trials as the percentage of the work force 
employed by large firms declines. The average trial in Los Angeles Municipal 
and Superior Courts lasts eight days. 
Arce pointed to a survey completed this year for United Way, which found that 
smaller businesses -- defined as those with less than 50 employees -- now 
account for 95% of all businesses in Los Angeles. 
"As a rule," Arce said, "businesses with less than 50 employees do not provide 
employees with (paid) jury service leave." 
In addition, Arce said that paid jury service benefits "disappeared long ago 
from many collective bargaining agreements," resulting in financial harships 
for prospective jurors drawn from ranks of organized labor. 
He said these benefits were generally eliminated in return for wage hikes, and 
that because courts have been widely viewed as "insensitive" in making good use 
of juror time, there has been no rush to try to win them back. 
People with menial jobs -- such as washing cars or busing tables -- rarely show 
up, he said. 
Arce said that "unless we devise some sort of plan for making sure that all 
areas participate . . . it's going to be an exclusive group that is serving." 
He said possible solutions include legislation that would require employers to 
pay workers while they serve on juries, or creation of a public fund to pay 
them. 
Times staff writer Lily Eng in Orange County contributed to this article. 
