SOLZHENITSYN URGES SLAVIC NATION TO REPLACE U.S.S.R.; 
DISSENT: EXILED WRITER LAUNCHES A VEHEMENT ATTACK ON GORBACHEV'S POLICIES. HIS 
ARTICLE WILL BE DISTRIBUTED WIDELY IN THE SOVIET UNION. 
Exiled writer Alexander I. Solzhenitsyn, given a public platform by the Soviet 
press, called Tuesday for establishment of an all-Slav state to replace the 
Soviet Union. 
In a 16,000-word article entitled "How to Revitalize Russia," Solzhenitsyn 
launched a scathing attack on 70 years of Communist rule in his homeland. 
"The time of communism is over," the exiled Nobel laureate wrote. "But its 
concrete structure hasn't collapsed yet. And let us not find ourselves under 
its rubble instead of becoming free." 
Solzhenitsyn, 71, wrote the article at his home in Cavendish, Vt. It was 
published in a special supplement to the reformist newspaper Komsomolskaya 
Pravda and took up the equivalent of four full pages. 
Komsomolskaya Pravda's circulation is 22 million. The article also will be 
published in this week's Literaturnaya Gazeta, a literary journal with a 
circulation of 4.5 million. 
The publication of Solzhenitsyn's hopes for his homeland represented another 
step in his official re-emergence in the Soviet Union. His long-banned books 
are being published in the nation that expelled him in 1974 for treason 
following the publication in the West of "Gulag Archipelago," his epic work 
about life in Stalin's labor camps. Last month, Soviet President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev ordered his citizenship restored. 
Although the article was lengthy, it was not the first time that the Soviet 
press has published Solzhenitsyn's views. 
In his essay, which was written in July, Solzhenitsyn sneered at Gorbachev's 
policy of revitalized socialism, saying: "What has five, six years, of 
perestroika (Gorbachev's program of reform) brought us except pitiful internal 
changes to the Central Committee, the building of an artificial electoral 
system to ensure the Communist Party does not lose power?" 
Solzhenitsyn implicitly compared the Communist Party to prewar Germany's Nazi 
Party and said the leaders of the "Marxist-Leninist utopia" ought to be judged, 
just as the Nazis were at Nuremberg. The KGB secret police, with its "evil 
70-year history," should be dismantled, he wrote. 
"And what of the glorious driving forces of glasnost (openness) and 
perestroika?" he wrote, referring to Gorbachev and his generation of party 
leaders. "In their collection of these fashionable words, where is the word 
'purification' or 'catharsis'? All the dirty mouths which for decades served 
totalitarianism have rushed into the new glasnost. Out of every four 
mouthpieces of today's glasnost, three are former servants of Brezhnevism. Who 
among them has said at least one word of repentance instead of denouncing and 
damning the (Leonid I. Brezhnev) period?" 
Solzhenitsyn, who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1970, called for the 
establishment of a Russian Union formed from the three Slavic republics of 
Russia, Byelorussia and the Ukraine plus a large part of Kazakhstan. 
Like Gorbachev speaking to the Lithuanians, Solzhenitsyn said the process of 
secession needs to be slow: "It shouldn't resemble the way the Portuguese ran 
from Angola, leaving behind a mess and many years of civil war." Solzhenitsyn 
disavowed the need for an empire, either Soviet or Russian. Japan, he wrote, 
rid itself of its imperial ambitions and thrived. "We must choose," he wrote, 
"between the empire which kills us and the spiritual and material salvation of 
our nation." 
