ONLY WAY OUT FOR SOUTH AFRICA 
The Johannesburg City Council held out promise of further progress last week by 
voting to open legally segregated residential areas to all races and ethnic 
groups. Although the local resolution carries no official weight -- only the 
president and national government can desegregate living areas -- the action 
symbolizes the widening acceptance in South Africa that apartheid is dying. 
After four hours of rigorous debate, the white City Council, emboldened perhaps 
by the prospect of reform, has called for making the divided nation's biggest 
city and financial center a "free settlement" area, a city without legal 
restrictions on residents. 
The progressive resolution specifically calls for a city "in which all people, 
irrespective of race, color or creed, can own property and live in the 
residential areas of their choice." That ideal should be the rule not the 
exception throughout South Africa. 
Residential segregation is a pillar of apartheid. The Group Areas Act, which 
was passed more than 30 years ago, requires whites, blacks and other racial and 
ethnic groups to live separately in areas designated solely for a single group. 
That law reserves most of the cities for the white minority. 
South African President Frederik W. de Klerk has promised the repeal of the 
Group Areas Act in the next session of Parliament, which is scheduled for 
February. What remains unclear, however, is what measures will replace the 
restrictions to protect what De Klerk is calling "community life." Nothing less 
than the total abolition of legal segregation is equitable. 
De Klerk, who on Friday called on his National Party to accept all South 
Africans, can also encourage residential change. The national government, with 
the president's approval, can exempt an area from the restrictive law. 
Progress is coming to South Africa -- but not smoothly. Steps forward include 
the freeing of Nelson Mandela and the legalizing of the African National 
Congress. Steps backward include the tribal and political fighting that has 
killed so many and the hardening of the pro-apartheid right wing. In that 
charged atmosphere, the Johannesburg City Council offered a timely new step 
forward, a reminder of the ultimate goal. 
