700 GUESTS DON'T ADD UP TO FUN 
In addition to the seasonal warmth of late summer, a great deal of hot air has 
circulated in our atmosphere, polluting otherwise sane and sensible minds with 
the thought that the party that Malcolm Forbes threw for himself was, in fact, 
the party of the century. 
By what criteria can one justify calling a party the greatest of the 20th 
Century? By the amount of money spent to transport, entertain, lodge, feed and 
quench the thirst of the guests? By the quantity of the guests? The qualities 
of the guests? For example, can we measure the qualities of that unique 
relationship called friendship against the qualities of professional skill or 
accomplishment, political power, artistic greatness, social standing? Can, as a 
matter of "fact," anyone actually have 600 to 700 friends? 
St. Thomas Aquinas says that the chief end of true friendship is much good 
conversation. Is there any confirmation that there was more good conversation 
among friends at Malcolm Forbes' 70th birthday celebration than at any other 
party in the 20th Century? Or were they content, silently, simply to mirror 
each other's reflected glory? 
If social status were the primary criterion, certainly no party has surpassed 
the grandeur of the funeral party for England's King Edward VII in 1910. The 
monarchs of Europe -- most of whom were descendants of Queen Victoria, related 
to each other like offshoots from a genealogical spider plant -- and their 
titled lessers gathered at Buckingham Palace for what was to be the last good 
time for the Old World. The czar of Russia, the kaiser of Germany, the king of 
Spain -- so many would lose their heads or their thrones in the next decade or 
two. 
Another candidate for the party that defined its age took place on May 18, 
1922, in Paris. It was meant to bring together the greatest artists of the 20th 
Century. According to George D. Painter, who wrote the biography of Marcel 
Proust, the formal supper was given by Violet and Sydney Schiff, a "wealthy, 
and highly intelligent English couple, patrons of art, literature, and music." 
To celebrate the first performance of Igor Stravinsky's "Renard," danced by 
Diaghilev's Ballet Russe, the Schiffs wished to honor "the four men of genius 
whom they most admired, Picasso (who did not show up), Stravinsky, Proust and 
James Joyce." 
Proust is known to have approached Stravinsky with the question, "Do you like 
Beethoven?" 
The most original composer of his time was suffering anxiety in anticipation of 
the first-night reviews and responded curtly, "I detest him!" 
Proust persisted. "But surely," he continued, "the late quartets?" 
"Worst things he ever wrote!" snarled Stravinsky. 
As for James Joyce, he arrived at midnight, "already the worse for wear, and 
improperly dressed because he did not possess a suit of tails," according to 
Painter's account. "He settled morosely down, head buried in hands, to drink 
champagne." 
At the end of the evening, Proust invited the Schiffs and Joyce into his car, 
having arranged that his chauffeur drive them each home. During the ride, Joyce 
complained of his eyes. Proust complained of his stomach. Joyce opened a window 
and lit a cigarette; Sydney Schiff quickly shut the window and asked Joyce to 
put out the cigarette. 
"I regret that I do not know M. Joyce's work," remarked Proust. "I have never 
read M. Proust," replied Joyce. 
Painter concluded that "the failure of writers of genius to appreciate one 
another's works is a common and unregrettable phenomenon of instinctive 
self-protection; for if one allowed himself to be seized by another's 
greatness, he would risk contaminating his own." 
Under such circumstances, how can one have a great party at all, let alone the 
greatest party of the century? 
Perhaps "greatness" in its various aspects cannot be introduced into the 
question of how to determine the party of the century. Where the entertainment 
consists of gawking at VIPs while presenting oneself as a VIP to be gawked at, 
enjoying the experience has no personal or social character at all -- unless 
one mirror can be said to dazzle another. Where people hardly know one another 
and, even if they do, have nothing to say to one another, then they are not 
participating in a party but merely performing for the benefit of an impersonal 
audience. Such performances are more like silent walk-on parts satisfying the 
need for a crowd in certain operas. 
No, no, the only kind of greatness that can possibly contribute to making a 
party great -- and, in the long run, making the party of the century -- is 
great-heartedness. Where everyone at the gathering knows everyone else, 
respects them and appreciates them, all will have something worthwhile to say 
to each other; where they are themselves personable and in their relationships 
sociable, there will be harmony, charm, humor. And, although it may be hoped 
that the moment lasts for a few hours at least, there will be a pause in the 
disappointments and drawbacks, the pains and sorrows of outrageous fortune in 
ordinary life during which no party is going on. The great-hearted can lose 
themselves in a group that is bigger and better than themselves. Celebrities 
can't, and therefore don't get together for that purpose. 
In other words, no public event can ever be judged the party of the century -- 
such an event is not public. It is private and it is subjective; it can be 
known and shared and cherished only by those who truly participate, and it will 
have different values for different guests. How many should there be? There 
would have to be more than two, because they alone would not constitute a party 
but a friendship. It would have to be more than a few of one generation along 
with some of the generations older and younger, for that would be a family, or 
a family substitute. So the ideal group would require more than two people of 
different ages -- but a good deal fewer than 600 to 700 -- who have enough 
genuine interest in each other not to worry about their own greatness being 
contaminated. 
