MISTAKEN IDENTITIES; 
A BLACK MAN WITH WHITE SKIN, JERRY DLAMINI LIVES UNEASILY ASTRIDE SOUTH 
AFRICA'S COLOR LINE 
Jerry Dlamini was whizzing along on his motorbike in this volatile black 
township three years ago when the machine conked out. Within minutes, a dozen 
angry black youngsters, knives and stones in their hands, surrounded him. 
"What's the matter?" Dlamini asked, using Xhosa, a black tribal language, and 
removing the helmet from his halo of short, kinky golden hair. 
"He's OK. He's a Xhosa," an elderly bystander shouted to quiet the mob. 
Thought He Was a Boer 
Surprised, the youths apologized. 
"We thought you were a Boer (white Afrikaner)," one of them said. 
Dlamini, the son of black parents and the father of black children, is an 
albino. His white skin brought him insults as a child, but as a 37-year-old man 
it gives him a rare opportunity to see across apartheid's deep divide. 
Often accepted as an equal by South Africa's privileged white minority, Dlamini 
belongs, legally and culturally, to its black majority. He knows what it's like 
to be treated like a white man in South Africa, where he finds skin color is 
more important than the size of one's wallet or the size of one's heart. 
Shortly after the close call with the township mob, Dlamini was pulled over by 
a white policeman with a friendly warning: "It isn't safe for whites like us to 
be driving around here." 
'Thicker Than Water' 
"People say that blood is thicker than water," Dlamini said the other day. "But 
in South Africa, color is thicker than blood. It means everything. If you wake 
up tomorrow with a dark complexion, you will be classified African or Colored 
(mixed-race), no matter what you are." 
Dlamini, a Salvation Army commanding officer, lives with his family in a 
four-room matchbox of a house next to his army church in New Brighton, a 
township near the "white" city of Port Elizabeth. His wife and their three 
children, ages 3 to 11, are black-skinned. 
"Most whites can see I'm not of European descent, but they don't care," 
Dlamini, sitting in front of a glowing space heater in his living room, said. 
"They accept me as a human being. They invite me into their houses. They never 
say so, but it's because I look like they do." 
It is an axiom in South Africa that the fairer the skin, the greater the 
privilege. Whites control the government while Coloreds and Indians occupy 
separate and less powerful chambers in Parliament. Blacks have no vote in 
national affairs. 
Few Leap Race Walls 
For about 40 years, the Population Registration Act, a pillar of apartheid, has 
blocked unauthorized leaps over the racial walls. 
Of the 1,142 people who applied for race changes last year, 90% were black 
Africans asking to become Colored or Coloreds wanting to become white. Only 13 
whites applied to become Colored and 15 Coloreds applied to become Africans. 
Slightly more than half the applications, after a careful study of the 
applicant's skin color, facial features and family tree, were granted. 
Dlamini is registered as black, but no one has yet asked for his identification 
card. They just see a short, white-skinned man with black-rimmed glasses, and 
they hear a precise English molded by private schools and an American 
benefactor. 
Every day, Dlamini feels the subtle deference that whites enjoy from policemen, 
store clerks and even bank tellers. 
" 'Hello, how are you? Can I help you?' " Dlamini says, imitating the friendly 
lilt of the white bank tellers who greet him. "But when my black friend Joe 
comes up to the counter, the teller is impatient. She wants Joe to come and go 
quickly." 
Felt Blacks' Anger 
As a child in the sprawling black township of Soweto near Johannesburg, Dlamini 
also felt the heat of black anger toward whites. Children called him names, 
such as mlungu (European) and Boer. 
Later, he became a teacher in Soweto and then trained as a Salvation Army 
officer. When he was transferred here in 1985, at the height of the country's 
political unrest, his motorbike was frequently pelted with stones by black 
radicals who thought he was a Caucasian. He began taking his son along to 
protect himself against dangerous misunderstandings. 
"I hoped they would think twice before throwing a rock at a little boy," he 
said. 
But Dlamini, who speaks the languages of Xhosa, Zulu and Sotho as well as 
English and Afrikaans, eventually became known in the township through his 
church work and was accepted as a fellow black African. 
No white person has ever asked Dlamini about his race, but some, knowing that 
his Salvation Army command is in a black area, ask if he's afraid to go into 
the township. 
'White People Don't Know' 
"Most white people don't know about black people," Dlamini said. "They have 
been taught from childhood that blacks are inferior and evil." 
Dlamini was distributing Salvation Army literature one evening in the 
conservative white town of Springs when he knocked at a white woman's house 
after dark. 
"Weren't you afraid to open the door for me?" he asked. 
"Why should I be?" she responded. "I could see that it was a white man. I 
wouldn't open for a black because most of them are dangerous." 
White ignorance and fear of blacks has been preserved by 40 years of 
state-enforced racial segregation and government pronouncements that it is 
doing all it can for blacks. 
'Just Like Children' 
"Some whites think blacks are unthankful for what whites have done," Dlamini 
said. "I feel pity for them. They are just like children, accepting whatever 
the government tells them." 
He tries to explain that to other blacks. 
"I'm aware, as most blacks are, that whites have more privileges and rights 
than we do," Dlamini said. "And it's not fair. It's un-Christian. But I tell my 
fellow Africans that there are good and bad elements among whites." 
Over the years, being a white-skinned African has created some embarrassing 
situations. A white restaurant owner, spotting Dlamini eating outside with 
other blacks, insisted that he take a table inside, with the "other whites." 
Dlamini and a black Salvation Army officer were going door to door a few years 
ago when a white man invited them to lunch. The host instructed his black maid 
to set one extra place at the table, telling Dlamini that his colleague would 
have to eat in the maid's quarters. 
Dlamini protested, pointing out that it would be awkward because Dlamini's 
colleague, a captain, outranked him. But the man refused to budge. 
"He was only happy to sit down with me, because I looked like him," Dlamini 
said. 
Being mistaken for a white man is not enough to make a man white in the eyes of 
the law, though. 
"I may be accepted by whites," Dlamini said, "but the laws of this country 
prevent me from ever living in their neighborhood." 
