THE STONES: JUST ROLLING ON NOSTALGIA?; 
ALREADY A HIT, THE TOUR NOW AIMS AT PROVING BAND'S RELEVANCE 
Even after all these years, nothing shakes the rock world like a Rolling Stones 
tour. 
The Who may be as prized by hard-core rock fans, and it may have sold out as 
many concerts (two) at 56,000-seat Veterans Stadium here this year, but the 
Stones generate more heat, especially outside the rock world. 
Both bands landed on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine with their tours, but 
only the Stones made the cover of Time. 
And there was no contest in terms of how many people were willing to shell out 
big bucks, according to Philadelphia ticket brokers. 
"The demand for Stones tickets was so much greater. It was like the Who never 
happened," said a spokesman for Entertainment Plus, a local broker. Chris 
Lipton, owner of Good Time Tickets, agreed. "The most brokers around town were 
getting for top Who tickets was around $200. With the Stones, you could double 
that." 
Similar excitement is expected on most of the stops on a 36-city stadium tour 
that will be seen by an estimated 3 million people before it ends in 
mid-December. That figure includes nearly 150,000 for Oct. 21 and 22 shows at 
the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. 
Anticipating this demand, the tour's promoter, Michael Cohl, president of BCL 
Entertainment Corp., reportedly guaranteed the Stones more than $65 million to 
do the tour. At an average ticket price of $28.50, the concerts will gross 
approximately $85.5 million at the box office alone. 
And that's just the beginning. T-shirt and merchandising income from the tour 
(applying the industry norm of $12 per person for a stadium tour) could bring 
in another $36 million. There will be additional millions from a pay-per-view 
TV special at the end of the tour and a "fashion clothing collection" due this 
fall from the Brockum Group, a division of BCL. The Stones line will include 
jackets, shorts, sneakers, sweat shirts and various accessories -- all designed 
under the direction of Mick Jagger and Charlie Watts. 
As Keith Richards asked in a pre-tour interview, "Why is everyone making such a 
fuss about a bunch of middle-aged madmen on tour?" 
The answer, in large part, can be traced to the appeal of the Stones' body of 
work -- a history of great singles that stretches from "Satisfaction" and "Get 
Off My Cloud" to "Tumbling Dice" and "Start Me Up," as well as less consistent, 
but occasionally magnificent albums. "Exile on Main Street," the band's 1972 
two-record set, has frequently been hailed as the all-time rock album. 
But there is another reason for all the interest in the Stones, and it's an 
issue that faces a lot of veteran bands these days: the nostalgia factor. 
You can almost see Mick Jagger and Keith Richards, both of whom will be 46 by 
the end of the year, wincing at the term. 
Nostalgia is a quaint enough concept under most circumstances. No one objects 
to the nostalgic overtones at an old-timers' baseball game. Fans love the 
chance to cheer once more for Mickey Mantle, Willie Mays, Sandy Koufax and the 
other great names from sport's past. 
But nostalgia is an unsettling term in rock 'n' roll -- the idea that music, 
rather than speaking to you in a new way, simply encourages you to reminisce 
about what the songs once meant to you. 
Indeed, the real test of this tour isn't how many tickets the Stones will sell 
-- that issue was largely a foregone conclusion before the shows were put on 
sale. 
The challenge of this tour is whether the Stones, after a quarter-century, can 
be more than nostalgia. If they can, the Stones will accomplish something that 
has eluded virtually all the band's own earlier rock heroes. 
The great fear connected to aging in rock hasn't turned out to be expanding 
waistlines or receding hairlines, but being viewed as nostalgia. 
That term has long been a buzz word, like "Las Vegas" or "lounge act," to the 
revolutionary young rockers of the '60s -- the symbol of show-biz hacks, or at 
least the end of the creative line. 
One reason Mick Jagger insisted on a new album to accompany the Stones' first 
U.S. tour in eight years was to combat the nostalgia inherent in doing just 
your oldies, a la the Who shows. 
While the Stones performed only three songs from the new album, "Steel Wheels," 
in the tour's opening shows here, more songs from the album will be added to 
the set as the tour proceeds around North America. Meanwhile, the band has 
carefully designed the show to make sure all aspects of the Stones' past are 
represented in the song selection -- not just the most nostalgia-rich mid-'60s. 
The 28 songs performed by the Stones on opening night Aug. 31 included seven 
from the mid-'60s (including "Satisfaction" and "Paint It Black"), five from 
the especially creative late-'60s period ("Honky Tonk Women," "You Can't Always 
Get What You Want"), nine from the '70s ("Brown Sugar," "Dead Flowers") and 
seven from the '80s. Six of the latter, including "Undercover of the Night" and 
"Harlem Shuffle," were recorded after the 1981 tour, and thus hadn't been 
performed before in concert. 
Richards acknowledged the nostalgia issue in interviews when he outlined the 
challenges facing the Stones at this point in the band's career. 
"Rock 'n' roll is still only about 32 years old and it is still getting over 
its (preoccupation) with teen-age themes. The Stones are in a good position to 
help it grow up." 
Inherent in Richards' statement is an anti-nostalgia provision. To "grow up," 
the Stones have to find a way to avoid the nostalgia tendencies of so many of 
their '60s counterparts and virtually all of their '50s predecessors. 
As great as they once were, almost every important '50s rock act has been 
reduced to nostalgia. It's true of Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, Fats Domino, Carl 
Perkins. The artists haven't progressed. They simply go on stage night after 
night and do the old songs pretty much the same way they always have done them. 
Similarly, a lot of '60s acts, including the Beach Boys and the Four Seasons, 
have become extensions of this nostalgia mentality. They both tend to treat the 
music as hits rather than art. 
The revolutionary thing about post-'50s rock is that the best artists -- from 
Bob Dylan and the Who's Pete Townshend to the Beatles and the Stones, from 
David Bowie and Bruce Springsteen to Prince and U2 -- approach rock as a medium 
as capable as literature or film of exploring social and personal issues in an 
artful way. 
In recent years, Dylan's shows have suggested that material, even though in 
rock it has often seemed tied to the pulse of a specific generation, can live 
on and touch new generations. Dylan has also combatted nostalgia by dressing 
songs up with new arrangements, a move that has frequently led to cries of foul 
from his more tradition-minded fans. 
The recent Who tour was another encouraging sign that veteran rock artists can 
sidestep nostalgia. As the band demonstrated, quality material can resist the 
nostalgia tendencies, especially if presented with a sense of continued passion 
and if the artist feels free to reinterpret the material. But the Who tour, for 
all the majesty of the Townshend songs, was a limited victory, a holding action 
of sorts, because it didn't deal with the issue of new material. 
That's what adds an extra dimension to the Stones tour. There's not only new 
material, but a different attitude. Where the Who all but came on stage with 
their hands in the air saying don't be too hard on us because we aren't, after 
all, pretending to be a competitive band anymore, the Stones came out here with 
guns blazing. 
They demanded to be judged by the same standards that would be applied to any 
new band. They wanted to show that musicians over 40 could compete and the 
songs could still connect. 
The point wasn't lost on critics here, and the notices were uniformly positive. 
The New York Times' Jon Pareles noted: "In a summer of reunion tours, the 
Stones can't rest on their fans' nostalgia -- and they don't have to. Under the 
stadium trappings is a band that still kicks, hard." 
Agreed Edna Gundersen in USA Today: "There's no rust gathering under these 
wheels. . . . No mere 'retrospective,' the Stones have geared this boisterous 
and bludgeoning show for the present tense." 
Jonathan Takiff, writing in the Philadelphia Daily News, concluded: "The 
Rolling Stones set out to make a grand statement with this show: that they're 
alive and relevant to today's audience and today's music. Last night, they 
proved the point." 
The Stones can do even more on the rest of the tour to combat nostalgia 
tendencies than the band did in the two shows here. Some songs in the set don't 
hold up, so they tend to connect only on a nostalgia level. Some songs are no 
longer relevant because they are tied to images (the sinister Stones of the 
"Midnight Rambler" period) or because the songs are simply too slight ("Play 
With Fire"). 
In their place, the Stones could offer some of the more wistful and 
introspective songs that reflect the changes in the band members' lives and 
attitudes since the bad-boy days -- songs such as "Black Limousine" from the 
"Tattoo You" album or "Slipping Away" from the new album. 
But the band ultimately can do only so much to control the nostalgia issue. The 
fans, too, play a part. One reason the '50s acts have kept doing the old hits 
the old way is that the fans don't demand more. 
At most '50s oldies shows, in fact, fans seem more intent on celebrating an era 
than saluting a particular artist. It doesn't seem to matter all that much 
which of the stars are on a given bill, or even if the original members of a 
group are singing the tunes. 
Many of the older fans in the Veterans Stadium audience, too, seemed to look at 
music chiefly as a way to reminisce about the good old days. 
Carol Perry, 41, said she paid a broker $75 each for two Stones tickets just to 
hear the old songs. "It was great," she said after the opening-night concert. 
"I just wish they would have done more of the older songs, like 'Let's Spend 
the Night Together.' To tell the truth, I didn't even know they were still 
making new albums. I don't follow rock much anymore. The last concert I went to 
see was the Moody Blues." 
But Perry seemed the exception. For one thing, the over-30 segment was 
outnumbered. As much as 75% of the two crowds at Veterans Stadium appeared to 
consist of teen-agers, and the theme that emerged from interviews with more 
than two dozen of them each day was that they view the Stones as still 
contemporary. 
"I've been a Stones fan since I started listening to my brother's Stones 
records five or six years ago," said Tony DeFazio, 17. "But it's not like I'm 
coming to see a 'golden oldies' act. I like their new stuff, too." 
Tony Pollinas, 14, added: "A lot of today's bands were recorded before I was 
listening to records. . . . Van Halen, Aerosmith, Def Leppard, maybe even 
Motley Crue, and no one calls them nostalgia acts. You could put 'Start Me Up' 
or any of the Stones records on the radio today and they'd still sound great. 
It's the music I'm interested in, not the age of the band." 
Kevin Morrison, 17, said he likes a lot of '60s music, including the Beatles, 
Led Zeppelin and the Doors. But he said he puts the Stones in a different 
category because the group is still active. 
"Besides, it's not just their '60s songs that I like," he added as he put on a 
tour T-shirt, the one with the bright red tongue logo on the front. "I didn't 
like the last album much, but I liked Keith Richards' solo album a lot." 
But are the older Stones songs at all relevant to today's teens? 
Chris Barden, 17, nodded vigorously when asked that question. 
"Absolutely," he said, sitting at the end of the stadium opposite from the 
stage. "Lots of Stones songs express how I feel at different times. Take here 
tonight," he said, smiling. "The song that I think of is 'You Can't Always Get 
What You Want' because what I want is a ticket up near the stage, and here I am 
in the back of the stadium." 
