MOVIE REVIEWS; 
FANTASY REIGNS IN INVENTIVE 'QUEEN' 
For some time now, American films have become less and less hospitable to 
whimsy or fantasy. Once the truffles of the film world, fantasy has come to 
mean hardware, generally so overproduced that it sinks of its own weight, while 
whimsy perished for lack of nourishment years ago. 
So it's particularly nice to see that the imported "Queen of Hearts" (Westside 
Pavilion), a thoroughly inventive and rewarding comedy-fantasy, is unafraid of 
either of these delicacies. 
Opening among the towers and spires of Gimignano, a medieval town near 
Florence, "Queen of Hearts" soon flies, like its desperate lovers, to London's 
present-day Italian quarter. That's where our 10-year-old hero, Eddie Lucca, 
and his sprawling family live, up over the Lucky Cafe, their pride as well as 
their livelihood. 
But first, in Gimignano, we meet Eddie's parents, Danilo (Joseph Long) and Rosa 
(Anita Zagaria), our faithful, fateful lovers. In this prologue, Rosa's fierce 
little mama has betrothed her to Barbariccia, the town's richest bachelor, but 
Rosa, who loves Danilo, will have none of it. Hounded by the entire village, 
the two lovers make a suicidal leap after deciding they cannot live without 
each other. Somehow, magically, they -- and we -- are flying to London where, 
over the course of the film's 20 years, their family and their little cafe will 
become part of the heartbeat of the Quarter. 
Newcomer Tony Grisoni's screenplay is a delight: fresh, charming, not 
infrequently poignant. The Luccas are at the movie's center and director Jon 
Amiel has filled in around them with a sketchbook's worth of faces: 
grandfathers, grandmothers, aunts, uncles, cousins and might-as-well-be family 
members. Small, big-eyed, dark-haired Eddie (Ian Hawkes), youngest of the four 
Lucca children, is our omnipresent narrator and resident mischief maker. 
(Imagine an Italian Lukas Haas and you have a fair idea of Eddie's charm.) 
Eddie's best friend, red-haired Beetle (Tat Whalley), is a whiz at anything 
electric. We watch as a vast family wedding is enlivened by the boys' talents 
at generating small electric shocks, while Amiel sets up the whole event to 
look like some squirming corner of a Hieronymus Bosch canvas. (Amiel has 
already had noteworthy experience in signature scenes; his most famous previous 
credit is Dennis Potter's "The Singing Detective," one of television's finest 
and most inventively staged dramatic fantasies.) 
Years whiz by, as they have a way of doing. Danilo's visiting father, Nonno 
(Vittorio Duse), becomes as much of a fixture as Rosa's grandmother, Mama 
Sibilla (Eileen Way), who never smiles. Children grow up, break their parents' 
hearts, then break their own. Suddenly, with the force of an entrance in opera, 
the vengeful Barbariccia (Vittorio Amandola) appears back on the scene. He has 
mellowed not one small bit, and the still-beautiful Rosa has never left his 
thoughts. 
Luckily, "Queen of Hearts," an English production of an Italian family's saga, 
complete with a magical talking pig's head and a miraculous hearing aid, is as 
long on inventiveness as it is on charm; it's almost impossible to predict 
which way the story will jump. (Not even when one of its pivotal scams is as 
familiar as one from "The Sting.") 
Although the film is beautifully photographed by Mike Southon ("Paperhouse"), a 
few of grandfather Nonno's recurring dream sequences don't completely work; not 
enough to get disturbed about. Every one of its actors works superbly; most of 
them, who come from British or Italian theater, are making their English film 
debuts. (Not Vittorio Duse: In 1942 he was the lead in Visconti's "Ossessione"; 
he's 72 now and still arresting.) They are an enchanting lot. 
