HARBOR DEPT. SCALES BACK BUILDING PLANS FOR SAN PEDRO; 
DEVELOPMENT: HARBOR COMMISSIONERS WILL CONSIDER $25-MILLION PROPOSAL FOR TWO 
PORT-OWNED LOTS AT A MEETING WEDNESDAY. 
The Los Angeles Harbor Department has dramatically scaled back plans for 
developing two port-owned lots in downtown San Pedro, convinced that a proposed 
$57-million office and retail complex is too costly and could sit largely 
vacant for years. 
Instead, the department is recommending a $25-million development that would 
provide additional office space for port staff but would eliminate several key 
elements of the previous plan. 
The new plan, which will go before harbor commissioners next Wednesday, has 
renewed debate in San Pedro over the port's commitment to the community's 
commercial development. 
Although the new plan has been met with a wait-and-see attitude by many 
merchants and officials, including Harbor Councilwoman Joan Milke Flores, one 
San Pedro business leader has complained that the port's staff is shortchanging 
the community by indefinitely delaying the large and long-promised commercial 
development adjacent to its headquarters building. 
"I think they're being so shortsighted it's ridiculous," said Rick Gaydos, 
president of the San Pedro Revitalization Corp. "Not only have they been land 
banking the parcels for years, but they have been unwilling to develop that 
area in a way that benefits San Pedro." 
But port officials, with qualified support from the San Pedro Peninsula Chamber 
of Commerce, insist that reducing the project's size is the only prudent course 
at a time when commercial office buildings in the community, and throughout the 
region, are begging for tenants. 
The new plan represents the latest proposal for developing the last two parcels 
in the Community Redevelopment Agency's Beacon Street project, an endeavor that 
began in 1969 and has transformed San Pedro's downtown business district with 
new offices, hotels and restaurants. 
As part of that project, the port not only built its new headquarters building 
at 425 Palos Verdes St., but entered into an agreement with the CRA in 1983 to 
develop two parcels between Harbor Boulevard and Palos Verdes Street. 
Most recently, the port had proposed that its parcels, including one purchased 
for $4.3 million from the CRA, include a mix of development. An existing 
warehouse on Harbor Boulevard was to be replaced by an 11-story office tower. 
The 200,000-square-foot building was to accommodate the port's administrative 
staff and provide seven stories of offices for lease, as well as 12,000 square 
feet of retail shops. In addition, the port proposed a 6,000-square-foot 
visitors' center between its headquarters and the office tower. 
But those plans, which were viewed as too ambitious by several harbor 
commissioners last December, have now been abandoned by the port's staff. 
"There was a concern over costs and a concern that the market demand just isn't 
there for that much office space," said Dwayne Lee, the port's deputy executive 
director of development. 
Now, Lee said, the port's staff proposes a six-story office building on the 
vacant lot directly across from the department's headquarters. The 
100,000-square-foot building would be used by the port and would be linked to 
the headquarters by an elevated walkway above Palos Verdes Street. In addition, 
the port has proposed refurbishing the 29,000-square-foot warehouse on Harbor 
Boulevard for, among other things, a 4,000-square-foot day-care facility open 
to the community. 
The new proposal does not include any retail space or a visitors' center, 
although port officials say some sort of tourist facility is still a 
possibility. 
A 200,000-square-foot office tower also could be built on the warehouse site 
but only if the demand for offices in San Pedro increases enough to justify 
that project, Lee said. 
Lee said the new plan was developed after a recent consultant's report 
concluded that leasing the 11-story office tower could take from five to 25 
years. "It just wouldn't generate revenues for us. So it made sense to reduce 
the project and our costs," Lee said. 
In doing so, however, the port has already been told by the CRA that the agency 
expects the quality of the new proposal to match what the department earlier 
planned for the site. 
"We're prepared to discuss the size of the project, and we'll be willing to 
support a scaled-down version," said Len Betz, the CRA's project manager for 
the Beacon Street redevelopment area. "But we will be looking for the same 
quality of project and by that I mean the look of the project, the type of 
construction and the public benefits." 
Specifically, Betz said in a Sept. 14 letter to the port, the CRA wants the new 
proposed development to address the issues of retail space, future office 
development, and completing the project, which has been debated and delayed for 
years. 
Under the port's new plan, the project would be finished by June, 1994. 
That completion date is key to the Chamber of Commerce's qualified support for 
the port's new plan, according to chamber Director Leron Gubler. 
"We would have preferred to see a larger development," Gubler said. "But it's 
our feeling that it's in the best interest of the community to get this project 
moving, to keep the development momentum going in San Pedro, rather than having 
the land vacant for another five to six years." 
Although one recent area transportation study suggests that significant 
commercial development will occur in San Pedro over the next 20 years, Gubler 
cautioned that the report does not pinpoint when the forecasted demand for 
nearly 1 million more square feet of office space will occur. 
"I agree we have a bright future," Gubler said, "but the current climate for 
commercial office space is not the greatest." 
Moreover, Gubler warned that pressing the port to immediately build a 
200,000-square-foot office tower when the market is soft may inadvertently slow 
other commercial development in San Pedro, most notably the second phase of 
Pacific Place, a 7th Street redevelopment project that could add as much as 
300,000 square feet of office space to downtown San Pedro. 
An aide to Flores said the councilwoman has not taken a position on the port's 
new plan, because she is awaiting some of the details that will be presented at 
next week's Harbor Commission meeting. 
"The bottom line is that we want to make sure that the port planners look at 
everything," said Flores' spokeswoman, Karen Constine. "We understand that 
today's market is not the best for new office buildings. But we also hope the 
port is looking at what may happen five years from now. 
"We want the port planners, who go out and look at every detail when they 
consider how to develop a container project, to spend the same sort of time on 
this." 
