TRAIN SWITCH VANDALIZED; 
DERAILMENT: TAMPERING BLAMED FOR FORCING CARS FULL OF ARTILLERY SHELLS TO JUMP 
TRACK. NAVY EXPERTS INSIST THERE WAS NEVER ANY CHANCE OF AN EXPLOSION. 
Railroad officials on Wednesday said vandals apparently tampered with a railway 
switch and caused Tuesday night's derailment of a freight train that carried 
thousands of rounds of live artillery shells. 
Two locomotives and two boxcars on the nine-car Southern Pacific train jumped 
the track at the Hoover Street crossing, about 2 miles from Seal Beach Naval 
Weapons Station. The ammunition was being shipped from the base to Indiana for 
storage. 
Bill Currier, a superintendent with Southern Pacific railroad, said Wednesday 
that the train's three-man crew realized a railway switch was not working 
correctly as they approached the crossing at 10 m.p.h., but they could not stop 
the train in time. 
Railroad officials suspect vandals because the switch -- a device on the track 
that allows trains to change tracks -- had been tampered with, Currier said. 
Although it looked as if it was in the correct position, there were gaps, and 
its lock was missing. 
Emergency crews blocked off the streets around the rail crossing and 
Westminster fire officials came close to evacuating several thousand people in 
the area. But naval ordnance experts called to the scene determined the cargo 
was undamaged and no evacuation was ordered. 
"There was no chance of it detonating in this particular accident. The packing 
was very well done and the cars stayed upright," Westminster Fire Chief Dwayne 
Scott said. "The next accident, however, you don't know what will happen." 
Scott said his crews were unable to immediately identify the types of 
explosives on board because the paperwork that described the cargo was in 
military code. He suggested that the Navy in the future include language that 
could be understood 
by civilian emergency crews. 
Scott also urged the military to find other ways to transport its materials, 
saying the hauling of live munitions through urban areas makes him extremely 
nervous. 
"It's not good to transport these materials through a metropolitan area," he 
said. 
Navy Capt. Stephen T. Holl, commanding officer at Seal Beach, said most of the 
base's munitions are moved by truck, but the rail line is used about six times 
a year. He said no accidents have occurred before, and added that rail is a 
safe and economical way to move the materials. 
"This ammunition is very safe," he said. "It's a very carefully controlled 
operation." 
The shells were wrapped with steel bands and packed tightly so they did not 
shift when the cars derailed, Holl said. 
The ammunition was fused, but Holl said it detonates only after an exact 
sequence of events. The projectiles would have to be jolted hard from behind, 
and then a mechanism senses whether there is a spinning motion. If there is no 
such centrifugal motion, they won't detonate. 
"It would be virtually impossible to duplicate that and cause it to detonate," 
Thomas said. 
Also, Holl said the ammunition probably would not have exploded during a fire 
because the casings are thick. About 100 gallons of diesel fuel spilled in the 
derailment, but there was no fire. 
Aboard the two cars that derailed were 2,304 38-caliber artillery shells that 
are 2 feet long and 5 inches in diameter. Two other cars were loaded with other 
ammunition, but they remained on the tracks. One contained 103,508 rounds of 
20-millimeter anti-missile shells and the other held 48 rounds of 16-inch 
projectiles. 
The shells were being shipped to a naval weapons support center in Crane, Ind., 
because they were outdated and can only be used on old battleships, Holl said. 
The fire crews, the first emergency teams to arrive on the scene, were in the 
dark about the types of explosives on board until Navy officials arrived 15 
minutes later to translate the manifests. All fire crews knew at first was that 
explosives were aboard, Scott said. 
"When we called them, the naval weapons depot responded very, very expediently. 
They identified exactly what was on board, so it put our minds at ease," Scott 
said. 
"If we did not know exactly what was in the boxcar, we probably would have 
initiated evacuation in the nearby area. That would have reached a hospital, a 
senior citizens center and a convalescent hospital. It would have been an 
exceedingly difficult evacuation." 
Scott said he worries about the codes because naval officials may be 
unavailable in the event of another such accident, or delayed in reaching the 
scene. 
"In the long run it turned out to be just a bunch of twisted track. But it's 
the potential, the what-ifs, that worry us," he said. 
Tom Thomas, a spokesman for the weapons station, said Wednesday that the cargo 
information is not classified and base officials will investigate changing the 
forms to assist emergency crews. 
"It is written somewhat in military jargon," he said. "We're required by Navy 
safety regulations to list it that way. Everyone within the military knows and 
understands it. But we will certainly investigate adding a column that says 
common names." 
Fire Chief Scott said he would prefer that the base's ammunition be moved by 
ship, although he said this cargo destined for Indiana obviously had to go by 
rail. He said he knew before the accident that the tracks through the city were 
used occasionally to carry ordnance. 
"Maybe (rail) is the best way, but it sure makes us feel uncomfortable here," 
Scott said. 
Gwen Forsythe, a Seal Beach councilwoman, said she was satisfied with the 
base's use of railroads. "I'm comfortable with the way this ammunition was 
transferred," she said. 
Southern Pacific's police team is investigating the apparent vandalism. No 
suspects have been identified. 
Each stretch of rail is inspected weekly by workers who use a special truck 
fitted with rail wheels that runs down the track. The track was inspected last 
week, and had been scheduled for another inspection Wednesday, said Southern 
Pacific road master Larry Magathan. 
Wednesday morning, the stranded cars were towed back to the Seal Beach weapons 
station, where the ammunition was to be stored until it can be hauled out 
again. 
By dawn, about 15 Southern Pacific workers were busy repairing about 300 feet 
of twisted rails and torn railway ties at the corner of Westminster Boulevard 
and Hoover Street. Using a crane-like device, they hoisted the damaged rail and 
pulled broken ties out. 
Magathan, who is supervising the repairs, said new rails and ties were on the 
way, and predicted that the rails would be repaired and opened to traffic by 
Friday. 
The National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal Railway Administration 
are not investigating the accident. The agencies usually get involved only when 
there are major injuries or property damage. 
Times staff writers Jeffrey Perlman and Sonni Efron contributed to this report. 
Westminster Train Derailment 
Authorities blamed vandalism for the derailment of a train loaded with 
ammunition from the U.S. Naval Weapons Station in Seal Beach. Two of the four 
boxcars loaded with ammunition, along with the two engines pulling the train, 
derailed. 
The Cargo 
Four of the boxcars were loaded with three different types of ammunition, 
including 5-inch and 16-inch shells fired by large guns on battleships, and 
20-millimeter shells used against incoming missiles and aircraft. 
