LOOKS: HAZARDOUS DUTY; 
LIFEGUARDS TAKE COVER WITH SUNSCREENS, SHIRTS AND SHADES 
ASK SANTA Monica State Beach lifeguard Jackie Burke about her skin-care routine 
and she starts spouting off SPF numbers. "A 40 on my lips, 30 on my face, 15 on 
my arms and chest and 6 on my legs," says the blue-eyed blonde just before 
ripping off her regulation red jacket and white T-shirt and jumping into the 
Pacific for a save. 
Protecting herself from the ravages of the sun is Burke's biggest concern, so 
she takes extra care to apply sunscreen lotions with higher SPF levels where 
her skin is more sensitive. To combat the drying effects of the sun after 
exposure, she also moisturizes her face and conditions her hair daily. 
Southern California lifeguards like Burke realize that spending eight hours on 
the beach every workday can make sun-induced skin cancer an occupational 
hazard. Many who used to wear deep-bronze tans like badges of honor can almost 
pass for pale office workers, even after an entire summer in the sun. 
"Once the information about skin cancer and premature aging of the skin started 
coming out, lifeguards jumped right on it," says a decidedly untanned Matt 
Karl, who has been a Huntington Beach lifeguard for the past nine years. Karl 
now wears a long-sleeved T-shirt every day, in addition to an SPF 30 sunscreen 
lotion, to protect his fair skin. "Once you hear about another guard getting 
cancer," he says, "you think about it every day." 
Fifty-four-year-old Howard Lee, chief lifeguard of the Los Angeles County 
Department of Beaches and Harbor, has worked the beaches for 36 years. He had 
manned a guard tower for about 12 years when he developed skin cancer on his 
lip, and he recently had more cancerous cells removed from his shoulder. 
"Thirty years ago, we used baby oil to fry our skin," remembers Lee, who also 
has no semblance of a tan today. "It's not uncommon for (veteran) lifeguards to 
develop skin cancer. Now, because we have more knowledge, the guards check 
unusual skin conditions early, before they become cancerous." 
Although the county has no regulations about skin protection for lifeguards, 
Lee distributes advisory information at least twice each summer to notify his 
team of lifeguards about the latest developments in skin cancer research and 
sun protection. He also encourages the men and women to wear protective 
clothing such as hats and Windbreakers. But the decision to take these 
precautions is up to each individual, he explains. "When there's a lot of 
rescue activity going on, it's not always possible to keep a shirt and hat on." 
Mark Bitler, who has been a lifeguard at Will Rogers State Beach for 17 years, 
says that only the new lifeguards appear to feel invulnerable to the sun and 
still go after a tan. By contrast, he wears an SPF 15 sunscreen and a jacket 
most days and sees a dermatologist for checkups -- just in case there might be 
early signs of the disease. "You start taking precautions as soon as your older 
co-workers start developing skin problems -- or as soon as you see the first 
signs of aging on your own skin," he says. 
Since 1984, Christian Henry has spent six months of the year working as a 
Huntington Beach lifeguard. Bombarded by the media and his supervisors with 
information about the dangers of the sun, he's become extra cautious. Now he 
wears a wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses with ultraviolet light protection, and 
he slathers on SPF 30. He also applies moisturizer to keep his skin supple. But 
despite his efforts, Henry's skin is tanned, a sign that it hasn't escaped 
unscathed. 
What is an occupational hazard for lifeguards is, of course, a recreational 
hazard for the general public. So lifeguards also spend time trying to protect 
sunbathers, especially those who coat themselves with baby oil or low-SPF 
tanning products. For Henry, observing sunburned beach-goers is one of the 
job's frustrations. "I see it happening every day, but by the time I warn them, 
it's usually too late -- they're already fried." 
