YOUNG ADULT BOOKS: RED ROVER, RED ROVER BY GEORGE ELLA LYONS (ORCHARD BOOKS: 
$12.95) 
Ah yes, loss and abandonment. Who hasn't experienced them while making their 
way from the nursery to their first job? "Red Rover, Red Rover," by 
award-winning author George Ella Lyons, is the story of Sumi Mitchell, a 
12-year-old who finds that the absence of the people she loves beckons her to 
find a home within herself that she didn't know she possessed. 
"In a way, Papa Gene's death was the beginning. Not the day he died, but all 
that came after his dying," writes Lyons, simply and movingly. Grief stricken, 
Sumi's mother, temporarily closes her heart. Sumi's brother goes off to prep 
school and the promise of a musical career, thus giving up the stewardship of 
his younger sister's future. Naturally Sumi turns to her best friend, Keezie, 
only to learn that she is moving to another town. 
Adolescence is harrowing and unpredictable. We suddenly wake up with large ears 
or unexpected inches or oddly changed voices; our body seems not so much to 
burst out but to outburst. The plot of "Red Rover, Red Rover" in some ways 
mimics this phenomenon: Like growing up it is not neat and comes in spurts. 
There are several themes that seem unrelated. First, there is Sumi's blossoming 
appreciation for reading and music. Second, there is her body: Her mother 
refuses to be candid about menstruation, thus leaving Sumi to feel shame and 
confusion. And because Sumi is overweight she diets, then starves herself. Then 
there is the disturbing fact that her female classmates are hiding their 
intelligence and painting their nails during English class. And finally there 
is the appealing Mrs. Waltz, already an idol, whom Sumi hopes will become a 
friend. Throughout the book there is the theme of letting go of the way the 
family existed in the past. 
The prose style here is fluid, confident, sometimes lyrical, occasionally 
baffling. We care about Sumi; we want her to find her equilibrium, to lose the 
weight, to understand her womanhood, to find her courage and to admit to her 
grown-up name: Stephanie Ann Mitchell. 
The story spans the years of 1962-63. Why did the author choose this period, 
then not exploit it? So much of significance happened in the early '60s: Yuri 
Gagarin went into space, the Pill was invented, the Civil Rights movement was 
brewing, the Peace Corps was established and women began to march out of the 
kitchen in order to raise their consciousnesses. The whole country was poised 
at a moment of captivating hopefulness and riveting change. Some of Lyons' 
characters could have easily reflected this altered landscape and thus 
broadened the scope of the book; 12-year-olds are subject to curiosity and 
observation about their environments. 
The author is aware of the revolutionary force that music was becoming. Sumi 
receives a Peter, Paul and Mary album from her brother's girlfriend and 
eventually trades in her flute for the thrill of the folk chords that she can 
pluck on the guitar. 
For Sumi, this is the year she finds the music of her life; that important 
moment when young people truly understand that they are really on their very 
own journey, distinct from family and school friends, trends and social 
expectations. As Sumi comes to the realization of the preciousness of her own 
mysterious potential, we are glad we took the time to accompany her. 
For me, that unforgettable discovery came one autumn, when I was about 12, 
seeing the dazzling brightness of the leaves upon the ground and being startled 
at my own singular consciousness. 
Sumi is going to be a person. 
Unlived Affections (Harper &amp; Row: $12.95), a first novel by children's 
literature critic and lecturer George Shannon, also begins with the death of a 
grandparent. When 17-year-old Willie Ramsey buries his grandmother, he is 
finally able to unlock his deceased mother's bedroom door. Inside it are the 
secrets of his parents, whom he has never known. 
It is 1964 and Willie's father Bill is in far off Kentucky, admirably pursuing 
his dream of becoming a master furniture builder. But as Bill's letters to his 
new wife lamentably reveal, along with his passion for carving beautiful cherry 
chairs, he discovers that he is a man who loves men and not women. In the 
nightlong tormenting but necessary confrontation with his past, Willie, a 
dedicated swimmer, discovers why he has been afraid to jump into life's deepest 
waters: to be able to love or trust. 
This is a compelling story of a father and son, each finding themselves, and 
the courage it takes to live the truth. 
