THE $430-DOLLAR QUESTION; 
A GLOOMY DIAGNOSIS FOR A SICKLY HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM 
After an 18-month study of America's health-care system, a bipartisan 
commission concludes that it is "approaching a breaking point." The nation will 
overlook -- or play politics with -- this gloomy diagnosis at its peril. Sen. 
John D. (Jay) Rockefeller IV (D-W.Va.), chairman of the commission, says that 
failure to improve health care could bring the United States to its knees. 
The study group consisted of a dozen members of Congress and three medical 
experts appointed by former President Reagan, including a past president of the 
American Medical Assn. 
As to the sometimes abysmal and often haphazard access to medical help in the 
United States, there was no dissent. The report drew criticism mainly on 
questions of how to change the system and where to find the estimated $72 
billion a year that improving the system will cost. 
There are shocks everywhere you look in the 315-page analysis. The number of 
Americans with no insurance of any kind to help pay for medical care now is up 
to 37 million. Another 60 million have some insurance, but not enough. What's 
more, these are not people on the economic fringes. Three-fourths of them have 
jobs or are in families that earn income. 
Another shock: Less than half of Americans with incomes below the official 
poverty level get medical help from either Medicaid or Medicare, the two 
immense federal programs for the elderly, the disabled or the poor. 
A bare majority of commissioners, eight of 15, voted to require companies to 
provide health insurance for employees. The majority also wants minimum health 
standards for all Americans -- including prenatal care -- and a new system for 
the poor to replace Medicaid. These changes and a decent program of long-term 
care for the elderly would cost most American adults an extra $430 a year in 
taxes. The group also split over just how to raise the money. 
But the nation has fair warning. Its leaders have no more important task than 
deciding how best to respond. 
