QUALITY OF CARE AT KING HOSPITAL 
It is acknowledged that problems exist at the Martin Luther King Jr. Hospital 
and the Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science. Nonetheless, your 
series of articles on these institutions were classic examples of one-sided, 
sensationalist journalism. 
The King/Drew Medical Center arose from the ashes of the Watts riots in 
response to the urgent needs of a medically under-served community. In 
addressing these needs, it has functioned admirably. The medical center's 
struggle to gain academic credibility and to consistently offer the highest 
level of care can be traced to a number of complex socioeconomic and political 
factors. A more constructive approach to dealing with the problems would have 
been to examine these complexities with a view toward change. Your denigration 
of the medical center based on unscientific case reviews and unfair superficial 
comparisons with other institutions served only to demoralize the staff and to 
create a greater schism between the medical center and the population it is 
desperately trying to help. 
The mission of the medical center is now clear and it is finding its course. 
Contrary to your implications, dedicated "top-flight doctors" have chosen to 
come to the medical center because of a belief in its mission and its goals, 
and because of a belief in the attainability of these goals. Other "top-flight 
doctors" from the nation's premier medical schools, residencies, and 
fellowships are scheduled to come because of similar beliefs. 
The community served by King Hospital deserves high quality medical care; the 
interns and residents who train in this institution deserve a solid educational 
experience. The series put the institution back a few giant steps in achieving 
these goals. Let's be fair about it and at least present the entire story. 
M. ROY WILSON, M.D. 
Chief, Division of Ophthalmology 
Department of Surgery 
PEARL GRIMES, M.D. 
Vice Chairperson 
Division of Dermatology 
Department of Medicine 
King/Drew Medical Center 
