TEAM OF SOVIET EXPERTS TO TOUR O.C. 'STAR WARS' LAB 
The "Star Wars" laser-testing facility in San Juan Capistrano will roll out the 
red carpet for visiting Soviet technical experts, according to the United 
States' chief negotiator at space defense talks in Geneva. 
However, the top secret research project remained off limits Tuesday when the 
U.S. Air Force denied a request for a tour of the facility by The Times. 
Air Force officials in Washington "were aware an invitation has been made to 
the Soviets," said Juventino Garcia, civilian director of public affairs for 
the Air Force Weapons Laboratory at Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque, 
N.M., which manages the project. TRW Inc. of Redondo Beach operates the testing 
facility under a government contract. 
"Until more is learned, the Air Force policy about keeping Alpha facilities 
closed to the public is still in effect," Garcia said. So-called Alpha 
facilities conduct laser research. 
The U.S. invitation was seen as a bid to defuse Soviet resistance to U.S. 
missile defense research. 
Beginning Friday, Soviet and American arms negotiators in Geneva are expected 
to hammer out details of the visit, which would open the TRW lab in San Juan 
Capistrano and a U.S. Energy Department lab in New Mexico to as many as 10 
Soviet specialists. 
"We are hopeful that the Soviets will accept this invitation," said Ambassador 
Henry F. Cooper, chief U.S. negotiator at the Defense in Space Talks in Geneva. 
"It was made without conditions, but we hope that it will provide a basis then 
for discussions in Geneva that will lead them to accept an exchange in the 
future of such visits." 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III proposed the Soviet visit during a 
weekend huddle with his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, who responded 
positively, according to U.S. officials. 
The U.S. Government is eager to gain access to Soviet laboratories engaged in 
missile defense research, which they hope will flow from Baker's initiative. In 
recent months, the Soviets have opened several of their most sensitive 
facilities to visiting U.S. lawmakers and arms control proponents, who 
concluded that the Pentagon has overplayed the Soviet "Star Wars" program. 
"I'm sure the intelligence community has learned things they have not known 
before because they got closer" to Soviet facilities, Cooper said. But he 
contested claims that the Soviet "Star Wars" effort has been less potent than 
advertised. 
"They are still working quite deliberately in this area," Cooper said. 
Cooper said the Soviets "have explicitly complained in the past" about work 
under way at the TRW facility and at Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico, the 
other site proposed for the visit. 
In April 1989 the high-powered laser was successfully tested at the 2,000-acre 
site at 32502 Avenida Pico on unincorporated county land in the San Clemente 
hills near the San Diego County border. The facility is barely visible from the 
road. 
"Under the contract, they were supposed to lase three times," Garcia said 
Tuesday. "Lasing is essentially firing. . . . I believe two of the three lases 
have been completed." 
On Jan. 7, 1988, a flash fire broke out at the San Juan Capistrano test site 
that delayed testing of the Alpha laser. A worker had opened a valve at the 
wrong time causing a brief but intense fire in the piping at the plant. 
The fire delayed testing about three months. Following the fire, portions of 
the facility's fluid supply system were redesigned and test procedures improved 
to avoid a recurrence, a spokesman said. 
The Alpha chemical laser would be a component of the Strategic Defense 
Initiative's "Zenith Star" program. Zenith Star is an effort to develop a 
satellite-based laser that would pick off missiles in mid-trajectory. It is now 
undergoing ground-based tests within the sprawling TRW facility. 
At Los Alamos, Soviet visitors would be permitted to see a neutral particle 
beam laser placed aboard a rocket in "Star Wars" experiments. The research 
laser has been tested extensively, provoking Soviet protests. 
Cooper said the Soviet visitors would be able to learn more from a visit to the 
two labs than they could glean from their overhead satellites. But John Pike, 
an analyst for the Washington-based Federation of American Scientists, said the 
Soviets would likely learn little more than they can read in the transcripts of 
congressional hearings and defense trade magazines. 
"Most of the sort of stuff you can find out from wandering around and kicking 
the tires in facilities like these is stuff you can find in the open 
literature," Pike said. "The process is probably more important than the 
content." 
Reflecting the broad appeal of Baker's proposal among American arms control 
experts, Pike said, is that "there's basically no downside to this. There's 
something in it for everybody." 
Private firms that do business with the Pentagon, however, have rarely welcomed 
visits by Soviet experts. During negotiations that led to the 1987 Intermediate 
Nuclear Forces, or INF Treaty, firms that were potentially subject to 
short-notice Soviet inspection feared that security could be jeopardized and 
the Pentagon would stay away. 
TRW spokesman Julian Levine, however, declined to discuss the effects of the 
Soviet visit on the firm's defense-related business. 
"It's a government-to-government issue," said Levine, vice president of 
communications for TRW's Space and Defense Sector. "We have been advised of it, 
and would be pleased to cooperate" when notified of the outcome of forthcoming 
talks in Geneva. 
