GI'S LETTER BRINGS MIDEAST FACE-OFF HOME; 
A FULLERTON FAMILY LEARNS WAR HAS A WAY OF PUTTING THINGS QUICKLY IN 
PERSPECTIVE 
One way the Mideast crisis is striking home in Orange County is that a support 
group for families of troops stationed in Saudi Arabia has been meeting. Among 
them are Dee and Ronnie Muir of Fullerton, parents of 20-year-old Robbie Muir, 
a paratrooper in the Army's 82nd Airborne Division. 
The Muirs' observations and communications with their son provide a fascinating 
kind of "home-front watch" to supplement the news and commentary that comes 
daily from world leaders and military and diplomatic analysts. 
In Washington last week, policy makers were debating what the best course of 
action in the Iraq conflict would be from here on out -- whether to try to 
replace Saddam Hussein or to be satisfied with Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait and 
the protection of Saudi Arabia. 
But it is unlikely that any of the participants in those high-level 
conversations will hear anything more to the point than the observation of 
Ronnie Muir, who last week said simply that his son is "the line in the sand 
that President Bush has drawn. My son." 
The letters from Robbie himself are equally direct and simple in their 
assessment of a complex situation. In his last telephone conversation before 
leaving, the young soldier had expressed his love for his parents and asked 
forgiveness for anything he might have done wrong. It was a moment of 
recognition in a young life that there is the possibility that there might not 
be another chance to set life's record straight. 
Then there was the short letter from the soldier that made reference to the 
threat of chemical warfare, an experience he had not faced while participating 
in the invasion of Panama. He wrote, "You have no idea what I feel like inside 
right now." 
No wonder the simple pleasures of life seemed so wonderful from a distant 
desert: He longed for a ride in a golf cart and a root beer float. 
Twenty is a young age to be making peace with the world, but the prospect of 
war has a way of putting things quickly in perspective. 
The world has been getting plenty of analysis from the experts, but in some 
ways, nothing is more profound than the ordinary communication between a family 
and a son at the front. 
