GERMANS ALONE BEAR BLAME FOR WAR: KOHL; 
BUT BONN OFFICIALS DIFFER ON HOW TO RECONCILE WITH POLAND; E. BERLIN REJECTS 
REUNITING NATION 
West German officials Friday marked the 50th anniversary of the start of World 
War II by acknowledging that Germans bear full responsibility for the cataclysm 
that cost more than 50 million lives. 
At the same time, an East German official praised the Soviet Union for 
resisting Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler during the war and warned the Bonn 
government not to attempt to reunite the nation, which was partitioned in the 
war's aftermath. 
West German leaders paid particular tribute to Poland, Nazi Germany's first 
victim of the war, but appeared to differ over how to reconcile the two 
countries. Germany's invasion of Poland on Sept. 1, 1939, began World War II. 
Speaking at a special nationally televised session of the Parliament, West 
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl declared that "Hitler wanted, planned and 
unleashed the war, (which) reached a dimension of horror that had never been 
seen before and must never be seen again." 
Seated in the audience were the Polish ambassador to West Germany and a group 
of Polish young people. 
Kohl called for reconciliation between West Germans and Poles. He said: 
"Terrible things were done to the Polish people in the name of Germany and by 
German hands. The wounds the Second World War opened have not healed even 
today." 
But differences in how to go about healing those wounds surfaced in Friday's 
speech-making by other West German leaders. 
Boundary Disagreement 
The opposition Social Democrats called on the government to reassure the Poles 
that West Germany has no claims on prewar territory that was given to Poland 
after the war. 
Right-wing members of Kohl's governing coalition, among them Finance Minister 
Theo Waigel, have insisted that until a permanent peace treaty is signed, 
Germany's legal boundaries are those of 1937. This area includes much of what 
is now western Poland. 
In his speech, Kohl skirted the issue by supporting the 1970 Warsaw Treaty that 
recognizes the postwar boundaries. But he did not specifically reject all 
claims to prewar German territory. 
Former Chancellor Willy Brandt criticized the government on the Polish issue by 
accusing right-wing officials of interfering with anniversary trips that Kohl 
and President Richard von Weizsaecker had planned to take this summer. 
The trips were not made, partly because Bonn and Warsaw could not agree on the 
amount and specifics of an economic support package for Poland. 
Brandt, a former leader of the Social Democratic Party, who spent the war in 
exile in Sweden, said: "Unfortunately, the fatal impression arose this summer 
that the road to Warsaw was shorter from London, Paris and even Washington than 
from Bonn." This was a reference to Polish visits by British Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher, French President Francois Mitterrand and President Bush. 
In his speech, Kohl took note of the debt to Jews who perished in the 
Holocaust. He said West Germany's improved relations with Israel and with Jews 
around the world indicate that "bridges can be built over an abyss." 
"Most countries of Europe suffered heavily at Germany's hand," Kohl said. "Many 
of them are now our partners, even our friends." 
In a remark apparently addressed to the political far right, Kohl, who was 9 
years old when the war began, paid tribute to Germans who fought in the war. 
"Most of them," he said, "were honestly convinced that they were serving their 
country loyally. There were countless examples of bravery and humanity that 
deserve respect." 
Refugee Crisis 
He did not mention the current crisis over East Germans trying to emigrate to 
the West. But in East Berlin, Foreign Minister Oskar Fischer told the East 
German Parliament that the Bonn government "must take leave of its baseless 
presumption of the right to represent all Germans and to exercise guardianship 
over them. 
"It must give up all claims on foreign territory," he said, "and end 
irresponsible talk about re-establishing the German empire within the 1937 
borders." 
Fischer said World War II could have been avoided if the Western nations had 
overcome their fear of communism and allied themselves earlier with the Soviet 
Union. 
East German leader Erich Honecker, 77, who is said to be recuperating from 
gallstone surgery, did not attend the meeting. 
Also on Friday, Polish-born Pope John Paul II addressed his countrymen via 
television from the Vatican. Poles who gathered in Warsaw's Victory Square saw 
the pontiff's image on a large screen as he deplored the "long and painful 
period of suffering of humanity" during World War II and urged all peoples to 
"eliminate war from all parts of the world," wire reports said. 
Jewish leaders boycotted the Warsaw ceremony to protest the presence of a Roman 
Catholic convent at the site of the Auschwitz concentration camp, where 
millions of Jews and others were killed by the Nazis. 
