MOVIE REVIEWS ; 
'HARDWARE': RELENTLESS HIGH-TECH BLOOD BATH 
"Hardware" (citywide) isn't a movie that can be comfortably recommended to 
anyone but hard-core sci-fi movie violence buffs: people for whom the sine qua 
non of cinema is "The Terminator," "Blade Runner" or "RoboCop." But they'll 
probably like it, perhaps even elevate it to minor cult status. 
It's a relentless, banging, slashing, robo-trap of a movie: a lady-in-distress 
thriller about a dystopic future Britain, in which the world has succumbed to 
nuclear holocaust and lies submerged in eternal reddish dusty haze, in which 
scavengers prowl deserts, while a scabrous radio deejay (the ferocious Iggy 
Pop) screams out cynical diatribes. People huddle behind triple-locked metal 
doors and barter the shards of a smashed society. And the wreckage that one 
scavenger brings back to his junk-artist wife proves part of a self-repairing 
military robot, which has become that horror movie staple: the bogeyman you 
can't kill. 
That's what limits the movie: the whole over-familiar form of the unkillable 
monster-splatter-thriller. Though it works here, it constricts the story. 
"Hardware" isn't long on ideas, emotions or character; it degenerates into a 
mindless slaughterhouse crescendo. 
But, given obvious limitation of means and budget, it's executed with murderous 
kinetic intensity and considerable mean, glitzy style. Writer-director Richard 
Stanley is someone to watch. He gets impressive performances from his 
beleaguered heroine (Stacey Travis) and one fat sybarite of a voyeur-villain 
(William Hootkins) and he creates a consistent grim, paranoid tone, a world 
almost as all-of-a-piece as the post-Apocalypse desert of "Road Warrior." 
The flaws of "Hardware" are the inherent blemishes of the techno-thriller 
genre: It treats its blood baths as if they were endless choruses in a Rolling 
Stones rocker, it reduces life to rhythm, event to a crushing cataract of 
images. 
You have to be somewhat inured to its all-out violence: the accelerating 
assaults, cliff-hangers and gory decapitations that initially earned this 
R-rated film (for extreme violence, language, nudity and sex) an X. But it's 
not without ideas. "This is what you want, this is what you get," drones under 
the credits, obviously Stanley's point. Insane exaggerations and all, this 
barbarous hell of wanton destruction and bleak post-industrial Darwinism is 
what may face us. That nasty notion pulls "Hardware" up above all but a 
fraction of its competition in the techno-thriller blood-bath sweeps. MICHAEL 
WILMINGTON 
