PARK SERVICE BACKS OFF ON BANNING CARS IN YOSEMITE 
Yosemite Valley, the picturesque gash in the granite walls and domes of 
Yosemite National Park visited by more than 2 million people a year, will not 
be closed off to cars anytime soon, the National Park Service finally conceded 
Friday after nearly 10 years. 
Despite pledges of a quieter, more peaceful Yosemite made in a 1980 master 
plan, park officials said in a new report that it will not be feasible before 
sometime next century -- if ever -- to ban private cars from the narrow, 
4,000-foot elevation valley. 
And besides, the report says, conservation groups may wish for a less motorized 
environment in the valley but most visitors don't. 
"Most people prefer the convenience and scheduling flexibility offered by a 
private automobile," the report said. 
Conservation groups that poured years of work into the 1980 master plan -- 
which also contained vows to cut overnight accommodations and remove most 
buildings from the valley -- had grown skeptical over the years that the more 
revolutionary changes would ever take place. 
Even so, the report Friday was called a serious blow. "It appears to me they 
are not dedicated to the goals of the master plan," said Patricia Schifferle, 
regional director in San Francisco of the Wilderness Society, one of the groups 
that hailed the 1980 plan. 
In its 1980 plan, the National Park Service proclaimed as its vision making 
Yosemite Valley, the most visited area of the park, "less congested, less 
developed and more attuned to the uncluttered, inspirational natural beauty and 
rhythms that visitors anticipate." 
Most of the provisions -- including a drastic cut in auto use -- were to be in 
place by next year, the 100th anniversary of the national park northeast of 
Fresno in a patch of the Sierra Nevada range carved by glaciers into 
splendorous rock formations. 
But, said acting Supt. B.J. Griffin Friday, "It was just too ambitious." 
1,500 Workers 
At times in summer, Yosemite Valley takes on the look of a small city. Nearly 
1,500 workers live on the valley floor and walk paths with views of the park's 
famous cliffs and waterfalls. The local Lion's Club meets for lunch twice a 
month at the Ahwahnee Hotel, the Rotary every Tuesday at Yosemite Lodge. There 
are regular sessions of Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous, and a 
dentist who sees patients five days a week. 
The valley environment has turned somewhat more natural in recent years, the 
report said. There is less dust, litter and smoke; the east end of the valley 
has been closed to cars; about 18% of overnight visitors come in tour buses 
rather than cars, and more people are riding shuttle buses after they arrive, 
the Park Service said. 
But requiring visitors to park their cars at distant lots and ride buses or 
some other form of transit into the valley, as suggested by the 1980 plan, is 
not realistic in the foreseeable future, the report said. It would cost too 
much and there are problems of logistics. 
For instance, the report calculates that buses would have to depart every 
minute from satellite parking lots to accommodate the park's current 3.3 
million annual visitors. The slow-climbing buses would add to congestion on 
Highway 140, the "middle route" into the park from Mariposa. 
In addition, the narrow road would need to be widened by cantilevering the 
pavement over the Merced River canyon. "The financial cost and environmental 
impact would be major," the report concluded. 
Ultimately, the report said, lessening the impact of traffic may be a long way 
off. 
"Future technologies may help us reach a more sweeping solution of the private 
automobile dilemma," the report says. "Perhaps a light-rail system, operated by 
21st-Century technologies such as electromagnetic conduction, could make it 
physically and economically feasible" to virtually ban cars from the valley. 
Reducing Overnight Stays 
Another major goal of the 1980 plan was to reduce by 17% the number of people 
who could stay overnight in the valley. Some were to be accommodated by new 
lodging in the Wawona and White Wolf sections of the park, though the plan 
foresaw forcing about 10% to leave the park altogether. 
But the valley has remained steady at about 1,770 sleeping accommodations, 
ranging in price and comfort from the rustic clubbiness of the Ahwahnee Hotel 
to tent cabins -- pieces of canvas slung over a wood frame under the fir trees. 
Increasing demand to sleep in the park has forced park officials to decide not 
to immediately take lodging units out of service, and lack of water has made it 
impossible to build new units at Wawona, the report said. 
Costs have also gotten in the way of plans to relocate workers -- most of them 
employees of Yosemite Park &amp; Curry Co., a private firm that runs lodgings 
and restaurants -- and the park's administrative headquarters to the El Portal 
area west of the valley. 
But the report Friday said that no new growth is anticipated in the valley. 
"We will continue to hold the line . . . by not increasing the number of 
overnight accommodations, parking spaces or operational structures in Yosemite 
Valley," the report said. 
Public comments on the new report are being taken by the park service until 
Oct. 6. 
