2 INDICTED IN HORMONE-SALES CASE 
A Sacramento-area bodybuilder and a Carmel man have been charged with 
distributing a genetically engineered human growth hormone, a drug increasingly 
sought by top athletes as a non-detectable substitute for anabolic steroids. 
William E. Cambra Jr., 31, of Carmichael and James V. Sorrano, 29, of Carmel 
were named in the 12-count indictment filed Wednesday in San Diego federal 
court. The indictment also included charges of conspiring to sell the synthetic 
hormone, distributing steroids and distributing counterfeit steroids. 
The charges were the first by federal prosecutors involving the distribution of 
the synthetic hormone, an expensive drug prescribed only for children with 
growth deficiencies but in increasing demand among world-class athletes seeking 
to pass drug tests, said Assistant U.S. Atty. Phillip L. B. Halpern of San 
Diego. 
The indictment was unsealed after the arrest of Cambra Wednesday morning in 
Carmichael, a Sacramento suburb. Known nationally as a bodybuilder and owner of 
a Carmichael gym, Cambra was being held pending a bail hearing today in U.S. 
District Court in Sacramento, Halpern said. Police are searching for Sorrano. 
If convicted, both face up to 38 years in prison and $3 million in fines. 
Cambra ran a national network that distributed large amounts of the synthetic 
hormone and bogus anabolic steroids, the indictment alleges. 
The hormone substitute costs between $600 and $1,200 per dose on the black 
market, Halpern said. 
"Because of that it's not used by every Tom, Dick and Harry who wants to use 
steroids," he said. "Only top-level athletes, be they bodybuilders, track and 
field, etc., would want to use human growth hormone." 
The hormone is so hard to detect under the drug tests given to athletes, 
Halpern said, that "if you took it in the last Olympics, it would not have been 
caught." 
The hormone is the compound Olympic gold medalist Florence Griffith Joyner 
recently was accused of taking. 
