FORSAKING HIS LINE OF DEFENSE; 
FOOTBALL: 'OLD-LINE NFLER' JACK PARDEE HAS A RUN-AND-SHOOT OFFENSE? THAT'S 
EVOLUTION. 
For Jack Pardee to be coaching the run-and-shoot offense seems totally out of 
character. 
When Pardee was hired by the Chargers in 1981 as assistant head coach in charge 
of defense, newspapers ran such headlines as "Mr. Defense," "Secretary of 
Defense," "Pardee to the Rescue" and "Pardee Puts Touch of Picasso Into 
Chargers' Defense." 
Pardee, who played linebacker in the NFL, was so heavily into defense that it 
almost seemed as though taking possession of the ball was offensive to him. In 
six seasons as an NFL head coach -- three each with the Chicago Bears and 
Washington Redskins -- he was noted for his conservative approach to offense. 
But here is Pardee today, espousing the aggressive, high-risk run-and-shoot as 
the new coach of the Houston Oilers, who will meet the Chargers Sunday at San 
Diego Jack Murphy Stadium. Instead of run, run, run, he teaches pass, pass, 
pass. It doesn't figure. 
Said Sid Gillman, who coached Pardee with the Rams and worked for him in 
Chicago: "I'm really amazed." 
Jim Laslavic, sports director of KNSD (Channel 39), was a linebacker in the 
season Pardee spent with the Chargers. He is equally surprised. 
"Jack is one of the last guys I would expect to turn to something so 
revolutionary," Laslavic said. "At least, it's evolutionary. He's an old-line 
NFLer. He played for George Allen, and he coached so conservatively in Chicago 
and Washington. It's hard to believe." 
If you press Pardee, 54, for an explanation, he makes his change of direction 
appear logical. He even traces his switch to a passing offense -- although not 
necessarily the run-and-shoot -- to his season in San Diego on Don Coryell's 
staff. 
"I came to a conclusion when I was in San Diego with Coryell," Pardee said. "I 
decided that if you're ever going to do more than beat bad teams, you can't be 
one-dimensional. 
"Being on the defensive side of the ball, you realize a lot of the things that 
give you problems, and the biggest thing is the pass. You have to run, too, but 
it's hard to do that all the time and win anymore in the NFL." 
The last statement brought back memories for Don Pierson, a Chicago Tribune 
writer who covered the Bears when Pardee was their coach. 
"Jack was the most defense-minded coach I've ever seen," Pierson said. "He just 
tolerated offense. One time I asked him to list Walter Payton's attributes, and 
the first thing he mentioned was pursuit. He was thinking primarily of what 
Payton did after an interception. 
"Sid Gillman was with Pardee in '77 when Payton gained a record 275 yards and 
the Bears won just 10-7 (against Minnesota). Gillman was really upset after 
that game. He said to Pardee, 'How can you have anyone run for 275 yards and 
score only one touchdown?' Sid thought it was embarrassing." 
Gillman was a master of the passing game -- perhaps the master -- and couldn't 
help but be frustrated by Pardee's emphasis on the run. When Pardee resigned 
after the 1977 season to take the Washington job, Gillman didn't go with him. 
Instead, he became athletic director at U.S. International. 
"There was a clash of personalities between Gillman and Pardee," Pierson said. 
"After bringing Sid in and having him spread out the receivers, Jack totally 
ignored him." 
Both coaches denied having had trouble co-existing in Chicago. 
Said Gillman: "Jack was a real great fella, a credit to the coaching 
profession. It was a fine year, and I enjoyed working with him very much. I had 
a little problem with one of the assistants on the defensive side, but it was 
very minor." 
And Pardee: "Sid was my first pro coach. I love Sid and Esther (Mrs. Gillman). 
Sid is smart, and he's a strategist without a peer. He taught me a lot." 
Asked if he had considered asking Gillman to join him in Washington, Pardee 
said, "I did, yes, but he was kind of anxious to get back out to California." 
As complimentary as they are of each other, Gillman doesn't hesitate to say he 
disapproves of Pardee's venture into the run-and-shoot, which dispenses with 
the tight end and calls for four wide receivers and one running back. 
"I'm not a run-and-shoot guy," Gillman said. "I just feel that you can't play 
without a tight end. At times, when the situation presents itself, I would use 
four wide receivers and take out the tight end, but certainly not on a regular 
basis. 
"The fact that the quarterback works so close to the line of scrimmage, if he 
isn't sacked, he's hit. In the Tampa Bay-Detroit game the other night, Rodney 
Peete almost got killed. 
"I don't know how long a quarterback will last in that system. He had better be 
able to run." 
Told of Gillman's comments, Pardee said, "Sid is from the old school of 
thought, but one of the hardest things to do is to get a tight end to do all 
the things you want a tight end to do. I have more success finding running 
backs and wide receivers than finding tight ends. 
"As for getting my quarterback (Warren Moon) hurt, I don't worry about that. If 
he doesn't hold the ball too long and if they don't hit him late, which is 
illegal, he'll be OK." 
Moon is so happy to be working for gentlemanly Pardee instead of much-disliked 
Jerry Glanville, now coach of the Atlanta Falcons, that he doesn't mind taking 
a few extra licks from pass-rushers. 
"It's a pleasant change," Moon said. "There's a more businesslike atmosphere 
here. Jerry was strictly a hands-on coach. Jack is more laid back, more like an 
observer. He lets his assistants run things. 
"I don't know if the run-and-shoot makes my job more dangerous. People think 
because I move out of the pocket so much that I'll take more of a beating, but 
that's not true. It depends on how much I throw the football and how good the 
blocking is." 
Pardee might never have been converted to the run-and-shoot if it hadn't been 
for an unusual combination of circumstances. 
The Charger defense plunged from sixth to 27th in the NFL while Pardee was in 
charge, and even the AFC West title they won with a high-powered offense 
couldn't save his job. 
Pardee went from the Chargers into private business, but when the short-lived 
United States Football League was founded in 1983, he was named coach of the 
Houston Gamblers. His offensive coordinator was Mouse Davis, who had been using 
the run-and-shoot for years, so he decided to take a flyer on it. Davis now is 
the offensive coordinator of the Detroit Lions. 
Remarkably, Pardee has been in Houston since, but in three different jobs. When 
the USFL folded, he went to the University of Houston, where his Cougars sent 
NCAA offensive records tumbling in every direction. Last season, they averaged 
53.5 points, 511.3 passing yards and 624.9 total yards, all best in the nation. 
Among Houston's nine victories a year ago was a 95-21 humiliation of Forrest 
Gregg's Southern Methodist team, reborn after a two-year death penalty. Gregg 
didn't complain, but Glanville made a nasty deal of it after his Falcons 
defeated Pardee's Oilers, 47-27, in the season opener this year. 
Said Glanville: "I'm giving the game ball to Forrest Gregg, because that total 
jerk ran up the score last year. Texas can kiss my butt." 
Pardee rarely says a bad thing about anybody, but he made an exception in this 
case: "Glanville always knows what a jerk is." 
Pardee has tried to change the Oilers' reputation, picked up under Glanville, 
for taking cheap shots. 
"I gave my players a message the first day," Pardee said. "You can't intimidate 
people in the NFL. If you try, all you do is self-destruct with 15-yard 
penalties." 
