ARTISTRY FROM INDONESIA; 
THE SHADOW FIGURES IN WAYANG KULIT TALES 
The bell-like shimmer of the palace gamelan still reverberates in the warm 
night air, but Wayang Kulit puppeteer Radyo Harsono has already lit a cigarette 
backstage. 
For the last two hours, he's provided the motion, voice and spirit of a whole 
company of flat, leather shadow-figures, dramatizing an episode from the Hindu 
epic "Mahabharata" on a translucent 6 1/2-by-10-foot cloth screen. 
Actually, Harsono says that he much prefers the traditional all-night Wayang 
Kulit performances but that this abridged version is the one he'll do most 
often on the "Court Art of Jogjakarta" tour of the United States from late 
August to early October. (The shortened program opens Tuesday at 8 p.m. in the 
Los Angeles State and County Arboretum, as part of the Los Angeles Festival, 
with a repeat on Sept. 11. A 10 p.m.-to-6 a.m. marathon is scheduled for 
Saturday.) 
Harsono worries that the language problem and other cultural barriers may pose 
difficulties in America and has considered learning a little English to insert 
in the clown scenes -- normally in the vernacular as opposed to the classical 
Javanese spoken by the noble characters and gods. 
At 30, he is younger than most dalangs (puppeteers) and highly thoughtful about 
the responsibilities of his profession. "It can be explaining something to the 
society," he says, "or passing on philosophy, or entertaining. There are many 
things you have to do, like fasting, as part of your overall need as a person 
taking on the role of dalang." 
"In the villages," he explains, "people have a strong belief that the dalang 
can help with non-physical healing. If someone has a baby during a performance, 
they will make it his godchild, and he is supposed to aid the child's 
education." Harsono has two godchildren of this sort. 
Audiences in Java go to see a particular dalang rather than just a play and are 
free to watch the performance from either in front of the shadow-screen or 
backstage, where they can appreciate how he manipulates, on rods, dozens of 
elaborately painted and incised puppets while also speaking, singing, supplying 
sound-effects and cuing the gamelan. 
Since there isn't a set script, the dalang must also be able to improvise 
within traditional performing conventions -- and Harsono lists "knowledge of 
music, dance, the visual arts, the vocal arts, literature and philosophy" as 
necessary for success in this career. 
"The main thing is to concentrate beforehand on the story," he says -- "on how 
you want it to go." Since he performs up to 20 times a month, there's also 
another essential in this vital, 9th-Century performance idiom: 
"You have to be healthy," Harsono says with a laugh. "You have to really guard 
your health." 
