GABO TALKS; 
GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ ON THE MISFORTUNES OF LATIN AEMRICA, HIS FRIENDSHIP WITH 
FIDEL CASTRO AND HIS TERROR OF THE BLANK PAGE. 
IMAGINE STOCKHOLM IN DECEMBER, when it is nearly always nighttime. A 
54-year-old son of Colombia's Caribbean coast has come to collect his Nobel 
Prize for Literature. It is 1982, and Gabriel Garcia Marquez is already famous 
as the author of "One Hundred Years of Solitude," which is selling better than 
the Bible in some Spanish-speaking countries. Garcia Marquez counts powerful 
men, including Cuban President Fidel Castro, among his closest friends. And he 
has written a ringing acceptance speech in which he defines the solitary 
existence of Latin America, dares Europe to allow these countries to make their 
own mistakes and defends the "persistent advantage of life over death." 
But the Nobel ceremonies are a confusion of activity that has this native of 
the tropics shivering with cold and mixing up day and night in a place so far 
north of the Equator. He is exhausted, begging for sleep. He falls asleep. And 
then a curious thing happens. 
"I suddenly woke up in bed, and I remembered that they always give the same 
room in the same hotel to the Nobel winner," Garcia Marquez says. "And I 
thought, 'Rudyard Kipling has slept in this bed, Thomas Mann, Neruda, Asturias, 
Faulkner.' It terrified me, and finally I went out to sleep on the sofa." 
Now, sitting in the study of his Mexico City home, Garcia Marquez laughs at 
himself as he recalls that night eight years ago. Considered one of the 
greatest masters of the Spanish language since Miguel de Cervantes, he is at 
once vastly proud and humbled by the literary company into which he has been 
cast. This tale he tells captures the character of the poor boy with 14 
brothers and sisters who grew up to become a world-famous author of books, 
published in at least 32 languages. 
If that is incongruous, then his life is full of incongruity, much like the 
characters in his fiction, which he has drawn from his own experiences and 
those of his family and acquaintances. This man, called Gabo by his friends, is 
guided by reason and superstition in nearly equal parts. He believes in the 
romantic idea of inspiration but has worked assiduously to master Western 
literature and the craft of writing. He is both generous and egocentric, 
dignified and vain. A devoted advocate of human freedom, he cannot bring 
himself to criticize the suppression of intellectual liberty in Cuba. He is a 
practiced journalist, yet he is so uncomfortable at being interviewed that he 
wrings his hands and sinks into the couch 
when questioned in ways that do not suit him. 
He often has broken with convention. He did so in his 1975 novel "The Autumn of 
the Patriarch," which is a single 297-page paragraph, the longest in Spanish 
literature. And he does again in his new novel, "The General in His Labyrinth," 
which is to be published in the United States this month. The book describes 
the final, tormented days of Gen. Simon Jose Antonio de la Santisima Trinidad 
Bolivar y Palacios -- called Simon Bolivar. Garcia Marquez has stripped away 
the winding cloths from the venerated legend to reveal the Great Liberator of 
South America in all his human nakedness and contradictions. 
The book shocked Colombia when it was first published in Spanish last year. 
Garcia Marquez was accused of being anti-patriotic, of destroying national 
heritage. The author says that he has neither maligned nor belittled the 
19th-Century liberator and leader of Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru and 
Bolivia. He just wanted Latin Americans to see Bolivar as he truly was. 
But you should not expect to see this sort of nakedness in the author himself. 
A witty and beguiling storyteller, Garcia Marquez forthrightly tries to shape 
the history that is written about him. He weaves enchanting yarns about his 
youth and family, insisting that all of it is present in his books, 
particularly in the best-selling "Love in the Time of Cholera," the romantic 
tale of a lifelong love affair he says is based on his mother and father. 
He is writing his memoirs in sections divided by theme rather than chronology, 
a method that not only frees him from what he calls the "imprisonment" of a 
work in progress but which "allows me to skip over the themes that don't 
interest me, or that are not in my interest to write." 
The author who unmasks the General says: "I believe one has a public life, a 
private life and a secret life. I have written a lot about my public and 
private lives. On my secret life I have not written a single word." 
But what if someone invents his secret life, as Garcia Marquez did for the 
General, detailing Bolivar's women and sexual intrigues? 
"Ah," he says with a grin. "What they invent will never be as good as the 
reality that I will take to my grave." 
GARCIA MARQUEZ IS A JAUNTY,energetic man of 62 with furrowed cheeks and a lined 
brow. His mustache is white, his eyebrows black, his hair salt-and-pepper gray. 
Upright and barrel-chested, he takes full advantage of his otherwise average 
height to fill a room with his presence. As he speaks in clear and modulated 
Spanish, he smiles playfully and punctuates with his hands. 
He loves good food so much that you might think he judges a man as much by what 
he eats as by what he does. He's curious about how world figures think about 
food, and what they eat. He wants to get to know Soviet President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev "over lunch . . . and in his shirt-sleeves." He keeps a cellar filled 
with French wines, but his daily habits are fairly austere: He diets on fruit, 
quit smoking cigarettes years ago and gave up coffee "because it made me think 
of death." 
With Mercedes, his wife of 32 years, Garcia Marquez lives much of the year in a 
Spanish Colonial-style house on the southern edge of Mexico City, a favorite 
neighborhood of Mexican writers and intellectuals. What first strikes you about 
their two-story house is its whiteness. The carpets are white, the walls are 
white, much of the furniture is white. You can't help but wonder whether this 
man has dirt on his shoes like the rest of us. Or does he levitate so that he 
can live with this virginal carpet, which looks like a giant canvas awaiting 
inspiration? 
He takes pride in this house with its high brick-and-wood-beam ceilings and a 
collection of paintings by Mexican artists Rufino Tamayo and Abel Quezada, 
Nicaraguan Armando Morales and Colombian Fernando Botero. He wants to show off 
the house -- one of several dwellings he owns, in Bogota, Cartagena, Barcelona, 
Cuernavaca and Paris -- but also he wants to show his affection for journalists 
by sharing something intimate that will make for a better story. He wrote news 
before novels and always is thinking of the story. As one writer to others, he 
leads us upstairs to see his bedroom and the books beside his low, white bed. 
Garcia Marquez awakens at 5 a.m. every day to reach into the pile of books, 
which this day includes Kenneth S. Lynn's biography of Ernest Hemingway, a 
biography of the late Mexican President Francisco A. Madero, the Italian 
translation of "The General," Octavio Paz's new collection of essays, "A Small 
Chronicle of Great Days," a Spanish mystery novel and a copy of the 
Constitution of Colombia. 
"I don't read at night because I have gotten up early, and I fall asleep. And 
if I work at night, I will keep working in my sleep, and then I wake up tired," 
he says. 
Now we can picture Garcia Marquez in the dawn light made brighter by the white 
room, reading and correcting what he has written the day before, while Mercedes 
sleeps by his side. This is the only time he has without the interruptions of 
telephones, secretaries and visitors. 
He begins his day's work at 8 a.m. in the shower, imagining characters and 
inventing sentences under a steady stream of hot water. "Sometimes," he tells 
us, "the bathroom fills with steam I take so long. You can't see anything in 
the mirrors." He had to install a second hot-water heater to support his 
inspiration. 
As a boy on scholarship in boarding school, Garcia Marquez was taught to make 
his bed, shower in cold water and get fully dressed before breakfast. Of that, 
he has preserved only the habit of dressing for work. He cannot write in a 
bathrobe or sweat suit. On many mornings, he stands before his mirrored closets 
searching desperately for something to wear. He calls this ritual one of his 
"secret vices." 
"Many times I arrive late at my desk because I don't have anything to wear. I 
can't decide what pants to put on with what shirt. I have a closet full of 
clothes, and I scream, 'I don't have anything to wear.' Of course, all of this 
is a pretext because of the fear of going to write." 
He admits that a blank piece of paper sparks the same terror in him today that 
it did at the beginning of his career. He dallies over the newspaper, makes 
telephone calls that simply cannot wait and rejoices at an electricity blackout 
that shuts down his computer. But he must go to work. 
"If I invent an excuse not to write and I don't write, then in the afternoon I 
have a tremendous attack of conscience. I really feel guilty, as if I have not 
earned my meal." 
After breakfast, Garcia Marquez crosses his back veranda and manicured garden, 
with its rosebushes, bougainvillea and citrus trees, to an old barn that he has 
converted into a comfortable, modern study as white as the rest of the house. 
The shelved walls are filled with expensive stereo equipment, records and tapes 
of classical music, and row after row of novels in Spanish, English, French and 
Italian -- the four languages in which he reads. 
When asked which current writer he prefers, he hesitates as if in fear of 
offending any of them. Finally, he volunteers that he especially likes the work 
of two close friends, Milan Kundera and Carlos Fuentes. 
On shelves above the couch he has "two yards" of the complete works of 
Hemingway and William Faulkner. He pulls two volumes of Herman Melville from 
their place: "This is the greatest American author. But most writers won't 
admit it." Edgar Allan Poe is another of his American favorites. He is reading 
the memoirs of Bertrand Russell; he admires the compactness of Russell's 
language. 
"I will never manage to write like him. First of all, he wrote in English, 
which is boom, boom, boom. I like my own books better in English than Spanish. 
They're not better written or more poetic, but they have fewer words than I can 
achieve in Spanish . . . because Spanish is such a sinuous language." 
To tighten his own writing, he has eliminated adverbs, which in Spanish all 
have the ending -mente. "Before 'Chronicle of a Death Foretold,' " he says, 
"there are many. In 'Chronicle,' I think there is one. After that, in 'Love,' 
there are none. In Spanish, the adverb -mente is a very easy solution. But when 
you want to use -mente and look for another form, it always is better. It has 
become so natural to me that I don't even notice anymore." 
At 9 o'clock, Garcia Marquez sits down at his neat wood desk. With a lifelong 
aversion to the cold, he slips into an old tan sweater with a loose button, 
and, fighting the urge to procrastinate further, he at last turns on his 
computer. He inserts the changes that he has made on paper in the early morning 
and then begins to elaborate on the ideas that have come to him in the shower. 
The computer, Garcia Marquez says, has saved him from his own perfectionist 
tendencies, which had become yet another means of stalling. When he wrote on a 
typewriter, he insisted that each page be flawless: no erasures, blotches or 
crossed-out letters. "I considered a typing mistake an error of creation," he 
says. Once, he went through an entire ream of paper typing the final manuscript 
of a 15-page short story. 
He used to write a page each day -- 250 words. "If you write several hundred 
words a day all your life, you will write as much as Balzac." But the computer 
has changed his technique slightly -- now he labors over longer sections and 
perfects them over several days. 
Although his two children have been grown and gone for more than a decade, 
Garcia Marquez stops his daily writing sharply at 2 in the afternoon, the hour 
that he used to pick them up at school and bring them home for lunch. Before 
leaving his office, he makes a printout of what he has written, which he will 
edit in bed the following morning. 
Garcia Marquez still occasionally writes pieces of journalism in addition to 
fiction. He tells us that he believes journalism is a literary genre, a 
rendition of reality, like the novel or the theater. 
"When I write journalism, some people think I am writing literature," he says. 
"And I am very rigorous when I write journalism, very careful of reality. But I 
have a way of selecting and seeing reality that is very literary. I use the 
same method of observation in journalism and literature. Because of literature 
I see things others don't. On the other hand, journalism has helped me in 
literature precisely because it has helped me maintain contact with reality 
always." 
In journalism, he recounts stories that most reporters only think to tell their 
friends. "For example, when I met the Pope a month after he was named, two 
things grabbed my attention. We were talking like this, face to face, and I 
felt one of the buttons fall off my blazer. I heard it fall on the floor. I 
maintained a poker face, but he saw it, leaned down and picked it up. I would 
have left it. 
"Then, when I was about to go," says this journalist who was reared Catholic, 
"he went to open the door to his study, and it was locked. He had only been 
Pope for a short time, and he couldn't get the door open. He made an 
exclamation in Polish. All I could think of at that moment was what my mother 
would say if she knew that I was locked in with the Pope and we couldn't get 
out." 
AS GARCIA MARQUEZ tells it, he did not set out to write the story of Simon 
Bolivar. He wanted rather to recount the tale of his beloved Magdalena, the 
Colombian river that he traveled so often as a youth and later used as the 
setting for "Love in the Time of Cholera." 
"I know the Magdalena River port by port, and I have a great nostalgia for that 
era. I think nostalgia is the source of all literature and poetry," he says. "I 
had thought I would write the story of the Magdalena River through Bolivar's 
trip, without worrying much about his personality. But it wasn't possible. He 
took over." 
The Great Liberator, Garcia Marquez discovered during two years of exhaustive 
research, was nothing like the one-dimensional hero presented to schoolchildren 
all across the continent. Garcia Marquez felt obliged to set history straight. 
So he wrote a novel of Bolivar's last, ambiguous journey down the Magdalena as 
a haggard and dying man, old at 47, reviled, nearly friendless, with his hopes 
of a unified and independent Latin America in tatters. 
Garcia Marquez's Bolivar is a romantic aristocrat, as myth would have it, but 
"The General in His Labyrinth" also says that the legendary hero is part black 
-- his is not the long Roman nose that it became in revisionist drawings. His 
language is vulgar, with a river man's coarseness that has shocked the Latin 
world of letters. Having lost his wife at a young age, Bolivar fills his nights 
not only with his well-known mistress, Manuela Sasenz, but also with countless 
young girls, whom he eagerly takes to his hammock and then discards. 
But most disconcerting for a sainted hero is the decrepit state of his body: He 
is a farting, foul-breathed insomniac who suffers periodic spells of delirium. 
This Bolivar is full of the contradictions that Garcia Marquez discovered in 
the 10,000 letters the General wrote over a lifetime. "He changed his opinion 
according to the circumstances. It was extraordinary to find that there was a 
human being in this myth that they had created." 
Unlike typical Bogota leaders, including his one-time vice president Francisco 
de Paula Santander, Bolivar was not at all cautious or formalistic. Bolivar was 
a republican who repeatedly denied that he was tempted toward a monarchy. A 
visionary gnawed by disillusionment, he wrote at the end of his life: "America 
is ungovernable, the man who serves a revolution plows the sea, this nation 
will fall inevitably into the hands of the unruly mob and then will pass into 
the hands of almost indistinguishable petty tyrants of every color and race." 
And yet, in the novel, Bolivar expects to keep on fighting for his ideals. He 
still dreams of a unified Latin America. "Bolivar has been criticized because 
he was a dictator," Garcia Marquez says, "because at one point he wanted to 
establish a monarchy. One sees very clearly that what happened with Bolivar is 
that he wanted to create a free and united country, and he didn't care how he 
did it." 
Some historians and intellectuals are angered by the book's emphasis on 
Bolivar's bitter quarrel with the other hero of Colombian independence, 
Santander. Other critics have dismissed the book as the work of a leftist 
trying to destroy democratic institutions. 
"I haven't tried to destroy anything but to show the man," Garcia Marquez says. 
"All the veneration and all the respect that he gets as a myth are greater if 
he is seen as a human being." 
THE RIVER THAT Garcia Marquez would have written about will have to wait its 
turn. He says it will receive ample attention in his memoirs. The Magdalena was 
a symbol of freedom to the young Garcia Marquez, who left home by steamboat at 
age 13 to go away to school. It is a source of inspiration to the mature writer 
who remembers the throaty whistle of the boats and their macho captains. 
Born in the small banana-growing town of Aracataca, Garcia Marquez was 8 when 
he moved with his parents to Barranquilla, at the mouth of the Magdalena. The 
story of his family is all there in "Love in the Time of Cholera," Garcia 
Marquez says. Like Fermina Diaz, his mother went to high school and studied 
piano; his father wanted to be a doctor but ran out of money before he finished 
school and, like Florentino Ariza, became a telegrapher. Later, he opened a 
small pharmacy. 
"We were very poor, but worse than that, we had pretensions. My mother and 
father had 11 children, and my father had four more outside of the marriage. 
Two of those were grown and didn't live with us. When the other two were born, 
my mother reacted with the usual drama, but then she said my father's blood 
couldn't be running around out there and she brought them home. They lived with 
us." 
Growing up, Garcia Marquez spent a lot of time with his maternal grandparents 
in Aracataca. He has said that he learned a lot from his storytelling 
grandmother. And his grandfather's Caribbean-flavored Spanish helped Garcia 
Marquez reconstruct Bolivar's style of speaking. 
As a boy, he loved comic books -- Dick Tracy and Terry and the Pirates -- and 
yearned to buy them, but they were too expensive. "I realized I had to leave 
the house because another mouth was born every year. I got the idea of a 
scholarship. In 1942, Colombia was such a centralized country that in order to 
win a scholarship, I had to travel 600 miles to take an exam in Bogota. The 
trip was very expensive. I don't know where my father got the money. I knew I 
had to pass the test, because I didn't have the return fare." 
This was his first trip on the Mississippi-style steamboats, whose whistles had 
called to him as boy. He passed the test, got the scholarship and enrolled in a 
boarding school outside of Bogota. But he continued to ride the river at each 
vacation for the next six years. 
"It was a wonderful trip because we were singing and dancing, and the boat was 
full of students. I loved to ride up with the captains. I learned that they had 
lovers in every port, and when the boats arrived, the captains signaled with 
the whistles to let them know who it was. Those captains are a legend. Now it 
has become nostalgia. I was always conscious that some day I would write about 
this. I was aware that something was happening to me." 
At school, Garcia Marquez learned what he now considers a basic truth: "It may 
be dogmatic and probably reactionary, but I believe you find some people are 
born knowing how to tell a story. They have a sense of timing, of organization 
of facts. After that, it is a long way to becoming a writer. You have to learn 
to write well. It is a technical process, a process of elaboration and a 
capacity to elaborate experiences. There are many writers who are just 
technicians, and you can tell that right away." 
In the boarding school, he says, "I was probably the only one who knew how to 
tell a story. I enjoyed telling stories, and my teachers heard me." 
His teachers were political radicals from all over the country, sent into a 
kind of internal exile to the boarding school, a place where it was thought 
they could cause no trouble. They recognized Garcia Marquez's interests and let 
him do as he pleased. He read every volume in the school library in the order 
they were arranged on the shelves. "I remember there were three volumes of the 
works of Freud. I read all without knowing what I was reading, but the clinical 
cases were marvelous. Now I understand why I was so interested -- because of 
the clinical cases." 
He entered the National University in Bogota, choosing to study law because the 
morning classes allowed him to hold a job in the afternoon. "I wanted to study 
philosophy and letters, but no one would have forgiven a student as poor as I 
was for studying philosophy," he says. 
Still, he made his way through the 19th-Century Russian novelists, 17th-Century 
Spanish poets, Charles Dickens and Mark Twain. Then he discovered Franz Kafka, 
who "impressed me the most. He revealed a certain sense of literature because 
he was capable of anything." 
In Bogota, he wrote stories "that had nothing to do with my reality. It was 
someone else's reality, the reality of other writers." But he sold one to the 
local newspaper, El Espectador, and then another and another. Suddenly, he was 
a writer, without, he felt, really knowing how to write. The responsibility 
sent him into a panic. He began to study the Greek and Latin classics, and 
then, "something providential happened." 
On April 9, 1948, liberal political leader Jorge Eliecer Gaitan was 
assassinated. The city erupted in three days of riots that became known as el 
Bogotazo and resulted in years of political violence. Like most university 
students, Garcia Marquez went into the streets to break windows in protest. 
When he returned to his pension he found it in ashes. The university shut down. 
Nothing remained for him in Bogota, so he left for the Caribbean coast where he 
knew he could find a newspaper job. 
"When I got to Cartagena, I rediscovered in the coast a reality and culture 
with which I completely identified," he says. He never fails to identify 
himself as a Caribbean. In his books and conversation, Bogota, sitting on the 
high plains of central Colombia, is cold, formal and austere; the Caribbean and 
its people are hot-blooded and exuberant. 
When he moved to the coast, his literary friends told him that the classics 
were fine but that the most exciting writers alive were the novelists from the 
Southern United States. He began to read them, and his great love for 
Faulkner's work was born. "I discovered that he was writing about a world 
exactly like the one I had lived," he says. It was a world of heat and 
slow-moving rivers, small towns and farming country, where storytellers spun 
long and fantastic tales. 
About this time, when he was in his early 20s, Garcia Marquez returned to his 
hometown of Aracataca with his mother on a trip that he says changed his life. 
"That is the day I really became a writer. I realized all I had written up to 
that point was invented. It had been due to a congenital capacity to tell 
stories, but I wasn't recounting my reality. I found the town exactly as I 
remembered it, but in ruins, totally deserted. There weren't any people in the 
streets. The banana company had left. Before, I had felt you had to write so 
that people identified and felt good. But when I suffered this shock, I 
realized that probably what I had to do was create a reality that would make 
people uncomfortable, transmit this sense of uneasiness and pain that I 
encountered. And that is what I found in the Southern writers from the United 
States. I returned to Barranquilla 24 hours later, tore up half a novel I had 
written and started over. Since then I haven't changed my concept of 
literature." 
Garcia Marquez says he could not then bring himself to enter the small house in 
Aracataca in which he had been raised, and, although it is a museum today, he 
has yet to go inside. "If I do, I will stop being a writer. The key is inside," 
he says. By way of explanation he offers only this: "I go on instinct. I'm a 
sentimentalist, not an intellectual." 
BUT OF COURSE he is an intellectual and, as such, his views on literature, art 
and politics command attention throughout Latin America. As in Europe, writers 
there are considered to have a moral authority that gives their opinions great 
weight. "I take care in every word I say, because I know it resounds in all of 
Latin America," Garcia Marquez says, accurately and matter-of-factly. 
His political views have been the subject of debate and controversy for nearly 
30 years. They have been the source of his continuing troubles with the U.S. 
State Department, which considers him an undesirable leftist and restricts his 
entry visas. He can and does go to the United States but only by special 
dispensation from the State Department, a condition that greatly irritates him, 
especially since he admires much about this country. He says with a wry smile, 
"My name will be remembered for hundreds of years because of all those American 
graduate students writing theses about my books." 
Originally, his political opinions were shaped by Marxist professors who 
commonly taught in Latin American high schools and universities. From listening 
to his teachers, and from witnessing the economic misery in which so many Latin 
Americans lived, he became convinced that capitalism did not work. 
"Probably in those first years I was very radical," he tells us. "But later 
life taught me that no existing system is good enough, because certainly no 
system has a general application. Between high school and my first trip to 
socialist countries I was somewhat a victim of propaganda," he says. 
He was a 29-year-old journalist when he made an extended journey through 
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union with friends in 1957. He wrote a series of 
plain-spoken articles on the countries' gloomy cities and disillusioned people. 
"Those articles were written with great care so that they were clearly a 
criticism of socialism without being a praise of capitalism. My newspaper, El 
Espectador, didn't publish the articles because they considered them very 
favorable to the socialist countries. And the Marxist left considered them paid 
for by the State Department. When I returned, it was clear to me that, in 
theory, socialism was a much more just system than capitalism. But that in 
practice, this wasn't socialism. At that moment, the Cuban Revolution 
occurred," he says. 
One cannot talk about Garcia Marquez without considering his intimate 
relationship with Cuba and his unwavering defense of Fidel Castro, who has read 
several of Garcia Marquez first drafts. The author is not prepared to unmask 
the myth of Fidel as he has with Simon Bolivar; he will not, and possibly 
cannot, bring himself to criticize seriously Castro's aging revolution. 
"With Fidel, there is great coherence between the myth and the man. I believe 
in that yth." Besides, he explains, "Fidel is my personal friend. It is very 
difficult to be Fidel's friend and to live in this world." 
The one time Garcia Marquez grows angry during days of interviews and telephone 
calls, it is over Castro. He believes the United States has an "almost 
pornographic obsession with Castro. The U.S. press has made him into a devil. I 
have many friends," he says furiously, "and in the world they have been reduced 
to one. I am friends with seven, eight, nine world leaders, with many 
presidents." 
Clearly Garcia Marquez feels that to criticize Castro would be to betray his 
friendship and the fundamental values for which Castro stands. They are the 
values that drew Garcia Marquez to Cuba in the first place and prompted him to 
enlist in its revolutionary news service, Prensa Latina, in 1960. 
"The Cuban Revolution was about national independence and social justice. It 
was a revolution based on national independence 1 
