REBELS KILL LIBERIA'S DOE, DISPLAY BODY; 
2ND FACTION CALLS FOR PULLOUT OF WEST AFRICAN FORCE 
President Samuel Doe was killed by rebels and his bullet-scarred body has been 
put on display at their camp outside Monrovia, news and government reports said 
today. 
Travelers returning to Monrovia told the British Broadcasting Corp. that Doe 
died in a rebel camp where he was taken Sunday after he was wounded and 
captured by rebel forces in a fierce gun battle in the capital of his war-torn 
West African nation. 
U.S. State Department officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said U.S. 
officials regard the reports as reliable and consider them confirmation of 
Doe's death. 
Meanwhile, Liberia's main rebel fighters demanded today that West African 
troops withdraw from Monrovia and said they will keep fighting despite Doe's 
death at the hands of Prince Yormie Johnson's rival rebel faction. 
Tom Woewiyu, chief spokesman of Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front, 
dashed hopes for an early end to the tribal conflict in which three warring 
parties have killed more than 5,000 civilians. 
Doe was interrogated by Prince Johnson over large amounts of money he allegedly 
embezzled during his time in power, then killed, the BBC quoted the travelers 
as saying. The president's body, badly mutilated, was reportedly on display at 
the camp. 
State Department spokesman Mark Dillen said the department has reports from 
several sources, including representatives of forces led by Prince Johnson, 
that Doe "died from the gunshot wounds he suffered in the shoot-out with Prince 
Johnson." 
Dillen said he had no further information. 
Johnson had telephoned the BBC to say he had captured Doe in a battle Sunday as 
Liberia's leader of 10 years was trying to flee the country, possibly on a ship 
of a West African task force sent to end the 8 1/2-month-old war. 
Woewiyu's announcement that Taylor's rebels will keep fighting came in a 
telephone interview from Burkina Faso, one of eight West African nations he has 
visited in an effort to get the West African force to withdraw from Monrovia. 
"Their mission has failed, and a prime example is the capture of Doe by the 
Prince Johnson group right in their headquarters," Woewiyu said. 
Prince Johnson, whose men felled Doe in a battle at the headquarters of the 
West African task force in Monrovia port, declared that he will run Liberia 
until elections are held. 
Johnson controls Monrovia, but Taylor's 10,000-strong army has overrun much of 
the rest of Liberia. 
Gambian President Dawda Jawara said today that Doe's ouster may help the peace 
process in Liberia. "All the factions that were involved in the fighting, 
including other interest groups, were insisting that Doe must go," he said. 
He said the West African community will try to consult both rebel leaders about 
an interim government. He made no reference to Johnson's having declared 
himself president. 
