TORONTO FESTIVAL: THE CIVILIZED ALTERNATIVE TO CANNES 
Here during the 14th running of the Festival of Festivals, the odds in favor of 
the dedicated moviegoer have been nothing less than startling. It's enough to 
make one superstitious. 
"In Country," the gala festival opener directed by Toronto's own Norman 
Jewison, was what Canadian festival programmers dream about: a warmly received, 
moving film headed for widespread exposure and made by a Canadian director. 
So far, on a daily average since opening night, if you picked your way 
carefully, it's been possible to see four exceptional movies out of four, or 
five out of five each day. Those odds seem pretty formidable, considering the 
range of nationalities in this best-of-the-best list: France, Australia, 
Taiwan, the United States, Italy, Poland and Canada; features and 
documentaries; the known, the unknown and the triumphantly discovered. 
Already there's been a sleeper, "Roger and Me," a modest-looking documentary 
whose subject -- the death of the one-industry town of Flint, Mich., after 
General Motors closed three plants and laid off 30,000 workers -- is 
far-reaching and tragic, but with a touch so warm, so piercingly hilarious, 
that film maker Michael Moore is finding himself the object of hot pursuit from 
every small distribution company here. 
It's like the documentary version of the rush that "sex, lies, and videotape's" 
Steven Soderbergh got at the U.S. Festival in Park City, Utah, and the 
genuinely modest Moore, a former political magazine editor whose persona is 
rather like that of a more political Garrison Keillor, seems understandably 
stunned. Not even his reception at the Telluride Festival the weekend before, 
where they had to tack on three additional screenings for the overflow crowds, 
quite prepared the first-time film maker for this. 
"In Country," which opens in Los Angeles on Friday, seemed to set the tone of 
profound audience reaction: Its closing moments at the black-marble Vietnam 
Veterans Memorial reduced the majority of the opening nighters to 
uncontrollable tears. Director Jewison likes to call it a healing film, and it 
may be just that. It's the story of a spirited 17-year-old Kentucky girl who, 
in 1989, tries to understand something about her young father who died in 
Vietnam before she was born and about the war that killed him. 
Centering on one splintered family and tenderly adapted from Bobbie Ann Mason's 
semi-autobiographical novel, "In Country" is all the more interesting for its 
seeming randomness and loose-limbed structure. And although the strong presence 
and solid performance by Bruce Willis as the girl's Vietnam War vet uncle will 
probably be the film's commercial magnet, it's British actress Emily Lloyd's 
shadings and insights as the mercurial Sam that audiences are likely to come 
away talking about. 
Heavy drama is not the only thing scoring with Toronto audiences. "The Icicle 
Thief," a convulsively funny satire that manages to savage contemporary TV and 
Italian neo-realism with equal invention, is another of the early hits. 
Maurizio Nichetti, the author, director and star who plays both an earnest, 
mustachioed director and his own central character, is a real find, with a 
comic identity as ingratiating as any of Jacques Tati's memorable bumblers. 
What seems amazing to American eyes are these Toronto crowds. They're eclectic, 
they're faithful, they're informed and they are undeniably dogged. With the 
word of mouth that came with "Roger and Me," it wasn't surprising that about 
100 people were turned away from its evening screening in a small theater. 
What's amazing is to see an equally patient line stretching around a block at 
9:30 on a Saturday morning, and to learn that another hundred didn't make it 
into "The Icicle Thief" at a remote 950-seat theater away from the center hub 
of screenings. 
As one global veteran of Third World festivals commented wryly, "I never saw 
such lines, not even under socialism!" 
Subject matter doesn't daunt these crowds. Describe a film in the catalogue as 
a "quiet, gentle reflection on a strange physical and spiritual voyage through 
India," and Alain Corneau's masterly "Nocturne Indienne" starring "Betty 
Blue's" leading actor Jean-Hugues Anglade fills up before noon on a Sunday 
morning. Explain that the witty and winning documentary "The Big Bang," by 
long-absent director Jim Toback, gets its mixed bag of subjects (astronomer 
Fred Hess, basketball player Darryl Dawkins, violinist Eugene Fodor and more) 
into discussions of life, death, creation, orgasm, love and madness and you get 
a capacity audience at 9:30 on a humid Sunday morning. Amazing. 
Toronto has been sneaking up on the position it holds today. It began like many 
hopeful festivals, a slightly insular and underfunded dream in the minds of two 
men, Dusty Cohl and William Marshall. It has emerged, particularly in the last 
five years, as a premiere flagship festival: the civilized alternative to 
Cannes' hurly-burly, the place to catch up with the cream of that festival, 
with Berlin, Montreal and even the Telluride programming. Unpretentious and 
warm, its programmers and directors have forged it into a festival with an eye, 
a conscience, wit and, apparently, wherewithal. 
As if to underline that, as the new week's outpouring of films began, Ontario 
Premier David Peterson announced the merging of the 20-year-old Ontario Film 
Institute with the Festival of Festivals. What does Peterson's flowery 
bureaucratese really mean? The first steps toward creation of a cinematheque, a 
consummation devoutly to be wished . . . in any civilized film community. 
