GEARED UP FOR THURSDAY NIGHT'S FAMILY FEUD; 
TELEVISION: THE FACE-OFF BETWEEN 'SIMPSONS' AND 'COSBY' HEATS UP AS THE LATTER 
OFFERS ITS FIRST NEW EPISODE OF THE SEASON TONIGHT. 
It holds elements of an epic confrontation: "The Cosby Show," aging and hinting 
vulnerability, challenged head-on by the smart-alecky pop culture phenom, "The 
Simpsons." 
Just the thought -- can the great Cosby really be taken by a cartoon? -- seems 
impossibly brash, but then the bold stroke is the signature of the Fox network, 
which posed "The Simpsons" gambit early last summer. 
After four weeks of dueling with reruns, the real battle -- at least half of it 
-- begins at 8 tonight when NBC debuts the seventh season of "The Cosby Show," 
which spent its hiatus undergoing an overhaul. It will be three more weeks 
before "The Simpsons" is back with new episodes. 
The "Cosby" changes, as well as the challenge from Fox, were prompted by signs 
last season that the show was teetering at the top. Where viewers had once 
religiously given "Cosby" TV's highest ratings for a series, the show had lost 
its lock-grip on the No. 1 spot and started to show signs of ratings mortality, 
finishing behind ABC's "Roseanne." 
But more, the show seemed tired and a bit stale, relying on such script 
gimmicks as dream sequences, and the spreading intuition in the industry was 
that "Cosby" had reached the point that all mega-hit TV shows eventually come 
to: held at the top by viewer routine, but poised for a fall. 
Bill Cosby and the show's executive producers, Marcy Carsey and Tom Werner, 
sensed that their show needed revitalizing, and "Cosby" got a new executive 
producer to supervise production in New York, the writing staff was swept out 
and nine new writers were brought in. And a new character was added to the 
Huxtable household -- Pam, a 17-year-old relative of Clair Huxtable's with a 
disadvantaged background. 
There will also be changes in the existing characters, reflecting the fact that 
five of the new writers are women: Clair's career as a lawyer will become more 
substantial and demanding, Vanessa will start high school and Denise, a college 
drop-out, finally gets her life in order. 
"The changes are helpful," says Bernie Kukoff, the new executive producer, 
"because they add texture." 
The possibility that "Cosby" was vulnerable resonated deeply, because an 
omnipotent "Cosby" has been the foundation underlying network programming 
strategies for the last several years. Thursday night became "Cosby's" night, 
which made it NBC's night, a fact that rival programmers' conceded by filling 
their Thursdays with programs bearing low ratings expectations. Until last 
week, NBC had not lost a Thursday night since February, 1988. 
In challenging this daunting force, Fox is gambling with its most valuable 
property. "The Simpsons," a sardonic animated view of family life that is the 
antithesis of "Cosby's" warmth, is more than just a popular cartoon. It's a 
genuine phenomenon in the mass culture, inspiring Simpsons' T-shirts, Simpsons' 
lunch pails and, most pervasively, a Simpsons' attitude. 
More significantly for Fox, the show was the network's first series to hit the 
rarefied reaches of the Top 10. Fox hoped that juice would transfer to 
Thursday, where "The Simpson's" would become the linchpin of a new night of 
programming for the network. 
It was a nervy step, admired even by the competition. "I really admire Fox," 
says Marcy Carsey, co-executive producer of "Cosby." "I think it was a 
wonderful move on their part." 
The early results seem to suggest otherwise. In its Sunday night time slot, 
"The Simpsons" reached No. 4 in the Nielsen ratings. But in August, when Fox 
moved the show to Thursdays, "The Simpsons" sank as low as No. 54. It was No. 
45 last week. 
This was only a contest between reruns, a summertime prelude to the real battle 
this fall, but the sobering result has Sam Simon, co-executive producer of "The 
Simpsons," wondering about Fox's strategy. 
"The gallows humor started immediately" says Simon, describing the mood of the 
"Simpsons" crew. "We were nervous and unhappy about the move (from Sundays). 
The numbers thus far have made us even more nervous." 
Fox officials have stoutly defended the move, insisting that the ratings plunge 
is not as bad as it looks. They point to the valuable demographics of their 
show, arguing that "The Simpsons" is actually doing just fine among the younger 
audience that advertisers prize -- especially considering that the network has 
fewer affiliates than NBC and that the show is in its third cycle of 
broadcasts. 
Fox's hope is that ratings will improve when new episodes of "The Simpsons" 
begin Oct. 11. Producer Simon, meanwhile, is more anxious. 
" 'The Cosby Show' is a quality, classic show that has a franchise on Thursday 
night," he says. "When I heard that 'Cosby' was ripe for the taking, my mind 
first flashed on how many shows have tried to take on Johnny Carson, who was 
supposed to be ripe for the taking." 
Simon says that "The Simpsons" wasn't expected to topple "Cosby" right away 
when the show was moved last month, but that Fox had predicted it would fare 
better than it has. Research indicates that "The Simpsons" lost some child 
viewers and some of its female audience with the move. 
Simon's deeper fear is not simply that his show will lose the battle of 
Thursday night, but that the war against "Cosby" may quicken the life cycle of 
"The Simpsons," which went on the air as a series only last January. He has the 
sensation of watching his show's life flashing before him. 
The fast rise of "The Simpsons" as a pop culture phenomenon was fueled at least 
partly by its perception as a hot vehicle. But what perceptions bring up, 
perceptions can also bring down, and that is what worries Simon. 
"The whole 'Simpsons' phenomenon has been so compressed," he says. "We became a 
'critics favorite,' then the next week we were a 'cult hit,' the next we were a 
'ratings hit,' the next we were a 'threat to society.' And the next, we were 
'over-merchandized.' And that (cycle) usually takes two years." 
For now, Simon can only wait for his show to begin airing original episodes, 
and hope that new shows will fetch more viewers. If not, he wonders whether Fox 
will consider moving his show back to Sundays, and even if it does, whether it 
will be too late. 
"The history of television," Simon says, "is not the history of networks 
admitting they made a mistake." 
