POLICE GROUP REJECTS ANOTHER REDONDO OFFER; 
6% RAISE TOO LITTLE BECAUSE OF DANGERS, OFFICERS ARGUE AFTER COLLEAGUE IS SHOT 
IN LINE OF DUTY 
Citing the shooting of fellow officer Leonard Knott as an example of the 
dangers inherent in police work, the president of the Redondo Beach Police 
Officers Assn. told the City Council on Tuesday that the group had rejected the 
city's latest proposal in ongoing efforts to reach a contract agreement. 
Paul Wrightsman said the city has offered police officers the same salary 
increases as maintenance workers and other city employees. Such comparisons are 
off-base, he said, because of the greater risks from police work. 
Other city employees "do not face the dangers we face from day to day, from 
hour to hour, or even from call to call," Wrightsman said. 
Backed by at least two dozen off-duty officers who joined him in the audience 
in the Council Chambers, Wrightsman said many had just returned from donating 
blood for Knott, who was injured Tuesday in a shoot-out about a block from City 
Hall. Knott was in serious condition Wednesday at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center. 
"We are praying hourly for his recovery," Wrightsman told the council. 
Second Shooting This Year 
Tuesday's shooting was the second this year involving a Redondo Beach officer. 
On Aug. 31, Officer Michael Clifton was grazed during an exchange of gunfire 
after he and another officer approached a suspect apparently trying to break 
into a car on the Esplanade. 
Redondo Beach police say that, despite their high level of service, they are 
among the lowest paid in the South Bay. 
The average Redondo Beach police officer's salary is about $3,100 a month, 
Wrightsman told the council. On average, according to the association, police 
salaries are 22% higher in Hawthorne, 11% higher in El Segundo and 6% higher in 
Manhattan Beach. 
Negotiations with the city began when the police contract expired June 30. 
About 30 police officers and their families set up tents Monday morning and 
camped out on the front lawn of City Hall in a two-day demonstration protesting 
the stalled contract talks. The camp was dismantled Tuesday night. 
Wrightsman said police officers and the city were at odds over issues that 
include pay rates, emergency family sick leave and other benefits. The city has 
been offering police a 6% increase, and the association is seeking a 7% annual 
raise, according to Wrightsman. 
The 85-member association unanimously rejected the city's most recent formal 
offer last week, Wrightsman said. Tuesday's informal proposal was not submitted 
to a vote, he said. 
City Manager Tim Casey has declined to comment on details of the ongoing 
negotiations. He said in an interview that the city has reached agreements with 
the Fire Department and a group of clerical and other employees, whose 
contracts also expired June 30. Those groups signed two-year contracts with pay 
increases of 6% each year, he said. 
Under the expired police contract, in addition to regular sick leave, officers 
received up to six additional sick days for emergencies, including a death or 
birth in the family or surgery or other serious illness of a family member, 
according to both sides. 
Elimination or Liberalization 
The police association says the city is attempting to eliminate that benefit. 
Casey said the city's proposal includes broadening the definition of emergency 
sick days and consolidating four different sick-leave plans into one program. 
Wrightsman told the council Tuesday that the city's proposal was unacceptable. 
"We have nothing more to say, and you can have this proposal back," Wrightsman 
told the council, tossing a sheaf of papers onto the speaker's podium and 
leaving the Council Chambers, followed by the officers in the audience. The 
papers were the city's proposal, which had been hand-delivered to the 
association Tuesday. 
In an interview Wednesday, Casey said he was "not completely sure that the 
proposal was read seriously by the association. . . . We did attempt to make 
movement toward two considerations that were keeping us apart. (We were) 
attempting to meet them halfway on a couple of issues." 
Casey said city and police negotiators met again Wednesday. The city was 
expecting a written response to its Tuesday proposal by the end of the week, he 
said. 
