BITTER ISSUE OF WRITERS GUILD ELECTION IS STRIKE OF '88 
The grueling Hollywood writers' strike that virtually shut down TV and film 
production ended more than a year ago. But this month's campaign for the top 
posts at the Writers Guild of America, West is reviving the painful memories 
and internal dissent prompted by that five-month walkout, the longest in movie 
history. 
Winners in the current voting -- which ends Thursday -- will help chart the 
course for the guild's next round of negotiations with management in 1992. 
Those contract talks aren't expected to be any easier than previous 
negotiations in the 1980s, when increasingly intransigent producers sought and 
won rollbacks from Hollywood's creative unions. 
While Writers Guild elections typically are more spirited than other union 
contests in Hollywood, this year's race is especially rough. "It's pretty 
nasty," said incumbent president George Kirgo. Added one of his two opponents, 
Burt Prelutsky: "There seems to be hard feelings this time, a lot more dirty 
politics." 
Many of those hard feelings are a direct outgrowth of the strike. Prelutsky and 
his allies wanted the guild leadership to be tougher with management -- even if 
it meant a longer strike -- while presidential candidate L. Travis Clark was 
part of a coalition of dissident writers who threatened to cross picket lines 
to go back to work. 
Kirgo falls squarely in the middle, defending his own performance as president 
during the strike, and that of executive director Brian Walton, the London-born 
lawyer who was hired to run the guild four years ago. 
Many in the guild view the election as a referendum on Walton, who was thrown 
into the limelight as the union's chief negotiator during the strike. Kirgo 
lists the future of Walton as one of the two most important issues facing the 
guild, right alongside the union's need to cope with the increasing 
globalization of film and TV production. 
"(Walton) is one of the most brilliant people I've ever met," said Kirgo. "For 
us to lose him would be a tragedy." Kirgo's allies hint strongly that Walton 
would leave if Prelutsky -- considered the most serious challenger to the 
incumbent -- won the election. 
Walton will say only that his contract runs through 1992, and he has "no plans 
to leave the guild earlier than that." 
Walton received a standing ovation when guild members met to ratify the strike 
settlement in August, 1988, but Kirgo's two opponents for president don't think 
he deserved it. 
"Somehow, (Walton) wound up being the hero," said Prelutsky, who has won awards 
for his TV movies and has written for such shows as "MASH," "Newhart" and 
"Family Ties." "But I don't think the strike was successful." 
As a member of the guild's board, Prelutsky cast what he calls a "symbolic" 
vote against the final strike settlement, and he continues to believe that the 
guild should have extracted more gains from management. 
Prelutsky has been critical of Walton and Kirgo for other reasons too. "Brian 
is sucking up too much power and George has been an accessory to that," said 
Prelutsky. During the strike, he insisted, "the board of directors was cut out 
of the loop." 
Walton disputes Prelutsky's claims, noting that board meetings during the 
strike averaged one per week and totaled more than 80 hours. "In addition, 
several board members were on the negotiating committee and the president 
(Kirgo) was at almost all the negotiations," he said. From the opposite end of 
the spectrum, Clark also chastises the guild's handling of the strike. A critic 
of contemporary union leadership in general, Clark said the guild's leaders 
should have tried harder to avert a strike by reaching an early accommodation 
with management. "The leaders were saying, 'We're going to bring this town to 
its knees.' But this is our community, our town," Clark said. "Negotiations 
should not start 30 days before a contract ends. (Guild leaders) should be 
keeping up contact with management. A strike should be a last resort." 
Clark also contends that neither Kirgo nor Walton has been accessible to the 
guild's membership during or since the strike. "My argument is not with 
management right now," Clark said, "it's with an elitist leadership that 
doesn't give its members access." 
Walton calls the charges of elitism "ludicrous." He said that between 1985, 
when he came to the guild, and 1988, he "personally met with 2,000 or more 
writers in small groups. . . . I came to the guild deeply concerned about 
making it a member-oriented service organization, and a very democratic one." 
Kirgo dismisses the accusation that he and Walton were inaccessible during the 
strike as "a joke. . . . I was on the phone day and night. I was never absent 
from a picket." As for Prelutsky's criticism of the settlement, Kirgo notes 
that in the final settlement, the union chocked up 33 gains over management's 
first offer. 
Though critical of Prelutsky, Kirgo saves his sharpest attack for Clark, saying 
his election would be a "travesty." "He's been a member of the guild for two 
years and he thinks he's ready to be president," Kirgo said. 
Both Kirgo and Prelutsky attack Clark for his involvement last year with 21 
dissident writers who not only threatened to cross picket lines, but also asked 
the National Labor Relations Board to invalidate provisions of the union 
constitution preventing members from resigning and going back to work. 
"If he won, would he then quit the guild?" asked Prelutsky. 
"We never said we would resign," Clark responded. "We said that anyone who did 
want to (resign during a strike) should have the right to do so." The labor 
board later sided with the 21 dissidents. 
It is unclear how much support Clark, a former civil rights activist who 
co-created the TV show "Tour of Duty," can draw. Although the 21 dissidents 
attracted about 550 interested writers to an informational meeting last summer, 
many writers are still bitter about the group's threatened secession in the 
midst of a difficult strike. 
Clark has engaged in some mudslinging of his own. In a Sept. 5 letter, Clark, 
who is black, virtually accused the guild of racism when he claimed that a 
non-candidate opponent had gained privileged access to his candidate's 
statement. "I look forward to being reassured that my candidacy has not been 
trivialized in the manner to which African-American candidates have been 
accustomed in so many elections in this country," Clark wrote to the guild. 
(The non-candidate opponent, Brad Radnitz, had referred to Clark's statement in 
a written critique of Clark and others. But guild spokeswoman Cheryl Rhoden 
said the candidate statements were made available to all guild members once 
they were submitted.) 
Even the secretary-treasurer race is not immune to these rough-and-tumble 
politics. Two allies of candidate Adam Rodman purchased an advertisement in 
Daily Variety contending that the election of one of his opponents, Oliver 
Crawford, "would be highly detrimental to the best interests of the guild." 
In an interview, Rodman said the advertisement was necessary because Crawford, 
a 25-year board member and a Prelutsky ally, is well-known among guild members. 
"Ollie is just unqualified," said Rodman, a Kirgo ally. "Everyone knows his 
name and they may associate that with competence." 
"I try to stay away from these scurrilous attacks," Crawford responded. "I 
don't think they belong in this organization." 
The third candidate for secretary-treasurer, David P. Lewis, has managed to 
stay out of this particular fray. 
Despite the high emotions in this campaign, the election results will probably 
turn on a fraction of the guild's membership. According to Rhoden, no more than 
1,600 of the guild's nearly 6,500 eligible members ever vote in officer 
elections. 
The Writers Guild, insists Kirgo, came out of the strike with a reputation for 
strength and unity. The current campaign is "embarrassing," he said. "I'm just 
embarrassed by all this." 
