CHARGER CUTS INCLUDE SUPER BOWL STAR SMITH 
Two seasons ago, Timmy Smith set a Super Bowl rushing record, gaining 204 yards 
in the Redskins' 42-10 victory over Denver in San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium. 
Monday, he was one of 11 players the Chargers cut to pare their roster to the 
regular-season limit of 47. 
Two days ago, Charger running back Gary Anderson, an unsigned free agent, told 
the Chargers: Pay me or trade me. 
All right, said rookie running back Marion Butts, Anderson's apparent 
successor, when he heard that news. 
"I've been checking that out," Butts said. "He (Anderson) is asking for so much 
money. One individual can contribute to a team, true enough. But there are 
limitations (on what) one individual can do. 
"Probably the only thing that individual (Anderson) can do is play tailback. 
You put him on kickoffs or kickoff returns and he's going to say, 'Oh no, I'm 
not playing there.' He (Anderson) won't be on no special teams." 
Charger Coach Dan Henning stopped short of saying Butts was his new starting 
first- and second-down running back. So both Butts and Smith said it for him. 
"Right now I probably will be," Butts said. 
"Most likely it will be Marion Butts," Smith said. 
The Chargers open their regular season Sunday against the Raiders in the 
Coliseum. To get down to the 47-man limit Monday, they also waived tight end 
Craig Davis, wide receiver Dokie Williams, defensive end Karl Wilson, guard 
Stacy Searels, free safety Michael Brooks, cornerback Johnny Thomas, inside 
linebacker Ricky Andrews, kicker Chris Bahr, cornerback Elliot Smith and 
defensive end Tyrone Keys. They also placed center/guard Dennis McKnight on 
injured reserve. 
The Chargers expect to re-sign Bahr Wednesday because he is a vested veteran. 
That means if another team claims him during the 24-hour waiver period, Bahr 
doesn't have to join that team. He can wait another 24 hours and become a free 
agent. At that point, he can rejoin the Chargers. 
The Bahr move enables the Chargers to keep rookie quarterback Billy Joe 
Tolliver, Jim McMahon's backup, on their regular-season roster for one day 
before placing him on injured reserve. Tolliver broke his left collarbone on 
the second-to-last play of Friday's night exhibition finale against Phoenix. 
Because of a new NFL rule, if the Chargers had placed Tolliver on injured 
reserve Monday, he would have had to miss the entire season. This way, they can 
reactivate him after six weeks. 
Henning also stopped short of saying who his starting center will be against 
the Raiders now that McKnight is lost for the year. It will probably be rookie 
Courtney Hall. 
But the best answer Henning could come up with when asked if it would be Hall 
or veteran Don Macek, was a curt: "I don't know. One of 'em." 
Asked if offensive line Coach Larry Beightol knew who the starting center would 
be, Henning said: "He doesn't know either." This is the same Henning who has 
closed practices to the media this week, the first time that has happened with 
this franchise in recent memory. 
Henning continued his purge of older, unproductive players in favor of youth. 
Six drafted rookies -- defensive end Burt Grossman, Hall, Tolliver, Butts, 
swingman Dana Brinson and running back Victor Floyd -- survived the final cut. 
Floyd and Butts tied for the team lead in rushing with 93 yards each during the 
exhibition season. Brinson led the Chargers in receiving with 10 receptions for 
100 yards. 
"Guys like me and Victor (Floyd) are fresh out of college," said Butts, a power 
back at 6-1, 248 pounds. "We're young and fluid and not getting paid that much. 
But what's Gary Anderson asking? He's asking enough that you can basically pay 
all the guys from the third through the 12th round (with the same amount)." 
Smith suffered in his competition with Butts because of a bad ankle and the 
resultant inability to raise his value by playing on special teams. "I believe 
I got a fair shot," Smith said. "I just don't think I took advantage of it. In 
this game, you have to play hurt." 
Said the not-so-bashful Butts: "I believe I had a terrific preseason." 
Tolliver's college teammate at Texas Tech, rookie free agent Wayne Walker, also 
made the roster as did four other wide receivers -- Anthony Miller, Jamie 
Holland, Quinn Early and Darren Flutie. 
Floyd, Butts and veteran Tim Spencer are the only pure running backs remaining. 
But Brinson, a return specialist and receiver, also comes in as a back on 
third-down plays. And Henning said H-back Rod Bernstine has been working part 
time in practice as a running back. 
Henning also said the Chargers will probably re-sign several of the waived 
rookies and first-year players to the six-man developmental squad the league 
allows teams to keep starting today. 
Keys, who started 11 games for the Chargers last year, plans to remain in San 
Diego to rehabilitate the right knee he injured against the Cardinals. 
Meanwhile, he has agreed in principle to a salary settlement with the Chargers, 
who were then able to waive him while he was still injured. The alternative was 
the injured reserve list, which would have cost Keys the entire season. Neither 
he nor the Chargers wanted that. But Keys was bitter about the options facing 
him and the Chargers. 
"You get a guy who tests positive for drugs and he's out for four weeks," Keys 
said. "And then you get a guy who's hurt and they want to punish him for the 
whole year. That's kind of crazy." 
Charger Notes 
The loss for the season of long-snapper Dennis McKnight has the Chargers 
looking for a replacement. Andy Parker and Courtney Hall are the current 
candidates. "Yes," said Charger Coach Dan Henning, "that is a major concern." . 
. . On the most nervous day of the year, senses of humor were hard to find, but 
they did exist. "I'm going to Buffalo," said receptionist Stella Viets during a 
mid-morning break. "They're sending three secretaries in return." 
