PERSPECTIVE ON THE GULF CRISIS; 
A PAUSE TO LOOK OVER THE BRINK ...; 
IN THE FIELD, ALL IS CONFIDENT READINESS, BUT CALLING A SUMMIT SUGGESTS THAT A 
MILITARY 'QUICK FIX' IS NOT THE U.S. INTENT. 
The United States will soon be able to decide whether to initiate combat with 
Iraqi forces in the Persian Gulf. That judgment by U.S. military commanders 
increases the urgency of deciding the wisdom of such a course. It also demands 
that President Bush explain directly to the American people the stakes in the 
crisis, the options, the costs, and what he plans to do. 
Although U.S. forces have been moving toward the gulf for only a few weeks, 
American air and sea commanders in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain are ready to take 
on Iraq. They are confident of the outcome and are inclined to get it over 
with. Ground force commanders are more cautious about offensive operations at 
this stage of the buildup, but they are already sure of their ability to 
contain an Iraqi attack. 
The pace of the U.S. buildup has been stunning. Military aircraft litter the 
region's airfields, leading one officer to quip that putting any more on the 
ground would cause Saudi Arabia to sink. Last Saturday, the flagship Blue Ridge 
steamed into the harbor at Manama, Bahrain, and rigged up the complex 
electronics needed to manage a modern war. Airborne troops are deployed forward 
in the desert, masses of supplies are rolling off gangways and aircraft ramps, 
and Marine amphibious units will arrive this week. 
U.S. military deployments are thus lending credence to the Bush 
Administration's strategy. Iraq's Saddam Hussein must weigh the risks to his 
position at home as well as in Kuwait. And any nation that is halfhearted about 
supporting the economic embargo knows now that there is a riskier alternative: 
open combat. 
Regional states, usually inclined to temporize, are facing up to the 
possibility of war. Bahrain's leaders do not believe it can be avoided without 
accepting Iraq's gains. Saudi Arabia is reluctantly willing to envision 
conflict if sanctions come to be seen as having failed, and Egypt believes that 
that time is at most a few months off. No one in the region believes that 
Saddam Hussein will give up easily. 
These assessments do not account for the imponderables of war, however. U.S. 
forces may be certain to prevail at sea and in the air, but success on the 
ground would depend on a host of assumptions. These include the ability of air 
power to keep Iraq from reinforcing its tank armies, which vastly outnumber 
opposing ground forces and will do so even after the U.S. buildup is completed. 
While U.S. forces would control the air and any night fighting, Iraq has the 
advantages of mass, proximity, combat experience and adaptation to climate. 
Morale is high among U.S. soldiers, but it will be tested by the harsh 
conditions and, perhaps, by uncertainty about what the United States would be 
fighting for. In random conversations, these young Americans express awareness 
that they are not being asked to defend democracy, and for many of them, 
protecting the supply and price of oil is not a compelling argument to start a 
war. A spirit of professionalism counts now, but it may not be enough later on, 
especially if there were no quick victory but rather a punishing battle of 
attrition. 
Despite the impressive buildup of American military power, therefore, the 
visitor to this forbidding part of the world is encouraged to explore other 
ways to get Iraq to leave Kuwait -- the indispensable objective. One dimension 
bears particular consideration: the unprecedented coalition that Bush has put 
together to support that limited objective. A U.S.-initiated war would splinter 
the coalition, and with it the President's attempt to exercise U.S. leadership 
through multilateral action. 
The alternative remains economic sanctions, a policy of waiting out Saddam 
Hussein. But sanctions impose their own difficult challenge: patience. That is 
not an American strength, as reflected in fears that U.S. troops cannot be kept 
in the Arabian desert for very long simply as a deterrent force. 
President Bush may already have decided to put aside the alluring, though 
perhaps elusive, vision of a military "quick fix." This is suggested by his 
plan to meet with Mikhail Gorbachev in Helsinki next Sunday. The fact of the 
meeting would make it harder for the United States to start a war because, 
having conferred with Bush, the Soviet president would appear to be in 
collusion with subsequent U.S. actions -- an untenable position. The meeting 
announcement itself has already taken the edge off the U.S. tactic of trying to 
scare Iraq into thinking that war is imminent. 
Bush is likely to use the summit to draw the diplomatic noose more tightly 
around Saddam Hussein's neck, to reassure Gorbachev that the United States has 
no long-term ambitions in the Persian Gulf that threaten Soviet interests, to 
stress the possibilities of U.S.-Soviet cooperation beyond Europe, and to 
broaden the media's focus. He could even invite Gorbachev to send Soviet forces 
to join the gulf blockade. 
The conduct of the summit can thus be the tip-off to Bush's plans. But the 
American people should not have to look for such signals of presidential intent 
on an issue of war and peace. It is the President's duty to present his goals 
and methods clearly to the nation. Otherwise, he could find himself with a 
military buildup that cannot be sustained for long at high levels, domestic 
frustration with the lack of resolution after so much activity, and global 
economic crisis based, in part, on confusion about U.S. intentions. 
