RIFTS REPORTED AMONG RADICAL PLO LEADERS 
Radical Palestinian leader George Habash has split with his longtime Syrian 
backers and is now in Iraq, marking a major shift within the PLO triggered by 
the Persian Gulf crisis, informed sources reported Sunday. 
They also reported that another radical, Nayef Hawatmeh, is struggling to 
retain control of his group, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine, after a mutiny sparked by his support for Syria's anti-Iraq stand in 
the month-old crisis. 
The developments underlined the shock waves striking within the Palestine 
Liberation Organization caused by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2. 
PLO chief Yasser Arafat's support for Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, qualified 
by a condemnation of the occupation of the gulf kingdom, has alienated the 
organization from the Arab mainstream that has opposed Hussein's action. 
That has cut Arafat off from the financial support of Saudi Arabia and other 
pro-Western gulf states, while at the same time firing up the PLO's radicals, 
like Habash and Hawatmeh. 
They reluctantly went along with Arafat's 1988 peace initiative, in which he 
renounced terrorism and recognized Israel. They have long argued that only 
military struggle will achieve a Palestinian homeland. 
Saddam Hussein has demanded an end to the Israeli occupation of the West Bank 
and Gaza Strip in any settlement of the gulf crisis. 
Habash, 64, heads the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the 
second-largest faction in the PLO after Arafat's Fatah movement. 
His new alliance with Hussein marks an increasing tilt by PLO radicals toward 
Baghdad amid growing fears that Palestinian militants and other Arab groups 
will launch terrorist attacks on U.S., Western and Arab targets to support 
Iraq. 
Hawatmeh, 54, has said that he cannot back the Iraqis, who he says have done to 
Kuwait what the Israelis did to Palestine. But the Democratic Front's deputy 
secretary general, Yasser Abed-Rabbo, flew to Baghdad with Arafat last week, 
cementing the split from Hawatmeh's leadership. 
Hussein already harbors the radical Palestine Liberation Front, a PLO faction 
led by Mohammed Abbas, known as Abul Abbas. That group hijacked the Italian 
cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985 and was behind an abortive seaborne raid on 
Israel last May. 
That operation led President Bush to suspend an 18-month dialogue with the PLO. 
The official Iraqi News Agency said in a terse dispatch that Hussein met with 
Habash on Sunday on the crisis. 
