AN UGLY SAGA OF EVERYWOMAN; 
NOW YOU KNOW BY KITTY DUKAKIS, WITH JANE SCOVELL (SIMON &amp; SCHUSTER: $19.95; 
315 PP., ILLUSTRATED; 0-671-68458-2) 
The 1988 presidential campaign offered one picture of Michael and Kitty 
Dukakis. They were a perfect American couple, with successful children, a 
lovely but modest suburban home and an almost unbelievably strong marriage. One 
reporter, sneaking through the bushes outside their house, discovered only the 
Dukakises dancing together in their living room. 
Kitty Dukakis' memoir, "Now You Know," tells another story, not about her 
marriage to the governor of Massachusetts but about her own internal turmoil. 
Although parts of this story emerged during the campaign and have been reported 
since then, much that is new, surprising and disturbing emerges in this often 
brutally frank first-person account. 
Behind the smiling faces of this would-be First Family lies a story of 
addiction and depression, a long-held and only partially successful battle with 
the demons of self-doubt and hidden substance abuse. If the Kitty Dukakis we 
saw on television in 1987 and 1988 represented Everywoman, then the Kitty 
Dukakis of "Now You Know" represents an equally familiar, if often troubling, 
modern figure: the woman who appears to have everything but is tortuously 
convinced that she has nothing. 
Katharine Dickson Dukakis was addicted to amphetamines for 26 years. She 
entered treatment in 1982 and announced herself cured in the midst of the 1988 
campaign. In the wake of that same disastrous campaign, she began a rapid 
descent into alcoholism. She entered treatment again, and emerged taking 
Prozac, an anti-depressant drug. By the end of 1989, she was no longer taking 
Prozac but had started drinking again. 
One evening last November, when she was depressed and desperate for a drink, 
Kitty Dukakis consumed nearly enough rubbing alcohol to kill herself -- 
although she insists that suicide was never her intention. After more 
treatment, she returned home. Within weeks she had swallowed large amounts of 
Tylenol with codeine and enough assorted household products -- including 
vanilla extract, men's after-shave, nail-polish remover and hair spray -- plus 
alcohol, to require treatment once more. Dukakis now declares herself a 
recovering alcoholic, drug addict and depressive; she takes Lithium to control 
her dark moments, and puckishly hopes for the best. 
Substance abuse is not the only secret in Kitty Dukakis' past. She also has a 
tangled family history. Her mother was the product of an illicit tenement union 
between two teen-agers, one Irish and one Jewish. At the insistence of both 
sets of parents, and with the help of esteemed Rabbi Stephen Wise, Kitty 
Dukakis' mother was adopted by a wealthy German-Jewish family, while her own 
mother served (covertly) as her nursemaid for the first three years of her 
life. The wealthy Goldbergs sent Dukakis' mother to school in Europe at age 10; 
they divorced shortly thereafter. 
However, "Now You Know" is not merely an airing of Kitty Dukakis' dirty 
laundry. This is because the image projected in 1988 was not all wrong; the 
memoir is as faithful to the clean, and often quite uninteresting, details of 
her mid-century, middle-class existence as it is to the gritty, interesting 
ones. The reader learns, for example, that with the exception of a short-lived 
first marriage, Kitty Dukakis has lived in the elite, largely Jewish Boston 
suburb of Brookline for the entirety of her adult life. 
The town, the era and her status-conscious mother helped make Kitty a popular 
girl, a "May Queen" at Penn State and a bride before her 20th birthday. Her 
mother taught Kitty that she could never be too rich or too thin, and by the 
time she met Michael Dukakis in 1961, she had developed a steady habit of 
taking amphetamine diet pills. 
By 1988, the threads of Kitty Dukakis' existence had nearly unraveled: Her 
children all were working or in college; Michael was a household name, and his 
wife had no more independent power than she had had at the Penn State 
Homecoming three decades earlier. The head-rush of the presidential campaign 
thrust Kitty Dukakis into the limelight even more precipitously than it did her 
husband. She liked it there. Important people asked her questions, and they 
left the camera running while she answered. 
It could not last. By the fall of 1988, it was increasingly clear that Michael 
Dukakis would lose the election. No one will pretend that losing a chance at 
the presidency of the United States is easy for the man who does it, but at 
least he had a job to come home to. As she started her problem-drinking, Kitty 
Dukakis must have known she was on her way back to Brookline and solitude. Her 
worst fears were confirmed in November: 
"To say the rug was pulled out from under me when Michael was defeated would be 
far too feeble a description; the world was pulled out from under me, a world 
of constant activity, motion, energy -- everything I thrive on. I felt as 
though I had been squashed in a giant compactor; all the breath went out of me. 
. . . Two mornings after the election, he was working in his office at the 
State House while I was drinking in our bedroom on Perry Street." 
Her fear and dissatisfaction were compounded by a sense of guilt. At one of her 
many treatment centers, she remembers, "I felt guilty, too, surrounded as I was 
by others whose histories were far more severe than mine. I did not come from a 
dysfunctional family. I have a loving husband, wonderful kids, financial 
security and a position of prominence. I had everything, and I had nothing." 
Kitty Dukakis never blames her husband for any of her troubles; but neither, in 
her presentation, does he seem to have been much help. Perhaps this is because 
Kitty Dukakis is so determined -- in a way every "12-step" program would 
approve -- to take full responsibility for her own actions. But it is possible 
to take this philosophy too far. In the dynamics of addiction, one person is 
rarely solely responsible. Kitty Dukakis says this obliquely when she writes 
about admitting her alcoholism: 
"I remember (a relative) saying, 'Alcoholism is a family disease.' 
"Michael reacted violently: 'I don't care what kind of disease it is, my wife 
needs help.' " 
Feeling sorry for Kitty Dukakis is different from excusing her political 
remembrances, which are sprinkled liberally throughout the text. In her take on 
an afternoon with British royalty, for example, most of which she spent with 
Prince Philip, Kitty Dukakis sounds like a candidate for the Miss America 
crown: "What a charming man," she assesses. "What an exciting day!" Similarly, 
in evaluating vice presidential nominee Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, Dukakis positively 
gushes. And in analyzing her husband's candidacy, Dukakis offers little that is 
new: 
"Why did my husband lose the election? My personal belief is that Michael 
Dukakis was not identified strongly enough in terms of any of his attributes 
before the other party began to attack him. . . . He doesn't show his emotions 
easily, but, dammit, he has them. I wouldn't be married to him if he didn't! . 
. . In politics, honor is quaint. If you want to rise to the top, it seems you 
have to stoop a bit first." 
Believing that his "honor" and Republican dirty tricks were all that stood 
between Michael Dukakis and the presidency may make things easier at home, but 
it won't help the Democrats win elections. 
They might come closer to winning if they figure out what Jesse Jackson had in 
1988 that the official candidate so desperately lacked. Kitty Dukakis' 
gossiping jibes at Jackson are the worst part of the book, not least because 
they lack originality. (The second-worst part is her repeated effort to "dress 
up" her prose with sophomoric references to Greek mythology and morsels of 
Great Western Literature.) In remembering the first Jackson speech she 
attended, Kitty Dukakis offers the familiar critique: 
"As often happens with Jesse Jackson, there weren't many specific proposals for 
change, but that didn't seem to bother his listeners. . . . . That first time I 
heard Jesse Jackson in person, all stories of his 'charisma' were borne out. . 
. . Nonetheless, persuasive rhetoric aside, I had real reservations about Jesse 
Jackson's qualifications to be President of the United States. He was a 
preacher who had never held an elective office. . . . Beyond the sound and the 
fury, his speeches lacked significance." 
Kitty Dukakis has written an occasionally eye-opening memoir of a largely 
straitened life. Her message may ring true for many readers, those of us who 
were never nominated for "May Queen" as well as those who were, those who 
grimace at our morning coffee consumption and midnight binges, as well as those 
with graver problems of substance abuse. Sharing another woman's experiences 
may not cure us -- but, at any rate, now we know. 
