ADVISER WENT AGAINST OWN ADVICE -- AND LOST; 
INVESTMENT: STOCK OPTIONS TRADER JAMES DOUGLAS DONAHUE ALWAYS HEDGED HIS BETS. 
THEN A GAMBLE BACKFIRED AND HE LOST MORE THAN $100 MILLION FOR INVESTORS. 
Financial adviser James Douglas Donahue had the golden touch -- and the track 
record to prove it. 
For about a decade, he made hundreds of clients happy by grabbing double-digit 
returns through aggressive trading of stock options, all the while promising to 
always hedge his bets. 
That's why many of his clients were shocked to learn last month that Donahue 
had lost more than $100 million belonging to 1,500 investors in a limited 
partnership run by his company, Hedged Investments Associates Inc. He had 
gambled big on UAL Inc. stock. 
Equally as surprising was the way they received that news: through an 18-minute 
videotape, broadcast during a meeting called by Donahue at a Denver hotel. 
Donahue himself was nowhere to be found. 
"Words aren't adequate to express my regret and sorrow over the impact I've had 
on your lives," Donahue said in a choked, breaking voice. "I have affected your 
lives and my life. Many of you have been my friends for 20 years and I feel 
terrible remorse for the things I've done to you." 
The investors ranged from the founders of Gates Rubber Co. and Samsonite Co., 
both based in Denver, to retirees who entrusted Donahue with their life 
savings. 
"I suppose I should be just as angry as angry can be," said Bert Johnson, a 
58-year-old insurance broker from Evergreen, Colo. "But I'm not at the point 
where I'm bitter as much as I'm just frustrated. We don't know what went on. My 
guess is that he broke his own rules." 
Johnson declined to say how much he lost. 
As the investors try to uncover just out how Donahue lost their money, 
Hedged-Investments, based in Englewood, has filed for Chapter 7 liquidation 
proceedings in U.S. Bankruptcy Court, claiming about $2 million of the $100 
million remains. 
In addition, Hedged-Investments' subsidiary, Aeroturbine Energy Corp. in 
California, has filed a petition for Chapter 11 reorganization. 
Donahue and his firm already have been named in at least four lawsuits alleging 
he was negligent, breached his fiduciary responsibility and failed to allow 
access to records. 
Attorneys and investors agree it could take more than a year just to sort out 
the complex case. 
Donahue was known as an aggressive trader in stock options, which are contracts 
to buy or sell stocks for a specified price in the future. Aides say Donahue 
lived by two rules: Never take an excessive position in any one stock and 
always hedge, a technique to ensure that potential losses are minimized. 
"The thing that attracted not only me, but obviously bigger hitters than I was, 
was the concept that this is a hedged-fund operation," client Johnson said. 
"You cover all your options so that it doesn't matter if the stock market goes 
up and down. You have yourself covered in both directions. That was the major 
selling point." 
In the past several months, Donahue gambled that the stock of UAL, United 
Airlines' parent, would rise. But a failed employee buyout plan, coupled with 
the drop in stock prices after Iraq invaded Kuwait, caught him by surprise. 
He wasn't able to cover his position quickly enough, he has told investors. 
"He basically acknowledged he broke the promise that he'd always hedge," said 
Chesley Culp III, a Denver attorney representing several small investors. "It's 
intentional misrepresentation." 
Attorney Harry Hobson, whose client, Union Texas Petroleum Corp.'s pension 
fund, lost an estimated $8 million, said there was no inkling that the firm was 
in trouble. The fund invested because "it appeared at the time, I think, that 
he had a good earnings record," he said. 
Robert Dill, Donahue's attorney, said investors were aware of the risk 
involved. Nonetheless, he said Donahue was "very depressed and upset and 
concerned about the effect this had on many friends and associates." 
Donahue received a bachelor's degree in business from the University of Denver 
in 1959 and earned a master's degree in mathematics from Stanford University 
the following year. 
In July 1960, he joined the research department of Martin Marietta Corp. in 
Denver as a statistician and computer systems analyst. He became part owner in 
Falcon Research Development Co. in May 1966, then joined the staff of Science 
Applications Inc., a specialist in statistical and computer research, in 1974. 
Intrigued by the stock options trading industry, Donahue developed and refined 
his own theory, which he detailed in a newsletter called Options Strategies 
that was published from 1974 to 1976. 
In 1977, Donahue opened Hedged-Investments, using his computer software program 
to assess stock risks. 
He kept the number of limited partners in each venture to fewer than 100 to 
avoid registering with the Securities and Exchange Commission. But some of the 
partners, like company retirement funds, were composed of 100 or more 
investors. 
Donahue's concept attracted investors of all financial backgrounds, from 
retirees to Denver business leaders and pension retirement funds, including 
Weyerhaeuser Co. of Tacoma, Wash., which lost $35 million in 
Hedged-Investments. 
As the years passed, Donahue reportedly earned 15% to 20% annually for his 
clients. 
"He really was very impressive from the standing of seeming to know what he was 
doing," said Johnson, who described Donahue as friendly and intelligent. "It's 
no secret that he was showing, for approximately 10 years, fantastic returns on 
money that people were investing with him." 
Some investors said they were skeptical about the UAL-blamed losses, noting 
that Donahue never provided them with the results of a company audit. And as of 
June 30, Hedged-Investments had informed clients that their investments still 
showed an increase, several have said. 
Attorney Harvey Sender, who has been appointed trustee of the Chapter 7 
liquidation process, said the case is complex because of the amount of money 
and documentation involved. 
Since the announcement was made late last month, Union Texas, Weyerhaeuser, 
Paradigm Partners Inc. of Northbrook, Ill., H&amp;W Hedge Fund of California 
and Denver-based Debt Investment Inc. have sued Donahue, Hedged-Investments or 
Aeroturbine to recoup losses. 
Among the investors listed in documents filed in bankruptcy court are: Charles 
Gates, owner of Gates Rubber; several members of the Shwayder family, former 
owners of Samsonite; Dianne Ingels, a former director of the failed Silverado 
Banking, Savings and Loan, and Laurence DeMuth Jr., secretary and general 
counsel of U S West Inc. 
Johnson said he knows several retirees who lost so much they will be forced to 
return to work. But he notes, Donahue, too, is suffering. 
"He's a broken man himself. When all this stuff shakes out, he'll lose 
everything he had," Johnson said. "He might keep his house, but his reputation 
is gone." 
