BRAZIL COMPUTER SALE SPLITS U.S. OFFICIALS; 
TECHNOLOGY: PROCESSOR CAN BE USED TO MAKE BALLISTIC AND NUCLEAR WEAPONS. 
A split has developed within the Bush Administration over whether to allow IBM 
to sell Brazil supercomputer equipment that some experts contend could help 
Iraq improve its missile technology and develop nuclear weapons, according to 
government officials. 
The debate over the pending export is expected to go to the National Security 
Council at the White House next week. And Congress is about to jump into the 
fray with the introduction of Senate legislation to block the sale. 
The equipment involved is called a vector processor, which would upgrade an 
existing IBM computer to supercomputer status at Embraer, the Brazilian 
aircraft manufacturer. Supercomputers are among the most powerful tools 
available for designing ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons. 
An application to export a second supercomputer to the University of Sao Paulo 
was recently returned to IBM by the Commerce Department for additional 
information, an IBM spokesman said. 
Concerns have been raised about both sales because Brazil has been helping Iraq 
improve its missile capabilities and because of its past arms sales to Baghdad. 
A congressional background paper said there is "strong evidence" that 
information has been exchanged between Embraer personnel and Brazilian weapons 
experts in Iraq. 
A team of 23 Brazilian arms experts remains in Iraq, along with other foreign 
engineers working on missile projects, the Wall Street Journal reported last 
week. The Brazilian government has disclaimed any knowledge of the activities 
of the engineers. 
The proposed shipment of the supercomputer equipment to Brazil is part of a 
growing debate over the transfer of technology with both commercial and 
military uses to countries aiding Iraq. 
"At this time, when the threat of a military confrontation with Iraq is a real 
possibility, sales of this nature to Brazil are contrary to the national 
interest in the short and long run," said Rep. Lawrence J. Smith (D-Fla.) in a 
letter he and 24 others in the House Foreign Affairs Committee sent to Bush 
Administration officials Friday. 
Sen. Bob Kasten (R-Wis.) plans to introduce an amendment that would bar the 
sale of supercomputers and related technology to any country involved in aiding 
Iraq in development of chemical weapons, ballistic missiles or nuclear weapons. 
In July the Administration blocked a U.S. firm's sale of industrial furnaces to 
Iraq because of worries that they could be used on nuclear weapons projects. 
The Commerce Department had approved the sale a year earlier. 
Last week, however, the State Department approved the export of rocket 
components to Brazil despite the concerns of some experts that they could be 
used to aid Iraq. 
In the case of the IBM supercomputer equipment, the Commerce and State 
departments support the sale to Brazil, while the Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency and Department of Energy are said to oppose the deal. 
"Something is amiss at the Commerce Department," Kasten said. "We need to 
tighten domestic control on the sale of American supercomputers and other high 
technology to countries such as Brazil, who turn around and transfer it to 
madmen like (Iraqi President Saddam) Hussein." 
