MARKETS / JOHN CRUDELE: OBSTACLES DOG STOCKS AS TRADING SEASON BEGINS 
When Albert E. Sindlinger conducted his survey of American households early 
this month, only 3.1% of the people who already owned stock said they planned 
to buy more in the near future. 
That figure, while extremely low, was a slight improvement over just one month 
earlier. Sindlinger, who has been conducting his survey daily for 36 years, 
says only 2.2% of the stockholders in early August said they would buy more 
shares. That was an all-time low. 
"The public is as disillusioned about the stock market now as they were in 
1930," says Sindlinger. 
The public's attitude is just one of the many hurdles the stock market faces as 
it enters the fall -- which, to Wall Street's mind, is the equivalent of 
beginning a new year. As traders came back from Labor Day and summer vacation 
last week, they faced a major psychological barrier: In two of the past three 
years, the stock market has celebrated the arrival of fall by -- what else? -- 
falling. 
And factors like the economy and the outlook for inflation are much bleaker 
this year than during the depressing falls of 1987 or 1989. 
Those facts haven't gone unnoticed by foreigners, who seem to have pulled away 
from U.S. financial markets. They've been lured away, the experts say, by 
higher interest rates and greater security overseas, and pushed away by the 
rapid deterioration in the value of the dollar. 
Even professional investors and money managers, while publicly extolling the 
stock market's virtues, appear to be turning as cautious as small investors 
after this summer's volatility in stock prices. 
"Wall Street pros are punch-drunk," says William LeFevre, chief market 
strategist for Advest Corp. "They were euphoric in July but became depressed 
after the Middle East situation resulted in higher oil prices and a further 
erosion of the domestic economy." 
Many experts would argue that the economy was failing even before Iraq invaded 
Kuwait and put the world over an oil barrel. 
Argus Research Corp. had already been predicting that the nation's gross 
national product would contract in the final quarter of 1990. Now it believes 
that the economy will shrink by a bigger amount -- 1.5%. 
Argus also is predicting that the economic contraction will be accompanied by 
uncomfortably high inflation and (for a time) rising interest rates. 
Even if the Federal Reserve Board reduces interest rates, experts fear that 
there is no way to force reluctant banks to give the economy a nudge by 
granting loans. 
As one investment banker said last week, the only way to get banks back into 
the business of lending would be to grant the entire industry a moratorium on 
government supervision of their loan quality. 
Since that isn't going to happen, experts say, a reduction in short-term 
interest rates by the Fed (which is now widely expected) might have little 
effect on business. Even worse, once the Fed reduces interest rates -- its most 
effective weapon -- Wall Street won't have anything good to anticipate. 
On top of all that, if the rate cut doesn't help the economy, financial markets 
could become more depressed than they are now. 
John Williams, a private economist, says it typically takes six months for 
lower interest rates to start pumping life into the economy. A full percentage 
point reduction in interest rates will generate an improvement of only 4% in 
corporate profits, he contends. 
Since many experts believe that company earnings are going to be significantly 
lower in the third and fourth quarters, a 4% improvement might go virtually 
unnoticed by the stock market. The Fed could have fired its silver bullet for 
no reason. 
Under normal circumstances, Wall Street would have expected a respite between 
now and mid-October, when corporate profits begin to be released. But the 
unstable situation in the Middle East may have robbed financial markets of that 
breathing space. 
Investors who might have bought stocks now with the idea of unloading them 
before the arrival of third-quarter profit reports have to worry every minute 
these days about bad news from the Middle East. Some professional traders are 
unloading all their stock just before President Bush or Iraq's Saddam Hussein 
appears on television. They have the attitude that you never know when someone 
is going to say the wrong thing. 
Other experts do see a candle at the end of the economic tunnel, however. 
H. Erich Heinemann, chief economist at Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Co., says 
private demand for credit is "falling like a rock" as the economy slows. He 
thinks this will offset the federal government's insatiable appetite for 
borrowing, preventing interest rates from rising. 
While Heinemann thinks there could be additional pressure on corporate profits 
short term, eventually he believes that declining interest rates will boost 
profits and stock prices. 
But for now, it's Happy New Year -- and keep your head down. 
Time Warner May Sell Part of Cable-TV Unit 
Ever since the Time Inc. merger with Warner Communications was panned by 
investors and the new Time Warner stock was driven off a cliff, Wall Street has 
been wondering what the entertainment firm would do to cure itself. 
Now, according to Wall Street sources, Time Warner Inc. may be thinking of 
revitalizing its shares by selling a piece of one of its biggest assets, its 
cable television business. 
Sources say Time Warner has already approached some would-be buyers, with 
little success. Speculation is that Time will combine its 82%-owned American TV 
&amp; Communications cable operation with Warner Cable. It would then sell off 
a piece of the combined entity to a third party, or (less likely) to the 
public. Or it could settle for a joint venture with another cable operator. 
A Wall Street source said such a move could be "a start." But he wouldn't 
confirm that talks had actually occurred. 
Meanwhile, Time Warner officials met recently with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. -- and 
it also left the impression there that a restructuring of the cable operation 
was in the works. "Management indicated that it is aware of investor concerns 
about high leverage, a situation that the Time and Warner managements would 
both like to alleviate," Oppenheimer analyst Dennis McAlpine said of the 
meeting. 
McAlpine said, however, that Time Warner management added that it would like to 
see passage of an acceptable cable TV re-regulation bill so it can "compare its 
options." 
The Oppenheimer analyst says he took this to mean that the company was 
considering a restructuring of its cable operations -- but would wait for the 
regulatory air to clear first. 
Despite recent rumors, McAlpine said Time Warner indicated that it would not 
sell a piece of its American magazine operations, or attempt to find a partner 
for its record operations. 
Time Warner has nearly $11 billion in debt as a result of the combination of 
the two companies. If completely sold, the cable TV operations could be worth 
$10 billion. 
Unions May Be Scaring Would-Be UAL Bidders 
Why isn't anyone else interested in owning United Airlines? 
UAL is a very profitable company; it flies to some of the most exotic foreign 
cities. Yet in all the months that the airline's unions have been trying to put 
together a buyout of its parent, UAL Inc., no other bidders have stepped 
forward. 
There may be a very simple explanation. Wall Street sources close to the UAL 
situation say the unions have privately threatened to strike anybody who tries 
to buy the company. The unions apparently want no offers that compete with 
theirs. 
The threat, says the source, may have caused other potential bidders to back 
off. After all, he said, what acquirer in his right mind would buy a company 
that immediately would be struck? And what bank would lend money to someone 
who's buying a firm that would likely be the target of a strike? 
So, mysteriously -- or so it seemed until now -- nobody else made a bid for UAL 
over these many months. It seems even more mysterious, given the fact that 
UAL's recent price is enormously below its peak. 
In early August, UAL's unions were given two additional months to come up with 
the $4 billion in financing they need to buy the airline. The unions and their 
advisers are now said to be trying to restructure their $200-a-share offer. 
Coniston Partners, UAL's biggest shareholder, is also said to be ready to wage 
a proxy solicitation if the unions' bid fails and UAL's board fails to come up 
with a way to boost the price of the stock. 
The big question is: What if the unions don't like what the board comes up 
with? Is there a strike in UAL's future? 
No Bad-News Bears in Baseball Card Outlook 
Smith Barney &amp; Co. thinks demographics are just right for a boom in the 
baseball card business. 
Ronald Morrow, an analyst at Smith Barney, told clients that there will be 17.3 
million boys between 6 and 14 by the year 2000. That's a 7.2% increase. 
"With the numbers of 6- to 14-year-olds now projected to accelerate, the 
outlook for sports card sales is even getting better," Morrow says. 
Boys between these ages are the biggest customers of the three major baseball 
card makers -- Topps Co., Fleer Corp. and Leaf Inc.'s Donruss division. 
In 1970, there were 18.86 million boys between 6 and 14. But that group 
dwindled to 16.2 million in 1980 and rebounded only to 16.4 million in 1990. 
Even so, baseball card sales did well in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Morrow estimates that $345 million worth of baseball cards were sold last year, 
up 35% from 1988. And he predicts that the business will expand a healthy 15% a 
year the next several years. 
