2ND GENERIC DRUG-SWITCHING CASE REPORTED 
Federal officials are investigating Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. for possible fraud 
in connection with the approval of a generic version of the brand-name 
anti-depressant drug Mellaril. 
Knowledgeable officials said Thursday that both the Food and Drug 
Administration and the House Energy and Commerce oversight subcommittee are 
looking into charges that Bolar fraudulently submitted the brand-name drug 
instead of the generic version to a testing laboratory -- the second such 
incident reported. 
Error Reportedly Corrected 
Federal officials said that the mistake was corrected at the time and that 
Bolar's generic drug ultimately was tested and approved. The generic drug now 
on the market, of the chemical thioridazine, is identical to Mellaril and is 
safe and effective, they said. 
"The stuff that's being marketed is the real thing," FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit 
said. 
Executives of Bolar, which is in Copiague, N. Y., could not be reached for 
comment. 
This is the second time this week that Bolar, one of the nation's largest 
manufacturers of generic drugs, has become embroiled in the broadening federal 
investigation of charges that some generics have been improperly tested and 
marketed. 
The FDA announced Monday that it will withdraw approval of Bolar's generic 
equivalent of Dyazide, a leading blood pressure drug. 
The investigation of Bolar's generic equivalent of Mellaril is based on a 1982 
letter in which Pharmakinetics Laboratories Inc. of Baltimore told Bolar that 
it believed Bolar had submitted Mellaril tablets instead of its own generic 
equivalent. 
Determining Equivalency 
It was Pharmakinetics' job to determine whether Bolar's generic was chemically 
equivalent to Mellaril, which is manufactured by Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corp. 
Pharmakinetics refused to comment specifically on its testing of Bolar's 
generic drug. But it said in a statement: 
"Seven years ago, in 1982, Pharmakinetics refused to conduct bio-equivalency 
studies on tablets supplied to the company by a pharmaceutical manufacturer. 
This refusal was based on the Pharmakinetics' personnel visual inspection of 
four batches of test tablets, which caused then-company officials to question 
the true identify of the product." 
After it communicated its suspicions to the manufacturer, Pharmakinetics said, 
the manufacturer supplied tablets that appeared to be "legitimate." Testing 
proceeded, and the FDA ultimately approved the generic drug for marketing. 
Probe Uncovered Letter 
Nesbit said that the FDA discovered Pharmakinetics' 1982 letter to Bolar as 
part of its investigation of alleged fraud and bribery in the federal approval 
process for low-cost generic drugs. 
The other case of apparent drug-switching that has come to light in the current 
investigation involved Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield, N. J. It has 
voluntarily withdrawn its generic version of Dyazide after admitting that it 
had substituted samples of the brand-name drug for its own in the approval 
process. 
