LIVES, RESEARCH HINGE ON LIMITING NEW AIDS DRUG; 
FREE ACCESS ONLY FOR THE DESPERATELY ILL 
A landmark medical experiment is about to begin: A new, unproven drug will be 
provided to thousands of people who desperately need it while research is 
conducted on its safety and effectiveness. 
This "parallel track" of research and simultaneous free drug distribution of 
the drug is the result of immense pressure from AIDS activists to make 
experimental drugs available as early as possible. The program will, however, 
still have an important limit, one that must be accepted for the "parallel 
track" experiment to work: The drug will be made available only to those who 
definitely need it, and not to all those who might want it. 
The experimental drug, DDI, will be made available to people who are unable to 
benefit from the only approved AIDS anti-virus drug, AZT. The first people to 
receive DDI will be those with AIDS or AIDS-related symptoms who get too sick 
from AZT to tolerate it. Around the same time, it is expected that the new drug 
will also be given to people who are taking AZT but are still getting sick, as 
shown by opportunistic infections, progressive weight loss, severe fatigue and 
so on. 
There will be thousands of others who are likely to want DDI -- people who have 
decided that AZT is too toxic to take without trying it, and those who are 
doing well on AZT but mistakenly believe that DDI has been proven to be a 
superior drug. These people will not be able to get DDI, at least until more 
research is completed. 
This decision to limit an experimental drug to those who need it is a wise and 
important one. DDI has been tested on fewer than 100 people. These studies 
suggest that over a short term, DDI is less toxic than AZT. However, we do not 
have adequate information about long-term side effects. 
More important, there is no solid information about whether DDI is as effective 
as, or more or less effective than, AZT. Indeed, limited information from the 
manufacturer suggests it may be somewhat less effective. 
But the fundamental question is: Why shouldn't people who want the drug be 
allowed to have it? Shouldn't people with a life-threatening illness be given 
any hope they want? 
There is no doubt that people who are sick and cannot tolerate AZT, or are 
getting sick in spite of AZT, need DDI as their only current hope. But for the 
others, a proven alternative is available. AZT does prolong life and keep many 
people productive, and at the lower doses now advised, its toxicity appears 
much less than before. 
Still, the question persists: Why shouldn't people be allowed to choose? The 
answer is both practical and philosophical. 
Realistically, if an experimental drug were available to anyone who wanted it, 
there would be little incentive for people to enter research studies, and 
without studies proving a drug safe and effective, it could not be approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration and then marketed. Instead, the drug company 
would have to provide the drug free to thousands of people. (An FDA physician 
estimates that it costs up to $5,000 per patient per year to provide a drug for 
free -- and that is just the administrative cost; it does not include the cost 
of the drug itself.) Obviously, if a drug can not be marketed, there will be no 
incentive for the company to continue its free distribution. 
Indeed, if that were to happen to DDI, the prototype of the parallel-track 
experiment, and the drug were not marketed, it is highly probable that other 
drug companies would be discouraged from undertaking research on drugs for AIDS 
and other life-threatening diseases. That decision would be a disaster for 
millions of Americans. 
Finally, how can people decide that DDI is a better choice for them than AZT? 
At this point, the answer is they cannot decide -- we simply do not know. That 
is why research is so critical. That is how we learned that AZT works, and that 
aerosolized pentamidine prevents the most common pneumonia seen in AIDS. It is 
also how we learned about two previously highly touted drugs -- suramin was too 
toxic and dextran sulfate was not absorbed, so it was of no benefit. But if all 
these and other "promising" drugs were made widely available, no one would have 
adequate information to make an intelligent choice about what drug or drugs to 
take. 
Society often assumes a responsibility for protecting people from potentially 
dangerous situations. Thus we tolerate seat-belt laws, speed limits and the 
requirement that drugs be proven safe and effective before they are made widely 
available. That is acceptable and wise. 
To completely do away with regulations that protect people from unproven drugs 
would lead to chaos and many unnecessary deaths. Even if the right to choose 
were granted, people would not have sufficient information to make an 
intelligent choice among untested drugs. So research and appropriate 
regulations must be protected. 
For people with no option -- people for whom AZT cannot do what it has done and 
is doing for others -- DDI must be made immediately available. For the others, 
AZT should be taken until we know more about DDI. And AIDS activists should be 
proud of the changes they have wrought. 
