MOVABLE FEASTS: CLASSIC CREOLE FARE AT HAROLD AND BELLE'S 
The Cajun craze may have fizzled, but why should Creole restaurants suffer? 
Harold and Belle's, a 20-year old restaurant in the Crenshaw district, features 
Louisiana-bred food to eat-in or take-out . . . and no blackened you-know-what. 
Partners Harold LeGaux and Al Honore are both descended from that scrumptious 
part of the world where French, Spanish, Portuguese and African recipes 
combined with indigenous ingredients (oysters, catfish, clams, shrimp) to form 
a New World cuisine, i.e. jambalaya, Po-boy sandwiches and gumbo. 
There are probably as many varieties of gumbo as there are cooks. Harold and 
Belle's version ($6.95 for a small portion, $11.95 for a large) uses file 
powder, with its earthy flavor from ground sassafras leaves, as a thickener and 
heaps of shrimp, crab, chicken, andouille and ham. The broth is complex and 
beautiful and meant to be lavishly spooned over the accompanying rice, or 
dunked with the huge slab of crisp French bread. The nubby sausage is 
particularly pleasing; only the woody chicken is a let-down. 
Po-boy sandwiches may have been created as a cheap way to feed hungry working 
men, but anyone eating Harold and Belle's catfish Po-boy ($7.75 including 
potato salad or steak fries) is one lucky guy. What a sandwich: a sweet 
white-fleshed catfish filet perfectly fried and mounded on a crusty foundation 
of French bread. It's all crunchy, juicy succulence. The soft-shell crab 
Po-boy's another contender for the sandwich hall of fame. It's dipped in a thin 
slip of cornmeal batter, fried up just right and then bathed in a fine ooze of 
mayonnaise. (Served only in season and market-priced, it's now $8.25.) 
I had several classic jambalayas earlier this year in New Orleans and found 
Harold and Belle's one-dish rice/chicken/sausage/ham/shrimp specialty 
plentiful, yet less distinctive than jambalaya from the source. Here, it's just 
too mild, just too well-blended. Order jambalaya as a dinner though ($11.95) 
and you get unusually sweet corn on the cob and a choice of a large fresh green 
salad or ultra-thick clam chowder which tightropes between deliciously peppery 
and too-floury. 
Fried seafood is central on the menu and the kitchen has a fine subtle hand. 
Louisiana oysters ($6.95 for an appetizer, $18.95 for a main course) are creamy 
within and crusty on the outside. All fried food tasted was crisp and fresh, 
not in the least greasy. 
Shrimp Creole ($20.95) probably the best known Creole dish, is tender jumbo 
shrimp in a so-called "richly seasoned" onion, green-pepper and tomato based 
sauce that I found extremely mild. 
For more assertive flavoring, Harold and Belle's serves "Home Style Favorites," 
distinctively Southern dishes like red beans and rice and pork chops, Southern 
fried chicken and country-style ribs. I was sure that I'd had my best barbecue 
of the year back in New Orleans (courtesy the Second True Love Baptist Church) 
but Harold and Belle's no-knife-needed (and maybe no teeth) beefy ribs, with an 
elixir of a sauce, proved that addiction to Harold and Belle's could start with 
this dish. The enormous portion, at $16.95, would easily serve two. 
Fried chicken ($12.95) is also lusty and generous enough for two. Accompanying 
steak fries drooped on the way home but were easily revived to proper crispness 
in the oven. Red beans and rice served with three flavorful centercut pork 
chops ($14.95) would make a delicious introduction to this classic, slow-cooked 
meal. 
For dessert, a sweet potato cheesecake with a graham cracker crust and a 
dousing of pralines on top was compelling; the too-sweet canned peach cobbler 
was not. I went back to those ribs. 
 Harold and Belle's, 2920 W. Jefferson Blvd., Los Angeles, (213) 735-9023 or 
(213) 735-9918. Open Monday through Thursday noon to 10 p.m.; Friday noon to 
midnight; Saturday 1 p.m. to midnight; Sunday 1 p.m. to 10 p.m. Parking lot. 
Valet parking at dinner. Visa and MasterCard. Call for take-out menu. 
