CLEANUP BEGUN AT ABANDONED PLATING SHOP; 
HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS: THE EPA SAYS THE FORMER OWNERS OF THE BURBANK FIRM CAN BE 
FINED UP TO THREE TIMES THE $1.3-MILLION COST TO RID THE WASTE. 
The Environmental Protection Agency on Monday began cleaning up thousands of 
gallons of hazardous chemicals at a former Burbank metal plating shop that was 
abandoned by its owners. 
Officials expect the removal of about 36,000 gallons of industrial solvents and 
other chemicals at Dynamic Plating to take about five weeks. The action is 
designed to prevent reactive chemicals from mixing. Although the chemicals used 
in various plating processes do not pose a significant health risk by 
themselves, they are potentially very dangerous when mixed, said Dan Shane, who 
is coordinating the cleanup. 
An emergency work order issued by the EPA said the combination of acids with 
cyanide solutions stored nearby could cause the release of hydrogen cyanide, 
which "would be a major disaster." EPA spokesman Terry Wilson declined to 
elaborate or speculate on the effects of such a gas release. 
Tests also will be conducted to determine if seepage from the shop has 
contributed to ground water contamination in the southeast San Fernando Valley. 
Soil samples already taken at the site indicate a "significant amount" of 
solvents have seeped into the ground over the years. High levels of solvents 
were detected at depths of up to 55 feet and officials suspect that other 
chemicals also might have found their way into the soil. 
The building was built as Army barracks during World War II and had been used 
as a plating shop since at least 1959. Because of the wood-framed building's 
age and dilapidated condition, officials feared there was a significant risk of 
chemicals spilling or mixing. 
The shop, which is in a light-industrial area near Burbank and Victory 
boulevards, has been closed since January, according to city records. At that 
time, city officials cited shop owners Frank Guerrero and Chuck Ceballos for 
exceeding their permitted limits on the amount of waste they were flushing into 
the sewer system. 
An assessment of the shop by the EPA in August revealed several open vats and 
sumps containing 36,000 gallons of chemicals and various industrial wastes. 
On Monday, about a dozen workers prepared the site for cleanup by removing 
empty containers and evaluating the potential risks. A portable meteorological 
station was erected to forecast the spread of a toxic cloud in the event any of 
the chemicals combine during the cleanup. 
Wilson said the cleanup will cost about $1.3 million. The EPA can fine Guerrero 
and Ceballos up to three times that amount. 
But Guerrero and Ceballos have indicated to city and federal officials that 
they are unable to pay for the cleanup. Sidney Troxell, an attorney for the two 
men, declined to discuss how they plan to settle the bill. He said Guerrero and 
Ceballos were considering declaring bankruptcy, but had not made a final 
decision. 
Shane said the first priority at the site will be to pump reactive chemicals 
into storage tanks and remove them, thus eliminating the immediate risk of 
toxic mixture. 
Work then will concentrate on removing chemical containers and disposing of 
them in an approved facility. Tests also will be conducted to determine the 
amount of contamination caused by chemicals seeping into the soil. 
