HOSPITAL TAKES HEART FROM NEW UNIT'S SUCCESS; 
MEDICINE: THE BUSINESS OF CARDIAC CARE IS BOOMING AT DOWNEY COMMUNITY HOSPITAL. 
THIS YEAR, 355 ANGIOPLASTIES AND CARDIAC SURGERIES HAVE BEEN PERFORMED, AN 8.8% 
RISE OVER '89. 
Cardiologist Winfried Waider maneuvered the guide wire through a main artery to 
the blockage that caused his patient severe chest pain by restricting the flow 
of blood to her heart. 
One, two, three, four times the tiny balloon was inflated, smashing down years 
of plaque buildup and blood that had clotted in the artery. 
The angioplasty cleared the artery and, minutes later, another patient was 
rolled into the high-tech lab at Downey Community Hospital for an exploratory 
heart procedure. Three more patients would follow before the workday ended. 
Business is booming at the hospital's Heart Center, which opened in the highly 
competitive Los Angeles area market just three years ago. 
So far this year, 355 angioplasties and heart surgeries have taken place at the 
207-bed hospital, said the hospital's administrative director, Tom Lonergan. 
That represents an 8.8% increase over the number of angioplasties and heart 
surgeries performed in all of 1989. Cardiologists also performed 758 diagnostic 
catheterizations, an exploratory procedure in which a catheter is inserted and 
maneuvered through an artery to the heart. 
"We'd never thought we'd be doing the kinds of numbers we're doing now, in our 
wildest dreams," Lonergan said. 
The upstart heart program still has a way to go before it challenges the big 
boys: The Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles, for example, had 663 
angioplasties and 2,978 diagnostic catheterizations in 1988, to lead all 
hospitals in California, according to statistics published by the California 
Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. 
Downey Community ranked 83rd in the number of angioplasties performed that 
year, its first full year of operation and the latest year for which statewide 
statistics are available. 
"I don't know that we'll ever have the volume that a Good Sam' has, but we have 
the potential of increasing our numbers and becoming a bigger player," Lonergan 
said. 
The heart center has contributed to the rising income the nonprofit hospital 
has enjoyed in recent years, Lonergan said. The hospital netted $1.9 million 
during its 1988 fiscal year and $4.1 million in 1989, according to a hospital 
report. That figure is expected to reach $6.4 million for the 1990 fiscal year, 
which ended June 30, a hospital spokeswoman said. 
The success of the heart-care program has drawn outside notice. Larry S. 
Stepnick, a spokesman for the Health Care Advisory Board, said: "Downey is in a 
very elite group of small, relatively 'unknown' hospitals which have been able 
to begin a successful cardiology program in the last few years, and perhaps the 
only one to do so in a market as competitive as that of Los Angeles." 
The Advisory Board, a Washington-based firm, performs studies each year to 
inform 450 hospitals across the nation about techniques that can increase 
profits. 
The Downey hospital will be profiled, along with others, in an Advisory Board 
study on cardiology programs. Stepnick said Downey Community offers "high 
quality at a competitive price." 
Heart care has become a plum business for hospitals that break into the market 
and run a successful program. Lonergan said heart care generally provides about 
17% of a hospital's gross revenues, but up to 50% of its profits. 
Marketing studies indicated that the Heart Center would be profitable, Lonergan 
said: "The community was really wanting it. You obviously would rather have 
major types of surgery performed in your community, with people you know, 
rather than travel long distances." 
Downey Community spent more than $6 million to build and equip its center, 
which opened Sept. 23, 1987. 
The idea was to couple top-notch service with aggressive marketing, which 
included an eye-catching billboard along the Santa Ana Freeway that featured a 
16-foot-high latex heart that beat by means of motors and fans. 
The hospital had relied on a core group of eight cardiologists for advice on 
how best to outfit the center, Lonergan said. 
The lab, where the angioplasties are performed, was built next to the operating 
room so open-heart surgery can be performed quickly if complications develop. 
The lab is equipped with the most modern digital X-ray equipment, which has 
helped attract about 30 cardiologists and their patients to the hospital. 
"They provide us with what we want and need," said cardiologist Stephen N. 
Berberich, one of the doctors who helped plan the facility. 
Most standard cardiac procedures are performed at Downey Community, including 
bypass surgery and valve replacements. Hospital charges for an angioplasty 
start at about $3,500, while heart surgery carries a hospital fee of $12,000 
and up, a hospital spokeswoman said. Doctor fees, which vary widely, are 
additional. 
The heart center has a good success rate. The number of deaths of patients with 
heart problems is well within the expected range, according to the federal 
Health Care Financing Administration. 
For example, the mortality rate for patients with severe, chronic heart disease 
was 15.4% in 1988 at Downey Community. The predicted mortality range for the 
hospital's clientele, based on demographic factors, was 9.8% to 33.8%, 
according to an HCFA report. 
"Like anything in business, you have to have the quality to be successful," 
Lonergan said. "That's been our focus." 
Cardiologists at neighboring hospitals praised the heart program at Downey 
Community because it provides top-notch, standard heart care to the community. 
But they also noted the limits of the hospital's program. 
For example, Downey Community uses the time-tested angioplasty. The hospital 
does not perform atherectomies, which are several experimental procedures that 
remove plaque from arteries by scraping, drilling or pulverizing. Usually, such 
high-technology procedures are limited to research hospitals, such as Good 
Samaritan. 
An atherectomy was performed last month on Dan Reeves, coach of the National 
Football League's Denver Broncos, who had hardened arteries. It took place in 
Redwood City, San Mateo County. 
Downey Community is "a prototype for what a community hospital giving cardiac 
services should be like," said Dr. Stephen Oesterle, director of 
catheterization labs at Good Samaritan. 
Dr. John Messenger, director of the coronary care unit at Memorial Hospital 
Medical Center, Long Beach, has watched Downey's heart program grow for three 
years. His partner, cardiologist Waider, performs some of his angioplasties 
there. 
"They've taken some of our business away, but it's probably better for patients 
if they are closer to home," Messenger said. 
