PIERCE OFFICIALS DENY INFERTILE SOIL DUMPED AT FARM ILLEGALLY 
A group of San Fernando Valley conservationists and animal lovers complained 
Friday that infertile soil laden with refuse and debris is being dumped on 
pastures at the Pierce College Farm, and accused college officials of approving 
the dumping. 
College officials denied the charge. 
Loretta Kemsley, president of the Friends of Pierce College Farm, said the 
dumping of concrete, subsoil and trash has been going on since 1987. Some of 
the dumping has been illegal, she said, adding that she saw a steady stream of 
trucks dump subsoil -- thickly compacted soil in which plants have difficulty 
taking root -- and refuse on the site Aug. 18. 
"We're determined to stop this," said Kemsley, who said she has been coming to 
the Woodland Hills farm for years to ride horses. 
Kemsley's daughter, Kim, said developers were being allowed and even encouraged 
by school authorities to bring in subsoil from excavation sites. "What they're 
doing is really detrimental to the whole agricultural program there," she said. 
College President David Means denied charges that the school allowed illegal 
dumping or deposits of inadequate soil. 
Latest Incident Legal 
"There have been instances where people have sneaked onto the property and 
dumped things, but this latest incident they're talking about was not illegal," 
Means said. 
"There was an excavation being done at that time, and the manager of the farm 
gave the developer permission to dump dirt on the low level of the pasture 
where floods have hit" to raise the ground level and prevent future flooding, 
he said. 
He said other developers have been given permission in the past to dump topsoil 
on the farmland. "But we just don't accept any dirt that's bad," he said. 
However, Martha S. Witter, a consultant with the Topanga-Las Virgenes Resource 
Conservation District, said soil recently dumped on the farm's pastures 
contained a large amount of debris such as concrete and steel. 
"It's obviously a lower quality than what was there before," Witter said. "The 
soil is not worth much." 
