SOVIETS REMOVE MAJOR OBSTACLE TO ARMS TREATY 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, in a concession that appeared 
to remove the single most important obstacle to the conclusion of a strategic 
arms reduction treaty, said Friday that the Soviet Union has dropped its demand 
that the pact be contingent on limiting U.S. efforts to develop new 
anti-missile defenses. 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III said the Soviet concession represented "a 
positive development" in negotiations toward a treaty that would cut the 
nuclear offensive arsenals of the superpowers about 50%, a senior U.S. aide 
said. But American officials are still seeking clarification of the new Soviet 
position, which they disclosed in a briefing to reporters during two days of 
talks here. 
The Soviets also eased their demand that a START treaty include limits on 
sea-launched cruise missiles, although the key difficulty of verifying limits 
on these weapons remained unresolved. 
More Pressure Seen 
The unexpected Soviet moves appeared certain to increase pressure on the Bush 
Administration to respond with comparable concessions. That may well lead the 
White House, in turn, to bring new pressure on Congress to make decisions on 
the defense budget that would permit the United States to change its 
negotiating stance in the START talks. 
The Administration has already come under fire from Democratic leaders and some 
arms control experts, who have accused Bush of being timid in his response to 
the initiatives of Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
The START negotiations, under way since 1984, have been described as 80% to 90% 
completed during the Ronald Reagan Administration, and Bush aides have 
expressed hope that the treaty might be finished by the end of 1990. That 
timetable will probably be accelerated by the new developments, although 
important differences on mobile missiles and overall verification differences 
remain to be resolved. 
The Soviet moves, which reverse longstanding insistence that the United States 
curb missile defense efforts such as the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as 
"Star Wars," were described with some ambiguity in a nine-page letter from 
Gorbachev to Bush on a range of arms control initiatives. 
Baker, at the meetings with Shevardnadze here following delivery of the letter, 
asked the Soviet official directly whether the tie between missile defenses and 
a START offensive weapon agreement had now been dropped. Shevardnadze's 
assurance that it had been dropped led a senior U.S. official to read the 
following statement: 
"They have dropped their linkage between completing and implementing an 
agreement with START and achieving a defense and space accord, including 
questions dealing with the ABM treaty." 
Another senior official, asked whether the Soviets had provided any more 
detailed description of their new position or its rationale, shook his head. 
The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 severely curtails missile defenses on 
both sides. The amount of research, development and testing of new types of 
missile-defense devices, such as space-based exotic beam weapons, has been a 
source of bitter dispute between the United States and Soviet Union since the 
START talks began. 
'Continued Commitment' 
The senior U.S. official added that "we have made clear the President's 
continued commitment to the Strategic Defense Initative," an assurance to the 
conservative supporters of "Star Wars" that Bush has not deserted the program. 
Congress has consistently cut Administration requests for SDI funding, however, 
and the Administration itself has scaled back the program's goal from Reagan's 
original, grandiose vision of a leakproof nationwide shield against missile 
attack to a more limited system that would guard against accidental launches -- 
and that not until the next century. 
Shevardnadze also offered two more concessions which also appeared aimed at 
breaking the remaining logjams in the START talks. 
One was the proposal that limits on sea-launched cruise missiles, which Moscow 
has sought as part of a START treaty, could be part of a separate agreement. 
But a senior Soviet official said his government still wants to see those 
missiles cut at the same time a START pact is signed. And a senior U.S. 
official warned that the Bush Administration still believes that limits on 
sea-launched cruise missiles would be virtually impossible to verify. 
In another apparent concession, Soviet officials said they had also softened 
their objection to testing of weapons to defend against nuclear missiles. 
Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Viktor P. Karpov told reporters that his country 
was willing to agree to "some testing of devices in space," and suggested that 
the two sides agree to a list of permissible tests. U.S. officials, who have 
long asserted a right to test exotic beam devices in space under the ABM 
Treaty, said they were willing to consider the Soviet approach. 
That issue, too, had long posed an obstacle to the conclusion of a START 
treaty. 
Although Gorbachev's letter spelled out some of these moves and hinted at 
others, U.S. officials appeared surprised by the breadth of the Soviet 
concessions. Asked for their assessment of Gorbachev's motives, several senior 
officials said simply, "Ask the Soviets." 
The conciliatory Soviet moves, moreover, came amid sharp disagreements between 
Baker and Shevardnadze over Afghanistan, Nicaragua, and human rights issues. 
The two diplomats, meeting in a luxurious lodge beneath the snow-topped crags 
of the Teton mountains, spent almost two hours of an intense one-on-one session 
sparring over their policies on the Third World conflicts, officials said. 
The two men became so absorbed in the argument that their meeting ran more than 
an hour overtime, leaving dozens of senior aides waiting in lobbies and 
hallways. 
Bush Administration officials have often pointed to Soviet behavior in the 
Third World as a key test of whether the "new thinking" proclaimed by Gorbachev 
has any real impact on the Kremlin's foreign policy. 
According to a senior aide, Baker told Shevardnadze bluntly, "that when we take 
a look at some of the patterns of Soviet involvement (in the Third World) . . . 
there is, from our standpoint, a disturbing flow of arms." 
He said U.S. intelligence reports have detected "a surge of arms" to pro-Soviet 
regimes in Cambodia and Ethiopia, "a tremendous increase" in weapons shipments 
to the pro-Moscow government in Afghanistan, and a continued flow of weaponry 
from the Soviet Bloc to the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. 
"That doesn't seem to fit our understanding of what 'new thinking' is supposed 
to embody," he quoted Baker as saying. 
Shevardnadze rejected the criticism and accused the United States of acting 
irresponsibly by continuing its military aid to Muslim rebels in Afghanistan, 
officials said. 
"In our view, the United States is violating its obligation as a guarantor of 
the Geneva accords (reached in 1988 to end the Afghan war)," a senior Soviet 
official said, pointing to continued U.S. arms shipments to the rebels. That 
agreement calls for an end to foreign aid to the rebels, but the Bush 
Administration has said that it will continue sending supplies as long as 
Moscow continues active support to the Kabul regime. 
In the case of Nicaragua, Shevardnadze annoyed U.S. officials by sticking to 
his position that the Kremlin has stopped sending arms directly to the 
Sandinistas but is powerless to stop its allies like Cuba from doing so. 
There were also sharp words over human rights, with Shevardnadze countering a 
U.S. list of Soviet citizens who have been refused the right to emigrate with a 
Kremlin compiled list of 40 alleged "political prisoners" in the United States. 
The Baker-Shevardnadze arguments, as recounted by their aides, sounded like a 
return to the bad old days of U.S.-Soviet polemics before Gorbachev came to 
power. But officials on both sides took pains to stress that the dispute did 
not poison the two countries' discussions on other issues. 
"It was a discussion that was carried on in a way that suggested that these two 
men have established a working relationship" in which both sides "have to be 
honest and candid," a U.S. official said. 
Soviet officials said they were neither surprised nor upset by the U.S. 
criticism, but they also appeared anxious to turn the meeting's attention 
toward arms control, the subject the Kremlin wants to keep at the center of the 
superpower agenda. 
In addition to the major Soviet concessions, the two sides moved toward 
conclusion of several technical agreements on arms control. 
Officials said they expect to sign today an agreement on "trial verification" 
to formalize a surprisingly fast acceptance by the two countries of a new 
principle in arms control talks: that experiments to test the feasibility of 
systems to verify the size and location of nuclear weapons can be conducted 
even before a treaty to reduce them is complete. 
The Bush Administration proposed the idea in June, but Soviet officials 
insisted that the agreement to be signed today was devised by their experts in 
Moscow. The pact is a general agreement by both sides to begin working on ways 
to begin mutual verification of each others' arsenals, a key part of any arms 
reduction effort. 
Baker and Shevardnadze are also expected to sign an agreement to exchange 
information before any major test or exercise of strategic nuclear forces, a 
Soviet official said. 
They may also sign an agreement to swap information about the size and location 
of each others' chemical weapons, a step toward reducing those arsenals, 
officials said -- although some officials said last-minute snags could delay 
that pact. 
Baker and Shevardnadze met here, at a resort built by the late John D. 
Rockefeller III, as part of an agreement to begin varying their twice-yearly 
meetings beyond Washington and Moscow. 
