ROUNDUP; 
LOS ALAMITOS OVERPOWERS COMPTON IN SECOND HALF 
It took more than half a football game for Los Alamitos High School to rouse 
its powerful offense Thursday night. In a revival led by Todd Gragnano and Erik 
Mitchell, the Griffins (3-1) scored 36 points in the second half to overpower 
Compton (1-3), 42-8, at Veterans Stadium. 
Gragnano ran for a seven-yard touchdown and completed 16 of 26 passes for 248 
yards and two touchdowns. Mitchell scored three touchdowns of his own, on a 
four-yard run and two others which proved to be the most exciting plays of the 
game. 
The first was a screen pass from Gragnano, which Mitchell caught and ran 62 
yards untouched down the left sideline. On the second, Mitchell took an inside 
handoff and broke out to the left sideline for a 44-yard touchdown. 
Compton of the Moore League held Mitchell to 24 yards in 15 carries in the 
first half. Mitchell finished with 106 yards in 25 carries. 
In other nonleague games: 
Brea-Olinda 20, Sonora 10 -- The Wildcats raised their record to 4-0 in a game 
played at La Habra High School that was stopped before its conclusion because 
of a bench-clearing brawl. Officials halted the game with 1:08 left in the 
fourth quarter when the benches cleared after three consecutive personal fouls 
were called on both teams. 
Brea's victory was secured with 2:37 left in the fourth quarter when running 
back Brook Coop capped a 14-play, 72-yard scoring drive with a four-yard run. 
The drive took nearly 7 minutes 30 seconds of the quarter and gave the Wildcats 
a 20-10 lead. 
Savanna 14, Buena Park 6 -- Kenison PoChing rushed for 95 yards and a touchdown 
to pace the Rebels' victory at Spaulding Stadium. 
Buena Park (1-3) scored first after Corey Owens recovered a fumble by Savanna 
quarterback Carlos Robledo at the Savanna 38. The Coyotes scored on a 
nine-yuard pass from quarterback Mark Medellin to Juan Guerra. 
Anaheim 12, Cypress 9 -- Ernie Akau's nine-yard run early in the second quarter 
gave Anaheim (1-3) it's first victory of the season at Glover Stadium. 
The drive began on Anaheim's 29, when Ishmel Lopez blocked Richard Parson's 
41-yard field-goal attempt. Robert Jones and Sammie Serna moved the ball to the 
Cypress 9 in eight plays. 
Cypress (1-3) scored first midway in the first quarter on Sundance Smith's 
73-yard run. 
Foothill 14, University 7 -- Foothill's Sean Saunders rushed 153 yards in 22 
carries and scored one touchdown, but the Knights still lost to University at 
Tustin High. 
Foothill scored six minutes into the second quarter on a nine-yard run by 
Saunders, but University gained control in the third quarter. 
Fullerton 37, El Dorado 3 -- Fullerton rolled in a nonleague rout of host El 
Dorado at Valencia High. 
Fullerton quarterback Rene Arias had a hand in four of the Indians' touchdowns. 
He scored on keepers of 34 and 16 yards in the first quarter, threw a 13-yard 
touchdown pass to tight end Glenn Eggert on a broken play in the third, then 
capped off Fullerton's scoring with a 14-yard touchdown dash in the fourth. 
