REFLECTIONS: 'ALL OF US ARE CAPABLE OF ENORMOUS AMOUNTS OF CREATIVITY AND 
HUMOR' 
Jacquie Lowell was headed for the medical profession until she abruptly changed 
tracks to a career in humor and creativity. The 43-year-old Clairemont resident 
is the proprietor of Creativity Games, where she helps people rediscover their 
humorous vein. Lowell also directs Zero Gravity, a comedy troupe, and is a 
consultant for the Gifted and Talented Education program in San Diego city 
schools. Lowell spoke with Times staff writer Terry Rather in her home and was 
photographed by Barbara Martin Pinhero. 
I was pre-med at Oberlin College and I passed up a lot of opportunities to 
laugh, play and be silly in order to get those A's. I fell off that train in 
senior year. I wanted a break before going on to medical school. 
Coincidentally, I was going to Long Island to visit some relatives and my last 
piece of dormitory mail was a notice about jobs at a creative arts school near 
where I was going to visit. So I stopped by and ended up working there for four 
years. It was there that I learned most of the principles I still use in 
teaching today, that all of us are capable of enormous amounts of creativity 
and humor. What stands in the way of the expression of those in adults is fear 
of being laughed at, making a fool of yourself. 
To get the creativity and humor flowing is a two-step process: Remove the fear 
by creating a safe environment that is warm, that is friendly, that is playful 
where people can let down those safeguards against looking foolish and take off 
their mental shoes; and two, a series of exercises that will spark the 
creativity and humor flowing. You get people comfortable, relaxed and playful 
and you give them some really intriguing things to do and bam, out comes so 
much humor and creativity that it's awe-inspiring. 
First thing I want to do is get them comfortable so I'll start with an 
icebreaker like "people bingo." People come in the door and I give them an 
8-by-10 piece of paper marked up like a bingo card. Instead of letters and 
numbers in each square, there are words. Things like, find someone with the 
same size thumb as yourself. Or, find someone who loves to hike. Or find a 
vegetarian. People are instantly so busy running around tapping total strangers 
on the shoulders they forget to be nervous. 
Pretty soon we realize with icebreakers like that that we're just all folks 
together and there's nothing to be afraid of. We then play a whole variety of 
different games. Some are verbal, some involve movement and mime, some involve 
characters. 
Someone once asked me if I had all money in the world, would I still do this? I 
would probably take a vacation and travel around the world, and yes, I'd come 
back to San Diego and do this again. I love it. I can't imagine anything else 
I'd rather be doing. 
Of course, it's always amusing to be in a situation where one has to practice 
what one preaches. I was driving up to Anaheim for a 4:30 p.m. appointment at 
the "Laughter and Play" conference and I got stuck in Friday afternoon Los 
Angeles traffic. I decided to creatively find a new way to get to the hotel by 
getting off the totally bumper-to-bumper freeway and going on side roads. There 
was major construction going on every one of the side roads I tried. It was 
getting later and later and I was getting more and more frustrated. I could see 
the hotel I needed to go to. It was 15 minutes away. Then my car started to 
overheat and by now I was starting to overheat. 
Finally I saw the freeway I was looking for, only according to my map I was 
supposed to go north on it and the freeway signs said east and west. I got on 
the wrong one and it's bumper to bumper again. At this point there's no way I'm 
going to make the appointment. I pulled over to the shoulder of the freeway and 
I burst into tears. 
Suddenly, a little part of my brain said Jacquie, you do what for a living? I 
teach humor and creativity! Now isn't crying a little silly? At that point I 
burst into laughter and relaxed. 
