SUPPLEMENTARY DERBY ENTRIES TO BE ALLOWED 
The Kentucky Derby was opened to supplementary entries as a result of 
adjustments made in the Triple Crown conditions announced Thursday. 
In an attempt to address criticism of the Triple Crown, particularly the point 
system for two rich bonuses, the operators of the Kentucky Derby, Preakness and 
Belmont Stakes made several changes. 
The biggest will permit supplementary nominations at entry time, two days 
before the Derby. Supplementary nominations have not been allowed in the Derby 
in modern times. 
Under the new rules, to bypass a January or April nomination deadline, an owner 
would have to pay $150,000 to get his horse eligible on the day entries are 
drawn. 
The $150,000, which would go into the Derby purse, also would make the horse 
eligible for the Preakness and Belmont Stakes. If an owner waited until the 
Preakness to supplement, he would have to pay only $100,000, which also would 
open the Belmont to him. 
A supplementary entry to the Belmont will cost $50,000. 
Horses had been supplemented for years to the Preakness and Belmont, but that 
provision was dropped starting with the 1986 Triple Crown, when the three races 
were joined for nomination purposes. 
"After review and analysis of the nomination procedures, and discussions with 
horsemen and the media, we felt the extension of the late nomination deadline 
and allowing supplements give horsemen every possible chance to be in the 
Triple Crown races," said Ed Seigenfeld, executive director of Triple Crown 
Productions. 
The Derby's prohibition of supplemental entries may have had one of its biggest 
impacts in 1980. That year, Codex won the Santa Anita Derby but was not 
nominated for the Kentucky Derby and had to skip the race. Codex had been 
nominated for the Preakness and won at Pimlico Race Course. He also had been 
nominated for the Belmont Stakes, in which he ran seventh. 
Also, the Triple Crown's point system -- involving a $1 million bonus for the 
best performance in all three races -- has been altered. 
Points had been awarded on a 5-3-1 basis. The new scoring will be based on a 
10-5-3-1 system. 
"Under the new system, a horse that wins two races has to finish in a tie for 
the bonus," Seigenfeld said. "Under the new system, Alysheba would have gotten 
the $1 million." 
Unchanged is the $5-million Chrysler Triple Crown Challenge, which guarantees 
that amount to any horse winning all three races. The guarantee amounts to a 
bonus of about $2.5 million because the $1 million bonus and the three purses 
would be deducted before the payoff is made. 
