CHIEFS CROSS UP VIKINGS, BRING THEM DOWN, 24-21 
The Minnesota Vikings went for the fake and Steve DeBerg didn't blame them. 
DeBerg, utilizing play-action fakes to 260-pound fullback Christian Okoye, 
drove the Kansas City Chiefs 78 yards to a touchdown with 9:35 left Sunday and 
beat the Vikings, 24-21. 
"It wasn't breakdowns by the defense," DeBerg said. "When we play-action fake, 
usually a team does get a little out of whack. They're trying to stop Christian 
Okoye with all the guys they can, and all of a sudden I have the ball going the 
other way. That is a tremendous burden for any defense." 
Okoye scored the go-ahead touchdown on a run from two yards out. On the winning 
drive, DeBerg found Bill Jones all alone for a 16-yard gain and connected with 
Rob Thomas, also uncovered, for 20 yards. 
Both plays came after fakes to Okoye, who set up the score with an 11-yard run 
around left end. 
"We didn't do a good job of stopping the play-action pass," Minnesota Coach 
Jerry Burns said. "We practiced against that bootleg, but we didn't stop it 
very well. We didn't cover their receivers." 
After Okoye's go-ahead touchdown, the Vikings failed on a fourth and two with 
2:14 left, and the Chiefs ran out the clock. 
Practically given two touchdowns in the first quarter, the Chiefs had to rally 
after Minnesota took a 21-17 lead when Wade Wilson flipped a six-yard scoring 
pass to Herschel Walker in the third quarter. 
DeBerg completed 16 of 28 passes for 196 yards and two touchdowns, but didn't 
want any credit. 
The Chiefs took a 14-0 lead in the first quarter after recovering fumbles by 
Wilson and Herschel Walker deep in Viking territory. 
DeBerg threw a four-yard touchdown pass to Jones and a 22-yarder to Rob McNair. 
Wilson rallied the Vikings with three touchdown passes, two of them six-yarders 
to Walker, and a 26-yarder to Steve Jordan. The first two tied the score, 
14-14, and the third, after Kansas City's Nick Lowery kicked a 43-yard field 
goal, gave Minnesota a 21-17 lead. 
