AFTER YEARS OF WORK, CHANGOVER HAPPENED IN HOURS 
The construction of the Thomas F. Riley Terminal at John Wayne Airport may have 
taken years, but the switch from the old terminal to the new facility happened 
literally overnight. 
Even before the last planes touched down for the last time at the Eddie Martin 
Terminal, work crews, airline managers and car rental agencies started racing 
the clock to get their new operations up and running in time for the 6 a.m. 
opening of the gleaming new terminal. 
Although much of the work of moving equipment, installing computers and 
stocking shops and restaurants had already been done in recent weeks, crews 
still had to put in a full night's work from late Saturday evening through the 
wee hours of Sunday morning to tie up loose ends and otherwise put the 
finishing touches on the nation's newest air transportation center. 
What follows is a chronicle of the passing into history of the Eddie Martin 
Terminal, and the first fledgling steps in the new life of the Thomas F. Riley 
Terminal. 
Saturday, 10 to 11 p.m.: Bernie Fougnie, senior supervisor of the night shift 
for Ogden Allied Security, which screens passengers and X-rays baggage at the 
airport, had already begun overseeing the transfer of metal detectors to the 
new terminal even before United Airlines Flight 997 from Chicago became the 
last plane to land at the old terminal. 
"I wish I had a penny for every passenger that went through there," Fougnie 
said, pointing to the last metal detector to be shipped down the road. Fougnie 
might also have wished for a penny for each of his memories of the small 
waiting area where only ripped chairs and stuffed trash cans remained. 
"Here we were a close-knit family," he said. "In a bigger place like the new 
terminal you don't have the charm of a smaller place. It (the old terminal) 
holds a lot of memories." 
Not everyone was wistful about the impending passing of the old terminal, 
however. Jayne Mallette stood behind her counter at National Car Rental -- 
housed in a ramshackle trailer near the curb -- counting the last few minutes 
as workmen bustled around her, disconnecting terminals and moving furniture. 
"In here, the air conditioning works in the winter and it doesn't work in the 
summer," Malette said. "When (employees) wanted to eat before, we had to drive 
so far. Now there'll be restaurants and Pizza Hut, so we can just go right out 
(in the terminal) and eat. I cannot wait to get in there." 
At the next counter, Avis employees began packing away rental contracts which 
they were forced to fill out by hand while their computers were connected at 
their new location. Next door, USAir employees scrambled to move out a few 
computers, office furniture and other equipment, carefully but swiftly loading 
the gear into pickup trucks. For both airlines and car rental firms, the move 
was almost complete. 
11 to 11:30 p.m.: By 11:15, operations had all but ceased. The baggage carousel 
had stopped. The repetitive announcement informing travelers that "the white 
zone is for immediate loading and unloading of passengers -- no parking," was 
silenced. An airport worker used the now-useless public address system -- 
useless because there was no public to address -- to send forth an ominous 
message: "Mine is the last voice you'll ever hear," he said. 
However, his was not the last voice that boomed from the loudspeakers. At 
11:30, a disembodied voice delivered a message to the few employees left in the 
terminal. "Ladies and gentlemen," the voice intoned, "Elvis has left the 
building." 
The Eddie Martin Terminal was effectively out of business. And indeed, Elvis 
was no where to be found. 
Midnight to 2 a.m.: The Don Pardo wanna-bes continued their public address high 
jinks inside the new terminal. And while Elvis may have left the old building, 
he turned up in the new one -- or at least a pale imitation of him did, as a 
seemingly frustrated entertainer belted out his rendition of "Heartbreak Hotel" 
for all the building to hear, followed by not-bad imitations of Ronald Reagan, 
Michael Jackson and Pee-wee Herman. 
Amid the smiles and giggles of workers, the countdown toward 6 a.m. continued. 
On the upper level, the color-coded arrival/departure board was tested -- the 
"status" column on each screen showed two words that the airlines probably hope 
is an omen: "On time." The message at Gate 7, was also somewhat optimistic -- 
it read "Now Boarding" for an 8 a.m. USAir flight to San Francisco. 
Nearby, security personnel ran tests on the X-ray scanners and metal detectors, 
which were on-line early to run checks on the handful of workers active in the 
gate areas. A "test bag" containing fake guns, replicas of bombs and other 
deadly devices proved the equipment worked -- the outlines of two pistols and a 
time bomb clearly showed up on the security screens. "This is the kind of stuff 
we don't want to find in the airport," a technician said. 
On the lower level, technicians for the car rental firms -- which seemed to 
have the most extensive jobs of the night -- began installing and connecting 
the all-important computer terminals. At National Car Rental, Jayne Mallette 
sorted out green-and-white signs reading "Next Position Please" and "Other 
Transactions," which were later stripped into a board above the counter. Sounds 
of drilling emanated from the otherwise quiet terminal as Hertz workers put the 
last touches on their facility. 
2 to 4 a.m.: Airports are usually associated with lots of hustle and bustle and 
sometimes downright chaos, but the Riley building was eerily quiet. The only 
sounds were a few scattered voices on the lower level and the gentle whirring 
of floor waxers run by the cleaning crews. 
Most of the customer-service areas were ready for the first travelers as 4 a.m. 
approached. Computers had been installed in most spots and were brought on 
line. A few clerks and managers started to leave, with a few others staying 
behind to hand over the reins to the morning shift. Security personnel quietly 
held down the fort, keeping eyes peeled for unauthorized intruders, but mostly 
biding time, waiting for the first passenger. 
4 to 5 a.m.: The security guards didn't have to wait long for the first 
passenger. He showed up at 4:15 a.m., nearly two hours before the terminal's 
scheduled opening and nearly five hours before his 9 a.m. flight to Chicago. 
"I thought my flight was going to be at 7 o'clock, now it's 9 o'clock," said 
Ronald M. Dreier, a Chicago resident who was in Orange County for a meeting of 
Century 21, explaining his pre-dawn arrival. 
OK -- but isn't 4:15 a little early to arrive even for a flight at 7 o'clock? 
Dreier was asked. 
"I enjoy being at the airport earlier," he said. "Different strokes, right?" 
While Dreier was by far the first passenger at the airport, he didn't hold the 
distinction of being the first member of the public to be there. That prize 
went to Bob Morse, driver of Coast Yellow Cab Co. taxi No. 64. Morse, 
resplendent in a sort of Panama hat gone wild, drove up to the taxi stand at 4 
a.m. -- just a bit early for the first scheduled flight arrival at 7:25. 
So why did Morse show up 3 1/4 hours early? "For that spot," he said, pointing 
to first place in line at the curb beneath the sign marked, "Taxi Only." "I 
wanted that spot, and I got it." Half an hour later, a second cab arrived to 
take its place in line -- surprised, no doubt, that the honor of carrying the 
first fare out of the new terminal was already secured by somebody else. 
5 to 7 a.m.: With an hour left before its scheduled opening, the dormant 
terminal began to stir to life. Employees of restaurants, snack bars and shops 
began to arrive, quickly setting up shop for early-morning fliers. 
"I'd love to answer your questions, but I just don't have the time," said Bob 
Elling, manager of the Orange Grill, as he hurried to load ice and wipe down 
the bar at the new restaurant. Still, Elling did find a minute to explain why 
he was so frenzied. 
"This is going to be the biggest thing in Orange County for a long time," he 
said. "This is a fantastic airport." 
Around the terminal, the final spit-and-polish touches were applied. 
Technicians checked the power at several gates, while restaurant workers 
started brewing coffee for the first bleary-eyed travelers. Airline counter 
clerks took their positions, and at 6 a.m., a few passengers started trickling 
into the airport. As the terminal officially opened, it was clear that 
everything had gone smoothly. 
7 to 8 a.m.: And then came the fog. 
Just after 7 a.m., a thick blanket of fog enshrouded the airport, leaving many 
to wonder if the textbook-perfect transition would be marred by an untimely act 
of nature. And while it did have a minor effect -- the first scheduled arrival, 
a Skywest flight from Los Angeles, didn't come in at 7:25, thereby delaying the 
7:35 departure of a Skywest flight to Fresno -- the fog did not prevent the 
first plane at the gate from leaving on time. 
At 7:22 a.m., an agent at Gate 12 made the pre-boarding announcement for Delta 
Flight 750 to Dallas-Ft. Worth and Tampa, Fla. Despite the fog, the passengers 
were quickly boarded. 
At 7:49, the first jetway ever used at John Wayne Airport rolled back from the 
plane, and a moment later, Delta Flight 750 taxied onto the runway. 
The transition from the antiquated terminal to the terminal that will carry 
Orange County into the 21st Century was successful. The operations of the new 
John Wayne Airport were officially under way. 
Postscript: Cab driver Bob Morse's industriousness paid off. At 7:51 a.m., he 
was seen driving off with the first passenger ever to hail a cab at the new 
terminal. 
