IRAQ MOVES TO AVERT POSSIBLE U.S. REPRISALS 
The Iraqi government moved swiftly Thursday to avert possible U.S. military 
reprisals, with several concessions interpreted here as clear signals that 
President Saddam Hussein would go to almost any length to avoid clashing with 
the multinational force facing him in the Saudi Arabian desert. 
The steps included a decision to give in to to U.S. demands for consular access 
to an American citizen wounded by Iraqi gunfire in Kuwait and an invitation to 
President Bush to address the Iraqi nation on television, which Bush quickly 
accepted. 
The Iraqi concession on the wounded American came a day after the U.S. State 
Department, in a terse announcement, said the unidentified man had been shot by 
an Iraqi soldier. The department demanded that U.S. consular officials be 
permitted to see him, and analysts here read into this an implied threat of 
military retaliation. 
According to Western diplomats in Baghdad, the Iraqi moves were a clear 
departure from the generally hard line that Hussein has followed since his Aug. 
2 invasion of neighboring Kuwait. In addressing the United States and the other 
nations in the multinational force that assembled to protect Saudi Arabia from 
the Iraqi army, Hussein's rhetoric has been fiery and confrontational. On 
Wednesday, he called for Muslims to join a jihad -- holy war -- against the 
Americans. 
Iraqi confirmation of the shooting incident, the diplomats said, was a rare 
display of candor for the Iraqi leadership, which routinely refuses to comment 
on virtually everything that puts their country in a negative light. 
Iraq's top official spokesman, Naji Hadithi, said at a hastily arranged press 
conference Thursday: 
"I have to confirm here that the American citizen was inadvertently wounded in 
his hand, and the wound is a very slight wound. He is recovering now in the 
province of Kuwait (Iraq now refers to occupied Kuwait as one of its 
provinces). Consular access will be given to the American Embassy in Baghdad." 
Asked about the circumstances of the shooting -- which occurred in an area 
where Iraqi soldiers have been rounding up foreigners to add to a human shield 
at strategic locations -- Hadithi replied, "I don't have that information, but 
he was wounded by accident." 
According to the State Department version of the incident, based on accounts 
from Kuwait, the shooting occurred as Iraqi soldiers seeking to round up 
Americans from an apartment building in Kuwait knocked on the door of one unit, 
then entered as an American in the room was climbing out the window in an 
attempt to evade capture. 
The Iraqis shot at the man, hitting his forearm, and, according to an 
unofficial description provided by a knowledgeable source -- causing him to 
fall and severely injure his leg. The man was taken to a hospital in Kuwait, 
while other Americans caught in the roundup were moved to the Mansour Melia 
Hotel in Baghdad. 
The decision to let U.S. officials see the wounded man marks the first time 
since the occupation of Kuwait that Iraq has allowed face-to-face contact 
between U.S. diplomats and any of the estimated 2,000 U.S. nationals still in 
Kuwait. 
The Iraqi regime informed American officials that the wounded man is expected 
to be discharged from a hospital shortly but will remain in Iraqi custody. 
According to the State Department, U.S. officials will be allowed to visit him 
when he is out of the hospital. 
Hadithi made it clear that the officials who visit the wounded man must be from 
the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. Even though nine American diplomats are holding 
out at the embassy in Kuwait, the Iraqis insist that because Kuwait is no 
longer an independent country, there are no longer any embassies there. 
"The American Embassy is in the capital, in Baghdad," Hadithi said. 
President Hussein has ordered all the embassies in Kuwait to shut down. More 
than a dozen, including the American facility, are still open. They are 
surrounded by troops, and the occupants are said to be desperately short of 
food and water. 
Hadithi recalled that President Bush had complained about not getting equal 
time after American television networks aired long, unedited interviews with 
Hussein. Bush, he said, "expressed the desire to have a chance to address the 
Iraqi people, and we have said yes, OK, we are ready to send an Iraqi TV crew 
to Washington to interview Mr. Bush." 
He emphasized that "we will not censor it." 
A Western diplomat in Baghdad said the change in tone on Baghdad's part 
indicates that the Iraqis "seem to be looking for some negotiating room." 
"The last thing Hussein can afford right now is all-out war with the West," the 
diplomat said. "If that happens, he knows he's finished. The shooting of this 
American clearly was a mistake by panicked or trigger-happy troops. It appears 
the president was genuinely afraid of a military response from President Bush, 
and so they're doing some fast damage control." 
Despite those concessions, there was a hard edge to one Iraqi announcement 
Thursday. Iraq's justice minister, Akram Abdul-Kader, ordered public 
prosecutors and police to revive a 1987 law that "a foreigner violating the 
entry and exit procedures . . . will be sentenced to life or temporary 
imprisonment, and all cash in his possession will be confiscated." 
In an interview with the official Iraqi News Agency, the justice minister also 
repeated an order given Aug. 24 that anyone caught harboring a foreigner would 
face charges of espionage, punishable by death. 
Meanwhile, Hussein was using the military stalemate as an opportunity to 
continue his diplomatic search for holes in the international embargo that is 
strangling Iraq. 
He sent Foreign Minister Tarik Aziz, fresh from talks in Moscow, an erstwhile 
ally, to Iran, an erstwhile enemy. Deputy Foreign Minister Taha Yassin Ramadan 
was in China. Hussein himself spent much of the day in talks with King Hussein 
of neighboring Jordan. 
A Western diplomat said of this activity: "They've been working on the (U.N.) 
Security Council members, to see if they're still firm. Iraq has to chip away 
at the edges and see how well-built the structure is. If this fails, they'll 
have to think of something else. What they need is time." 
Foreign women and children were still being moved out of the region, by 
overland routes from Kuwait to Baghdad, and by air from Baghdad. 
Thursday afternoon, a Canadian government charter flight carrying 136 Canadian 
passengers, 10 Irish and 12 Americans left Baghdad for Amman, followed by a 
British charter filled with many of the 306 British women and children who had 
come to Baghdad by bus Tuesday night from Kuwait. 
Western diplomats said that most of the 1,400 American women and children 
estimated to be in Kuwait were still in hiding, too frightened to put any faith 
in the offer of safe passage. 
But the diplomats said they are certain that the Americans will begin coming 
out today. 
