POOR KIDS MUST EAT IN SUMMERTIME TOO; 
COUNTY SHOULD SUBSIDIZE MEALS WHEN SCHOOL'S OUT 
It is now September, and soon schools on traditional schedules will reopen 
after summer vacation. That's good news for many thousands of children in 
Orange County who, during school sessions, are fed lunch through a federal 
assistance program but are not when school is out. 
Despite the poverty of many of its neighborhoods, Orange County is the only 
urban county in the state in which there is no federal lunch program in 
operation for indigent children while they are out of school. That shouldn't be 
so. 
In all, 52,000 children in Orange County receive free lunches or lunch 
subsidies during school sessions through a program funded by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. When school is out, the USDA makes available similar 
programs to agencies that service areas in which schools subsidize meals for 
50% or more of their students. Such lunches also are available in other 
counties where schools are year-round, not just in summer months but also in 
the so-called "off-track" weeks between sessions. 
But no agency yet has taken advantage of the program in Orange County. As a 
result, both the USDA and California Rural Legal Assistance (CRLA), an 
anti-poverty group, are targeting Orange County, hoping to bring a 
subsidized-meals program on line in the next year. The end of this summer is a 
good time to be planning for next. 
While Orange County's image is one of affluence, there are portions of Santa 
Ana, Garden Grove and several other cities with an underclass of impoverished 
families. The children from these families many times eat their only good meal 
of the day at school. When they are on school breaks, however, nothing magical 
happens to replace that meal. Food banks in these areas report that it is not 
unusual to have these hungry children show up at their agencies looking for 
something to eat. It is heartbreaking, they say, to turn them away. 
Meanwhile, the county's ability to respond to the needs of poor families seems 
to diminish with each budgetary year. This is why the USDA program is 
especially needed now. 
Why then do no such programs exist in Orange County? The reasons are many. 
While it seems hard to believe, officials at school districts in poverty areas 
said they haven't noticed much of a demand. Meanwhile, nonprofit agencies -- 
eligible to provide meals programs for the first time in nearly a decade -- 
said they are discouraged by the applications and daunting requirements. 
No such agencies in Orange County, and only six in the state, completed 
applications in time to begin programs this year. A few, including the 
Salvation Army of Anaheim, are determined to be ready by 1991. Meanwhile, CRLA 
is counseling agencies on how to apply and is working with the USDA to simplify 
rules. The Orange County Hunger Coalition has also been organizing for months 
to help agencies gear up programs. 
Other urban areas in California long ago worked through the initial 
difficulties of establishing meal-subsidy programs during school breaks. In Los 
Angeles, for example, the school district's 18-year-old lunch program serves an 
average of 34,000 meals a day. And Riverside's Parks and Recreation Department 
for 17 years has operated a lunch program that on a typical summer day serves 
1,000 children. 
Labor Day will mark the traditional end of summer. But Orange County needs a 
major commitment to provide children's lunch programs in the future. Let's make 
sure that such programs are in operation by next summer. 
