MARVIN GAYE FINALLY GETS A STAR 
"I am not a star. At least, I don't consider myself a star." 
Marvin Gaye, in a 1973 interview published in the Los Angeles Times. 
Grammy award-winning recording artist Marvin Gaye, popular for his intimate 
reflections on the ways of love and spiritual salvation, received a posthumous 
star Thursday on Hollywood's Walk of Fame. 
The award came after two years of intensive campaigning by fans across the 
country and by local radio stations with predominantly African-American 
audiences. 
Friends and fans gathered around Gaye's star on Vine Street adjacent to the 
Motown Building, which houses the company he recorded with during most of his 
career, turning out early hits such as "Stubborn Kind of Fellow," "Pride and 
Joy" and "Ain't No Mountain High Enough." His version of "I Heard It Through 
the Grapevine" is considered one of popular music's biggest hits. 
The crowd of more than 400 reminisced about the soul singer who was shot to 
death in 1984 by his father, Marvin Gay Sr., during an argument in their 
Crenshaw district home. (Gaye added an "e" to his family name when he began 
recording for Motown in 1962). 
Fans remembered Gaye's smooth tenor, which has for two decades caused tears to 
well up in the eyes of the happy, the hurting, the introspective, and those 
with even the faintest stirrings of soul. 
Gaye's children, Nona, Marvin III and Frankie, accepted the award on behalf of 
their father. Marvin Gay Sr. and Gaye's mother, Alberta, did not attend. 
Gaye's father, who testified in court in 1984 that he was beaten repeatedly by 
his son, pleaded guilty to a voluntary manslaughter charge and was sentenced to 
a jail term that later was reduced to five years' probation. The probation 
period ended last November. 
Many of the African-American fans at Thursday's ceremony said the circumstances 
of Gaye's death, his reported abuse of drugs and his penchant for controversy 
may have caused an undue delay in his receiving a star. They also speculated 
that the Chamber of Commerce selection committee was uncomfortable with Gaye's 
outspoken -- some said strident -- manner. 
"At first we were told that Marvin didn't get a star because he was not a good 
role model," said Joyce Miller, 26, a South Los Angeles special education 
teacher who began lobbying two years ago for recognition of Gaye on the walk. 
"It is so offensive to black people to hear he was refused because of something 
like that," said Miller, noting that Elvis Presley, who also abused drugs, has 
a star on the walk. 
A protracted wait is common, said Johnny Grant, chairman of the star selection 
committee of the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce. 
"There was never a doubt that Marvin would be given a star," Grant said. "It 
was just a matter of time." Grant added that a stipulation in the selection 
rules states that five years must pass before considering any candidate for a 
posthumous star. 
