SHARING THE EARTH; 
AT LAST, WAR-WEARY ENVIRONMENTALISTS AND DEVELOPERS ARE LEARNING TO WORK 
TOGETHER TO PRESERVE ENDANGERED SPECIES. 
More than 20 years after a 3-inch perch called the snail darter stalled 
construction on a $137-million Tennessee dam, today's growing herd of 
endangered species, from foxes to phlox, is just as unpopular with builders and 
their bankers. It's not hard to see why. 
Southern California developers and state and federal agencies expect to pay 
more than $100 million for the land to protect what all parties refer to as the 
K-rat, the endangered Stephens' kangaroo rat. Others have recently seen the 
once wide-ranging desert tortoise given emergency listing as an endangered 
species. 
A battle-toughened establishment of home builders, landowners, slow-growth 
advocates, environmentalists, urban planners, lawyers, hydrologists, biologists 
and assorted other consultants sees combat daily over the future of the brown 
hills and green glens of California. And many of those struggles hinge on the 
fate of the state's growing gallery of endangered, threatened and rare living 
things, which now number 254 sheep, salamanders, grasses, thistles and the 
like, with hundreds more waiting in the wings. Beyond this, the federal Fish 
and Wildlife Service has its own list, which includes 62 species in California 
alone. 
Developers have long yearned to be rid of the endangered species laws. Now, for 
long-debated environmental reasons, and with some misgivings, many 
conservationists working with scarce species may be willing to give developers 
much of what they want. 
The move is toward habitat conservation planning, which holds that the best way 
to save scarce species and accommodate reasonable development, is with broad, 
whole-habitat preserves that may involve groups of developments, collections of 
rare beasts and plants, and fewer but larger tracts of land. Piecemeal 
setting-aside of land has often created preserves that are too small for the 
species, or that ignore the interconnection of various species. 
In fact, endangered species often appear in clusters. The pressures of growing 
cities, for instance, often affect many organisms at once. Environmentalists 
now speak in terms of preserving healthy communities, not just single beasts in 
islands of habitat. 
Larger wildlife preserves also solve the problems of home range. The Florida 
panther, for instance, needs more room to roam than was realized when various 
small patches of land were first set aside for it. Each species may also have a 
minimum requirement to support enough individuals to keep a healthy gene pool. 
Now Florida conservationists are going back to set aside corridors of land to 
connect the smaller panther preserves. 
Many developers are ready for the habitat conservation approach. Long resigned 
to endangered-species expenditures as part of the cost of doing business, they 
welcome the chance to consolidate their problems with rare bugs and plants and 
to be able to plan with greater certainty. Disruptive lawsuits under the 
endangered species acts often enter the picture late in the day, when the meter 
is running on a developer's construction loans. 
The classic example of habitat conservation planning was also the first in the 
country. 
In the early 1980s, developers were poised to build on San Bruno Mountain, the 
last large open space on the San Francisco peninsula. Of 3,000 acres, the 
builders agreed to set aside 2,000 as open space and for recreation. It wasn't 
until then that the endangered Mission blue butterfly turned up -- over the 
entire 1,000 acres. 
Under endangered-species law, this stopped the bulldozers cold. Even the 
accidental killing of a butterfly would bring automatic, and heavy, financial 
penalties. But in light of the earlier dedication of so much land to open 
space, this seemed unfair in the extreme. A San Mateo County supervisor set 
about to change the rules. 
The upshot was an agreement among the several landowners and developers, the 
County of San Mateo, three cities, two state agencies, the local environmental 
lobby and the federal Fish and Wildlife Service to design the development to 
protect some 20 species -- not only the butterfly but also such endangered 
species as the San Francisco garter snake and scarce organisms not yet 
officially listed. Several hundred more acres were set aside as preserve. 
But since the planning was done early enough in the game, developers lost not 
one of their 3,000 planned houses in the deal. More to the point, the resulting 
amendment to the federal endangered species law ended developers' liability, 
when they agreed to this kind of multi-species protection, for accidental 
deaths. They could build without interference on the rest of the land. 
"No one is saying we're going to walk away from using the endangered species 
laws," cautioned Richard Spotts, California representative of Defenders of 
Wildlife. "This is more taking us to a higher level, if you will. . . . People 
have seen this coming for a long time now, looking at systems instead of 
individual parts of the system." 
Nor are calm and reason about to arrive in the exploding Southern California 
housing tracts. While such habitat conservation plans may be in the works for 
the Stephens' kangaroo rat, they are still the exception. And absent such 
sometimes-tricky agreements, environmentalists are still likely to resort to 
their safety net, the endangered species laws. With predictable opposition. 
"About two weeks ago I saw a new map that just came out, on protecting the 
desert tortoise," said an unhappy Mel Wynn, president of the Building Industry 
Assn. of Southern California. "And the map showed the endangered species area 
running from the Antelope Valley all the way to Las Vegas, and all the area in 
between, a huge amount of ground. . . . That's pretty scary." 
"I sound like a real redneck," Wynn continued, "but I just see somebody sitting 
down and saying, 'Now, how can we stop these guys from developing?' And this 
was the brainstorm." 
"We're not all looking under rocks for endangered species," countered an 
exasperated Jill Swift, president of Friends of Caballero Canyon and a longtime 
Sierra Club activist. "We're working for something that our kids and 
grandchildren will savor and enjoy, instead of a 20-story condominium that's 
about to be torn down because it was built so poorly." 
In fact, these scarce species have become sophisticated and powerful weapons, 
wielded by developers and environmentalists alike. 
Some developers now use the presence of an endangered species to bargain-down 
the price of land, arguing to landowners that their costs will be higher to 
build on that site. 
For their part, slow-growth advocates and environmentalists have found an 
uncompromising legal tool in obscure flora and fauna found nesting in the path 
of progress. Not only do endangered species laws disregard how much it costs a 
developer to preserve a rare grass or spotted owl, once they are discovered on 
a project, they move the battle from the political and to the judicial arena, 
where environmentalists have often been more successful, not being pitted 
against expensive lobbying campaigns. 
With the endangered species laws looming in the background, some builders will 
try to reach accommodation even before a battle develops. 
Take the case of the newly found Riverside fairy shrimp, an animal which 
developers are likely to save before it is declared endangered; before, in 
fact, it has even been officially declared a separate species. 
Don't get out the cocktail sauce. The size of a cashew, this flimsy crustacean 
lives its brief, quiet life swimming upside down in as few as five small ponds 
in Riverside County, ponds that exist for a matter of weeks, or at most months, 
after the first big winter rains. The Riverside version is most easily 
distinguished from the 16 other species of fairy shrimp in California by the 
male's head appendages -- large for its kind -- which are used to grasp female 
shrimp during mating. They eat bacteria and are in turn eaten by wading and 
migratory birds. 
Clyde Eriksen, a bushy-browed ecologist and biology professor at the Claremont 
Colleges, has been studying fairy shrimp for 35 years. He was "dragged onto the 
environmental side" when his wife was sprayed with malathion, the same 
pesticide used against the Mediterranean fruit fly, two decades ago. A breeze 
wafted the spray onto her sewing porch as municipal workers debugged a nearby 
tree. When she complained, the men told her: "Oh, that's all right, lady. This 
isn't potent stuff at all. Just wait. In two weeks, that oak tree across the 
street? We're going to come back and spray that with DDT." 
Five years ago, Clyde Eriksen joined Denton Belk, a world-renowned fairy shrimp 
expert from Texas, and Larry Eng, a shrimp researcher himself and an endangered 
species specialist for the California Department of Fish and Game, to conduct a 
survey of the state's fairy shrimp population. 
They studied all the embalmed collections that they could find, as well as 
fresh samples from sites around the state. Under the microscope they discovered 
what they considered to be four new species, including the Riverside shrimp. 
Eriksen also soon discovered that the only significant remaining pool in which 
the shrimp lived, called Skunk Hollow, was about to become part of Rancho Bella 
Vista, a development with more than 2,500 master-planned homes. 
Eriksen wrote to a Riverside County supervisor pleading that his new shrimp, 
and the endangered California orcutt grass found on the same site, "not be 
lightly wiped from the face of the earth." The Sierra Club rolled out its siege 
guns and the board of supervisors demanded a plan to save the Riverside fairy 
shrimp. 
Meanwhile, to the casual eye, the Skunk Hollow pool most of the time is a dry 
depression of slightly darker grasses in a farmed area of roughly a hundred 
acres. One proposal from the first developer was to physically transport Skunk 
Hollow somewhere else. 
Michael Packard, president of Lane/Kuhn Pacific Communities, which bought the 
Skunk Hollow site in January, this time naming the project MountainView, knew 
that the rare crustacean was there. But Packard hasn't wasted a minute or a 
dollar arguing that the world could well do without the Riverside fairy shrimp. 
"There's enough question here," said Packard one afternoon in his Escondido 
office, "that rather than fight . . . let's just make the assumption that it is 
in fact worth preserving, endangered or not, and figure out the best way to 
accommodate that preservation." Packard, seated at a conference table in the 
company of his attorney, admitted that he's something of a new breed of 
builder. 
"It's been very easy for a long time to paint this industry as the black hats," 
he said. "And I think to some extent our community has earned that distinction. 
"And I think there is a heightening of awareness" among many developers today, 
Packard said. "But I don't think you can ignore cost." 
"In some cases," explained Lindell Marsh, the attorney, "the issue you're 
dealing with is of a magnitude that one project owner really can't adequately 
address it. . . . When you have a species over an extended range, that's a real 
problem." 
This is the sort of vexation that all sides hope broad habitat conservation 
plans can solve. 
As it happens, Marsh is also the driving force behind what are known as the 
Starr Ranch discussions, a series of meetings over the past few years that were 
first held at the Audubon Society's Starr Ranch Preserve in Orange County. At 
these, environmentalists, planners, developers, public regulators and 
scientists attempt to develop ways to ease the friction between Southern 
California developers and their opponents. Habitat conservation plans are 
central to their discussions. 
"And I think that at least with the big land developers, government agencies 
and environmentalists," said Marsh, holding his thumb and forefinger slightly 
apart, "we're that close to basic agreement." 
"As conservationists, we're sort of offering the olive branch," agreed Richard 
Spotts, of Defenders of Wildlife. 
Still, environmentalists want to move with caution. 
Michael Bean, a Washington-based senior attorney with the Environmental Defense 
Fund who has been a central figure in endangered species law for more than a 
dozen years, thinks that most conservationists favor the new plans, though some 
remain ardently opposed. Critics worry that developers can bring much greater 
economic resources than can nonprofit environmental groups to these complicated 
planning scenes. Habitat conservation planning may take a year or more of 
committee work and reports. 
"I don't think anyone disagrees with the potential of these habitat plans to be 
very useful," said Bean, who supports them. But he worries that most so far 
have been largely dominated by the developers. "The question left open . . . is 
whether they give away more than they should give." 
Nona Yates, in the Times library, assisted with the research for this article. 
SPECIES AT THE BRINK 
1 FAIRY SHRIMP 
A typical fairy shrimp. The Riverside variety was discovered so recently that 
no drawing exists. It has yet to be declared a new species, let alone 
endangered. But the shrimp is so rare that the owner of the largest pond where 
it lives has agreed to cooperate with environmentalists to protect it. 
2 DESERT TORTOISE 
The California desert tortoise, whose population has dropped by as much as 60% 
in some areas, was given emergency listing as an endangered species in July. 
3 KANGAROO RAT 
The Stephens' kangaroo rat was placed on the federal endangered species list in 
October, 1988. Some 27 square miles of Riverside County may be set aside to 
preserve its habitat. 
