PYRENEES DEVELOPERS CAUGHT IN A BUZZ SAW OVER ALL-BUT-INVISIBLE BEARS; 
ENDANGERED SPECIES: ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY RARE COLONY COULD BE EXTINCT WITHIN 
20 YEARS UNLESS STRICT PROTECTION GUIDELINES ARE ADOPTED AND OBEYED. 
This is the story of a dozen bears with pretty names like Papillon, Zoe, 
Dominique and Camille, who have become the center of one of Europe's fiercest 
environmental debates. It also concerns Jojo, a millionaire loner, who is the 
best-known animal in the Pyrenees. 
Jojo is tame and the rest are wild. Fifteen thousand people a year visit the 
village of Borce, France, under snow-speckled mountains to see Jojo in his cage 
and be told how he was rescued as an abandoned cub by schoolchildren 19 years 
ago. He is soon to be given a 1.5 million reserve of his own and his first 
mate. 
One of the reasons for spoiling him is that he justifies the logo of the Aspe 
Valley, the entrance to the Pyrenees National Park. On tourist brochures, a 
cuddly teddy clutches a flower, giving the impression that bears are as common 
as those in America's Yellowstone and as much loved. 
Both themes are wrong. Bears are all but invisible while local people fear that 
campaigns on their behalf will hold up road, ski station and other building 
plans that might save a dying valley populated by dairy farmers who have hated 
bears for centuries. 
The Council of Europe's environmentalists say the bears could be extinct within 
20 years unless strict protection guidelines are obeyed. 
The head of the national park's scientific committee, Michel Clin, a Bordeaux 
geological professor, agreed with this view. He resigned in anger in July, 
saying that the valley's 13 local councils were going ahead with development 
plans that will destroy one of Europe's last bear colonies. 
Visitors to the Pyrenees Park might think that this has already happened. A 
game warden has just retired after 45 years' service without ever sighting the 
animal. Villagers at Urdos or Accous tell thrilling stories of bears attacking 
the parish priest's beehive or terrorizing isolated shepherds but the tales 
date back 10 years or more. 
Only men of faith see the bears. A local photographer, Gerard Lopez, camped out 
every week for six years before he got his picture. But the most persistent 
bear-tracker is Jean-Jacques Camarra, an official of the National Hunting 
Office who has identified and named at least a dozen bears although sometimes 
the only clue was a footprint or a piece of fur. 
His whole life is devoted to protecting the animals and he spends seven or 
eight hours a day walking from forest to forest. He has seen bears only 12 
times in 10 years -- including cubs playing with butterflies -- and has just 
written a book called "L'Ours Brun" in which he reveals their names for the 
first time. 
In it, he sets out the arguments of environmental lobbies, backed by the 
minister, Brice Lalonde, who believes the bears must have 250,000 acres of what 
he calls "tranquility space" to survive beyond 2010. The enormous popularity of 
Jean-Jacques Annaud's film, "The Bear," which was pre-released here to a 
background of violent controversy, has done much to aid his cause. 
"It is not just an ecological argument" he said. "The presence of bears and 
their increase could contribute to bringing back prosperity to the region". 
This is a minority view in a valley of 3,000 people that has lost 75% of its 
population in 90 years. The bear is a natural enemy of high altitude sheep and 
cattle farmers. Last year there were 39 cases of bear attacks on sheep, but 
shepherds say there were many unproved cases where animals died of fright. Turn 
of the century photographs of villagers tormenting or maltreating 10-foot-high 
bears show how deep the resentment goes. 
In 1982, two bears were shot dead despite fierce protection measures in which 
large areas are inaccessible to local communities. One village received 
compensation of 40,000 francs last year because a forest was put out of bounds 
so that bears would not be disturbed by timber work. Some of the money was 
spent on flying in food, including half a cow, by helicopter in an attempt to 
lure the animals away. Helicopters are also used to fly shepherds' supplies to 
high mountain pastures so as not to disturb bear trails. 
"We can't collect wood, we can't graze sheep and we can't collect berries 
because of those animals" an irritated farmer said. "Bears, bears . . . they 
always come first." 
According to Jacques Capdeville, a nature lover who runs the equivalent of a 
public works cooperative for the 13 village councils, every argument over 
saving bears is full of contradictions. 
"There were more bears in the valley when there were more people" he said, 
implicitly casting doubt over the immense zone of tranquility that would throw 
centuries of farming tradition into disarray. "In the adjoining Ariege 
department bears have disappeared at the same time as the population has 
drifted away, leaving the area like a desert. Bears appear to thrive in the 
proximity of humans and it's not surprising if local people feel they should be 
left to sort this out by themselves without pressure from outside". 
In the Aspe Valley with its medieval stone villages, the rural drift has been 
temporarily stopped but new job opportunities are still desperately needed to 
persuade young people to stay. Local councilors have approved a 25-million 
franc European Community road-widening scheme, a new road tunnel alongside the 
park and long-distance skiing facilities and other developments to encourage 
tourism. The environmental lobby, backed by radicals who have destroyed 
construction equipment, say that the bears will run away in fright or just lie 
down and die if the work starts. 
But while Zoe, Dominique and Camille play hide and seek, Jojo looks smugger 
than ever in his cage at Borce. The same farmers who hate the wild bears go 
sloppy when they talk of the local orphan brought down from the mountains in a 
haversack. He will be more than ever the center of interest in his own 10-acre 
reserve from December, which expects to receive 50,000 visitors a year. At 20, 
he will at last be given a mate. Because of the shortage of candidates in the 
Aspe Valley, his mate will come from a Paris zoo. 
