U.S. OFFERS TO MEDIATE FOR S. AFRICA, BLACKS 
The Bush Administration congratulated South Africa's ruling party for its 
election victory and offered Thursday to serve as mediator between the 
government and the black majority. 
"We are committed to working with all parties to bring the South African 
government and black South Africans together in a substantial effort to end 
apartheid," State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said. "We therefore 
are prepared to work with the new government toward this end." 
White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said Bush sent a personal telegram 
of congratulations to acting President Frederik W. de Klerk, although Fitzwater 
insisted that such messages are "relatively routine," even in elections that 
Washington considers to be less than democratic. 
Tutwiler declined to say if the United States is ready to lift its economic 
sanctions against South Africa. 
In a formal statement reacting to the ruling National Party's narrow victory in 
Wednesday's election, the Administration underlined its objections to the 
apartheid system of racial segregation. But the statement also echoed Bush's 
congratulations to the ruling party for winning an election that the U.S. 
government had earlier decried as unfair and unrepresentative because blacks 
were denied a right to vote. 
"We congratulate acting President De Klerk on his party's victory at the polls 
and for leading his party to win its mandate for real change in South Africa," 
Tutwiler said. 
Reminded that Washington has seldom used such warm language in reference to 
South Africa's tightly segregated political system, Tutwiler replied: "You keep 
focusing on congratulations. The message is a two-page message. There's more 
than just congratulations." 
Fitzwater added that U.S. policy toward South Africa is essentially unchanged. 
"I would not characterize these telegrams as any different from those sent to 
other heads of state in the same situation," he said. However, Fitzwater agreed 
with a questioner who noted that no similar telegram was sent to Iranian 
President Hashemi Rafsanjani after his recent electoral victory. 
Tutwiler emphasized that the Administration's offer of cooperation is 
conditioned on the De Klerk government's taking prompt action to bring the 
country's black majority into the political system. 
