THE COLLEGES; 
CSUN VOLLEYBALL ROTATION GOING IN CIRCLES 
The season is almost a month old and Walt Ker, coach of the Cal State 
Northridge women's volleyball team, still does not have a set lineup. 
Ker, in his 11th season as coach of the Lady Matadors, says that he cannot 
remember taking so long to make a final decision. 
On the final day of the Portland State tournament last Saturday, three freshmen 
-- setter Alison Wool, middle blocker Nancy Nicholls and outside hitter Patty 
Fitzsimmons -- were in the CSUN starting lineup. 
"We still beat Regis (Colo.) and played a competitive match against Portland," 
Ker said. "It still being this early in the season, I was encouraged a lot. I 
know they'll improve a lot." 
Although CSUN lost its match against defending NCAA Division champion Portland 
State, the Lady Matadors finished with a 3-1 record and won the tournament on 
the basis of points won. 
Ker was particularly impressed with CSUN's team defense and the continued 
strong play of junior Marianne Dixon. 
Dixon, a second-team All-American as a middle blocker last season, has been 
moved to the left-side hitting position to bolster the Lady Matadors' attack. 
"The more I see her out there, the more I like her," Ker said. "Nancy Nicholls 
has been doing such a nice job in the middle, we could afford to move her 
outside." Nicholls is a freshman from Cleveland High. 
Keeping up with Jones: Cobi Jones, a midfielder on the UCLA soccer team, set 
what is believed to be a school record by registering either a goal or an 
assist in each of the Bruins' first eight games. 
Jones, a graduate of Westlake High, recorded six goals and six assists for UCLA 
(9-0). The sophomore had his streak snapped Tuesday against UC San Diego, but 
his 18 points are among the leaders in the NCAA Division I. 
"He's definitely having a better year than we expected," UCLA Coach Sigi Schmid 
said. "With the injury to Bill Thompson, our All-American forward, it has 
really forced Cobi to shoulder a big load. So far he's been up to the task." 
Jones, a walk-on who has earned a scholarship, worked his way into the Bruins' 
starting lineup seven games into last season. 
Another Valley-area player, Paul Ratcliffe, a freshman walk-on from Calabasas 
High, has a goal and three assists this season. He has played in all nine 
matches, starting twice. 
Untimely tune: Seconds after Pomona-Pitzer's public-address announcer informed 
spectators that alcoholic beverages were not allowed inside the stadium during 
the Sagehens' football game last Saturday against Occidental, the school band 
struck up the Budweiser theme. 
Trading compliments: The best winless team in the NCAA Division II? That would 
have to be Central (Okla.) State, says Bob Burt, coach at Cal State Northridge. 
Northridge defeated Central State, 31-28, last Saturday on a 17-yard touchdown 
pass from Sherdrick Bonner to Anthony Harris with 11 seconds left. Central 
State is 0-3-1 but has been outscored by only 11 points. 
"That's the quickest team and one of the best teams talent-wise that we've 
played in the four years I've been here," said Burt, whose team is 2-2. "They 
haven't won yet, but I promise you they will." 
Central State's defense -- led by linebacker Keith Traylor, a 6-3, 251-pound 
transfer from the University of Oklahoma -- was particularly impressive. 
Northridge had only 22 yards rushing in the first half, largely the result of 
six quarterback sacks. 
In the second half, Northridge compiled 138 rushing yards, including 99 by 
tailback Albert Fann, who drew a rave review from Central State Coach Gary 
Howard. "He's a big-time player," said Howard, who watched Fann run for 137 
yards. "I can't imagine that there are too many guys around better than he is." 
Wrestle-mania: Moorpark College begins its wrestling season Friday night when 
it plays host to El Camino at 7:30. 
Serge Mezheritsky and Carson Wollert, both of whom placed in last season's 
state championship meet, are expected to be the Raiders' top wrestlers. 
Mezheritsky, who was second in the state at 142 pounds, will wrestle at 150 
this season. Wollert will compete in the 190-pound class, in which he finished 
fourth in the state. 
Freshmen to watch include Del Ochoa from Hueneme (118 pounds) and Robby Cook 
from Rio Mesa (134 pounds). 
"We're going to be very similar to last year," said Moorpark Coach John Keever, 
whose team placed fifth in last season's state meet. "We'll be a strong 
tournament team, and dual-meet-wise we'll be in a battle with every team 
because we do have some holes." 
Honoring the wounded: Valley placekicker Jim Harper was a preseason 
All-American selection by the JC Grid-Wire. As a freshman, he converted 12 of 
17 field-goal attempts and 28 of 29 extra-point attempts in earning All-Western 
State Conference honors. 
So how is he dealing with success? 
Not very well -- but through no fault of his own. Harper has been hampered all 
season by a pulled quadriceps muscle in his right (kicking) leg. He has made 
only one of three field-goal tries. 
In Valley's 23-0 loss to Moorpark on Saturday, Harper was short from 40 yards, 
wide left from 40 yards and had another attempt blocked. 
"He injured his leg before the first game and he hasn't kicked in practice 
since then," Valley Coach Chuck Ferrero said. 
Unfortunately for Ferrero, injured or not, Harper is still the Monarchs' best 
kicker. 
Steven Fleischman, Gary Klein and staff writers Mike Hiserman, John Ortega and 
Brendan Healey contributed to this notebook. 
