TOO LITTLE, TOO LATE FOR TRACK?; 
LAND DEAL CAN'T HALT DROP IN PRICE OF STOCK IN HOLLYWOOD PARK 
The last thing shareholders in Hollywood Park expected to see in the past week 
was a drop in the price of the stock of their ailing race track. 
After all, Hollywood Park was able to announce on Sept. 11 that it had made 
still another deal to sell Los Alamitos, the track it owns in Orange County, 
and it appears that a sale will actually take place. More than $100 million in 
debt, Hollywood Park is to receive about $71 million when the Los Alamitos sale 
is completed in two months. 
Even so, Hollywood Park's stock has dropped several points and is headed toward 
the low of about $20 a share that it cost last year. 
"The drop in the stock reflected disappointment," said David Winters, a 
securities analyst. "The price Hollywood Park is getting for Los Alamitos is 
much less than the $100-million deal that fell through earlier this year, and 
this leaves the company with just the Inglewood facility, which is in need of 
refurbishing. 
"Despite the sale of Los Alamitos, the company could still be about $50 million 
in debt, and it has not been a well-run company." 
Marje Everett, the 68-year-old chief executive officer of Hollywood Park and 
the track's largest shareholder with an interest close to 10%, evidently was 
among those who were disappointed. "When I heard what happened, I wanted to 
start walking West and not stop until I reached the ocean," Everett reportedly 
told Ed Allred. Allred is the physician and quarter horseman who was part of a 
group that tried to buy Los Alamitos for a sum, Allred says, that was several 
million dollars more than the offer Hollywood accepted. 
Everett said that she did not recall making that remark to Allred. "As far as 
I'm concerned I had a good relationship with both groups that were trying to 
buy the track," she said. 
The successful buyers are Lloyd Arnold and Chris Bardis, veteran harness-racing 
operators in California, and commercial developers Buzz Oates and Frank Ramos. 
Oates is a former board member of Wells Fargo Bank, which is Hollywood Park's 
largest lender. 
Of the 300 acres at Los Alamitos, less than half is needed to conduct racing. 
Hollywood Park's $100-million deal with SDC Development of Newport Beach 
disappeared earlier this year when the citizens of Cypress, where Los Alamitos 
is located, voted against commercial zoning of the property. 
Another major Hollywood Park shareholder disappointed by the sale of Los 
Alamitos is Tom Gamel. The second-largest Hollywood Park shareholder with about 
5.6% of the stock, Gamel has been trying to oust Everett since early this year. 
"The deal they made was one that could have been made six months ago," Gamel 
said. "It cost the company about $15 million." 
Gamel, who has a wide-ranging plan designed to restore Hollywood Park's 
national prestige, is trying to force his way onto the board of directors, and 
this week he told Everett that there would be a proxy fight unless some of his 
allies named to the board. 
Among those Gamel wants on the board are Gary Hamilton, the president of SDC 
Development; Barry Weisbord, president of Matchmaker Breeders Exchange in 
Lexington, Ky.; and J. R. Sturges, a commercial developer from Santa Barbara. 
Except for Gamel, none of his candidates owns a significant amount of stock in 
Hollywood Park. 
Everett had little to do with cutting the final deal that sold Los Alamitos. 
When Marvin Davis, the oil billionaire, was appointed to the Hollywood Park 
board and bought more than $1 million of Everett's stock, his office took over 
the company's serious negotiations for the purchase of Los Alamitos. 
Davis' representatives were reportedly unhappy with the offer from Allred, 
because one of his prospective partners was PacTel Properties. 
"Davis' people felt that they were dealing with people at PacTel who didn't 
fully realize what they were getting into," said a source familiar with the 
negotiations. "That left Arnold and Bardis as the only true bidders." 
Arnold and Bardis also had more clout with Hollywood Park than Allred and his 
quarter horse friends, because they represent a harness industry that had at 
least two lawsuits pending against Hollywood. 
Allred, who heads a quarter horse group that has a lease to conduct racing at 
Los Alamitos until the year 2002, still doubts whether the latest deal to sell 
the track will be completed. 
"I have serious reservations about whether the closing will take place," Allred 
said. "The amount of money up front -- $500,000 -- was so small that it was 
ridiculous. I don't think the final chapter has been written on this 
transaction yet." 
Allred, a partner with Dee Hubbard in Ruidoso Downs, a quarter horse track in 
New Mexico, is already turning to other fronts, including modest plans to build 
a track in Southern California, which would have a limited racing season and 
stay open the rest of the year for betting on races from other tracks. 
"When we present our proposal to the California Horse Racing Board, it will be 
so inviting as a money maker for the state that there won't be any reason to 
turn it down," Allred said. 
Hollywood Park bought Los Alamitos in 1984 for about $58 million. It has paid 
about $25 million in interest on the bank loan since then, and the track also 
paid Arnold and others more than $9 million to secure harness-racing licenses. 
So the sale to Arnold and Bardis represents a loss of more than $20 million on 
the property. 
The annual meeting of the Hollywood Park shareholders is scheduled for Dec. 8. 
The annual report has not been issued, but based on reports already filed with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission, Hollywood Park's losses will total 
about $10 million for 1988. 
The balance sheet for 1989 will not be any better, despite substantial revenues 
for the second straight year from off-track betting that Hollywood Park takes 
on the races from Del Mar. This year, Hollywood Park has been unable to further 
capitalize the interest on Los Alamitos for land cost and investment. 
The key player in the Hollywood Park scenario used to be Everett, who has 
managed the track since 1972. Now that role belongs to Davis, 64, who owns only 
about 1% of Hollywood Park stock. Davis told friends that he handled the Los 
Alamitos sale as a favor to Everett. 
