200 FOREIGNERS REPORTED KILLED IN LIBERIA 
Liberian rebels have killed 200 foreign civilians from the five nations that 
make up a West African task force in Liberia, the Ghana News Agency said 
Friday. The killings were in retaliation for the force's presence there, the 
agency said. 
A Ghana News Agency correspondent with the West African force said that rebels 
loyal to Charles Taylor began attacking the civilians shortly after the peace 
force arrived in Monrovia last Saturday to try to end the eight-month-old civil 
war. 
Taylor opposes any intervention in the conflict. 
There was no comment Friday from Taylor, who confirmed on Thursday that he was 
holding thousands of foreign citizens. 
The task force fought its way to the eastern edge of Monrovia and took control 
of the capital's airport Friday, diplomatic sources in Freetown said, speaking 
on condition of anonymity. 
The airstrip is big enough to handle military transport planes. Controlling it 
will make resupplying the task force much easier. 
About 3,000 soldiers from Ghana, Nigeria, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Gambia are 
under orders to end the conflict, which has turned into a tribal war. 
The Spriggs Payne Airfield had been in the hands of President Samuel K. Doe's 
troops but was under fire almost daily from Taylor's rebels, camped less than a 
mile away. 
The British Broadcasting Corp. said a spokesman for Prince Johnson, who broke 
with Taylor and leads a rival rebel group, called Friday to report that Doe's 
troops broke an informal truce and attacked Johnson's forces, killing 21 
soldiers. 
Doe and Johnson had both welcomed intervention by the West African force and 
declared a truce more than a week ago. 
Also Friday, the peacekeeping force pushed eastward toward the embassies of 
three member states -- Guinea, Ghana and Nigeria -- which lay just behind rebel 
lines. Taylor's rebels had rounded up thousands of Guineans, Ghanaians and 
Nigerians who had taken refuge at their embassies, saying they were being held 
for their own protection. 
The Ghana News Agency quoted Ghanaian teacher Kwasi Kwateng, 36, as saying that 
rebels attacked a community of 2,500 Ghanaians living in Barnesville, about 3 
1/2 miles from Monrovia's port. 
The agency gave no specifics about this or other alleged attacks, however, and 
there was no confirmation from other sources. 
Kweku Egyir, 52, a Ghanaian who has lived in Liberia since 1963, said Taylor's 
men were looking for Ghanaians and Nigerians in particular because their 
members of the African force had inflicted many casualties on the rebels. 
Egyir said the rebels could identify Ghanaians and Nigerians by their accents 
and tribal scars. "The marks on our faces are called identity cards in this 
country," he said. 
Taylor invaded Liberia from Ivory Coast on Dec. 24, calling Doe's government 
corrupt and pledging to overthrow it. His fighters quickly overran most of the 
West African country of about 2.5 million people, but they have been unable to 
dislodge troops loyal to Doe. Johnson's rebels, who split with Taylor, have 
taken control of much of the capital. 
