SACRAMENTO FILE: GOVERNOR 
Will speak to the annual Host Committee breakfast in Sacramento on Friday and 
attend the state Republican Party's fall convention in Anaheim on Saturday. 
Assembly 
Floor Action: 
Automobiles: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments on 
a 70-1 vote a bill (SB 788) by Sen. Herschel Rosenthal (D-Los Angeles) to 
require auto dealers to inform prospective purchasers if the vehicle they want 
to buy was returned under the state "lemon law" because of a defect or the 
dealer's inability to conform to warranty terms. 
Northern Ireland: Passed and sent to the governor on a 43-21 vote a bill (AB 
2443) by Assemblyman John Burton (D-San Francisco) designed to steer state 
pension fund investments away from companies that practice religious or ethnic 
discrimination in Northern Ireland. 
Cal Vet Loans: Passed and sent to the governor on 71-0 vote a bill (AB 2139) by 
Assemblyman Bob Epple (D-Norwalk) to increase the maximum value of a Cal Vet 
home loan from $90,000 to $125,000. 
Firearms: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments on a 
41-30 vote a bill (SB 861) by Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) to require 
gun dealers to equip concealable firearms with trigger-locking devices before 
offering them for sale. 
Infant Deaths: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments 
on a 66-2 vote a bill (SB 1070) by Sen. Daniel Boatwright (D-Concord) to 
establish a Sudden Infant Death Syndrome Task Force to advise the director of 
Department of Health Services on SIDS program needs. SIDS claims the lives of 
about 800 California babies each year. 
Pro Wrestling: Passed and sent to the governor on a 62-2 vote a bill (AB 1040) 
by Assemblyman Richard Floyd (D-Carson) to repeal state law requiring licensing 
of professional wrestlers. The author argues that pro wrestling is 
entertainment and not a sport. 
Automobiles: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments on 
a 42-19 vote a bill (SB 1700) by Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) to allow 
variable interest rate auto purchase loans. 
Artists: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments on a 
68-2 vote a bill (SB 1189) by Sen. Milton Marks (D-San Francisco) to let 
artists claim a tax credit equal to 9.3% of the fair market value of their work 
if it is donated to a nonprofit organization. 
Senate 
Floor Action: 
Telephone Calls: Passed and sent to the governor on a 24-1 vote a bill (SB 10) 
by Sen. Bill Lockyer (D-Hayward) to require state agencies to answer incoming 
telephone calls within 10 rings during regular business hours under normal 
working conditions. 
Boom Boxes: Passed and sent to the governor on a 21-10 vote a bill (SB 1130) by 
Sen. Cecil Green (D-Norwalk) to prohibit the operation of any vehicle sound 
amplification system that can be heard 50 feet or more away from the vehicle. 
Junk Fax: Passed and sent to the governor on a 25-4 vote a bill (SB 487) by 
Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) to make it illegal to transmit junk 
advertising material over facsimile machines. 
Doctors' Fees: Passed and returned to the Assembly for concurrence in 
amendments on a 30-3 vote a bill (AB 675) by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier 
(D-South San Francisco) to make the charging of excessive fees grounds for 
state disciplinary action against doctors. 
Discrimination: Passed and returned to the Assembly for concurrence in 
amendments on a 26-1 vote a bill (AB 2208) by Assemblyman Robert Campbell 
(D-Richmond) to prohibit rental property landlords and home sellers from 
discriminating against immigrants from other countries. 
