INTERNAL AUDIT CLEARS UCI'S PSYCHIATRIC UNIT; 
MEDICINE: NO EVIDENCE IS FOUND TO SUBSTANTIATE ALLEGATIONS OF FALSIFIED DRUG 
RECORDS OR IMPROPER BILLING OF MEDI-CAL. 
An internal audit of UCI Medical Center's psychiatric unit has found no 
evidence of falsified prescription drug records or improper billing of Med-Cal 
for unapproved research drugs, university officials said Wednesday. 
After a 10-month investigation that included a review of the records of about 
60 psychiatric patients at the hospital in Orange, the university's internal 
audit department concluded that "Medi-Cal was not improperly billed for 
research drugs," according to the summary report released Wednesday. 
"What it means is that . . . there was no indication or finding of any 
impropriety," said Dr. Donald B. Summers, UCI Medical Center's chief of 
clinical psychiatric services. 
The investigation was begun last November amid allegations by medical center 
employees that unidentified doctors falsely labeled research drugs with the 
names of approved drugs and illegally billed the state. The doctors allegedly 
kept two sets of medical records to hide the practice from Medi-Cal, which does 
not pay for research trials. 
Similar allegations are the focus of a second investigation by the state 
attorney general's division of Medi-Cal fraud. Don Kennedy, a senior 
investigator for the office in San Diego, said Wednesday that the investigation 
is continuing. UCI spokeswoman Karen Young said a copy of the internal audit 
findings would be forwarded to the attorney general's office. 
Complaints that sparked the internal investigation were made in letters to 
hospital administrators by two UCI psychiatrists and an administrator for the 
department. The letters to Dr. William E. Bunney and Summers, the chairman and 
vice chairman, respectively, of UCI's department of psychiatry and human 
behavior, raised ethical and legal concerns about these practices, emphasizing 
that these same questions were raised months earlier but that department 
officials had taken no action. 
Summers said Wednesday that he and Bunney requested the internal audit in late 
October, 1989, and that at least two of the letter writers were informed of the 
investigation in a meeting on Feb. 13. 
Summers said Wednesday that he did not know why the investigation took so long, 
but auditors indicated that it was part of a continuing major audit of the 
95-bed hospital unit and psychiatric department. 
According to the audit report, the medical center was reimbursed by Medi-Cal 
for the hospital stays of some patients used in research studies. 
"However, Medi-Cal was not billed for the actual cost of the research drugs 
administered to these patients," wrote internal audit director Andrew C. 
Yeilding in the summary report to Mary A. Piccione, the medical center's 
executive director. 
As for keeping a "second set" of medical records, such practice is "standard 
procedure," the audit said, citing the director of research for the medical 
center's department of psychiatry and human behavior, Dr. Steven G. Potkin. 
Potkin was unavailable for comment Wednesday. 
The report indicated that one set is the patient's medical record and the other 
is the research record of the patient's participation in research studies. 
The audit said such a research record is required by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, but that these are not part of the official hospital medical 
records and consequently "are not relevant to the hospital records used for 
billing procedures." 
Summers said that research drugs are generally supplied by the drug company 
supporting the studies and that "there is no way to generate a charge" for the 
drugs. 
"Medi-Cal was never billed for any of these medications," Summers said. 
A central part of the criticism that led to the internal investigation revolved 
around the labeling of drugs on patient records. Charts of patients who were 
receiving the research drugs Raclopride and Zacopride were variously labeled 
Haldol/R and Haldol/Z. 
Haldol, a brand name for the drug haloperidol, is an anti-schizophrenic drug 
approved by the FDA and reimbursable by Medi-Cal. It is a major tranquilizer 
used in treating psychotic disorders, severe behavior problems in children and 
hyperactivity in children. 
The audit called it standard practice in conducting medical research to use a 
"double blind" study and identify a drug by a code name in the medical record. 
Since the physician's orders and those in the medical center's pharmacy 
indicate the appropriate research drug, what is actually written in the medical 
record "is moot," the audit concluded. 
However, Summers said, when questions were raised about this labeling practice 
last October, he ordered a procedural change requiring that the drugs be more 
fully labeled to prevent confusion. 
