INDIVIDUAL OWNERS MAY GET VOICE IN REDEVELOPMENT PLANS 
The Glendale Redevelopment Agency on Tuesday unanimously adopted a 
developmental concept that, for the first time since downtown revitalization 
began 18 years ago, encourages individual property owners to work together to 
improve their area. 
The concept would permit individual owners to renovate or replace their 
buildings in a two-block area south of Broadway. In the past, owners of smaller 
properties generally have been forced to sell their holdings in the downtown 
area to make way for large-scale, high-rise projects by single developers, 
Jeanne Armstrong, redevelopment director, said. 
But now, with a great demand for office space, low-rise buildings in the area 
are economically feasible, she said. 
The concept was bolstered in part by the agency's growing concern over 
increasing traffic congestion from large-scale developments. 
And, Armstrong said, downtown redevelopment "is moving so well that, with 
encouragement, the economic forces will take the lead, as they should," 
allowing property owners to make their own improvements. 
"We don't want to force the market into anything it is not ready for," she 
added. 
She said a key to the plan is the city's willingness to build a parking garage 
to serve new development and renovation in the area bounded by Brand Boulevard 
on the west, Louise Street on the east, Broadway on the north and Harvard 
Street on the south. Much of the area consists of parking lots or buildings 
that are badly deteriorated, ugly, vacant or beyond repair. 
A city-sponsored garage would make reconstruction or development of new retail 
space financially feasible, Armstrong said. The development design adopted 
Tuesday by the agency, which consists of the five Glendale City Council 
members, calls for two parking garages. One, to be built by the agency on the 
northeast corner of Harvard Street and Maryland Avenue, would have 820 spaces. 
The other would have space for 370 vehicles and be built privately for office 
development on Brand Boulevard. 
Armstrong told agency members that "the amount of parking which the agency and 
private sector together provide will set the limits on the total development" 
in the two-block area. 
Previously, individual owners along Brand generally had only small lots and did 
not have the economic resources or interests to take on a block-long project, 
Armstrong said. Today, however, property owners have larger parcels and appear 
willing to participate in redevelopment. 
"What we have is a blueprint for development and we will work with individual 
property owners to encourage them," she said. 
The proposal would extend the "Exchange," a two-block area north of Broadway. 
The renovation project features a pedestrian-oriented treatment of Maryland 
Avenue, decorated with stately palm trees and bubbling fountains. 
Two "master developers" were named in that area to oversee reconstruction and 
development. Many of the owners of small lots there simply sold their property 
or were forced by the city to sell to the master developer of their block. 
Armstrong said the city has no plans yet to select a master developer for the 
area south of Broadway. Instead, the agency is asking individual owners to come 
up with their own plans. 
"We think we have enough interest there to do without a master developer," 
Armstrong said. She said the interest became evident in March when a large 
group of owners and developers crammed into an agency study session to learn 
more about proposed expansion of the Exchange. 
Seven years ago the property owners wanted to develop their own renovation 
plans, but the city turned them down, opting instead to pursue a more grandiose 
plan consisting of retail and office space plus condominiums. 
Plans for that development, called the Colonnades, fell through in 1984 because 
the developer, Goldrich, Kest &amp; Associates of Sherman Oaks, decided that it 
wanted to build apartments and a residential hotel instead of condominiums -- a 
plan the city did not like -- and because the developer failed to meet 
financial commitments. 
City officials estimated that the Exchange, just east of the Glendale Galleria, 
may not be ripe for high-density development for at least 15 years, if ever. In 
the meantime, construction and renovation are feasible, they say. 
