STAGE REVIEW; 
'FRANKIE AND JOHNNY': MAKING A ONE-NIGHT LOVE LAST LONGER 
That irresistible couple, Frankie and Johnny, are back in Southern California 
and what's amazing is how durable these middle-aged klutzes are. 
Playwright Terrence McNally may have written a relatively slight piece in 
"Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" -- the retelling of a one-night 
encounter between a short-order cook and a waitress who work for the same New 
York City joint -- but he has crafted it with uncommon skill and perception. 
In the play's current incarnation, which opened Saturday on South Coast 
Repertory's Second Stage in Costa Mesa, Karen Hensel plays the pudgy, pragmatic 
realist Frankie, who's happy for the roll in the hay but now wants her 
apartment to herself again, thank you -- and Richard Doyle portrays Johnny, the 
incurable romantic from Brooklyn Heights who spouts Shakespeare, is sure he's 
found his life's mate, won't stop talking and absolutely will not leave. A 
likely story? Love stories rarely are, but McNally -- and South Coast veterans 
Hensel and Doyle -- know how to make it work. 
The play starts at the end of the beginning, with the sounds of love-making in 
the dark (audiences intimidated by nudity, explicit language and sex are fairly 
warned), but it's all much tamer from there. It goes on to become a long night 
of sparring, wooing, snapping, reeling, ranting, cooking, confessing and 
ultimately connecting. 
By the end of the first act, you feel that you've watched a satisfying 
one-acter that's also a terrific workout for a pair of good performers. What 
could another act bring? The real goods. 
If Act One is mostly fun and games, Act Two brings on fiber and sinew. That's 
what lifts "Frankie and Johnny" out of the realm of the ordinary two-character 
knockabout and makes it a provocative, engaging play. Act Two is where we get 
to know these people, even as they get to know each other. The real Johnny: an 
ex-boozer, the product of foster homes, nursing the wounds of an earlier failed 
marriage and the shame and surrender of his two kids to life with his ex-wife's 
wealthy new husband. Frankie: a would-be actress made cannily wary of love and 
happiness by some rotten experiences with a violent man. 
There may be nothing all that exceptional about a past littered with such 
prevalent incidents, but it is in the quality of the confessions, the 
forthrightness of the writing, the careful skirting of sentimentality in favor 
of candor and true romance that the distinction lies. There is nothing in 
memory quite as unprepossessing and unforgettable as the final image of these 
two ordinary folks listening to Debussy's "Clair de Lune" on the radio as the 
sun comes up, pensively brushing their teeth, and reaching across an eternity 
of kitchen countertop to touch fingers . . . 
Director Warner Shook has seen to it that Hensel and Doyle play the energy (in 
his case) and the negativism (in hers) without lapsing into mawkishness. 
Hensel's Frankie is pugnacious and untidy, with just enough vulnerability 
showing under the gruffness, like a slip below the hemline. Doyle, in the 
tougher job, has to bluster and battle his way through to winning her heart. 
"You're so . . . sincere," she barks at him at one point. Who can withstand so 
much of that? But Doyle, like some dogged kitchen Quixote, never lets go of his 
impossible dream. And wins. 
John Iacovelli designed the cluttered one-room walk-up, but it is Brian Gale's 
lights -- from the different drab areas in the room, to the silver-blue 
moonlight filtering in -- that truly make it. Costume designer Ann Bruice's job 
was easiest: boxer shorts and undistinguished (on purpose) robes. 
 At 655 Town Center Dr. in Costa Mesa, Tuesdays through Fridays, 8:30 p.m.; 
Saturdays, 3 and 8:30 p.m.; Sundays, 3 and 8 p.m.; until Oct. 22. Tickets: 
$20-$27; (714) 957-4033. 
