ARMENIA, AZERBAIJAN WARNED BY GORBACHEV TO END THEIR QUARREL 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Monday gave the two southern Soviet republics 
of Armenia and Azerbaijan two days to stop their quarreling, to end 
Azerbaijan's blockade of Armenia and to agree to talks to settle their feud 
over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh. 
Otherwise, Gorbachev told the Supreme Soviet, the national legislature, the 
central government will have to intervene. He said the situation in the region 
is of "the greatest concern" to the country. 
Angered by a dispute that has cost more than 100 lives and thrown into doubt 
the Communist Party's ability to rule, Gorbachev made it clear that his 
patience -- and that of the entire Soviet leadership -- has run out. 
"If the situation does not stabilize, the Soviet government with republican 
authorities must, I think, make concrete proposals to untie that knot," he told 
the Supreme Soviet at the opening of its autumn session. "We shall wait and see 
a day or two, but let the government be prepared, if the need arises, to make 
its proposals." 
Refrained From Using Troops 
Gorbachev did not disclose what action the government might take. Until now, it 
has refrained from using troops to avoid bloodshed. But clearly, he sees the 
situation as a test of political will and a challenge to the party's new policy 
on ethnic relations. 
"It is important that our society understands that intolerance and force are 
not methods for solving problems," Gorbachev said. "One can, on the contrary, 
only move away from the solution of a problem and complicate it. 
"In the conditions of a democratic state under the rule of law that we are 
striving for, there cannot and must not be any method of political action 
except reliance on law and the desire to resolve any problems first of all 
through consensus." 
Despite a series of government measures, including direct rule of 
Nagorno-Karabakh by Moscow, the 20-month dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan 
has worsened, Gorbachev said, and now threatens the stability of the country as 
a whole. 
Armenia has been under a nearly total economic blockade by Azerbaijan for three 
weeks. Azerbaijan has halted rail and road traffic to and from the neighboring 
republic to support its claim to Nagorno-Karabakh. Armenia normally receives 
about 85% of its supplies through Azerbaijan. 
Widespread Shortages 
Food and fuel are both in short supply now in Yerevan, the Armenian capital, 
and in many of the republic's larger towns. Fresh produce is available from the 
countryside, but sugar, salt, cheese and pasta have disappeared, according to 
Armenian journalists, and traffic is limited to emergency vehicles. Most 
factories have stopped working because of shortages of raw materials and 
energy. They said that reconstruction in the areas devastated by last 
December's earthquake that killed 25,000 has come to a halt. 
The blockade is unprecedented in Soviet history, and the Armenian Parliament 
appealed to the central government last week to intervene in the dispute. 
The Azerbaijani Parliament responded by passing a law declaring that its 
present territory is indivisible, underscoring its determination to retain 
Nagorno-Karabakh, an enclave of Armenian Christians in Muslim Azerbaijan. 
Past efforts by Moscow to settle this quarrel -- Armenia wants to annex 
Nagorno-Karabakh -- have failed. The region, under effective martial law, is 
ringed by elite troops, supplied by air and administered by a representative of 
the central government with plenipotentiary powers. 
Afraid of bloodshed and an even sharper conflict, the government has refrained 
from ordering troops to break the blockade, which was established by the 
militant new Azerbaijan Popular Front on all the railways and roads leading to 
Armenia. 
The blockade is "shameful for the Communist Party, shameful for the country," 
an Armenian deputy, Sergei Ambartsumyan, rector of Yerevan State University, 
told the legislature. "I believe our (national) Parliament must give guarantees 
against occurrences like this anywhere." 
A woman deputy from Azerbaijan said that both sides are probably to blame for 
the prolonged dispute. She urged reconciliation. An Armenian deputy replied 
that who is at fault may not be clear, but that only his republic is under 
blockade and that it must be lifted if there is to be progress on the broader 
issues. 
Speaking of the country's ever-deepening ethnic crisis, Gorbachev said the 
situation has worsened since the Supreme Soviet concluded its summer session in 
late July. Last week's discussion of ethnic questions at a special meeting of 
the party's policy-making Central Committee, and the adoption of a new party 
platform on the matter, has made no apparent difference, he said, so the 
nation's political will and his reform policies are now being tested. 
Describing the situation in Armenia and Azerbaijan as "extremely tense," 
especially in Nagorno-Karabakh, Gorbachev said repeated efforts have not "eased 
the tight knot of problems," especially the blockade. But he reported that 
freight trains are starting to run again. 
System Based on Law 
The overriding concern, however, is the establishment of a political system 
based on law and the conciliation of differences, he said, adding: 
"The actual strengthing of legality is assuming increasing importance. No law, 
even the best, will be worth anything if it remains only on paper, if the state 
fails to ensure its implementation, if citizens do not comply with it 
conscientiously." 
Armenians had appealed earlier this month to the United Nations to send 
peacekeeping troops to Nagorno-Karabakh, asserting that the Kremlin has failed 
to protect them from Azerbaijani attacks despite the presence there of more 
than 4,000 troops from the Soviet Interior Ministry. 
"For long months now, this tiny Christian region . . . has been under the 
harshest of blockades," a council representing the Armenian majority in 
Nagorno-Karabakh said. "Regular killings and actions of violence are being 
perpetrated against it, and now there is talk of deporting the native 
population. . . . 
"We now appeal to you to do everything possible for the security of the 
Armenian population of Karabakh, including even the dispatch of a contingent of 
U.N. soldiers should this become necessary." 
Although government officials said in Moscow that a way around the blockade has 
been found through neighboring Georgia, local authorities said Monday that 
virtually nothing has arrived by this route. 
Newsprint Allowed In 
"During the last 24 hours, only trains with construction materials and 
newsprint were allowed into Armenia," the Azerbaijan Popular Front said in a 
statement received from Baku. "The rest of the freight is not being let 
through." 
Nagorno-Karabakh was described by the official news agency Tass as very tense, 
with supply convoys still being attacked by Azerbaijanis. One soldier was 
seriously wounded in an attack in the regional capital of Stepanakert, 
according to Tass. 
"Troops are guarding wells and oil storage plants, providing for the delivery 
of food and mail, and unloading helicopters and accompanying convoys with food 
to Armenian and Azerbaijani settlements," Tass reported from Nagorno-Karabakh. 
