COUNTY JAIL TAX MEASURE RESURRECTED; 
BILL BROUGHT BACK TO LIFE FOR 3RD TIME BUT ITS FATE IS UNCERTAIN 
In biblical lore, Lazarus was restored to life after being entombed for three 
days. The event was counted among Jesus Christ's greatest miracles. 
In Sacramento politics, a "Lazarus bill" is a legislative measure left for dead 
in one committee or another only to miraculously reappear. 
So it went Monday as state Sen. Marian Bergeson resurrected her measure to 
allow Orange County residents to vote on a half-cent sales tax for new jail and 
court construction -- a Lazarus bill if there ever was one. 
Bergeson, a Newport Beach Republican, revived her controversial measure for the 
third time this year when she convinced her colleagues in the state Senate to 
add it to a similar measure up for debate on the floor. 
One More Chance 
The move now means that the half-cent sales tax proposition will have at least 
one more chance to become law before legislators finish their business for 1989 
in a frenzy of activity this week. The Senate will debate the merits of the 
Orange County tax proposal later this week, and could still vote it down. 
"It's stop-and-go, stop-and-go," Bergeson said after the Senate voted to let 
the measure live again through amendments to the existing bill. "We're 
certainly pleased that we got the amendments passed" on Monday. 
If approved by the Legislature and signed into law by the governor, the sales 
tax proposal could go to Orange County voters as early as June, 1990. County 
supervisors have voted to build a new $700-million jail in Gypsum Canyon, near 
Anaheim Hills, and they are counting on the sales tax to generate $121 million 
a year in seed money. (Voters in November will consider another half-cent sales 
tax increase for transportation improvements.) 
Monday's last-ditch revival of the sales tax bill prompted some senators -- led 
by Sen. John Seymour (R-Anaheim), Bergeson's Orange County challenger next year 
for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor -- to cry foul. 
Seymour and others claimed that Bergeson is trying to "subvert" the process and 
sneak the jail tax increase measure through at the last minute, rather than 
live by the legislative rules and face the fact that her proposal has been 
defeated. 
"We have a policy in this house that when a matter has been turned down by a 
committee, you can't take that matter, amend it into some other bill and then 
bring it to the floor," said Seymour, who nonetheless agreed that Orange County 
is desperate to find some way to pay for a new jail. 
He Upholds the Rules 
"Every time we argue that there is a crying need, does that give us the right 
to break the rules? I say no," Seymour declared in an interview. 
But Orange County's desperate state is exactly what Bergeson cited to persuade 
her colleagues to revive the bill. 
"We are turning criminals loose," she told them. "The frustration level 
continues because the problems are acute and we are simply not having our 
problems addressed in a way that is really meeting local needs. . . . " 
Earlier this year, Bergeson killed the bill when Santa Ana city officials had 
it amended to make sure that the new jail wasn't built in their community. She 
later agreed to take it up again after striking a delicate political compromise 
that resulted in elimination of the Santa Ana amendment, instead placing the 
question of where to put the jail squarely in the hands of county supervisors. 
The second death knell seemed to come just before legislators broke for their 
summer recess in July, when an Assembly committee held up the tax measure 
because of nagging doubts about its constitutionality, since it would require 
only a simple majority vote, not the two-thirds majority mandated by 
Proposition 13, the 1978 tax-cutting initiative. Although the measure 
eventually passed committee, it was entombed in yet another Assembly committee, 
where those same doubts were expressed. 
Bergeson immediately began behind-the-scenes negotiations to incorporate the 
Orange County measure in a similar bill sponsored by Assemblyman Dan Hauser 
(D-Arcata). Hauser's bill would allow voters to consider the half-cent sales 
tax for jails in Humboldt, Riverside, San Bernardino and Ventura counties. 
With Hauser's consent, Bergeson and Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) on Monday 
moved to add Orange and Los Angeles counties to that list. The Senate allowed 
the amendments by a vote of 20 to 10. 
