NEW DRUG OFFERS HOPE FOR SOME SCHIZOPHRENICS 
Frederick J. Benham Sr. had his first bout with mental illness in 1948, when he 
was on the cusp of adulthood and away from home in the Army. Something just 
snapped, and he found himself in a military hospital, undergoing hypnosis. 
"At that time there was no such thing as tranquilizers," the 58-year-old 
Bridgeport, Conn., man said of the array of anti-psychotic medications that 
later would help usher in a new era of treatment for schizophrenia. 
Benham has been on and off neuroleptics, as they are called, since 1960. Like 
others who have taken them, he is ambivalent about the drugs, which becalm 
hallucinations and clarify disordered thinking. 
"They gave me relief for symptoms I had," he said. "I would get over-excited . 
. . and they made me more controllable." But, "as for making me feel good, it 
was not as if I was on Cloud 9." 
In recent years neuroscientists have searched for an improvement on the old 
anti-schizophrenic medicines. One could be on the market within months, its 
manufacturer says. 
"Even though we welcomed" the older generation of drugs, "they've got 
limitations," said Dr. William M. Glazer, an associate professor of psychiatry 
at Yale University School of Medicine in New Haven. 
The problems of classical anti-schizophrenic medications such as Thorazine, 
Mellaril and Haldol include their awful side effects: uncontrollable -- and 
often irreversible -- tics and twitches, motor disturbances and persistent 
states of restlessness. 
Another limitation is that they are not effective on as many patients as 
doctors would like, said Glazer, one of many scientists around the United 
States experimenting with new drugs that offer "a better profile." 
One of those drugs, clozapine, is likely to be on the market for some 
schizophrenics by the end of the year, said Dr. Gilbert Honigfeld, who has led 
clozapine research for Sandoz Pharmaceuticals since 1973. 
Clozapine is one of a new class of atypical neuroleptics that works differently 
in the brain and doesn't seem to cause the usual side effects. 
Also, studies show that clozapine more effectively reaches schizophrenics who 
for unknown reasons do not respond well to the older drugs. 
In addition to its anti-delusional activity, clozapine seems able to help break 
through the wall of isolation and withdrawal that often surrounds patients in a 
way that current medicines do not, said Dr. John W. Goethe, head of clinical 
research at the Institute of Living in Hartford. 
Although it avoids the worst side effects of the existing anti-psychotic drugs, 
clozapine does have some side effects. It causes 2% of the patients taking it 
to suffer a severe drop in white blood cells, Honigfeld said. Those cells are 
key to the immune system's ability to fight infection, and the condition can be 
life-threatening. 
As a result, if the Food and Drug Administration approves it for other than 
experimental use, clozapine will be restricted to the quarter-million or so 
schizophrenics who do not respond to the current drugs, Honigfeld said. 
One of the most debilitating and chronic, if least understood, diseases, 
schizophrenia exacts an enormous toll on the estimated 1 million Americans who 
have it, as well as on their loved ones. 
Some schizophrenics' "lack of insight," or failure to acknowledge their illness 
and the need for treatment, is a common obstacle to many patients' getting 
better and staying out of the hospital. 
But the effectiveness and side effects of the classical neuroleptics are issues 
that have plagued patients and doctors for years, Glazer said. 
Only about 15% of schizophrenics on the regimen of existing drugs show a 
complete response to the medication, Glazer said, while three-quarters show a 
partial response. Ten percent show no response. 
The side effect known as tardive dyskinesia strikes a third of all patients 
taking neuroleptics, said Glazer, who heads a Yale clinic that investigates the 
disorder. 
Some patients are hit severely, exhibiting movement disturbances that an 
onlooker might mistakenly conclude result from the mental disorder itself. 
These include bizarre motions of the mouth and tongue, lip-smacking, chewing 
and tics of the fingers and toes, Glazer said. Painful side effects include 
rigid, immobilized features. The eyes can become fixed, the jaw thrust open. 
Other patients experience a chronic restlessness and hyperexcitability that can 
be "very, very debilitating," he added. These side effects can have the 
paradoxical effect of stimulating the very delusions and hallucinations the 
drugs are meant to correct. 
Today's research aims at finding chemicals that minimize side effects, while 
more exquisitely fine-tuning the chemical reactions in the brain that have been 
linked to the onset of schizophrenia. 
After two decades of study, neuroscience still has only dimly illuminated those 
reactions, even in the normal brain. 
It took seven years after the discovery of Thorazine in 1952 for a Swedish 
scientist to determine that the drug worked by interfering with the passage 
within the brain of a chemical called dopamine. 
Dopamine is one of the neurotransmitters responsible for the way information 
from our senses, our memories and our conscious and unconscious thoughts is 
relayed back and forth. In the normal brain, these neurotransmitters work 
dynamically with each other, allowing us to perceive the world and act in it in 
ways that are varied and idiosyncratic, to be sure, but also, by consensus, 
normal. 
In the schizophrenic brain, that delicate balance is upset by miniature deluges 
and droughts of dopamine, and, it is increasingly believed, other 
neurochemicals. 
Scientists are "hot on the trail of the mechanism underlying schizophrenia," 
Glazer said. Although "dopamine continues to be the leading candidate," its 
relationship to other neurotransmitters is a subject of intense inquiry. 
Clozapine research is focusing on the way the drug regulates the balance 
between dopamine and another neurotransmitter, serotonin, Glazer said. 
Research suggests that something about the drug's effect on dopamine and 
serotonin enables it to work in schizophrenics who have been unresponsive to 
the older drugs, he said. Brain biochemistry is showing that schizophrenia is 
less "a unitary disease than a spectrum of diseases," Goethe of the Institute 
of Living said. 
The treatment of schizophrenia has come a long way since the day Fred Benham 
entered Walter Reed Hospital at age 17. 
Before Thorazine, patients were strapped in "tranquilizer chairs," spun around 
until they were dizzy, restrained much of the time and given high doses of 
insulin designed to plunge them into insulin shock, a procedure then thought to 
be therapeutic, Glazer said. 
There is no question, he added, that the introduction of anti-psychotic drugs 
revolutionized the care of schizophrenia and paved the way for the movement 
that helps the mentally ill leave the hospital to start a new life back in the 
community. 
Nearly 40 years later, clozapine is "only tiding things over" until the next 
"designer drug" comes along, made safer and more effective by "bending atoms, 
adding a little carbon here, a hydrogen there," Glazer said. 
But, he said, he finds the prospects of a new generation of atypical 
neuroleptics exciting, capable of producing major changes in the delivery of 
mental health care. 
