AMERICANS WISE UP TO BUSH SELLOUT; 
TAXES: PRESIDENT'S BROKEN PROMISE WILL DROP A BIPARTISAN WHAMMY ONTO JOE 
SIX-PACK. 
With each passing day, the Bush Administration acts more and more like the 
beleaguered Ryzhkov government in the Soviet Union. Nikolai Ryzhkov is Mikhail 
Gorbachev's prime minister whose economic plan has come under fire for 
proposing "business as usual" while the Soviet economy sinks into depression 
and famine. Russians, burned by this callousness, are calling for the 
government's resignation. 
Bush's budget negotiators are showing the same insensitivity. As the U.S. 
economy sinks into recession, President Bush, his budget director Richard A. 
Darman and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, together with Republican 
congressional leaders Bob Dole and Bob Michel, are engaged in a bidding game 
with Democrats to see who can pile the most onerous new taxes on the voters. 
The budget deal that Bush is cutting with Congress is an agreement that lets 
political incumbents of both parties spend more money in an effort to buy their 
reelection. Recently, Bush allowed Rep. Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) and others who 
oppose the bipartisan sellout of the taxpayers to be excluded from the 
negotiations. The group now includes only those who are determined to raise 
taxes. 
Americans are no less fed up with government than Russians. Washington insiders 
should take note of John Silber's primary victory over the Massachusetts 
political Establishment and of the limited terms Oklahoma voters placed on 
state officeholders last week. Our politicians should also note the polls that 
show a jump in the number of low- and middle-incomeAmericans who believe that 
hard work no longer guarantees success because local, state and federal taxes 
steal most of the income gains that people achieve. 
The U.S. government has a budget of $1.3 trillion, a sum that exceeds the gross 
national products of both France and Great Britain. If the U.S. budget were a 
country, it would be the fifth-largest economy in the world. Yet the greedy 
politicians want still more. Appealing to class warfare, they claim to be 
taxing the rich, but the rich are too few to produce much money. That's why 
taxes always hit Joe Six-Pack. President Bush and Senate leader George Mitchell 
want to tax his beer, his cigarettes and his gasoline. Not content with this, 
budget negotiators want to undermine his job with massive surtaxes on 
entrepreneurial income. Everyone whose success creates jobs for others is to be 
hit with a 20% surtax. 
This is no way to invigorate a declining economy. The last time taxes were 
raised in a recession, the result was a lengthy depression that created a 
market for more government. 
The income surtax proposal is a conscious attempt to overturn the Reagan 
tax-rate reductions. The politicians know that sooner or later big money will 
result from inflation pushing Joe Six-Pack into surtax brackets. 
The proposal to take away the federal deduction for state and local taxes is 
aimed at homeowners. It would further weaken a declining real estate market and 
raise the cost to taxpayers of the S&amp;L bailout. 
Not satisfied with wrecking the private economy, the budget negotiators want to 
destroy the nonprofit sector by taking away the charitable deduction. This 
proposal is aimed at the only institutions in our society that still work -- 
private schools, hospitals and museums, charities that feed and house the 
homeless, and nonprofit research organizations. The proposal would not raise 
any revenues -- but that is not its purpose. The budget negotiators intend to 
greatly expand the education and welfare bureaucracies by eliminating the 
efficient private competition. If there are no alternatives to government 
programs, incumbents can spend still more money. 
By violating his "no new taxes" pledge, the President is putting himself and 
his government in the same league with fraudulent S&amp;L operators. The 
American people bought his candidacy in an election based on his financial 
promise, just as investors bought S&amp;L bonds based on the representations of 
S&amp;L managements. How can Charles Keating be tried for S&amp;L fraud when 
our political leaders behave the same way? A financial lie told in politics is 
no less damning than one told in business. 
When President Richard Nixon lied to the American people, he was forced to 
resign. President Bush should be held to the same standard. If Russians can 
demand the resignation of a government that puts its interest before those of 
the people, so can Americans. 
