DETECTOR OF PRE-TERM LABOR OKD; 
HEALTH: FDA APPROVAL ALLOWS TOKOS MEDICAL CORP. TO BEGIN MARKETING A MONITORING 
DEVICE DEVELOPED FOR WOMEN WITH A HISTORY OF PREMATURE BIRTHS. 
Tokos Medical Corp. said it received federal approval Thursday to begin 
marketing a device for detecting pre-term labor in pregnant women with a 
history of premature births. 
The device, which is manufactured by Physiologic Diagnostic Service, a small 
Atlanta firm that Tokos acquired 10 days ago for $31.4 million, is the first of 
its kind in the nation to receive pre-marketing approval from the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration. 
Tokos, based in Santa Ana, first announced plans to acquire PDS in June after 
abandoning a three-year effort to gain federal approval for its own 
uterine-monitoring device to provide early warning of premature births. Tokos 
began negotiating the purchase when it appeared that the Atlanta firm was 
nearing final FDA approval for its device, called the Genesis System. 
Industry analysts have praised the move as a strategic coup for Tokos that 
could make it the leader in a market with an estimated value of $1.5 billion to 
$3 billion. 
About 7,000 obstetrician-gynecologists in the country already prescribe the 
monitor -- a miniaturized version of monitors used in hospitals -- for use at 
home by women with high-risk pregnancies. Tokos has a national network of 64 
centers that are staffed by nurses who interpret data transmitted from uterine 
monitors by telephone lines. 
The monitors, which are strapped to patients by a belt, can detect an unusually 
high incidence of contractions, signaling a need to administer drugs or take 
other action to prevent premature birth. 
Sales of the monitors have been hampered by the refusal of some major insurers, 
including Medicaid, Blue Cross and Prudential, to reimburse patients for 
pre-term labor monitoring devices pending FDA approval. Until now, uterine 
monitoring devices had FDA marketing approval for use only during full-term 
labor. 
Under the FDA's approval Thursday, Tokos will be allowed to market the device 
only to women with a history of pre-term labor but not to women with other 
kinds of high-risk pregnancies, such as those in which the mother is expected 
to give birth to more than one child. 
"We are obviously delighted," Tokos President Craig T. Davenport said of the 
FDA's action. "We anticipate that this pre-market approval will lead to 
expanded prescriptions for our service." 
