SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
POLARIZATION BRINGS CONSERVATION TO LIGHT; 
ENERGY: PLASTIC PANELS INVENTED THREE DECADES AGO CAN CUT A BUILDING'S LIGHT 
BILLS IN HALF AND TRIM 25% OFF AIR-CONDITIONING BILLS. 
Myron Kahn can hardly control his excitement these days, what with President 
Bush actually saying the words "energy conservation" on national television in 
response to the Mideast oil crisis. 
Every time Americans get nervous about all the energy they waste, Kahn, of 
Tarzana, receives a flurry of orders for the polarizing panels he invented 
three decades ago -- thin lenses of plastic that can cut an office building's 
light bills by up to half and trim another 25% off the air-conditioning bills. 
Interest is also mounting, albeit slowly, in various pockets of the country. 
Several utilities in California and other states have begun offering rebates to 
businesses that install the energy-saving panels. And in Sacramento, new 
statewide building guidelines for lighting will allow builders to opt for 
polarizing panels and other innovative techniques over traditional lighting 
systems. 
The way polarization works is simple enough: The clear panels contain laminated 
layers that convert randomly vibrating light rays into a vertical pattern. 
Installed below ceiling lights, the panels transform the bothersome horizontal 
light rays that ricochet off desktops and computer screens and cause what we 
know as glare. With glare reduced, the eye sees richer colors and details. And 
when the useless horizontal rays become vertically polarized, they are better 
absorbed by objects and reflected back to the eye, further aiding vision. 
That is why art museums often use natural lighting, and why artists love to 
paint under blue skies. Sunlight is automatically polarized during its passage 
through the Earth's atmosphere, creating a superior setting, here on the 
planet's surface, for the eye to judge color, texture and detail. Conversely, 
on an overcast day the polarizing effects are disrupted. The result is glare. 
That is why people often squint under a slate-gray sky. 
What on earth does this have to do with cutting light bills by as much as half 
in the American workplace? 
Glare creates most of the visual problems in the office or factory. According 
to several lighting experts, once the light is polarized, employees can see 
their computers, desktop papers, factory equipment or other work surfaces so 
much better that about one-quarter to one-half of the overhead light bulbs can 
simply be removed. 
"It's an elegant and simple technology for minimizing glare," said lighting 
researcher Robert Sardinsky of the Colorado-based Rocky Mountain Institute. 
"The real value is that if you reduce glare, you can reduce the quantity of 
light. A bright room is not the answer to good vision." 
Not only are lighting bills slashed, according to independent studies, but the 
considerable heat generated by overhead light bulbs is reduced. That means air 
conditioners can be turned down, further cutting electrical costs. Employees 
working beneath polarizing panels also routinely report fewer headaches and 
reduced tension once glare is controlled. 
Today, from IBM's complex in Lisbon, Portugal, to the Department of Water and 
Power headquarters in downtown Los Angeles, buildings that were once 
electricity hogs have gone on the energy diet prescribed by Kahn. 
More than 30 million square feet of the desktop-size polarizing panels, selling 
for about $15 each, have been installed in 4,000 buildings worldwide since 
Kahn, 73, invented and patented them in the 1960s. 
Which brings us to why Kahn, deeply troubled by events unfolding in Iraq and 
what they portend for the country's energy supply, is so keenly monitoring the 
White Houses's sudden interest in conservation. 
For all its energy-saving properties, polarized light has never been widely 
accepted in America, where the major lighting conglomerates and large utility 
companies have generally pushed for the sale of more energy, more light bulbs 
and more lighting devices -- not less. 
Lighting industry spokesmen contend that they are waiting for more scientific 
proof that polarization significantly improves vision as it reduces glare. But 
the same groups have eagerly popularized other glare-control devices, from 
metal louvers to prismatic panels, without waiting for scientific documentation 
of significantly improved vision, Kahn says. 
"The industries who benefit from selling unnecessary lamps, lighting fixtures 
and power have a stranglehold on America's future," he says. "All the 
skyscrapers going up today are using parabolic fixtures and other 
energy-wasting devices that create glare. It's going to cost a fortune in light 
bills over the lifetime of a building. But worse than that, we're using up 
energy as if it were water." 
When it comes to conserving electricity, the economic stakes are indeed high. 
The Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental and conservation 
research group, has estimated that California's commercial ratepayers would 
save $2 billion a year if all existing and new buildings were outfitted with 
basic energy-efficient lighting systems now readily available. The calculations 
did not include polarized lighting. 
The estimated $2-billion saving is equivalent to the electricity generated in a 
year by 4 1/2 oil-fueled power plants. The reduced demand would also mean that 
$7.5 billion worth of construction in new power plants could be avoided, 
according to the research group. 
Because polarizing panels can achieve energy savings of 25% to 50%, they could 
play a meaningful role in cutting electricity demands in the United States. But 
Kahn faces an uphill battle, in part because most lighting designers have never 
even heard of polarizing panels. 
Polarized lighting is so little known within the lighting industry that 
Southern California Edison Co.'s new demonstration laboratory -- which purports 
to be a showcase for the latest in energy-efficient lighting techniques -- has 
no display on the benefits of polarization. 
Nor did the Natural Resources Defense Council, which is often on the cutting 
edge of new conservation techniques, include polarization in its high-tech 
lighting lab, opened in Seattle last year. One of the agency's researchers, who 
asked not to be named, said, "I don't know how this type of polarizing works, 
or what it is supposed to do for energy conservation." 
Even graduates of top engineering schools still mistakenly try to correct glare 
in the workplace by throwing more artificial light into a room, according to 
lighting engineer Bill Jones, director of Lighting Research Laboratory in 
Orange. 
"The last thing you should do is the first thing most people try -- attacking 
bad vision with even more lighting," Jones said. "There's just a tremendous 
lack of education out there among people who really should know better." 
Lighting experts say much of the ignorance stems from the fact that the 
Illuminating Engineering Society, an influential trade organization, has 
resisted pressure from Kahn and others to include recommendations for polarized 
lighting systems in its specifications manual. 
The society's manual is a bible for American contractors, architects, engineers 
and interior designers when they create lighting systems for buildings. 
H. Richard Blackwell, a world authority on lighting who has written hundreds of 
papers on the subject, said his studies in the 1970s, for which he won a 
prestigious Gold Medal award, showed that polarizing panels improved vision and 
required far less light than the room brightness levels recommended by the 
Illuminating Engineering Society. 
"Illumination standards for buildings still do not include the information we 
had more than 15 years ago, and this strikes me as the most ridiculous thing in 
the world," said Blackwell, a professor emeritus at Ohio State University. "I 
fought hard for fair play for polarization . . . but the vested interests did 
not want to hear that less lamps and less lights were needed. 
"My former students are now running the IES, and they seem to have developed 
bad habits. My feeling is that because national productivity and global energy 
are involved, it's no time for them to be acting cute." 
Don Thomas, IES president and an executive of GTE-Sylvania, said the issue is 
more complex than the society's critics make it. While agreeing that polarizing 
panels are an effective shield against glare and allow reduced lighting, Thomas 
said the IES is not in a position to decide if polarization provides better 
vision than competing glare-control techniques. 
"We need Myron's help, not his opposition," Thomas said. "We need money and 
support to research these things." 
He denied a frequent charge by critics that the IES has fallen into the same 
profit-motivated syndrome that afflicted Detroit car manufacturers, who failed 
for years to make American automobiles gas-efficient and were finally forced to 
do so by the government during the 1970s oil crisis. 
"That's an unfair charge," Thomas said. "It's not good marketing to hoodwink 
the public into buying more when it's not needed." 
(The IES bases its recommendations on the light measurement known as 
foot-candles, a formula arrived upon in the 1930s that is not correlated to 
vision, but simply assesses the brightness thrown off by a given light source. 
The society's recommended light levels for a given task, from sewing to typing, 
were increased steadily from the 1950s until the 1970s oil crisis.) 
Many conservation experts fear that once the current oil crisis subsides, 
energy-efficient technologies that have been struggling for national 
recognition, such as polarizing panels, will lose their momentum. 
A number of other forces are at play, however, that may help elevate polarized 
lighting to the consumer's shopping list of environmentally conscious products. 
Utility companies in Massachusetts and California have begun offering rebates 
to businesses that install polarizing panels to cut electricity use. The 
data-processing industry, hoping to reduce computer-screen glare that causes 
headaches and impedes worker productivity, is looking for ways to adapt the 
principles of polarized lighting to computer equipment. And Suffolk County in 
New York has approved laws to protect employees at video-display terminals by 
using overhead polarized panels to improve vision and reduce glare. 
Moreover, California's Energy Commission, a national trend-setter, last month 
published new statewide lighting guidelines, which recommend that designers 
install lighting based upon how well the eye actually sees, instead of relying 
solely on the Illuminating Engineering Society's standards for room brightness. 
Aimed at promoting energy conservation, the new guidelines recommend as an 
option to the longtime IES standards a visual performance measurement developed 
by Blackwell known as equivalent spherical illumination. 
"You might say the new guidelines pry the door open for intelligent lighting 
technology a little bit," said lighting engineer Jones, a member of the 
advisory committee that wrote the guidelines, and a fellow of the Illuminating 
Engineering Society, "but not nearly enough." 
POLARIZING LIGHT 
Polarized light panels can reduce energy costs and improve effective vision by 
reducing surface reflections and glare. Here's a look at light waves and how 
they are polarized. 
Normal Light 
Normal light beams consist of rays vibrating in random directions. The waves 
vibrating vertically produce better contrast and color, enhancing vision. 
Horizontal waves produce glare. 
Polarized light 
Polarized light consists of waves vibrating in primarily one plane. Normal 
light can be polarized using a special multi-layer filter which permits 
vertically vibrating planes of light to pass through. Most important, the 
multi-layer filter causes light traveling the horizontal plane to bounce back 
and forth until it is converted to vertical-plane light, which then passes 
through the filter. This system is different from linear polarized sunglasses, 
which block out light vibrating in the horizontal plane. 
