HE'S LIKE IKE; 
BUSH FOLLOWED REAGAN, BUT HIS APPROACH IS PURE EISENHOWER 
Slowly the truth is beginning to dawn on Washington. People and policies are 
starting to fall into a familiar pattern. And the realization is growing that 
George Bush has not found a formula for extending the Reagan revolution. 
Instead, he has re-created the Eisenhower presidency. 
The early indicators were misleading. Where Dwight D.Eisenhower was elected in 
1952 on a "Time for a Change" slogan, ending 20 years of Democratic control of 
the White House, Bush's theme was continuity. While Eisenhower was a national 
hero, Bush seemed at first to be badly overshadowed by his predecessor and 
unlikely to command a large following of his own. 
But less than one-sixth of the way into his first term, this President has 
turned out to be as popular in his way as Eisenhower -- a comfortable figure 
that most of the voters have decided is well-meaning, well-organized and on top 
of his job. If his speeches are as forgettable as Eisenhower's, his news 
conferences are as frequent and professional. His overall approach evokes 
trust, and opponents find their disagreements on specific policies hard to 
dramatize. 
Once the parallel is acknowledged, it makes sense, for Bush was raised as an 
Eisenhower Republican. His father was one of the general's early political 
supporters and a loyal ally in the Senate. Eisenhower was the first President 
for whom George Bush voted. 
Like Eisenhower, and unlike Reagan, Bush's instinct is to seek consensus. His 
background is far more partisan than that of the general, a lifetime military 
man who did not declare a party affiliation until he was persuaded to seek the 
presidency. But if Bush cares more deeply than Eisenhower ever did about 
Republicans winning elections for other offices, he is as willing as Eisenhower 
was to do business with the Democrats on Capitol Hill. And those Democrats are 
easy to draw into the bipartisan game. 
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) is a protege of the late Sen. Henry 
(Scoop) Jackson, one of the key Democratic legislators of the Eisenhower era 
and a man who believed that politics should stop at the water's edge. Foley 
obviously doesn't have the control of the House that Sam Rayburn had in the 
Eisenhower era. But from Nicaragua to Lebanon to Poland to China, Foley has 
proven to be Bush's loyal partner. 
Over on the Senate side, Majority Leader George Mitchell (D-Maine) is a far cry 
from Lyndon Johnson, who held that post during most of the Eisenhower period, 
when it comes to legislative showmanship. But Mitchell, like Johnson, believes 
that his party must be "responsible" if it is to regain the voters' trust. He 
is also cognizant that his own presidential hopes, no more implausible than 
L.B.J.'s seemed 30 years ago, rest on making the Senate look more productive 
than partisan. 
What makes all of this possible is the crucial break Bush has made with the 
Reagan model. Reagan came to the presidency convinced that government was not 
the solution but the problem. For all his personal agreeableness, that 
deep-seated belief, or prejudice, put him at odds with the rest of official 
Washington, which depends on governmental activism. Bush, as successful a 
careerist in the civilian side of government as Eisenhower was in the military, 
harbors no anti-government sentiments. He enjoys government and believes in its 
utility. 
Even more than Eisenhower, Bush is ready to recognize domestic needs that 
require government action. Like him, he'd rather things were done 
inexpensively, with a minimum of federal paper work and a maximum reliance on 
the states. But he accepts that there are tasks to be done and that the federal 
government has a role to play. Once that's conceded, Congress, the bureaucracy 
and the interest groups are in a game they enjoy, knowing that all of them will 
be, to some degree, winners. 
Legislators will have bills or amendments with their names on them -- drug 
bills, day-care bills, disabled-rights bills, you name it. Old agencies like 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Environmental 
Protection Agency, which languished in the Reagan years, will get new missions. 
And new agencies, like the one bailing out the savings and loans, will come 
into being. Lobbyists will make deals with each other to carve up the expanding 
federal pie, instead of being at each others' throats as they were when Reagan 
was upsetting everyone's apple carts. 
A few cranky columnists, like this one, will fret that "divided government" is 
unhealthy and that important tasks, like reducing the deficit, are being 
postponed. But as in the Eisenhower era, most voters will see nothing dreadful 
happening to them. 
Of course, the United States does not dominate the world economic and political 
stage now the way it did in the '50s. But the chaos inside the Soviet and 
Chinese superpowers provides a breathing space and people are ready to enjoy 
it. 
Even the politicians -- the Democrats on Capitol Hill and the Republicans in 
the Administration -- find the status quo easily endurable. They can muster 
limited enthusiasm for the seemingly remote prospect of ousting the other party 
from its place of power. 
It's so much easier to relax and play the familiar low-stakes game, which is 
exactly what Washington is doing. 
