4 CANADA ARRESTS HEIGHTEN FEARS OF DRUG RETALIATION 
Canadian police Thursday disclosed the arrest of four South Americans near the 
U.S. border carrying automatic weapons and 9-millimeter pistols amid growing 
fears that the Medellin cocaine cartel will attempt to retaliate against a 
U.S.-backed crackdown on Colombian drug kingpins. 
The four, traveling in three cars, were arrested Wednesday by police from 
Edmundston, New Brunswick, and were found to be carrying Venezuelan passports, 
two of which were determined to be fake, according to Edmundston's deputy 
police chief, Delbert Pelletier. 
Although a grenade, tear gas, zap guns and a machete were found in the vehicles 
along with more than 2,000 rounds of ammunition for the weapons, a highly 
placed U.S. law enforcement source said: "It's not our belief that this is any 
kind of hit squad." 
Cocaine Smuggling Suspected 
The source, who declined to be identified by name or agency, said that the four 
are suspected of trying to smuggle cocaine into Canada. More drugs are moving 
through the New Brunswick area since interdiction was stepped up on Caribbean 
drug routes, according to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
Police are searching for another suspect because a fifth Venezuelan passport 
was found in the cars, two of which had New York license plates. The other car, 
which was rented, had Canadian plates. 
"They have no story, no explanation," Pelletier said, noting that his officers 
acted on a civilian tip to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police that three cars 
had been seen with suspicious people outside Edmundston, a city of about 
13,000. 
The four, who Pelletier declined to name, will be arraigned today in court in 
Edmundston on charges of possessing prohibited weapons, the deputy chief said. 
Their arsenal included an Uzi submachine gun, Soviet and Israeli assault rifles 
and a Japanese grenade that was deactivated. Maps of several Canadian locations 
and an unmarked map of Maine were found in the cars, Pelletier said in an 
interview. 
He said that the four claimed not to speak English, but Louis Picard, an 
Edmundston lawyer representing two of the men, said that one does speak English 
and that he communicated with the other through an interpreter. 
"I advised them of their rights and why they were arrested and what's likely to 
happen in court," Picard said Thursday night. 
Meanwhile, Secret Service agents Thursday asked the Senate Permanent 
Investigations subcommittee for any information that it could provide on any 
security threat to President Bush believed to be growing out of the Colombian 
drug crackdown. 
A defector from a Colombian paramilitary unit working for the Medellin cartel 
testified before the subcommittee Wednesday, saying among other things that 
Bush and subcommittee members could be targeted by the Colombian drug outlaws. 
Times staff writers Douglas Jehl and Don Shannon contributed to this story. 
