DEL MAR; 
PAT VALENZUELA CALLS IN SICK AGAIN, WILL FACE A DRUG TEST UPON RETURN 
Pat Valenzuela, who missed a mount in Maryland and two racing days here 
recently because of illness, called in sick again Wednesday morning and was 
taken off his eight mounts. 
Well on his way to his second consecutive riding title -- he led Kent 
Desormeaux, 50-36, at the start of the day -- after beating Gary Stevens on the 
final day at Hollywood Park, Valenzuela spoke to steward Dave Samuel by 
telephone. 
"He said he was sick and asked to be taken off his mounts," Samuel said. "He 
didn't sound well, but he did say he wanted to be tested when he comes back." 
Samuel said Valenzuela indeed will be asked to take a drug test when he 
returns, presumably today. 
Scheduled to ride Sunny Blossom in the Frank DeFrancis Memorial Dash on Aug. 18 
at Pimlico, Valenzuela called the track's stewards that afternoon and told them 
he was sick and would not be able to fulfill his commitment. He was then taken 
off his mounts the next two days at Del Mar. 
After seeing Dr. Neil Fisher in Covina on Aug. 21, the 27-year-old jockey met 
with the stewards the following day, submitted to a drug test -- which came 
back negative -- and was permitted to ride that afternoon. It was determined 
that Valenzuela had been suffering from a virus or food poisoning. 
Referee Steve Schwartz said he expects to make a decision in "a couple of days" 
after a hearing on trainer Ron McAnally's appeal of the stewards' 
disqualification of Tight Spot in the $300,000 Del Mar Derby on Aug. 19. 
After he prepares his decision, Schwartz, who was appointed by the California 
Horse Racing Board to hear the matter, will submit it to the CHRB, which will 
then vote either to uphold or to reject the decision. 
In the Derby, Tight Spot, who beat Itsallgreektome by three lengths, was 
disqualified and placed last for allegedly tightening up the field in the first 
sixteenth of a mile. Itsallgreektome, moved up to first, and Super Abound were 
victimized the most. 
However, more than a few observers thought, immediately after the race, that 
Pro for Sure, who was directly inside of Tight Spot coming down the chute, and 
In Excess, were more responsible for the problems. 
Extensive viewing of different angles of the start during Wednesday's 2 
1/2-hour hearing seemed to support that argument. 
However, there was no testimony from the man with perhaps the best view of the 
incident. Paddock judge Darrel McHargue, who watched the Derby from his usual 
spot in the finish line tower, was asked to testify by Arthur Martin, the 
attorney representing McAnally and owner Verne Winchell. He said he had not 
been served with a subpoena, did not wish to testify and left the room. 
Schwartz said he had no jurisdiction to force McHargue, a former rider, to 
testify. 
Mort Lipton, representing fellow stewards Hubert Jones and David Samuel, said 
the decision to disqualify Tight Spot was unanimous. "There was exceedingly 
little room between (Tight Spot) and (Pro for Sure)," Lipton said. "(Alex) 
Solis (on Pro for Sure) was defenseless in the matter. (Laffit) Pincay was 
clearly in control and therefore responsible." 
Pincay, who was suspended for five days by the stewards after the 
disqualification, said he simply followed Pro for Sure, who was angling toward 
the rail. 
"I noticed that Pro for Sure started going and I started following him," he 
testified. "We were going very, very slowly, and I kept following him. I wanted 
to make sure I was clear and I could only see (Pro for Sure). I thought I was 
OK because I was clear of that horse. 
"Our horses were close, but not that close. I wasn't causing him to go in. I 
was just following him." 
Pincay added that he didn't think he deserved to be suspended but didn't appeal 
because he "didn't think I had any chance of beating you guys (the stewards)." 
There was also testimony from Solis; McAnally, who had never before appealed a 
disqualification; trainer Charlie Whittingham, who said horses were coming from 
all directions and that, if he were a steward, he wouldn't have known whom to 
disqualify; ex-jockey Bill Harmatz, who said, "In my opinion, Pro for Sure set 
the thing up coming out of the gate and I saw nothing improper from Tight Spot 
or Pincay." 
Rather than run Cee's Tizzy in Wednesday's $75,000-added El Cajon Stakes at Del 
Mar, trainer John Russell decided to work him seven furlongs before shipping 
him out for the Super Derby in Louisiana on Sept. 23. 
Without competition from the son of Relaunch, who ran a mile in 1:33 2/5 on 
Aug. 19, Asia took full advantage, going wire-to-wire to beat favored Warcraft 
by a half-length in 1:41 3/5 for the 1 1/16 miles. 
Making his second start for Jeff Copland, who had bought him privately for 
owners Marty Nadel, Pete Accardy and Bill Snyder from Claiborne Farm on Aug. 9, 
Asia had chased Cee's Tizzy 2 1/2 weeks earlier, and although beaten by almost 
three lengths, had been well clear of the rest of the field. 
The El Cajon was the third victory in nine starts for the gelded son of Danzig, 
who paid $9.20 as the 7-2 second choice. Warcraft, the even-money choice off 
some good workouts, was second, a half-length ahead of 10-1 shot Shinko Wine. 
"The horse came over in very good shape," said Copland, a one-time jockey agent 
who maintains a small stable. "I thought he might make the lead today. He's a 
nice little horse and a tryer. 
"I was happy to see Cee's Tizzy come out. I was hopeful because of his last 
race, but it's hard to feel too confident when you have Charlie Whittingham. 
This is my first stakes win." 
The El Cajon also continued a stakes hot streak for Solis. He has now won three 
in a row after taking the Del Mar Debutante Sunday aboard Beyond Perfection and 
the Del Mar Handicap with Live the Dream Monday. 
"The trainer didn't tell me much," Solis said. "He just said try to get a good 
position. He was going good for me and felt strong all the way. I took a peek 
at the head of the stretch and saw Chris (McCarron aboard Warcraft) coming with 
those red silks. That's when I asked my horse to run, and he gave it to me." 
Horse Racing Notes 
Jockey Rafael Meza became a father for the first time when his wife, Doreen, 
gave birth to Adriana Dominique Wednesday morning at Scripps La Jolla Hospital. 
. . . Pete Accardy, one of the owners of Asia, is the swimming coach at Cal 
State Northridge. . . . Chris McCarron and Russell Baze each rode two winners 
Wednesday. 
