U.S. DISCUSSES WITH ALLIES NEW WAYS TO PUNISH IRAQ 
The Bush Administration, encouraged by an international backlash against raids 
by Iraqi troops on Western diplomatic compounds in Kuwait, said Saturday that 
it is discussing with other countries new ways to punish the Baghdad regime for 
its actions. 
"We continue to consult with France and our other friends on further possible 
steps to bring home to Iraq the costs of its aggression, including tightening 
of the sanctions in all possible ways," the White House said in a statement. 
Although White House spokesman Sean Walsh declined to elaborate, analysts said 
the discussions are likely to include a proposal by French President Francois 
Mitterrand to impose an air blockade against Iraq. Another possibility would 
involve some form of sanctions against nations that help Iraq evade the 
international embargo. 
The White House statement came as the U.N. Security Council, at France's 
request, prepared for an emergency session in response to the forcible entry of 
Iraqi troops at the French, Canadian and Belgian embassy compounds on Friday 
and at the Netherlands compound earlier last week. 
Meanwhile, U.S. officials delivered to Iraq a videotape in which President Bush 
offers his view of the Persian Gulf conflict to the Iraqi public. 
The Administration also tried to resolve internal differences on the scope of a 
proposed sale of U.S. arms, possibly worth as much as $23 billion, to Saudi 
Arabia. 
A planeload of 285 former U.S. and Canadian hostages arrived at 
Baltimore-Washington International Airport. Among those aboard was a 
25-year-old bank employee who was released after his mother sent a personal 
plea to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. 
A flight carrying a second group of former hostages is scheduled to arrive at 
the airport today. 
White House officials, seeking to stress the international opposition to Iraq's 
Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait, strongly approved of France's decision to add 4,000 
soldiers to the defense forces in the Persian Gulf and to evict from Paris 
Iraq's military attaches and other Iraqi personnel. 
"We welcome France's decision to contribute substantial additional forces, 
including ground troops, to the international effort in the gulf," the White 
House said in its statement. "This decision is further evidence of the 
determined and unified international will to resist Iraq's blatant aggression 
and violations of international law." 
President Bush spent the day at his mountain retreat at Camp David, Md., where 
he signed into law a bill authorizing an expansion of the nation's strategic 
petroleum reserve to 1 billion barrels from its current cap of 750 million 
barrels. The law allows the government to lease crude oil from producers and 
keeps the reserve in operation for four more years. 
One day after Iraqi troops in Kuwait forced their way into diplomatic compounds 
of France, Canada and Belgium, a group of about eight diplomatic personnel 
remained inside the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait city without electricity and cut off 
from outside supplies. State Department spokesman Mark Dillon said their 
situation has not changed. Despite the continuing presence of Iraqi soldiers 
outside, there was no word of any advances on the American compound, Dillon 
said. 
The Administration, meanwhile, was preparing to submit to Congress an 
extraordinary list of weapons it wants to sell to Saudi Arabia, including F-15 
fighter planes, tanks and other sophisticated arms to bolster the kingdom's 
long-term security. 
White House spokesman Walsh said the arms sale proposal is being worked on by a 
task force of representatives from the Defense, State and Commerce departments 
and had not yet been forwarded to the White House. "They would all have their 
recommendations," he said. 
Earlier in the day, U.S. Embassy officials in Baghdad delivered the President's 
videotaped message to the Iraqi public to Iraq's undersecretary of foreign 
affairs, Nizar Hamdun. Iraq has promised that it will allow the tape to be 
broadcast on state-owned television, but the timing of the transmission is 
unclear. 
"The U.S. has announced that if it's not broadcast within five days, it will be 
released to the media," said a spokesman for the State Department's Kuwaiti 
Task Force. 
The discussions involving further action against Iraq are expected to include a 
possible air blockade to prevent goods from entering or leaving Iraq by plane 
in violation of the international trade embargo. Both Libya and Yemen are 
believed to have allowed such flights. 
An air blockade "is being debated now," a senior Arab diplomat in Washington 
told The Times last week. While acknowledging that such an escalation of the 
trade embargo would involve potential dangers, the diplomat estimated that it 
would be effective in 8 out of 10 cases because many pilots would refrain from 
trying to evade an air blockade. 
"Why? Because four of those eight won't go because they know perhaps it's 
dangerous," he said. "And the other four, you can prohibit them in the airports 
if you can identify them, say, in the airports." 
The talk of tougher economic sanctions comes amid signs that the existing 
sanctions have been taking a toll. There were reports Saturday that Iraqi 
troops in Kuwait, short on food as a result of the embargo, have eaten many of 
the animals in the Kuwaiti zoo. 
The White House also applauded recent announcements by France, Canada, Belgium, 
Italy and Britain that they will bolster their military forces in the Persian 
Gulf with additional combat troops, fighter planes, tanks and ships. 
Citing the latest French deployments, the White House statement declared: "We 
consider such steps appropriate and justified in view of Iraq's continued 
infringement of diplomatic conventions covering the presence of foreign 
embassies in Kuwait." 
