BIG TEN ROUNDUP; 
IOWA WINS WITH NEW QUARTERBACK 
Sophomore Matt Rodgers, son of Boston Celtic Coach Jimmy Rodgers, passed for 
276 yards and three touchdowns in his first game as the Hawkeye starter 
Saturday, leading Iowa to a 31-21 victory over Iowa State in Ames, Iowa. 
After trailing, 21-14, at halftime, Iowa tied the score when freshman defensive 
end Larry Blue recovered an Iowa State fumble in the end zone in the third 
quarter and got the go-ahead touchdown on Rodgers' 10-yard pass to John Palmer 
on the second play of the fourth quarter. 
Rodgers also threw touchdown passes of 37 yards to Danan Hughes and 40 yards to 
Travis Watkins in the first half as Iowa (1-1) beat Iowa State (1-2) for the 
seventh consecutive time. 
The holder for placekicks last year, Rodgers completed 20 of 33 passes and was 
intercepted once. He started in place of senior Tom Poholsky, who lost the job 
after Iowa's 44-6 loss to Oregon. 
Rodgers' dad was in the stands for the game. But that didn't bother the young 
quarterback. "I didn't feel any pressure at all. I'm used to him watching," 
Rodgers said. 
Illinois 41, Utah State 2 -- Apparently recovered from the embarrassment 
suffered last week at Colorado, the Illini made the most of their home-field 
advantage and beat the Aggies. 
Jeff George threw two touchdown passes, and the Illini defense held Utah State 
to 24 offensive yards in the first half. 
George hit Dan Donovan with a two-yard touchdown pass early in the second 
quarter, and two minutes later lofted a 27-yard scoring pass to Mike Bellamy. 
Illinois led, 31-0, at halftime and coasted to victory before 61,553. 
Illinois' leading rusher this season, Howard Griffith, suffered a knee injury 
late in the first half and did not play in the second half. 
George completed 12 of 18 passes for 180 yards. Ken Thomas was the leading 
rusher with seven carries for 77 yards. 
Rutgers 38, Northwestern 27 -- Scott Erney completed scoring passes of 90 and 
83 yards to Randy Jackson and ran for another touchdown at Evanston, Ill., to 
give the Scarlet Knights a victory in their 1,000th intercollegiate football 
game. 
Erney's two scoring passes made him Rutgers' all-time leader with 30 touchdown 
passes. 
The Wildcats (0-3) had taken a 27-26 lead on Bob Christian's second touchdown, 
a two-yard run in the third quarter. Christian had a career-high 161 yards 
rushing. 
