SOUTHERN SECTION FOOTBALL PREVIEW; 
FONTANA STARTS THE WAY IT FINISHED, ON TOP 
It was a moment of truth for Fontana High's football team. It was the fourth 
quarter of its Southern Section Division I semifinal game last December against 
Huntington Beach Edison and the Steelers trailed, 35-28. 
After crushing 12 opponents, outscoring them by more than 400 points, Fontana 
found itself struggling to stay alive in the playoffs. Winning a second title 
in three years seemed far away. 
But the Steelers rallied to win, 48-35, and defeated San Bernardino San 
Gorgonio, 35-7, in the championship game the next week. 
This season, Fontana will again open as the section's top-rated team, and with 
his entire offensive line returning, Coach Dick Bruich has reason to believe 
the Steelers could be even better. 
No team has won consecutive Southern Section major division titles since 
Anaheim Servite in 1982-83, but Fontana, which also won the title in 1987 and 
was a runner-up in '84, might have the team to accomplish the feat. A look at 
the Times' preseason top 15 Southern Section football teams: 
1. FONTANA 
Division I 
Last season: 14-0 
The Steelers return 10 starters from last season's Citrus Belt League 
championship team, including linemen Robert Loya and Clay Hattabaugh. Loya, 6-4 
and 270 pounds, is considered one of the top linemen in the nation and 
Hattabaugh, 6-5 and 262, is also a heavily recruited prospect. Running behind 
the Steelers' experienced line will be Don Small and Hollerith Jones. Mark 
Bennett is a solid returning starter at tight end. 
Bruich, in his 14th year at Fontana with a career coaching record of 127-31-1, 
will again have a stingy defense to count on with four returning starters, 
including linebacker Bryan Sylvester, an all-Division I selection last year, 
and lineman Jeff Karp, who excelled in the playoffs a year ago. Against seven 
Citrus Belt League opponents last year, the Steelers allowed a combined 28 
points. 
2. CANYON COUNTRY CANYON 
Division I 
Last season: 8-4-1 
With the Golden League moved up from Division II, it is fitting that Canyon 
Country , which has a 39-1 all-time league record and has reached the playoff 
semifinals or final seven consecutive seasons, has one of its best teams. Last 
Thursday, the Cowboys opened the season by defeating Honolulu St. Louis, 40-0, 
to end the Crusaders' 55-game winning streak. 
Coach Harry Welch, who has a 90-17-1 record, returns eight starters on defense. 
It is headed by senior linebacker Scott Blade, a starter since his sophomore 
year, lineman Brad Weaver and defensive back Mark Santos. On offense, the 
Cowboys will rely on the running talents of David McDivitt, who rushed for 198 
yards and scored twice against St. Louis. 
3. LA PUENTE BISHOP AMAT 
Division I 
Last season: 7-4 
Coach Mark Paredes may not agree with the Lancers' early season rankings, but 
after the coaches in the powerful Angelus League named them the team to beat, 
it is hard for Bishop Amat to go unnoticed. With six starters returning, 
including all-league quarterback Zack Zertuche and running back Jason 
Patterson, the Lancers hope to have a better showing in the playoffs than last 
year, when they lost in the first round to Rialto Eisenhower. 
Zertuche passed for more than 1,800 yards and 14 touchdowns last season, but he 
had Jeremy Smith, now at California, and Jason Green, now at UCLA, on the 
receiving end. Look for junior Scott Fields to become one of top offensive 
threats. 
4. EL TORO 
Division II 
Last season: 12-2 
With the South Coast League moving up from Division III, El Toro Coach Bob 
Johnson will get a chance to showcase his second son, Rob Johnson, at 
quarterback. Johnson is the brother of former UCLA quarterback Bret and was an 
all-Southern Section performer last season at wide receiver. He will move back 
to his original position of quarterback and will be looked upon to carry a 
young offense, which returns two starters. 
It is on defense, with linemen Jeremy Hogue and Matt Krajec, linebacker Brian 
Haas and defensive back Danny Maetues, where the Chargers have experience. 
5. PASADENA MUIR 
Division II 
Last season: 11-1-2 
Coach John Tyree directed Muir to a co-championship last season in his first 
year, playing Santa Barbara to a 7-7 tie. This year, the Mustangs, who finished 
second to Arcadia in the Pacific League last season, are expected to be even 
better with the return of eight starters -- four of them all-league selections. 
Muir's secondary may be the best in the Southern Section, with Reggie Reser and 
Demetrice Martin leading the way. The Mustangs probably have the toughest 
nonconference schedule, playing Palmdale, Fontana, Bishop Amat, Anaheim Servite 
and City power Banning. 
6. REDLANDS 
Division I 
Last season: 9-3 
Expectations are high for Redlands and tailback Marcus Rogers, an all Division 
I defensive back last season. First-year Coach Dave Perkins, who led Corona to 
the Division V title last year, will have seven returning starters, including 
quarterback Julian Burrola and fullback Mike Dragna. Playing in the Citrus Belt 
League with Fontana does not give the Terriers an easy path to the playoffs, 
but their nonconference schedule is not that difficult. 
7. HUNTINGTON BEACH EDISON 
Division I 
Last season: 10-3 
Coach Dave White, who has a 29-16 record in his five seasons, returns six 
starters and 20 lettermen from a year ago. Last season, Edison won the Sunset 
League and came within minutes of upsetting Fontana on the road in the playoff 
semifinals. 
This season, the Chargers will not have the one-two offensive punch in 
quarterback Donnie Smith and running back Shane Sherman. However, they do have 
all-league wide receiver Mike Cunningham on offense and safety Mike Hawks and 
end Chip Anderson on defense. 
8. LOS ANGELES LOYOLA 
Division I 
Last Season: 10-2 
Loyola no longer will have the defunct Del Rey League to beat up on, but the 
Cubs are talented enough to hold their own in the Angelus League. Coach Steve 
Grady will have Corby Smith, son of USC Coach Larry Smith, at quarterback and 
Alex Yeboah handling most of the rushing chores, with David Susank leading the 
line. 
9. HAWTHORNE 
Division III 
Last season: 9-2 
With 14 starters and 44 lettermen returning, Hawthorne, which drops from 
Division II in the Bay League, is the team to beat in Division III. Coach Goy 
Casillas has one of the fastest teams in the Southern Section, with trackman 
Erik Allen leading the way. 
10. LONG BEACH POLY 
Division I 
Last season: 9-2 
Poly is seeking its 11th consecutive Moore League title and first trip to a 
major division championship game since 1984. The Jackrabbits were upset by San 
Gorgonio in the second round of the playoffs last season after an impressive 
regular season. Co-Coaches Jerry Jaso and Michael Whiting will count on two-way 
starters Richard Washington, Chris Love and Ed Hopkins. 
11. LOMPOC 
Division VII 
Last season: 13-1 
The Braves will depend on all-Southern Section running back Napolean Kaufman to 
lead them back to the Division VII championship game, after losing to Gardena 
Serra in the final last season. Kaufman, who accounted for 2,954 all-purpose 
yards and 39 touchdowns last season, led the Braves into the title game a year 
ago and then won State track titles in the 100- and 200-meter dashes in the 
spring. Coach Dick Barrett returns 11 starters from last year's Northern League 
champions, including linebacker Jason Grossini and defensive lineman Moose Mau. 
12. PARAMOUNT 
Division II 
Last season: 13-1 
Coach Ken Sutch, seeking his third consecutive divisional title, will not have 
Jack Manu, the two-time divisional player of the year, at quarterback. However, 
he will have Leon Neal, who rushed for more than 1,500 yards last season, at 
running back. The Pirates have eight returning starters, including defensive 
back DeMondre White and running back Rolando Avila. 
13. CAPISTRANO VALLEY 
Division II 
Last season: 12-1 
Passing is the key at Capistrano Valley, led by quarterback Tony Soliday and 
receiver Dave Polti. The Cougars reached the semifinals last year, losing in 
overtime to Paramount. With 11 starters back, including defensive backs Jeremy 
Brion and Bernie Chapman, Capistrano Valley has a chance to repeat as South 
Coast champion. 
14. QUARTZ HILL 
Division I 
Last season: 6-5 
Like rival Canyon Country, Quartz Hill is making the move up to Division I, 
with loads of talent. Coach John Albee returns 15 starters, headed by running 
back/linebacker Selves Smith, an all-league selection last season. Running back 
David Nelson and defensive tackle Ralph Gutierrez also will provide leadership 
for the Rebels. 
15. WESTLAKE 
Division II 
Last season: 5-6-1 
Behind the play of quarterback Todd Preston, who was fourth in passing last 
season in the Southern Section, Westlake will be battling for the Marmonte 
League title. Coach Jim Benkert watched Preston pass for 2,015 yards and 19 
touchdowns last year and is expecting more from him this season. 
