IT'S BARRIO VS. MADRID IN SPAIN'S NEW CIVIL WAR; 
URBANIZATION: SUBURB DECLARES INDEPENDENCE AND LAUNCHES A PUBLICITY BLITZ AFTER 
CITY TRIES TO SEIZE LAND FOR LUXURY CHALETS. 
We don't want bread! 
 We don't want wine! 
 We want the mayor... 
 Hanging from a pine! 
That's the first verse of a new national anthem adopted by an angry suburb of 
Madrid that says it's seceding -- and the song pretty much sums up the feelings 
of the 500 residents. They charge that the Madrid City Council is trying to 
snatch their homes at a fraction of fair market value, and they are waging a 
savvy public relations campaign to stop it. 
The skirmishes have included a "Provisional Transitional Government," announced 
earlier this month, and demonstrations in front of the Cuban Embassy demanding 
political asylum. Madrid officials are not amused -- but other residents are 
beginning to ask questions. 
The Barrio de Cerro Belmonte is a 20th-Century urban anachronism that began as 
a village on the outskirts of Madrid about 70 years ago, without water, 
drainage or even paved roads. As Madrid has spread, so Cerro Belmonte has been 
surrounded by modern developments and tower blocks of flats. Many of the 
families have lived there all their lives, paying for the installation of 
amenities and building their own houses, some of which have been expanded as 
their savings allowed and now boast modern bathrooms, kitchens, central heating 
and telephones. 
The owners, many of whom are retired, tend their gardens, lovingly planting 
grape vines, fig trees, and flower and vegetable plots. 
But 20th-Century speculation has caught up with them, and the Madrid City 
Council has plans to develop the area into an estate of luxury chalets that 
would be sold at prices beyond the dreams of the Belmonteses. Taking advantage 
of a 1985 land law, the area was designated a development zone, and the 
residents were offered money to move into alternative accommodations on the 
other side of the city -- financial compensation many times lower than the 
market value. Virtually all the residents rejected the council's offer, so a 
year ago the council placed a compulsory purchase order on the 30,000 square 
meters of Cerro Belmonte. 
But if the City Council thought that the affair would end at this point, with 
the sale of the planned chalets adding to its coffers, they had not counted on 
the Belmonteses or their lawyer, dynamic 28-year-old Esther Castellanos. Until 
this year Castellanos' legal practice had concentrated on divorce and 
matrimonial cases, but she has taken up the challenge with all the fighting 
spirit of a latter-day Spanish Civil War heroine. Although she admits to no 
political affiliation or ambition, she is masterminding a publicity campaign 
that would make any political leader proud. 
Realizing that Spain's notoriously laborious court system was unlikely to be of 
any help, she decided to embarrass the City Council, whose members face 
reelection early next year, with a series of publicity stunts. 
In August, when relations between Spain and Cuba were at their lowest ebb in 
many years, a group of Belmonteses demonstrated outside the Cuban Embassy in 
Madrid and requested political asylum. Fidel Castro's reply was to invite 24 of 
them, whose ages varied between 10 and 84, for a fully paid 10-day visit to 
Cuba, where he treated them as VIPs. 
Then, earlier this month, the barrio issued a unilateral declaration of 
independence, naming Maria Teresa Quirol as head of state and threatening -- 
tongue in cheek -- to bar access to the barrio by instituting passport control 
and customs posts. It said it might also issue its own postage stamps and 
currency. 
These stunts have caught the ear of the public, which is asking embarrassing 
questions. Why, people want to know, have the residents been offered only 5,018 
pesetas (about $54) per square meter for their land when the going rate in the 
area is more than 20 times that? And who will profit when the land is sold for 
expensive developments? 
Castellanos and her supporters are determined to continue the struggle. 
Recently they announced their intention to join forces with other barrios 
facing similar threats -- the Kingdom of Cerro Belmonte allied with the 
neighboring Principality of Villaamil or the Country of Penagrande, for 
example. 
Cerro Belmonte's red-and-white flag is already flying, and residents set up a 
symbolic roadblock twice a day, barring access to the barrio. 
Madrid City Hall says it is not prepared to join their pantomime. Jose Luis 
Garro, second deputy mayor of Madrid with responsibility for urbanization, 
said: "I am not prepared to buy tickets for the Belmonte Circus." 
Castellanos countered: "If we are the circus, who are the clowns?" 
