SINGLE CAUSE SUSPECTED FOR MANY WOES OF MAGELLAN; 
SPACE: SCIENTISTS THINK THEY CAN WORK AROUND THE PROBLEM. THEY HOPE TO START 
MAPPING VENUS BY THE END OF THE MONTH. 
Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory who are trying to nurse the 
Magellan spacecraft back to good health believe both of the failures that hit 
the Venus orbiter last month may have resulted from a single cause rather than 
multiple problems. 
Furthermore, it may not be necessary to fully understand the cause of the twin 
communications blackouts in order to work around the problem, said JPL 
scientist Stephen Wall. 
"That's the best news yet," Wall said in a briefing televised to space centers 
around the country. 
Since its last blackout on Aug. 21, Magellan had been operating on a small 
backup computer to lessen the chance of engineers losing control of the craft 
as it orbits Venus 153 million miles from Earth. On Saturday, the craft's main 
computer was switched on and has worked well since. 
"We carefully watched the spacecraft for eight hours," Wall said. "Everything 
went fine." 
Scientists are studying data from that eight-hour period with the expectation 
that it will help them narrow the problem down to the "root cause," Wall added. 
That progress has encouraged scientists to put the craft through a series of 
maneuvers next week, and they hope to begin mapping the surface of Venus by the 
end of the month. On Tuesday, they will switch to a "medium gain antenna" used 
to transmit commands to the craft at a higher rate than is now possible. 
Wednesday they will try out the "high gain antenna," which will be used to 
transmit huge amounts of data from the craft to Earth. 
Thursday, they will examine the results, plus data sent back before the 
problems occurred, "to see if it will tell us anything more about what happened 
during the first anomaly," Wall said. 
Meanwhile, scientists continued to study the single strip of images that 
Magellan transmitted back to Earth before the problems began. The images are 
about 10 times sharper than photos from previous spacecraft, and they are 
giving scientists a tantalizing preview of what to expect during the two years 
that Magellan is to photograph nearly the entire surface of Earth's sister 
planet. The craft uses a radar camera that penetrates through the dense layer 
of Venusian clouds. 
So far, everything seen by the scientists supports long-held theories that the 
surface of Venus has been very active in the recent geological past. 
"We see a lot of areas in which the surface is deformed, pulled apart or pushed 
together," much like the tectonic processes on Earth, said Jim Head of Brown 
University, a member of the Magellan science team. 
Some of the features appear to be quite young, geologically speaking, Head 
said. They seem to have been created by processes that have occurred within the 
last few tens of millions to hundreds of millions of years, "and maybe even 
today." 
