AIRPORT TERMINAL PASSES FINAL TESTS; 
CONSTRUCTION: COUNTY TAKES POSSESSION AFTER CONTRACTOR GETS SYSTEM OF FIRE 
CONTROL TO WORK. 
More than five months late and millions of dollars over budget, the new 
$62-million Thomas F. Riley Terminal at John Wayne Airport finally passed a 
series of fire control tests Friday, allowing an embattled airport contractor 
to turn the cavernous structure over to the county. 
As more than two years of problem-plagued construction ended Friday, airport 
officials jubilantly prepared for next week's series of celebratory galas, 
including an open house on Sept. 8 and first use by the airlines on Sept. 16. 
"We're worn out but yes, we're very happy," said Assistant Airport Manager Jan 
Mittermeier. 
Added Airport Manager George Rebella: "We are extremely pleased. . . ." 
Supervisor Thomas F. Riley, for whom the terminal is named, had predicted early 
Friday the building would pass muster by the end of the day, after weeks of 
agonizing glitches in the building's computer-controlled fire suppression 
system. 
"I'm very excited," Riley said. "Everywhere I go, other people tell me they 
think it's wonderful." 
Mittermeier said Friday's test results mean that airport contractor Taylor 
Woodrow California Construction Ltd. has met its contract requirements for 
"substantial completion," even though minor cleanup work remains. She said the 
county's Environmental Management Agency won't issue a much-needed certificate 
of occupancy for a few days. 
"We have been testing the complex life safety and operational systems for the 
past few weeks in the terminal," said William Ostfeld, Taylor Woodrow's senior 
vice president. "We've had to make some modifications and will continue to work 
with the county on all final issues. But we are very proud of the work that we 
have accomplished." 
The Board of Supervisors awarded the terminal contract to Taylor Woodrow in 
July, 1988. The firm's low bid came in more than $17 million over the $42.5 
million originally budgeted by the county. A cost-cutting frenzy ensued, 
reducing steel tonnage, marble, skylights and landscaping. 
Relations between the county and Taylor Woodrow were tense at best. Forced to 
postpone the original April 1 opening day and citing missed construction 
milestones, the Board of Supervisors fired Taylor Woodrow from a $25-million 
contract to build a garage and elevated roadway. 
