BRAQUE AND PICASSO: ODD COUPLE; 
MOMA RETROSPECTIVE FOCUSES ON THE COLLABORATIVE BIRTH OF CUBISM. 
Today an epic exhibition opens at the Museum of Modern Art. Called "Picasso and 
Braque: Pioneering Cubism," it chronicles the birth of the century's most 
original and influential style in nearly 400 works. The event certainly ranks 
with the museum's landmark Picasso retrospective and its examination of 
Cezanne's late paintings. 
It's an astonishing show on many counts, not least of which is the fact that, 
after all these decades, it is the first in-depth sounding of the legendary 
collaboration between Picasso and Braque, then young Turks in their mid-20s. In 
larger cultural terms, it sets one wondering how an art becomes classic when, 
in the beginning, knowledgeable observers regarded it as a sham and a 
deception. 
I was mulling this over after flying in from Los Angeles for a press preview 
when the fates stepped in with an absurd and disturbing object lesson. 
It was raining hot water as I hurried back to the hotel after dinner. A young 
man stopped me, apparently to ask directions. He appeared ordinary but spoke 
oddly, as if retarded. 
He held out a bank safety deposit envelope that turned out to contain three 
coins packaged as you see them in collectors shop windows. The incident was too 
intricate to recount here in detail but it involved my telephoning the presumed 
owner of the coins, her refusal to deal with the street person and the offer of 
$1,000 reward (which I did not want) if I would return the coins. 
The finder demanded $100 claiming he was homeless and needed money for a place 
to stay. I gave him $80 -- all I had -- and returned to the hotel to assure the 
owner all was well. 
After interminable ringing, a man answered to inform me that the number was a 
public phone on the street. 
I had been seamlessly had. The adroit caper was distressing (and weirdly 
amusing) in many ways, not least of which was its resemblance to an artwork. It 
was like a piece of street theater or a chapter in "The Bonfire of the 
Vanities." No wonder people so often confuse art with an audacious rip-off. 
Like real con men, Picasso and Braque were risk-takers -- intransigent and 
subversive of convention. Like real con men they were out to create a seductive 
myth. They lived at least in part in the image of the outsider artist 
established by the 12th-Century outlaw poet Francois Villon and carried on by 
Artaud and Genet. The difference between the artist and the swindler may not 
even be so much one of morals or ethics as one of accuracy. The real con man 
uses artful guile to deceive, the artist uses it to get at the truth. Sometimes 
the distinction is not immediately apparent. 
By 1906, Picasso was considerably famous for pictures of circus nomads and 
street derelicts. That year he painted "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon," a work so 
shocking he became a pariah even among his peers. Ironically, it was inspired 
partly by two ancient Iberian stone heads bought from an acquaintance. It 
turned out they'd been stolen from the Louvre. 
Today "Les Demoiselles" acts as the revered iconic frontispiece of MOMA's 
remarkable exhibition (to Jan. 16). It was brilliantly organized by William 
Rubin, the museum's former chief curator of painting. 
The show demonstrates an unforeseen logic in the artists' intuitive quest. As 
we go through the galleries the works seem more and more like like a jazz duet, 
each player making riffs inspired what the other has just played, stopping for 
each other's flashy solos and joining again to weave a whole that has 
remarkable direction and integrity. 
As collaborators, the artists were the Odd Couple par-excellence. Their shared 
catalogue chronology begins in 1906. Picasso's photos show the Spaniard small, 
demonic and charismatic. His chronicle is punctuated with drama. He fears being 
embroiled with the law over the theft of the "Mona Lisa" and his stone heads 
from the Louvre although he is perfectly innocent. An artist friend commits 
suicide after a night with Picasso, punctuated with booze and opium. He breaks 
with his mistress for a new love. When working out of town he sneaks from 
village to village to avoid the old girlfriend and assorted hangers-on. Just 
one cliff-hanger after the next. 
Braque was big, handsome, athletic and so laid-back they called him "the gentle 
giant." He boxed, cycled and played the accordion. His vitae is as sleepy and 
professional as a dentist's. He goes to Ceret to paint, back to Paris to enter 
the salon, off to Le Havre for another show. Somewhere along the line he meets 
the girl he'll marry and that's that. Except of course for playing his part in 
forging the style of the century. 
Contrast notwithstanding, the two heavily egoed men were irresistibly drawn 
together until, as Braque said, they were joined like two mountain climbers, 
seeing each other daily for endless talks and observations of progress. They 
struggled together to reach the same summit even without quite knowing what 
their goal was. Artists are like that. They go with the feeling they are "onto 
something." It turned out to be the art that would act as a metaphorical 
definition of our culture and resonate through literature, architecture, music 
and the objects of daily use. 
In the beginning, Braque was interested in the art of Cezanne, Picasso was into 
African as we see in the first galleries. Braque, outgrowing his beginnings as 
a Fauvist, painted landscapes at L'Estaque, searching for Cezanne's structure. 
Picasso, still smarting from the rejection of "Les Demoiselles," pursued the 
African quand meme. The exhibition includes such rare and powerful treats as 
the 1908 "Three Women" from the Hermitage. (A contemporary called it "a 
hideosity.") 
By hindsight and excellent curatorial guile we see an unexpected link. Both 
Cezanne and African art have to do with structure, which has to do with 
analysis. That's one important piece of our metaphor. This has been the 
analytical century par excellence from the probings of Freud to the 
anatomizations of science and philosophy. 
One of the great beauties of the work is its intense seriousness. Picasso was 
never more sober and consistent, Braque never more intelligent and free of 
decoration. Analytic Cubism with its sharded space and silver-brown coloring 
has the moving gravity of Beethoven or an equation in higher physics. Cubism 
discovered relativity. Its space is ambiguous, exciting and curiously true to 
life. 
In one painting Picasso introduced the motto, "Our future is in the air." He 
called Braque "Wilbourg" -- short for Wilbur Wright. Everybody knows the story 
of how Gertrude Stein compared Cubism to both military camouflage and aerial 
photography. When you look at Picasso's portrait of Ambroise Vollard, the art 
dealer's head is like the Wizard of Oz. It seems to float closer and further 
without changing sizes. 
Cubism predicted the idea of a world culture by becoming an art that frankly 
could not be anything but art -- like African art, like Oriental art. It 
predicted accordion-folded time and space that today brings the latest massacre 
in Beirut closer than the corner bistro. 
It didn't leave out the bistro. Both artists used the commonplaces of studio 
and cafe to make an epic art out of guitars, absinthe bottles and daily 
newspapers. They painted private jokes to each other and carried on amicable 
and productive rivalries -- as when Picasso, challenged by a Braque innovation, 
lettered "The Battle is Joined" into one work. He also made compositions that 
served as valentines to his mistresses. So the dynamic duo even hinted at Pop 
Art. 
The question of which of them "really" invented Cubism misses the point. Could 
Simon have done it without Garfunkle, Lewis without Clark? It was an authentic 
dialogue where each inspired other. Rubin is sure that Braque invented the 
papier colle but gives collage to Picasso, making a slightly crabby 
distinction. Picasso acknowledged his debt to Braque when he wrote, "I'm using 
your latest papery and powdery procedures." 
So much said, it has to be admitted that just about every time a work really 
grabs you here it is Picasso's. Braque's natural Gallic taste and restraint 
suffer except in the occasional masterwork like "Le Portugais" -- a triumph of 
elegant probity. Picasso is so forceful we come near to missing Braque's 
compositional innovation in works like "Man with a Violin" which predicts 
overall abstraction. 
Unlike the garden variety con job, real art has no goal but to tell as much of 
the truth about the essence of its maker and his times as it can manage. 
The Picasso-Braque odyssey ended in 1914 when the Gentle Giant was called up 
for military service in World War I. Even before that Cubism had started to 
lose density in collage. The method allowed a suppleness of composition that 
brought out Braque's elegance and allowed Picasso to move into rich planar 
sculpture, but the galleries containing these works have a certain weary, 
rococo flimsiness. 
Cubism held up for decades and it will be a long time before anything touches 
it as art, but to tell the truth the show has something of the flavor of a 
period piece, classics of a bygone time. Ah, but what a time it was. 
Then a "bogus act of artistic charlatanism" could turn to pure poetic gold. 
In our odd present, when art art has become a commodity and adroit cynicism a 
virtue, a slick street-corner scam can feel telling and relevant, like an 
artwork. That's a bad omen. 
