END OF THE LINE FOR TROLLEY CARS; 
MONTEREY PARK: AFTER A FOUR-YEAR EXPERIMENT, THE CITY SEES THE FOLLY OF ITS 
TROLLEYS. THEY'RE JUST TOO IMPRACTICAL AND TOO EXPENSIVE. 
The city's bright red and green "trolley cars," now classified as an experiment 
that failed, will soon give way to carpeted transit buses. 
For four years, the trolleys-on-wheels have rolled up and down city streets 
five days a week, 12 hours a day, each month taking 15,000 passengers to places 
Rapid Transit District buses don't go, for just a quarter a ride. 
But although the novelty of the trolleys hasn't worn off, city officials say 
the vehicles are impractical. They guzzle gas, break down on steep climbs and 
are expensive to repair, Parks and Recreation Director Susan Hunt said. 
Brian Navis, the city's transit consultant, said Wednesday that the trolley 
cars probably were a mistake, but "hindsight's 20-20. . . . The city didn't 
have any experience in transportation at the time. The trolleys were not doing 
what they were expected to do, but how do you know that (in advance)?" 
The City Council on Monday decided to scrap the trolleys and replace them with 
ordinary 23-passenger transit buses similar to the kind used by automobile 
rental agencies. The buses, to be in service by June, 1991, will come equipped 
with wheelchair ramps, which the trolleys do not have. 
Instead of paying a transportation company $450,000 a year to run five trolley 
routes, Monterey Park will use Proposition A sales tax money to buy five buses 
for about $110,000 each under a lease-purchase agreement with an as-yet 
undetermined operator. 
Although the city will pay more at first under the lease-purchase arrangement, 
it will save money in maintenance and repairs over time, Navis said. Rides will 
still cost 25 cents, he said. 
"The trolley just eats up all the money," Hunt said. "While they're pretty to 
look at, they don't have a heavyweight body. Their useful life is over." 
The city's hilly terrain has taken its toll on the trolleys, which weigh only 
12,000 pounds, compared with the sturdier 22,000-pound transit buses. Hunt said 
trolleys have broken down, sometimes leaving riders stranded. 
Councilman Fred Balderrama, who cast the lone vote against the plan to purchase 
buses, said the city instead should pay a transit company to run the bus routes 
to avoid liability when the buses are old and in need of repair. "Monterey Park 
has a lot of hills," he said. "There'll be a lot of wear and tear on those 
buses." 
Navis, who recommended switching to buses, said the trolleys "served a purpose 
in attracting riders. It was unique and different and fun -- it was a novelty." 
But the transit system needs to be more reliable than the trolleys, he said. 
Covina, meanwhile, began running its own trolley routes last month, promoting 
the new system as "the return of the Red Cars." 
"We have had a few breakdowns since we've started, but we're hoping those are 
just inconsistencies," said Paul Hogan, administrative analyst in charge of 
transportation programs. The city owns two trolleys and pays a private company 
$174,000 a year to run the lines. 
