PREVIEW '90; 
COMING SOON TO YOUR LIVING ROOM ; 
SPECIALS: A HYMN, 'NICHOLAS NICKLEBY' AND MOTHER EARTH 
Quoth the Church Lady: "Isn't that special?" 
Here's what the broadcast and cable networks plan this fall in the way of 
specials -- dramas, documentaries, variety shows, profiles, comedy showcases 
and musical extravaganzas: 
NETWORK 
ABC 
"World of Discovery," an as-yet unscheduled series of five specials, covers 
subjects ranging from archeology to wildlife. 
CBS 
"Mike Wallace, Then and Now, A CBS News Special" profiles the veteran newsman's 
40-year career, Sept. 26 at 10 p.m. ... From Nashville comes "The Country Music 
Assn. Awards," Oct. 8. ... An "All-American Thanksgiving Day Parade" covers 
festivities across the nation, Nov. 22. 
NBC 
"Sunday Night With Larry King" gives the radio and cable talk-show host a 
prime-time interview-and-variety showcase, Oct. 28 at 8 p.m. ... Former U.S. 
Surgeon General C. Everett Koop hosts five specials about the country's 
health-care system. 
FOX 
Television's Emmy Awards are handed out Sept. 16 at 8 p.m. 
PBS 
"Amazing Grace With Bill Moyers" explores the history of the popular hymn, 
Sept. 12 at 9 p.m. on KCET ... Gregory Peck narrates "Adlai Stevenson: The Man 
From Libertyville," a profile of the Illinois Democrat who twice ran for 
President, Sept. 19 at 8 p.m. on KCET and 9 p.m. on KOCE and KVCR; Oct. 2 at 
9:30 p.m. on KLCS. ... A true story of 13 men who helped turn the tide of 
Allied fortunes in the Pacific is told on "The Heroes," Oct. 24 at 9 p.m. on 
KVCR; Oct. 27 at 10 p.m. on KOCE; Nov. 4 at noon on KLCS. 
LOCAL 
KNBC 
Newscaster Linda Alvarez hosts the fourth in a series on education in Southern 
California, October. 
KTLA 
Thanksgiving Day brings the biannual "Twilight Zone Marathon," Nov. 22. ... 
"The Hollywood Christmas Parade" kicks off the holiday season, Nov. 25 at 6 
p.m. 
KCAL 
The "Variety Club Telethon" raises money for local charities with a six-hour 
telecast, Sept. 23 at noon. ... "Kids Under the Influence," a "For Kids' Sake" 
documentary, examines alcohol abuse among the young, Sept. 29 at 8 p.m. 
KTTV 
Arsenio Hall emcees "The MTV Video Music Awards" (seen last week on MTV), 
Wednesday. ... The Fox affiliate previews the Emmy Awards, Sept. 16. ... TV's 
top commercials are featured in "The Clio Awards," November. 
KCET 
The station observes Hispanic Heritage Month with programs throughout the 
month. ... Narrated by Jesse Jackson, "Blue Helmets" deals with United Nations 
peacekeeping forces, Sept. 23 at 4:30 p.m. 
KOCE 
"Orange County's Air Terminal Takes Off!" a public affairs program, airs 
Saturday at 6 p.m. ... "The George Mendoza Story" tells about a blind, 
record-setting runner, Sept. 16 at 10:30 p.m. 
CABLE 
A&amp;E 
"Campaign '60" is a monthlong package of nine programs focusing on 1960's John 
F. Kennedy-Richard M. Nixon election. ... In "Caught on a Train," Dame Peggy 
Ashcroft plays a wealthy eccentric who manipulates the lives of a couple in 
Europe, Oct. 4 at 6 p.m. ... "In Search of the Dream," a six-part series, uses 
interviews and archival footage to trace the black experience, Oct. 7 at 5 p.m. 
BRAVO 
Performed by the National Ballet of Marseille, "Ma Pavlova" pays tribute to 
prima ballerina Anna Pavlova, Sept. 16 at 8 p.m. 
DISCOVERY 
"Treasures of a Lost Voyage" explores the remains of the S.S. Central America, 
which sank off the Carolina coast with three tons of gold in 1857, tonight at 
6. ... "Opening Night" previews the network's new season Sept. 30. 
DISNEY 
The Royal Shakespeare Company's Emmy Award-winning production of "The Life and 
Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby," with Roger Rees in the title role, arrives as 
an 8 1/2-hour spectacle airing on four consecutive nights, Oct. 21-24. 
FAMILY CHANNEL 
Punchlines flow fast and freely during the "Third Annual Stand-Up Comics Take a 
Stand," Oct. 6. 
HBO 
Steven Wright, Robert Wuhl and Joe Piscopo headline comedy hours in September, 
October and November, respectively. ... "Sex, 1990" takes a mature look at 
contemporary "sexual realities," October. ... Rare footage and audio tapes 
offer a personal view of Robert F. Kennedy during "RFK: In His Own Words," 
November. 
MTV 
"Sex in the '90s" probes the country's sexual mores and morals, Wednesday at 10 
p.m. ... "The Breakdown Tour: A Ken Ober Special" casts the actor/game show 
host as an overworked TV personality, Sept. 17 at 7 p.m. 
NASHVILLE NETWORK 
Hosts Lorianne Crook and Charlie Chase preview the Country Music Assn. Awards, 
Oct. 5 at 7:30 p.m. ... The Doobie Brothers perform in Hawaii, Oct. 9 at 5 p.m. 
... "The Grand Ole Opry 65th Anniversary" salutes the legendary country music 
show that launched Nashville's music industry, Oct. 13. 
NICKELODEON 
"Stories From Growing Up" offers childhood tales told by celebs, October. ... 
Whoopi Goldberg plays the guardian angel of "Hot Rod Brown, Class Clown," 
November. 
SHOWTIME 
"Deep Dish TV" spoofs the small screen, Sept. 21 at 9:35 p.m. ... "National 
Lampoon Comedy Playoffs" hunts for the country's top amateur comic, October. 
... John Mendoza and Pat Matteson are "A Pair of Jokers," October. 
TBS 
"Voice of the Planet" is a five-part series based on the Michael Tobias novel 
about Gaia, mother goddess of the Earth, Oct. 15-19. 
TNT 
Jessica Lange narrates "Vivien Leigh: Scarlett and Beyond," a profile of the 
two-time Oscar-winning actress, October 22 
