AROUND THE SOUTH BAY: THERE WILL BE MORALE IN THE PERSIAN GULF, THANKS TO SOUTH 
BAY PATRIOTS. 
As the general said Wednesday to the U.S. Marines in the Persian Gulf, "There 
will be morale." 
And if not, it won't be for lack of trying from the folks back home in the 
South Bay. 
From videos and letters for U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia to button sales and 
yellow ribbons for the hostages in Iraq and Kuwait, local patriots have 
launched a host of programs aimed at boosting the spirits of Americans in the 
Middle East. 
"Those people need a lot of support," said Mike Leonzo of Redondo Beach, an 
elder in the Oceanside Christian Fellowship, which has mailed 75 letters to 
U.S. troops on the front lines. "We have a friend there now in the 82nd 
Airborne, and this is the second Christmas he won't be home -- he was (deployed 
with troops) in Panama last year." 
Leonzo's church is not scribbling alone. 
The Sand Debs, a girls club affiliated with the philanthropic Sandpipers 
organization, has also launched a letter-writing campaign to service people in 
the Middle East. 
And in Torrance, a group of students at North High School is offering 
higher-tech greetings: Anyone with relatives or friends stationed in the Middle 
East is invited to come to the school Nov. 3 and tape a free 10-minute 
videogram. 
Jerry Smith, student activities director at the school, said the idea was 
dreamed up by teacher Gary Parton and the 13 students in his video production 
class. 
"They ran across the idea out of a newscast and thought we could provide the 
service here," Smith said. 
Anyone interested should call the class at 533-4426 during school hours and 
make a reservation for Nov. 3, when the taping will be done, Smith said. 
Participants will have a choice of three backgrounds -- one with a Christmas 
tree, another with a huge package and a third with an outdoor scene -- and will 
be allowed 10 minutes of recording time. 
The taping will be done by student technicians on videotapes paid for by Toyota 
Motor Sales USA in Torrance, the school's partner in the Adopt A School 
program, Smith said. Participants will get the finished tape that day along 
with mailing instructions. 
So far, Smith said, only about a half-dozen inquiries have come in, but the 
class hasn't really advertised the program. It plans to distribute flyers in 
coming weeks. 
Meanwhile, lest the hostages be forgotten, a group of employees at TRW's Space 
&amp; Defense Sector in Redondo Beach have tied a big, fat yellow ribbon on a 
tree near the company cafeteria. 
According to the company, electronics technician Jerry Trager came up with the 
idea and suggested it to TRW's Veterans Committee. 
"This is a simple gesture not only to acknowledge our military troops, but also 
the American civilians who are being held there," Trager said. 
The ribbon has been up since last Friday as "a kind of quiet reminder and a 
positive ray of hope for employees who have relatives or friends involved in 
the crisis," said Bob Neale of the veterans group. 
And elsewhere in Redondo Beach, housewife Terri Clune has yet another project 
in the hopper. 
Enraged and frustrated by developments in the Persian Gulf, she has contacted 
Coming Home, an Illinois-based nonprofit group set up for the families of the 
hostages, and is lining up volunteers and pledges for a plan to sell buttons to 
benefit the stricken families of "guests" in Iraq and Kuwait. 
"I was watching the news one day, and they showed a bunch of people in a bar 
wearing yellow ribbons," Clune said. "It seemed like they were just using it as 
an excuse to party." 
Resolving to do something "more personal," Clune and her husband at first 
donned homemade buttons demanding the return of the hostages because "We're 
Saddam Disgusted!" Then, on the Oprah Winfrey Show, she heard about Coming 
Home, a Champaign, Ill., group recently founded by a former hostage in Iraq. 
Jean Belt, spokeswoman for Coming Home, said Clune is the first Californian to 
volunteer to help the organization, which maintains a communications network 
for the families of people detained in Iraq and Kuwait. 
In the short time since it was launched, Belt said, Coming Home has collected 
about $2,000 through donations and sales of buttons that say: "Coming Home. 
Help Bring Americans Home From Iraq and Kuwait." 
In addition to passing along messages and news culled from interviews with 
those who have escaped or been released, the group offers solace and counseling 
to hostages' families, sets up support groups and helps finance trips home for 
former detainees who are stranded in other countries. 
Clune said she is still processing the paperwork necessary to launch an arm of 
Coming Home in Redondo Beach, but would be glad to hear from anyone willing to 
help her. Buttons are offered in exchange for a donation. Clune can be reached 
at 378-8608. 
And for anyone who doubts that morale can be boosted by projects such as these, 
there is this week's letter to the Oceanside Christian Fellowship from Marine 
Cpl. Richard (Rico) Lopez, 22, of Santa Barbara. Lopez, who has been camped in 
Saudi Arabia for the past month, received one of those 75 letters the 
congregation mailed out and responded with a thank-you note. 
"I think it is great that my fellow Americans and Christian brothers and 
sisters are taking time to let the services know that they have the country's 
support and prayers," Lopez wrote. 
"I was deeply touched by the amount of mail that flowed in to 'any service 
member.' I wanted to answer them all." SHAWN HUBLER 
