PARTY ICONS REPLACE FALLEN CHINA GODDESS 
At the spot in Tian An Men Square where student demonstrators set up a "Goddess 
of Democracy" this spring, there now stand the figures of a worker, a peasant, 
a soldier and an intellectual. 
These "socialist art" icons of Chinese communism, set up for the Oct. 1 
National Day celebrations, and the students' statue, which was modeled after 
the Statue of Liberty and destroyed by martial-law troops on the night of June 
3-4, symbolize two clashing visions of China's future. 
The new, 25-foot-high figures symbolize the old Maoist dream of dictatorship by 
a worker-peasant-soldier alliance, combined with new emphasis placed during the 
past decade on respect for technical and scientific skills. 
Over the past few months, China's still-dominant octogenarian revolutionaries 
have sought desperately to crush the vision symbolized by the "Goddess of 
Democracy" and reimpose stability based on the type of hard-line Marxist 
ideology represented by the new statues. 
Emphasis on the late Chairman Mao Tse-tung's dictum that art must serve 
socialism is only one of many elements in this attempt to suppress all 
opposition and reinforce political orthodoxy. 
Arrests and Executions 
Thousands of arrests, at least 30 executions, a continued search for fugitive 
pro-democracy activists, purges of reformist officials from party and 
government positions, waves of televised propaganda and new political 
indoctrination sessions in schools and at workplaces -- all are aimed at 
consolidating more restrictive political and economic policies and ensuring 
that street protests do not break out again. 
Orders also have been issued that many young university graduates in Beijing 
are to be sent to provincial cities or rural towns for a year or more of 
lower-level work experience. These transfers are aimed especially at people who 
graduated within the last five years and now work in central government offices 
or Communist Party organizations. Many college graduates who wish to enter 
graduate school are also being required to work at a job for at least a year 
before continuing their studies. 
The summer-long crackdown has restored a superficial calm in Beijing and 
throughout the country. But helmeted soldiers still stand guard at major 
bridges and intersections in the capital, and police are making spot checks of 
personal identification cards. 
In what amounts to a symbol of continued instability, Tian An Men Square, the 
center of this spring's protests, remains closed to ordinary pedestrian 
traffic, although Chinese and foreign visitors in organized groups can receive 
permission to sightsee in the square. 
Publicly announced figures on arrests are in the range of 5,000, but it is 
clear that far more people -- perhaps 10,000, perhaps more than double that 
figure -- have in fact been detained. Arrests are still continuing, although 
the current rate is impossible to determine. Some of those detained have 
already been released after periods of intense interrogation and ideological 
indoctrination and, at least in a few cases, beatings. 
Executions have taken a toll of uncertain magnitude. China has officially 
announced about 30 executions that appeared to be related to the June unrest, 
but whether much larger numbers of protesters have been executed secretly is 
impossible to know. 
Wang Meng, a respected writer associated with less restrictive policies toward 
the arts, has been removed from his position as minister of culture, and a more 
orthodox ideologue, He Jingzhi, has taken over his duties. 
Liang Xiang, a key reformist ally of ousted Communist Party General Secretary 
Zhao Ziyang, was fired earlier this month from the post of governor of Hainan 
province. Liang's ouster came as part of an anti-corruption drive -- he was 
accused of "abusing power for private gain" -- but this effort appears to be 
partially intended as a tool for attacks on Zhao's supporters. 
Crackdown on Media 
As part of an effort to reassert hard-line control of the media, editors of 
several of the nation's most important official newspapers have been replaced 
and at least a dozen journalists were detained, although some were subsequently 
released. 
A heavy-handed propaganda campaign is playing a key role in the process of 
control. It aims to rewrite the history of this spring's student protests and 
establish an official version of events, officially described as a 
"counterrevolutionary rebellion," from which public deviation is dangerous. 
But there are many indications that at least in Beijing, where hundreds of 
thousands of people took to the streets in support of the pro-democracy student 
demonstrators who were at the core of the protests, the government has had 
little success in convincing the public that the bloody crackdown in June was 
justified. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of people died that night as the army 
shot its way into the city against crowds seeking to block its path. 
"I'm a Communist Party member," one Beijing area university student told a 
foreign acquaintance a few days ago, "but I still think the (student) movement 
was right." 
More remarkable than that sentiment is the fact that the young man made his 
statement in front of three other Chinese. He acknowledged that he could lose 
his party membership for such a comment but expressed confidence that he could 
trust those who were with him not to turn him in. 
This is one of the most profound differences between the current crackdown and 
earlier waves of political repression in China. On campuses and also in many 
work units, friends and colleagues know that everyone resents the government's 
actions. Many Chinese are cautious, but some feel they need not be. In general, 
only those who were deeply involved in the pro-democracy protests are genuinely 
afraid. 
In many instances, however, it is an act of some bravery for Chinese to talk to 
foreigners these days. While there are no restrictions on casual conversations 
between foreign tourists or business people and Chinese, students at some 
Beijing campuses have been warned they will be punished if caught talking to 
foreign diplomats or journalists. 
"The view I've been getting is that the events of the past three months were 
horrible and very deeply upsetting to China's intellectuals, but they tend to 
take a long-range view . . . that things haven't really permanently changed 
course or direction," a visiting American scholar commented recently. 
"They very much want the outside world to see it that way," he added. "They do 
not want to be punished (by foreign rejection of academic contacts) and they do 
not want China to be punished. . . . (But) there is an underlying feeling of 
anxiety. They're not sure how much further the current atmosphere of scrutiny 
of intellectuals will be carried. There is this sense of waiting for the other 
shoe to drop." 
Harsh Rhetoric 
This sense of foreboding is reinforced by harsh rhetoric, some of it 
reminiscent of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, that has reappeared in the 
state-run media over the summer. 
A mid-September commentary in the official Guangming Daily declared that "class 
enemies" have opposed the "people's democratic dictatorship" by spreading the 
theory that "class struggle has been wiped out" and by advocating "bourgeois 
democracy, freedom and human rights." 
Such class enemies, the commentary declared, must be "firmly, precisely and 
ruthlessly" attacked. 
As part of National Day preparations, some billboards in Beijing also have 
resumed carrying propaganda messages. 
"Support the Four Cardinal Principles . . . Carry Forward the Construction Work 
of Socialist Modernization in the Capital," declares one such message. 
The Four Cardinal Principles are socialism, the "people's democratic 
dictatorship," the leadership of the Communist Party and "Marxism, Leninism and 
Mao Tse-tung thought." 
The government also has launched a new wave of censorship against publications 
deemed to be pornographic or politically subversive. Particular efforts have 
been made to suppress the works of reformers who have fled overseas. In Beijing 
alone, 490,000 banned books and periodicals have been seized, according to a 
report Friday by the official New China News Agency. 
The crackdown has alienated virtually an entire generation of educated youth, 
who until the June slaughter had placed great hopes in the possibility of rapid 
liberalization of the Communist Party itself. Ambitious, educated young people 
in China today have only one dream: to study abroad. Only a tiny percentage 
will succeed, but many have turned their energies to studying English and 
trying to work through the bureaucratic maze of domestic and foreign hurdles 
they must overcome if they are to escape China through this route. 
For most of these students, the greatest hurdles still lie abroad -- in winning 
university acceptance, arranging financial assistance and, in the case of the 
United States, convincing consular officials that they do not intend to become 
immigrants, as such an intention disqualifies them under U.S. law from 
receiving student visas. 
New Restrictions 
But the Chinese government has also imposed a variety of new restrictions on 
the pursuit of study abroad, including cuts in funding for certain categories 
of students and imposition of a new rule requiring those who receive a foreign 
visa to go back to a public security office for final approval to leave China. 
Even so, the lines outside Western embassies this summer have been longer than 
ever, and the study of English has never been so popular. 
An American English teacher in Beijing described the situation this way: "One 
of my students from last year . . . told me that he tries to spend all his time 
working on his studies and exercising now, partially to keep his mind off the 
'environment,' which he says depresses him, and partially to improve his 
chances of going overseas. 
"He said he and his classmates have all been feeling very depressed lately, and 
all of them . . . are working harder than ever to improve their chances of 
going overseas." 
Students also have taken songs praising socialism or the Communist Party and 
used them either as calls for rebellion or as vehicles for ridicule, all 
without needing to change the words. 
During this month's Mid-Autumn Moon Festival, a time when friends traditionally 
gather at a pleasant spot outdoors to view the full moon, a group of students 
met on a Beijing campus for a songfest. 
This was no happy occasion, however, according to one of those who 
participated. The songs were superficially acceptable to authorities -- tunes 
such as "Without the Communist Party There Would Be No New China," "The Sky Is 
Bright Over New China" and a song about how the People's Liberation Army 
liberates the Chinese people. But as the students sang, many of them cried. 
Educated young people are not the only ones who have tuned out the government's 
propaganda drive. 
Among the most politically reliable individuals in China are the maids and 
drivers of the Diplomatic Service Bureau, an agency of the Chinese Foreign 
Ministry that enforces a monopoly on the provision of service personnel for 
diplomats and journalists stationed in Beijing. It is an open secret that part 
of the function of these people is to spy on the foreigners for whom they work. 
But when a foreign resident in Beijing got a chance recently to stand near the 
door of a meeting room and watch a political education class for maids and 
drivers of the bureau, it was clear that most of those in the study session 
were exceedingly bored or on the verge of falling asleep. 
