FISHING / DAN STANTON; 
ANGLERS CATCH AND RELEASE THREATENED BLACK SEA BASS 
The catching and releasing of bass came as a surprise for 12 anglers on a 
half-day trip aboard the Southern Cal, out of Long Beach Sportfishing. 
Capt. Pat Whittaker was just past the Long Beach gap on the way to Horseshoe 
Kelp when he noticed birds working near floating kelp. 
He made a quick stop, and the anglers started casting anchovies. Within 25 
minutes a near-limit of calico bass went into the sacks. 
Then the bite shut off. Instead of moving on, Whittaker urged anglers to go to 
the bottom and try for white sea bass. 
Instead, the unusual took place: Every angler who went to the bottom had a 
hookup and reeled in small black sea bass. 
Black sea bass is on the endangered species list and must be released unharmed. 
Deckhand Myron Ackerman carefully unhooked the bass and returned them to the 
sea. 
To avoid hooking more, Whittaker moved out of the area. 
Jerry Austin of Torrance, fishing from his boat the Jernmo with 12-pound test 
line, did battle for 22 minutes with a marlin at Catalina Island, brought it 
aboard and released it. 
Stan Eckland of Redondo Beach, aboard the Happy Hooker, caught and released 
five marlin after weighing one at Avalon. That battler weighed 166 pounds. 
Thirty boats are expected to compete in the eighth annual King Harbor Marlin 
Club and Marina del Rey Anglers interclub marlin tournament Friday and 
Saturday. The clubs are contesting the perpetual trophy as well as individual 
awards. 
The sixth annual Dave Freeman fire department burn foundation derby will be 
held Wednesday . Freeman, of the Los Angeles Fire Department's San Pedro 
division, said private boats will depart at 6:30 a.m. and fish until weigh-in 
at the Cabrillo launch ramp at 2:30 p.m. First, second and third prizes will be 
awarded. The entry fee is $20, with proceeds benefiting the burn foundation. 
For information, call (213) 530-9850. 
South Bay Catches: Bob Potter of Manhattan Beach, fishing at Farnsworth Bank 
aboard the Blackjack, caught the whopper of the week, a 30-pound yellowtail. 
Darren Wilson of San Pedro, aboard the Sportking at the oil rigs, caught a 20 
1/4-pound yellowtail. 
Lou Robinson of Carson, casting from the Sharpshooter at Catalina Island, won 
the jackpot with a 20-pound yellowtail. 
Anita Reoies of Long Beach won the jackpot fishing aboard the Admiral with her 
18-pound halibut. 
Phil Hazelman of Wilmington, fishing aboard the Hitless Miss at Santa Barbara 
Island's hidden reef, caught a 14 1/2-pound cow cod. 
San Gabriel Catches: Ron McNab of Monterey Park, fishing aboard the Hitless 
Miss at Santa Barbara Island, caught an 18 1/2-pound ling cod. 
John Orsano of Alhambra, at the rigs, aboard the Calico Ed, caught a 18-pound 
yellowtail. 
John Louie of Hacienda Heights, fishing aboard the Redondo Special, won the 
jackpot with a 15 1/2-pound yellowtail. 
Ko Lee Chen of Monterey Park, fishing aboard the Matt Walsh, caught a 12-pound 
halibut. 
