DISCORD OVER 'MISS SAIGON' ACCORD; 
STAGE: ASIAN-AMERICANS SAY THEY HAD NO REPRESENTATION IN THE NEGOTIATIONS. 
"What do we want? Equity! When do we want it? Now!" 
Chanting those words, about 60 picketers wearing yellow armbands marched on the 
sidewalk Friday in front of the Hollywood office of Actors' Equity, protesting 
the Monday accord between the union and "Miss Saigon" producer Cameron 
Mackintosh over the casting of the Broadway production. The $10-million London 
musical is scheduled to begin previews March 23 in New York and open April 11. 
Most of the protesters were Asian-American activists critical of the accord and 
what they see as lack of representation from Asian-Americans in the 
negotiations that resulted in the agreement. Simultaneous events were also 
scheduled for New York and San Francisco. 
According to a copy of the agreement obtained by The Times, Equity agreed to 
allow Mackintosh to alternate two non-American Asian actors in the title role 
of the musical, "if no American Asian actors can be found." The agreement 
stipulated that eight candidates are under consideration for the role, 
including two who are not American citizens, and added, "it is hoped that 
future auditions may provide additional Asian American candidates." 
Open auditions for the Asian roles in the show will be Friday and next Saturday 
at the Los Angeles Music Center and Oct. 1 and 2 in New York. 
However, "if none of the candidates proves to have the specific qualities 
necessary to originate this major role on Broadway," Mackintosh reserved the 
right to request permission for Lea Salonga, the Filipina actress who created 
the role in London, to do it in New York. 
Mackintosh also agreed that "for all U.S. productions of 'Miss Saigon,' neither 
'yellowface' makeup nor prosthetics for eyes will be used for any actor." 
Mackintosh asserted that the white actor who is being imported from London to 
play the Engineer, Jonathan Pryce, had never used "yellowface" in his London 
performance, but he acknowledged that Pryce had initially used prosthetics to 
make his eyes look more Asian until he "became aware that their use was 
offensive to the American Asian community." 
The agreement also established that "these special arrangements for 'Miss 
Saigon' are not intended to establish a precedent" and will be binding "subject 
to written confirmation from the League of American Theatres and Producers." 
The agreement contains "too many loopholes, too many exceptions," said 
demonstrator James Hong, who said he has been a working actor for 37 years. 
"There was no representation from the Asian side (in the negotiations). Is the 
(union) trying to hide something? The modern generation (of Asian-American 
actors) isn't going to give any more ground." 
There was some disagreement over whether a demonstration would be mounted at 
the Music Center auditions next week. Dom Magwili said he doubted it. "This is 
not censorship. Actors who choose to audition are working on their own 
conscience." But actor Tzi Ma said "I think we will be down there (to 
demonstrate)." 
Meanwhile, in New York, an Equity statement announced that executive secretary 
Alan Eisenberg and Carole Hughes, equal employment opportunity business 
representative for the union, will meet with minority members to discuss 
'Saigon'-related issues on Monday in New York and Thursday in Los Angeles. 
Equity "is aware of the frustration, anger and outrage . . . ," according to 
the statement, and "continues to maintain its commitment to increased 
employment for its ethnic minority members." 
