MOUNTIES ADJUST TO SPARKS' EXIT 
Montclair Prep entered the post-Sparks era battered and emotionally spent but 
wearing a brave face. Of course, the Mounties have little choice. 
Jerome Sparks, the uncle of Derek and Leland Sparks, picked up his nephews' 
transcripts Thursday, officially severing ties between the private school in 
Van Nuys and the two transplanted Texas football players. Derek and Leland are 
expected to leave this weekend with June Sparks, Derek's mother, who arrived 
Wednesday to take the pair home. 
The players tentatively have scheduled a farewell party Saturday at the Granada 
Hills home of Steve and Susie Goldbaum, with whom Derek lived from last winter 
until the team left for a season-opening game in Hawaii last week. 
Teammates already have begun the farewell process, saying they will miss the 
Sparkses not just as players but as friends. Derek is a 6-foot-1, 208-pound 
senior running back who is regarded as one of the area's top college prospects 
after rushing for 3,338 yards in two seasons since arriving from Texas. Leland 
(5-10, 170) quarterbacked the Mounties to a 12-1 record last year and had been 
moved to wide receiver. 
Donovan Roy, a 6-foot-6 1/2, 280-pound senior offensive lineman, is one of the 
few players who has talked to Derek since the players returned from Hawaii on 
Sunday. 
"I almost cried when I talked to him on the phone," Roy said. "I hate to see 
him go. I don't care if he doesn't play football. I just want to have him 
back." 
Roy claimed that Sparks is leaving Montclair Prep reluctantly, a view shared by 
many in the Montclair Prep community. Sparks said all summer that despite bad 
feelings between his uncle and Montclair Prep, he wanted to remain there. 
"I don't think Derek wants to leave," Roy said. "He told me he wants to play 
Friday night with us and he misses all the guys. But family is family and 
you've got to do what the family says. I have to respect him for that." 
Many players sensed that Derek would be taken from the team after they learned 
that the Southern Section had denied Leland Sparks' request for a fifth year of 
eligibility. Leland repeated the 11th grade when he entered Montclair Prep in 
1989. 
Although two other players were denied eligibility, Jerome blamed Montclair 
Prep for the decision and was angered that Leland was told just hours before 
Montclair Prep's 28-7 loss to Farrington of Hawaii on Aug. 30. 
The Southern Section will hear an appeal Wednesday for tackle Rusty Savage and 
wide receiver Cardell Henderson and had planned to rule on Leland's appeal. 
Regardless, there seems little anyone at Montclair Prep can do to satisfy 
Jerome Sparks, who has battled with the school since last spring when Derek 
sought refuge in Los Angeles County Juvenile Court, claiming he had been 
abandoned by his uncle -- his legal guardian at the time. 
Derek became a foster child of the Goldbaums, whose son John plays for 
Montclair Prep. The Goldbaums relinquished their role as foster parents, 
yielding to the wishes of his family. 
Jerome, who denies that he abandoned his nephew, objected to Derek's living 
arrangement and urged him to move into an apartment with Leland. Leland had 
been living in Chatsworth with the Cole family, whose son Greg also plays for 
the Mounties. 
The Mounties will enter tonight's nonleague game against St. Monica at Culver 
City High with either Cole or sophomore Eliel Swinton at tailback. 
