REVERENT RESTORATION; 
TINY RAMONA CHAPEL, STEEPED IN HISTORY, GETS A FACE LIFT IN NEWHALL 
Gary Cooper became an honorary Sioux there. Rudy Vallee -- by some accounts -- 
said his wedding vows there. 
But the people who visit Ramona Chapel in Heritage Square in Newhall probably 
know little of the stories and myths surrounding the tiny wooden building 
which, like a tattered wedding dress, displays a faded loveliness. Most people 
are drawn to the chapel simply because it is unique and charming. 
"It does seem to get a lot of attention," said Bob Diem, who is overseeing the 
chapel's restoration for the Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society. The 
chapel, built about 1925, is perhaps the most popular attraction at Heritage 
Square, a collection of antique buildings maintained by the society. 
"It's the one that attracts people right away," said Paul Kruetzer, society 
president. 
"It's a delightful little building," said Jerry Reynolds, another society 
member. "I wish it were twice as big as it was. It seats about 12 -- if they're 
friendly." 
Bell for Ringing 
Part of its attraction, Kruetzer said, is the spire's bell, which people ring 
by yanking a rope hanging down the side of the building. Newly engaged couples 
often ask when the restoration work will be completed. "They want to get 
married in it," he said. 
The couples will have a long wait. The society began restoring the outside of 
the chapel this summer and poured a concrete base for the wooden steps last 
week. The group hopes to complete the work by December, Diem said. Fixing the 
inside, which has suffered from years of neglect, will take longer, he said. 
The chapel was built for Callahan's Mission Village, an early theme park of 
sorts that was located where the Santa Monica and Golden State freeways 
intersect southeast of downtown Los Angeles. Reynolds said it was designed by 
Carrie Jacobs Bond, a well-known songwriter of the era who composed "I Love You 
Truly," "The End of a Perfect Day" and other "soggy stuff." 
The chapel was used for weddings and as a movie set but was not used for 
regular religious services. Rudy Vallee supposedly was married there, but 
Reynolds said he hasn't confirmed that story. But it is true that the park's 
owner, Robert Callahan, who was part Indian, had Gary Cooper officially 
inducted into the Sioux Nation at the chapel. 
"We do have pictures of Gary Cooper there with his war bonnet on," Reynolds 
said. 
Chapel Was Showpiece 
It's also true that the village was "quite the spot for the movie crowd in the 
'20s," Reynolds said. And the showpiece of the village was the Ramona Chapel, 
Kruetzer said. 
When the Santa Monica Freeway displaced the village in 1962, Callahan had the 
chapel carted off to Canyon Country to create a new theme park along Sierra 
Highway. Callahan was hit by a train two years later and, although he lived 
until 1981, his health faltered and the Canyon Country park went into decline. 
Callahan's widow donated the chapel to the society, which trucked it to the 
Newhall park in 1987. The move will be long remembered by the historical 
society. 
"We lifted it up and, holy cow, this swarm of bees came out of there," Reynolds 
said. "People scattered in all different directions." The movers promptly 
bought several cans of bee repellent. "It took half a day to get the bees out," 
Kruetzer said. 
