REMEMBERING BERLIN-ALWAYS; 
THE BEST TRIBUTE IS TO TREAT HIS SONGS WITH RESPECT 
Irving Berlin lived longer than he wanted to live. That's got to be the message 
of his later years, when he was only a voice on the phone to his friends and 
business associates, and then not even that. 
A Carnegie Hall tribute was the only celebration that Berlin, who died Friday 
of natural causes, allowed for his 100th birthday last year. He didn't attend 
it and didn't acknowledge it. Perhaps it depressed him. He wasn't producing hit 
songs now, and that was how he had always measured success. 
Berlin has been public property since 1912, but we have never known much about 
the inner man. He refused to write his biography and refused to let anyone else 
do so. There would be no movie version of his life either. His life was his 
business. 
He was also exceptionally protective of his songs. In 1980, a small Los Angeles 
theater put together a revue of Berlin's pre-1920s material called "Early 
Berlin." A phone call from New York cut short its run. You didn't do an Irving 
Berlin show without consulting Irving Berlin. 
A suspicious man -- but then he had to keep his wits about him as a kid selling 
papers on the Lower East Side. Berlin counted his royalties for a good reason: 
he could remember being poor. 
He never studied music. He couldn't even read music. He got "secretaries" to 
take down his stuff. Perhaps we will learn more, now, about how that worked. In 
any case, Berlin published at least a thousand songs and may have left a 
thousand more in his trunk. 
His output includes great songs, good songs, songs that did the job and 
potboilers. The man who wrote "Remember" and "Always" also wrote "Any Bonds 
Today" and "I Like Ike." 
That's not so surprising as the fact that the man who wrote "Oh, How I Hate to 
Get Up in the Morning" also wrote "Let's Face the Music and Dance." 
Again there's a mystery here. Berlin wasn't a faceless composer. There is such 
a thing as a typical Irving Berlin song. Whether the mood is snappy ("I Love a 
Piano") or sad ("All Alone"), the tune will be simple and the words will be "so 
natural that you want to go to war." 
(Years later, Berlin said that if this line from "Alexander's Ragtime Band" 
sounded too martial, it could be changed to "so natural that you want to hear 
some more." Has anyone ever sung it that way?) 
His early songs are as unpretentious as a straw hat. They are even corny. 
"Waiting for a ring . . . a ting-a-ling. . . . " Cole Porter wouldn't have 
written that in a million years. But at the top of the 1930s, Berlin started 
writing stuff that matched Porter for sophistication and even went beyond him 
in a certain respect: songs like "Puttin' on the Ritz," "Cheek to Cheek," 
"Let's Face the Music and Dance." 
These were luxury-liner songs that nevertheless had something dark about them, 
a sense that the ship was nearing the iceberg. Fred Astaire, who introduced 
many of these songs, was a major influence here. But so were the times. Berlin 
had lost a lot of money in the Crash, and wasn't sure what was on the horizon. 
By the 1940s, he had turned into a national institution, the composer of "God 
Bless America" and "White Christmas." But there was a question in his own mind 
as to whether he could write the score for the new Ethel Merman musical, "Annie 
Get Your Gun," originally assigned to the late Jerome Kern. 
Berlin wasn't sure that a musical about Annie Oakley was his kind of a show. 
This was resolved when the idea of "Anything You Can Do I Can Do Better" came 
to him in a taxi cab. He wrote it overnight. How come? "They needed it right 
away." 
Berlin couldn't explain his gift and didn't want to analyze it. It had 
something to do with feelings and something to do with a shrewd sense of what 
the public wanted; but that was as far as he cared to go. All that bothered him 
was that "someday I'll reach for my talent and it won't be there." 
In 1962 he wrote a Broadway show called "Mr. President." It had an enormous 
advance sale, but it got dreadful notices, and quickly closed. Broadway decided 
(or perhaps Berlin decided) that he no longer knew what the theater audience 
wanted. 
A few years later MGM scrapped a big Berlin musical film, "Say It With Music," 
and this was his farewell to Hollywood. He had once told a reporter that he 
couldn't retire: that he needed to work to stay happy. "When I rest I get 
restless." Now he had nothing to do but rest. No wonder he turned to the 
telephone. 
His death will bring more all-star tributes. The biggest tribute would simply 
be to treat his songs with respect. We have come to treat them carelessly, like 
furniture that has always been there. That was the attitude at the 
under-rehearsed Carnegie Hall birthday concert, which richly deserved Berlin's 
snub. It was as if the performers thought that all they had to do was remind 
the audience of Berlin's songs, without having studied them on their own. 
Not so. Berlin's work needs to be approached as carefully as Joan Morris 
approaches the ballads of the 1890s. His songs aren't as naive as they look, 
and when they are, that naivete has to be respected. 
Ella Fitzgerald does so when she sings "How About Me?" in "The Irving Berlin 
Songbook." Bernadette Peters does so all the time: she understands Berlin's 
forlorn shopgirls perfectly. Or, listen to Sinatra's "How Deep Is the Ocean." 
"And if I ever lost you . . . how much would I cry?" sounds as if he has lost 
her. 
For all Berlin's pep, it's his sad songs that we believe the most. 
