BRUINS MIGHT NOT BE IN RUINS; 
DONAHUE IS ENCOURAGED DESPITE LOSS TO MICHIGAN 
UCLA, ranked sixth before its opening game, is 1-2 after its third, out of the 
top 25 and out of the race for the national championship before the end of 
September. 
Why no long faces in Westwood? 
A strong showing against Michigan -- albeit in a 24-23 loss -- has given new 
hope to the Bruins, who seemed on the verge of despair only a week ago. 
"We were a team Saturday night," Coach Terry Donahue said Monday. "I thought we 
responded, acted, looked (and) behaved like a team. Up until Saturday night, I 
don't think we had gotten that accomplished. 
"It was just tragic that we came up one point short." 
 Tragic? 
 Not really. 
Two losses have taken UCLA out of the running for the national title -- a goal 
that has eluded UCLA since 1954 -- but the Bruins showed against Michigan that 
they are capable of making another strong challenge for the Pacific 10 
Conference championship. 
Only two weeks ago, after a 24-6 thrashing by Tennessee, Donahue moaned that 
either Tennessee had been grossly mis-evaluated, "or this might be as poor a 
football team as I've ever had." 
His fears weren't exactly alleviated in a 28-25 victory over lowly San Diego 
State in Week 2. 
But the last-second loss to Michigan left him encouraged. 
"Certainly we're pleased with the progress we made from one week to another," 
Donahue said. "We played with a great deal of enthusiasm and spirit. Our team 
came together as a group and played together as a team. 
"My hope is that we will build from this point and continue the rest of the 
season at that level of intensity and (maintain the) interest and teamwork that 
we had Saturday night. 
"If we do, I think we'll become a decent-looking team and be successful as the 
season goes along." 
The most notable transformation was made by the Bruin defense, which limited 
Michigan to 256 total yards, including only 174 before the Wolverines' last two 
possessions netted 82 yards, nine points and an improbable victory. 
In its first two games, UCLA gave up almost 200 yards a game on the ground and 
five yards per rushing attempt. Michigan, playing without four offensive 
starters, ran for 126 yards in 42 attempts, three yards a carry. 
"Our defensive team looked a little different," Donahue said. "Why did it? Was 
it the changes we made? Maybe. Was it the fact we were interested in the game 
and wanted to play well and were a little bit nervous and scared? Probably. Was 
it because Michigan didn't have its first-string quarterback? Maybe." 
Three Bruin defenders started for the first time against Michigan. 
Brian Kelly, who missed most of training camp with a hamstring injury, replaced 
senior Jon Pryor at nose tackle; Meech Shaw replaced sophomore Stacy Argo at 
inside linebacker, and senior Randy Beverly, who broke a toe last month, 
replaced freshman Michael Williams, a walk-on, at cornerback. 
Donahue was especially pleased with the play of Kelly and Shaw. Kelly deflected 
a pass on Michigan's two-point conversion attempt with 1 minute 35 seconds left 
and Shaw, a 6-foot-2, 212-pound redshirt freshman from Ponca City, Okla., led 
the Bruins with 14 tackles. 
"Jon Pryor has given us everything he has, but Brian Kelly's a bigger, more 
physical player," Donahue said of the 6-5 1/2, 270-pound sophomore, who is two 
inches taller and 20 pounds heavier than Pryor. "He shores up the middle a 
little bit better." 
Shaw, said Donahue, "gives us a dimension of speed and natural linebacking 
instincts. He's a very natural linebacker who feels the ball and feels the 
flow. 
"He's young and he went the wrong way one time and got his clock cleaned a few 
times, but he also made a lot of plays. 
"He's a speed guy. And one of the things we were lacking was speed." 
Bruin Notes 
Coach Terry Donahue might not be through tinkering with the defense. "There may 
be a position or two where I'm not convinced that we're where we need to be or 
could be," he said, indicating that more changes in the starting lineup may be 
forthcoming. . . . UCLA opens its Pac-10 schedule at the Rose Bowl Saturday 
against California, which has lost 17 consecutive games against UCLA since 1971 
and is 4-34 against the Bruins since 1950. 
What's wrong with the UCLA running attack, which has produced only 2.9 yards a 
carry? "I don't think we're playing as well in the offensive line as we had 
hoped to play," Donahue said. "I think (tailbacks) Shawn Wills and Brian Brown 
should be averaging more (yards) per carry and I think there should be bigger 
and better holes. We should be running the ball more effectively." . . . Wills 
is averaging 4.2 yards a carry; Brown is averaging 3.1. 
Donahue said that Michigan used an illegal technique when it blocked Alfredo 
Velasco's conversion attempt after Bret Johnson's touchdown pass to Corwin 
Anthony gave the Bruins a 23-15 lead with 5:42 left. "You're not allowed to 
block below the waist on kicking plays and a Michigan player (dived at) our 
guard at the knees and took him out," Donahue said. "And then two players 
jumped and blocked the kick. The umpire didn't see it and didn't make the 
call." 
Unusual statistic: In UCLA's last two games, freshman tailback Kevin Williams 
has carried four times for no yards and three touchdowns. In his only 
non-scoring run, Williams lost three yards in a carry against San Diego State. 
. . . Linebacker Craig Davis, on Michigan's fourth-quarter onside kick, which 
took a kangaroo hop over the Bruins' front line of defense and was recovered by 
the Wolverines: "We would have had to have Kareem Abdul-Jabbar in there to stop 
that." 
