NEWSMAKERS: SHOPPING CHILD'S PLAY TO YELTSIN 
Contrary to published reports, Boris N. Yeltsin, the Communist Party maverick 
who recently visited the United States on a speaking tour, did not shop till he 
dropped, an aide said. The total of Yeltsin's bourgeois purchases, in fact, was 
a toy pistol and two calculators for his grandchildren for the sum of $24, the 
aide, P. Voshchanov, said. Earlier this month, in what quickly became known as 
"the Yeltsin affair," the Italian newspaper La Repubblica reported that Yeltsin 
acted like the United States was "a bar 3,000 miles long, downing two bottles 
of vodka, four bottles of whiskey and countless cocktails in five days," and 
spending his speaking fees on movie videocassettes and other luxury goods. The 
La Repubblica article was then reprinted in Pravda, prompting outraged denials 
from Yeltsin. In fact, Voshchanov said in an article recently published in the 
youth newspaper Komsomovskaya Pravda, Yeltsin did not even want to be paid for 
his speeches and handed over his speaking fees to aides. "While Yeltsin was 
delivering his last lecture, which was to end three hours before our departure, 
me and (aide) Lev Sukhanov rushed to satisfy his 'insatiable consumer 
appetites,' " Voshchanov said. "We chose a child's pistol for his grandson, 
worth $6, and two toy calculators for his two granddaughters, worth $18." In a 
rare move, Pravda apologized for the article, apparently in a rebuff to 
conservatives. 
 -- Author Tom Wolfe's research into a new novel has taken him into the 
courtroom, where the "Bonfire of the Vanities" writer is observing a trial 
involving two real estate developers. "Real estate development is one of the 
themes I want to elaborate (on) in the novel I'm working on now," he said. 
"Along with investment banking, it is one of the two industries that set the 
tone of the period. Here are two developers in a lawsuit -- lots of things in 
the business will come forth. One of the great things about lawsuits is they 
tend to pull the covers off of things." During the trial in Boston, Wolfe also 
appeared at a convention of the International Council of Shopping Centers, 
inviting the crowd to tell him anecdotes about the real estate game. 
 -- Veteran U.S. space researcher James A. Van Allen has received the 
prestigious Crafoord Prize from Swedish King Carl XVI Gustaf for his pioneering 
exploration of space. Sweden's Royal Academy of Sciences, which also awards the 
Nobel science prizes, in particular cited Van Allen's discovery in 1958 of the 
Earth's high-energy radiation belts that were named after him. Van Allen, 74, 
of the University of Iowa, developed new rockets and space instruments used in 
launching the first U.S. satellites. ANN CONNORS 
