NEWS ANALYSIS; 
DRUG WAR UNWINNABLE AT SOURCE, EXPERTS FEAR; 
COCAINE TRAFFICKERS SEEN CHANGING TACTICS AND ROUTES TO SATISFY RICH U.S., 
EUROPEAN MARKETS 
In the South American war against cocaine traffic, Colombia is only one of many 
strategic theaters where traffickers enjoy a big advantage over anti-drug 
forces. Even if authorities could win the battle in Colombia, they could still 
lose the war. 
New U.S. aid for South America, proposed this week by President Bush, is 
unlikely by itself to improve bleak prospects for stopping cocaine at its 
origins. 
In interviews over the past several months, numerous officials near the front 
lines of the South American war have underlined a common concern: The 
continent's rugged geography, weak institutions and needy peoples give cocaine 
traffickers almost unlimited opportunities for exploitation. Despite 
enforcement crackdowns like the current one in Colombia, officials agree, South 
American cocaine traffic will probably thrive as long as there are 
multibillion-dollar markets for the illegal product in the United States and 
Europe. 
"I see law enforcement as buying time for demand-reduction programs in the 
United States to take hold," one Drug Enforcement Administration official said. 
The Colombian blitz against traffickers by President Virgilio Barco Vargas 
began Aug. 18, the same day that assassinations of a leading presidential 
candidate and the police commander in Medellin triggered public outrage over 
violence by the Medellin drug cartel. 
How long the enforcement campaign keeps its momentum depends in part on how 
long the public outrage lasts, many Colombian analysts say. The storm might 
well blow over if the Medellin traffickers adopt the more discreet tactics of 
the rival Cali cartel, which favors bribery and useful connections over 
assassinations and terrorism. 
If President Barco's battle results in a temporary reduction of cocaine moving 
out of Colombia, that might even be profitable for Colombian traffickers. 
Assuming that a curtailed supply could not meet U.S. demand, the shortage would 
force up drug prices and profits. 
"The whole interdiction theory is based on economic fallacies," a European 
diplomat said. "If you stop a ton, what you actually do is put up the price of 
cocaine. The Medellin cartel certainly doesn't suffer." 
Others in the Wings 
Any traffickers caught and convicted in the Colombian crackdown would enjoy no 
windfall profits, of course. But even if some of the cartel kingpins were 
arrested, they would soon be replaced from the ranks of middle-level 
traffickers, some officials say. 
Others contend that the imprisonment of major traffickers will dissuade 
would-be drug lords from expanding. But in a continent where most people are 
poor, it is hard to calculate how many will risk their freedom for the lure of 
easy millions. 
Should the battle rage on, and should the Colombian government eventually win, 
the control centers of cocaine trafficking undoubtedly would shift to other 
South American countries. Colombia has nothing that is essential for the 
production and smuggling of cocaine. 
"There is no reason why they couldn't do it somewhere else," the European 
diplomat said. 
Up to 80% of all cocaine that reaches the United States is refined in Colombia, 
but less than 20% of the coca leaves used in the refining process are grown 
here. Increasing amounts of cocaine hydrochloride, the purest form of the drug, 
are already being produced in Peru and Bolivia, where most coca leaves are 
grown and where traffickers would be eager to fill any temporary gap in the 
flow. 
Eyes on an Opening 
Bolivian traffickers have long been looking for the kind of opening that the 
crackdown on Colombian traffickers might provide. 
"The Bolivians are getting tired of getting the short end of the stick with the 
Colombians," a DEA agent in Bolivia said. 
President Bush's anti-drug proposal includes $260 million in additional foreign 
aid, the first installment in a $2-billion plan for fighting cocaine production 
in Colombia, Bolivia and Peru. But increased enforcement pressure in all three 
countries cannot dry up production, because Brazil and Venezuela are also 
beginning to make cocaine hydrochloride. 
Enforcement officials in Colombia often say that the only way to control the 
traffic in South America is to eradicate coca and replace it with legal crops. 
And that is what U.S. policy is aiming for. 
In both Peru and Bolivia, however, officials admit that farmers are planting 
new coca bushes faster than old plants can be pulled out. 
One problem with eradication is political. Governments seem reluctant to 
provoke the hostility of hundreds of thousands of peasant farmers by taking 
away their best means of livelihood. Leftist opposition parties in both 
countries capitalize on the eradication programs, contending that the 
authorities are siding with U.S. imperialism against popular interests. 
Economic Impediment 
The sensitivity of the "imperialism" issue also makes it unlikely that South 
American governments will invite substantial contingents of U.S. security 
forces to join the fight. 
But the main impediment to eradication is economic. Farmers cannot come close 
to making as much money on fruit, vegetables, coffee or other legal crops as 
they make on coca. Some government officials argue that in the long run, the 
only way substitute crops can become nearly as profitable as coca is for the 
United States and other consumer countries to guarantee their purchase at 
attractive prices. 
U.S. officials say that coca crop substitution can be effective if farmers 
receive technical and financial aid for efficiently producing substitute crops 
while enforcement efforts effectively drive off drug buyers, making it hard for 
farmers to sell leaves or semi-refined cocaine paste at a profit. 
In the past, that kind of enforcement has not succeeded for any sustained 
period. The jungle regions where coca is grown in Peru and Bolivia are 
extensive and difficult to patrol. Peasants help keep security forces out of 
some coca-growing zones, and in Peru's coca-rich Huallaga River Valley, 
guerrillas make penetration doubly difficult. 
Although there are no guerrillas in Bolivia's main coca-growing region, the 
Chapare, officers of the anti-narcotics police have been notorious for taking 
bribes from traffickers. The low pay of officials in general, and the fragility 
of institutional controls, make corruption a major enforcement problem anywhere 
in South America where traffickers deal in huge sums of money. 
If the cultivation of coca in Bolivia and Peru could somehow be stopped, it 
could be expanded in neighboring countries. In the past, coca has grown well in 
Ecuador. Colombia currently produces tens of thousands of acres and has the 
potential for much more. 
"If they were really to do a good job of eradication in Bolivia, my guess is 
that there would be a significant increase in coca production here," a DEA 
agent in Colombia said. 
And in the vast Amazon region of Brazil, a variety of coca called epadu is 
becoming widespread. The dense Amazon forest could hide enormous quantities of 
epadu if traffickers found it necessary to use the region as a major source of 
raw material. 
Brazil, as large as the United States without Alaska, also offers infinite 
possibilities for trafficking routes. Many are already in use. Large 
hydrochloride laboratories have been uncovered in remote places in the 
Brazilian interior, and big shipments of cocaine powder have been seized coming 
from Brazil. 
Brazil's Potential 
One DEA official in Brazil said the country has the potential to be a major 
producer of cocaine. 
"It's not that yet, but it's on the way," he said. 
Investigators say that, increasingly, cocaine routes also go through Venezuela, 
Paraguay, Ecuador and Argentina. 
"When the police do manage to plug up a route for export, the bad guys quickly 
have two or three alternative routes," an American diplomat in Bogota said. 
A diplomat from another drug-consuming country draws what he calls an 
inevitable scenario starting with tough enforcement pressure in Colombia, a 
decline of trafficking through this country and a progressive displacement of 
hydrochloride production to Bolivia, Peru, Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina. 
"I can see the inevitable historical drift of cocaine production down the cone 
of South America," the diplomat said. 
Ultimately, he emphasized, the outcome of the South American cocaine war will 
depend on U.S. and European programs for discouraging consumption. 
