TEARS, FEARS LINGER A YEAR PAST HURRICANE HUGO FURY; 
DISASTER: REPAIRS CONTINUE IN AREAS STRUCK BY THE 1989 STORM. MANY SUFFER 
SOMETHING AKIN TO POST-WAR STRESS. 
Whenever thunder rumbles and wind blows, Leroy Cummings gets icy shivers. His 
wife, Bertha, hides. "I can't take it," she says. 
The sounds bring back the furious day Hurricane Hugo dismantled their home and 
lives, along with thousands of others. A year has passed since the storm 
ravaged coastal South Carolina, but for many residents the fear, pain and 
apprehension are a lingering, everyday legacy. 
The Cummingses -- he is 71, and she is 70 -- now live in a house trailer, with 
four foster children. Most furnishings were donated. While their physical 
losses were devastating, the emotional damage seems appallingly larger. Dabbing 
away tears, Leroy Cummings said he asked himself for days: "By the 21st of the 
month (the anniversary of Hugo) will it happen again?" 
There are other legacies of that fateful day. South Carolina lost $1.4 billion 
worth of timber, much of which still lies on the ground, rotting and raising 
fears of forest fires for years to come. Lawsuits involving insurance claims 
and contractors will clog the court system. Meanwhile, in the U.S. Virgin 
Islands and Puerto Rico, where the storm hit on Sept. 17 and 18, officials say 
they are rebuilding apace, laying underground telephone wiring and putting up 
hurricane-proof structures to replace the inferior ones that were destroyed. 
"The recovery is going very well," said Bent Lawaetz, president of the Virgin 
Islands Senate. Once the rebuilding is completed in a couple years, "we will be 
in better condition than we were," he said. 
Similarly, in Charleston, "the most extraordinary building boom in the city's 
history" is under way, said Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr., noting especially the 
massive refurbishing of the city's elegant old homes. 
For many, however, particularly the elderly, the poor, and those in dusty 
hamlets outside Charleston, there is no silver lining, only the agonizing task 
of getting from one day to the next. 
"In the rural areas, we still have a good way to go," said Riley, adding that 
he encourages people to seek counseling for their fears. "People are not likely 
to come up to you and talk about it, but you know it's there." 
As residents pause to remember on today's anniversary of the storm and ponder 
the possibility of another hurricane sweeping in from the Atlantic, coping 
becomes more difficult for some, say officials of the state Department of 
Mental Health. 
Hurricane victims "are going to have an unusually long recovery period" said 
Nancy Carter, state clinical coordinator for emergency preparedness at the 
department, which operates a counseling program called Hugo Outreach Support 
Team. 
Some victims say the year since Hugo's 140-m.p.h. winds swept into the state, 
killing 29 people and causing an estimated $6 billion in damages, has already 
been an eternity. 
In Mt. Pleasant, James Swinton, 72, who limps heavily and speaks in the soft, 
lyrical accent of coastal South Carolinians, said, "I don't feel safe," 
expressing a feeling he has had ever since he returned the day after the storm 
to find his home wrecked. "Things could happen again." 
Most of the people around here who suffered through Hugo had never seen a 
hurricane before, although coastal thunderstorms were common. Now that they are 
painfully aware of how powerful and dangerous hurricanes can be, they are more 
cautious than ever. 
"Hyper-vigilant" is what Frederic Medway, professor of psychology at the 
University of South Carolina, calls this behavior. "I don't think a large 
number of people living near the coast are having hurricane parties anymore," 
he said, referring to an age-old practice of partying while storms threaten. 
Indeed, as the hurricane season progresses this year, many people watch weather 
reports with unprecedented apprehensiveness. In stores all over the area, there 
were runs on radios and batteries when a tropical storm headed north toward the 
Carolinas. 
Experts liken problems of hurricane survivors to those of combat veterans who 
experience post-war stress. 
Lee Hartley, professor of social work at the University of South Carolina, said 
that right after Hugo, peoples' "initial reaction was shock" at their losses. 
"Now, there's a delayed reaction that says, 'Things can happen to me. We're all 
vulnerable.' " 
Tears are still common a year later. 
In McClellanville, Gladys Shepherd, 67, told a visitor that she cried for two 
weeks after the storm, adding: "Off and on, I cry now. As long as I live, I 
will talk about Hugo." 
Her husband, James, who is 73 years old, said, "You never forget it." He 
compared the hurricane to his combat duty as an infantryman in Africa during 
World War II, asserting that Hugo was worse than Adolf Hitler's army. "Those 
Germans didn't scare me as much as Hugo did," he said. "I had a chance with 
them." 
There is apparently something mystical about the one-year anniversary, as if it 
signals a need to close out an awful chapter in people's lives. 
Cathy Joyner, who leads a team of 11 mental health counselors working out of a 
Charleston office, said the anniversary has triggered an avalanche of requests 
to help fix roofs and repair homes, problems that are stacked on top of the 
emotional ones her team is supposed to address. 
The link between solving the physical problems and emotional problems is 
inextricable. Thus, the Federal Emergency Management Agency funds both the 
mental health programs and grants to help people make repairs. 
The sense of powerlessness seems to pervade the Hugo victims. 
In San Juan, Puerto Rico, Ernestina Villegas, acting director of FEMA's 
individual and family grant program, said that the storm "affected quite a few 
children. When they hear a wave or the sky is too dark, they get very scared." 
Despite the massive rebuilding, Virgin Island residents sense that true 
recovery is out of their hands. 
Bent Lawaetz, the Senate president, noted that rising costs of jet fuel that 
drive up airplane fares, combined with the slackening U.S. economy, threaten to 
cut tourism, which accounts for half the employment on the islands. 
"My biggest concern is beyond my control: the U.S. economy and the Iraq 
situation," he said. 
Back in South Carolina, Leroy and Bertha Cummings did not want to live in a 
cramped mobile home, but on fixed income with a variety of health problems, he 
said, "I had to turn to a trailer. I had to have some place to live." 
At $29,000, the plain brown trailer was affordable, although it is so hot, he 
said, that "we have to stay outside 'til the mosquitoes run us in." 
Christopher Wells, a counselor who makes weekly rounds around this area, told 
of the single mother who huddled in a corner with her daughter through Hugo, 
hearing the air conditioner blow out of a window and through an opposite wall. 
Now, Wells said, "She reports nightmares. She's stuck. No motivation. Life had 
never gotten really tough, then all of a sudden, blam! People who didn't have 
good coping skills went under." 
The rest are trying to stay afloat. They do it in different ways. 
If you talk long enough, just about everybody who went through the storm will 
pull out memories of the way life was before Hugo. Many show photographs of the 
devastation and progressive snapshots of their climb back from it. 
James and Gladys Shepherd's trailer sits next to their storm-damaged house. 
Hoping to move back in next month, they showed a visitor through the two-story 
frame home and talked excitedly of having relatives visit again. The good times 
will be back, they hope. 
But something has changed. Like many others, they vow not to ever have as much 
to lose as they lost to Hugo -- even though Gladys is a self-avowed "pack rat." 
It is as if they are paring down their things to make themselves small targets 
for any future tragedy. 
"As long as I live," said James Shepherd, "I don't ever want as much as I had 
before." 
Staff researcher Edith Stanley contributed to this story. 
