GRIFFITH JOYNER DENIES BUYING GROWTH HORMONE 
A West German news magazine in Wednesday's editions quoted American 400-meter 
runner Darrell Robinson as saying he sold human growth hormone to Florence 
Griffith Joyner in March of 1988, about six months before she won three gold 
medals at the Seoul Olympics. 
Human growth hormone, banned by the International Olympic Committee, is used to 
stimulate muscle growth. 
The magazine, Stern, published a lengthy cover story entitled, "Doping 
Scandal," in which Robinson, a former junior world record-holder, told of drug 
use by himself and others. 
The article quotes Robinson as saying he often discussed drugs with Griffith 
Joyner, who competed with him on the World Class Track Club, which trained at 
UCLA. 
Griffith Joyner, who has retired from track, denies the allegation. 
Robinson, who was paid by the magazine for his information, was quoted as 
saying that Griffith Joyner asked him about HGH. The article said that Robinson 
told her it was expensive but she replied, "If you want to make a million 
dollars, you've got to invest some thousand dollars." 
According to the magazine, Robinson said Griffith Joyner gave him 20 $100-bills 
and said, "Get it." Robinson said in the article that he put a bottle 
containing 10 cubic centimeters of HGH in Griffith Joyner's track bag and that 
she acknowledged the transaction. 
Griffith Joyner, who is scheduled to appear with Robinson this morning on "The 
Today Show," said she is shocked at the allegations. 
"At first, to me, it was funny," she said. "I thought I was reading one of 
those tabloids. I'm shocked at some of the things he said." 
Griffith Joyner said she might have listened as Robinson talked about drugs but 
she showed no interest in such discussions. 
"For him to say I was curious about drugs is totally false," she said. "I'd be 
a stone fool to have discussed drugs with anyone, since I don't believe in 
them. Much less someone I didn't know that well. I didn't even have $2,000 at 
the time. Everybody who comes to a track has a bag for their spikes. I never 
left my bag so somebody could mess with it." 
Stern is the largest news weekly in Europe with a circulation of 1.4 million. 
The article, compiled by three reporters, quotes Robinson as alleging drug 
involvement by Carl Lewis, Houston track coach Tom Tellez and local coaches Bob 
Kersee and Chuck DeBus. Robinson was reportedly paid $100,000 by the magazine 
for a three-day series of interviews. The magazine did not carry any response 
from those accused. 
Griffith Joyner said the story is just another in a series of allegations that 
helped persuade her to leave the sport. 
"I can't even find the words," she said. "I don't expect to stop hearing it. 
People are trying to make money. I've never been surprised by what people will 
do for money. Darrell can run but he can't hide. If he was man enough to tell 
Stern this, he can be man enough to tell a woman to her face about it. I can 
only pray for him." 
Griffith Joyner said she will take any legal action open to her. 
"You have to draw the line somewhere," she said. "I regret not taking action 
before on these allegations. I'm going to do everything in my power." 
