WOOD SPILL AGGRAVATED CYCLE CRASH 
Cords of firewood that spilled from a flatbed truck aggravated the fiery crash 
that killed five motorcyclists participating in an annual Labor Day weekend 
trip in the Sierra Nevada, the California Highway Patrol said Sunday. 
Authorities said the load spilled after the driver of the truck crossed into an 
oncoming lane and into the path of dozens of bikers. 
The driver, his passenger and a sixth motorcyclist were seriously injured in 
the crash Saturday on a stretch known as the Mormon Emigrant Trail, a mountain 
road about five miles south of Sly Park in El Dorado County, about five miles 
east of Jenkinson Reservoir south of U.S. 50. 
The back roads of the Sierra Nevada forest land are the scene of an annual trek 
that attracts hundreds of cycling enthusiasts from the West. 
Friends said the victims of the Saturday crash had been biking to the area for 
10 years and were en route to a campsite in the Hope Valley. 
40 Fatalities 
Forty-two Labor Day traffic fatalities were reported in California by Sunday 
night. Those included that of a highway patrolman who burned to death in San 
Francisco when his car was rear-ended by a pickup truck. 
Officer Hugo Olazar, 35, died inside the patrol car, which he had parked on the 
shoulder of a freeway late Saturday night in order to investigate a crash in 
which no one was injured. 
The driver of the pickup, Jorge Perez of Daly City, was arrested on suspicion 
of felony driving under the influence of alcohol and vehicular manslaughter. 
Perez was in stable condition at San Francisco General Hospital. 
In the Sierra Nevada incident, investigators were still trying to determine 
whether the motorcyclists were hit by the wood or crashed into it, and at which 
point the bikes and truck collided. 
"Apparently, for some unknown reason, (the driver) crossed over the line and 
lost control, causing (a panel) that held the wood to break," CHP spokeswoman 
Mary Ann Biggs said. "Wood went all over the roadway. The cycles went down; 
then there was a fire at the scene." 
No Charges 
The truck driver was identified as Daniel DeWater, 24, of Shingle Springs. He 
was listed in serious condition at University Medical Center in Sacramento. His 
passenger, Wanda Robertson, 32, was reported in very critical condition with 
burns over 90% of her body, a spokeswoman said. 
No charges have been filed in the incident, officials said Sunday. 
