BUENA OFFENSE HAS NOTHING ON THOUSAND OAKS' DEFENSE 
This is no longer just a defense. At Thousand Oaks High, it's a quest for 
perfection. 
And nobody wants to miss any of the action. 
"I'd much rather play defense," said Steve Rudisill, the Lancers' 6-foot, 
185-pound free safety who was pressed into service in the offensive backfield 
Thursday because of an injury to starting flanker Scott Barkman. "It's just a 
different kind of mental thinking. You're out there going crazy like a bunch of 
crazy dogs." 
At Ventura High, the dogs were barking again. One week after posting a shutout 
in their opener, the Lancers turned the trick again with another 27-0 drubbing 
-- this time against high-powered Buena and Coach Rick Scott. 
A Scott-coached team had not been shut out in nearly four years, since a 
scoreless tie against Saugus in 1985 when Scott was head man at Hart. 
Buena (1-1), which ran up nearly 400 yards in its opening 35-30 victory against 
Westlake, was held to 52 total yards Thursday. Thousand Oaks' defense has 
allowed 87 total yards in the Lancers' two wins. 
"We just lost our intensity," Scott said, "and got in the way of a wave." 
Mostly, waves of defensive linemen, linebackers and defensive backs. Guys like 
Rudisill, Lance Martin, Nick Ochoa and Jim Magallanes, all of whom returned -- 
along with four others -- to a defense that posted a pair of shutouts last 
season and allowed an average of 12.1 points a game. 
"There was no key. It was just execution," said Rudisill, who took over for 
Barkman after Barkman was taken away in an ambulance in the first half because 
of a neck injury. Barkman returned to watch the second half from the sidelines. 
The defense even led the offense. Chris Foster, the defensive tackle who has 
added fullback duties to his nights of havoc, rushed for 92 yards and four 
touchdowns in 23 carries. The scoring plays -- of five, six, four and four 
yards -- always seemed to include several Bulldogs being dragged into the end 
zone with Foster. 
Rudisill added 97 yards in 11 carries and sophomore Cory Bowen had 62 yards -- 
all but two after halftime. 
Thousand Oaks led, 14-0, after a first half that was nowhere near as close as 
the score indicated. The Lancers limited Buena to minus-two yards rushing and 
25 yards passing in the first two quarters. 
In fact, the Bulldogs never reached Thousand Oaks territory. Buena's longest 
drive was its first, 27 yards from the Bulldog 20-yard line to the 47. But, 
after an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty, Buena was forced to punt from its 35. 
Jason Isaacs' punt was blocked by Bassam Kneizeh and recovered by Neil 
McConnell on Buena's 21. 
That led to a missed field-goal attempt by Thousand Oaks, its second of the 
first quarter. 
The Lancers scored on their first possession of the second quarter to take a 
7-0 lead. Foster broke two tackles on a second-and-goal play from the five with 
9:33 left for the touchdown. 
Less than eight minutes later, he scored from six yards, this time while 
dragging three Bulldogs with him. It made the score 14-0. 
Foster banged in again with 46 seconds left in the third quarter and finished 
off Buena with a four-yard run 57 seconds into the fourth. 
Thousand Oaks gained 384 yards in total offense, but this night again belonged 
to the defense. 
Magallanes intercepted two of Isaacs' passes in the fourth quarter to preserve 
the shutout. 
In all, Isaacs completed four of 17 passes and running back Tony Williams, who 
piled up 141 yards last week, rushed for 35 yards. 
Asked if he had even considered the thought of 10 shutouts, however, Rudisill 
hedged. 
"Ten?" he repeated. "That's a goal but, hey, I can't say. That would be nice." 
