SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA JOB MARKET; 
INTRODUCTION; 
IF YOU WANT MORE FROM YOUR JOB, NEED A CHALLENGE, LONG TO DO SOMETHING 
DIFFERENT, MAYBE IT'S . . .; 
TIME FOR A CHANGE; 
WHY AM I DOING THIS? 
What a frightening question. No wonder we avoid asking it! 
No wonder we turn away from our yearning for a more satisfying job with 
rhetorical head-slaps like: "It's not supposed to be fun. Why do you think they 
call it work?" 
Outside the vortex of our frustrations, in the rarefied seminars where people 
try to bring order to chaos, massive amounts of lip service are being paid to 
the notion of building a happier worker. 
This is, after all, the era of EI (employee involvement), as the seminars call 
it. This is the era of benevolent bosses who practice MWBA (management by 
wandering around), as the consultants call it. 
Your company cares about you and your career -- that's the enlightened approach 
that employers like to trumpet these days. 
And yet . . . . 
What about the tens of millions of us to whom this enlightenment has yet to 
trickle down? 
What about the tens of millions of us for whom "the workplace," as our 
less-than-tidy factories and cubicles and classrooms are now tidily known, 
represents a gnawing knot in the stomach, a sinking feeling of lost chances, a 
blackboard filled with daunting challenges -- a situation best summarized not 
by studious consultants, but by that popular bumper sticker: "I Owe, I Owe, So 
Off to Work I Go"? 
Ask American workers whether they are satisfied with what they do for a living, 
and a slew of contradictions hits you in the face. 
In a Gallup poll released on Labor Day, 89% of 796 employed adults said they 
were satisfied with their jobs to some degree. Yet a significant number groused 
about pressures on the job, low pay, lack of opportunities for promotion and 
the medical benefits their employers provide. 
And 40% of those surveyed looked upon their jobs as just a way to make a 
living. 
Satisfaction? It's a lovely concept, but too often it has to wait in line 
behind a host of other considerations that sculpt what has become an 
ultra-pressurized existence -- not just for two-income families, but for anyone 
who reads the morning paper and recognizes how lucky he or she is to have a job 
that is steady and protected. 
Sure, employment is relatively high, but consider the headlines -- the mergers, 
the purges, the deadly euphemisms -- restructuring, organization transition 
plan. If they're not trying to squeeze your medical benefits they're 
introducing "engineered work standards" and telling you that if you don't 
operate at 96% of that level you'll be disciplined. Some days, it's satisfying 
enough simply to feel secure. 
Does it have to be like this? Isn't there a way to slow the world down and 
reflect, with some modicum of optimism, on the bigger questions, like whether 
you feel respected in your job, whether you feel it's important, whether you're 
learning, whether you're positioning yourself for advancement? 
Yes. 
Too often, what separates us from job satisfaction isn't the powers that be or 
the intangible economic forces or the assistant manager who wanted to hire his 
girlfriend but got stuck with you. It's us. It's our willingness to pull 
ourselves out of life's frustrating inertia and do something -- to take night 
classes at the community college or consult a career counselor or rewrite the 
resume or make the phone calls, to summon the courage to think that maybe, just 
maybe, we're capable of more, and we should -- we must, we will -- find out. 
The articles that follow are intended to chip away at your doubts about what 
you can do. They will not solve your problems. But they will make you think. 
hey will make you think about job training, about the bridge into management, 
about negotiating for a raise, about increasing your education, about changing 
companies, about scoping out a prospective employer not only on the issue of 
money, but matters such as vacation policy, medical coverage and other 
benefits. 
Some of us are lucky. We came of age with this sort of laundry list in hand. 
Someone -- a parent, a professor, a mentor -- prepared us. The rest of us, the 
vast majority of us, have gaping holes in our game plans. We have all seen 
opportunities slide through these holes. What remains now is to close the gaps, 
cover the bases, widen the field of vision. 
The pursuit of job satisfaction is an attitude dance far more subtle than the 
race for success. It is a test of introspection, a challenge to sit down for a 
while and mull the present and sketch the future and see, in your mind's eye, a 
way to bring those two images closer together. 
Read on, and explore. 
Editor: Linda Finestone * News Editor: Paul Zieke * Art Director: Matt Moody 
