COLUMN RIGHT; 
UNDESERVED SANCTUARY FOR CRIME; 
A JUDGE HARUMPHS, AND A PRUDENT GAMBIT TO GAIN CUSTODY OF A MEXICAN NATIONAL IS 
VOIDED. 
Last month, U.S. District Judge Edward Rafeedie ordered the federal government 
to follow the genteel Queensberry rules in fighting international drug 
trafficking and terrorism. In the case, U.S. vs. Rafael Caro-Quintero, he 
harumphed against a prudent gambit by the Drug Enforcement Administration to to 
seek custody of a Mexican national indicted here for complicity in the torture 
and murder of a Drug Enforcement Administration agent in Mexico. If Rafeedie's 
muddle-headed ruling survives appeal, a legal sanctuary abroad will have been 
erected for despicable crimes. 
In 1985, DEA agent Enrique Camarena was kidnaped, tortured and murdered by a 
Mexican drug trafficking ring. Dr. Humberto Alvarez Machain and a score of 
others were indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of collaborating. 
Representatives of the Mexican Federal Judicial Police offered to deliver 
Alvarez to the United States for trial if a $50,000 douceur was paid in 
advance, but the DEA demurred. 
A DEA agent had simultaneously offered a handful of his Mexican contacts a 
$50,000 reward if Alvarez were delivered to the custody of the United States. 
The monetary enticement brought about the abduction of Alvarez. The Mexican 
government protested the kidnaping to the State Department three times, on the 
grounds that it circumvented an extradition treaty between Mexico and the 
United States. Rafeedie took notice of the protests, ruled that the treaty 
violation deprived the United States of jurisdiction to try Alvarez and ordered 
him repatriated. 
But the Supreme Court declared in Frisbie vs. Collins (1952) that it "has never 
departed from the rule . . . that the power of a court to try a person for a 
crime is not impaired by the fact that he had been brought within the court's 
jurisdiction by reason of forcible abduction. . . . There is nothing in the 
Constitution that requires a court to permit a guilty person to escape justice 
because he was brought to trial against his will." 
Thus, as Rafeedie conceded, if no extradition treaty had existed, Alvarez's 
jurisdictional claim would have failed. Rafeedie's conclusion that a treaty 
violation frustrates jurisdiction perversely discourages extradition 
arrangements because they add to the defendants' legal arsenal to circumvent 
justice. 
Extradition treaties are constructive adjuncts to international law 
enforcement, and are ordinarily preferable to abduction or other stratagems for 
gaining custody of a defendant. The latter, however, are sometimes imperative 
if the extradition process has been corrupted, or if the nation of sanctuary 
would resist extradition to escape political embarrassment. The "anti-Yankee" 
political culture and government venality pervasive in Latin America thus make 
U.S. reliance on extradition to obtain jurisdiction over fugitives foolish. 
Rafeedie's ruling usurped authority to decide a foreign-policy question fit 
only for President Bush. International obligations stemming from extradition 
treaties confer rights on nations, not individuals. The Mexican government 
formally protested Alvarez's abduction to the State Department, not to 
Rafeedie. The department, as the foreign-policy voice of the President, denied 
Mexico's demands for Alvarez's return. 
Bush might have believed that Mexico's demands reflected insincere political 
posturing for the benefit of a Mexican constituency, or that Mexican 
retaliation was unlikely because its failure to cooperate with the United 
States in fighting drug trafficking would trigger losses in American trade and 
economic benefits. In any event, the U.S. response to accusations of 
international law transgressions turns on quintessential political 
considerations alien to the understanding, expertise and responsibilities of 
federal judges. 
Rafeedie also errantly held the DEA responsible for Alvarez's abduction by 
private individuals solely because of its reward offer. That responsibility was 
the linchpin of his finding of an extradition-treaty violation. But a financial 
inducement to private conduct is no justification for imputing government legal 
responsibility. The United States offers rewards of up to $500,000 to persons 
furnishing information leading to the arrest of terrorists, but it is not 
legally answerable for private searches, seizures or surveillances occasioned 
by that allurement. 
Rafeedie's decree that the United States play exclusively by Queensberry rules 
in attacking international criminals has a place in Utopia, but not in a world 
that must cope with unsavory criminal acts. 
