NUMBER OF STUDIES GROWING; 
MADNESS AND CREATIVITY: SCIENTISTS HUNT FOR LINKS 
For centuries, people have talked about a connection between creativity and 
madness. 
Socrates and Winston Churchill, Edgar Allan Poe and F. Scott Fitzgerald, 
Michelangelo and Vincent Van Gogh. They are but a few of the highly creative 
individuals who are known to have suffered from some form of mental illness. 
But it was not until two years ago that an American researcher published the 
first scientific article demonstrating, to the satisfaction of scientists, that 
a connection did indeed exist between creativity and mental disorders. 
Since then a number of other studies have been published. At least three books 
are being written. And now researchers are trying to explore what appears to be 
a genetic link between creativity and mental illness. 
In trying to unravel the biological and physiological mysteries that surround 
creativity, scientists have found that artists and writers -- especially poets 
and novelists -- are much more prone to mania and depression than the general 
population. Ordinary people who are not necessarily known for their creativity 
but clearly exhibit signs of it have also been found in unusually high numbers 
to suffer from mild cases of mental illness. 
Even more intriguing are recent studies showing that, while many creative 
people have a predilection to mental problems, their relatives appear to be 
even more highly susceptible to severe depressions or crippling manic attacks. 
One emerging theory is that creativity may be nature's way of helping 
individuals overcome a genetic predisposition to mental disease. If so, this 
could have profound implications not only on the study of creativity but on the 
practice of psychiatry as well. The research may also pose some knotty ethical 
questions about how to treat mental illness without dampening the creative 
drive. 
Dr. Nancy C. Andreasen, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Iowa 
College of Medicine was the first to document the connection between creativity 
and mental illness in a landmark 1987 study. 
But she was not the first to notice the connection. Even Aristotle, in ancient 
Greece, had observed it: "(All) of those who have been famous for their genius 
. . . have been inclined to insanity," he said. 
Before becoming a physician, Andreasen was a literary scholar. She couldn't 
help notice the number of suicides among writers. In the 20th Century alone, 
there had been Ernest Hemingway, Sylvia Plath, John Berryman, Anne Sexton, 
Virginia Woolf. 
Had these writers been mentally ill? 
Or were there simply some similarities between creative people and mentally 
deranged ones? As Roy Thurston, a Los Angeles artist, put it recently: 
"Creativity is being aware of the boundaries and going beyond them. Mental 
illness is just not being aware of boundaries." 
Modern Criteria 
Unlike earlier research efforts, Andreasen used modern psychiatric diagnostic 
criteria to assess the mental health of creative people. She chose as her 
subjects 30 faculty members at the University of Iowa's Writers' Workshop, the 
country's oldest and one of its most notable writing schools. 
What Andreasen had expected to find when she began her work in the 1970s was a 
slightly higher than normal incidence of schizophrenia. To her surprise, the 
writers she studied did not exhibit the symptoms she expected -- delusions, 
hallucinations, bizarre thoughts and the loss of sense of self. 
Instead of schizophrenia, 80% of them exhibited depression or had some other 
form of mood disorder. Only 30% of a control group of non-writers suffered from 
mood disorders. Nearly half of the writers -- 43% -- were diagnosed as having 
one of the most serious forms of mood disorders -- manic depression -- compared 
to a rate of 10% among the control subjects. 
In the worst cases, patients suffered episodes of uncontrollable hyperactivity, 
often accompanied by grandiose delusions and long periods of incapacitating and 
often suicidal depression. 
At the time, Andreasen warned that her findings, while statistically 
significant, were not necessarily relevant to other types of creativity. But 
last spring her observations were bolstered by a study involving writers and 
artists conducted by Kay Redfield Jamison, an associate professor of psychiatry 
at Johns Hopkins University. 
Jamison analyzed the work patterns and mental health status of 47 of England's 
most highly honored poets, novelists, playwrights, artists and biographers. 
More than a third, she found, had sought treatment for mental-health problems 
-- a rate about 30 times that of the general population. 
One of the most revealing patterns that emerged from the British study was the 
sharp contrast between those writers who dealt in fiction and those who dealt 
with fact. 
While about a third of the poets and novelists reported having either severe 
mood swings or extended, elated mood states, none of the biographers reported 
significant shifts in mood. A handful of the biographers had taken 
anti-depressants at some time in their lives, but they did not seem subjected 
to what Jamison calls the "creative fire" that was reported by so many of the 
others in the study. 
Similarly, scientists do not seem to be as prone to mental illness as do other 
creative people, perhaps because of the more rigid nature of scientific 
research, which requires at least some measure of stability and predictability. 
Although there have yet to be any systematic studies, Jamison believes that 
truly gifted political and corporate leaders may have mental disorders and mood 
patterns similar to those of poets and artists. 
Truly gifted leaders, Jamison said, tend to share many of the characteristics 
that are exhibited by manics: high energy, enthusiasm, intense emotions, 
charisma, gregariousness, extroversion, self-aggrandizement, optimism, 
heightened alertness, fearlessness, decisiveness, sleeplessness. 
Although there have been "relatively few overtly psychotic political and 
military leaders," she says, there have been any of a number who would surely 
be diagnosed as having some form of abnormal swings in moods. Oliver Cromwell, 
Napoleon Bonaparte, Abraham Lincoln, Robert E. Lee, Theodore Roosevelt, Winston 
Churchill and Benito Mussolini all suffered from some form of mood disorder, 
Jamison said. 
Dr. Ruth Richards, a professor of psychiatry at Harvard University and a 
researcher at the Mailman Research Center at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., 
has also been working in this field. Details of her work, which is the result 
of a collaboration with her colleague Dennis K. Kinney, is also scheduled to be 
published shortly in a book titled "Creativity and the Healthy Mind." 
'Everyday Creativity' 
Rather than studying famous people and trying to assess their mental states, 
Richards and Kinney have taken a different tack. They have been trying to 
identify individuals and families with a history of mental disease and then 
assess their levels of creativity. 
To do so, the researchers evaluated what they call "everyday creativity." 
Without revealing precisely what it was they were looking for, the researchers 
asked a group of subjects detailed questions about work patterns and leisure 
habits. People who tended to do things in imaginative, unusual ways scored high 
on the scales of everyday creativity. Those who worked or played in predictable 
ways scored low. For example, an auto mechanic who was especially clever in 
solving problems and who designed his own tools or invented new uses for old 
tools would receive a very high rating, whereas a painter, even a gifted one, 
who simply made copies of originals would get a rather low score. 
Using these scales, Richards and Kinney have found some intriguing connections 
between creativity and mental illness. 
It was not those with extreme cases of manic depression who tended to be the 
most creative. Rather, it was the relatives of those who were mentally ill -- 
people who themselves exhibited only mild signs of mental illness or, in some 
cases, no symptoms -- who were the most creative. 
Researchers had already determined that manic depression seemed to be a 
genetically inherited characteristic, passed along in families from one 
generation to the next. Maybe, Richards theorized, there were similar genetic 
or biological predispositions for creativity. And just maybe, creativity and 
manic depression were somehow linked, so that a person who was susceptible to 
mental illness was also predisposed to creativity. 
Such genetic links seemed to exist elsewhere in nature. For example, scientists 
had long wondered why sickle cell anemia, which is such a debilitating and 
often fatal disease, didn't die off with its victims long ago. The reason, they 
now believe, is that, for some reason, this devastating form of anemia seems to 
be genetically coupled to an immunity to malaria. As a result, individuals who 
are not stricken with sickle cell but are merely carriers of it are also 
blessed with a much-needed immunity to malaria, which has long been one of the 
most pervasive and virulent diseases facing the human population. 
Just as an immunity to malaria seems to offer a kind of "compensatory 
advantage" for the carriers of sickle cell, Richards said, so creativity may be 
a form of compensation for those who are carriers of the genes that predispose 
individuals to mental disorders. 
The apparent connection between mental illness and creativity raises complex 
medical and ethical issues, which scientists have not even begun to resolve, 
said Jamison in a chapter on creativity in a forthcoming medical text published 
by Oxford University Press. 
Traditionally, psychiatrists and psychologists have treated manic depression 
with medication and psychotherapy and, in so doing, ignored the potentially 
creative aspects of the manic stages of the disease, which they viewed as 
destructive. 
Scientists are moving closer to being able to identify the genetic markers for 
mental illness. This means they soon will be able to spot fetuses and even 
recently conceived embryos that are at a high risk of mental disease, in much 
the same way that Down's syndrome, spina bifida, Tay-Sachs disease and other 
devastating genetic abnormalities are identified by such simple medical 
procedures as amniocentesis and chorionic villous sampling. 
This leads Richards and other experts to wondering if, in trying to dull the 
pain of mental illness, scientists might inadvertently destroy its beneficial 
side effects. 
