LA HABRA'S EFFORT FALLS JUST SHORT; 
DEFENDING CHAMPION LOS ALTOS REGISTERS TOUGH 24-13 VICTORY 
After watching his team lose to Los Altos High School, the Division IV 
defending champion and No. 1-ranked team, 24-13, Friday night, La Habra Coach 
Jack Nichols wiped the tears from his eyes, huddled with his players and with 
all the volume his lungs could offer, let his feelings be known. 
"Any other team would have quit! You didn't quit!" he shouted. "You almost won 
the football game. They're the No.1-ranked team in the state. You can beat 
anybody." 
Yes, emotions ran high at Los Altos, where an estimated 2,500 fans watched La 
Habra (2-1) put up a valiant fight. 
Although the Highlanders trailed 14-0 at halftime and 21-0 early in the third 
quarter, they never gave up. 
"These kids showed great, great character out there," he said, bear-hugging 
running back Mark Brown in midsentence. "They just would not give up. They 
haven't been behind all year, but tonight they came out after being down at the 
half and gave it their all." 
Although La Habra quarterback Mark Moreno completed only four of 15 passes for 
58 yards and was intercepted twice, he showed great promise midway through the 
third quarter with two consecutive touchdown passes. 
Brown connected with Moreno on a screen pass and then raced down the sideline 
for the Highlanders' first touchdown. 
Then, on La Habra's next possession, Moreno hit junior Mike Miller in the end 
zone for a 24-yard touchdown pass. La Habra's extra point attempt fell short, 
and Los Altos led 21-13. 
But Los Altos, relying on the talented tandem of running backs Roger Boden (144 
yards in 17 carries and a touchdown) and Fernando Zambrano (76 yards in 12 
carries and a touchdown), finished off its next drive with a 32-yard field goal 
by Cortney Smith for its final 24-13 lead. 
"It was a hard-hitting game, we got a couple breaks in the beginning," said Los 
Altos' 23-year coach Dwayne DeSpain, who earned his 190th victory. 
"But when we jumped out 21-0 and thought we got them on the run, the kids just 
got lazy on us. I got to give coach Nichols credit -- you gotta praise La 
Habra." 
Brown, younger brother of former Servite star Derek Brown, was slow warming up 
but finished with 106 yards in 12 carries, including a 58-yard sprint down the 
sideline to set up the Highlanders' first score and a 36-yard run to set up 
their second. 
