UTILITIES PAYING PREMIUM TO STAY AT FULL CAPACITY LEVEL 
Right now, the utilities are paying too much for electricity from third-party 
generators like windmill owners. 
But capacity counts too, offsetting much of that cost. 
Capacity is what a utility needs to supply all customers when all of them turn 
on all their appliances at the same time. 
"We can't plan our system for only one appliance at a time. We need to plan for 
everyone turning on everything at once," said Alison Silverstein of the Pacific 
Gas &amp; Electric Co. 
Utilities like PG&amp;E have difficulty building large traditional plants to 
increase their own capacity because of politics, permits and protests. 
But third-party generators are not as strictly regulated. So PG &amp; E pays 
many of them for their capacity, as well as for the electricity that goes into 
the grid. 
Silverstein said payments for "firm" capacity can range from $60 to $160 per 
kilowatt per year, depending mostly on availability during PG&amp;E's peak 
periods. Wind turbine operators, because of the vagaries of the winds, usually 
qualify only for "non-firm" capacity, which pays much, much less. 
Third-party generators, called qualifying facilities or QFs in the trade, 
include small producers who use solar, geothermal and many other sources of 
power. 
Payments Vary 
Payments for electricity delivered to the grid vary with type and age of 
contract. Many contracts offer 10 years at a high fixed price -- 7 or 8 cents 
per kilowatt hour -- based on early 1980s petroleum prices and production 
efficiency and an additional 10 or 20 years at "avoided cost," or what the 
utility would otherwise have to pay elsewhere. 
Were those contracts to be written today, the price would be around 3 cents. 
Said William J. Steeley, senior projects engineer at PG&amp;E: "At the time, it 
was right. It might well have gone up to 10 cents." PG&amp;E is still honoring 
those contracts, "but we really don't need energy at that price," he said. 
"Avoided cost," once around 8 cents per kilowatt hour, is now less than 3 
cents, making it "real tough" to make money, in the words of Jerry Fuchs, 
manager of project planning for the Fayette wind-power company of Tracy. 
Federal law, the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, required the 
utilities to contract with all viable third-party producers. The purpose was to 
promote efficient energy production, encourage the development of alternative 
sources of energy and reduce the reliance on foreign oil. The law also called 
for price incentives, which were translated by the California Public Utilities 
Commission into the fixed-price contracts. 
The result for PG&amp;E in 1988 was that in August, at its all-time peak load, 
it needed 18,000 megawatts. Its own capacity was 15,030 megawatts, and it had 
5,963 megawatts of third-party capacity under contract. The total is more than 
enough until the late 1990s or early 2000s. 
Thus, PG&amp;E is caught in a short-term dilemma of obeying the law that is 
aimed at keeping third parties on line and holding down prices. 
Silverstein said it can buy power from the federal Bonneville Dam on the 
Columbia River for 2.3 cents per kilowatt hour. But the average it pays all 
third-party producers is 5.7 cents per kilowatt hour -- compared to a 
systemwide average cost of about 2.8 cents. 
"If we are required to pay 2.9 cents from a QF (third-party producer), this 
precludes us from buying less-expensive power elsewhere. It's not good for the 
customers," Silverstein said. 
When the demand curve starts climbing again, Silverstein foresees an auction 
system in which third parties would bid to fill holes in needs. 
