GASTRONOMES' DREAM; 
TRUE BOUILLABAISSE ARRIVES FOR BRIEF STAY AT LE MERIDIEN HOTEL WITH FISH FLOWN 
IN FROM MEDITERRANEAN 
It was exactly 20 years ago that I experienced my first bouillabaisse, the 
Provencal fish soup that gastronomes everywhere dream about. I wandered the 
docks of Marseille until I found the grubbiest fishmonger's shack advertising 
the dish, and there experienced one of the most memorable meals of my life. 
Platters and platters of whole fish came out of the kitchen, along with a broth 
that surpassed anything I had ever tasted. Little did I realize that it would 
be 20 years before I had the dish again. 
The fact that a true bouillabaisse is virtually impossible to prepare away from 
the Mediterranean does not deter countless American chefs from trying to 
reproduce it, despite the lack of rascasse, vive (weever), rouget (red mullet), 
and other fish that the recipe requires. American chefs throw just about 
anything into their stock pots, even shellfish, a departure that borders on 
blasphemy. It makes me redder than a lobster to think about it. 
This week, thanks to Le Meridien Hotel, Newport Beach's "SeaFest" and Chef 
Sylvan DuParc of the Carlton Hotel in Cannes, you can have a real bouillabaisse 
without going to the south of France. Cafe Fleuri in Le Meridien will be 
preparing the dish throughout this week at dinner time, and Chef DuParc is 
having the fish flown in from France on a daily basis, using the exact recipe 
from his own kitchen. It's fabulous, and you even get the recipe with the 
dinner. Good luck doing it at home. 
Here's how to eat it. You will be served a large soup bowl filled with a rich, 
ruddy, fennel and saffron infused broth, on top of which are steaming chunks of 
white fish, angler fish, John Dory, spiny lobster (the one shellfish that can 
be included), conger eel, and the rascasse, vive and rouget. 
Alongside, on small plates, are croutons waiting to be smothered in rouille (a 
garlic and red pepper mayonnaise) and mounds of finely grated Gruyere cheese. 
You plunge the doctored croutons into the soup bowl, spoon up a big chunk of 
fish, and voila!, you're an honorary Marseillaise. It's a taste sensation 
you'll never forget. 
Should you run out, waiters are at the ready to ladle more of Chef DuParc's 
nectar-like broth into your bowl. There are also several Provencal 
accompaniments to complement the meal. Begin with tapenade, an anchovy and 
olive puree, here served with a platter of baby vegetables for dipping. End the 
meal with a clafouti aux prunes (a custardy fruit tart made with mirabelles -- 
the irresistible little yellow plums that grow everywhere in rural France). A 
Provencale rose wine will make a charming compliment. 
The bouillabaisse will be available for dinner only from today until Friday. 
The price is $30, and the Cafe Fleuri is in Le Meridien Hotel, 4500 MacArthur 
Blvd., Newport Beach. For reservations call (714) 476-2001. 
