FOR GARCIA, GOING FROM PLANNER TO LOBBYIST WAS EASY 
Daniel P. Garcia, former president of the Los Angeles City Planning Commission, 
was explaining why he became a land development lawyer-lobbyist -- one of the 
most successful at City Hall. 
"When I had my heart attack or whatever it was, I was in the hospital," he 
said. "It occurred to me that leading the two lives of doing litigation on the 
one hand and running the Planning Commission was too much. 
"It had taken too big a personal toll. I had already gone through two divorces 
and I was in the hospital, overweight, smoking, eating too much. This was not 
what I wanted to do." 
Garcia, a partner in the downtown Los Angeles firm of Munger, Tolles &amp; 
Olson, is representing the Porter Ranch Development Co. in its effort to win 
city permission to build a huge residential and commercial subdivision on 1,300 
acres in the far northwest San Fernando Valley. 
He is one of several former top city officials who have gone through what 
critics consider a "revolving door," moving from public life into lobbying or 
consulting for clients with business before the city. 
Porter Ranch Development Co. is also represented by former City Councilman 
Robert Wilkinson, who once represented the district where the big subdivisions 
would be built. 
And in another City Hall link, Porter Ranch has also hired as a consultant Paul 
Clarke, who has been a top political adviser to the current councilman, Hal 
Bernson, and also is a close personal friend. That is part of another City Hall 
pattern: Developers and others with business before the council often hire 
lobbyists or consultants with close ties to certain council members. 
The emergence of Garcia as a land development attorney had a major impact 
because, as Planning Commission president, he was one of the most influential 
men in city government. 
The planning commissioners are part-timers, paid a nominal amount for their 
work. But Garcia, with a love for detail, politics and power, extended his 
influence beyond the commission. 
He worked with staff members in the writing of zoning laws and community plans. 
He was a close adviser to Mayor Tom Bradley, who had appointed him, and he 
influenced mayoral policy. 
Garcia did his work with a point of view -- moderately pro-development, walking 
a line between slow-growthers, of whom he disapproved, and those committed to 
unbridled development. 
His opposition to the slow-growth movement stemmed, in part, from his Latino 
background. A ban on building, he said, would cost jobs, limit housing 
opportunity and cause social tension between the working class and the wealthy. 
In addition to Porter Ranch Development Co., Garcia has other big business 
clients, including May Centers; Ratovich Co., a major developer and restorer of 
historic buildings; Price Co., the big discount firm; and Harvey Capitol Co. 
His clients have been major players in city politics over the years. Since 
1982, eight of his clients have donated $226,163 to city political candidates. 
Did his years in City Hall give him special influence with the mayor, the 
council and members of the Planning Department staff? 
"Lots of people have access to the mayor," he said. "I would say I have good 
access, but I don't think it is distinguishable (from that of others). The fact 
that I was in city government -- does that account for that access, in part? 
Yes, of course." 
"Nobody approves any projects simply because of me, and Porter Ranch is a good 
example. I haven't lobbied anyone on Porter Ranch. I'm not the lobbyist on 
Porter Ranch. They've got Wilkinson and I assume (developer Nathan) Shapell is 
talking to people." 
Although Garcia said he does not lobby council members, he has written strong 
legal and planning arguments defending the Porter Ranch project's effect on 
schools and on regional planning aspects of the development. 
