THE WAR IS OVER; 
IMPROVING RELATIONS WITH HANOI WILL REQUIRE PATIENCE AND PRAGMATISM 
Washington's recent efforts to forge a meaningful dialogue with Hanoi get a 
welcome boost with the scheduled sit-down in New York City today between 
Secretary of State of James A. Baker III and Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach. 
It marks the fourth meeting between U.S. and Vietnamese officials since July. 
Talks with Hanoi then were prompted by the desire to end the 12-year-old 
Cambodian conflict. Perhaps the Cold War with Hanoi will thaw even more today 
when Cabinet level officials from the United States and Vietnam meet for the 
first time since the Vietnam War. 
Hanoi and Washington have a long list of issues to talk about. Baker wants to 
acknowledge and discuss the progress made toward a settlement in Cambodia, 
including the acceptance of a United Nations peace plan and the formation of a 
Cambodian National Supreme Council. Such a new Cambodian government, composed 
of Vietnamese-backed Hun Sen, and the three opposition parties, would assume 
the country's U.N. seat. 
Baker also will press Thach to be more forthcoming about the fates of more than 
2,400 Americans missing since the Vietnam War. Some Americans fervently believe 
that 1,700 of that number might still be -- or at least had been -- within the 
territory of Vietnam itself. 
A resolution of the MIA issue has been one of three conditions that Washington 
has insisted Hanoi fulfill before better relations. A second one is for Hanoi 
to help work out some solution to the heartbreaking Vietnamese refugee problem. 
But the third condition has already been met: Hanoi has withdrawn its troops 
from Cambodia. 
Vietnam's cooperation, so far, has helped to bring Hun Sen to the bargaining 
table. It is important to recognize that contribution and encourage Hanoi to do 
more of the same. Baker's meeting might go quite a way toward doing just that. 
The secretary of state's penchant for pragmatism is widely noted. That's 
exactly the tone that needs to prevail in these talks. 
