NOW THE TECHNO-SNOOPERS WANT TO GET INTO OUR GENES 
Move over Buck Rogers, Dick Tracy and Mr. Spock. Space-age technology has come 
to the criminal justice system. Recent developments in forensic molecular 
biology have brought us DNA "fingerprinting," a technique that its advocates 
claim offers certainty in the matching of genetic material found at a crime 
scene with that taken from a suspect. More than half the states are exploring 
plans to create computerized genetic databases, and the FBI is seeking to build 
a national computerized DNA index, for which those convicted of serious crimes 
will be required to provide blood and saliva samples. 
This week, in California's first DNA conviction, a Ventura County woman was 
found guilty of murder in a case that rested largely on 15 hairs found at the 
scene of the crime that matched her DNA patterns. "Without the DNA test 
results," said the judge in the case, "there's not enough evidence." 
In this euphoria of quick techno-fixes, it is possible to overlook short- and 
long-range problems. There are questions about the validity of DNA testing and 
about the standards that should be required for court use. An accurate match is 
no guarantee of legal guilt, and the tactic raises Fourth Amendment search and 
property ownership questions: Under what conditions should a DNA sample have to 
be provided, and who should control the findings? 
But there is another problem -- the danger of "surveillance creep," in which an 
invasive technology, benignly introduced for limited purposes, silently extends 
beyond those borders. Examples are everywhere: the Social Security number that 
Congress intended only for tax purposes has become a de facto national ID 
number; video cameras, once restricted to prisons and high-security areas, are 
found in offices and shopping malls; the polygraph, once limited to 
national-security violations, is now routinely applied to government employees 
and contractors; drug testing, once restricted to those working in 
nuclear-power facilities, is now required of bank tellers and even junior high 
school students; a congressional restriction on matching computer databases 
only for purposes consistent with the original data collection has given way to 
widespread matching of databases for any reason government chooses; the FBI's 
records of criminal histories, created as a crime-fighting tool, are now most 
frequently used to investigate job applicants, not crime. 
Once a surveillance system is established, many factors extend it to new 
subjects and new uses. Economies of scale are created that reduce the per-unit 
cost of such extensions. Precedent is established; what was once seen as a 
shocking intrusion comes to be seen as business as usual. Interest groups lobby 
for expansion. The surveillance appetite becomes insatiable, both as a 
bureaucratic end in itself and as an insurance policy. 
To be sure, sometimes the camel's nose is pushed back from under the tent. 
Thus, following Watergate and revelations about the FBI's COINTEL program, 
policies were changed and the number of domestic national-security 
investigations dropped from thousands to fewer than 50 a year. Director William 
S. Sessions recently rejected a proposal to expand the FBI's automated criminal 
records system to include information on persons who were under suspicion but 
had not actually been charged with anything. But such cases of restraint are 
the exception. 
In the case of mandatory DNA fingerprinting, one can imagine its creeping from 
violent to nonviolent criminals, then to anyone having contact with the 
criminal justice system, and finally to the everyone. In the latter case, this 
might initially be voluntary and only for purposes of identification, as 
protection for missing children and for amnesia or Alzheimer's victims. Success 
with that could lead to a numerically expressed national DNA standard for all 
Americans, which could find its way onto all the documents that make up our 
"data image" in distant computers. 
New uses also may appear. There is no reason why the technique has to be 
restricted to the limited number of DNA strands used for identification. 
Information on one's complete genetic makeup will be available. This could lead 
to coercive therapy in the name of prevention, the denial of certain types of 
employment, insurance or even the right to have children by those whose genetic 
makeup indicates they may be prone to particular illnesses or forms of 
anti-social behavior. With that could come a permanently stigmatized genetic 
underclass, with enormous moral and social costs. 
Some years ago, research on recombinant DNA was suspended until appropriate 
laboratory guidelines could be developed. It might now be appropriate to have a 
social moratorium on the use of DNA databases for public-policy purposes while 
the legal, ethical, social and psychological questions are considered. With 
respect to this technology, we are now in the twilight zone that Justice 
William O. Douglas wrote about in noting that the protection of liberty is not 
self-executing: "As night-fall does not come at once, neither does oppression. 
. . . It is in such twilight that we all must be most aware of change in the 
air -- however slight -- lest we become unwitting victims of the darkness." 
