GORBACHEV'S VISIT TO JAPAN PLANNED FOR APRIL 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze told Japan on Thursday that 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will make his long-planned visit here in the 
"middle of April" next year but offered no assurance that the Soviet leader 
would settle a territorial dispute that continues to poison Soviet-Japan 
relations. 
Shevardnadze delivered the message in an hourlong meeting with Prime Minister 
Toshiki Kaifu. 
The visit -- which after years of discussion the Soviets in 1989 scheduled for 
"sometime in 1991" -- will be designed to bring about a "fundamental 
improvement" in Soviet-Japan relations, Shevardnadze told the prime minister. 
Gorbachev, in a message that Shevardnadze relayed to Kaifu, complained that 
bilateral ties lagged far behind changes sweeping the rest of the world. 
Although four Japanese prime ministers have visited Moscow since the two 
nations restored diplomatic relations in 1956, no top Soviet leader has ever 
traveled to Japan. The two nations have never signed a peace treaty to formally 
end World War II hostilities. 
Kaifu responded that he, too, hopes that Gorbachev's visit will lead to an 
improvement in relations. But he warned the Soviet foreign minister that "the 
issue of returning the four northern islands is one that cannot be bypassed," 
according to Kazuhiko Togo, director of the Foreign Ministry's Soviet section. 
The Soviets seized the islands off the east and northeast coasts of Japan's 
northernmost island of Hokkaido after World War II. 
Shevardnadze called the territorial dispute "the most difficult and complicated 
issue" between Moscow and Tokyo. Creating an overall "environment of trust and 
goodwill" must precede a solution that both sides can accept, Togo quoted him 
as telling Kaifu. 
A solution, Shevardnadze added, must not injure the security interests of 
either country -- an apparent reference to the location of the islands on the 
outer rim of the Sea of Okhotsk, the Soviets' naval gateway to the Pacific. 
Japanese diplomats said that Shevardnadze's statements marked the first time 
that the Soviet Union has acknowledged the importance of settling the 
territorial dispute as a prerequisite to improving bilateral relations. 
Previously, Shevardnadze referred to the issue only as "a difficulty" blocking 
a peace treaty and closer ties. 
Symbolizing attempts by both nations to broaden a relationship that has been 
frozen in continuing feuding over the issue, Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama and 
Shevardnadze signed four technical agreements as they completed nearly nine 
hours of talks over the last two days. One involved a promise of Japanese aid 
to Soviet victims of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. 
The Soviets' top diplomat also proposed to meet Nakayama again this month at 
the United Nations in New York and before the end of the year in Moscow. He was 
scheduled to leave Tokyo today. 
