NEIGHBORHOOD PROFILE: COLLEGE PARK/COLONY: FOCUS; 
GOOD MORNING, BUENOS DIAS, CHOA EM , BUON GIORNO . . . 
Echoes of more than 70 different exotic phrases have resounded throughout the 
halls of the College Park Elementary School, thanks to its English-assimilation 
instruction programs. The school is one of two elementary schools in Irvine 
offering ESL (English as a Second Language) courses to students. 
Because of the influx of immigrants into Southern California, the need for 
bilingual and ESL learning became a must at the school five years ago. At the 
College Park school, on Chaparral Avenue, there are two ESL magnet classes -- 
one class for grades one through three and the other for grades four through 
six. 
The ESL magnet program involves teaching children, in English, who have very 
little or no interpretation or comprehension of the language. Most of the 
instruction is done through visual aids and constant repetition. This concept 
is sometimes tagged "motherly." The one-semester (nine months) program is 
"orally intensive," says Maureen Terry, who taught an ESL class for two years 
at College Park and is now reinitiating an interactive video class for the 
Irvine Unified School District. "Children are like sponges -- you'd be 
surprised how quickly they absorb everything. As long as you make their 
environment comfortable, the atmosphere relaxed and use the hands-on approach, 
they'll be eager to learn." 
When students use their native language, educators give them an example in 
English rather than scolding them. Teachers have found this technique 
encourages the children to use English while respecting their native tongue. 
Kathy Allard was among the first to teach and assist in instituting this 
program five years ago at the College Park school. 
"I love teaching children," she said. "I couldn't do it if I didn't. They bring 
me great joy. This summer to get a better understanding of the culture of the 
majority of my students, I went to Japan." 
Allard has 27 children in her class -- 15 are Japanese, three are Taiwanese, 
three are Latino, two are Italian, one is Costa Rican, one is Lebanese, one is 
Vietnamese and one is Norwegian. 
The College Park/Colony and its environs does include other properties along 
with its unusual and highly-acclaimed school. The Colony area is northeast of 
Walnut Avenue and was built in three phases 16 years ago, The Colony, Colony I 
and Colony II. Four different styles of homes are situated on streets given 
such names as Hemingway, Steinbeck and Wyeth. For the Colony residents' 
convenience, there is the Walnut Village Center (a mini-shopping center) at 
Culver Drive and Walnut Avenue. 
Southwest of Walnut Avenue is the College Park residential tract. But don't 
expect to find street signs with college names; they don't exist. Instead, they 
have been given names of trees. 
About a mile away, both sides of Jamboree Boulevard are lined with acres of 
vacant space, with the exception of a few trucks, pieces of equipment and a 
pile of rocks being stored there. The Irvine Co., which owns the land, has no 
development plans at present. 
For the entire community's pleasure, a 20.4-acre park -- Harvard Community 
Athletic Park -- has been on Harvard Avenue for 12 years now. It is a 
multipurpose facility with a snack bar, lighted softball, baseball and soccer 
fields, and a community building where meetings and other neighborhood 
functions are held. 
Population 
Total: (1989 est.) 6,142 
1980-88 change: +24.3% 
Median Age: 34.3 
Racial/ethnic mix: 
White: (non-Latino) 78% 
Latino: 9% 
Black: 1% 
Other: 12% 
By sex and age: In hundreds 
MALES Median age: 33.8 years 
FEMALES Median age: 34.6 years 
Income 
Per capita: $15,685 
Median household: $47,198 
Average household: $49,838 
Income Distribution: 
Less than $25,000 12% 
$50,000-74,999 31% 
$25,000-49,999 46% 
More than $75,000 11%Los Angeles Times 
