REDSKINS GAMBLE ON OLKEWICZ 
Neal Olkewicz has cleared his last hurdle and now seems destined to finish his 
career with the Washington Redskins. 
The 11-year middle linebacker, who signed with Washington as a free agent out 
of Maryland and beat back several challengers over the last decade, cleared 
waivers Tuesday and will rejoin the team Wednesday when it starts practicing 
for the opener against the New York Giants Monday night. Olkewicz plans to make 
this his last season. 
"I look at it as one more obstacle I had to overcome," Olkewicz said. "I try to 
make a positive out of everything. It worked out all right so it wasn't that 
big a deal." 
Olkewicz spent the last 24 hours wondering whether he could finish his career 
with the Redskins. 
"It was a little weird," he said as he waited to see if any other team would 
claim him, "but I wasn't on pins and needles." 
The Redskins, who went two-for-three in roster gambles, won the gamble with 
Olkewicz when he wasn't claimed. They figured that no team would claim him 
because of his age (32) and salary ($350,000). He also didn't get any offers 
when he was left unprotected in February as a Plan B free agent. 
They also won their gamble when they put kick returner Joe Howard on waivers 
Monday. Because Howard cleared waivers last month when the Buffalo Bills cut 
him, the Redskins figured he'd clear again. They were right. 
But they lost their gamble when they put two defensive linemen, Curtis Maxey 
and Mark Duckens, on waivers and hoped that one of them would clear. 
Neither did. Maxey was claimed by the Atlanta Falcons and Duckens by the New 
York Giants. 
So the Redskins re-signed offensive lineman Ralph Tamm, who was one of the 13 
players waived Monday, and added him to their roster while putting two 
offensive linemen, Ray Brown (knee) and Mark Schlereth (shoulder), and 
linebacker Brian Bonner (back) on the injured reserve list. They'll be out a 
minimum of six weeks. 
The Redskins will open the season with nine offensive linemen and six defensive 
linemen. Usually, they have eight linemen on offense and seven on defense. 
This was the second time in the last year that the Giants have claimed a 
defensive lineman from the Redskins. Late last year, they claimed Robb White. 
"The way we're going, we better hire Torgy (Redskins defensive line coach 
LaVern Torgeson)," George Young, the Giants' general manager, said. "He knows 
our players better than we do." 
When he was asked if he considered claiming Olkewicz to deprive the Redskins of 
their middle linebacker for the opener against the Giants, Young said, "We 
wouldn't do that. That's not fair to the Redskins or the player." 
The Falcons claimed Maxey to back up nose tackle Tony Casillas. To make room 
for Maxey, the Falcons cut their 12th-round draft pick, nose tackle Tony 
Bowick. 
Explaining why he claimed Maxey, Ken Herock, the Atlanta director of college 
player personnel, said, "He's a big kid with good size and decent quickness. We 
just felt like he'd give us some decent push up the middle." 
When Dean Hamel walked out of camp, Maxey became a starter, but then he 
suffered a twisted ankle. Markus Koch will open the season as a starting 
defensive tackle, although it's likely Koch would have wound up moving inside 
even if Maxey hadn't been hurt. 
If there was one surprise, it was that running back Willard Reaves wasn't 
claimed by any other team even though he scored six touchdowns in the 
exhibition season. He's now free to sign with any team. 
The Redskins also signed four players to their developmental squad -- wide 
receiver Carl Harry, offensive lineman Jim Bishop, defensive lineman Lybrant 
Robinson and safety Tim Smiley. 
The Redskins were working the phones trying to fill the other two slots with 
players cut by other teams. 
