HIGH LIFE: A WEEKLY FORUM FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS; 
A SENSE OF SEEING; 
BRAILLE INSTITUTE'S STAFF LEADS STUDENTS TO A LIFE OF INDEPENDENCE 
The garden is beautiful. 
The irony is that the people for whom the garden exists cannot see it. They are 
legally blind and are students at the Orange County Center of the Braille 
Institute in Anaheim. 
But just because these students can't see the flowers doesn't mean that they 
can't observe their beauty. They can sense beauty that sighted people often 
can't perceive. 
The adolescents program at the Braille Institute is made possible by three 
groups of people: the students, the volunteers and the coordinators. 
"We rely heavily on our volunteers," said Steve Schuyler, the Braille 
Institute's youth coordinator. 
There are about 55 registered volunteers who help at activities and functions 
throughout the year. In addition, there are special groups of volunteers from 
various clubs who donate their time for special events, Schuyler said. 
During the school year, the program primarily focuses on independent living 
skills (ILS). These weekly classes help the blind students learn to accomplish 
the tasks necessary to become more independent. 
"In the ILS classes, we try to create a one-to-one ratio between volunteers and 
the students," Schuyler said. "And in it, the volunteers do the actual 
teaching." 
In the ILS classes, students learn ways to help them identify paper money, such 
as folding different denominations in different ways. They also learn to cook 
their own meals and tie their own shoelaces. 
"Tying shoelaces is so difficult because they (the blind) can't see where the 
ends are, and so it's hard for them to distinguish one end from the other," 
Schuyler said. 
Other activities during the year include rock climbing, ski and camping trips, 
and other outdoor events. 
"River-rafting down the Colorado River was the best trip we ever took. We ate 
really well and even though we didn't go in the rapids, it was really great," 
said Kellie Walders, a 16-year-old junior at Fountain Valley High School. 
Walders, who has been legally blind since birth, has been a student of the 
Braille Institute since she was 5. 
"I don't think it's sad that I'm not able to see everything," she said. "But 
the people treat me differently. Actually, I'm good at those things because I 
can laugh at it. If they saw themselves act the way they do (toward blind 
people), they'd probably be real embarrassed. 
"A lot of people literally think that we cannot function as human beings. They 
think since we're blind that we're deaf, too. That's a real common 
misconception." 
Kellie explained that it is sometimes difficult to cope with stereotypes at 
school. 
"With the sighted people in school, it's like no one can be different from 
anyone else," she said. "But with us (the blind students), it's OK to be 
different because we are different. I think that's good because we've learned 
to accept people as they are." 
Kellie hopes to someday become a novelist. 
During the summer, the institute's program for teen-agers includes daily, 
fun-oriented activities. They organize everything from roller-skating to trips 
to Wild Rivers water park; from scavenger hunts on Balboa to visiting a 
recording studio, and from windsurfing to tandem bike-riding. 
"It's great watching the blind kids do things normal kids do and see them doing 
things you don't think they can do," said volunteer Brandon Marumoto, a 
17-year-old senior at La Quinta High School. "Roller-skating, for instance. How 
often do you see blind kids roller-skate? 
"When you see a blind person, instead of feeling sorry for them, you should 
respect them for all the things they can do." 
Mari Sanchez, blind since birth, has attended classes at the Braille Institute 
since she was 5. She is a 15-year-old sophomore at Bolsa Grande High School. 
Mari, who can read material with very large print, said: "It's frustrating to 
go into a restaurant and not be able to read the menu and have to guess what 
they may have. I would love to read small writing without a magnifying glass." 
Schuyler said only a small percentage of the 152 students enrolled in the 
Braille program are totally blind. Most can see shadows, figures or even, as in 
the case of Mari, large print. Mari said: "I help people who are totally blind 
at Braille. Helping them makes you feel useful and needed. 
"The faculty at Braille made me an independent person, and they taught me to 
speak for myself," said Mari, who sings for her school choir and hopes for a 
music career someday. 
Volunteer Erica Guerra, an 18-year-old sophomore at Stanford, said: "Ever since 
I saw Mary (a blind girl) on 'Little House on the Prairie,' I've wanted to work 
for Braille Institute. . . . If I couldn't see, I would be so helpless, but 
they (the students) make up for it in so many other ways. They're very 
independent." Guerra graduated from Connelly High School in 1988. 
"Don't assume they are helpless. The only limitations (blind people) have are 
the ones sighted people give them." 
Greg Weins, 16, has been legally blind since birth and has been in the Braille 
Institute's program since he was 7. The sophomore at Fountain Valley High 
School hopes to become a professional keyboard player someday. 
"I play music all by ear," he said. 
Schuyler emphasized the importance of the program's volunteers. "If everyone in 
the country volunteered as much as our volunteers do, its significance would be 
hard to imagine," he said. 
