VIEW FINDER: ODDS &amp; ENDS AROUND THE VALLEY: HORSING AROUND WITH FASHION 
"On Saturday nights at the L.A. Equestrian Center, I bet at least 20% of the 
audience is dressed for polo and they don't even know how to ride a horse," 
muses Ron Volpe, owner of Burbank Pet &amp; Equestrian Supply in Glendale. 
When the Western look came into style in the '70s, some non-riding 
clotheshorses were inspired to check out the tack shops for more authentic 
apparel. The Western style remains strong, but this fall the English riding 
style is in the forefront of women's fashion: high-top boots, form-fitting 
vests, hunt coats that resemble long-tailed blazers, jodhpurs -- and for a 
touch of whimsy, fringed leather gloves. 
"The fashion designers copied the look, but they don't have quite the right fit 
as genuine equestrian attire does," says Harlene Gordon Gilroy of the Paddock 
Riding &amp; Sports Shop in Burbank. "The whole idea behind the English riding 
look is that it's very fitted to the body. We know how to do the alterations 
here to get that fit." 
Women from Santa Monica, Beverly Hills and Malibu are trekking over the hill to 
Valley tack shops for another reason as well. "Some of the stores over there 
are carrying the genuine riding clothes, but they charge twice what we do for 
them," notes Nancy Wyman, manager and buyer of Dominion Saddlery at the L.A. 
Equestrian Center in Burbank. "On Saturday nights at the polo games here we 
sell more clothes to non-riders than to riders." 
Many riders are amused -- but not fooled -- by the latest trend. Laughs Suzanne 
Peika, polo coordinator at the L.A. Equestrian Center, "You can tell they don't 
really ride because their clothes are never dirty!" 
Firewood Facts 
Do you feel twinges of foolishness when you call to order firewood? Typically, 
a supplier rattles off a forestful of wood types, extolling the virtues of his 
company's custom blend. Who are you to debate the merits of pinion over pine? 
A typical mistake buyers make is in thinking that soft wood burns fast and hard 
wood burns slow. Not so. "Soft wood has snap/crackle, and hard wood doesn't," 
says Norma Vaughan of Brigg's Firewood in Canoga Park. It's density that 
affects the rate at which wood burns. 
Slow-burning woods include eucalyptus, oak, olive, almond and citrus. 
Fast-burning woods include pine, elm, fir and avocado. Woods that burn at a 
medium speed include pinion, walnut, juniper and plum. (In case you're 
wondering, a cord of oak costs about $300. More typically, firewood is a mix of 
woods such as oak, pine and juniper and costs about $265 a cord.) 
Medical Condominiums 
"I think most doctors want to own their own office space," says Dr. Robert 
Hesselgesser, president of Coastal Radiation Oncology Medical Group in Thousand 
Oaks. Yet most physicians are renters. In two months members of Hesselgesser's 
group will open a branch at Westshore Medical Plaza in Westlake Village where 
they will own their office space -- because the Plaza is a medical condominium. 
"You have a building with so many offices, and each physician owns his 
particular space within it," says Ted Walters, assistant vice president at the 
Money Store Investment Corp., which provided the financing for the Thousand 
Oaks facility. 
Terry Heuer, owner of Townsgate Financial in Westlake Village and developer of 
Westshore Medical Plaza, says, "The idea has probably been around for 10 or 15 
years, but it's been a difficult one for developers because of a lack of 
available financing. Residential condos in the '60s and early '70s had the same 
problems." 
"It's most common to find doctors renting, less common to find them having 
ownership interest in a building, and least common to find them purchasing 
medical office condominiums," says Michael Zugsmith, president of Zugsmith and 
Associates, a commercial real estate brokerage with two offices in the Valley. 
Hesselgesser views the purchase as a business investment. "Real estate in 
California only goes up, and plus we're in control here. No one can come in 
down the road and tell us they're raising our rent or they sold the building 
and we have to move out." 
The 51,000-square-foot, two-story Westshore Medical Plaza has 30 units, two of 
which are unsold. Prices ranged from $160,000 to more than $1 million, 
depending on size. Heuer's company is in various stages of developing four 
other medical condominiums in Southern California, with a combined value in 
excess of $55 million. 
What got him started on this path? 
"Demand," he says simply. 
Halloween's New Status 
It used to be a simple occasion requiring only a few bags of candy, a pumpkin 
and a costume. But Halloween is moving in to the major leagues of 
merchandising, according to retailers across the Valley. 
"We have everything: Halloween ribbons, wreaths, tole painting, shirt designs 
or plasterwear you can paint yourself, decorative picks to stick in plants, 
lapel pins, you name it," enthuses Susan Thomson of Judy's Carousel Crafts in 
Burbank. 
"Halloween is becoming more cute rather than scary. The manufacturers are 
trying to make it a more fun holiday. A lot of our ghosts and witches have 
smiles." 
Kids aren't the exclusive target audience of this merchandising blitz. 
"It's so much more commercialized now," states Monique Bourget, manager of 
Aahs, a card and gift shop in Sherman Oaks. "The prices are higher too. People 
are paying more this year for Halloween decorations. Among the best-selling 
items in the store are mechanically operated Draculas and bats for $210 apiece 
that light up and flail around. 
Bourget also notes that many parents are buying small knickknacks such as 
wind-up toys, key chains or plastic eyeballs to hand out to trick-or-treaters 
instead of candy. 
This year, Party World in Van Nuys has doubled the amount of store space 
devoted to Halloween merchandise. "There are a lot of new families nowadays 
with the baby boom," theorizes manager Jeff Goodman on the occasion's growing 
importance. 
Halloween fashion accessories are popular impulse items. "We sell Halloween 
hairpieces, clip-on ties, earrings -- things employees can wear to work," says 
Fred McPhillips, owner of Rainbow Stationers in Sun Valley. "Hallmark even has 
a new line this year for infants -- shirts, bibs and little caps with devil 
horns." 
All you need now is extra storage space in your closet. 
Overheard at. . . . 
"I'm beginning to think of dust as a legitimate decorating statement." 
 -- Woman customer at Creative Floors in Van Nuys Compiled by Marci Slade 
