25 VIETNAMESE JOURNALISTS IN COUNTY DENOUNCE KILLING OF COLUMNIST, WIFE 
The slaying of a controversial Vietnamese-American magazine columnist and his 
wife in Virginia prompted Vietnamese-language newspaper publishers in Little 
Saigon on Monday to denounce what one editor called "terrorism against 
newsmen." 
Triet Le, 61, is the ninth Vietnamese emigre journalist to be attacked or 
killed since 1980. The victims include a Garden Grove publisher who died in an 
arson fire in 1987. 
Le and his wife, Tuyet Thi Dang-Tran, 52, were found dead of gunshot wounds in 
the driveway of their home in Baileys Crossroads, Va., about 11:30 p.m. 
Saturday, a Fairfax County police spokesman said. 
Police would not comment on a possible motive Monday, and had made no arrests. 
"The people in the Vietnamese news media have been killed, and . . . the 
government didn't find out who did it," said Dinh D. Nguyen, editor-in-chief of 
the Westminster-based weekly magazine Dieu Hau, or The Eagle. About 25 
Vietnamese publishers, editors and other journalists signed a statement Monday 
night denouncing terrorism, threats and killing of writers regardless of the 
motivation. They called on U.S. authorities to investigate assassinations of 
four newsmen and to take steps to protect writers in the future. 
"We call for more attention (by U.S. authorities) to this kind of terrorism 
against Vietnamese newsmen," Nguyen said. 
Two of Le's children by a previous marriage live in Orange County and were 
headed back to Virginia for their father's funeral, which is scheduled 
Thursday, said Len Phuong, who worked with Le at Van Nghe Tien Phong magazine 
in Arlington, Va. The bimonthly magazine has a staff of five and an 
international circulation of 14,000, Phuong said. 
Although Le enjoyed a wide following, he had been criticized for sensationalism 
and for personal attacks on a number of Vietnamese political figures, community 
leaders and other prominent exiles. He was also the subject of a libel suit, 
Phuong confirmed. 
"He had a critical mind, so there is some group of people that do not like 
him," Phuong said. "But what he wrote was the truth." 
Others who knew Le described him Monday as a fiercely anti-communist muckraker 
who reported -- some say fabricated -- everything from political intrigue to 
corruption to adultery. Though he wrote under the pen name Tu Rua, his real 
name was well known and he had accumulated a long list of personal and 
political enemies, they said. 
"He is one of the most controversial Vietnamese journalists and one of the most 
famous," said Yen Ngoc Do, editor of the Nguoi Viet Daily News in Westminster, 
who said he himself was once tongue-lashed in print by Le. "He had so many, 
many, many enemies." 
"He has very bitterly attacked almost everyone in the Vietnamese community," 
said another prominent emigre whom Le had accused in print of pro-communist 
leanings. "It could be a lot of people, but I would lean toward a political 
motive (for the Le killing) rather than a personal one." 
Ten years ago, the magazine's publisher, Nguyen Thanh Hoang, was the target of 
an arson attack that damaged his home and car. Two years later, Hoang's name 
appeared with several others on the "hit list" of a Vietnamese extremist 
organization. Last November, a page designer for the magazine, Nhan Trong Do, 
was found shot to death outside his home. Police have not made an arrest. 
Vietnamese extremist groups have claimed responsibility for a number of 
previous attacks on newspaper editors and publishers whom they accused of 
communist leanings, including the 1987 arson death of Garden Grove publisher 
Tap Van Pham. The Vietnamese Party to Exterminate the Communists and Restore 
the Nation claimed responsibility for the attack, which investigators believe 
was motivated by Pham's acceptance of advertisements that were perceived by 
some as pro-communist. 
In 1988, the FBI announced an investigation into political violence in the 
Vietnamese exile community after reports of political motives in attacks around 
the nation. 
Officer Bill Coulter, spokesman for Fairfax County police, would not comment 
Monday on whether any group had claimed responsibility for the Le killings, nor 
would he say whether the FBI had been asked to investigate. 
An FBI spokesman in Santa Ana, Jim Neilson, declined to say whether the 1988 
FBI investigation is still active. No indictments have been made, and the 
majority of the attacks have gone unsolved. 
Phuong said Le had received numerous death threats during his 13-year career, 
as have many other Vietnamese-American writers, editors and publishers. 
"It does sound like a campaign to stifle dissent or eliminate rival or 
discordant voices within an exile community," said Bruce Hoffman, a domestic 
terrorism expert with the Rand Corp. in Santa Monica. 
As in the Cuban, Armenian, Filipino and Taiwanese exile communities, Hoffman 
said, the attackers could be motivated by politics or by a personal vendetta, 
or could use one to mask the other. 
"Often it can be a mixture of things, but if you claim it as a political 
attack, the perpetrators gain legitimacy and notoriety that they wouldn't 
otherwise have," Hoffman said. 
