ATHLETE OF THE WEEK; 
HAVERT A SOFT TOUCH AFTER 6 SCORES 
Although it might seem ludicrous to the Calabasas High defense, Colin Havert 
claims that he has a soft spot. 
To be sure, there are no soft spots on Havert's 6-foot, 200-pound, diamond-hard 
frame. But Chaminade's senior tailback has a soft spot in his heart. 
That's why Chaminade's final touchdown in a 48-0 thumping of Calabasas last 
Friday hurt him more than it hurt Calabasas. 
It was his sixth, yes, sixth touchdown of the game. "My last one was sorta 
getting old because I didn't really expect to get back in the game," he said. 
"And when I did it was like, 'All right, here's another one.' I was a little 
embarrassed." 
Havert has nothing to be embarrassed about, Coach Rich Lawson says. Havert 
gained 183 yards in 15 carries and scored on runs of two, 33, one, 32, one, and 
26 yards. That places him in a third-place tie for most touchdowns in a 
Southern Section game. The record is eight. 
And Lawson insists that this was not a case of pouring it on. Every player on 
the Eagles' roster played and the coach reasoned that keeping Havert in the 
game actually reduced the likelihood of injuries to his offense. 
"I don't have any depth," Lawson said. "On offense, if guys don't know the 
blocking scheme and they're running back and forth, then you're really going to 
create an injury." 
Chaminade had already sustained a major blow, losing All-Southern Section 
defensive back Jeff Burdick, who broke his leg and tore ankle ligaments on the 
fourth play of the game. Burdick, who also starts at receiver, was injured 
after catching a pass. 
After that, Havert had to shoulder the bulk of the Chaminade offense. He also 
played linebacker on a defense that limited Calabasas to 111 yards passing and 
30 on the ground. 
Against hard-hitting and heavily favored Palmdale, he scored three touchdowns 
in a 35-14 rout. His performance against Calabasas gives him 379 yards in 50 
carries (a 7.6-yard average) and also earned him recognition as the National 
Football Foundation's Player of the Week for the San Fernando Valley. 
The molar-rattling blows Havert took in the Palmdale game prepared him for what 
might have been similar treatment from the Coyotes. Instead, he found open 
space. Lots of it. 
"Calabasas had some real big kids," he said. "I was ready to pound it out and I 
lowered my head. But the holes were wide open every time." 
In addition to the Eagles' offensive line, give credit to Felix Goodson, a 
utility back who alternately spells Havert and fullback Ted Corcoran. Goodson 
noticed a weakness in the Calabasas defense and spied a way to spring Havert 
with a kick-out block on a blitzing linebacker. 
The play didn't work on the first try. Havert failed to cut to the sideline 
quickly enough and was tackled after a short gain. 
Before Havert's next carry, Goodson drew him the suggested path in the air and 
pointed to the hole before the snap. Havert took the handoff, blasted into the 
gap, squirted to the sideline and ran 42 yards before he was accidentally 
knocked down by a teammate. 
But it was the 32-yard touchdown run that most impressed Lawson. Starting from 
the right hash mark, Havert took the handoff, juked three times to the left, 
then crossed the goal line at the left corner of the end zone. 
"Hey, not only can this guy bruise but he can cut back," Lawson said. "I've 
been telling people all year that he's really underrated, but like I told 
Colin, 'You just let your feet do the talking.' " 
