COMMUNITY COLLEGE ROUNDUP; 
ANDERSON LEADS SADDLEBACK IN WATER POLO 
A.J. Anderson scored with 24 seconds remaining in the second overtime, leading 
Saddleback College to an 11-10 victory over San Diego Mesa in an Orange Empire 
Conference water polo match Tuesday at San Diego. 
Anderson also assisted on Andy Harris' goal, which sent the match into 
overtime. Harris' goal, his second, came from close range with one second left 
in regulation and tied the score, 9-9. 
Saddleback trailed, 9-7, with about two minutes left in regulation. Tino 
Perone, who led Saddleback with five goals, then scored with about a minute 
remaining to set up Harris' game-tying goal. Perone also scored in the first 
overtime, tying the score, 10-10. Saddleback is 7-3 overall, 2-0 in conference. 
San Diego Mesa is 8-6, 0-2. 
In nonconference water polo: 
Golden West 14, Cal State Long Beach JV 8 -- Matt Nauser and Pono Faulkner each 
scored three goals for Golden West (14-1) at Belmont Plaza in Long Beach. 
In South Coast Conference women's soccer: 
Palomar 1, Orange Coast 1 -- Michelle Forgette scored with 15 minutes remaining 
to earn the tie for host Orange Coast. The Pirates are now 2-0-1 in conference, 
4-2-3 overall. 
Golden West 5, Oxnard 1 -- Lisa Smith, Jen Bitting, Jeannie Stovken, Rhonda 
Robinson and Deena Haurer all scored for Golden West (3-2-4, 2-0-1). Alicia 
East also had seven saves for Golden West, which led, 2-0, at the half. 
In nonconference men's soccer: 
Golden West 4, Los Angeles Harbor 3 -- Greg Hartman scored two second-half 
goals, helping host Golden West break a seven-match home losing streak. John 
Gideman and Chris Tomlin scored in the first half as Golden West (1-7) took a 
2-1 lead. 
Harbor tied it, 2-2, early in the second half but Hartman then scored twice to 
put Golden West ahead, 4-2. LA Harbor's final goal came with six minutes left. 
Clinton Larson had eight saves for Golden West, which had to play most of the 
second half a man short because a player was ejected. 
In nonconference men's soccer: 
Orange Coast 3, Moorpark 3 -- Host Moorpark tied the score with 25 minutes 
remaining in the match. The Pirates (4-2-1) led 3-2 at halftime on goals by 
John Coggins, Paul Oldham and Pat Callaghan. Moorpark is 2-1-1. 
