INGLEWOOD GROUP WANTS TO LIMIT TERMS IN OFFICE 
A group of Inglewood residents, citing the potential for "stagnation and abuse 
of power" among incumbent officeholders, has begun preparing a ballot 
initiative for next June that would limit all of Inglewood's elected officials 
to three consecutive terms in office. 
Even before the petitions have hit the streets, however, strong opposition is 
developing. Critics call the measure a political move by a small group of 
residents to steer their candidates into office and wrest control of city 
government from the incumbents and the voters. 
Organizer Curren D. Price Jr. said the newly formed Inglewood Citizens for 
Reasonable Reform wants a limit on government service to keep elected officials 
accountable to the voters and to lessen the stronghold incumbents have on their 
seats, whether they are effective or not. 
"It's not directed at anyone personally," said Price, a community activist. 
"It's a forward-looking measure. In no way should it be looked at as an attack 
or a swipe on anyone currently in office." 
But third-term Councilman Anthony Scardenzan, who would be prevented from 
seeking reelection if the measure goes into effect, called the initiative 
crazy. 
"The community is going to be deprived of the opportunity to select the elected 
official they want," Scardenzan said. "A mayor will be out after three terms 
even if he walks on water. The community should decide that. Not Curren Price." 
The measure would allow Mayor Edward Vincent, first elected in 1982, only one 
more four-year term in office. Scardenzan and Councilman Daniel Tabor, who were 
both first elected in 1981, could not run for reelection when their third terms 
end in 1993. City Clerk Hermanita Harris, first elected in 1985, and City 
Treasurer Wanda Brown, first elected in 1987, would have two more terms. 
Council member Jose Fernandez, elected to complete an unexpired term in June, 
could continue as a councilman for two or three four-year terms depending on 
whether his unexpired term is counted as a full term. 
The proposed City Charter amendment would permit a maximum of three consecutive 
terms in a single position and would permit those who have reached the limit to 
run for another office or sit out four years before running again. 
"Twelve years is a reasonable span of time for a person to make a 
contribution," said Price. "At that point, they should step aside, move up or 
move over." 
Scardenzan charged that Price, a supporter of Tabor, is proposing the measure 
as a political ploy to ease competition for future city races. Once Vincent is 
out of the way as mayor, Tabor would have a better chance of winning that 
position, Scardenzan said. 
Not a Scheme 
But Price insisted that the initiative is a step toward more responsible 
government and not a scheme to take over any politician's seat. Tabor said he 
has nothing to do with the ballot initiative. 
To get the proposed City Charter amendment on the ballot next June, the group 
must collect signatures from 15% of the city's registered voters, an estimated 
7,500 names. 
The measure's proponents submitted a notice of intent to circulate the petition 
last Friday. City Atty. Howard Rosten must now prepare an impartial ballot 
summary and title in the coming weeks. After a newspaper notice of the measure 
is published, the petitions can begin circulating. 
Price said the initiative must gain widespread grass-roots support because it 
is not in elected officials' interest to endorse it. He said the measure is 
already supported by many neighborhood and civic leaders, small-business owners 
and former elected officials. 
"It's very doubtful that an elected official would voluntarily agree to place a 
limitation on their terms," Price said. He added later, "We hope that 
enlightened, positive-minded government officials would support this." 
Inglewood's 100-member United Democratic Club is expected to support the 
initiative at its meeting Thursday, the group's vice president, Terry Coleman, 
said. Citing big-city machine politics, such as the long-term administration of 
the late Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley, Coleman said: "I don't want to see a 
demagogue or a dictator" in Inglewood. 
Neither For Nor Against 
Tabor said his position is somewhere between the measure's critics and 
supporters. 
"At the present, I don't have a for-or-against stance on it," said Tabor, who 
was narrowly elected to his third four-year term in June. "I don't see it as 
necessary, but I don't see it being an evil thing, either." 
Tabor said the limits would "keep different personalities and different 
perspectives" in leadership positions, but, he added, "I don't think continuous 
turnover of elected officials is necessarily good. . . . 
"The thing that troubles me the most is that it takes a while to learn how the 
process works before you can make long-term changes," Tabor continued. "You'll 
be constantly forced to deal with short-term things. Most development projects 
take five to 10 years to put together." 
Fernandez said he will let the voters decide the issue. 
"If they collect enough signatures and it passes, let the will of the people be 
done," Fernandez said. "I feel it's not something I should get involved in. . . 
. I'm neither for it or against it. It's something the people have to think 
about. It's that kind of issue." 
City Clerk Harris refused to comment on the measure. Neither the mayor nor the 
city treasurer could be reached. 
Lee Weinstein, Vincent's predecessor who served as mayor from 1979 to 1983, 
said a limit on terms in office would contribute to the notion of public 
service and prevent officeholders from using politics for "feeding at the 
public trough." 
3 Terms 'Sufficient' 
"I've observed over the years that there is a tendency to become so dependent 
on the office you hold that you become corrupt in your efforts to hold that 
office," Weinstein said. "Three terms is certainly sufficient. Anything beyond 
that is an empire. . . . I guess I'm pretty old-fashioned. I always looked at 
public office as public service." 
Inglewood's school board already limits its members to three consecutive 
four-year terms, and supporters of the initiative said more than 125 
municipalities across the country limit their elected officials' terms. 
Twenty-six states also limit their governors to two consecutive terms. 
But a state Court of Appeal in San Francisco ruled in April that some local 
measures limiting terms in office are invalid because eligibility to hold 
office is controlled by state law. 
That ruling concerned general-law cities, those that operate under general laws 
of the state rather than their own municipal charters, but the ruling's 
possible application to charter cities such as Inglewood remains in question. 
The court reviewed the case of a councilwoman in South San Francisco who was 
reelected to a third term in 1987 despite a local law forbidding more than two 
consecutive terms. In its decision, the court upheld the election of 
Councilwoman Roberta Cerri Teglia and decided that numerous state code 
provisions governing eligibility to hold office in general-law cities indicate 
that the state governs such matters. 
In the general-law city of Rolling Hills Estates, Councilwoman Jacki McGuire 
said she has shelved plans to circulate petitions on a similar initiative in 
that city because of the recent court decision. Instead, McGuire is attempting 
to gain support from state officials for a bill that would allow general-law 
cities to limit their own officeholders' terms. If that fails, McGuire said, 
she would consider launching a statewide initiative that would put the issue on 
the ballot. 
Ran for Other Offices 
Redondo Beach and Cerritos are two charter cities in the Los Angeles area that 
have already passed ordinances limiting time in office to two terms. 
The Redondo Beach law, enacted in a charter election in 1975, prevented former 
Mayor Barbara Doerr and City Councilman Archie Snow from running for their 
offices again this year. The two then ran for other offices; Doerr won election 
to the council in March, and Snow was defeated in a bid for mayor. Snow has 
hired a lawyer to challenge the law. 
The Cerritos two-term limit was approved by voters in 1986 as a means of 
preventing long-term incumbents from seeking office again. But confusing 
wording led City Atty. Ken Brown to issue an opinion that the limit applied 
only to terms beginning after the ordinance took effect. It has yet to prevent 
anyone from running again. 
On the state level, Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp has incorporated a proposed 
limit on the terms of state officeholders into his gubernatorial campaign. Van 
de Kamp proposed the state's first-ever limits on the consecutive years a 
person may hold a single office -- 12 years for the Assembly and Senate and 
eight years for statewide constitutional officers. Van de Kamp's proposed 
limits would not be retroactive but would start as of the 1990 elections. 
