MARTIN AVIATION NAMES NEW PRESIDENT; 
MANAGEMENT: AS CEO, RICHARD M. JANISSE'S MAIN GOAL IS TO EXPAND THE COMPANY'S 
REACH IN AVIATION SERVICES AND IN THE CHARTER INDUSTRY. 
Former World Airways chief executive Richard M. Janisse on Monday was named 
president and chief executive of expansion-minded Martin Aviation, an arm of 
developer William Lyon's growing aviation service business. 
Janisse, 41, replaces Marvin Tuomala, a Martin employee for 14 years and 
president since 1986. 
In a prepared statement, Martin Aviation said Tuomala resigned last week "to 
pursue other business interests." Tuomala, who left just six months after the 
company was acquired by Lyon and partner David Banmiller, could not be reached 
for comment. 
Martin, with about $30 million in annual sales, provides aircraft fueling and 
maintenance services, and supplies parts for private, corporate and commercial 
aircraft. It also operates a flight training school, aircraft charter service 
and an aircraft sales operation. 
Janisse said one of his immediate chores will be "to improve the overall 
quality" of Martin's various services, which include aircraft sales, charters, 
cleaning and fueling services and maintenance. 
"Certain industry surveys haven't ranked Martin as high" in customer 
satisfaction as its new owners would like it to be, Janisse said. 
A major goal, Janisse said, is to expand Martin's reach in the aviation 
services and charter industry. The company currently has an East Coast charter 
operation in Leesburg, Va. 
Janisse, who resigned as World Airway's chief executive in a policy dispute in 
July, has an extensive background in aviation services. 
At World, which is based at Dulles International Airport near Washington, he 
ran a $200-million-a-year firm that operated 10 wide-bodied passenger and cargo 
jets for a variety of charter clients. 
Before that, he was president of AMR Services Corp., which operated a ground 
service division, a chain of 10 fixed-based operators, an executive aircraft 
charter unit and an aircraft sales division. AMR Services is a unit of AMR 
Corp., the Ft. Worth holding company for American Airlines. 
Martin was acquired earlier this year by Air/Lyon, a holding company formed by 
Lyon, a retired Air Force major general and former co-owner of AirCal, and 
David Banmiller, a former AirCal president. 
Less than a month after being acquired by Air/Lyon, 67-year-old Martin 
purchased Million Air, a smaller FBO, as part of a plan to increase its 
presence at the airport. Air/Lyon also owns International Aircraft Support 
Inc., an aircraft engine repair and leasing company in Belmont, Calif., and 
Elsinore Aerospace Services Inc. of Downey, a national operation with ground 
services, design and engineering and airframe maintenance and modification 
divisions. 
