ARAFAT, ISRAEL REPORTERS DEBATE PLAN FOR TALKS ON PALESTINIAN ISSUES 
Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat, in an unusual direct 
appeal to the Israeli public, said Thursday that he endorses "open talks" with 
Israel, and he urged citizens to help him resist the most recent crackdown on 
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
"How can you accept that, as Israelis?" Arafat declared, waving one of the 
controversial new identity cards required of residents in the occupied 
territories to help quell the 21-month-old Palestinian uprising. "You have to 
help me reject it, because I'm a human being, like you." 
In a sometimes heated exchange with Israeli journalists after a meeting with 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Arafat refused to commit himself on Mubarak's 
10-point peace initiative, but he did endorse the Egyptian leader's proposal 
for direct talks between Israelis and Palestinians -- as long as the ground 
rules are left open. 
"I have agreed to the preliminary conference that Mr. Mubarak has proposed," 
Arafat said, "but open talks, without conditions. Not your conditions, not my 
conditions. No preconditions. Fair?" 
While Egyptian and some moderate Israeli leaders have proposed the talks as a 
prelude to elections in the occupied territories, which would select a 
delegation to decide final peace issues, Arafat insisted that the talks lead 
the way to an international conference on peace in the Middle East. 
"It's our right to demand what we want," Arafat said, "and it's their right to 
demand what they want. That's fair enough. Or aren't you democratic? Have you 
been a little bit affected by the armed (Jewish) settlers (in the occupied 
territories)?" 
Many of the PLO leader's remarks were aimed directly at the Israeli 
journalists, whose request to interview Arafat prompted the press conference, 
which included other reporters as well. Israeli citizens by law are barred from 
contacts with the PLO except through "international" press conferences. 
Appeals to Israeli Public 
At times, the repartee became heated, as the Israeli journalists demanded to 
know whether the PLO would promise permanent peace if it were granted a 
Palestinian state in the West Bank, whether Israel should be negotiating with a 
group it considers a terrorist organization and why the PLO doesn't call a 
cease-fire in the uprising, or intifada, as a prelude to any peace talks. 
Arafat, in turn, used the occasion to appeal directly to the Israeli public, 
often framing his comments as if he were face to face with them over a 
bargaining table, while the Israeli reporters, just as often, argued back. 
"Do you think we lack humanity?" he asked at one point, and then referred to a 
common Yiddish term for non-Jews. "Am I goy, and you're a person, or what? I am 
a human being like you. I am not goy!" 
Later, arguing with reporters over terrorism allegations, Arafat broke into a 
smile and declared: "Why should we go into these details? You are our cousins. 
We know each other. We want peace." 
"That's what we want," shot back one of the Israeli journalists. 
"But what kind of peace?" Arafat went on. "We don't want the peace of 
destruction and occupation and death." 
The PLO chairman said he is "always open to discussions which will bring us to 
a complete and just peace," but he said it is up to Israel to respond formally 
to Mubarak's 10 points before the PLO accepts or rejects them. 
Israeli Cabinet Divided 
The Israeli government has put off a final response in the wake of deep 
divisions within the Cabinet, whose most hard-line members, including Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Shamir, are strongly opposed to the Mubarak plan's provisions 
for Israel to exchange land for peace, halt all Jewish settlements in the 
occupied territories and allow Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem to vote 
in any elections. 
Israelis have also refused to negotiate with the PLO, a stand that has raised 
questions about who would make up the Palestinian panel in any direct talks. 
Would it be confined strictly to West Bank and Gaza residents, as the Israelis 
would prefer, or would representatives of the vast Palestinian refugee 
populations outside the territories be represented as well? 
Mubarak has proposed including two Palestinians deported from the territories 
as one way of compromising, but Arafat said outsiders should not be allowed to 
dictate the makeup of the Palestinian panel. 
"Aren't I a representative of the Palestinians?" he said. "Am I the son of my 
people, or the son of a crook? I'm not able to say I accept such-and-such a 
person from your (Israeli) side. No. You're free to choose who you want. And we 
have to be free in the same way. Or are you free, and we're slaves?" 
