WRONG SIDE OF STREET 
On a lovely July afternoon, en route to a Gaslamp Quarter restaurant, I was 
panhandled seven times in six blocks. Just as I reached the corner of 5th 
Avenue and E Street, I was accosted by a drunk lying in the middle of the 
sidewalk who, when I ignored his demands, rolled his bottle toward me in an 
attempt to trip me. I quickly glanced up 5th Avenue and noting that there was 
no traffic, I crossed the street against the light. 
I confess. I am guilty of jaywalking. 
Heading south on 5th Avenue, I heard someone saying, several times, "Excuse me, 
miss." Not even considering stopping, I hurried toward my destination until I 
felt a hand on my shoulder. With more than a little relief, I turned to face 
two San Diego police officers. Thinking they had seen the incident and had come 
to help, I became incensed when I realized that they had stopped me for 
jaywalking. 
I was not pleased and I was not polite. I told them of my plight and all they 
could say was that they had not seen the incident, but had seen me cross 
against the light. 
I also plead guilty to being angry and verbal with the two officers. I pointed 
out my difficulty in walking the six blocks from my rented condo and asked if 
they didn't have anything better to do. 
I questioned the need for two young, strong and armed officers to stop one 
128-pound middle-aged woman for what I felt was a justifiable incident of 
jaywalking. I expressed relief that I wasn't carrying a screwdriver, as I might 
have risked being shot. 
I do not regret one second of my diatribe. I was and am very angry at a policy 
that penalizes citizens, visitors and businesses for a trivial infraction, 
while public drunkenness, vagrancy and drug peddling are allowed to flourish. 
I am not without compassion for the homeless; it is a dreadful problem and 
certainly not unique to San Diego. But I have yet to be panhandled by someone 
sober. I have also yet to be protected from them by any officer of the San 
Diego Police Department. 
The young officer who cited me suggested that if I didn't like the way things 
were run in San Diego, perhaps I might be happier elsewhere. He has a point. 
DOROTHY A. STARR 
San Antonio, TX 
