THE NAME OF THE GAME IS CHANGE 
In an industry whose only constant is change, this season's sports television 
lineup features a larger than usual number of switches of both broadcast 
packages and announcers. 
Here's a look at what to expect this season: 
NETWORK 
CBS 
Arrivals: Merlin Olsen (from NBC) ... Brad Nessler (from Minnesota Vikings 
announcing team) ... Jim Henderson (from New Orleans Saints announcing team). 
Departures: Musburger (to ABC) ... Will McDonough (to NBC) ... NBA Basketball 
(to NBC) ... Dick Butkus (to concentrate on acting career). 
New Events: The PGA Championship (from ABC) ... Atlantic Coast Conference 
basketball (from NBC) ... Big 10 Basketball (from ABC). 
Big Events: Baseball's League Championship Series and the World Series ... NCAA 
Men's Basketball Tournament, leading up to the Final Four and title game ... 
Daytona 500 ... The Masters. 
Familiar faces in new places: Pat O'Brien has become the host of the network's 
post-season baseball pre-game shows and college basketball halftime shows and 
an "NFL Today" regular. 
Andrea Joyce will anchor the college football studio show along with Mike 
Francesa. 
Greg Gumbel has succeeded Musburger as "NFL Today" host. Terry Bradshaw and Irv 
Cross also have switched places, with Bradshaw joining "NFL Today" and Cross 
becoming a game analyst. Lesley Visser also will be an "NFL Today" regular. 
NBC 
Arrivals: Todd Christensen (from Raiders) ... Pat Riley (from Lakers) ... Mike 
Fratello (from Atlanta Hawks) Will McDonough (from CBS) ... Cris Collinsworth 
(from Cincinnati Bengals) ... Jim Laslavic (from KNSD Channel 39). 
Departures: Bobby Beathard (to San Diego Chargers) ... Merlin Olsen (to CBS) 
... Jimmy Cefalo (to "Trump Card" game show) ... Atlantic Coast Conference 
basketball (to CBS). 
New Events: NBA Basketball (from CBS). 
Big Events: New Year's Day college football bowls, including the Fiesta and 
Orange Bowls ... Wimbledon and French Open tennis ... Horse racing's Breeders' 
Cup. 
Familiar Faces in New Places: Bob Costas and Marv Albert will serve as NBA 
basketball play-by-play announcers. 
ABC 
Arrivals: Musburger (from CBS) ... Jim Valvano (from North Carolina State) ... 
Beth Ruyak (from USA Today on TV). 
New Events: Golf's Skins Game (from NBC) ... The World League of American 
Football, a 12-team circuit with franchises in the United States, Montreal, 
Mexico City and Europe set to begin play in March. 
Big Events: Monday Night Football plus Super Bowl XXV ... Rose Bowl and Sugar 
Bowl ... thoroughbred racing's Triple Crown ... Indianapolis 500. 
CABLE 
ESPN 
Other than professional basketball and hockey, nearly every sport imaginable 
again will be seen on ESPN. The network also has found time to add 22 hours of 
coverage of December's $6 million Grand Slam Cup, the richest tournament in 
tennis history. "Expedition Earth," a 16-part adventure series examining the 
environment, will debut in November. The exercise series "Body By Jake" comes 
to ESPN in January. 
Prime Ticket 
At least 35 Lakers games, 70 Kings games, college sports featuring USC, UCLA 
and San Diego State along with Forum boxing, tennis and volleyball highlight 
Prime Ticket's viewing choices. The service's most ambitious project is "Prime 
Ticket Press Box," a daily live half-hour sports news show set to air at 10 
p.m. beginning Oct. 15. Prime Ticket expects to add a 7 p.m. broadcast in 
November. 
Prime Ticket's partnership with regional sports networks throughout the nation 
provide it with many other live events, topped by college football and 
basketball and professional tennis. The service also has moved up its weekend 
sign-on to 9 a.m. 
SportsChannel 
The youngest Southland regional sports service has augmented its programming by 
adding 52 live Big West Conference events, including eight football games and 
the California Raisin Bowl. 
SportsChannel will continue its exclusive home game coverage of the Dodgers and 
Angels. The fall and winter will be highlighted by the National Hockey League, 
Notre Dame sports, college basketball and high school sports telecasts from 
throughout the nation. 
TNT 
A nine-game NFL package joins television's most comprehensive NBA schedule. The 
network has added two prominent commentators, former Rams and USC quarterback 
Pat Haden and veteran NBA coach and announcer Hubie Brown. 
USA 
The network will add Saturday and Monday night prime time World League of 
American Football telecasts. Also, six Saturday afternoon games and a playoff 
game are added to its sports schedule. 
PAY-PER-VIEW 
Beginning with the Buster Douglas-Evander Holyfield world heavyweight 
championship fight Oct. 25, look for nearly every major boxing match to go the 
pay-per-view route as the major broadcast networks, basic and pay cable 
networks are economically unable to match the riches possible on pay-per-view. 
Several made-for-pay-per-view events are on the horizon, including the return 
of the "One-on-One Collegiate Challenge" basketball tournament with top college 
stars. A home run contest with top major leaguers is in the talking stages. 
