PROBLEMS WITH CONTROLS PROBED IN PLANE CRASH; 
GRAND CANYON AIRLINER ON WHICH 10 DIED HAD PRIOR LANDING TROUBLES 
Attention focused Thursday on possible problems with the directional controls 
of a sightseeing airliner that crashed when attempting a landing at Grand 
Canyon Airport on Wednesday, killing 10 and injuring 11. 
A survivor said that she had seen the cockpit crew struggling with the controls 
in the moments before the crash, and Federal Aviation Administration records 
indicate that, last February, the De Havilland Twin Otter had veered to the 
right when attempting a landing at the airport, striking a wing tip on the 
runway. 
The records say the plane "lost directional control" in the Feb. 27 incident, 
possibly as a result of a "nose-wheel centering problem." Ronald L. Warren, 
vice president and general manager of Grand Canyon Airlines, said he did not 
know whether there had been a final determination of the cause of the Feb. 27 
incident. 
Two Men on Plane 
The records show that, during the February incident, only two men were aboard 
the aircraft -- a pilot trainee and William Welch, 47, of Sedona, Ariz., 
captain of the flight that crashed on Wednesday. Neither man was injured. 
Warren said that the plane, built in 1975 and bought by Grand Canyon Airlines 
two years ago from an operator in Alaska, had performed well, with no major 
mechanical problems. 
Katherine Mayes, 66, told reporters from her hospital bed in Flagstaff, Ariz., 
Thursday that she had seen Welch and co-pilot Keith Crosson, 43, of Kailua 
Kona, Hawaii, fighting the controls on Wednesday as the turboprop airliner 
touched down on the runway. 
Mayes, a Nashville, Tenn., resident, said that, seconds after the plane's right 
wheel touched down, the aircraft "shot straight up" in the air again. 
She said she heard a loud buzzing sound as the plane made a slow U-turn to the 
left before crashing on its side in a hillside grove of scrub pine about 300 
yards from the runway. 
Mayes, who suffered a broken pelvis and severely bruised shoulder in the crash, 
said she had dragged herself from the wreckage. 
"I crawled as far away as I could and I waited for the medics," she said. "It 
seemed like an eternity." 
Welch and Crosson were among nine people listed by the Coconino County 
Sheriff's Department Thursday as having died in the crash. The identity of the 
10th person killed -- said to be a woman tourist from Scotland -- was being 
withheld pending notification of next of kin. 
The identified dead, in addition to the cockpit crew, were Joyce Jones, 52, of 
Woodbridge, Va.; Lorraine Murphy, 75, of Random Lake, Wis.; Barbara Marchand, 
61, of Meriden, Conn.; Eugenia Sheehan, 78, of Youngstown, Ohio; John Sutton, 
65, and his wife, Donna, 63, of Modesto; and Helen Zuckerman, 64, of Boca 
Raton, Fla. 
The survivors, in addition to Mayes, are Florence Bickley, 63, of Manchester, 
Conn.; Minnie Bowden, 59, of Murfreesboro, Tenn.; Susan Cline, 42, of 
Farmington, Mich.; Catherine Hampton, 55, of Walnut Creek, Calif.; Virgil 
Jones, 54, of Woodbridge, Va.; Jesse Murphy, 75, of Random Lake; Ellen Newman, 
75, of Youngstown; Joanne Pembleton, 57, of Murfreesboro; Mary Shaver, 57, of 
Nashville, Tenn., and Julius Zuckerman, 67, of Boca Raton. 
All eleven of the survivors remained hospitalized Thursday at the Flagstaff 
Medical Center, about 70 miles from the crash site. 
Laurin Bosse, an administrator at the medical center, said that Jones, the most 
seriously injured of the survivors, was in guarded condition on Thursday, 
suffering from severe head injuries. 
Bosse said that the other survivors were listed in serious or stable condition. 
"Generally speaking, there's a lot of fractures -- hip, pelvis, leg and arm," 
she said. "There are a lot of lacerations, and a lot of bruising about the 
head, face and chest . . . . A lot of them are still under sedation." 
National Transportation Safety board investigators are expected to spend four 
or five more days at the scene in their efforts to piece together evidence on 
what caused the crash. 
Grand Canyon Airlines spokesmen said that there was no indication of any kind 
of trouble during the 55-minute flight over the eastern end of the Grand 
Canyon. 
John Lauber, the NTSB member heading up the investigation, said Thursday that 
transcripts of conversations between the cockpit crew and air traffic 
controllers at the airport confirmed earlier reports that nothing was said to 
indicate any problems as the plane came in on final approach. 
"They were cleared to land, and that was the last communication with the 
aircraft," Lauber said. 
