ATLANTIC SQUARE NO 'DONE DEAL' 
(Times Staff Writer) Irene Chang, in her article mistitled "Renewal Project 
Gets a Boost" (Times, Sept. 16), was at a loss to make any sense of the mess 
which we in Monterey Park call the "Atlantic Square Muddle." 
The latest flurry of activity was instigated by a number of developments, all 
of which make the questionable project less attractive as an investment for 
Monterey Park. The developments are: 
1. Champion Development failed to obtain a loan to cover its part of the land 
acquisition and construction costs under terms originally agreed upon by a 
previous City Council. 
2. The new package of conditions requires: 
a. An increase in the city's investment of 50%. 
b. A loss in security for the city as the lender's interest supersedes Monterey 
Park's interest in case of developer default. 
3. The report prepared by Kotin, Regan and Mouchly, for which Monterey Park and 
Champion each paid $5,000 for a total of $10,000, is not an independent 
evaluation of the Atlantic Square project. The above mentioned firm has a 
business relationship with the developer; therefore, the report fails the 
requirement that it be an objective analysis. A decision will be made based on 
this questionable document. The report overstates the net benefit to the city 
by $5.9 million and our city stands to lose $5 million over a 30-year period. 
Monterey Park residents should not consider this project as a "done deal." A 
public hearing has been scheduled for Monday night, Oct. 29, in the Monterey 
Park City Council Chambers. Our concern is that in scheduling the public 
hearing so late, the council may commit the city to the deal before the public 
can express its views. 
We urge all residents to contact the city manager's office, 320 W. Newmark 
Ave., for a copy of the report. And by all means, please plan to attend the 
public hearing! It is time to send a message to the Community Redevelopment 
Agency that we want accountability and that CRA (Community Redevelopment 
Agency) business, such as the report, is public business to be discussed at 
open meetings. 
IRV and RUTH M. WILLNER 
Monterey Park 
