OFF-ROAD PARK LEFT IN LAWMAKERS' DUST; 
OTAY MESA DEVELOPER SAYS HE'LL UP THE ANTE IN NEXT ROUND 
A frantic last-minute attempt to secure legislative approval for a $7-million 
deal to build an off-road vehicle park on Otay Mesa failed Friday as lawmakers 
wrapped up their deliberations for the year. 
As a result, developer Roque De La Fuente II said he considers his offer to 
lease the land "withdrawn" and that any further negotiations with the state 
Department of Parks and Recreation will have to include more money. 
"Personally, I don't see the off-roaders or the state doing anything until the 
first quarter of 1990," De la Fuente said. "The offer on the table is going to 
be withdrawn by me, and, if they are going to negotiate, it's going to be for 
more money." 
No Nearby Site 
The deal being pushed by the off-roaders would entail the state leasing nearly 
1,000 acres, most of it from De la Fuente, for 20 years so that off-road 
enthusiasts could legally ride their motocross bikes and three-wheelers on 
specially marked trails north of the Mexican border. 
Off-road enthusiasts in San Diego have long complained that the closest place 
to ride their vehicles is 2 1/2 to 3 hours away at the 38,000-acre expanse at 
Ocotillo Wells, next to Anza-Borrego Desert State Park. Off-roaders have 
secured a promise from San Diego County and state officials to use proceeds 
from their special "green sticker" license fee to build a closer park. 
But the way state officials structured their deal with De la Fuente caused 
lawmakers to balk at the idea earlier this year during deliberations over the 
state budget. 
The state wanted to pay De la Fuente $5.3 million for his 920 acres up front 
and take over title for the land. But it would agree to sell it back to him in 
20 years -- when it would be worth an estimated $100 million -- for only a 
dollar. 
State officials said they are willing to pay the rent up front and take title 
to satisfy De la Fuente's requirement that he not be personally liable for any 
lawsuits arising out of accidents on his property. 
That provision caused a chorus of murmurs among legislative staffers, who also 
privately questioned the amount of money being offered to De la Fuente. 
275% Increase in Price 
A state appraiser just two years ago suggested paying De la Fuente no more than 
$77 an acre to lease the property; the recent asking price was about $288 an 
acre, nearly a 275% increase. 
Robert Ham, lobbyist for the off-roaders and De la Fuente, said he and other 
proponents of the deal overcame those questions during a hastily called public 
hearing on the matter last month. Legislators were told that Otay Mesa land 
such as De la Fuente's is skyrocketing in value and that any further waiting 
could cost the state dearly. 
Ham said that, although legislators gave him the green light for the park, he 
was unable to find a suitable bill in which to insert the $7-million request. 
At one point, it looked as though it could be included in a last-minute, 
$48.2-million pork barrel arrangement between the governor and the Legislature, 
but it was set aside because other pet projects crowded it out. 
Ham said his subsequent effort to stick the proposal into yet another bill 
during the waning hours of the 1989 legislative session were unsuccessful, 
leaving off-roaders to wait to bring up the deal again in January. 
