FINALLY, A DIGNIFIED BURIAL; 
AFTER 17 YEARS, ALLENDE TAKES HIS PLACE NEXT TO OTHER CHILEAN PRESIDENTS 
Prior to the military coup that ushered in the rigid rule of Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet, Chile was widely admired in Latin America for its political 
tolerance. That honorable tradition was revived Tuesday when Chileans finally 
gave a dignified burial to Salvador Allende, the democratically elected 
president Pinochet overthrew in 1973. 
That was no easy, symbolic gesture for the new government of President Patricio 
Aylwin. For Allende is a controversial figure even in death, and many of the 
men who overthrew him are still alive and still powerful enough to cause 
political problems. Not least among them is Pinochet himself, still the chief 
of Chile's armed forces and publicly unhappy at the decision to hold a formal 
funeral for the late Marxist president. 
Allende died in the final hours of fighting around Chile's presidential palace 
in Santiago 17 years ago next week. It is generally believed that he committed 
suicide rather than surrender to Pinochet's forces. He was quietly buried in an 
unmarked grave and his family sent into exile. 
Allende's survivors were present when his body was disinterred. They were 
joined by Aylwin and most of his Cabinet for a funeral procession along 
Santiago's widest thoroughfare to a funeral mass in the national cathedral and 
burial in the cemetery where other Chilean presidents are buried. Even the date 
chosen for Allende's funeral was a symbol of reconciliation. Allende's family 
did not choose the anniversary of the coup, but instead the date Allende was 
elected president, Sept. 4. 
At the funeral, Aylwin, a Christian Democrat, admitted with candor and grace 
that he would still oppose Allende's policies if the circumstances were the 
same today as they were 17 years ago. "But the drama lived by Chile since 1973 
has taught us that those circumstances should never repeat themselves," he 
added. "It is the duty of all Chileans to avoid them." It was a fitting tribute 
to a man who -- whatever his faults or mistakes -- devoted his life to 
peaceful, democratic politics. 
