ART BUCHWALD: THE BUCK DOESN'T STOP FOR SUPER RICH 
It has been reported that Michael Milken made more than $180 million last year. 
Michael is now having his problems with the Feds, but he is still flying up 
there in the ozone with the super rich. His name appeared on a list that 
included the highest-paid executives in America. (The lowest was Robert Haas, 
who earned a paltry $25 million in 1988.) 
What can somebody do with so much money, except buy Grey Poupon mustard from 
the next Rolls-Royce? At some point the sublime becomes really ridiculous. I 
sought out one of the men on the top-money all-star team. His name was Net 
Gross, and his fortune came from manufacturing suspenders to hold up yuppies' 
pants. 
I walked into his office as he was having his shoes shined. He waved me over to 
a chair. 
"How do you feel now that everyone knows I hanged you?" 
"Why should it? Of course I go first-class now. For example, this shoeshine is 
costing me $50. I could get one on the street for $2, but it wouldn't say 
anything about me." 
"Is it really a better shine for $50 than it is for $2?" 
"Most multimillionaires think so. The shine wouldn't seem worth much if it came 
cheap." 
"But nobody knows whether you've had a $2 shine or a $50 one." 
"I know it and that's all that counts. It's the same with this shirt. It cost 
$250. That's what I used to pay for a suit when I started out in this business. 
With a shirt like this I feel as if the lord and Merrill Lynch are watching 
over me." 
"Besides, the material happiness that money brings, what other good reason is 
there for you to earn so much?" 
"It tells me exactly where I rank socially. More importantly, it shows where 
the wealthy stand in relation to me. It's hard for you to understand how 
important it is to me to take in more money than Malcolm Forbes. If I have more 
big bucks, I can ruin his breakfast." 
"Then, making a billion dollars is still the best revenge?" 
"Yes, because when your income is in the billions, there are only about 20 guys 
in the world who can really screw you." 
"Do you have any friends among the billion-dollar class?" 
"Yes and no. I might gang up with T. Boone Pickens just to get a third guy. 
Then on Friday he might gang up with someone else to get me. That's why having 
money is so satisfying -- you stick it to those who are trying to stick it to 
you." 
"What else can you do with your fortune besides sticking it to the other guy?" 
"The really rich are the ones who put money into play. We spread it around, 
throw it on the table and toss it up, and make sure that it comes back to us 10 
times more than what we put in." 
"You must still be left with a lot that you don't know what to do with." 
"That would be true if we didn't have to hire lawyers." 
"Why do you need lawyers?" 
"To tell us if it is legal to get a $50 shine." 
