2 INDICTED IN ARTIFICIAL GROWTH HORMONE SALES 
A Sacramento-area bodybuilder and a Carmel man have been charged with 
distributing a genetically engineered human growth hormone, a drug increasingly 
sought by top athletes as a non-detectable substitute for anabolic steroids. 
William E. Cambra Jr., 31, of Carmichael and James V. Sorrano, 29, of Carmel 
were named in the 12-count indictment filed Wednesday in San Diego federal 
court. The indictment also included charges of conspiring to sell the synthetic 
hormone, distributing steroids and distributing counterfeit steroids. 
The charges were the first by federal prosecutors involving the distribution of 
the synthetic hormone, an expensive drug prescribed only for children with 
growth deficiencies but in increasing demand among world-class athletes seeking 
to pass drug tests, said Assistant U.S. Atty. Phillip L. B. Halpern of San 
Diego. 
The indictment was unsealed after the arrest of Cambra Wednesday morning in 
Carmichael, a Sacramento suburb. Known as a national-class bodybuilder and 
owner of a Carmichael gym, Cambra was being held pending a bail hearing today 
in U.S. District Court in Sacramento, Halpern said. Police were searching for 
Sorrano, he said. 
If convicted, both face up to 38 years in prison and $3 million in fines. 
Cambra ran a nationwide network that distributed large amounts of the synthetic 
hormone and bogus anabolic steroids, the indictment alleges. 
The hormone substitute costs between $600 and $1,200 per dose on the black 
market, Halpern said. 
"Because of that it's not used by every Tom, Dick and Harry who wants to use 
steroids," he said. "Only top-level athletes, be they bodybuilders, track and 
field, etcetera, would want to use human growth hormone." 
The hormone is so hard to detect under the drug tests currently given to 
athletes, Halpern said, that "if you took it in the last Olympics, it would not 
have been caught." 
The hormone is the compound Olympic gold medalist Florence Griffith Joyner 
recently was accused of taking. Sprinter Darrell Robinson told the West German 
magazine Stern that he sold Griffith Joyner 10 cubic centimeters of the hormone 
for $2,000 in 1988. Griffith Joyner, who retired from competition in February, 
denies the accusation. 
Because the risk of being caught using the growth hormone is so low, an 
"expanding" segment of the $200-million to $400-million black market in 
steroids is turning to the hormone, according to Halpern, who is acknowledged 
as the nation's leading prosecutor of illegal steroid sales. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration allows only two American firms to make 
the compound, Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco, which calls the drug 
Humatrope, and Eli Lilly Co. of Indianapolis, which calls it Protropin. Sold at 
retail for $450 per dose, Halpern said, it is prescribed for children whose 
pituitary glands do not naturally secrete enough growth hormone. 
It aids athletes, Halpern said, because it produces effects similar to 
steroids, which help the body build and repair tissue, even under tremendous 
workout stress. To use the synthetic hormone, two refrigerated substances, one 
crystalline and one liquid, must be mixed and then injected, Halpern said. 
Cambra and Sorrano were charged in connection with the Sept. 23, 1988, sale to 
undercover agents of $100,000 worth of the Lilly hormone, Halpern said. Worth 
$250,000 to $500,000 on the black market, the hormone had been trucked down 
from Northern California to the buy site, a motel in El Centro in Imperial 
County, Halpern said. 
It was not known how much, if any, of the hormone substitute allegedly 
distributed by Cambra and Sorrano actually was sold to athletes. 
