CHAMBER OF COMMERCE NAMES HERB CAWTHORNE VICE PRESIDENT 
Herb Cawthorne, who resigned in a veil of secrecy as president of the San Diego 
Urban League, was named vice president of the San Diego Chamber of Commerce on 
Thursday. 
Cawthorne's appointment was announced late in the afternoon and came as a 
surprise. Cawthorne said last month that he was founding a development company 
to revitalize the downtown and Southeast areas of San Diego. It was not clear 
Thursday whether he would continue with the previously announced Cawthorne Co. 
Chamber officials said Cawthorne, who resigned from the Urban League in June, 
will begin his new duties today and will be in charge of local government 
issues, including growth management and downtown redevelopment. He will replace 
Dorothy Migdal, who died earlier this year after serving 12 years as chamber 
vice president. 
In a four-page written statement released by the chamber, President Lee Grissom 
is quoted as saying that he was impressed by Cawthorne's "leadership, vision 
and passionate commitment to San Diego." Grissom said he also expects Cawthorne 
to play a major role in "public safety issues" affecting the city. 
The statement included a brief mention of Cawthorne's recent two-year tenure at 
the Urban League and ignored the controversy that surrounded his resignation 
June 7. Cawthorne and other league officials have never explained his sudden 
departure from a post that made him possibly the city's most influential black 
leader. 
Cawthorne and his attorney have also refused to comment on allegations of 
fiscal mismanagement at the league that was reportedly revealed by an internal 
audit of his spending. 
He also served as executive director of the Portland, Ore., Urban League before 
coming to San Diego. A Portland newspaper reported in May that league officials 
there were blaming Cawthorne for huge debts that had been piled up by the 
organization. 
According to chamber officials, Cawthorne graduated from the University of 
Oregon and taught for 12 years at Portland State and the University of Oregon. 
Neither Cawthorne nor Grissom could be reached for comment Thursday night. 
During last year's citywide campaign on growth controls, Cawthorne 
energetically spoke out against the most restrictive slow-growth proposals, 
which he said would be economically detrimental to the black community. 
