SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA JOB MARKET; 
CHALLENGES / OPPORTUNITIES; 
PARADOX IN DEFENSE; 
THE SOUTHLAND WILL SEE A 15% DROP IN OVERALL EMPLOYMENT IN THE SECTOR BY 1992. 
STILL, MANY FIRMS ARE STILL HIRING. 
Most discussions of defense industry employment in the post-Cold War era 
revolve around a single word: Layoffs. The guns-and-missiles business, quite 
simply, is shrinking, and few experts believe that even the Mideast crisis will 
reverse that trend. 
The numbers paint a grim picture. Total employment in the aerospace industry in 
California, including the civilian and military sectors, is expected to decline 
nearly 15% to 294,000 by 1992 from 344,000 this year, according to the UCLA 
Business Forecast for California released this month. 
And defense-related employment in the state, which includes all jobs that are 
directly or indirectly a result of military spending, will decline nearly 11% 
to 647,000 during the same period from 725,000 this year, according to the 
economic forecasting firm DRI/McGraw-Hill. 
But this contraction isn't industrywide. Even as defense companies announce 
layoffs, they are still recruiting college graduates and hiring experienced 
workers with highly specialized skills. 
"It's a definite paradox," said Sandy Lechtich, president of National 
Recruiters in Canoga Park. "There are lots of people being laid off, lots of 
people who can't find anything, but there are still a lot of needs in certain 
areas." 
Many of the current opportunities involve electronics specialties, a reflection 
of the military's growing emphasis on electronic warfare and the efforts of 
some defense firms to diversify into civilian high-tech markets. Experts in 
complex software, microwave radio systems, digital signal processing and 
satellite communications, for example, are all in demand. 
Hughes Aircraft, for one, is recruiting microwave radio experts and other 
communications engineers to work on civilian air-traffic control systems, even 
as it pursues a companywide work-force reduction program aimed at eliminating 
6,500 jobs. 
Skilled production workers with experience in structural assembly, aircraft 
maintenance and toolmaking are also in short supply. That's in part because the 
shrinking defense budget has been accompanied by an unprecedented boom in the 
demand for new and used commercial aircraft, creating jobs in building or 
retrofitting airplanes. 
Northrop Corp., for example, is cutting its overall payroll by about 3,000, but 
nonetheless has 400 openings for skilled assembly workers to build B-2 bombers 
in Palmdale, according to Dave Suydam, vice president for human resources at 
the B-2 division. In fact, Boeing Co., a subcontractor on the B-2, has 
dispatched workers from its Seattle plants to work in on the project in 
Palmdale. 
Suydam said the company needs experienced structural mechanics, electrical 
mechanics, painters and liaison engineers. "If you're an aircraft worker doing 
'touch-labor,' then you're working," he said. 
But landing the available jobs is no easy feat. Companies are looking for 
recruits with specific skills and are being highly selective. And as the 
defense companies attempt to pursue commercial work, experience on military 
projects can even be a disadvantage. 
"The military environment is very different," said Fred Rodriguez, director of 
employment at Hughes. "The military people are used to working with military 
specifications, and many of them don't have the expertise" for civilian 
projects. 
Military specifications often require special materials and extremely exacting 
standards that are not generally employed in commercial projects. That 
explains, in part, why Hughes would be laying off electronics engineers from 
some divisions and hiring outsiders into others. 
The attempts by many defense companies to shift their focus to commercial 
markets will not do much to improve the employment picture, experts agree. 
McDonnell Douglas has been forced to lay off 8,000 people in Long Beach, 
despite a record backlog of commercial aircraft orders. 
Rodriguez points out that even though Hughes hopes to move to 60% dependence on 
defense from 80% during the next several years, much of that transition will be 
brought about by acquisitions. 
The model presented by firms that are already diversified is not terribly 
promising either. Rockwell International, which relies on military contracts 
for just 25% of its revenue, has had few layoffs among its Southern California 
work force of 34,000, but employment is not expanding. 
Indeed, it appears that from an employment point of view, the defense industry 
in Southern California will increasingly resemble other industries. Those who 
get jobs will have top-notch technical skills, good interpersonal skills and an 
aggressive, well-thought-out approach to job hunting. 
Gone are the days of massive employment for all types of workers. "Long term, 
we'll see more need for high-tech skills and far less need for basic skills," 
said Sal Monaco of DRI/McGraw-Hill. "I just don't see any prospect that it's 
going to take off again." 
