AS REBUILDING LAGS, ARMENIA QUAKE VICTIMS ARE LOSING HOPE 
When heavily laden trucks rumble by in the street outside, the children in 
Karush Pogosyan's family run for shelter. Usually, two dive under the bed, a 
third hides in a wooden wardrobe and the fourth, a cousin, runs about 
frantically, uncertain where she will be safe. 
"The earthquake -- they remember the earthquake," Pogosyan said simply, 
recalling the Dec. 7, 1988, temblor that devastated Leninakan and a wide area 
of northern Soviet Armenia. "We all remember the earthquake, in fact, and for 
us the suffering it brought continues, day after day." 
Pogosyan and his brothers, Gevork and Hoganes, and their wives and two of the 
older children are living in a tent on one of Leninakan's tree-lined 
boulevards. Most of the children have now been sent to a government vacation 
house to spare them what Karush Pogosyan calls "the misery of being a refugee 
in your own city." 
"More than half a year we have been living like this," he said, gesturing 
around an army tent furnished with an assortment of beds, tables and chairs as 
well as the wardrobe salvaged from the wreckage of their homes. 
"There are eight of us here, with just a plastic basin for washing, a camping 
set for cooking, a floor that turns into mud with the rain, no lock on the 
door. . . . This is not life -- it's an existence but nothing more." 
520,000 Armenians Left Homeless 
The earthquake left more than 520,000 Armenians homeless, and the 
reconstruction is proceeding far more slowly than they and the government had 
hoped. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's promise that all would be rebuilt 
within two years appears over-optimistic, and government engineers talk of 
perhaps five years, even with extensive assistance from other parts of the 
Soviet Union and foreign donors. 
The slowness of the redevelopment effort is draining away much of the hope that 
the victims had retained through the first few months after the quake, and a 
social pathology is developing as they remain unhoused and unemployed, their 
families divided and the future uncertain. 
"We are facing another winter without a home, and I don't know how we will make 
it," Gevork Pogosyan said, despair creeping into his voice. "Some people have 
managed to get (construction workers') cabins, and those are all right for a 
small family. We would need a couple, and I don't know where we could get them. 
I just don't know how we will make it through another six months, let alone 
another year or two." 
The boulevard where the Pogosyans and perhaps 60 other families are living in a 
collection of army tents, portable cabins, shanties and even a few yurts, the 
circular felt tents of Mongolia, has taken on the look and smell of a refugee 
settlement. 
Block-by-Block Demolition Efforts 
Down the street are the shattered ruins of apartment houses where they once 
lived. Demolition is proceeding block by block, adding to the number of people 
on the streets as the ruins in which they were living are leveled. 
The querulous temper and soul-destroying malaise, typical of long-term 
refugees, are both growing. The gratitude of surviving an immense tragedy is 
being succeeded by concern over their future, along with a helplessness and 
then by a bitter anger that the authorities are doing too little to assist 
them. 
Everyone has been sheltered, fed and clothed, but their lives remain in such 
disarray that few, particularly in Leninakan, appear to have much hope for the 
future. 
Dr. Armen L. Goenjian, a Long Beach psychiatrist who has been working with 
mental health specialists here to help people cope psychologically with the 
earthquake and its aftermath, said the housing crisis has become the main 
concern. 
"Psychiatric care and construction now overlap," he said. "What people need to 
be reassured of, for their well-being and to regain their hope for the future, 
is immediate housing, and they won't have that at the pace at which the 
reconstruction is proceeding." 
For family oriented Armenians, the loss of their homes was more than the loss 
of shelter, Laura Vartanyan, first deputy chairman of the Armenian Children's 
Fund, said, because it also meant the loss of the family's cohesion. 
"Armenians draw strength from the family -- children from their parents, 
parents from the children, everyone from the grandparents," she said. "The 
family is always a source of hope for the future, of wisdom in difficult times, 
of belonging when modern life is so full of alienation. . . . The family for us 
is the center. 
"But with more than 25,000 people killed in the earthquake, we have that many 
families that are deeply grieving. We also have perhaps 100,000 other families 
without housing, tens of thousands of families in which the women and children 
have been sent around Armenia and around the Soviet Union. This provides them 
with the shelter they need, but it means that as a family they are divided. In 
its aftermath, the earthquake for us as a nation remains a crisis because of 
the danger it poses to so many of our families." 
Officials Divided on Response 
Armenian officials are divided on whether to house as many people as possible 
in quickly built, prefabricated houses and then proceed with an orderly but 
slower reconstruction, or whether to press ahead with the whole redevelopment 
effort, even though it might leave some families housed in shacks, shanties, 
portable cabins, dormitories, school buildings and even tents for several more 
years. 
"There is no point in putting up more temporary housing only to replace it in a 
year or two or three -- that is a loss of time as well as money," Yuri 
Mkhitarian, a senior official of the Armenian State Construction Committee, 
commented in Yerevan, the capital. 
"People must realize that we lost more than 11% of the republic's housing in 
the earthquake, plus a lot of enterprises and community facilities, and we will 
not replace those overnight. The whole situation is critical, not only 
housing." 
But the need for housing is undeniably urgent, according to Goenjian, Vartanyan 
and others concerned with the social and psychological rehabilitation of the 
victims as well as the physical reconstruction. 
"Although there was the shock of the earthquake and everything that happened 
then, most people had a high degree of expectation that things would settle 
down, and many in fact believed they would quickly resume their previous 
functions," Goenjian said. 
"This is not happening -- whether the expectations were realistic is another 
question -- and so there is a kind of psychological 'aftershock,' if you will, 
and it is a growing problem. Psychological morbidity will increase if families 
remain separated and if families remain away from their homes for a prolonged 
period." 
Goenjian has urged the authorities to reunite families and to provide ways for 
them to take part in the reconstruction of the earthquake zone, particularly in 
their villages or neighborhoods. 
Most of the population in the earthquake area, which included Armenia's 
second-largest city, Leninakan, the towns of Spitak and Kirovakan and about 60 
villages, are suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome, according to 
Goenjian and Armenian health workers. 
"There are recurrent fears of the earthquake being repeated," Goenjian said. 
"People re-experience the earthquake, sometimes every day. They are easily 
startled, any noise from a passing truck, flickering lights or an unexpected 
vibration -- and the tremors are continuing in the area -- will trigger these 
fears. 
"There are a whole series of problems, those usually associated with 
post-traumatic stress syndrome, including insomnia, nightmares, apathy, 
detachment, avoidance behavior, as people attempt to protect their psyches from 
further damage and traumas. Children suffer from regression, including 
stuttering, bed-wetting, thumb-sucking. There is increased alcoholism, chemical 
abuse, aggression. . . . 
"The majority of the population, in short, suffers from mild to severe 
post-traumatic stress syndrome. Thirty percent of the population suffer 
significantly as well from grief depression, in which they have a sense of 
hopelessness, guilt, a wish to die." 
Double Trauma for Some 
The most vulnerable are the children, the elderly, those who were buried in the 
rubble, who lost limbs in the disaster and who handled corpses. There are also 
those, Goenjian said, who suffered from the "double trauma" of having fled in 
terror from anti-Armenian pogroms in neighboring Azerbaijan only to be caught 
in the earthquake here. 
The problems appear most acute in Leninakan, which had a population of more 
than 330,000, and in the larger towns. In rural areas, farmers have gone ahead 
with the rebuilding faster, according to Armenian officials, and life is 
returning to normal there more quickly. 
"We are optimistic," said Albert Sarkisian, the 65-year-old patriarch of an 
extended family of nearly 20 people in one of Spitak's outlying villages. "Our 
home was destroyed -- a big, beautiful house of Armenian stone. Seeing those 
ruins was worse for me than the earthquake itself, because it was the house 
where I was born and lived my entire life. But we will rebuild. 
"The authorities wanted us to leave -- me because I am old, and the women and 
the children too. But we have a huge family, and we did not want to be 
scattered around the country like leaves. So we stayed here, and it was better 
for us that we did, staying together to rebuild." 
Goenjian, an Armenian-American, believes that short-term treatment by Armenian 
mental health specialists, who have developed special programs and are working 
with him and other Armenian psychologists from the United States, Britain and 
France, as well as the natural resilience of Armenians like Sarkisian will help 
most to recover. 
"Armenians do not, by and large, have many mental health problems," Goenjian 
said. "The family is a good support system for most day-to-day psychological 
stresses, but the earthquake crushed this natural support system. The mother, 
on whom everyone depends, has her own losses and cannot provide all the care to 
her children and husband, just as teachers in school cannot help the children 
as they usually do." 
Mental Health Problems 
Given the extent of the disaster, he expects "significant numbers" of people to 
develop chronic mental health problems, including pronounced pessimism, 
depression, anxiety, psychosomatic illnesses, alcoholism and drug abuse. 
"As an Armenian, I am worried about the long-term impact of the earthquake and 
the aftermath on the character of our people," he said. "A very significant 
number of Armenians will be suffering from problems that will make it difficult 
to form the strong personal relations that are typical of our people, that will 
make them inadequate parents, that will increase chemical dependencies of 
various types, that will make them suspicious and anxious." 
Leonid Gozman, president of a new association of Soviet clinical psychologists, 
also sees serious danger of prolonged mental health problems among Armenians if 
measures are not taken quickly to overcome the present psychological and social 
problems here. 
"Those who happened to witness the disaster, their relatives and, in fact, all 
Armenians had the feeling that the catastrophe was global," Gozman commented in 
Moscow recently, warning that the problems should not be minimized and that 
government policies should take account of them. 
"Even war veterans told me that they had never seen so many people perish so 
quickly. The earthquake took an appalling toll of lives in just about 20 to 30 
seconds. From afar, you cannot even imagine the scale of this holocaust." 
And for many Armenians, some of whose parents or grandparents had fled from 
Turkey during the 1915 massacre of Armenians, this revived the fears, never 
forgotten, that despite a history that goes back centuries, they are in danger 
of disappearing as a people. 
"Our Armenian history is one of pain, yes, but also one of achievement and one 
of joy," Vartanyan said at the Children's Fund offices, "and we draw tremendous 
strength from it. We have these inner resources that we must activate. We can 
survive; we will survive. And we must not give in to pessimism." 
