SUNSHINE LANDFILL CRITICS WANT TRASH SENT BY RAIL TO DESERT; 
GARBAGE: THE ACTIVISTS CALL FOR TRANSFER STATIONS IN CHATSWORTH, SYLMAR, VAN 
NUYS, CANOGA PARK AND BURBANK-SUN VALLEY. 
Opponents of the proposed expansion of the Sunshine Canyon Landfill on Monday 
unveiled their own plan for disposing of the region's trash: shipping it by 
rail to the desert. 
The plan outlined by San Fernando Valley homeowners and activists called for 
closing city and county landfills, recycling as much trash as possible and 
sending the rest to an unspecified new dump in the desert. Transfer stations 
where trash would be loaded from trucks onto rail cars could be located in 
Chatsworth, Sylmar, Van Nuys, Canoga Park and Burbank-Sun Valley along existing 
rail lines, suggested Michael Ormsby, who led a press conference organized by 
the North Valley Coalition and Friends of Sunshine Canyon. 
But a railroad company executive who attended the briefing at a Granada Hills 
restaurant said such a plan would not work unless the traditional "not in my 
back yard" fears of Valley homeowners can be overcome. 
"Unless there's public support for transfer stations, this is not going to be a 
reality," said John Spisak, president of SP Environmental Systems Inc. in 
Sacramento, a sister company of the Southern Pacific Transportation Co. 
Spisak added that his company and other private concerns were eager to develop 
remote, "rail-haul" dumps but feared precisely the kind of backlash that has 
stalled expansion of the Sunshine Canyon Landfill north of Granada Hills. 
The landfill's owner, Browning-Ferris Industries, wants to expand its 230 acres 
already in operation into an additional 542 acres of unincorporated county 
land. The proposal is scheduled for discussion Thursday by the Regional 
Planning Commission, which delayed voting on it at the July 25 meeting. 
The expansion proposal, which has been pending for five years, needs several 
county approvals, including a permit to cut down an estimated 6,000 oak trees, 
said supervising regional planner Richard Frazier. 
The site is classified as a significant ecological area in the county General 
Plan, which would have to be amended to allow the dump's expansion, he said. 
Frazier said the county is already considering a rail-haul system of disposing 
trash, among other trash-disposal plans, but was not ready to entirely give up 
landfills. 
Still, Ormsby and about 30 other homeowners and self-proclaimed 
environmentalists said they would resolutely oppose landfills in Sunshine 
Canyon and other ecologically sensitive canyons. "I see them falling like a 
deck of cards if we don't do something fast," said Ormsby. 
