HOWARD ROSENBERG: WITHOUT REGRET, NEW HEROES CONTINUE TO DO IT 'THEIR WAY' 
The new season continues tonight with more gritty fantasy. 
First comes bottom-of-the-barrel "Top of the Hill," a CBS series getting a 
two-hour premiere at 9 p.m. on Channels 2 and 8. Meanwhile, NBC checks in with 
the lowball "Hardball," which premieres in 90-minute form at 9:30 p.m. on 
Channels 4, 36 and 39. Its regular time slot is 9 p.m. Fridays. 
Both series center on stock television characters -- mavericks who reject 
convention in favor of doing things Their Way. 
In "Top of the Hill," Thomas Bell's way is tedious, absolutely absurd and 
relentlessly banal. 
Fresh from winning an election to complete the unexpired congressional term of 
his ailing father (Dick O'Neill), young Bell (William Katt) arrives in 
Washington in his truck, looking like someone who thinks that lobbyists are 
people who hang out in foyers of hotels. 
He may be dumb, but he has ideals. So no hanging around the office and learning 
Congress for Bell. He has barely unpacks his duffle bag when he's off to Costa 
Verde, a Latin American nation where a powerful drug lord is suspected of 
holding a United States drug-enforcement agent whose father is one of Bell's 
constituents. 
Although Bell is determined to free the agent, there are obstacles. Not only is 
Bell temporarily jailed, but his meeting with the brutal drug kingpin seems 
fruitless. Then the action congressman -- drawing on his experience as a surfer 
who used to book rock bands into discos -- applies The Pressure. He calls his 
office and asks his secretary: 
"Who do we know with connections?" 
Is this rich or what? The ease with which Bell prevails in executive producer 
Stephen J. Cannell's script seems all the more ludicrous in light of present 
reality -- the entire U.S. government's apparent helplessness in restraining 
Colombia's drug lords. 
The only bright spot in "Top of the Hill" is the late Kenneth McMillan as the 
tough party whip who makes Bell pay a price for his assistance. But this is 
politics? It's difficult to believe that Bell would run for office, even more 
difficult to believe that he would win. 
Politics is supposed to be the art of compromise. In the case of "Top of the 
Hill," television is compromise minus the art. 
NBC's "Hardball," on the other hand, is a case of style and potentially 
interesting protagonists only occasionally being enough to energize formula TV. 
Middle-aged detective Charlie (C.B.) Battles (John Ashton) is balding and wears 
a back brace and permanent scowl. He rejects suggestions that he take a desk 
job or retire. 
Cocky young Detective Joe (Kaz) Kaczierowski (Richard Tyson) wears his long, 
stringy hair in a ponytail except for one strand that hangs in his face, keeps 
a shotgun strapped to his arm and rides a Harley. 
Both cops are rebels. 
C.B. does things His Way. Kaz does things His Way. 
They meet when assigned to guard a witness who is hiding out with her young son 
before testifying against a mobster. They discover Their Ways clash. 
"You can't be no cop," says C.B., who groans about getting a partner with hair 
like Yoko Ono's. "I wanted hair like yours," Kaz snaps back, "but I couldn't 
get the part that wide." 
"The way you two bicker, you sound like an old married couple," says the 
witness, Connie Villanova (Kay Lenz), who happens to be the mobster's wife and 
C.B.'s former girlfriend. 
Tyson is refreshingly off-beat, and he and Ashton are fun together and perform 
well when given the opportunity. However, they're undermined by co-executive 
producer Frank Lupo's weak script, one whose infrequent glimmers of logic and 
intelligence are eclipsed by enormous flaws. 
The peril and suspense here are artificial and the witness-protection program 
so inept as to be laughable. In one instance, C.B. and Kaz frantically rush 
across town to warn Connie and two other cops with her that she's in danger, 
when all they have to do is call them on the phone. In another instance, a mob 
infiltrator makes a big production of leaving Connie's apartment in order to 
sneak back and try to kill her. Why leave and sneak back? Why not kill her 
immediately? 
Meanwhile, the only thing longer than Kaz's hair is the ankle-length coat he 
wears while on his motorcycle. He's already taking a chance by forsaking a 
helmet, but wearing a coat that could get tangled in the wheels would seem to 
be especially foolhardy. Maybe if he wore his coat in a ponytail. . . . 
