TWOSOME LINKED BY LOVE OF COMPETITION; 
TRANS-MISS GOLF: RICHARDSON AND MYERS, TWO-TIME RUNNERS-UP, DON'T HAVE MUCH IN 
COMMON. BUT EACH SAYS HE LIKES THE COMPANY. 
As they squinted toward the seventh fairway at The Farms Golf Club Friday 
afternoon, Kemp Richardson and Jim Myers seemed to have captured the moment of 
every amateur golfer's dream. 
On a brilliant afternoon on the last day of summer, traversing the beautiful 
but treacherous landscape of a championship course, Richardson and Myers were 
relaxed, kidding around as longtime buddies do and shooting under par. 
If either had a concern at that moment, it was not about how they would play 
their next tee shots but that neither could recall exactly where and when they 
first met. 
"Having a beer, probably," said Richardson as he smashed a three-wood into the 
sun and out of sight until a tiny white dot appeared 30 feet to the right of 
the pin, about five feet closer than the white dot that belonged to Myers. 
All they could say for sure was that they had seen each at other amateur 
tournaments off and on during the past decade and finally decided to play as a 
team in the Trans-Mississippi Assn. Four-Ball Championship tournament two years 
ago. Richardson, 44, of Laguna Niguel, and Myers, 45, of Oceanside, who play 
together maybe six times a year, were getting a jump on the competition for the 
1990 event, which opens with a practice round at the Farms today. 
Richardson and Myers have never won the Trans-Miss, a tournament that draws 
some of the best 25-and-older twosomes in the country and serves as the 
association's primary fund raiser. Winning, they say, is not the reason they've 
put up the $600 fee to play this event. They just enjoy the competition and 
each other's company. 
But Richardson and Myers twice have finished second. This year they enter the 
three-round, 54-hole event Tuesday as the strongest bid for a local champion in 
a 10-year-old tournament that's making its first stop in San Diego County. 
"It's not life or death, and we're not trying to earn our living at it," said 
Richardson, an investment broker. "But we like the competition, and that's 
really how you find out if you're good at anything." 
Twenty-two years ago, Richardson considered joining the PGA tour until he 
realized he didn't like living out of a suitcase. In 1968, he was an 
All-American at USC. He proved last February that he hadn't lost his touch when 
he shot a 68 during qualifying and beat out 138 other amateurs for a spot in 
the Shearson Lehman Hutton Open at Torrey Pines. 
In competition, Richardson and Myers make an unlikely team. Myers is an 
Oceanside fire chief who only played golf competitively in at Oceanside High 
School. Richardson, whose father was a national senior amateur champion in 
1987, the year before his death, played his first round of golf at age 6, but 
Myers didn't touch clubs until he was 14. But the two seem to share a chemistry 
on the course that makes for success. 
"I don't remember Jim in college, I can say that," Richardson said. "But he's a 
very good player. We play well together." 
"As Kemp goes we go, pretty much," Myers said. "He's the dominant player." 
Myers gives all the credit to Richardson for the twosome's opening-round 61 at 
Barton Creek Country Club in Austin, Tex., a year ago. They shot 11-under par 
to lead by eight strokes after 18 holes, then collapsed. They finished the 
tournament three shots back. In 1988, they were one stoke off the pace the 
entire tournament. 
"We really should have won it last year," Richardson conceded. "That was awful. 
You just have to play each hole the best you can. If your partner gets in deep 
doo-doo, you don't want to get in deep doo-doo with him." 
