HERSHISER HAS A DIFFERENT SCORELESS STREAK; 
DODGERS GIVE THEIR PITCHER ZERO SUPPORT AGAIN AS PADRES WIN IT, 1-0 
The Dodgers, visiting their southern neighbors Friday night for the first time 
since late July, had their first chance to see what this San Diego Padres' 
pennant fuss was all about. 
Some of them may still have their hands over their eyes. 
In a 1-0 loss, the Dodgers discovered at least three of the ways the Padres 
have crept within six games of the first-place San Francisco Giants: 
 -- With a 22-year-old pitcher who last season was in the Midwestern Collegiate 
Conference. 
 -- With a former starter who quietly set the Padre record Friday by earning 
his major league-leading 38th save. 
 -- With a game-winning double off a shortstop's knees. 
With two out in the seventh inning of a scoreless game, Dodger starter Orel 
Hershiser walked Bip Roberts, who stole second base on a pitch that bounced 
under catcher Mike Scioscia's glove. Roberto Alomar was intentionally walked, 
bringing up Darrin Jackson, who entered the game in the fourth inning in place 
of sore-heeled Tony Gwynn. 
What happened next, even Gwynn couldn't have pulled off. 
Jackson lofted a ball in front of shortstop Alfredo Griffin, who retreated in 
anticipation of the bounce. But the bounce went crazy, shooting off the infield 
dirt and ricocheting off his knees into shallow left field. Roberts scored, and 
Jackson got his sixth, and oddest, double of the season. 
"I got lucky, what can you say?" said Jackson, who had struck out in his 
previous two at-bats against Hershiser. "As soon as I hit it, I said, 'Shoot, 
it's right at him.' But it was a knuckleball. And it landed in a perfect spot." 
Said Griffin: "I think I should have caught the ball. At least, I should have 
blocked the ball." 
The San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium crowd of 28,771 didn't know whether to cheer 
or laugh, so they did both. They kept it up for the remaining two innings as 
rookie Andy Benes gave up two hits in 7 1/3 innings for his fourth consecutive 
victory. Mark Davis threw the final 1 2/3 innings for his save. 
The Padres' 15th victory in their last 18 games was enough to keep them in a 
second-place tie with the Houston Astros, who beat the National League 
West-leading Giants, 5-2. And it was more than enough to help Hershiser reach a 
milestone of frustration. 
He lost his third consecutive game and has an 0-4 record in his last six 
starts, despite an earned-run average of 1.93 during that time. This is because 
the Dodgers have been shut out in his last three starts, and have not scored in 
his last 30 innings. 
How bad has Hershiser's luck been? Bad enough, he implied, that it may have 
cost him a second consecutive Cy Young Award. 
"I think I'm pitching better than last year," said Hershiser, who is 14-12 with 
a 2.31 ERA. 
Last season, he had a 2.26 ERA but was 23-8. 
"It would be more frustrating if we were in a pennant race . . . if these games 
meant anything," Hershiser said. "All I can do is go out and do my job." 
Because the Dodgers were shut out for a major league-leading 16h time, 
Hershiser's performance -- he gave up seven hits in seven innings -- was 
overshadowed by those of Benes and Davis. 
Davis got the record after he replaced Benes in the eighth inning with Lenny 
Harris on second base and one out. Davis struck out both Willie Randolph and 
Eddie Murray, then retired the Dodgers in order in the ninth. He has had six 
saves in the Padres' last seven games and has blown only four of his 42 save 
opportunities. 
"I try not to reflect on the season and any numbers until the end of the year, 
but this (record) is definitely a highlight for me and my career," said Davis, 
who passed Rollie Fingers' record of 37 saves set in 1978. 
Benes, last year's National League No. 1 draft pick from the University of 
Evansville, was celebrating the passing of a different landmark. 
"I felt like I grew up tonight," said Benes, who struck out six in improving to 
4-2. "It made me feel like I'm finally over the hump." 
The Dodgers' offense, getting their first look at Benes, learned what 
Philadelphia and Montreal had already discovered. Benes can throw well -- and 
hard. He entered with only five previous major league starts but with victories 
in his last three -- over the Expos and the Phillies twice. During those 
starts, he had struck out 18 in 19 1/3 innings. 
Benes struck out at least one batter in each inning until the sixth, which 
featured his most important pitch. And it wasn't a strike. 
With one out, he walked Randolph, then watched as Murray drove a fastball into 
the left-field corner for a double, moving Randolph to third base. 
Up stepped Mike Marshall, who if he thought the kid was cracking, soon realized 
otherwise. Benes' first pitch hummed underneath Marshall's chin, dropping him 
to the ground while the roaring crowd jumped to its feet. Four pitches later, 
Marshall fouled weakly to the first baseman. Jeff Hamilton hit a grounder up 
the middle that shortstop Garry Templeton picked off in front of second base 
and threw to first to end the inning and the final Dodger threat. 
"Every other start, I've had an inning where I've given up more than one run -- 
this was the big inning for me," Benes said. 
Hershiser hasn't seen a big inning since Eddie Murray hit a two-run homer for 
him in the sixth inning of an Aug. 18 game in New York. The Dodgers have not 
scored for him since then. That was 21 days ago. 
Dodger Notes 
The Dodgers could finish with two pitchers among the league's top five in ERA 
-- Orel Hershiser and Mike Morgan. But Morgan needs 162 innings to qualify and 
has only 148 2/3. With 21 games remaining, it will be difficult for Morgan 
because he is no longer a starter. "It would be nice to go home for the winter 
having that ranking under my belt," said Morgan, whose 2.60 ERA ranks fifth. 
"It wasn't my main objective when we started the season, but here it is 
September, and it's become a little more important." Morgan said he would need 
eight or nine more appearances to accumulate the 12 1/3 needed innings. 
Look for several more players from triple-A Albuquerque to join the Dodgers 
after the weekend. The Dukes could finish their Pacific Coast League 
championship series against Vancouver by Sunday. Among the favorites for recall 
are pitcher Jeff Fischer, third baseman Dave Hansen and shortstop Jose 
Vizcaino. . . . Dodger Vice President Fred Claire said Friday he has discussed 
the possibility of catcher Rick Dempsey remaining with the organization as a 
minor league coach or manager after his playing career ends. "I think he would 
be a tremendous asset in that area," said Claire, who must first decide whether 
to offer another playing contract to Dempsey, whose contract expires at the end 
of this season. Claire and free-agent pitcher Fernando Valenzuela won't begin 
negotiations until after the season, as Valenzuela's agent, Tony DeMarco, said 
last month. 
