FEINSTEIN PROPOSES 'DRUG CZAR' TO COORDINATE STATE'S EFFORTS 
With her two political opponents already proposing solutions to California's 
drug problem, Democratic gubernatorial candidate Dianne Feinstein unveiled her 
own plan Thursday, calling for a "drug czar" to coordinate enforcement, 
education and treatment efforts. 
"(California) state and local agencies will spend some $9 billion this year on 
programs to combat illicit drug use, but there is no state strategy to 
effectively coordinate those resources," Feinstein said in remarks prepared for 
delivery in Manhattan Beach. 
Much as what is being done at the federal level, Feinstein said that if elected 
in 1990 she would name one person to "draft a comprehensive plan to combat drug 
use on the supply side and the demand side." 
"At present," Feinstein said, "there is no statewide drug plan, no strategy to 
fight narcotics. And President Bush's drug plan fails to give California the 
resources it needs or the priority it deserves to wage an effective battle." 
To finance her plan, Feinstein said she would seek bond measures if necessary. 
She also called for mandatory jail sentences for the sale of narcotics on the 
first offense and for same-day treatment programs for pregnant women who are on 
drugs. 
U.S. Sen. Pete Wilson, who is seeking the Republican nomination for governor, 
has introduced legislation in the Senate that would earmark the money now spent 
on congressional newsletters for fighting the drug problem. 
A special focus of Wilson's efforts is the increasing number of women who give 
birth to drug-addicted babies in California. 
In Los Angeles County alone, that number has jumped from 500 cases in 1985 to 
more than 2,500 today, according to Dr. Margaret Yonekura, chief of Obstetrics, 
Maternal and Fetal Medicine at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center. 
Yonekura recently got a promise from Wilson to find more money for a program 
she runs for crack-addicted mothers and newborns. 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, Feinstein's opponent for the Democratic 
gubernatorial nomination, announced this week that he would try to qualify an 
initiative for the November, 1990, ballot that would raise taxes on 
corporations and target the revenue for drug enforcement and treatment programs 
statewide. 
Van de Kamp described his proposed financing plan as an adjustment in the 
accounting methods now used by some corporations that he said would bring their 
state tax procedures into line with the methods they use in computing their 
federal taxes. 
