INJURIES MOUNT IN NFL 
The Mean Season is upon us with gusto. Ankles are turning. Muscles are pulling. 
Limbs are snapping. Miles of tape are being unrolled. Dozens of prognoses are 
being made. General managers are working the phones, finding new players to 
replace those who went down with a pop, a bang, a crunch. 
After two weeks of the National Football League season, there were 99 players 
on the league's injury report last week. Twenty-three different parts of the 
body were listed as damaged, everything from a buttocks to a jaw. (My favorite 
listing? "Head." What, precisely, does that mean? And has anyone asked the man 
to count to 10?) 
The numbers will swell this week. It was a tough Sunday. The Washington 
Redskins' quarterback strained his knee. The Minnesota Vikings' quarterback 
injured his thumb. The Indianapolis Colts lost all three of their quarterbacks 
to injury during a game in Houston. 
The year is young, but already tough. The Denver Broncos don't have much of a 
defense. The Cleveland Browns don't have much of an offense. The Los Angeles 
Rams are flopping almost as miserably as "Ishtar." Injuries are among the 
central aspects of each of those stories. 
Welcome to the Mean Season. Blocking, tackling, running and passing determine 
the outcome of every football game, from pee wee to the pros. But in the NFL, 
no part of the game is more important than injuries. 
"It's a war of attrition," said George Young, general manager of the New York 
Giants. "The teams that have the most healthy, good players at the end of the 
season tend to be in the hunt. That's the way it is almost every year." 
Injuries are a given in the NFL, a fact of life. Most players will need a 
doctor at some point during the season. Teams can only hope that their injuries 
aren't catastrophic, that the wrong players aren't ruined for the season. 
The San Francisco 49ers have been the NFL's best team the last few years, but 
they also have been among the luckiest. Not one of their essential players has 
lost much time because of an injury. 
"The 49ers are a very good team, but the healthiest team is going to win," said 
Joe Theismann, who was the Redskins' quarterback until a badly broken leg ended 
his career, and is now an ESPN broadcaster. "We can pretty well guess right now 
who is going to make the playoffs this year. Injuries will be the ultimate 
difference between them." 
Already, the impact is significant. The Broncos, for instance, are in some 
trouble. They have lost a starting cornerback and defensive end for the season. 
Both safeties are out right now. "I don't recognize anyone in the huddle," 
linebacker Karl Mecklenburg said. (Author's note: The nation will not mourn if 
the Broncos fail to return to the Super Bowl.) 
The Vikings certainly will be diminished without quarterback Wade Wilson. The 
Browns are punchless without their best back, Kevin Mack, who has a broken 
finger. Both teams -- division winners a year ago -- are off to a 1-2 start. 
The Rams, a popular preseason choice for the Super Bowl, also are 1-2, their 
defense staggered by injuries. The home-field advantage in the playoffs, which 
they dearly wanted, may soon be outside their grasp. 
On the other hand, it is no coincidence that the Chicago Bears are (a) off to a 
surprising 3-0 start, and (b) one of two teams that didn't list an injury in 
last week's report. (Maybe Mike Ditka warned them that only sissies got hurt.) 
Was it always this way? One wouldn't think so. With players constantly getting 
bigger, stronger and faster, it seems only logical that injuries are more of a 
factor now than, say, a decade ago. The collisions are more brutal. 
Neither does it help that 15 of the 28 teams play on artificial turf, on which 
risk increases, or that there has been widespread use of steroids, with which 
players develop stronger muscles than their bones can stand. 
But according to Dr. John Powell, who runs the National Athletic Injury 
Reporting System, in Iowa City, Iowa, there is hardly a difference at all. "The 
risk pattern in the NFL hasn't changed much in the last decade," he said. 
Theismann agrees. "It doesn't seem much different from even back when I 
started," he said. "The day I started training camp was the last day I was 
healthy. Injuries are part of the game." 
Said Young, "It isn't much worse now. A lot more time is spent now on 
preventing injuries, staying in shape." 
With all due respect, this just doesn't seem right. The NFL has always been 
brutal, but never did injuries seem as widespread as they are now, such a 
critical aspect of determining winners and losers. Never did Charles Darwin's 
lesson -- survival of the fittest -- seem so appropriate. 
Forget what the survey says. The great Green Bay Packer and Pittsburgh Steeler 
teams almost never suffered an injury. The good Baltimore Colt teams almost 
never had to reshuffle their lineup. Years ago, it was news if a team suffered 
more than one major injury in a season. Today, rare is the team that goes 
through a season without a major problem resulting from injuries. 
The New York Jets lost most of their secondary last year. The New England 
Patriots lost most of their linebackers. Both teams had lousy seasons. Everyone 
else held their breath, hoping the same troubles didn't befall them. They're 
all holding their breath again this year. 
The Mean Season has never been meaner. 
