NEWS AND BRIEFS: ELLIS ISLAND TO REOPEN AS GATEWAY TO OUR PAST 
It took six years and cost $156 million, but Ellis Island in New York Harbor 
finally is ready to reopen to the public as America's National Museum of 
Immigration. 
After a week of official ceremonies and special events, the museum will be open 
starting Sept. 10. It can be reached by ferry from the Battery. Shuttle 
services are available to the Statue of Liberty daily from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Soviets Can't Lick This Problem: Moscow, which often boasts of having the 
world's best ice cream, has a shortage in these waning days of summer. 
Ice cream kiosks on street corners and in city parks have been displaying "no 
ice cream" signs, although they continue to sell souvenirs, marshmallows, 
chocolates and other candies. 
Ice cream is still available at foreign outlets, such as the Baskin-Robbins 
stores in the Rossia Hotel and on the Arbat pedestrian mall, or the 
Soviet-Swiss joint-venture Pinguin. 
But lines are long and prices are high for Muscovites who have always taken 
pride in their own ice cream, which they buy in paper-wrapped slabs or on 
sticks, rather than in cones. 
Officials said the shortage has been caused by two of the three ice 
cream-making factories in Moscow being closed for repairs this summer. 
Jerusalem Anniversary: Israel's national museum celebrates its 25th anniversary 
Monday with the opening of the $11-million Nathan Cumings 20th-Century Art 
Building, the latest of more than 20 pavilions, galleries and gardens that 
bestride Jerusalem's Hill of Tranquility. 
The Israel Museum receives about one million visitors a year, with the famous 
Shrine of the Book housing the Dead Sea Scrolls being perhaps its most 
well-known exhibit. 
Happy Valley Again: Hong Kong has succeeded in reversing the decline in tourism 
it suffered as a result of neighboring China's massacre of pro-democracy 
demonstrators in June, 1989. 
According to figures compiled in the British colony, tourism dropped 4% to 5.4 
million visitors last year. In the first four months of this year, however, 
there has been a 1% increase in the number of visitors compared to the same 
period a year ago, and overall growth is forecast to be 8% to 10%. 
Climbing the Scaffold: After two years of repair and restoration, a 
16th-Century fresco by Correggio has reopened to the public in Parma, Italy. 
The work, accomplished between 1520 and 1524, can be found in the dome of the 
abbey at San Giovanni Envangelista church. Until Sept. 30, groups of about 20 
visitors are being allowed to climb to the 100-foot-high dome on scaffolding to 
see the painting up close. 
Egyptian Reassurance: Egyptian tourism officials are going to great lengths to 
assure would-be visitors that they will be safe and that the situation in Egypt 
is stable despite the Middle East crisis. 
"Despite the tension and current circumstances in the Middle East at present, 
Egypt is still enjoying a normal influx of tourists from all parts of the 
world, with the exception of the countries directly involved in the conflict," 
said Hamdi Saad El-Din, director of the Egyptian Tourist Authority. 
"We feel it is extremely important to inform the public that the U.S. State 
Department has not issued any travel advisories warning citizens against 
traveling to Egypt." 
From Cowbell to Liberty Bell: Swissair has inaugurated daily direct service 
between Zurich and Philadelphia, bringing to nine the number of gateway cities 
in the United States served by the airline. 
Fees Take a Hike: As of Sept. 1, California's Department of Parks and 
Recreation has hiked the cost of campsites, day use, boat rentals and other 
services in the state parks system. 
Most fees will be increased by $2 and will place a greater portion of the cost 
of state park operation on park users rather than the taxpayers as a whole. 
Fallout From Pompeii: Travelers headed to New York City in the next two weeks 
have the chance to combine it with a visit to Pompeii, if they feel so 
inclined. 
Care to see the skeleton of a woman clutching coins that bear the date AD 79 
(the year Pompeii was buried)? How about a video simulation of the eruption 
itself? Or a look at more than 200 objects unearthed at the doomed city within 
the past two years? 
They're all part of an exhibit at the Midtown IBM Gallery of Science and Art 
that runs through Sept. 15. The gallery, on Madison Avenue at 56th Street, is 
open Tuesday through Saturday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Admission is free. 
