HOLD THE TINSEL; 
EVERETT ISN'T THE HOLLYWOOD TYPE 
Quarterbacks were never meant to lead lives of quiet desperation. Bob 
Waterfield married Jane Russell. Later, in a commercial, Joe Namath tried on 
her brand of stockings. Dan Pastorini raced cars, and was stopped by a few with 
flashing red lights. 
When John Elway arrived in Denver, reporters followed him to the barber shop to 
chronicle what one town considered the most famous haircut since Elvis' 
induction to the Army. 
So who lead the National Football League in touchdown passes in 1988 with 31? 
Marino? Montana? Elway? Lomax? 
No, Jim Everett of the Rams. Although most days you would never know he was in 
a media capital. Imagine Joe Montana riding through the streets of San 
Francisco in an open-air Jeep. 
First, a few differences between Hollywood and the upper west side of Stanton, 
where Everett lives. 
"It's not L.A.," Everett says of Orange County. 
But it says Los Angeles right there on your team's letterhead. 
"There's a big difference," Everett says, "and that's just fine with me. I can 
just jump in my Jeep and have a grand old time." 
Meanwhile, Elway sneezes in Denver -- and gets in the papers. 
"You have to realize in Denver they don't have much else to write about," 
Everett says. "Here, there's a ton of things going on. There's the Dodgers, 
there's Magic Johnson and the Lakers and who the Clippers drafted and couldn't 
sign. All that stuff." 
A while back, Everett and some buddies landed in a Buena Park theme restaurant 
where customers dress in medieval costumes and partake in such traditions as 
gnawing cooked leg of oxen while watching simulated jousting between simulated 
knights. 
"I put on a damn crown and rooted for the blue section and no one even came up 
to me for an autograph," Everett said. "I was sitting there with this goofy 
crown on, starting every chant possible and having a ball with my friends. 
There were kids everywhere, and not a single person asked me for an autograph. 
I don't know if it was because the crown was so ugly that no one recognized me 
or what. But it was really fun." 
After a few years in Irvine, Eric Dickerson fled for Malibu to get closer to 
the action. 
For Everett, that night in Buena Park was action. 
"I'm not this person you're going to see parachuting out of a plane," Everett 
says. 
Everett has a very private side, to which you're not invited, but it's not the 
stuff of newspaper tabloids. Years of investigation into Everett's life might 
lead you to an uneventful conclusion: He seems like a nice guy. 
"If a reporter said he wanted to spend seven days a week with me, every minute, 
I'd say 'No way,' " he said. "I ain't that exciting for one, and two, it's just 
not going to happen." 
Everett embodies the qualities of suburban life style. He's as noncontroversial 
as the weather. 
If Orange County seems an endless string of tract homes, malls and fripperies, 
then Everett is frozen yogurt. Like Gertrude Stein, you sometimes wonder if 
there's a there there. 
The public Everett is patient, kind, courteous, ever-smiling. He is a native of 
Albuquerque, the son of educators. His father, James, teaches special education 
at the University of New Mexico. His mother, Bonnie, teaches at the elementary 
level. 
Everett brought home a bad report card -- once. 
"They really didn't have to say anything," he said. "They just looked at me." 
And that was that. Everett pressed on and became a member of the National Honor 
Society, and later, All-Academic Big Ten at Purdue. 
The public Everett has poured time and energy into the community, recently 
establishing the Jim Everett Foundation in Orange County. He's paying more than 
lip-service to charity, taking hands-on responsibilities for all the 
foundation's projects. His charities raised nearly $120,000 last year, most of 
the mony going to Drug Use is Life Abuse. Next up is a canned-food drive for 
the homeless. 
"This is a genuinely nice man," Ram Coach John Robinson said. "I think he's 
going to live his life and do a lot of good things. 
The public Everett has the gift of saying things without saying much at all. 
"I'm as thin as a blade," he says proudly. 
Blade, in fact, is Everett's nickname. 
The public Everett is calculatedly boring, so as to not divert attention away 
from the field. 
"I don't want to be remembered as 'Hey, that was the guy who wore the 
headband,' " he says. "Or that's the guy who said this about that guy. Or 
that's the guy who thinks we should bomb Iran. I have my opinions about that 
stuff. And if you ever want to get into them someday, I'll tell you my beliefs 
on religion and politics. But that's not what I want to be remembered for. I 
want to be remembered at some point as being the best quarterback the Rams have 
had. And that's a big step. It's something that won't come easy. We've had guys 
like Waterfield and Gabriel." 
In one of his parting shots, Dickerson called Everett an "organizational pimp," 
insisting he kowtowed to management's whims. Everett, naturally, had no 
comment. 
The private Everett recently purchased a sprawling, ranch-style home in rural 
Orange Park. He likes to hunt and fish and take long walks on the beach at 
night. He has a steady girlfriend, Kristina Beatty, whom he met while he was at 
Purdue and she at Indiana. Everett also is head-over-heels about a new golden 
retriever, Gunner, who doesn't yet follow a quarterback's orders as well as Ram 
teammates. 
The private Everett is not beyond telling a spicy joke, chewing tobacco and 
having a few beers with friends. But it's his mission in life to never become a 
news headline. He has never done drugs, he says, and when he does have a few 
too many beers, he makes sure there's a designated driver. 
A star quarterback can't afford to make a mistake. 
"No one can," he says, "Not in this day and age. It's the '90s and it's the 
wrong thing to do. And it's to me the wrong image to have." 
But Everett has an ego like any other pro quarterback. 
When coaches at Purdue tried to convert Everett to tight end, he refused. 
"I would not accept that," he said. "That to me was failure. Because I was a 
quarterback. I truly saw myself as a quarterback, and I wasn't going to let 
some so-called specialist tell me I wasn't. I wanted to prove myself to the 
point where someone said, 'We don't want you anymore.' I've always been 
determined. And when it's not football someday, I guarantee you it'll be 
something else." 
The private Everett also is driven by the opportunity to grow in the pass 
offense coordinated by coach Ernie Zampese. Last year, in only his second full 
season as an NFL starter, Everett established Ram records for passes attempted 
(517), passes completed (308), yardage gained (3,964), touchdown passes (31), 
and most touchdown passes in a game (five). 
Everett is consumed by football. He hangs out at Rams Park on his days off, 
making no apologies to those who think that makes Jim a dull boy. 
"You see a guy who works on Wall Street," he says. "He gets up in the morning, 
he eats, and he's already thinking about Wall Street and what he's going to do 
with his money. And he doesn't get home until six o'clock. I just happen to be 
putting all that into football." 
The private Everett lives for Sunday afternoons. 
"They always expect quarterbacks to be big risk-takers," he says. "My idea of 
living life on the edge is competing on Sunday. That brings me more thrill than 
anything I can do in life. I realize that's where it's at and that's what I 
concentrate on. I realize there are other things in life that just can't match 
that. I don't think a cocaine high, and I've never done drugs, can match that 
feeling on Sunday." 
It helped that Everett knew this was his team from the minute he arrived in a 
trade with Houston in 1986. At first, some thought he was a little too slick, 
too bubbly -- a guy who perhaps tried to press all the right buttons too fast. 
"When he came, he was a bit of a kid," Robinson said. "But he's maturing into a 
man now. I think he's a great, great guy for this team. I spent a lot of time 
trying to figure him out, to guide him. But I never felt he was headed in the 
wrong direction. I felt he might have been a degree off. When he first came, he 
was almost effervescent." 
So far, Everett has managed to bridge the distance between his star status and 
that of his teammates. But that becomes increasingly difficult as his star 
continues to rise. 
Everett enters the last year of a contract that pays $450,000 this season and, 
unlike so many of his teammates, finds himself with enormous negotiating 
leverage. The Rams must sign Everett before Feb. 1 or risk losing him to 
restricted free agency, at which time any team could sign Everett for two 
first-round draft choices -- a small price to pay for such a precious 
commodity. 
That won't happen, of course. The Rams will renegotiate his contract during the 
season, but on Everett's terms. And the going rate for top quarterbacks in the 
NFL these days is about $2 million per year. 
Everett hopes this doesn't cause a class struggle. 
"I'm not blind," he said. "If a guy happens to start a shirt company and makes 
millions, you hope he doesn't change. But sometimes he does. I don't want to. I 
think the values of what my parents taught me, being educators, helps. It's 
what you are that makes you. I'm the same old idiot that showed up here the 
first day and hopefully I'll be the same old idiot that leaves here when I go." 
But as Everett improves, new pressures await on the horizon. Word may travel 
slowly out of Orange County, but the football world is catching on. Everett is 
getting stopped in movie lines now and recently landed a bit part in a Bo 
Jackson commercial. 
"His face is starting to pop up on TV," Robinson said. "And if we go to the 
Super Bowl and win it he's a national figure. Sure, that affects you. That's 
why I think it's so important to be well grounded. Make no mistake, a person 
like Jim Everett or any of these people, they have very complicated lives. They 
almost seem to be as vulnerable as the rock musician or the entertainer seems 
to be. Their images and life styles seem to becoming almost similar. Therefore, 
there's more scary parts." 
For now, Everett clings to the present and awaits a promising and complicated 
future. 
KING OF THE HILL 
Philadelphia Eagles' Randall Cunningham has become NFL's most dangerous 
quarterback. Story, Page 8. 
