DISNEYLAND WORKERS RATIFY PACT GIVING FIRST RAISE IN 7 YEARS 
The Disneyland workers who do everything from operating rides to sweeping Main 
Street voted by a wide margin Saturday to accept the company's latest contract 
offer, which includes the first hourly pay increase for them in seven years. 
The vote was 886 "yes" to 493 "no," 64.2% of the total ballots, well above the 
51% needed to approve the new three-year contract. 
But the voting left reaction mixed among many of the workers. 
"The people who voted 'no' are mad and those who voted 'yes' were motivated by 
short-term profits," said Ross Jones, an eight-year employee who voted against 
the company proposal. "They paid more for the Muppets than they did for their 
own workers." 
But others were more satisfied. 
"This has gone above all that I expected," said Miles Ketchum, 20, who has been 
with Disneyland for two years. 
Union negotiators had urged the 2,400 Disneyland workers to approve the 
company's latest contract offer in speeches before the balloting in morning and 
evening sessions. 
Members of 5 Unions 
The employees are represented by a coalition of five unions and make up 30% of 
Disneyland's full-time, permanent staff of 8,000. Disneyland's offer included a 
5.5% pay increase for two 18-month periods in the three-year contract, said Tom 
Ramsay, a spokesman for Disneyland. 
For example, a senior ride operator now making $9.94 an hour would get an 
immediate raise to $10.48. A culinary worker now making $8.54 an hour would get 
$9. 
The contract also includes an additional 25-cent-an-hour increase for job 
foremen. 
In other concessions from the company: A provision allowing management to force 
workers to switch jobs was dropped. The company also agreed to drop a plan to 
cut back on health benefits. 
Five years ago, workers went on a 22-day strike that bruised an already 
volatile relationship with management. That action, which pitted strikers 
against employees who stayed on the job, was the longest strike in the park's 
history. 
Lump-Sum Bonuses 
In their previous contract, which expired midnight Thursday, workers had agreed 
to accept lump-sum bonuses instead of across-the-board pay increases. Once 
again, the pay increase became a key issue. 
By Friday morning, Disneyland negotiators had abandoned their initial offer of 
a 1.5% pay increase for each of the next three years. That proposal had been 
rejected by union representatives, Ramsay said. 
The result of the negotiations pleased many of the employees Saturday. 
"This is the best contract I've seen in a long time," said Michele Relation, 
who has been a Disneyland employee for 20 years. 
"The contract can do no wrong," said Margie Jones, who has worked at Disneyland 
for two years. 
"The pay increase definitely helps. I thought it was a wonderful contract," she 
added. 
Workers at Saturday's meeting said they had been worried about the possibility 
of a strike and had hoped that negotiations between their representatives and 
Disneyland would not sour. 
"It's been quite stressful. I kept hoping that they would just keep talking, 
and they did. This turned out to be quite fine. I think everybody is happy 
now," Relation said. 
The new contract also gives some part-time workers benefits that they had 
wanted, including holiday pay and health benefits. Previously, such workers 
were paid regular time during holidays and they were not included in health 
packages. 
Walt Disney Co., which owns Disneyland, marked record earnings for the year. 
