A TRIP FROM STARK TO CHIC TO EXOTIC; 
FROM BISTRO 201'S OUTSIDE TO ITS INSIDE TO ITS FOOD, DAVID WILHELM GOES UPSCALE 
WITH A VENGEANCE IN IRVINE 
When we last saw David Wilhelm, he was creating Southwestern oeuvres in his 
arty Laguna restaurant, Kachina. He's the chef who created the original Newport 
Beach version of what has turned into the El Torito G-R-I-L-L. Now he has gone 
quintessentially Orange County and opened a dazzler of a restaurant smack in 
the middle of an office complex. 
And what a complex: It's a maze, a grid of office buildings east of John Wayne 
Airport. You could even find Bistro 201, Wilhelm's hot new restaurant, and not 
know where you are. The restaurant sign is so small -- according to Irvine city 
regulations -- that you have to squint to see it. 
You walk up to a nondescript door that looks like the entrance to an ultra-chic 
office building. It's so quiet here you can almost hear the discreet hum of the 
air conditioner. 
When you pull on the heavy glass door, you have no clue as to the drama that is 
about to unfold. From the moment you stride past the zinc-topped bar -- all raw 
metal, blond wood and sharp, angular corners -- your evening is being 
orchestrated in a surprisingly clear pattern: from stark to chic to splendid. 
Just past the bar is the main dining room, a place of high ceilings and 
sculpted, inlaid walls. Soft Diva lights perch on wires above lush booths 
upholstered in raw silk; at the same time, 12-foot-high wooden slats suggest a 
Japanese temple. If you want, you can continue in a beeline to the more 
intimate patio, where a little forest of bamboo shields tables that are 
shadowed by giant canvas umbrellas. The place is positively overwhelming. 
So are the people who dine here. This is simply great people-watching 
territory, because Irvine makes such an unapologetic show of its affluence. 
Everyone is here to see and be seen, in formal evening wear and stunning 
designer fashions. At Bistro 201, the sideways glance becomes an art form. 
The food is even more avant-garde than the surroundings. Often Wilhelm's dishes 
are like a David Lynch movie: creative to the point of self-indulgence. They 
are so exotic you are surprised they're not served in tiny, precious portions a 
la nouvelle cuisine. The menu refers to appetizers as "small plates" and main 
dishes as "large plates" but the conceit is misleading -- all the portions here 
are huge, unqualifiedly huge. 
In another unusual turn of affairs, the first course is actually the least 
satisfying. Grilled shrimp on creamy polenta with roasted peppers has a 
Southwestern flair that Wilhelm knows all about: The shrimp are slightly 
blackened and served on a bed of creamy, bright yellow polenta, while the 
peppers are pureed to a verdant green and a red salsa is drizzled on top. But 
you don't eat color. The shrimp is bland and the polenta is apt to be mushy. 
Other appetizers have unexpected problems too. Cold smoked filet of beef, 
served in attractive rounds with an onion marmalade, has an unpleasant cutting 
flavor; perhaps the hardwoods used in the smoking process need to be 
reevaluated. Lobster cakes with basil sauce and corn relish sound absolutely 
irresistible, but the aromatic flavor of the basil mutes the taste of the 
lobster, and the corn relish has a sharp flavor, as if slightly fermented. 
You're better off trying the more straightforward appetizers. Forest mushrooms 
and hickory smoked ham in brioche is delicious (despite the apparent absence of 
any ham). The mushrooms come in an intense cream sauce that you will long for 
more of. Caesar salad with herbed croutons is the strong-and-not-so-silent 
type, with a wonderful bite and a fresh crispness to its greens, mostly romaine 
lettuce. The steamed clams with leeks, garlic and mashed potatoes are fine too; 
the lumpy mashed potatoes are the very best thing this restaurant serves. And I 
should mention the complimentary tapenade, a rich suspension like an aioli with 
olives mixed in. It's impossible to stop eating. 
The main courses are pretty consistent, ranging from the mundane (bistro burger 
-- the only thing even remotely bistro-like about this place) to the bizarre 
(grilled swordfish with pesto and apricot relish). Muscovy duck with Michigan 
sun-dried sour cherry sauce is a solid choice. The duck is tender and gamy, 
charred black around the edges for extra complexity, and the sauce works like a 
charm. 
Something the restaurant calls rustic noodles are a pleasant surprise: eggless 
noodles shaped like pappardelle (flat, wide and wavy), crisped up in a pan and 
served with smoked chicken, mushrooms and herbs. Best of all is one of the most 
nearly traditional things Wilhelm serves, roast pork served on apples with a 
green peppercorn sauce. 
Do try the summer vegetable plate, a symphonically orchestrated platter of up 
to 12 wonderful baby vegetables from the Chino Ranch. You can expect squash 
blossoms, fennel, an excellent potato gratin among them. However, do not try 
things with fruit butters, relishes or sauces that sound too weird to be true. 
Dessert is the best course of all. There are, among other things, a masterful 
souffle made from Belgian chocolate that explodes with chocolatey richness in 
your mouth and a sumptuous apple and blackberry cobbler with homemade vanilla 
ice cream. The star is raspberry brioche bread pudding, a feathery-light 
concoction whose taste belies its sinfully rich composition. Better still is 
the cappuccino, one of the best cups of coffee I have ever tasted. 
As you walk out, pick up one of the restaurant's spiffy Rolodex business cards. 
The fax number is printed neatly on the bottom. That'll make it easy for you to 
reserve a table directly from the office. 
Have the restaurant fax you some directions while you're at it. 
Bistro 201 
18201 Von Karman Ave., Irvine, (714) 553-9201. 
Lunch 11:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday-Friday; dinner 5:30-10 p.m. Sunday-Thursday, 
5:30-11 p.m. Friday-Saturday. Full bar. Valet parking only. All major cards. 
Dinner for two, food only, $50-$75. 
Recommended dishes: Caesar salad with herbed croutons, $5.50; summer vegetable 
plate, $12; roast pork on apples with green peppercorn sauce, $14.50; raspberry 
brioche bread pudding, $4.95; cappuccino, $3.50. 
