NO SUSPENSION FROM USD; 
PUNISHMENT METED OUT TO CROSS-BURNING FRATERNITY 
A series of punishments short of suspension have been meted out to the 
University of San Diego fraternity whose members burned a cross at Torrey Pines 
State Reserve the night of May 20, it was announced Thursday. 
The 80-member Theta Lambda chapter was placed on three years' probation, and 
its members will be required to perform 25 hours of community service, attend 
workshops on racial and cultural biases, and remind new members at initial 
meetings each semester of the incident and "how appalling and offensive the 
cross burning was to the university and the San Diego community." 
Thomas F. Burke, USD vice president and dean of students, said Thursday that he 
decided not to suspend the fraternity because "USD is a powerful institution 
and education is a powerful antidote to the kind of ignorance displayed last 
May." 
A dozen fraternity members and 17 pledges were caught by a state park ranger as 
they were planting and lighting a wooden cross on an isolated bluff as part of 
an initiation ritual. One student, Jeffrey Schizas, 21, is scheduled to appear 
in Municipal Court on Wednesday on a misdemeanor charge of starting a fire in 
an area of the park where burning is prohibited. The area contains rare Torrey 
Pines trees. 
Schizas signed a written statement on the night of the incident describing the 
ritual as based on a vision seen by the Roman emperor Constantine. The 
fraternity's emblem incorporates a cross. 
Members told police at the time that the initiates make a list of their faults, 
then burn the list in the fire of the cross as a symbolic way of cleansing 
themselves for membership. The fraternity later apologized for carelessness in 
starting a fire in the nature reserve, but said it did not mean to link the 
cross burning to racial or cult activities. 
But Burke said the cross burning "violated the educational mission of the 
university and brought embarrassment, scorn and ridicule to all members of our 
community. . . . 
"We asked the question, 'How could committed young men participate in an 
activity so offensive to their fellow human beings?' As a Catholic university 
that stands for the dignity of all, we were further appalled," Burke said. 
He said that, by keeping the fraternity members "here on campus, with their 
nose to the grindstone for the next three years, we will be able to expose them 
to sensitivity workshops and other educational vehicles that will combat such 
insensitive behavior." 
USD officials said Thursday that the discipline will stand regardless of the 
legal outcome against Schizas. They said the fraternity members have told them 
they will adhere to the sanctions. 
During probation, "any violation of the student code or illegal activity will 
result in immediate suspension of the chapter," Burke said. 
