PARSIMONIOUS REPUBLICAN PROGRAMS MAY SPUR DOUBTS ABOUT PARTY PRIORITIES 
The Bush Administration's calculated decision to meet three of America's 
greatest problems -- education, crime and drug use -- with spending commitments 
worthy of Ebenezer Scrooge may be the start of the new political wars of the 
1990s. Democrats and Republicans must now move on to the central debate: Are 
America's social dilemmas largely the result of liberal sociology and its 
erosion of personal responsibility, or have skinflint conservative economics 
taken over blame? 
Although the GOP starts with the edge, there are too many valid points on both 
sides for an easy victory. Just as the Democrats won't easily break free of 
their permissive, spendthrift past, it's hard to see the GOP ducking its image 
of being more interested in low millionaire tax brackets than child poverty. 
And it's also tricky for Republicans to credibly demand "reform" after two 
decades of White House control. 
Yet the stakes could hardly be higher. By 1992, if voters still perceive 
liberal sociology as America's cultural weakness, and demand toughness and 
tradition as the remedy, the continuing crisis will be tantamount to "Reelect 
George Bush" advertising. However, if the public decides that streets are 
unsafe and children's opportunities are collapsing because the Republican 
Administration won't raise taxes that might interfere with Palm Beach yacht 
owners or Wall Street megadealers, then the nation's plight will become a 
Democratic call to arms. 
Recent history is with the Republicans, however -- because refusal to commit 
more than modest new program funds in education, crime and drug abuse extends a 
proved GOP fiscal and electoral strategy. Toughness and values -- an end to 
permissiveness, a return to basics in education, plus harsher sentences and 
penalties -- have been carrying the day politically since the rise of Ronald 
Reagan, George C. Wallace and Richard M. Nixon in 1966-68. Voters have 
repeatedly responded to the conservative case. Weekend furloughs for 
first-degree murderers and marijuana legalization proposals -- all liberal 
conceptual flaws and political embarrassments -- still nurture skepticism of 
liberalism's capacity for hard-boiled cultural solutions. 
Republicans, then, not only have good reasons to oppose spending as a solution 
-- better to keep values and toughness pre-eminent -- but they also have 
Machiavellian reasons not to worry about the need for success. On the contrary, 
the greater the decay of education or breakdown of society or fear of drugs, 
the more likely the electorate is to embrace conservative arguments for 
additional authority to impose traditional values -- and then some. 
Earlier this month, for example, Ira Glasser, executive director of the 
American Civil Liberties Union, attacked Bush's just-released drug program as 
"a joke -- a hoax on the public," in part because of "its utter disregard for 
the ever-worsening conditions in our nation's inner cities." Yet within a few 
days, opinion polls began showing the public's very different assessment: White 
House proposals didn't crack down hard enough. Huge majorities favored quick 
searches and other new police measures -- one poll even found a 62% majority 
saying they would give up "a few of the freedoms we have in this country" to 
reduce drug use. If anything, the GOP's political ability to scoff at the ACLU 
is even greater now, with this intensified public drug concern, than during the 
1988 presidential campaign. 
Another great irony is also relevant -- the contrast between abstract public 
support for higher federal outlays to deal with problems ranging from education 
and housing to health and drug use, and the electorate's simultaneous 
skepticism of Democratic proposals for doing exactly this. Not only has a 
20-year reputation for wasting taxpayers' money, coupled with naive sociology, 
given liberalism a profound credibility problem, but it has also armored 
Republicans against Democratic attacks on the GOP's reluctance to spend. 
These perceptions, however, may be about to change. Despite their reputation, 
Democrats haven't been all that spend-crazed recently, while high support for 
more spending in specific areas partly reflects the public's awareness of how 
much federal "human resources" outlays have been curbed during the 1980s. 
Moreover, programs for the low-income groups prominent in today's depressing 
crime, education and drug-abuse statistics have been notable casualties. 
Yet the larger change would lie less in new public affection for the Democrats 
-- or new middle-class empathy with the underprivileged -- than in three 
growing doubts about GOP economic priorities. 
First, by the time Bush's term is up in January, 1993, the Republicans will 
have held the White House for 20 of the last 24 years. Because problems with 
education, crime and drugs have intensified during this period, one can wonder 
how much longer voters will let Republicans blame liberal "values" or softness. 
Besides, the economic polarization of the 1980s, with a 3%-5% of national 
income shifting from the bottom half of Americans to the top 1%, has become a 
factor in the lower groups' disarray. 
Second, GOP refusal to propose significant new outlays in response to such 
problems as crime, drugs and education -- new spending in Bush's 1989 education 
program is less than Michael Milken's bail bond -- is as much a matter of 
economic priorities as values. Camouflaging chintziness with values, after all, 
not only puts the Democrats on the cultural defensive, but gives the 
Republicans a philosophic framework for maintaining emphasis on the 
marketplace, a minimal role for government, low taxes on the wealthy and the 
resultant capital formation and investment. This priority may have been correct 
back in 1980, when incentive economics were still missing in Washington, but it 
may be less valid today. 
And third, the GOP's insistence on keeping low tax brackets rather than raising 
money to deal with acknowledged national problems has an upper-income bias that 
class-conscious Democratic politicians seem to be fingering with mounting 
enthusiasm. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York said recently, "It doesn't take a 
genius, just a school parent or someone who lives in an unsafe neighborhood, to 
realize that billions of dollars that might be used for falling bridges and the 
drug war will end up in minks and Jaguars when the top rate drops to 28%." 
Similarly, it doesn't take a genius to figure out that more Democratic 
politicians are going to be talking about the GOP's refusal to spend money on 
crime, drug control and education so they can keep the under-taxed rich in 
penthouses and private schools. Where Cuomo trod carefully, others will tread 
demagogically. 
This, then, is where the battle over solving national crises with unfunded 
government must lead -- into what could be the decisive political and 
philosophic fight of the early '90s. If conservative cultural macho and 
Scrooge-like fiscal policy are no longer the answer, America's political mood 
could change. But if today's mood continues, then officers of the ACLU may want 
to check their passports. 
