CHAUMP IS DETERMINED TO REVIVE NAVY 
Taking a brief break from his task of reviving Navy football -- a chore he has 
devoted most of his energy to the past seven months -- Coach George Chaump 
recently reflected on life at Marshall University. 
"Every place I'd go in Huntington (W.Va.), I was known," said Chaump, who 
coached the Thundering Herd for four years before taking the Navy job. "No one 
asked me how to spell my name. Nobody asked for verification to cash a check. 
No one questioned anything. 
"People there had what they called 'Green Fever' -- they bled green. Football 
there was big." 
Here, Chaump shouldn't have to worry about being approached by strangers who 
bleed Navy blue blood. Navy football, to some, is about as big as curling. 
None of which phases Chaump. Hired to revive a struggling program, Chaump said 
he realizes that winning is the only way he'll get a following. And he plans to 
win now, not later, starting with the season opener on Sept. 8 against 
Richmond. 
"I'm not talking about rebuilding. We're going to go on from here," said 
Chaump, sitting in his office, which is virtually unchanged from the days of 
his predecessor, Elliot Uzelac. "And I don't plan on having a losing season. I 
don't care how bad things are." 
"Bad" for Navy has meant seven straight years of losing football, with the best 
record in that span 4-6-1 in 1984. Enter Chaump, who has had one losing season 
in eight years of college coaching (57-32-2) and has a reputation for winning 
with a crowd-pleasing style. 
"I just have one piece of advice for Navy fans -- they better be in their seats 
before the game starts," said Mike Carey, president of Marshall's Quarterback 
Club. "George has an exciting brand of football. And he always does something 
exciting on the first play." 
The Navy brass is waiting for the excitement to start. 
"He and his staff are doing an excellent job," said Jack Lengyel, Navy's 
athletic director. "I'm very impressed with what I've seen. Morale is high, and 
everyone is looking forward to the start of the season." 
Tempering the excitement are everyone except, surprisingly, Chaump. At the 
start of fall camp, Chaump and his assistants were looking forward to whipping 
the team into shape for the opener. But since then injuries that have sidelined 
several projected starters. Offensive tackle Michael Davis (knee problems) and 
tailback Ivan Bullard (pulled stomach muscle) are out for four weeks, offensive 
guard Carl Voss (back surgery) will miss the season, and linebacker Beau Laskey 
(shoulder problems) is out indefinitely. Those injuries, and others, have 
quelled some of that exuberance Chaump felt. 
"After spring ball, I was hoping to get some offensive linemen back, but with 
losing two starters and being thin to begin with, I'm a little concerned," said 
the soft-spoken Chaump, an exasperated look on his face. "We need more time. I 
dread the thought of playing Virginia (Sept. 15) so early in the football 
season. If you want my opinion, the home opener is coming too soon." 
And when would he like to open? 
"How about December?" he said, laughing. "We don't have too much depth, and 
with the injuries, it's slowing us down. I never considered this many problems 
with injuries. It's just a bad rash at a time we need players in practice to 
learn the system." 
Chaump's system probably played a big part in his getting the Navy job. He 
favors a high-powered offense -- i.e. "passing" -- that should pull fans out of 
the doldrums they sank in watching the "run, run, run" which should please fans 
more than the running game that eventually ran Uzelac out of Annapolis. 
The players, apparently, also were in a funk. Looking back at spring practice, 
Chaump remembers a team that was "floundering and grasping" and lacking "a 
sense of unity." Now, he says, that has changed. 
"Seven years without a winning record, you're going to flounder, you're going 
to grasp, you're going to doubt," Chaump said. "But by the end, I sensed there 
was the development of pride, team unity, emotion and excitement. The team 
started believing in themselves, and believing in their teammates. They seemed 
very, very confident." 
Just like their ever-confident coach, who said his passing attack will work 
even though similar schools -- Army, Air Force and The Citadel -- use the 
run-oriented wishbone because of their inability to attract top-notch 
quarterbacks or big offensive linemen. 
"I've heard all the arguments, in addition to the fact that the wishbone is a 
ball-control offense that controls the clock, which keeps your defense off the 
field," Chaump said. "I think there's truth to all of this, but I don't 
necessarily buy it. If I didn't think we could win with the more wide-open 
attack, I certainly wouldn't have gone with it." 
There's no arguing with Chaump's success. In his first head coaching job, John 
Harris High School in Harrisburg, Pa., went 58-4 in six years, including four 
unbeaten seasons. He next spent 11 years as quarterback coach at Ohio State 
under Woody Hayes, coaching such players as Cornelius Green and Art Schlichter. 
Ohio State went 95-15-3 while Chaump was there. 
After that came the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the National Football League, where 
Chaump coached the offensive backfield -- including quarterback Doug Williams 
-- for three seasons under John McKay, when the team won its only two NFC 
Central Division titles. 
Chaump became a college head coach in 1982, leading Indiana (Pa.) University to 
a 24-16-1 record in four years. At Marshall, his four-year record was 33-16-1, 
including a berth in the 1987 Division I-AA final. 
With a record of winning at all levels (Indiana went 4-6 his first year, his 
only losing season), Chaump said he doesn't see why he can't win in Division 
I-A with Navy. 
"I have a better feeling here then I had anywhere else, based on what I've seen 
the kids can do," Chaump said. "But there's a Catch-22 there because we play 
tougher people. But that's irrelevant. 
"As far as differences in my approach to coaching, I've coached all levels -- 
even my daughter's softball teams -- and the drive to win is just about the 
same. There's no difference in the way I coach. When we played a championship 
game in girls softball, I had the same sleepless night and nervous morning 
before the game as I have now." 
Although Navy hasn't had a winning season since 1982 -- and has had just six in 
the past 22 -- Chaump said he feels no pressure from Navy backers. 
"The only pressure I feel is pressure I put on myself to prove we can win," 
Chaump said. "I get the feeling the people here just want a class operation. 
And even though they'd like to win, if things are going well and the football 
is entertaining and they could be proud of their team, they'd be happy. 
"But I don't feel that way. I want to go out and win. I want to be a football 
team that's respected, a football team that's a class act. I think if we take 
care of those things, the wins will take care of themselves." 
With winning comes support. Chaump is hoping that enthusiasm at Navy will soon 
rival that at Marshall. 
"After losing for so long, it's almost like it's in a dormant state here," 
Chaump said. "Even the people who have a strong feeling for the Navy, they have 
been turned off because of losing. 
"What we want to do is get the brigade excited about football. Then we'll try 
to get local interest, statewide interest, and then get Navy recognized on a 
national level. This year, we hope to get the brigade excited, and if we go any 
farther, it'll be a plus. It's going to take some time, but we plan to do it." 
