SEX-LINKED DISEASES; 
YOUNG, POOR SUFFER SILENT EPIDEMIC 
Health workers were the first to see it coming. They sensed it on the street 
corners where prostitutes loitered. Behavior was changing. Prostitutes were no 
longer bothering with motels. They were out on the curb hailing tricks, working 
hastily out of cars. 
People coming into the sexually transmitted disease clinics could not remember 
their partners. More and more seemed to be out of work or using drugs. Despite 
warnings about AIDS, health workers sensed a desperate recklessness afoot -- 
brought on by upsurges in cocaine, poverty and social decay. 
"You know it's a matter of time until you see the statistics," recalled Sibyl 
Howard, a public health nurse with Los Angeles County. "When you're out in the 
field and you sense people's despair, you can say, 'Look, this is what's 
happening.' " 
'Silent Epidemic' 
What Howard intuited during those years in the mid-1980s is now an alarming 
national fact. There is a "silent epidemic" of sexually transmitted diseases. 
They are spreading rapidly with no sign of a slowdown. And they are falling 
hardest on the young and the poor. 
About 12 million Americans will develop sexually transmitted diseases this 
year. Eighty-five percent will be under age 30. As many as 100,000 women will 
become infertile as a result of infections. Thousands of babies will be born 
infected. 
Organisms barely heard of 10 years ago appear to be rampant. More than 20 
viruses and bacteria are now known to be spread by sex. Meanwhile, many 
inner-city neighborhoods have become permeated with syphilis, a disease long 
thought a thing of the past. 
"It is increasingly apparent that the cities of North America are more and more 
resembling the cities of developing countries," Dr. King K. Holmes, a prominent 
researcher of sexually transmitted diseases, said in a talk at the 
international conference on AIDS earlier this year. 
By contrast, cases of sexually transmitted disease in Orange County have been 
decreasing steadily, public health officials said. For instance, gonorrhea 
cases totaled 5,845 in 1986 but had dropped to 2,873 two years later, declining 
from a rate of 266.5 cases per 100,000 people in 1986 to a rate of 127.1 per 
100,000 by 1988. 
Because of the AIDS epidemic, "a fair number of people have changed their 
choices of sexual behavior, reducing the risk of getting AIDS, Hepatitis B, 
syphilis and gonorrhea," said county epidemiologist Thomas J. Prendergast. 
"Where that has ceased to happen -- in Los Angeles where the numbers are going 
back up -- they're having a problem with 'crack houses,' with people trading 
sex for drugs. So far we haven't seen that phenomenon in Orange County," 
Prendergast said. "We have not seen a syphilis cluster around a crack house. . 
. . I'm not saying it couldn't happen." 
Powering the grim statistics are a mix of forces, the most notorious of which 
is the spread of crack cocaine, the uncommonly addictive drug that has spawned 
a life style centered on swapping sex for drugs, inadvertently spreading 
disease. 
Many inner-city heterosexuals have not learned the safe sex message of the AIDS 
era. In addition, urban and suburban teen-agers are having sex earlier and more 
often. Many use no protection, despite the spreading epidemic among their age 
group. 
Meanwhile, resources for controlling sexually transmitted diseases, other than 
AIDS, have remained flat or declined. Many public clinics have had to cut their 
hours. New diseases have outsmarted old disease-control tactics. Research 
funding has barely grown. 
The result has been a scourge of suffering borne disproportionately by women 
and children. Many of the diseases are linked to other conditions, including 
cervical cancer, and some carry with them the risk of birth defects and brain 
damage for babies born infected. 
What's more, some sexually transmitted diseases now entail an added danger. 
They appear to increase one's risk of AIDS, either by causing sores through 
which the AIDS virus can be transmitted or, some researchers suspect, by 
accelerating the course of the fatal syndrome. 
"The last thing we can allow to happen today is continued spread of those STDs 
which have been implicated as risk factors for sexual transmission of the 
(AIDS) virus," Holmes said. " . . . We must put control of these diseases back 
on the public health agenda." 
A quarter of a century ago, there were for the most part just two well-known 
venereal diseases: syphilis and gonorrhea. Now, new diagnostic techniques have 
made it possible to identify and characterize more than 20 organisms spread 
through sex. 
Among them are chlamydia trachomatis, a cause of a painful inflammation of the 
urethra; incurable viruses like herpes, hepatitis B and human papilloma; the 
bacterium that causes genital ulcers, once rare in the United States, and 
various fungi and protozoa. 
The numbers, being accumulated by federal agencies and researchers, are 
stunning: 
* Chlamydia infection, barely known a decade ago, has become the most common 
bacterial infection in the United States. There are as many as 4 million new 
cases a year. Up to 2 million new cases of gonorrhea occur annually, one 
quarter of them among teen-agers. 
* There are half a million new cases of genital herpes each year; 30 million 
Americans are believed to be affected by the often-painful, incurable disease. 
Studies suggest that the number of cases of chancroid, a rare bacterial 
infection, increased sevenfold between 1984 and 1988. 
* The number of doctor visits each year for treatment of genital warts has 
jumped more than sevenfold since 1966. An estimated 750,000 cases are diagnosed 
annually. The virus that causes warts, human papilloma virus, may also be 
linked to cervical cancer. 
* The largest leap in cases of infectious syphilis in a quarter century in the 
United States occurred in 1987. The number of babies reported to have been born 
with congenital syphilis, a potentially fatal condition, climbed from 150 in 
1983 to nearly 700 in 1988. 
"If you had asked me two years ago would the day ever come that you'd see 1,000 
cases of (infectious) syphilis in Connecticut," said Gordon Joachim, director 
of the state's sexually transmitted disease control program, "I would have bet 
my house that that would never happen." 
So far, the burden of disease appears to be spreading unevenly. 
Among whites, syphilis rates have dropped in this decade, thanks largely to 
safer sex among gay men. But among blacks, the incidence of the disease has 
jumped sharply since 1985. Among black women, the rate is now 50 times higher 
than among white women. 
Gonorrhea peaked in the United States in 1975. Among whites, it has declined 
steadily since. But among blacks, the decline reversed itself in 1985, and by 
last year the reported incidence among black women was 21 times higher than 
among whites. 
Similar patterns appear to be occurring with chancroid and a vaginal infection, 
trichomoniasis, according to Holmes. Like syphilis and gonorrhea, those are 
among the more easily detectable and treatable of the sexually transmitted 
diseases. 
Some viruses, on the other hand, such as herpes and human papilloma viruses, 
appear to be moving quickly among whites and the middle class. They are 
currently incurable, though their symptoms can be treated. 
Holmes, a professor of medicine at the University of Washington, traces the 
growing concentration of disease in the inner cities to several factors -- from 
economic and demographic shifts to drug abuse and the growing pinch in 
resources devoted to public health. 
Black and Latino populations are growing faster than the white. Meanwhile, 
poverty is increasingly concentrated in certain pockets of the United States. 
More and more blacks and Latinos find themselves living in those communities, 
plagued by abuse of drugs like crack. 
At the same time, funding for public clinics and other health services catering 
to those communities has failed to keep up with the workload. Health care 
resources have shifted steadily away from the public to the private sector, 
Holmes and others contend. 
"I attribute the increase in syphilis to two things, one of which is drug use," 
said Dr. Robert Rolfs of the federal Centers for Disease Control. "The second 
reason is that in a number of areas . . . there's a real problem of access to 
STD care." 
Philadelphia was one of the first cities to see a dramatic increase in 
infectious syphilis. In 1985, there were just 317 reported cases. That number 
has leaped every year since, to 1,293 in 1988, a figure expected to nearly 
double this year. 
Reported gonorrhea cases also increased -- from 17,345 in 1985 to 22,976 in 
1988. The actual numbers may be higher since public health officials believe as 
many as 50% to 80% of all syphilis and gonorrhea cases go unreported. 
Support for Control Drops 
At the same time, city support for sexually transmitted disease control 
dropped. 
The sole public clinic for sexually transmitted disease screening and treatment 
in Philadelphia reduced its hours by 20% between 1986 and 1988. With clinic 
registration stopping earlier and earlier and more patients being turned away, 
patient visits dropped nearly 10%. 
"It's not a matter of demand," said Martin Goldberg, senior public health 
adviser with the city's Department of Public Health. " . . . It's a reflection 
of the limited number of hours. What increases is the number of patients turned 
away without service." 
There have been similar problems in Los Angeles County, where the infectious 
syphilis rate climbed from 1,558 in 1984 to 2,770 in 1986 to 4,198 in 1987. The 
syphilis incidence per 100,000 population in Los Angeles County was 55.6 in 
1988, nearly four times the national average. 
Part of the funding problem, officials say, is traceable indirectly to AIDS. 
Since the early 1980s, AIDS has dominated sexually transmitted disease control 
funding. Money for other diseases has remained virtually flat. Many health 
workers and researchers trained in sexually transmitted diseases have shifted 
to the fight against the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS. 
"I think that both in terms of financial resources and human resources, there 
is no question that the AIDS epidemic has been a mixed bag," said Dr. Judith 
Wasserheit of the federal National Institute on Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, which conducts sexually transmitted disease research. 
"There has been a real siphoning of funds from STD control to HIV-related 
work," said Wasserheit, chief of the sexually transmitted disease branch. "I 
think that is reflected as well in the availability of people to provide STD 
services." 
She emphasized that research funding has remained flat and has not been 
actually cut. 
Some physicians, too, have let down their guard. Routine screening for syphilis 
ceased in many places during the 1970s when it appeared to many to be no longer 
a threat. Now that it has resurfaced, some have responded slowly. Cases have 
gone undetected. 
For example, congenital syphilis can be prevented if diagnosed early in a 
woman's pregnancy; it can also be treated successfully if the newborn is 
tested. But pregnant women are going untested, despite laws requiring testing, 
and babies are going untreated. 
Not Tested in Prenatal Care 
A review by Los Angeles County health officials of the 75 reported cases of 
babies born with syphilis in 1988 turned up a disturbing fact. Some of the 
mothers had received prenatal care but appeared never to have been tested for 
syphilis. 
In 20 cases, the mothers had tested positive for syphilis. But the opportunity 
to cure the baby was missed at delivery. The babies, born without obvious 
symptoms, went untested or untreated, developing symptoms only after leaving 
the hospital. 
The county study also found two babies born symptomatic by mothers who had been 
treated improperly. They had been given erythromycin, an antibiotic that does 
not cross the placenta well and therefore cannot be counted on to cure syphilis 
in the fetus. 
"The management of syphilis is kind of a lost art," said Dr. Deborah Cohen, who 
headed the county study. " . . . I think there's still a lot of physicians that 
don't know what all the tests mean and how to interpret the lab results." 
The burden of the epidemic falls disproportionately on women and children. 
An estimated 1 million American women a year develop pelvic inflammatory 
disease when infections like chlamydia spread into the uterus and Fallopian 
tubes. According to federal statistics, most of the women are under age 25 and 
have not yet had children. 
The disease leaves them 10 times as likely as other women to experience a 
pregnancy occurring outside the uterus. The rate of so-called ectopic 
pregnancies per 1,000 reported pregnancies in the United States has nearly 
quadrupled since 1970. 
Pelvic inflammatory disease is also linked to infertility; one in four women 
with the disease lose their ability to conceive. Sexually transmitted diseases 
account for one-fifth of all cases of infertility, a condition affecting 2.4 
million married couples. 
Risk of Cervical Cancer 
Another possible risk for women may be cervical cancer, long suspected to be 
linked to sexually transmitted diseases -- in particular, several strains of 
human papilloma virus, the virus that causes genital warts. 
Infants face some of the gravest risks. 
Most organisms spread by sex can be passed on to a fetus, often with 
debilitating consequences. Congenital syphilis, for example, can result in 
fetal death, prematurity, blindness, neurological disease and abnormalities of 
soft tissue and bone. 
Exposure to herpes in the womb can in some cases result in growth retardation 
in the uterus and prematurity. And some babies exposed to human papilloma virus 
develop a potentially life-threatening obstruction of the upper airway. 
Only with screening and treatment can such cases be averted. 
One morning recently in the living room of a bungalow in South-Central Los 
Angeles down the street from the Little Flock Primitive and Greater Revelation 
Baptist churches, a 58-year-old woman sat, ankles folded, on a piano bench 
discussing her 14th child. 
Lula Chism raised 13 children of her own. At age 57, she was not expecting 
more. But when she went to visit her daughter and new granddaughter at Los 
Angeles County-USC Medical Center 16 months ago, the county sent the baby home 
with Chism. 
The baby had been born carrying the bacterium that causes syphilis. According 
to Chism, her daughter is a cocaine addict who had not sought prenatal care. 
The infant would probably recover, the nurses said, if Chism would ensure she 
got daily shots of penicillin. 
For 10 days, Chism took the child across town to a county clinic. The child is 
healthy and appears to have suffered no permanent harm. But Chism regrets 
bitterly that her grand-daughter's introduction to the world included those 
daily clinic visits. 
"It made me feel bad that it had gotten into my family," said Chism, who places 
the responsibility squarely with her daughter. " . . . If my daughter would 
take care of her body and be careful who she goes out with, it could have been 
avoided. 
"If I'd have had anything to do with it, she would have used birth control and 
not got pregnant to begin with. Maybe they get this cocaine and don't think 
about this sort of thing." 
