LITTLE PROGRESS AT MEETING TO UNIFY EUROPEAN CURRENCY; 
MONEY: FINANCE MINISTERS OF 12 EUROPEAN COMMUNITY NATIONS DISCUSS WAYS TO 
ACHIEVE MONETARY UNION. THEY ARE FAR FROM A CONSENSUS. 
Europe's finance ministers, stumbling on the path to economic unity, emerged 
Saturday from an all-day meeting as divided as ever on whether and how to 
transform the moneys of the 12 nations of the European Community into a single 
currency. 
British Chancellor of the Exchequer John Major said he won new sympathizers for 
his go-slow approach to monetary union. "Of the 12," Major said after the 
meeting, "nine in one form or another saw some merit in elements of our 
proposals." 
Karl Otto Pohl, director of the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, was asked 
whether the meeting advanced the cause of monetary union. "Not at all," he 
said. 
Italian Treasury Minister Guido Carli, as host to the session, claimed that 
"some progress has been made in identifying ways in which differences can be 
met." 
But he conceded that the 12 finance ministers were far from a consensus on all 
the delicate issues involved in abandoning such currencies as the British 
pound, the German mark and the French franc. 
EC President Jacques Delors proclaimed himself optimistic that European heads 
of state could advance the cause of monetary union when they meet in Rome in 
December. 
Delors is the author of a 1989 report urging movement toward a single European 
currency promptly after the 12 EC nations create a single market for goods and 
services as of Jan. 1, 1993. A single currency, in Delors' view, would bind the 
European economies more closely together and eliminate the cost of exchanging 
money from one currency to another as it crosses borders. 
Although France and some of Europe's smaller nations have signed on to the 
Delors formula, officials in Germany and, more particularly, Britain have 
balked. 
Pohl, less favorably disposed toward currency union than German Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl, has argued that Germany's vigilantly anti-inflationary monetary 
policy might fall victim to a common monetary policy for all of Europe. 
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has warned that to accept a common 
European currency would be to abandon an important aspect of national 
sovereignty. 
Earlier this year, Major launched an alternative proposal to establish not a 
single currency for all of Europe but a pan-European currency that could be 
used even as the existing 11 currencies (Belgium and Luxembourg share the 
Belgian franc) stayed in use. 
A single European currency cannot work, Major said after Saturday's meeting, 
unless all nations adopt matching economic policies. Although conceding that 
none of the other finance ministers supported the British position in full, he 
said many of them expressed support for elements of the plan. 
The 12 EC members range from the German juggernaut to the relatively weak 
economies of Greece and Portugal, and Major said the weaker nations would face 
massive unemployment and a collapse of asset values if they were yoked to the 
tight monetary policies that the larger European nations would demand. 
But Major insisted that the goal of a single currency is not dead. 
"All that has happened," he said, "is that people are coming upon some of the 
hard practicalities." 
