MEDELLIN DRUG TRAFFICKERS RESUME TERROR CAMPAIGN; 
COLOMBIA: THREE HOSTAGES ARE TAKEN TO BACK AMNESTY DEMANDS. THE GOVERNMENT 
DECLINES TO CONFIRM THAT THE NARCOTICS CARTEL IS RESPONSIBLE. 
The Colombian government refused Friday to acknowledge publicly what the local 
news media are calling a fact: Medellin drug traffickers have resumed their 
terrorist campaign by seizing at least three hostages. 
A statement sent to newspapers, radio and television stations late Thursday 
confirmed that traffickers had kidnaped two leading journalists and the sister 
of Colombia's ambassador to Italy. 
The statement said the hostages would be freed only when the government of 
President Cesar Gaviria agrees to grant drug traffickers amnesty. 
Justice Minister Jaime Giraldo Angel refused to discuss the demands at a Friday 
news conference. He said that the government had still not determined whether 
traffickers of the so-called Medellin cartel were behind the recent kidnapings. 
"I will not speculate on unverified reports of the cartel's responsibility," 
Giraldo told reporters. 
But a senior journalist at El Tiempo, Colombia's leading newspaper, said 
government officials had privately acknowledged the cartel's responsibility for 
Wednesday's kidnaping of the daily's managing editor, Francisco Santos. An 
armed band abducted Santos, the 28-year-old son of El Tiempo's publisher, 
Wednesday after forcing his car to the side of the road and killing his 
chauffeur. 
El Tiempo has reported that it received several calls from a man, identified as 
Carlos Jimenez, who represented the cartel. The caller said traffickers had 
kidnaped Santos and several other Colombians. 
"We have every reason to believe that the calls were authentic," the El Tiempo 
source said, while asking not to be identified. 
"The government has told us that it will not deal directly with the cartel to 
obtain the release of Francisco," the journalist said. "The Gaviria 
administration is moving very cautiously in order to avoid the accusation that 
it is negotiating with Pablo Escobar." 
Escobar is the cartel's leader, accused of masterminding terrorist attacks that 
have killed more than 500 people since August, 1989. 
Both the caller and the cartel statement said traffickers are also holding 
Diana Turbay de Uribe, the editor of a news magazine and daughter of former 
Colombian president Julio Cesar Turbay. Turbay de Uribe is missing along with 
five other journalists who had been working with her. Another Bogota newspaper, 
La Prensa, reported Friday that the cartel is planning to release the other 
five journalists, including a West German. 
In its statement, the cartel also claimed responsibility for Wednesday's 
kidnaping of Marina Montoya, the sister of Colombia's ambassador to Italy. 
Both the phone calls to El Tiempo and the cartel statement give further 
evidence that traffickers have ended a two-month-old cease-fire in their 
terrorist campaign. Traffickers said in July that they were suspending bombings 
and assassinations to show their desire for peace. 
The move was intended to pressure Gaviria, who took office Aug. 7, to call off 
the government's anti-drug crackdown, which began in 1989. As part of the 
campaign, Gaviria's predecessor, Virgilio Barco Vargas, had decreed new 
anti-drug measures, including the extradition of trafficking suspects to the 
United States. 
Gaviria pledged to maintain the pressure on the cartel, but he soon offered 
traffickers incentives for maintaining their truce and turning themselves in. A 
recent presidential order said that surrendering drug suspects would be tried 
at home rather than extradited to the United States. It also offered 
traffickers reduced prison sentences in exchange for their cooperation. 
Some analysts say the cartel, viewing Gaviria's peace overture as inadequate, 
decided to take hostages to force negotiations. 
"The Medellin cartel is obviously dissatisfied with the government's plan," 
said the El Tiempo journalist. "It wants much more than a promise of trial in 
Colombia, and it is willing to use terrorist tactics once again to achieve its 
goal." 
The source added that Gaviria's efforts to persuade traffickers to surrender 
had failed. He repeated what the Medellin cartel representative had told the 
paper, "None, absolutely none of us, will turn ourselves in." 
Gaviria has yet to acknowledge that the cartel is restarting its terrorist 
campaign. But the president said in a television interview broadcast Thursday 
that the government miight be willing to "revise the extradition mechanism" if 
traffickers refrain from carrying out new terrorist attacks. 
