STARS TURN OUT TO SUPPORT AIDS BENEFIT 
Madonna and a host of top-name stars turned out for AIDS Project Los Angeles' 
fourth annual Commitment to Life benefit Friday, a high-energy show at the 
Wiltern that took an audience of 2,400 through a night of emotional highs and 
lows. 
"We have to stop meeting like this," said actress Carol Kane at the beginning 
of the evening, adding, "but if we do meet again, let it be in joyous 
celebration of a cure." 
The audience heartily agreed. 
Madonna was one of four honorees, along with artist David Hockney, congressman 
Henry Waxman and British actor Ian McKellen, who were singled out for their 
contributions on different fronts to AIDS causes. APLA is an 8-year-old 
nonprofit organization that assists people with AIDS by offering services such 
as support and counseling groups, dental treatment, transportation services and 
education programs. 
Their awards were given intermittently throughout a two-hour show that featured 
the peroxided Madonna opening the show with "Vogue," performed in a Marie 
Antoinette costume (skirt occasionally lifted to reveal petticoats, naturally). 
Others on the bill included comedian Michael Colyar, singers Toni Childs, 
Melissa Etheridge, Sarah Brightman and Rod Stewart; Burt Bacharach and Herb 
Alpert performing a duet; violinist Joshua Bell; dance group Brat Pack; Jo Beth 
Williams reading Paul Monette poems, Bruce Davison and Alfre Woodard, and Sam 
Harris, Brenda Russell and the Diva Choir in a closing number. Vince Paterson 
directed the show, which was produced by Barry Krost, Bernie Taupin and Barry 
Josephson. The event raised approximately $1.15 million for APLA. 
Madonna came on stage in a pin-stripe suit with garter belts dangling to say, 
"I'm very honored to receive this award. In the back of my mind I feel that I 
don't really deserve it; in fact, I feel a little guilty. Because it's very 
easy to lend your name to a celebrity fund-raiser if you're famous, and it's 
very easy to donate money to AIDS research if you're rich. What isn't easy is 
changing the way people think. While the AIDS epidemic is wreaking havoc on 
this planet, it's also released a wave of homophobia that is truly frightening. 
. . . It takes a lot of courage these days to come out and say, 'I'm gay,' but 
it takes a . . . warrior to come out and say, 'I have AIDS.' 
"These are the people who deserve awards so much more than me. So to the 
handful of people that I have known and loved dearly who have died of AIDS, to 
the thousands I have heard about and to the millions I will never know, I share 
this award with you. You are my heroes." 
Ian McKellen said that publicly declaring himself gay "hasn't done my career 
any harm. I was actor of the year in London last year, I played John Profumo in 
the film 'Scandal,' and all that anybody knows about Profumo is that he's a 
raging heterosexual. It's lovely out of the closet. . . !" 
And Waxman reminded the audience: "It's important during this flood of sadness 
for us to keep clear memories of our friends and loved ones as they would want 
to be recalled. I also invite you to celebrate the people who have not died, 
the people with AIDS and HIV who have survived, who are thriving, and who may 
soon make this a disease that is beaten and is over." 
Among the celebrities who acted as presenters, ushers or who just showed up, 
were Don Johnson and Melanie Griffith, Tim Curry, Valerie Harper, Rob Lowe, 
James Woods, Marlee Matlin, Bette Midler, Anjelica Huston, Whoopi Goldberg, Jon 
Lovitz, Danny Glover, Corbin Bernsen, Dan Aykroyd, Lynn and Vanessa Redgrave, 
Sarah Jessica Parker, Robert Downey Jr., Richard Grieco, Meredith 
Baxter-Birney, Lainie Kazan, Jimmy Smits, Ricki Lake and Faith Ford. Chairing 
the event were Krost, Mark Canton and Harold Huttas. 
In five years, the very tenor of the Commitment to Life benefit has changed. 
Speeches are more impassioned as people recalled friends and lovers who are 
HIV-positive or who have died from complications of AIDS. 
On Friday night there were mentions of outing, of children dying of AIDS and of 
censorship, the last point brought home when photographs by the late, 
controversial photographer Robert Mapplethorpe were shown on stage. 
The great buzz of excitement during the show carried over into the post-party 
at the nearby Atlas Bar and Grill, where guests were squished up against each 
other in a true survival-of-the-fittest test. Whoever could breathe and get to 
the food definitely won. 
