THREE CHEERS: FIRST RACHEL CARSON AWARD GIVEN 
Irvine resident Suzanne Baker, a junior at Cal State Fullerton, was named the 
first recipient of the Rachel Carson Scholarship Award in Conservation Biology. 
Carson, the author of "Silent Spring," was one of the first to bring attention 
to the effects on the environment of the use of DDT, a toxic pesticide. Baker, 
a naturalist who cares for animals at the Tucker Wildlife Sanctuary in Modjeska 
Canyon, also acquaints the public with the canyon's wild habitats. 
Gail I. Roberts of San Juan Capistrano has been elected president of the 
Advertising Production Assn. of Orange County. Roberts is production/traffic 
manager for Stiller Advertising Inc. in Costa Mesa. 
Trudy Hawkins, 21, an Orange Coast College student and Tustin resident, has 
been named Grand Bethel Honored Queen of the International Order of Job's 
Daughters for California. 
The Tustin High graduate is a Past Honored Queen of Bethel No. 344 of Tustin. 
She plans to attend Cal State Long Beach and pursue a career in interior 
design. 
Dr. Sid Adler was named Ambassador of the Year, Andrea Manes was named winner 
of the Athens Award and Arnie Pike was named Small Business Person of the Year 
at the recent Anaheim Chamber of Commerce's 94th annual meeting and recognition 
dinner. 
Anaheim resident Debbie Krebs, the convention services manager for the Anaheim 
Marriott, was named Marriott National Convention Services Manager of the 
quarter. 
She was selected from a field of 140 candidates and will vie with three others 
for national manager of the year in the Marriott Hotels, Resorts and Suite 
competition. 
Krebs, who has a degree in human services from Cal State Fullerton, joined the 
Marriott staff in 1985. 
Dr. Sharon Kawai, the recipient of many awards from organizations that work 
with disabled people, has been selected to receive the 1990 Governor's Trophy 
from the California Governor's Committee for Employment of Disabled Persons. 
Kawai, the medical director of rehabilitation services at St. Jude Medical 
Center in Fullerton, was cited for her achievements in significantly increasing 
public awareness of people with disabilities. 
