JOHN WAYNE AIRPORT; 
SOUND ADVICE FOR EASIER AIR TRAVEL 
Jet-setting isn't easy. 
Travelers feel anxious about flying, frustrated over packing, worried about 
protecting valuables and stiff from sitting too long in uncomfortable airline 
seats. 
To prevent this, all they really need is sound advice. 
Easing Flying Fears 
If you have a fear of flying, you're not alone. A Gallup poll found that 48% of 
airline passengers are at least occasionally afraid while in the air, even 
though flying is roughly 35 times safer than driving in a car. 
People who have little flying experience or have claustrophobic reactions are 
candidates for flying anxiety, says Jerry Kasdorf, director of the PhobiaCare 
Treatment Center in Tustin. "Preparing for your flight as you would an 
important meeting can help you get a grip on your worst fears," says Kasdorf. 
If you're unfamiliar with flying, he recommends a visit to the airport, maybe 
even talking to a pilot. Familiarize yourself with the flight routine. (Kasdorf 
has his clients view a videotape that shows them what to expect). 
Anxiety intensifies if you think you won't be able to contain your panic. "Most 
people panic when the door closes," Kasdorf says. "They start thinking they're 
going to lose their mind or start screaming." 
You can't control the airplane, but you can concentrate on controlling your 
reactions. Accept the fact that planes encounter air turbulence about 10% of 
the time and your best bet is to wear a seat belt at all times and stay as 
comfortable as you can. 
Distract yourself before and during the flight by listening to relaxation 
tapes, performing simple exercises, reading or talking with the person seated 
next to you. Planning how you will spend your time in the air will give you a 
feeling of control. 
Often, Kasdorf says, people attribute their anxiety solely to the thought of 
flying, when other anxiety-producing factors may be contributing. "Anxiety is 
an accumulation of stress factors," he says. 
Minimize departure-day stress by packing early and allowing yourself plenty of 
time to arrive at the airport. 
The day before your trip, eat nutritious foods, such as fresh fruits, 
vegetables and whole grains, and avoid stimulants, such as alcohol, caffeine 
and sugar. 
One of the major sources of anxiety is caused by separation, Kasdorf says. If 
at all possible, travel with a companion. 
Finally, realize that you won't allay all your fears in one flight. Set a goal 
to improve each time you fly. 
Packing It All 
There's an art to reducing your travel kit to the smallest possible package. 
The key is to make each item do the work of three or four. 
Kitty Leslie, fashion director of the Fashion Island stores in Newport Beach, 
has to be well-dressed, "but I hate to take luggage." She developed a system 
for trimming her traveling wardrobe to a manageable size. 
Before the trip, Leslie hangs her initial choices on a rolling rack and begins 
to weed out unrealistic items. 
Comfort comes before style, especially with shoes. For outfits, she considers 
the wrinkle factor. Polyester may have a bad reputation, but it travels well, 
as does silk and lightweight wool. 
"Minimum shoes," Leslie says, "only one handbag, if possible, and neutral 
hosiery. One blouse works with two or three outfits. Resist the temptation to 
throw in another top at the last minute." 
Stack everything that goes with an outfit together and separate the layers with 
clear-plastic cleaning bags to prevent wrinkles. Pack shoes around the 
perimeter of the bag to keep clothes from shifting. Roll up belts and tuck them 
in the shoes. Reduce your travel gear to a single carry-on. 
Protecting Valuables 
While John Wayne Airport is no hotbed of crime, theft is reported every week. 
The most common crimes are "distraction thefts" of carry-on luggage, says Lt. 
Ken Lohrey of the Sheriff's Department's Airport Bureau. 
"Thieves use diversionary tactics such as asking for change or directions, or 
dropping coins on the floor, and when you play Mr. Nice Guy and help them, they 
split with your briefcase," Lohrey says. 
It's difficult to pick out thieves in the controlled chaos of the airport, 
Lohrey says, because they wear business attire to blend in with the crowds. 
Security agents look for people who are hanging around but who don't seem to be 
doing anything. Thieves step to the back of the line or hang around the snack 
bar and are overly observant of people's bags. 
If you put your carry-on on the floor, hold it between your feet so you'll know 
if someone tries to move it and don't ask anybody to watch it for you, Lohrey 
suggests. 
Occasionally luggage is stolen from the baggage carousel, but the thefts go 
mostly unreported because travelers think the airline lost it. Lohrey 
recommends picking up bags as soon as you get off the plane and checking ID 
tags so you don't accidently take off with look-alike luggage. 
In auto burglaries at the airport, sound systems are the most popular target, 
Lohrey says. Thieves break into cars that have valuables lying in plain sight, 
so preventing crime requires common sense: "Completely lock your car, roll the 
windows all the way up and keep valuables at home or in the trunk," says 
Lohrey. 
"Everybody is anxious and in a hurry when they're traveling, but they need to 
pay attention to what's going on around them." 
Exercising Out Aches 
Racing across continents and oceans is all well and good, but add fatigue, 
skewed meal schedules, changing time zones, a moistureless atmosphere in a 
cramped cabin and exertion from carrying overstuffed bags and the trip begins 
to take its toll on you mentally and physically. 
A program of limbering and aerobic exercises during and after long plane 
flights will quickly reduce most of the sluggishness felt from traveling, says 
Dr. Geoffrey Ricchio of Ricchio Chiropractic Rehabilitation Center in El Toro. 
While on the plane, walk as much as possible. There is often a clear space 
around the exits on larger planes where you can put your hands on your hips and 
gently twist to relax your back and leg muscles. Pull your knees to your chest 
while in your seat to stretch your legs and lower back. Roll your head gently 
to stretch your neck and shoulder muscles. 
When you reach your destination, allow exercise time in your day's itinerary. 
Studies show that vigorous exercise for 45 minutes to one hour during the day 
will help adjust your internal time clock (but working out before bed may wind 
you up). After exercising, take a hot shower. 
Take advantage of the exercise facilities in the hotel. If you're a 
weightlifter, go easy with less weight but more repetitions. Swimming reduces 
the effects of jet lag and muscle stiffness, and walking is the sport of 
serious travelers. 
If you develop a mild muscle pull or strain, apply a bag of ice to the ache, 
followed by a hot shower. Alternating heat and cold is the best home remedy for 
mild strains, Ricchio says. 
