STARS, STRIPES, HYPE; 
PATRIOTISM: LEONA HELMSLEY, FREE PENDING APPEAL OF HER CONVICTIONS FOR TAX 
EVASION, FRAUD AND CONSPIRACY, TAKES PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF SUPPORT FOR U.S. TROOPS 
TO MAGNIFICENT HEIGHTS. 
For billionaire hotel queen Leona M. Helmsley, the last three weeks have been a 
coming-out party of sorts. 
But the felon wants to make one thing clear: It was patriotism, not 
publicity-seeking, she says, that inspired her to sing "God Bless America" 
after having the Empire State Building decked out in red, white and blue on 
Aug. 29. 
It was a desire to influence the Iraqi tyrant, not the hope of spin-doctoring 
the appeal of her convictions for tax evasion, mail fraud and conspiracy that 
compelled her to buy a full-page "open letter to Saddam Hussein" in Monday's 
New York Times. (The general rate for such an ad is $44,453, a newspaper 
spokesman said.) 
It was her love of her country, she says, that prompted her Tuesday night to 
light up the Helmsley Building with a giant flag. 
"I did it," Helmsley says, leaning forward on her desk at the Helmsley Palace 
hotel, "because I am an American." 
She got the idea for her public displays of patriotism after hearing President 
Bush speak on the Kuwait crisis, she says: "I thought that the American public 
should get behind the President. . . . Those that don't like our flag and want 
to burn it, let them go home. Those that don't think our national anthem should 
be sung, let them go to another country. We have the most wonderful country in 
the world, and this is my way of showing it." 
Her letter reads in part: 
"Dear Mr. Hussein: 
"As your troops terrify innocent men, women and children; as your occupation 
forces loot Kuwaiti cities; as your security forces smash down the doors of 
apartments looking for foreigners to intern, you keep referring to these 
victims as 'guests.' 
"I know something about how one is supposed to treat guests, Mr. Hussein. I 
have been inviting guests from around the world into my hotels for 18 years.. . 
. In your bizarre world where detention centers have become hotels and hostages 
have become guests, I can make one recommendation that I have never made in all 
the years that I have been welcoming people: Mr. Hussein, it is time to check 
out. . . ." 
Helmsley says the assertion that the letter may be a bizarre bid to overcome 
her own image as a tyrant is "nonsense" and "ludicrous." 
She says she wrote the letter herself, then let her high-profile public 
relations firm and her lawyer read it. Neither suggested that such a letter 
might prove imprudent at this delicate moment in the judicial appeals process. 
"They thought it was a wonderful thing to do. Very patriotic. . . . They said, 
'How did you ever think of anything so wonderful?' 
"I can't conceive how anyone could think it's a publicity stunt," she says, her 
face, much scrutinized during the trial, growing taut, her right eye twitching. 
"I didn't create this stuff in the Middle East. How could it be a publicity 
stunt?" 
Rather, she says, her activities are intended to inspire Americans. "I hope 
people will put a flag in front of their house. I hope they will wear a flag on 
their clothes," she says, her hand adorned with a ring containing a pearl the 
size of a quail egg, gesturing to the four American flag pins on the lapel of 
her navy suit. 
Helmsley is convinced the public will rally behind her patriotic efforts, just 
as they have rallied, she says, behind her legal battles. 
During her trial and conviction last year in a U.S. District Court, for which 
she received a sentence of four years in prison, 750 hours of community service 
and a $7.1-million fine, the media dubbed Helmsley "The Queen of Mean," after 
former employees offered a litany of complaints about her imperious and 
cavalier management style. Quickly, the coverage itself became mean-spirited. 
"But I understand that," Helmsley says. "There was a gag order out. I was not 
permitted to speak to the media." With the gag order lifted, though, her public 
image has changed, she says. "The public has turned. They like me." 
To illustrate this national mood swing, Helmsley, 70, asked an aide to bring 
out folders containing some of the "thousands and thousands and thousands" of 
letters of support she has received -- a clear contrast to the hate mail her 
attorney produced at Helmsley's sentencing. A perusal shows encouragement from 
individuals, flooring companies, tropical fish companies and even an inmate at 
Lompoc, offering advice on how to fight tax charges. 
Many correspondents eventually get around to other matters: "We would like to 
obtain funds so we can open a pet shop," one wrote, for instance. But most 
express admiration for Helmsley and anger at the media for their portrayal of 
her. "The media, in order to generate class hate, has tried to convict you.. . 
. " a writer from Elmhurst, Ill., wrote. "All I can recall is Donnie Trump's 
statement, 'It couldn't happen to a nicer person. . . . ' Well, look at little 
Donnie now," another wrote. 
Before moving on to a live interview with a San Diego radio show, Helmsley 
takes a moment to point out music boxes she has given her ailing husband, Harry 
Helmsley, over the years. From a walnut shelf she removes a box with a drawing 
of King Kong atop the Empire State Building grasping a caricature of her 
husband, reputedly one of New York's wealthiest men and the owner of a 
controlling interest in the legendary skyscraper. Gently clasping her visitor's 
arm, she turns on the box and softly sings along: "I'm just wild about Harry, 
and Harry's wild about me." 
Later that evening, Helmsley arrives by limousine at a landscaped traffic 
island outside the Helmsley Building on Park Avenue and wades into the small 
crowd consisting mainly of staff members with American flag pins on their 
lapels, a platoon of public relations people, and the press. 
She shakes hands with employees, waves at passing motorists, busses a reporter 
who interviewed her for the November Playboy, and scratches the chin of his 
ribbon-bedecked cocker spaniel. 
Then, with a flourish, she steps up behind a podium. At her signal, 169 
employees behind curtains in the elegant building push plugs into sockets, and 
an American flag of red white and blue lights, 148 feet tall and 104 feet wide, 
emblazons the building. 
"God bless America!" Helmsley says over the honks of passing taxis. "God bless 
the hostages!" 
One of her employees watches the scene admiringly. "It's beautiful, isn't it," 
the woman says. "She's a real Yankee Doodle Dandy. She was born on the Fourth 
of July, you know." 
