COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT; 
WEEKDAY UPDATE; 
SAN DIEGO STATE; 
FOSTER GETS START AT INSIDE LINEBACKER 
The Aztecs will likely have a new look at inside linebacker Saturday against 
Cal State Long Beach when transfer Lou Foster makes his first start. Foster, a 
junior from DeAnza Community College (near San Jose), won the job in spring 
practice but pulled a hamstring in mid-August and didn't resume practicing 
until last week. Freshman Jamal Duff, who started at inside linebacker Saturday 
at Oregon, has a left quadricep contusion and a right-hand chip fracture and 
didn't practice Tuesday. 
"It sure looks like (Foster will start)," defensive coordinator Barry Lamb 
said. "Jamal was unable to go (Tuesday), and we don't know about (Wednesday). 
Really, the same thing happened to Lou before the Oregon game. He would have 
started had he been healthy." 
Trainer Brian Barry said Duff is day-to-day, and probable for Saturday's game. 
But if Duff doesn't practice today, he will have missed the two heavy workdays 
in the Aztecs' game preparation. 
Foster, meanwhile, said he is ready to go. 
"It's good to be back," he said. "It's been too long. I've got a lot of energy 
to take out on somebody. Long Beach is just the team to do it (against)." 
Just when you thought Cal State Long Beach Coach George Allen, 72, had seen 
everything, here is a new one: SDSU wide receiver Jimmy Raye III is the son of 
Jimmy Raye II, who played for Allen when Allen coached the Los Angeles Rams. 
"It's interesting to be playing against one of my former player's sons," Allen 
said. "I think that's the first time that's ever happened." Raye's reaction? 
"I've never met him," Raye said. "I've never even thought about my dad playing 
for George Allen before." . . . Allen on SDSU's promotion whereby fans get free 
pizza if the two teams' combined score Saturday is his age or higher: "They 
didn't have my permission to do that," he said, laughing. "I hope our defense 
is better than that." . . . Free safety Johnny Walker (groin) and defensive 
lineman Pio Sagapolutele (bruised knee) missed practice Tuesday. Neither injury 
is considered serious. . . . Injury report: Defensive lineman Steve Matuszewicz 
(ankle) is doubtful for Saturday's game, and defensive back Zac Stokes 
(shoulder) is out. SCOTT MILLER 
