STYLE: HARDLY CHANGING THE CHANEL 
Karen Rockwell and Sally Cain stood poised before the new Chanel boutique, 
waiting impatiently for the thick glass doors to swing open and admit the first 
customers. 
"Look at that great jacket -- oh, God," said Rockwell, peering through the 
glass. She had driven from her home in Rolling Hills Estates on Monday morning 
to see the new Chanel store in South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa. 
"We've been waiting a whole year for this," said Cain, a Huntington Beach 
resident. 
The opening of the Orange County store means that Chanel aficionados will no 
longer have to travel to the boutique on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills for those 
precious quilted handbags or silk-lined suits, the kind with gold chains sewn 
into the hems so they hang just so. 
"Every time we travel, we look for the closest Chanel," Cain said. "We've been 
to the boutiques in Paris, Monaco and Washington, D.C." 
The new boutique offers virtually everything found in those in Beverly Hills or 
Paris. 
Rockwell and Cain, who wore Chanel earrings and toted Chanel handbags for the 
occasion, were among the first to enter the gleaming interiors. 
Inside they found elegant mirrored walls with black lacquer trim that have been 
duplicated in Chanel boutiques worldwide. A pale apricot-colored carpet 
cushioned customers' feet, while spotlights shone down on them from above. 
Sales clerks, all impeccably dressed in their Chanel uniforms, stood behind the 
spotless glass counters. A hostess in a white apron brought out orange juice on 
a tray. 
Within minutes, 20 or so customers had fanned out among the high-gloss displays 
of artfully arranged merchandise and an occasional keg-size perfume bottle. One 
customer already inhabited a plush dressing room with walls covered in beige 
suede, while a saleswoman hurried in and out with wool jackets and cashmere 
sweaters. 
Rockwell, who quickly singled out a black satin hair bow to add to her Chanel 
accessories, said the new boutique compares favorably to others she has 
visited. 
"I love it," she said. "It's smaller than some, but it's a really well-stocked 
store." 
Some customers came not to shop but to ogle the boutique. 
"I was anxious to be here, to be one of the first ones in the store. I've 
studied the evolution of apparel and (Coco) Chanel has always been one of my 
favorite designers," said Bernadette Granados of Newport Beach, a graduate of a 
fashion design school who seemed content just to wander around the boutique. 
"I've followed Chanel's story -- she started out in hats," said Granados, who 
wore a broad-brimmed straw hat with gold trim and a red jacket and shorts 
ensemble. 
"Chanel has a clean look -- it will always be in style," she said. 
Many shoppers had never seen the inside of a Chanel boutique. 
"I've known the name Chanel forever," said Irma Alt, a 70-ish resident of Santa 
Ana. "I've never been in one of the stores. It's very classy, very 
rich-looking. Some of the styles don't appeal to someone my age, but they do 
have something for everyone." 
The boutique stocks a broad assortment of the entire Chanel collection, 
including the ready-to-wear collection designed by Karl Lagerfeld, an array of 
quilted leather handbags, long gold chains studded with faux pearls and gems, 
and Chanel's line of shoes, belts, watches and skin-care products. 
Chanel's fall line features velvet jackets in rich jewel tones such as purple 
and red with black velvet trim on the pockets and cuffs for $2,140, coupled 
with a short velvet skirt with a chain detail bordering the hem for $860. 
There's a red wool coat-style dress with a black velvet collar and 
gold buttons for $2,390, or a quilted silk parka with black satin trim and gold 
buttons, for about $2,800. 
Chanel suits start at about $2,000, yet even at those prices the competition 
for an especially hot style can be intense, attracting long waiting lists of 
buyers. 
The new boutique has 3,600 square feet of selling space, making it the third 
largest Chanel store. It's the 11th boutique in the country, and the first to 
be placed in a mall. 
"We've been looking for a second Southern California location for two or three 
years," said Barbara Cirkva, senior vice president of the fashion division for 
Chanel Inc. in New York City. 
"Because of Orange County's super development and growth, we thought this was 
the place we should be. The boutique works in this mall because South Coast 
Plaza is really a city in itself." 
To fit into the mall, designers had to create a single-story boutique. Other 
Chanel stores on the U.S. mainland have two or three stories. 
A few Chanel veterans said they missed the boutique's famous mirrored stairway. 
Copies of the stairway in the original Paris store on Rue Cambon have become a 
fixture of Chanel boutiques worldwide. 
Still, Chanel has never occupied such a huge space on one floor, according to 
Cirkva, and the new boutique lacks none of Chanel's distinctive style. 
"Once you walk in, you feel you're in that environment and look Chanel 
created," she said. 
