PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: HEAD LICE EASILY OVERCOME BY OVER-THE-COUNTER PREPARATIONS 
The first day of school was Christine's birthday. To make up for the 
disappointment, her mother promised she could invite her friends to sleep over. 
The slumber party was a big hit with everyone who attended, but one party favor 
that no one wanted went home with the other girls. Unknown to her mother, 
Amanda had lice and innocently shared her infestation with her friends. 
Lice infestation has nothing to do with cleanliness, social class, or age, 
although school children suffer far more often than adults. But even nursing 
home residents are vulnerable. Americans fight more than 10 million cases a 
year. 
Adult lice are about the size of a sesame seed. They suck blood roughly every 
three to four hours, injecting an anti-clotting chemical that causes intense 
itching. Eggs are firmly attached to the hair shaft close to the scalp and may 
be more easily seen than the insect itself. Eggs hatch in 7 to 10 days and the 
nymphs take two weeks longer to mature. 
Killing lice is easy. There are lots of effective over-the-counter lice 
shampoos from A-200 and R&amp;C to Rid and Triple-X. They all contain 
pyrethrins, a chemical insecticide derived from chrysanthemums. 
A new creme rinse, Nix, contains a related compound, permethrin. It used to be 
available only by prescription, but has recently been approved for 
over-the-counter use. 
Two other insecticidal products are available only by prescription. Kwell and 
Kwildane contain lindane, while Ovide contains malathion. These lotions are 
also effective at killing lice. 
The challenge is preventing reinfestation. None of the available products 
reliably kills every nit. Although malathion and permethrin are supposed to 
persist on the hair shaft and affect nymphs as they emerge, removing the nits 
is a wise public health precaution. 
This is not a simple task. Nits are "cemented" to hair and are difficult to 
remove even with a fine-toothed comb. A solution of half white vinegar and half 
rubbing alcohol may loosen the cement and make this task a little easier. 
Any clothing, pillowcases or sheets should be washed in hot water and dried at 
high temperature. Combs and brushes should be soaked in very hot water for at 
least 10 minutes. Stuffed animals, headphones and other items that cannot be 
washed, dry-cleaned or boiled should be isolated in plastic bags for at least 
two weeks. 
