12 EUROPEAN NATIONS WILL CLAMP DOWN ON IRAQI DIPLOMATS; 
SANCTIONS: SOME WILL BE EXPELLED, OTHERS CONFINED. MINISTERS FAIL TO AGREE ON 
AID FOR TURKEY, JORDAN, EGYPT. 
The foreign ministers of the 12 nations of the European Community agreed Monday 
to expel military personnel from the Iraqi embassies in their capitals and to 
limit the freedom of other Iraqi diplomats to travel within their borders. 
But the foreign ministers, in their second such joint effort, again fell short 
of consensus on financial aid to Turkey, Jordan and Egypt, which have lost 
substantial export markets because of the U.N. economic embargo against Iraq 
and Kuwait. 
In a statement citing last week's Iraqi incursions against the French, Belgian 
and Dutch embassies in Kuwait, the ministers said they "have decided jointly to 
expel military personnel based in Iraqi embassies and to limit the freedom of 
movement of personnel in those embassies." 
In addition to the three European diplomatic compounds, Iraqi troops also 
raided the Canadian Embassy in Kuwait last week. 
Even before the joint announcement, Britain expelled six Iraqi Embassy staff 
members in London and ordered 23 more Iraqi nationals in Britain to return 
home, while Belgium restricted the movement of Iraqi diplomats to a small area 
around Brussels. Italy had announced similar action Sunday. 
British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said his government was expelling the 
Iraqis, among them two defense attaches and four staff members in the embassy's 
military section, as an expression of solidarity with European allies. 
Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2 and has ordered all foreign diplomats out of 
Kuwait on grounds that it is no longer an independent country. Iraqi troops 
ring the many embassies where diplomats have refused to leave. 
The European foreign ministers also considered but postponed action on a 
proposal by Jacques Delors, the president of the European Community, that the 
EC dedicate about $2 billion to assisting Turkey, Jordan and Egypt. Half the 
money would come from the EC budget and half from the 12 member nations. 
Britain's Hurd argued that any such aid formula should take into account the 
substantial contributions that some European nations, including Britain, have 
already made to the U.S.-led multinational force in the Persian Gulf area to 
prevent further Iraqi aggression, particularly against Saudi Arabia. 
Just 10 days earlier, the European foreign ministers, meeting in Rome, had 
agreed in principle on an aid package to Turkey, Jordan and Egypt, although 
they did not set an amount. The finance ministers of the 12 nations, meeting 
the next day, cautioned that any aid should be approved only after a thorough 
study of the recipients' needs and the donors' abilities to pay. 
The United States, which dominates the multinational military force arrayed in 
the gulf after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, had asked the European nations to 
help defray the cost of the buildup, or, short of that, to help the nations 
suffering from the U.N. trade embargo against Iraq and Kuwait. 
Despite the reluctance of the 12 nations to act jointly, at least seven of them 
have contributed in one way or another to the multinational military presence 
in the gulf. 
West Germany, which has constitutional restrictions on what it can do 
militarily, has contributed minesweepers and vehicles capable of detecting and 
analyzing the presence of poison gases. Iraq has chemical weapons and, 
according to the U.S. mission to the European Community, West Germany is ahead 
of the United States in the development of chemical weapons survey vehicles. 
Also, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl on Saturday pledged $2 billion, about 
half to defray the costs of the military buildup in the gulf and half to assist 
Turkey, Jordan and Egypt. 
France, provoked by the Iraqi raid on its embassy in Kuwait, announced Saturday 
that it would send 4,000 ground troops to Saudi Arabia as well as aircraft and 
tanks, to bolster the three warships it had already dispatched. 
Britain has sent 6,000 troops and seven warships, as well as fighter aircraft. 
Italy has dispatched five warships. 
Among the other EC nations, Denmark, the Netherlands and Spain have made 
smaller contributions to the force in the gulf region. Beyond that, according 
to a U.S. survey, Greece has offered three vessels for sea-lift purposes, and 
Portugal has turned away an Iraqi merchant vessel that had been scheduled for 
repairs at a Portuguese shipyard. 
Hurd told reporters that Britain ordered the Iraqi expulsions because of a 
conviction "that we've got to act in solidarity with the French and the other 
countries whose embassies have been invaded and people taken out during the 
last few days." 
Home Secretary David Waddington, who announced the details of the expulsion in 
London, said that he considered their presence "not to be conducive to the 
public good for reasons of national security." He provided no names of the 
civilians involved, but most are believed to include students and, possibly, 
business people. 
Iraq's ambassador to Britain said the expulsions are unfair. 
Staff writer Mark Fineman, in London, contributed to this article. 
