CITY, LATINO FEDERATION MOVE CLOSER TO SETTLING MINORITY ELECTION SUIT 
The city of San Diego and the Chicano Federation edged closer to a settlement 
of the federation's lawsuit over minority voting rights but failed to reach an 
agreement by late Tuesday evening, after a day of intensive negotiations. 
The council, which held three closed-door sessions to discuss the matter, ended 
the day by authorizing a "last and final offer" that will be discussed today in 
a settlement conference before U.S. Magistrate Harry McCue. 
"We have sent our offer over to the other side and the judge," Mayor Maureen 
O'Connor said after the final closed-door discussion. 
Talks to Continue With Judge Present 
Patricia Meyer, attorney for the Chicano Federation, confirmed that the two 
sides had moved closer to a settlement, but she said they will continue 
negotiating with McCue present, probably this morning. 
The two sides are scheduled to appear this afternoon before U.S. District Judge 
John S. Rhoades to report on their progress. Rhoades has threatened to postpone 
next Tuesday's City Council elections or invalidate them later because of 
issues raised by the lawsuit. 
At issue is the federation's demand that the number of City Council seats be 
increased to at least 10 from the current eight to enhance minority clout. The 
method and timing of the redrawing of district boundaries, whether new 1990 
census data would be used in the redistricting and the date of elections in the 
new districts are also being discussed. 
Last month, the council offered to put the issue of increasing the number of 
districts to a vote on the June, 1990, ballot. However, the federation wants 
elections in the new districts, if approved by voters, held in 1991, two years 
before the council wants them held. 
Legal Fees Are Also a Sticking Point 
The two sides also are negotiating over the how much the city will pay the 
federation in attorneys' fees. 
The federation originally sued in January, 1988, alleging that the city's 
two-tiered election system -- district primaries followed by citywide runoffs 
between the top two vote-getters -- unconstitutionally diluted the effect of 
Latino votes. 
The at-large runoffs were eliminated when San Diego voters approved a system of 
district-only elections in November. But last month, Rhoades allowed the 
federation to broaden its lawsuit to include the other issues. 
