NBA NOTES; 
INDICTED WINGATE WILL NOT RETURN TO SPURS 
San Antonio Spurs officials said today that guard David Wingate will not be 
back with the team after his indictment on rape charges in Maryland. 
Wingate remains free on a $10,000 bond; a trial is expected in about four 
months. 
"The Spurs will honor our obligations -- if any -- to David Wingate," team 
owner Red McCombs said in a statement, "but at this time there are no plans for 
David being a part of our team." 
McCombs said Wingate is likely to be spending his "primary energies" defending 
himself against the allegations. 
"We appreciate David's contributions to the Spurs last season and we have 
sympathy for him and all others connected to the various allegations," the 
statement said. 
Wingate has been unavailable for comment. 
Forward John (Hot Rod) Williams said he will decide before the weekend is over 
whether he will be playing the 1990-91 season with the Seattle SuperSonics or 
Cleveland Cavaliers -- even if it means playing the 1991-92 season in 
Minneapolis. 
"In the next 48 hours, I'll make my decision," Williams said late Thursday 
night. 
Williams, 28, would be the major component of a deal that would send Xavier 
McDaniel and Nate McMillan from the Sonics to the Cavs, while Cleveland would 
send Williams and an undisclosed sum of money to Seattle. 
"The Cavaliers have already told me if I don't accept this deal they're going 
to trade me to Minnesota next year," Williams said. "But if that's what 
happens, that's OK. . . . Nobody is going to tell me what to do." 
Denver Nuggets point guard Michael Adams has agreed to terms of a 
multimillion-dollar, five-year contract extension. 
Adams had one year remaining on a contract that was to pay him $400,000 this 
season. He would have been an unrestricted free agent at its conclusion. 
Negotiations are not going as smoothly with Chris Jackson, the Nuggets' top 
draft choice. Jackson is "tired of waiting" for the club to make a deal, his 
agent, Eddie Miller, said. 
