BUTTE'S 'FISCAL CANCER' AFFLICTS OTHER COUNTIES 
As Butte County struggled through Friday on the brink of bankruptcy, state and 
local officials elsewhere warned that the county's threatened financial 
collapse is symptomatic of money problems facing counties throughout 
California. 
"Butte is just at the head of the line. At least a half-dozen other counties 
are just a step behind, with more behind them," said Assemblyman Stan Statham 
(R-Oak Run), who represents the county in the Legislature. 
A new report by the County Supervisors Assn. of California, obtained Friday by 
The Times, identifies at least 18 California counties that it said were in 
various stages of financial distress. Of those studied, San Diego and Ventura 
were said to be the Southern California counties facing the biggest financial 
headaches. 
The report said, "The fiscal cancer that afflicts Butte County is present to 
some extent in all California counties." The report warned that "the gradual 
fiscal collapse of county government, given its present fiscal structure, is 
inevitable." 
Orange County's fiscal woes have yet to bring it to the brink of collapse, but 
the county is faced with mounting financial problems that officials say will 
eventually cripple local programs unless the state steps in. 
Already, some of the effects of budget shortfalls are being felt: The county 
was forced to make sharp cutbacks in indigent medical care this year after the 
state reduced its support for the program. And many Orange County officials 
predict that the problem will be repeated in 1991. 
"You think this is bad, just wait till next year," Orange County Supervisor Don 
R. Roth said recently as the county board was considering its 1990-91 budget. 
"There's no relief in sight." 
The problem, as most experts see it, is that the state and the courts are 
requiring counties to provide more health, welfare and other services than 
local tax bases -- or the governor and Legislature -- can support. 
Most deeply hurt are counties that had low tax rates when Proposition 13 was 
passed and have been unable to raise taxes to keep pace with rising costs. 
One such county, San Diego, "parallels Butte County in an alarming number of 
instances," the report said. The county has lost $76 million in tax revenue 
over the last five years because of cities incorporating or annexing county 
territory. Over the last five years, as taxes and fees were rising 66.8%, the 
report said, the cost of state-required programs was rising 90.5%. During the 
same period, San Diego County's welfare costs rose 284%. 
And while Ventura County now is relatively healthy compared to other counties, 
"there are storm clouds on the horizon," the report said. 
It cited a budget analysis done at the beginning of the year projecting that 
spending will exceed tax revenues by almost $6 million in 1991-92 and $18 
million by 1994-95. 
As for the more immediate problem facing Butte County, a once-sleepy farming 
region in the Sacramento Valley that is experiencing growing pains, officials 
said Friday that they would delay a decision on whether to become the first 
California county to file for bankruptcy, hoping to work out a bailout plan 
with Gov. George Deukmejian. 
Deukmejian on Thursday rejected a $15-million financial aid package approved by 
the Legislature and offered his own scaled-down plan. County officials said the 
Deukmejian package would not be enough to keep the county afloat. But, after 
considering filing for bankruptcy Friday, county officials decided to try to 
work something out with the governor. 
Emmett Pogue, deputy county administrative officer, said, "Bankruptcy is a 
last-resort-type step. There still are other doors open. So long as there are, 
we do not want to go through that last door." 
Deukmejian, in a letter to Ed McLaughlin, chairman of the Butte County Board of 
Supervisors, seemed to suggest that the county could weather the crisis with a 
bit of state financial aid and some belt-tightening. He did not address broader 
themes that county officials say are at the heart of the problem. 
Among Deukmejian's suggestions were that the county forgo the purchase of a new 
fire engine to save $300,000, reduce the amount budgeted for county pay raises 
and leave unfilled all but 45 of the 183 new positions it hoped to create. 
Deukmejian, in addition, offered the county a grant of $700,000 and promised to 
waive or defer $5.1 million in obligations to the state. 
Statham, who carried the $15-million county aid plan in the Legislature, said 
he was so enraged by Deukmejian's response that he hoped the county would 
immediately file for bankruptcy. 
He called the governor's proposal "ridiculously inadequate," declaring that the 
benefits were mostly "funny money" in the form of letting Butte County off the 
hook from state obligations that it couldn't meet anyway. 
"The governor is basically hanging Butte County out to dry. It is outrageous 
that he cannot find a few million in the $55-billion state budget to stop a 
California county from going belly up," Statham said. 
Deukmejian defended the plan after a speech to business leaders in Sacramento, 
telling reporters that it was "a responsible, good-faith proposal . . . 
recognizing that there's just so much that we can do for Butte County." 
Government officials and experts who have studied county problems statewide say 
many of Butte County's problems are showing up in other counties. 
Casey Sparks, a consultant to the Assembly's Local Government Committee, 
acknowledged that Butte reached the point of bankruptcy faster than other 
counties. But, she said, "the same problems are there in other counties. They 
tend to show up first in a rural county because the tax base is smaller." 
Part of the problem is Proposition 13, which requires public votes on tax 
increases, rather than votes by local boards of supervisors as before 1978, 
county officials say. Butte County officials asked local voters in the June 
primary to approve four different taxes to finance the Fire Department, 
libraries and other services. Voters rejected them all. 
Also feeding the problem are state requirements that counties administer and 
partially pay for welfare programs. Costs of these programs are soaring. 
According to the county supervisors association report, some counties spend as 
much as 70% of their general-purpose tax dollars on state-required programs, 
leaving only 30% to support local programs, such as law enforcement, fire 
protection and public works. 
Statewide, county officials say rural counties like Butte, where living costs 
are much lower than in the big cities, are a magnet for welfare recipients 
because people can stretch their grants much further. According to the report, 
the costs to Butte County for administering the Aid to Families With Dependent 
Children program rose 322% during the 1980s. 
At an Oroville mini-mart Friday, clerk Sue Thompson complained to a reporter: 
"We have to pay out too much money for state programs and there are a lot of 
people here on welfare. We've had people move here from Oregon just because of 
the welfare." 
Shuit reported from Sacramento and Gillam reported from Oroville. Staff writer 
Jim Newton contributed to this story from Orange County. 
