MONEY WOES PLAGUE DIRECTOR OF L. A. / AFRICA TASK FORCE 
Personal financial problems -- including bankruptcy filings, foreclosure 
threats and tax liens -- have dogged the head of Mayor Tom Bradley's 
scandal-plagued Africa task force since the mayor first secured city funding 
for the trade group four years ago. 
At the same time, The Times has found, none of those officially associated with 
the task force -- not the mayor, his staff, task force board members or 
officers -- assumed responsibility for supervising Juanita St. John, director 
of the Task Force for Africa/Los Angeles Relations. 
The result, according to records and interviews, was that, while St. John 
wrestled with mounting personal financial problems, there were virtually no 
checks on how she managed a $400,000 infusion of city funds. 
City and state officials now are investigating St. John's handling of public 
funds, which allegedly were commingled with personal funds in St. John family 
checking accounts. City auditors specifically want to know what happened to 
$180,000 in unaccounted-for withdrawals made by St. John. 
On-Call Advisory Group 
Richard Parsons, an oil company executive, chaired the Bradley-appointed task 
force board in recent years, but insisted the panel had no executive 
responsibilities. "Juanita St. John is the task force," Parsons said. "The 
board is merely an advisory group that remains on call." 
The task force listed Parsons in state corporation records as the 
organization's president, but he told The Times he never held the post and was 
unaware he was registered as a corporate officer. 
Aides to Bradley say supervising St. John and watching expenditures was not the 
mayor's responsibility. They maintain it was up to the city controller's 
auditors and task force board members to ensure funds were spent properly. "Why 
else do you have a board?" asked Deputy Mayor Michael Gage. 
The task force -- intended to promote stronger business and cultural ties 
between the city and Africa -- has been a pet project of Bradley's since he 
helped create it in 1978. He regularly attended board meetings, strongly 
defended it against critics at UCLA, where it was housed, and at City Hall, 
where it received most of its funds since 1985. 
UCLA officially referred to it as the "mayor's" task force. Bradley -- who is 
not registered as a corporate officer -- signed a key contract with UCLA on 
behalf of the nonprofit corporation. Later the university turned to Bradley and 
his staff in 1986 and 1988 after the task force repeatedly overdrew its account 
-- perhaps the first sign of task force financial problems. 
Bradley has declined to comment on the task force because of the pending 
investigations by the city controller, city attorney and the state attorney 
general. St. John and her attorneys declined to be interviewed for this 
article, but in the past she has denied misusing taxpayers' money and said she 
can produce records to prove it. 
Arraignment This Month 
The city attorney's office has filed criminal charges against St. John, saying 
she failed to supply subpoenaed records. She will be arraigned later this 
month. A city audit of the task force is expected to be released next week. 
St. John and the mayor are friends, professional associates and business 
partners. In addition to supporting the Africa task force, Bradley has hired 
St. John's daughter, Kathy, to work in his office. Bradley also is a partner in 
a Riverside County land venture with St. John, her daughter and several other 
investors. 
St. John had both professional and personal financial problems when Bradley won 
the first infusion of city funds for the task force in 1985. 
The task force was struggling. Federal and university grants that had paid St. 
John's salary were drying up. 
Money Problems 
At the same time, records and interviews show, St. John had growing personal 
financial problems. A collection agency won a court judgment against her. An 
insurance company was suing St. John's husband to collect on a $65,000 bounced 
check. And a mortgage company was threatening to foreclose on her home. 
St. John and her husband, John, managed to fend of creditors and stay afloat by 
borrowing money, mostly against the equity in their Spanish-style, two-story 
home in north San Marino, recently valued at $800,000. 
But as her debts continued to mount and, after a recent foreclosure action, St. 
John filed for bankruptcy. Last month a U.S. bankruptcy judge granted her 
permission to borrow another $250,000 against the house to pay off several 
creditors. 
News reports about St. John's problems with the handling of Africa task force 
financial matters have a familiar ring for Ed Kaleff, a neighbor two doors down 
from the St. Johns. "That's Juanita," he said. "She tells me the same thing. . 
. . I keep getting promised month by month . . . the check's in the mail." 
Kaleff said he lent St. John about $32,000 two years ago after spotting a 
notice in the local paper that her house was in foreclosure. "I did it because 
she was a very pleasant person. I . . . knew them," he said. 
St. John said she was in a temporary bind; a mix-up had cut off her husband's 
retirement income, Kaleff recalled. 
But after "many, many" efforts to get St. John to repay the loan, Kaleff filed 
his own foreclosure action, now tied up in the bankruptcy case. 
Several of those who worked with St. John on task force business, and attended 
parties at her home for visiting African artists and dignitaries, said they had 
no inkling of her personal financial problems until her bankruptcy was reported 
recently. "Not at all," said Parsons. 
Since 1981, Bradley has had a financial interest with St. John in a Riverside 
real estate partnership. The partnership was organized by then-UCLA Vice 
Chancellor Charles Z. Wilson. Now publisher of the Wave newspapers in South Los 
Angeles, Wilson is a Bradley friend who helped the mayor organize the task 
force at the university. 
Despite the personal financial relationship, Gage, after checking with the 
mayor, said Bradley did not know about St. John's financial problems until 
recently. 
Bradley and St. John's relationship developed through the formation of the task 
force 11 years ago, Gage said. The mayor recalled meeting St. John once before 
that at a UCLA event, and Bradley was not initially involved in selecting her 
for the task force job, Gage said. 
A one-time string musician who friends say played with the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic, St. John worked in various mid-level administrative assistant 
jobs since 1965, including a stint as a Peace Corps coordinator. For several 
years before the formation of the task force, she served as an assistant to the 
director of the university's Africa Studies Center. 
When the university agreed to Bradley's request to form the group, the job of 
pulling it together was assigned to St. John. 
She seemed a logical choice, associates said. She was well-traveled and 
well-connected in Africa and she had a reputation for juggling challenging 
staff assignments, notably the difficult logistics of university academic tours 
through Africa. 
"She could handle things . . . she was very creative," recalled Prof. Boniface 
Obichere, a former Africa Studies Center director and St. John's boss for much 
of the 1970s. 
The 58-year-old St. John -- described by friends and associates as "charming," 
"gregarious," "committed" -- dived into the task force work and soon was 
assigned to the project full time, and moved to a separate suite of offices, 
where she worked for Wilson. One of her first tasks was to arrange a trip for 
Bradley and a group of businessmen to Africa. She also helped bring a Nigerian 
art exhibition to the county's Museum of Natural History and organized local 
business seminars. 
But tensions quickly began to build between the African Studies Center, which 
oversees most of the university's Africa-related programs, and St. John, who 
was running the task force independently. "I could not discern any potential 
for benefit to the university," said Prof. Peter Hammond, one of several 
critics. 
Hammond said the educational aspects of the task force were never clear and 
housing it on campus took away scarce resources and space from other needy 
programs. "I think they wanted to accommodate the mayor," he said. 
The conflict came to head in early 1985, when separate delegations from the 
task force and the Africa Studies Center arrived in Liberia. "The left hand 
didn't know what the right hand was doing," Hammond said. 
As the controversy escalated, Bradley strongly defended the task force in an 
exchange of letters with university faculty members -- at one point being moved 
to declare his pet project was not "an embarrassment to UCLA, nor any 
government." 
But with the departure of Wilson in 1984, university and federal support lapsed 
and the mayor turned to the city for "interim" funding to keep his task force 
alive. 
"I think the mayor felt if they could (get) one or two years of funding, then 
the federal government would be more interested in coming in," Wilson said. "It 
didn't quite work out that way." 
After winning a city budget fight over the funds, Bradley signed an agreement 
on behalf of the task force with the university. Among other things, it called 
for city funds to go to the task force, with a portion to be deposited in a 
UCLA account that would pay St. John's $40,000-a-year salary and other 
expenses. 
The new financial arrangement gave St. John considerably more latitude over the 
financial affairs of the group. University accountants were no longer 
overseeing the task force's expenditures. 
"We had no administrative authority over it," said Harlan Lebo, a UCLA 
spokesman. 
Just who did have administrative authority over St. John was not specified. "I 
really couldn't tell you," said Robert Gordon, a bank executive and task force 
member. "It never came up in any of our meetings." 
Attended Meetings 
Other board members say that while Bradley frequently attended board meetings, 
he rarely initiated discussions about policy matters. 
University records show there was trouble in St. John's handling of the city 
funds almost immediately. The UCLA account was overdrawn within months of the 
city's release of the first $100,000 in summer of 1985. The problem would 
repeat itself several times and a year later frustrated university officials 
contacted the mayor's office for help. 
But Gage said Bradley only learned of the problem last year, when a vice 
chancellor wrote him directly to complain about the task force and "these 
irritating problems (that) continue to persist." Gage said that the overdraw 
problem appeared to be resolved, and Bradley did not see it as a signal of 
larger financial problems with the task force. 
Over the years, sources said, some of Bradley's staff did have concerns about 
the task force -- the political heat it generated each year when critics on the 
City Council questioned whether it should be funded. But aware of Bradley's 
dedication to the project and his support of St. John, no one on his staff 
raised objections, sources said. 
It was not until April of this year when the investigations of the task force 
and St. John were under way that Bradley withdrew his task force funding 
request for $121,000. 
The task force office is now closed, the program is in limbo and UCLA says the 
group still owes it $40,000. 
