SOCKERS, COLLINS AGREE TO TERMS 
In one day, the Sockers agreed to terms with one of the rare commodities in 
indoor soccer -- a proven American midfielder -- and invited to camp a former 
member of the Moscow Dynamo. If he makes the cut, he would be the first Soviet 
national to play in the Major Soccer League. 
The names are Michael Collins and Alex Golovnia. Guess which is which. 
Collins, considered one of the top playmakers in the MSL, was with the St. 
Louis Storm last year but never saw eye-to-eye with Coach Don Popovic. In 39 
games, Collins collected 17 goals and six assists. He spent the previous two 
seasons with the Los Angeles Lazers, scoring 48 goals and adding 56 assists in 
95 games. 
But Socker Coach Ron Newman said Collins was offered a contract because of his 
guile, not his scoring. Collins, 28, has been in the league since 1981 and 
developed a strong passing game. 
"We need that type of player," Newman said. "We've got quite a bit of foot 
speed, but we need someone who can pass the ball, someone with experience who 
knows what the indoor game is all about." 
Collins has not signed a contract but is expected to after arriving for the 
start of training camp Monday. 
The addition of Collins will aid the Socker offense, but the team still needs 
help in back. Since last season, three players -- fullbacks George Fernandez 
and Ralph Black and goalie Zoltan Toth -- have defected to other teams. Another 
defender, Cacho -- whose 41 blocked shots was fourth on the team last year -- 
likely will not be offered a contract because he is 32 years old. 
This leaves room for Golovnia. Newman saw him play when the Dynamo met the 
Sockers in an exhibition in 1987 at the Sports Arena. Golovnia assisted on 
Dynamo's second goal; the Sockers won, 7-5. 
But it wasn't Newman's memory that brought Golovnia here. It was forward Rod 
Castro's recommendation. This summer, Castro and Golovnia played together for 
the Orlando Lions of the American Soccer League. 
Now Golovnia, 30, wants to stay in this country, and Castro says his skills 
will allow him to do that. 
"He reads the game very well," Castro said. "And he knows what the forwards are 
going to do. I really pushed for (the Sockers) to take a look at him, to get 
him in here and to sign him." 
The question is whether he can adapt to indoor soccer. Castro is certain he 
can, saying Golovnia's outdoor style of play parallels the Sockers' control 
game. Newman wasn't quite so sure. 
"Coming from that background, he has the pedigree, which must mean he has the 
necessary tools," Newman said. "The question is how long will it take him to 
adapt to the indoor game." 
Also invited to camp, which gets under way at 9 a.m. Monday was Bob Lilley, a 
defender from the Hershey Impact of the National Professional Soccer League. 
Last year, he had 20 goals, 16 assists and 84 blocks. 
