CLARK'S TWO HOMERS LIFT GIANTS OVER REDS; 
BASEBALL: BUT THE POWER OUTBURST DOESN'T MAKE UP FOR A DISAPPOINTING SEASON FOR 
SAN FRANCISCO'S FIRST BASEMAN. 
Going into this season, Roger Craig, among others, rated Will Clark, the San 
Francisco Giants' first baseman, the best player in the National League. 
In four seasons, Clark had established himself as an outstanding hitter. Last 
season, he batted .333, hit 23 home runs and drove in 111 runs. 
Because Clark was only 26, his manager, Craig, thought it was reasonable to 
expect more from Clark, already an exceptional defensive player. 
It didn't happen. Injuries have slowed him in the second half of the season, 
but he never did hit the way he did a year ago. 
Clark, who will undergo foot surgery after the season, had one of his best 
hitting days since early June Tuesday at Cincinnati to lead the Giants to a 5-3 
victory. 
He hit two home runs and a single and drove in three runs to keep the Giants 
alive. After splitting the two-game set, the Giants are 7 1/2 games behind the 
Reds but have only 14 games to play. 
With the Dodgers beating Atlanta, the Reds, who begin their final six-game trip 
tonight at Houston, have a 4 1/2-game lead. 
"It helps morale," Clark said, "but I wish I could have done more this season. 
I have had problems. 
"Today, (Tom) Browning made the mistakes. The difference is I was able to 
capitalize on them. I haven't been doing that for some time." 
After 70 games this season, Clark had 13 home runs and 55 runs batted in. But 
in the next 77 games he hit only three home runs and drove in 26 runs. 
Rookie John Burkett (13-7) had a 5-1 lead and a four-hitter going into the 
ninth, but needed Steve Bedrosian to get the final out with the potential tying 
runs on base. 
The Reds believe the race is over in the West, but are concerned about 
Browning. 
The veteran left-hander (13-9) has been ineffective since spraining his ankle 
Aug. 19. 
"I just haven't had good outings," he said after being chased in the sixth. "I 
haven't pitched well. I have no excuses." 
Another starter, Jack Armstrong, relieved in the seventh. Armstrong, bothered 
by a sore elbow, said he still has pain. DAN HAFNER 
