PRO FOOTBALL; 
DEFENSE MAKES A DIFFERENCE, AS IT USUALLY DOES 
The most obvious difference between the Raiders and Rams this season is that 
the Rams have the personnel to play effective defense. 
The Raiders, as a 1989 defensive team, are basically inept, proving it rather 
conclusively in Kansas City Sunday. 
On a good day for quarterback Jay Schroeder, the Raiders lost, 24-19, to the 
Kansas City Chiefs because they couldn't defend against three long touchdown 
drives measuring 71, 88 and 92 yards. 
Hours later in Anaheim, on a big day for quarterback Jim Everett and wide 
receiver Henry Ellard, the Rams won easily, 31-17, by playing a smart defensive 
game against the Indianapolis Colts -- particularly against running back Eric 
Dickerson and his very young quarterback, Chris Chandler. 
The Colts, in a stirring effort to keep the Rams off Dickerson's back, attacked 
with pass formations exclusively -- with new sets featuring three and four wide 
receivers. Their objective was to force the Ram defense to double-cover 
Chandler's receivers -- thus opening some holes for Dickerson. 
The Rams simply ignored this strategy. They lined up against Dickerson, anyway. 
They knew they could beat a young passer by reacting to the ball when he put it 
up. They weren't going to let Dickerson win it. On nearly every down they met 
Dickerson with a gang regardless of whether he had the ball. 
Chandler is 23 years old. He is the youngest Colt. He was possibly the youngest 
player on the field. He is one of the youngest quarterbacks ever called on to 
lead a National Football League championship contender. 
And although he is a fine talent with, no doubt, a fine future -- demonstrating 
it with a touchdown bomb in the second quarter -- he is no threat yet. The 
Indianapolis threat is Dickerson, who gained 100-plus yards against a team that 
committed seven or eight of its 11 defensive players against him on every down. 
That is the way to defense Dickerson. That is the way to defense Indianapolis. 
On the Anaheim field, Dickerson, who is 29, appeared to be as fast and 
dangerous as ever. But the Indianapolis defensive team, by comparison with the 
Rams, is neither fast nor dangerous. 
The Colts seldom got a rush on Everett, who was well served, as usual, by his 
offensive line, which is probably the best in the conference. And in the 
secondary, the Colts lacked the quickness to contend with Ellard. 
Indianapolis cornerbacks were frequently in step with Ellard under Everett's 
passes, but they were outmaneuvered almost every time at the moment of the 
catch. 
There isn't another receiver in the league with Ellard's ability to make a 
defensive back lean one way for the ball just as he goes the other way to grab 
it. 
This game was child's play for Everett and Ellard. And what it chiefly showed 
is what all such matchups show: The best teams in the American Conference are 
no match for the best in the National Conference. 
The Colts are a nice little AFC team, but in Anaheim Sunday they found 
themselves in the big leagues. 
This isn't to say that the Rams are a team without a weakness. On clutch plays, 
for one thing, they don't run the ball well with Greg Bell. Although a team 
coached by John Robinson will always look good in the annual rushing 
statistics, Bell is no Dickerson. 
What the Rams need is Dickerson. With Everett, Ellard and Dickerson, they would 
be breezing this fall to the Super Bowl. They may be anyway. Not since the 
Waterfield-Van Brocklin-Hirsch-Fears era 30 years ago have the Rams passed the 
ball this artistically. 
The Raiders are fielding a lively, well-coached offensive club this season, 
unlike their recent past. With Schroeder, running back Marcus Allen and quality 
receivers, they have everything, seemingly, but a quality offensive line. 
A team that gives up back-to-back sacks in the fourth quarter when it has a 
chance to win -- as the Raiders did in Kansas City -- needs considerably more 
offensive-line depth than this team has. 
Where is 1988 center Bill Lewis, the Raiders' MVP blocker last year? 
Why did they pick up a center off the streets instead? 
Where is their defense? 
The defense, of course, is the real problem. There is almost nothing left of 
the last great Raider defensive club these days but safety Vann McElroy. 
Howie Long is no longer a factor. Matt Millen is with the San Francisco 49ers. 
Another talent, Sean Jones, was banished for mouthing off during the 1987 
strike. Some of his old teammates have aged. Some are too young. Others are 
perhaps looking forward to a new life in Oakland or Sacramento. 
Earlier in the '80s when the Raiders came to Los Angeles, they had a Hall of 
Fame talent, Ted Hendricks, at linebacker. Now they have Jackie Shipp there, 
and, as they have discovered, any team dropping from Hendricks to Shipp is in 
trouble. 
To be sure, the Raiders under Al Davis remain the most successful American 
sports team of the last quarter century. They've done a lot -- and they'll be 
back. The question is when. 
