BAGHDAD RENEWS ITS VERBAL ATTACK ON U.S. MILITARY BUILDUP IN MIDEAST; 
DEPLOYMENT: 'BUSH HAD BETTER WITHDRAW,' IRAQI SAYS. SYRIA IS SENDING A BRIGADE 
TO SAUDI ARABIA. 
On the heels of its first tenuous diplomatic success in the Persian Gulf 
crisis, Iraq on Thursday followed the call of its old enemy, Iran, and renewed 
its attack on the presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia. 
Foreign Minister Tarik Aziz, responding to President Bush's address to Congress 
on Tuesday night, insisted that Iraq has no intention to invade Saudi Arabia or 
any other gulf state. 
"We challenge the U.S. President to present tangible proof of his allegations," 
Aziz said in remarks published Thursday. "Bush had better withdraw his forces 
and reduce American expenditure on war." 
The silver-haired foreign minister was fresh from a trip to Tehran, a visit 
that resulted in the renewal of diplomatic relations between the two countries. 
On Wednesday, the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the Iranian spiritual leader, harshly 
attacked the American troop buildup in the gulf and called for a holy war on 
the United States. 
And Iraq warned Thursday of possible terrorist attacks against U.S. forces, 
sounding the theme of Arab feelings wounded by the presence of non-Muslim 
soldiers massed in the holy lands of Saudi Arabia, wire services reported. 
Iraq's warning came in a memorandum to the U.S. charge d'affaires in Baghdad, 
according to the Iraqi News Agency. The service said Iraq was responding to a 
U.S. claim that Iraq-based terrorists were preparing to attack U.S. targets. 
The United States is creating a "pretext" for aggression, the memorandum was 
quoted as saying, and "Iraq reserves its legitimate right to self-defense, to 
reciprocate and to retaliate firmly against these parties if it becomes a 
target," the news agency added. 
Meanwhile, Syria was reported to be sending an armored brigade, involving up to 
10,000 troops and 300 tanks, to Saudi Arabia in a signal of its new role in the 
Middle East. Western diplomats told Reuters news service that the Saudi 
government had asked Damascus to send the division to supplement the 3,000 
Syrian troops already there. About 1,000 Syrian troops are in the United Arab 
Emirates. 
According to the Western diplomats, the number of Syrian troops expected to be 
deployed in the crisis may reach 14,000. 
Since the Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait, Baghdad has worked hard to win support 
from Iran, with which it engaged in a bloody, eight-year war that ended in 
1988. Iran, with its long land border, could make or break a trade embargo 
imposed on Iraq by the United Nations. 
Last month, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, in a lightning diplomatic move, 
pulled his troops out of land that Iraq had occupied during the war and gave in 
on all the border issues that were at stake in the conflict. The countries 
agreed to exchange prisoners of war and, following Aziz's visit, to take steps 
to normalize diplomatic and trade relations. 
On Thursday, the Tehran Times newspaper, which often reflects the views of the 
Iranian government, denied that Iran would exchange food and cash for Iraqi 
oil. It quoted an "informed source" in Tehran as saying the government had not 
yet decided whether to allow shipments into Iraq. 
But Iran's enmity toward the United States, dating from the 1979 Shiite Muslim 
revolution, could tempt Tehran to play a spoiler's role in the gulf crisis: The 
mullahs who rule Iran might undermine the sanctions enough to keep Iraq afloat 
-- and force the United States to choose between remaining bogged down in Saudi 
Arabia or opening fire on Iraq. 
"Iran can sit back and watch its enemies struggle over this one," said one 
Western European diplomat, noting that it was a reverse of the situation during 
the Iran-Iraq war, when much of the world stood by and watched the warring 
neighbors fight it out. 
Iraq's counteroffensive against the U.N. trade sanctions continues to center on 
the needs of tens of thousands of Asian refugees stranded in both Iraq and 
Kuwait. The refugees are forbidden to buy food in Iraq, and supplies are 
reportedly running short in Kuwait. Baghdad is demanding that Asian 
governments, particularly India and the Philippines, send food to their 
citizens. 
Western governments want any food deliveries to the Asians handled by the 
International Red Cross or some other foreign relief agency. One U.S. diplomat 
has accused Iraq of "cynical manipulation" of the refugees' suffering. 
Iraq counters that the shortages are the fault of the blockade and that 
shipments should enter the country like regular imports. 
On Thursday, the Red Cross and its Islamic counterpart, the Red Crescent, 
reached an agreement to supply medicines to civilians. 
Meanwhile, in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
Gen. Colin L. Powell, visited with U.S. forces and said the American troops 
"are deterring (Iraq) now, and with each passing day, our defensive capability 
gets better and better." 
At a news conference, Powell responded to repeated questions about the U.S. 
deployment's ultimate size and purpose by saying the U.S. military has not been 
assigned an offensive mission. 
"The only mission I have been assigned is to deter and defend," he declared. 
"The force is being structured for that purpose." 
"Don't sell them short. They are good for the long haul," Powell said. 
Staff writer Melissa Healy, in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, contributed to this 
report. 
