GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ORGANISMS NOT DANGEROUS, SCIENCE PANEL FINDS 
Organisms produced by genetic engineering techniques are fundamentally no 
different from those produced by conventional cross-breeding and are "not 
inherently dangerous," according to a report issued Wednesday by a special 
committee of the National Academy of Sciences. 
For tests of some microorganisms that have a potential to threaten the 
environment, the committee recommended introduction of a "suicide gene" that 
would cause the mutated bacteria or virus to self-destruct after the test. 
But overall, there is no need for a major revision of existing rules governing 
the release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment, the 
committee said. 
Instead, the decision to release engineered plants, bacteria and viruses into 
the environment "should focus on the characteristics of the plant or 
microorganism itself, not the techniques used to create it," said biochemist 
Robert H. Burris of the University of Wisconsin, chairman of the panel. 
Engineered plants are especially safe, the committee said, because they 
"rarely, if ever, escape to cause problems in the natural ecosystem." Release 
of microorganisms requires more study, but "no adverse effects have developed" 
from such introductions in the past, according to the report. 
Since the techniques of genetic engineering were first developed 15 years ago, 
controversy about the potential danger has surrounded it. Critics have charged 
that mutated bacteria or plants released into the environment during tests 
could escape and produce an ecological disaster. The new report seems to 
discount those objections. 
But activist Jeremy Rifkin of the Foundation on Economic Trends, a long-time 
opponent of genetic engineering, attacked the report as "irresponsible public 
policy," charging that the committee was motivated by "politics, not science." 
To date, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Environmental Protection 
Agency have issued about 80 permits for field testing of engineered organisms, 
most of them plants. But officials expect much larger numbers of applications 
in the future because of the great potential of genetically engineered 
organisms. 
Applications currently being pursued include bacteria that would degrade 
environmental pollutants and extract metals from ores, food plants that would 
flourish under dry or salty conditions, viruses that would control insect pests 
and crops that would resist weed killers and pests and, eventually, produce 
their own fertilizer. 
The panel was created last year by the academy at the request of federal 
regulatory agencies to determine whether new rules should be developed for 
evaluating the growing number of applications. 
The panel noted that "society has benefited greatly from the use of genetically 
modified microorganisms and plants" and that field testing of new species "is 
essential" for the development of still better species. 
The testing of genetically engineered plants, they concluded, is particularly 
hazard free because scientists have already tested "hundreds of millions of 
genotypes . . . over decades" with no adverse effects. 
The report said genetically engineered plants may be safer than those produced 
by cross-breeding because the gene transfer is more precise. 
"The (genetic) techniques are . . . more predictable than the classical 
methods," Burris said at a Washington press conference. 
Critics have argued that the biggest risk of field testing such plants is that 
they will escape and become weeds. But the committee concluded that the 
physiological characteristics that enable plants to thrive as weeds have been 
bred out of the crop species that researchers are experimenting on so that 
there is little risk that such plants could survive if they escaped from test 
plots. 
Hence, there is no need to change the way such experimental tests are 
evaluated, the committee concluded. 
"The laws as they exist now are adequate for this," said panel member Edward L. 
Korwek of the Washington-based law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson. 
Researchers have less experience with microorganisms, the panel said, but 
ecological uncertainties can be addressed by considering the changed properties 
of the microorganisms, in addition to such environmental considerations as 
nutrient availability. 
In particular, the panel concluded that the fear of creating hazardous 
microorganisms, or pathogens, is overstated. 
Thomas H. Maugh II reported from Los Angeles and Kevin Davis from Washington 
