EXPANDED AIRPORT RECEIVING HIGH MARKS 
The expanded John Wayne Airport was functioning nearly flawlessly Monday as the 
first horde of business travelers swarmed in and out of the long, sleek 
terminal with a minimum of fuss. 
"Things are going amazingly well, considering," said Continental Airlines 
ticket agent Pam McPhall, who was setting up a new lost-and-found office for 
the airline. "I'm surprised." 
Airport officials faced a few minor glitches on the second day of operations -- 
one balky baggage ramp, a few magnetized security badges that failed to open 
doors -- but the most serious problems seemed to have been licked. 
Computerized boards that were not displaying the gate numbers of arriving 
planes on Sunday were flashing correct information by 8 a.m. Monday. Incoming 
planes were on time, and by 9:30 a.m., only one arriving passenger had reported 
a baggage problem -- his luggage cart had not arrived with his bag. 
Although several travelers said they had left home early in case of chaos at 
the new airport, traffic was sparse. Parking spaces were abundant, and the curb 
stretched far enough for every car to pull over while dropping off departing 
passengers. 
"There's elbow room!" reported John Akins of Laguna Niguel, one of about 20,000 
passengers expected to use the airport each Monday. "It's delightful, 
absolutely delightful." 
Although it was rush hour, Akins stood nearly alone under the arching ceiling 
while the rosy morning light filled the cathedral skylights. 
"I was just thinking, how long before it fills up?" Akins said wistfully. 
"Because it's bigger than you need right now, but it won't stay that way." 
"It's quite an improvement -- as long as it doesn't bring too many more people 
into Orange County," agreed Bob Clifton of Huntington Beach. 
However, bringing more people in -- and out -- is precisely the idea behind the 
$63-million Thomas F. Riley terminal, which officially opened on Sunday. Twelve 
times the size of the old terminal, it will be capable of handling up to 160 
flights a day within two years, double the current capacity. And it will 
accommodate up to 8.4 million passengers, compared with 4.5 million at the old 
Eddie Martin Terminal. 
Aesthetically, travelers were unanimous Monday in declaring the terminal an 
unqualified success. 
"It's gorgeous! It's gorgeous!" said Howard Schwartz of San Clemente. " 'Course 
there was something nice about the old terminal. It was like a small town." 
Blame the early hour, perhaps, but a few people stumbled through the terminal 
missing signs and scouting for maps. 
"When I left home last weekend, this wasn't here, so I'm a little confused 
about where I should be," said Faith Ackley of Tustin as she got off a plane 
from Oakland and had to follow the signs to find her way out. "I'm not sure 
where I am, and you used to know where you were at all times in (the old) John 
Wayne." 
"I have no idea where I am but this is beautiful," declared Adele La Sala of 
Huntington Beach. 
Several travelers, however, wondered whether they were paying for the new 
terminal in the form of higher air fares. 
"It's a beautiful airport, but I think the rates into here are outrageous 
compared to Burbank and Ontario," said Jim Watterson, a Bay Area-based 
salesman, as he searched for the hotel limousine that was to pick him up. 
Watterson said he paid $150 for a round-trip ticket from Oakland to Ontario 
last week, but $356 for Monday's round-trip flight from Oakland to John Wayne. 
"I think I'll go back to Ontario," Watterson said. 
