CONDO Q &amp; A: WHAT AGE LIMIT FOR CHILDREN TO USE LAKE? 
QUESTION: I am serving on the rules and regulations committee of a newly 
developed homeowners association. Our association has both a spa and a swimming 
lake that are enclosed or fenced. 
Our committee is now trying to formulate rules that state the ages of the 
children that will be allowed to swim unsupervised. We are concerned about 
small children using the spa even when they are supervised. We would like to 
have your advice as to the age restrictions that other associations use. 
ANSWER: The rules that you are formulating should have been adopted before the 
swimming facilities were even opened for use. You must check with your city or 
county code enforcement officials about age restrictions, spa temperatures and 
the rules that must be enforced by the association. 
You should have the required health and safety ordinances posted at the lake 
and spa or else you are probably in violation of your local codes. 
Most community associations require that children under the age of 12 or 14 be 
accompanied by an adult while using pool and spa facilities. Consult with the 
association's insurance agent to see what effect your regulations will have on 
your insurance costs. 
Spas are unsafe for young children. The temperature in the spa should not 
exceed 104 degrees. Signs should be posted discouraging spa usage by persons 
who have heart or respiratory problems, pregnant women and children under the 
age of 10. 
You may be accused of age discrimination unless you carefully research this 
matter and show that the association's restrictions are for health and safety 
reasons. Most associations that have very restrictive rules controlling the 
hours of pool usage by children are finding those rules challenged by owners 
who want to swim with their families. 
No Laws to Restrict Terms of Directors 
Q: The condominium association where I live was formed in 1976. I believe that 
the bylaws need updating because they have led to an unduly close relationship 
to the manager/developer of the complex. The current president has served for 
over four years. 
Are there any laws that control the length of time that a president or a board 
member can serve? 
A: I have not found any laws that restrict the length of time that a board 
member or officer may serve. I have seen some association bylaws that limit the 
number of terms that a board member may serve. I assume that is the type of 
bylaw change that you are contemplating. 
In general, it is not in the best interest of the association to have the same 
people serving for several years. Four years is not too long if the current 
board is doing a good job. On the other hand, four years would be much too long 
if the board members are not fulfilling their duties appropriately. 
Board members have a duty to make decisions based upon the needs of the whole 
association membership, not just for the benefit of the developer. 
Since you live in a resort area, many of the owners probably have another home 
as their primary residence. It may be difficult to find other people who are 
willing to serve on the board. 
Owner Entitled to Copy Mailing List 
Q: I would like to contact the other owners in my condominium association 
regarding the next annual meeting. I have requested the association mailing 
list from the board of directors but they will not release it to me. They say 
that they don't want to give the list out because it might be used to advertise 
my business. Actually, they know why I want the list and they do not want to 
cooperate or assist me in any way. What can I do? 
A: You are entitled to inspect the records of your association and make copies 
for your use. There have been many lawsuits that have been decided in favor of 
the requesting owner. Several states now have laws that compel the board of 
directors to provide access to records. 
Send a letter to your board of directors requesting permission to inspect and 
copy the membership list and mailing addresses. Request that the board discuss 
and act upon this matter at the next board meeting and notify you in writing 
within 10 days after the meeting. If your board does not meet on a monthly 
basis, then send your letter to the board president, requesting action within 
30 days. 
Management Company Wants Exclusive List 
Q: I serve on the board of a condominium complex. We have recently heard from a 
management company that is owned by a real estate broker. This management 
company states that the association should sign a management contract with 
their firm and amend the association's legal documents to include the 
following: 
1 -- Owners wishing to sell their condominium unit must list the unit with the 
management company. 
2 -- The management company will place the property on the multiple listing 
service. 
3 -- Owners offering their unit for rental must contract with the management 
company to handle the rental of the unit. 
The management company offers huge discounts on the association's management 
fee based upon units sold. 
What is your opinion? Would it be wise to revise our documents for this 
purpose? 
A: Wow! If the management company makes several sales in one month, they could 
end up owing the association money for the privilege of managing your 
association! What a deal! 
This is not a new gimmick. The owner of the management company knows that 
unless the restriction is placed in the declaration of the covenants, 
conditions and restriction (CC&amp;Rs), it can't be enforced. In my opinion, 
the amendment that it suggests would unduly restrict an owner's rights. For 
instance, if I were a real estate agent, I would not willingly give up the 
right to sell my own unit. 
Owners should have the right to select any agent they choose for either rental 
or resale of their unit. A restriction like this could end up being challenged 
in court. 
I urge you to select your management company based on the merits of their 
management ability and experience, not on the basis of a real estate license 
and the offer of projected discounts. 
If your association is definitely considering hiring this management company, 
consult an attorney who specializes in community association law. 
Hickenbottom is past president of the Greater Los Angeles chapter of the 
Community Associations Institute (CAI), a national nonprofit research and 
educational organization. She welcomes readers' questions, but cannot answer 
them individually. Readers with questions or comments can write to her in care 
of "Condo Q&amp;A," Box 5068, Thousand Oaks, Calif. 91360. 
