MOVIE REVIEWS; 
PACINO AND BARKIN MAKE A BIG SPLASH IN 'SEA OF LOVE' 
"Sea of Love" (citywide) is a satisfactory end-of-summer diversion, the kind of 
film that works as long as you ask nothing of it beyond simple escape. It's a 
slick, knowing genre film, through and through, a New York cop suspense 
thriller that we've seen countless times before. 
It does, thankfully, have a sense of humor, and it does have Al Pacino, Ellen 
Barkin and John Goodman, all of whom are a bright, constant pleasure. Pacino 
and Barkin do scorch the screen, although this doesn't happen until a full hour 
into the picture; nevertheless, they become helpful in distracting attention 
from various implausibilities. 
Writer Richard Price and director Harold Becker take more time and pains than 
necessary to establish that Pacino's Frank Keller, a Manhattan police detective 
unsettled by reaching 20 years on the force, is a savvy, dedicated pro, earthy, 
gregarious and volatile yet an achingly lonely man beneath all the bravado. 
Goodman's sharp, humorous Sherman, a detective in Queens, comes into the 
picture when he and Frank team up to try to catch a serial killer whose victims 
are selected in the personals column of a singles magazine. Their one break 
appears to be that the murderer is attracted to ads employing poetry. 
Barkin's Helen, the cool, sexy manager of a chic shoe store, is one of the 
respondents to an ad placed by Frank as a bait. After a bit of skirmishing, 
Frank and Helen commence a highly combustible romance. Never mind that this is 
contrary to orders; Frank is so carried away that he even resists having 
Helen's water glass checked for prints. Yet a series of incidents and remarks 
suggest that Frank's life could very well be in great danger. Golly, Helen even 
has a copy of Phil Phillips' "Sea of Love" in her collection of old 45s, a 
record that was playing over and over at the scene of the killings. 
On its most basic level, "Sea of Love" works because Barkin has the skill to 
keep us guessing whether she is actually a man-hating crazy or just a wary 
veteran of the dating wars. There's no question that we are meant to see writ 
in large the paranoia that cripples so many relationships out there in the 
urban jungle, but this is to take "Sea of Love" too seriously. (Actually, the 
film is preferable to the disturbingly muddled seriousness of "Fatal 
Attraction.") 
There's nothing at all profound in Helen or Frank, and Pacino and Barkin are 
engaged in showy star turns, loaded with attitudes and poses, that are fun in 
themselves and in fact appropriate for this superficial entertainment. Their 
duel of personalities is nicely anchored by the presence of Goodman, whose wit 
is as formidable as his bulk. Patricia Barry is heart-breaking as an elegant, 
lonely older woman who has answered Frank's ad. 
As sleek as "Sea of Love" (rated R for violence, sex and language) is, it can't 
quite keep us away from wondering how a smart woman like Helen, whose looks 
would stop traffic and whose work would bring her into constant contact with an 
array of sophisticated men, would ever resort to the personals -- unless, of 
course, she really is a psychopath. 
