SCIENCE AND MEDICINE; 
ARE WE ALONE?; 
TECHNOLOGY IS ADVANCING THE SEARCH FOR OTHER PLANETARY SYSTEMS 
Scientists have succeeded in recent years in unraveling some of the great 
mysteries of the universe, but some where out there, trillions of miles away, 
the grandest trophy of all awaits discovery. 
That trophy is a simple answer to the most haunting question of all: Are we 
alone? 
The quest for an answer has proved nearly as frustrating as it is important, 
because the distance between stars is so vast that it has been impossible to 
prove whether other stars even have planets and thus could support life. But 
today, scientists see themselves on the brink of discovering whether planetary 
systems are rare or common throughout the universe. 
"The technology is now at hand to search for planetary systems," said David 
Black, director of the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston. "We are 
witnessing the birth of a new discipline." 
That technology will include a wide range of orbiting telescopes that will have 
to function on a level of perfection almost beyond imagination. It will take 
years, and possibly decades, to design, build and put the telescopes in orbit, 
but scientists believe they are ready to begin answering a question that has 
bedeviled humans since the dawn of history. 
The search is hampered by the fact that there is only one known planetary 
system throughout the entire universe. 
"We only have one we can study, and that is our own," Peter Goldreich of 
Caltech told a planetary seminar at UC Berkeley marking the 100th birthday of 
the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. 
But because the solar system formed about 4.5 billion years ago, there is 
little evidence remaining that has not been severely altered by the passage of 
time. 
"All the clues we have are very old," Goldreich said. 
What happened all those many years ago to cause nine planets to form around a 
young, undistinguished star? 
While scientists disagree on the details, there is a consensus on how it all 
began. 
Experts believe that in its prenatal stage the sun was a giant cloud of gas and 
dust, called a "solar nebula," drifting through the galaxy. Like clouds in the 
Earth's atmosphere, some areas were more dense than others, and they gradually 
accumulated enough material to create weak gravitational fields. 
As the denser pockets grew in mass they swirled around each other and 
ultimately merged, causing the core of the cloud to grow ever more compact. 
In time, the inner core of the cloud collapsed from the increasingly strong 
gravitational field, causing an implosion that set off a nuclear chain 
reaction. It was a spectacular -- but not unusual -- event, repeated billions 
of times throughout the Milky Way galaxy. 
Another star had been born, a star destined to become a modest, average 
performer, like trillions and trillions of others. 
After its birth, the sun remained cloaked in a cloud of gas and dust for 
awhile. But the new star generated powerful forces, including an immense 
magnetic field and fierce solar winds that soon began sweeping the cloud away 
from the sun's poles and into a flat disk that swirled around its equator. The 
dust and gas then coalesced into planets. 
In recent years, space-borne observatories and advances in the sensitivity of 
ground-based telescopes have found evidence that disks routinely form around 
young stars, but they do not last very long. 
Richard Terrile of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Brad Smith of the 
University of Arizona captured a dramatic photograph of a star known as Beta 
Pictoris, showing a band of infrared radiation around its central core, 
indicating the presence of a disk. 
Astronomers Steven Beckwith of Cornell University and Anneila Sargent of 
Caltech took that one step further and discovered several young stars with 
disks. But their evidence suggests that a disk lasts only through a star's 
infancy. 
Other findings support that. 
The husband-and-wife team of Steve and Karen Strom of the University of 
Massachusetts found that 60% of the stars they looked at showed signs of a 
disk. 
"But as they age, stars lose the infrared signature," Steve Strom said. 
The disk disappears by the time a star is only about 3 million to 10 million 
years old. 
That leaves astronomers with the predicament of having evidence that disks are 
a common part of star formation, but with real difficulties in showing how a 
system like the sun's should be able to form before the star blows the gas and 
dust away. 
"The question is, can you form planets before the solar nebula goes away?" 
asked astronomer Peter Bodenheimer of Lick Observatory. 
Does that suggest that our solar system is possibly unique, an aberration in 
the star formation process? 
Probably not, most experts believe. 
"We expect to find that planetary systems occur rather frequently in nature," 
Black, of the Lunar and Planetary Institute, said. 
That optimism is supported by a team of Canadian astronomers who announced two 
years ago that they had detected evidence of planets orbiting around at least 
two nearby stars. The stars are so bright, and the planets so dim, that it is 
not possible to see them, but astronomer Bruce Campbell, who led the Canadian 
team, insists they are there. 
Planets would not simply travel in perfect circles around a stationary star. 
Instead, the entire system would orbit around a point at the center of the 
system's mass. 
That would cause the star to "wobble" slightly, Campbell said. Sometimes the 
star would appear to be moving slightly closer to a distant observer, and at 
other times it would appear to be receding. 
But since the star is so much more massive than the planets, the point around 
which everything rotates would still be within the star, just slightly off 
center. That, in turn, makes detection a formidable task. 
Scientists are now proposing some extremely sophisticated telescopes in hopes 
of finally resolving the issue. All of the telescopes would have to be placed 
in orbit because the measurements are so exacting that the Earth's atmosphere 
would distort the results. 
Physicist Eugene Levy of the University of Arizona believes it should be 
possible to detect planets through a process known as "astrometry." That 
involves tracking stars so precisely that any deviation -- such as that caused 
by orbiting planets -- could be demonstrated. 
A star with planets should travel in small circles. That would cause a slight 
change in the angle when viewed from the Earth. 
But what a tiny change it would be. 
Levy tried to dramatize that point in a presentation during the Berkeley 
symposium. Standing behind a lectern, Levy tapped the side of a light on top of 
the speaker's stand. 
He told his listeners to look at him while sighting along the side of the 
light. Then, he said, move in along the light the width of one atom. That's 
right, one atom. 
The change in the angle is comparable to what the orbiting observatory would 
have to measure. 
"We're talking small here," he said. 
Furthermore, it takes years for large planets to orbit a star, so the 
observatory would have to work flawlessly for 10 to 20 years, unattended, in 
space. 
It would be so sensitive to movement that even if astronauts could get up to it 
they could not touch it, so "it would not be possible to go up there and diddle 
with it from time to time," he added. William Borucki of NASA's Ames Research 
Center in Mountain View has proposed a system that could detect planets more 
quickly, but it is at least as demanding as Levy's. 
Borucki said that if a planet orbiting another star passes between the observer 
and the star, it would block out part of the star's light during its transit. 
An extremely sensitive orbiting observatory should be able to detect that drop 
in luminosity if the planet is in an orbit close to the star. 
Borucki's plan would have the advantage of detecting Earth-like planets that 
might be in the proper orbit to sustain life, but the precision demanded by 
such an observatory is mind-boggling. 
"Planets are small and stars are large, so your signal is not going to be very 
strong," Borucki said. "But it's within the realm of possibility." 
Yet even he admits, "It would take a real act of courage to say you've found a 
planet." 
JPL's Terrile believes the only way people are going to be satisfied that there 
are planets out there is if they can see them. That is not possible with 
existing technology because planets are so dim compared to stars that it would 
be comparable to seeing a lighted match in front of a glaring searchlight. 
"A planet the size of Jupiter would be about one billion times fainter than its 
star," Terrile said. 
Nonetheless, Terrile is working on a NASA proposal to develop a telescope that 
would block out the light of the star and still be sensitive enough to see the 
planet. The telescope would need a five-foot mirror free of microscopic 
imperfections. And it would have to remain so even after being launched into 
orbit. 
No one has ever built such a perfect mirror, but Terrile is working with the 
people who fabricated the optics for the Hubble Space Telescope and he believes 
it may be possible. 
Many astronomers are eager to see devices such as these made available, because 
they are convinced that planetary systems abound throughout the universe. All 
of that gas and dust surrounding newborn stars ends up someplace, and they see 
no reason why the sun's planetary system should be unique. 
But a few suggest that in many cases stellar disks form something else entirely 
-- the dreaded "brown dwarfs." 
It is possible that the gas and dust left over after star formation simply form 
another star, many theorists have argued, but there isn't enough of it for the 
star to get massive enough to ignite. If so, there could be trillions of "brown 
dwarfs" in the galaxy, small stars that are too dim to be seen. 
It would greatly diminish the number of planetary systems -- and thus the 
chances of intelligent life elsewhere -- if many stellar disks accrete into 
brown dwarfs instead of planets. 
Many scientists, however, see no reason to think the Earth is unusual. 
"We haven't found any reason to think that a planetary system is unique or a 
miraculous thing," said Alan Boss of the Carnegie Institute. 
If that turns out to be wrong, it would suddenly become a very lonely universe. 
