CONTRACT WENT TO SOUTH KOREA; 
LOCKHEED WORKERS HOLD SAVINGS BOND PROTEST 
Lockheed workers, angered over an aircraft parts contract awarded last week by 
the firm to Daewoo Heavy Industries of South Korea, have organized a protest in 
which they said they are canceling their participation in a U.S. savings bond 
drive. 
Lockheed said Tuesday that it had signed a contract with Daewoo worth up to 
$109 million for wing assembly work on the Navy P-7A anti-submarine patrol 
aircraft, one of the first times that military work has been contracted 
overseas. 
The symbolic protest was organized spontaneously by employees and not formally 
endorsed by the union, according to officials at the International Assn. of 
Machinists, which represents workers. The bond drive is part of a regular 
payroll deduction savings plan. 
It could not be determined how many workers had made the protest, but five 
employees who were interviewed by The Times said it was widespread throughout 
the Lockheed Burbank plant and was starting at the Palmdale plant. 
"I canceled mine the day I read the article (about the Korean award) and so did 
everybody else in my department," said Lockheed shipping clerk Carrie Thomas. 
"We could do that work here." 
Lockheed spokesman Jim Ragsdale confirmed that some workers had withdrawn from 
the program in protest but said he did not have a count of the participants. 
"It is unfortunate that employees would choose to do this as a way of striking 
back at the company for something they perceive as a problem," Ragsdale said. 
"It is not a problem for those employees at Lockheed Burbank." 
But employees said they were outraged that Lockheed would subcontract U.S. 
military work overseas when it was laying off U.S. workers and had shut down a 
plant in Watts only last year because of a lack of work. 
"A lot of people are really angry about this," said Leon Washington, a Lockheed 
production worker, who said he collected cancellations from 67 co-workers in 
his department. "We want to know why they would send this work to Korea when 
they shut down the Watts plant and laid those guys off." 
Chris Andrade, a union steward, estimated that 99% of the three dozen workers 
in his immediate area chose to join the protest. 
"We feel this could go on and on, like the automobile industry," Andrade said. 
"It upsets everybody." 
But Ragsdale said the wing assembly work to be performed by Daewoo was 
historically contracted out to a foreign nation, Canada, in the P-3 program, 
the predecessor of the P-7. 
"If anybody is losing work, it is the people in Canada," he said. 
Ragsdale also noted that Lockheed received bids from two other firms and 
conducted a study of what it would cost the firm to build the wing at its own 
facilities. 
Daewoo was "lower than the other bidders and they were significantly lower than 
our own studies showed would be the cost of Lockheed doing the work in house in 
the United States," Ragsdale said. 
But such rationale provided little solace to workers. 
"If they think our labor is too high, maybe they should get somebody from South 
Korea to run our country," said Thomas, the clerk. "They are crippling our 
country by sending all of this work overseas. The American people have nothing 
but poverty. I hate the fact that they are doing this." 
Asked if he thought some workers' reaction to Korea was different from their 
reaction had it been Canada, Ragsdale remarked: "I don't know. That gets into 
areas of what individual employee's ethnic prejudices are, and I don't know 
what they are." 
Ragsdale acknowledged that Americans are growing concerned about economic 
competition from low-wage Asian nations, but noted, "Korea does not have an 
airplane industry. We see no evidence that Korea is developing an industry that 
would become competitive with this country." 
He also noted that Lockheed must place some of its work in foreign nations if 
it expects to sell weapons to those countries, an arrangement called an 
"offset." But Lockheed officials were careful to note that Daewoo won the 
contract because it outbid others and not because of preferential treatment. 
