PUTTING CALIFORNIA BACK ON ENERGY-EFFICIENCY TRACK: A TORTUOUS STORY; 
CONSERVATION: THE NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL FIGHTS IT OUT WITH THE BIG 
FOUR UTILITIES AND THE PUC. 
Last month, the California Public Utilities Commission approved a far-reaching 
array of programs that give consumers and the Big Four utility companies 
incentives to conserve energy. But it took a battle royal to get it done, with 
the Natural Resources Defense Council, the utilities and the commissioners 
fighting it out. 
The two-year, $560-million program doesn't require citizens to turn down the 
heat or forgo the dishwasher. Its remedies for energy gorging will rely on 
proven construction techniques, efficient factory motors, retrofitting 
California's drafty and poorly insulated homes, sunlight-controlling window 
glass, fluorescent bulbs that don't flicker and a range of other long-ignored 
methods and devices whose aggressive use could save consumers many billions of 
dollars between now and the year 2000. 
Consumers will get rebates for embracing the innovations. In most cases, the 
products will pay for themselves in two or three years of significantly reduced 
energy bills. Renters, homeowners and building owners can then look forward to 
permanently lower bills. Utilities will be allowed to keep part of that savings 
as profit, a reward for enticing consumers to get involved. 
In the early 1980s, California led the nation in pursuing energy efficiency. 
Five years later, it had a competitive edge over states whose industries had 
stayed inefficient. Although we retain some of that edge due to permanent 
installations of conservation equipment, California is in a slide. Starting in 
1985, utilities began quietly slashing their consumer rebate programs and 
promotional efforts that had popularized energy efficiency. According to the 
NRDC, when conservation programs began to disappear, energy waste skyrocketed. 
No politicians in Sacramento led the call for a turnaround, since energy 
efficiency is not a sexy issue. While the utilities were arguably failing to 
build on gains made in the '80s, politicians were getting headlines by focusing 
on such issues as the 1987 tax rebate. Today, politicians are howling about the 
steep increase in a gallon of gas, another issue they can snarl over, change 
nothing and come off as good guys. 
In truth, Californians have needlessly been burning up more of their disposable 
income on utility bills than has been snatched away at the gas pump. While 
politicians whine about our overextended pocketbooks, few seem to care that 
every state taxpayer has already spent his or her 1987 rebate, several times 
over, on pointless energy waste in the home and workplace. According to the 
NRDC, California consumers are throwing away about $1 billion a year. 
To understand the problem, a good place to start is with the state's Big Four 
utilities -- Southern California Edison Co., Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co., 
San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. and Southern California Gas Co. Each is 
issuing statements to take credit for the sweeping energy-efficiency programs 
approved by the PUC in late August. 
Actually, environmental critics charge, the utilities would still be promoting 
increased energy use had the NRDC not embarrassed them on the front pages of 
California newspapers last year. 
When accused of fueling a new era of waste, utility executives insisted energy 
had become so cheap that consumers would not save money by installing 
state-of-the-art motors in factories, office-tower lighting systems that slash 
bills by 50% or extensive insulation in drafty homes. Such actions, they 
claimed, were just not cost-effective in an era of cheap energy. 
But energy-efficiency experts claimed to have caught the utilities in a bit of 
a lie. Conservation proponents trotted out one of their most prominent experts, 
Amory Lovins, director of the Rocky Mountain Institute. The institute employs 
about 24 people dedicated to conservation research. The whole place -- complete 
with computers and Xerox machines -- generates energy bills of just $5 per 
month. Lovins gets a big kick out of explaining that the alterations made to 
his mountain complex paid for themselves through dramatically lower energy 
bills in just one year -- as he explained last year to the PUC members. 
Surely, Lovins has pointed out, the utility executives knew what he has known 
all these years. Yet, according to the NRDC, the utilities were laying off top 
talent in their conservation programs while bolstering their marketing staff, 
which specializes in finding ways to sell more energy. One obvious explanation 
is that these executives were after profits. The apparent truth, conservation 
advocates say, is something else. 
In an arrangement unique to California, the PUC decided several years ago to 
decouple the utilities' profits from the amount of energy they sold. The idea 
was to guarantee the utilities a profit, regardless of how much energy was or 
wasn't used by consumers, so that the utility companies wouldn't make policy 
decisions based on the demands of their stockholders, who, critics charge, put 
profits before consumers. 
But something went wrong. As energy prices eased and energy became more 
plentiful in the mid-1980s, the utilities, some critics charge, began dreaming 
up new ways to sell more energy -- even as conservation efforts were scaled 
back. Ralph Cavanagh, the mind behind the NRDC's victory, theorizes that the 
Big Four executives equated idle generating capacity with economic decline and 
powerlessness. These highly competitive people simply could not stand the 
emotional letdown of running an industry whose best possible goal is to shrink, 
not to grow. 
The utilities attributed their decisions to waning interest in conservation 
among consumers. One executive explained that "social engineering" was not an 
appropriate activity for utilities. But Howard P. Allen, outgoing chairman and 
president of Southern California Edison, conceded that mistakes were made, 
saying, "How do you motivate Joe Sixpack when it's not one of his higher 
priorities? . . . The utilities and regulators have not done as much as we 
should, as good as we should. Well, we're like Joe Sixpack." 
As David Morse, a spokesman for the PUC's Division of Ratepayer Advocates, 
complained last year, the utilities, given their guaranteed profits, should not 
have needed any further monetary incentives "to do the right thing." 
This is something to remember as the the four utilities embark upon the most 
sweeping energy conservation program undertaken in the nation. 
