A BURGEONING COUNTY BUDGET? 
James L. Doti of Chapman College presented a simplistic and misleading analysis 
of the county's budget in the Aug. 26 commentary "Taxpayers will Eventually 
Balk at Burgeoning County Budget." 
The erroneous conclusion of the analysis is that the county budget has been 
mismanaged because expenditures have grown at a rate greater than population 
increases and inflation. 
By simply looking at the county expenditures from 1975 to 1990, one might be 
led to such a false conclusion. However, Doti's analysis lacks a much-needed 
recognition of the increasing complexity of the county structure and service 
system that has evolved over the past 15 years. This understanding is needed to 
truly grasp the expenditure picture. 
A primary reason the county's budget has grown over the past 15 years is that 
the state and federal governments have required the county to assume the 
financial and sometimes functional responsibilities for a host of services. 
Examples include mandated social services programs and construction and 
financing of new highways in the county. 
Additionally, Orange County has evolved into a metropolitan region. 
Consequently the county is a much more complex society today and it requires a 
different and a more substantial mix of services to meet demands. 
Had Doti taken the time to compare the services Orange County is providing and 
funding this fiscal year to those 15 years ago, he would have reached a 
conclusion that the county is now responsible for many more services, with more 
than 50% of the county's General Fund budget financed by federal and state 
government reimbursements. 
Doti's review needs some comparative analysis to truly understand county 
expenditures. A simple comparison of the per-capita expenditures among 
California counties would have revealed that Orange County has the lowest among 
all of the major metropolitan counties in the state. This speaks to fiscal 
responsibility rather than the fiscal irresponsibility imputed by the 
professor. 
ERNIE SCHNEIDER 
County administrative officer 
Santa Ana 
