COMMITTEE OKS LOAN FOR S.D. OLYMPIC TRAINING SITE 
San Diego's quest to cash in on the Olympic dream received a major boost 
Thursday when a key state Assembly committee agreed to lend $15 million in 
public funds toward building a year-round Olympic training center in the South 
Bay. 
The proposal, sponsored by state Sen. Bill Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights), 
received the bare majority of 12 votes required to pass the Assembly's Ways and 
Means Committee, over the objections of the panel's powerful chairman that the 
$15-million transaction was tantamount to a "giveaway." 
Campbell's bill would lend $15 million from the general fund to the private, 
nonprofit San Diego National Sports Training Foundation to help build a 
$70-million all-season Olympic training facility on 154 acres west of the Lower 
Otay Reservoir. 
Scattered Sniping 
The bill has been the subject of scattered legislative sniping because it does 
not require the private foundation to pay back the money. Instead, it calls for 
the public funds to be replenished through the sale of personalized Olympic 
Training Center license plates, at $100 a pair. 
Assemblyman John Vasconcellos (D-Santa Clara), chairman of the Ways and Means 
Committee, criticized the personalized license plate scheme as unrealistic. 
His criticism was based on a Department of Motor Vehicles analysis that 
estimated that such license plate sales would bring in $1 million during the 
first two years, but only $100,000 annually after that -- a scenario that would 
require 142 years for the state to recoup its $15 million. 
"There is no repayment provision, and it would take 200 years to repay the 
loan. . . . It's just a giveaway," Vasconcellos said at Thursday's hearing. "I 
won't be here then to make sure that it happens." 
But Campbell countered by saying that the DMV estimate was misguided because it 
was based on the $2 million in sales of specialized license plates for the 1984 
Los Angeles Summer Olympic Games. The 1984 license plate sales fell flat 
because they were not promoted, said Campbell, who was president of the 
Coliseum Commission during the Los Angeles games. 
"This will be significantly promoted," Campbell told The Times in an interview 
before the hearing. "Now we're going to go out and get significant public 
service announcements working to sell the plates, and you'll have a group of 
people who will also be out there to promote it -- all the Olympic athletes in 
California." 
Besides the financial objections, the political issues surrounding the bill 
also raised some eyebrows around the state capital. 
Lawmakers Surprised 
Some San Diego lawmakers said they were surprised that Campbell, whose district 
lies miles north in Los Angeles and Orange counties, was contacted by the San 
Diego officials to carry the bill. One of the training center's most public 
proponents is San Diego City Councilwoman Gloria McColl. 
"I continue to be surprised," said state Sen. Larry Stirling (R-San Diego). "I 
don't know why the councilwoman would have gone around the San Diego 
delegation. 
"We're disappointed that she did, obviously," said Stirling. "We wanted to be 
helpful and involved." 
But foundation director David Nielsen said Campbell was enlisted for the job 
after he received a glowing referral from a member of the state's Department of 
Commerce. 
Enthusiastic Backer 
McColl said Campbell enthusiastically took up the foundation's cause. "He came 
down and asked us about the program," said the councilwoman. "He was very 
enthusiastic and was interested in the benefits of it for Californians and the 
youth." 
McColl has spearheaded the drive to build an all-season training center for 
Olympic athletes as a way to provide wholesome models for San Diego youth. The 
center, which has received the blessing of the U. S. Olympic Committee, is also 
expected to provide an economic boon to the South Bay area near Chula Vista 
where residential and commercial development is strong. 
The EastLake Development Co., a partnership that includes the politically 
powerful J.G. Boswell Co. agribusiness firm of Los Angeles, has already agreed 
to donate 154 acres overlooking the Otay reservoir. The training center site is 
also contiguous to the former Otay Ranch, which was recently purchased by the 
Baldwin company, a large Orange County development firm. 
Nielsen said plans call for the construction of 250,000 square feet of 
buildings on the site, including a 300-bed dormitory, with about 1.5 million 
square feet of outdoor training areas. The foundation hopes to break ground 
next spring and complete construction in 18 months -- in time to start training 
for the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona. 
$7 Million in Pledges 
So far, said Nielsen, the foundation has received about $7 million in private 
pledges and will receive $1.2 million of that by the end of the year. 
In all, the foundation is hoping to raise at least $50 million from the private 
sector, an amount that includes the $13-million donation of land and 
infrastructure -- streets, sewers, drains -- from EastLake Development. 
Because the total project is expected to cost $70 million, Nielsen said the 
state's $15 million is crucial. 
Nielsen said that Thursday's action by the Assembly committee made him "very, 
very happy," and he added that he "felt very badly" about the criticisms voiced 
by Vasconcellos. Nielsen said the foundation will be supplying more information 
to buttress its assertion that specialized license plate sales will be brisker 
than the DMV expects. 
Campbell's bill now goes to the full Assembly for approval. It must pass 
through the Legislature before lawmakers break for the year next Friday for the 
money to be sent to the foundation this year. 
