S. AFRICA LEADERS SEE VOTE AS MANDATE FOR MILD REFORM 
The ruling National Party attempted Thursday to put the best face on an 
election setback, its worst in 41 years of rule, saying the slim parliamentary 
majority has given the government a clear mandate for modest racial reform and, 
ultimately, relinquishing some white control of South Africa. 
But some political analysts said the government's heavy losses Wednesday, to 
pro- and anti-apartheid white parties -- and its inability to gain even half of 
the total popular vote -- reflect growing divisions within South Africa's white 
minority and might paralyze efforts to dismantle apartheid. 
Meanwhile, police and church leaders argued over the number of people killed in 
dozens of election-day clashes between police and anti-apartheid demonstrators. 
Anglican Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu, criticizing "the brutality of this 
government," told a news conference that the police killed at least 22 people 
in townships near Cape Town. 
Police Deny Killing 22 
But a police spokesman denied the accusation, saying that 12 people had died in 
"mob and street violence" and only one person, a 16-year-old mixed-race girl, 
had died in unrest. She was killed when police fired shotguns to disperse a 
crowd that had fire-bombed a car, seriously injurying the driver, the spokesman 
said. 
"We invite Archbishop Tutu to produce the evidence," the police said in a 
statement Thursday. The police accused Tutu, the 1984 winner of the Nobel Peace 
Prize, of using a news conference to "propagate untested allegations." 
The black majority, which outnumbers whites 5 to 1, had no vote in the 
elections that brought the National Party-led government back to power and 
assured the selection of acting President Frederik W. de Klerk as South 
Africa's leader for the next five years. 
The National Party, which has had a firm grip on South Africa as the original 
architects of apartheid, saw its 123-seat majority in the controlling white 
chamber of Parliament fall to 93 seats, or 56%. The far-right Conservative 
Party won 39 seats, a gain of 17, which was less than had been expected. The 
surprise came from the anti-apartheid Democratic Party, which now has 33 seats, 
an increase of 13. 
The race for one of the 166 seats in the white chamber ended in a tie between 
the Nationalist and Conservative candidate, and a new election was called in 
that district. 
De Klerk said the strong showing by his left- and right-wing opponents will 
neither speed nor slow his party's plan for reform. That program includes 
bringing blacks into the political system on a limited basis while assuring 
that they cannot overrule white interests. 
De Klerk also has pledged to begin a dialogue with black leaders, although his 
party's crackdown on dissent, opposition to a one-person, one-vote system and 
commitment to retaining segregated schools and neighborhoods have prevented 
similar attempts to attract legitimate black leaders to the table in the past. 
Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the moderate leader of the 2-million-member Zulu 
nation, said the Democratic Party's gains herald "a new and very distinctive 
political era" in which "the National Party will have to look over its left 
shoulder and not its right shoulder." 
No Plans to Change Course 
But De Klerk said he has no intention of deviating from his party's middle 
course, although he added that he is encouraged by the fact that his party and 
the more liberal Democrats, who want to abolish all segregation laws and grant 
equal votes to blacks, now hold 70% of the white seats. 
"It is absolutely clear," De Klerk said, "that there was an overwhelming vote . 
. . for policies which give full political rights in some way or another to all 
South Africans." 
Although the Conservative Party nearly doubled its strength in Parliament, its 
popular vote increased by less than 20%, indicating less support than it had 
expected for its plan to strengthen apartheid and deny political rights to 
blacks. 
"Some of our supporters were overly optimistic," said Andries Treurnicht, the 
Conservative leader. But he said the election has given his supporters "a 
stable foundation for future action." 
De Klerk has raised expectations in foreign capitals that he will quickly move 
to improve the climate for talks by easing a three-year-old state of emergency 
and freeing black nationalist Nelson R. Mandela and other political prisoners. 
But senior government officials in recent weeks have sought to lower those 
expectations, saying that they do not expect significant moves from De Klerk 
before the end of the year. 
In his first months, though, De Klerk will have to overcome the international 
outcry that has followed his government's attempt to crush a five-week-long 
defiance campaign by black activists protesting apartheid laws and curbs on 
free expression. 
While some black protests have been allowed by the authorities to continue 
peacefully, many more have been broken up by police whips, dogs, tear gas, 
rubber bullets and shotguns. The authorities have arrested more than 2,000 
people in the past month. 
On Thursday, De Klerk defended the government's handling of the defiance 
campaign, saying the police had acted "with aplomb and in a very reasonable 
way." 
But anti-apartheid leaders argue that the police have provoked trouble in the 
townships by using their broad powers to order peaceful demonstrators to 
disperse -- and then attacking participants and spectators. 
A mixed-race police lieutenant, Gregory Rockman, said Wednesday that a white 
superior threatened to arrest him when he tried to stop officers from hitting 
bystanders and students picketing in a township near Cape Town. 
"They were just hitting people," Rockman said. "They couldn't care if they were 
innocent bystanders or not. They were running after them even when they were 
fleeing, hitting them. It seemed to me that they were enjoying themselves, 
feasting on the people." 
