CONSULTANTS MAKE IT EASY TO COPE -- BUT NOT CHEAPLY 
A few years ago, Sally Ryan was forced to acknowledge that her business had 
grown a little quicker than she had expected. Her office was such a mess that 
it might have qualified as a community redevelopment project. She didn't hide 
behind mere piles of files and paper work; her vision was obscured by mountain 
ranges of the stuff. 
When Ryan, a public relations specialist based in Granada Hills, spotted an ad 
for an office organizing service in Los Angeles magazine, she wasted no time 
hiring an expert to help sort through the paper jam -- even though it meant 
spending a few hundred dollars. 
"It has brought order and sense into my life," Ryan said. "It was well worth 
the money I spent to have an office that functions. I could never have done it 
myself." 
Like Ryan, a growing number of people are turning to consultants to solve 
problems that were once considered to be within the exclusive purview of the 
individual or the family. In the Los Angeles area, there are people who can 
plan a wedding, baby-proof a home, help one dress for success and tend to the 
needs of a depressed family dog. 
Up to $5,000 
Naturally, such services aren't cheap. A party consultant can charge $3,000 to 
$5,000 for a single event, and that fee doesn't cover the food or 
entertainment. An image consultant may charge a minimum of $75 an hour. But in 
today's frenzied society, there seem to be plenty of people willing to spend 
their hard-earned dollars to let somebody else do the thinking and worrying for 
them. 
Carol Viamant, an image consultant who, along with partner Shelly Wessler, runs 
At Your Service in Tarzana, offers personalized shopping at $50 an hour. 
Typically, the women will interview a client (and sometimes do a color 
consultation) before going to department stores to choose a selection of 
outfits. 
They're not the only ones who see green in color and image consulting. Vivian 
Dobay, who runs Style Connection in Encino, has done costuming for television 
shows for 12 years and has had her own business for the last eight years. She 
charges $35 an hour. 
Her clients range from college graduates on a limited budget to those who have 
made it and don't mind spending it. Thus, her shopping expeditions can take her 
to Rodeo Drive or the Cooper Building downtown. "It's easy to buy a wardrobe 
for somebody who has $5,000 to spend," she said. "It's harder for someone who 
has only $500. And those people still have to look good." 
(For $500, Dobay said, a man can count on a suit, a couple of shirts and ties, 
and a pair of shoes. A woman might get a couple of business dresses, an evening 
dress -- no designer labels -- and various accessories. Five thousand dollars 
buys some variety. A male client might expect several suits, sweaters and 
shirts, some sportswear, a coat and accessories. A woman could add 
designer-label suits and dresses and gowns -- or even some custom-made outfits 
-- to her closet.) 
Essential Service 
It's a service that Patricia Foote said she couldn't live without. Over the 
last four years, the Monrovia woman has used Style Connection dozens of times. 
"I tell her what I want, and she finds it. It's not only a service, she has an 
uncanny talent for putting together a wardrobe." 
Of course, clothes are only part of the picture. Brian Brase, a Reseda-based 
trainer, charges $60 an hour to visit clients in their homes, where he 
constructs and supervises custom-tailored fitness programs. His clients range 
from the "very sedentary" to "high-level athletes in the prime of their lives." 
Brase, who has a background in business and athletics, has about 35 clients -- 
some of whom he works with at gyms such as the Mid-Valley Athletic Club, Gold's 
Gym in Northridge and the Nautilus Fitness Center at Cal State Northridge. 
"These people use a trainer to make the time they are exercising more 
efficient," Brase said. "A lot of people go to the gym unsupervised and spend a 
majority of their time not working out purposefully. This is a very good use of 
discretionary time." 
Maureen McDade, a Northridge resident who works in the finance division of 
First Interstate Bank, uses Brase's services as often as three times a week. 
"There's a lot more to exercise than just sitting on a machine," she said. "I 
want to get the maximum results out of my workouts." 
Elaborate Parties 
People who want the maximum results from their parties sometimes turn to 
consultants. Life's A Party! in Van Nuys will produce elaborate handmade 
invitations, have them delivered by limousine, concoct a multi-course menu and 
set up elaborate decorations that can transform a back yard into, say, a 
Polynesian paradise. 
And as if all this isn't enough to make one's head spin, the firm can arrange 
to have parachutists drop in on the gala event, or can orchestrate a dolphin 
show in the swimming pool. All, of course, for a hefty price -- which can range 
anywhere from $5,000 to $100,000. 
"People today want to do something different. They want a fabulous evening, but 
they don't have the time or the inclination to do it themselves," said company 
President Charlie Scola. Life's A Party! subcontracts much of the work to other 
firms; it generally charges a 10% to 15% service fee for its efforts. 
Marti Snider runs A-to-Z Organizing Services, a Van Nuys company that 
eliminates office clutter for $35 to $65 an hour. "Some people are notoriously 
behind in handling paper work. They get to the point where they can't do their 
job efficiently," she said. "We help them sort everything out. Afterward, they 
usually feel freed from something that has been bugging them for years." 
A typical job can take anywhere from two hours to two weeks, but Snider also 
offers a maintenance service to prevent things from slipping back into chaos. 
In addition, she handles closets and storage areas in the home. 
How does one decide on a qualified consultant? According to David Lord, 
managing editor of Consultants News, a trade publication based in Fitzwilliam, 
N. H., it's best to check references and ask if a consultant belongs to an 
association that has specific guidelines, if not a code of conduct. "It's 
important to see if they can really do for you what they profess to have done 
for others," he said. "There are some people with some weird schemes out 
there." 
