CAUSE OF RENO BUS CRASH PROBED; 
ACCIDENT: RAIN APPARENTLY CONTRIBUTED TO THE COLLISION THAT INJURED DOZENS OF 
NORWALK SENIOR CITIZENS AND KILLED AN OFF-DUTY PATROL WOMAN. TWELVE PEOPLE 
REMAIN HOSPITALIZED. 
Twelve members of a Norwalk senior citizens group remained hospitalized in Reno 
Tuesday as investigators tried to find out why a car driven by an off-duty 
Nevada Highway Patrol officer strayed into the path of a tour bus carrying 44 
seniors. 
The officer, Lynne T. Hammill, 52, of Carson City, was fatally injured in the 
collision on U.S. 395, about 10 miles south of Reno. 
Pat Dyer, 69, of Norwalk remained in serious condition with a head injury at 
Washoe Medical Center in Reno, hospital spokeswoman Wendy Knorr said. 
Eleven other injured passengers were in satisfactory or good condition with 
broken ribs, back injuries, cuts and bruises at Washoe and two other hospitals. 
Thirty-three others, including the bus driver, were treated for minor injuries 
and released. 
Washoe County Sheriff's investigators said Tuesday that Hammill's 1986 sedan 
crossed from the southbound lanes into the northbound lanes and was struck by 
the tour bus at about 5:30 p.m. Monday. 
Hammill, a 22-year-veteran who worked court cases, had left work in Reno and 
was on her way home when the accident occurred, said patrol Capt. Ronald 
Forshey. 
The patrol transferred the accident investigation to the county Sheriff's 
Department because one of its officers was involved. 
A rain-slick highway was at least partially responsible for Hammill's car 
crossing the median of the four-lane highway, Sheriff's Lt. James Ganyon said. 
"When it rains sometimes it's easy to hydroplane," Ganyon said. "For some 
reason she lost control of the vehicle and crossed into the northbound lanes." 
The Norwalk Senior Citizens Center, which is funded by the city of Norwalk, 
chartered the bus from Majestic Tours of Redondo Beach. The bus left Norwalk 
Monday morning and was to return Thursday. 
The bus was en route to Bally's Resort Hotel. It had been raining 
intermittently, and the bus's windshield wipers swept off a light sprinkle just 
before impact, said bus driver Gregory A. Armenta, 27, of Manhattan Beach. 
"I noticed a car coming southbound . . . started fishtailing a little bit," 
Armenta said. "This vehicle just lost all control and went into a spin and came 
at me." 
Armenta said he lost control after the collision sent the bus onto the highway 
shoulder and down an embankment. The bus hit a tree and a utility pole before 
crashing on its side, Ganyon said. 
Eduarda Perez, who helped organize the tour, was sitting with her husband, 
Hector, in one of the front seats. Perez said she was pinned in a stairwell as 
the passengers on the left side of the bus spilled onto those on the right 
side. 
"When the bus rolled over a man fell right on my chest," Perez said Tuesday 
from her hospital bed. "I kept saying, 'Please get up, get up, get up,' and he 
finally got up from my chest." Perez suffered a fractured sternum and was in 
stable condition. 
Meanwhile, city officials in Norwalk scrambled to make arrangements for the 
seniors to return home. 
Mayor Luigi A. Vernola said some would return by plane and others by bus 
provided by Majestic Tours. 
