KENNY G SEEKING NEW DIRECTIONS IN HIS LIFE AND MUSIC 
For soprano-saxophone superstar Kenny G, change is in the air. 
He has moved to a house he bought a few months ago in this exclusive Seattle 
suburb, a finger of land jutting into Lake Washington, and recently bought a 
small airplane to fly between gigs. 
He says he has discovered the joys of mountain hot springs and rarely listens 
to the music that earned the Arista recording star three Grammy nominations for 
best pop instrumental performance. 
Billboard magazine named him contemporary artist of 1989 and artist of the 
decade and named his "Silhouette" album of the year for 1989 and "Duotones" 
jazz album of the decade. He was also voted top instrumentalist in the Rolling 
Stone magazine readers' poll. 
What's next? 
"I've got a few songs, a few ideas, but my next album is going to take me 
probably a lot longer to make than the other ones," he said. "My last few 
albums -- I love all the songs and each song has a different message, a 
different melody -- (but) the essence has a lot of similarities and I want to 
try to see if I can find something that is a step in a different direction." 
What direction? 
"I don't know. I just want to start playing my saxophone and have a melody come 
to me," he said. "To do that, what I'm going to have to do is sit on the dock 
and just relax, just hang out, play my saxophone and not work too hard." 
"I'm trying to make the right choices, but it's more important for me to kind 
of stay out of the way and just let it happen, you know, and not try to control 
it." 
Kenny Gorelick, Phi Beta Kappa and magna cum laude accounting graduate of the 
University of Washington, bought his first soprano saxophone 18 years ago, when 
he was 15, for $300. 
His former instructors, Johnnie Jessen, 81, who played in the vaudeville and 
big-band eras, and University of Washington jazz-band leader Roy Cummings, 
remember him for a practice-practice-practice work ethic. 
The payoff was speed-demon fingering that helped get him his first break, a 
weekend gig with Barry White's Love Unlimited Orchestra at age 17. 
Before long, he was the only white player in the funky soul band Cold, Bold and 
Together, fondly remembered in Seattle since its brief existence in the 
mid-1970s. 
"Being the only white guy in the band was one of the biggest learning 
experiences of my life," he told the Seattle Times last spring. "I not only 
crossed the color barrier; I found people were as happy to hear my blue-eyed 
soul as they were to hear the real thing. I got over my stage fright once and 
for all." 
A couple of years with Jeff Lorber Fusion of Portland, Ore., led to his first 
solo release, "Kenny G," a stage name he adopted because it "had a nice ring to 
it." 
Big money began rolling in with "Songbird," a hit tune that helped sell more 
than 3 million copies of "Duotones." The inspiration for the tune was Lindie 
Benson, an acting student and his companion since 1985. 
One of his performance trademarks is continuous breathing, inhaling through his 
nose while blowing out through his mouth, to maintain a note for long, soulful 
moments of suspense. Fans leap to their feet, clapping and cheering, as he 
slides into a smooth riff and the band picks up the beat. 
Playing, Kenny G said, "is a very happy feeling. It's coming from a divine 
place where I think all art comes from. Just think about the fact that it's 
actually inside of me, going through me and then coming out. It's just 
unbelievable, a total euphoric kind of high." 
He says he never listens to his own music after it's recorded and rarely to any 
other recorded music. "I really like the silence," he said. "I like just 
sitting out there and listening to the waves. I do. I like the silence." 
