2 WHO DEFRAUDED N. AMERICA S&amp;L AVOID JAIL TERMS 
The final two defendants in the North America Savings &amp; Loan scandal were 
each sentenced Monday to serve one month in a halfway house and ordered to pay 
$35,000 in restitution and fines for laundering $1.5 million stolen from the 
now-defunct thrift. 
Armando J. Vasquez, 53, and Frederick Youngdahl, 55, were convicted last month 
of bank fraud for submitting phony invoices to North America and then returning 
the money they received -- minus a $25,000 laundering fee -- to thrift Chairman 
Duayne D. Christensen. 
U.S. District Judge Alicemarie H. Stotler denied a request by federal 
prosecutors to imprison the two, agreeing with the defense that they were bit 
players in a fraud that caused the failure of the thrift. 
"I am extremely sorry that my actions, however small, hurt the public," said 
Vasquez, a Costa Mesa architect. "I am ashamed." 
Youngdahl, a Newport Beach engineer, declined to comment in court. 
North America was seized by regulators in 1987, and its failure is estimated to 
cost taxpayers $120 million. The case was described by federal authorities as 
particularly egregious because the masterminds behind the fraud -- Christensen 
and consultant Janet Faye McKinzie -- spent much of the thrift's money on 
extravagances like Rolls-Royces and lavish parties. 
McKinzie was convicted in March on 22 of 26 counts that included racketeering, 
conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud and interstate transportation of stolen 
property. Stotler sentenced McKinzie to 20 years in jail, the harshest 
punishment meted out in California and the second-longest nationwide for an 
insider involved in the nation's savings and loan debacle. 
The former real estate agent and high school dropout had pleaded that she was 
temporarily insane because she was under the influence of prescription drugs as 
well as Christensen himself, whom her attorney characterized as "the Jim Jones 
of the savings and loan industry." 
Vasquez and Youngdahl claimed that they, too, were taken in by Christensen, a 
major client of both men. Christensen was an unindicted co-conspirator in the 
North America trials. He died in a mysterious car accident just 9 1/2 hours 
before regulators seized North America. 
Youngdahl's attorney, Richard G. Hirsch, said his client was still in something 
of a fog about the transactions that got him into trouble. 
"Mr. Youngdahl to this day is still somewhat under the spell of Dr. 
Christensen," Hirsch said. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Paul L. Seave told Stotler he didn't believe the 
defendants' stories. 
"Each defendant, a successful entrepreneur, portrayed himself as an innocent 
dupe, totally ignorant of any wrongdoing -- or even the possibility of 
wrongdoing -- by Christensen," Seave said in his sentencing recommendation. 
"The defendants' stories, in the government's view, were wholly incredible." 
Stotler denied a federal recommendation that the two men pay millions of 
dollars in restitution, saying the $13.5 million that McKinzie was ordered to 
return in restitution and fines would cover the money stolen through the 
money-laundering scheme. 
"I do believe Mr. Vasquez when he says it won't happen again," Stotler said. 
Monday's sentencing marked the end of the federal government's criminal 
prosecution of those involved in the North America fraud. Altogether, seven 
people were convicted of crimes ranging from racketeering to making false 
statements. 
"Christensen and McKinzie used other people, including their good friends, to 
accomplish a massive looting of the savings and loan," Seave said after the 
sentencing. "It's sad they not only stole from the taxpayers but exploited 
their friends for their own greed." 
THE NORTH AMERICA S&amp;L SCANDAL 
North America Savings &amp; Loan in Santa Ana was seized by regulators in 1987 
and its collapse is expected to cost taxpayers $120 million. Seven people 
connected with the S&amp;L were convicted, including thrift consultant Janet 
Faye McKinzie. She received 20 years in jail in July, the stiffest sentence 
ever meted out in California and the second- longest nationwide for a S&amp;L 
insider involved in the country's thrift debacle. Below is a tally of the 
punishments issued against others involved in North America's failure. 
Defendant: Janet Faye McKinzie 
Conviction: Racketeering, conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud, interstate 
transportation of stolen property 
Sentence: 20 years jail; $13.5 million restitution 
Defendant: David L. Morgan 
Conviction: Bank fraud and conspiracy 
Sentence: 1 year, 1 day jail 
Defendant: Frederick Youngdahl 
Conviction: Bank fraud 
Sentence: 1 month halfway house; $35,000 restitution and fines 
Defendant: Armando J. Vasquez 
Conviction: Bank fraud 
Sentence: 1 month halfway house; $35,000 restitution and fines 
Defendant: Victoria R. Walker 
Conviction: Bank fraud and conspiracy 
Sentence: 90 days work-release; $5,000 fine; 3 years probation 
Defendant: Kathleen A. Taormina 
Conviction: Making false statement 
Sentence: 3 years probation; $5,000 fine; 300 hours community service 
Defendant: Thomas C. Clarke 
Conviction: Making false statement 
Sentence: 2 years probation; 200 hours community service 
Source: U.S. attorney's office 
