VIDEO LINK LETS UNIVERSITY REACH OUT; 
SCHOOLS: COMPTON HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS GET TO PARTICIPATE IN -- NOT JUST WATCH 
-- CLASSES AT CAL STATE DOMINGUEZ HILLS. 
Cal State Dominguez Hills chemistry professor Oliver Seely was burning wood in 
a test tube last week to show how chemical reactions occur. 
The experiment was relatively simple, but school officials point to its wider 
significance. 
Seely and his class at the university's California Academy of Mathematics and 
Science -- a specialty high school established this semester with 120 
ninth-graders from six area school districts -- had a participating television 
audience. 
Students from Dominguez High School in Compton were tuned in as part of a 
program that allows teachers and students at both schools to see and hear each 
other via a two-way television hookup. 
"About the only thing they can't do is smell the wood burning," Seely said of 
the Compton high school students. 
The audio-video link -- a cooperative effort among the university, the Compton 
Unified School District and Pacific Bell -- gives the Compton students a 
sampling of what college instruction is like, helps improve their academic 
achievement and offers them courses not available on their own campus. 
Classes are broadcast from a studio-classroom on the Cal State Dominguez Hills 
campus. A second television camera and a microphone at Dominguez High School 
allow students there to interact with the instructor and class at the 
university. 
Pacific Bell gave the college a $148,000 grant to purchase equipment and 
administer the two-year program, the second of its kind in the state. The other 
has linked Cal State Bakersfield with the mountain community of Tehachapi since 
November, 1989, phone company officials said. 
The Bakersfield link "bridged a geographical barrier of 40 miles," said Bob 
Lee, Pacific Bell executive vice president for marketing. "Here, it's not so 
much the physical distance but the psychological barriers" the Compton students 
may face concerning the difficulty of college classes or what college is like. 
University classes being broadcast to Dominguez High include one-day-a-week 
courses in anatomy, physiology, chemistry, physics and algebra, and a 
five-day-a-week German course. Plans are to offer other five-day courses in 
mathematics and science. Time is also allotted for guest speakers. 
Access to university professors allows Dominguez High School to fill staffing 
needs unmet by the Compton school district, said Laura Brown, technology 
coordinator with the district. 
"For example, we did not have instructors to teach German," Brown said. "The 
university did, and now our students are able to take a German course." 
Academy freshman Staci Davis, 14, said the hookup allows her small German class 
to carry on a conversation in German with Dominguez High students "as easily as 
doing it in our small group." 
When the program started three weeks ago in Compton, academy student Jose 
Arredondo, 14, was surprised when he "looked up into the screen and there was 
my brother," Juan, 16, a junior at Dominguez High. 
Students and instructors praised the system's ability to let them interact. It 
"allows students (at Dominguez High) to participate in the class and not just 
view it as they would with one-way video," said Warren Ashley, Cal State 
Dominguez Hills' director of distance learning. 
Many of the classes broadcast to Compton will be those offered at the academy, 
which is expected to become a full-fledged high school. Ashley said the 
telecommunications link will someday allow other schools to use the academy as 
a resource. 
"In a sense," he said, "the university becomes a broker" of enriched teaching 
by creating "an electronic forum" for education. 
Ashley said the program gives the university a way to recruit potential 
students, stimulate development of innovative and non-traditional teaching 
strategies and promote better relations with the community. 
Compton school officials hope to expand the system to the district's two other 
high schools. 
"We're fascinated by the program here," Dominguez High Principal Ernie Roy said 
over the audio-video link during a demonstration last week. "We feel there is 
no limit to what we can do." 
University President Robert Detweiler praised the system as being on "the 
cutting edge of today's educational technology." 
"When I was a boy," Detweiler pointed out, "distant learning meant walking two 
miles to school." 
