SALES DOWN, PROBLEMS UP FOR ADULT HOME-VIDEO INDUSTRY 
Anti-pornography groups haven't squashed the X-rated home-video business but 
they have certainly inflicted damage. The industry, which prefers to be called 
adult rather than X-rated, is suffering from dwindling profits, decreasing 
visibility and a steady shrinkage of outlets. 
Anti-pornography groups such as Citizens for Decency Through Law and the 
American Family Assn., working mostly on a state and local level, usually 
attack video retailers, encouraging the passage and enforcement of laws that 
forbid the sale or rental of "obscene" materials. 
"When retailers are prosecuted, they have to hire lawyers, which is costly," 
said David Kasten, president of the Adult Video Assn. "Some retailers unite to 
fight the legal battles, but it's still a financial drain. Some retailers find 
it easier to just stop stocking adult titles. In some states -- such as Utah, 
Florida, the Carolinas, Virginia -- you can't really market adult films." 
Lamenting the shrinking number of outlets, Mara Epstein, vice president of 
sales and promotion for the adult company Arrow Films and Video Inc, said: 
"Most of the big national chains don't stock adult titles any more -- too many 
complaints and hassles." 
And those that do tend not to make it obvious. 
Explaining why the Tower chain still carries adult titles, product manager John 
Thrasher said: "Adult movies are about 5% of our business. We just try to 
provide as wide a range of titles as possible for our customers. Retailers just 
have to be smart about it. They put them in a special section or under the 
counter or in some out-of-the-way place. They have to be very discreet about 
displaying them." 
But out of sight doesn't mean out of mind. 
There's still a big audience for these movies. The sale and rental of adult 
movies represents 12% of the home-video business, according to Adult Video 
News, the industry's most respected publication. Based on calculations from 
Paul Kagan Associates that the entire home-video industry last year generated 
$6.4 billion worth of rentals and $1.5 billion in sales, that would work out to 
a whopping $948 million in the sale and rentals of adult movies. 
And the adult business is actually even larger than these figures indicate. The 
numbers don't include business done by mail order or through adult-only stores. 
According to Adult Video News, there are about 1,300 adult stores in the 
country. 
"There's no way to measure the volume of business done through these outlets," 
said Paul Fishbein, editor and publisher of Adult Video News. "These people 
don't reveal financial figures, but a lot of money is generated both by the 
adult stores and mail order." 
Nevertheless, profits in the adult home-video industry are down. Part of the 
problem is that prices have dropped drastically since the gravy days of the 
early '80s, when retail prices were often in the $80-$90 range. Though major 
new releases still retail for $40-$60, many titles sell for $14-$20. 
Shipments are down too. "With fewer outlets, you can't ship as many copies as 
you could years ago," said Arrow Video's Epstein. "Now you ship about 2,000 
copies of a title -- 5,000 is great. In the old days you could ship 25,000 
copies of a good title." 
The industry has made some changes in an effort to adapt. Some companies, 
including Arrow Video, are exploring other outlets -- such as liquor stores -- 
and different marketing techniques, such as using low-key, inoffensive pictures 
on the packages so that store-owners will be more inclined to stock the titles. 
In addition, 98% of the adult movies are now shot on videotape rather than film 
because it's cheaper. The average movie on videotape now costs between $10,000 
and $50,000 to make, Fishbein said, compared to about $100,000 to shoot on 
film. 
It used to be that shooting on film was necessary because most of the movies 
would first be shown in adult theaters. But the home-video boom doomed the 
theater business. According to Fishbein, there were about 1,500 adult theaters 
in the country at the beginning of the decade. Now there are fewer than 300. 
Along with shrinking profits, another problem plaguing the adult home-video 
industry is what various officials describe as a drop-off in the quality of the 
product. "Only about 15% of what's coming out is quality," Fishbein said. 
"There are too many garbage movies on the market -- poorly shot, poorly made." 
Much of this inferior product is released by small, low-overhead companies that 
are the scourge of the industry. Such outfits sell old movies as if they were 
new, use low-quality tape, duplicate on slow speed (often resulting in a fuzzy 
picture) and frequently package the same movie under a different title. Major 
adult companies such as Arrow, Caballero and VCA are furious at these renegade 
firms for flooding the market with low-cost product, which drives all prices 
down. 
These low-quality tapes, Fishbein insisted, undermine the adult industry by 
turning consumers off. "They feel ripped off, so they stay away from adult 
movies," he said. "The way things have been going, this industry can't afford 
to alienate customers." 
