U.S. ORDERS IN TROOPS TO QUELL ISLAND VIOLENCE; 
ST. CROIX LOOTING AND LAWLESSNESS IN WAKE OF HURRICANE DAMAGE SPURS 
AUTHORIZATION BY BUSH 
President Bush ordered more than 1,000 military police, federal marshals and 
FBI agents to St. Croix on Wednesday as the Coast Guard began evacuating 
residents and tourists terrorized by violence on the streets and looting in 
stores and homes shattered by Hurricane Hugo. 
In a wave of lawlessness that spread across the island, eyewitnesses reported 
looting by men and women, children and the elderly, even police and National 
Guardsmen. Armed gangs were reported roaming the streets. Ham radio operators 
said between 300 and 500 inmates had broken out of a hurricane-damaged prison 
and were loose in the city. 
Tourists and residents alike pleaded for evacuation. Fifteen tourists were 
quoted as telling the first outsiders to arrive on the island after Hugo's 
devastation: "Please get food! Please get water! Please help us! They're 
looting. We've seen police looting. We've seen National Guard looting. There's 
no law and order here." 
Some looters offered poverty as the justification for plundering. Roberto 
Rivera, 22, a store clerk whose wife pushed a cart full of clothes and shoes, 
said: "When starvation comes, people are going to start breaking into people's 
homes. People are afraid of running out of food and are taking stuff from the 
stores even if they don't want to." 
Several of the looters insisted that shop owners had invited them to help 
themselves, explaining that their insurance would cover the losses. 
In Washington, Bush announced that he had authorized the troops and federal 
police because "conditions of domestic violence and disorder exist in and about 
the Virgin Islands endangering life and property." He said local law 
enforcement could no longer keep the peace. 
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Bush authorized deployment after 
receiving a request for help from Virgin Islands Gov. Alexander Farrelly. In 
Christiansted, the governor said he had not asked for federal help to restore 
order. But Holland Redfield, a Virgin Islands territorial senator and 
legislative liaison to the White House, said he asked for assistance from 
Washington. 
Fitzwater said Bush's authorization called for deployment "as necessary." That 
left the actual dispatching of military police units and federal police 
officers up to Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburg and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. 
At the Justice Department, spokesman David Runkel said Thornburg sent 100 U.S. 
marshals and FBI agents to Christiansted immediately. At the Pentagon, Lt. Col. 
Keith Schneider said that Cheney was preparing to send 1,100 military policemen 
from bases in Texas, Missouri, Louisiana and North Carolina. 
Heavily armed Coast Guardsmen began evacuating tourists and residents from the 
island even before the troops and federal police arrived. Personnel from the 
cutter Bear went ashore during the afternoon and took 40 people back to the 
ship, said John Ware, a petty officer at Coast Guard headquarters in San Juan, 
Puerto Rico. 
"Our shore party basically determined there was a complete breakdown of 
authority," Coast Guard Lt. Jeff Karonis said in Miami. "There's a very high 
indication that innocent people are going to get hurt in an act of violence 
there. We don't know who is in control of the island. There is widespread 
looting. 
"There doesn't seem to be a form of control." 
The Coast Guard said the evacuees were being taken to Puerto Rico. It said six 
cutters were in the area and that a C-130 cargo plane was ready to help if 
needed. 
Claim Response Slow 
Many residents of St. Croix complained bitterly about what they called the slow 
response to their plight from local and U.S. authorities "I can't believe there 
are no U.S. troops or presence here yet. We are a U.S. territory," said Marise 
James, 31, an attorney in Christiansted. "We feel terribly forgotten." 
Throughout the day, looters sacked stores at Sunny Isle, the island's largest 
shopping center, and at markets and smaller shops through Christiansted. 
A few merchants guarded store doors. At one shopping center on the outskirts of 
town, armed men stood watch on the roofs of several large stores. Outside of 
one electronics store, a makeshift plywood sign read: "Looters will be shot on 
sight." 
But the looters had free access to most stores. They carried bags and boxes, 
wheeled carts full of food, clothes and household items. Some even packed 
furniture onto the beds of pickup trucks. 
The mood among the looters was casual, almost jovial, and the scene had the 
appearance of a weekend flea market. 
Fail to Report 
Police and National Guardsmen stationed on the island were hardly visible 
outside the downtown area. Many of them, coping with their own property losses, 
had not yet reported for duty, according to officials. 
Although some residents said they had personally seen National Guardsmen 
packing looted goods into their trucks, government officials denied that this 
happened. They said guardsmen may have been retrieving stolen goods or 
delivering food to shelters. 
For Paul Gelep, a retired jeweler from Fitchburg, Mass., his St. Croix 
"shangri-la" had turned into a "living hell." 
Gelep, who moved to Christiansted in February, survived the terror of Hurricane 
Hugo's devastating assault -- but now lives in fear of looters. 
He and his neighbors began taking turns standing armed guard at their large 
trailer home park. 
'Completely Isolated' 
"We're completely isolated here," said Gelep, sitting in the kitchen of his 
trailer, one of the few Hugo left standing. "We do have some weapons. Our backs 
are up against the wall. If it's necessary, we'll use them." 
Tourists sat on the porch of the King Christian Hotel, protected by hotel 
employees carrying shotguns. "It was horrendous," said Rose Hertzog of 
Northampton, Pa. "I thought we were going to die." 
In addition to pleading poverty, looters argued that, once food supplies were 
exhausted, they would not be able to feed their families. 
"Everybody else is doing it, why shouldn't we?" said one young housewife. 
Eugene Mitchell stood watch at his small grocery store and called the situation 
"near anarchy." 
Mitchell, who claimed good rapport with his customers and neighbors, said the 
looters had been "very respectful -- while I'm here." The problem, he said, is 
when he went away. "I just stay here 'till I fall, and then I go home to sleep. 
"We need federal troops to reassure the community that the government is in 
place and doing its best to get a handle on a very unfortunate situation," 
Mitchell said. "We don't have the manpower to do it alone." 
Armed Mobs Reported 
Reports reaching Washington said machete-armed mobs had taken to streets on St. 
Croix -- and that looters included even small children and old women. 
Amateur radio reports relayed from the island said that prisoners who had 
escaped its hurricane-damaged prison were terrorizing residents. Gunshots were 
heard. 
Frank A. Bracken, undersecretary of Interior, ordered to go to the Virgin 
Islands on Tuesday, confirmed that the prison had been damaged and that inmates 
had gotten loose. He told of a general feeling of fear. 
Bracken told his boss, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr., that the federal 
government needed to establish security before aiding post-hurricane cleanup. 
"He said there had been a lot of devastation, that every store he had seen on 
the island appeared to have been looted, and that he was very concerned about 
security," said Interior spokesman Steve Goldstein. 
A Coast Guard spokesman said: "Our understanding is that there has been a 
breakdown in law and order. . . . The situation is serious. Looting and civil 
disturbances continue." 
Storm devastation on St. Croix was widespread. 
Most of the homes on the island were badly damaged or destroyed. Dozens of 
small boats littered parking lots, where they had been towed. Others rested 
awkwardly against the sides of buildings. At a small sea-plane landing site 
near the bay, several aircraft lay tumbled over on their sides. 
Roads throughout the island remained littered with fallen trees and broken 
power poles and electrical lines. Three days after Hugo's ravaging passage, St. 
Croix was still without water or lights or telephones. 
It remained virtually cut off from the outside world. 
Gov. Farrelly, who stopped briefly to talk to a small group of reporters 
visiting the island by helicopter, said up to 70% of its structures were 
destroyed. He said it will take four weeks to restore water service and 
electrical power. 
Farrelly said he would maintain an 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. curfew. 
In his request for federal help, Redfield, the Virgin Islands territorial 
senator, said he had described the scene on St. Croix as the devastation left 
by "an atom bomb" -- but that the first priority for assistance was 
"reestablishing law and order." 
"If it continues this way, panic will set in and it will get worse," Redfield 
said. 
Before the evacuation, the Coast Guard had been involved in hurricane relief. 
At the same time that he authorized troop deployment, Bush declared the Virgin 
Islands a disaster area. The declaration made more hurricane relief available, 
along with federal disaster assistance. A similar declaration was expected for 
Puerto Rico. 
In Puerto Rico, at the north end of Hugo's arc of destruction, the hurricane 
was being called the territory's worst natural disaster in half a century. Gov. 
Rafael Hernandez Colon described it as a "tragedy of the greatest proportions" 
and said he would ask President Bush to declare the island a disaster area. 
In Washington, White House officials said Bush already had ordered the Pentagon 
to send troops and equipment to restore electricity and water. 
The Pentagon sent a C-141 jet transport with portable generators and 
communications gear and another with 17 tons of additional equipment and 16 
officials from the Federal Emergency Management Administration. The Coast Guard 
flew an HC-130 cargo plane between San Juan and the offshore island of Vieques. 
It carried emergency supplies to the island. 
Troops Patrol Capital 
National Guard troops patrolled the capital of San Juan to prevent plundering. 
Thirty persons reportedly were arrested for looting, but officials said the 
police were able to bring the situation under quick control. 
Lack of fresh water posed a serious problem for homes, hotels, hospitals and 
emergency shelters. Banks and supermarkets in San Juan were open on a limited 
basis, but retail stores remained closed, their windows cracked, taped or 
boarded up. 
All across San Juan, people were selling water, milk, juice and food from the 
back of trucks. Everywhere, hot, thirsty residents searched for water, carrying 
large plastic water jugs. Streets were hopelessly gridlocked. Only a handful of 
stoplights worked, and traffic police were few. 
Only a few gasoline stations had emergency power to operate their pumps, and 
lines formed hundreds of cars long. 
At Isla Verde commuter airport, charter flights and Coast Guard aid missions 
resumed, taxiing around dozens of small airplanes tossed about the field. 
Damage there was estimated at $20 million. 
Luis Munoz Marin International Airport reopened to flights to and from the 
United States, but departures and landings were limited to daylight hours. The 
main terminal was operating on emergency power and few lights. 
Airline officials were unable to communicate with air fields in the Virgin 
Islands and at other Caribbean destinations. 
Contributing to this story were staff writers Bob Secter in Puerto Rico; James 
Gerstenzang, Ronald J. Ostrow, Stanley Meisler, Melissa Healy, Don Shannon and 
Douglas Jehl in Washington; and Paul Lieberman in Los Angeles. 
HURRICANE WATCH -- From Florida to the Carolinas, residents were preparing for 
the storm. Page 14 
CHAOS ON ST. CROIX 
President Bush authorizes troops to restore order on St. Croix after reports of 
wild looting on the U.S. Virgin Island in the wake of Hurricane Hugo. 
Coast Guard ships began evacuating tourists and residents "who fear for their 
safety." 
All communications on the island were wiped out by the fierce storm. Ham radio 
operators on the mainland heard pleas for help. 
Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh ordered 100 marshals and FBI agents to protect 
federal officials and property on the island. 
PICTURE OF CHAOS -- Officials painted a grim portrait of the events that led 
President Bush to authorize the use of troops, FBI agents and marshals to 
restore order. Page 16 
