LIGHTNING STRIKES AGAIN FOR IRISH; 
NOTRE DAME: FOR THE SECOND WEEK IN A ROW, A DEFLECTED PASS SPARKS A COMEBACK 
VICTORY FOR NATION'S TOP-RANKED TEAM. 
Rodney Culver's one-yard touchdown run with 34 seconds remaining lifted 
top-ranked Notre Dame to a 20-19 victory over No. 24 Michigan State, the second 
consecutive comeback victory for the Irish over a ranked team from Michigan. 
"I believe there's a special thing about Notre Dame," Irish Coach Lou Holtz 
said. "I can't prove it. But I think it's a special place. I believe the school 
is blessed. 
"But to say we're lucky would be taking something away from Michigan State's 
football team." 
Ricky Watters' two-yard touchdown run put Notre Dame (2-0) within 19-14 with 
13:13 left. 
The Irish began the winning drive at their 19 with 5:15 remaining, taking 12 
plays to score. 
Rick Mirer, who completed 14 of 21 passes for 155 yards, set up the score with 
a 24-yard pass to Adrian Jarrell at the Michigan State two-yard line. Mirer's 
pass bounced off linebacker Todd Murray and into Jarrell's arms. 
Mirer said it was the same play the Irish used last week for a key completion 
on a deflected pass in a 28-24 victory over Michigan. 
"I saw it hit him in the chest," Mirer said. "I thought it was a poor decision 
on my part. I heard it hit him in the chest. It made a thud. 
"I was getting ready to make the tackle." 
Culver scored three plays later. 
"Those two balls that were tipped the last two games very easily could have 
gone the other way," Mirer said. "There's definitely somebody looking out for 
us. There's somebody on our side." 
It marked the sixth time Notre Dame came into a game against Michigan State 
ranked No. 1. The only time the Irish didn't win was the famed 10-10 tie of 
1966. 
Notre Dame is 60-9-3 in games in which it was ranked No. 1. 
"We have no excuses, no alibis," Michigan State Coach George Perles said. "I 
told the team we aren't snake-bitten. You play the cards that are dealt and it 
works both ways." 
The 24th-ranked Spartans (0-1-1) stunned the Irish with 12 points in a 5:20 
span of of the second quarter to take a 12-7 lead. 
After John Langeloh kicked a 43-yard field goal, Murray blocked Craig 
Hentrich's punt out of the end zone for a safety, cutting the Notre Dame lead 
to 7-5. 
The Spartans then drove 56 yards in seven plays, highlighted by Hyland 
Hickson's 32-yard carry to the Irish one-yard line. Three plays later he scored 
behind a block by Toby Heaton. 
The Spartans went 88 yards in 12 plays on their only possession of the third 
quarter for a 19-7 lead on Tico Duckett's one-yard run. 
The Irish answered with a 66-yard, 16-play drive that was capped by Watters' 
carry on the fourth snap of the fourth quarter. 
Notre Dame took a 7-0 lead in the first quarter on Watters' five-yard scoring 
run. 
