U.S. CONGRESSMEN IN GULF REITERATE INTENT TO DRIVE IRAQ OUT OF KUWAIT; 
BIPARTISANSHIP: MEMBERS OF BOTH PARTIES SIGNAL POLITICAL SUPPORT FOR AMERICAN 
EFFORT. 
A blue-ribbon mission of American Congress members delivered assurances 
Saturday of political staying power for the U.S.-led effort to force Iraq out 
of Kuwait. 
"There is tremendous support in Congress and among the American people for what 
President Bush has done," House Majority Leader Richard A. Gephardt said on a 
midday tour of the La Salle, command ship of the Persian Gulf-based Middle East 
Task Force. 
Heading a bipartisan delegation of 22 members of Congress, the Missouri 
Democrat was expected to deliver the same message Saturday night to Sheik Isa 
ibn Salman al Khalifa, ruler of this small island nation, now bristling with 
foreign armaments. The House mission will make further stops in the gulf region 
and Egypt. 
Democrats and Republicans alike said political support for the American effort 
is solid, and none saw it as an issue in this fall's elections. "The President 
has support on both sides of the aisle," insisted Rep. William E. Dannemeyer, 
an Orange County Republican. "But one issue may come up," added the 
budget-focused congressman. "Who's going to pay for it all?" 
As the confrontation with Iraq developed over the past month, some gulf state 
officials have expressed nagging concerns that the American commitment might 
flag in a drawn-out standoff. But they have been buoyed by the continuing 
buildup of U.S. and allied forces and now speak in hawkish terms. 
Bahrain and other gulf states have opened their territory to foreign forces, 
and, according to military sources, American combat planes are now operating 
from the semi-secret Sheik Isa air base on Bahrain. No official confirmation 
has been made, but the forces are known to include F-16 fighters and Marine 
Corps aircraft. 
As the Congress members toured the La Salle, the command ship Blue Ridge, newly 
arrived from the Philippines, was docked at Manama's main port. The Blue Ridge 
is the flag vessel of Vice Adm. H. H. Mauz, who now heads U.S. Navy forces 
ringing the Arabian Peninsula. 
House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin, in shirt-sleeves as were 
many of the visitors in the sizzling summer heat of the gulf, told reporters: 
"The support is there for the long haul. The American public does not object to 
deployments abroad. They do object when people are getting killed with no 
objective in sight." 
The Wisconsin Democrat suggested the objective was clear in the gulf -- force 
the army of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. 
Asked whether he expected a long-term U.S. military presence in the region if 
the Iraqis withdraw, Aspin said it depends on the outcome of the confrontation. 
If Hussein is somehow toppled, he said, there will be no need for a major 
foreign presence in the region. If the Iraqi president retains power in 
Baghdad, "there will be a need for some sort of military force." He suggested 
it could be a multinational force, including Americans, in Kuwait. 
Rep. Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who chairs the Foreign Affairs 
Committee, said the few complaints he has received on the massive American 
military commitment have come from families of activated military reservists. 
Fascell, who represents a heavily Jewish district in Miami and Miami Beach, 
answered a question about the Israeli position on the conflict by saying: 
"Nobody can step into the Israelis' shoes in what they regard as necessary to 
the defense of their country." But, he added, if the confrontation threatens to 
break into open conflict, the American-led multinational force, not the 
Israelis, "needs to speak first." 
A delegation of American senators arrived in Bahrain on Saturday night and will 
review the situation with American military officers and Bahraini officials 
today. 
Meanwhile, British Foreign Minister Douglas Hurd was visiting nearby Qatar, 
which last week became the last gulf state to accept foreign troops on its soil 
in the crisis. He said the Qatari government has approved British plans to 
permit Oman-based Jaguar fighter-bombers to use Qatari airfields. 
