STATE REPORT FINDS MASSIVE ASBESTOS PERIL 
A state task force on the dangers of asbestos in public buildings has concluded 
that the cancer-causing material poses significant problems in most government 
facilities in California and that the cost of reducing exposure to workers and 
the public may run as high as $660 million, according to a report obtained by 
The Times. 
The alarming findings are based on inspections of 250 government buildings 
scattered across the state, including hospitals, police and fire stations, 
airports, libraries and courthouses. 
Inspectors found asbestos-containing material in more than 80% of city and 
county buildings they sampled. In 60% of the structures, the asbestos was in a 
form that could crumble easily, sending its lung-damaging fibers into the air. 
In 42% of the buildings, the potential health risk was severe enough that the 
task force recommended that the asbestos be removed or treated within a year -- 
and in some cases within six months. The task force also found less frequent 
but still significant problems in privately owned offices leased by the state. 
Government agencies have been notified about the asbestos problems in each of 
the buildings included in the sample, according to the report. And some have 
taken emergency steps to prevent asbestos exposure. 
However, the purpose of the study -- ordered by the Legislature in 1986 -- was 
to estimate the extent of the asbestos problem in about 40,000 government 
buildings and offices throughout the state and to determine the best way to go 
about the slow, expensive process of removing or repairing the material. 
As a result of its findings, the task force "urges all cities and counties to 
begin an inspection program as soon as possible." 
Assemblyman Burt Margolin (D-Los Angeles), author of the 1986 legislation, is 
angry that the Administration of Gov. George Deukmejian has taken so long to 
complete the study, which is almost two years overdue and still has not been 
released officially. The study was conducted by a private consultant under 
contract to the state Department of Health Services. 
"I'm outraged at the delay in this report and angered by the Administration's 
resistance to letting this information be made public and allow a cleanup to 
proceed in a rational fashion," Margolin said Monday. 
The task force report makes sweeping recommendations for rating the health risk 
posed by asbestos in different situations and advises government officials on 
how to identify problems that require emergency removal. 
Margolin said that he was surprised by the extent of the problem identified in 
the study. "I'm even more surprised by the state's slowness to act." 
The completed asbestos report is still awaiting approval by the governor's 
office before it can be officially released, said Tom Beermann, Deukmejian's 
deputy press secretary, who said he could not comment on the delay in 
completing the study. The governor's office received the lengthy report only on 
Friday, he said. 
Earlier this year, the Environmental Protection Agency ordered a near total ban 
on the manufacture or import of asbestos-containing products by 1996. Among the 
items affected by the ban are automobile brakes, concrete pipes and roofing 
material. 
Asbestos is one of a relatively small number of substances proved to cause 
cancer, not just in animals, but in humans. It can also cause chronic, 
debilitating lung disease among those exposed to its microscopic fibers. 
Ban Would Not Be Total 
Even an outright ban would not eliminate asbestos exposure because so much of 
the material has been used over the years for a variety of purposes. 
Because of its resistance to heat and fire, asbestos was used in materials for 
wrapping pipes and boilers and in ceiling and floor tiles. Removing material 
from buildings can itself be a source of asbestos exposure if the cleanup is 
not done carefully. 
The state task force found the most frequent asbestos problems in buildings 
constructed before 1976. 
The group's report estimates that it will cost $31 million to conduct a 
complete building-by-building survey of city, county and state-leased 
facilities. Surveys of state-owned facilities -- including state office 
buildings and university campuses -- have already been conducted. 
The task force recommended that government agencies begin by attacking the 
problem where the risk of exposure of workers and the public is highest. The 
group recommended that priority be given to police offices and medical 
facilities, which are used around the clock and where inspections turned up 
especially high levels of crumbling or damaged asbestos material. 
Could Be Left in Place 
In many cases, asbestos-containing material could be safely left in place if 
regularly inspected, maintained and labeled, the task force concluded. The 
group recommended establishing a statewide register of government buildings to 
keep track of cleanup and maintenance efforts. 
Although the task force report obtained by The Times does not include the 
results of inspections of each building in the statewide sample, those findings 
were released to individual government agencies last year. 
In Los Angeles County, for example, 20 of 56 government buildings in the survey 
were found to require immediate asbestos removal. Among the county facilities 
that required emergency action were Rancho Los Amigos Medical Center in Downey, 
the Lynwood sheriff's substation, and the Los Cerritos Municipal Court building 
in Bellflower. After a story on the contamination problems appeared in The 
Times, the county supervisors ordered emergency action to eliminate any risk to 
workers or the public in those facilities. 
