VICTIM REPORTED IN GOOD SPIRITS; 
ASSAULT: NEWPORT HARBOR HIGH GRADUATE IS DAUGHTER OF A FORMER SOUTHERN 
CALIFORNIA BANK EXECUTIVE. 
A 1986 graduate of Newport Harbor High School was reported to be in good 
spirits Thursday night after being wounded by a psychotic gunman near the UC 
Berkeley campus. 
Karen A. Grundhofer, 22, the daughter of former Southern California bank 
executive John F. Grundhofer, was among the six people injured when 30-year-old 
Mehrdad Dashti stormed the Durant Hotel bar and opened fire, killing one 
student. 
Dashti, who was shot and killed by a SWAT team, took more than 33 hostages 
during a seven-hour standoff with police. 
Wendy Raway, a spokeswoman for Grundhofer's father, now president and chief 
executive officer of First Bank System in Minneapolis, said Karen Grundhofer 
was able to speak with her father, who flew to California on Thursday morning. 
Karen Grundhofer, a UC Berkeley student majoring in sociology, was initially 
treated at Highland General Hospital in Oakland for a wound reportedly suffered 
when a bullet grazed her head. She was transferred to Pacific Presbyterian 
Medical Center in San Francisco about 3:30 p.m. Hospital officials said she was 
listed in stable condition. 
Raway said Karen Grundhofer apparently had suffered seven separate wounds but 
that none appeared to be serious. 
A Pacific Presbyterian spokeswoman said Grundhofer was able to talk with family 
members. 
Julie Jacqueline Evans, 23, Grundhofer's former roommate at UC Berkeley and a 
schoolmate at Newport Harbor High School, said she learned that her friend was 
"talking, laughing and showing people her bullet wounds." 
Evans, who graduated from UC Berkeley last May, said Grundhofer worked at the 
Durant Hotel as a desk clerk. She said the hotel's bar was a favorite meeting 
place for Grundhofer and her friends. 
Evans said Grundhofer was planning to graduate next spring and pursue a career 
in hotel management. In between semesters, Evans said, Grundhofer continued to 
live in Newport Beach with her mother. 
"It's just so crazy that this happened," Evans said. "She's really a strong 
person." 
Former Newport Harbor High School Principal Tom Jacobson described Grundhofer 
as the "center of a lot of social activity at the school." 
"She was probably one of the most outgoing personalties on campus," Jacobson 
said. "The kids gave her a nickname, 'Grundo,' which was meant in a positive 
light. You would hear that nickname shouted across campus. I used to tease her 
because she drove a brand-new blue Ford Bronco. I teased her because it was 
better than the car I drove." 
"She is one of those kids who has personality-plus," Jacobson said. "She was 
one of those students who truly enjoyed school." 
During her high school years, Grundhofer was involved with the girl's high 
school soccer team. She was also among the debutantes at a 1986 Children's Home 
Society ball. 
Her father was Wells Fargo Bank's top executive in Southern California before 
resigning last February to head the First Bank System. He also served as 
chairman of the Southern California United States Olympic Committee. 
Times correspondent Laura Michaelis contributed to this report. 
