DANCE; 
FLOWERING IN THE POST-BALANCHINE ERA 
Margaret Tracey and Ben Huys are part of the new generation of New York City 
Ballet dancers who never knew company founder and choreographer George 
Balanchine in any personal way and are now entrusted with his ballets. 
But despite lacking the benefits of a personal connection with the seminal 
choreographer, these two talents have flowered in recent seasons, as each took 
on demanding assignments with aplomb. 
Tracey and Huys, both 23, come to Orange County as soloists who have 
accumulated a considerable repertory of important roles. While a one-week 
season (performances continue through Sunday, Sept. 30) can give only a 
sampling, each has some plum assignments. 
Tracey danced Balanchine's "Tarantella" on opening night and will perform the 
featured role that Peter Martins created for her in his most recent ballet, 
"Fearful Symmetries," on Friday, Sept. 28, and Saturday, Sept. 29, at the 
Performing Arts Center. Huys was in the First Theme of Balanchine's "The Four 
Temperaments" on opening night and will be seen as the Man in Green in Jerome 
Robbins' "Dances at a Gathering" on Thursday, Sept. 27, and at the matinee on 
Saturday, Sept. 29. 
During breaks between recent rehearsals at the New York State Theater, Tracey 
and Huys each took time to look back on the route that led them to NYCB. 
Both had to travel a considerable distance -- albeit in opposite directions -- 
to get to New York, and overcome initial discomfort at finding themselves alone 
in the city at a very young age. 
Tracey, one of four children of a talented family in Pueblo, Colo. (her younger 
sister, Kathleen, is also in the company), came to the NYCB-affiliated School 
of American Ballet at 15 after auditioning in Colorado, and studied there for 
four years. 
"I was dying to get out of Pueblo," recalled Tracey, who received the bulk of 
her early training from her mother. "I knew that if I wanted to be a 
professional, Colorado had nothing to offer me." 
Huys, a native of Ghent, Belgium, who received his ballet training in Antwerp, 
had longed to join the company but had been frustrated that NYCB does not hold 
auditions. His success at the Prix de Lausanne competition won him a 
scholarship to the School of American Ballet in 1985, and after a year of study 
there, he achieved his long-held goal. 
However, Huys' first months at the school were frustrating. His Soviet-based 
early training was at odds with the speed and attack emphasized there. He was 
ready to head back to Europe but was persuaded to stick it out. 
While both dancers seem to recognize the significance and uniqueness of the 
Balanchine legacy and of the extensive challenges that NYCB repertory holds for 
them, each is also out to break some molds. 
Huys is concerned that he not be "stereotyped. . . . I would like to do as many 
different kinds of roles as I can. Otherwise, you don't develop into a complete 
dancer." 
He has his eye on several of Balanchine's knottier Stravinsky ballets, such as 
"Agon" and "Duo Concertante." 
Tracey mentions "Stravinsky Violin Concerto" as a Balanchine ballet that others 
might not picture her in but that she hopes to try. 
Tracey has acquired one of the primary traits associated with Balanchine's 
dancers: a boldness and energy on stage, a willingness to take chances and give 
a little extra. "I don't know how to hold back on stage," she said. "If I did, 
I'd feel I was cheating not only myself but also the audience, and I wouldn't 
have as much fun." 
What: The New York City Ballet. 
When: Through Sunday, Sept. 30. 
Where: Orange County Performing Arts Center, 600 Town Center Drive, Costa Mesa. 
Whereabouts: One block east of South Coast Plaza shopping center. 
Wherewithal: $14 to $49. 
Where to Call: (714) 740-2000. 
