CSI HONORED BY U.S. CUSTOMS FOR ROLE IN BLOCKING NUCLEAR PARTS TO IRAQI FIRM 
In retrospect, Jerry Kowalsky says his good deed is all the more important, now 
that Saddam Hussein's army has conquered Kuwait and lurks only a few miles from 
U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia. 
"I think we helped put a dent in Saddam Hussein's development of nuclear 
weapons," said Kowalsky, the 57-year-old president of CSI Technologies of San 
Marcos. 
Friday morning, Kowalsky received the Yorktown Certificate, which can only be 
bestowed by the Commissioner of the U.S. Customs Service, for his part in 
cracking an Iraqi plan to illegally export nuclear weapon detonation devices 
made by his firm. 
"I feel it was a privilege to have been put in a position to have slowed down 
Saddam Hussein's development program for nuclear weapons," he said. But "sooner 
or later," he added, the Iraqi leader is bound to obtain nuclear weapons. 
In September, 1988, Kowalsky received a transmission from a London exporter 
inquiring about the purchase of high-voltage capacitors, which, aside from 
detonators, have a wide range of uses -- depending on their power -- including 
flashcubes and heart defibrillators. 
But the specifications that came with the request made it clear to Kowalsky 
that a hospital was not the final destination. 
So he called federal officials and soon was teamed with San Diego Customs agent 
Daniel Supnick, who also received the award, but privately, as he is still 
undercover. 
The work of those two resulted in seven indictments in March. 
The episode started when Euromac Ltd., a London firm headed by Ali Ashour 
Daghir, sent CSI a query about a possible purchase of 40 capacitors. 
After Kowalsky notified authorities, customs officials said they identified 
Euromac as having done millions of dollars of business with Iraq during its war 
with Iran. 
In September, 1989, after a year of correspondence and undercover work, 
Kowalsky and Supnick, posing as a CSI executive, traveled to London, where they 
met with Daghir and other Iraqi representatives at the Cavendish Hotel. 
There the Iraqi agents specified that the capacitors were to be built to 
military standards, customs officials said. 
The 18-month case culminated in late March with indictments for five 
individuals -- including Daghir -- and two British companies, including 
Euromac. 
Since the Iraqi representatives thought CSI was going along with their request, 
customs let the company handle all the paper work in the transaction, in effect 
running the operation entirely through them. 
As a detonator, the capacitor -- a gray cylinder about the size of a small soup 
can attached to a black plastic stem about 14 inches long -- is used to ignite 
conventional explosives, which implode the nuclear fuel, bringing it to 
critical mass, Kowalsky said. 
CSI, which has 35 employees, makes capacitors primarily for medical use, 
including defibrillators and lasers. 
