CHANGING STRIPES; 
ONCE STEADFASTLY OPPOSED, KATHY CHRISTIAN OF WEST HILLS NOW RELISHES THE THRILL 
OF THE HUNT 
Kathy Christian performs all the usual household duties each weekend at her 
family's two-story West Hills home. She vacuums the carpets. She does the 
laundry. She washes the kitchen floor. She dusts the wildebeest. 
And, if time allows, she brushes the mouflon sheep, runs a damp rag over the 
horns of the greater kudu and straightens out the zebra-skin (and head) rug 
that adorns her dining-room floor. 
This is no collection of moth-eaten relics salvaged from a pawn shop. These are 
genuine big-game trophies taken while on safari, and that they occupy wall 
space at the Christian home is rather remarkable. 
Up until about a year ago, Christian, 42, was a woman steadfastly opposed to 
hunting. But with one not-so-perfect but still fatal shot from a .280-caliber 
rifle on a scorching African day in August last year, she became a hunter. 
The transformation was extraordinary -- and one that Christian finds difficult 
to explain. 
Most people who have not hunted by the time they reach the age of 40 don't 
change course. It is a sport instilled in youth by a hunting father or 
grandfather, most commonly in rural areas. 
"For all of my life I was an anti-hunter," Christian said. "When my husband 
went hunting, I would actually pray that the animals got away." 
Unfortunately for several animals that once roamed the South African veld and, 
most recently, a black bear that inhabited the woods of Alberta, Canada, 
Christian no longer feels that way about hunters. 
In the months since her first kill, she has gone -- without her husband, Fred 
-- on hunts in Spain, where she took a fallow deer, and Alberta, where she 
overcame the hardships of a backcountry tent camp for a successful shot at a 
bear. 
For 24 years, Fred Christian endured the wrath of his anti-hunting wife. A trip 
to Colorado to hunt deer would bring weeks of silent and not-so-silent protest. 
As a hunter since boyhood, Fred understood the anti-hunting sentiment, 
especially in a place such as Los Angeles, which long ago abandoned any 
pretense of being anything but an enormous slab of cement upon which several 
million people live. 
So he suffered the anti-hunting abuse silently. Always, he said, he wished his 
wife would try to understand his love of the hunt, his love of the outdoors. 
But, it seemed, that was not to be. 
"My idea of roughing it was going someplace in a motor home that didn't have a 
microwave oven," Kathy Christian said. 
Finally, she was persuaded to accompany her husband on an African safari. She 
would shoot big game, she said, but not with a rifle. Her shots would come from 
a camera. 
The dust swirled and the midday heat was at full bore now on the Thabazimbi 
plains of South Africa. Kathy Christian crouched at the base of a gnarled and 
twisted tree and felt her heart pound as a herd of antelope swept across the 
flat, grassy land. The first few were females, prancing nervously as their 
noses probed the air for danger. Seconds later, two males emerged from the 
brush. And Christian's heart raced as she brought her massive rifle down and 
rested the barrel against the tree. 
With an eye pressed to the scope, she scanned the distant bush. The cross hairs 
found the first male impala, but he passed quickly. A second later, the other 
male -- a much bigger specimen -- filled the scope. And, with only a gentle 
urging from her guide, she pulled the trigger and sent a bullet slamming into 
the animal. 
And then, it ran. 
"I felt no remorse about shooting him," Christian said. "But I did feel bad 
that I didn't kill him instantly. When he ran and we couldn't find him, I just 
felt terrible. I thought how he must be suffering." 
The guide and Christian searched the plains for a long time and found no trace 
of the animal. Finally, they found it, no more than 40 yards from where it was 
shot, stiffening already as its lifeless body slumped against some dried 
shrubs. 
"I said to myself, 'Thank God it's over,' " Christian said. 
A few days later Christian took down a blesbok -- an antelope indigenous to 
that area -- and it wasn't pretty. Her shot was not a killing shot and had only 
immobilized the 200-pound animal. She had to walk up to it and finish it off 
with a round into its chest from only 10 feet away. The impact made the 
blesbok's body lurch backward. 
And Christian looked into the animal's eyes the entire time. 
"He was looking at me," she said. "I felt really terrible." 
The next day a male zebra fell to her gun. It was traveling, according to the 
guide, with two females that had, earlier in the week, been accompanying 
another male zebra, this one shot and killed by Fred Christian. 
In all, the Christians took seven animals in those two weeks. Among their kill 
was a Cape eland that weighed about 1,500 pounds. 
And all of those animals, along with others taken by Fred, are nailed solidly 
to the walls of their living room, eyes wide open as they seem to gaze out over 
the room. Often, their view is of the television set as it plays videotapes of 
the hunt that marked the animals' final day. 
It is a somewhat eerie feeling, sitting in the room watching a Cape eland who 
is, it seems, watching himself being shot. 
Late last year Kathy went on the fallow deer hunt by herself in Spain. And in 
May, she and a woman companion who is a longtime member of Safari Club 
International, went to a remote site near Edmonton, Alberta. Christian dropped 
a 350-pound black bear that had been lured into her shooting zone by a mound of 
rotting food. 
And if all of this makes a person want to stand up and shout, "Please. Stop 
shooting everything!" ... well, Kathy understands. 
"When I shot my first animal, the impala, I felt no remorse at all," she said. 
"And I was shocked that I didn't feel that sadness that I thought I would. I 
felt guilty that I didn't feel guilty. 
"After I did it, all I could think was, 'I have to have that animal. I have to 
have it mounted and bring it home. It's mine.' That's why this room is filled 
with animals. Because both Fred and I want to have those heads as a lasting 
memory of what we did, of being out there with those animals, seeing the beauty 
of them." 
There has been a somewhat nasty reaction among members of the Christian family 
to Kathy's new-found passion. Her mother, for example, strongly suggested that 
she find something else to do until the anxiety of mid-life crisis fades away. 
A sister believes, Kathy said, that she is absolutely crazy. 
And a daughter, Trish, 20, has to fight a feeling of nausea each time she 
passes through the living room. Which, by the way, she doesn't do very often 
anymore. 
"I don't like hunting or anything associated with it," said Trish. "I'm 
preparing to be a firefighter. I think it's important to save life, not take it 
away. I am an animal lover. 
"When all those heads came home, I moved out." 
Indeed, she did. One day this summer she strolled in, saw the heads of a 
mouflon sheep and a Corsican sheep that had been shot by dad, and headed out 
the door. 
"She called us from a phone booth and said she wasn't coming home until they 
were off the wall," Kathy recalled. "The heads stayed up, and she didn't come 
home that night." 
For all the people who don't understand, for all the people who refuse to even 
try to understand, for all the anti-hunters, Christian has no bitterness. 
She was, she remembers, one of them. "I see women wearing animal-skin shoes and 
they criticize hunting," she said. "I see women in seal coats and beaver-skin 
coats, and they criticize hunting. I know I used to be like that. And now I 
know that those people just don't see it. They just don't get the whole picture 
of animals and hunting. 
"A few years ago I ran over a little rabbit on a road in Moorpark. I got out 
and looked at the little thing and I cried about it for a long time. 
"And if I ran over a rabbit today, I would cry just as hard." 
