CSUN TO USE GRANT TO HELP CHINA TRAIN ITS EDUCATORS 
Cal State Northridge officials Wednesday announced that the university has 
received a grant from the People's Republic of China to assist in a massive 
overhaul of that country's educational system. 
The university will use a $965,888 grant to run a series of educational 
workshops aimed at boosting the quality of teaching in rural China, officials 
said. 
CSUN was selected by the Chinese government over three other universities to 
receive the grant. 
The university's application for the grant spurred some dissent last year among 
faculty members who said they feared that the university would appear to be 
supportive of China's totalitarian regime. 
But physics Prof. Paul Chow, who helped the university prepare its grant 
application, said the university's efforts will benefit common Chinese 
citizens, not the country's political leaders. 
"People should make a very, very clear distinction between the people and 
politics," Chow said. 
"The people must be educated. Education has no boundary." 
More than 75% of the People's Republic of China's 2 million junior high school 
teachers do not have any college education and some did not finish high school, 
Chow said. 
As part of a long-range plan to expand compulsory education in rural areas from 
six to nine years, the government has launched a massive effort to retrain some 
of these "unqualified" teachers. 
China received a $50-million loan from the World Bank earmarked for educational 
improvements. 
Some of the money will be used to purchase equipment for schools, Chow said. 
With the grant money, Chow said, staff members with the campus's China 
Institute will recruit educational experts from around the world to go to China 
to run a series of two-week workshops. 
The sessions will be on topics ranging from methods of teaching physics and 
geography to the use of computers for educational management. 
Each workshop will accommodate about 40 faculty members of China's Institutes 
of Education, where Chinese secondary schoolteachers go on weekends, nights and 
vacations to improve their teaching skills, Chow said. 
CSUN competed for the grant against Ohio State University, Columbia 
University's Teachers College and the Ontario Institute for Studies in 
Education in Toronto. 
Some faculty members at the university were upset because they did not want to 
appear to support the Chinese government that in June, 1989, killed scores of 
students in a massacre in Beijing's Tian An Men square. 
They had urged the university to sever any educational links with China until 
its citizens were granted more freedom. 
But other CSUN professors argued that a better educated populace would be 
better able to press for change and freedom in their country. 
