SPORTSSCOPE; 
UCLA SOCCER TEAM TO HOST SANTA CLARA SUNDAY 
The UCLA men's soccer team (8-0), ranked second nationally, will play host to 
No. 4 Santa Clara (7-0) at 2 p.m. Sunday at the North Soccer Field. 
The Bruins have shut out their last six opponents and have outscored foes, 
27-1. Santa Clara, with its highest national ranking ever, has four shutouts 
and has outscored opponents, 27-4. 
Last week, UCLA defeated New Mexico, 2-0, before an Albuquerque crowd of 8,000. 
Senior goalkeeper Anton Nistl, who has seven shutouts this season to lead the 
nation, recorded his 32nd career shutout, extending his school record. Cobi 
Jones, among the nation's scoring leaders with 18 points, scored one goal and 
made it eight straight games in which he has had either a goal or an assist. 
UCLA is off to its best start since 1980, and Nistl is having a sensational 
season. He has not allowed a goal in his last 544 minutes, and his 
goals-against average of 0.13 is the best among West Coast goalies and puts him 
among the nation's leaders. In his UCLA career, he has been in the net for 46 
victories, two less than the school record held by Tim Harris. 
The Broncos, coached by former UCLA assistant Steve Sampson, defeated UCLA, 
1-0, last year, but the Bruins lead the series, 8-3-2. 
The Santa Monica College men's soccer team (0-2) will play today at 3 p.m. at 
Orange Coast, defending Orange Empire Conference champion. The Corsairs have 
been idle for two weeks. 
The third-ranked UCLA water polo team (4-4) will play host to No. 1 California 
at 11 a.m. Saturday at the Sunset Canyon Recreation Center. 
Two-time All-American Alex Rousseau and Mark Maretzki, both seniors, lead the 
Bruins in scoring, each with 14 goals. Sophomore goalkeeper Danny Hackett has 
67 saves in seven games. 
The third annual Bruin Invitational will be held Oct. 14-15 at the Sunset 
Canyon Center. Teams include the Harvard Super Club, Loyola Marymount, UC San 
Diego, Claremont-Mudd-Scripps and Air Force. Games start at 9 a.m. Oct. 14 and 
10 a.m. Oct. 15. 
The No. 4 Pepperdine water polo team, coming off a second-place finish at the 
Air Force tournament, will play at No. 9 UC San Diego at 6 p.m. Friday. 
Earlier, the Waves (9-3) defeated UCSD, 15-7, in the UC Irvine tournament. 
At the Air Force tournament, Pepperdine lost to No. 2 Irvine, 15-12, but then 
defeated UC Santa Barbara, 17-9; Army, 17-4, and Air Force, 15-6. 
Senior Sasa Poljak tops the Waves with goals, followed by sophomore Geoff Clark 
with 32 and senior Rafael Gandarillas with 25. Sophomore goalie Wells Guthrie 
has 98 saves in 10 games. 
The Santa Monica College water polo team (3-3 as the week started) will open 
Western State Conference competition when it plays host to Los Angeles Valley 
at 6 p.m. Tuesday at Santa Monica High School. 
Last week the Corsairs defeated San Bernardino Valley, 15-13, but lost to Long 
Beach City, 15-5. 
The Santa Monica College football team, (2-0) overall, which defeated Los 
Angeles Harbor, 40-13, last week in its Western State Conference opener, will 
continue its conference schedule at 7:30 p.m. Saturday at Ventura College 
(2-0). 
SMC tailback Charles McKinzie had 15 carries for a career-high 151 yards and 
scored two touchdowns against Harbor. Linebacker Randy Cole and defensive 
tackle Rodney Scott were named the Corsairs' defensive players of the game. 
Cole had five unassisted tackles with 18 assists and two sacks, and he forced a 
fumble and deflected a pass. Scott was in on 11 tackles and forced a fumble and 
recovered it. 
Ventura is coming off a 36-0 rout of Compton and shut out Porterville, 30-0, in 
its debut. The Pirates are led on offense by tailback Ryan Rapoza, who is 
averaging 6.2 yards a carry, and on defense by nose tackle Eeron Wilson, 
linebacker Lee Jaitt and defensive back Kyron Johnson. 
SMC is ranked 12th in the state and 10th in Southern California, and the 
Pirates are ranked 15th in Southern California. The Ventura defense has been 
holding opponents to just 154 yards a game in total offense; the Corsairs have 
been giving up an average of 187.5. 
The second-ranked UCLA women's volleyball team (7-1 overall, 2-0 in the Pacific 
10 Conference) will play Friday at No. 20 Washington (6-5, 2-2) and Saturday at 
Washington State (6-10, 1-3). 
Last week the Bruins extended their home winning streak to 22 matches by 
defeating No. 10 Arizona in four games and Arizona State in three. 
UCLA senior middle blocker Daiva Tomkus was named Pac-10 player of the week 
after she had 23 kills, 17 blocks, nine digs and one service ace against the 
Arizona schools. Junior outside hitter Samantha Shaver added 21 kills, 10 digs 
and three combined blocks. 
The Pepperdine women's volleyball team, two-time defending West Coast 
Conference champion, will open its conference schedule this week on the road. 
The Waves (5-5) will play tonight at Santa Clara, Friday night at St. Mary's 
and Saturday night at the University of San Francisco. 
Last week Pepperdine upset No. 13 UC Santa Barbara, winning in three games at 
Malibu. 
Outside hitter Cari Delson leads the Waves with a .347 hitting percentage and 
has 128 kills, outside hitter Tami Seidenberg has a team-high 141 kills and 
freshman middle blocker Debbie Merandi tops the team with 29 total blocks. 
The West Los Angeles College women's volleyball team (5-6 overall, 0-3 in the 
Western State Conference at the start of the week) will play a conference match 
at 7 tonight at Moorpark. 
Last week WLAC finished second in the Cypress tournament, defeating Cypress, 
Mount San Jacinto and Chaffey but losing to Fullerton in the championship 
match. 
The Santa Monica College women's volleyball team (1-4 overall, 1-2 in the 
Western State Conference as the week began) will play a WSC match at 7 p.m. 
Friday at Ventura. 
Last week the Corsairs lost conference matches to Moorpark and Cuesta and 
finished seventh in the 25-team Rancho Santiago tournament. In tourney pool 
play, SMC won two games each from Dixie of Utah and Mesa of Arizona, split two 
with American River and lost two to Grossmont. In the championship round, the 
Corsairs lost to Cerritos, 15-4, and were eliminated. 
The UCLA women's golf team, which won the Brigham Young invitational last week, 
and Bruin senior Jean Zedlitz won the individual competition with a 
four-over-par 220 for 54 holes. UCLA is competing this week at the University 
of Oregon invitational. 
Other Bruin scores and finishes at BYU were: junior Debbi Koyama and freshman 
Elizabeth Bowman, 229, fourth-place tie; freshman Carrie Leary, 234, 10th, and 
sophomore Christy Erb, 235, 11th. 
The Pepperdine men's golf team will begin its season in the Coca-Cola 
tournament, which will be held Friday through Sunday at New Mexico State 
University in Las Cruces. 
Coach Kurt Schuette's top returning players include senior Kevin Eden and 
juniors John Geiberger and Brad Payne. 
The UCLA women's cross country team, coming off a third-place finish at the San 
Diego State invitational, will compete Saturday in the UC Riverside 
invitational. 
At San Diego State, Bruin sophomore Jennifer finished 13th in 18:12.4 and 
freshman teammate Kira Jorgensen was 19th in 18:18.7. 
