IBM, BAXTER FORM VENTURE TO TAP HEALTH-CARE MARKET 
The world's dominant computer firm and the nation's largest hospital supply 
concern said Thursday that they would join forces to develop computer products 
and services for the rapidly growing health-care information management market. 
International Business Machines Corp. and Baxter International Inc. said they 
will form a joint venture information management company that will serve all 
segments of the health-care industry. The new company, a 50-50 partnership 
between IBM and Baxter, will employ 800 when it becomes operational. 
The joint venture will sell products and services to hospitals of all sizes as 
well as to individual doctors and group practices, said Scott Roeth, director 
of health industries at Armonk, N.Y.-based IBM. "We will have services for 
financial applications and clinical applications of health care," he added. 
These software products would, for example, manage hospital billing and 
patient-care records. 
$11-Billion Market 
The joint venture is expected to be in place by the end of the year to compete 
in the $11-billion worldwide market for health-care-related computer products 
and services. The companies declined to disclose financial terms of the 
transaction. 
Both IBM and Baxter currently provide a range of computer products and services 
to the health-care industry. Baxter, based in Deerfield, Ill., said it will 
spin off its Systems and Annson Systems divisions into the new partnership. 
IBM said certain of its health-care software products and development projects 
will also be transferred to the Long Island, N.Y.-based joint venture, as well 
as a small number of IBM employees. 
The joint venture will take over the software applications portion of an 
ongoing IBM project to develop an integrated bedside workstation for nurses, 
Roeth said. "We have a great interest in the nursing area," he said. The goal 
of the project is to provide nurses immediate access to patient records, 
allowing them to update those computer records at the bedside. "We want to 
automate as much as we can for the nurse at bedside," he added. 
