CHILDREN'S BOOKSHELF 
More than 50 years ago Hardie Gramatky, an animator with Walt Disney Studios, 
decided to branch out on his own and pen a children's book. The result was 
"Little Toot," the tale of a lovable tugboat's adventure in New York Harbor. 
Since its 1939 publication, scores of youngsters have listened to the story and 
stared at its inviting pages. 
When the author died 10 years ago at age 72, he left behind the nearly 
completed manuscript of Little Toot and the Loch Ness Monster (G. W. Putnam's 
Sons: $13.95; 48 pp.; ages 3-6) along with notebooks stuffed with sketches and 
ideas for the end product. His widow, Dorothea Cooke Gramatky -- also an artist 
-- colored several of his black-and-white drawings and fashioned two 
illustrations out of his original artwork. Their daughter, Linda Gramatky 
Smith, finished the text. 
The result is clearly a labor of love. Curious as ever, Little Toot ventures 
across the ocean in search of the Loch Ness Monster, a "fierce, awful" 
creature, Grandfather Toot explains. The Scottish loch is crowded with 
"bleeping and blurping" boats, also hunting for Nessie. Finally, as mist rises 
on the water and the cliffs loom overhead, Little Toot meets the legendary 
monster and learns that things are not always as they seem. Toot's courageous 
deed will please children right up to its satisfying end. 
This year marks the 20th anniversary of another classic, "Very Hungry 
Caterpillar," and, to celebrate, the artist has something new to charm 
youngsters. Eric Carle's Animals Animals (Philomel Books: $18.95; 70 pp.; ages 
4 and up) is a feast of color accompanying 60 poems about creatures from ants 
to yaks. Those familiar with Carle's lumpy "Caterpillar" will immediately 
recognize his tissue paper collages and splashes of acrylics and finger paints. 
Laura Whipple gathered the poems, from sources as diverse as Shakespeare and 
the Bible, American Indians and Japanese Haiku, X. J. Kennedy and Judith 
Viorst. Sample "The Octopus" by Ogden Nash. 
 Tell me, O Octopus, I begs, 
Is those things arms or is they 
legs? 
I marvel at thee, Octopus; 
If I were thou, I'd call me Us. 
 One of the unspoken ideas behind picture books is that the text and 
illustrations should be able to tell the story independently of the other. A 
Country Far Away (Orchard Books: $12.95; 32 pp.; ages 3-6), written by Nigel 
Gray and illustrated by Philippe Dupasquier, will evoke blank looks in children 
who are only listening, but put those listeners on your lap, spread these pages 
in front of them and oh! What a story. The top half of each page shows a young 
African in his village, the bottom half shows a blond American in his suburban 
neighborhood. Each frame is richly detailed with parallels as well as 
distinctions between the two cultures. "Today it rained" shows the Africans 
joyously holding their hands to the sky as parched crops are watered; the 
Americans, meanwhile, are seen snug in their homes or walking under umbrellas. 
Amy the Dancing Bear (Doubleday: $12.95; 32 pp.; ages 3-6) is singer/songwriter 
Carly Simon's first book, based on a bedtime tale she told her children when 
they were wee and full of reasons about why they should be allowed to stay up 
later. Amy is a bear full of such excuses. She is charming and sweet, so the 
mother gives in -- again and again. Predictably, Amy outlasts her mom and ends 
up putting her to bed. The illustrations by Margot Datz are lovely, with 
flowered borders and dreamy colors. The worst part is not that the small, 
italicized text causes eye strain, but that the mother is portrayed as being 
weak and indecisive. 
Caldecott Medalist Paul Goble tells another delightful fable about the 
trickster named Iktomi (eek-toe-me), which in Lakota Sioux means spider. Native 
Americans love telling on this fellow who, like the spider of folk literature, 
is clever but careless and always showing off. A cautionary tale children are 
sure to understand without help from moralizing parents, Iktomi and the 
Berries: A Plains Indian Story (Orchard Books: $14.95; 32 pp.; ages 4-7) will 
teach children about hunting and berry gathering while its exquisite 
illustrations reveal traditional Indian dress, customs and sense of humor. 
With Halloween around the corner, the shelves are heavy with new holiday books: 
tall, thick, silly, serious and wretchedly terrifying. The following are just a 
few of the best. 
Angela Sommer-Bodenburg's If You Want to Scare Yourself (Harper &amp; Row: 
$12.95; 106 pp.; ages 7-10), illustrated by Helga Spiess, includes four short, 
shivery stories told to Freddy by his parents while he's confined to bed with 
an infected leg. The pages have easy-to-follow type with excellent ink 
drawings. 
Another easy reader is Nate the Great and the Halloween Hunt, written by 
Marjorie Weinman Sharmat and illustrated by Marc Simont (G. P. Putnam's Sons: 
$11.95; 48 pp.; ages 6-9). Nate, the pint-size detective, and his dog Sludge 
are off on a new case: Rosamind's kitten is missing; it's Halloween night; the 
streets are dark, and there's an old haunted house down the block! For those 
who like to burrow with a flashlight under the blankets, this slim book has a 
built-in shiny cover so there'll be no telltale rustlings of a paper one. 
The Spooky Eerie Night Noise, written by Mona Rabun Reeves and illustrated by 
Paul Yalowitz (Bradbury Press: $13.95; 32 pp.; ages 3-6), is a pleasant, not 
too spooky or eerie, story for preschoolers. The monster pictures are soft and 
droll, as is the surprise ending. 
