BILL IMPLEMENTING TOBACCO INITIATIVE GOES TO GOVERNOR 
Ten months after passage of Proposition 99, the anti-smoking tobacco tax 
initiative, the Senate and Assembly Thursday sent Gov. George Deukmejian a 
$1.5-billion bill implementing the measure on back-to-back lopsided votes. 
Lobbyists and officials from counties, medical organizations and other health 
groups that backed Proposition 99 whooped and cheered in the hall outside the 
Assembly chamber moments after the measure won final legislative approval on a 
68-2 vote. Earlier, the Senate had approved the Proposition 99 implementation 
bill by a 38-0 vote. 
Deukmejian is expected to sign the bill. 
The impromptu celebration by health advocates allowed a release of tension that 
had built up during weeks of intense bargaining by lawmakers and a threat to 
the bill posed by a last-minute lobbying effort by the tobacco industry. The 
lobbying effort keyed on a provision of the bill that directs $28.6 million 
over two years into an anti-smoking television and print advertising campaign 
aimed at California's youth. 
Tobacco companies, said to be fearful that a television ad campaign would 
persuade more Californians to give up smoking, hoped to delete the provision 
from the bill. They won some allies in the Legislature, including Senate 
Republican Leader Ken Maddy of Fresno, who said he opposed using any of the 
advertising money for television ads because he did not think mass advertising 
was the best way to reach smokers. 
Maddy, who had dropped his objections Wednesday, carried the bill on the Senate 
floor. He said numerous compromises were made by lawmakers. But he said the 
overall benefits of the bill overrode objections to individual parts. "When you 
have $1.5 billion to give away you usually can find room for accommodations," 
he said. 
The $1.5 billion contained in the bill represents 2 1/2 years worth of money 
raised by the tobacco tax increases mandated by Proposition 99. The measure 
caused cigarette taxes to go up 25 cents a pack and resulted in comparable 
increases to other tobacco products, like cigars. The initiative directed that 
most of the money be used to finance health programs for the poor. 
County hospitals, emergency centers and health programs for the indigent will 
get the lion's share of the money. Los Angeles County government's share of the 
pie will amount to about $350 million over the 2 1/2-year life of the bill. 
