ANAHEIM SIMPLIFIES RECYCLING IN PILOT PROGRAM 
Ever since Ruth Wilcox heard earlier this year that Anaheim was starting a 
recycling program, she has been saving her cans and newspapers. Now, instead of 
having her recyclables gathering dust in the garage, the 77-year-old Wilcox 
will be able to dump them into a 110-gallon can and know the papers and cans 
won't be going to waste. 
"I think it's great," Wilcox said. "I'm a saver, you know. I just hated to 
throw away all those newspapers." 
Today, Wilcox joins about 11,000 other Anaheim households in the start of a 
pilot program designed to appeal to the frustrated recycler. People generally 
think recycling is a good idea, but they quickly tire of sorting trash into 
three or four containers for aluminum, glass, plastic and newspapers, said Ric 
Collett, director of recycling for Anaheim Disposal Inc. 
So in Anaheim, there will be just two cans to deal with: one for recyclables 
and one for the rest of the trash. The sorting will be done by workers of the 
disposal company. 
"Research does say the simpler you can make it, the more participation you 
get," Collett said. 
If the yearlong test program is successful, recycling will gradually spread to 
the rest of Anaheim's 234,000 residents, he said. 
Until now, Irvine has been the only Orange County city with a recycling system. 
Irvine's two-year-old program uses the multicontainer approach to serve 26,000 
households, and has a participation rate of about 71%, according to city 
statistics. 
But due to a combination of environmental concerns and the increasing cost of 
landfill fees, recycling programs are on their way to a number of Orange County 
cities this fall. In November, the cities of Brea and Laguna Beach are 
scheduled to begin curb-side recycling programs, and Costa Mesa is starting a 
program in which residents don't have to do any sorting. The city Sanitation 
District is taking the unsorted trash of Costa Mesa's 91,900 residents to a 
processing center where the recyclables and nonrecyclables will be separated. 
State lawmakers also turned up the heat on the recycling issue recently by 
passing a bill requiring all California cities to reduce by half the amount of 
solid waste being taken to landfills before the year 2000. The measure now 
awaits the signature of Gov. George Deukmejian. 
The catalyst for much of this concern occurred in 1987, Collett believes, when 
there was widespread media coverage of a Long Island garbage barge that roamed 
for more than five months -- traveling 5,000 miles -- in search of a dump. 
"It really woke a lot of people up," Collett said. 
As a result, people such as Anaheim resident Mike Blackwell are familiar with 
the problems of solid waste disposal and receptive to idea of recycling. 
"It's great," Blackwell said, looking at his newly delivered trash cans for 
recycling. "We've been expecting it." 
To pay for the program, the city generated $2.7 million, in part through a 
citywide garbage rate increase. The monthly household garbage fee was raised in 
March to $7.03 from $6.11. 
But only 27 cents of the increase will go toward recycling. The balance will 
cover recent increases in landfill dumping fees, which are up 130% since the 
start of the year, officials said. 
To make sure the recycling program touches a cross section of city residents, 
officials selected households along five different trash routes. 
Several months ago, Anaheim Disposal began sending several letters to each 
household taking part in the program and conducting community meetings to 
explain how the procedure will work. 
The trash company has provided each participating household with two 110-gallon 
cans, one black and one green. Nonrecyclable trash, to be placed in the black 
can, will continue to be collected once a week on regular pickup days. 
The recyclables in the green can will be picked up every other week on garbage 
days by a truck trailing behind the regular garbage truck. Trash hauling under 
the recycling program will also take on a new look in Anaheim because newly 
purchased automated garbage trucks will reach out two robotic arms to lift the 
trash cans off the curb and empty them into the bins of the vehicles. 
Collett said some residents were worried about the size of the new trash cans, 
which stand 41 inches tall and are 31 1/2 inches in diameter. But the cans, 
with built-in wheels, are designed to be tipped back and easily moved around, 
Collett said. For those residents still unable to manage, however, Anaheim 
Disposal will swap the b110-gallon size for a 60-gallon container, he said. 
After persuading people to begin sorting their trash, the next step is to teach 
them about the variety of materials than can be recycled, said Rita Tagge, 
recycling coordinator for Anaheim Disposal. 
For instance, glass recycling is not limited to beer bottles, she said. Any 
glass container, from peanut butter jars to vinegar bottles, can be recycled. 
And besides newspapers, other paper products such as magazines, notebook paper, 
telephone books, cereal boxes and even junk mail can go into the recyclable 
can. 
"They don't have to clean it, they don't have to take the labels off," Tagge 
said. "They can throw it all into one can." 
TAKING OUT THE GARBAGE 
Today, about 11,000 Anaheim households begin a curbside recycling program that 
is unique because it doesn't require them to sort trash before tossing it. The 
city will provide residents with two 110-gallon cans: one for recyclables and 
one for other discards. 
Question -- So how much recyclable garbage does Anaheim generate each year? 
Answer -- If placed end to end, it would stretch the 24 miles from Anaheim to 
Los Angeles. 
Cardboard: 841 tons 
Newspaper: 7,685 tons 
Aluminum cans: 492 tons 
Mixed paper waste: 8,035 tons 
Glass: 10,655 tons 
Question -- So what's in a typical American household's garbage can? 
Answer -- According to a federal report prepared by Franklin Associates, this: 
paper and paperboard: 42.1% 
food and yard waste: 23.4% 
glass: 9.4% 
metals: 9.2% 
plastics: 6.5% 
other: 9.4%. 
Source: City of Anaheim and Franklin Associates' 1984 report to the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency 
