CLOSING ARGUMENTS MADE IN GIOIOSA TAX-FRAUD CASE 
Lawyers for Thomas Gioiosa tried to convince a U.S. District Court jury Monday 
that he cashed a winning race-track ticket for Pete Rose out of friendship, not 
as part of a tax-fraud scheme. 
Gioiosa's lawyers said in their closing arguments that federal prosecutors 
failed to prove a conspiracy between Gioiosa and Rose, who lived together from 
1979-84, to defraud the government. 
Defense lawyer Martin Weinberg said Gioiosa cashed a $47,646 race-track ticket 
for Rose as a favor to the man he admired. 
"Is that a conspiracy (to defraud the government) or is that the result of a 
decade-long friendship?" Weinberg said. 
The 12-member jury began deliberating Monday in Gioiosa's trial on charges of 
tax evasion and conspiracy to distribute cocaine. 
Rose, who hasn't been charged with any crime, is under investigation by a 
federal grand jury in Cincinnati looking into whether the former Cincinnati 
Reds' manager claimed all his income from gambling, memorabilia sales and 
autograph appearances. 
One of the tax counts against Gioiosa involves a $47,646 Pik Six payoff from 
Turfway Park in northern Kentucky that Gioiosa cashed and claimed on his taxes. 
Three witnesses testified that Rose owned the majority share of the ticket. 
Rose wasn't called as a witness. Weinberg tried to use that to Gioiosa's 
advantage. 
"The question is, what did Pete Rose do?" Weinberg said. "Did he also report 
the $47,000? We don't know what Pete Rose did. The government hasn't produced 
Pete Rose's tax return." 
The government wasn't interested in arguing the point Friday, generally 
avoiding mention of Rose. Instead, Assistant U.S. Attorney William Hunt 
suggested to the jury that Gioiosa was trying to hide his income from cocaine 
involvement and illegal gambling. 
"He needed to cover up the illegal money that he was making that he couldn't 
report," Hunt said. "Here was the perfect opportunity for him to seize that 
chance to defraud the IRS." 
