SOME WANT 1 VOICE FOR PALMDALE; 
CONGRESS: LEADERS ARGUE THAT THE CITY'S EMERGING IDENTITY MERITS A HOMETOWN 
REPRESENTATIVE. OTHERS THINK SHARING LAWMAKERS WITH OTHER CITIES MEANS MORE 
CLOUT. 
When the state's power brokers carved out California's congressional districts 
a decade ago, the high-desert city of Palmdale in north Los Angeles County was 
an afterthought. 
Not that Palmdale has been unrepresented in the U.S. Congress. On the contrary, 
the 65,000 residents of the fast-growing city are in the extraordinary position 
of having three congressmen watch out for their interests. 
For these lawmakers, however, Palmdale represents only a tiny percentage of 
their constituencies. Each of their home offices -- and the majority of their 
respective districts -- range from 30 to 65 miles away. Even the congressmen 
themselves concede that figuring out who represents which neighborhoods can be 
difficult, and the City Hall staffer who refers residents to the respective 
lawmakers said last week that she had never heard of one of them. 
"In the long run, as far as good government is concerned, it probably would be 
best if all of it were in one district," said Rep. Carlos J. Moorhead 
(R-Glendale), who represents Palmdale along with Reps. Jerry Lewis (R-Redlands) 
and David Dreier (R-Covina). "They'd feel a little closer." 
As the decennial redrawing of election districts approaches, many officials and 
activists in Palmdale agree. They maintain that a single officeholder 
representing the area would have greater incentive to focus on the region's 
defense, transportation and environmental concerns and pour more time and staff 
resources into the city. 
That sentiment applies equally to the entire Antelope Valley, which is split 
among the three congressmen who represent Palmdale, plus Rep. William M. Thomas 
(R-Bakersfield), whose district includes neighboring Lancaster. Some officials 
see this political drawing and quartering as an extension of the lack of 
respect they perceive at the state and county levels. 
Not everyone agrees, however, that the valley would be better off under one 
congressional roof. Some argue, in fact, that limited shares of four lawmakers 
are actually better than substantial stock in one. 
"If I had something I was trying to get through Congress, I would rather have 
four votes than one," said ex-Assemblyman Larry Chimbole. He added that calls 
for a home-grown congressman are often "the typical provincial thinking of 
these areas, the rah-rah viewpoint. I don't think the valley has suffered or 
been victimized at all." 
Indeed, most of those interviewed spoke well of the four legislators. 
Nevertheless, many said that the region -- which relies heavily on Edwards Air 
Force Base and defense contracts -- has an emerging identity and a political 
significance that merit a hometown voice in Congress. 
"If you are in the corner of the district, the attention is not the same as if 
you were in the center of the district," said Palmdale Mayor William J. (Pete) 
Knight, who cited efforts to win a rail link from Palmdale to the San Fernando 
Valley as one issue on which a locally based congressman could exert influence. 
"You have a limited number of voters and a limited amount of time." 
Palmdale officials are not alone in such views. A study by the Rose Institute 
at Claremont McKenna College in 1980 found that a convincing majority of local 
government officials did not want their municipalities divided among state 
legislative or congressional districts, according to Alan Heslop, who teaches 
classes in government at the college and is an expert on reapportionment. 
"They felt their power would be greatest if they had a one-to-one, unshared 
relationship," Heslop said. 
Statewide, at least 29 cities are divided among two or more legislators. The 
California Constitution calls for congressional districts to respect city and 
county boundaries "insofar as practical." It does not prohibit splitting them 
when deemed necessary. 
No one can yet predict how the state Legislature and governor will reapportion 
California following the 1990 census. But experts say that the Antelope 
Valley's threefold population growth in the past decade makes its consolidation 
as a cornerstone of a new congressional district likely. 
None expects a repeat of 1982, when the valley's small population, political 
homogeneity and location on the border of three counties led the Democratic 
line-drawers to carve it up to fill the population requirements of surrounding 
districts. 
Yet, despite the griping, Thomas maintains this has often turned out to be in 
the valley's interest. 
"I think the Antelope Valley gets the best representation of any area in 
California," said Thomas, who represented the entire valley prior to 1982. 
"There's no place else in California that has direct representation on Ways and 
Means, Energy and Commerce, Appropriations and Banking," Thomas said, referring 
to powerful House committees. "We can utilize resources that no one member 
could ever utilize. But, on a day-to-day basis, it's perceived as a negative 
because, 'Nobody's looking out for us.' " 
All four lawmakers are senior conservatives and consistent proponents of the 
1980s defense build-up and the development of high-tech weapons programs, such 
as the B-1 bomber and the B-2 Stealth bomber, work on both of which has been 
done in the valley. 
Moreover, Lewis ranks third in the House GOP leadership, and Moorhead is 
California's senior Republican. The districts the four represent are heavily 
Republican, as is the valley itself. 
When NASA proposed moving construction of the next space shuttle orbiter from 
Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale to Vandenberg Air Force Base in Lompoc in 1987, 
the valley lawmakers -- led by Lewis and Thomas -- pooled their clout to block 
it. 
"It came down to four against one," said John Doherty, a senior aide to Rep. 
Robert J. Lagomarsino (R-Ventura), who was pushing for relocating the shuttle 
to his district, which includes Vandenberg. "It probably was one of the factors 
in that instance." 
Palmdale City Manager Robert Toone agreed that the lawmakers have often teamed 
up for the city's benefit. He cited the space shuttle effort as well as $5.7 
million in Air Force funds obtained this year for widening congested Avenue M 
near Plant 42. 
On the other hand, Knight said it took the city four years to get the road 
money. He maintains that more concentrated congressional pressure could have 
speeded the process. 
And even Lewis challenges the notion that Palmdale has triple the clout. He 
blames city officials for failing to come up with a game plan to mobilize the 
three lawmakers who represent the city. 
"There has been confusion about who you go to for x and y instead of going to 
everybody," Lewis said. He added that this has combined with "a lack of coming 
together so that Palmdale hasn't gotten the benefit of having all these 
members." 
Each lawmaker says he gets to the Antelope Valley as often as he can. But these 
visits are limited by distance and competing demands elsewhere in their 
districts and in Washington. 
Thomas, who represents more valley residents than the other three lawmakers 
combined, is the only one with a full-time district operation in the region. 
(Dreier has a part-time field office.) Thomas' office, which he calls "a 
vestigial remain" of the days when his district included the entire valley, is 
in Lancaster. 
Moorhead, whose 22nd District includes the portion of Palmdale west of Sierra 
Highway, has offices in Glendale and Pasadena. He represents about 40,000 
valley residents, 6% of his total district. 
Lewis, who represents the other half of Palmdale, hails from San Bernardino 
County, which makes up most of his 35th District. His Redlands district office 
is about 55 miles from Palmdale. 
Dreier was given the valley communities of Pearblossom and Littlerock when his 
33rd District was created in 1982. He later gained a small part of southeastern 
Palmdale when the expanding city annexed unincorporated territory within his 
district. The sliver of the Antelope Valley he represents is a 1 1/2-hour drive 
from his district office in Covina. 
Thomas' sprawling 20th District extends into Kern and San Luis Obispo counties 
and throughout Inyo County. His 150,000 valley constituents represent only 20% 
of the population in his 21,000-square-mile district. 
The rapid growth of the valley in the past decade -- Palmdale, which had only 
12,297 residents in 1980, has grown by 432% -- combined with an apparent 
paucity of reliable, detailed maps, has created some confusion over exactly who 
represents which communities. 
Both Lewis and Dreier said they believe that Thomas still represents part of 
Palmdale. Although a finger of his district extends south past Palmdale into 
Saugus, he no longer represents any of the city. 
"None of us actually have in our minds where those lines are," Lewis conceded. 
"I've yet to see a precise map of Palmdale" showing the congressional 
districts. 
Dreier says there is so much uncertainty about the lines that he responds to 
mail and constituent cases from throughout Palmdale, dispensing with the 
tradition of "bumping" letters or calls from other districts to that member's 
office. "They probably wrote all four of us and asked for our response," Dreier 
said. 
Nevertheless, when a reporter called Palmdale City Hall for information about 
congressional district boundaries, the administrative secretary who handles 
such inquiries said that Moorhead represented the city west of Sierra Highway 
and Lewis represented those to the east. Asked about Dreier, she replied, 
"Who's that?" 
Despite the confusion and inconvenience, there are political advantages to the 
incumbent in such geographical setups. 
A district that spans more than one county or splits cities protects an 
incumbent congressman by diluting the political base of a mayor or county 
supervisor with higher aspirations, said Heslop of Claremont McKenna College. 
This also affords the incumbent access to local contributors in more than one 
city or county. 
Whether or not the incumbents prefer the status quo, the population explosion 
in the Antelope Valley, as well as in neighboring Kern and San Bernardino 
counties, assures major changes when the new lines are drawn. 
Some valley activists envision a high-desert district that would stretch from 
the Antelope Valley east to Victorville and north to Barstow. They maintain 
that a district encompassing vast desert areas that identify with each other 
would be a logical "community of interest." 
"We are a different breed," said Lancaster Councilman Arnie Rodio, who was 
instrumental in forming the Desert and Mountains Division of the California 
League of Cities. "We have water problems, toxic waste dumps, sludge getting 
trucked up from other areas. . . . We would have someone pushing our issues." 
Even if a consensus forms that one member of Congress for the valley is ideal, 
there is little that proponents can do to make this happen. The state 
Legislature, with the governor's approval, has the final word in a complex, 
high-stakes redistricting process that is largely brokered in political back 
rooms. 
As Democrats and Republicans vie over coveted seats, their only legal 
constraints are ensuring that each district has the same number of voters 
(expected to be 572,000 in 1992) and that minorities are not discriminated 
against. 
"It is the anvil of equal population on which this nut is cracked," said 
Thomas, one of the GOP's reapportionment leaders. "Not the rational idea of 
representation." 
Alan C. Miller reported from Washington, and Sebastian Rotella reported from 
the Antelope Valley. 
