30-CAR PILEUP SHUTS VINCENT THOMAS BRIDGE 
A "massive chain-reaction collision" involving 30 cars and as many as 14 
separate accidents shut down traffic on the Vincent Thomas Bridge in San Pedro 
for 2 1/2 hours early Tuesday, according to the California Highway Patrol. 
Despite the amount of property damage -- one CHP officer described it as "just 
a mass of damaged vehicles pointed in all directions" -- no one was seriously 
injured. 
The bumper-car-style pileup began at 5:45 a.m. when one car rear-ended another. 
From the first crunch to the last bump, the incident lasted just 13 minutes. 
During the pileup, a jackknifed truck blocked both eastbound lanes of the 
bridge and a car caught fire when a motorcycle slid underneath it. 
"Basically," said CHP Officer Ken Ratcliff, "it was just a bunch of collisions 
one after another that just blocked the whole bridge. . . . It stretched out 
for approximately 300 yards on the bridge -- 30 damaged vehicles, some turned 
backwards, some turned crossways." 
Two people suffered minor injuries. Motorcyclist James Lord, 34, fell off his 
bike before it slid under the car and fractured his foot. 
And the driver of one of the cars involved in the first collision, Flordileno 
Lahep, 47, of Gardena, suffered neck strain. 
Both were treated at St. Mary's Hospital in Long Beach. 
There was no damage to the bridge itself and no damage estimate was immediately 
available for the cars. 
Bridge workers and Caltrans officials said Tuesday's pileup was the biggest 
accident on the 26-year-old Vincent Thomas in recent memory. 
The bridge, which connects San Pedro to Terminal Island, is a commuting route 
for hundreds who work on the industrial island in Los Angeles Harbor. 
According to Ratcliff, the first collision, in which Lahep's car rear-ended 
another, occurred on a curve just over the crest of the bridge. The road was 
somewhat slick, because of morning dew, but officials have not said what caused 
the initial crash. 
By the time other drivers spotted the crash, he said, it was too late for them 
to slow down to avoid it. 
Both sides of the bridge were reopened at about 8:15 a.m., Ratcliff said. 
