POLICE KILL GUNMAN AT HOUSE; 
OXNARD: AUTHORITIES REPORT THAT THE MAN POINTED A WEAPON AT THE OFFICERS. 
Oxnard police officers shot and killed a man who had threatened a La Colonia 
family Saturday evening after the man pointed a handgun at the officers, police 
said. 
Sgt. Jeff Young said several officers responded to a call that a man was drunk 
and waving a gun at a Hayes Avenue residence. 
"Several officers were talking with the woman at the front of her residence 
when the man exited the house carrying a weapon in his hand," Young said. "He 
was confronted by the police and then the shooting occurred." 
The man, whom police had not identified by late Saturday, was wounded several 
times in the legs and at least once in the head, Young said. 
The sergeant said he did not know if the man, who was about 50 years old, had 
fired at the officers. 
The man died almost immediately and was taken to the Ventura County coroner's 
office for an autopsy, which is scheduled for this morning, police said. 
The shooting ended a confrontation that began when the man arrived at the Hayes 
Avenue residence and began threatening the family, Young said. 
"No one at the residence knew who he was. They'd seen him around and he knew 
someone who lived there, but his acquaintance was not there at the time," Young 
said. 
"He told the lady he was going to start killing people," said a neighbor who 
identified himself only as Max. 
He said the woman and her two young children had fled to his house. 
Police said the woman called for help about 6 p.m. and was still on the 
telephone when officers arrived. Neighbors said they heard no shots until 
police arrived. 
Saul Rivas, who lives at the Angel Hotel across the street from the house, 
said: "I was watching TV, and I heard like firecrackers: Boom! Boom! Boom! 
Boom! About four times. When I came out the guy was already dead." 
The shooting took place on a street dotted with two restaurants and four bars 
and in a neighborhood that has one of the highest crime rates in Oxnard. 
Several witnesses were taken to the Oxnard police station and interviewed, 
police said. 
Investigators from the coroner's and district attorney's offices responded to 
the shooting. The district attorney's office investigates all shootings 
involving police officers. 
Young said there was at least one fatal shooting by an Oxnard officer last 
year. 
