MEDICARE BILL CONTROVERSY SHUTS UCLA CANCER UNIT; 
MEDICINE: RED TAPE AND MISCOMMUNICATION ARE BLAMED FOR THE CLOSING OF A 
SOPHISTICATED NEUTRON THERAPY CENTER, ONE OF JUST FOUR IN THE UNITED STATES. 
A sophisticated neutron therapy facility at UCLA, built with nearly $17 million 
in National Cancer Institute money and offering superior treatment for certain 
cancers, has been shut down because another federal program -- Medicare -- has 
refused to pay patients' bills, UCLA officials say. 
The facility is one of only four of its kind in the country. The three others 
-- in Houston, Seattle and Chicago -- all receive Medicare reimbursement for 
patient care, according to UCLA officials, who blame the situation on poor 
judgment by Medicare's fiscal agent for Southern California, Transamerica 
Occidental Life Insurance Co. 
For its part, Transamerica blames poor communication by UCLA. 
The bottom line is that Medicare patients in need of neutron therapy now must 
go out of state for care while a facility built and operated with public money 
sits virtually idle on the campus of the Wadsworth Veterans Administration 
Hospital in Westwood. 
The situation may be short lived -- Transamerica officials say they have 
changed their minds and are now trying to work out the terms of payment with 
UCLA. But it is illustrative of a larger issue involving the Medicare program, 
which currently gives local carriers broad discretion in deciding coverage, 
leading to great variation in the services available to Medicare patients from 
one state or region to another. 
In an interview with The Times, Gail R. Wilensky, administrator of Medicare's 
parent agency, the Health Care Financing Administration, said she is "very 
concerned" about the UCLA case and others like it that reflect inconsistencies 
in Medicare coverage. 
Wilensky said she is convening a task force to report in six months on 
mechanisms to increase Medicare's control over local carriers. 
"My distinct sense is that what we are going to recommend is not what it looks 
like today," she said. 
Medicare's willingness to pay was a make-or-break issue for UCLA's A. Frederick 
Rasmussen Neutron Therapy Facility. Nearly 75 of the 100 patients treated 
annually were over 65 and therefore insured by Medicare. Overhead costs were 
about $100,000 a month, said Dr. C. Michele Burnison, co-director of the 
facility. 
Acting on advice from the Southern California Radiation Oncology Society in 
early August, Transamerica reached an internal decision to pay for neutron 
therapy in early September, said Stanley Friedman, the company's manager for 
professional and beneficiary services. 
UCLA officials say they received a letter to that effect on Sept. 28 -- the day 
the facility was shut down. It was too late to stop the closure, and the 
payment the letter proposed was inadequate, according to Dr. Robert G. Parker, 
chairman of radiation oncology at UCLA. Parker, a neutron therapy expert, has 
supervised the UCLA facility since its groundbreaking in 1979. 
Fast neutrons are generally used on large tumors that are not likely to respond 
to conventional radiation. It is, for example, the superior treatment for 
advanced, inoperable salivary gland cancer, said the National Cancer 
Institute's director of radiation research, Dr. John E. Antoine. At one point, 
Antoine said, he wrote to Transamerica on UCLA's behalf to try to persuade the 
carrier of the appropriateness of Medicare coverage. 
Neutron therapy also appears to work better than conventional radiation on 
advanced prostate tumors, although the data is still being analyzed. 
Because it delivers a more powerful irradiating jolt to the tumor, and is able 
to kill cancer cells in any stage of reproduction, the therapy is also 
considered promising for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, 
melanomas, sarcomas and some thyroid and renal cancers. 
A drawback of neutron therapy is that it damages nearby healthy cells in a way 
that prevents them from fully recovering. Conventional radiation also damages 
surrounding non-cancerous tissues, but not their recuperative powers. As a 
result, neutron therapy is not appropriate for tumors in the brain or spinal 
cord. And those administering it must be highly skilled in targeting the beam. 
The UCLA facility began treating patients in July, 1986. Simultaneously, Parker 
said, the facility began negotiating with Medicare and other insurers for 
coverage. 
Some private insurers paid, but because Transamerica repeatedly denied claims, 
the cost of treating Medicare patients had to be subsidized by the facility's 
National Cancer Institute research grants, he said. These ran out in September, 
necessitating the closure. 
The university officially describes the facility's closing as "temporary, while 
reimbursement arrangements are being worked out." 
But Burnison, the co-director, said it will not be easy to reassemble the staff 
necessary to run the key piece of machinery, a high-energy cyclotron. Some 
employees have found jobs elsewhere, she said, anticipating the closure as 
negotiations with Transamerica continued to be fruitless. 
"It is a big disappointment," Burnison said. "We have struggled very hard to 
hold it together over the last few months." 
Parker said he is trying to keep the neutron team together by putting most of 
its members on his department's payroll. But he too is worried about 
negotiations dragging on much longer. In an interview, he spoke of exasperating 
delays and inconsistencies on Transamerica's part. When preliminary agreement 
appeared to have been reached on reimbursement early in September, for example, 
the company's follow-up letter articulated a different position, Parker said. 
Transamerica's Friedman blames the protracted affair on UCLA's failure to 
provide the kind of documentation that might have persuaded the company to 
reverse its position sooner. 
Transamerica's power to deny coverage comes from its position as Medicare's 
carrier for Southern California. The federal program uses local insurance 
companies to process claims and pay bills. These carriers are guided in 
coverage decisions by Medicare, but have latitude in areas where coverage is 
not explicitly mandated. 
For several years, Transamerica denied reimbursement on grounds that neutron 
therapy is "investigational" -- a category that permits denial of Medicare 
payments. Transamerica did so even as carriers in Texas, Washington and 
Illinois recognized it as appropriate for certain tumors, according to UCLA and 
federal officials. 
Richard Hedlund, a Transamerica senior vice president, said he would welcome 
more guidance from Medicare on coverage issues involving new technology. 
