COLUMN ONE; 
KOREA: IT'S SUFFER, NOT SUFFRAGETTE; 
ECONOMIC PROGRESS AND DEMOCRATIC REFORMS HAVE DONE LITTLE TO BREAK MEN'S 
CENTURIES-OLD DOMINATION OF THE SOCIETY. 
After centuries of abuse and discrimination, South Korean women decided to draw 
the line last year when a homemaker was convicted of assault for biting off 
part of the tongue of a man attempting, with an accomplice, to rape her in an 
alley. 
A district court in provincial Taegu gave the woman a six-month suspended 
prison sentence for using "excessive self-defense" against her two attackers. 
The male judge reasoned that in the end, she only had lost a kiss, while one of 
the men had lost a third of his tongue. The court also handed down suspended 
jail terms for the would-be rapists. 
Astonished and enraged, a hodgepodge of radical and conservative women's groups 
banded together to fight the chauvinism behind the verdict. 
With legal backing from the feminist coalition and moral support from a 
sympathetic husband, Mrs. Pyon, as she is identified in the local press, 
established her innocence on appeal. Prosecutors still advanced the case to the 
Supreme Court, which issued a ruling exonerating Pyon in August. 
Yet the battle of the sexes is far from finished in South Korea. Critics say 
the kind of mentality that resulted in Pyon's public humiliation remains 
stubbornly entrenched in society, despite nominal gains for women amid the 
recent whirl of economic advancement and democratization. 
The focus of controversy is the Family Law, which institutionalizes Korea's own 
brand of Confucian ethics, a rigid tradition of male ancestor worship that was 
imported from China in antiquity but survives here as nowhere else. Under the 
law, members of the same clan are forbidden to marry each other no matter how 
remote their blood ties. Women are denied the right to become head of their 
households, a condition with profound implications for divorce, child custody 
and communal property ownership. 
"I see the gap between the sexes widening rather than closing," said Lee Kyung 
Ja, a fiction writer and outspoken advocate of sexual equality. "I'm trying to 
show people that the problem is in the structure of society and in institutions 
that hate women." 
In a promising sign of relaxing attitudes, Lee's collection of short stories 
dealing with the problems of contemporary women, "Half Failure," was dramatized 
last month on prime-time television. Some of her extreme polemic was weeded out 
of the screenplay, but Lee said there has been an outpouring of viewer 
response. Both wives and mothers-in-law told her they wept over a segment on 
their primordial family conflict. 
"Of course, they have different reasons for crying," Lee said, referring to the 
typical mother-in-law's habit of advocating a son's male prerogatives. "I was 
hoping they would cry together." 
Men, meanwhile, are not standing by idly while their value system comes under 
attack. Although women have been trying to revise the Family Law since 1975, 
they have made no discernible progress. Recent proposals to take action on the 
issue in the National Assembly have prompted mass rallies by the nation's 
Confucianist lobby. 
"Contrary to the common belief, women are not discriminated against in South 
Korea," said Kang Jung Hee, chairman of the traditional learning committee of 
the National Institute of Confucian Studies. "Not only do they have equal 
rights, it's the men who are dominated." 
Kang, an elderly scholar who works out of a ramshackle pagoda-style building on 
the campus of Sung Kyun Kwan University, had some difficulty citing examples of 
how South Korean men have been oppressed by their women. During the Yi Dynasty 
(1392-1910), he noted, men did backbreaking agricultural labor while their 
wives relaxed at home. He only smiled when it was pointed out that today, women 
frequently do the lion's share of farm work. 
Confucianists do not oppose women joining -- or rising in -- the work force or 
participating in politics, Kang said. But they fear the "erosion of traditional 
morals" symbolized by the effort to revise the Family Law. The principle that 
only a man can be the head of any household must be immutable, he said. 
"We're not discriminating against women here," Kang said. "We just favor the 
man because he's more active in society and better able to serve as the master 
of the house." 
What has resulted is a milieu in which a widow's son becomes her master, or, if 
she has only daughters, a paternal in-law takes charge of her legal affairs. 
Divorced women can and often do reside with their children, but the ex-husband 
maintains legal custody through the official family register. Assets and real 
estate, technically, belong only to the male head of the house, and divorce 
courts tend to favor the men. 
"In the Confucian scheme, fathers transmit family honor and ancestral virtue to 
their sons through an unbroken line of male-linked kin," Laurel Kendall, an 
anthropologist at the American Museum of Natural History, wrote last year in a 
monograph that pondered the "moral inferiority" of Korean women. 
"Sons repay their debt of gratitude through filial piety; sons accept the 
father's authority for the sake of family welfare and reputation," Kendall 
said. "Sons support aging parents. Sons sustain the living family's link with 
the past through periodic offerings of wine and rice to the family's ancestors, 
and sons sustain the family's links with the future through the provision of 
male heirs." 
A Korean woman who fails to produce a healthy son is in a serious predicament. 
In Lee's case, she forced the issue by undergoing a tubal ligation -- without 
her husband's knowledge -- after bearing two daughters. Her husband, a bank 
executive, is the eldest son and heir in his family. 
"You can imagine the pressure," Lee said. "Even if I had seven daughters, I 
could go to a fortune teller and be told I have no children. Daughters don't 
count. Under Korean custom, my husband could drive me from my home and deprive 
me of my status as a wife." 
A tragedy last February underscored the depth of the male-superiority ethos. 
Four sisters, ages 6 through 11, took rat poison in a suicide pact, intending 
to lighten the burden on their impoverished family so that their 3-year-old 
brother could receive the best possible education. The youngest sister died. 
"I think Koreans are all a little bit insane, especially the females," said 
attorney Kang Gui Won, who until a few years ago was one of only three women 
practicing law in South Korea. "Women live like dogs at home. You can live like 
that for a short period, but after a while you become very sick." 
Kang, a conservative former judge who assisted with Pyon's legal appeal in the 
tongue-biting incident, is not related to Kang, the Confucian scholar. 
Nevertheless, had the two been closer in age and chanced to catch each other's 
eye, they most likely would have been forbidden to marry. They share the same 
surname. 
That's another tenet that Kang, the Confucianist, insists must be protected at 
all costs. 
"If the law is changed, soon we'd be allowing cousins to marry each other -- 
there'd be no control," he said. "Can you imagine having to carry around your 
genealogical records to screen people before falling in love? This isn't just 
custom, it's science." 
The present law does not bar distant cousins from marrying if it is their 
mothers, instead of their fathers, who are related. And in fact, the government 
grants occasional amnesties to paternal kinsmen who have been living in sin 
because of the name game. But critics of the law say it lends official credence 
to a stifling social atmosphere. 
"Our men will never understand," said Kim Yung Chung, a second state minister 
for political affairs and the only woman in President Roh Tae Woo's Cabinet. 
"We don't really have racism in Korea -- the only discrimination is by sex. Men 
ridicule us when we bring up the subject of affirmative action or revising the 
Family Law. They laugh it off." 
Kim, a former history professor at Ewha University, a prestigious women's 
college, said she still suffers from a double standard in her political career. 
She can't always have a cigarette when the urge arises, for instance. 
"If I smoked in front of men," she said, "my reputation would be very bad." 
While women in nearby Japan are experiencing a surge in political power, 
sparked in part by the charismatic chairwoman of the Japan Socialist Party, 
Takako Doi, participation of South Korean women in the electoral process 
remains a sad state of affairs. Not a single candidate was successful among the 
14 women running for district seats in April's National Assembly election. The 
six members of the chamber's female caucus were on proportional lists. 
The Korean Women's Development Institute recently started a training program 
aimed at preparing candidates for local assembly elections expected sometime 
next year. But at last count, women account for only 1.1% of the country's 
career civil servants, compared to 26.5% in the United States and 6.8% in 
Japan. 
In employment, too, the downtrodden women of Japan appear liberated by South 
Korean standards. Women make up about half the work force here, yet they earn 
on the average about 40% what men take home. Women university graduates 
complain they can't find work. Young and dispensable female laborers remain the 
backbone of much of the nation's export-oriented light industry, such as 
textiles and electronics, toiling until they reach marriage age. 
Kendall, the anthropologist, observed that "an unprecedented number of young 
women began to come to the cities in the late 1960s. Without this pool of 
cheap, educated and initially docile female labor, the Korean economic miracle 
could not have taken place." 
An Equal Employment Opportunity Law enacted last April 1, on the eve of the 
National Assembly election, corrected on paper many of the injustices in the 
workplace, but Kim, the Cabinet minister, said the new law is so ideal that it 
is unenforceable. Kang, the attorney, sits on a special committee empowered 
under the law to take appeals in job equality disputes in the Seoul area. No 
cases have come up so far. 
"We're watching, but they say they solve all the cases in the workplace," Kang 
said. "We feel women don't come to us for fear they'll lose their jobs if they 
fight against their employers." 
A range of grave social problems persist for women. The conventionally timid 
South Korean press, freed from censorship only last year, has published 
disturbing accounts of young women being kidnaped by gangsters and forced into 
prostitution rings, where they remain virtual slaves because social shame 
thwarts their return to home and family. 
The situation is so threatening that one married woman, a senior reporter at a 
financial newspaper in Seoul, said she stopped taking walks alone at night. 
"The kidnaping cases we hear about are only the tip of the iceberg," said Lee 
Jong Mok, a male official at the International Human Rights League of Korea. "A 
lot of girls don't come forward, because under the Confucian moral code their 
lives are completely destroyed. The problem won't go away until a lot of 
attitudes are changed." 
Domestic violence is another menace. Lee Kye Jong, publisher of Women's Weekly, 
a feminist newspaper that sponsors a battered women's hot line, said her staff 
conducted a poll and found that two out of every three homemakers claimed they 
had been beaten at least once by their husbands. The survey suggested that more 
than 40% of the respondents suffered regular physical abuse. 
"I can't walk down the street now and see a man without suspecting that he 
beats his wife," she said. 
Wife beating was one of the taboo topics taken up by Lee Kyung Ja, the feminist 
writer, and she believes the dramatization of her fiction on the 
government-owned Korean Broadcasting System had a "collective catharsis" effect 
on many ordinary women. 
"Television dramas portraying women have been so isolated and out of touch with 
reality that viewers thought they were about other people's lives. But women 
have been calling me asking how I learned about their families, their own 
stories," Lee said. "The men, on the other hand, are feeling a little 
uncomfortable. My husband was blushing when he watched." 
