SUNNY HILLS ROLLS OVER CANYON BEHIND POTENT RUNNING GAME 
Sunny Hills High School's running game continued to pile up the yardage 
Saturday night, although the Lancers had problems scoring in a 17-0 victory 
over pesky Canyon in front of 1,050 fans in Buena Park's Spaulding Stadium. 
Sunny Hills won its fourth consecutive game by rushing for 298 yards, but the 
outcome was in doubt until the final quarter, when the Lancers scored 10 
points. Fullback Brian Pizula gained 122 yards in 22 carries and scored his 
eighth touchdown of the season with only 55 seconds remaining to put the final 
touches on a sluggish Sunny Hills performance . 
Junior Mike Sullivan, who found it difficult breaking into the lineup with the 
all-league duo of Pizula and Ken Overby returning this year, had his best game 
of the season. Sullivan, playing at Z-back, gained 112 yards in eight carries, 
including the most exciting play of the night. 
Sullivan, utilizing his great speed, swept to his right and then sprinted past 
the Canyon secondary for a 74-yard touchdown run with 2:31 remaining in the 
first half to break a scoreless deadlock. 
"That was the best we've seen Mike run this season," said Tim Devaney, Sunny 
Hills coach. "He picked his lanes well and ran real well inside. I thought all 
three runners complemented each other very well." 
Overby added 64 yards in 12 carries and had the defensive play of the game when 
he teamed with tackle Darren Correll to stop Canyon fullback Jeff Brunswig for 
no gain on fourth down and one at Sunny Hills' 30-yard line. 
Canyon (1-3) outplayed Sunny Hills in the first half and showed vast 
improvement over last season, when the Comanches struggled to an 0-10 record. 
Canyon had opportunities to score twice in the first half when John Leos 
recovered a fumble and Mike Greene intercepted a pass, but each time the 
Comanches self-destructed. 
"Canyon will surprise some people," Devaney said. "It was good for us to get 
our butt kicked a little. Hopefully, practices will be better next week with 
Esperanza coming up." 
Sunny Hills was coming off a weeklong trip to Edmonton, Canada, where it 
pounded host La Zerte, 51-0, and Devaney feared a letdown. The Lancers appeared 
to be a half step off stride most of the first half but got on track in the 
second half, when they rushed for 175 yards. 
