EX-ENVIRONMENT ACTIVIST WILL TAKE HELM AT EDISON; 
UTILITY: JOHN BRYSON CO-FOUNDED NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL IN 1970. 
OBSERVERS ARE WATCHING CLOSELY. 
Twenty years ago, John Bryson helped found one of the nation's most aggressive 
environmental organizations. 
Today, the former environmental activist takes over as chairman and chief 
executive officer of one of Southern California's largest polluters. 
The significance -- and irony -- of Bryson's ascendancy to the top job at 
Southern California Edison Co. and its corporate parent, SCECorp, has not been 
lost on either the business community or the environmental movement. 
Members of both camps hope that Bryson will become a prototype for a new 
generation of top corporate executives who understand how to manage a major 
company in a climate of growing environmental awareness and regulation. 
"John's appointment suggests that the carriers of the environmental ethic may 
now be able to carry out those ideas from a position of power, rather than as 
critics of those who hold power," said Richard E. Ayers, who was a co-founder 
with Bryson of the Natural Resources Defense Council in 1970. Ayers now heads 
the group, which is known for its readiness to sue government and business to 
enforce environmental laws. 
The choice of Bryson, who at 47 succeeds retiring Howard P. Allen, is widely 
viewed as an inspired public relations move for the image-conscious utility. 
Bryson stressed in interviews last week that his primary loyalty is to the 
utility's shareholders and he cautioned that "the company is not in the 
business of providing (for) social needs." 
"We will . . . provide electric service in a way that is very sensitive to the 
environment," Bryson said. "(But) there is nothing that says in every case, 
every environmentalist will like what we're doing. In the environmental 
community itself there are always disputes about one thing or another." 
Bryson's rise to the top at Edison -- which serves 5 million customers as the 
nation's largest operating electrical utility -- under-scores a move among U.S. 
corporations to recruit executives for high-profile positions who have 
experience with environmental issues. For many companies this reflects a 
growing awareness that it makes good business sense to pay closer attention to 
the environment. 
Government environmental regulations are getting tougher, particularly in the 
aftermath of the Exxon Valdez and other oil spills. A negative public image on 
environmental issues can cost companies dearly in lost sales. 
Exxon, Monsanto and other companies have added board members with environmental 
credentials. Even Walt Disney Co. recently created a new corporate position of 
vice president for environmental policy, appointing a marine biologist to the 
post. 
Perhaps the best-known appointment came at Browning-Ferris Industries, the 
nation's second-largest waste management firm. The company was widely applauded 
when it hired William D. Ruckelshaus, two-time administrator of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, as CEO and chairman of the board in 1988. But 
some environmentalists have criticized Ruckelshaus' performance for falling 
short where environmental quality is concerned. 
SCECorp, whose profits are set by the California Public Utilities Commission, 
earned $778 million last year on revenues of $6.9 billion. As a 
government-regulated utility that operates, in effect, as a monopoly, Edison is 
under more pressure than most companies to be sensitive to the environment. 
Bryson, who joined Edison in 1984 as a senior vice president, will be put to 
the test as soon as he walks through the door at the company's Rosemead 
headquarters. 
The utility is embroiled in a major controversy over its proposed $2.5-billion 
merger with San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. Environmentalists and other 
critics, including state Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, object to Edison's 
plans to shut down older power plants in San Diego and shift electricity 
generation to under-used facilities in the South Coast Air Basin, the nation's 
smoggiest urban area. 
Meanwhile, criticism lingers over Edison's opposition to a far-reaching plan to 
bring Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino counties into 
compliance with federal clean air standards by 2007. 
Edison vigorously fought the plan and spent at least $1 million on a rival 
proposal. The utility agreed to support the South Coast Air Quality Management 
District's version only after winning important financial concessions. The 
compromise has not yet been approved by EPA. 
Bryson, whom one colleague describes as a "thoughtful, bulldog-type of man," 
has consistently supported Edison's position on both sensitive issues and sees 
no conflict with his environmentalist roots. 
"The public is concerned, correctly so I think, about a healthy environment," 
he said. "Energy, and particularly electricity, is at the heart of the modern 
economy and I would say we as electric utilities have an obligation to provide 
that reliably, but also promote sound environmental objectives." 
Bryson also may face management challenges within Edison. Some observers say 
mid-level executives at the utility have been slow to grasp environmental 
concerns and the importance of energy conservation. 
"Edison's middle management is still somewhat confused about whether it should 
be selling more electricity or less," said Amory Lovins, the well-known 
alternative energy proponent who is a Bryson supporter. 
Bryson can be expected to attract critics among those opposed to the SDG&amp;E 
merger and others who believe the AQMD plan is not strong enough. 
"We'll have our differences," predicted William S. Shaffran, deputy city 
attorney of San Diego, where public and private agencies from the mayor to the 
Chamber of Commerce strongly oppose the proposed merger. 
Bryson raised eyebrows recently when he got the NRDC to endorse an Edison plan 
for offsetting air pollution increases expected to result from a merger with 
SDG&amp;E. 
Many believe the NRDC position helped persuade AQMD to go along with the 
pollution reduction plan. 
"John asked me to take a look at this issue," NRDC's Ralph Cavanagh said. 
"There's no question, given John's connections in the environmental community, 
that he had the ability to get an issue on the (NRDC) agenda." 
Was it the "old-boy network" at work? 
"I wouldn't describe it as the old-boy network," Bryson said. "It meant that I 
had the acquaintance of many of the NRDC (staff) and I hoped, based on my work 
in the past, I had the respect of those people." 
Bryson also opposes one of the favorite projects of environmental activists in 
California -- passage of Proposition 128, the environmental initiative on the 
Nov. 6 ballot known as "Big Green" by its supporters. 
Bryson praises the measure's "worthy objectives," but said he is concerned 
that, for the utility company, it may be too "inflexible." 
Many environmentalists have no illusions about where Bryson's main allegiances 
are now. 
"I think (Bryson's) loyal to his company," said Mary Nichols, a senior attorney 
in NRDC's Los Angeles office. "He's not going to do anything as CEO of Edison 
to compromise the interest of shareholders." 
But, she added, "I think his view of his responsibilities and philosophy of how 
he carries them out will clearly have a broader environmental component than 
any previous CEO of Southern California Edison -- or any other head of a 
utility in the country." 
Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce President Ray Remy, who occasionally plays 
tennis with Bryson, said the Edison executive called recently to ask whether 
his NRDC history posed a problem for the chamber. Remy told him it did not. 
Bryson, who lives in South Pasadena with his wife, Louise, and four children, 
said many people might consider his environmental career "the most intriguing 
part of my background. But, in terms of what I have learned and bring to the 
job . . . I don't know that I would say that NRDC contributed more." 
Although Bryson is expected to generally follow the course at Edison set by the 
departing Allen, the new chairman will have a decidedly different management 
style. Allen was known for his sometimes gruff, no-nonsense demeanor, in 
contrast to Bryson's conciliatory approach. 
Bryson's style and background in the environmental movement can be expected to 
not only reap public relations dividends, but prove to be an advantage in 
working with environmental groups and making life easier for Edison down the 
road. 
In contrast to Bryson's unorthodox corporate career path, Allen worked at 
Edison since 1954 and gradually rose through the ranks. Before retiring, he 
served as president as well as chairman and chief executive officer. Bryson, 
however, will not hold all three positions. Executive Vice President Michael R. 
Peevey will serve under Bryson as president. 
Peevey may counterbalance Bryson's image as an environmentalist. Peevey's 
career includes a 10-year stint as president of the California Council for 
Environmental and Economic Balance, an industry-labor coalition that most often 
opposed environmental agendas. 
Bryson, who grew up in Portland, Ore., graduated from Stanford University and 
Yale Law School. In 1970, he was among a group that used a Ford Foundation 
grant to found the NRDC. 
"The idea was an organization that would base itself on good science and 
careful advocacy," he said. 
Today, NRDC is one of the country's leading environmental organizations. It has 
sued the federal government so often that some have called NRDC the "shadow 
EPA." More recently, NRDC sparked a nationwide controversy when it released a 
report warning that apples sprayed with the pesticide Alar were unsafe. 
In 1974, Bryson married and left the environmental group to work for a private 
law firm in Portland. 
By 1976, he was back in California, as chairman of the State Water Resources 
Control Board during the administration of Gov. Edmund G. (Jerry) Brown Jr. 
There he became a valuable intermediary for bureaucrats vying for the 
governor's ear. 
"John was an unfailing co-conspirator," said Michael Fischer, now executive 
director of the Sierra Club, who then was deputy director of the governor's 
Office of Planning and Research. 
Fischer recalled that Bryson would argue before Brown the merits of a proposal 
on behalf of Fischer and others. Then, Bryson would call them at night to 
report, "I think I've got Jerry softened up. Now's the time to come in." 
From 1979 through 1982, Bryson served as PUC president, generally receiving 
good marks. At one point, he joined commission members in slapping Edison with 
an $8-million fine for defying a PUC order. 
"I thought he was a good regulator because he was fair," said Edward J. Tirello 
Jr., managing director and senior utility analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham 
&amp; Co. in New York. "I always felt he gave every side a chance." 
Bryson has also gained a reputation as a deft negotiator. 
Daniel Yergin, now president of Cambridge Energy Research Associates and a 
seasoned consultant to government and business, first met Bryson during the 
early 1980s. Yergin recalled a conference on energy issues Bryson organized at 
the Stanford campus. 
"John put together this extraordinary conference that brought all sorts of 
people together from all different points of view in what were then very fierce 
energy debates. He shaped it into a reasoned and creative discussion. . . . It 
showed a real capacity to bring different people together and to focus on 
common concerns rather than knee-jerk antagonisms," Yergin said. 
"I was at that conference," said energy researcher Lovins. "I think if John 
hadn't taken up this line of work I think he would have been a fine diplomat. 
He's the kind of lawyer who tries to solve problems, not win fights." 
Bryson is a proponent of several ideas that have long been discussed by 
environmentalists, but only lately welcomed in utility company planning 
meetings. These often include the use of financial incentives to encourage 
energy conservation. The idea is to use government regulation to set 
conservation goals, but allow business to develop the technologies and methods 
to meet those goals. Energy savings, so the theory goes, will come more 
efficiently this way than if government dictates every move. 
Bryson notes that Edison recently proposed to the state that alternative and 
renewable energy sources -- such as co-generation and geothermal -- be given 
greater weight in planning for energy needs because they involve less potential 
environmental impact. 
"This is sound from an environmental point of view," Bryson said, "but also 
just as plain sound business. It would be a mistake in judgment, I believe, to 
approve a coal plant today that had some level of carbon dioxide emission that 
would add to its cost about 15 years down the way -- while the geothermal 
facility might have less." 
Bryson's supporters see his appointment as an opportunity for a harmonious -- 
and unusual -- confluence of environmental and business interests. 
"This is a great opportunity to see whether or not that confluence works," said 
PUC President G. Mitchell Wilk. "I've got a lot of optimism that says it does." 
