TOUGHER LAW ENFORCEMENT WILL MEAN BIGGER PROFITS FOR DRUG DEALERS, NOT 
DECREASED USE 
James Flanigan is to be congratulated for the courage and good sense shown in 
his Sept. 3 column ("Drive Down the Profits in This Business"). Unfortunately, 
no one is listening. As a professional economist, I liken the illegal drug 
trade to a business. 
There is not one shred of evidence that the current drug policy is working or 
that more of the same will work. The obvious evidence is what has happened to 
the street price of drugs. Prices, particularly for cocaine, have dropped. 
Hardly the result expected if our efforts had actually restricted the supply of 
illegal drugs. 
Perhaps the best way to see the problem is to assume for a minute that our 
efforts actually do reduce the supply of illegal drugs. What are the most 
likely effects? First, the street price would go up. This means that addicts 
will feel compelled to steal more from the rest of us to maintain their habits. 
Second, the profits of those with drugs to sell will increase. Potential drug 
dealers are nothing if not sensitive to the profit motive. Accordingly, the 
increased price ought to attract new sellers. 
No one ever shut down a market by making it more profitable, yet that is 
exactly what is being proposed! 
Complete legalization is not the answer. This is as simplistic and as silly as 
the current policy of complete prohibition. All drugs are not the same. We can 
probably live with the problems caused by the widespread use of marijuana. PCP 
and other such drugs are quite another matter. Selective decriminalization and 
differential taxation, however, may be part of a viable effective drug policy. 
We do have experience with legalization. Before the first decade of this 
century, most drugs, including opiates, were legal and cheap. We apparently did 
have a significant proportion of the population addicted. This was a tragedy 
for the addict and his family but not for society. Criminals did not usually 
fight over and get rich on the drug trade. Many addicts were able to live 
productive lives in spite of their addiction. We should be so lucky today. 
JOHN A. TOMASKE 
Baldwin Park 
