ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: IRVINE; 
GAIDO WON'T RUN AS WRITE-IN CANDIDATE 
After losing her legal battle to fill an open seat on the City Council, Mary 
Ann Gaido said this week she will not appeal last week's court decision or run 
as a write-in candidate in the Nov. 6 election. 
With less than two weeks before the election, Gaido said there wouldn't be 
enough time for her to mount an effective publicity campaign to win as a 
write-in candidate. Instead, she will spend her time speaking out on city 
issues and preparing for the 1992 council election, she said. 
The state Court of Appeal ruled last Thursday that the open City Council seat 
should be filled by special election, overturning a Superior Court's decision 
in August that Gaido had a legal right to the seat. 
Gaido, 48, came in third place in the June 5 race for two open council seats. 
As the runner-up in the race, she was entitled to fill the council seat vacated 
when Councilwoman Sally Anne Sheridan resigned to become mayor. But the law 
also allows residents to petition for an election, which a group did 
immediately after the June election. 
After the City Council accepted the petitions and called an election, Gaido 
sued, saying the petitions probably misled some signers into believing an 
election was the only way to fill the seat. The petition, using wording 
required by city law, did not state that the seat automatically would have been 
filled without an election. 
A Superior Court judge agreed with Gaido and ordered her seated. But the 
appeals court said that an election was the least of two evils. Although the 
petition language was misleading, the appeals court said, voters probably also 
didn't know that Gaido, as the runner-up in the election, would have taken the 
seat automatically. 
On the Nov. 6 ballot will be five candidates who filed to run in the special 
election. They are Bill Vardoulis, an engineering consultant and former 
councilman; Carol Yocum, a former planning commissioner and community activist; 
Michael Tague, an assistant principal in Irvine; Albert E. Nasser, a 
semi-retired attorney; and Genovica Niculescu-Balteanu, a mechanical engineer. 
The winner of that race will fill the seat until its term expires in 1992. TOM 
McQUEENEY 
