A SUFFERING HUMANITY 
A survey of global health has concluded that a billion people -- one in five -- 
are diseased, in poor health or malnourished, according to the United Nations 
World Health Organization. The report underscores the importance of a greater 
commitment to public health, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and 
Latin America. 
"This is a preventable tragedy because the developed world has the resources 
and technology to end common diseases worldwide, Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, WHO 
director general, commented. "The missing ingredient is the will to help the 
developing countries. Simply, the rich countries must transfer technology, 
health manpower and money because the poorest countries can't help themselves." 
Health expenditures in the poorest nations average $5 per capita compared with 
$400 or more in the industrialized nations of the West. An increase of as 
little as $2 per person would cover the cost of global child immunization and 
remedies for many of the most prevalent diseases, including diarrheal and acute 
respiratory infections, tuberculosis, malaria, schistosomiasis and sexually 
transmitted diseases. 
Some 60% of the world's children are now vaccinated against polio, tetanus, 
measles, diphtheria, pertussis and tuberculosis, but the diseases still kill 
almost 3 million children each year. Oral rehydration therapy to reduce the 
risk of death from diarrheal infection has been adopted by public health 
services in most nations, but the therapy still only reaches about one-third of 
the children at risk. Pneumonia kills an estimated 4 million children a year 
because they do not have access to the inexpensive antibiotic treatment that 
could save their lives. 
Not all of the problems are focused in the developing nations alone. The spread 
of sexually transmitted diseases in developed industrialized nations, notably 
the United States, has been dramatized in recent reports. It is now estimated 
that 5% of teen-agers and young adults worldwide contract a sexually 
transmitted disease each year. Gonorrhea, syphilis, chancroid, chlamydia, 
genital warts and two incurable diseases, genital herpes and acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome (AIDS) are increasing in many regions of the world, 
"aggravated by the greater mobility of populations and the breakdown in 
traditional mores, increasingly leading to multiple sex partners," according to 
the report. 
Malaria remains a major scourge in 100 nations of the world, with no progress 
evident. Half the world's population is at risk from it. In 76 developing 
nations, schistosomiasis, a debilitating tropical disease spread by water-borne 
parasites, afflicts an estimated 200 million people. 
Nakajima notes in his report the progress that has been made: Smallpox has been 
eliminated, and polio is likely to be eradicated by the end of the century. But 
he prefers, quite correctly, to focus on what needs to be done, not on what has 
already been done. "We cannot rest on our laurels, waiting for things to 
change," he said. "We need to act now." 
