CONSUMER VIEWS: BENEFITS AND THE WORKING RETIREE 
Question: I read with great interest your recent article about retired people 
receiving Social Security, but also working part time, and thereby getting 
their benefits recalculated each year. Since I retired in 1984, I have worked 
part time every year to the maximum allowed without being penalized. I rushed 
to my local Social Security office to find out why my benefits had not been 
recalculated. 
I was told that the early years are being indexed, and that for 1989 you need 
to earn at least $17,000 in part-time work to get your benefits recalculated. 
(Of course, $4,200 in, say, 1956, is not $4,200 in today's money.) The person 
to whom I talked was unable to tell me what type of indexing is used, however. 
I also found that the benefits for every Social Security beneficiary are not 
automatically recomputed each year. In order to have a recalculation made for 
1989, you must have earned $17,000 or above, and you must submit your W-2 form 
for the year to your local Social Security office to get any action. Who is 
right in this matter? -- B.L. 
Answer: We'll split the difference. The earlier column was in response to a 
reader who chided me for, by inference, suggesting that, once retired, Social 
Security benefits would not be increased through part-time work. He went on to 
inform me that, since retiring 11 years ago, he had had his benefits increased 
automatically every year (exclusive of cost-of-living adjustments) by virtue of 
his part-time work. 
In the follow-up column to which you refer, I probably made such increases 
sound more commonplace than they actually are -- although many Social Security 
beneficiaries do, indeed, have their benefits so increased on the basis of 
part-time work. 
Today, a Social Security beneficiary's earnings (part time) are calculated, 
and, if they are higher than his earnings for some year 20 or 25 years ago, 
today's higher earnings are calculated into benefits and the older, lower, 
earnings-year is dropped. 
Since the late 1970s, though, Social Security has been indexing the early years 
to take into account, as you put it, that "$4,200 in, say, 1956, is not $4,200 
in today's money." And so the indexing was put into place to put a more 
realistic light on today's part-time earnings in terms of what comparable 
earnings would have been in, say, 1956. 
Right now, the figure given you is about right -- at this moment. It takes 
part-time income of about $17,750 to offset one of those lower, earlier, years. 
But how does this jibe with the fact that the ceiling on part-time earnings for 
those 65 and older this year is $8,800? 
"The two don't really have anything to do with each other," according to Joe 
Giglio, public affairs spokesman here for Social Security, "because a Social 
Security beneficiary can earn well in excess of $8,800 in part-time work, and 
still draw, at least, partial benefits." 
Above earnings of $8,800, that is, you lose $1 in benefits for every $2 earned. 
So, if you earned $17,750, you would be penalized on the surplus $8,950, or on 
the one-for-two formula, $4,475. 
"But," Giglio adds, "if his normal monthly benefit was, say, $600, or $7,200 a 
year, he would still have been receiving annual benefits of $2,725 ($7,200 
minus $4,475)." And, of course, that base benefit would still go up because it 
is replacing -- even with indexing -- one of those earlier years. It might not 
mean much at present in terms of money in the pocket, but it will if, in the 
future, he knocks off the part-time work and draws full benefits. 
Giglio doesn't know why you were told that recomputation requires your W-2 form 
and that it isn't automatic. It is automatic. 
