CUNLIFFE WHISTLE-BLOWER SETTLES CITY SUIT; 
AGREES TO $800,000 AWARD; COUNCIL'S APPROVAL STILL REQUIRED 
Whistle-blower Robert O'Neill, a key figure in the forced retirement of Sylvia 
Cunliffe as general manager of Los Angeles' General Services Department last 
year, has agreed to an $800,000 settlement of his lawsuit against the city, 
authorities said Thursday. 
Deputy City Atty. Art Walsh said the city and O'Neill, 48, a real estate 
officer in Cunliffe's department, appeared before Superior Court Judge Bruce R. 
Geehnaert on Monday to place the agreement on record. The settlement still must 
be approved by the City Council. 
"All parties are satisfied," Walsh said. 
O'Neill's lawyer, Jay Plotkin, told United Press International that O'Neill 
felt both "relieved" and "vindicated" by the settlement. 
Before filing suit, O'Neill had made several anonymous telephone calls on a 
city corruption hot line, accusing Cunliffe of improprieties. He charged that, 
in retaliation, Cunliffe tried to discredit him by revealing his youthful 
troubles with the law. 
In a memo to Mayor Tom Bradley and the City Council, Cunliffe said that 
criminal records showed that O'Neill had been convicted of misdemeanors in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s in Connecticut, had had an alcohol problem and was 
"a known gambler." 
Bradley subsequently charged that O'Neill's privacy had been violated. Cunliffe 
had "falsely implied that Mr. O'Neill was dishonest and had never rehabilitated 
himself," he said. 
"It was quite clear that her purpose in sending the memoranda was as an act of 
reprisal against Mr. O'Neil," Bradley said. 
The mayor urged Cunliffe's firing because of allegations that she had hired her 
mother and other relatives, favored friends in granting of contracts, rented 
city-owned property and invaded O'Neill's privacy. 
The controversy ended when Cunliffe, then 54, agreed to retire with full 
pension benefits on March 4, 1988, her birthday. The agreement, approved by the 
City Council after a half-hour debate, spared Cunliffe from possibly being 
fired. 
The City Council agreed to pay Cunliffe's share of damages and legal fees. As a 
result, the settlement announced Thursday provided that O'Neill drop his case 
against his former boss as well as the city. 
