FATALITIES BRING DRIVE WARNING OF DEADLY NATURE OF TRAINS 
In the wake of the third fatal train accident in three weeks, transportation 
officials on Monday announced plans for a public-awareness campaign designed to 
remind San Diego County residents that, now more than ever, trains can kill. 
Two people were killed Sunday night when they were hit by a train in Encinitas. 
Jesus Garcia, district director of Caltrans, said his agency will meet with 
city and county officials to decide how best to update the often-outdated 
perceptions of railroad hazards. 
"Most people are aware that a freeway is not a safe place to play, but for some 
reason they don't understand that train tracks, in many cases, are even more 
deadly," Garcia said in a statement. "We need to make them aware. Their lives 
could depend on it." 
The agency hopes to erase romantic visions of hobo-hauling freight trains 
ambling leisurely -- and noisily -- down the track. Howard Robertson, an Amtrak 
spokesman, said its trains -- 16 of which zip through San Diego County each day 
-- are faster and quieter than ever. And as they have gained speed and lost 
decibels, partly as a result of newly installed quarter-mile strips of smooth, 
silent track, they also have grown more deadly. 
"People like it (the improvements), but it's creating a little bit more 
danger," Robertson said. The trains "are on you before you even know it." 
Law enforcement officials said that is apparently what happened to a group of 
at least five people Sunday evening. About 7 o'clock, a southbound train 
appeared suddenly out of the darkness, moving at 87 m.p.h. along a section of 
track in Encinitas where the group had apparently gathered to drink beer. 
Sheriff's deputies said the locomotive's engineer saw the group on the tracks 
and sounded his horn in warning, but he was unable to stop. 
The bodies of Juan Carlos Ortega, 24, and Sandra Spires, 45, were found dozens 
of feet south of the point of impact. A third person, Eliseo Zarate, 30, was 
taken to Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla with fractured ribs, a broken 
collarbone and numerous cuts. Zarate was believed to have been struck by one of 
the two people hit by the train. 
The accident brought the county's train-related death toll to four this month. 
On Oct. 13, a 16-year-old girl was killed by an Amtrak train while she and two 
friends were walking along the railroad tracks near her parents' home in 
Encinitas. On Oct. 4, a 22-year-old surfer was struck and killed while taking a 
shortcut along a train trestle to the beach in San Onofre. 
Just the day before, a southbound Amtrak train hit an auto-transport truck that 
was stuck on the tracks in the Leucadia area of Encinitas. Six train passengers 
suffered minor injuries. 
