WHAT ABOUT THE MOUSEKETEERS? 
The nine of us who survived for the entire show are all now in our 40s, with 
careers and families. The original Mouseketeers had a lot of social and 
professional reunions in the '80s. We starred in an hourlong 1980 NBC special 
celebrating our 25th anniversary and performed live at Disneyland for two 
months each year from 1980 through 1985. We also appeared on a number of talk 
shows and at charity benefits. 
We get together frequently at parties, weddings, even christenings. Annette 
Funicello had her own serial, "Annette," before graduating to beach movies and 
later to peanut butter commercials. Annette then took time off to raise her 
children, who are now in college and high school. She returned to performing in 
the mid-'80s in the Disney Channel film "Lots of Luck" and in the 1987 film 
"Back to the Beach," with singer Frankie Avalon. Frankie and Annette toured the 
country in 1990. 
* Tommy Cole is the make-up artist for "Evening Shade," "Wings," "Lassie" and 
"Designing Women." He also worked on such features as "Three Fugitives" and 
"Pretty in Pink." On television, Tom has had four Emmy nominations and won an 
Emmy for the miniseries "Backstairs at the White House." 
* A car accident in 1983 made Karen Pendleton a paraplegic, but she went on to 
become an activist for handicapped rights. She returned to college to work on a 
degree in psychology. 
* Cubby O'Brien was always partnered with Karen. He has a 20-year-old daughter 
and has continued his drumming on six Academy Award shows and with such 
entertainers as Andy Williams, Bernadette Peters and, recently in Los Angeles, 
Shirley MacLaine. 
* Doreen Tracey posed for nude magazine photos in the '70s, then became a 
television producer and currently is a partner in Big Bertha Productions. 
* Bobby Burgess danced on "The Mickey Mouse Club" and kept dancing for 21 years 
on "The Lawrence Welk Show." He is still dancing and making appearances with 
his partner, Elaine Niverson. Bobby and his wife, Myron Floren's daughter 
Kristie, have four children. 
* Darlene Gillespie was in her own serial, "Corky and White Shadow." She is now 
a surgical nurse and has two children. (Earlier this year, Darlene filed suit 
against Walt Disney Productions in connection with her payment for "The Mickey 
Mouse Club.") 
* Sharon Baird now lives in Reno. After three years on Disney Channel shows and 
playing the title role in Sondra Locke's film "Rat Boy," Sharon became the 
dialogue coach on the NBC series "Day by Day." LONNIE BURR 
