COPING WITH THE PROSPECT OF HIGHER TAXES; 
LEVIES ON GASOLINE, BOOZE, LUXURY GOODS GET MIXED RECEPTION FROM BUSINESS 
Federal budget proposals to impose new taxes on gasoline, liquor and such 
luxury items as furs, jewelry and yachts have so far received a mixed reaction 
from businesses that would be affected. 
While some business people vigorously opposed the measures, others thought a 
healthy economy -- if the new budget could bring it -- would be more important 
to their businesses, particularly in the long run. 
The tax proposals "may not help you, and they may not hurt you," said Michel 
Glouchevitch, a general partner in Los Angeles-based Riordan Venture 
Management. "They may just create a more stable (economic) environment. . . . 
We have neglected the budget for so many years now that we're going to have to 
hurt for a while, in the short run." 
The proposals, still being negotiated, include a variety of so-called "sin 
taxes." These include raising the current 16-cent tax on cigarettes to 20 cents 
next year, and to 24 cents in 1993. The 16-cent tax on a six-pack of beer would 
double, and levies on wine and spirits would also go up. 
At Trader Joe's Co., the South Pasadena-based retailer with 37 California 
outlets, CEO John Shields called the proposed tax on liquor "regressive." 
More than 90% of the wines he sells are priced under $5, Shields said. But the 
tax would be a uniform tax per unit. 
"If I were a wine seller on the West Side, selling $25-a-bottle wines, the tax 
wouldn't have as much impact," Shields said. 
The proposed gas tax hike -- at least 5 cents a gallon -- would come on top of 
already high oil prices from the Persian Gulf crisis, a particularly onerous 
prospect to some owners of large delivery fleets. 
United Parcel Service Chairman Kent C. Nelson has vigorously lobbied 
congressional leaders to avoid adding new taxes at a time "when the whole 
industry is struggling to cope with the steep escalation in fuel prices." 
A 5-cent increase in the gas tax would cost United Parcel an additional $12 
million for fuel over the next year, according to a company spokesman. The 
package delivery company already is paying $900,000 a day more for fuel because 
of the Kuwait invasion. 
On the other hand, Federal Express Corp. is less concerned. Spokesman Armand 
Schneider said they expected they would be forced to pay $250,000 more for the 
5 million gallons of fuel the firm consumes every month. 
"We're a $7-billion company," Schneider said. "Our financial people think that 
for a company our size, we don't consider that a very heavy hit." 
Among luxury merchants, reaction was similarly mixed. 
"Obviously, nobody wants taxes," said Edd Jacobs of Somper Furs Inc. in Beverly 
Hills. "But I think everyone knows we have problems, and they're going to cost 
us whatever they cost. If a $10,000 coat is going to be another $500 -- I think 
people will live with that. As long as everybody is doing the same thing." 
Taxes are also proposed on yachts costing $100,000 or more, which in the 
already depressed economy have not been selling well as it is. 
"Our sales are down, and I don't think (new taxes) are going to help any," said 
Finlay G. Scott, owner of Bayside Marine Sales in Newport Beach. "When they put 
a sales tax on used boats, it had a negative effect," he said. "People resented 
it. But they get used to it, and they pay it." 
Still, Finlay noted that advertisements have already begun to appear in 
yachting publications, urging people to buy now and save the expected 10% tax. 
Many jewelers are concerned that customers will wait for the opportunity to buy 
jewelry overseas, avoiding any new tax imposed here -- something not so easily 
done with a yacht. And other luxury goods manufacturers also warned that the 
people most directly hurt may be the workers who make such products. 
"People forget that poor people make those luxury items," said Michael Pappas, 
owner of Los Angeles-based Michael's Furs, a manufacturer. 
"This industry has already been hit by the recession: furs, jewelry, cars, 
boats, vacations -- anything a person could cut back on. This is bad news. This 
is going to make things even worse." 
