TRAIN KILLS WOMAN WHOSE CAR IS TRAPPED IN TRAFFIC; 
ACCIDENT: SURROUNDING CARS TRIED IN VAIN TO MAKE ROOM FOR HER MERCEDES-BENZ AT 
A CROSSING WHERE THE CITY OF IRVINE HOPES SOMEDAY TO BUILD AN OVERPASS. 
A woman whose car became stuck on railroad tracks in heavy commuter traffic 
screamed and honked her horn in vain before a speeding Amtrak train barreled 
into her vehicle, killing her. Seconds before the train struck, Mary A. Shaw, 
47, of Irvine, nudged her car hard against the back bumper of the car in front 
of her in a panicky attempt to save her own life, witnesses said. 
As the train neared, she stopped screaming and looked straight down the track 
as if in quiet resignation, said a motorist stuck in traffic directly ahead of 
Shaw's car along Culver Drive. 
"She kind of looked at the train and watched it come," said witness Becky 
Bennett of Irvine. 
The train struck the rear of Shaw's car at an estimated 70 m.p.h., twisting it 
into a block of flaming wrecked steel and throwing her to her death a few feet 
away. No one aboard the San Diego-to-Los Angeles train was injured. 
A friend of Shaw, Eddie Heimstra, said Shaw so disliked driving that she logged 
only about 3,000 miles a year and avoided freeways. He said Shaw was a 
well-liked, outgoing woman who had just dropped her two teen-aged children off 
at school and was driving to the Irvine design agency where she worked as a 
purchasing agent. 
The accident occurred at one of the two intersections where city officials have 
sought for years to build an overpass above the train tracks. 
Rush-hour traffic and fog were thick when the accident occurred. Police, 
however, were hesitant to point to either as a direct contributor to the 
accident. 
Shaw was headed south on Culver shortly after 8 a.m. when she reached the 
railroad tracks. 
"The lights started flashing and the arm started coming down," said Kelly 
Albright of El Toro, who witnessed the accident from another lane. "She had 
already started through (and) the front of her car was underneath the bar. So 
she thought she could make it through." 
She drove as far forward as she could, but about a foot of her 1972 
Mercedes-Benz remained in the path of the train. Other drivers, alerted by her 
screams and honks of the horn, tried as best they could to make room. 
Alex Bos, directly behind the woman's car, said he backed up to give Shaw 
enough space to clear the tracks. "I saw her panicking right in front of me and 
I was waiting for her to open her safety belt and run," Bos said. 
Becky Bennett, whose car was in front of Shaw's, tried to make room for Shaw by 
moving her own vehicle forward until she pushed into the bumper of the car 
ahead of her. Bennett, too, was screaming and honking to encourage other 
motorists to help as well. 
The train was traveling so fast that it could not come to a halt for nearly 
three-quarters of a mile, according to an Amtrak official at the scene. 
Sue Martin, an Amtrak spokeswoman in Washington, said buses arrived to take 
passengers to their destinations about two hours after the accident. But since 
the train was cleared to proceed to Los Angeles Union Station about that time, 
some passengers elected to stay aboard. The accident delayed other Amtrak 
trains on the Los Angeles-San Diego line for as much as two hours. 
Irvine Public Works Director Harry Ehrlich said plans for overpasses at that 
crossing at Culver Drive, as well as at a second one over Jeffrey Road, have 
stalled amid costs estimated at $23 million and opposition from neighboring 
residents about the proposed height of the structures. 
The Culver intersection is one of 44 crossings in Orange County where cars must 
avoid the 14 to 16 trains, both passenger and freight, that run along the Santa 
Fe Railroad tracks daily, according to authorities. Another 27 crossings are 
separated from the tracks by overpasses or underpasses. 
But Irvine officials said accidents are rare. The need to improve traffic flow, 
rather than safety considerations, was the primary force behind the proposal 
for overpasses at Culver and Jeffrey. 
Shaw's death came as a major blow to her co-workers at Beckham-Eisenman in 
Irvine, a commercial design and furniture company. 
"It's a total loss to all our employees. We had to allow most of our 40 
employees to go home because they were so upset," Stephen Eisenman said. He 
called his purchasing agent of the last four years "a super dedicated person." 
Eddie Heimstra, a partner in B&amp;C Awnings Inc. in Placentia who had known 
Shaw through business dealings, lauded her as "an outgoing lady, so full of 
life, so happily married. She is very well known in the industry." 
Contributing to this story were Davan Maharaj and Don Kelsen of the Times 
staff, Joe Bel Bruno and Le Kim Dinh. 
