TOYOTA CHANGING ITS CORPORATE CULTURE PROFILE ; 
WORKPLACE: IN A BID TO BECOME A FIERCER COMPETITOR, THE JAPANESE AUTO GIANT 
SCRAPS ITS OLD SENIORITY SYSTEM AND INCREASES ITS BUDGET FOR RESEARCH. 
Not long ago, Hideki Ueda, 36, was an assistant manager at Toyota Motor Corp., 
with a staff of four to boss around and a title and salary to match. 
Now, like 1,000 other former Toyota managers, Ueda has returned to the ranks of 
his staff. Although he retained his higher salary, inside the company he is 
just plain Mr. Ueda, researcher. 
"One feels a bit bereft," Ueda admitted in a telephone interview. "On the other 
hand, I'm rid of a lot of niggling, mundane tasks. . . . The wind blows more 
freely through the company." 
Ueda's demotion is part of a sweeping internal restructuring of Toyota, until 
now the staid and lumbering giant of the Japanese auto industry. To respond 
more nimbly to advancing technology and become an ever fiercer competitor 
internationally, Toyota is trying to cast aside decades of hierarchical, 
group-oriented tradition in favor of individual creativity and an easy, 
informal flow of ideas. 
To that end, the company put half of its white-collar managers back to work on 
the front line. It reduced the number of approvals needed for any single idea 
to be put into effect. It will base future promotions and raises more on merit 
than seniority, upsetting a revered Japanese custom. 
And the company decreed that employees will be known simply by the title -san 
(Mr. or Ms.), rather than by their rank, with even the company president to be 
addressed as "Toyoda-san." 
In a language so hierarchical that Japanese sometimes switch to English simply 
to escape the pressure, that apparently cosmetic change might be the most 
revolutionary aspect of Toyota's action. 
The restructuring affects about 25,000 white-collar workers among Toyota's 
total labor force of 68,000 in Japan. It does not affect the company's 
blue-collar work force, which has long relied on small "teams" that encourage 
ideas to flow from the bottom. 
The change reflects a Japanese trend to slim down and invest for the future in 
a way that suggests that competition from Japanese industry is unlikely to ease 
up any time soon. 
Like most big firms, Toyota is plowing money back into future productivity; 
this year, it will increase capital spending by 12.5%, fully half of which will 
go to research and development, according to the Japan Economic Journal. 
All this might seem surprising for a corporation that already ranks sixth in 
the world, according to Fortune magazine, with handsome profits and growing 
sales. Toyota sold 4.1 million cars in its fiscal year ended June 30, a 6.2% 
increase above the previous year. 
But Toyota has suffered a slight drop of market share, and executives are 
worried that the company might be growing too comfortable with success. 
"Toyota's good point was said to be its very solid organization," said Iwao 
Isomura, managing director and member of Toyota's board. "That's fine for 
repeating what you've done before, but we wondered whether it was right for 
responding to all the changes that might come our way." 
Among those changes are a maturing of the auto industry, which means Toyota 
cannot continue to grow as quickly as before, and an aging of the Japanese 
population. 
Both those changes, in turn, mean more and more bosses for fewer and fewer 
employees, an industrywide problem in Japan. Isomura said a U.S. company would 
respond to such top-heaviness with layoffs. 
"But in Japan, that's not the way," he said. "So our challenge is to find a way 
to use everyone." 
Analysts here generally applauded the changes, although they said their effect 
will not be seen for some time. 
"I think it's obviously going to take awhile for them to get used to it, 
particularly in this culture, and it's going to be hard to stick to it," said 
Sheryl Hogg, who analyzes the automobile industry for County NatWest Securities 
Japan Ltd. 
"I think they're smart to recognize the problem now and try to do something, 
instead of waiting until it's too late. . . . I think it is going to have 
beneficial effects." 
"It's going to take time. There's no quick remedy for the big corporation 
disease," agreed Keisuke Kasagi, an analyst for W. I. Carr. "But it's the right 
step to take at the moment." 
In one sense, Toyota is only playing catch-up. Honda has long been known as a 
more flexible company, and Nissan gave its designers more freedom several years 
ago -- a change that has led to less stodgy cars and growing popularity for 
Nissan, especially among younger buyers. 
But Hogg said she believes that Toyota's restructuring is "more far-reaching." 
Toyota, she said, is "huge and very staid, and it is trying to energize itself 
and become more youthful." 
"In some ways, I'm sure it causes a lot of shock," she said. "If you've been 
sitting around waiting to get your kacho (manager) title, I'm sure it's not a 
very pleasant prospect." 
Ueda, the manager-turned-researcher, acknowledged a certain "loneliness" 
resulting from his loss of rank, and he also said that his job has become 
tougher. 
Before, any idea had to pass across his desk; now, he will be consulted by his 
colleagues only if he can prove that he is "capable and trustworthy and 
responsible," he said. 
Indeed, the need to prove one's worth will likely weigh heavily on most 
white-collar workers if Toyota's changes, which went into effect Aug. 1, take 
hold. 
Where workers could previously expect promotion as long as they showed up for 
work and demonstrated loyalty, now performance will count most -- and greatest 
weight will be given to recent evaluations, "regardless of seniority or past 
evaluations," according to a company statement. 
