BEARS, RAIDERS AND DOLPHINS ARE STAGING REVIVALS IN NFL 
Think this business of giving each team a week off has more than the NFL 
schedule-makers confused? That the local paper or TV station is showing the 
standings from 1985, or more confusing still, upside down? 
Well, BOOM! POW! CRASH! as coach-turned commentator John Madden is guaranteed 
to scream at least once during an NFL telecast this coming weekend. Look again, 
but don't touch that dial! There is nothing wrong with your eyes or your 
reception. 
The Bears, Raiders and Dolphins really are back with a bullet. And the reason 
they are ruling their respective roosts -- Chicago (5-1) in the NFC Central, 
Los Angeles (6-1) in the AFC West and Miami (tied with Buffalo at 5-1) in the 
AFC East -- is not because nostalgic gremlins are stalking the print shops and 
the airwaves. 
Simply put, they are playing "smashmouth football" -- as in smash your 
opponents with a punishing running game, then smash them some more with a 
punishing defense. 
Granted, the slice-and-dice San Francisco 49ers are still the class of the 
league, still killing everybody softly with dink passes and a defense that 
relies as much on guile as guts. But as the continued success of the New York 
Giants and the resurgence of these three dominant teams of yesteryear is 
proving, hurting people is only going to help your standing. 
"It's a good feeling after last year," grizzled Bears defensive tackle Dan 
Hampton said, "especially the way the ground gave out under us." 
Ah, last year. When we left off then, the Bears were 6-10, tired and nearly 
toothless themselves, grateful for a chance to go into hibernation early. The 
Raiders were 8-8, having lost their last two games and a shot at the playoffs 
in the bargain, and seemed more concerned with relocating the team than 
fielding one worthy of moving. And the Dolphins? They, too, were pinned down at 
8-8 and tarnishing the bust of coach Don Shula being kept in a closet for 
shipment to the Hall of Fame. 
Now, the ground seems to be giving out under their opponents. 
All three teams are distinguished this time around not only for what they are 
doing right, but for what they are not doing at all -- which is leaving their 
defenses on the playing field past the point of diminishing returns. 
Heading into the weekend's action, the Giants -- no surprise there -- were 
ranked first overall in total defense. But the Dolphins were a a surprising No. 
2, surrendering an average of just 13.8 points per game; followed by the Bears 
and their league-low 12.5 yield; and another place farther back were the 
Raiders at 14.1. 
"Our biggest improvement in defense is offense," Miami defensive end Jeff Cross 
said matter-of-factly. "It's all about fatigue." 
Modesty may cause Cross to figure his own improvement into the equation -- the 
ninth-round pick out of Missouri two years ago shares the NFL sack lead at 
eight with San Francisco's Charles Haley -- but the point about the offense is 
well made. 
"This year, I've already had one game in which I was on the field for a total 
of 22 plays," said inside linebacker John Offerdahl, Cross' teammate and the 
Dolphins' leading tackler. 
"I walked off the field after the game," he added, "and it felt like a 
practice." 
The reason for that is smashmouth category No. 2. The Bears, led by Neal 
Anderson, lead the NFL in rushing. Though Anderson ranks second in the NFC in 
yards gained on the ground, if you put aside the kickers, he is tops in the 
conference in scoring. 
In the team rushing ranks, neither the Raiders nor Dolphins look very 
impressive, settling in at 16 and 17th, respectively. But the resillient Marcus 
Allen ranked sixth among all AFC running backs in rushing and seventh in 
scoring, with 340 yards and four touchdowns, and the surprising Sammie Smith 
was 10th in rushing and third in scoring, with 318 yards and six touchdowns in 
86 attempts. 
Indeed, Smith's proficiency and the addition of two big rookie offensive 
linemen, No. 1 pick Richmond Webb and No. 2 Keith Sims, finally convinced Shula 
to restore the kind of balance between running and passing to his offense 
unseen since the successful Dolphin teams of the mid-1980s. 
"We had turned into a very one-dimensional offense and it wasn't working," he 
said. "We'd been talking for years about doing something about it, but it 
wasn't really until the last couple of years that we did something about it. 
"Now," he added, "we're starting to see some of the results." 
The Raiders never were genuinely in balance that way, owing to owner Al Davis' 
constant tinkering and the love of the home-run ball. But by dumping coach Mike 
Shanahan for Art Shell last season, Davis did get the team back into its own 
quirky version of equilibrium. 
Shell is a former Raider lineman and like Davis, a bottom-line guy. The first 
thing he did was to do away with Shanahan's rule barring players from sitting 
on their helmets; the result is that the Raiders are forcing other teams to do 
so. 
Last Sunday, the San Diego Chargers drove inside the Raider 20-yard line on 
five occasions, but came away with only nine points. And when someone asked him 
whether it wasn't dangerous to allow opponents to penetrate so deep so often, 
Shell hardly blinked. 
"It's dangerous if they get in the end zone. If they don't get in the end zone, 
it's not dangerous. ... I don't care about statistics. I," said Shell, sounding 
remarkably like Davis, "just want to win." 
