WHOLESALER'S FILES SEIZED IN ART FRAUD 
Los Angeles police art fraud investigators Thursday searched the home of Larry 
Groeger, one of the West Coast's leading wholesalers of popular prints, and 
discovered records showing that Groeger supplied "fraudulent" artworks to a 
popular chain of galleries raided last month, the chief investigator said. 
Detective William Martin said business records seized during the search of 
Groeger's Hollywood home showed that the 39-year-old businessman was the 
distributor of the Marc Chagall and Joan Miro prints confiscated during the 
earlier raid on the Upstairs Gallery chain. 
Groeger, who could not be reached for comment Thursday, has not been charged in 
the case. But Martin said he is "under investigation . . . as a source of 
fraudulent graphics." 
Martin said police now will be seeking information on other art galleries that 
might have received prints from Groeger. 
"Obviously Upstairs wasn't his only customer," Martin said. "But the 
investigation is continuing. We're not going to comment on every gallery that 
might have been sold bad prints." 
Investigators seized Groeger's business records and 60 graphics attributed to 
Chagall and Miro, according to Martin, the department's art fraud expert. 
Police now hope to discover the art publisher who provided Groeger with the 
suspicious prints, he said. 
Groeger's company, Collections: A Fine Art Service, is known as one of the top, 
if not the top, distributors of popular graphics in the Western United States, 
a business that has blossomed in recent years due to the escalating demand for 
decorative art. Groeger runs his highly successful business out of his 
two-story Spanish villa in the Hollywood Hills. 
The search of the Hollyridge Drive address is the latest step in a widening 
probe of Southern California art fraud. Police say that sophisticated forgers 
are making hundreds of millions of dollars from sales of fake prints. 
Local and federal investigators confiscated 1,685 prints in last month's raid 
on the popular Upstairs Gallery chain. Prosecutors have filed grand theft 
charges against the former manager of the chain's Beverly Hills branch, Lee 
Sonnier, and another art broker, Frank de Marigny. 
In an affidavit recently filed in Los Angeles Superior Court describing the 
search of the Upstairs Gallery, police told of finding dozens of phony Chagalls 
on the walls. Other prints were taken from the chain's warehouse in Huntington 
Beach. 
An independent appraiser inspected Upstairs' inventory after the raid and 
removed any remaining works deemed to be suspicious, according to E. Timony 
Applegate, Upstairs Gallery's general counsel. 
Upstairs purchased "most" of its supposed Chagalls and Miros from Groeger, but 
had no reason to suspect the works were fakes until police said so, Applegate 
said. 
BACKGROUND 
Local and federal authorities are conducting a major investigation of art fraud 
in the Southland. Last month, they seized 1,685 allegedly fraudulent copies of 
prints by such popular artists as Marc Chagall and Salvador Dali from the 
Upstairs Gallery, an eight-store chain based in Huntington Beach. Investigators 
said they hope eventually to find the source of the phony art, which is said to 
be making its way to more and more galleries in what has become a 
multimillion-dollar fraud. 
