LARGEST SUCH TAKEOVER IN NATION; CORRUPTION, MISMANAGEMENT CHARGED; 
STATE SEIZES JERSEY CITY SCHOOL SYSTEM, FIRES OFFICIALS 
The state of New Jersey fired the superintendent and dismissed the local school 
board of this faded industrial city Wednesday in the largest state takeover of 
an urban school district in the nation. 
The takeover, approved by a unanimous vote of the state Board of Education, 
meeting in nearby Jamesburg, was based on allegations by state investigators 
that the 28,000-student school district is academically bankrupt and riddled by 
corruption, mismanagement and political favoritism. 
In examinations administered last spring, more than half of the ninth-graders 
in the district -- the second largest in New Jersey -- failed a test on basic 
proficiency in reading, writing and mathematics. In addition, state 
investigators have described conditions in the city's schools as deplorable. 
'Innocent Victims' Cited 
"We can now step in on behalf of the innocent victims of the Jersey City school 
system -- the children who have not received the educational opportunity to 
which they are entitled," state Education Commissioner Saul Cooperman said 
after the board's action Wednesday. 
The board appointed Elena J. Scambio, who had been serving as Essex County 
schools superintendent, as the new Jersey City superintendent for a three-year 
term at a $100,000 annual salary. Scambio, speaking at a news conference, 
pledged a get-tough policy and said that her first initiative will be to 
streamline the school district's bureaucracy. 
"Now is the time to fish, cut bait or get out of the boat," she said in a 
warning to principals and school administrators in Jersey City. 
The takeover was the first in New Jersey under a law enacted last year giving 
the state the power to assume control of chronically troubled school districts. 
At least seven other states have similar laws, and two of them -- New Mexico 
and Kentucky -- have seized districts that were judged to be failures. 
State education officials in New Jersey said that the Jersey City case is being 
watched closely throughout the nation as a possible model of school 
accountability. 
Under New Jersey's law, once the state takes over, the local school 
superintendent and board of education are immediately dismissed, along with 
executive administrators in charge of curriculum, finance and personnel. 
Cooperman said that a 15-member advisory board of education will be established 
in Jersey City within 60 days to replace the locally appointed nine-member 
board. He will appoint 13 of the members and the city government will name the 
other two. 
The state has five years to bring the district up to par with state 
certification requirements. 
Scambio said that "change will not come easily nor will it come overnight." 
But, she added: "I do not have the slightest doubt that students from even the 
most impoverished and difficult backgrounds can succeed academically and 
socially. I intend to see that Jersey City students succeed." 
The student population in the district is about 44% black, 34% Latino and 13% 
white. More than half the students are enrolled in compensatory, bilingual or 
special education programs. 
The school budget this year is about $186 million. 
Kabili Tayari, president of the Parents Council of Jersey City, said that his 
organization had mixed emotions about the state takeover. "What we heard sounds 
good," he said, "but we have reservations because it's the first time it's 
happened (in New Jersey) and we haven't seen a plan for implementation or a 
timetable." 
Tayari said he hopes that state control leads to a more aggressive program of 
hiring minority-group teachers and staff members. Less than 5% of the teachers 
are black or Latinos, he said. 
The takeover move was bitterly resisted by many Jersey City officials, who 
blamed past administrations and the inadequacies of school funding for the the 
district's problems. The board of education reportedly owes $500,000 to the New 
York law firm it hired to defend itself against state seizure. 
Called Blow to Children 
Franklin Williams, the superintendent fired by the state, said Wednesday: "In a 
society that offers little enough to bolster the self-confidence of urban 
children, the campaign to take over the Jersey City schools has only further 
lowered the self-image of our students." 
However, Mayor Gerald McCann, who won office earlier this year after a campaign 
that endorsed a state takeover of the school district, called the state's 
action a "real win for the schoolchildren of Jersey City," according to a 
spokesman. 
In approving the takeover, the state board cited political intrusion in hiring, 
violations of bidding laws, failure to provide for handicapped children and 
unauthorized use of state funds. 
