SENATE RETAINS GAS TAX INCREASE; 
BUDGET: BIPARTISAN LEADERSHIP STOPS AN EFFORT TO DELETE THE 9.5-CENT-A-GALLON 
BOOST FROM ITS DEFICIT-CUTTING PACKAGE. THE ACTION CLEARS THE WAY FOR FINAL 
APPROVAL. 
The Senate's bipartisan leadership staved off a potentially fatal blow to its 
$500-billion deficit reduction package Wednesday night by turning aside an 
effort to eliminate a proposed 9.5-cent-a-gallon increase in the gasoline tax. 
The leadership prevailed on a 59-40 roll call, burying the attempt to knock out 
the proposed gas tax increase. California's two senators split over the issue, 
with Democrat Alan Cranston voting to keep the tax in the package and 
Republican Pete Wilson voting to drop it. 
Although supporters of the budget plan won their battle, the difficult struggle 
to retain the gas tax signaled the fragile nature of the Senate coalition 
seeking to raise taxes and cut spending in the face of strong election-year 
opposition. 
The move cleared the way for final Senate approval of the deficit reduction 
package, which must be reconciled with a House plan that contains no gasoline 
tax hike. President Bush has indicated that he would support the Senate plan. 
Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) and his GOP counterpart, Sen. 
Bob Dole (R-Kan.), led the move to derail what they characterized as a "killer 
amendment" to eliminate the gasoline tax from the bill, saying that it would 
have destroyed their carefully crafted deficit-cutting plan. 
"We're playing by the rules in an effort to preserve this package," Dole said. 
"I'm doing the best I can for President Bush, and the last time I checked he 
was a Republican." As for killing the gas tax hike, Dole said: "It would not 
only unravel the package -- it would finish the package." 
Dole said that eliminating the gasoline tax would result in the loss of $42.6 
billion in new revenue over the next five years. 
The struggle over this issue delayed the Senate's progress on the overall 
budget bill. Congressional leaders hope to hammer out a compromise plan in a 
House-Senate conference and complete congressional approval by midnight Friday. 
Earlier, the Senate voted, 67 to 32, to kill an effort by Sen. Kent Conrad 
(D-N.D.) to raise top-bracket income tax rates to 33%, cut the proposed gas tax 
increase to 5 cents a gallon and reduce the impact of planned spending cuts on 
farmers and Medicare beneficiaries. 
Failure to act on the budget package quickly could throw the government into 
another weekend of fiscal chaos, prompting Bush to shut down government 
services again when the current funding authority runs out, at midnight Friday, 
as he did on Columbus Day weekend. 
The House deficit reduction measure, approved 227 to 203, would raise taxes for 
all Americans, especially those in higher-income brackets. 
"It's a toughie," said Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D-Tex.), chairman of the Senate 
Finance Committee, who was active in the battle to preserve the gasoline tax 
provision. "I think we'll get it (a majority), but it'll be a hell of a fight." 
The budget package, which had been endorsed, 15 to 5, by the Senate Finance 
Committee, faced strong election year opposition despite increasing pressure to 
meet the midnight Friday deadline for final congressional action on 
deficit-cutting legislation. 
In a party-line split, the House on Tuesday night defied Bush's veto threat and 
approved a Democratic plan that would raise taxes and reduce spending to reach 
the $500-billion deficit reduction target. 
The House-passed measure would keep federal gasoline taxes at the current 9 
cents a gallon. 
The White House backed off somewhat Wednesday from its threat to shut down the 
government if Congress had not finished its work before the government's 
spending authority expires. 
John H. Sununu, White House chief of staff, said he expected that the President 
would sign another stopgap spending resolution if the lawmakers showed that 
they meant business about passing a deficit reduction plan along the lines of 
the Senate bill. Senate progress slowed to a crawl Wednesday, however, as 
supporters worked behind the scenes to try to round up votes to defeat the move 
by Sen. Steve Symms (R-Ida.) to take the gasoline tax out of the package. 
Symms, who said he opposed all tax increases in the package, argued that the 
gasoline levy would weaken the economy and place an unfair burden on commuting 
workers, rural residents and older people. 
"This is a good test of whether we want to raise taxes or freeze spending," 
Symms told the Senate. 
In an impassioned speech in defense of the gasoline tax hike, Dole said the 
deficit reduction effort that was started last May would be lost if the 
increase was deleted. "If we can't win this one, we might as well wrap it up," 
Dole said. "If this amendment passes, count me out." 
Mitchell, who also staked his prestige on the outcome of the vote, agreed with 
Dole on the importance of retaining the gas tax. "This is a test of the Senate 
as an institution," Mitchell warned. 
"Do we have the minimum level of courage necessary to do something that is 
unpleasant, difficult and unpopular? Once we start down that road (of deleting 
proposed tax increases), this deficit reduction effort will be over." 
Some senators who supported the leaders' efforts to preserve the gasoline tax 
in the package served notice in advance that they expected it to be removed or 
scaled back sharply in a Senate-House conference. 
"We can't pick this apart one item at a time," said Sen. Dale Bumpers (D-Ark.), 
who said he traditionally opposed raising the gas tax but would vote to 
preserve it to get a budget bill into a Senate-House conference, where it might 
be dropped. 
Others indicated that they expected the Senate-House conference to produce a 
plan that would place greater burdens on wealthy Americans and less on 
middle-income and lower-income families. 
"I want the (Senate) conferees . . . to be fighting for more progressivity," 
Sen. Bob Kerrey (D-Neb.) said. But his home state colleague, Democratic Sen. J. 
James Exon, who is in a tough race for reelection, said he would oppose any tax 
increases at this time. 
"The price of gas is so high now," Sen. William S. Cohen (R-Me.) said. "This is 
not the time to raise the gas tax." 
RIGHTS BILL GOES TO BUSH -- The House sent a major civil rights bill to the 
President, who plans a veto. A20 
HIGH COST OF GAS -- Analysts see no relief in sight from soaring fuel prices. 
D1 
