THE CHILDREN'S BOOKSHELF: FICTION FOR YOUNG READERS; 
THE LEGEND OF JIMMY SPOON BY KRISTIANA GREGORY (GULLIVER BOOKS/HARCOURT BRACE 
JOVANOVICH: $15.95; 159 PP.; AGES 8-12) 
Here's a puzzle: Would a 12-year-old white boy, taken from his home and family 
-- unexpectedly but not altogether unwillingly -- and plunked into a place of 
honor with an Indian band, accept his new role without question or objection? 
The year is 1854, the place Utah. Jimmy Spoon is mad at his father because he 
can't have a horse until his 14th birthday. Two Indian boys appear and offer 
him a horse if he'll visit their chief's mother -- or that's how Jimmy 
understands the invitation. Once he reaches the Shoshone camp, it becomes clear 
that the Indians mean for him to stay and be Chief Washakie's little brother. 
Why? Jimmy doesn't ask. He finds out much later, and then only by accident. 
He spends three years with the Shoshone, learning their ways and becoming a 
respected tribe member in his own right. Then he goes back to his family. 
That's it. That's the whole tale. 
This is a piece of historical fiction rich in its portrait of Indian philosophy 
and daily life but skimpy in the basics of story: character and plot. Jimmy 
learns to hunt, fish, tan hides and pluck the tail feathers of an eagle without 
harming the bird. He slowly becomes aware and ashamed of white people's 
imperialistic brutality toward the Indians. He observes how the Indian notion 
of a Great Spirit figures in all aspects of life, in contrast to the 
once-a-week religion he grew up with. He questions the need for war, and 
ultimately gets a chance to prevent a war by his own action. 
But why don't the Indians wonder why he so eagerly leaves his family and 
community? They don't ask him about it until the very end of the book. Why 
doesn't he ask them why they want him in the first place? And there's the 
matter of scalping, which is described but unfortunately not explored. Why 
doesn't Jimmy ask for some explanation or justification of an act he finds so 
repulsive? Why doesn't Jimmy try to contact his parents, and why do they wait 
three years before trying to get him back? 
Compressing three years' time into a children's book may leave little space for 
adequately developing character. Still, there's not enough depth even to the 
central figure of Jimmy to make us laugh with him, ache with him, or care very 
much what happens to him. Eileen Heyes 
