FAULTY WHEELS SUSPECTED IN DERAILMENT 
The derailment of a Los Angeles-bound freight train that crashed into a Mt. 
Washington apartment building may have been caused by faulty wheels on a 
boxcar, state officials said Tuesday. 
Investigators determined that the derailment occurred when a section of track 
bent under the weight of a passing freight car, said Ed Damrom of the Public 
Utilities Commission's Railroad Operations and Safety Section. 
Damrom said investigators were trying to determine why the rail, which was in 
good condition before the accident, bent and triggered the derailment. He said 
the most plausible theory was that the wheels, or "trucks," of one boxcar may 
have been defective and caused the boxcar's load to shift while the car 
negotiated a curve. 
Eight families were temporarily left homeless by the Monday morning derailment. 
After Santa Fe Railroad crews removed the demolished boxcars, city officials 
allowed residents to return to all but two units in the 11-unit apartment 
building Tuesday afternoon. 
Meanwhile, workers laid 2,500 feet of new track to replace that damaged in the 
accident. The rail line, which serves freight and passenger traffic, was 
expected to be reopened by early today after several hours of testing, said 
Dave Mansheim, assistant superintendent with the railroad. Residents of the 
damaged apartment building in the 4600 block of North Figueroa Street were not 
pleased to hear news of the rail line's reopening. Some said that the accident 
-- which crushed several cars in the apartment building's parking lot -- had 
left them traumatized. 
Rocio Peralta, 20, said that after the accident she spent a restless night 
tossing and turning on a cot at a nearby Red Cross evacuation shelter. Her 
apartment was one of those most seriously damaged by the derailment. 
She fell asleep just long enough to have a brief nightmare in which she 
struggled to save her 2 1/2-year-old son, Enrique, from crashing boxcars. 
"I could feel the train, I could see the train coming," Peralta said in 
Spanish. "I reached for my son, to save him. And then my husband woke me up." 
Enrique, she said, would wave to the passing trains each morning while standing 
on the apartment steps, which were crushed in the accident. 
On the day of the derailment, Peralta said, Enrique slept late because a 
neighbor's party had kept the family awake all night. 
"It's a miracle that my son wasn't there," she said. 
Investigators determined Tuesday that the derailment occurred after a rail bent 
and "flipped over" under the weight of a boxcar carrying two metal containers, 
one stacked on top of the other. 
"Double stacking" is common on freight cars but, in Monday's accident, the load 
may have become unevenly distributed because of a faulty suspension system in 
the wheelbase, Damrom said. This would have caused the boxcar to bend the rail 
as it negotiated the curve. 
After the rail curved, the double-stacked boxcar rode for several hundred feet 
along the inner edge of the track. It was the first car in the 53-car train to 
derail, Damrom said. Eleven other cars also left the tracks. 
Damrom added that Santa Fe officials inspect the track three times a week. It 
had last been inspected Friday and was in good condition, he said. 
Investigators said they determined that the train was traveling 18 m.p.h. at 
the time of the accident, below the 25 m.p.h. speed limit established for 
freight trains on the curving track. 
