U.S. FORCES HAVE NO NUCLEAR ARMS IN GULF STATES, NO PLANS TO USE THEM; 
MILITARY: OFFICIALS FEAR SUCH WEAPONS COULD SHATTER THE FRAGILE COALITION 
ARRAYED AGAINST SADDAM HUSSEIN. 
The United States has placed no nuclear weapons in Saudi Arabia or surrounding 
countries and has no plans to use them even in response to an Iraqi attack 
using chemical or biological weapons, U.S. military officials said Monday. 
After considerable debate among the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a decision was made 
early in the crisis not to deploy tactical nuclear weapons with Army, Air Force 
or Marine Corps units sent to the area, the officials said. 
Some Navy ships in the region are equipped with nuclear bombs and cruise 
missiles, but Navy ships customarily sail with nuclear weapons, and their 
presence is not meant as a threat to use them, according to military 
authorities. 
Administration officials said that they have kept nuclear weapons out of the 
region not only for moral reasons, but also because a threat to use them could 
shatter the fragile coalition of nations now arrayed against Iraqi President 
Saddam Hussein. 
Besides, military commanders said, they are not needed to counter the threat 
posed by Iraq's army. 
"You lose the moral high ground if you use one of those stupid things," a 
senior Army planner privy to discussions of the Joint Chiefs said. "Plus, you 
don't have to. The conventional weapons we have there are absolutely, 
absolutely devastating and will have many of the same effects" as tactical 
nuclear weapons. 
He cited in particular cluster bombs, which can wipe out large troop 
concentrations over an extensive area and new generations of conventional high 
explosives with many times the destructive power of earlier munitions. 
And if a decision is ever made to employ nuclear weapons, they are readily 
available in abundance in Europe or could be dropped from B-52s based in Diego 
Garcia, an island in the Indian Ocean, officials said. 
The unusually frank U.S. government comments on nuclear weapons come in the 
wake of a weekend press report from Britain -- since denied by Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher -- that Britain is prepared to use nuclear arms in response 
to an Iraqi chemical attack. 
Iraq is known to have one of the world's largest arsenals of chemical weapons 
and no compunctions about using them. Hussein has threatened to fire poison gas 
at U.S. and allied troops if war breaks out. 
U.S. intelligence agencies also recently have reported that by the beginning of 
next year, Iraq will be able to produce and deliver substantial amounts of 
biological weapons, which involve living organisms used to spread diseases such 
as cholera, anthrax or typhoid fever. 
But U.S. officials said there remains a huge gulf between these weapons of mass 
destruction and nuclear arms, which were not used in Korea and Vietnam even 
when the United States was on the verge of losing those conflicts. 
Public U.S. policy statements since the end of World War II always have left 
the use or threat to use nuclear weapons ambiguous. 
The United States insists that its nuclear weapons in Europe are there solely 
to deter their use by the Soviet Union and its allies, yet the United States 
has never forsworn their first use. 
American military doctrine since the early 1960s has been one of "flexible 
response" -- a continuum of escalation from the use of conventional military 
force to the unleashing of intercontinental ballistic missiles with nuclear 
warheads in an all-out superpower war. 
But in practical terms, nuclear weapons are taboo, officials said. 
"The matter has been fairly heavily debated and discussed . . . among the 
Chiefs, and that's the decision they came up with," a knowledgeable civilian 
Pentagon official said of the policy of not sending tactical nuclear weapons to 
the Persian Gulf. "If we were to rattle the nuclear saber now, it wouldn't bode 
well for the coalition." 
A senior Army officer noted that the use of nuclear weapons would expose as 
hypocritical previous U.S. efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear 
technology, with potentially catastrophic consequences. 
"If you popped a nuke, you'd lose the moral imperative overnight. The nuclear 
genie is still very much in the bottle. If you use one, every nation on Earth 
would want to have them and use them," this officer said. 
"It would have extraordinary and long-lasting consequences. It just points up 
the fact that nuclear weapons are fundamentally unusable," he added. 
Administration officials and outside analysts cited two other fundamental 
reasons why nuclear weapons have not been moved to Saudi Arabia: the elaborate 
security precautions required to protect them from being seized by terrorists 
or overrun in battle and the diplomatic repercussions of putting such weapons 
in a sovereign country without extensive consultations. 
"You'd need 20,000 men just to guard them," one senior military officer at the 
Pentagon said. 
Artillery-launched nuclear shells would have to be deployed with forward units, 
running a high risk of their being captured in battle. The Air Force would have 
to build or find secure shelters to store air-dropped atomic bombs and missiles 
-- an expensive and manpower-intensive proposition, officials said. 
Diplomatic considerations also played in the decision not to send nuclear 
weapons to the Middle East, officials said. 
The civilian planner noted that the Saudis invited the international force to 
deter an Iraqi attack, not to rain nuclear weapons on a fellow Arab state. 
"Neither us nor the Brits could introduce them without Saudi approval" -- and 
that hasn't been granted, this official said. 
But several officials and analysts noted that Hussein should not assume the 
United States could not or would not use nuclear weapons if the military 
situation grew sufficiently dire. 
"The use of nukes is preposterous, and they have not been deployed in theater," 
a Pentagon official said. "But we could get them there in a hurry if the 
President decided we needed them." 
Added Bruce G. Blair, a nuclear weapons specialist at the Brookings 
Institution: "There's enough ambiguity in our deployments of nuclear weapons at 
sea and our ability to deliver nuclear weapons by air and quickly move them 
into the region to plant the seeds of doubt in Hussein's mind." 
Times staff writer Robin Wright contributed to this story. 
