STALKER BOUNTY; 
19 COLLECT SHARES OF THE COUNTY'S $36,777 REWARD FUND 
The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors meted out shares Tuesday of a 
$36,777 bounty for the capture of convicted Night Stalker killer Richard 
Ramirez, paying rewards ranging from $250 to $10,388 to 19 people. 
Officials said that the largest sum will go to Jesse N. Perez, 65, of Los 
Angeles. Perez is a one-time acquaintance of Ramirez, who was convicted Sept. 
20 of 13 murders and faces death in the gas chamber. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Alan Yochelson said Perez led police to the recovery of a 
murder weapon used to help convict the Night Stalker defendant. Perez's 
daughter, Pauline, who persuaded her father to call the police, will receive 
$3,250. 
"My father didn't do it for the money," Pauline Perez said Tuesday night at the 
family's home. "He requested that any reward money be given to me. It will go 
into the bank for something we really need. 
"We never gave much thought to what we would do with a reward. People shouldn't 
think about spending money when they don't have any idea of what they are going 
to get." 
Jesse Perez said he still feels there is some question about his own safety. 
"I'm just glad that there was a stop to the killing and I don't want to bring a 
lot of attention to myself," he said. "I don't want people to think I'm 
bragging about all this. I was doing it because I wanted to help the people in 
California stop all the killings. He had to be stopped." 
Of the $36,777 to be paid by the county, most was contributed by corporations 
and individuals. It is part of about $80,000 offered by various jurisdictions 
and the governor's office for the Night Stalker's arrest and conviction. 
"We assigned the monies in proportion to how important a person's information 
was in leading to the identification, arrest and conviction" of the Night 
Stalker, said Georgette Dewyer, deputy executive officer to the Board of 
Supervisors. 
Citing privacy statutes, county officials declined to give addresses and other 
specific information about those who won rewards. Times sources provided the 
identification of some of the people issued awards. 
Laurie Ochoa, an unemployed truck driver from Lompoc, will receive $2,500 for 
tipping off police to the possibility that Ramirez was the Night Stalker. 
"That's great," she said after hearing about the reward, adding: "It really 
helps. I'm out of work." 
Ochoa said her brother, Earl Gregg Jr., also of Lompoc, and Ramirez were once 
roommates. 
"We looked at composites," she said, "and the more we talked, the more we 
decided it was Rick." She said her brother and his wife turned over to police a 
bracelet from Ramirez that was linked to one of the Stalker's crimes. Gregg and 
his wife, Deleen, will also receive $2,500. 
Alejandro Espinoza, who will receive $6,338, was awarded his share of the 
reward for assisting police in the recovery of property taken from the homes of 
murder victims, Yochelson said. 
Rewards of $1,000 each will go to eight East Los Angeles residents who, in 
August, 1985, helped subdue Ramirez and held him until police arrived. They 
include Carmelo Robles, Frank Moreno and Faustino Pinon, three of the people 
who gave chase as Ramirez made a desperate -- and futile -- bid to outrun 
pursuers after Robles spotted Ramirez's picture on the front page of a 
newspaper in a Boyle Heights liquor store. 
Also receiving $1,000 is James Romero, a 13-year-old Orange County boy who in 
1985 got a partial license number of a car believed used in several of the 
Stalker's attacks. 
Others receiving shares of the reward are Manuel De La Torre; Jose Burgion and 
his sons, Jaime and Julio; Ken Will; Edgardo Molinar; Elena Salter; Arturo 
Benavidez; Paul Wallace, and Donna L. Myers. 
Times staff writer John H. Lee contributed to this story. 
