STUDY CITES BENEFITS OF USING PALMDALE ROUTE FOR LAS VEGAS TRAIN 
A proposed high-speed train from Las Vegas though Palmdale to Sylmar would be 
easier, quicker and less expensive to build -- but also would have fewer riders 
-- than rival routes ending in Anaheim, according to a study conducted for the 
city of Palmdale. 
A 54-page report comparing route options for the $4-billion system was released 
by Palmdale city officials Wednesday in hopes it will help keep their city in 
the running against Anaheim. 
"We feel with the data we have acquired, we can present a compelling story that 
would say, 'Yes, this is the way to go,' " said Palmdale Mayor William (Pete) 
Knight. The report was conducted by Daniel, Mann, Johnson &amp; Mendenhall, a 
Los Angeles engineering firm, and cost $49,600. 
City officials said they plan to use the report at Friday's meeting of the 
California-Nevada Super Speed Ground Transportation Commission, a panel of 
officials from both states charged with exploring development of the train 
system. 
The commission was expected to consider choosing between the alternative 
termination points in Southern California. But Palmdale officials said they 
will urge the commission instead to ask for opinions from private businesses 
considering building the 230-mile system. 
The Palmdale consultant found that a Palmdale-Sylmar line could be 45% less 
expensive, completed up to a year sooner and have fewer environmental impacts 
than the others. It would travel through less-developed areas, likely reducing 
the cost of obtaining right-of-way and the political and construction snafus 
that could delay the project or inflate costs, the consultant said. 
The route, which would aid Los Angeles' long-delayed plans to develop a 
regional airport in Palmdale, had been viewed as an underdog of sorts. 
Earlier this month, the commission released a study indicating alternative 
routes ending in Anaheim would draw 5.7 million and 6.5 million round trips 
annually by 2000, while a Palmdale-Sylmar line would have just 2.3 million 
round trips. 
The Palmdale report was more optimistic about the Palmdale-Sylmar link, but the 
projection of 3.76 million round trips by 2000 was still well below those of 
competing routes. 
The Palmdale report also said ridership by 2025 should increase to between 10.4 
million and 13.4 million round trips with development of the airport and growth 
in commuter ridership. The city consultant acknowledged, though, that those 
longer-range figures still might not exceed those for Anaheim. 
