SAN DIEGO SPOTLIGHT : POP MUSICRIO'S NOT EVEN SINGING 'HOW DRY I AM' ANYMORE 
The Rio's story is finally over. The Loma Portal nightclub, which for the last 
three years has been one of the few places in town to regularly showcase local 
bands that play original music, shut its doors for good Sept. 21 after a 
protracted and bitter battle with the state Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) 
department. 
"Unfortunately, there aren't a lot of clubs in San Diego that feature original 
music, so the closing of Rio's is particularly hard to take," bassist Michael 
Davis said. His former band, Secret Society, played Rio's at least once a 
month. 
"Sometimes, I wonder if the ABC has it out for the clubs in this town," said 
Steve Saint, singer-songwriter with Club of Rome and the editor of San Diego 
Music magazine. "It seems a lot of clubs are having trouble with either their 
noise limits or alcohol or some other technicality. And is it my imagination, 
or do they tend to pick the original-music clubs to hassle?" 
The closure of the 400-capacity nightclub came less than four months after the 
ABC effectively revoked club owner Cameron Moshtaghi's liquor license because 
Rio's wasn't doing enough food business to meet the Type 47 license 
requirements. 
Since then, Rio's has been operating as a booze-less 18-and-over club, but the 
resultant dip in revenues eventually proved too much to bear. 
"All summer long, we tried very hard to go without alcohol," Moshtaghi said, 
"but we just can't make it with soft drinks alone any longer." 
The battle lines were first drawn in 1987 when Moshtaghi bought the former 
Halcyon, a combination restaurant/Top 40 nightclub, and acquired a Type 47 
liquor license from the old owner. 
After an extensive remodel, in which kitchen operations were reduced and some 
restaurant space was merged into the nightclub area, Rio's was born. 
The ABC issued a series of warnings to Moshtaghi that he wasn't complying with 
the license, said Pete Case, district administrator of the ABC's San Diego 
office. In June, 1988, the ABC found Moshtaghi in violation of his license, 
fined him $800 and ordered him to operate what Case terms "a bona fide public 
eating place," just like the Halcyon had been. 
Moshtaghi subsequently reopened the kitchen and hired a full-time cook. "But 
then nobody wanted to eat," he said. "We kept throwing out all that food, but 
because of the stupid ABC rule, we had to have it." 
That fall, Moshtaghi was found in violation a second time. "This time, my 
attorney said they're wrong and we're going to fight it," he said. "We had 
everything they told us to have -- food, a cook on duty -- and if the people 
weren't eating, it wasn't our fault." 
Oh yes it was, Case maintains. "How could he expect people to eat with all that 
din?" Case said. "He's supposed to be primarily a restaurant, not a hard-rock 
club. And if you look at that thing he's running, it's a far cry from a 
restaurant. No wonder people wouldn't eat." 
The ensuing fight between Moshtaghi and the ABC involved various hearings and 
lasted nearly two years. Finally, on June 7, the ABC suspended Moshtaghi's 
liquor license for an indefinite period. He could no longer sell booze until he 
exchanged his Type 47 license for a Type 48, which doesn't require serving 
food. 
Moshtaghi did as he was told. But what he hoped would be a quick transfer was 
delayed due to protests from police and residents of a neighboring apartment 
complex. 
"At that point we called the ABC and said, 'You guys dictated to us we had to 
change, but now this thing is dragging on and on and we're having trouble 
surviving,' " Moshtaghi said. "So we asked to get our Type 47 license back, and 
they said no; then we asked for help in getting a Type 48, and they said well, 
you've got problems; you have a right to a public hearing, but that may take 
six months." 
In late July, after operating Rio's, in the red, for nearly two dry months, 
Moshtaghi -- or, rather, the corporation he set up to run the place, Javad Inc. 
-- filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal 
Bankruptcy Code. 
"We couldn't afford to pay the rent," Moshtaghi said, "and that would hold 
everyone off." 
At the same time, Rio's hours of operations were cut back from seven nights a 
week to as few as two or three. 
Then it became a question of how long Moshtaghi could hold out. The answer came 
Sept. 20, when trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court forced Javad Inc. into 
Chapter 7, which is a complete dissolution. The next night was Rio's last. 
"At this point, I'm pretty much out of it," Moshtaghi said. "The trustee told 
me to shut it down, and I did." 
Still, Moshtaghi said, he's hoping to open a new nightclub somewhere else. 
"I'm looking for a new location where I can do local showcases and have some 
national acts, just like Rio's, but it isn't easy," he said. "But I'm going to 
pursue it until I do. 
"I've been getting so many phone calls from all these local bands, asking me, 
'where are we going to play now that Rio's is gone?' " 
"From a musician's standpoint, I'm really sorry to see it go, mainly because I 
don't see anything else popping up to replace it in the near future," Secret 
Society's Davis said. "We're really lacking places that size to play." 
"If club owners depend on alcohol to stay in business," added Saint, "maybe it 
would be nice to see a new paradigm emerge where clubs can find another way to 
stay in business and still showcase music." 
LINER NOTES: Linda Ronstadt must have graduated from the Sean Penn school of 
charm. At her concert Sunday night at San Diego State University's Open Air 
Theater, the fortysomething singer went into a snit when some fan aimed a 
camera at her. Stop flashing that camera, she snapped, or a security guard 
might come and take it away from you. . . . 
Honk, the eclectic Orange County rock band of "Five Summer Stories" fame, will 
headline Sunday night's Surfrider Foundation benefit at the Belly Up Tavern in 
Solana Beach. Also appearing at the fund-raiser for the nonprofit coastal 
environmental group will be local oldies band the Mar Dels. A dozen surfboard 
companies -- including Hobie, Nectar and Shannin -- have each donated a custom 
surfboard to be auctioned off. Honk broke up in 1976 and then got back together 
in 1985; ever since, they've been doing a handful of reunion concerts each 
year. . . . 
Tickets go on sale Thursday at 3 p.m. for Jane's Addiction's concert Nov. 2 at 
UC San Diego Price Center Ballroom. It's the first date on the band's U.S. 
tour. UCSD students can buy tickets as early as 10 a.m., but only at the campus 
box office (IDs required). . . . 
Peter Allen's scheduled Oct. 17 appearance at Humphrey's has been canceled. . . 
. 
Best concert bets for the coming week: John McLaughlin with Steve Morse, 
Thursday at the Bacchanal in Kearny Mesa; Robben Ford with Lowen and Navarro, 
Thursday at the Belly Up Tavern; the U.K. Subs with Gorgeous George, Saturday 
at the Spirit in Bay Park; Carlene Carter, Sunday at the Bacchanal; and Andrew 
Tosh with Bob Harvey, Tuesday at the Belly Up Tavern. 
