FASHION; 
FLOWER POWER IS BLOOMING IN SPRING LINES 
Spring, 1990 will send a strong message about '60s style flower power, across 
the fashion world at least. 
Giorgio Armani, who opened the Italian spring-summer ready-to-wear shows on 
Sunday with his Emporio line, recalled the original hippie dress code with his 
gypsy skirts and shawls, vests, tattered jeans, oversized shirts and jackets, 
and clumpy sandals. 
And he reminded his audience about the "nature girl" ideal that many a flower 
child aspired to when he filled his runway with bare-chested women, attended by 
bare-chested men, all wearing Armani blue jeans. 
At this sight a gasp went up among Americans attending the early-morning show 
in the theater of Armani's downtown palazzo. Europeans, accustomed to topless 
bathing, didn't bat an eyelash. 
Still known to some as the blazer king, Armani showed long jackets for spring, 
this time with curved fronts that recall the tulip petal shape seen several 
seasons ago in the collection of Italy's Romeo Gigli. 
There was a touch of Gigli, too, in the rounded, uneven hemlines of skirts and 
dresses. For summer, Armani's hemlines are hiked way above his demure winter 
lengths. 
Lightweight pantsuits with ample jackets and baggy trousers, and a series of 
cool cotton jumpsuits were Armani's answer to city-dweller fashions for the 
summer. 
Franco Moschino, a favorite among the young-at-heart, showed his collection 
just after Armani. He is known by now for his sense of irony toward the fashion 
world at large. This time as usual, he tended to hide his own beautiful clothes 
under exaggerations of other designers' embellishments. 
In past collections, Moschino's antics have included an entire show based on 
outrageous headgear -- from stovepipes to teddy bear shapes -- as a sendup of 
French designer Christian Lacroix's extravagant hats. Almost always, he ladens 
his evening wear with heavy gold chains, to imitate the popular, Parisian 
Chanel look. 
This time, like Armani, Moschino flirted with the hippie idea, in a series of 
multicolored gypsy skirts, jeans outfits and Mexican-style long vests. But his 
most astonishing outfit was a three-piece suit -- jacket, brassiere and short 
skirt -- in glimmering gold fabric, with lavish gold jewelry and a gold chain 
belt. (There are bra tops galore in the new spring collections here.) And his 
most ironic style in the spring show was a floor-length black chiffon gown with 
the gold letters, VIP, extending from the neckline down the bodice. 
In his Sunday night show, Gianni Versace combined a multitude of shades into 
beautiful silk prints for skirts, pants, jackets and dresses. 
The daring shapes of his clothes -- his skirts are known to be so short and 
tight they barely cover the hips -- and his penchant for theatrical styles make 
him a favorite in Hollywood and among rock stars. There is enough gold and 
glitz in his new collection to satisfy even the most demanding entertainer. 
Outfits were adorned with gold balls, tassels and colorful crystals. And he 
decorated shoes with gold studs. 
It is a strong statement, but Versace's exquisite tailoring and artistic sense 
make it work. 
Dominant in his spring collection are high-waisted silk pants with one leg slit 
open to the hip, mini lingerie dresses in bright shades of taffeta, bra tops 
and bustiers encrusted with colorful crystals, silk printed lapels on 
man-tailored jackets, fringed piano shawls to drape over the shoulders or tie 
around the hips. 
At Missoni, famous for artistic sweaters, the new stitch is a zig-zag crochet. 
The new jacket is hip length and reversible, with one side in quilted fabric 
and the other a bulky striped knit. 
At Byblos -- who showed Monday, as did Missoni -- the unusual summer palette is 
based in rich browns, which appeared in floral prints and solids mixed with 
white, sienna, amethyst, ruby and violet. A naval theme ran through the 
collection, with gaily colored nautical flags, gold braiding, exaggerated 
emblems, and bold red and blue stripes. 
