COLUMN ONE; 
ANOTHER FIGHT TO INTEGRATE; 
THE DISABLED ARE BEING 'MAINSTREAMED' WITH NEW FERVOR IN SOME SCHOOL SYSTEMS. 
MANY TEACHERS AND PARENTS SAY EVEN THE SEVERELY HANDICAPPED FARE BETTER IN 
REGULAR SCHOOLS. 
When Sarah Engelman talks about the education of her blonde-haired, blue-eyed 
daughter, her speech is peppered with the vernacular of the civil rights 
struggles of decades ago. She wants her daughter taught in an "integrated" 
setting, she says, instead of the segregated classrooms she was offered by the 
Los Angeles Unified School District. 
But Engelman is not concerned about race. For her and millions of other parents 
of handicapped youngsters across the country, "integration" means putting their 
children on regular campuses alongside children without disabilities. 
"A segregated classroom leads to a segregated life. And I want Alexis to be 
part of the real world," said Engelman, whose 6-year-old daughter has a 
chromosomal anomaly that limits her mental and physical development. 
Once called mainstreaming, the idea of putting disabled children in regular 
classes is not new. 
But the push for integration has been taken up with a new fervor in some school 
systems by teachers, parents and advocates for the disabled, who cite scores of 
studies showing that even profoundly handicapped children fare better on 
regular campuses. 
They make friends and learn social skills from other children, the research 
shows. And many of their parents have decided that is more important than the 
practical skills they might learn in the cloistered atmosphere of special 
education schools. 
"I would love it if Alexis could learn to read and write and handle money so 
she could have a job," said Engelman, "but realistically what I want for her is 
to get along with people, to learn to speak up for herself, to be able to enjoy 
herself at her sister's birthday party." 
While some California school districts such as San Diego and San Francisco have 
embraced the notion of full inclusion of handicapped students, others like 
those in Los Angeles and Orange County are moving more slowly, responding to 
specific parent requests, but doing little to push alternatives to their 
special education schools. 
Nationwide, as the integration movement picks up steam, some states, such as 
Vermont, Colorado, Oregon and Iowa, are closing their separate special 
education schools and placing handicapped students at regular schools -- some 
in small, separate classes made up only of children with similar disabilities, 
and others sprinkled among nonhandicapped children in regular classes. 
Students in both of those settings are considered "integrated" because they 
have opportunities to interact with non-handicapped children, either in class 
or during activities such as lunch or recess. Research cites benefits of 
placing handicapped children in either regular classrooms or in separate 
classrooms on regular campuses as long as they are allowed to interact with 
other students. 
Still "segregated" are the children who attend separate special education 
schools, which handle students with the most severe physical, mental or 
emotional problems -- children who were, as recently as 15 years ago, often 
denied a public school education at all. 
For some of their parents, the separate schools represent a hard-won victory 
and a refuge from rejection and hostility. 
"There's a split among parents," said Bonnie Clemans, whose teen-age, mentally 
retarded son attends a special education school in Azusa. "Some of us are still 
very protective; we feel it would be just as limiting to put a child with a 
peer group he can't compete with and doesn't identify with." 
There is no one right way to educate all handicapped children, contends Phillip 
Callison, assistant superintendent for special education for the Los Angeles 
Unified School District. "We've got everything from students who need just a 
little help with speech, to ones who are on a gurney and need somebody to check 
on them and see if they're still breathing," he said. 
"A lot of these children are not going to get all the services they need in a 
regular classroom. When a regular teacher has to spend 40% of her time trying 
to teach a child who's not going to learn anything anyway, everyone suffers." 
Required by a 1975 federal law to educate handicapped students, districts 
around the country created "special education" departments, with separate 
schools and programs for youngsters whose disabilities ranged from almost 
imperceptible learning problems, to severe mental and emotional disturbances, 
to physical handicaps, such as deafness or blindness. 
Today in California about half of the most profoundly disabled children attend 
segregated schools. 
In the 625,000-student Los Angeles district, more than 58,000 students are 
enrolled in special education programs. Of those, 5,000 attend the district's 
18 special education centers. 
Orange County -- which teaches about 1,000 of its 31,900 special education 
students in schools for the handicapped -- took a major step toward integration 
with the opening in September of a San Juan Capistrano school built 
specifically to accommodate all students, including those who are severely 
handicapped. 
The San Diego School Board voted last year to try to move all of the district's 
handicapped students onto regular campuses by the 1995-96 school year in a 
comprehensive effort touted as a model for the rest of the state. 
And in Ventura County, the Conejo Valley school district was ordered by state 
education officials in 1988 to transfer all 65 students from a county-run 
special education school to regular schools to provide integration 
opportunities. 
Most school districts offer a range of educational options, with each child's 
placement determined annually after an assessment by teachers, psychologists 
and parents, who devise a plan that spells out such things as what the child 
should learn and how much time should be spent with non-handicapped students. 
But some parents say they are not told about the option of putting their 
children in regular classes. 
"It's like you go to a restaurant and you're given a menu, but there are 
choices available that are not on the menu so you don't know to ask for them," 
said Eileen Cassidy, who heads the local office of the Developmental 
Disabilities Board, a state agency that monitors programs for people with 
disabilities. 
Placement decisions must be approved by school officials and parents, but 
Cassidy said administrators often tout the advantages of segregated placement, 
with its small, intimate classes and specialized instruction and services. 
"It's very inviting," said Engelman. "The whole idea that she's better 
protected, she'll get more attention. . . . They feed you into the special ed 
system, leading you to think it's better for your child." 
Keeping her daughter in a busy classroom with up to 30 other students has "been 
rough at times," admits Engelman, who hired an aide to help Alexis in her 
kindergarten classroom when the district refused to provide one. 
"School is hard for her. She's all right when she's there, but sometimes she 
gets in the car (after school) and starts sobbing and I wonder if I'm doing the 
right thing." 
But experts say the evidence is irrefutable that disabled children taught in 
integrated settings display better social development and a higher mastery of 
skills than segregated students. 
"Prior to 1978, if a child was severely disabled it was felt he should be 
taught whatever you could teach him in a secure environment, then when he 
reached 21, hand him over to a day activity program where he could make baskets 
or ceramics," said Wayne Sailor, a San Francisco State professor recognized 
nationally as an expert on integration. 
"Now we realize that by enhancing a child's social development, you maximize 
his chances to learn more sophisticated skills." 
Connie Lapin of Northridge said she bought the separate-is-better argument 17 
years ago and kept her autistic son "isolated" in special education classes all 
his life. The youth, now 22, lives in a group home with several other autistic 
adults. 
"It was the biggest mistake I could have made," said Lapin, who heads state 
schools Supt. Bill Honig's advisory committee on special education. "The small 
classes, the extra attention . . . it all sounded so good. But what are the 
kids going to learn in a situation like that, with six other autistic kids as 
models? 
"If I'd had him in a normal environment, my son wouldn't have been cured, but 
he would have been a lot happier. Can you imagine how good it would have felt 
for him to just make a friend?" 
In practice, the integration of handicapped children is often difficult. Some 
are disruptive, others out of touch with what goes on around them. Many need 
aides to keep them tuned in to classroom activities and others need medical 
assistance or help with physical tasks. 
"It's not just a matter of having ramps and special restroom facilities," 
explained Carol Arnesen, director of special eduction for the Orange County 
Department of Education. 
"Sometimes it's special medical equipment, changing tables for older children 
who are incontinent, specialized cafeteria services because many are tube fed. 
. . . It's like running a mini-hospital and in many cases it's just not 
practical to (adapt) a regular classroom." 
But in San Diego, school officials are working to do just that, as they try to 
move even the most severely handicapped students onto regular campuses. 
"When we first proposed it three or four years ago, there was panic," recalled 
Jack Fleck, the district's assistant director of special education. "Principals 
wanted to know what they were going to do with these (handicapped) kids and how 
the regular ed kids were going to react." 
In fact, there has been little opposition expressed by either regular education 
students or their parents in San Diego and other districts. 
School officials say that is because they typically meet with teachers and 
parents to explain the integration process. And parents of handicapped students 
often go out of their way to smooth their children's paths -- offering to meet 
with PTAs and student groups to answer questions and dispel parents' fears. 
But other parents say their disabled children are sometimes made scapegoats by 
parents of non-handicapped students for problems that arise in regular 
classrooms. "If their kids start having problems, it's because the teachers 
gave that handicapped kid too much time," Clemans said. "No one wants to say it 
to you, but you know that kind of resentment exists." 
Young children seem to accept their new handicapped classmates well, but it is 
sometimes difficult for teen-age students to find acceptance, unless they have 
been in regular classes over the years and already made friends among their 
non-handicapped peers, parents and teachers say. 
"At Alexis' age, the kids notice that she's different, but they don't hold it 
against her," said Engelman, whose daughter receives the same birthday party 
invitations her non-handicapped classmates do. "What I hope is the friends she 
makes now will still be her friends when she's 16." 
Even some pioneering parents confess, however, to doubts about the wisdom of 
integration. 
"It's difficult and it's scary," said Karen Pekarcik, whose 6-year-old daughter 
with Down's syndrome spent kindergarten in a special education class with eight 
other retarded children in the Pomona School District but moved to a regular 
first-grade class this fall. 
"We've always included Molly in everything our family's done," said Pekarcik. 
"But our daughter is mentally retarded; there's no way we can say she's like 
the other kids." 
The initial cost of adapting schools to accept handicapped children is high -- 
particularly given the small number of disabled children who benefit from the 
changes and the competing needs faced by financially strapped districts. 
But studies show that in the long run it is more cost-efficient to educate all 
handicapped children at regular schools, minimizing costly bus service to 
special programs and the need for a student-teacher ratio that often approaches 
3 to 1. 
The Los Angeles district recently agreed to build a ramp at an elementary 
school to settle a lawsuit on behalf of a wheelchair-bound 4-year-old who was 
barred from attending her neighborhood school and was to be bused to a school 
three miles away -- one of 40 in the district equipped for wheelchairs. 
But Callison said it would cost the district $1 billion to make all 600 of its 
campuses wheelchair accessible, and millions more to equip the schools with all 
the services severely handicapped students need. The district last year spent 
$490 million of its almost $4-billion budget on special education services, he 
said. 
Another stumbling block in California's move toward integration is what to do 
with the special education centers that would no longer be needed. The state 
was a national leader 25 years ago in providing expensive, specially equipped 
schools for its handicapped children. 
Last year, the Los Angeles Board of Education, prodded by complaints that the 
district was not moving quickly enough to integrate all handicapped students, 
appointed a team to study its special education system. Its report is due out 
this year. 
But Callison said it is unlikely Los Angeles will attempt to close its special 
education centers or equip all campuses to handle disabled students. 
"It's like a pendulum (that) swings back and forth," he said. "Stick around for 
a while. You'll find all the school districts . . . that closed their (special 
education) schools are wishing they'd left them open." 
