ROUND 2 OF SALVADOR TALKS OPENS; 
CENTRAL AMERICA: THE PRESIDENT OF HOST COSTA RICA CALLS ON THE COMBATANTS TO 
'RECTIFY THE HISTORY OF 10 YEARS OF WAR.' 
Government and rebel negotiators from El Salvador opened a new round of peace 
talks here Monday after hearing a plea by Costa Rica's president to "rectify 
the history of 10 years of war in your country." 
"Seven million Salvadorans have turned their eyes toward you, with optimism and 
faith," President Oscar Arias Sanchez told the negotiators in a public 
ceremony. "You have an obligation to bury the past, because you do not want to 
leave here as accomplices of more war." 
The stern appeal by the Costa Rican leader, who won the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize 
for his campaign to pacify Central America, dramatized the pressure on both 
sides to end a war that has cost 70,000 lives. 
El Salvador's new rightist government and the Farabundo Marti National 
Liberation Front met for the first time Sept. 13-15 in Mexico City and agreed 
to try to end the fighting "by political means in the shortest time possible" 
through monthly negotiations. 
This first round of substantive talks, in a suburban Roman Catholic monastery, 
centered on a rebel peace plan unveiled during last month's meeting and a 
government counterproposal offered Monday. Catholic leaders from El Salvador 
mediated the talks, and representatives of the United Nations and Organization 
of American States attended as witnesses. 
The rebel plan calls for a cease-fire by Nov. 15 in return for reforming the 
judiciary and the army to combat human rights abuses, as well as moving the 
1991 election of a national legislature to a date in 1990. It envisions an end 
to the conflict by Jan. 31, with the transformation of the guerrilla movement 
into a political party and a sharp reduction of the 55,000-man armed forces. 
Details of the government counteroffer have not been made public. But its 
central point, announced by Salvadoran President Alfredo Cristiani to the U.N. 
General Assembly on Oct. 2, is that all fighting must cease before serious 
talks can proceed. 
Arias appeared to endorse that idea Monday when he told negotiators they "have 
a lot to learn" from the two-year-old peace process in Nicaragua. There, an 
informal truce between the Sandinista government and U.S.-backed Contras took 
hold in March, 1988, at the start of high-level peace talks, and still holds 
despite the lack of a final armistice. 
Arriving here for the scheduled two-day session, Salvadoran guerrilla leaders 
ridiculed any comparison with the Nicaraguan rebels, who are apparently more 
dependent on foreign support, and rejected the idea of an unconditional 
cease-fire. 
They also expanded their own proposal by calling for creation of a powerful 
human rights body representing "all political and social forces," including the 
rebel front. The new body, working under U.N. and OAS supervision, would have 
access to army and police jails. 
Such safeguards, the rebels insist, are needed to halt the practice of 
arbitrary arrests, torture and murder by government forces and right-wing death 
squads and to ensure a climate of peace. 
"The impunity of those who kill and torture has to end," said Joaquin 
Villalobos, the rebels' chief military strategist. "It is impossible to base (a 
settlement) on so simplistic a concept as a ceasing of hostilities if everybody 
just keeps shooting as they please." 
Villalobos said the new demands are a response to a recent government crackdown 
on the rebels' civilian supporters. 
Indeed, the onset of peace talks appears to have sharpened the conflict. More 
than 70 combatants on both sides have been killed in intense fighting since the 
guerrillas ended an 11-day unilateral cease-fire Sept. 23, after the government 
began arresting and beating leftist union leaders and other rebel supporters. 
On the eve of the talks, army troops used tear gas to break up a peace vigil by 
100 leftists in a Catholic church in San Salvador. The same day, the Salvadoran 
air force commander, Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo, made a fight-to-the-finish 
speech that likened the guerrilla alliance to a wounded bull. 
"It's wounded, it's dying," he said. "But we must not turn our backs, because 
that's how great bullfighters die." 
Since taking office June 1, Cristiani has surprised his critics just by his 
willingness to talk. But opposition in the military and his right-wing 
Nationalist Republican Alliance has given the rebels the edge in the propaganda 
war. 
"We all want peace to come to our country right now," Cristiani said Sunday in 
a speech televised in El Salvador. "But 10 years of fratricidal conflict is 
difficult to solve. We do not want people to get frustrated if, perhaps, the 
talks do not move forward at the accelerated pace that the people demand." 
