'TEMBLOR' MAKES IMPACT ON GLENDALE 
Just before Alberto Ocon was born, the earth shook. It should have been taken 
as a warning. 
Because now Ocon, a junior offensive lineman at Glendale High, leaves opponents 
quaking in their cleats. 
"He could have a big future in front of him," Glendale High football Coach Don 
Shoemaker says. 
His past is already memorable, stretching back three weeks before he was born. 
Ocon's parents lived in Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, at the time a 
mammoth earthquake leveled the city on Dec. 23, 1972. The quake killed more 
than 6,000 people and caused nearly $1 billion in damages -- and forever 
stamped Alberto with the nickname "temblor," the Spanish word for earthquake. 
"The temblor" made an immediate impact on Glendale's football program, rumbling 
onto the team last year to earn All-Pacific League honors as a sophomore. 
Ocon is the cousin of swimmer Lawrence Ocon, who set numerous water polo 
scoring records before graduating from Glendale two years ago (see related 
story). And he's not the first in his family to give football a try. Lawrence's 
older brother, Luis, was a wide receiver for the Dynamiters before teammate 
Duane Bickett, now with the NFL's Indianapolis Colts, ended his career with a 
jolting tackle in practice. Two of Alberto's uncles also played at Glendale. 
"The young people in both families have been very successful," Glendale 
Principal Sam Harvey says. 
Ocon's standout rookie season is adding to the family legend -- as well as 
helping to make up for the years he spent waiting to play. 
"I never really got a chance to try football until I got to high school. I was 
too heavy and too young for any of the local (youth) teams," says Ocon, 16, who 
stands 6-foot-2 and weighs 265 pounds. 
Ocon plays either the strong tackle or guard on Glendale's offensive line, and 
younger brother Max, a sophomore, plays the quick, or "weak," tackle. (First 
cousins Alan Arellano and Iggy Guerra also play at times on the Glendale line.) 
And although Ocon sees some action on defense, Shoemaker maintains "his 
position is offense. That's where he'll play in college." 
For which college is a subject Shoemaker and Ocon will discuss in detail after 
this season. 
"I know the Oregon schools are interested in him and I know the Arizona schools 
are interested in him," Shoemaker says. "The schools . . . said that if he's a 
player, they'll take a look at him." 
They're likely to take a look at him in basketball and track as well. A forward 
on the junior varsity team last season, Ocon is a probable varsity 
letter-winner this winter. In track, he won the sophomore league title in the 
discus as a freshman but last year his season was cut short by injuries 
suffered in an auto accident. 
However, football is the sport that will get him to college. 
"Coach says if I get good grades and I play good football, then he thinks a 
Division I school should pick me up," says Ocon, a C-plus student. "If I have a 
much better year in league than I had last year, hopefully I'll get some kind 
of CIF recognition. 
"And hopefully I'll look good for some college that might want me." 
