IRON WORKERS RECAST IMAGE AS UNION CELEBRATES ITS 50TH YEAR; 
LABOR: THOUGH LOCAL 627 HAS ALWAYS HAD A RAUCOUS REPUTATION, THE UNION'S 
ATTITUDE TOWARD MANAGEMENT AT THE NASSCO SHIPYARD HAS TEMPERED. 
Robert Godinez, business agent for the Iron Workers Union, Local 627, chuckled 
when asked to compare the recent launching of a Navy supply ship, which went 
off without a hitch, and the launching of another Navy ship 10 years ago. 
Both ships -- the auxiliary oiler explosives (or AOE) Supply and the destroyer 
tender Cape Cod -- were built and launched at the National Steel &amp; 
Shipbuilding Co. shipyard. But the vessels also symbolized different eras in 
the sometimes confrontational, but always rocky relations between the iron 
workers local -- the largest of seven unions at Nassco -- and the shipyard that 
spawned the group 50 years ago. 
The company had gathered several dignitaries at the Aug. 2, 1980, launching of 
the Cape Cod, including Navy Undersecretary Robert J. Murray, as Nassco 
officials proudly waited to present their latest ship. 
Murray's approach to the podium was the cue for 200 iron workers, who marched 
toward the stage in a carefully planned demonstration and took over the 
platform. Stunned dignitaries, including a prospective Nassco customer, watched 
as some of the workers used bullhorns to give their own speeches, denouncing 
working conditions at the shipyard. 
Embarrassed Nassco officials reacted swiftly. The company fired 27 of the 
protesters, including Miguel Salas, then business agent for Local 627. The 
union responded by staging a three-day wildcat strike that led to more firings. 
One year later, an arbitrator upheld the firings of Salas and 12 of the 27 
workers. 
Local 627, which will celebrate its 50th anniversary on Saturday, has always 
had a raucous reputation. The men and women who make up its membership come 
from various ethnic groups and are as tough as the shipyard they work at. 
Over the years, Local 627 has survived a near fatal rift within its ranks, an 
attempted takeover by communist radicals, a takeover by its International Union 
and negative publicity it suffered when two of its members were convicted in 
federal court of attempting to bomb the Nassco shipyard during a bitter labor 
dispute. 
Turning to the present, Godinez, who has been a union member and Nassco 
employee since 1975, explained that the union's attitude toward management has 
been tempered somewhat since the 1980 incident. Indeed, in April, 1989, the 
iron workers and other unions joined management in a buyout of the shipyard 
after the former owner threatened to shut it down, following a $30 million 
loss. 
"Concerted activities" like the one staged at the Cape Cod launching are not 
necessarily a thing of the past, said Godinez, but a tactic that is now used 
when all else fails. 
"Now, we're making an attempt to work together," he said. "We brought our 
families to the launching (of the Supply) and everyone had a good time. But we 
also have to stand firm and defend our rights. That still happens more 
frequently than you think. Management doesn't really do us any favors." 
Despite its adversarial relationship with Nassco, Local 627 owes its existence 
to the shipyard. The union was founded in 1940 at what was then called National 
Iron Works. Lloyd Sanders, one of 30 men who organized the local, recalled that 
during World War II the company built mostly barges and refrigerator boxes for 
the military. 
Sanders, 77, said that it was not until after the war that Nassco began 
building its first boats for the tuna industry. 
"The first 70 or 80 boats we built were tuna boats. Hell, we didn't know if the 
first one we built was going to float until they put it in the water, and it 
didn't sink," said Sanders in a telephone interview from his St. Joseph, Mo., 
home. 
Fred Hallett, Nassco's chief financial officer, noted the "highs and lows" that 
the company has experienced over the years in its labor relations with Local 
627, but agreed that both sides are less confrontational these days. 
"I think our relationship is excellent. Over the last several years, both sides 
have learned that it's extremely important to talk to each other," Hallett 
said. "We don't see everything the same, but we have learned to sit down at the 
table and understand the other's position." 
However, both sides agreed that it was not too many years ago when sitting at a 
table was merely a prelude to frustration. It was a time when Local 627 
represented more than one-third of Nassco's 8,000 employees and the union, led 
by a group of young and intelligent radicals, relished the power and influence 
it could muster. 
It was also a time when the union appeared to have more leaders than followers. 
"Local 627 has had a long and interesting history," said local labor attorney 
Richard Prochazka. "But the late 1970s and early 1980s were certainly some of 
their most interesting periods." 
Local 627 president Tom McCammon recalled the labor strife that prevailed at 
Nassco in those years, much of it brought about by union complaints of unsafe 
working conditions at the shipyard. Worker dissatisfaction with the company 
also led to a split within the union, which was eventually torn apart by 
internal squabbling. 
"There were so many different slates (factions) formed at the time. We didn't 
know who our leaders were from one day to another," said McCammon. "Meanwhile, 
there was a tremendous number of people getting injured at the yard and people 
were getting killed regularly. The union was disintegrating. People would file 
grievances which wouldn't go anywhere. It was incredibly chaotic." 
Anarchy reigned within the local and some members resorted to violence. Other 
union employees were involved in a break-in at Nassco's labor relations office. 
Finally, in January, 1981, the Iron Workers International Union charged that 
Local 627 was operating "under a cloud of violence and threats of violence" and 
took control of the local union for two years. 
Both McCammon and Godinez credit Salas and former business agent Reynaldo 
(Cherokee) Inchaurregui with making Local 627 an aggressive union that stood up 
to Nassco management for workers' rights. 
Inchaurregui and McCammon, who has worked at Nassco since 1976, were among the 
13 workers fired in 1980 for their roles in the demonstration at the Cape Cod 
launching. However, the arbitrator who reviewed the firings ordered the 
shipyard to rehire McCammon a year later. 
"It was a rough place to work. Conditions were pretty primitive at the 
shipyard," said McCammon. "(Inchaurregui) had a different outlook on how unions 
should do business. He believed in a high-profile confrontational style. He set 
the pattern for the Iron Workers after that. He came up with the idea for 
petition drives, demonstrations and going to the press with our horror stories. 
"He organized people's anger and focused it at the company," McCammon added. 
It was Inchaurregui who came up with the idea for concerted activities, said 
Godinez. His style of leadership encouraged the local's members to get 
involved, he added. 
"We were lucky that (Inchaurregui) became active at the right time. He made 
people feel a part of the union and like they had a say," said Godinez. "We 
were fortunate that there were a lot of active members. The unfortunate thing 
was that not everybody saw things the same way and this split the union into 
different factions." 
The factionalism within the union's ranks also encouraged violent 
confrontations with Nassco officials, said Godinez. 
"We used to have massive lunchtime rallies, attended by 3,000 or more workers, 
where people would direct their frustrations at the company. Everyone wanted to 
show the members that they could be tougher with the company," he said. 
Godinez remembered one rally, where a Nassco official was seen taking notes. 
"Everyone felt that his presence was an attempt by the company to intimidate 
us. One group, well, how can I say it. Truthfully, they started beating up the 
guy. Then everybody decided to share their lunch with him." 
After that incident, the company outlawed the noontime rallies, he added. 
But the worst was yet to come. 
In September, 1980, the FBI and San Diego Police uncovered a plot by two iron 
workers and a member of the Communist Workers Party to blow up electrical 
transformers at the shipyard. 
David Boyd and Rodney Johnston, both union members, and Michael Woo, a member 
of the Communist Workers Party, were arrested before they could go through with 
the plot and were tried in federal court. Johnston also admitted to being a 
party member. 
The bombing case became a cause celebre among U.S. leftists. The trio was 
sentenced to six months in federal prison each, but each defendant ended up 
serving only four months in custody. 
"They were caught up in the fervor of the times. They weren't really terrible 
people," said attorney Gene Iredale, who defended Boyd. 
Hallett has a different opinion of the three men. 
"Here were three guys who were threatening Nassco officers and their families. 
Their agendas were way beyond that of the iron workers," said Hallett. 
Nevertheless, Hallett said he had grudging admiration for the would-be bombers 
and the union's leaders at the time. 
"They were very brilliant individuals. These guys were smart, but they had 
agendas that went beyond local issues," said Hallett. 
According to Iredale, Woo went on to complete his studies at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, while Salas earned a teaching degree and went on to 
become a college professor in Arizona. Salas and Woo could not be reached for 
comment. 
McCammon said the union's international leadership feared Salas' charisma and 
radical politics. 
"He came from an academic background. He had a college degree, which is rare 
for a shipyard worker. (Salas) was extremely intelligent and highly educated. 
He chose to go work in the shipyard. Most workers end up at a shipyard out of 
necessity, not choice," said McCammon. 
Looking back over his 14-year affiliation with Local 627, McCammon said the 
union has been able to survive because "it's like a fire that refuses to go 
out." 
"This local has a long tradition, and different political factions are part of 
that tradition. You can blow it up into 1,000 pieces at election time, but when 
it comes time to negotiate a contract, everyone is together." 
