MANY SAY THEY WILL HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO SWALLOW GAS TAX 
At a Mobil service station in downtown Los Angeles, Michael Pracha leaned 
against his black station wagon Tuesday and watched with resignation as the 
electronic digits tallied his gasoline bill with dizzying speed: $23, $24, $25. 
For Pracha, 36, who drives as many as 800 miles a week in his job as a garment 
industry production manager, there is nothing abstract about the proposed 
12-cent-a-gallon tax hike that is part of the federal deficit-reduction 
package. 
"It's bad," he said between bites of an ice cream sandwich. "But again, there's 
nothing you can do. You still have to go to work, you have to travel and you 
have to pay the extra money." 
The proposed federal gasoline tax would come on the heels of a 
27.1-cent-a-gallon increase that has raised the average price of regular 
unleaded gasoline to $1.346 a gallon since the crisis in the Persian Gulf 
began, according to the American Automobile Assn. In California, price 
increases have included a 5-cent-a-gallon voter-approved state tax hike that 
went into effect Aug. 1, the day before Iraq invaded Kuwait. 
The proposed federal tax would place a further burden on motorists, 
particularly low-income consumers, and squeeze service station operators, 
critics said. The tax, which would be phased in incrementally, has drawn fire 
from consumer groups, service station organizations, petroleum marketers and 
the automobile association, which called it "reckless public policy in the face 
of a recession." 
Observers say a new federal tax would cut demand for gasoline only slightly. 
Within a year, it would drop 1% to 1.5% from its current level of 7.7 million 
barrels a day, economists estimated. Still, at around 100,000 barrels a day, 
"that's no small potatoes," said Gary N. Ross, president of Petroleum Industry 
Research Associates of New York. 
Some motorists have already cut gasoline consumption and altered their driving 
habits. "I'm driving less and making more use of my time when I'm on the road," 
said Ed Rodieck, 25, an Orange businessman who drives 60 to 90 miles a day. 
"I'm starting to ride-share a lot more . . . (And when I'm in downtown Los 
Angeles), I do a lot more walking . . . and take the DASH bus." 
Motorists who can't cut back stand to suffer the most, critics said. 
"I can't ride-share with anybody," said Gerry Walling, a 43-year-old legal 
librarian from Monrovia who drives 45 to 130 miles a day. 
"I have to have my own car because of my obligations to go to other offices," 
she said as she filled her tank at a Unocal station downtown. So far, she 
added, the price hike "hasn't affected my family (financially). But it may. I 
don't know how it's going to affect us if it keeps going up." 
"It's a regressive tax," said Nicholas Fedoruk of the consumer group Citizen 
Action in Washington. "It has the largest impact on the low- and middle-income 
consumers." 
Motorists would not be the only ones to suffer. The tax could add to service 
station owners' costs of processing credit card transactions, cut sales volumes 
and increase cash flow requirements, industry officials said. 
Robert Weiss, who owns Bob's Chevron in Anaheim, said the price run-ups in the 
past two months have turned motorists away. His sales volumes have fallen by 
15%, he said. 
Although prices are higher, he says his per-gallon gross profit margin, out of 
which he pays rent and overhead, has actually shrunk. "The lower our volumes 
go, the more rent we pay" to Chevron, he added. Higher taxes will drive away 
even more customers, he said. 
Although Weiss said he has not suffered serious financial problems, others 
might not be so lucky. The tax "affects the marginal dealer," said Stephen 
Shelton, executive director of the Southern California Service Station Assn. in 
Irvine. 
