RANDY LEWIS: 'FESTIVAL OF BRITAIN' STUDY IN ART OF HUCKSTERISM? 
To be, or not to be . . . an arts festival. That is the question. 
If you've been in the vicinity of the South Coast Plaza mall lately, you've 
probably noticed banners hanging from light poles on all borders, proclaiming 
the "Festival of Britain." 
And well may you may wonder: "What is this Festival of Britain? A travel-agency 
promotion, a fish-and-chips sale at the mall or what?" 
If, however, you are one of more than 300,000 Southlanders on the festival 
mailing list, by now you have received a festival program and ticket 
information booklet, and have read that numerous arts and entertainment events 
and assorted amusements constitute this Festival of Britain. 
But that first impression wasn't incorrect. 
A good portion of the festival -- and in fact its raison d'etre -- is indeed a 
mall fish-and-chips sale to the nth power, to wit, "the largest British 
consumer goods promotion ever staged in the United States," according to the 
organizers. And the retail promotion is based exclusively at South Coast Plaza, 
whose idea the whole thing was in the first place. 
Costa Mesa City Council members were so impressed at the revenue-generating 
potential of this two-week event -- which officially begins today (though some 
of the arts events already are finished, and others won't start for a while 
yet) -- that they voted in June to kick in $400,000 to help promote it. 
Their reasoning: South Coast Plaza officials are targeting for $20 million in 
sales per week at the mall during this event, a projected 50% increase over 
average weekly sales during 1989. And via the city's percentage of those 
millions of Andrew Jacksons passing over sales counters, council members hope 
to recoup all or more of their contribution. 
BritFest organizers are worried, though, that the arts and entertainment 
component is not receiving enough attention on its own merits. 
They note that they've set up a separate nonprofit agency to support and 
promote these programs, which range from performances by the reconstituted 
D'Oyly Carte Opera Company to a weekend of readings in Fullerton featuring the 
tiny but ambitious Poets Reading Inc. 
In addition, they are doling out nearly $300,000 in grants to the various 
presenting and performing groups to help pay for many events that clearly would 
not have existed otherwise. And, the festival is fostering a greater degree of 
interaction among a wider variety of local arts groups than has been seen 
before. 
Still, the question nags: 
Do these events signal a new era of sophistication for Orange County arts, or 
are they the '90s marketing equivalent of the organ grinder's monkey, who 
delights passersby with his antics, all the while collecting dimes for his 
master? 
Officials argue that there is a complete division between the commercial and 
artistic aspects of the Festival of Britain. Yet the program lists exhibits 
taking place in the mall itself -- conveniently located within a credit card's 
throw of many fine participating merchants -- right next to those at the 
Performing Arts Center, South Coast Repertory, Muckenthaler Cultural Center and 
other actual arts venues. 
The not-so-subtle invitation to the public? After you've gone to the Center or 
SCR, stop into the mall for the "Robes of the Realm" show or the "British 
Design 1790-1990" exhibition. And as long as you're there. . . . 
Let's make one thing clear. There's nothing objectionable to commercial 
sponsorship of arts events. Such underwriting can help expose more people to 
theater, music, art and dance than those who can afford to pay $10, $20, $30 or 
more for tickets to independently organized events. But there's a line between 
sponsorship of a true arts festival -- where, in my book, the primary 
motivating force is support and promotion of the arts -- and hucksterism, where 
entertainment is tacked on to a retail promotion as a lure for shoppers. 
Ultimately, it's not all that important -- though it's certainly true -- that 
many of the key events included under the Festival of Britain umbrella would 
have taken place anyway, festival or not. (Among them: Newport Harbor Art 
Museum's retrospective on British sculptor Tony Cragg, the D'Oyly Carte 
engagement, SCR's West Coast premiere of David Hare's "The Secret Rapture," the 
Grove Shakespeare Festival production of Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being 
Earnest," the Laguna Art Museum's "Pursuit of the Marvelous" exhibit, and the 
Orange County Philharmonic Society's London Classical Players concert. 
Officials at those organizations all said the programs were under consideration 
and would have taken place -- if, perhaps, not at precisely the same time of 
year -- had South Coast Plaza mall officials never dreamed up the Festival of 
Britain.) 
What is important to the public at large is that a healthy number of British 
arts and entertainment offerings will be available essentially at the same 
time. Another positive side effect: smaller groups that normally have to 
promote themselves with cheaply printed flyers slipped under windshield wipers 
now are beneficiaries of a major marketing campaign. 
"We have our name and our picture in the program -- our whole gig is being read 
all over Southern California," beamed Michael Logue, founder of Poets Reading 
Inc. "We are on mailing lists that we would have no chance of acquiring on our 
own. This is gold for (our and similar) organizations." 
But would there even have been an arts festival without the mutton sale at 
South Coast Plaza? (And, make no mistake, this is South Coast Plaza's game. One 
arts participant, not based in Costa Mesa, said he asked festival officials 
about including merchants in his city in the retail promotion, and was told 
that South Coast Plaza has exclusive rights to all commercial activities. Why? 
Is it because South Coast Plaza is owned by C.J. Segerstrom &amp; Sons, the 
company and family that, having been the prime forces behind the construction 
of the Performing Arts Center and South Coast Rep, has the best connections 
with the highest-profile Orange County arts groups?) 
Truth be told, the city of Costa Mesa never would have voted $400,000 -- nearly 
half the arts component's total budget of $850,000 to $900,000 -- if the only 
thing going on was arts. 
Fact: At the same meeting that the council approved money for the Festival of 
Britain, it effectively killed a plan to form a new agency to provide millions 
of dollars for arts and tourism within the city. 
Plus: The council recently voted down a request (introduced, by the way, by one 
of the council members) for $20,000 to pay the Pacific Symphony to perform for 
county supervisors and various VIPs at black-tie opening ceremonies for the new 
John Wayne Airport terminal. Councilwoman Sandra L. Genis condemned the 
expenditure as being too elitist before siding with the majority to can it. 
But along comes South Coast Plaza and the Festival of Britain and -- BING! -- 
the Pacific Symphony gets $20,000 to support its "Royal Gala Concert" and 
black-tie dinner, for which tickets are $250 per person. 
BritFest officials say it's important that all the art events be recognized 
collectively -- and hailed as a festival -- rather than individually because 
these two weeks mark an important step forward in the development of the 
still-young Orange County arts scene, and without a festival imprimatur, the 
impact of all this might be considerably lessened. 
In other words: Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to lump together a bunch of 
mostly exciting entertainments, even though they add to the outrageous fortune 
of only one landlord, or to take arms against a sea of haughty boasts, and by 
opposing, risk ending them? 
I'll be looking forward to many of the events coming our way in the days and 
weeks ahead. But as to launching a cheer for Orange County's first great arts 
festival? I'll keep waiting, thanks, for one that's not stamped "Made 
exclusively for South Coast Plaza." 
