USD DRUBS POMONA PITZER TO GO 5-0 
He probably waited until no one was around. He might have even locked himself 
in a closet somewhere to insure his privacy. 
But at some point after the University of San Diego's 31-6 drubbing of Pomona 
Pitzer Saturday afternoon, you get the feeling USD Coach Brian Fogarty let out 
a whoop and a holler and maybe even danced around in circles, clenching his 
fists while pumping his arms up and down. 
Normally subdued, Fogarty probably lost control for a moment or two -- like a 
golfer who just drained a 63-foot chip shot on the 18th hole to win The 
Masters. 
Then again, maybe he didn't. 
This was not a huge victory for USD. It was not handsome. Whopping numbers do 
not come jumping off the stat sheet. Few players, if any, dazzled. 
But it was a victory, USD's fifth in as many games. And for Fogarty, it 
represented a breaking even. In seven years at USD, Fogarty is now 31-31-2. 
His team is ranked No. 4 in the NCAA Division III West Region and has a shot at 
the playoffs for the first time since 1973. 
"This is a team," a reserved Fogarty said. "We've come through in every phase 
of the game. I don't think it's the most talented team we've had, but as a team 
. . . " 
Tim Oder, the defensive line coach, said, "The whole team's playing well. Some 
of the kids that are playing, if you'd have told me six months ago they'd be 
out there, I'd have quit. (They are) pretty run-of-the-mill type kids who are 
playing their butts off." 
And winning. 
USD is averaging 25.4 points per game and allowing only 8.4. Against Pomona 
(1-2), USD built a 31-0 lead midway through the third quarter before 
substituting freely to the delight of a Parent's Day crowd of 1,840 at Torero 
Stadium. 
Last week, USD only attempted two passes in the second half. Saturday, the 
Toreros threw once in the final 30 minutes, a 20-yard scoring pass from backup 
quarterback Doug Piper to reserve Brad Leonard. 
Todd Jackson rushed for 116 yards in the first half. (He carried once for one 
yard in the second half). His two touchdowns, on runs of one and 29 yards, and 
Ty Barksdale's eight-yard scoring run gave USD a 21-0 halftime lead. 
Leonard's touchdown and a 38-yard field goal by Dave Bergmann made it 31-0. 
Bergmann has made 10 of 13 attempts this season; his next will equal the school 
record set by Robert Lozzi in 1981 and '82. 
Scott Bradley, Lenny Territo and Mark Crisci each had an interception. 
Bradley's, after a 17-yard return, gave USD a first and goal at the five and 
set up its first touchdown. Territo's, at Pomona's 21, set up its final 
touchdown. 
Not always the case in the past, Fogarty pointed out, "The defense knows now 
that if they get the ball back, the offense is going to put it into the end 
zone." 
