BATTLE BREWS OVER FATE OF 3 DISPLACED PIER SHOPS; 
PRESERVATION: THEY SIT IN INLAND EXILE WHILE VARIOUS HUNTINGTON BEACH FACTIONS 
DEBATE WHETHER THEY MERIT INCLUSION IN PLANS FOR THE NEW PIER. 
For decades, the three small buildings commanded a million-dollar view. Perched 
on the edges of the Huntington Beach Pier, they had vistas of ocean and miles 
of beach. 
Today, however, the three little shops sit ignominiously at the rear of the 
city's vast work and storage yard at 17371 Gothard St., 4 miles from the ocean. 
The brown-and-cream-colored buildings, with their fanciful roofs and wall 
decorations, look like displaced toys. Weather-worn signs tell their names: the 
Tackle Box -- Tackle, Bait, Rentals; Captain's Galley -- Fish, Chips, Chowder; 
Neptune's Locker -- Beer, Sandwiches, Smoked Fish. 
For three generations, thousands of people from all over the world stopped in 
these shops on the pier. And now, as the tiny buildings sit in inland exile, 
they have become the objects of a preservation fight. 
On Sept. 4, the city removed the three buildings from the pier, which is 
scheduled to be razed by late October and rebuilt. Preservationists vow to see 
the three old shops returned to the new pier. 
Barbara Milcovich, archivist for the Huntington Beach Historical Society, said: 
"These buildings very much were a part of the character of the old pier. When 
the old pier is destroyed in a few more weeks, these buildings will be the only 
remnant left, and they should be preserved. With a little cleaning, and some 
windows restored, they'd be charming on the new pier." 
A city advisory group, the Pier Design Committee, overwhelmingly disagrees with 
Milcovich. By an 11-1 vote, the committee decided that it would not be feasible 
to restore the three former pier shops to the new pier. 
Councilman and committee member John Erskine said: "These are nice buildings, 
and maybe they can be saved and placed somewhere else in the city, but the 
committee believes they're just not safe for the new pier. These old buildings 
are just held together right now with tape and baling wire. We just don't want 
to put unsafe buildings on the new pier." 
Councilwoman Grace Winchell, also a member of the Pier Design Committee, argued 
that the old buildings "would not be beneficial to the shape or harmony of the 
new pier. It's different when you have buildings on a street. In this case, 
however, you're removing the basic structure -- the old pier -- that the 
buildings once were part of." 
Jerry Person, chairman of the city's Historic Resources Board, was the only 
member of the Pier Design Committee to vote for keeping the old shops. He 
disagreed with Erskine's contention that the buildings are unsafe. 
"These buildings are in good shape," he said. "And what better way to 
incorporate a historical look into the new pier than by using some of the old 
pier itself? These are Art Deco buildings, and there are very few Art Deco 
buildings in this city." 
The three shops reflect the geometric style of Art Deco in their tiered blocks 
and decorative circles. The old bait shop features the curious mix of a mansard 
roof -- a 17th-Century French design -- on a 20th-Century Art Deco building. 
Milcovich believes that the eclectic combination of styles adds to the shop's 
charm. 
"These three buildings date back to the 1920s, and they're an important part of 
the city's history," she said. She also noted that the city received a 
$1.3-million federal grant for the new pier and that the funding is contingent 
on the city's incorporating a historical element into the pier's design. 
Milcovich is leading a letter-writing campaign, through the city's Historical 
Society, to pressure Mayor Thomas J. Mays and the rest of the City Council to 
save the buildings. 
Mays said that he is sympathetic to the idea but that the city must have hard 
evidence that the old buildings are safe and of actual historical value. He 
said the city is hiring an expert to make such an assessment. 
"Actually, this is a decision that probably won't be made until about a year 
from now," he said. "It's something the new council members being elected this 
fall will have to decide, after the city gets a report from the expert." 
In the meantime, the three old buildings wait for the verdict. Humble as they 
are, Milcovich said, the little shops are city treasures. 
"You can read a city by its commercial buildings," she said. "These are 
interesting old parts of our old city. No city should wipe away the memories of 
its past." 
