ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COSTA MESA / NEWPORT / IRVINE; 
NEWPORT BEACH; 
4 HONORED AS TOP '89 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES 
Four Newport Beach public safety officers have been selected to receive 
employee-of-the-year awards, one of the highest honors their departments can 
bestow for outstanding public service. 
The Newport Beach Police Department has named Thomas Voth, 36, of Orange as 
Officer of the Year for 1989. Voth, a 12-year police veteran, is one of three 
officers on the force who work with police dogs. 
He and his partner, a 5-year-old German shepherd named Hondo, are credited with 
field work and searches that have resulted in several arrests. Department 
officials also praised Voth for his work with Neighborhood Watch organizations. 
"Voth was selected for consistent and outstanding teamwork," Sgt. Andy Gonis 
said. "He is always there when you need him, and he always does a good job." 
Named Firefighter of the Year was Richard D. Middlebrough, 42, of Laguna 
Niguel. Middlebrough, a 14-year veteran, is part of the department's videotape 
unit at its headquarters and president of the Newport Beach Firefighters Assn. 
"I just have fun doing my job, and that's about it," Middlebrough said. 
Lifeguard of the Year honors went to Mike Halphide, 24, of Yorba Linda, a 
recent graduate of UC Irvine. Halphide, who has been a seasonal lifeguard since 
1984, is credited with hundreds of rescues. 
"He is an all-round great guy and has done every job that's been handed to 
him," Marine Safety Officer Mitchell White said. "He's one of the leaders down 
here." 
Orange County Sheriff's Deputy Brian Kleeman, 46, of Huntington Beach has been 
named Harbor Patrolman of the Year for his contributions to training exercises 
involving marine firefighting. 
Kleeman, a 17-year veteran of the Sheriff's Department, was praised 
particularly for a joint exercise with the Newport Beach Fire Department to 
assess firefighting capabilities. 
Voth, Middlebrough, Halphide, and Kleeman were honored Saturday night at a 
dinner-dance hosted by the Newport Harbor American Legion. DAN WEIKEL 
