HUSSEIN, PLO RADICAL WARN ISRAEL TO RETREAT 
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and Palestinian guerrilla chieftain Abul Abbas 
warned Israel on Tuesday that failure to withdraw from the occupied territories 
will invite eventual retaliation. 
In separate remarks on the killing Monday of 19 Palestinians in the Old City of 
Jerusalem, the two Arabs demanded international condemnation of the bloody 
incident. 
Hussein, in a statement read by a studio announcer on Baghdad Radio, told the 
Israelis: "You have no choice but to leave the land of Palestine and Muslim 
shrines." He said Iraq has developed a long-range missile that would "serve 
like the stones of Palestinian youths." 
Several times in the last 10 months, Iraq has threatened to use missiles 
against Israel but only in response to an Israeli attack on Iraq with "weapons 
of mass destruction." In Tuesday's remarks he mentioned no such condition. 
"O Zionists," Hussein's statement said, "the heavier your weapons, the more 
arrogant you are and the more sins you commit." 
Later in the day, demonstrations protesting the killings were held at several 
sites around Baghdad. 
Abbas, the guerrilla leader, spoke out at a news conference, saying he holds 
the United States and Israel equally responsible for what he termed a "vicious 
massacre." 
He called on Washington to refrain from using its Security Council veto to 
block any U.N. condemnation of the incident. If the world body fails to take 
action, he said, "our reaction will be very severe . . . against Israel in a 
direct way." 
The Security Council should require the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip and their replacement by an international peace force, 
Abbas said. This proposal has been put forth before by Palestinian leaders. 
Abbas, head of the maverick Palestine Liberation Front and a member of the 
Palestine Liberation Organization's ruling council, talked with reporters at 
PLF headquarters in Baghdad. 
Compared to past statements, his performance was relatively tempered and 
appeared to be aimed at creating divisions between European countries and the 
United States. He singled out France for praise of its Middle East policies. 
He linked the violence in Jerusalem to the Persian Gulf crisis and asserted 
that it was the first step in an Israeli plot to invade and occupy Jordan, 
where popular sentiment is strongly pro-Iraqi. 
A thickset, unsmiling man, Abbas was behind the 1985 hijacking of the Italian 
cruise ship Achille Lauro, in which an elderly American, Leon Klinghoffer, was 
shot and pushed overboard. Last May, Abbas' forces mounted an abortive raid on 
Israeli beaches. Washington and Jerusalem have branded him a terrorist. 
"Will the international community expect us to keep silent in the face of this 
massacre?" Abbas asked. "What will you say in the future if there is a reaction 
from our side? Will you say it's a terrorist action?" 
He insisted that Palestinians have a "legitimate right to armed defense." 
