ON THE ROAD TO RECOVERY; 
COLLEGE FOOTBALL: UNDER NCAA SANCTIONS, THE SOONERS ARE TRYING TO CLEAN UP 
THEIR IMAGE WITH GIBBS AS COACH. ONE THING HASN'T CHANGED: THEY STILL WIN. 
If nothing else, the Oklahoma Sooners of old were good for a scandal or two. Or 
three. Or four. 
You had your Barry Switzer. Your Boz. Your steroids. Your quarterback selling 
cocaine. 
You had your three R's, too: rap sheets, recruiting and the rat-tat-a-tat-tat 
of machine-gun fire at the university's Bud Wilkinson House. 
"Hard Copy" would have loved this place 18 months ago. It was an NCAA 
investigator's dream. And an Oklahoma nightmare. 
"It was just a few incidents that tarnished us," linebacker Chris Wilson said. 
"Five people were trying to tarnish 100 years of greatness. That's a 
frustrating feeling." 
Now look at it. If you didn't know any better, you'd think you were visiting 
the Brigham Young campus, what with all the "Yes, sirs" and "No, sirs" going 
around. There isn't a scandal in sight, unless you include pillow fights. 
For instance, security at Wilkinson House, the school's athletic dormitory, is 
so tight, you need Siegfried and Roy to get in. Players sign "truth 
statements," the university's version of an honor system for class attendance. 
There are a dress code, a curfew and an emphasis on image. 
There is also Tom Hill, an assistant athletic director who has already booted 
at least one of the Sooners' finest recruits for ignoring his warnings about 
going to class. 
But the most glaring difference involves coaches. Gone is Switzer, the King. In 
his place is Gary Gibbs, the second-year boss who rules in a much different 
fashion. 
"It's different," Wilson said. "But I guess it's like a job. Once new 
management comes in, you adapt." 
This is the new Oklahoma, all right -- the repentant Oklahoma, the 
probation-scarred and scared Oklahoma. Bland as tap water, the 1990 version of 
Sooner football continues to put distance between itself and a checkered past. 
The Oklahoma of old did win championships, lots of them: six national and 33 in 
the various conferences the Sooners have played in since 1895. But it also 
caused controversy and embarrassment. Held up to the light by the NCAA, Sooner 
football was ultimately found to be as dirty as a dust rag. 
Upheaval followed. Switzer was forced out as coach and later wrote a 
best-selling book about it. Charles Thompson, who made the mistake of selling 
cocaine to undercover police, is serving time in the Big House . . . and wrote 
a book about it. Brian Bosworth, another ex-Sooner author, is making 
action-packed B movies. 
Everyone and anyone who had something to do with Oklahoma's downfall is gone, 
some more gracefully than others. 
And guess what. The Sooners are the better for it. This season they find 
themselves 5-0 and ranked fourth in the country. They can't go to a bowl, but 
they could win, if the stars and moon are aligned just so, another national 
championship. 
Don't laugh. It has been done before. Just ask the soap opera-handsome Gary 
Gibbs, who earned a championship ring while spending New Year's Day, 1975, at 
home with his Oklahoma teammates. Those Sooners finished the year 11-0, 
recorded three shutouts and didn't allow any of the eight other opponents to 
score more than two touchdowns apiece. Probation kept them out of postseason 
play, but not from finishing atop the polls. 
Of course, few Oklahoma faithful are comparing this year's Sooners to the ones 
in the 1974 season. There is no Lee Roy Selmon, no Dewey Selmon, no Tinker 
Owens, no Joe Washington on the roster in 1990. 
"We're not a dominant team," said Gibbs, who played linebacker on that 1974 
team and spent the next 14 years as a Sooner assistant coach. "We're not a 
great team. We're nowhere close to where we were back in the middle '80s." 
But oddly enough, this might turn out to be the most satisfying season the 
century-old school has witnessed. For a pleasant change, Oklahoma football has 
become a good citizen, an example -- can you believe it? -- of the right way of 
restructuring priorities. 
And to think, all it took was enough misery and heartache to last another 100 
years. 
"We're trying to re-establish credibility among the press, the fans, the 
supporters," Gibbs said. "But those things were ongoing. 
"We've made a lot of headway. But I think people in this part of the country 
feel better about Oklahoma and what we stand for as opposed to people from 
afar." 
If ever there was a school that overdosed on football, this was it. Gibbs saw 
the excesses and understood the dangers of it all. He watched his friend and 
mentor Switzer get gobbled up by circumstances, some preventable, some not. 
In the end, Switzer couldn't or wouldn't control the "monster," as he called 
it, that is Oklahoma football. Instead, he is now an occasional visitor to 
Sooner practices, where he stands on the sidelines and pretends there isn't a 
part of him that misses being a coach. 
"It's strange," tight end Adrian Cooper said of Switzer's appearances, "I miss 
him a whole lot. He's the primary reason for me coming to Oklahoma." 
In his place is the anti-Switzer: Mr. Clean. The Sooners wanted a 
disciplinarian with a heart. Well, they got him. They wanted a keen football 
mind and they got that, too. 
Athletic Director Donnie Duncan is the man who recommended that the school hire 
Gibbs. The thought of pursuing an outsider, a big-name coach with a reputation, 
never crossed Duncan's mind. 
After all, Duncan had tried to lure Gibbs to Iowa State in 1978. Duncan was the 
coach and he needed a defensive coordinator. Gibbs was all of 24. 
"I was coaching (at Oklahoma) when Gary played," Duncan said. "Gary later came 
on as a part-time coach. From Day 1, it was obvious Gary Gibbs was ahead of his 
time. He was brilliant. He was always able to understand concepts." 
As hoped, Gibbs accepted Duncan's offer to fly to Iowa State for an interview. 
One problem: "Gary visited up there in the middle of winter," Duncan said. 
Ames, Iowa, may be a wonderful place during the other three seasons, but during 
winter you can barely feel your toes. Gibbs, who had never lived farther north 
than Norman, stayed put. 
Eleven years later, Duncan offered Gibbs another job -- Switzer's. 
"From the standpoint of leading our program, I knew that every decision that 
had to be made by Gary Gibbs would be made in the direction that we needed to 
go," Duncan said. 
The direction is simple enough -- away, far away, from the eye of the NCAA. 
Oklahoma needs another investigation like it needs another tell-all book. 
No problem for Gibbs. For all the accusations made against the school's 
recruiting methods in the past -- and there have been many -- Gibbs' name has 
never been mentioned as a possible rules violator. In fact, so sure is Duncan 
of Gibbs' preventive efforts, he all but guarantees success. 
"The solution is the same solution everywhere," Duncan said. "You have to have 
the right type of individuals in your program first. Then you have to have a 
structure that keeps them that way or eliminates them if they're not that way." 
In recent years, Oklahoma had neither. Switzer was a gifted recruiter, an 
ultra-successful coach and the great communicator, but he and Duncan lost grip 
of the football program. A lack of "institutional control" are the words the 
NCAA uses to describe such things. 
There are other mandates. Duncan and university President Richard L. Van Horn 
want the student part of student-athlete emphasized more. Enter Hill, who 
single-handedly is reshaping the image of Oklahoma, the football factory. 
How big a part does Hill play? Consider this: The Sooner football calendar, 
usually chock-full of game scenes and star player mug shots, took on a 
different look in 1990. Featured prominently is Gibbs, which is understandable 
enough, and Hill, the academic guru. Imagine that! 
Still, it is Gibbs who serves as the point man, the guy who has been asked to 
win games and nationwide respect all at the same time. So far, so good. 
"We understand that we're in the light, that we're being watched," Gibbs said. 
"People are always going to judge us because of the circumstances of the last 
18 months. We've got to make sure that we're cognizant of that scrutiny." 
No problem there. Hardly a week goes by that Gibbs isn't asked about Switzer or 
the controversy that enveloped Oklahoma football like a mushroom cloud. To each 
question, Gibbs recites a variation of the same answer he has given since he 
was hired: 
 -- He isn't Barry Switzer Jr. 
 -- He promises no miracles. 
 -- He will do things his way. 
Only when asked about Switzer's continued visits to practice sessions does 
Gibbs show a spark of emotion. 
"This is part of him," Gibbs said. "This program, these kids . . . this is part 
of Coach Switzer." 
Moments later, Gibbs is back to being Gibbs: calm, reserved and -- how does one 
put this tactfully? -- dull. 
Watch Gibbs on his weekly show and you see a man who would rather be cleaning 
his attic than looking into a television camera. News conferences aren't much 
better. 
Married for 14 years, father of two daughters, Gibbs could start now and never 
be half the hell-raiser Switzer was. 
"I don't believe I've seen Gary do anything crazy," Duncan said. "But Gary 
knows who he is. He knows he's not a comedian. He knows he has been handed one 
of the top football traditions in the country." 
And isn't that the point? 
Today's game against longtime rival Texas will be another indication of how far 
the Sooners have progressed under Gibbs. Already this season, Oklahoma has 
beaten UCLA, Pittsburgh and Oklahoma State, along with Tulsa and Kansas. 
However, Gibbs, who led the Sooners to a commendable 7-4 record in 1989, warned 
that Oklahoma is operating under some distinct disadvantages, as designed by 
NCAA probation. 
For example, Oklahoma arrived in Dallas Friday with only three sound 
linebackers and three defensive ends. With only 80 players on scholarship, as 
opposed to the usual 95, Gibbs is scrambling for replacement parts. 
"We're No. 4 in the country, but anybody who thinks that we're back and that 
we're not going to have hard times again is fooling themselves," Gibbs said. 
"We've got a long ways to go before we can get our program back to where we're 
comfortable with the talent and the numbers and the depth, given the kind of 
schedule we'll be playing." 
UCLA Coach Terry Donahue might disagree. Oklahoma beat his Bruins, 34-14. The 
next week, the Sooners trounced Pitt, 52-10. At the time, Pitt was ranked No. 
14. 
As usual, the Sooners are winning with their running game. Fullback Kenyon 
Rasheed, who wasn't even a starter when fall practice began, is averaging 
nearly six yards a carry. Quarterbacks Steve Collins, the starter, and Cale 
Gundy, the occasional replacement, give Oklahoma the semblance of a passing 
game, a rarity in these parts. 
And as you might expect, the Sooners' defense is solid. Remember, Gibbs is the 
team's former defensive coordinator. 
It has been a strange, trying journey back to respectability for Oklahoma. 
Given their druthers, Gibbs and his players probably would like to forget the 
sins of the past. But nobody is in a hurry to let them -- not Duncan, not Van 
Horn, not the NCAA, not the media. Maybe it's better that way. 
"Those were dark days," said Cooper, the senior tight end. 
But they're getting brighter. At last. 
