E. GERMANS WIN BID TO GO TO WEST; 
PRAGUE, WARSAW PERMIT 4,000 IN EMBASSIES TO LEAVE 
More than 4,000 East German refugees in West German embassies in Czechoslovakia 
and Poland began leaving the grounds of the missions late Saturday after a 
surprise agreement was reached to allow them to go by train to West Germany. 
In a dramatic announcement, the official East German news agency ADN reported 
earlier Saturday that the Communist regime in East Berlin had agreed to "expel" 
the refugees aboard special rail coaches that will carry them to the West 
through East Germany. 
West German officials in Hof, a town in Bavaria near the East German border, 
said that the first trainload of incoming refugees is expected about 4 a.m. 
today. 
Will Go to Reception Centers 
The refugees will taken to reception centers in West Germany, officials said, 
as have thousands of East Germans fleeing westward by way of Hungary in recent 
weeks. 
Saturday's developments temporarily allayed the political crisis that involved 
West Germany, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Poland over the fate of East 
German refugees who had sought refuge in the embassies' grounds. 
The agreement was revealed after West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich 
Genscher -- after talks in Bonn with a senior East German official, Horst 
Neubauer -- unexpectedly flew to Prague, the Czechoslovak capital, where he 
drove directly to the West German Embassy. 
There he spoke from a balcony, telling a cheering group of the estimated 3,500 
East Germans camped out in the embassy compound that they would be allowed to 
go to West Germany. 
'Welcome to Germany' 
"I came to tell you that you can leave," declared Genscher, who himself is from 
Halle in East Germany. "Welcome to Germany." 
He said the arrangements worked out with Communist regimes on the refugees was 
the "biggest success in my political career." 
At the same time, West German officials said that about 650 East Germans 
sheltered in the Warsaw Embassy and at a Roman Catholic hostel in the Polish 
capital would also leave by train for the Federal Republic. 
Genscher's statement was greeted with cries of "Freedom! Freedom!" Many of the 
East Germans wept openly and embraced one another at the handsome, baroque 
embassy complex in the heart of the capital. 
They had been living under tents in rudimentary conditions, worsened by cold 
rains and a mass of mud -- and by the soaring number of incoming refugees. 
"We made it; we made it," the refugees called to journalists outside the 
embassy's spiked fence. 
"I would never have believed this," said one young man with his son on his 
shoulders. 
Genscher told the East Germans that the first train to West Germany would leave 
at 8 p.m. local time. He was off by half an hour. The first train, pulled by an 
East German locomotive, left Prague's Liben station at 8:30 with about 400 East 
Germans aboard, some laughing, some singing and some seemingly dazed by the 
sudden turn of events. 
In an effort to legalize the departure of the refugees, East German officials 
would issue exit visas about the trains while en route to West Germany. 
Genscher said he had discussed the refugee crisis at the United Nations in New 
York last week with the foreign ministers of Czechoslovakia, Poland, East 
Germany and the Soviet Union. But he declined to give details of the talks. 
"We agreed on complete discretion," he said. 
In East Berlin, the news agency ADN reported: "In an effort to end the 
untenable situation in the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw, the East 
German government has arranged to expel to West Germany the East Germans 
illegally staying in these embassies by train through East German territory." 
Czechoslovakia has a common border with West Germany, but Poland does not. 
The rail transit through East Germany was viewed by political observers in Bonn 
as a face-saving device by which the East Berlin regime could claim it was 
expelling the refugees from its own territory, rather than watching them flee 
through other Communist countries. 
Czechoslovakia, like Hungary, has an accord with East Germany, agreeing not to 
let East Germans cross its territory to the West without proper credentials 
issued by East Berlin. 
On Sept. 10, the Hungarian government decided to suspend the pact in order to 
allow thousands of East Germans in refugee camps there to depart for West 
Germany without exit visas. 
That action angered the East Berlin government, but the Communist government in 
Budapest evidently believed it had more to gain from Western countries by its 
humanitarian actions than it lost in breaking Communist solidarity with East 
Germany. 
Since then, about 25,000 East Germans have streamed across the Hungarian border 
into Austria and then West Germany. The Bonn government recognizes all Germans, 
East or West, as its citizens. 
Poland and Czechoslovakia, friends of East Berlin, nevertheless wish to 
maintain cordial relations with West Germany for trade and economic reasons. 
The East Berlin ADN report said that East German Foreign Ministry spokesman 
Wolfgang Meyer declared that the Communist regime had complied with West German 
requests to allow the refugees to leave, after consulting the governments in 
Prague and Warsaw. 
The refugee crisis has deeply upset East Germany, which is planning a large 
celebration on Saturday to observe the 40th anniversary of the creation of the 
state. Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev heads the Communist guest list. 
The East Berlin regime has been hoping to brighten up its image, damaged by the 
flight of about 100,000 East Germans, authorized and unauthorized, this year. 
Spokesman Meyer said he hopes that the joint gesture by East Germany, 
Czechoslovakia, and Poland would ensure that conditions would return to normal 
at West German diplomatic missions in all three countries. 
Bonn's embassies in Prague and Warsaw and its mission in East Berlin have been 
closed to the public for weeks because of the influx of would-be emigrants. 
In Bonn, government sources indicated that part of the deal struck with 
Czechoslovakia and Poland would be that the Saturday night train ride to the 
West would be limited to those East Germans already in embassy grounds. 
The Communist governments do not want to deal with the problem again, these 
sources indicated, but it was not clear how they would keep East Germans from 
entering West German missions unless police guards are posted. 
