HAS EDGE ON DOUGLAS, HOLYFIELD SAYS 
If Evander Holyfield has his way, Thursday's heavyweight title fight with 
champion James (Buster) Douglas will be as much a test of minds as bodies. 
And in his mind, Holyfield feels he has a clear advantage. 
"When it comes down to the clutch, it comes down to determination and smarts," 
Holyfield said. "That's where I feel I can control the fight." 
Holyfield, undefeated in 24 fights, goes into his first heavyweight title fight 
giving away size, reach and weight to the undisputed champion. 
But his determination and focus have never been questioned, unlike those of 
Douglas, who many thought quit when he was stopped in the 10th round of a 1987 
title fight against Tony Tucker. 
"I think the deciding factor will be mental strength, and I think Evander has 
just got so much more mental strength," co-trainer Lou Duva said. "That's what 
we're gambling on." 
Oddsmakers apparently agree, making Holyfield a 7-5 favorite to beat Douglas in 
the champion's first defense of the title he won when he shocked the boxing 
world by stopping Mike Tyson in Tokyo last February. 
Holyfield, a former cruiserweight champion, will be fighting as a heavyweight 
for only the seventh time against the 30-year-old Douglas, who stands 30-4-1 
after a nine-year pro career. 
The 27-year-old challenger is at a decided physical disadvantage, giving away 
about 20 pounds and nearly six inches in reach to Douglas. But Holyfield's 
conditioning is impeccable and his will to win is unquestioned. 
Holyfield had two trainers, strength and conditioning coaches and even a ballet 
teacher to help him prepare. 
"I'm willing to pay every price I have to pay to be the heavyweight champion," 
Holyfield said. "Both of us fight pretty well and we both have the skills. It 
becomes a mind thing, which man is stronger mentally and can adjust more to win 
the fight." 
Douglas, who battled weight problems since winning the title from Tyson, 
canceled his last scheduled workout on Tuesday to concentrate instead on 
resting up for the scheduled 12-round fight. 
Douglas said he will come into the ring weighing about 230 pounds, the same he 
weighed when he knocked out Tyson in the 10th round. Holyfield is expected to 
weigh about 210 pounds at this afternoon's formal weigh-in. 
