ART BUCHWALD: RECESSION: BLAME THE CONSUMER 
I was driving into work the other morning when I heard this on the radio, 
"There will be a recession if the consumer doesn't shape up. Economists say 
that only the shopper can decide whether the country will go into a tailspin or 
not." 
I thought to myself, "If I could just get my hands around the consumer's 
throat, I would force him to buy twice as much as he needs." 
I turned to Sister Mary Louise, a nun who is in my car pool, and said, 
"Wouldn't you think that after all we've done for the consumer, the least he or 
she could do is keep us out of a recession?" 
Sister Mary Louise told me, "The problem for the consumer is that we gave him 
mixed signals. On the one hand we said that he was getting into too much debt 
and he should put his money into a savings and loan -- and, on the other, we 
urged him to go out and buy a new car. The consumer isn't to blame because the 
government economists don't know which end of the year is up and which is 
down." 
"Nevertheless, I don't want my future in the hands of people who are not sure 
whether this is a good time to spend any money." 
Sister Mary Louise added, "We must not be unkind to consumers. For the most 
part they are just like you and me. The only difference is that they have money 
to spend, and if they're going to sit on it I'm afraid that we will all be 
selling imitation Rolexes on Fifth Avenue. The problem as I see it is that the 
consumer is jittery and thinks that if he uses up his money, there won't be any 
left when the hard times roll by. He doesn't realize that by not spending it, 
he is actually causing the depression he lives in fear of." 
"Someone should tell the consumer that if he doesn't bring about prosperity, 
nobody will," I said. 
"I personally know a lot of buyers," Sister Mary Louise informed me, "and 
they're nice people. It's just that there are times when they can be stubborn. 
If you want my opinion, their sin is that they blow hot when they should blow 
cold, and cold when they should blow hot." 
"Do you think that the reason they blow cold is because they have enough of 
everything?" 
"Not necessarily. Most people buy to prevent others from having more than they 
do. For example, kids will purchase T-shirts to look better than other kids, 
and girls will purchase flashy jeans to attract the boys. They may look young, 
but they are consumers too. If the kids stop acquiring clothes, then there'll 
be a recession." 
"Perhaps we should do more to honor the shopper who spends money. For example, 
the Federal Reserve could have the Consumer-of-the-Month to lunch and give him 
a shopping cart for life," I suggested. 
Sister Mary Louise had another idea. "The only solution is to create more 
consumers by issuing more credit cards -- 10 to a family -- and keep a supply 
of them at perfume counters in case somebody doesn't have one. The two things 
that go together are debt and plastic." 
I said, "Many consumers are lazy and don't like to shop." 
The sister said, "I know what you mean. This country is not going to make it 
when consumers buy just food. If we're to beat the doldrums -- and I'm not 
saying we will -- we have to make everybody who goes to Safeway stop off on 
their way home at Victoria's Secret." 
