CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS / STATE ASSEMBLY RACES; 
10 CANDIDATES SHARPLY DEFINE DIFFERENCES IN 2 TV DEBATES 
Candidates for five Orange County seats in the state Assembly met Thursday in 
two debates that offered voters some clear distinctions between opponents but 
little time to explore their views in any depth. 
The half-hour debates were taped in the studios of KOCE-TV Channel 50 at Golden 
West College and were moderated by Jim Cooper. 
The first debate, which will air Oct. 29 at 6:30 p.m., featured 58th Assembly 
District candidates Luanne Pryor, a Long Beach public relations executive and 
Huntington Beach Mayor Thomas J. Mays, and 71st District hopefuls Peter 
Mathews, a Cypress College professor, and incumbent Assemblywoman Doris Allen 
(R-Cypress). 
Mays, a Republican, and Pryor, a Democrat, are vying for the seat vacated by 
outgoing Assemblyman Dennis Brown. They traded charges that each is susceptible 
to influence from developers who have contributed to their campaigns. 
Pryor said Mays was in the pocket of the Huntington Beach Co., the largest 
landowner in that city, while Mays pointed out that Pryor took contributions 
from David Malmuth, a major Long Beach developer. 
Mathews, meanwhile, said that legislators are influenced by private special 
interests and that voters should reject incumbents and "return responsibility 
to the Legislature." 
Allen agreed that the Legislature is not functioning properly but blamed it on 
a Democrat-dominated power structure that is forcing citizens to legislate by 
initiative. 
When asked about two initiatives on the ballot that would limit legislator's 
terms, Mays, Allen and Mathews all said they would support some form of term 
limits, with Mathews also supporting public financing of campaigns. Pryor said 
she sees limiting terms as being detrimental to women candidates, who are 
already underrepresented in the Legislature. 
In the second debate, which will air Oct. 30 at 6:30 p.m., candidates in the 
67th, 69th and 70th districts squared off. 
All three are heavily Republican districts, and the Democrat challengers are 
decided underdogs. 
In the 67th District, Chapman College Prof. Fred Smoller got into a short but 
heated argument with incumbent John R. Lewis (R-Orange) when Smoller blasted 
Lewis for his since-dismissed indictment on political forgery charges. 
"That alone is enough for him to forgo reelection," Smoller said. 
Lewis countered by saying that the charges were trumped up by Atty. Gen. John 
Van de Kamp and other powerful Democrats and were "laughed out of court." He 
characterized Smoller as being "on the most extreme left-wing fringes of the 
Democratic Party." 
When Smoller said "that's ridiculous," Lewis asked him why, then, was he 
arrested for trespassing on government property to protest nuclear testing? 
Smoller said that Lewis was wrong, that he was "detained" and not arrested. 
Meanwhile, the Democratic candidate in the 69th District, business attorney 
James Toledano, attacked his opponent, Assemblyman Nolan Frizzelle 
(R-Huntington Beach) for refusing to debate him one-on-one during the campaign. 
"He's trying to conceal his record," said Toledano. 
Frizzelle did not directly answer the charge. Instead, he used his time to 
remind voters that he is a fiscal conservative who is concerned about keeping 
taxes low and restricting government growth. He said he opposes Measure M, the 
county's proposed sales tax increase for transportation improvements but 
supports construction of additional toll roads. 
Toledano said he, too, opposes Measure M, but because it is "a Band-Aid and 
Scotch tape" approach to problems that need a more comprehensive solution. 
In the 70th District, Democrat Howard Adler said the Republican incumbents 
"can't get the job done" and have failed to provide the county with any 
political leadership. 
"The voters believe all you guys are crooks," Adler said. 
Gil Ferguson answered that the Democrats in power in Sacramento for the past 37 
years are the crooks who have been "sucking this state blind." 
"I'm glad to leave there myself if I can take all those crooks down with me," 
said Ferguson (R-Newport Beach), proclaiming his support for Prop. 140, the 
strictest of the term-limitation initiatives. 
