KUWAIT WOMEN RESIST IRAQ, SEEK RECOGNITION OF ROLE; 
GULF CRISIS: CHANTS, POSTERS AND PEACEFUL MARCHES ARE THEIR ARMS AGAINST 
INVADERS. THREE HAVE DIED SO FAR. 
Instead of guns, their weapons are soft Arabic chants and posters of their 
beloved emir, Sheik Jabbar al Ahmed al Sabah. Their battlefields are the 
mosques and living rooms of Kuwait city. For armament against the Iraqi 
soldiers, they tote their children at their sides. 
With most of the military leaders of the organized resistance now in hiding, 
the veiled, often-secretive women of Kuwait have become the most public leaders 
of the opposition, marching peacefully through the streets, organizing 
neighborhoods for civil defense and secretly carrying cash and supplies to the 
military resistance. 
"After the invasion, the whole of Kuwait nearly froze. Nothing going on except 
telephone calls and tears and fears, and of course you hear all of these sounds 
of the military machines," said a woman named Fatima, an organizer of the 
women's resistance who escaped from Kuwait only last week. 
"We felt it was our responsibility to break the ice. If somebody hits you on 
the head and you faint, you need somebody to splash cold water, to pat your 
cheeks to wake you up. I think at this particular moment this is the role of 
women in Kuwait," she said. 
Three women have been shot to death in public demonstrations so far. Others 
have been imprisoned and raped, according to reports from Kuwait, and still 
others have risked their families by secretly aiding the Kuwaiti resistance. 
On Monday, Fatima made a step toward official recognition of women's role in 
the resistance effort, becoming the only woman to address the more than 1,000 
Kuwaiti intellectuals, political leaders and businessmen who gathered in Saudi 
Arabia over the weekend to discuss the liberation of Kuwait and future 
political reforms. 
Women do not have the right to vote in Kuwait. They do not attend the private 
diwaniyas, a kind of Kuwaiti men's kaffeeklatsch, where important political 
issues are usually debated and decided. 
Sheik Saad al Abdullah al Sabah, the crown prince and prime minister, has 
promised an expanded role for women in a liberated Kuwait. However, many women, 
angry at not being invited to participate in the Jidda talks, want to make 
certain that the pledge includes real, tangible political rights, such as the 
right to vote. 
As she stood in front of the delegation in a closed session Monday, Fatima 
said, many men seemed to think the idea of women's political rights was a novel 
idea. 
"Everybody thought it was new, just because the crown prince had mentioned it," 
she said. "I told them this was not something new. Somebody asked me: 'Did you 
think about all this before?' I said, 'Of course, yes. For years.' " You know, 
I think they were listening." 
Kuwaiti women organized their first demonstration against the Iraqi occupation 
only three days after the Aug. 2 invasion, telephoning neighbors and calling 
them to a meeting at a centrally located mosque. 
The meeting was to be limited to women and children. Fathers and sons who 
dropped off family members were instructed to leave immediately in the hope of 
avoiding a confrontation with Iraqi soldiers. 
By 9 a.m., nearly 250 women had shown up, and they began praying for those 
killed in the invasion up to that point. Then, they began quietly marching down 
the street with posters of the emir and the crown prince, planning to go only a 
short distance. When Iraqi soldiers held back, the women made a circuit of the 
entire block. 
Women arriving at a nearby grocery store got out of their cars and joined the 
demonstration. By noon, the crowd had swelled to 400. 
"That was quite a change," Fatima said. "Anybody who was living in Kuwait could 
really feel it. Everyone had been afraid to leave their houses, and the next 
day, there were three times more cars on the streets because we broke the wall 
of fear." 
A short time later, they organized another demonstration at another mosque. 
Nearly 750 women participated. The demonstrations went on, erupting at one 
point into an angry confrontation with Iraqi soldiers that left three women 
dead. 
And so, quietly, the women began a system of organizing neighborhoods, drawing 
up lists of doctors and pharmacists living in each region of Kuwait city, 
conducting first-aid training, showing women how to protect their families 
against chemical weapons, explaining how to store food and water supplies and 
manage electricity in the event of war. 
A few women began publishing a newsletter, Al Kuwaitia (The Kuwaiti Woman), 
carrying documentation of the Kuwaiti resistance and news of the occupation 
based on reports from the British Broadcasting Corp. and the Voice of America. 
Women provided reports of resistance clashes based on what they had seen in 
their own neighborhoods. 
They published 18 issues, at first daily, then every three days, until Iraqi 
soldiers began confiscating fax and photocopying machines and arresting people 
found with copies of the newsletter. 
In recent weeks, as violent reprisals have forced members of the military 
resistance into hiding, Kuwaiti women have taken on the job of bringing food 
supplies to the resistance fighters and withdrawing cash for them from the 
banks. 
For former policemen and soldiers who are no longer collecting government 
salaries, the women of the resistance have been contacting friends and 
collecting money. They also have been calling on Kuwaiti merchants, collecting 
rice, sugar and tea for the men in hiding. 
Leaders of the military resistance who have left Kuwait said women are going so 
far as to carry weapons and give medical treatment to the resistance fighters. 
Some have become soldiers in the Kuwaitis' mounting psychological warfare 
campaign as well. 
"They go up to the Iraqi soldiers and ask them, 'Why are you here? Why do you 
want to kill our people and destroy our country?' " said one former resistance 
fighter. The soldiers, he said, are usually "perplexed." 
Some Kuwaiti women, Fatima said, have been captured by Iraqi soldiers and 
sexually assaulted. Her nephew, held prisoner in a home occupied by Iraqi 
troops for several weeks, said he and several of his colleagues heard the 
weeping of women every night from a room nearby. 
When the male prisoners were finally released, they saw the source of the 
crying: three Kuwaiti women huddled together in a room in their underwear. The 
men took off their long, white dishdashas and threw them at the women as they 
left. When the soldiers demanded to know why they had done this, her nephew 
told them: "Because they're mine." 
"I don't know how to translate what this means," Fatima said. "It means they 
are my responsibility, they are my family, and it also has a sexual meaning, in 
a way," she said. "He was crying when he told me this." 
Fatima decided to drive out of Kuwait to the Saudi border city of Khafji last 
Tuesday after Iraqi soldiers surrounded and searched her home and began 
following her around Kuwait city. 
She drove through Saudi Arabia as far south as Dammam before the religious 
police stopped her and reminded her that women are not allowed to drive in 
Saudi Arabia. She quietly complied -- just as she did a few days later at the 
airport in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, when she was told that she was not 
allowed to have a glass of water in the main passenger lounge, but would have 
to go to the "family" lounge instead. 
"In Kuwait, I would put my finger in their eyes if anybody says anything like 
that," she said. "In Kuwait, we are allowed to sit in any coffee shop, 
anywhere. But we must be well-behaved guests. If I am invited to your house for 
lunch, I don't change my clothes and go into your bedroom." 
Still, some Kuwaiti women have expressed irritation that this past weekend's 
conference on the future of Kuwait, which concluded Monday when a final 
communique was issued, was held in a place like Saudi Arabia, where joint 
meetings between men and women are forbidden. 
In fact, a woman who identified herself only as Aicha sat boldly in the middle 
of the male delegates during Saturday's opening session, a silk veil demurely 
covering her head, and listened as the crown prince vowed: "The Kuwaiti woman, 
whether she is a mother, a sister or a wife, has confirmed that she is equal to 
men and has participated fully in the resistance, rejecting the occupation. She 
has proven that she is equal to her brothers in Kuwait. I am quite confident 
that she will play a major role and contribute further in our future, freed 
Kuwait." 
Afterward, Aicha confessed that she sneaked into the conference disguised as a 
journalist but said she isn't sure if full political rights for women is a good 
idea. 
"Before, we had democracy between all the people in Kuwait. Now there will be 
more democracy for women," she said. "But we are an Islamic country, and we are 
an Arabic country. The women, we don't need to sit with men and talk, and we 
don't like to vote. When the men do it, it's good for all of us. Everything we 
want, our prime minister will do for us." 
Fatima shrugged and said she fully expects that women will be elected to 
Kuwait's new national assembly after the liberation. 
"Democracy is something that's new for us," she admitted, "but as anything else 
in life, it's always between high tide and low tide. So I think now we have 
quite a good future experience. It had got a little bit stuck. Now, it's 
recovering. I think with this shock we will have a full, complete, bright 
democracy." 
