GALILEO ON PERFECT COURSE; SHUTTLE HAS COOLING TROUBLE 
The Galileo spacecraft was speeding along Thursday toward its eventual 
rendezvous with Jupiter, following a course so perfect that ground controllers 
will not have to make even a minor adjustment for at least 20 days. 
"It's doing good," said Ron Dittemore, a shuttle flight director at the Johnson 
Space Center. 
However, the ghost of Galileo lingered aboard the shuttle Atlantis, which sent 
the 3-ton spacecraft speeding on its historic expedition six hours after the 
shuttle was launched Wednesday from the Kennedy Space Center. It seems that 
Galileo's controversial nuclear generators may have temporarily messed up the 
air conditioning system in the crew's quarters. 
The five astronauts aboard the Atlantis were alternately either a little too 
cool or a little too warm during their first day on orbit, Dittemore said. 
"We're trying to find a happy medium," he said at a press briefing here. 
Galileo carries about 48 pounds of plutonium, which gives off heat as it goes 
through radioactive decay. The heat, in turn, is converted to electricity to 
run the craft's many scientific instruments. 
While it was nestled in the Atlantis' cargo bay, excess heat was removed from 
Galileo by a cooling loop containing water, Dittemore said. The cooling loop 
was integrated into the shuttle's "total cooling system," he said, and it 
apparently added more heat than had been expected. 
That caused condensation in one of the cooling and heating ducts, which 
promptly turned to ice and blocked the system. The ice was eventually melted, 
but the temperature in the shuttle's cabin remained a bit chilly -- in the low 
70s -- Thursday. 
Galileo, meanwhile, was more than 200,000 miles away from Earth on Thursday. 
Its speed, relative to Earth, was 9,400 m.p.h. -- slightly more than half of 
the orbiting speed of the shuttle. 
With their primary mission already accomplished, the five astronauts aboard the 
Atlantis spent Thursday taking photographs of Earth in a program designed to 
examine trouble spots in the planet's environment, such as deforestation in the 
Brazilian rain forest. In addition, they activated a number of experiments, 
including one that will study the damage to the ozone layer that protects Earth 
from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays. 
The shuttle is scheduled to land Monday at Edwards Air Force Base in Southern 
California at 12:38 p.m. 
Navy Capt. Donald E. Williams, 47, is the commander of the Atlantis. The other 
members of the crew are Michael J. McCulley, 46, the pilot, and Shannon W. 
Lucid, 46, Franklin Chang-Diaz, 39, and Ellen S. Baker, 36. 
