CLOUDS OF DISPUTE COVER WORLD WARMING; 
POLITICAL HEAT VS. SCIENTIFIC LIGHT; 
ENVIRONMENT: AS GREENHOUSE POLITICS BECOME MUDDLED, GREENHOUSE SCIENCE GROWS 
MORE CLEAR -- AND OMINOUS. 
"High Cost of Greenhouse Hysteria." 
"Greenhouse Effect Looks Like Just a Lot of Hot Air." 
"Environmentalists, Not Pollution, Are the Real Threat." 
The greenhouse backlash has appeared, as is obvious from these recent newspaper 
headlines. Global climate change has not only been popularized, it has been 
politicized. 
Those already unhappy with the state of the world are using one hot summer to 
call for major social reform. Those traditionally comfortable and conservative 
are resisting. They will probably deny the possibility of climate change until 
they see palm trees growing in New York and rising seas lapping the White House 
steps. 
If we let public discussion of environmental matters degenerate into ideology, 
we will all be losers. The planet does not lean right or left. It follows its 
own laws, which we can understand, at least partially -- and we will need all 
the understanding we can get to deal with the slow, complex, Earth-changing 
phenomenon we call the greenhouse effect. 
Fortunately, as greenhouse politics gets more muddled, greenhouse science is 
becoming more clear. There are maverick scientists with extreme opinions, of 
course, but there is also strong scientific consensus -- strong enough to 
debunk many politically popular greenhouse myths. Here are seven deadly ones: 
Myth 1. "We're not sure there's a greenhouse effect." One of the first Nobel 
Prize winners, the Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius, explained in 1896 how 
greenhouse gases trap the sun's energy and warm the Earth. He warned that one 
of those gases, carbon dioxide (CO2), is released when we burn oil, gas or 
coal. 
Nearly 100 years later his reasoning is completely accepted, and atmospheric 
CO2 has increased by 25%. The main thing changed since Arrhenius' time is that 
we now synthesize gases he never heard of, such as Freon and other 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which are more powerful heat traps than carbon 
dioxide. 
The warming effect of greenhouse gases is not in doubt. Nor is the fact that 
these gases are increasing. They have been measured directly for 30 years, and 
indirectly (from air bubbles buried in polar ice) for 200 years. Different 
gases are increasing at different rates, all of them in upward-rising curves. 
Each year fossil fuel burning, deforestation and pollution release more of them 
into the atmosphere than the year before. 
If we allow these atmospheric changes to continue at their current rates, the 
equivalent of Arrhenius's CO2 doubling will be reached about the year 2030 -- 
when a child born this year is 41 years old. That would produce an average 
global warming of 1.5 to 4.5 degrees centigrade. That range tells you how much 
scientific uncertainty there is -- not in the existence or the direction of 
climate change, but in its exact rate of onset. 
Because scientists talk so much about an equivalent CO2 doubling, people are 
beginning to see doubling as some sort of end-point to the greenhouse warming. 
It is only a calculation point. The warming will not stop there, or anywhere, 
unless we stop it. 
Myth 2. "Last summer's drought was a sure sign of the greenhouse effect." 
Specific weather events at any one place or time are not evidence for or 
against the greenhouse effect. Even the fact that the 1980s saw the five 
hottest years in the past 110 doesn't prove anything. Weather is variable, 
noisy, shifting. A climate change can only be proved by keeping track of 
weather over decades. 
The counterclaim by greenhouse scoffers that the contiguous 48 states have 
cooled doesn't prove anything either. Such statistics represent only 1.5% of 
the Earth's surface. The Earth as a whole has warmed by 0.6 degrees centigrade 
in the past century. 
Myth 3. "There will be time to act when a climate change is measured for sure." 
The climate is the last place the greenhouse effect will show up. That's not 
only because it takes so long to measure climate, but because the oceans and 
ice sheets act as delays or drags. Any climate change we detect now reflects 
what we put into motion decades ago. 
If we want to deal constructively with the greenhouse effect, we have to 
measure not the lagging indicator, climate, but the leading indicators, 
greenhouse gases. Scientists use the word "commitment" to indicate the warming 
portended by the gases already in the atmosphere. So far we are committed to a 
warming of 0.5 to 1.5 degrees centigrade. 
Myth 4. "It will get warmer everywhere." No one really knows what a greenhouse 
world will be like. As ocean and air currents shift, some places will be 
hotter, some colder, some wetter, some drier. Climatologists are using huge 
computer models to sort out what might change where, but the models do not 
agree. Anyone who tells you that the Soviet Union will grow more grain with 
global warming, or that the Midwest will dry up, or that there will be more 
rain in the Sahara, is going out on a limb. The one certainty is that "normal" 
weather will change just about everywhere. 
Myth 5. "We can adapt at reasonable cost." Since we don't know exactly what 
greenhouse weather will be like, easy claims that we can build dikes or move 
the Grain Belt north are just speculation, and uninformed speculation at that. 
The most chilling speech I have heard about greenhouse implications was from a 
senior agricultural expert who pointed out that it takes years to learn local 
conditions well enough to farm successfully. Imagine coping with ever-changing 
weather and pests, with shifting ground water, with irrigation systems 
engineered for obsolete water regimes. Old agricultural traditions will fail. 
New ones cannot form as long as the climate is in flux, perhaps for 100 years 
or more, during which time Third World population is scheduled to double -- and 
then double again. 
If you add up the possible costs of what scientists are projecting -- more 
forceful tropical storms, salt water infiltration of coastal ground waters, 
some rivers rising, others falling, inland droughts, flooding of coasts and 
estuaries -- you ask less about the cost of adapting to all this and more about 
the cost of preventing it. 
Believe it or not, there's good news there. 
Myth 6. "Combating the greenhouse effect will require great, grim sacrifice." 
By some kind of providence, every measure that will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions is worth doing anyway, has other benefits and can be cost-effective. 
For example, here is a list presented last month to an international scientific 
gathering, of greenhouse prevention measures, in order of their effectiveness 
and urgency: 
Use energy much more efficiently and accelerate the transition to solar, wind, 
hydro and biomass energy sources (would also reduce fuel bills, urban smog, 
acid rain, oil spills, toxic wastes and oil imports). 
Phase out CFCs completely and quickly (a partial phase-out is already 
internationally agreed upon, at a leisurely schedule, to fix the "ozone hole"). 
Shift fossil fuel use, away from coal and oil, toward natural gas (would reduce 
many air pollutants). 
Stop deforestation, accelerate reforestation (would protect lumber, pulp and 
other forest resources, reduce soil erosion, flooding, and drought, moderate 
temperatures, preserve endangered species). 
Increase use-efficiency and recycling of all materials and of water (would 
increase energy efficiency, with all the benefits listed above, plus reduce 
municipal solid waste, toxic waste, mine waste, water pollution and materials 
and ground water depletion), 
Practice low-input agriculture (would reduce farm costs, increase energy 
efficiency, restore soils and rural ecosystems, reduce water pollution, improve 
health). 
These measures require tremendous changes in our current, environmentally 
semiconscious ways of doing things. Changes, not sacrifices. Actually 
improvements. 
But if we look at the gains to the whole society and take into account the very 
real social and environmental costs of continuing business as usual -- 
especially the immense costs of not reducing the greenhouse effect -- we would 
see there is no better payoff on the planet than greenhouse prevention. 
Myth 7. "The greenhouse effect is a problem of the rich countries/poor 
countries, capitalist countries/communist countries." This is the favorite 
international political myth, a convenient way of shifting responsibility 
around the world. We point to the Brazilians burning their forest, they point 
at us wasting energy. Western Europe points at inefficient coal-burning in 
Eastern Europe (while the West Germans could save 26 million tons of CO2 
emissions a year just by putting a speed limit on their autobahns). Everyone 
looks nervously at China's plans to burn its huge deposits of coal. The Third 
World says it really has more immediate problems than some future climate 
change. We all suggest that someone else go first. 
If there was ever a problem the whole world has in common, this is it. If we 
let it proceed full-scale, climate change will affect everyone and the effects 
will be devastating. There will not be winners and losers -- only losers. 
Without a sense of global responsibility and justice, we will make a hash of 
this challenge. And we get only one chance -- only over the next decade or two. 
I would see no hope, if the the steps we must take were not possible, 
affordable and beneficial. It's not a matter of allocating unbearable costs, 
but of building a more efficient, less polluted world -- a world worth 
building, greenhouse effect or no greenhouse effect. 
There is a greenhouse effect, though, pushing us toward environmental maturity. 
It's very real. So far only a small amount of it is inevitable. Probably the 
greatest and most dangerous myth we could create about global warming is to 
call it a matter of destiny, rather than a matter of choice. 
CARBON DIOXIDE CONCENTRATION 
Time trend of the concentration of atmospheric CO2, at Mauna Loa Observatory, 
Hawaii. Line follows fluctuations in monthly mean concentrations obtained from 
a continuously recording gas analyzer. 
