ARE THE RIGHT SUBJECTS BEING TESTED?; 
HORSE RACING: OWNER AND BREEDER JIM RYAN SAYS THAT MORE ATTENTION NEEDS TO BE 
PAID TO DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE AT THE TRACK. 
When Jim Ryan gets up to speak, it's usually as much a performance as a speech. 
At a meeting of turf reporters a few days before this year's Kentucky Derby, 
the highly charged Ryan began talking about racing's ills with tears in his 
eyes. The venue was an outdoor picnic at Churchill Downs, and the crowd was 
inattentive and restless. Ryan put two fingers to his mouth and whistled the 
audience to attention. 
Ryan, a breeder and owner of horses whose Ryehill Farm is located in Mt. Airy, 
Md., reflected on that appearance the other day. 
"They gave me an award (the Joe Palmer Award for meritorious service to 
racing), and if I had to do it over, I would just take the award, say thank you 
and get off," Ryan said. "I thought it would be a good time to make an appeal, 
but I was wrong. The Derby is a time for levity, and I picked the wrong time 
for something as serious as what I was talking about." 
Ryan, 57, has long been interested in improving the welfare of those in racing, 
and as he prepares to sell the last of his horses and leave the game, the 
former home builder is making a farewell gesture: Whatever his 19 horses bring 
during an auction at Keeneland in Lexington, Ky., on Nov. 12, he will 
contribute half of that amount toward drug- and alcohol-rehabilitation programs 
and backstretch-related organizations, providing that the industry matches 
those funds. 
Two of the horses in the Ryan consignment, Cefis and Ring Dancer, are stakes 
winners and offspring of Caveat, the colt who won the Belmont Stakes for Ryan 
and his partners in 1983. Ryan estimates that the consignment will net more 
than $2 million. Assuming that projection is realized, and if Ryan's challenge 
is met by race tracks and other organizations, it will be the second time the 
Maryland horseman has contributed a seven-figure amount to the sport. 
In January 1989, Ryan offered $1 million for rehabilitation programs if 50 
tracks -- about half of the national total -- would contribute $20,000 apiece. 
There was no stampede. After a month, 15 tracks had joined the effort, but by 
the end of April the total was stalled at 18 tracks. A professional counselor 
was hired to visit tracks and pitch the program, and finally, by the end of 
November, the matching $1 million had been raised. 
Ryan has given racing a deadline of May 4, Kentucky Derby day, to match half 
the money that his horses bring at Keeneland. 
Despite his altruism, Ryan is not unanimously hailed in racing circles. 
Sounding like an evangelist -- he studied pastoral counseling in college -- he 
spoke at a conference of industry leaders late last year and told them that 
available statistics from tracks indicated that substance abuse in racing is 
three times as frequent as it is among the overall population. Some racing 
officials grumbled that Ryan made it sound as though everybody in racing had an 
addiction. 
Last year, Ryan quit the Jockey Club, the New York group that is heavy on 
bluebloods and one of the most prestigious organizations in racing. Ryan said 
the Jockey Club's foundation for helping backstretch employees has about $7 
million, and during a heated meeting at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., he was denied a 
request to use some of the money. 
"I was told that they were saving the money for a rainy day," Ryan said. "I 
told them that it was pouring out there. After they told me that I should get 
off the committee if I didn't want to participate, I voted with my feet and 
resigned." 
Mike Steele, president of the Horsemen's Benevolent and Protective Assn., which 
represents owners and trainers nationally, said 25% of uncashed betting tickets 
could be used to finance drug and alcohol programs. 
Millions of dollars in tickets go uncashed annually, with the money, depending 
on local laws, going to states, the tracks and the horsemen. Steele's 
suggestion would result in about $5 million a year for programs that he and 
Ryan support. 
"Of the tracks that keep track of substance abuse, 35% to 40% of the licensed 
workers are in trouble," Ryan said. "The (overall) national average is about 
10%." 
The problems of some well known jockeys -- Pat Day, Julie Krone, Chris Antley 
and Pat Valenzuela -- have been documented through the years, but besides 
jockeys, Ryan said industry studies show that exercise riders, who ride horses 
during morning workouts, and assistant starters, who have the dangerous job of 
loading horses into the gate before a race, also have high rates of substance 
abuse. 
"There's a pattern to all of those jobs," Ryan said. "They are all jobs where 
there is an ongoing sense of fear. Of the name jockeys, Pat Day, whose problems 
have been behind him for a long time, has been very vocal about how you can 
lick drugs. Chris Antley and Pat Valenzuela have been less vocal, because they 
are still dealing with putting the pieces (of their lives and careers) back 
together." 
A recent study by the Assn. of Racing Commissioners International showed that 
$27.5 million was spent on animal drug testing -- horses and greyhounds -- last 
year. 
"We should be testing the humans more than we test the horses," said Ryan, who 
recalled an incident that occurred as he left a winner's circle at a Maryland 
track last year. 
A woman approached him and said: "My husband is riding stoned. He's going to 
get killed. Can you help us?" 
The Jockeys' Guild, which represents most of the approximately 2,000 jockeys in 
the United States, is aware of the problem but won't support random testing of 
its riders. 
"This is a dangerous sport, and we certainly don't want to see anybody get away 
with riding and using drugs," said John Giovanni, a former jockey and managing 
director of the guild. (But) riders have rights, too. There is always the 
chance of a mistake with the testing, and we don't want to see a rider branded 
as a junkie because of a mistake. Random testing is supposed to be a deterrent, 
but it didn't work that way for Antley." 
Antley, 24, one of New York's top jockeys, has said his cocaine problems began 
in 1985, when he was riding in New Jersey, a state that tests riders randomly. 
Ryan has been in racing for almost 20 years, and besides his association with 
Caveat, he has won Eclipse Awards with Smart Angle and Heavenly Cause. He said 
he has made money in racing but wants to spend more time with his family and 
friends. He would like to be remembered as someone who left racing with at 
least a seed program for drug and alcohol abusers. 
"One of the reasons there's more of a problem in racing than elsewhere is 
because more than 50% of the horse business involves money that's paid in 
cash," Ryan said. "Cash is the foundation for a (drug-pushing) business that's 
also built on sin." 
