LOAN OKD FOR OLYMPIC TRAINING SITE 
Gov. George Deukmejian Sunday approved a controversial $15-million loan to help 
build a year-round Olympic training center near Chula Vista, but only after 
extracting an unusual written promise from a San Diego nonprofit group to make 
good on the money. 
Deukmejian said he asked for the guarantee from the San Diego National Sports 
Training Foundation before signing into law a bill that dips into the state's 
general fund to help finance the $70-million facility planned for 154 acres 
overlooking the Lower Otay Reservoir. 
Commemorative License Plates 
The measure, sponsored by Sen. William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights), has 
raised eyebrows here because it gives the foundation $5 million during each of 
the next three years but does not specifically require the nonprofit group to 
reimburse the state. 
Instead, Campbell's bill would pay back the loan by selling new Olympic 
Training Center commemorative license plates -- a scheme that has been 
criticized by some legislators as unrealistic and a "give-away." 
An analysis by the Department of Motor Vehicles indicated that, at the rate 
people were willing to buy the plates for $100 a pair, it would take 142 years 
to make up the $15 million. 
However, the bill passed out of the Legislature last month after a personal 
lobbying effort by Campbell, who told his colleagues that a training center 
would be an economic and public-relations boon for California. He also said 
that many former Olympic athletes living in California would be mobilized to 
hawk the license plates and accelerate the pay back. 
Yet the uncertainty of the license plate sales apparently bothered Deukmejian, 
who directed his staff to extract the promise from the foundation. 
"Although I originally had concerns that the source of revenue provided in this 
bill would be insufficient to repay the loan to the state, I have received 
assurances in writing from the San Diego National Sports Training Foundation 
that they will enter into a written contract with the Department of Commerce to 
guarantee repayment of the loan," Deukmejian said Sunday in a message issued 
with the announcement that he had approved the loan. 
"Therefore, I am satisfied that state resources will not be jeopardized by 
enactment of this legislation." 
Details to Be Worked Out 
David Nielsen, director of the San Diego foundation, said Sunday that the 
nonprofit group didn't hesitate to make the loan guarantee when the Department 
of Commerce called him in the last few days with the governor's request. While 
the details of the guarantee are still to be worked out, Nielsen said the 
foundation is "quite willing to put our money into marketing" the proposed 
Olympic Training Center tags. 
"We felt comfortable guaranteeing it (the loan) based on the Los Angeles 
experience in 1984," Nielsen said, referring to the $2 million raised by the 
state from the sale of special license plates during the 1984 Los Angeles 
Summer Olympic Games. 
Even before Campbell introduced his bill for the criticized loan, Deukmejian 
had been approached privately by at least one prominent San Diegan about the 
idea of building an Olympic Training Center near Chula Vista. Developer Ernest 
Hahn, architect of San Diego's downtown redevelopment and a member of the 
sports training foundation board, gave Deukmejian and his wife an aerial tour 
of the proposed training center last year, the governor's press secretary 
confirmed. 
The tour took place Nov. 27, when the Deukmejians were riding in Hahn's plane 
from Long Beach to San Diego to see a 49ers-Chargers football game as a guest 
of Charger owner Alex Spanos, said Kevin Brett, the governor's press secretary. 
Before landing in San Diego, Brett said, Hahn had his plane circle over the 
proposed Olympic training center site for the benefit of the governor. "The 
governor is familiar with the geographic location of the site as a result of 
the tour," Brett said. 
The site, west of the Otay reservoir, was donated by the EastLake Development 
Co., a partnership that includes the politically powerful J.G. Boswell Co. 
agribusiness firm of Los Angeles. It is also contiguous to the former Otay 
Ranch, which was recently purchased by the Baldwin Company, a large Orange 
County development firm. 
Plans for the training facility call for 250,000 square feet of buildings, 
including a 300-bed dormitory and 1.5 million square feet of outdoor training 
areas. Construction is expected to begin in the spring and be completed in 18 
months -- enough time to help American athletes train for the 1992 Summer Games 
in Barcelona. 
Besides the property, private fund-raising efforts by the foundation so far 
have yielded $7 million in pledges, and Nielsen said about $1.2 million of that 
will be collected by the end of the year. 
The legislation signed by Deukmejian requires the foundation to match its $5 
million in state loans each year with private donations, a task that Nielsen 
said he is confident can be performed. 
Overall, Nielsen said Sunday, the $15-million state loan is a "major 
contribution" to the effort to build a training center. 
He also said that the center "will bring significant benefits to the state . . 
. as one of the capitals of international amateur sports activity." 
