SOVIET BRASS SMILE ON U.S. WEAPONRY 
Breaking another Cold War barrier, the Americans opened the gates of two 
military installations in California on Wednesday to the Soviet Union's top 
military official, a jovial man who chatted with Marines, joked with generals 
and admiringly watched the firepower paraded before him. 
"We are on a good will tour," Defense Minister Dimitri Yazov said, beaming. "We 
have come to show the American people that we have sincere and friendly 
feelings toward the Americans." 
High-ranking U.S. and Soviet officials heralded Yazov's visit, the first to the 
West Coast by such a high-ranking Soviet, touting it as glasnost trickling down 
to each nation's stronghold, the military forces. 
Yazov viewed North Island Naval Air Station on San Diego Bay, where he shook 
hands with F-14 Tomcat jet fighter crewmen. The cordial and grandfatherly Yazov 
and his entourage then traveled to the Marine Corps base at Camp Pendleton, 
where a drama of simulated fighting unfolded on the shores of Red Beach. 
As soon as Yazov had taken his seat on a bluff overlooking the dunes, rubber 
boats and amphibious assault craft zipped through the water, depositing men on 
shore. Marines stormed the beach, and planes roared overhead, dropping 
simulated bombs. The ground shook, officials covered their ears, and the 
Marines surged forward, each toting about 70 pounds of equipment. 
A watchful Soviet Adm. Vladimir Z. Khuzhokov, a member of Yazov's entourage, 
said, "It's good. Your boys are just like our boys. Just the same boys." 
Dust swirled, engines roared and yellow smoke bombs clouded the simulated 
combat area. An announcer, first in English and then in Russian, told the 
assembled dignitaries about the attributes of each craft. 
And as the announcer described the capabilities of the CH-46 Sea Knight 
transport helicopter, one Marine pilot watching the ceremonies groaned. "Oh, 
no, don't tell the Russians about that," he said. 
"Here come the Russians. I've been trained to hate Russians," said Rear Adm. 
John W. Adams. "It's kind of odd. Now, I'm welcoming them. It's an initiative 
that can do nothing but help the entire world. Ultimately, if it's successful, 
it would cost me my job -- I think that would be wonderful." 
Many of the Marines seemed pleased with the pat on the shoulder that Yazov gave 
as he walked down the line chatting with the men who had stormed the beach. 
Others showed off the Soviet enamel pin he placed in their hands. 
"He said he hoped we are the best for our service, like his men are for his," 
said Cpl. Robert Denully of Seattle. 
Showing the equipment to the Soviet group violated no security restrictions. 
And officials and experts agreed that it was probably all hardware that the 
Soviet military already knew about. 
"Certainly both sides know everything there is without visiting the sites," 
said Leon Aron, an expert on Soviet affairs with the Heritage Foundation in 
Washington. "But this is public diplomacy. We'll see more of these visits." 
Yazov, who joined the Soviet Army in 1941, was appointed defense minister in 
June, 1987. He replaced 75-year-old Marshal Sergei L. Sokolov, who was fired 
after a West German teen-ager flew a single-engine Cessna from Finland more 
than 400 miles over Soviet territory and landed in Moscow's Red Square, next to 
the Kremlin. 
