COAST SAVINGS' QUARTERLY LOSS IS $24 MILLION 
Coast Savings Financial Inc. on Thursday became the latest California thrift to 
report problems this month, posting a $24.4-million third-quarter loss and 
eliminating its dividend. 
Separately, the Los Angeles-based firm, at the urging of regulators, said it 
will file a plan showing how it will meet tougher federal standards for capital 
that are being phased in through 1994 -- as required by last year's thrift 
bailout law. The action is unusual because Coast is in compliance with the 
standards, albeit barely. Normally, plans governing capital -- the financial 
cushion that institutions maintain to protect against losses -- need to be 
filed only by thrifts failing to meet the standards. 
Coast, parent of Coast Federal Bank, said the plan is being filed to assure 
regulators that it will meet the standards -- which get tougher Jan. 1. The 
thrift's capital is thin, and it has posted losses recently. Through the first 
nine months of the year, it lost $47.2 million. 
Coast's quarterly loss was caused mostly by $61 million that it set aside for 
losses that may occur on loans that turn bad in the future. The action was 
suggested by regulators at the Office of Thrift Supervision and Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corp. Regulators are increasingly concerned about how the softening 
economy and deteriorating real estate market will hurt institutions. 
The money that Coast is allocating is called a "general loan-loss reserve." 
That's something banks have done for years, but it's relatively new to the 
thrift industry, which is being forced to adopt more bank-like standards. 
Historically, thrifts set aside money to cover specific problem loans. The 
FDIC, which is examining thrifts -- as required by last year's savings and loan 
bailout law -- is putting them through tougher examinations. Thrift regulators 
also have tightened their standards. As a result, industry executives expect 
that other thrifts will be forced to take similar actions. 
Coast, the state's 10th-largest thrift, is the third major California S&amp;L 
this month to cut its dividend. CalFed and Glenfed cut their dividends sharply. 
Coast was paying shareholders a quarterly dividend of 10 cents a share. 
Coast Chief Executive Ray Martin said a proposed sale of 27 branches with $1.2 
billion in deposits is moving quickly and there is more than one interested 
buyer. The sale would give a much-needed boost to Coast's capital. 
In the year-earlier third quarter, Coast posted a $92.2-million loss caused by 
a major restructuring. 
