TWO GERMANYS TRADE CHARGES OVER REFUGEES 
East Germany and West Germany exchanged accusations of bad faith Monday over 
their negotiations that allowed more than 6,000 East Germans to go to West 
Germany from Czechoslovakia and Poland over the weekend. 
At the same time, East German refugees continued to crowd into West Germany's 
embassies in Prague and Warsaw. 
By nightfall Monday, more than 1,000 new would-be emigrants from East Germany 
were reported to have entered the West German Embassy compound in Prague. About 
5,000 had been there before Saturday's surprise exodus. 
Sent to Guest Houses 
About 150 East Germans made their way into the West German Embassy in Warsaw, 
where they were registered and sent off to guest houses on the outskirts of the 
city. 
The Communist government of East Germany said in East Berlin that the Bonn 
government had broken its promise to close its embassies in Prague and Warsaw 
in order to keep additional East Germans from flooding in. 
The official East German news agency ADN said that East Germany had "resolutely 
protested" that West Germany, after promising to halt the influx, was instead 
allowing additional refugees to enter its embassies. 
An East German official, Horst Neubauer, was quoted as calling Bonn's action "a 
gross breach of trust." 
Political observers here think the East Germans now believe that their 
"humanitarian gesture" in allowing their citizens to leave for the West may 
have backfired. ADN said that Neubauer, the East German official, was insisting 
that the new East German refugees in Prague and Warsaw "be ejected and returned 
to East Germany." 
In reply, Juergen Chrobog of the West German Foreign Ministry denied that any 
deal had been made to close his government's embassies as part of the agreement 
to allow those already in Prague and Warsaw to go by special train to West 
Germany. 
Meanwhile, Hans Klein, chief spokesman for the West German government, said 
that Chancellor Helmut Kohl has been "in constant contact" with Soviet 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev concerning the refugees crisis, which has soured 
East-West relations in Bonn, East Berlin, Prague, Warsaw and Budapest. He 
offered no details. 
6,300 Left Saturday 
In the agreement reached between the two Germanys, about 6,300 East Germans 
were allowed to board trains in Prague and Warsaw late Saturday and to proceed 
through East Germany to reception centers in West Germany. 
Chrobog, the West German Foreign Ministry official, said the embassy in Prague 
was closed for a time Sunday because extensive renovation was needed after the 
thousands of East Germans had been living in the buildings and on the grounds. 
"It is in an appalling state," he said. 
But when additional scores of East Germans started showing up, he said, "it 
broke our heart not to let them in. We could not leave them standing outside." 
As for the future, Chrobog said, "it is West German policy that any German 
citizen turning up at a West German embassy for help will be helped." West 
Germany recognizes only a single German citizenship, which entitles an 
individual, whether from the east or west, access to Bonn's missions. 
East German Anger 
Chrobog's statement was sure to anger the East German government. Its citizens 
need no special documents to travel to Czechoslovakia, and Prague, which is 
only about 60 miles from the East German frontier, could continue to be an 
unofficial exit point for East Germans headed for West Germany. 
The area around the West German Embassy in Prague was clogged with cars 
abandoned by East Germans seeking asylum in the embassy compound. Other East 
Germans, burdened with suitcases, hiked through Prague on Monday looking for 
the embassy. Their numbers grew as trains arrived from East Germany. 
"We are losing the equivalent of a village a day," an East German official 
said. 
Also, the refugee crisis, which began in May when Hungary opened its frontier 
with Austria, threatens to spoil the long-planned celebration of the 40th 
anniversary of the founding of the East German state on Saturday. 
West German officials said they told the Czechoslovak government in a protest 
filed Monday that the police in Prague should not try to prevent East Germans 
from entering the grounds of the West German Embassy there. 
Earlier in the day, police seized two men trying to get into the embassy. Both 
were released after a West German diplomat intervened and escorted them into 
the compound through the front gate. 
Shortly before that, police were seen beating and grabbing at four East German 
youths trying to get into the compound through the rear garden. But by 
afternoon, refugees could walk in through the front gate. 
The Bonn government asked East Germany to allow the 1,000 East Germans who 
entered the embassy in Prague on Monday to join those who were allowed to 
proceed to the West. It said in a statement issued by Rudolf Seiters of the 
chancellery that only a change for the better in the Communist regime could 
stem the flow of emigrants. 
"Now that East Germany has made the basic decision on letting refugees leave, I 
would like to ask it to deal with this problem as well," Seiters declared. "The 
East German leadership must recognize that it must change course if its young 
people are not to run away." 
The East German regime has called East Germans who fled to the West 
"irresponsible, anti-social, criminals and traitors." 
East German Offer Stands 
In East Berlin, special negotiator Wolfgang Vogel said the offer he extended 
last week still holds: If the East Germans in West German missions return home, 
they will be guaranteed legal emigration within six months. 
But few appeared to be heeding his words. 
Czechoslovakia and Poland, like Hungary earlier, are caught in a dilemma: They 
have signed treaties with East Germany that commit them to refuse to allow East 
Germans to exit without credentials, but at the same time they do not want to 
offend West Germany, a major trading partner and supplier of economic aid. 
The Soviet Union appears to be opposed to the East German position. It has 
called on East German leader Erich Honecker to undertake Soviet-style reforms. 
In this light, Western diplomats believe, Soviet President Gorbachev's 
scheduled visit to East Berlin on Friday and Saturday promises to be tense. 
