CHENEY THREATENS HE'LL URGE VETO IF 'STAR WARS' IS CUT 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, in a spirited defense of the proposed "Star 
Wars" missile defense system, said Thursday he will urge President Bush to veto 
the 1990 defense appropriations bill if it provides "inadequate funding" for 
the program. 
Cheney's comments came as House and Senate lawmakers entered their fifth week 
of negotiations on the military funding measure. Differences between the two 
chambers on "Star Wars" funding have been one of the most divisive issues in 
the conference. 
Cheney, a former Republican House leader who was an ardent supporter of the 
program on Capitol Hill, refused to specify what level of funding would prompt 
his veto recommendation. 
The House has proposed to cut the Bush Administration's $4.6-billion "Star 
Wars" request to slightly less than $3 billion for the fiscal year that began 
Oct. 1. The Senate has approved a budget of just over $4 billion. 
Several Democratic lawmakers reacted skeptically to Cheney's threats. By not 
specifying a minimum funding level, they maintained, Cheney implicitly left the 
figure open to negotiation. They said the defense secretary's threats might 
have been designed to appease conservative backers of the program rather than 
to boost the 1990 funding figure. 
In a speech before a Washington-based defense group, Cheney touted the 
technological progress of the Strategic Defense Initiative, as the "Star Wars" 
program is formally known, saying it has proven that space weapons can be built 
to blunt a Soviet first strike and provide U.S. cities with a defense against a 
Third World missile assault. 
"An effective strategic defense could be the single most important military 
bequest this generation could make to the future," he said. 
In another effort to solidify support for "Star Wars," the Pentagon is 
circulating the results of two scientific studies that favorably assess the 
Pentagon's proposed development of missile-killing bullets known as "brilliant 
pebbles" as an initial space-based defense. 
According to knowledgeable defense officials, the Defense Science Board, a team 
of independent technical experts, recently told senior Pentagon officials the 
brilliant pebbles proposal is feasible. A second advisory board of independent 
scientists, known as the Jasons, also concluded that brilliant pebbles is 
worthy of further research, the officials said. 
At a recent Washington symposium, however, the director of the Jasons' 
brilliant pebbles study was highly critical of the project. John M. Cornwall, a 
physicist at UCLA, recently told the American Assn. for the Advancement of 
Science that brilliant pebbles could be countered by the Soviets. He added that 
despite claims by the program's proponents, the system could not be built 
cheaply using components already readily available. 
Cheney, however, offered a buoyant assessment of the program. 
"I am very encouraged by the potential contribution that brilliant pebbles can 
make to strategic defenses," Cheney said. 
The defense secretary also sought to deflect charges by the program's opponents 
that the Bush Administration's scaled-back plans for "Star Wars" would result 
in an imperfect defense that would allow nuclear warheads to leak through. 
"I call on the critics to cease their attempts to make perfection the enemy of 
the good, and let's get down to the real debate about how defenses fit into our 
strategy for nuclear stability, deterrence and arms reductions." 
The Pentagon believes that the first-phase of a "Star Wars" deployment, which 
could begin as early as 1994 "could provide effective population defense 
against limited missile launches," Cheney said. 
