LET CLAIMS BYPASS PANEL, COURT URGED 
The California Supreme Court was urged Friday to allow job-bias claimants to 
bypass the state's civil rights agency and file suit directly in court, where 
they could obtain far larger damage awards. 
Attorneys for two women who charged that their employer demanded sexual favors 
as the price of keeping their jobs told the justices that state prohibitions 
against employment discrimination permit such suits to deter bias. 
"The highest expression of public policy in California is through its 
Constitution . . . and the public policy of this state is against 
discrimination," David C. Anton, a Berkeley lawyer representing civil rights 
groups, said during a court hearing in Los Angeles. 
Attorneys for employers countered that workers charging bias should be required 
to resort first to the state Fair Employment and Housing Department, the agency 
established to review such claims, offer mediation and conciliation and promote 
settlements. Those cases can result only in awards by the Fair Employment and 
Housing Commission of back pay, reinstatement and compensatory damages -- 
although the commission's authority to award such damages is under challenge. 
Steven G. Drapkin of Los Angeles, a lawyer for the Merchants and Manufacturers 
Assn., said that sending bias claims to the agency promoted resolution of 
disputes without resorting to the courts. "It gives employers who screw up an 
opportunity to make ameliorative efforts," Drapkin said. 
The case has drawn considerable attention from employers, who have expressed 
concern that allowing claimants to bypass the agency will result in a flurry of 
additional lawsuits seeking big punitive damage awards. One study showed that 
California juries sided with employees in 70% of the cases, granting an average 
award of $652,100 in one five-year period. 
Employment-rights advocates reply that the threat of such punishment is the 
best deterrent to wrongful acts by employers. 
The case arose from a lawsuit by Emma Rojo and Teresa Maloney charging that 
they suffered emotional distress from sexual harassment and improper demands by 
Dr. Irwin H. Kliger of Los Angeles, their former employer. Kliger has denied 
the allegations. 
A Los Angeles Superior Court judge dismissed the case because Rojo and Maloney 
had failed to go first to the fair employment department. But a state Court of 
Appeal reinstated the suit, saying the state Constitution allowed civil rights 
claims to be filed directly in court. 
The appellate panel called the agency's process "largely ineffectual," noting 
that the overwhelming majority of the 8,000 cases filed annually were dropped, 
settled or otherwise resolved without a formal hearing. Forcing claimants to go 
through the department would "diminish, rather than enhance" their remedies for 
discrimination, the panel said. 
