NORIEGA PROMISED FREEDOM TO REBELS; 
DICTATOR BEGINS DRIVE TO OUST FOES IN REGIME 
Panamanian dictator Manuel A. Noriega announced a sweeping crackdown against 
his foes inside the government Thursday, two days after surviving a coup 
attempt by junior military officers. 
Speaking in a defiant and angry tone before 2,700 cheering supporters, the 
general railed against enemies in the Panama Defense Forces, the political 
opposition, the civil service, the state-controlled broadcast media and the 
Bush Administration, which he again accused of abetting the revolt. 
"Panama has to live in a moment of emergency, and that emergency means that 
here there will be no room for traitors," he told a crowded school auditorium 
in Santiago, a rice-growing center in southwest Panama. "How can we have a 
democracy when we're under so much pressure?" 
Opposition Aides Seized 
As Noriega spoke, security forces in the capital surrounded the Authentic 
Liberal Party headquarters and arrested two aides to Guillermo Endara, the 
opposition leader who was fasting inside to protest the annulment of the May 7 
presidential election that international observers said he won. 
The raid, in which one shot was fired into the air, sent opposition leaders who 
had come out of hiding Thursday back to a semi-clandestine existence. 
In an unusual maneuver that may indicate lingering internal conflict, about 20 
Defense Forces troops wearing camouflage fatigues and black greasepaint 
surrounded offices of the National Intelligence Directorate, Noriega's 
investigative police force. The helmeted troopers carried M-16 and AK-47 rifles 
and tear gas canisters. 
A Defense Forces spokesman said the troopers' presence was justified but did 
not explain why. "We did have an emergency situation the day before yesterday," 
he said. 
Foreign diplomats said there were unconfirmed reports of new arrests of 
soldiers involved in the five-hour seizure of Noriega's downtown headquarters, 
as well as purges of suspected rebel sympathizers from public ministries. 
The Ministry of Health, where cheering was heard in the halls during Tuesday's 
uprising, fired some of its employees, one diplomat said. 
While Noriega's speech warned of action against a wide range of adversaries, it 
was most specific in its reference to disloyal employees of the state. 
"We have to make a package of emergency war laws," he declared. "We must 
abolish those laws that protect the enemy within the government." 
Strongman's Thanks 
Thanking those who backed him during the uprising, Noriega added: "In the name 
of the functionaries who acted with dignity, we have to throw out those who did 
not. We have to throw them out to create vacancies for people who do not have 
jobs." 
He urged each civil servant to act as a "prosecutor" and inform on disloyal 
co-workers. "We are going to make a list, because there are many people outside 
the government who need to be included." 
Teachers, he said, will be watched closely because "they are the most vicious 
and traitorous." Without naming them, he said some state-controlled radio and 
television stations were bribed by the coup plotters to broadcast their 
communique and will be closed. 
The 51-year-old general, wearing tropical mufti and a floppy white hat, threw 
daisies into the crowd of supporters, who waved Panamanian flags and chanted 
"People power!" 
A diplomat said that Noriega had asked his aides for a list of people who 
called to congratulate him after the uprising, along with the time that each 
called. 
Arrests Reported 
The government has reported arresting three members of Noriega's general staff 
and 34 soldiers since the coup attempt, in which it said 10 rebels died. 
Civilian opposition leaders said they believed the death toll was at least 
three times that figure. 
In his first extensive comments on the coup attempt, Noriega did not say why 
his intelligence chief and two other top aides were among those arrested. 
While acknowledging that he was in his downtown headquarters when the company 
assigned to guard it started the revolt, he offered few details of what 
happened there, leaving it unclear whether he was ever in the rebels' hands. 
At one point, he said that he told the rebels, who demanded his removal as 
Defense Forces commander in chief: "You are going to have to kill me first." 
Then, warning them that loyalist forces were moving in, he recalled saying: 
"Not even the death of the commander can stop this movement." 
Noriega said the rebels were backed by the United States "with its money, its 
bribes and its advice" in what ended as "another Bay of Pigs." 
Noriega's Accusations 
He repeated his government claim that the U.S. Southern Command, from bases 
near his headquarters, blocked access roads with tanks three hours before the 
uprising. And, in a new accusation, he said that U.S. Cobra attack helicopters 
tried unsuccessfully to turn back Panamanian air force jets flown by loyalist 
pilots toward the besieged headquarters. 
Brushing off Washington's denials, he said: "Don't be hypocritical. The North 
Americans were involved in this coup." 
He said American officials were on the phone to opposition leaders during the 
coup attempt "to divide up the new government." 
Opposition activists denied knowing in advance about the coup. They said they 
believed the plotters were interested only in changing the military high 
command and apparently did not share their goal of restoring a democracy and 
civilian supremacy. 
Even so, they expressed a belief that the coup attempt had furthered their 
goals by weakening Noriega's grip on the 14,000-member Defense Forces. 
"They are in their moment of greatest weakness and disintegration," said 
opposition spokesman Ricardo Arias Calderon. "It may take weeks to sort out the 
consequences of this crisis, which are still unpredictable." 
Arias, who was one of Endara's running mates in the May election, said he has 
been telephoning Latin American leaders to urge them to take stronger action 
against Panama in upcoming regional forums. Such diplomatic pressure has been 
weak and ineffective so far. 
The two men spoke to dozens of reporters in Endara's party headquarters after 
hiding since the coup attempt to avoid death threats by pro-Noriega radio 
commentators. 
Endara was in the 16th day of a hunger strike to promote an opposition-led tax 
revolt to cut the government's funds. Taking only water and vitamin pills, the 
portly, double-chinned politician said he had lost 230 pounds and now weighed 
245. 
About an hour after the press conference ended, riot police appeared in the 
street outside while plainclothes intelligence agents entered the party 
headquarters. They nabbed Carlos Bares, an unarmed bodyguard, and Melvin 
Ceballos, a press agent for the party, witnesses said. 
The police then sealed off the building for two hours, barring anyone from 
leaving or entering. 
"They always want to intimidate the Panamanian people," Endara said. "One of 
the reasons they did this was to intimidate not only me but the whole 
population." 
