COLUMN LEFT; 
A COUNTRY DIMINISHED IN POSSIBILITY; 
THERE IS ROT. BUT OUR PROBLEMS ARISE FROM HUMAN FOLLY AND CAN BE RESOLVED BY 
HUMAN EFFORT. 
There once was a country called America -- imperfect, scarred by spasmodic 
violence and large injustice -- but constituted by a common purpose, a belief 
in ever-enlarging opportunity for a free people. 
That nation is rapidly disappearing. It is being destroyed, not only by its 
public leadership, but by all those able to influence the course of events; 
even by those who could have acted or spoken out, but chose to remain silent. 
We must all share responsibility for the incredible waste and extravagance, the 
rampant greed and disregard for long-term consequences, that have characterized 
all of our public life and much of our private life over the past two decades. 
We have danced with the piper, and now the piper must be paid. 
If a house deteriorates it can usually be restored with fresh paint or a 
modicum of carpentry. But if the foundation goes there is nothing on which to 
rebuild. And the American foundation is being eroded, and with it the illusion 
that distress is merely cyclical, a belief we cling to despite the irrefutable 
evidence of history that permanent decline has been a constant feature in the 
story of nations and empires. 
And the rot at the foundation is visible and spreading. We continue to 
accumulate an already unmanageable debt; our industries have become less 
productive and competitive. Finance -- the source of future investment -- is in 
disarray. 
More than 40 million citizens are now below the so-called poverty level. They 
have been are virtually eliminated from the base of mass demand and savings on 
which our economy depends. Our educational structure is failing to prepare 
citizens to play a productive role in the life of the country. 
The approaching revolution in American politics is fueled by a growing 
awareness that the political structure has contributed to the accelerating 
cycle of waste and decline. For a decade Democrats and Republicans alike have 
sown the seeds of disaster. Indeed, we no longer have a two-party system. There 
is only one party: the Washington Party. And it has been thoroughly corrupted 
by private wealth, seeking, immediate profit at the expense of long-term 
investment in America's future. 
Many, perhaps most citizens, know this to be true. What we call disillusionment 
or voter apathy is a direct consequence of this awareness. Many people believe 
that who wins a particular election, whether for mayor or president, makes 
little difference to their lives or their hopes for the future. And they are 
right: It has made little difference. However, people are not indifferent to 
personal distress, fear about future prospects, or their own loss of connection 
with the American community. Indeed, they are angry, bitter and confused. They 
are, therefore, ripe for demagogues -- for men willing to assault adversaries, 
real or illusory, and offer assurance that they possess answers. 
What was once called the left -- the progressive, populist sector of American 
political life -- is virtually non-existent. Unless there is a revival, the 
emergence of a public movement that puts traditional values of equal 
opportunity at the top of its agenda, that is willing to rebuild our economic 
foundation, then the future belongs to the harbingers of a permanent class 
society and increasing public oppression. 
In little more than a decade we have betrayed the hope of centuries -- the 
promise that freedom would companion ever-enlarging opportunity for all. This 
was a promise, an idea, a purpose, a dream that once fired the imagination of 
the globe. It is being sacrificed, not merely to blind exploitation of the 
present at the expense of our future, but to a failure of imagination, of 
empathy, an erosion of the binding impulse of the human heart to consider each 
individual life worthy only if it contributes to the lives of our fellow 
citizens, those now among us and those yet to be born. 
It is possible that we may be the first generation of Americans to bequeath the 
future -- our children and their descent -- a country diminished in 
possibility. 
But our problems were not divinely ordained. They are the creation of human 
folly; and they can be resolved by human effort. That effort will will require 
us to accept a sacrifice in our living standards while we divert our resources 
-- money and vitality -- to building a nation capable of enriching the life of 
our future, a country able to bind to itself the mounting numbers of 
impoverished outcasts. 
To accomplish this will require specific, tangible measures. But they are not 
beyond our capacity, only beyond our will. We have the resources and we have 
the people -- the same kind of people -- ready to respond and to act if we are 
fortunate enough to find leadership intelligent and courageous enough to point 
the way. 
