DECOMPOSED BODY MAY BE THAT OF MISSING GIRL 
The discovery of decomposed remains in the Arizona desert may signal the end of 
a three-state search for a 7-year-old girl who was last seen alive Oct. 2 in 
Bullhead City, Ariz., with her suspected abductor, who was later arrested by 
police in Oceanside. 
Arizona authorities say that the body -- found in a shallow grave Friday on the 
Fort Mohave Indian Reservation -- may be that of Rebecca Lanning. The girl who 
disappeared after riding a ferry with a man -- identified as Timothy P. 
Quinton, 24, a transient from South Carolina -- across the Colorado River to 
Bullhead City. 
An autopsy conducted Tuesday in Tucson by the Pima County coroner should reveal 
the identity of the victim and the cause of death, said George Olsen of the 
coroner's office. The results of the autopsy are expected to be available early 
next week. 
The discovery of the body about 10 miles north of Bullhead City was reported to 
tribal police on the Indian reservation, said Jewell Potter, a spokeswoman for 
the Mohave County Sheriff's Department. Two men searching for scrap metal 
"detected a strong odor" and found the grave, Potter said. 
Accompanied by detectives from Bullhead City, Mohave County authorities 
uncovered the nude remains of a young girl, Potter said. The shallow grave was 
situated just off a dirt road used to enter an illegal dump, she said. Potter 
said the body was partially covered with pieces of scrap metal. 
"There's probably a good likelihood it's her (the Lanning girl) but there's no 
way to confirm that yet," said Steve Chenoweth of the FBI's Phoenix office. 
"Assuming that it is her, the federal government has no authority to 
prosecute," he said, explaining that no interstate transit laws were apparently 
violated since the child was reported missing in Arizona. The role of the FBI, 
according to Chenoweth, will be to assist local authorities in investigating 
the case. 
Quinton was arrested in Oceanside Oct. 7 on suspicion of auto theft and was 
returned to Arizona last week. He is now being held on suspicion of kidnaping 
in the Mohave County Jail in Kingman. Quinton, whose bail has been set at 
$250,000, has refused to cooperate with authorities, Potter said. 
Evidence gleaned from Quinton's car by FBI agents in San Diego County has been 
forwarded to an FBI laboratory Washington for analysis, Chenoweth said. Results 
that could link Quinton with the Lanning girl's disappearence may take up to 
three weeks to materialize, he said. 
The girl was living in a car with her mother and two other children in 
Laughlin, Nev., when she reportedly accompanied Quinton on a ferry ride across 
the Colorado River to Bullhead City. Rebecca's mother, Cynthia McGee, told 
authorities that she allowed the child to make the trip with Quinton, whom the 
mother had met a few days earlier. 
