NEW VACCINES FOR CHILDHOOD ILLS PROPOSED 
A vaccine that would be the nation's first for chicken pox has been submitted 
for federal approval, and a new whooping cough vaccine with less risk of side 
effects may follow soon. 
Chicken pox strikes more than 3 million Americans a year, mostly children. 
While it is generally just bothersome, a small fraction of patients suffer harm 
to the central nervous system or other complications such as pneumonia or 
bacterial infections. About 175 Americans a year die from such problems. 
Some calculations suggest that given the medical costs of complications, a 
chicken pox vaccine can make economic sense for society as a whole. 
Merck Sharpe &amp; Dohme of West Point, Pa., in August asked the Food and Drug 
Administration to approve its vaccine, which Stanley Plotkin, chairman of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics said is already used in Japan and Europe. 
One question is whether a childhood inoculation will lose its effectiveness in 
adulthood, a particular concern because chicken pox is generally more serious 
when it strikes adults. 
"We would all like more data" on the duration of immunity, Plotkin said. 
Studies have shown no problem up to 10 years after inoculation, and vaccinated 
people who do get chicken pox later appear to get milder cases, he said. 
The vaccine contains a weakened version of the chicken pox virus, which in its 
natural form causes a lifelong nerve infection that can erupt into herpes 
zoster, commonly called shingles. Studies suggest that vaccinated people run a 
lower risk of later shingles than do people who had chicken pox, Plotkin said. 
The standard vaccine for whooping cough, called pertussis, is given in early 
childhood as part of the diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis, or DTP, vaccine. 
About half of children who get the DTP vaccine run a fever, with swelling or 
soreness at the injection site in 40% to 50%, chiefly caused by the pertussis 
portion of the vaccine, according to one large study. 
The fever can cause convulsions, usually not a serious problem but still 
upsetting for parents. 
In contrast, recent research found that fever appeared in only about 5% of 
children vaccinated with a new "acellular" pertussis vaccine, and localized 
reactions were minimal, said James Cherry of the UCLA School of Medicine. 
Lederle Laboratories of Wayne, N.J., may be ready by early next year to ask the 
FDA to approve the new vaccine, a spokesman said. The immunization, which 
eventually would become part of the DTP, is already used in Japan, he said. 
The infectious disease committee of the pediatrics academy recently urged the 
FDA to approve the vaccine, but only for the booster shots given after age 1, 
Plotkin said. Experts disagree on whether it works as well as the standard 
version when administered before that age, he said. 
The DTP vaccine is recommended at 2 months, 4 months and 6 months, with 
boosters at either 15 months or 18 months, and again before entering school at 
ages 4 to 6 years. 
The current DTP vaccine has been dogged by concerns that its whooping cough 
component can cause brain damage, including mental retardation and movement 
difficulties. 
That is "a highly controversial area," Plotkin said. "My opinion is that there 
is no solid evidence that it causes brain damage." 
In any case, the Lederle spokesman said, it is too soon to tell whether the new 
vaccine will affect rates of brain damage alleged to result from the current 
vaccine. 
