HOW TO TRAIN AN 1,800-POUND MOVIE STAR; 
WHAT IT TAKES TO TURN A KODIAK INTO A SCREEN SENSATION 
A breath of frosty morning air gently sweeps through the valley, rustling 
brittle autumn leaves and sending a flurry tumbling down the mountainside in an 
orange, yellow and red waterfall. They settle at the base of a mountain, not 
far from a log cabin that was hand-framed by Mormon pioneers in 1879. 
Doug and Lynne Seus are relaxing inside the restored cabin as their son Clint 
Youngreen prepares a fire in a blackened pot-belly stove. Together, the three 
raise and train wild animals for the movie industry on a seven-acre spread 
located about an hour's drive east of Salt Lake City -- and civilization. 
A timber wolf howling outside is soon joined by a chorus of a dozen more. The 
wolves are being prepared by another trainer for director Chris Menges' film 
version of Jack London's novel "White Fang." Doug Seus peers through a window 
and motions to the majestic landscape outside. "This is all spiritless, silent 
scenery," he says, a tinge of sorrow in his husky voice. "The true magic is not 
here any more." 
The missing element Doug Seus is talking about is the endangered brown bear, 
specifically the grizzly, an animal that roamed the countryside freely until it 
was hunted down as vermin by settlers with repeating rifles in the early 1920s. 
"We become placid, mechanical robots in land that does not have that great 
bear," he continues. "You use senses in grizzly country that you never used 
before. Your sense of smell, your eyes, everything is more acute." 
"The natural man takes over," Lynne Seus says. 
But there is at least one brown bear left in Utah. A tremendous cage with heavy 
steel bars sits in the center of the family's animal compound. It is home to 
Bart, a shaggy 12-year-old behemoth who tops the scale at 1,800 pounds and, 
when standing, towers nearly 10 feet. Bart is a Kodiak bear -- cousin to the 
grizzly -- and the world's largest land-dwelling carnivore. The custom-built 
cage is the only way that Bart is allowed to legally live in the state of Utah. 
Under the Seus family's tutelage, Bart stars opposite a baby bear cub in "The 
Bear," a Tri-Star release that opens Wednesday. The film is the personal 
project of French director Jean-Jacques Annaud, who artfully demonstrated that 
spoken language is not a necessary component of modern cinema in 1981's "Quest 
for Fire." 
In "The Bear," Annaud carries the idea of nonverbal communication a step 
further with a motion picture shot entirely from an animal's point of view. 
Based on James Oliver Curwood's 1916 novel "The Grizzly King," it tells of an 
orphan bear cub who befriends a solitary grizzly, and the two hunters who 
relentlessly pursue them. 
The $25-million European production reached epic proportions in the wilds of 
the Italian Dolomites and the Bavarian Alps as the 200-man crew battled nature. 
Director of photography Philippe Rousselot ("Dangerous Liaisons") shot 1 
million feet of footage for a film that required seven years to plan and 
execute. The project employed three full-grown bears, a dozen bear cubs, one 
golden eagle, two cougars, four deer, five grass snakes, 10 Dobermans, 18 
turtle doves, 20 newts, 100 frogs, 300 trout, 900,000 bees -- the list 
stretches on. After shooting, a cacophony of animal roars, grunts, squeaks, 
squawks, yawns and whimpers was digitally sampled and recorded, then carefully 
laid onto an intricate sound track, consuming the manpower of 30 technicians 
over 10 months. 
For his part in the film, Doug Seus achieved what was believed to be 
biologically impossible. Adult brown bears are inherently cannibalistic and 
commonly eat bear cubs that they encounter in the woods. Because of this, 
Annaud commissioned Muppets creator Jim Henson to design remote-control 
animatronic bears to double for the big bear and the little bear. But with 
positive conditioning, Seus broke through Bart's predatory instincts, enabling 
the bears to work side-by-side and opening the door for an unexpected offscreen 
friendship to develop. The synthetic bears were used only in scenes that 
depicted violence. 
"The Bear" opened on 400 French screens late last year, one week after "Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit." The antics of Disney's animated rabbit were no match for 
Annaud's hometown popularity and the real-life charm of a bear cub and his 
adult companion. "The Bear" swatted aside "Roger Rabbit" in its route to a 
$100-million-plus worldwide gross. Meanwhile, folks at Tri-Star -- which is 
distributing the film in the United States and Canada -- set their sights for a 
fall release, when the box office is generally slower. 
"November seemed to be a fairly clear period of time, before the big crunch of 
Christmas product," said former Columbia chief Frank Price, whose newly formed 
Price Entertainment acquired "The Bear" for Tri-Star. "We have a wonderful film 
starring bears, and as appealing as our stars are, I think some of the press 
would prefer to interview Robert Redford. So we have to make sure we open at a 
time when we can get the attention of the press and the public." 
This week, "The Bear" will be unleashed on 800 screens across the nation. The 
question is, will American movie audiences take the bait? 
"When people ask what the film is about, and I say that bears are the stars, 
they cannot think of what it is, they think maybe it is a documentary or a 
cartoon," Annaud said last week from his room at a Bel-Air hotel. "I see 
puzzlement in their eyes. Because people like categories. They like to be 
reassured with a formula." 
The 47-year-old Annaud, who directed some 500 television commercials in Europe 
before turning to films, spoke with measured words. In France, his movies are 
national treasures, but in America they are curious baubles. His first one, 
"Black and White in Color," was released in 1976 and received an Oscar for best 
foreign-language film. The prehistory adventure "Quest for Fire" was a modest 
success in the United States. His next film was 1986's "The Name of the Rose," 
a medieval mystery story starring Sean Connery. It was a blockbuster in Europe, 
but failed to generate much box office in the United States. 
Annaud's confidence in "The Bear" is unwavering. "Nobody is prepared for what 
they see when they come to see the film," he said. "This is the whole problem 
of the film -- at the same time it is the fun of it. My pleasure is to think 
that I am trying to push to the very limit the possibilities of film drama." 
Having delved into the feelings of primitive man in "Quest for Fire," Annaud 
wanted to explore the deeper currents of human emotion that he believes are 
common to superior species of animals. Annaud enlisted the services of "Quest 
for Fire" screenwriter Gerard Brach, an agoraphobic who once spent 20 years 
without leaving the confines of his apartment. Brach sent Annaud a copy of "The 
Grizzly King," one of his favorite books as a child. Annaud was enthralled by 
the rich details he found in the adventure story. 
Brach wrote a screenplay and Annaud met with Seus in 1984 to make sure that 
Bart could perform what would be required of him -- to limp down a rocky ravine 
on three legs, wallow in the mud, catch trout with his paws, climb steep 
slopes, rub his back against trees. After that, Brach's screen adaptation of 
"The Grizzly King" was turned into a 382-page story board with 1,700 images, 
mapping out the fine points of each scene. The pictorial script also served as 
a communications tool on location for the international film crew comprising 
technicians from France, Germany, Italy and the United States. 
Once the intricate details of the production were worked out, the film's 
proposed budget began to notch steadily skyward. Fortunately, Annaud was 
cushioned from a fall by the deep pockets of French producer Claude Berri, the 
founder of RENN Productions. Berri, who felt a passion for "The Bear," fronted 
the film with money he made producing and directing the successful "Jean de 
Florette" and "Manon of the Spring." Berri's dictum: "What is important is not 
what a movie costs, but what it grosses." 
"We were afforded the luxury to wait as long as we wanted and roll the film as 
long as we needed to treat the animals like star actors," Annaud said. "I was 
very proud of the moments when the little bear falls asleep in front of the 
camera or wakes up in front of the camera. Those moments cannot be cheated. You 
need a little bear who is tired. 
"In one scene, the little bear snuggles up to her dead mother (which was 
actually a stuffed bear)," he continued. "To get the cub used to that, we would 
spray dew all around the stuffed bear, and then we would put a little warming 
device under its fur. So for weeks the little bear would cuddle up to that 
space to sleep. My trainers would say, 'We're going to play with the little 
bear. When she's fed up we will give her double portions of rice and raisins, 
and then she will be tired.' But we had to play with her for almost 10 hours. 
It wasn't until the end of the day, at sunset, when she felt like yawning. Then 
it was magic." 
After spending almost six months shooting with bears, Annaud grew to suspect 
that "The Grizzly King" was rooted in an actual encounter with a grizzly. When 
he arrived in Los Angeles last week, Annaud's belief was confirmed in a letter 
sent to him by the author's granddaughter, Amy Bajakian. It read: "The book 
'The Grizzly King' was based on the real-life experience my grandfather had 
while hunting in British Columbia. While tracking a bear he had wounded, he 
lost his rifle down a cliff. The bear returned, confronted him and then left 
him alone. This resulted in a soul-searching reassessment of the meaning of his 
life, and life in general." 
That letter had a special meaning for Annaud, who experienced a similar tense 
moment on the set. While posing in front of Bart for a publicity photo, Annaud 
suddenly swung around and pointed the viewfinder hanging around his neck at the 
Kodiak. Annaud thought it would make a good photograph. Bart perceived the 
action as a threat. 
"I blame myself for being too confident and making that sudden move," Annaud 
said. "The bear struck me a strong blow with his right paw. I was thrown flat 
on my face. Then he was on me. I just protected my ears, and eyes, and played 
dead as best I could. For a few seconds, I had the impression that I was living 
the climax of my own movie." Seus called Bart off in seconds, but Annaud wound 
up with a nasty puncture wound in his rear end. It was the only incident on an 
otherwise safe shoot. 
"Easy kisses! Don't touch! Easy kisses!" Doug Seus shouted to Bart, who earned 
more than $500,000 for his role, not including feeding and transportation 
costs. His resume includes "The Great Outdoors" and "Clan of the Cave Bear." 
Bart's 47-year-old trainer, who prefers to be called a behaviorist, was in the 
field in back of his house demonstrating one of the 45 commands that Bart has 
mastered -- in this case, gingerly lowering his head and nuzzling a fuzzy teddy 
bear on the ground beside him. Seus raised his arms high in the air, and the 
Kodiak lifted his mighty bulk and squatted on his haunches, the small teddy 
bear tucked protectively under his arm. Bart looked at Seus and smiled. Or so 
it seemed. 
"It's called transference," Seus said a few moments later, huffing and puffing 
as he wrestled with the nearly 1-ton Kodiak. Seus, a sturdy man who was a 
halfback at Notre Dame, was playfully batted about like a toy soldier by paws 
at least a foot in diameter. "We work on a positive rapport basis. This job is 
all about back scratches and ear rubs. We taught the big bear to do easy kisses 
on this thing," he picked up the dog-eared teddy, "and then we transferred that 
behavior to one of the animatronic bears, and finally to a real cub." 
The bear cubs used in the movie were not as cute and harmless as one might 
suspect. Their fangs are as sharp as pike teeth and their jaws pack the power 
of a bulldog's. Only the trainers and nurses, whose hands were insured for the 
film, were allowed to handle them. The cubs were raised from infancy in a 
nursery in France by a staff of nurses, who kept careful records to track their 
growth and development. The cubs received bottles every three hours, were 
weighed twice a day and checked weekly by veterinarians. 
Seus' 26-year-old son Youngreen trained the primary bear cub used in the film. 
Her name was Douce, meaning sweet in French. Douce was chosen because she had 
the best attitude of the 19 bear cubs recruited from European zoos (all brown 
bears are born in January, so they were approximately the same age) and dyed a 
similar muted brownish gray. In a few short weeks, Youngreen had imparted to 
the young Douce many of Bart's trained behaviors, including a miniature, 
less-than-ferocious version of Bart's erect bipedal stance. Douce also did some 
improvising -- hopping after a frog in one scene, and rubbing her back against 
a tiny tree in imitation of Bart's knotty-pine back scratches in another. 
The significance of the trainers' accomplishment in bringing the two bears 
together is not lost on the followers of the brown bear community. "I'm not 
aware of a cub ever taking up with an adult male, because it would surely 
become bear food," said Colin Gillin, grizzly bear biologist for the state of 
Wyoming. "It's hard to say behaviorally why that happens. Quite often with 
predatory species, the adult male will kill the young in order to breed with 
its mother. Even yearling bears that weigh as much as 100 pounds will be killed 
and eaten by an adult." 
"The hardest shot we faced was getting the big bear and the little bear to eat 
together off the same carcass," Youngreen said after the back-yard workout 
session with Bart was over. Father and son exercise the Kodiak at least an hour 
each day. "It was a fake carcass stuffed with real meat, but it was real enough 
to the bears. There's a natural tendency for one animal to usurp the carcass 
from the other. To get them eating this far apart" -- he stretched his arms 
about three feet -- "on the same carcass was probably the epitome of our 
training." 
"They became friends," Seus said. "Through a training process, they learned 
initially to tolerate each other and eventually they formed a camaraderie. They 
would walk together, put out a paw to touch the other one and even lick each 
other." 
It was a good thing that the bears could be trusted -- alone or together. At 
times, their trainers were as far as 100 yards away from their animals, 
shouting commands at the top of their lungs and hurling food rewards at them 
like football passes. In one scene, Douce runs after her departing friends, 
stops and stands up straight to get a better look at them. Her shoulders drop 
in sorrow, she slowly sits back down and rubs her eyes with a paw, then swipes 
at empty air as if to say goodby. "When a shot like that works, it brings tears 
to your eyes," Lynne Seus said. 
There were a couple of times when Annaud and Doug Seus, two headstrong 
perfectionists striving for the same goal, clashed on the set. On a rocky 
mountain shot when the bears were heading into their winter den, with biting 
winds blowing snow sideways, Seus sensed an uneasiness in the air. Keying into 
the bears' mood, he thought it best to keep them a safe distance apart. 
"I was worried about the safety of the bears," Seus said. "Jean-Jacques said to 
me, 'I can't live with the shot that way.' And I said, 'Well, you will have to 
live with it that way because that's the way it's going to be.' He said, 'You 
can't talk to me that way. I'm not one of your bears.' And I said, 'I'm not one 
of your subjects.' So we packed it in and walked off the set." 
"Everything had worked beautifully up to that point, so Jean-Jacques naturally 
wanted the bears right next to each other," Lynne Seus said. "He said he had to 
have that shot, when a few months earlier he didn't even have two bears in the 
same frame together." 
Annaud supported Doug Seus in most situations. The two believe in 
anthropomorphism -- attributing human characteristics and feelings to animals. 
In Brach's script, the bear cub ingests hallucinogenic mushrooms -- presumably 
because he likes it. He also spends nights dreaming, a nocturnal activity 
carnivorous animals are believed to engage in for 20%-30% of their sleep time. 
Using handmade puppets, it took Czech artist Bretislav Pojar six months to 
create the psychedelic images used in those sequences. 
"The old school of biology teaches that anthropomorphism is incorrect, that 
animals don't dream or cry or mourn," Doug Seus said. "One biologist witnessed 
a bear sliding down a snow bank, and he said it was called 'thermal regulatory 
behavior.' Absurd! The bear was having fun. If he was merely trying to reduce 
his body heat, why did he go up the hill six more times, and make six more 
passes at the slide, and then prance around at the bottom?" 
"What the film did to me as a human being, it humbled me," Annaud said. "I had 
the privilege to spend time with people who are zoologists, veterinarians and 
animal trainers. They have a totally different approach to man. They don't see 
man as something different, a creature from another world. They see a strong 
continuity between man and animal, physically and psychologically. That's like 
telling some people in the middle ages that the Earth is not the center of 
universe. They take it as a personal blow. It reduces their status." 
There are currently believed to be fewer than 1,000 grizzlies living in the 
lower 48 states. Since 1975, all grizzly bears in the United States south of 
Alaska have been listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. 
"Hopefully, this film will encourage people to support the existing 
environmental laws," Seus said. "I think the bear is the canary of the mine 
shaft. It's the barometer by which we judge the health of our environment. If 
it goes, then what?" 
