HOT TO SHOP: SUNGLASSES THAT ARE A CUT ABOVE 
DEAR HOT: I have a whole drawer full of sunglasses. One pair blocks ultraviolet 
light. Another blocks out blue light. I've got a pair that's shatterproof. Then 
I've got some that are good for nothing but style. Has anybody figured out how 
to put all this stuff into one pair of glasses yet? 
DEAR HOT SHOPPER: Swiss Army Brands Ltd., the company best known for making 
Swiss Army Knives that have such doohickeys as scissors and screwdrivers 
inside, has recently applied its more-is-more philosophy to sunglasses. Created 
for the needs of people who like to carry Swiss Army Knives (which is to say 
outdoorsmen and women who prefer to be well-equipped but also travel light), 
the sunglasses have all the features you mentioned -- and more. 
Their amber-tinted lenses are coated for scratch resistance. The nose bridge is 
adjustable so it conforms to your face for precision fit so that when you ski 
or bike, for instance, the glasses won't slip down your nose or fly off your 
head. What's more they're lightweight and have detachable leather weather 
shields for extra protection against wind, snow and rain. 
The company even claims that when a steel projectile was fired at them from an 
air gun at close range, the lenses withstood the impact. Ouch! As for style, 
the glasses are shaped in classic aviator tradition. They sell for $119, come 
in red or black and are available through Hammacher Schlemmer stores or through 
their catalogue. To order products or get a free Hammacher Schlemmer catalogue, 
call (800) 543-3366. 
DEAR HOT: I'm a Liz Claiborne fan and I'm in heaven or hell, I'm not sure 
which. I'm delighted to see so much more Liz Claiborne merchandise on the 
market but I can't tell the difference between Liz Claiborne clothing sold in 
department stores, Liz Claiborne goods sold in First Issue boutiques and things 
sold at Liz Claiborne Concept shops. They could open 50 different Liz stores 
and I'd still be happy but I'd just like to know what the differences are. 
DEAR HOT SHOPPER: It is confusing out there for Liz devotees, what with all the 
variations from Liz Wear (very casual clothes aimed at a younger audience), Liz 
Sport (casual weekend wear), Liz and Co. (casual knitwear), Elizabeth (large 
size clothing), Liz Claiborne Collection (styles suitable for the office) and 
Liz Claiborne Dresses (career and casual dresses). 
And, lately, the company's been selling this stuff in so many different kinds 
of places! According to a Claiborne spokesperson, First Issue is a nationwide 
chain of stores that sell clothing in the familiar style and quality of Liz 
Claiborne casual sportswear and work clothes -- but simply under the relatively 
new, First Issue label. 
The only difference is that the styles and colors marketed in the First Issue 
stores will never be exactly the same as the Liz Claiborne merchandise sold in 
department stores or in Liz Claiborne retail stores. 
There are now 37 First Issue stores throughout the country, including one in 
South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa and one in Sherman Oaks' Fashion Square. 
Liz Claiborne Concept Shops are boutiques within retail stores, devoted to 
Claiborne clothing, handbags and small leather goods, though you may find 
exactly the same merchandise in stores without Concept Shops. 
The first Liz Claiborne Concept Shop in Southern California is located in South 
Coast Plaza at the May Co. and it's devoted exclusively to handbags and small 
leather goods. 
We're not holding our breath for Liz Claiborne Concept Drapery Shops, Elizabeth 
Muu-Muus and First Issue Press-On Nails. 
