APARTHEID FOES STAGE S. AFRICA 'VICTORY MARCHES' 
Tens of thousands of black workers and anti-apartheid activists, many carrying 
banners of the outlawed African National Congress and celebrating the imminent 
release of key ANC leaders, marched through the streets of more than a dozen 
South African cities Saturday. 
Listening to militant anti-government speeches, and wearing placards saying 
"Long Live the ANC," the protesters sang and danced in the downtown streets as 
police, for the most part, watched quietly from a distance. 
"We are marching to freedom," Moses Mayekiso, general secretary of the National 
Union of Mineworkers, told about 12,000 who had marched from a downtown church 
to the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. "We must give them (the 
government) the message that their time is over. They are talking about 
negotiation. We say they must scrap apartheid, imperialism, colonialism and 
capitalism." 
The marches, approved in advance by local officials, were organized by the 
Congress of South African Trade Unions to protest new labor laws that unions 
say will restrict their ability to strike. But in recent days, organizers had 
said the demonstrations also would serve as "victory marches" to welcome the 
release, expected within a day or two, of eight prominent black nationalists. 
South Africa's black townships have been tense in recent days as residents 
anticipate the arrival, after 26 years in jail, of Walter Sisulu, the 
77-year-old former ANC general secretary, and seven other political prisoners. 
Sisulu and five others were moved from Pollsmoor Prison in Cape Town to a 
prison near Soweto, the Johannesburg township that is Sisulu's home, on Friday 
in preparation for their release. 
Most of the marches were peaceful, although police said several people were 
arrested in Pietermaritzburg during a protest for breaking shop and bus windows 
and looting. March marshals kept most of the protests quiet, although riot 
police in Johannesburg ordered more than 10,000 people who had gathered at the 
final destination of the march to disperse, giving them an hour to do so. They 
left without incident. 
An estimated 10,000 activists marched in Port Elizabeth, 2,000 in Bloemfontein, 
the conservative provincial capital of the Orange Free State, and several 
thousand in Durban. Several hundred marched in Secunda, where a municipal judge 
had approved the protest but the right-wing Conservative Party-controlled town 
council had denied permission. 
In Cape Town, where about 5,000 joined the march, demonstrators took down the 
South African flag in front of Parliament and placed flags of the ANC and the 
outlawed South African Communist Party over a statue of former Prime Minister 
Louis Botha. 
The Afrikaner Resistance Movement, a militant group of right-wing whites, 
issued a statement Saturday condemning "these Communist-inspired protest 
marches" and warned that if President Frederik W. de Klerk allows such protests 
to continue, the movement would find a way to stop them. 
DeKlerk has taken the first steps toward creating a climate for negotiations 
with the black majority by allowing anti-government protests previously 
considered illegal under the state of emergency. He then ordered the release of 
the eight prisoners, including seven who have spent a quarter-century in jail. 
