BIG COMPUTER FIRMS GIRD FOR VIRUS ATTACK 
Major computer companies said today that they are taking seriously the threat 
of a computer virus attack later this week and are advising employees to take 
precautions to protect their systems. 
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph and International Business Machines have 
both issued internal memos warning staff about the impending virus, called 
Datacrime, which is expected to be activated Thursday or Friday. 
A computer virus is a destructive program in a computer system that can damage 
or destroy data. It is called a virus because it acts like a biological virus 
-- it can travel from an "infected" disk or program and infect other computers. 
Computer industry experts say Datacrime is an especially dangerous virus that 
could infect older IBM personal computers and compatibles based on Intel 
Corp.'s 8086 chip. 
"It's very, very rare but very destructive," said Russell Brand, chief 
technical adviser at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, 
Calif. Brand said his group has examined Datacrime in an infected computer. 
Can Kill Entire Disk 
Since networked computer systems are so widely used in major corporations, 
universities and by the government, a virus could disrupt thousands of 
machines. A virus also puts an organization at risk if its computer is 
penetrated by outsiders or exposed to programs of unknown origin. 
Brand said Datacrime is unique because it can wipe out a complete hard disk. 
"Most viruses, you can put the data back together," he said. 
Without a hard disk drive, there is no way of getting to information on the 
disk, except to re-format that sector -- thus destroying all the files. 
At AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories, employees were warned not to use software from 
unknown sources and to back up data. 
IBM, which introduced an antiviral software product last week, said it is 
advising its employees to begin using its new software, and make copies of 
their data. 
Some Already Infected 
IBM's product scans IBM compatible computer programs, looking for a change in 
programming patterns that may signify a computer virus. 
Datacrime, also dubbed the "Columbus Day" virus because of this week's Columbus 
Day holiday, has already infected a number of corporate systems and government 
installations. 
Experts do not know the source of Datacrime, except that it was first discussed 
publicly at a conference for computer hackers in Europe this summer. 
Brand and other experts said there are other computer viruses rumored among 
computer hackers -- one estimate is that about 77 different viruses are now in 
circulation. 
