PADRES TO ALLOW RASMUSSEN, PAGLIARULO, LYNN TO FILE FOR FREE AGENCY 
The Padres have decided to allow starting pitcher Dennis Rasmussen, third 
baseman Mike Pagliarulo and outfielder Fred Lynn to file for free agency 
without making any contract offers before the Nov. 4 deadline, Joe McIlvaine, 
Padre general manager, said Wednesday. 
The Padres also will offer salary arbitration today to first baseman Jack 
Clark, preventing him from becoming a free agent. 
"It was an easy decision," McIlvaine said. 
Clark, however, still could be declared a second-look free agent by an 
impending Collusion III ruling, which is expected within weeks. If Clark 
becomes a free agent and signs with another team, the Padres would not be 
compensated. 
"I'm just waiting right now," said Clark, who led the Padres with 25 homers. 
"Everything hinges on that ruling. I just want a decision one way or another, 
to know what's going to happen to me." 
The Padres remain undecided about who they want to retain or seek in the free 
agent class. Privately, they've expressed interest in third baseman Terry 
Pendleton, center fielder Willie McGee and left-handed reliever Ken Dayley, but 
they have yet to publicly disclose their sentiments. They've also talked about 
free agent right fielder Darryl Strawberry, but Strawberry said three weeks ago 
he will not play for the Padres, chastising the organization and its fans. 
Rasmussen, who earned $802,500 this past season, is one of nine left-handed 
starters eligible for free agency. He and his agent, Bob Teaff, have had 
preliminary discussions with the Padres, but no contractual numbers have been 
discussed. 
"The door's open, they know where they can start," said Rasmussen, who was 
11-15 with a 4.51 earned-run average. "But it's evident we'll have to be 
filing." 
Lynn, who like Clark had to be provided arbitration by today's deadline to 
avoid being eligible for free agency, is not expected to be offered that 
option. Yet, Lynn likely will return to the Padres as a reserve 
outfielder/first baseman since Manager Greg Riddoch says that he wants him 
back. Lynn, who earned $600,000 this past season, is expected to sign at about 
the same salary for the 1991 season. 
Pagliarulo, one of six third basemen eligible for free agency, said Wednesday 
he also wants to return to the Padres, but it's unknown whether the club want 
him. Pagliarulo batted .254 with seven homers and 38 runs batted in, and the 
Padres must determine whether they can improve by finding another third baseman 
or using Bip Roberts as an everyday player at that position. 
"They need a third baseman, that's very obvious," said Pagliarulo, who earned 
$605,000 this past season. "But I just don't know what the manager or 
organization wants to do. I'll give them every opportunity to sign me, but I 
want a commitment. 
"I'm not going to demand anything and I can't, not with my numbers. But I 
certainly can play better and I will, by playing every day. 
"I'm a very loyal guy, but it's a two-way street, isn't it?" 
