FEE STALEMATE CAUSES COUNCIL TO DELAY VOTE 
Because of a stalemate between the city and the developer over future fees, the 
City Council on Monday night postponed for a week a vote on a development 
agreement for the 768-acre Holly-Seacliff area. 
The proposed agreement would be between the city and the Huntington Beach Co. 
-- the largest and most influential landowner in the city. The company wants 
the 15-year agreement to exclude Holly-Seacliff from any new fees on 
development that the city may enact in future years. 
But City Administrator Michael T. Uberuaga urged the council to insist that the 
development be subject to any future fees. 
"I am adamant on this," Uberuaga said. "The city is not as financially sound as 
it should be. I would hate to see us preclude ourselves from new fees in the 
future." 
Huntington Beach Co. officials, however, said in a position paper that the city 
would be asking too much to expect the company to pay new fees in the future. 
The position paper said that the company has already "agreed to mitigation 
measures and the construction of public improvements well in excess of the 
project's impact. We have also agreed to pay increases to all existing fees 
that may be adopted in the future as well as any and all new citywide taxes. 
The project . . . therefore should be exempted from any new fees programs." 
The proposed agreement would allow the Huntington Beach Co. to build 3,780 new 
homes in the Holly-Seacliff area, in addition to some commercial and industrial 
development. The agreement, in effect, would be a 15-year contract that would 
protect the company's right to build on the land. 
In return, the city would get increased park acreage donations, a new water 
reservoir, a police substation and a new fire station. The Huntington Beach Co. 
said it would give 41 acres of land to the county's new Bolsa Chica Regional 
Linear Park and an additional 12 acres for new city neighborhood parks in the 
Holly-Seacliff area. 
Several residents addressed the City Council on Monday night, urging the 
council members not to "rush" the agreement. 
Shirley Dettloff, president of Amigos de Bolsa Chica, a major environmental 
organization, said: "The agreement is being rushed . . . the public is being 
denied an opportunity to carefully review the Holly-Seacliff agreement." 
She urged the council to insist that the agreement include an additional six 
acres of parkland at Ellis Avenue and Edwards Street that would connect the 
Linear Park to the city's Central Park. 
HOLLY SEACLIFF 
Here are some facts about the Holly-Seacliff area in Huntington Beach. 
Size: 768 acres. 
Location: Northwest Huntington Beach. 
Description: Mostly vacant land; oil pumps formerly used in the area are being 
removed. 
Principal owner: the Huntington Beach Co. owns 80% of the site. 
Proposed development: Construction of more than 4,000 new homes; also 
construction of four neighborhood parks and a mix of shopping facilities and 
light industries. 
Population: Planners forecast more than 10,000 new residents. 
Source: City of Huntington Beach 
