FIGHTING TO TAKE BACK THEIR AREA; 
WEST HOLLYWOOD: RESIDENTS SAY CITY OFFICIALS MUST DO MORE TO CURB DRUG DEALING 
AND MALE PROSTITUTION OFF SANTA MONICA BOULEVARD. 
Unhappy with recent efforts by law enforcement and city of West Hollywood 
officials to decrease the highly visible problems of drug dealing and male 
prostitution in the area around La Jolla Street off Santa Monica Boulevard, 
neighbors are turning up the heat with letters, complaints and even a threat to 
bring in the Guardian Angels, the self-styled crime fighters. 
City officials, who recently arranged for foot patrols by Los Angeles County 
sheriff's deputies and weekend barricades of parking areas frequented by 
out-of-town cruisers, are responding to the pressure with further attempts to 
make the area around Circus of Books bookstore inaccessible to drug dealers, 
prostitutes, and their customers. 
After a hastily called meeting with unhappy neighbors last week, Mayor Abbe 
Land directed city staff this week to put together a comprehensive program of 
traffic restrictions suggested by residents and designed to discourage 
cruising. Suggestions include barricading parking lots all night, making an 
alleyway into a one-way street, placing "no right turn" and "no left turn" 
signs at some intersections, and changing landscaping to eliminate shadowy 
trysting areas. 
But some neighbors, wary of previous city promises to reduce illegal activity 
in the area, are still holding out the possibility that the Guardian Angels may 
be called in to help. 
"It should be very embarrassing for this city to admit they can't handle a 
crime problem in such a small area. If changes aren't implemented soon, we (the 
neighbors) are going to have a show of force. I'll call the Guardian Angels 
down," said Jordan Berkove, who lives at the end of the parking lot on 
Havenhurst Street, where much of the nighttime vice takes place. 
Berkove contacted the Los Angeles chapter of the well-known youth patrol last 
week after becoming frustrated that sheriff's foot patrols had done little to 
discourage late-night drug and sex activity in the alleyway and parking lot 
behind Circus of Books. 
Steve Kirkman, leader of the Los Angeles Guardian Angels chapter, said the 
group agreed to help if residents organize a community orientation meeting. He 
said the group would come in and be what he called "a presence," carrying 
signs, following prostitutes and teaching residents how to take back the 
neighborhood. 
Sheriff's Capt. Rachel Burgess of the West Hollywood unit said she "absolutely 
opposed" bringing in outside groups such as the Guardian Angels, and said such 
a move would probably cause more problems than it solved. 
Berkove and other neighbors have recently flooded West Hollywood city officials 
with complaints about highly visible drug deals, discarded syringes and people 
engaged in sex in their front yards. 
Resident Tom Larkin, who said previous city proposals to clean up the 
neighborhood were a "Band-Aid approach," developed the plan to alter traffic 
routes to work in conjunction with the closure of Circus of Books between 2 
a.m. and 6 a.m., as recently ordered by the city's Business License Commission. 
