HELP FOR HEALERS; 
W. LOS ANGELES TEAM AIDS CARE GIVERS TRAUMATIZED BY HURRICANE'S TOLL 
Even the experts are shaken by disaster. 
Mory B. Framer has been experiencing mild symptoms of post-traumatic stress 
disorder since he visited South Carolina in the days after Hurricane Hugo. "I'm 
still having images of trees snapped in half," said the Westside psychologist, 
who went to Charleston to teach local counselors and therapists how to deal 
with the emotional aftermath of the devastating storm. 
Framer is clinical director of Barrington Psychiatric Center in West Los 
Angeles, whose 26 psychiatrists, psychologists and other therapists specialize 
in treating the victims of natural disasters and other catastrophes. According 
to Framer, at least 90% of the victims of killer storms and other disasters 
experience one or more of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, the 
psychological affliction most commonly identified with troubled Vietnam War 
veterans. 
These symptoms, he said, can include everything from flashbacks, nightmares, 
anger, shame, irritability and emotional numbness to loss of sexual drive and 
cold-like symptoms. Just knowing that such symptoms are a predictable part of 
the disaster experience helps victims recover, Framer said. 
Framer said his firm was invited to South Carolina to work with the staff of 
the Medical University of South Carolina. Their job was to help equip 
mental-health workers for the emotional cleanup necessitated by Hurricane Hugo, 
which killed at least 18 people and left an estimated 70,000 homeless and many 
thousands more without jobs. 
"What was so fascinating was that, due to the enormity and scope of that 
disaster, the people entrusted with mental-health care were suffering the same 
consequences of the disaster as everyone else," Framer said. "We're not 
immune." 
Framer said he and his colleagues gave the mental-health workers the advice 
they give all disaster victims. First, they educated them as to what to expect, 
including feelings of being out of control or feelings of guilt at having 
survived. "If you know what to expect, it helps you to normalize the reaction," 
Framer said, adding, "It doesn't take away the pain." 
The mental-health workers were told that the healing process would take time 
and not to have heroic expectations for themselves. "People hold themselves to 
an unreasonably high standard," said Raymond J. Friedman, Barrington's medical 
director who was also part of the Charleston team. "People feel that after a 
day or two they should feel much better." 
The mental-health workers were urged not to bottle up their feelings and to 
talk about their own reactions to the storm. They couldn't stop doing so. 
Barrington staffer Jan Friedman, who also went to Charleston, noted that the 
closer she got to the storm-ravaged area, the more she heard people talking 
with great sadness about trees, one of the treasures Hugo had destroyed. 
"Everyone was literally mourning the trees," she said. 
Helpful Tips 
The Barrington team advised the mental-health workers to seek additional help 
if their symptoms got worse. They also counseled the counselors to watch their 
diets, get plenty of exercise and to maintain familiar routines. Framer said he 
followed his own advice and kept up his jogging routine while in Charleston, 
despite sneers from passers-by who didn't recognize psychological self-help 
when they saw it. 
The study and treatment of traumatic stress is a relatively new field, Framer 
said. His organization advises companies on how to deal with stress after 
workplace accidents or disasters, in part with an eye to containing costs. The 
group is also one of the few that provides post-disaster psychological services 
to communities, usually at no charge, as was the case in Charleston. 
The center has sent response teams to disasters as diverse as the Whittier 
earthquake, the First Interstate Bank fire and the Stockton schoolyard 
massacre. The group also worked with search and rescue workers after the 1987 
crash of a PSA plane near San Luis Obispo. Other clients include reporters 
haunted by horrifying news stories they have covered. 
Disaster, Framer said, "teaches us probably the most painful lesson in life: 
that we are mortal, that we are not Rambo or Superwoman. There are forces out 
there that are more powerful than ourselves." A personal perception of 
powerlessness is one almost universal consequence of experiencing a disaster, 
he said. 
Quick Help 
But he and his colleagues have found that the earlier professionals are on the 
scene working with disaster victims, the sooner people regain a sense of 
control. Early intervention reduces the severity of the individual's distress 
and also the ultimate cost of the experience, he said. 
In light of the Charleston experience, Framer said he is convinced that 
Angelenos should prepare for the Big One emotionally, as well as physically. 
"I think everyone should have a list to put in their little 
earthquake-preparedness kit," he said, referring to the list of emotional 
reactions disaster victims can expect to experience and self-help tips for 
dealing with them. The prepared parent knows, for instance, that a toddler who 
has given up his bedtime blanket may want it back again after a quake. Prepared 
parents will also return as quickly as possible to the telling of bedtime 
stories and other family rituals. 
Framer said he has also realized how important it is for disaster victims to 
have access to mental-health professionals who aren't unduly stressed or 
exhausted by the catastrophe. Local mental-health workers should start 
networking now, he advised, so that experts from other parts of the country 
will be poised to move quickly into Southern California in case of need. 
