SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT STUDIES RESPONSE TO 911 CALL BEFORE TRAIN WRECK; 
ACCIDENT: INVESTIGATION ASKS WHY DISPATCHERS FAILED TO NOTIFY THE RAILROAD 
ABOUT A TRUCK STALLED ON THE TRACKS. 
The Sheriff's Department was investigating Thursday the actions of dispatchers 
in the moments before a mishap in which a speeding Amtrak passenger train 
slammed into a tractor-trailer loaded with cars that had become stuck at a 
Leucadia train crossing. 
In the four minutes before the 2:45 p.m. Wednesday wreck, 911 dispatchers at 
the department's Kearny Mesa communications center received five calls from 
witnesses reporting that the tractor-trailer had become lodged at the crossing 
at Leucadia Boulevard and Highway 101. 
While a sheriff's patrol unit was notified after the first call, dispatchers 
failed to contact railroad officials in an effort to alert the Amtrak engineer 
that the truck was in his path, sheriff's officials acknowledged. 
"That's the crux of our investigation," said Sgt. Glenn Revell of the Sheriff 
Department's public affairs division. "If the dispatcher has information that a 
tractor-trailer is lodged across the path of a train, we feel it would have 
been appropriate to notify the Santa Fe railroad. However, that was not done." 
Meanwhile, railroad officials said Thursday that, had they been notified even 
moments before the crash, they could well have slowed and possibly stopped the 
passenger train. 
"Of course, it depends on getting the information and reaching the engineer 
but, yes, we probably could have got to him," said Bob Harper, a Santa Fe 
railroad assistant regional manager in San Bernardino. 
"We had a couple of signal crossings north of that area where we could have 
alerted the engineer that there was a big rig in his path." 
The engineer of the southbound passenger train was traveling about 88 m.p.h. 
when he spotted the truck 1,500 feet away, Harper said. 
"He applied his emergency brakes and held on," he said. "The train was probably 
going about 55 or 60 when collision occurred." 
The impact sliced the rig in two, spraying its cargo of eight automobiles about 
the intersection like children's toys, tying up both the railway and nearby 
vehicular traffic for several hours. 
Seven passengers aboard the train were treated for minor injuries at a nearby 
hospital, as well as two motorists involved a minor crash along Highway 101 
moments after the train wreck, officials said. 
The train, which became partially derailed upon impact, sustained more than 
$20,000 in damages, primarily to the lead car, Harper said. 
On Thursday, the driver of the tractor-trailer, who was delivering an 
automobile to a couple who lived nearby the crash site, was issued three 
citations for his involvement in the mishap. 
Michael E. Tune of Summersville, Mo., was cited for driving on a route posted 
for no-truck traffic along Leucadia Boulevard between Interstate 5 and Highway 
101, blocking a railway crossing and stopping at a railway crossing, said 
sheriff's Lt. Kathy Fulmer. 
On Thursday, the Sheriff's Deapartment held a press conference at which it was 
announced that investigators were focusing their attention on the actions of 
the 911 dispatchers and that they were reviewing tapes of conversations with 
witnesses in the minutes prior to the wreck. 
Dispatchers received the first call shortly after 2:41 p.m., presumably from a 
motorist with a cellular phone who had noticed the low-slung carrier hung up on 
the tracks, authorities said. 
Thirty-four seconds later, the second caller was told to contact the 
department's non-emergency line. A clerk at a nearby convenience store who 
apparently made the call said he was told by a dispatcher: "We don't handle 
minor traffic accidents." 
Sheriff's deputies who reviewed the tape denied that claim. 
"We're looking to see if a mistake was made either because the dispatcher was 
not trained to deal with such an emergency or whether the department needs to 
institute a policy to deal with large vehicles lodged on the tracks -- right 
now, we don't have such a policy," said Sgt. Jim Cooke of the department's 
public affairs office. 
"But it's not the dispatcher's fault that truck got stuck on those tracks. It's 
not like she ignored the situation -- a car was sent to investigate the scene. 
It's a judgment call." 
In many would-be emergencies, patrol cars are first sent to the scene to 
investigate before an ambulance is dispatched, he said. 
"That's what happened here," Sgt. Revell said. "If we called the Santa Fe 
Railway every time there was a report of an obstruction, we'd be stopping 
trains every day." 
On Wednesday, neighbors at the scene of the wreck said they had seen numerous 
trucks become stuck on the mounded crossing, which they said has become a 
traffic hazard. 
"I've lived in this neighborhood 31 years and I've seen too many trucks get 
stuck there," said one man, who declined to give his name. "That place is a 
time bomb just waiting to go off." 
Neither railroad officials nor sheriff's deputies said they have received any 
complaints about the crossing. Nonetheless, in the wake of the accident, 
railroad engineers will investigate the slope of the Leucadia Boulevard 
crossing, Harper said. 
"Both the city and the state have requirements for the grade of such 
crossings," he said. "We'll run a survey on the grade and I suppose the city 
will do the same. Between us, we'll get to the bottom of any problems that 
exist there." 
