ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: BUENA PARK; 
CANDIDATES FOCUS ON CITY'S FISCAL WOES 
The city's ailing budget is taking center stage this election among the eight 
candidates vying for a spot on the City Council. 
Six challengers and two incumbents are squaring off for three open seats. 
Councilman Kenneth B. Jones is not seeking reelection. 
Although they disagree on how, all candidates list getting the city back on 
sound financial footing as their top priority. During the past two years the 
city has begun the new budget season with a deficit and projections show the 
picture only getting worse. 
According to official figures, by the 1993-94 budget year the city could be in 
debt by as much as $4 million. To help close the gap, the City Council has 
increased the local bed tax and implemented some "fee for service" measures, 
the most recent being a paramedic assessment fee. While some candidates propose 
internal belt tightening, others are looking for outside resources. Once again 
the idea of an amusement tax, which would add an additional tax on local 
attractions, is being offered as a means to cure the budget woes. 
Candidates Arthur Brown and Max R. Schulman are coming out in favor of the 
often controversial amusement tax suggestion. "It is a ready source of revenue 
that hasn't been tapped into," said Brown, a retired deputy sheriff. "What else 
is there?" said Schulman, who making his third attempt for a seat on the 
council. 
It is not the first time the proposal has been suggested. Although it has been 
studied, prior councils have never taken action on it. The exact terms are not 
known, but the general concept is to tax people attending events that require 
any type of admission fee. This percentage would go directly to city coffers. 
Stuart Zanville, head of public relations for Knott's Berry Farm, the city's 
biggest attraction, said it would place an unfair burden on the park's ability 
to compete. "A tax like that would have to be passed on to the consumer as a 
price increase . . . putting us at a disadvantage with other parks." He added 
that the park already pays more than $1 million in sales tax and fees to the 
city. 
Calling it "biting the hand that feeds us," several of the other candidates 
firmly oppose the tax, including incumbent Donna L. Chessen. 
"I would rather see us increasing tourism and bringing businesses into the 
city," she said. Chessen suggests tapping into grants and other monies made 
available and also supports implementing a "fee for services" policy. 
Incumbent Rhonda J. McCune, the city's first female mayor, said she has been 
open to looking at the suggestion but does not support it at this time. If 
implemented, it could affect development of the Entertainment Corridor project, 
she said. 
For the past few years, the city has been busy luring attractions to the 
corridor along a one-mile stretch of Beach Boulevard. Several businesses have 
opened and others are planned for the near future. 
Also not willing to disturb the redevelopment plan is candidate Larry Wieck. He 
suggests several internal changes to help the budget including cutting back on 
the number of outside contractors hired. He also wants to make the Recreation 
Department self-sustaining. The remaining candidates, Robert Roefs, Alfred 
Whitmore and Gerald N. Sigler call for long-term planning and study of the 
situation. Sigler, a member of the Planning Commission, said there are many 
wasteful practices that could be eliminated. "I don't think we should spend 
money on projects, then wait before they are approved," Sigler said. BUENA PARK 
CITY COUNCIL These are the candidates running for three seats on the Buena Park 
City Council in the Nov. 6 election. Incumbent Kenneth B. Jones is not seeking 
reelection.Arthur BrownAge: 53Occupation: Retired sheriff's deputy.Background: 
Served as chairman of Crime Prevention Committee; served five years as trustee 
of the Savanna School District Board of Trustees; ran for state Assembly in 
1988; member of the endowment board for California Pools for the 
Handicapped.Issues: Advocates raising revenue with an admissions tax on local 
attractions; opposes "service fees"; favors increasing the benefits package of 
city employees; favors establishment of a Fine Arts Center.Donna L. ChessenAge: 
53Occupation: Incumbent; office manager.Background: Council member since 1985; 
instrumental in bringing LPGA tournament to the city; member of Orange County 
Harbors, Beaches and Parks Committee; chairwoman of the Arterial Highway 
Financing Program; member of Transportation Strategy 21 Committee.Issues: 
Favors promoting tourism; believes in following through on major development 
projects, including the possibility of a convention center; advocates raising 
money through grants; favors "fee for services."Rhonda J. McCuneAge: 
44Occupation: Incumbent; commercial appraiser.Background: Bachelor's degree in 
finance-business administration from Cal State Fullerton; first female mayor of 
Buena Park; former planning commissioner; member of the board of directors of 
the Boys Club.Issues: Advocates rejuvenating Buena Park Mall and finishing 
established redevelopment areas; advocates stronger code enforcement; favors 
using contractors for services; favors continuation of infrastructure 
improvements. Robert RoefsAge: 55Occupation: Business manager.Background: Past 
president of the Exchange Club; member of the Parks and Recreation Commission; 
member of the Bicentennial Committee.Issues: Advocates long-term financial 
planning; favors completion of the Entertainment Corridor; wants higher 
visibility for local businesses; advocates more children's programs and more 
housing for senior citizens.Max R. SchulmanAge: 55Occupation: 
Businessman.Background: Former member of the Transportation Commission; served 
10 years as a member of the Centralia School District Board of Trustees; 
operations manager for the annual Silverado Days Festival.Issues: Advocates 
balancing the budget with an admissions tax on local attractions; favors hiring 
more police officers; advocates cutting back waste in city departments; wants 
to limit terms of council members to eight years.Gerald N. SiglerAge: Refused 
to give.Occupation: Retired.Background: Member of the city Planning Commission; 
member of the Buena Park Elks Club, the Noon Lions Club and the Coordinating 
Council.Issues: Believes the city's financial problems can be solved with 
better planning; advocates bringing anti-gang and drug programs to elementary 
schools; wants to continue with redevelopment projects.Alfred WhitmoreAge: 
66Occupation: Retired.Background: Former manager of the Chamber of Commerce; 
served on the city Planning Commission from 1981-88; member of the board of 
directors of the Boys Club; member of the Optimist Club.Issues: Believes 
traffic problems can be solved with rapid transit; advocates starting more 
recreational programs for children to keep them away from gangs; wants to start 
resident groups to get input for the City Council.Larry WieckAge: 41Occupation: 
Businessman.Background: Planning commissioner since 1987; member of the 
Citizens' Committee for Crime Prevention, the board of directors of the Buena 
Park American Little League and the Kiwanis Club.Issues: Favors cutting back on 
the number of outside contractors hired by the city; wants to make the Parks 
and Recreation Department self-sustaining; advocates making Big T Golf Course a 
municipal course. 
