'PEANUTS' CREATOR COMES OUT OF HIS SHELL 
Good grief! Charlie Brown is 40 years old? 
Yep. Charlie and the rest of the "Peanuts" gang hit the Big Four-O, a midlife 
plateau that usually sets off a good deal of soul searching in most folks. Just 
don't expect to see it mentioned in the award-winning strip. 
"A comic strip should not make self-conscious statements," says Charles Schulz, 
67, creator of the "Peanuts" characters who appear in more than 2,000 
newspapers in 68 nations. "There will be nothing in the strip." 
But that hardly means the milestone will pass unnoticed. An exhibition is 
planned at the Louvre in Paris, and half time at the Super Bowl next January 
will feature a birthday extravaganza. 
Most importantly, the story of Charlie, Snoopy, Lucy, Linus and friends can 
finally be told. The whole truth comes out in the shy cartoonist's biography, 
"Good Grief: The Story of Charles M. Schulz," due Thursday from Pharos Books. 
The book by Rheta Grimsley Johnson is a first, says Phyllis Henrici of Pharos, 
a sister company of the Scripps Howard newspaper chain. Schulz draws for United 
Features Syndicate, a Scripps Howard subsidiary. "Publishers have wanted to do 
a biography of him for years, but he hasn't wanted to authorize one," she said. 
What made the difference this time? "I liked her right away," Schulz said of 
Johnson, a columnist for the Memphis Commercial Appeal. 
Lured by Art Ad 
Schulz studied art when he was in high school, after he saw a "Do you like to 
draw?" advertisement. "The truth is, I wasn't a very good student," he said. 
His first professional job was doing lettering for drawings in Timeless Topix, 
a Catholic comic book. He later taught at the Art Instruction School and sold 
cartoons to the Saturday Evening Post. 
His cartoon feature, "Li'l Folks," the start of Peanuts, was developed for St. 
Paul Pioneer Press in 1947. The strip was sold to a syndicate in 1950, and the 
name changed to "Peanuts." 
Although the book contains stories about all the strip's characters, the most 
interesting is about a character never shown -- the "little red-haired girl" 
who is Charlie Brown's unrequited love. 
"Peanuts" began syndication on Oct. 2, 1950, 19 days after Schulz's proposal of 
marriage was turned down in his native St. Paul, Minn., by Donna Mae Wold, the 
original red-haired girl. 
"It's heartbreaking," said Schulz, who proposed five years after plowing across 
France in a half-track as an infantryman during World War II. "It's something 
you never get over, but I think the only purpose in recounting the story was to 
show how experience prompts a cartoonist's ideas." 
Johnson, whose book discloses that the artist suffers from depression, says 
Schulz's life contains many rejections he translated to the strip. "Rejection 
is his specialty, losing his hobby. He has spent a lifetime perfecting 
failure," she said. 
Fighting Agoraphobia 
At first, Johnson thought the artist was kidding about Wold's turning him down. 
"He talked about it as if it took place last year," she said. 
Along with depression, the artist also has bouts of agoraphobia, the fear of 
being alone in public places from which escape might be difficult. "The sight 
of a hotel lobby, for example, puts Schulz in a sweat," writes Johnson. 
Such fears and troubles are too bad, says the author. Yet, there would not be 
Schulz's "unique gift to the world without the sensitivity that so limits his 
personal life." 
