FAME COMING AT ISMAIL FASTER THAN A ROCKET 
Outside the window was a Christmas card come to life. 
Indiana was getting a winter preview from a storm that was expected to drop up 
to six inches of snow by Thursday night. The Notre Dame campus was blanketed 
with the flakes, leaving a scene of peace and serenity. 
Inside, the young man stared at it almost wistfully as he spoke, seeming to 
search for some calm in the storm. Peace and serenity are the last things he 
has in his life right now. 
No, this is not another story about a kid going down the road of drugs or gang 
warfare to ruin. This is a story about a kid who has taken the high road to 
fame and glory. 
But sometimes, that journey can be almost as harrowing. 
As in this case. 
Meet Raghib Ismail. Age: 19. Background: deeply religious. Nature: modest, 
soft-spoken. 
Now meet Rocket, brightest new star to streak across the media sky, with his 
faithful companions, Missile and Bomb, and his mom, the Launching Pad. 
Sound like a Saturday morning cartoon crew? 
That's what life sometimes seems like for Ismail, alias the Rocket, American 
sports' new super hero. 
No secret identity for this guy. No Clark Kent alter ego. 
Everybody knows who the Rocket is. 
Everybody. 
In the last month, he has been mentioned in a speech by President Bush, 
featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated, profiled by major media outlets 
across the country and linked by name and deed to a select few, such as Magic 
and Bo, who can be instantly identified with a single word. 
Ismail is trying to keep it all in perspective. As the nation's premier kickoff 
returner, he may have no trouble keeping his balance, but standing on a 
pedestal can be a little trickier. 
He tells people that, at Notre Dame, he is just one weapon of the defending 
national champions, that Saturday's showdown here against USC is just another 
big game in a season full of big games and that he is just another student who 
needs his education because he might not it as a pro. "Many people have done 
some pretty good things in college," Ismail said, "and they have not even 
played in the pros, even if they were drafted. So I'm not thinking about it." 
But he can't avoid thinking about his newly acquired fame when it stares at him 
from the cover of a national magazine. 
"At first, I was shocked when I saw my picture on the cover," Ismail said. "But 
then, I started thinking, 'I hope it doesn't bring on more than I want. Now, 
everybody knows your business. Everybody wants to be your friend.' " 
Even those he considers friends don't always understand his new life. 
"A couple of weeks ago, I was sick," he explained, "and I had to study for 
midterms. So, I didn't eat lunch with the people I usually do. But not knowing 
what was going on, they started saying, 'Now that he's been on the cover of 
that magazine, he can't eat with us. He's too good for us.' " 
The nation discovered just how good Ismail is in Notre Dame's second game this 
season, a nationally televised contest against Michigan. Ismail returned two 
kickoffs for touchdowns, one for 89 yards, the other for 92. 
Michigan Coach Bo Schembechler said Ismail was "faster than the speed of 
sound." 
Bush, in a speech on the obligation to use one's talent, picked Ismail as an 
example. 
"Perhaps some of you saw," the President said, "this amazing Notre Dame 
sophomore. . . . not once, but twice returning kickoffs for record-breaking 
touchdowns -- the best use of speed since Chuck Yeager broke the sound 
barrier." 
Notre Dame fans discovered Ismail a year earlier when he first pulled off this 
double-barreled feat against Rice, returning kickoffs for touchdowns of 87 and 
83 yards. 
But they've known about the Rocket in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., for several years. 
It was there that he and his brothers, Qadry and Sulaiman, moved after the 
death of their father, Ibrahim, from kidney problems. 
Their mother, Fatma, working two jobs just to survive, worried about the bad 
environment in the schools of Newark, N.J., where they lived. So she sent her 
kids to live with her mother-in-law, Laura Bauknight, in Wilkes-Barre. 
It was there that the Ismail kids expanded their religious horizons. Bauknight, 
a devout Christian, introduced the boys to her beliefs with a simple rule -- no 
church, no food. 
It was there the legend was born. 
A track coach, Jim Cross, watching eighth-grader Ismail race out of the 
starting blocks, said, "He has the thrust of a rocket." 
And who at Meyers High School could disagree? 
Before he left, Ismail rushed for 4,494 yards and 62 touchdowns, caught 57 
passes for 858 yards and five more touchdowns and gained 2,024 additional yards 
and scored seven more touchdowns on kickoff and punt returns. Grand total: 
7,376 all-purpose yards and 74 touchdowns in 26 games. 
Ismail gained 313 yards rushing in one game, scored six touchdowns in another. 
And he still found enough energy to be a star on the track squad as a 
sprinter/triple jumper/long jumper, and play guard on the basketball team. 
Rewriting the Meyers record book is one thing. Doing the same at Notre Dame is 
quite another. 
But Ismail is working on it. 
His four kickoff returns for touchdowns are already enough to break the school 
record of three, set by a pretty good player by the name of Tim Brown. 
Ismail is only two behind the NCAA career mark, set by USC's Anthony Davis. Two 
of Davis' were against Notre Dame in 1972. 
Ismail was so impressive last year that the NCAA made a rare statistical 
decision, awarding him the kickoff return title even though he didn't qualify. 
Ismail averaged 36.1 yards on a dozen kickoffs. The NCAA required minimum is 
14. But he was ruled the winner anyway when it was determined that he would 
have finished ahead of the runner-up, Chris Oldham of Oregon, even if he hadn't 
gained a single yard on his next two returns. 
His average this year is even higher at 39.9 yards a runback. 
You can always kick away from him, as teams are doing. But Notre Dame Coach Lou 
Holtz is countering by using Ismail and his 4.28-second, 40-yard dash speed 
more and more in his game plan: 
 -- Ismail has been used as a split end, and he leads the Irish in receiving 
with 17 catches for 333 yards, a 19.6-yard average. 
 -- He has been used as a ballcarrier out of a full-house backfield. 
 -- He has been used as a punt returner. In only his second punt return of the 
season last week against Air Force, Ismail went all the way on a 56-yard run. 
 -- And, the ultimate horror for opposing coaches, Ismail is now running at 
tailback. 
Against Air Force, Ismail rushed for 92 yards in 10 carries, including a 
24-yard touchdown on a reverse. 
"I just felt we had to do something to be more productive," Holtz said. "He 
didn't know the blocking schemes that well, but when he saw a hole, he just 
accelerated. I don't think you're going to see him eight, nine, 10 times at 
tailback. I don't think we can afford to do that. But he is stronger for his 
size than we were led to believe." 
At 5-10 and 175 pounds, Ismail may not look imposing. But after the Rocket 
receives his payload and takes off, afterburners roaring, there are no more 
doubters. 
Behind him, fueled and ready, are Qadry (nicknamed Missile), a Syracuse 
freshman who has already returned a kick 56 yards this season to set up a 
touchdown, and Sulaiman (Bomb), still at Meyers. 
Fatma placed the nickname, Launching Pad, on her own head. 
All this stuff only serves to make the spotlight on Ismail even brighter, but 
he's still managing to have fun in the pressure cooker. 
When he scored his first touchdown as a collegian against Purdue last season on 
a 54-yard pass from Tony Rice, Ismail kept going, right into the stands to a 
hug a few folks. 
"Hey, son," Holtz later told him, "if you want to go up in the stands, I'll get 
you a ticket." 
The Rocket roared, with laughter. 
And, why not? 
It looks as if he's got a ticket that will take him a long way. 
Peace and serenity will have to wait. 
