VENICE MINI-MALL PLAN DEALT A SETBACK; 
DEVELOPMENT: THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS VOTED TO REQUIRE ENVIRONMENTAL 
CLEARANCES FROM THE CITY. THE DEVELOPER HAD RECEIVED APPROVAL THROUGH A 
SELDOM-USED STATE LAW. 
A Board of Zoning Appeals member cast a tie-breaking vote this week that forces 
a Venice developer, who had received approval for an Ocean Front Walk mini-mall 
project without going through normal permit processes, to obtain environmental 
clearances from the city. 
The vote by board member Daniel Lamaute, who was absent when the appeal was 
considered by the board two weeks ago, is another foray into uncharted waters 
for a case referred to by one attorney as a conundrum. 
The project at issue is a 21,269-square-foot, three-story mini-mall planned by 
developer Stephen Blanchard for the Venice Boardwalk at Sunset Avenue. 
Venice residents had been vigilant about following the progress of the 
mini-mall, which is designed to contain up to 28 shops, including about a dozen 
restaurants and fast-food outlets, some of them serving alcohol. Opponents, 
contending that such a development would overwhelm the neighborhood with noise, 
congestion and other problems, sought to pare down its size and impacts. 
In mandating Tuesday that zoning administrators take back the case, board 
members acted against the counsel of the city's legal advisers, who had 
recommended that project permits be granted because the city took too long to 
consider the matter, a violation of the state Permit Streamlining Act. 
Under the little-used, 12-year-old law, a developer can demand that permits be 
issued if a city takes more than a year to decide on a project when a full 
environmental impact report is required, or six months when a modified 
environmental review is ordered. In the Blanchard project, the city missed both 
deadlines. 
The approvals "as a matter of law" were particularly upsetting to community 
members because they were shut out of the process and had no appeal rights. 
After Tuesday's vote, Zoning Administrator James Crisp wondered loud to the 
board whether their "nice action" had any legal weight. 
In explaining his action, Lamaute said that to vote otherwise would ignore the 
crucial third party in the matter -- the public. "We must put the well-being of 
our residents of our community above all else," Lamaute said. 
The board also received conflicting advice from the state attorney general's 
office. At the hearing two weeks ago, Deputy Atty. Gen. Gail Ruderman Feuer 
predicted "devastating results" statewide if the streamlining act could be used 
to avoid environmental regulations. Both the public and local government would 
lose control of the process, she argued. 
The intervention of the state attorney general before the Board of Zoning 
Appeals was unusual -- but so is this case. The city's decision to allow the 
project permits to go through without adhering to the normal permit process 
because of untoward delays is unprecedented. 
Opponents of the project, acting as the Venice North Beach Coalition, have 
filed a lawsuit saying the state streamlining act was never intended to act as 
a loophole by which projects could avoid the full environmental reviews 
required under the California Environmental Quality Act. 
The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals "shifts the legal burden on to 
someone other than the community," said coalition leader Steve Schlein, who 
lives next door to the proposed mall site. 
Now, the attorney for the developer is expected to sue to force the city to 
issue the permits. "The Board of Zoning Appeals is wrong," said Blanchard's 
attorney, Sherman Stacey. "Their own lawyer advised them (that) they had no 
jurisdiction." 
Stacey said he had been told he cannot appeal the board's ruling to the Los 
Angeles City Council. After getting an official opinion on that, he said, he 
will ask the Los Angeles Superior Court to order the city to issue the permits 
because of the violation of the state Permit Streamlining Act. 
Meanwhile, Stacey persuaded the California Coastal Commission to accept his 
application for a coastal permit, with a hearing scheduled for later this year. 
It is not clear how the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision will affect the bid 
for a coastal permit. Normally, the Coastal Commission does not act until a 
project has received local clearances. 
Barry Fisher, the attorney for the North Venice Beach Coalition, is seeking an 
opinion on whether the City Council can hear an appeal of the board's ruling. 
"I've never seen something so confusing and happening on so many different 
fronts," the land-use attorney said. 
Fisher also called on Venice area Councilwoman Ruth Galanter to take a strong 
leadership role in this matter, which he said has significant environmental 
ramifications. 
According to Jim Bickhart, Galanter planning deputy, the councilwoman is 
treating the case as a matter for the lawyers to iron out. 
But Fisher was critical of Galanter's decision to stay away from the issue by 
terming it a "legalistic" matter. "Every public official has to apply law to 
fact," he said. 
