THE NEW TV SEASON; 
THE FALL SEASON: FROM THE OUTER LIMITS TO REAL DOWN TO EARTH PROBLEMS; 
WHY SCIENCE FICTION IS ALIVE AND WELL ON TELEVISION 
On Channel 13, a 60-year-old woman is implanted with an alien seedling. When 
she gives birth, the infant is offered up to the Eternal -- a hideous, 
tentacled, pulsating monster straight out of a child's worst nightmare. 
Over on Channel 11, a human cop meets, dates and copulates with his neighbor, 
an attractive female scientist from outer space who is endowed with a bald, 
leopard-spotted head and some peculiar erogenous zones. 
And on Channel 4, a physicist whose experiments have gone just a little haywire 
can be found leaping back through time to assume the identities of a gorgeous 
woman, an elderly black man, a baby and maybe even a dog. 
Science fiction is alive and well -- and outrageous and creepy -- on television 
this season. Aliens from the planet Morthral are vying to take over Earth in 
the second season of Paramount's syndicated "War of the Worlds." An entire 
community of some 250,000 bald-headed "newcomers" from the planet Tenctone are 
intermingling with the human population of Los Angeles in Fox's new series 
"Alien Nation." A perplexed scientist and his mischievous hologram sidekick are 
traveling through time and swapping identities in NBC's "Quantum Leap." And 
with the U.S.S. Enterprise continuing to encounter out-of-this-world adventures 
on "Star Trek: The Next Generation," sci-fi buffs won't have much time for 
their usual dose of Heinlein, Asimov and Bradbury. 
But while pleasing hard-core sci-fi fans is essential to the success of these 
series, the trick for TV programmers is to make science fiction appealing to 
the mass audience as well. 
Over the past 25 years, that hasn't been easy. Re-creating the magic of Rod 
Serling's "The Twilight Zone," which wasn't exactly a huge ratings smash itself 
during its six-year run in the early '60s, has been virtually impossible. 
Witness NBC. Brandon Tartikoff has guided the network from an almost-dead, 
last-place standing to a commanding first in the prime-time ratings during his 
nearly 10 years as president of the network's entertainment division. His knack 
for ordering and scheduling programs that lasso the loyalties of the Nielsen 
families has been uncanny. Except when it comes to science fiction. 
Throughout Tartikoff's reign, NBC has repeatedly tried and repeatedly failed to 
score with a sci-fi or fantasy series. Neither "Voyagers," "The Powers of 
Matthew Star," "Misfits of Science," "Manimal," "Amazing Stories" nor "Alfred 
Hitchcock Presents" lasted more than two seasons. Even the network's two 
blockbuster sci-fi miniseries, "V" and "Something Is Out There," flopped as 
weekly series. 
"I came to Brandon with the idea for 'Quantum Leap,' " said Donald Bellisario, 
the show's creator and executive producer, "and he was definitely reticent to 
give it a try. He said, 'science fiction just doesn't work.' Different is OK, 
but science fiction is a four-letter word." 
Unabashedly science-fiction shows such as "Star Trek: The Next Generation" and 
"War of the Worlds" have flourished in syndication the last couple of years 
with a smallish (by network standards) audience of hard-core fans. But not a 
single science fiction/fantasy show has clicked on any of the networks since 
"The Incredible Hulk" was canceled in 1982 after a four-year run on CBS and 
"The Bionic Woman" and "The Six Million Dollar Man" enjoyed their modestly 
successful runs on ABC in the mid '70s. 
Over the last two decades, a period in which sci-fi movies such as the "Star 
Wars" trilogy, "Close Encounters of the Third Kind" and "E.T." were shattering 
box-office records, the networks were churning out such sci-fi flops as 
"Battlestar Galactica," "Buck Rogers in the 25th Century," "Project UFO," "Man 
From Atlantis," "Starman" and "Max Headroom." In the '60s, neither "The 
Invaders" nor "The Time Tunnel" could survive past their first year, "Outer 
Limits" lasted only a year and a half and even the original "Star Trek" wasn't 
anything close to a hit during its three seasons on NBC. 
"It's part of the history of the sci-fi and alien form," said Warren 
Littlefield, NBC's executive vice president of prime-time programs. "You go all 
the way back to 'The Invaders' on ABC, which started out great and then faded 
fast. What happens ultimately is the audience asks for a resolution. Is it 
going to be us or them? Who's going to win? They get frustrated sitting week 
after week without getting to the final battle. 
"With the miniseries 'Something Is Out There,' it was really scary and we had 
great monsters and the audience responded to that. But when we got into the 
weekly grind of series television, we couldn't deliver that kind of scary stuff 
and great monsters every time." 
So why, in the face of so much failure, do the networks keep trying? 
"It's not as if we walk around here with a sci-fi stamp and say, 'Where is it, 
we've got to have it,' " Littlefield said when pressed about NBC's seemingly 
obsessive search for a science-fiction hit. "But we do walk around looking for 
something that's different. And when you introduce a show like 'Quantum Leap' 
that covers new territory and the audience doesn't out-and-out reject it, 
that's enough for us to say, 'Let's stick with it.' " 
Perhaps in deference to that less-than-ringing endorsement of their genre, 
science-fiction TV producers such as Kenneth Johnson, executive producer of 
Fox's "Alien Nation" and formerly the creator of the miniseries "V" and "The 
Incredible Hulk," say the secret to making a science-fiction series with mass 
appeal is "to completely forget about science fiction." 
"Sure we want to come up with episodes and approaches that you can only see on 
'Alien Nation,' but they have to be driven by character and personal, moral 
issues rather than driven by externals," Johnson said. " 'Battlestar Galactica' 
became mostly shots of space ships flying around and eventually people said, 
'Haven't I seen that already?' And when they turned 'V' into a weekly series, 
it became dependent on action and special effects, whereas the miniseries was 
really an allegory about power and how different people react to it. 
Conversely, the series was all about, 'Well, last week Diana ate a guinea pig, 
what can we have her eat this week?' 
"The reason 'Star Trek' has been so successful is that people know that when 
they tune in, it is going to be about something. With science fiction, as with 
everything else, you have to capture their minds more than just dazzle their 
eyes." 
So while syndicated series such as "War of the Worlds" flaunt their traditional 
sci-fi aliens and monsters, today's network shows downplay their sci-fi 
weirdness. "Alien Nation," Johnson maintained, is not about aliens from outer 
space. It is instead a giant allegory about the integration of an outsider race 
of people into mainstream society. It is an exploration of the prejudice 
encountered by any group -- the Jews and Italians at the turn of the century, 
blacks in the '50s and '60s, the Vietnamese boat people today -- as they search 
for acceptance from the majority. 
True, the aliens look strange, they get drunk on "sour milk rather than sour 
mash," they can see in the dark and they have two hearts and some bizarre 
reproductive requirements, but all those physical differences, Johnson insists, 
only make it easier for the audience to swallow strong statements about bigotry 
and the moral necessity of accepting others. 
Likewise, Bellisario, whose show recently began its first full season on NBC 
after an abbreviated, mid-season run earlier this year, has limited the 
time-travel element of "Quantum Leap" to the span of the main character's 
lifetime -- this in an effort to bring as much realism to the show as possible. 
Whereas "The Time Tunnel" in 1966 sent its two scientists to the siege of Troy, 
the battle of Jericho and the home of Marie Antoinette, Bellisario's scientist 
pops in and out of only the last four decades, and 
he never gets involved in any major historical events. 
"What makes this interesting from week to week is if you get involved with this 
character," Bellisario said, "and it's hard to do that if you're bouncing 
around with the lions and the Christians in ancient Rome. You suspend belief so 
much (in that kind of series) that it becomes an unrealistic kind of show. But 
our audience can identify with the Walter Mitty idea of becoming someone else. 
People think about what it would be like to be a baseball player or an airline 
pilot. We daydream about that." 
To enhance the realism of the program and to acclimate the audience to the idea 
of "quantum leaping," the first few shows of the new season will see the 
physicist, played by Scott Bakula, assuming the identity of men around his own 
age. (In the series, the TV audience sees Bakula as himself, but other 
characters see him as the person he has become. When he is reflected in a 
mirror, however, the TV audience also sees him as his new persona.) 
"Once everyone understands how this works, then we'll get wilder," Bellisario 
said. "He'll come leaping in as a woman, then as a baby. We may even bring him 
back as a dog, but until we have the audience on our side, it's dangerous to be 
too weird." 
On the other hand, "War of the Worlds," is weird, scary and impelled by the 
age-old battle of good against evil -- exactly the kind of thing you think of 
when you hear the words science fiction. In contrast to the network's 
experience with sci-fi, syndication has been the genre's best friend. The 
popularity of the original "Star Trek" series didn't explode until it was 
canceled by NBC and sent off into syndicated reruns. And Paramount's other 
first-run sci-fi/fantasy/horror dramas, "Star Trek: The Next Generation" and 
"Friday the 13th," have found loyal audiences in syndication as well. All three 
shows air weekly on more than 200 stations nationwide, including KCOP Channel 
13. 
Network executives contend that science-fiction shows work in syndication 
simply because they can survive with relatively small audiences. "You can be a 
hit with much smaller numbers made up of strictly hard-core fans," Littlefield 
said. " 'Misfits of Science' had a hard-core 19 share and they were upset when 
we canceled it, but it just wasn't enough to sustain the show on the network." 
(Hit network shows generally score at least a 25% share of the audience.) 
Frank Kelly, executive vice president of programming for Paramount Television, 
conceded that syndicated shows can "tolerate" smaller audiences. But he added 
that Paramount's three syndicated sci-fi series have succeeded primarily 
because syndication allows for more adventurous content than the networks seem 
to permit with all their research, formulas and preconceived notions about 
"what works and what doesn't." 
"They try to get this demographic and cover that audience and apply rules from 
other shows and they think about whether a show fits into their schedule on a 
particular night or hour or week, and that can bog down a good product," Kelly 
said. 
"There is more freedom in syndication to take risks and push things as far as 
you can push them," said Frank Mancuso Jr., the executive producer of "Friday 
the 13th" and "War of the Worlds." "If you try to fit sci-fi into a network 
box, it won't work. There's a certain homogenization that takes place at the 
network and maybe that's why genre pieces don't work there. They are careful to 
make shows that are certain not to offend anyone, but those shows won't turn 
anyone on either. Genre shows create a rabid following because they are willing 
to go out there in the fringe." 
"War of the Worlds," which premieres locally Saturday at 10 p.m., is filmed in 
Toronto and produced on a budget of about $600,000 per episode, significantly 
less than the money spent on a typical network drama. Young men flock to the 
show, and though Paramount was disappointed with the content of the series' 
first season, it still was the fourth-highest rated of all syndicated programs 
among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 -- advertisers' favorite demographic 
group. "Star Trek: The Next Generation" was first, and does as well as or 
better than many network shows. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether these syndicated dramas are more 
adventurous than the sci-fi programs that have come and gone on the networks. 
It would be difficult to argue that "Max Headroom," which died a quick death 
two years ago on ABC, was less risky, less innovative, less spectacularly 
cinematic or less out there on the fringe than anything Paramount Television 
has ever tried. What is certain is that all three Paramount series have 
benefited from recognizable titles, which Kelly said induces large chunks of 
the audience to at least sample them once or twice and then stick around if 
they like it. The studio has yet to produce a syndicated sci-fi series that 
isn't named after a famous previous success. Fox's "Alien Nation" is likewise 
based on the Twentieth Century Fox movie of the same name, even though the film 
was far from a box-office smash and the title, according to Johnson, is 
"alienating, sinister" and at cross purposes to drawing a broad network-style 
audience. 
"You would think from its title that this would be a show for young boys, but 
it's not," Johnson insisted. "Women will click to this show as long as we can 
get them to try it, because our female characters are liberated and not afraid 
to speak their mind. The promotional problem will be getting them past the 
title. People have had it up to here with aliens." 
Or maybe not. Even if "Alien Nation" and "Quantum Leap" crash with warp speed 
onto the sci-fi TV scrap heap, it is unlikely that the genre will ever become 
the exclusive domain of those rabid hard-core audiences that garner profits for 
shows only in syndication. 
No matter how many times they strike out, network programmers never stop 
swinging for the fences. At least every once in awhile. 
"I think you'll continue to see the networks experiment in this genre," said 
NBC's Littlefield. "You won't see a lot of it, because it requires an 
investment of roughly $15 million just to step up to the plate with a new 
series. And since it costs a fortune, there's a tendency to say, 'Maybe we 
should be up there with a genre that has been doing better.' 
"But ultimately the pores get so clogged with the same old thing that you just 
have to try something different. You may go down in a ball of flames, but part 
of being a good programming executive is to believe you can step up there and 
hit a home run with that next at bat." 
