NUTRITIONALLY SPEAKING: 'HEALING' A SOLID GUIDE TO CURATIVE POWERS OF FOOD 
Dietitians have a saying: People eat for taste, not nutrients. 
If that's true, then the authors of the new book "The Healing Foods" (Rodale 
Press: $24.95) should have a best-seller on their hands. 
Unlike its counterparts in the diet section of the bookstore, which focus on 
the hazardous characteristics of some foods, "Healing Foods" is an A-to-Z 
compendium of foods that have pharmacological benefits. Its subtitle says the 
book is "the ultimate authority on the curative power of nutrition." The book 
focuses on all the good reasons there are to eat. 
Enough Science for Perspective 
There are familiar food-and-health correlations and unfamiliar ones; food is 
implicated in everything from rheumatoid arthritis to wound healing. But the 
text is written in a manner that is easy to read, with just enough science for 
perspective. 
Designed, according to its introduction, to accentuate the positive, the book 
is a tool that may help guide readers to the "healing potential of food." On a 
more general note, it aspires to help readers view food as friendly and fun -- 
not boring, inflexible and frightening. 
All the contemporary connections between health and food are here: fish and the 
omega-3 it provides is good for the heart; high-fiber foods help maintain 
better levels of both blood sugar and blood cholesterol; calcium-rich foods and 
those containing Vitamin D help build strong bones, and foods with substantial 
carotene, Vitamin C, fiber and selenium all are important cancer-fighting 
nutrients. 
Unfamiliar Benefits 
But there are some surprises here too: 
Hearts of palm -- the famous ethnic/gourmet ingredient, boasts a mere 21 
calories per cupful and provides a full 100% of the Recommended Dietary 
Allowance for Vitamin A. 
Cauliflower -- although prized for its health benefit as a cruciferous 
vegetable, is noted for its contribution to lowering risk for some forms of 
cancer. A one-cup serving of cauliflower also provides 100% of the RDA for 
Vitamin C. 
Garlic -- although noted for centuries as a food with special health 
properties, an Indian study has shown that large amounts of the popular 
seasoning (10 to 12 cloves a day) may help reduce "bad" cholesterol and 
increase levels of the "good." 
The book is complete with a disclaimer, which warns against its use as a 
medical manual or guide to self treatment. The goal, according to co-author 
Judith Benn Hurley, is to restore the enjoyment once associated with eating, 
while providing information on how to keep a watchful eye on excess. 
'Too Many Fad Diets' 
"We just thought that there were too many diets, too many recommendations, too 
many foods to avoid," said Hurley, "with this book you can have a personalized 
approach with lots of options." Hurley is food editor for Prevention magazine 
and writes a syndicated column for the Washington Post. 
"Diet is a 'four-letter word' for people," Hurley said; "this book brings 
nutrition to the lay level. It's a friendly guide to a personalized approach to 
nutrition." 
But what about all those oat-bran-potato-chip eaters who may view this 
collection as a means of using food as a cure-all? 
"The book doesn't lend itself to that," said Hurley. "I think this is a real 
rational approach and it won't contribute to this whole-day-of-oats-thing. We 
stress the importance of looking at the whole day of food." 
Hurley explained that such over-zealousness on the part of consumers is one 
reason why some foods were intentionally omitted from "Healing Foods." 
Meat and Potatoes 
While organ meats, for example, have some nutritional value, they are extremely 
high in fat and cholesterol, which tends to reduce their merit as healthful 
foods. Likewise, zucchini is a food that is terribly low in calories, but it is 
lacking in the protective nutrients necessary for today's battles against 
degenerative diseases, she said. Both of these were left out. Conversely, 
winter squash, with its high carotene content, has enough protective nutrients 
to be worthy of a mention. 
Sections on the nutritional advantages of beef and reasons to return pasta and 
potatoes to the diet are included. Also, the book discusses food choices that 
may relieve symptoms of angina, anemia, headaches, the discomfort of 
fibro-cystic breast disease, cold symptoms, and ease the pain of ulcers. 
The book also includes recipes, cooking tips and a table of the lactose content 
of some dairy products. A couple of seven-day menus for lowering triglycerides 
and cholesterol also are features. 
Following is a recipe for Sweet Potato Soup With Celery from "The Healing 
Foods" plus some other good-for-you recipes from The Times' recipe files. 
SWEET POTATO SOUP WITH CELERY 
1 tablespoon peanut oil 
1/2 cup chopped onion 
1 cup sliced celery 
1 pound sweet potatoes, peeled and chopped 
2 cups chicken stock 
1 bay leaf 
1/2 teaspoon dried basil 
Toasted croutons 
Heat oil in large stockpot over medium heat. 
Add onion and saute until just golden, about 3 minutes. Add celery, sweet 
potatoes, stock, bay leaf and basil and bring to boil. Reduce heat and simmer, 
loosely covered, until vegetables are very tender, about 25 minutes. Remove bay 
leaf, then puree in batches in food processor or blender. Serve hot garnished 
with croutons. Makes 4 servings. 
FILLET OF SOLE WITH 
GARDEN VEGETABLES 
1 pound sole or flounder fillets 
1 envelope golden onion recipe soup mix 
1 1/2 cups water 
1/4 cup dry white wine 
1 tablespoon lemon juice 
2 cups shredded cabbage 
2 cups shredded carrots 
1/4 teaspoon dried oregano leaves, crumbled 
1/8 teaspoon black pepper 
Parsley sprigs 
Lemon slices 
Roll up each fillet, jellyroll fashion, starting with small end. Set aside. 
Combine soup mix, water, wine and lemon juice in microwave-safe 1 1/2-quart 
casserole. Add cabbage, carrots, oregano and pepper. Microwave on HIGH, 
covered, stirring occasionally, 8 minutes or until vegetables are tender-crisp. 
Remove vegetables to serving platter and keep warm. Reserve liquid. 
Place fish in reserved liquid in casserole. Microwave uncovered on HIGH 5 
minutes or just until fish is tender, turning and rearranging fish once. To 
serve, arrange fish over vegetables and garnish with parsley and lemon slices. 
Makes about 4 servings. 
HIGH-FIBER PRUNE MUFFINS 
1/2 cup bran 
1/2 cup prune juice 
1/2 cup low-fat milk 
1/4 cup brown sugar, packed 
2 eggs, lightly beaten 
1 1/2 cups flour 
2 teaspoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup melted butter or margarine 
1 cup pitted prunes, coarsely chopped 
1/2 cup chopped walnuts 
Combine bran, prune juice, milk and sugar in large bowl and set aside 10 
minutes. Stir in eggs, then flour, baking powder, nutmeg and salt to blend 
thoroughly. Stir in butter, prunes and walnuts. 
Spoon into paper-lined muffin cups, then sprinkle with additional bran, if 
desired. Bake at 425 degrees 15 to 20 minutes or until lightly browned and 
springy to touch. Cool on rack. Makes 12 servings. 
EASY VEGETABLE STEW 
2 potatoes, peeled and cubed 
2 carrots, peeled and sliced 
1/2 head cauliflower, cut into florets 
2 stalks celery, sliced 
1/2 pound mushrooms, sliced 
2 onions, sliced 
1 sweet red pepper, cut in strips 
1 clove garlic, minced 
1 (13 3/4-ounce) can chicken broth 
1/8 teaspoon black pepper 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill 
Combine potatoes, carrots, cauliflower, celery, mushrooms, onions, red pepper, 
garlic, broth, pepper and dill in 3-quart baking dish. 
Cover and bake at 350 degrees 1 hour, until vegetables are tender. Makes 8 
servings. 
TURKEY RATATOUILLE 
1 cup green pepper, cut into 1-inch cubes 
2 cups thinly sliced onion 
1 to 2 cloves garlic, minced 
1 tablespoon olive oil 
1 pound eggplant, cut into 1-inch cubes 
1/2 pound zucchini, thinly sliced 
1/2 pound mushrooms, quartered 
1 pound tomatoes, peeled and cut into wedges 
1/4 cup parsley, chopped 
1 1/2 teaspoons Italian seasoning 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon black pepper 
1 pound turkey breast, cut into 1/2-inch cubes 
Saute green pepper, onion and garlic in oil in 5-quart saucepan over medium 
heat until tender-crisp. Add eggplant, zucchini and mushrooms and cook 3 to 4 
minutes longer or until vegetables are tender. 
Stir in tomatoes, parsley, seasoning, salt and pepper. Bring to boil, then 
reduce heat and simmer, uncovered, 5 minutes. Fold in turkey and cook 2 minutes 
or until heated through. Makes 5 servings. 
