RESEARCHERS IDENTIFY SOME RISK FACTORS FOR MENTAL ILLNESS 
As experts become convinced that many mental disorders begin in childhood and 
adolescence, responsibility for recognizing problems is shifting to parents, 
teachers, pediatricians and youth counselors. 
But researchers can give adults only vague guidelines to help them assess 
whether children are at risk for mental disorders or show symptoms of an 
emerging problem. 
Researchers, for example, know that genetic factors are linked to autism and 
some learning disabilities; that head injury or exposure to toxic substances 
puts some children at risk for behavior disorders; that psychological trauma, 
such as physical or sexual abuse, increases the risk of such mental illnesses 
as multiple-personality disorder. 
But, says Michael Goldstein, of the UCLA department of psychology, "These risk 
factors need to be honed down to those that have high reliability and high 
predictability. I'm not sure we're there yet." 
Experts often group risk factors for mental disorders into four areas: 
* Biological risk factors, including genetic defects; very low birth weight; 
chronic physical conditions, such as deafness or blindness; illness, such as 
diabetes or asthma; physical trauma, or exposure to toxic chemicals or drugs. 
* Psychological risk factors, including low intelligence, learning difficulties 
and deficits in sensory perception. 
* Social risk factors, including poverty, homelessness, over-crowded living 
conditions, inadequate schooling, neighborhood disorganization and poor peer 
relations. 
* Familial risk factors, including poor prenatal care, a very young or mature 
mother, parental criminality, maternal mental disorder, severe marital discord, 
poor parental supervision, erratic discipline, child abuse and placement of a 
youngster in a series of foster homes. 
But much research remains to be done before the association between these risk 
factors and the emergence of a mental disorder can be understood. 
While many mental disorders are thought to have a biological cause, little is 
known, for example, about which genes might predispose an individual to a 
particular disorder, says Dr. James F. Leckman, a child psychiatrist at Yale 
University. Technological skills to understand genetic defects are within 
reach, he says, but little research is directed at causes of child psychiatric 
disorders: "There are fewer than 100 child psychiatrists in the nation who 
devote 30% or more of their time to research." 
Leckman blames the low priority given to child psychiatric research to the 
stigma associated with mental disorders; the relatively low status of 
professionals working with children, especially impaired children, and the fact 
that the field of mental health is overwhelmed with providing services for the 
ill, leaving little time for basic research. 
Research into the social and familial risk factors is equally vague, says Gail 
Wyatt, who studies psychological effects of childhood physical and sexual abuse 
at UCLA's Neuropsychiatric Institute. 
Abused children tend to develop sleeping and eating problems, withdraw from 
friends and have problems concentrating in school. Girls tend to become 
depressed and withdrawn while boys act out. "Children are often punished, 
rather than treated, for their mental health problems," she says. "But these 
are classic mental health problems that in the past have not been associated 
with sexual abuse." 
Children with low intelligence or learning disabilities are also vulnerable to 
mental disorders, says Claire Kopp, a developmental psychologist at UCLA. 
Cognitive problems can lead to aggression, conduct disorders and psychosis. 
"These children are greatly neglected because there are many complexities 
involved," she says. "They tend to fall through the cracks because they are so 
easy to miss in terms of mental disorders." 
Also far from clear is how certain family relationships and problems affect 
children, Goldstein says. "It has been difficult until recently to obtain 
clear-cut evidence about the type of family disturbances that cause problems," 
he says. "Some children are more vulnerable than others. Some family 
disturbances are more toxic than others." 
In general, the risk of having a mental disorder increases with the number of 
risk factors. One study found that the likelihood of having a mental disorder 
increased tenfold when four or more risk factors were present. 
Children with cognitive difficulties often fare worse, for example, when 
adverse rearing conditions are present, Kopp says. And depression is 
increasingly seen by experts as a precursor to substance abuse. 
One study showed that a major depressive episode among 18- to 30-year-olds 
doubles the risk of subsequent drug abuse. 
"It's usually the behavioral problems that start first," says Dr. Adrian 
Angold, a Duke University researcher. "These kids do not just have substance 
abuse problems, they have a variety of emotional and behavioral problems as 
well. If we focus just on substance abuse, we're missing the point. We need to 
start before the individual has even seen alcohol." 
Besides pinpointing the predictability of risk factors, researchers are trying 
to learn more about "protective factors" that seem to make some children immune 
to psychological injury no matter what they experience in life. 
Although less well-understood, these factors are thought to include: early 
prenatal care, good maternal nutrition, a loving relationship with at least one 
parent or other adult, consistent parental supervision and discipline, 
cognitive training, social skills training and improved peer relations. 
"What we're learning . . . is how to tie together risk and protective factors 
with specific disorders," says Dr. Felton J. Earls, a professor of child 
psychiatry at Harvard. "We're beginning to make some progress. We have to 
understand something about timing and the combination of risk factors." 
