COLORADO VICTORY UPHELD; SEVEN OFFICIALS SUSPENDED 
A play that never should have been run cost Missouri a victory, resulted in 
seven Big Eight officials being put on indefinite suspension and could affect 
the national championship. 
The Big Eight ruled Monday that Colorado's 33-31 victory over Missouri will 
stand even though game officials inadvertently allowed the Buffaloes a fifth 
down that resulted in the winning touchdown on the game's final play. 
Carl James, Big Eight commissioner, said in a prepared statement: "It has been 
determined that, in accordance with the football playing rules, the allowance 
of the fifth down to Colorado is not a postgame correctable error. The final 
score in the Colorado-Missouri football game will remain as posted." 
While there was confusion in the final frantic seconds, Colorado clearly had 
five downs. After spiking the ball on fourth down to stop the clock, 
quarterback Charles Johnson scored from the one-yard line on fifth down. 
Colorado, ranked 14th, is 4-1-1 and could get a second consecutive shot at a 
national title if it repeats as Big Eight champion and returns to the Orange 
Bowl. 
The officials, whose collective experience totals 177 years and includes 19 
bowl games, were suspended indefinitely beginning with this week's games. Their 
future in the league was uncertain. 
J.C. Louderback of Arkansas City, Kan., referee and crew chief for the game, 
said of the officials in a prepared statement: "We are human. We erred. And, we 
feel terrible in regard to the circumstances at the end of the game." 
Said Colorado Coach Bill McCartney, who had charged that the field was so slick 
it was unplayable: "If Missouri had outplayed us and if the field conditions 
had been fair and an inadvertent mistake by an official had worked in our 
favor, I would call our squad and coaches together and discuss with them 
whether we should forfeit because we won unfairly," McCartney said. "But I 
don't feel like we did. 
"It was remarkable under the circumstances that we won the game. We counted 92 
times when our players slipped on that turf. That turf is treacherous and it 
took us right out of our game." 
Said Dick Tamburo, Missouri's athletic director, of the fifth down: "I know no 
one purposely does anything like that. But we have seven people who were 
supposed to be monitoring that thing. The whole episode is most disappointing." 
