SALVADOR OUTLINES PLAN TO END WAR; 
CENTRAL AMERICA: BUT MARXIST REBELS, OFFERED FEW OF THE CHANGES OR RIGHTS 
GUARANTEES THEY SEEK, BELITTLED THE OFFER. 
El Salvador's new government outlined a plan Monday to end nearly 10 years of 
guerrilla war but offered Marxist rebels few of the political changes or human 
rights guarantees they seek in return for laying down their weapons. 
In its first peace proposal since taking office June 1, the right-wing 
government of President Alfredo Cristiani called for a cessation of hostilities 
within two days and the return of the guerrillas to civilian life by Jan. 15 
under international supervision. 
The proposal, made here in peace talks with the guerrillas, addressed two rebel 
demands. It offered a multi-party "review" of electoral laws and measures to 
"perfect" the justice system. The rebels want a new Supreme Court, a new 
attorney general and early legislative elections, before their scheduled March 
1991 date. 
Guerrilla leaders quickly belittled the plan, saying it ignored entirely their 
demands for investigations of right-wing death squad murders, a purge of 
anti-democratic elements from the armed forces and specific steps to punish 
military officers who abuse human rights. It also rejected any negotiations 
over the size of a peacetime army. 
The government offered instead to set up a joint commission with the rebels to 
oversee the disarmament process and "protect the life and the physical and 
moral integrity" of former rebels. 
In addition, the proposed accord would be supervised by delegates of the United 
Nations, Organization of American States and the Roman Catholic Church. 
"This is a serious, responsible proposal that seeks a global solution to the 
conflict," said Oscar Alfredo Santamaria, the Salvadoran justice minister, 
during an evening break on the first of two scheduled days of talks. "It 
deserves a serious response." 
Minutes later, the chief rebel negotiator, Joaquin Villalobos, faced reporters 
and branded the proposal "absurd, illogical and inflexible." 
"It is a plan that asks us to make an unconditional surrender and accept the 
country as it is," he said. 
However, talks on the proposal, and a rebel peace plan made last month, resumed 
late Monday evening. Rebel negotiators said it was expected that the two sides' 
opening positions would be far apart and expressed guarded hope for closing the 
gap. 
The Cristiani government and the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front met 
for the first time Sept. 13-15 in Mexico City and agreed to try to end the 
fighting "by political means in the shortest time possible" through monthly 
negotiations. 
This first round of substantive talks at the suburban monastery of the Roman 
Catholic Clarist Sisters. was mediated by Catholic leaders from El Salvador and 
witnessed by U.N. and OAS representatives. 
In a sign of the pressure on both sides to end the war, Costa Rican President 
Oscar Arias Sanchez met separately with each, then challenged them publicly to 
"bury the past." 
"Seven million Salvadorans have turned their eyes toward you, with optimism and 
faith," said the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize winner. "You do not want to leave here 
as accomplices of more war." 
The conflict has left at least 70,000 dead, most of them civilians killed by 
right-wing death squads. 
With that in mind, the rebels have made prosecution of such violations the key 
condition for disarming. Their plan calls for a cease-fire by Nov. 15 in return 
for reforming the judiciary and the army to end rights abuses. The rebels would 
then disarm by Jan. 15 and turn into a political party. 
The government proposal calls for agreements on undefined "measures to 
strengthen respect for human rights." 
"The impunity of those who kill and torture has to end," said Villalobos. 
The onset of talks appears to have sharpened the conflict, adding to a climate 
of distrust. More than 70 combatants on both sides have been killed since the 
rebels ended an 11-day unilateral truce Sept. 23, after the government began 
arresting and beating leftist union leaders and other rebel supporters. 
Since taking office June 1, Cristiani has surprised his critics just by his 
willingness to talk. But opposition in the military and his right-wing 
Nationalist Republican Alliance appears has given the rebels the edge in a 
propaganda war. 
"We all want peace to come to our country right now," Cristiani said Sunday in 
a speech televised in El Salvador. "But 10 years of fratricidal conflict is 
difficult to solve. We do not want people to get frustrated if, perhaps, the 
talks do not move forward at the accelerated pace that the people demand." 
