AIR AMERICA AND DRUGS IN LAOS 
In "Fury Won't Make the Truth Go Away," (Column Left, Commentary, Sept. 20) 
columnist Alexander Cockburn makes the serious charge that I doctored a later 
edition of my book "Air America" to enhance the reputation of the protagonists 
of a second book I was writing. This is completely untrue. 
The chapter on opium in my book "Air America" is expanded and updated -- not 
dropped -- to take into account further research. While writing a second book 
on the secret war in Laos -- "The Ravens" -- I inspected numerous documents 
that were classified when I first started my research, and conducted interviews 
with people involved in all aspects of the war. 
I concluded that the drug-smuggling in Laos was conducted by high military 
personnel in the Laotian military, and these were the people who profited from 
it. Unable to control their clients' activities, the U.S. government and the 
CIA turned a blind eye. 
This view is backed up by Prof. Al McCoy whose "legendary research" Cockburn so 
admires. McCoy states in his book, "The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia": 
"Unlike some national intelligence agencies, the CIA did not dabble in the drug 
traffic to finance its clandestine operations." Again, McCoy points the finger 
at the Laotian military. And the professor has not been banned from mainstream 
academia, as Cockburn says, but enjoys tenure at the University of Wisconsin. 
Similarly, Prof. William Leary, at the University of Georgia -- who has 
conducted exhaustive research into Air America -- concludes that "portions of 
the Laotian air force and high officials of the Laotian government" were the 
culprits in the drug trade. 
A recent article in the New Yorker states that it is still the Laotian military 
today that conducts the drug trade -- under a communist government. 
Cockburn seems to have an ideological need to believe the trivialized and 
distorted view of the cartoon version of Air America, which is the movie -- 
described by its own screenwriter as "a fun, zany thing for the whole family, 
with laughs aplenty and big things blowing up." 
It is the movie -- and its misguided true-believers -- who are ignoring the 
truth, not those of us -- often from opposing political positions -- who have 
spent years of research in trying to shed light on a complicated and difficult 
subject. 
CHRISTOPHER ROBBINS 
Santa Monica 
