ENDPAPERS: INTERNATIONAL PEN GOES TO CANADA 
One of the largest and most geographically diverse international meetings of 
writers ever convened ended last week on a high note of cooperation and 
understanding through literature. International PEN president Rene Tavernier 
called this literary global village "one of the most important Congresses in 
the history of PEN." Six hundred writers from all over the world were hosted 
for the 54th International PEN Congress in both Toronto and Montreal, where 
they read from their works, debated literary issues, struggled with problems of 
freedom of expression and confronted painful matters of censorship and 
imprisoned writers. 
Reflecting the positive atmosphere of glasnost, the congress announced the 
reinstatement of a long-dormant Czechoslovakian Center with recognition of 
Czech- and Slovak-language branches, and accepted two new centers from Eastern 
Europe in Ukrainia and Romania. In addition, a task force was organized through 
the Austrian Center to reexamine literature and ideologies in both East and 
West since World War II to recommend important work that had been ignored on 
either side of the Iron Curtain. The Moscow Center and centers from the Baltic 
states worked in cooperation on a resolution protesting "declarations against 
the freedom of speech of the Baltic writers" by various Soviet organizations. 
The specter of Iran's death threat to writer Salman Rushdie over his novel "The 
Satanic Verses" still hung over the congress, and Lady Antonia Fraser made an 
impassioned plea for concerned observers to realize that the situation was not 
better. "If anything, life is worse for Rushdie since the new administration in 
Iran has reaffirmed the death threat," she stated. "It is tragic that one of 
our most distinguished PEN members cannot walk where he might be recognized." 
A "Recommendation on Tolerance and Fanaticism" adopted by the congress 
specifically addressed the Rushdie case and called upon the Islamic community 
to cease the use of terrorism against writers. International secretary 
Alexander Blokh noted that many victims of this fanaticism are Muslims 
themselves: "There are Islamic writers, even in cities like Paris and London, 
who live in a state of permanent terror." 
For the first time in recent decades, both the United States and Canada were 
criticized by PEN for freedom-of-expression violations. The U.S. Congress was 
urged to rescind the Helms amendment to the National Endowment for the Arts 
(NEA) appropriations bill which would restrict funding arts projects on the 
basis of content. John Farrell, president of the USA Center West in Los 
Angeles, drew parallels to the Rushdie case, suggesting that the Helms 
Amendment ". . . reflects the pernicious influence of religious 
fundamentalism." The U.S. centers in New York and Los Angeles jointly called 
for a end to the ideological exclusion provisions in the McCarran-Walter Act 
which have been used to refuse visas to writers such as Farley Mowat, Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez and Carlos Fuentes because of their political beliefs. 
The PEN Congress unanimously supported a resolution calling on the Canadian 
government to alter a little-known law that allows any individual who requests 
an injunction order against a writer to prevent an unpublished manuscript by 
that writer from being published. This action was taken in response to the 
legal tactics used by the Reichmann family, who are Toronto developers, against 
free-lance writer Elaine Dewar in a $102-million libel suit. Precedents already 
established by this case (which has not yet gone to trial) would have a 
chilling effect on investigative journalism in Canada. 
Following an extraordinary three-day meeting of the PEN Writers-in-Prison 
Committee, the congress took action on many specific cases in more than two 
dozen countries. Thomas von Vegesack, chairman of the committee, noted that 382 
cases now are being followed, which is the highest number of writers imprisoned 
in the past five years. "It is terrible to think that in the contemporary world 
so many countries are becoming more repressive," he observed. 
The situation in China has grown dramatically worse since the armed attack on 
the student demonstrations in Beijing's Tian An Men Square on June 4. According 
to the Writers-in-Prison Committee report, at least 2,000 people have been 
arrested and more than 20 executed. Chinese media have reported that more than 
60 categories of books and publications have been banned, including foreign 
newspapers and magazines. 
The committee is monitoring 36 specific cases, affecting some of China's 
best-known intellectuals. A 38-year-old Chinese poet, Duo Duo, spoke movingly 
to the congress of his decision to live in exile after witnessing the Tian An 
Men Square massacre. "Politics and art are inseparable in China," he said. "In 
a totalitarian society, politics is always a theme for writers -- even when it 
doesn't seem to be." 
Other countries with particularly disturbing records for imprisoning writers, 
according to Von Vegesack, include South Korea, where PEN has identified 41 
cases; Vietnam; Nepal; Turkey, where Kurdish writers are regularly arrested; 
South Africa; Romania, which was accused of "cultural genocide against the 
Hungarian, German, and Serbian minorities"; Burma; Israel, and Cuba. The 
situation in several Latin American countries is more tragic, as dozens of 
journalists have been killed because of their writings in countries such as 
Columbia, El Salvador, Peru, and Brazil. 
The charter of International PEN (an acronym for Poets, Essayists and 
Novelists) dedicates the organization to fighting for freedom of expression 
worldwide and to fostering international understanding through literature. The 
latter certainly was accented in Canada, where participants could select from 
more than 50 readings, literary panels and "encounters" with authors. After 
four days of English language in Toronto, the entire congress was transported 
to French-speaking Montreal via an exhilarating train trip on the specially 
chartered "Author Express." 
In the literary sessions, one could hear playwright Arthur Miller musing on his 
experience of writing "The Crucible" during the McCarthy Era or watch a film of 
Simone de Beauvoir discussing feminism in America in 1978. Harold Pinter read 
from his plays "The Betrayal" and "Mountain People" with emphatic use of what 
are now known as long "Pinteresque" silences. Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe 
("Anthills of the Savannah") calmly faced down a British journalist who was 
advocating that the children's book "Little Black Sambo" should be banned by 
saying he could not imagine the circumstances under which he would endorse the 
banning of any book. 
Larry McMurtry, president of the American Center in New York, could be heard 
frequently on the congress floor speaking eloquently in his role as a delegate. 
Or, late at night in the hotel bar, you could listen to Leo Tolstoy's 
grandniece, Tatyana Tolstoya ("On the Golden Porch") explain that there is such 
a gap between the meanings of words in Russian and in the bureaucratic language 
of Soviet officialdom that the average Moscow citizen would need a very thick 
translation dictionary to understand officials. 
A panel on "Universality and Women's Writing" drew a standing-room-only crowd 
to hear Claribel Alegria of El Salvador, Margaret Atwood and Nicole Brossard 
from Canada, and Monika Maron from East Germany engage in heated debate about 
whether women could create literature with the same universal appeal as 
literature written by men. When discussion was opened to the floor, Betty 
Friedan, Maxine Hong Kingston, Alison Lurie and Miriam Tlila from South Africa 
made eloquent statements from the audience. Because the Canadian organizers 
made a point of inviting 50% women among the 60 "honored guests," participants 
took the opportunity to meet and establish a new International Network of Women 
Writers to explore ways of assuring the widest possible audience for literature 
written by women. 
A second innovation at the Canadian Congress was the establishment of special 
panels and readings for younger writers whose work is not yet established. "The 
Next Generation" programs featured writers such as Luis Rodriguez from Chicago, 
Mutabaruka from Jamaica, Arturo Arias from Guatemala, Gichora Mwangi from Kenya 
and Alootook Ipellie from Canada. "Although we all came from different cultures 
and had differing degrees of experience, we felt that we had a commonality," 
said Luis Rodriguez. "Each of us was from a segment of society that doesn't 
usually get heard. And it was nice to be heard for a change." 
For the first time at an International PEN Congress, the USA Center West from 
Los Angeles was represented by a delegation of 15 writers -- fourth largest at 
the congress -- including official delegates Joanne Leedom-Ackerman and John 
Farrell. The Los Angeles center proposed four resolutions on various issues, 
all of which were adopted. 
