THE TRAINS THAT COULDN'T 
The Soviet Union's promised era of reform threatens to become an era of 
material disaster. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plans to modernize the 
long-faltering economy, rather than providing Soviet consumers with a more 
comfortable life, have so far only produced a harsher one. Not for 30 years 
have state-run food stores had so few products on their shelves. Despite a 10% 
increase in investment in consumer goods, shortages of the most basic household 
items have become acute. Anything that is available is hoarded for future use 
or barter. Moscow is being swept by rumors of imminent food rationing. 
How could matters have become so bad? Among the few things not in short supply 
are plausible explanations. One is that recent steps to decentralize planning 
have thrust much of the burden of economic decision-making on inexperienced 
managers and bureaucrats, with predictably unhappy results. Another is that 
last summer's strikes and ethnic unrest continue to disrupt normal economic 
activity; among other things, coal is in short supply, possibly portending heat 
and electricity rationing this winter. Still another is that Soviet workers, 
seeing almost nothing to buy with the hundreds of billions of rubles they 
already hold, have no motivation to work harder or produce more. Finally, a 
major explanation is that the nation's distribution system is at a point of 
near-paralysis. 
Distribution has always been a weak link in the Soviet economy. The inadequacy 
of the country's road, railroad and storage systems is dramatized anew year 
after year as a significant percentage of the food the country's farmers 
produce rots before it can be delivered to consumers. Right now, according to 
railways minister Nikolai S. Konarev,25,000 fully laden freight cars are spread 
out across the country, stalled because freight yards are filled to capacity 
and key junctions are congested. One consequence is that enormous quantities of 
cargo are piling up at ports and on the country's western borders for lack of 
transport. Among the imports yet to move to market are 500,000 tons of potatoes 
from East Germany and Poland, 350,000 tons of wheat, and heavy tonnages of 
sugar, coffee, tea and rice, along with billions of dollars of non-food 
consumer goods. 
Konarev has not hesitated to suggest that the rail tie-up may be due to 
"sabotage," a word heavy with political significance in Soviet history. In the 
1930s and '40s, failure to meet work norms, breakage of tools and equipment and 
the like was as often as not attributed to deliberate sabotage, and punishments 
were severe. Konarev has in mind political sabotage by conservative enemies of 
Gorbachev's restructuring program. As Times correspondent Michael Parks reports 
from Moscow, no one has felt compelled to dispute him. 
In another time, the shortages and the mood of despair they are fueling might 
well have been seen as precursors of violent upheaval. The current dismal 
situation seems to be producing something else. As Mikhail L. Berger, a 
respected economic commentator for the government newspaper Izvestia notes, he 
and many like him "don't have any trust any more, any faith that the government 
is going to get (us) out of this." The Soviet Union is experiencing a consumer 
crisis, but there is a deepening crisis of confidence as well, and in the long 
run that could be decisive in determining whether Gorbachev will be able to 
muster the popular support he must have if his hopes for major reform are to 
succeed. 
