GONZALEZ, WIFE SHOO-INS IN SPAIN VOTING 
At the rostrum, an earnestly bearded candidate is in full cry, but all seven 
photographers in the homey auditorium with butterscotch walls ignore him, 
focusing instead on a smiling schoolmarm in the first row. 
When her turn comes to promise Socialist elixir to quench Spanish political 
thirst, the graying, blue-collar crowd of 400 rises in welcome. 
"We Socialists have the spirit to win this election, and many after it," said 
companera Carmen Romero, pledging a better deal for all Spaniards, but 
particularly the disadvantaged -- the old, the poor, the women. "Schools, 
social centers, health care, the equality of opportunity -- we are opening the 
way," she said to rhythmic applause. 
In elections today, the 42-year-old Romero, a teacher-turned-First Lady, is a 
shoo-in for a seat in Spain's Parliament from this sherry-bulls-and-cork region 
of Andalusia. 
As virtually certain is the national choice of her husband, Felipe Gonzalez, to 
be Spain's prime minister for a third term. 
Indeed, unless all the polls are wrong, the question is not so much if Gonzalez 
and his Socialists will win today, but by how much: Will they retain an 
absolute majority in the 350-seat Parliament or need to add a few votes in 
giant-pygmy coalition with some regional party? 
Gonzalez and Romero, who by Spanish tradition uses her maiden name, are 
disparate symbols of breathtaking change in a young democracy. 
So routine are free elections now in a country that lived for more than three 
decades under dictator Francisco Franco that as many as a third of Spain's 29.5 
million registered voters may not bother to go to the polls today. 
Gonzalez, a graying 47 whose socialism has become nominal after seven years in 
power, is running on a record of solid achievement. Rushing to catch up, once 
backward Spain is growing faster economically than all of its partners in the 
European Community. 
Despite 16% unemployment that is West Europe's highest, growth will be a solid 
5% again this year in a country that has gained 1.2 million jobs -- and nearly 
3 million cars -- since it joined the community in 1986. 
Gonzalez, who polished his statesman's image during the campaign with an 
official visit to President Bush in Washington and as host to French President 
Francois Mitterrand, has long since scrapped his early leftist rhetoric and 
policies. 
Under Gonzalez, Spain has become increasingly active in the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization, and an outspoken advocate of the European Community, which 
is spending billions to help on badly needed infrastructural improvements. Amid 
all the development, Spanish phones whistle, Spanish trains sigh, and potholed 
national highways are decades out of date. 
Amid all the change, Romero's candidacy is a microcosm of social restructuring 
undreamed in Franco's day. Tourists here in Andalusia can still buy tiles 
painted with the inscription "Women and sardines to the kitchen," but the 
stereotyped Spanish woman, smothered in black, beads clicking, is history. 
For this election, the announced goal of the ruling Socialist Workers' Party 
was to have women candidates for one quarter of Parliament's seats. "There is a 
change of mentality. Women are incorporating themselves in political life, in 
jobs and skills that have been traditionally closed to them," said candidate 
Romero, a mother of three who grew restive as a Moncloa Palace decoration. 
By most counts, the Socialists will win around 40% of the vote today, and 
170-180 seats in Parliament, down slightly from their 44% and 184-seat showing 
in Gonzalez' 1986 victory. 
Second place will again fall to the conservative Popular Party, which, under 
Jose Maria Aznar, a 36-year-old regional politician from Valladolid making his 
national debut. Campaigning for privatization of state industry, reduced 
government spending and lower taxes, the conservatives may not keep all of the 
105 seats that they won last time. 
Aznar assumed the party leadership from Franco-linked founder Manuel Fraga less 
than two months before Gonzalez called the elections -- eight months early to 
take advantage of opposition disarray. "I did as much as I could," said Aznar 
as campaigning ended for a "day of reflection" Saturday. 
Centrists under former prime minister Adolfo Suarez, 58, are unlikely to 
improve today on their 28 seats in the outgoing Parliament despite a call for 
the abolition of obligatory military service that appeals to young voters. 
The United Left, under Julio Anguila, a 48-year-old Communist and former mayor 
of Cordoba, by contrast, is expected to at least double its seven seats, thanks 
largely to disaffection among members of Socialist unions who believe that 
Gonzalez has sold out to unchecked capitalism. 
