YOUR CAKE IS IN THE MAIL; 
FRUITCAKE: BETTER THAN ITS REPUTATION 
It is better, we say, to give a fruitcake than to receive one. Lots better. 
But this is the wrong attitude, altogether wrong, totally, totally wrong . . . 
even though sometimes it may have a deceptive appearance of justness. Actually, 
a properly made fruitcake is one of the glories of our heritage, steeped in 
tradition and rum, and this is the time of year to start making them for 
Christmas. Those who believe (wrongly, we hasten to add) that there is only one 
fruitcake in the world, which everybody hands around like a hot potato, will 
find some surprises in the recipes that follow. 
Of all the cakes tested here in The Times Test Kitchen, this was the general 
favorite. Even avowed fruitcake haters could be seen secretly sneaking a piece 
of this moist cake. 
 -- KATHIE JENKINS 
HOLIDAY FRUITCAKE 
1 pound dried apricots, chopped 
1 pound dates, chopped 
1 pound golden raisins 
1 pound red and green candied cherries 
1 pound red and green candied pineapple 
1 pound almonds, blanched, toasted and chopped 
1 pound pecans, broken into pieces 
4 cups flour 
1 pound unsalted butter, softened 
1 1/2 cups brown sugar, packed 
1 1/2 cups granulated sugar 
12 eggs 
1 teaspoon ground cloves 
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 
1 teaspoon ground mace 
1 1/2 teaspoons baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup rum 
1/4 cup brandy 
Grand Marnier 
Juice and zest of 2 oranges 
Juice and zest of 2 lemons 
Thoroughly grease 4 (8x5-inch) loaf pans. Combine apricots, dates, raisins, 
candied cherries and pineapple, almonds and pecans in large bowl. Mix in 1 cup 
flour to dredge mixture. Set aside. 
Cream butter and sugars until light and fluffy. Add eggs, 1 at time, beating 
after each addition. 
Sift remaining flour with cloves, cinnamon, mace, baking soda and salt. Add to 
creamed mixture alternately with rum, brandy, 1/4 cup Grand Marnier and fruit 
juices and zests. Fold into fruit-nut mixture. Pour into loaf pans. Bake at 300 
degrees 2 1/2 to 3 hours, or until wood pick inserted in center of cake comes 
out clean. 
Cool in pans 15 minutes. Remove from pans onto wire rack and let cool to room 
temperature. Moisten 4 pieces cheesecloth, large enough to cover each loaf, 
with Grand Marnier and wrap around each loaf. Wrap Grand Marnier-soaked loaves 
in foil and refrigerate or store in cool place. Makes 4 (8x4-inch) loaves. 
Note: Longer it sets better fruitcake tastes. 
