HOUSE VOTES DOWN BUDGET DEAL; FATE OF PLAN UNCERTAIN; 
DEFICIT: BY 254 TO 179, LAWMAKERS IGNORE PLEAS BY BUSH AND CONGRESSIONAL 
LEADERS TO APPROVE $500-BILLION PACKAGE. CUTS COULD GO INTO EFFECT SATURDAY. 
In a stunning defeat for President Bush and the leaders of both parties in 
Congress, the House early today rejected the new five-year, $500-billion 
deficit-reduction plan. The vote was 254 to 179. 
A combination of conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats scuttled the 
accord worked out by White House officials and top-ranking members of Congress 
in marathon negotiations that ended Sunday. 
Because of the vote, the process of resolving the nation's budget dilemma now 
is plunged into uncertainty. About $85 billion in spending cutbacks under the 
Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law that would have been avoided had Congress 
adopted a budget resolution are scheduled to go into effect Saturday. 
There was no immediate indication of what steps the Bush Administration will 
take now. Congress is expected to pass a stopgap resolution today to keep the 
government in operation until Oct. 19 and increase the debt limit to permit the 
Treasury to keep borrowing to finance the debt. 
But Bush has said that he would veto any further attempts to delay the 
Gramm-Rudman cutbacks if Congress refused to approve the agreement. That would 
effectively shut down government services Saturday and require furloughs for 1 
million federal employees. 
Republicans, who had been expected to oppose the budget plan, did so by a 
margin of 105 to 71. Democrats, who had been expected to favor it, instead 
voted against it by a 149 to 108 margin. 
After announcing the result, Rep. John P. Murtha (D-Pa.), the presiding 
officer, said: "The Conference Report is rejected," then adjourned the House 
until 10 a.m. today. 
Rep. Bill Frenzel (R-Minn.), one of the budget summit negotiators, said 
afterward that he had no idea what would happen next in the House. 
The rout of the President and the leadership reflected widespread unhappiness 
not only with the tax increases and spending reductions in the budget accord 
but also a resentment by many rank-and-file lawmakers that they have been left 
out of the process. 
Opponents argued before the vote that a 12-cent increase in gasoline taxes, 
cutbacks in Medicare and higher taxes on beer, wine, alcohol and cigarettes 
would trigger a recession. And, they said, the burden would fall more harshly 
on middle-income and lower-income Americans than on the wealthy. 
House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) led the GOP opposition to the 
agreement, pulling many in his party along with him, while liberal Democrats 
attacked the plan as too tilted toward the rich and overly generous with the 
Pentagon. 
Others objected that a handful of lawmakers, meeting with unelected White House 
aides, had crafted the package without rank-and-file lawmakers' participation. 
"We're asked to buy a pig in a poke," complained Rep. Bud Shuster (R-Pa.). 
"It's sheer folly to impose a $130-billion tax increase when we are on the 
brink of recession." 
"The solution is worse than the problem," said Rep. Marty Russo (D-Ill.). 
Others, however, argued that approval of the agreement was essential. As Rep. 
Bill Archer (R-Tex.) said: "This is the best we can do." 
Bush, joined by his Cabinet and top White House staff members, put on a 
down-to-the-wire lobbying campaign for the agreement. Some members of Congress 
reported that they had telephone calls from two or three members of the 
Cabinet. Bush himself wrote lawmakers urging that they "do what is right for 
America." 
Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) also wooed members of his caucus by declaring 
after a meeting with President Bush that there would be "flexibility" for House 
and Senate committees to revise provisions of the agreement that caused the 
greatest political pain for Democrats. 
Foley and his lieutenants, working one-on-one to gather support for the plan, 
also argued that a vote for the budget resolution would only move the 
legislative process forward and avoid a chaotic cutoff of government services 
and furloughs for federal employees that was threatened if the House refused to 
pass it. 
Despite opponents' charges that the proposed $130 billion in tax increases over 
the next five years would derail the economy and bring on a recession, 
advocates of the accord said that there was no other reasonable choice but to 
endorse it. 
"If we have to hold our nose and vote for this, let's do it because it's best 
for America," argued Rep. James H. Quillen (R-Tenn.). 
"If we fail to pass this budget resolution, we are nowhere," warned Rep. Leon 
E. Panetta (D-Carmel Valley), chairman of the House Budget Commitee. 
Opponents, however, replied with equally forceful arguments. "My people have 
been taxed to death. . . . I'm going to vote against this turkey," said Rep. 
James A. Traficant Jr. (D-Ohio). 
House Majority Leader Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.) argued for passage of the 
agreement. 
"I was personally deeply disappointed with what we achieved," he said of the 
budget negotiations, which he chaired. "But the best thing to do is to go 
forward. We can pass the agreement tonight, try to improve it in the 
committees, and come back to fight another day." 
In a rare appearance on the House floor, Speaker Foley delivered the final 
speech just before the vote early today in behalf of the budget agreement he 
helped to negotiate. 
"This is one of the most important congressional decisions in your career," 
Foley told the hushed chamber. "We have a chance to let the legislative process 
go forward. . . . If not now, when? If not us, who?" Foley received a standing 
ovation. 
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan had predicted that there would be 
trouble in the world's financial markets if the plan were defeated. Both he and 
Bush have warned that defeat could throw the economy into a recession. 
The agreement, worked out after four months of negotiations between the White 
House and congressional leaders, has run into criticism since it was announced 
from two camps: Conservative Republicans have attacked its call for some 
increases in taxes. And liberal Democrats say that it would cut spending too 
far. 
On Tuesday, Gingrich and dozens of his followers broke with the President to 
oppose the pact, contending that it would destroy jobs and weaken the sagging 
economy. 
The President spent about an hour Thursday morning with several dozen 
Republican members of Congress, seeking to win them to his side. 
