SOBER HOPES; 
LIFE APPEARS TO BE TURNING AROUND FOR GIRL WHO REPORTED FAMILY DRUG ABUSE 
Come January, Terah Beth Cortez hopes that three years of pain and uncertainty 
caused by her parents' use of cocaine will come to an end and that she will be 
able to once again live with her now-sober father. 
Terah gained national attention Oct. 27, 1986, when she decided to report to 
Los Angeles police that her mother and stepsister were using drugs. Last March, 
her story was told again, when she was on the verge of being moved from a 
foster home into a home for psychologically disturbed youths because she was 
refusing to attend school. 
Now Terah's life appears to have taken a turn for the better. The biggest 
change, she says, is that her father, Ernest, who was also a cocaine user, has 
been clean of drugs and alcohol for 162 days -- about 5 1/2 months. 
She is attending Mulholland Junior High School and getting good grades. She has 
been allowed by the Juvenile Court division of Los Angeles Superior Court to 
live with her stepsister near her father in Reseda and visits him frequently. 
And a Studio City movie producer is attempting to have a movie made of her 
life. 
But Terah says she knows now that her father must fight his own battle. She 
realizes that she cannot keep him, or her mother, off drugs. 
The bright, articulate Reseda eighth-grader says she also realizes that she is 
not the only youth whose family ties have been severed by a loved one's 
attraction to cocaine. 
"Some of the kids have gone through so much," Terah said of those who attend 
her Alateen group. In Alateen, youths whose parents are addicted to drugs or 
alcohol share their stories with one another. 
"I just noticed that I'm not . . . the only person in this world to have 
problems like this," she said. "It made me feel a lot better because . . . if 
they can get through some of the things they've gone through, then I'm sure I 
could too." 
Her resolve to deal with her difficulties has been bolstered by her father's 
sobriety. 
"As soon as he changed, there was finally somebody I could depend on," Terah 
said of her father, an ex-minister, ex-drug dealer and ex-Los Angeles city 
tree-trimmer. "A lot of the problems went away because he became more 
responsible and took care of things he needed to take care of, and took care of 
himself." 
Terah says now that she did not realize that her life would begin spinning out 
of control as soon as she notified police that her mother and stepsister were 
freebasing cocaine in the living room of their home in Reseda. 
As a result, Barbara Cortez was arrested on drug charges. The Los Angeles city 
attorney's office held a hearing on the charge but did not prosecute. Her 
stepsister was gone when police arrived. Ernest Cortez and Terah's sister's 
boyfriend were arrested on charges of child endangerment, which were later 
dropped. 
Terah, who was 10 at the time, and another child were placed in the protective 
custody of the Department of Children's Services. Typically in such cases, a 
social worker is assigned to make recommendations to the court. 
Four months after the incident, Terah was allowed to live with her parents, but 
the social workers assigned to the Cortezes' case ordered Barbara, 48, and 
Ernest, 58, to undergo counseling and drug testing if they wanted to regain 
legal custody of Terah. 
But because her parents' erratic behavior continued and they failed to abide by 
the court's orders, she has been moved by the court through three foster homes. 
When her parents had custody of her, they moved her to the homes of various 
friends and into two different apartments. 
In January, 1988, her parents were evicted, beginning an eight-month period of 
homelessness for the family. While they lived partly in their car, Barbara and 
Ernest Cortez moved Terah from place to place, sometimes alone, sometimes with 
them. 
She became so depressed with all of the disruption that, about a year ago, she 
took a overdose of cold pills in a suicide attempt and was hospitalized 
briefly. She has also endured an emotionally draining series of court hearings, 
meetings with lawyers, therapy sessions and confrontations with psychologists, 
social workers and educators. 
Finally, just over five months ago, Ernest Cortez said he realized that he was 
on the verge of losing Terah forever, and he began complying with the court 
orders. 
Cortez said he stopped using drugs and began attending individual and group 
counseling and meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous and Cocaine Anonymous. He 
rented a quiet, one-bedroom guest house in Reseda and cut himself off from his 
circle of drug-using friends. Cortez said he still must attend a court-ordered 
parenting class, but hopes that Terah will again be allowed to live with him 
permanently by early next year. 
He said Barbara Cortez, still struggling with her own powerful cocaine 
addiction, has moved to the East Coast to live with her mother. 
Living on Streets 
But before her decision to move, Barbara had been living on the streets of Los 
Angeles. The fact that she "was out in the street with no home, no place to go 
and sometimes no food to eat and involved with a bunch of druggers was a very 
heavy thing that weighed on Terah and my mind," Cortez said. 
In June, Cortez said, he finally gathered up his resolve and ordered Terah to 
go back to school. Although Terah was a good student who had previously done 
well in school, the turmoil in her life had distracted her and made her 
unwilling to go. 
"You have to make yourself do this," he remembers telling Terah. "I said that's 
what discipline's all about. You've got to make yourself do stuff." 
He told her that it was not easy for him to go to the meetings and talk about 
his powerful attraction to cocaine or alcohol. It was not easy to cut himself 
off from his drug-using friends. And it was not easy to work for $50 to $80 a 
day as a masseur, when he had made that much in a matter of minutes as a drug 
dealer. But he did it, because he didn't want to lose her, he said. 
Terah took an art class this summer and resumed going to school in September. 
She attends Alateen sessions twice a week, meets frequently with a school 
psychologist and is making plans to attend modeling school with the proceeds 
she hopes to get from selling her story to a movie production company. 
TV Movie 
Michael McCabe, the co-founder of the Actor's Center of Los Angeles, and a 
partner, Michael Fournier, have written a treatment of the Cortezes' story for 
a television movie and said it is generating considerable interest. 
McCabe said the proposed movie project would cover the period of time from when 
Terah called police until the present, but will also tell the story of the 
Cortezes' slide into drugs. 
"The finish will be a happy ending, which we are all hoping for," he said. 
"She's back in school and at least one of her parents is straight, and she is 
happy." 
Terah said the lowest point in the past three years was when she wanted 
desperately to be back with her mother, but her mother had disappeared. 
Eventually, she said, she learned to let go. 
"I'd done all I could for her and after awhile I learned to separate myself 
from her, like when a kid goes off to college," Terah said. "I had to get on 
with my own life. I couldn't hide forever, and as soon as he changed, I felt I 
could change." 
Gloria Walker, a Hermosa Beach woman who contacted the Cortezes after reading 
about their story and who put them in touch with McCabe, has noticed the change 
in Terah. 
"She's come out of her depression," Walker said of Terah. "She feels hopeful. 
If you saw her in a room of kids now, you would just think she is a normal, 
all-American girl." 
Terah recognizes the progress she and her father have made and has written a 
poem to thank him for his efforts to free himself from drugs. 
"Being clean and sober is the most wonderful high of all," the first line of 
the poem reads. The last line reads, "You're with people who care for you most 
of all." 
Terah said: "He's come so far. We've both come so far. Since it happened, this 
is like the best it's ever been." 
