ORANGE COUNTY VOICES; 
MEASURE WOULD TRASH IRVINE'S STRUCTURE FOR SELF-GOVERNANCE 
Popularly elected leadership is the essence of democratic government. When was 
the last time that citizens in any representative democracy were asked by their 
government to abolish democratically elected leadership? It's a rare event, 
indeed, more familiar to authoritarian or totalitarian regimes. 
Yet that's precisely what the Irvine City Council is asking Irvine residents to 
do by voting for Measure E, which will eliminate the direct election of 
Irvine's mayor. 
For the third time in five years, Irvine voters must decide whether they want a 
mayor directly elected by the people or a mayor appointed by the majority of 
the City Council behind closed doors. Capitalizing on popular dissatisfaction 
with Measure D, the City Council moved hastily to put Measure E on the November 
ballot. 
According to the Council, Measure E will remedy "the expensive lawsuits and 
divisive elections" produced by Measure D. How will it accomplish this? Not by 
abolishing or amending Measure D but by eliminating the direct election of the 
mayor. This is the political equivalent of selling your automobile because it 
has a flat tire. 
Contrary to the council's claim, there is nothing intrinsic in the direct 
election of the mayor that leads to expensive lawsuits and divisive elections. 
These are the stepchildren of Measure D, which provides for political 
succession in the event that a council member is elected mayor, and have no 
family relationship whatsoever to a directly elected mayor. Measure E has been 
deceptively set up to force voters to render a single judgment on two very 
distinct issues. 
For varied reasons, a city the size of Irvine needs a directly elected mayor. 
First, a directly elected mayor can provide the political leadership and 
initiative necessary for community improvement in a municipality undergoing the 
strains of development and growth. American cities with council-manager forms 
of government -- the kind Irvine has -- recognize that while government by a 
professional city manager works well for small cities, larger cities need the 
leadership and initiative that comes from a directly elected mayor. As a 
result, two-thirds of these cities directly elect mayors in addition to city 
managers. 
Second, a directly elected mayor guarantees political accountability for the 
principal executive official in the city. That's as it should be in a 
representative democracy. The results of effective political accountability can 
be seen in the results of Irvine's June election. The political system worked; 
the electorate effectively rejected one political agenda and endorsed another. 
Third, Irvine needs a directly elected mayor to stand up to the Irvine Co., 
which has forcefully opposed the direct election of the mayor because it 
challenges the company's control over the city's development. As the dominant 
voice in the city, the Irvine Co. has a major stake in diminishing the ability 
of Irvine residents to speak through a single voice in opposition to its 
interests, especially through a popularly elected mayor with ample political 
credibility and legitimacy. 
Irvine needs a directly elected mayor to buttress the development ambitions of 
the Irvine Co. and to balance the influence of the company on important 
political and economic issues. 
Irvine needs electoral reform. However, reform must nurture, not trash, the 
city's commitment to democratization. Irvine's problems with political 
succession must be remedied. But that remedy should not come at the price of 
democratically elected leadership. 
Measure E is a giant step backward in self-governance. In the name of 
democratic leadership, Irvine residents should send a stern rebuke -- No on 
Measure E -- to those who would too quickly sacrifice democracy in pursuit of 
private interests. 
