BAKER LOOKS AHEAD 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III has offered the most comprehensive and 
optimistic view of Soviet-American relations to come from the Bush 
Administration so far. To paraphrase, he peered into the Soviet future and 
decided it may work. He also declared that this country's best interests lie in 
helping make it work, where help is feasible without interfering in Soviet 
affairs. 
Skeptics about both the intentions and the chances for survival of Soviet 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his reform movement will quarrel with much 
of what Baker said to the Foreign Policy Association in New York Monday. But as 
a whole, his view is balanced and reasonable, a sturdy foundation on which to 
build American policies for dealing with the Soviet Union. 
"We now have an historic opportunity with the Soviet Union," Baker said in one 
passage. "We have the chance to leave behind the ups and downs of the Cold War. 
We can move beyond containment to make the change toward better superpower 
relations more secure and less reversible." 
Baker's speech was both an analysis of change in the Soviet Union and Eastern 
Europe and a report on impressions formed since last summer, particularly 
during his long series of meetings with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. 
Shevardnadze. To the extent that it was intended also to rebut claims, chiefly 
from Democrats, that the Bush Administration is only vaguely aware of the scope 
and magnitude of the changes and too timid to do much about them, it was a 
success. 
The analysis was not all sweetness and light. Baker criticized the Soviet Union 
for stalling on total withdrawal from regional trouble spots in which the 
superpowers are on opposing sides. Arms shipments to Afghanistan and Ethiopia 
are increasing, he said, and shipments to Cambodia have doubled during the past 
year. And while Gorbachev speaks of cutting the Soviet defense budget, he said, 
and of turning swords into plowshares, Washington still sees no concrete 
results. 
Still, the Baker speech went farther than the Administration had gone before in 
linking Soviet domestic reforms with changes in its foreign policy that are 
"more advantageous to our interests." One task of American foreign policy, he 
said, is to search out converging interests and do what it can to help domestic 
Soviet reforms along. ". . . We want perestroika, including the restructuring 
of Soviet-American relations, to succeed," he said. 
He said expanded trade will take time because it must be strictly 
cash-and-carry. Most-favored-nation status must wait, he said, until the 
Soviets codify their emigration policies. 
But Baker said the United States could start at once to help the Soviets 
through the "uncharted waters" of market incentives, competition and pricing by 
helping them build a statistical base, create a consumer price index and advise 
them on other economic reforms, as requested. That may not sound momentous, but 
at a minimum it would spare Soviet visitors the embarrassment of having to base 
discussions of their economy on Central Intelligence Agency figures. It is an 
offer to help, and with the Cold War still so vivid a memory, the thought alone 
counts for something. 
