COLUMN LEFT; 
THROW THE RASCALS OUT; THEN WHAT?; 
ANGER WILL NOT PRODUCE REAL CHANGE UNLESS IT'S BACKED BY A POLITICAL MOVEMENT. 
Amid the rubble of the failed budget deal, Senate Majority Leader George 
Mitchell declared Monday, "We reap the bitter harvest of 10 years of national 
self-indulgence." Other accomplices in the package rejected by the House of 
Representatives redoubled their calls for "necessary sacrifice" by the American 
people. 
The people said hooey, and the people were right. The failed package required 
only selective sacrifice, from which the rich were exempted. There's been no 
national self-indulgence over the last 10 years, only the indulgence of a class 
that launched a smash-and-grab raid on the Treasury more than a decade ago. 
As the Democratic leaders capitulated in the final days of the secret budget 
negotiations, the package tilted in a savagely regressive direction: not just 
the hike in Medicare premiums and deductibility and in consumption taxes, but 
-- at the onset of a recession! -- such cruelties as requiring that laid-off 
workers wait two weeks before collecting unemployment. 
President Bush's on-again, off-again agonies Tuesday about whether to raise the 
top marginal tax rate to 32% (it was more than 75% in the days of Comrade 
Nixon) in exchange for a capital gains tax cut only underscore Bush's 
sympathies for the rich. 
The majestic contours of the smash-and-grab have been swelling since the 1970s 
(no need to blame it all on Reagan, Bush and the Republicans). Since then, the 
income of the richest one-fifth of the population has risen by 33.2%, of the 
top 1% by 95.1%. The income of the bottom 60% fell. Between 1979 and 1989, 
capital income (from rents, dividends and interest) rose by 66.2%. Real hourly 
wages fell by more than 9%. Pensions, health insurance and paid time off 
dropped by 13.8%. 
One more set of figures from Lawrence Mishel and David Frankel's "State of 
Working America," recently published by the Economic Policy Institute: The 
average American CEO earned a pretax $308,200 in 1979 and a pretax $612,800 in 
1989. The post-tax figure for 1979 was $153,900 and in 1989, $429,100. 
Such, in statistical form, is the political culture that shaped the budget 
package finally rejected by legislators cowering under the abuse of their 
constituents. Such are the ingredients of the popular fury that handed the 
neo-Nazi David Duke his surprisingly large though losing vote in Louisiana and, 
more significantly, gave the more respectably racist John Silber his stunning 
victory in the Democratic gubernatorial primary in Massachusetts. 
Angry people will strike out with such weapons as are available to them, and 
effective weapons are hard to come by in a country run under one-party rule in 
the interests of the rich and the corporate. One weapon, tested already in 
Oklahoma and scheduled for a vote in California on the November ballot, is term 
limits for elected officials and politicians. Throw the rascals out. It's 
pretty clear that Pete Schabarum's Proposition 140, with its shotgun six-year 
legislative limit, would land the state even more deeply in the arms of the 
lobbyists and corporate interests in which it already reposes. Proposition 131, 
the liberal alternative, has more appeal. Limited merely to 12 consecutive 
years in office, state legislators wouldn't, as with Proposition 140, just be a 
bunch of chickens led around by seasoned lobbyist foxes. With $3 in public 
matching money for each $1 in small donations raised within the district, it 
would give the little guy a bit more clout. 
So Proposition 131 could be a powerful, constructive weapon for angry people. 
But what would all those prospective new legislators, some of them presumably 
burning with zeal to reform a corrupted system, actually do? It's the same 
question one can ask about the admirable Proposition 128, "Big Green." Suppose 
it wins? Then where is the mass movement to ensure that its provisions don't 
get beached in protracted court fights; to sustain its challenge to present 
economic assumptions about what costs and benefits should be? 
You can't make any substantive political change without a political movement 
and, in the end, without a political party. In Canada there is that third-party 
alternative to the Liberals and Conservatives -- the social-democratic New 
Democratic Party. Last month, angry voters in Ontario, Canada's industrial 
heartland, kicked out the ruling Liberals and handed power to the self-declared 
socialist Bob Rae. 
There's no New Democratic Party here, but if people are not to turn in 
desperation to the hate-mongers like Silber or Duke, the 1990s will have to see 
the forging of populist, radical grass-roots coalitions. Without such 
collective purpose and sanction, the consequences of term limits will be 
nothing but bipartisan business as usual, as symbolized by the budget package 
in Washington or Monday's pillow fight between Dianne Feinstein and Pete 
Wilson. 
