MOVIE REVIEW; 
TWICE THE DEAD WEIGHT NEEDED IN OLD FORMULA FOR 'DEADWOOD' 
In the self-consciously Chandleresque mystery saga "From Hollywood to Deadwood" 
(at the AMC Century 14), fledgling writer-director Rex Pickett wants to operate 
within the hard-boiled detective tradition, but his movie is merely scrambled. 
The story has all the tough, cynical conventions of classic film noir: private 
eye (or eyes, since this version has two heroes) sent off in search of a 
troublesome-but-beautiful brunette who turns out to be less femme fatale than 
tragic victim. Private eyes find that their employer(s) had much more sinister 
reasons for hiring them than was at first naively assumed. Feeling used and 
implicated in the evil, the detectives wreak the necessary justice and wind up 
slightly tougher and more cynical than when the piece began. 
Not a bad little pattern for a dramaturgist to follow. But the predecessors 
Pickett is straining to emulate, reached their dark, pulpy conclusions out of 
some dark, real-life sensibilities that had real weight. "Deadwood" is full of 
dead weight, the heavy weight of homage, and the weight of truth in the maxim 
that film schools turn out auteurs who make movies mostly about other movies. 
The biggest wrinkle Pickett introduces into the old formula is in providing the 
plot with two detective heroes. The effect, though, seems less for innovation's 
sake than for the sake of grafting the buddy-movie formula onto the existing 
one. One detective, Raymond Savage (Scott Paulin), falls for the knockout 
target of their search, while the older, wiser, harder-drinking of the two, 
Jack Haines (Jim Haynie), tries to knock some sense into his love-struck 
partner. 
The missing person in question is luscious Lana Dark (Barbara Schock), who 
disappeared, apparently in a prima donna huff, from a movie set and shut down 
production at great cost to some possibly slimy producer types who've hired our 
heroes. That this obscure object of desire does not turn out to be a Garbo-like 
head turner when we finally catch up with her in Deadwood, S.D., is not all 
that surprising. The entire picture is wildly miscast, lead actors included. 
To reinforce the forced art-vs.-reality subtext of the picture, there's a 
black-and-white film-within-the-film, full of allusions to such classics as 
"Out of the Past." This sepia-toned homage is pale in more ways than one. "From 
Hollywood to Deadwood" (MPAA-rated R for language) -- is the work of a major 
film fan, not a major film maker. 
