COLUMN LEFT; 
AMONG THE PEOPLE, NO LUST FOR WAR; 
ORDINARY AMERICANS ARE MAKING CALCULATIONS THAT TOOK YEARS TO DEVELOP ABOUT 
VIETNAM. 
Monday morning, the day President Bush addressed the U.N. General Assembly, 
found me a mile or so away from U.N. headquarters at Rockefeller Center, 
discussing the gulf crisis on the Phil Donahue show with Ralph Nader and 
Richard Barnett of the Institute for Policy Studies. What struck me in the 
course of our highly critical examination of the Bush Administration's policy 
was that not a single member of the large studio audience called for war or 
suggested that this was a cause in which American lives might justly be 
sacrificed. 
This was a crowd of about 200 people, from New York area and around the 
country, who'd sent in for tickets to be in a Donahue studio audience weeks 
ago. By far the loudest cheers followed charges from Nader that the people 
doing well out of this crisis are the oil companies, the arms manufacturers and 
the big agricultural and commercial interests who had been urging appeasement 
of Saddam Hussein before the invasion took place. 
The studio reaction was certainly striking to me in light of the torrent of 
stories in the press, plainly intimidating to the Democrats, suggesting that 
Bush's policy since Aug. 2, the day of the invasion, had won overwhelming 
popular backing. No doubt there is support for the rapid and entirely proper 
imposition of sanctions by the U.N. Security Council in the wake of Iraq's 
seizure of Kuwait, but that's where the certainty seems to end. That same 
Monday morning, the papers carried reports of a poll conducted for a bipartisan 
group of political consulting firms. The results showed that just one in 10 
Americans favors war at this point. Nearly half of the thousand people surveyed 
said they thought that if the Bush Administration launched a war it would lie 
to them and claim the Iraqis started it. 
American soldiers in Saudi Arabia tell reporters that the thing that worries 
them most is the possibility of loss of public support back home, as happened 
in the war in Vietnam. The ingredients of just such a loss of confidence are 
already there. The fact that right up until the invasion the State Department 
sent out strong public signals that the United States would not take sides in 
any Arab-Arab border dispute is now sinking into the popular mind. 
There were gasps from the Donahue audience as U.S. Ambassador April Glaspie's 
amiable discussions with Hussein in Baghdad on July 25 were scrolled down the 
studio TV monitors. The audience followed with keen attention suggestions that 
what the Administration was actually doing in the pre-invasion days was trying 
to nudge Kuwait into halting its overproduction of oil beyond OPEC guidelines 
and thus allay Hussein's furious charges that the emirate had declared economic 
war on Iraq. 
Hussein: "Twenty-five dollars a barrel is not a high price." 
Glaspie: "We have many Americans who would like to see the price go above $25 
because they come from oil-producing states." 
From the questions raised by this exchange -- after all, the President and 
secretary of state have roots in the Southwest -- it is no great leap to 
strenuous questions about the leap of oil to $40 a barrel. Why have oil prices 
risen 100% in response to a supply drop now running less than 2.5% of world 
output? How come U.S. oil companies exported oil to Europe in September because 
prices were higher there? These are the sorts of questions that the folks in 
Donahue's studio applauded. 
If war is the extension of politics by other means, it is also a particularly 
dramatic display of the class system. Rich men start wars and poor people fight 
them. The day after Bush's speech to the United Nations came details of the 
budget deal hatched on Capitol Hill. Toss the colossal red herring of the 
capital gains tax fight to one side and the outline of one more familiar plot 
to shaft the middle-class wage-earner looms into view. 
The people on the receiving end of the proposed tax package are the people 
already bruised by the rising gas prices and among them are those who will be 
doing the fighting and dying in any war in the gulf. On one TV program, I saw a 
soldier in Saudi Arabia say that he thought he and his fellows were there to 
knock a few cents off the price of gas at the pump. What will he think as he 
reads of the prospective gas tax increase of 12 cents a gallon? 
An inevitable consequence of any substantial war is domestic political upheaval 
as the bodies come home and people figure out who is doing the bleeding. There 
are signs that in this crisis people are making the calculations that it took 
them years to get to in Vietnam. Let us hope that President Bush reflects on 
this as he is belabored by the urgings of the war faction. 
