WORLD TRAVEL WATCH: TERRORIST ATTACKS POSSIBLE IN MIDEAST, EUROPE 
World Travel Watch is a monthly report designed to help you make informed 
judgments about travel throughout the world. Because conditions can change 
overnight, always make your own inquiries before you leave home. In the United 
States, contact the nearest passport agency office; abroad, check in with the 
nearest American embassy. 
PERSIAN GULF 
Iraq/Kuwait: Due to the continuing crisis, avoid travel to Qatar, Bahrain, the 
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Jordan, Yemen and Oman. Keep a close 
eye on developments if you are considering travel to Israel. At this time, 
however, travel to Israel, Turkey and Egypt remains safe for the most part. 
Terrorism warning: The U.S. Department of State has issued a warning about 
possible terrorist attacks in Europe and the Middle East, as a result of the 
Iraq/Kuwait crisis. The warning states, "Evidence continues to accumulate that 
Iraqi-sponsored terrorism may occur in the near future." The evidence 
reportedly indicates that Europe and the Middle East are the likeliest places 
for these attacks, and the warning goes on to say, "While information does not 
suggest that Americans traveling abroad are the specific targets of possible 
Iraqi-sponsored terrorism, Americans overseas should exercise caution, 
particularly when in or near U.S. military or civilian facilities or at other 
facilities commonly identified as 'American.' " 
ASIA 
India: An attempt to reserve more jobs in the central government for 
lower-caste Indians has provoked violent protests in Delhi and other cities 
across northern India. Avoid large gatherings and exercise caution. 
Nepal: One result of the new-found democracy here has been the developing 
awareness among Sherpas and porters who man climbing expeditions and work for 
trekking agencies of the value of unity to obtain higher wages. Loose labor 
unions are forming and the cost of mounting expeditions to the Himalayas is 
increasing. 
Pakistan: Whatever the outcome of ousted Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's legal 
wranglings to have her dismissal rescinded, national elections are scheduled 
Oct. 24, and could be volatile. Exercise caution. 
AFRICA 
Liberia: Civil war continues; defer travel here until further notice. 
Nigeria: A new law prohibits smoking in public places, including cinemas, 
elevators, schools, offices and on public transportation, punishable by up to 
two years in prison. 
EUROPE 
Soviet Union: Alaska Airlines plans to begin regular summer service to the 
Soviet Far East next June, the result of agreements reached between the United 
States and Soviet Union. Flights will be offered three times a week from 
mid-June through August, from Anchorage to Magadan and on to Khabarovsk, and 
will be timed to connect with flights from Seattle. The route will be the first 
and only entree to the Soviet Far East from the West Coast. 
Bulgaria: There are signs that more unrest is brewing in this country where 
promises of reform by the Communist Party resulted in its return to power in 
free elections following the political upheaval of the past year. Recent 
demonstrations against the government and the growing strength of the 
opposition indicate that a struggle for power may resume. Exercise caution. 
France: For the first time, water is being rationed to pilgrims at the famous 
shrine of Lourdes. Previously, pilgrims were permitted to take home as much as 
they wanted, but now they are restricted to one small container to protect the 
levels of the bathing pools, at least until the end of the peak season this 
month. 
CENTRAL AMERICA 
and CARIBBEAN 
El Salvador: Civil war drags on here, and travel to the northern and eastern 
parts of the country is dangerous and should be avoided. If arriving by air, 
allow enough time to clear customs and depart the airport by 5:30 p.m. If 
arriving by road, the safest routes are along the Guatemalan border in the 
south. Avoid traveling after dark, stay away from military vehicles and army 
patrols, and stay indoors after 1 a.m. 
Guatemala: National elections are scheduled for Nov. 11, and with them will 
come heightened tensions and possible violence. Political violence has 
increased in recent months, and President Vinicio Cerezo has ordered an 
investigation of army involvement in the June 8 murder of a popular American 
resident, which pits Cerezo against an institution believed to be more powerful 
than the government. A sharp increase in poppy production has also moved the 
United States to place Guatemala on a short list of countries contributing to 
international drug trafficking. 
Nicaragua: The threat of general strikes and other unrest to protest government 
austerity measures exists. The deposed Sandinistas are flexing their muscles as 
an opposition party, threatening a mass anti-government movement. Although the 
government has moved to ease the austerity plan's effects, tensions remain 
high. Such unrest could affect travel. 
Trinidad &amp; Tobago: A passport and proof of return or onward tickets is now 
required of arriving or departing travelers. The new regulation is a result of 
the July/August coup attempt against the government. An 11 p.m.-to-5 a.m. 
curfew remains in effect throughout Trinidad, but there is no curfew in Tobago. 
Conditions are returning to normal, with most air service restored, but it's 
not clear yet whether flights around the Christmas holidays -- which are 
usually heavily overbooked in both directions -- will be as busy this year. 
Business in pubs and nightclubs is picking up now that the curfew has been 
moved from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. 
SOUTHEAST ASIA 
Indonesia: Monkeys in Sangeh, Bali, are becoming accomplices to crime. There 
have been cases of monkeys filching eyeglasses, guidebooks or anything not 
firmly gripped or tied down from travelers, then dropping them when chased by 
local people. The not-so-friendly locals then have refused to return the goods 
without payment. Watch your possessions, even around seemingly innocent 
animals. 
Philippines: Threats of violence by Communist rebels (NPA) accompanied recent 
talks between Philippine and U.S. officials on the future of American bases 
there, and prompted the State Department to issue a warning to avoid Roxas 
Boulevard near the American Embassy. 
Talks have adjourned until late this month, but the advisory should be heeded 
in light of a recent rejection by the NPA of the government's proposal to cease 
hostilities in metropolitan Manila. Adding to the confusion, mutinous soldiers 
trying to destabilize the government recently set off bombs in the offices of 
three American companies. 
For more information on safety concerns in countries you may be visiting, 
contact the Citizens Emergency Center, U.S. Department of State, Washington, 
D.C. 20520, (202) 647-5225. 
