CHINA OFFICERS AGAIN WORK IN U.S. ON ARMS 
Over the last four weeks, the Bush Administration has permitted Chinese 
military officers to return to work in the United States on the ground-breaking 
$500-million arms sales program from which they were excluded after the Chinese 
army's bloody crackdown on student demonstrations last June. 
The Chinese officers' quiet return to a U.S. military base and to facilities of 
the Grumman Corp. reflects an effort by the Administration to minimize the 
impact of the sanctions against China that were imposed as a protest against 
the Chinese army's suppression of the pro-democracy movement. 
Immediately after the June 3-4 massacre in Beijing, President Bush ordered a 
suspension of all U.S. military sales to China and of all visits between U.S. 
and Chinese military leaders. At that time, Chinese military officers who had 
come to the United States for the mammoth program to upgrade China's F-8 
fighter planes were told to stop reporting for work. A few stayed on here, but 
most of them returned home last summer. 
However, spokesmen for the Grumman Corp. in Bethpage, L.I., and at 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base outside Dayton, Ohio, confirmed that Chinese 
officers were allowed to resume work in both facilities earlier this month. The 
F-8 modernization program, which has the code name "Peace Pearl," is by far the 
largest single military cooperation program between the United States and 
China. 
"It was determined by the U.S. government that they (the Chinese military 
personnel) are needed," explained a Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Cmdr. Edward 
Lundquist. "They were authorized to return in October. You can assume that the 
decision was fully coordinated by the Defense Department, the State Department, 
the White House and National Security Council." 
"We can't proceed without the participation of some Chinese engineering and 
maintenance personnel," Lundquist said. ". . . To the best of my knowledge, the 
purpose here is not for training (of the Chinese). But training may be part of 
the overall package. There may be a fine line between them learning something 
and providing the technical support we need." 
Since June, the presence of the Chinese military officers in the United States 
has been so sensitive that some U.S. Air Force personnel have gone to 
extraordinary lengths to conceal it. 
Last month, local police arrested a Chinese military officer for shoplifting at 
a department store in Kettering, Ohio, near Wright-Patterson. Within hours, the 
U.S. Air Force colonel supervising the F-8 fighter division there paid the 
Chinese officer's bail and helped hire a lawyer who succeeded in getting 
criminal charges dismissed. 
When the Dayton Daily News sought access to the records of this case, the 
defense attorney -- who is a retired Air Force officer -- persuaded the judge 
to seal all the records of the incident. An Ohio appeals court ruled last week 
that the Dayton newspaper is entitled to examine these records. 
Lundquist, the Pentagon spokesman, asserted that "the Department of Defense was 
not involved" in bailing out the Chinese officer or in sealing arrest records 
in the case. 
"The guy who bailed him out was an employee of the Air Force Aeronautical 
Systems Division, acting as a private citizen and as a friend, and not on the 
direction or authorization of the Department of Defense," he said. 
In June, when the Bush Administration announced that it was freezing military 
sales to China, Administration officials said the President's action would 
apply to $600 million in arms that previously had been ordered by China from 
the U.S. government. 
"It is very important the Chinese leaders know it's not going to be business as 
usual," Bush explained at the time. "The United States cannot condone the 
violent attacks (by the Chinese army)." 
After the embargo was announced, Defense Department officials confirmed that it 
would have limited impact because it would stop only the final delivery of U.S. 
military equipment to China. They said that the development work on arms-sale 
programs would go forward on schedule. 
Project Peace Pearl, the program in which the United States is selling advanced 
avionics equipment to upgrade China's F-8 jets, is still in the development 
stage. The first shipment of the avionics equipment is not scheduled until 
1992. 
Grumman, the Long Island firm that has the main contract for Peace Pearl, kept 
its 250 employees on the job. However, on June 5, immediately after Bush's 
freeze order, Grumman told 40 Chinese nationals working alongside the Americans 
"that it was their last day, that they had to discontinue coming to work," said 
Grumman official Miriam Reid. 
Two Chinese military officers who had been working as liaison officers for the 
F-8 fighter program at Wright-Patterson Air Base were also told to stop coming 
to work. The Air Force unit that runs Project Peace Pearl and supervises the 
contract with Grumman is stationed at the Ohio air base. 
"At that time, there were only two here," said Mike Wallace, a spokesman at 
Wright-Patterson. "They were not kicked off the base, but they were told they 
could not work in the office. They still had access to the commissary, the base 
exchange, and so forth." On Sept. 6, the arrest of the Chinese military officer 
for shoplifting occurred. 
Over the summer, 35 Chinese nationals barred from working at Grumman went home. 
The other five remained in this country. 
According to Reid, the Grumman spokesman, these five were allowed to return to 
work on Oct. 2. This week, another 18 Chinese officials have arrived at Grumman 
to begin long-term work on the F-8 program, and 10 more Chinese officers made a 
two-day visit to the Long Island facility. 
"The Chinese are back at work, both at (Wright-Patterson) and at Grumman," said 
Wallace. "They were authorized to return at the beginning of October." 
"We're going to continue the work," said Lundquist, the Pentagon spokesman. 
"Whether the aircraft will be delivered when the work is done, that's between 
the Chinese government and the U.S. government." 
In addition to the $500-million F-8 avionics program, the arms deals with China 
supposedly covered by Bush's freeze order include another $100 million in 
radar, artillery modernization, torpedoes and torpedo launchers for the Chinese 
armed forces. 
However, some of this equipment already had been shipped from the United States 
to China before the Administration's freeze order was imposed, and other 
materiel is still being manufactured for future deliveries. 
The freeze on military sales to China was one of several sanctions that the 
Bush Administration imposed after the People's Liberation Army broke up the 
democracy demonstrations at Tian An Men Square. 
Among the other Administration actions was a suspension of any exchanges 
between U.S. officials and the Chinese government at the rank of assistant 
secretary or higher. But the impact of this sanction also was eased when the 
Bush Administration later decided that it applied only to official visits 
between Washington and Beijing, and not to contacts between U.S. and Chinese 
leaders in other locations. 
As a result, Secretary of State James A. Baker III met with Chinese Foreign 
Minister Qian Qichen in Paris and at the United Nations, and outgoing Chinese 
Ambassador Han Xu saw Bush, Vice President Dan Quayle and Baker before leaving 
Washington last summer. This week, the White House announced that an upcoming 
visit to China by former President Richard M. Nixon is being closely 
coordinated with the White House. 
