GOOD HEALTH MAGAZINE; 
PSYCHOLOGY; 
AT RISK; 
OF PRUDENCE AND PERIL: WHY SOME TAKE CHANCES AND OTHERS FEAR TO TREAD 
Everything is sweetened by risk," observes a 19th Century treatise on the fear 
of dying. 
Well, perhaps not everything. The pleasures of sunbathing, for example, do not 
increase with the realization that the sun's ultraviolet rays can cause skin 
cancer. 
But risk, in other forms, seems to have partakers who are more avid than others 
-- people who get a certain charge out of performing acts that pose physical, 
social or financial peril. In itself, risk is not the prime motivation for 
behavior that the more timid among us might deem as crazy, according to 
psychologists. Rock climbers and tightrope walkers don't harbor a secret death 
wish; venture capitalists don't invest in start-up businesses because the 
majority of enterprises fail within the first five years; struggling artists 
don't persist because their works are ignored by critics. Yet, because of the 
lurking potential for failure and even disaster, most of us steer clear of such 
pursuits. 
"I don't think anybody engages in risk taking just for the sake of it," says 
Louis J. West, UCLA professor of psychiatry. "What we describe as 'risky' is a 
value judgment placed on somebody else's behavior." 
Psychologists and other researchers note that people vary greatly in their 
tolerance for life's "sweetener" and the uncertainty that, by definition, risk 
carries. Those who have a powerful hunger for variety and intensity of 
experience do have fears, says University of Delaware psychologist Marvin 
Zuckerman. But they appraise risks differently than people who are strongly 
drawn to the predictable and who receive ample stimulation from familiar 
surroundings and routine activities. 
"The attitude of the high-sensation seekers," Zuckerman wrote in an article 
published in 1988, "seems to be: 'Yes, it's risky, but everything will turn out 
fine for me, and I will feel good.' The attitude of the low-sensation seeker 
is: 'Everything bad that can happen will happen, and I will be devastated.' " 
Evidence from several lines of research suggests that some of those who cross 
to the "wild side" of the fuzzy boundary of conventional behavior may have an 
inherited biochemical predisposition that makes them more likely to take risks. 
Moreover, the further one's behavior moves him or her away from that boundary, 
according to emerging theories, the closer he moves to the clinical domain of 
manic-depressive illness, a biochemically-based disorder characterized by 
marked swings between extreme elation and deep melancholy. Finally, there are 
indications that the willingness to take risks is a critical psychological link 
between the need for exhilarating physical or mental experiences and the drive 
to create. 
Whatever the basis for risk taking, determining why one individual will spend a 
Sunday afternoons kayaking in the seething rapids of a river while another 
person regularly opts for a lawn chair and the newspaper may say much about who 
we are as individuals. 
Using scales that measure, for example, "sensation seeking," "thrill seeking," 
"monotony avoidance" and "constraint," researchers have found that the 
propensity to engage in physically or socially risky acts is deeply -- perhaps 
biochemically -- ingrained in one's personality and may even be inherited. 
Zuckerman has spent 25 years studying "sensation seekers," using a composite 
scale that measures the "need for varied, novel and complex sensations and 
experiences and the willingness to take physical and social risks." He says 
some forms of mania resemble "sensation-seeking behavior that is out of 
control." Even when their disorder abates, manic depressives rate high in 
sensation seeking, according to Zuckerman's research. Other studies have found 
that the brains of people who suffer bouts of mania are biologically similar to 
those of normal sensation seekers. 
In sensation seekers, Zuckerman suggests, fluctuations in the distribution of 
chemical messengers, or neurotransmitters, and other compounds may alter the 
brain's regulatory mechanisms. One consequence, he says, may be that higher 
levels of stimulation are needed just to trigger the brain's internal reward 
system. That may account for the reason that high-sensation seekers run 
inordinately high risks of using cocaine or other stimulant drugs. 
Also implicated in sensation seeking -- particularly in males who seek 
stimulation through drinking, partying, gambling and sexual variety -- are high 
levels of male sex hormones, Zuckerman says. The hormones' suspected influence 
may account for the greater prevalence of sensation seeking among males, 
especially adolescents and young adults. 
Perhaps the most compelling evidence for a biological underpinning of risk 
taking comes from the University of Minnesota's large-scale study of identical 
twins who were raised apart. The Minnesota scientists concluded that about half 
of our personality is inherited, with the remainder shaped by the family, peers 
and other environmental influences. Particularly strong was the correspondence 
between twins for the personality trait that corresponds closely to sensation 
seeking. Nearly 60% of the time, a twin who was impulsive and reckless, enjoyed 
dangerous kinds of activities and questioned authority had an identical 
counterpart who shared those and other traits that are the hallmarks of 
sensation seeking. 
Sometimes the similarities bordered on the uncanny. Consider Jerry Levy of 
Tinton Falls, N.J., and Mark Newman of Paramus, N.J., 65 miles away. Separated 
five days after birth and unaware of each other's existence, the identical 
twins were reunited at age 31. Among their many shared traits was a love of 
motorcycles, a raucous joviality and an avocation that ranks high on any 
risk-taking scale: Both are volunteer firefighters. 
"A clear streak of wildness runs through some of the twin pairs," Tellegen 
says. "Of course, the opposite (shared high levels of caution and a preference 
for the routine rather than the adventurous) is also true. I think it's good 
for the species to have people on both sides." People who are driven by a 
desire for the novel and exciting and, as a result, the risky, may blaze new 
paths, he says, but they may not be the kind of people you want working in a 
nuclear power plant or "steering an oil tanker from port to port." 
If one accepts -- and not everybody does -- the theory that some people are 
more predisposed to taking risks than others, an important question remains: 
What do they get in return? One pay-back may be a feeling of euphoria. From 
reports of cliff divers and others, "we know that taking enormous risks often 
translates into tremendous highs," says Lewis P. Lipsitt, a Brown University 
psychologist who is studying infants and children to identify factors that may 
foster risk-taking or inhibition later in life. "We also know that some people 
need a sense of risk in their sexual encounters. For them, the threat of 
'getting caught' has an enhancing effect." 
Or it may be that some people engage in risky activities just to achieve a 
normal state of arousal, suggests the University of Wisconsin's Farley, who has 
devised a series of measures to assess "thrill seeking." A barrage of sensory 
signals -- having the stereo on while talking on the telephone and 
simultaneously paging through a magazine -- may be more than most people can 
handle. But those who rate high on Farley's thrill-seeking scale -- he calls 
them Big Ts -- may need all this stimulation to "rev up an under-aroused 
nervous system." 
Although not wedded to the arousal concept, Farley has found that Big Ts tend 
to be "experimenters with life," exploring and seeking variety in everything 
from their surroundings to their sex lives. Their curiosity, he says, is aided 
by an ability to think concretely and abstractly, fostering high levels of 
creativity, which Farley has observed among many of the thrill seekers he has 
studied. 
The work of Farley and Zuckerman closely parallels new research on the sources 
of human creativity. 'Someone who does something new is a minority of one," 
says psychiatrist Ruth Richards, who with psychologist Dennis Kinney developed 
a scale to measure how creative people are in their jobs and hobbies. As a 
result, creative individuals often must be willing to face the chances of 
failure and the potential for social disapproval, she adds. 
"Even in fields that ostensibly value creativity -- the arts and the sciences 
-- true creativity challenges the status quo and carries the risk of getting 
punished or ostracized," says Kinney, who along with Richards is a staff member 
of the McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., and the Harvard Medical School. 
Since the 1970s, researchers have been exploring the origins of human 
creativity, following up on anecdotal evidence that many eminent writers, 
composers and other artists suffered from manic-depressive illness. Examples 
include writers Ernest Hemingway, Virginia Woolf, Herman Melville, Edgar Allan 
Poe, F. Scott Fitzgerald and Lord Byron. Among composers, Handel, Mahler and 
Tchaikovsky were known to have mood disorders. 
Studies of living artists strongly indicate a biochemical connection between 
creativity and manic-depressive illness. Extraordinarily high rates of the 
disorder -- usually a third or higher -- have been found in samples of top 
artists. 
Richards and Kinney took a different tack. Instead of studying acknowledged 
artists, they concentrated on people who are creative in more common pursuits. 
Their findings add a twist to the link between creativity and mood disorders. 
People who are most creative in their everyday lives, according to the 
research, are not individuals who suffer from the full-fledged disorder but 
rather those who experience milder mood swings or are simply members of a 
family with a manic-depressive member. 
The scientists suggest that in exchange for a presumed genetic risk of 
developing a mood-swing disorder -- shared by up to 15 million Americans, 
according to some estimates -- these people are equipped with a "compensatory 
advantage" of creative potential. The result, Richards speculates, is a "richer 
thought process, greater emotional awareness, and motivating energy." 
Whether these individuals tap this apparently innate reservoir of creativity 
may depend on their propensity to take risks. Those who do, Richards suggests, 
may already view themselves as standing outside of mainstream society and may 
be more willing to experiment with novel ideas. Or, she says, the drive to 
create may generate internal rewards that are reaped during the process of 
creating. 
While risk taking can be healthy, it has a dark side, destructive to the 
individual and sometimes to society. The most reckless forms of behavior, 
however, may not have anything to do with the willingness to take risks but are 
a denial of fear. UCLA's West classifies Russian roulette, playing chicken on 
the highway, and other seemingly irrational, lethal behavior as 
"counterphobic." 
"The motivation behind this kind of behavior is to prove to oneself and to 
others that you are not afraid," he says. "The more fear one has, the more 
powerful the 'counterphobic' force to deny it. Denying one's timidity results 
in foolhardy behavior of the worst kind." 
Still, much of what is regarded as destructive behavior may stem from the need 
for stimulation through socially unacceptable activities. Both Zuckerman and 
Farley contend that a strong desire for excitement, which tends to decline in 
adulthood, may be a major factor in juvenile delinquency. Without constructive 
outlets, they speculate, boys and young men are more apt to engage in criminal 
behavior. 
"It's unrecognized how much of a role sensation seeking plays in juvenile 
delinquency," Zuckerman contends. 
In an unpublished study, Farley and his associates found that thrill seekers 
were about twice as likely to be involved in automobile accidents than those 
who rate low on his scales. Combining this disparity with the tendency of young 
thrill seekers to drink alcohol and use drugs, Farley suggests that efforts to 
improve highway safety would be more successful if they were tailored to the 
individuals behind the wheel. 
"We lowered and then raised the drinking age; yet accidents are the No. 1 cause 
of death among teens and young adults," he says. "Psychology has helped us 
understand and address problems at other stages of life, but we haven't done 
this with adolescents. Adolescents are dying of their own behavior. It's a 
psychological problem, and we should treat it that way." 
In another study, Farley found that thrill seekers from high-income families 
tended to find stimulation in socially acceptable outlets. Thrill seekers in 
the lower income groups were more likely to be involved in delinquent 
activities. The findings, Farley says, suggest that the difference between 
constructive and destructive risk taking may be a matter of whether families 
and social institutions are able to provide safe options, such as sports, for 
satisfying one's need for stimulation. 
Other researchers approach risk taking by studying the cognitive processes by 
which one makes decisions. These investigators view the situation somewhat 
differently. Baruch Fischhoff of Carnegie-Mellon University, for example, 
concedes that some people may be more willing to take risks than most, but he 
contends that "people behave differently on a lot of different dimensions. They 
may be cautious at work, for example, but not at home." 
Adds John Payne, a professor of business administration at Duke University, who 
studies how businesses handle risk, "I think there's more to be understood by 
looking at the environment in which people are working," rather than at 
personality differences. To support his view, Payne notes that middle-level 
managers tend to be "more risk-averse and worry more about the probability of 
failure" than their superiors, and that businesses are more likely to take 
risks during bad times. 
Fischhoff, now involved in a major study of how adolescents make decisions, 
says the difference between reckless risk taking and constructive risk taking 
is often the amount of information people have and how they process that 
information. Like the adults he has studied, Fischhoff has found that youths 
tend to "overestimate their knowledge" of risks and underestimate the potential 
dangers of particular behaviors. 
Overall, however, "kids know a lot," he says. "Where they fail is putting 
information together to make decisions." 
Regardless of their disciplinary perspectives, researchers agree that some 
degree of risk taking -- what most of us would call calculated risk taking -- 
is beneficial. Experimenting, exploring options and seeking out new experiences 
can enrich life, they say. 
Without some risk taking, an individual becomes "trapped in a single 
perspective," says Ellen Langer, Harvard University psychologist and author of 
the book "Mindfulness." "You're in a rut and don't even know it." 
Langer and other experts aren't recommending that people set out immediately to 
scale a mountain peak, or that they go into work tomorrow and demand a raise 
from their curmudgeonly boss, although, for some, such risk taking might be 
appropriate. Risk can be taken in doses, big and small. 
"If you always eat at the same restaurant, you'll never discover a new one," 
Fischhoff quips. "You'll never find out that you like Thai food." 
