HOWARD ROSENBERG: THERE'S MORE TO NEWS THAN A HOUSEHOLD NAME; 
TELEVISION: CONNIE CHUNG'S SATURDAY SHOW DEMONSTRATES THE GROWING STATUS OF 
NEWSCASTERS. 
Are the stars out tonight? 
"PrimeTime Live" with Sam Donaldson and Diane Sawyer on ABC gets bigger 
headlines, but "Saturday Night With Connie Chung" on CBS is the new prime-time 
news series delivering the biggest performances. 
Rarely have the values of news and entertainment been so artfully merged, and 
with such rewarding results. On a sour note, rarely has the importance that TV 
news attaches to its own stars been more dramatically on display as well. The 
past and future of TV news -- the messenger and message system increasingly 
eclipsing the message -- merge here too. 
"Saturday Night With Connie Chung" is an enjoyable show, so you applaud -- but 
uneasily. 
Although near the bottom of the ratings, the successor to "West 57th" has 
largely been a program not to be missed, topped by last Saturday's bewitching 
and profoundly moving segment on Terry Anderson, the longest held of the 
Western hostages in the Mideast. First came a capsule docudrama depicting the 
agonies of Anderson in captivity, followed by a Chung-moderated discussion with 
former hostages David P. Jacobsen and Father Lawrence M. Jenco; Anderson's 
sister, Peggy Say, and former Assistant Secretary of State Richard Murphy. 
The series premiered Sept. 23 in similar style -- a panel discussion following 
a dramatic re-creation -- with James Earl Jones giving a stirring performance 
as civil rights pioneer Vernon Johns of Montgomery, Ala. It was bracing 
television, as was much of Chung's recent interview with Marlon Brando. 
The Brando interview was fascinating in that it embodied at once the best and 
worst of this series. 
His bluntness, combativeness, high standing as an actor, passion for social 
causes and media skepticism promised to make Brando a challenging and 
captivating interview subject. And he didn't disappoint. 
Everything went extremely well, with Chung asking some pointed questions and 
wisely giving Brando almost the entire stage. But then, inevitably -- Chung's 
name isn't in the title for nothing -- the interview dissolved into a joint 
performance. Chung's cutaways seemed to grow longer and the camera shots of 
Brando and her together more frequent, until the two of them became an act, a 
duet, two celebrities in front of the cameras. 
Barbara Walters could not have executed it more self-servingly. Well, perhaps 
just a shade more, for Chung didn't sing or tap dance, and her modus operandi 
was the giggle, not the melodramatic pause and lowered gaze. 
"Saturday Night With Connie Chung" also renews the debate over news 
division-produced programs potentially confusing viewers by stirring 
re-creations and reality in the same pot. There's peril in giving substance and 
credibility to skillful re-enactments, as this program does, by making them the 
basis for ensuing discussions of the topics being depicted. And peril in using 
-- as the program did in a riveting piece on the December's crash of Pan Am 
Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland -- both actual home-movie footage of a 
victim and "reconstructions of the investigators' own theories" on how the 
terrorists' bomb may have been brought aboard. 
Yet such programs as Chung's and "PrimeTime Live" (which does not use 
re-enactments) reflect something far more intrinsic to TV news and something 
just as incongruous with its avowed mission to inform the public. 
More than anything, the host of "Saturday Night With Connie Chung" is the 
epitome of the journalist as star, and stars tend to outshine everything in 
their presence. 
Yes, you're right. In a sense, this is old news: Edward R. Murrow was a star. 
Huntley and Brinkley were stars. Walter Cronkite was a star. "60 Minutes" was 
predicated on its correspondents becoming the stars of their stories. And so on 
and so on. 
But times are changing. The number of news stars seems to be increasing even as 
the link between stardom and competence seems to be diminishing. TV news 
people, on both the network and local level, are increasingly promoted to us as 
personalities, and we are tuning in to them because of their personalities. No 
one should watch a newscast because of the messenger's attractiveness, but -- 
shame on us -- that's exactly what we do. 
Chung's exodus from NBC to CBS was widely regarded as a devastating loss for 
the former and an enormous coup for the latter because she was widely regarded 
as a valuable property and rising star. That was not because of anything she 
had accomplished journalistically, but because of some undefined star quality. 
There are surely lesser interviewers and journalists on the air than Chung, who 
also anchors the Sunday evening news, has a nice personality and is very 
likable. But her name in the title? Please, give us a break. As it turns out, 
"Saturday Night With Connie Chung" works best without much Connie Chung. 
Attribute that to the good producers who do the work behind the scenes. 
What makes a news star? 
Chung is a journalism dean compared with Deborah Norville, who was on the list 
of NBC News "stars" cited last spring by division president Michael Gartner. It 
is Norville who recently replaced veteran correspondent and non-star John 
Palmer as news anchor on "Today" and is thought by many to be the heir apparent 
to Jane Pauley. 
What makes Norville a news star? Her tough news coverage? Her reporting on 
Vietnam? Civil rights? AIDS? Central America? Glasnost? Get serious. This kid 
looks like Corky on "Murphy Brown." Norville is a star because, well, she's a 
star. That is why she is co-hosting the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade on NBC 
with Willard Scott. 
One of these days, as she continues to grow in stature, she'll be joining the 
rest of the news stars in using television to share their views on the human 
condition, as if stardom and wisdom were necessarily synonymous. And America 
will listen because she'll be a star. 
By that time, Connie Chung's present series will probably will have been 
canceled. But she'll have a new one that will reflect her next level of 
stardom: "Connie Chung With Saturday Night." 
