LIZ SMITH: PUTTNAM FORESEES 5 BIG HOLLYWOOD MOVIE COMPANIES 
"I'M ONE of the few people who've done what they thought in the back of their 
minds would be the ultimate within the role they performed, and discovered they 
were not very good at it. Both the Coca-Cola Co., then owner of Columbia 
Pictures, and I made extraordinarily tragic errors, but we made them for very 
good reasons." 
Thus spoke David Puttnam, according to Hollywood's "Dateline" columnist Steve 
Pond. If you don't exactly jump out of your skin over Puttnam's name, be 
reminded he was the British filmmaker who ran Columbia briefly and set the film 
community on its ear with his criticisms of Hollywood in general and a few 
huge-salaried stars in particular. 
Puttnam is making a "comeback." He is in the U.S. doing promotion for his new 
film, "Memphis Belle," a World War II flying saga that has all the earmarks of 
a sturdy hit. But the most interesting thing in this report is Puttnam's 
prediction of what's in store for Hollywood. 
He says the Japanese company Matsushita will succeed in its effort to buy the 
entertainment giant MCA/Universal. With Columbia already owned by Sony of 
Japan, this will cause widespread alarm that Hollywood is being taken over by 
the Japanese. 
In response, Puttnam predicts, Disney and Paramount will merge to create a huge 
American film company. In the end, Hollywood will consist of five enormous 
companies, only two of them based in the United States, and a handful of 
independent producers. They'll make all our movies. 
Gee, let's hope David Puttnam is wrong -- again. 
BRITISH BEAUTY Lysette Anthony has landed the juicy role of the witch Angelique 
in NBC's lush remake of that cult series of the late '60s, "Dark Shadows." 
Dan Curtis, creator of the original series, continues at the helm of this new 
version. Some of you may recognize Anthony from her recent roles in CBS' "The 
Lady and the Highwayman," or TNT's "A Ghost in Monte Carlo." And remember her 
1988 layout in Playboy? 
Ben Cross ("Chariots of Fire") will play the reluctant vampire Barnabas 
Collins. He is required to fend off the persistent sorceress, who just won't 
take no for an answer. (This is the role that turned Jonathan Frid into an idol 
of afternoon TV.) 
