GOINGS ON SANTA BARBARA; 
CREATIVE GRAINS; 
ODD AND ENCHANTING BEASTS MAY REAR THEIR HEADS AT THE 17TH SANDCASTLE AND 
SCULPTING CONTEST. 
Along with the usual overzealous Boogey-board riders and ear-piercing sounds of 
teen-agers' radios, a Santa Barbara beach will be invaded by anything from 
giant octopuses to monster frogs this Sunday. 
In its 16 years, the Sandcastle and Sculpting Contest at East Beach has 
inspired such creations as mermaids, a dog watching TV and a New York City 
skyline. 
And if all goes well, a Ventura County dragon will appear in Santa Barbara for 
the 17th annual contest on Sunday, noon to 3 p.m. 
A group of employees at a Camarillo computer company won first place in a 
Ventura sand-sculpting contest this summer. They would like to recreate their 
legendary lizard, but the woman in charge of sculpting the head has moved to 
Maryland. 
"We can't have a headless dragon," team captain Carol Cook said. "And that's 
such an intricate part we don't know if we can get anyone else to do it in time 
for the contest." 
Most teams do a few practice runs before the contest to get things organized so 
they can finish their sculpture -- confined to a 15-square-foot area -- by the 
3 p.m. deadline. A total of $1,500 will be awarded to the winners, who will 
donate the money to a chosen charity. Contest entry is closed, but looking is 
open and free. To get to East Beach go north on the Ventura Freeway and exit on 
Cabrillo Boulevard. Turn left to the first visible beach. 
The films of three significant directors will be screened on three consecutive 
Sundays and Mondays starting this Sunday. The "Independent! Films by Black 
Women' series opens with works by the late Kathleen Collins, marking two years 
since her death. "Losing Ground" is an often-humorous 1982 drama about a black 
female philosophy professor's search for a more complete sense of identity. 
On Oct. 21 and 22, Pearl Bowser, a film archivist, will discuss the work of 
black women filmmakers in general. She will present a documentary by D. Elmina 
Davis, "Omega Rising: Woman of Rastafari." The film explores decolonization and 
raises questions about race and identity. 
The series concludes on Oct. 28 and 29 with works by Ayoka Chenzira, a film and 
video artist in New York, who writes, directs, edits and markets her films. 
The first two Sunday shows -- this week and Oct. 21 -- will be at 2 p.m. at the 
Santa Barbara Museum of Art, and the third Sunday show will be at La Casa De La 
Raza, also at 2 p.m. All the Monday shows, this week and Oct. 22 and 29, will 
be at 8 p.m. at Isla Vista Theater, at UC Santa Barbara. Tickets, $5, are 
available at the door. For information (805) 893-3535. 
Ethnic arts films will be shown at the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History 
on Thursday nights throughout October. Two films concerning the people of 
Oceania will be shown at the Fleischmann Auditorium at 8 tonight. Suggested 
donation for the films is $6, $2 for seniors and students. Call (805) 682-4334. 
Art, food and entertainment are the highlights of the 10th annual Italian 
Festival. This year, visitors will be invited to take off their shoes and stomp 
around in a vat of grapes. 
The festival will run from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m., Saturday and Sunday, at Santa 
Barbara's Oak Park. Admission is free. 
The sounds of Beethoven and Brahms, with pianist Garrick Ohlsson, open the 
Santa Barbara Symphony's 1990-91 season on Saturday at 8 p.m., and Sunday at 3 
p.m. Tickets range from $5 to $35. Call 965-6596. The Angeles Quartet will 
perform compositions by Beethoven, Brahms and Janacek when they appear at 
UCSB's Campbell hall at 8 p.m. Friday. 
The quartet is composed of violinist Kathleen Lenski, co-concertmaster of the 
Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra; violinist Roger Wilkie, also a member the L.A. 
orchestra; cellist Stephen Erdody and violist Brian Dembow, formerly with the 
now-defunct New York String Quartet. Tickets are $11 to $15. Call (805) 
893-3535. 
At UCSB's Campbell Hall, the National Theatre of the Deaf, the Tony 
Award-winning ensemble of deaf and hearing actors, will perform their original 
version of Robert Nathan's novel "One More Spring" on Tuesday at 8 p.m. The 
1933 Depression-era comedy is about a spirited group who decide to "live off 
the land" in New York City's Central Park. Tickets are $11 to $15. Call (805) 
893-3535. 
"Vacuum: A Brief History of Housework and Desire," a new play by Susan Stewart 
Potter, will run from tonight to Nov. 4 at the Center Stage Theater at the new 
Paseo Nuevo shopping center, Chapala and De la Guerra Streets. Tickets range 
from $11.50 to $14.50. For tickets and information, call 963-0408. 
