UNIQUE TECHNIQUE IN NETHERLANDS; 
SERGEANT SNIFFS OUT WAY TO ID SUSPECTS 
Police Sgt. Jan de Bruin proudly displays his collection of glass jars, each 
containing the scent of a robber, a rapist or a killer. 
The scents, extracted from objects on the scene of a crime or from human 
subjects, could help Rotterdam's police dogs sniff out some of the city's most 
dangerous criminals. 
In his new "smell bank," the first of its kind in the West, De Bruin already 
has about 40 samples that he can preserve for at least three years. 
He plans to build the collection to about 300 samples, providing Rotterdam 
police with a unique addition to their criminal files. 
"Everybody has a different smell that a dog can recognize," said De Bruin, 48, 
who has devoted the last 12 years to perfecting the science of collecting and 
storing human odors. He is technical director of Rotterdam's police dog unit. 
Scientists are impressed by De Bruin's work, which they say could provide vital 
clues for criminal investigations. 
Other Dutch police forces are envious of Rotterdam's $700,000 smell bank, while 
canine experts in other European countries and the United States are intrigued 
by his methods. 
When a serious crime, such as a murder or bank robbery, occurs in Rotterdam, De 
Bruin is called to the scene with his homemade scent-extraction kit. 
He wraps any article bearing traces of the criminal's personal odor in a 
sterilized cotton cloth and places it in a large plastic ventilation box, 
equipped with an electric fan. 
As air blows through the box, scent molecules from the object evaporate and are 
absorbed by the cotton. 
After 20 minutes, the cloth is transferred to an airtight storage jar, labeled 
with the date and place of the crime, and stored in a room especially reserved 
for De Bruin's collection. 
"This sample was taken from the glove of a bank robber," De Bruin told a 
reporter, pointing to one of the jars, the sort more commonly used for 
preserving fruit and vegetables. 
Another sample came from a cigarette lighter, carelessly dropped by a murderer 
as he fled. 
"The whole human body is a source of odors. We leave behind scent molecules 
wherever we go," De Bruin said, noting that he also gathered odor traces 
directly from human skin. 
When major crime suspects in Rotterdam are arrested, they are photographed and 
fingerprinted on arrival at a police station. But they also have to provide a 
scent sample by holding one of De Bruin's special cloths for five minutes. 
In his experiments, dogs have accurately identified people from a scent sample 
taken three years ago, but De Bruin believes the specimens could last much 
longer. 
"De Bruin's techniques are quite new and could be very helpful to police," said 
chemist Jan Schaefer, an odor specialist at the TNO private research institute 
in Zeist, who advised De Bruin on his research. 
Police have traditionally used trained dogs to help track down or identify 
criminals, using the scent of an object belonging to the culprit. 
Schaefer said, however, that only highly trained dogs can match a human odor to 
its owner, and even the most skilled animals make mistakes if improperly 
handled. 
He said the most commonly used police identification test, in which a dog 
selects a culprit from a line-up of suspects, is unreliable because humans 
under stress emit different body odors. 
It was such flaws that spurred De Bruin, who has worked with dogs for more than 
30 years, to devise more scientific ways of putting his canine colleagues to 
work. 
Besides creating his smell bank, De Bruin introduced more sophisticated 
detection tests. Instead of a row of people, he presents the dog with a row of 
glass jars containing cloth odor samples, taken earlier from participants in 
the test. 
