COUNCIL MEMBERS ASSAIL CRA BUDGET REPORT AS 'MISLEADING'; 
CITY HALL: TAKING THEIR FIRST HARD LOOK AT THE AGENCY'S MASSIVE AND COMPLEX 
EXPENDITURES, SOME ON THE PANEL DON'T LIKE WHAT THEY SEE. 
Struggling to make sense of a 350-page document, City Council members on Monday 
criticized the Community Redevelopment Agency for producing a budget they 
called "misleading" and "suspicious." 
"It's like an Easter egg hunt," Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky said. "You've got to 
be a Harvard research assistant to try to figure out what's going on." 
Yaroslavsky and Councilwoman Gloria Molina professed exasperation Monday during 
a committee meeting scheduled to take the first hard look at the CRA's 
expenditures since the council voted itself greater control over the agency 
last June. 
"Believe me, this is the last you've seen of rubber stamps by the City 
Council," Molina said. 
The document sent to the council describes an annual budget of $582 million and 
two dozen major projects under way. 
But Molina complained that, for example, nowhere in the document could she find 
money earmarked to pay the Union Rescue Mission $6.5 million to relocate its 
downtown site, a proposal approved by the council last week at the prodding of 
the CRA. 
"This makes your budget look suspicious," Molina said. "How am I to know what 
you are really spending money on?" 
Molina called the budget "very misleading" and said: "This document doesn't 
tell us the truth." 
Said Yaroslavsky: "It does not give us a true picture of how you're spending 
money." 
John Tuite, the CRA's chief administrator, appeared angered by the criticism 
and said he was offended at the suggestion that he was attempting to mislead 
the council. He offered to provide the council with any information it wants, 
in any form they like. 
In a developing controversy over the direction of the CRA, the council voted 
last June to give itself authority to review the agency's budgets and work 
programs before they are approved by the CRA's commission, appointed by Mayor 
Tom Bradley. In addition, the council gave itself veto power over CRA decisions 
and created a new committee to review CRA policy. 
The council rejected a proposal sponsored by Yaroslavsky last June to take over 
the CRA entirely. 
"We should have taken the thing over when we had the opportunity," Yaroslavsky 
said Monday. 
The council's new review panel, called the Community Redevelopment and Housing 
Committee, is chaired by Molina, who in recent weeks has become a thorn in the 
side of the CRA. She voted against the Union Rescue Mission move and has been 
increasingly vocal in her criticism of the CRA. 
Gerry Hertzberg, an aide to Molina, said Monday that the council's new role in 
relation to the CRA is "more revolutionary than evolutionary" and said the 
committee, which is meeting jointly with Yaroslavsky's Budget and Finance 
Committee, intends to go over the CRA budget "line by line" and make changes 
where warranted. 
In past years, "nobody knew what was going on" with the CRA budget, Hertzberg 
said. 
