BUSH UNVEILS PROPOSALS TO PROTECT FOOD SUPPLY; 
SAFETY: CRITICS TAKE BITTER ISSUE WITH MAKING TOLERANCE LEVELS FOR VARIOUS 
PESTICIDES UNIFORM ACROSS THE COUNTRY. 
Unveiling his controversial plan to overhaul the nation's pesticide control 
laws, President Bush on Thursday vowed to keep the United States' food supply 
the safest in the world. But key elements of the plan were immediately attacked 
by environmentalists. 
The initiative, which requires congressional approval, would cut by as much as 
half the time required to get a dangerous pesticide off the market, would 
tighten pesticide registration procedures and would expand the definition of 
hazards. It also would stiffen sanctions against violators. 
However, critics immediately took bitter issue with several other elements in 
the plan, including a proposal to make tolerance levels for various pesticides 
uniform across the country. Some states, particularly California, currently 
impose stricter standards than the federal government. 
Environmentalists also objected to Bush's new "negligible risk" standard for 
approving pesticides used on food crops. 
Currently, regulations put acceptable cancer risks at 1 in a million, based on 
a lifetime of exposure to a compound. In other words, the standard calculates 
the chance of the pesticide causing 1 cancer that otherwise would not occur 
among 1 million people exposed. 
Under the Bush "negligible risk" standard, the Environmental Protection Agency 
would be allowed to assess risk at between 1 in 100,000 and 1 in a million, 
depending on various factors. Although EPA Administrator William K. Reilly said 
that 1 in a million will remain the standard for the majority of cases, the 
potential for relaxation of the standard brought swift reaction. 
The lower limit, noted Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles), chairman of the 
House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health and the environment, is far 
greater than the Food and Drug Administration says is acceptable. 
The flexibility, Waxman said, "would allow a dangerous pesticide to continue to 
be used, if its removal would mean lost profits to farmers. Balancing the 
cancer risks against farmer income does not protect the public and 
unnecessarily pits family farmers against consumers." 
Waxman earlier this year introduced his own pesticide control bill. The 
subcommittee will begin consideration of his bill within three weeks, he said 
Thursday, adding that he expects to take up the President's initiative in the 
course of those meetings. 
The President's proposals were revealed to key lawmakers invited to the White 
House for a briefing Thursday afternoon. The seven-point package, debated for 
weeks by the Agriculture Department, the FDA, and the EPA, will be shaped into 
formal legislative proposals and submitted to Congress within days, or at most 
a few weeks, officials said. 
Immediate indications are that the initiative will become a major battleground 
between environmentalists and the chief executive, who has made known his wish 
to be recognized as an "environmental President." 
The reform move was precipitated by last spring's nationwide panic over the use 
of a potentially cancer-causing chemical, Alar, on most of the nation's apple 
supply. After months of deliberation, Bush told Congress that the 
Administration had produced a plan "to speed the process for removing 
pesticides from the marketplace, to protect public health and the environment 
without being either unreasonable or impractical." 
Reilly estimated that the four to eight years now required to cancel the 
registration of an unsafe pesticide will be reduced to two or three years by 
eliminating a hearing process now required. Another proposed provision would 
make it easier for authorities to temporarily suspend a pesticide registration 
when there is reasonable evidence of risk to health or the environment. 
The EPA was ordered under a law passed last year to re-register pesticides now 
in use, a process that is expected to take several years. As each is reviewed, 
it will be brought under the uniform standard. 
Even before Bush put his plan forward, rumors about its major elements 
triggered an angry reaction, especially against the proposal to set uniform 
nationwide tolerances. 
The provision provoked special interest in California, where state standards 
are stricter than those of the federal government. Administration officials 
said, however, that there is some "wiggle room " in the Bush package for states 
in such a position. 
First of all, pesticides now registered and on the market will not be 
immediately brought under the nationwide uniform tolerance. Moreover, Reilly 
said, the Administration program will give the EPA authority to grant states 
permission to impose more stringent standards on a case-by-case basis. 
Food industry officials did not agree with environmentalist concerns that the 
uniform tolerance would undermine California's tough stance on pesticides. 
Of the more than 300 chemicals available to farmers, "less than two dozen will 
be affected" by the uniformity provision in the Bush package, said Jeff 
Nedelman, vice president of public affairs for the Grocery Manufacturers of 
America. 
Most of the chemicals targeted by the environmental initiative on the 1990 
California ballot, he said, will fail the EPA's re-registration review and be 
phased out anyway. 
Deputy Agriculture Secretary Jack Parnell, who was formerly Gov. George 
Deukmejian's director of food and agriculture, said Thursday that Californians 
have insisted upon tougher pesticide standards because they lacked confidence 
in the EPA. He said that Californians upset by the move to preempt state 
authority with uniform federal standards "will have every reason to come on 
board" once the details of the Bush initiative are understood. 
Under the Bush plan, maximum civil penalties for sales, distribution, or 
commercial use of unapproved pesticides would increase from $5,000 per day to 
$25,000 per day. Also, EPA's enforcement machinery would be expanded. 
Anticipating the major elements of the package, environmental activists 
launched their counterattack almost at the same moment it was being unveiled. 
"The Administration is saying that the benefits of pesticides outweigh the 
risks," said Janet Hathaway, senior project attorney of the Natural Resources 
Defense Council. "The valuation of human life should not be quantified in this 
or any other Administration." 
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), who attended the White House meeting with the 
President, said that the Administration plan includes "a number of constructive 
proposals," but added that it "falls short in critical areas." 
His own pesticide reform bill is due to be voted upon in the Senate Labor and 
Human Resources Committee next week. 
"There is no justification for giving in to the pesticide industry and 
weakening the health and safety standards essential to protect us from 
cancer-causing residues on our food," he said. 
"It is also unacceptable that the Administration is proposing to weaken current 
federal health and safety standards and then prohibit states from setting 
higher standards themselves." 
NEXT STEP 
The provisions of the Administration's pesticide and food safety reforms will 
be drafted into proposed legislation and submitted to Congress, probably in 
about two weeks. All of the major proposals must be approved by Congress before 
they can take effect. The first hearings are expected to be before the House 
Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health and the environment, chaired by Rep. 
Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles.). 
