ARIAS SEES DEMOCRACY PREVAILING IN PANAMA 
Costa Rican President Oscar Arias Sanchez, who won the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize 
for his successful sponsorship of a regional peace plan in Central America, 
predicted Wednesday that democracy will ultimately prevail in turbulent Panama. 
"Sooner or later, the Panamanian government has to find a democratic path," 
Arias said during a visit to San Diego. "Otherwise, the instability will 
continue for many years in the future." 
Arias, in town to receive an award from the Institute of the Americas, a policy 
research group based at UC San Diego, told a news conference that he believes 
the days of Gen. Manuel A. Noriega's rule in Panama are numbered. But he 
expressed his opposition to any military action against that regime, which 
Washington has denounced as criminal -- an allegation that has sparked 
countercharges of U.S. interference by Noriega and his allies. 
"I would never be in favor of military pressure," Arias said, clearly alluding 
to suggestions that the U.S. armed forces take a more active role in 
undermining Noriega's rule. 
His comments reflect a widespread fear in Latin America and elsewhere that 
direct U.S. military action in Panama could backfire, casting Noriega in the 
role of a victim of U.S. aggression. 
The comments by Arias came a day after an attempted military coup in Panama 
City collapsed, leaving Noriega in power. 
True democracy, Arias said, is the only antidote for the cycle of warfare and 
repression that grips much of Central America. He expressed considerable 
optimism about elections scheduled for February in Nicaragua -- elections that 
he assisted in bringing about -- but he acknowledged feeling "saddened" by the 
continuing violence in El Salvador. 
Peace With Democracy 
"There will never be peace if there is not democracy" in Central America, said 
the president of Costa Rica, which is often cited as a singular example of 
stability in a tumultuous region. 
Arias, who addressed the United Nations in New York on Tuesday, stopped in San 
Diego to receive the second Award for Democracy and Peace given out by the 
institute, which is officially nonpartisan and is funded through grants and 
contributions. In 1987, Raul Alfonsin, then president of Argentina, won the 
first award, for his contribution to the restoration of democracy and respect 
for human rights there. 
