BAD DREAM UNDER A PANAMA HAT; 
NORIEGA: IF THE U.S. GOVERNMENT DID SNATCH THE GENERAL, COULD HE TURN INTO 
GEORGE BUSH'S TAR BABY? 
I had a dream -- a bad one. 
In it, Manuel Noriega was turned over to the American authorities after a coup 
in Panama, flown to Miami and clapped into jail. 
At a crowded hearing the next morning, the prosecutor read the two indictments 
charging the strongman with drug trafficking and money-laundering. The 
prosecutor also asked that Noriega be held without bail. Nevertheless, the 
magistrate set bail at $5 million, which was promptly paid in cash, in 
hundred-dollar bills, by a lawyer known for defending drug kingpins. 
At a pretrial hearing, a battery of Miami, Washington and New York lawyers 
appeared and asserted that Noriega had been kidnaped in violation of Panamian 
sovereignty. The U.S. attorney presented a Justice Department opinion that 
jurisdiction of foreign states could be overridden to apprehend violators of 
American law. 
The Panamanian government charged a violation of international law, and a 
famous Harvard Law School professor volunteered to argue the case before the 
International Court of Justice in The Hague. Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh said 
the United States would not accept the World Court's jurisdiction. 
Meanwhile, Noriega, free on bail, traveled the country, with a bevy of FBI 
agents, lecturing for $25,000 a pop, giving news conferences and appearing on 
television. He broke the one-month record for number of appearances on ABC's 
"Nightline" previously held by the Rev. Jim Bakker. 
After six months of uproar, the U.S. district court judge in Miami ordered that 
the case proceed to trial. Thereupon Noriega's lawyers announced that they 
would introduce the "Ollie North defense" -- they asserted that the general's 
drug activities had been known and sanctioned at the highest levels of the 
United States government in the superior interest of combating the Sandinistas 
in Nicaragua. 
The defense demanded that a subpoena be issued for President Bush who, as vice 
president, had met with Noriega, and they asked for the records of the CIA 
about Noriega's services for the agency and his dealings with the late 
director, William J. Casey. Several counts of the indictments were quashed when 
the CIA refused to release its files. 
A year after Noriega's capture, the court was still hearing arguments on 
whether Bush could be subpoenaed and the World Court was in preliminary 
hearings on Panama's complaint. 
By now, Noriega had his own television talk show, called "Miami Advice." Drug 
Czar William J. Bennett was a frequent guest. 
I awoke from my dream about the time President Bush was offering Noriega a 
pardon on condition he go back to Panama. 
