GOVERNMENT GASPS ITS LAST AS DEBT AND POLITICS THRIVE; 
NATION: THE PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF CONGRESS POSTURE FOR THEIR OWN POLITICAL 
BENEFIT WHILE OUR FEDERAL SYSTEM BLEEDS DRY. NOTHING WORKS BECAUSE THERE'S NO 
MONEY. 
A few years back, one New Yorker remarked that for 25 years, "the New York 
Times had reported everything that happened in the New York City schools except 
that they were collapsing." The same thing can be said of most of the 
Washington press corps and the national government today. 
Truth is, few Washington reporters know much, or care much, about what goes on 
inside government. We write about scandals when they are gamy enough and about 
the handful of policy fights that pit the White House against Congress, like 
the battle over capital-gains taxes. But the question of whether government is 
working well -- or working at all -- is not one that usually draws our 
interest. 
Today, by almost any measure, government is working very badly, so badly in 
fact that even journalists are beginning to notice it. When Stanley W. Cloud, a 
veteran reporter and editor, took over recently as Washington bureau chief of 
Time magazine, he persuaded his editors to do a cover story headlined "Is 
Government Dead?" 
The answer, Cloud's story said, is that if government is not dead, it 
increasingly "looks like a costly irrelevancy today . . . . Under the shadow of 
a massive federal deficit that neither political party is willing to confront, 
a kind of neurosis of accepted limits has taken hold from one end of 
Pennsylvania Avenue to the other." Whether the challenge is an oil spill in 
Alaska or a hurricane in South Carolina, an abortive coup in Panama or a 
democratic revolution in Eastern Europe, the government's response is slow, 
grudging and massively inadequate. 
When confronted by a crisis or even an unexpected opening, it fumbles. And on 
the larger, long-term challenges -- things like the decline of the schools, the 
deterioration of our transportation system, the scourge of drugs and the steady 
accumulation of unpaid debt -- its tendency is to postpone hard choices and 
posture rather than produce. 
The explanation is twofold. What we choose to call a government is no such 
thing. In our era of debilitated political parties, Washington is run by 536 
individual political entrepreneurs -- one President, 100 senators and 435 
members of the House -- each of whom got here essentially on his own. Each 
chooses the office he seeks, raises his own money, hires his own pollster and 
ad-maker and recruits his own volunteers. 
Each of them is scrambling to remain in office, no matter what. And each of 
them has commitments and objectives he considers paramount. When George Bush 
says, "Read my lips," each member of Congress replies, "I want mine." And the 
result is the paralysis of which Time wrote. 
The second part of the story is laid out in the October issue of a magazine 
called Government Executive, a sort of trade paper for the bureaucracy. In a 
piece called "Hollow Government," writer Mark L. Goodstein cites example after 
example of how the budget cuts of the 1980s have left "federal agencies 
increasingly unable to perform the missions for which they were created." 
His story is a compendium of examples of government struggling with outmoded 
equipment and inadequate staffing. A former Internal Revenue Service 
commissioner says the IRS computer system "is somewhere in the Ice Age." At a 
time when the nation is aging and new programs for the elderly are being 
enacted, the Social Security Administration has had a 20% cutback in personnel. 
The root of this problem is that Presidents and Congresses in this decade have 
lacked the courage to ask people to pay for the government services they 
receive. This year's budget fiasco compounds the hypocrisy. When the political 
cowards in the Bush Administration and on Capitol Hill decided last month it 
was easier to admit failure than to reach agreement on a budget, that triggered 
automatic, across-the-board cuts in hundreds of domestic and military programs. 
No one seems to know or care what the $16 billion in cuts will do to the people 
who depend on those services. The President and Congress are engaged in a 
conspiracy of silence to keep the public from putting the blame where it 
belongs. 
But those cuts guarantee that a "hollow government" will be further drained of 
the talent, the energy and the equipment it needs to do its job. When the 
complaints come in, the politicians will do what they always do: Blame the 
bureaucrats. "Is government dead?" The answer is that it might as well be, so 
debilitated and demoralized has it become. 
