CAMPAIGN JOURNAL; 
TERM LIMITS NOT POPULAR TOPIC FOR FEINSTEIN 
Dianne Feinstein is the candidate of "change." It says so in her television 
ads. She says so in almost every speech. That is her main message. 
And it is true that as the race for governor speeds toward a Nov. 6 climax, 
Feinstein increasingly has been talking about changes she would make in such 
areas as education, crime and health care. 
For example, while campaigning before labor groups last week she repeatedly 
promised to sign a bill providing health insurance for California's 5 million 
uninsured workers "within 100 days" of taking office. 
But there is one "change" voters seem to be demanding that she cannot promise 
-- in fact, one she does not even care to talk about very much. That is a major 
shake-up of the political system in Sacramento, starting with term limits for 
legislators. She does not believe in term limits, the candidate will say if 
pressed, because they weaken a Legislature by destroying the opportunity to 
develop experienced leaders. 
"It's like throwing out the baby with the bathwater," she said during a press 
conference in Montebello last Tuesday. "If people don't like an incumbent, they 
should vote against that incumbent." 
Feinstein's stand seemingly is at odds with most voters who, according to 
recent polls, favor two ballot propositions that would limit the terms of 
officeholders. Just as significant, Feinstein has been resisting the broader 
temptation to "run against Sacramento," a fat political target with its 
revealing FBI investigation, recent corruption convictions and incessant 
legislative gridlock. 
Feinstein, a close ally of Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco), is 
being careful not to alienate the legislators she hopes to deal with as 
governor. Aggressively attacking "Sacramento" and "special interests" -- words 
regarded by most lawmakers as euphemisms for themselves -- would risk "creating 
an atmosphere where they would go out of their way to see that I'd not be a 
successful governor," she said in an interview. "I'd like to create an 
atmosphere that addresses issues and where everybody is willing to work 
together." 
History shows that although beating up on Sacramento may be popular with 
voters, there inevitably is a price to pay for gubernatorial candidates who do 
it. "That's a mild understatement," said former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr., who 
pushed for political reform and enraged legislators when he ran for governor in 
1974, the first post-Watergate election. 
"Even to this date, it kind of sticks in their craw," Brown said of his first 
campaign. "There are a couple of senators who haven't spoken to me since. That 
was something not well received." 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp paid the price literally earlier this year for 
proposing Proposition 131 -- a government ethics initiative with term limits -- 
and vowing to "drain the swamp" of political corruption in Sacramento. Angry 
legislative leaders used their leverage over bills to dry up Van de Kamp's 
campaign contributions from special interests, particularly trial lawyers who 
had supported him. 
"We thought we had commitments (from trial lawyers) but they (legislators) shut 
off the funds," said one former Van de Kamp adviser, who asked not to be 
identified. "They found a way to get to us and it cost us well into seven 
figures." 
This fall, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, Sen. Pete Wilson, is joining 
Feinstein in opposing Proposition 131. But his opposition is not based on term 
limits. He is opposed because the measure also would allow tax dollars to be 
used to help finance political campaigns. Wilson has not taken a position on 
the more stringent term limit measure, Proposition 140, sponsored by Los 
Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum. 
Taking whacks at the Legislature could gain the gubernatorial candidates a lot 
of points with voters, The Los Angeles Times Poll indicated in its most recent 
statewide survey. Voters disapproved of the Legislature's job performance by 2 
to 1. They also had a basically unfavorable impression of Speaker Brown. And 
they overwhelmingly backed the term limit initiatives, especially Schabarum's. 
But as with Feinstein, Wilson's criticism of Sacramento has been relatively 
mild, confined primarily to denouncing the "arrogance" of Democratic leaders 
for "gerrymandering" legislative districts and assailing liberals for burying 
crime bills. 
"He hasn't gone out of his way to say, 'We have to clean up the mess in 
Sacramento,' " said Wilson's press secretary, Bill Livingston. "He's not 
saying, 'Throw the bums out.' " 
Feinstein's gentle scoldings of Sacramento have been aimed basically at the 
lame-duck Republican governor, George Deukmejian. There is gridlock in the 
capitol, she says, because of inertia in the governor's office. 
That is not to say the Legislature is faultless, let alone ethically pure, the 
former San Francisco mayor will acknowledge if asked. 
"That body has to come to grips with its own rules," she said. "That's the 
whole essence of ethics reform and I think it's beginning to happen. There have 
been some big and painful lessons learned. And with a new governor, there is an 
opportunity to set a new tone up there and that's what I hope to do." 
