SCULPTOR, PAINTER WIN $15,000 VISUAL ARTS AWARDS 
Two artists with strong ties to the Los Angeles area are among 10 winners in 
the ninth annual Awards in the Visual Arts program, a national competition 
funded in part by the National Endowment for the Arts to recognize outstanding 
emerging artistic talent. 
The selection of conceptual sculptor Ann Hamilton of Santa Barbara and painter 
Raymond Saunders, who lives in Oakland but has also resided in Santa Monica, 
was formally announced Sunday by the Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art. 
The Winston-Salem, N.C., arts agency runs the award program under grants from 
the endowment, the Rockefeller Foundation, BMW of North America Inc. and the 
Equitable Foundation. Hamilton, 33, is currently spending a year completing a 
special project at the Headlands Center for the Arts in Marin County. A 
specialist in installations, Hamilton was chosen last year to develop an 
environmental sculpture called "the capacity of absorption," on view at the 
Museum of Contemporary Art's Temporary Contemporary from December, 1988, 
through February. 
Saunders, 54, uses a variety of media, including oil and watercolors. His work 
was featured in an exhibited titled "Raymond Saunders: Some Choices," last year 
at the Long Beach Museum of Art. His work was also shown in 1987 at the 
Hunsaker/Schlesinger Gallery. 
Each recipient receives a $15,000 grant and inclusion in a traveling show 
featuring work by all 10 winners. The program's 1990 show opens in May at the 
New Orleans Museum of Art and travels later in the year to a gallery under 
construction at the Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art and to the Fogg 
Art Museum at Harvard University. Some of the work will be shown at the BMW 
Gallery in New York in the spring of 1991. 
Other winners include: Mike Glier of Hoosick Falls, N.Y., drawing; Lisa Hoke of 
New York City, sculpture; Lorna Simpson of Brooklyn, N.Y., photography; Martin 
Emanuel of Atlanta, sculpture; Malcolm Cochran of Columbus, Ohio, sculpture; 
Tony Tasset of Chicago, sculpture, and Randy Twaddle of Houston, drawing. 
The Awards in the Visual Arts format divides the country into 10 regions, each 
of which contains roughly the same artist population. Manhattan is a separate 
region. Other districts include several states. The program is intended to 
guarantee geographical recognition for promising artists. 
"It's a really wonderful, very generous award that allows each of us to keep 
doing work," said Hamilton. 
Saunders said he spent his summers in Oakland and winters in Santa Monica until 
a couple of years ago when he changed his base of operations exclusively to the 
Bay Area. But he said he intends to re-establish at least a part-time residence 
in Southern California. 
The program came to political prominence earlier this year over its inclusion, 
in its 1988 edition, of photographs by Andres Serrano, including his image of a 
crucifix immersed in urine. The selection was one of the factors that brought 
about a summerlong clash between conservatives in Congress and the endowment. 
"It's really important to do work you believe in and not be compromised," 
Hamilton said. "I think there's going to be a fight to save the NEA. That's the 
larger issue." 
