PUTTING WOMEN'S EDUCATION TO WORK COULD ENRICH U.S. ECONOMY ; 
COMPETITION: AMERICA HAS THE BEST EDUCATED FEMALE WORK FORCE IN THE WORLD; NOW 
IT MUST GET SMART AND USE THAT TALENT FULLY. 
The economic pundits are fingering their worry beads and pronouncing the doom 
of the United States' work force. It will be wholly eclipsed, say columnists in 
publications ranging from Newsweek to Barron's, by those of other advanced 
post-industrial nations. We are unprepared for the upheavals and opportunities 
of a global economy, this school of thought would teach us, and ultimately our 
standard of living will fall. 
Reality teaches something else: If we play it right, if economic justice can 
determine economic strategy, the women of the United States will make the 
difference. We will not be eclipsed. If we play it right -- and just. 
The United States will enter the next century with a remarkable edge over its 
global competitors. U.S. women, of all races, are the best educated and trained 
in the world. They will constitute 64% of the new entrants to the work force 
over the next 10 years. U.S. women now comprise more than half of enrollees and 
degree recipients at all levels of higher education -- except the doctorate. In 
contrast, women constitute only 42% of higher education enrollees in what was 
West Germany and 34% in Japan. 
Labor market equity in the United States, sadly, is another issue. "Americans 
are missing something," says Kerstin Keen of Volvo. Keen, who wrote a 
work-force education report on behalf of 24 major European corporations, adds, 
"You're not utilizing women as well as you have prepared them." 
The most telling evidence of this unhappy paradox comes from the richest 
archive ever assembled on a generation of Americans -- the U.S. Department of 
Education's study of the high-school class of 1972. The 22,600 men and women 
who initially participated in this survey are now "thirtysomething," and 
represent the "critical knowledge work force" of the year 2001. While there are 
dozens of stories in their records over 14 years, the most stunning is that of 
the women. 
Consider, first, the evidence of women's superior academic performance: 
 -- Matching women and men who took equal amounts of math or science in high 
school, the mean class rank for women exceeded that for men by 10 points. That 
is: Women beat men on conventionally "male" turf. 
 -- The parents of the class of '72 had lower educational aspirations for their 
daughters than they had for their sons. The daughters themselves had lower 
educational aspirations than the sons. Yet a higher percentage of women than 
men entered college directly from high school and won scholarships. 
 -- Once in college, women earned consistently higher grade-point averages than 
men, no matter what field they studied. The differences in performance are 
greatest in matching women and men who majored in science, business and 
engineering, traditionally "male" fields. 
 -- Achievement in college had a striking impact on the further educational 
plans of women in the class of '72. When they were surveyed in 1976 and 1979, 
the proportion of those aspiring to graduate degrees vaulted over that of men. 
These data show that women's aspirations are less inflated than men's, their 
plans more realistic, their focus on goals more intense. They do what they say 
they will do. Women "walk away from their pasts" in late adolescence, Mary 
Belenky and her colleagues wrote in "Women's Ways of Knowing." Further 
education supports their development. And further education -- along with 
realistic plans and determination -- is the basic currency of the world economy 
of the 21st Century. 
The U.S. economy, however, seems to discount all the evidence of women's 
superior educational performance and commitment. Between age 25 and 32, a 
substantially higher percentage of women from the class of '72 experienced 
genuine unemployment and underemployment than did men. This experience was as 
stubbornly true for women who earned bachelor's degrees as it was for those who 
earned no degree. And at age 32, the women who were college graduates tended to 
hold lower-paying and traditionally female jobs -- for example, nursing and 
health technology (11%), teaching (23%) and office or financial-services 
support (9%). 
The data are dry; the stories are not. Janice, for example, a former student of 
mine in a mass-communications course, was always prepared, articulate and 
searching for knowledge beyond the course syllabus. She organized three or four 
of her peers to do a group study that involved commuting to Manhattan to 
interview TV rating service researchers. She stood out in a class of 140. 
Janice graduated in 1978, with a major in allied health sciences. Three years 
later, she was passing out towels in a health club in downtown Washington, 
waiting for a job testing exercise equipment in Pennsylvania or one in a 
physical therapy clinic in New Jersey. And out of work for two months before 
she started passing out towels. 
We're not talking here about the "glass ceiling," that fragile metaphor for the 
barrier between women in management careers and the executive suite. We're 
talking about the entire labor market for jobs requiring more than a 
high-school education, and Janice, a state college graduate of some promise, 
was typical. 
Even more telling than the experience of unemployment or underemployment are 
earnings differences between women and men with the same undergraduate 
backgrounds. If one restricts the women in this comparison to those without 
children -- the group with as many years of job experience as men -- the bottom 
line is devastating. Our analysis of data, reported in 1986, indicates that men 
who majored in fine arts earned, on average, 15% more than the women; men who 
majored in foreign languages earned 54% more than the women, and men who 
majored in education earned 26% more than the women. These fields are supposed 
to be female turf. 
In only four major occupations did the women college graduates earn more, on 
average, than men: chemist, economist, computer programmer and purchasing agent 
-- all requiring solid backgrounds in mathematics. In five other major 
occupations -- accountant, editor/reporter, physician, engineer, health 
technician -- differences in earnings were insignificant. Appearance and dress 
are not keys to mobility in these occupations. Despite messages from the 
Glamours of this world, women achieve pay equity in fields requiring substance 
more than fluff. 
Outside of these occupations, however, earnings differences in favor of men 
ranged from 15% for pharmacists to 42% for retail sales managers to 77% for 
architects. 
Despite this discouraging pattern, a much higher percentage of women than men 
who attended college -- no matter what degree they earned -- reported at age 32 
that their learning and training were relevant to their work. In other words, 
women tend to use what they've learned more than men. Perceptive employers 
agree. "Women come into the workplace like immigrants," said Harold Tragash, 
vice president for human resources at Rorer, "determined to succeed on the 
basis of what they know, not who they know." 
Tragash sees women more likely than men to "influence co-workers from a 
technical knowledge base." People who do that can change the knowledge with 
which we work, and that ability is critical to innovation in manufacturing, 
services and public administration. Innovations stemming from this supply of 
knowledge that women, in particular, bring to the job can make the difference 
in our economy in the 21st century. 
It has been frequently observed that women make occupational choices for more 
complex -- and personal -- reasons than do men, and those reasons do not always 
include economic self-interest. The currently fashionable argument built on 
this observation is that women will continue to perform well academically and 
then contribute their knowledge to the workplace regardless of economic 
rewards. This argument unwittingly condones both the exploitation of women and 
economic stagnation. 
Why? First, because it does not encourage anyone's educational achievement. It 
certainly does not tell men, who have been slacking off in school and college 
for decades, that genuine knowledge counts. Second, because it does not 
encourage the sharing of knowledge for the good of any enterprise. If we take 
women's contributions for granted at the same time as we treat men's knowledge 
as proprietary and rewardable, we have a half-economy. 
The rest of the world doesn't behave this way. Other nations may not educate as 
high a percentage of women beyond high school, but their economies do not leave 
a Janice passing out towels in a health club at age 25. 
Our national rhetoric holds that education is ultimately an economic investment 
on behalf of the whole society. The history of the high-school class of 1972 
strongly suggests that women can prove that point. The coming century is theirs 
to do so. But if the market rewarded women's attainments, everyone would 
benefit. That's playing it right -- and just. 
