SAN DIEGO COUNTY; 
'DANGEROUS GAMES' RIPPED BY N.Y. CRITICS; 
BROADWAY: AN EARLY CLOSE IS PREDICTED FOR GRACIELA DANIELE'S PLAY, ORIGINALLY 
CO-PRODUCED BY THE LA JOLLA PLAYHOUSE. 
"Dangerous Games," the Graciela Daniele play originally co-produced by the La 
Jolla Playhouse with Spoleto Festival, USA and the American Music Theater 
Festival in Philadelphia, opened to bad reviews at the Nederlander Theater on 
Broadway Thursday and will likely meet with an early close. 
Aside from scattered praise for the music by Astor Piazzolla and the skill of 
the dancers, the pans were universal and extreme. Critics tore mercilessly into 
Daniele's choreography, William Finn's lyrics and the very concept of the show 
that depicts, in two tango pieces, the links between machismo, eroticism and 
violence in an unnamed Latin American country. 
Frank Rich of the New York Times put down the production as "a hypocritical 
exploitation of the machismo it purports to condemn." Linda Winer of New York 
Newsday condemned it as "a twisted show, more muddled and inept than scary or 
controversial." Howard Kissel of the New York Daily News described it as "not 
very satisfying," and Clive Barnes of the New York Post said that "its spurious 
theatrics were awful," and "its gratuitous violence . . . ran close to 
pornography." 
As a co-producer, the financially strapped La Jolla Playhouse would share in 
any profits but is not risking any money in the Broadway production. A source 
in New York who asked not to be named said the show will probably close this 
weekend. 
The kindest words any of the New York critics had came from Michael Kuchwara of 
the Associated Press, who said the show was "not as interesting as it sounds" 
and "the dancing is a tad pretentious and silly." 
When the show opened locally, it gathered negative to mixed reviews from Sylvie 
Drake of the Los Angeles Times and Welton Jones of the San Diego Union, with a 
sole rave from Bill Hagen of the Tribune, who called the show "unusual and 
exciting . . . pretty close to flammable theater." 
Drake praised the "stunning visuals," but said the show "loses most of its edge 
when it opens its mouth. Silence in this case would have been, if not golden, 
ever so much more eloquent." 
Jones said, "There's no denying that 'Dangerous Games' packs a wallop," but 
added, "To be charitable, one can say that 'Dangerous Games' fails to make any 
significant comment on the somber issues it raises." 
From the New York Times' Rich: "If theater people want to make a spectacle of 
themselves on a Broadway stage, that is their inalienable right, but whatever 
happened to the poor audience's right to enjoy a few laughs in the face of such 
disaster? 'Dangerous Games' . . . extinguishes all opportunities for fun by 
shrouding its inanities in stern sermonettes on sexual politics, dour images 
from Greek mythology and real-life South American state terrorism." 
From Newsday's Winer: "Perhaps Broadway has seen uglier, clumsier, more 
repugnant shows than 'Dangerous Games.' In the bad-taste theatrical 
sweepstakes, however, this one is a world-class contender." 
From the Daily News' Kissel: "Daniele's imagination seldom goes beyond the 
adolescent in her depiction of the earthiness and sensuality of the brothel or 
the repressiveness of the generals." 
And from the Post's Barnes: "The sad thing is that the dancers do their level 
best to raise this grisly corpse of an evening into some semblance of life -- 
as if they were literally flogging a dead horse." 
