FOR OPENERS SOCKERS TAKE SIDE KICKING; 
SOCCER: WHILE TATU WAS GIVING THE CROWD THE SHIRT OFF HIS BACK THE SOCKERS WERE 
BEING UNDRESSED IN THEIR SEASON OPENER AGAIN. 
Every time Tatu gave the fans the shirt off his back Saturday night, it was a 
reminder to the Sockers that this is a new season and they are no longer 
champions. 
He reminded them five times, throwing his jersey into the stands after each 
goal he scored. Five goals. Five jerseys. 
So it was a typical season opener for the Sockers, who were dismantled by the 
Dallas Sidekicks, 9-3, in front of 10,782 at Reunion Arena. The Sockers have 
won just one road opener in their indoor history. 
"I think it happens every year in San Diego," goalie Victor Nogueira said. 
"It's natural for you to be cocky after you've won the championship." 
Said defender Kevin Crow: "We don't start off with the right kind of intensity 
that the other teams do. We ponder (our decisions) for a while, saying 'Do I 
want to go there? Do I want to make that run?' People that think quickly and 
react quickly are usually going to have a better night." 
That explains it. Maybe the Sockers were still thinking a little bit about how 
they defeated this team in the playoffs last season and then went on to win 
their seventh championship. All the while, Tatu, leading scorer in Sidekicks' 
history, was thinking how much better he feels this year. His confidence wasn't 
all there last season, following a year of rehabilitation on his right knee, 
which he injured on the first game of the 87-88 season. 
"I have my speed back," said Tatu, whose five goals were a career high. "I'm 
not a step slow like I was last year. I feel I'm healthy." 
In the early part of the game there was a lot of give and take. Tatu gave 
Dallas a 1-0 lead midway through the first quarter, drilling a shot under 
Nogueira's right hand off an assist from midfielder Mark Karpun. 
The Sockers came right back less than three minutes later when Branko Segota 
was in perfect position to score off a deflection from Sidekick defender Wes 
McLeod. Rookie Rod Castro put the Sockers ahead, 2-1, with his first Major 
Indoor Soccer League goal. But not long after his bright smile faded, McLeod 
scored to tie the score again. 
The Sockers hurt themselves with penalties during the remainder of the half. 
Zoran Karic (charging) and Waad Hirmez (pushing) served two-minutes in the box 
and the Sidekicks capitalized, forward Steve Kinsey and Tatu each scoring to 
make it 4-2. 
Socker Coach Ron Newman elected to pull Nogueira and put in a sixth attacker at 
the end of the half. Brian Quinn donned the oversized jersey and did some 
flashy footwork in front of McLeod before sending a left-footed shot through 
goalie Krys Sobieski's legs with 55 seconds remaining in the half. If it was a 
championship team that disappeared into the locker room for intermission, it 
was something a good deal less than that that returned in the second half. The 
offense went flat and the defense just sat. 
Sidekick Mike Powers scored with a minute to go in the third quarter. Tatu 
scored three in a row in the fourth. And defender Troy Snyder wrapped things up 
with a goal in the final minute. 
Of course, the Sockers are so used to starting the season this way that this 
really can't be too much of a concern, right coach? 
"Yeah, but nine goals?" Newman asked. "If you're going to get beat, I thought 
you might get beat by a goal or two if you're not ready. It looked like we were 
manhandled by them. Our regulars weren't ready to mix it." 
Still, for the Sockers there is consolation in history. In nine previous 
seasons of starting at or below .500 in the first 10 games, they have come back 
to win five championships. So there weren't too many long faces Saturday. 
Players were critical, but also confident that the questions left over from 
this inauspicious debut can soon be answered. 
"It was more or less like a day at the beach," defender George Fernandez said. 
"We were pretty flat." 
After a whole summer of thinking about losing to the Sockers in the seventh 
game of the last season's semifinals, the Sidekicks were determined to make 
sure the Sockers left the beach with a nice burn. 
"We've been waiting for this game all off-season," Powers said. "It seemed 
every day during training camp somebody mentioned the opener. I think that made 
us more aggressive than them." 
