CBS MAKES SEASON'S FIRST CHANGES 
CBS, off to a fast start in the 18-day-old fall TV season, moved quickly 
Thursday to keep its momentum by yanking the low-rated "E.A.R.T.H. Force" and 
also pulling the sitcom "Lenny" until it finds a better time slot for the 
blue-collar comedy. 
Streamlining its schedule as it prepares to broadcast up to three weeks of 
baseball's Major League baseball playoffs and World Series, CBS also postponed 
the Oct. 25 debut of another series, "Sons and Daughters," and moved several 
other shows to new time periods. 
"E.A.R.T.H. Force," a series about a team of environmental protectors that 
debuted Sept. 16, apparently became the season's first cancellation as CBS 
announced that it "has been placed on hiatus" and "had its last regularly 
scheduled broadcast" last Saturday. 
In the case of "Lenny," another new show, CBS said that it definitely will 
return to the schedule in a different time period. It had aired Wednesdays at 8 
p.m. 
With the baseball playoffs a possible make-or-break period during the new 
season for CBS, the network -- which has finished third in prime time for the 
past three years but is a solid second thus far into the 1990-91 season -- 
appeared to be dumping or moving its ratings deadwood in preparation for a real 
run at No. 1 NBC. 
In a key move, CBS Entertainment President Jeff Sagansky also pulled Dan 
Rather's successful "48 Hours" from its new late-night Saturday slot and gave 
it the important 8-9 p.m. time period opening the Wednesday lineup, starting 
Oct. 24. 
"48 Hours" did well last season against NBC's 8 p.m. Thursday powerhouse, "The 
Cosby Show." 
Now, "48 Hours" will lead into two other series upon which CBS is depending on 
Wednesday: the reliable ratings entry "Jake and the Fatman" and "WIOU," an 
upcoming new show about a local TV news operation, which many observers feel 
may be the network's best freshman program. 
CBS also made moves to strengthen its Thursday and Saturday lineups. On 
Thursday, "Top Cops," a reality show about police stories, switches from an 
hour to a 30-minute format and goes up against "Cosby," "The Simpsons" and 
"Father Dowling Mysteries," beginning Oct. 25. 
Also on Thursdays, CBS will move its comic-book entry "The Flash," which has 
started stronger than expected, out of direct competition with "Cosby" and "The 
Simpsons." It will follow "Top Cops" from 8:30 to 9:30 p.m., with CBS hoping 
the carryover last half-hour of the show will draw viewers away from NBC's 
"Cheers." 
Rounding out CBS' Thursday lineup will be "Doctor, Doctor" and another reliable 
ratings winner, "Knots Landing." 
On Saturdays, CBS has revamped its 9-11 p.m. lineup after dumping "E.A.R.T.H. 
Force" and moving "48 Hours." Starting Nov. 17, "Wiseguy," with Steven Bauer 
replacing Ken Wahl, will be a weekly entry. Beginning Nov. 24, it will be 
joined by "Broken Badges," a series about an undercover crime-fighting unit. 
