MOVIE REVIEW; 
A PLEASING ALLEN AND ASSANTE CAN'T SAVE 'ANIMAL BEHAVIOR' 
There's a warm sensibility and an engaging cast in "Animal Behavior" (opening 
today at the Century Plaza Cinemas and Edwards Island Cinema, Newport Beach), 
but it's too slight to recommend it. Dusted off after three years on the shelf 
since its completion, it's the kind of film you want to like -- and wish there 
was more to it to like. 
The ads are misleading, overemphasizing Holly Hunter's importance in the film. 
It's not Hunter but a chimpanzee who is standing in the way of Karen Allen and 
Armand Assante falling in love. Allen is Alex Bristow, a psychologist at a New 
Mexico university who is so intensely absorbed in an interspecies study with 
her adorable chimp, Michael, that she tries to persuade herself that she has no 
time for love, even though she is as attracted to Assante's Mark Mathias, the 
new music professor, as he is to her. Even though "Animal Behavior" was 
directed by two people, Jenny Bowen and Kjehl Rasmussen, the film's producer 
who replaced her, its problem seems mainly in Susan Rice's undeveloped script. 
Allen and Assante seem to keep playing the same scene over and over, with Alex 
pushing away Mark in the name of work. "Animal Behavior" is too talky by a mile 
yet it seems superficial. Throughout, there is the feeling that the film makers 
never quite decided how seriously to take Alex's research project or her 
attachment to Michael. We're never quite sure whether the chimp is, on some 
level, Mark's rival or whether Alex is simply a workaholic. 
Allen and Assante are so terrific together you regret that "Animal Behavior," 
goes for whimsy and sentimentality rather than the screwball humor and 
sophistication of "Bringing Up Baby." 
Holly Hunter, who made this film before "Broadcast News," has only a small role 
as Assante's good ol' gal neighbor, who has a mute little daughter taught to 
sign by the chimp. Actually, Josh Mostel has more to do as Mark's breezy 
sidekick, an art professor, and Richard Libertini scores as Alex's arrogant, 
jealous superior, a nasty academic with whom she had a fling when she was his 
student. 
Unfortunately, 'Animal Behavior" (rated PG) is filled with repetitive and inane 
humor, culminating in a silly and contrived ending. It's not enough that Allen 
and Assante are such a pleasure. 
