RAIN, FLOODS, TORNADO ADD TO HURRICANE WOE 
Rain, floods and a tornado heaped more misery on Hugo-wrecked South Carolina on 
Monday, interrupting rebuilding efforts from the hurricane that pummeled the 
coast 12 days ago. 
Relief officials deluged with clothing urged donors to send building supplies, 
food and cash. 
"I feel sorry for the people. It's terrible. It adds insult to injury," 
National Weather Service meteorologist Dick Shenot said after 2.5 inches of 
rain fell in a 24-hour period on Charleston, the town hardest hit by the 
hurricane's 135-m.p.h. winds. 
A tornado in Lebanon, about 25 miles north of Charleston, left two injured. 
About 100 people in Anderson County, 200 miles north, had to be evacuated 
because of flooding. 
The Broad and Blair rivers in Gaffney, the Congaree River in St. Matthews, the 
Waccamaw River in Conway and the Saluda River in Chappells spilled over their 
banks Monday. 
The Tiger River rose 12 feet above flood stage, damaging a major telephone 
cable and knocking out long-distance service from Spartanburg to Asheville, 
N.C., said Ron Laughlin, spokesman for AT&amp;T. He had no estimate of the 
number of people affected. 
In North Carolina, also deluged by rain Monday and still recovering from Hugo, 
Monroe rescuers were looking for three people missing when a creek flooded and 
swept away their car. A fourth passenger was rescued after clinging to a downed 
tree for more than an hour. 
Aid from across the nation continued to pour into South Carolina. The response 
has been so overwhelming, though, that some officials do not know what to do 
with everything. 
"We have clothing backed up on us, including in boxcars that have come from the 
West Coast," Maj. Ken Bush of the Salvation Army said. "People, generally 
speaking, only want a number of clothes . . . and we've reached that certain 
amount. We're backlogged." 
10 Rooms Full of Clothes 
In the fishing village of McClellanville, population 500, about 10 classrooms 
in the local school are filled "from floor to ceiling with used clothing." 
"Used clothing has almost choked us to death," said Billy Newsom of the 
American Red Cross. 
Bush and Newsom said donations of non-perishable food items are still 
desperately needed. As cleanup efforts progress, hardware items will be in 
demand to help repair homes and businesses, Bush said. 
Marilyn Quayle, Vice President Dan Quayle's wife, visited the hardest-hit areas 
of South Carolina and worked briefly at a relief center Monday in Moncks 
Corner. She was expected to work in Charleston before leaving the state today. 
Hurricane Hugo slammed into South Carolina Sept. 21 with 135-m.p.h. winds, 
leaving at least 18 dead, 50,000 homeless and 270,000 jobless. 
