ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: LICENSE TAG WAS A GAMBLE, INDEED 
Sheriff's deputies, investigating what they say is the largest sports 
bookmaking operation ever uncovered in Orange County, could not help but smile 
when they saw the license plate on the vehicle belonging to a man they had 
arrested in the case. It read: AGMBLR2, with a license holder saying: THE GOOD 
THE BAD &amp; THE LUCKY. In a search of the vehicle Thursday, deputies said 
they recovered ledgers containing names of more bettors and betting agents. It 
was the latest development in the case, which has resulted in the arrests of 
eight people on suspicion of running the ring out of restaurants and residences 
in Orange and Los Angeles counties. 
"The new evidence will surely firm up our cases, and as we analyze the 
information, more arrests may follow," Investigator Larry Vance said. 
The Ford utility truck is registered to Vincent Marchionno, 40, of Fullerton. 
Marchionno was among seven men and one woman arrested Tuesday night when 
sheriff's deputies served search warrants on residences in Anaheim, Lakewood, 
Bellflower and Norwalk. They also searched Spoons restaurants in Santa Ana and 
Tustin and Shipmates Tavern in Cerritos, where some of the suspects worked. 
Searches yielded ledgers and computerized records that Vance said appear to 
contain the coded identities of hundreds of bettors. The operation allegedly 
involved using employees of popular Orange County bars and restaurants as 
agents to take bets on professional and collegiate baseball, football, 
basketball, hockey and horse racing. 
Deputies paid for the costs of their undercover investigation by placing 
winning bets on basketball's Los Angeles Lakers and baseball's Oakland 
Athletics, according to the Sheriff's Department. 
Marchionno had refused deputies' request to search his vehicle when he and two 
others were arrested at a Bellflower apartment Tuesday. Deputies alleged that 
the men were accepting bets on the telephone when the arrests were made. 
Vance said he secured a warrant to search Marchionno's truck Thursday and 
confiscated betting slips and ledgers that he alleged could point investigators 
to the ringleaders of the alleged $3-million-a-year operation. 
When contacted at his home Thursday, Marchionno declined comment. 
He has been released on $10,000 bail. Thomas Eric Stevens, 52, of Norwalk and 
Mary Scallon, 25, a bookkeeper at Spoons in Tustin, were released after posting 
$50,000 and $10,000 bail, respectively. 
Vance said the suspects still in jail on suspicion of bookmaking and conspiracy 
to commit bookmaking included two Spoons managers, Michael Dunn, 38, of Tustin 
and Thomas Sullivan, 30, of Fullerton; also Robert Reed, 59, of Anaheim; Donald 
Richard Trava, 37, of Lakewood, and Ian White, 30, of Bellflower. Bail for 
Trava and Reed was set at $50,000 each, $10,000 for the others. DAVAN MAHARAJ 
and CHRIS WOODYARD 
