JEWS THANK THE FRENCH TOWN THAT SAVED THEM 
The people of this hardscrabble hill town in the French Massif Central Range 
never thought of themselves as heroes. 
They didn't think twice when several thousand terrified Jews came here seeking 
shelter during World War II and Nazi Germany's occupation of France. The 
townspeople were mostly Protestant Christians whose ancestors suffered 
centuries of persecution in Roman Catholic France. When the Jews asked for 
refuge, Chambon-sur-Lignon gave it. 
By the end of the war, the little Huguenot farming village in the Haute Loire 
region of France had protected 5,000 Jews -- one for every man, woman and child 
in the town. 
On Sunday, the aging population of this remarkable town was acclaimed for those 
acts of courage and integrity 50 years ago. 
In an emotional afternoon, they saw for the first time an American documentary 
film, "Weapons of the Spirit," by Los Angeles filmmaker Pierre Sauvage, 
dedicated to the town. And the Israeli ambassador to France, Ovadia Sofer, 
awarded them Yad Vashem medals of "righteousness" for their courage. 
On hand for the ceremonies were several dozen of the wartime Jewish refugees 
and the handful of people who saved them who are still living. 
The survivors found themselves overcome by affection mixed with a feeling that 
they had never properly acknowledged the people of the town. 
"We had no idea of the terrible things that were going on outside Chambon," 
remembered one of the survivors, Jack Lewin of Woodmere, N.Y. "These people 
protected us from the horror. I will never forget what they did." 
Lewin, 65, is an American Jew who was born in Germany and found refuge in the 
town for two years before escaping to Switzerland. The ceremonies Sunday marked 
the second time in four years that the retired chef has traveled here to 
personally thank the people of Chambon. 
Half a century ago, when German soldiers and French collaborators came to 
Chambon-sur-Lignon hunting Jews, the townspeople refused to cooperate. Several 
villagers, including Daniel Trocme, nephew of the town pastor, paid the price 
of their silence by being sent off to Nazi death camps. 
"My brother only did what he considered his duty," said Robert Trocme of his 
sibling, who was exterminated in the Nazi death camp at Maidanek, Poland, in 
1944 for sheltering Jewish children. "He was willing to give his life to help 
reconstruct the future." 
The bravery of the people of Chambon and of the peasants in the surrounding 
countryside stood in stark contrast to the dismal record in much of the rest of 
France, where more than 75,000 Jews were rounded up and sent to Germany for 
extermination, often with the cooperation of the French people. 
At Sunday's ceremony, the townspeople found themselves a little embarrassed and 
wondering what it was all about. The town's young Protestant pastor, for one, 
is concerned that all the attention will cause the town to lose the humility 
and spirit of righteousness that led to its courageous wartime acts. 
"I think these ceremonies are very dangerous," he said, standing outside the 
small stone Protestant reform church with the words "Love One Another" painted 
over the door. "We risk breaking the spirit of what we did here. I am afraid we 
will become too proud of ourselves and lose our ability to react to what 
happens in the world." 
Later in the day, the pipe-smoking pastor used the occasion of the medal awards 
ceremony to criticize the killing of Palestinian protesters by Israeli police, 
demonstrating the tradition of religious leaders in the town to speak out 
loudly and boldly, no matter who is listening. One of his predecessors in the 
pulpit, pacifist Pastor Andre Trocme, had been credited with leading the 
Chambon-area effort to resist the Germans and protect Jews. Trocme, uncle of 
death camp victim Daniel, was the main character in the 1979 book "Lest 
Innocent Blood be Shed," by American philosopher and historian Phillip Hallie. 
The book was the first to celebrate the courage of the region. 
Probably the most satisfied with the events here Sunday was independent 
filmmaker Sauvage, who spent seven years interviewing townspeople to make the 
film. 
Sauvage, 46, was born in Chambon-sur-Lignon in 1944. If it had not been for the 
townspeople who hid his parents, he might not be alive. The doctor who 
delivered him, Roger Forestier, was arrested and killed by the Nazis. 
