ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: WESTMINSTER; 
GANG SUSPECTS HELD IN VIRGINIA ROBBERY 
Two Westminster men suspected of ambushing a Vietnamese family at their home 
and holding them at gunpoint overnight were arrested in Virginia this weekend 
after a shoot-out with police at the family's jewelry store, authorities said 
Tuesday. 
Trung Viet Cao, 19, and Charlie Hung Vu, 23, were booked on suspicion of 
robbery and abduction Saturday after the terrifying takeover of the family's 
home in Fairfax County, Va., outside of Washington. They are being held in lieu 
of $525,000 bond each. 
Westminster Detective Marcus Frank, a specialist in Asian crime, said Cao is 
wanted in Westminster on an outstanding warrant charging him with strong-arm 
robbery. The allegations involve a "chain grab," a common crime in the Asian 
community in which jewelry is snatched off victims' necks. 
Frank said Cao and Vu are believed to associated with several Vietnamese gangs 
in the Orange County area, including the Natoma Boys. 
Fairfax police said that on Friday evening several gunmen burst into the home 
of a jeweler and held his family at gunpoint until Saturday afternoon, when the 
jeweler agreed to drive the gunmen to his business in nearby Falls Church. 
After the gunmen left, the jeweler's family called police, who then confronted 
the suspects at the jewelry store. Vu tried to flee and was arrested, police 
said. Authorities said Trung came out of the store and exchanged gunfire with 
police. 
Although wounded, Trung retreated to a restaurant and took five hostages before 
surrendering, according to police. 
Frank said the involvement of young men from Westminster in a crime on the East 
Coast illustrates the typical "cross-country" capabilities of Vietnamese gangs, 
who live in one region of the nation and commit crimes in another. 
Although they do not always have accurate crime statistics, police say the 
Fairfax home invasion is part of an apparent increase in such robberies in 
Southeast-Asian communities across the nation.DAN WEIKEL 
