GIRLS' ATHLETE OF THE WEEK: KURAGAMI SWEEPS HER WAY TO TOP 
Cindy Kuragami is the top singles player on the Savanna High School girls' 
tennis team. And that's right where she wants to be. 
But she has kept that part of her life in perspective. 
"Tennis never gets in the way of studies, but not vice versa," Kuragami said. 
"Ever since I started playing, my family has emphasized studies." 
Kuragami, The Times' Athlete of the Week, is a rare athlete who considers 
sports an extra-curricular activity. 
Although there's great money to be had by young tennis players. There are 
chances to travel Europe, play tennis and get paid for it. 
But Kuragami says that such aspirations are a bit off in her case. She's not 
sure if she can go that far on her talent and she is concerned about a college 
education. 
She has been working off-and-on with a private coach and, more than anything 
else, has learned she must accept her limitations. 
"I don't have a strong serve -- and part of that is because of my size 
(5-foot-1 1/2, 107 pounds) -- but I try to make up for that in other ways. I'm 
working on placing my serves. I try to slice my serves, spin serves and I have 
a flat serve. It's coming along slowly." 
Which might come as a surprise to her Orange League opponents. Last week was a 
typical week for Kuragami. She swept her sets, 6-0, 6-0, 6-0, on Thursday in a 
13-5 victory over Magnolia, and swept 6-1, 6-0, 6-0 in a loss to Western 
Tuesday. 
She also sweeps through her classes as exemplified by her 4.0 grade-point 
average. 
"I've talked with some of her teachers, and they say, 'She doesn't get most of 
the points in class -- she gets all of them,' " Savanna Coach Eric Hansen said. 
"At practice, she shares everything she knows and hits with anyone who wants to 
hit -- it's like having an extra coach out there." 
That is considerably high praise for a 15-year-old. Kuragami skipped the second 
grade and is still leaving her peers behind. 
Kuragami has been a standout player on a mediocre team. She has a set record of 
48-0 this season, while Savanna has a team record of 7-7 overall, 5-3 in league 
play. And the Orange League has an overall quality of tennis that tends to make 
Kuragami appear to be a big fish in a small pond. 
Kuragami is ranked ninth by the Southern California Tennis Assn. for ages 16 
and under and is 40th in the nation. 
Including nonleague matches, Kuragami has lost only one set, when she was a 
freshman, at Savanna. In the past two years, her only other losses have been in 
the third round of the Southern Section tournament. 
Perhaps what really sets Kuragami apart is that she's not just another 
hard-working-athlete-student-robot type. 
"Oh, she's outgoing and liked very well by, it seems like, everyone," Hansen 
said. "She really is a wonderful person." 
Not surprisingly, Kuragami wants to attend Stanford because of its reputation 
for academics and for its top women's tennis program. "But I would weigh any 
offers I would get," Kuragami said. "I hope my grades will help me get some 
offers." 
TOP PERFORMERS 
Michelle Berkowitz of Fountain Valley swept her matches, 6-0, 6-0, 6-0, against 
Ocean View Tuesday and swept 6-1, 6-0, 6-0 against Huntington Beach Thursday. 
Wendy Herb of Rosary had 31 blocks in a 14-16, 15-10, 9-15, 15-12, 15-10 
victory over Bishop Amat Thursday. 
Cindy Kuragami 
Savanna High School 
Position: No. 1 singles tennis player 
Height, Weight, Class: 5-1 1/2, 107, Junior 
Last Week: Kuragami swept her matches, 6-0, 6-0, 6-0, on Thursday against 
Magnolia and won, 6-1, 6-0, 6-0, Tuesday against Western. 
Season: Kuragami has not lost a set this season (48-0). 
