JUSTICES QUESTION FETAL-PROTECTION JOB POLICIES 
The Supreme Court reacted skeptically Wednesday to a company's claim that it 
can exclude all young women from its battery plants to protect their potential 
offspring. 
"It seems to me you are not coming to grips with the Pregnancy Discrimination 
Act," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor told an attorney for the Johnson Controls Co. 
Justice Antonin Scalia chimed in, saying that Johnson Controls was turning the 
anti-discrimination law "into a dead letter, a farce." 
They referred to a 1978 law in which Congress banned discrimination on the 
basis of pregnancy. Johnson Controls, the nation's largest maker of car 
batteries, says that high levels of lead in its plants have forced it to 
exclude all potentially fertile women. 
That policy, however, is not in effect in the company's Fullerton plant, 
because a California appeals court last February struck it down as a "blatant, 
overt violation" of state anti-discrimination laws. 
Justice O'Connor hinted that the policy may also violate the 1978 federal law, 
saying: "Your policy applies to women who are not pregnant and can perform the 
work." 
 In the past, companies contended that they were discriminating against 
pregnant women only in the interest of their children, Scalia said. But he 
added that federal law now forbids such discrimination. 
Last year, a federal appeals court in Chicago shocked women's rights advocates 
by upholding the company's "fetal-protection policy" without a trial. The 
judges did not require the company to prove that any children had suffered harm 
or show why women in their 50s also were excluded. 
Women's rights lawyers said that this decision, unless overturned by the high 
court, could threaten millions of women whose jobs -- whether in hospitals, 
offices or manufacturing sites -- could expose a fetus to hazards. 
But the company says that lead is so dangerous to a developing child and so 
difficult to remove from the air that women can be excluded from its facilities 
to protect children. 
Lead "poisons the fetus and causes permanent brain damage," said Milwaukee 
attorney Stanley Jaspan, representing the company. 
"How often does this happen?" asked Justice John Paul Stevens, noting that the 
court record did not show proof that any child had been harmed by a mother's 
employment at a battery plant. 
Even if the justices agree among themselves that the appeals court ruling must 
be reversed, they could be divided over how to do it. 
Marsha Berzon, a San Francisco lawyer representing the women workers, said that 
these female employees, not the company, should decide whether they must leave 
their jobs to protect their offspring. 
In a friend-of-the-court brief, the Justice Department agreed that the appeals 
court ruling must be reversed, but it said that the case should be sent back 
for a trial. There, the company could be given a chance to prove that it cannot 
operate safely and reasonably with fertile women in its battery plants. 
A ruling in the case (United Auto Workers vs. Johnson Controls, 89-1215) is not 
likely for several months. 
