MAGNET SCHOOLS DETER IMMIGRANT PUPILS; 
EDUCATION: CRITICS SAY A DEARTH OF BILINGUAL TEACHERS IN TOP-FLIGHT CLASSES 
SHUTS THE DOOR TO MOST GIFTED BUT LIMITED-ENGLISH CHILDREN. 
Most immigrant students are excluded from the Los Angeles Unified School 
District's highly lauded magnet schools, intended to provide top-flight 
education for high-achievers, because nearly every class is taught only in 
English, according to some educators and lawyers. 
Last year, 4% of the 30,000 students enrolled in magnet schools spoke limited 
English, compared to 35% of the district's students. The district this year is 
providing bilingual instruction in just 13 magnet school classrooms. 
District officials say they are meeting the demand for Spanish-language 
instruction at magnet schools and that many Latino parents don't want their 
children bused to magnet schools outside their neighborhoods. 
But School Supt. Bill Anton agreed that the low enrollment of limited 
English-speaking students at magnet schools points to a problem. "It's not the 
way it was set up," he said. "We have to find out why we are not having 
(bilingual) programs in the magnet schools." 
Some education and legal experts say the numbers are appalling and blame the 
district for failing to recruit more non-English speakers. 
"Where you have schools that are set up to provide specialized instruction to 
students of the district and one significant group of students are effectively 
shut out, you have both a legal and ethical problem," said Peter Roos, an 
attorney with Multicultural Education Training and Advocacy, a national 
public-interest law firm specializing in educational rights of minority and 
immigrant children. 
Roos and several other public-interest attorneys are preparing to go to trial 
early next year in a 4-year-old lawsuit alleging that the district is unfairly 
spending more money and employing more experienced teachers at schools with 
higher than average enrollments of white students, such as magnet schools. 
The district reserves between 30% and 40% of the seats in magnet schools for 
Anglo children, although they make up less than 15% of the district's total 
enrollment of 625,000. Together, Anglo and Asian students make up nearly half 
of the magnet school enrollment, even though the two groups make up only 20% of 
district enrollment. 
"There is a general attitude that the limited English-speaking student is a 
second-class citizen," said Juan F. Lara, a professor at the Claremont Graduate 
School and a resident scholar at the Tomas Rivera Center, a national institute 
of policy studies. "Look at school districts with large limited 
English-speaking populations and it becomes patently clear they are considered 
an expendable population." 
District officials say there are no barriers to magnet schools. A magnet school 
brochure, including a version in Spanish, is distributed to students once a 
year. 
"All children may apply to magnet programs, we never limit it," said Assistant 
Supt. Theodore T. Alexander Jr., who heads the district's magnet schools and 
other voluntary integration programs. "But it is a misconception that everyone 
in the district wants to be in a magnet." 
The district's magnet schools and centers, which share facilities with regular 
schools, have for years finished far ahead of the city's regular schools in 
almost every measure of academic achievement including test scores, graduation 
rates and college eligibility. Tens of thousands of children are on waiting 
lists for magnet schools, which can accommodate fewer than 10,000 new students 
each school year. 
The district does not keep track of the language proficiency of its magnet 
school applicants. But district officials say a shortage of bilingual teachers 
and a reluctance by immigrant parents to send their children to schools outside 
of their neighborhoods probably discourages limited English-speaking students 
from applying to magnet schools. 
District records show that last year 1,237 limited English-speaking students 
were enrolled in 93 magnet schools and centers, which by design offer the sort 
of equipment, curriculum and teachers found only in the best private schools. 
Of about 8,000 students enrolled in 27 magnet schools and centers for only 
high-ability and gifted students, only 102 were Spanish-speaking, district 
records show. Another 200 or so gifted students who spoke languages other than 
Spanish or English were enrolled in those schools. 
The Euclid Avenue School's bilingual magnet center -- which opened last year -- 
is the first and only in Los Angeles to offer classes in Spanish for gifted and 
high-ability students, generally children who score in the top 2.5% to 4% on 
standard IQ tests. 
"The sad fact is students aren't being identified as gifted until they learn 
English," said Euclid Principal Esther Castruita-McShane. 
Bright immigrant children should be identified as gifted or high ability and 
then offered special programs in their native language while they learn English 
part of the day, said Sandra Kaplan, a visiting professor of education at USC 
and the assistant director of the Los Angeles-based National/State Leadership 
Training Institute on the Gifted and the Talented. 
Kaplan has developed a series of tests to identify gifted students who speak 
languages other than English. Teachers at Euclid Avenue School have been using 
her techniques and this year identified 33 students as gifted. 
The school board in May, 1988, voted to give priority to the hiring of 
bilingual teachers for magnet schools. 
"Magnet schools are the best kind of schools the district has to offer," said 
Eastside board member Leticia Quezada, who pushed for creation of the Euclid 
Avenue magnet school. "The fact is we spend more money in magnet schools 
compared to regular schools." 
The magnet school system was created nearly 15 years ago. 
