ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: ORANGE; 
D.A. REVIEWING PANEL APPOINTMENT 
The Orange County district attorney's office is reviewing a complaint that the 
City Council acted improperly in appointing Mark Murphy to the city Planning 
Commission last month. 
The review is the second this week by the district attorney's office concerning 
the Planning Commission. 
On Monday, Chief Assistant Dist. Atty. Maurice L. Evans said his office was 
also considering a complaint that Don Greek, a City Council candidate and 
former planning commissioner, violated state conflict of interest codes while 
serving on the commission. 
Murphy, who replaced Greek on the commission, was appointed by the council 
Sept. 18 despite the protests of residents who said that Murphy had missed the 
Sept. 4 filing deadline. 
Following an investigation by the city attorney's office, the council voted 
unanimously to confirm the appointment. Mayor Don E. Smith told residents at 
the time that Murphy's resume had been "lost in the shuffle" but had actually 
been on file for months. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Donna Crandall said her office had received a request to 
"look into that particular appointment" and the procedures that led to the 
council's selection. 
The complaint filed with the district attorney alleges that Murphy's resume was 
not received by the city clerk's office until Sept. 7, three days after the 
filing deadline. The complaint also states that a City Council agenda made 
available to the public on Sept. 6 already listed the appointment of Murphy, 
though his resume was not received until the following day. 
Dale Rahn, a Planning Commission candidate, was one of the residents who 
protested the selection process. "If we were in a competitive bidding 
situation, his bid would've been thrown out for being late and delinquent," 
Rahn said. 
But Murphy contends that the city clerk's office has kept a copy of his resume 
in its "skills file" for some time and called the complaint a "classic 
misunderstanding of the process." 
"It's no different than any other position that I've been appointed to," said 
Murphy, who has also served on the city's Centennial Commission and the 
Community Video Advisory Board. "All I know is that I followed the rules." 
City Clerk Marilyn Jensen said candidates for appointed positions are often 
pulled from the skills file and that Murphy, who is a senior sales 
representative for the Apollo Systems Division of Hewlett-Packard in Irvine, 
was not required to submit an updated resume to be eligible for the post. 
When Murphy did submit an update, it was "buried under a stack of papers" in 
the city manager's office until it surfaced Sept. 7, Jensen said. 
Residents who protested the selection process complained that not all 
candidates were considered equally and that Murphy's appointment was a reward 
for serving as campaign manager for Councilman Gene Beyer, who is running for 
mayor. MARY HELEN BERG 
