LIFE ON WHEELS: GRATEFUL TO BE DEEMED WORTHY OF INSURANCE 
Last week, a California auto insurance company was kind enough to permit me to 
write a check for several hundred dollars as a down payment on a year's worth 
of coverage. 
This was far and away the most I've ever paid for car insurance. But hefty as 
it was, the check didn't seem like quite enough, somehow. I got the feeling I 
should have enclosed a thank you note as well. The nice young woman who 
accepted the check on the insurance company's behalf kept telling me how lucky 
I was that the company was willing to take my money. 
Strangely enough, that seemed to make sense, because we'd just spent nearly an 
hour looking through computers and charts to find one that would. Even then, 
she had to call and get a company employee to tell her it was OK. And this was 
the same company I've been dealing with for three years now. 
It appears that after suffering a direct hit from Proposition 103 last year, 
the insurance companies are sort of like wounded bears. They're frightened, in 
pain, no longer able to distinguish between irresponsible, expensive drivers 
and those of us who have been faithfully sending them money year after year 
without ever costing them a penny (aside from the modest expense of preparing 
and mailing our bills and, of course, cashing our checks). They've lost 
whatever trust they once had in humans, and they seem ready to lash out at 
anyone who comes within swiping distance. 
In a sense, you can hardly blame them. They know that millions of their loyal 
customers turned on them last November, but they have no way of finding out who 
those dastardly folks might be, aside from the fact that most of them live in 
California's eight most populous counties, including Orange County. Places 
where, not coincidentally, auto insurance rates were (and still are) the 
state's highest. 
Proposition 103 was supposed to roll back insurance rates 20% from their 1987 
levels. It passed and was upheld by the state Supreme Court. So I was a little 
surprised to get a bill a few weeks ago that was 15% higher than last year's. 
California Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie's announcement on Monday 
that she had ordered a freeze of up to six months on increases in private 
passenger auto insurance rates may have made headlines, but it made no 
difference in situations like mine, where rates were already higher. 
To make matters worse, I couldn't have paid that bill even if I'd wanted to, 
because it was for my share of a joint policy for which I am no longer eligible 
as a result of a change in family circumstances that I hadn't yet notified my 
insurance company about. When I called and explained the situation, my agent 
told me I'd have to start from scratch, at -- you guessed it -- a higher rate. 
Even though my insurer and I have a longstanding relationship in which, so far, 
I've made no demands, the rules said that history was worthless. I had to be 
treated like a new customer, a veritable stranger. And since Proposition 103, 
my agent explained, most companies in the state are reluctant to take on new 
customers. 
I couldn't just mail in my payment as I'd done in years past, nor could I 
authorize anything over the phone. I had to make an appointment, go to the 
office and fill out an application. I considered shopping around on my own, but 
things seemed complicated enough. So I stuck with the same agent I'd had for 
years, an independent broker who deals with several companies. At least to her, 
I wasn't a stranger. 
When I showed up at the office, however, my agent had the day off, but she had 
arranged for one of her co-workers to take care of me. 
I answered lots of personal questions, stopping just short of revealing my shoe 
size or whether I'd ever gone all the way on a first date. Did I have children? 
Were they living in my household? With some companies, that made a difference, 
whether the children were old enough to drive legally or not even tall enough 
to reach the gas pedal and the steering wheel at the same time. 
Understandably, they wanted to know what I did for a living, and how I went 
about it. Everything went smoothly until I revealed that I'm a telecommuter, 
working out of my home most of the time with my telephone, modem and personal 
computer. Since that means I spend less time on the road, I figured, 
innocently, that I might get a discount for it. 
"Uh-oh," the woman said, the color draining from her face. She crumpled the 
application we'd been working on and tossed it into the wastebasket. 
"Did I say something wrong?" I asked. 
"That company won't insure people who work out of their homes," she said. "They 
feel it's a much greater risk because you're out driving around all the time." 
"They've never heard of computers?" I asked, explaining that my in-home office 
helps keep me off the freeways. 
"They just don't take that into account," she said, tapping the keyboard of the 
computer in front of her. Other companies weren't so strict, she explained, but 
in any case, my work arrangements meant I was going to have to pay a little 
more. 
After some more keyboard tapping and chart flipping, she determined that my 
best bet would be the company I've had all along. But first she had to call and 
get a special dispensation for me, because I was, after all, a new customer. As 
I watched helplessly, checkbook in hand, she eloquently pleaded my case. After 
a few minutes, the man on the other end acquiesced. 
As the woman hung up the phone, I opened my checkbook. 
"Wait," she said as I uncapped my pen, "you have to sign these forms first." 
Finally, it was time to write the check. "Would you prefer a one-pay, two-pay, 
three-pay, four-pay or nine-pay plan?" she asked. 
Considering that my total premium would be around $1,000, I chose the four-pay 
plan. I handed her the check, she handed me some papers, and I went home, 
relieved and grateful that I had been deemed worthy of car insurance. 
So what do you think? Should I send a nice card? Maybe some flowers? Or wait, I 
know: a tip! Let's see, at 15% of my bill, that would be . . . 
Nah. 
