DEFENDANT WANTS JURORS TO DECIDE HIS SANITY; 
CRIMES: ACCUSED OF STABBING HIS 18-YEAR-OLD GIRLFRIEND TO DEATH, CHRISTOPHER 
ROWLAND, 22, SAYS HIS LAWYER AND PROSECUTORS WANT HIM SENT TO A MENTAL 
HOSPITAL. 
In an unusual hearing Thursday in Van Nuys Superior Court, a murder defendant 
who described himself as a fallen angel who has spoken to Jesus complained to 
jurors that his lawyer has joined with prosecutors and the judge in trying to 
lock him away in a mental hospital. 
Christopher Michael Rowland, 22, insisted to the court that he is mentally 
competent to stand trial on a charge that he stabbed 18-year-old Roberta 
Rosentheim to death in a Van Nuys motel eight days after meeting her. 
Rowland disputed the argument of his attorney, Deputy Public Defender William 
M. Thornbury, that he is too mentally unstable to assist in his defense. 
"I want to proceed to trial as speedily as possible and get this over with," 
Rowland told jurors, who are expected to begin deliberations today over whether 
Rowland is competent to stand trial. 
"All it is, is an attempt by the D.A. to get their case together. I'm fully 
competent and fully aware of the details of this case." 
But later, Rowland told jurors: "If I can put it very briefly, I'm a fallen 
angel. . . . I believe I spoke to Jesus three times. . . . A voice said, 'Be a 
warrior for me and you'll have all you desire.' " 
Rosentheim fell in love with Rowland, a drifter, after being introduced to him 
by her brother, who brought Rowland home after meeting him on a bus, family 
members said. 
She was killed Feb. 12 in a room at the Chateau Motel on Sepulveda Boulevard, 
where the couple had gone because Rosentheim's family disapproved of the 
relationship. 
If the jury finds Rowland incompetent, he may be housed in a state mental 
hospital until psychiatrists determine that he is able to stand trial. 
Claims of mental incompetency in trials are usually determined by a judge after 
reviewing statements by psychiatrists who have examined the defendant, 
prosecutors said. 
But Rowland took the unusual step of asserting his right to have jurors decide 
the matter, saying they were the best witnesses to his behavior. 
Rowland appeared composed and articulate during most of an hourlong statement 
in which he accused the Los Angeles public defender's office of dragging its 
heels in its investigation of the killing. He said the office was trying to 
make him appear insane because he had accused it of wrongdoing, and he wanted a 
new lawyer. 
The public defender's office, Rowland said, wants "to have it on the record 
that I'm insane or I have organic brain damage, to cover up these allegations I 
made" so "the whole case would be shelved." 
Thornbury, in questioning his client, said his office had begun an 
investigation into the killing in June. 
Rowland said he was unaware of the investigation and had not been interviewed 
by the office. 
A psychiatrist testified Thursday that Rowland suffers from paranoid 
schizophrenia and major depression. 
A second psychiatrist said Rowland's mental troubles may be related to 
long-term drug abuse. 
Rowland, however, said he appeared psychotic when interviewed by the 
psychiatrists because he was taking Thorazine and Stelazine, which are 
anti-psychotic drugs. 
"I was so heavily and thoroughly medicated, I was a zombie," he said. 
