GRANADA HILLS POSTS 3RD SHUTOUT IN A ROW 
The mismatch between Granada Hills and Cleveland highs took place -- as 
expected -- Friday night as the Highlanders rolled to a 33-0 Northwest Valley 
Conference victory at Cleveland. 
Granada Hills' Brett Washington ran wild -- as expected -- gaining 104 yards in 
13 carries and scoring his ninth and 10th touchdowns of the season. 
Highlander quarterback Bryan Martin strafed the Cleveland secondary -- as 
expected -- completing 11 of 20 passes for 153 yards and two touchdowns. 
And Cleveland Coach Steve Landress was upset afterward -- as expected -- as his 
team fell to 0-4-1, 0-3 in conference play. 
"We belong in the (City Section) 3-A (Division)," Landress said of his 4-A 
Division team. "This is a misfortune. I can't believe the district would allow 
this to happen." 
It happened, all right. Granada Hills (5-1, 3-0) recorded its third consecutive 
shutout and held Cleveland to 135 yards while amassing 338. Even reserve 
running back Earl Andrews got into the act, racing 59 yards for a fourth-period 
touchdown on his first carry. 
About the only bright spot for Cleveland was the running of tailback Ibn Bilal, 
who gained 134 yards in 19 carries in his first start of the season. 
Bilal was pressed into action because Delvon McDaniel, the starting tailback, 
was playing quarterback in place of the injured Dave Erhardt, who is recovering 
from a separated shoulder. 
McDaniel completed two of eight passes for 10 yards. 
Washington scored twice in the first half, lumbering 13 yards for a 
first-period touchdown and 34 yards down the left sideline for a second-quarter 
touchdown. 
Martin, who struggled a week ago against Reseda, was six of 12 for 68 yards 
passing in the first half. 
Martin tossed his eighth touchdown pass of the season -- one of eight yards to 
Eric Moss -- as time expired in the first half. Martin also threw a 35-yard 
touchdown pass to Alonzo Finney in the third quarter. 
Cleveland, meanwhile, could do little right in the first half. The Cavaliers 
fumbled three times, losing one, and McDaniel misfired on all four of his pass 
attempts. 
Cleveland, which was held to 31 first-half yards, had four first downs at 
intermission but only one was earned without the aid of a penalty. 
