JORDAN'S REFUGEE CRISIS NEARLY OVER, U.N. OFFICIALS SAY; 
RELIEF: ONLY 37,000 PEOPLE REMAIN IN CAMPS. AN AIRLIFT IS EXPECTED TO COPE WITH 
ARRIVALS, UNLESS WAR BREAKS OUT. 
International relief officials Saturday proclaimed a virtual end to the 
two-month refugee crisis in Jordan while they begin to make plans for 
potentially larger numbers of refugees should war break out in the Persian 
Gulf. 
There were still about 37,000 Asian refugees in well-ordered tent encampments 
in Jordan, but they are being moved out at the rate of about 7,000 a day, 
representatives of the U.N. Disaster Relief Office (UNDRO) said Saturday. 
About 80,000 more migrants are expected to come overland to Jordan from Iraq 
and Kuwait in the coming weeks, but a multinational airlift under way from both 
Amman, the Jordanian capital, and the southern port city of Aqaba is expected 
to keep up with the flow. 
In all, almost 700,000 refugees have fled Kuwait and Iraq since the Iraqi 
invasion of the oil state on Aug. 2, officials here say. The scenes of 
desperate searches for food and shelter have all but disappeared from Jordan's 
desert horizon, to be replaced by an organized relief effort staged by numerous 
public and private groups. 
"If the present rate of arrivals, and the forecast of arrivals, is maintained 
and if the departure rate is stepped up, the exercise of evacuation would be 
over by the end of October," said Mohammed Essaafi, undersecretary of UNDRO. 
Essaafi cautioned that the orderly outflow depends on continued international 
financing of the refugee program. Money has been a source of friction between 
Jordan and relief agencies, with Jordan complaining that it has had to pay for 
land transportation through the country. 
In addition, an outbreak of war would greatly increase the number of refugees, 
changing official calculations. 
"What I say today might not be true tomorrow, given the fluidity of the 
situation," Essaafi said. 
Officials are meeting in Amman to work out plans for another massive exodus. 
The U.N.-affiliated World Food Program has stockpiled three months' supply of 
food in warehouses on the Mediterranean island of Cyprus. The food is meant to 
feed 120,000 refugees and would be delivered to Jordan or other key exit points 
for the migrants. 
Tents, drainage pipes, blankets and other needed materials are being collected 
in case more refugee camps have to be set up. Precise estimates of needs are 
difficult to come by and perhaps meaningless, given the potential numbers. A 
million Egyptians are working in Iraq along with hundreds of thousands of other 
Asian and Arab laborers. 
"If war begins, who knows what really can be done?" said an official from the 
International Committee of the Red Cross. 
"In war, maybe everyone will move, maybe no one will be able to." 
Winter is much on the minds of relief officials, who note that many of the 
tents set up to shelter refugees during the past eight weeks are inadequate for 
the winds and rain of the desert winter. "We are in the process of contingency 
planning against these enemies, but . . . there is no perfect protection 
against them," said Essaafi. 
These concerns seem far away from the relative tranquility at Azraq, a desert 
oasis town northeast of Amman where two large refugee camps have been 
established in the wake of the influx of Asian refugees. 
At Azraq I camp, about 12,000 Indian citizens were in various stages of transit 
Saturday. New arrivals bedded down under large green or pale blue tents. 
Refugees bused in over the past day or two lounged in the shade, took outdoor 
baths or cooked rice and lentils over gas-fueled stoves. 
Groups of evacuees preparing to leave Saturday lined up to board buses to take 
them to Amman's international airport for the last leg of the trip home. The 
average waiting time between arrival at Azraq and departure for the airport is 
about three days, refugees and officials said. 
"We are very happy with the conditions here," said Mohammed Abdul-Rahman, who 
reckoned that he would be boarding an airport bus late Saturday. Rahman left 
Kuwait three days ago, abandoning his job as a construction worker and leaving 
the equivalent of $30,000 in a Kuwaiti bank. The banks are closed in Kuwait 
and, in any case, Kuwaiti money has been been merged into Iraqi currency; if 
withdrawn, Rahman's money would be worth just $3,000 in Iraqi 
currency. 
"I hope the Iraqis are expelled soon," he said. 
Several of the refugees had heard tales of the difficult conditions experienced 
by many of their predecessors on the long trek across the Iraqi desert to 
Jordan. In the chaotic early weeks of the crisis, transportation, food and 
water were in short supply, and intense heat and bottlenecks at the border 
brought on illness and short tempers. 
"This is like home in comparison," said Devendar Kumar Sinak, an Indian. "We 
have food and shelter and everything is clean." 
Sinak and other refugees who were interviewed reported that Kuwait was 
relatively quiet when they left. Some shooting was heard at night and Iraqi 
soldiers had set up checkpoints to inspect documents and search cars. The 
Indians said they had no trouble leaving by bus, although they had to pay the 
equivalent of $300 for the trip through Iraq to Jordan. 
Unlike many of their countrymen, the Indians did not have to stay in Baghdad 
where, during the past month, Iraqis had detained traveling refugees in squalid 
makeshift camps without adequate supplies of food and clean water. 
The refugees who have fled Kuwait come from as far away as the Philippines, Sri 
Lanka and Pakistan. Besides Egyptians, workers from the Arab world include 
Syrians, Yemenis and Sudanese. All were attracted to Kuwait by a relative 
abundance of jobs and high wages. About two-thirds of the population of Kuwait 
were foreigners. 
The Jordanian government and the United Nations are still at odds over payment 
for relief services. Jordan has complained that it has paid for land 
transportation within its boundaries at a time when the country's economy is 
suffering from reduced trade with Iraq. Jordan has reluctantly enforced the 
U.N. trade embargo on its neighboring country and ally. 
"In the next U.N. plan, whatever it is, we want Jordan to be taken care of 
first," said Salameh Hammad, an Interior Ministry official. Hammad wants 
international donations to flow directly to the Jordanian treasury instead of 
being disbursed through international relief agencies. 
Foreign relief officials have complained that Jordan skimmed off some food 
supplies arriving from abroad and has imposed an airport tax on refugees as 
they left the country. For a time, Jordan also charged landing fees for 
international jetliners coming to pick up the migrants. 
Essaafi, the U.N. relief official, appeared to recognize Jordan's plight 
Saturday, saying money will be found to finance ground transportation to take 
the burden off the Jordanian government. 
