TWO CHEERS FOR OUR STANDARD OF LIVING; 
INCOME: MOST AMERICANS HAVE DONE MODERATELY BETTER IN THE 1980S, BUT THE POOR 
HAVE FALLEN FARTHER BEHIND NOT ONLY THE RICH BUT THE MAINSTREAM AS WELL. 
The most-scrutinized numbers published by the Census Bureau are the annual 
poverty and income statistics. In the 1980s, they have become a political 
battleground. On the one side are those (mainly Democrats) who contend that we 
face economic stagnation and growing inequality between rich and poor. On the 
other are those (mainly Republicans) who claim that living standards are 
steadily rising and that all is well. There ought to be a truce. The latest 
census report proves both sides half right. 
What the report shows is this: The 1980s have not been a period of joyless 
prosperity, whose benefits have gone only to the filthy rich. But stubborn 
poverty persists in the midst of plenty -- indeed, in the midst of increasing 
plenty. Let me give you some numbers. 
Since 1979, average household income ($34,017 in 1988) has risen about 10% 
after adjusting for inflation. The gain since 1967 is roughly one-third. This 
is almost identical to the increase in productivity (output per hour worked). 
Higher living standards reflect our ability to produce. The more we produce 
(cars, airline service or whatever), the more we can consume. For married 
couples, average incomes ($42,801 in 1988) have increased 15% since 1980 and 
nearly 40% since 1967. This is not stagnation. 
But while most households are moving up, many low-income Americans have hardly 
made any progress. In 1980, households with income of less than $10,000 were 
18.7% of the total. In 1988, they were still 17%. (Again, all figures are 
adjusted for inflation and are stated in today's dollars.) It's possible to 
choose a variety of definitions of poverty. The conclusion remains the same: 
The poor are being left further behind. 
It's not only that the gap between the rich and poor is growing. The gap is 
growing between the poor and the majority of Americans who are, broadly 
speaking, in the mainstream. 
What's depressing, then, is that the poverty trends remain unchanged. "A rising 
tide lifts all boats" is one of Americans' favorite economic faiths. 
Translation: Prosperity will make everyone better off. But this hasn't 
happened. Some possible explanations make the problem look less daunting. 
Others make it look virtually insoluble. Consider: 
Family breakdown -- Since 1967, the proportion of households headed by a woman, 
usually with children, has risen from 8.4% to 11.7% of the total. These 
households have low incomes and nearly two-fifths of them fall beneath the 
government's official poverty line. The situation is the same, though far less 
extreme, for men heading households with children alone. Since 1967, they've 
risen from about 1.8% to 3.1% of the total. 
Immigration -- The influx of poor Latinos and other immigrants has increased 
poverty and tended to reduce average incomes. Since 1980, the number of Latino 
households has risen by about 50%; the rise in Latino households represented 
one-fifth of the increase of all households in the1980s. The open question is 
whether the new immigrants will permanently enlarge the poverty pool or, after 
a while, climb up the income and social ladder. 
Falling earnings of low-skilled workers -- By one theory, the poor earnings of 
many men fosters family breakdown, because they aren't attractive husbands or 
cannot hold a family together. In 1973, a man 25 to 34 with a high school 
diploma earned 82% of what a college graduate of the same age did. By 1987, the 
high school graduate's earnings averaged 72% of the college graduate's. No one 
knows whether this slippage reflects a demand for higher skills, a cheapening 
of a high school diploma, the impact of foreign competition . . . or something 
else entirely. 
The trouble with the great debate about general living standards is that it 
distracts attention from what, if anything, government can do to reduce 
poverty. There are real and important differences between liberals and 
conservatives on this question. But that's where the argument ought to be 
focused, rather than on the issues of whether living standards are declining. 
This debate is mainly political theater masquerading as a serious inquiry. 
Democrats want to stigmatize the economy. Republicans want to glamorize it. 
Both stereotypes are misleading. 
What's involved is psychology as much as economics. Between World War II and 
the late 1960s, incomes and living standards rose so dramatically that 
Americans came to expect rapid and constant improvement as preordained. It 
wasn't. The subsequent slowdown is just that -- a slowdown. Some groups have 
struggled more than others. Younger baby boomers have suffered generational 
congestion. Their relative incomes have been depressed. But most Americans can 
still expect a gradual rise in living standards. It's neither calamitous nor 
glorious. 
