IRAQ GAINS NEW CLOUT WITH SAUDI ARABIA OIL TERMINAL; 
MIDEAST: ADDITIONAL CAPACITY WOULD ALLOW COUNTRY TO FLOOD THE MARKET AND SEIZE 
CUSTOMERS FROM ITS NEIGHBORS, BUT OFFICIALS SAY THEY WON'T DO THAT. 
The Iraqi government of President Saddam Hussein, already a formidable military 
power after eight years of war with Iran, took a significant stride this week 
toward developing a new oil weapon with the opening of a crude-oil terminal on 
Saudi Arabia's Red Sea coast. 
The terminal here puts Iraq in a position to triple its current crude-oil 
exports through Saudi Arabia, a route chosen during the Persian Gulf war years 
after Iranian planes and artillery in 1980 bombed and burned Iraqi ports, oil 
tanks and loading terminals all along the southern frontier that joins the 
longtime belligerents. 
Because of the size of Iraq's oil reserves and its production and export 
capabilities, oil industry officials, Western diplomats and other Arab 
governments have privately expressed concern that Iraq now has the ability to 
wield considerable power in world oil markets, giving it economic and political 
leverage in the region and a role that only Saudi Arabia claimed in the past. 
While many oil-producing countries are struggling to maintain oil production at 
levels that support their national budgets, Iraq not only is sitting on a huge 
pool of oil -- and more is being found each year -- but its ability to pump it 
out of the ground and get it to market also has grown dramatically. 
The increase of Iraq's oil power raises the question of how it will use it, 
according to oil industry executives in the region. Will it turn up its 
production and seek to take away customers, or market share, from other 
countries by offering discounted prices? 
Iraqi officials say no, but there is little trust these days in the oil 
markets. 
The sprawling Iraqi Petroleum Co. terminal and tank farm here loom out of the 
desert haze 150 miles north of Jeddah on an unmarked stretch of shoreline. 
There are no signs or national flags fluttering in the stiff westerly wind that 
whips through the security barriers of chain-link and barbed-wire fences 
stretched over floodlighted concrete pillars. 
The terminal is fed by an oil pipeline that crosses 900 miles of Arabian desert 
from well fields near Basra and Zubair in southern Iraq. The first tanker to 
call here, the Al-Qadassiyeh, finished loading Monday and was to depart for 
customers in Europe and the United States this week. 
Today, Iraqi technicians and foreign construction companies are working at 
breakneck speed to repair Iraq's offshore oil-loading terminals at the northern 
end of the gulf. By 1990, Iraqi Oil Minister Issam Abdul-Rahim Chalabi 
predicted recently, Iraq could be pumping up to 6 million barrels a day of 
crude oil onto the world markets, more than double its current volume. 
Until now, Iraq's crude-oil shipments to the Red Sea have traveled through the 
Saudi pipeline system to a terminal at Yanbu. The previous output of 500,000 
barrels a day through the Saudi line will jump to 1.65 million barrels a day 
through the new Iraqi system. 
The view of Iraq as a country seeking to strengthen all of its regional 
alliances in anticipation of future competition with Iran provides what one oil 
company executive described as "the ultimate deterrent" against Iraqi 
belligerency in OPEC or in bilateral relations with the Arab neighbors who were 
critical allies during the war. 
"Iraq is not trying to make enemies in the Arab world, quite the contrary," 
noted a Western ambassador in the region. 
As Iraq has toed the line on production, some of the smaller sheikdoms along 
the gulf, such as Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, have been pumping all 
out, totally disregarding the OPEC quotas assigned to them. 
So far, the world's demand for oil has soaked up this excess production. But it 
has only raised the prospect that other OPEC members might abandon the quota 
system too in the quest for new customers and revenues. 
Iraq has demonstrated -- in part with the opening of the terminal here -- that 
it would be able to flood the market to seize more customers from its 
neighbors, but Iraqi officials say they harbor nothing but good intentions. 
"We will continue to hold to the quota, and we will press the others to hold to 
their quotas also," Oil Minister Chalabi told reporters in Baghdad. 
