SAVIMBI AGREES TO RETURN TO TALKS ON ANGOLAN PEACE 
Jonas Savimbi, the leader of rebels trying to overthrow the Marxist government 
of Angola, agreed Thursday to return to negotiations intended to end a 14-year 
civil war in the southern African nation. 
Savimbi's promise came after prodding from President Bush, who rewarded Savimbi 
by issuing statements of continued U.S. support for the rebel movement. The 
Angolan peace effort is directed by President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire. 
Conservatives in this country have kept up pressure on successive U.S. 
administrations to maintain assistance to the anti-Marxist rebels. Most 
recently, Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the ranking Republican on the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, complained that Mobutu cut off supply links 
that pass through Zaire to Savimbi's forces, the Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola (UNITA). 
In a written statement, White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said that 
the President used his 30-minute meeting with Savimbi "to stress the United 
States' continued support for UNITA and the goal of national reconciliation in 
Angola." 
However, the statement noted, Bush also urged Savimbi "to work with President 
Mobutu and others in the region to foster the peace process." 
Fitzwater said that Bush reminded Savimbi of the United States' "longstanding 
support for a cease-fire and face-to-face negotiations and, ultimately, free 
and fair elections" in Angola. 
A cease-fire between Savimbi's forces and the army of the Angolan government, 
led by President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, was reached June 22. But it began to 
falter two months later. 
After his meeting in the Oval Office, Savimbi said that he was "reassured by 
the President of the continued support of the United States to UNITA." 
And, he said, "we accepted . . . that President Mobutu is the mediator" of 
talks between the rebel movement and the Angolan government. 
Asked whether he was ready to return to cease-fire talks, he replied, 
"Absolutely." 
Savimbi had balked at attending a recent round of peace talks intended to 
smooth out differences over the interpretation of the June 22 agreement. 
Savimbi has implicitly accused Mobutu of concluding secret deals with Angola to 
change the terms of the agreement. 
Dos Santos has argued that under the agreement, Savimbi was to step down from 
his leadership of UNITA and integrate his forces with those of the Angolan 
military. Savimbi has denied such an interpretation. 
Bush met with Mobutu on Wednesday, urging him to "work out any differences" to 
meet "the goal of national reconciliation," Fitzwater said. 
"Mobutu has been very constructive in serving as a mediator. . . . We want that 
to continue," Fitzwater said. 
