AFTER SHOCKS 
People go about their business. But for almost everyone who lived through the 
biggest earthquake in California since 1906, life remains different a year 
after. 
The differences can be subtle. People may jump when a truck rolls by, or when 
the washing machine spins and shakes the house. Many people need more time to 
gain their composure when a small temblor rumbles through. Some people still 
won't cross the Bay Bridge. Some people have moved away. No one who survived 
the earthquake on that warm evening last Oct. 17 ever wants to experience 
another one like it. For people who came close to death, whose homes are no 
more, who saw up close the destruction the quake wrought, the effect will 
remain forever. Times Staff Writer Dan Morain talked with some of those people. 
Here are their stories. . . . 
'It's not debilitating, but it is difficult.' 
 Jack -- 
 Earthquake hit while I was under concrete. Worst happened it collapsed on my 
car. I'm alive just my left foot is stuck under the car. Hope they don't kill 
me getting me out. I love you lots. Good luck to both of us. 
 It was, Dorothy Otto said, an informational memo to her husband written as she 
sat trapped in her car, tons of concrete from the collapsed Cypress Viaduct all 
around. She wrote the words "I love you lots" only after she smelled smoke from 
a car that caught fire up ahead. 
Otto, 45, is one of the lucky ones pulled to safety. A year later, she sat in 
the living room of her Marin County home with Jack. A chunk of concrete from 
the collapsed freeway lay on her coffee table. 
"I can truthfully tell you my life will never be the same. But my life is not 
ruined," she said. She had once felt she was invincible. "And now I'm not." 
Otto knows exactly where she was at 5:04 p.m. on Oct. 17, 1989: under beam 
104-A. The concrete beam seemed to explode. It crashed down on the hood of her 
1988 Pontiac Bonneville SSE. The crushed front end pinned her in by her left 
foot. 
Under tons of concrete from the upper deck, the lower deck on which she was 
driving plunged down 25 feet. She realized she was choking on dust from the 
rubble and it struck her that she was alive "and that was incredible." 
Back in Marin that evening, Jack turned on the television. When the camera 
panned to the Cypress, he felt a cold chill. He knew where his wife was. All 
night, he waited by the phone, not speaking to a niece and nephew who sat with 
him, not eating, just staring at the television. 
From where she sat, Dorothy could see light, and hear the heroic people who ran 
to help. Her left foot felt like it was ablaze. "I had no idea pain could hurt 
like this," she said. She could be saved, she shouted, if only someone could 
free her foot. 
"I tried to tear it free," she said. "I could not do it." 
Her life did not flash before her eyes, she did not pray. But she did worry her 
insurance company would not cover the damage to the car. A man, a hero named 
Tom, arrived. A man named Clyde came, too, crawling to her through a narrow 
passageway between the decks. They used a crowbar to try to pry her free from 
the car. It wouldn't budge. She bit on an old rag to keep from screaming out in 
pain. She still marvels at Tom and Clyde's bravery. 
Jack sat in front of the television wondering how to let authorities know that 
Dorothy was missing. She always calls when she is away on business. Sometimes 
the phone doesn't ring until 3 a.m. That's fine with him. The important thing 
is that he hears from her. 
"I've got to know she's OK, or I can't function. My day is shot if I don't get 
a call," Jack said. 
Firefighters from Oakland's Engine House No. 1 arrived. They spent an hour 
cutting the car from around her. She knows them all by name, and calls them "my 
firefighters." 
Finally, at 10:45 p.m., Jack's phone rang. 
"We have your wife here and she would like to talk to you," the voice from the 
hospital said. 
"I made it," Dorothy remembers telling him. "Then we kind of whimpered at each 
other." 
"Yeah," Jack said, "it was great." 
She broke no bones, but she has not recovered completely. A knee is still 
bruised, but her left foot is not permanently damaged. A few weeks ago, she 
watched a television movie about the earthquake, and she got ill. 
She is quick-witted and outgoing, traits that make her a good saleswoman. But 
sometimes on a trip she thinks about dying in a plane crash. That sort of 
thought never used to cross her mind. 
Jack, 47, a Vietnam veteran who survived the 1968 Tet offensive, knows about 
such fears, and about nightmares. "You're never going to get over it," he tells 
her. "You will learn to deal with it. It will come back in bits and pieces, at 
the wrong time." 
The Ottos had come to California a year before the quake from New York where 
she was a national accounts manager for the Weyerhaeuser Co. selling corrugated 
boxes. She took a step down when she moved West, but she had good reason for 
doing it. She wanted to help a sister care for a son who has AIDS, and another 
son who sustained a head injury in a fall. 
"That's why I figure I didn't get smashed," she said. "I came here with a pure 
heart." 
Recently, she changed jobs, and has one comparable to what she left in New 
York. But as hard as she works, she has a tough time on some Mondays. On those 
difficult Monday mornings, she goes to her car, then gets ill and has to return 
to the house until she regains her composure. 
"It's not debilitating," she said. "But it is difficult to deal with." 
