MAN SENTENCED TO 2 YEARS IN DRUNK-DRIVING DEATH IN 1979 
A man who eluded the law for nearly a decade pleaded guilty to manslaughter 
Wednesday in the death of a Canyon Country teen-ager in a drunk-driving 
accident. 
Gregg Wendlandt, 38, was sentenced to two years in prison for killing Mytina 
Lee Bailey, 18, in a traffic accident Feb. 17, 1979, a week before her wedding 
date. 
With credit for jail time served since his February arrest, Wendlandt probably 
will be out of prison in less than seven months, said Deputy Dist. Atty. 
Kenneth L. Barshop. 
Wendlandt could have received more jail time if he had been sentenced under a 
law enacted two years ago, Barshop said. Because of public outrage over 
drunk-driving accidents, the Legislature in 1987 stiffened the maximum sentence 
for vehicular manslaughter to 10 years. 
But Wendlandt, by law, had to be sentenced under the statute that existed in 
1979, when the maximum for vehicular manslaughter was three years, Barshop 
said. To further complicate matters, Barshop said, there was no law against 
fleeing to avoid criminal charges in 1979. 
Judge Ronald S. Coen ruled that because Wendlandt had no prior felony 
convictions and pleaded guilty before a trial, he should not receive the 
maximum sentence now allowed. 
Wendlandt was arrested in Milwaukee on Feb. 10, after he was in a street fight, 
authorities there said. At the time of his arrest, he admitted that he had used 
several aliases, including Gerald Voigt, they said. The authorities ran the 
aliases through a computer and discovered that Voigt was wanted in California 
for manslaughter. 
Wendlandt agreed to return to California after extradition proceedings were 
started. His guilty plea came just hours before attorneys were to begin picking 
a jury for his trial. 
The accident occurred at the intersection of Sierra Highway and Via Princessa 
at 2:45 a.m. Bailey, driving a pickup truck she had received as a birthday gift 
from her fiancee two weeks before, was waiting to make a left turn onto Via 
Princessa when Wendlandt's car hit her head-on, authorities said. 
Tests showed that Wendlandt's blood-alcohol level was 0.13, investigators said. 
The legal limit in California is 0.10. Bailey died 10 days after the accident 
from brain injuries suffered in the crash. 
After his arrest 10 years ago, Wendlandt posted $500 bail and disappeared. 
