LENDERS MUST THINK 'GREEN' IN THIRD WORLD 
Third World scientists meeting in India early this year concluded that 
developing countries -- highly dependent on natural resources and ill-equipped 
to adapt to a rapidly changing climate -- will experience particular strain 
from warming driven by the greenhouse effect. 
Developing nations currently contribute about one-third of total greenhouse gas 
emissions. By the middle of the next century they will be releasing the 
preponderance of these gases, most importantly carbon dioxide (CO2). Ways must 
be found to help them moderate unnecessary growth in these emissions while 
simultaneously furthering larger development objectives. 
The greenhouse effect also adds considerably greater urgency to policies -- 
energy efficiency, forest conservation and elimination of chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs) -- that make sense for other economic and environmental reasons. 
Development assistance from the World Bank could accomplish these goals. 
Energy is essential to economic development, and Third World countries must 
increase power-generating capacity to satisfy their needs. But fossil fuels are 
the primary source of CO2. There is a way out of this double bind. According to 
respected Third World energy specialists, by the year 2020 the world can 
achieve an acceptable standard of living without increasing global energy 
consumption. 
That does not mean limiting access to the energy services necessary for 
development. Rather, Brazil, India, Costa Rica and other developing countries 
can cut the need for growth in power-generating capacity by up to 30% or more 
through investment in state-of-the-art energy-saving industrial equipment, 
lighting systems, air conditioners and other appliances, realizing considerable 
monetary savings in the bargain. Regrettably, the bank -- the planet's biggest 
development assistance institution and the Third World's largest single source 
of foreign exchange for energy investments -- has devoted at most 4% of its 
energy and industrial-sector lending to these "end-use" energy efficiency 
improvements over the last decade. Economically viable technologies exist, and 
the World Bank should help deploy them. 
Although World Bank President Barber Conable pledged last week at the annual 
meetings of the bank and the International Monetary Fund to make Third World 
environmental problems a priority for the 1990s, the director of the bank's 
Industry and Energy Department has publicly expressed doubt that bank loans to 
improve end-use energy efficiency are even necessary. Another bank staffer said 
that he can count the number of staff with experience in end-use efficiency on 
one hand. "And I still have fingers left over!" he added. 
Tropical deforestation is the leading source of Third World greenhouse gas 
emissions, accounting for 10% to 30% of global CO2 emissions and 10% to 20% of 
methane emissions. If the trend continues, tropical forests could be wiped out 
during the next century. Through forest conservation and tree planting, 
developing countries could instead create a living repository for excess 
carbon. Studies have demonstrated that well-managed, intact forests have 
substantial economic as well as environmental value. 
Nonetheless, a World Bank draft greenhouse paper, which dismisses forests as 
"less important" than energy, devotes only a few sentences to this crucial 
issue. While the bank has paid lip service to the need for tropical-forest 
conservation, and Conable has pledged to triple lending in this area, the 
bank's forestry projects continue to generate substantial criticism. Logging 
and plantation projects designed with inadequate input from the affected people 
have been unresponsive to their needs and on occasion have triggered strenuous 
opposition from the local populace. 
The World Bank can play a major role in disseminating substitutes for CFCs, 
which are responsible for 10% to 25% of the overall global warming threat. 
These chemicals, the principal culprits in depletion of the stratospheric ozone 
layer, will very likely be outlawed by international measures now under 
negotiation. But instead of emphasizing the necessity for the bank to seize 
leadership in helping developing countries accomplish this transition, the 
bank's draft greenhouse policy characterizes deployment of alternative 
chemicals as no more than an "insurance option" in which the bank will be 
relegated to at most a passive "monitoring role." 
This situation is symptomatic of the bank's continuing failure to integrate 
development goals with environmental imperatives. In June, the U.S. Agency for 
International Development published a list of $3 billion in environmentally 
questionable investments proposed for bank financing through 29 loans in 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
Conable has now joined the growing club of world leaders calculatedly reaping 
substantial political benefits from disingenuous "greenspeak" -- talking a good 
line on the environment without closing the gap between rhetoric and policy. 
Business as usual puts the future of our planet at risk. There is no excuse for 
foot-dragging on the national and international level on the greenhouse issue 
by the industrialized world. But neither is there justification for 
half-hearted consideration by the World Bank of a wider variety of development 
alternatives that are in the interest of both developing nations and, for that 
matter, the entire world. 
