SAN DIEGANS ROLL UP SLEEVES TO HELP QUAKE VICTIMS 
Within an hour of the earthquake that hit the San Francisco Bay Area late 
Tuesday afternoon, the San Diego Blood Bank had packed 50 units of blood 
platelets onto a Greyhound bus headed north. 
By noon Wednesday, 100 people here had rolled up their sleeves and were 
donating fresh blood to the victims in Northern California. 
"I've seen a lot of first-time donors here today," said Lynn Stedd, a 
spokesperson for the local blood bank. "I've seen families. I've seen mothers 
and children, relatives coming in together. I've seen longtime volunteer 
donors, even a 25-gallon donor came down." 
But Stedd particularly remembered the elderly woman who stopped by. 
"She made her first blood donation," Stedd said. "She just felt like she was 
trying to contribute to the community." 
Blood donors, charitable organizations, utility workers and the military -- all 
types of San Diego people and groups began pitching in Wednesday to send 
manpower and supplies to help the recovery in the Bay Area. 
By this morning, as many as 100 Navy Seabees and civilian employees from 
various San Diego bases are expected in the Bay Area to help with repairs on 
military installations, Mike Stuart, commander of naval base operations in San 
Diego, said. 
Besides manpower, San Diego's Navy bases are sending equipment and supplies. 
Those items are being transported by truck convoys and airlift. Additional 
Seabees and civilians could be sent later in the week, once officials learn how 
badly the Bay Area bases are damaged. 
Paul Revier, communications director for the Salvation Army in San Diego, said 
his organization is sending vehicles filled with bottled water, blankets and 
emergency cots. 
Al Davis, a senior vice president at San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co., said the 
utility is dispatching as many as 30 employees to help repair the natural-gas 
distribution network in the Bay Area. 
"You've got lines that are broken and customers who have turned off their gas," 
he said. 
