RESEARCHERS TAKE NEW LOOK AT CREATIVITY AND MADNESS 
The excellent articles on creativity (by Anne C. Roark, Part I, Sept. 29 and 
30) must be considered in parallel with those on the "educational summit" and 
the joint pledge of our President and governors to set national educational 
goals for the first time. Jerome Bruner, in "Play" (1976), noted that it is 
fair to say that creativity not only defies explanation but that it defies 
description, too. The same might be said for intelligence -- whatever that is 
-- and for establishment of standardized tests to measure educational 
accomplishment. This nation was founded upon faith in individuals. It became a 
leader among nations because of creative citizens. Development of individual 
capabilities and of the self-confidence to take risks should be high among the 
goals of our educational systems at all levels. There is no indication of this 
in the reports of the governors' conference or in the statement of support by 
Education Secretary Lauro Cavazos. 
As a professor of child development at San Diego State University, I teach a 
course called Development of Creative Behavior in Young Children. One of the 
basic distinctions that I expect students to make is between "convergent" and 
"divergent" thinking. In the former, it is assumed that there is only one 
correct answer. Students are expected to respond that Columbus discovered 
America in 1492, for instance -- and ignore voyages of the Vikings, ancient 
Chinese or others. This is neat, because anyone with a different response is 
wrong. It's easy to grade exams -- and this is the sort of thing that I fear 
will become even more horrendous with federal goals for education. 
On the other hand, schools described in the articles on creativity not only are 
expecting basic skills but are encouraging divergent thinking, encouraging 
children to have unpredictable ideas and to risk failure. This is the basis of 
science, arts, the humanities and such mundane pursuits as repairing plumbing 
or carburetors. It is also part of the standard negotiating process, whether it 
is done between two ordinary citizens or between nations. This is not just a 
matter of making daily life more interesting. It isn't even a matter of 
maintaining a high level of economic success and technical advancement. 
Survival of the human species depends upon divergent creative thinking. I am 
concerned that the establishment of measurable goals will again take the easy 
way out with tests of convergent answers to tests of reading, writing, and 
arithmetic to further frustrate children and their teachers. 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi's perspective cannot be ignored. We know from accounts 
of past nations that creativity flourishes in cultures valuing it and that it 
declines in nations that ignore or are afraid of it. 
DOROTHY W. HEWES, Ph.D. 
San Diego State University 
