USE OF RICO TO SUE ABORTION PROTESTERS OKD 
The Supreme Court cleared the way Tuesday for a tough federal anti-racketeering 
law to be used against militant abortion protesters who break into abortion 
clinics and harass customers and employees. 
With only one dissenting vote, the justices refused to consider an appeal by 
anti-abortion activists in Philadelphia who contended that they, like the civil 
rights protesters of the 1960s, had a First Amendment right to stage sit-ins. 
Instead, the high court let stand an appeals court ruling that provided a 
powerful weapon -- the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 
Act -- against protesters who use intimidation or force to disrupt their 
targets. 
Under the ruling, anti-abortion protesters may march in front of clinics, shout 
slogans and carry signs. But, if they invade a facility, attack its employees 
or block pregnant women from entering, they can be charged with violating the 
federal law. 
If found guilty of RICO violations, they can be forced to pay three times the 
actual business loss suffered by a clinic. They must also pay the clinic's 
legal fees. 
The 26 protesters in the Philadelphia case were assessed fines and legal fees 
totaling $108,000. They were found to have broken into the Northeast Women's 
Center on four occasions and to have damaged equipment, stolen supplies and 
assaulted employees. 
The high court action gives a boost to a similar racketeering suit brought by 
the National Organization for Women against the Operation Rescue anti-abortion 
group. 
The suit, filed in Chicago, accuses the group of conspiring to drive abortion 
clinics out of business through bombings, break-ins, violent protests and other 
illegal means. Although the case is still months away from trial, NOW is 
seeking a nationwide court injunction against Operation Rescue and its 
affiliated groups. 
"This (high court action) certainly gives us encouragement," Patricia Ireland, 
NOW's general counsel, said in a telephone interview. "All the court is saying 
is that, if you act like a gangster, you'll get treated like a gangster." 
Ireland and other lawyers cautioned, however, that the high court decision is 
not a binding ruling on the issue. It merely leaves standing a decision of the 
U.S. 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia. Other federal courts are 
free to rule differently. 
At the least, the decision indicates that the justices are not ready to set 
constitutional limits on RICO or to come to the aid of law-breaking 
anti-abortion activists. 
Michael McMonagle, director of the Pro-Life Coalition of Southeast Pennsylvania 
and a leader of the protests, said that he would not be deterred by the 
decision. "This is one battle in a long war," he said. 
In his appeal to the high court, McMonagle said that, under RICO, Dr. Martin 
Luther King Jr. could have been branded a racketeer for leading sit-ins at 
segregated lunch counters in the South. 
But the Philadelphia jury that heard the case was said to have been swayed by 
videotapes showing angry and belligerent protesters pushing and shoving 
pregnant women and clinic employees. The clinic's lawyers said the high court 
decision means that abortion protesters may not use "fear and intimidation" to 
close abortion facilities. 
Only Justice Byron R. White voted to hear the case (McMonagle vs. Northeast 
Women's Clinic, 88-2137). 
For the Supreme Court, the 1970 anti-racketeering law has become a persistent 
headache, with no relief in sight. The justices, both liberal and conservative, 
have made it clear that they are troubled by RICO's broad reach and vague 
boundaries. 
A RICO offense must be triggered by "at least two acts of racketeering" within 
a 10-year period. But racketeering is defined to include everything from murder 
and extortion to mail fraud or securities fraud. In the Philadelphia case, the 
protesters were found to have used extortion to close down the clinic. 
Although it originally was designed to attack organized crime and its 
infiltration into legitimate businesses, RICO in recent years has been used 
against all manner of violators, from insurance agents and accountants to stock 
traders and sellers of pornographic books. 
Nevertheless, in lengthy opinions in 1985 and earlier this year, the high court 
concluded that it would be up to Congress, not the judiciary, to rewrite the 
law and narrow its scope. 
Next month, the Senate Judiciary Committee is expected to vote on a bill to 
curb RICO in civil cases. Under the legislation, in most business fraud cases 
plaintiffs no longer would be able to win triple damages and have their 
attorneys' fees paid. But neither the Senate bill nor a similar House bill 
would alter the law when used in criminal cases brought by the government. 
In other actions, the court: 
 -- Overturned a libel award against a Pennsylvania newspaper for publishing 
secretly recorded telephone conversations that appeared in a court record 
(Easton Publishing vs. Boettger, 89-265). In June, the high court said that the 
news media may not be punished for accurately reporting lawfully obtained 
information. 
 -- Agreed to decide a high-stakes patent dispute involving new medical 
equipment (Eli Lilly vs. Medtronic, 89-243). The Food and Drug Act permits 
makers of generic drugs to test-market their products before the patent on an 
original drug has expired. Earlier this year, a federal appeals court said that 
the same patent exemption applies to new high-tech medical devices. On appeal, 
the Eli Lilly Co. said that this decision will cost it millions of dollars in 
lost sales for its patented heart defibrillator and that it threatens to 
undercut medical research nationwide. 
BACKGROUND 
Almost 20 years ago, Congress enacted a broad anti-racketeering law, the 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. It was aimed at Mafia 
figures infiltrating and preying on legitimate businesses. Two or more acts of 
racketeering -- including everything from murder and extortion to mail fraud or 
securities fraud -- can be prosecuted under the act. Increasingly, however, 
private lawyers have invoked the law in ways apparently never envisioned by 
Congress. 
RESTRICTIONS FAIL: A Florida legislative panel rejected four restrictive 
abortion measures. A18 
