LOOKS: UNDER COVER; 
OIL-FREE COSMETICS AND MAKEUP SAVVY HELP ADULTS HIDE ACNE BLEMISHES 
I FIGURED I'd have acne until I was 19, not 36," says a film industry executive 
who makes monthly visits to her dermatologist. Many people think acne plagues 
only teen-agers. But Southern California dermatologists report that at least 
25% of their patients who are troubled by acne are women over 30. 
While there is no cure for acne, it can be controlled with creams and lotions 
containing benzoyl peroxide, salicylic acid or sulfur and, for more serious 
cases, Retin-A and antibiotics. Many dermatologists offer their own skin-care 
products for acne-ridden skin. Yet, even the most advanced medical care won't 
clear up a complexion overnight, so camouflage makeup is necessary. 
In Beverly Hills, makeup artist Valerie Sarnelle has celebrity clients, but she 
also caters to patients with skin problems. In fact, she gets almost as many 
referrals from dermatologists as from plastic surgeons. "Women want to know how 
to hide their acne breakouts without making them worse, and the doctors want to 
be sure that cosmetics are not going to aggravate the problem," says Sarnelle, 
owner of Valerie's Cosmetics. 
To disguise acne, Sarnelle uses an oil-free primer -- yellow for pale to medium 
complexions and green for darker skin -- to reduce redness and balance skin 
tones. Taking a bit of yellow liquid from a bottle, she sponges it onto a 
client's face. Then with the tip of a makeup sponge, she applies a foundation 
that she has formulated for oily skin. Sarnelle suggests selecting makeup one 
shade darker than the natural tone to further conceal blemishes. An oil-free 
makeup she stocks also provides SPF 15 protection because people who use 
Retin-A are sensitive to the sun. 
Makeup specialist Judith August, who sells camouflage cosmetics by mail-order 
from her Studio City offices, says that many of the techniques used on women 
recovering from plastic surgery can be used on acne patients. For complete 
coverage, August pats on natural-tone foundation, allows it to dry and then 
sponges on a second layer. August urges clients to then use powder "because it 
cuts light reflection that calls attention to the blemishes." She also 
recommends a flesh-toned kohl pencil for touch-ups. 
When clients with acne turn to Eugenia Weston at her Senna Cosmetiques salon in 
Tarzana, Weston, before applying foundation, dabs on a liquid containing 
camphor, an ingredient present in some acne preparations, to "protect the skin 
and dry out the blemishes." She uses matte charcoal or brown eye makeup and red 
lipstick to call attention to the eyes and mouth "so the skin is not the focus 
of the face." 
Camouflage techniques are fine "as long as the cosmetics are labeled 'oil-free' 
-- not just 'water-based' because some of those have oil -- and 
'non-comedogenic,' meaning they aren't supposed to cause blemishes," explains 
Dr. Lorrie Klein, an assistant clinical professor at UC-Irvine Medical Center 
and a dermatologist in Laguna Niguel. And Dr. Letantia Bussell, a Beverly Hills 
dermatologist, cautions against using a makeup sponge more than once. 
"Organisms can go back and forth between the makeup and the face, irritating 
and prolonging the breakouts," Bussell says. "Throw away the sponges after 
every use, use cotton balls instead of powder puffs, and clean brushes daily 
with alcohol or witch hazel." 
Noting that even she breaks out, Sarnelle says: "No woman wants to admit to 
having acne. But you can't hide when you have pimples, so you've got to hide 
the pimples." 
Photographed by Veronica Sim / stylist: Pauline Leonard, Cloutier / model: 
Jennifer Kroll, Elite 
