GOVERNMENT GAIN 
Dennis Sundstrom's Speaking Out was interesting as far as it went. However, his 
credibility might be suspect if all of his comments are as incomplete as his 
statement on the Mello-Roos Act. 
For example, it is true that the Mello-Roos Act requires a two-thirds vote. But 
in most cases where it has been used, the developer files an application with 
the county under the act and since he owns all the land, he has three-thirds of 
the vote! It is my understanding that where Mello-Roos has been put to a vote 
of the people, it has been voted down. 
I have found that after discussions with representatives of developers/builders 
and two different county assessor offices, where Mello-Roos does apply and thus 
the various facilities mentioned by Sundstrom are financed via bonds rather 
than by the price to the home buyer, there is no one who can verify that the 
price of the house is less than it would have been without application of the 
act. The word is that once Mello-Roos applies, this latter aspect will be 
"monitored by the market." 
Sundstrom's article asks who's to blame for high housing prices. Of course, he 
is a developer and he wrote the article as chairman of a nonprofit organization 
of the real estate industry, set up to educate the public. Education should 
include all aspects of a subject. Do we always have to have the fox tell us how 
many chickens are in the henhouse? Maybe we need a HUD-type audit of the entire 
industry. 
Why no comment on builders who allocate a number of new houses to their 
employees, who may well be in the speculation business? 
Why no comment on speculators as contributors to the new-house price? 
Why no comment on builders who increase the price of new houses with each 
release of each new phase, even where releases are but a few weeks apart, when 
the land has been owned for some time, the facilities ae in (or at least the 
costs are included)? 
I know, free enterprise! But don't put all the blame on taxes. (Proposition 13, 
developer fees, etc.) 
Rather than beat this badly maimed horse, I'd ask this question: Is the house 
to which Sundstrom would apply Mello-Roos going to be cheaper to the consumer 
than the house where the "developer is charged for" such facilities (though we 
realize the cost is in the price of the house to the consumer)? If not, why is 
this mentioned as a big factor in the cost of housing? 
GEORGE A. ABBOTT 
Laguna Niguel 
