RED STAR OVER ORANGE COUNTY 
In conservative Orange County, where the well of good feeling toward 
Republicans runs deep, it's small surprise that President Bush would enjoy 
higher-than-average approval ratings. 
But a new Times Orange County Poll finds that Bush shares the local popularity 
limelight with an unlikely counterpart: Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
Bush and Gorbachev, in fact, polled identical favorable ratings in the 
600-voter survey, each winning the approval of 77% of those interviewed. 
A January, 1989, Times Orange County Poll also found that about seven out of 10 
voters had favorable impressions of both leaders. 
"A lot of what Gorbachev has done are things that are in the American populist 
tradition, shaking up the system," said Mark Baldassare, the pollster who 
conducted the survey for The Times Orange County Edition. "He's very strongly 
identified with political reform and hope for world peace." 
Gorbachev's economic reforms, many of which are aimed at introducing elements 
of the free market into the highly centralized Soviet system, may find an 
especially receptive audience in conservative areas of the United States. 
In fact, Gorbachev, who received the Nobel Peace Prize last week, racked up his 
highest ratings among Orange County's richest residents. Two-thirds of voters 
who make less than $35,000 a year viewed the Soviet president favorably, but 
fully 86% of those making more than $75,000 held a positive impression. 
What's more, although Gorbachev is the best-known Communist Party member in the 
world, it doesn't seem to hurt him in one of the United States' most famously 
anti-Communist counties. Orange County Republicans actually like him more than 
Democrats do, and more than seven out of 10 members of both parties have a 
favorable opinion of the man who commands thousands of nuclear missiles aimed 
at American targets. 
"He doesn't face the partisan political problems that an American president 
does," Baldassare said. "Bush can be happy about being as popular as 
Gorbachev." 
