STUDY OF L.A. RIVER FREEWAY PLAN AUTHORIZED BY COUNTY PANEL; 
TRANSPORTATION: USE OF THE WATERWAY IS SEEN AS A WAY TO REDUCE CONGESTION AS 
MUCH AS 20% ON TWO HEAVILY USED ROADWAYS, BUT ENVIRONMENTALISTS OBJECT. 
Over the protests of environmentalists, the Los Angeles County Transportation 
Commission on Wednesday authorized a $100,000 study to determine the 
feasibility of turning 30 or 40 miles of the Los Angeles River into a part-time 
freeway. 
The controversial proposal by Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) would create 
exclusive express lanes for buses, car pools and trucks along the winding 
floodway that extends from the San Fernando Valley through downtown Los Angeles 
to Long Beach. Most of the waterway was paved half a century ago to control 
flash flooding and carry waste water. 
No one is certain if such a project would work or how much it would cost. But 
according to Katz, chairman of the Assembly Transportation Committee, the river 
traffic lanes would relieve as much as 20% of the congestion on the Ventura and 
Long Beach freeways. Critics say the scheme is not practical, would harm the 
environment and would be dangerous when storms send floodwaters raging down the 
concrete channels. 
However, the commission's preliminary study found "no fatal flaws" in the idea. 
Consultants, after an initial look at the proposal, reported, "With modest 
improvements . . . the Los Angeles River and Tujunga Wash flood control 
channels could be used for transportation purposes between 220 and 300 days a 
year." 
As Katz envisions the route, the northern sections from the Valley south to 
Glendale and into downtown would be used by car pools, van pools and buses, 
weather permitting. The southern segments of the river expressway would be 
reserved for trucks running between the harbor and downtown. Trucks now 
primarily use the Long Beach Freeway. 
Opponents, led by the environmental group Friends of the River, contend that 
such construction would destroy the fragile ecosystems that support green 
vegetation and wildlife along some segments of the river channel that are not 
paved. Hiking and equestrian trails near Griffith Park would be adversely 
effected, they contend. 
Instead of diverting traffic into the river bottom and adding to urban 
congestion and air pollution, Lewis MacAdams, spokesman for the environmental 
group, called for a green belt, parks and more trails along the river, 
returning it to a more natural state. 
The issues of safety and liability in the event of flash flooding were raised 
by Commissioner Ray Grabinski, a Long Beach city councilman who is concerned 
that motorists might get trapped in a flood. 
"Who is responsible?" he asked Katz, who had spelled out the proposal for the 
commission a few minutes earlier. 
Katz said the $100,000 study was needed to answer such questions, adding, "This 
may not be the answer to the transportation crisis in Los Angeles . . . but we 
have to look at what resources we have, see how we can get ourselves out of 
trouble." 
The commission authorized the study on a voice vote and directed that the 
questions of safety and liability be answered. The study will also determine 
how to handle the treated sewage that now flows down the river, an issue raised 
by opponents. 
Consultants doing the study will also have to determine if the freeway lanes 
could be built without interfering with the flood control functions of the 
waterway. The freeway work would have to be coordinated with the Army Corps of 
Engineers, which has overall responsibility for the floodway. 
A financial plan would also be developed during the study, spelling out how 
much the project would cost and how it would be financed. 
