ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: LAGUNA BEACH; 
STUDENTS GET TRIAL RUN AT PARENTHOOD 
Mike Hendricks and Kim Zehner waited nervously in the lobby of South Coast 
Medical Center for space to be cleared in the hospital's maternity ward. Zehner 
fiddled with a baby blanket and pajamas while Hendricks calmed her with 
soothing words. 
"I got these (clothes) off my doll," said Zehner, a high school junior. "Yeah, 
we want to keep the baby warm," added Hendricks before donning a flannel robe 
and accompanying Zehner down the long hallway to the maternity ward. 
Just 45 minutes later, Zehner was wheeled out of the hospital with 5-pound 
identical twins, one on each arm -- 5-pound sacks of flour, that is. 
The medical center distributed the flour sacks to 23 Laguna Beach high school 
students as part of a weeklong project to teach teen-agers the realities of 
parenthood. 
The students, who are part of a decision-making class called Choices and 
Challenges, must keep their "flour babies" with them at all times and simulate 
the daily chores of parenting: changing diapers, buying supplies, finding child 
care and, of course, feeding. 
"I want you to go home tonight and set your alarm for every two hours, because 
that's when your baby will require feeding," Kathy Higgs, a hospital staff 
member who leads real parents in prenatal exercises and parenting classes, told 
the students. "I also would like you to be up at 5 a.m. to start your day 
tomorrow morning." 
Higgs orchestrated Wednesday's "birth" along with Laguna Beach High School 
teacher Art Smart and the Laguna Beach Chamber of Commerce. Tuesday, Higgs came 
to the students' classroom wearing a borrowed maternity gown and gave students 
a first-person account of her pregnancy, as well as sample breathing exercises 
and other prenatal training. On the day of the delivery, students toured the 
maternity ward, viewing the obstetrics lab and the nursery where newborns are 
kept for observation. 
While most high schools have similar parenting classes that involve eggs or 
other fragile objects, Smart said he decided to use the heavy sacks of flour to 
make a point about parenthood: It's not all fun. 
"Five pounds becomes cumbersome, especially for students who have cheerleading 
or track practice. It's exciting now, but after the honeymoon wears off, then 
reality sets in," Smart said. 
In addition to carrying their offspring at all times on school grounds, 
students will also be required to research the cost of food, clothing, medical 
attention and child care, Smart said. 
The unusual project elicited jokes and giggles from the class of seniors and 
juniors, but most students said that carrying the sacks of flour for the next 
week will be a valuable exercise. 
"If I really had a kid, I'd probably have to drop out of school," said 
16-year-old Tom Wilkerson. "My parents wouldn't like that too much." 
"It's a little strange," added Gordana Jurilj, an exchange student from 
Yugoslavia. "I think it's really good having these classes." CHERYLANNE BEALER 
