SKIN CANCER RATES APPEAR TO BE WANING, STUDY FINDS 
After decades of soaring rates of skin cancer -- largely because of suntanning 
-- Americans finally may be wising up to the dangers of the bronzed look, a 
medical researcher says. 
Rates of malignant melanoma, the most deadly form of skin cancer, appeared to 
start leveling off in 1988, after 27 years of steep rises, said Dr. Andrew 
Glass of Kaiser Permanente's Center for Health Research in Portland, Ore. 
"It's going to take some more time to follow that along," Glass said in a 
recent interview. But early figures from the National Cancer Institute in 
Bethesda, Md., appear to indicate a similar leveling off, he said. 
Glass' remarks came after he reported on long-term tracking of 300,000 members 
of the Kaiser Permanente prepaid health plan in the Portland, Ore., and 
Vancouver, Wash., areas. 
Researchers found that from 1960 to 1987, annual cases of a type of skin cancer 
called squamous cell carcinoma increased 2.6 times in men and 3.1 times in 
women. 
Squamous cell carcinoma is one of the most common skin cancers, occurring in 
thousands of people each year. Usually starting as a scaly patch on the lip, 
ear or hand, it grows, spreads and even causes death if untreated. 
"Squamous cell skin cancer clearly seems to be related to skin exposure -- it 
is more common among fair-skinned individuals, especially those with frequent 
or long-term exposure to sunlight," said a report by Glass and Dr. Robert N. 
Hoover of the National Cancer Institute. 
Their findings represent the first systematic report over time of squamous cell 
skin cancer, they said. 
The researchers also looked at melanoma and found its incidence rose 3.5-fold 
and 4.6-fold among men and women, respectively, during the same 27-year period. 
Greater exposure to sunlight is only one of many factors believed to have 
contributed to the increased rates of melanoma, the researchers said in their 
report in the Journal of the American Medical Assn. 
But the occurrence of melanomas on the body's trunk rose much faster than 
cancers involving the head and neck or the extremities, the researchers said. 
"These observations are consistent with the impression that the rising 
incidence of both malignancies may be attributable to increased voluntary 
exposure to the sun," the researchers said. 
Malignant melanoma, which often starts in an existing mole that becomes 
enlarged, is the kind of cancer most likely to spread and kill. 
Researchers found 2,453 cases of invasive skin cancers among members of the 
health plan. 
The American Cancer Society has estimated that half of all people who live to 
age 65 will have skin cancer at some point in their lives and predicted that 
malignant melanoma will kill 6,000 people this year. 
"As individuals and as a society, it is only prudent to take precautions to 
save our skins," said an editorial in the journal by Dr. Martin A. Weinstock of 
Brown University in Providence, R.I. 
He called for preservation of the Earth's ozone layer, which blocks harmful 
ultraviolet radiation, and early detection and treatment of skin cancers, as 
well as increased public awareness and use of sunscreens. 
