EAST GERMAN LEADERS TALK TO OPPOSITION; 
REFORM: NEW FORUM ACTIVISTS ARE CAUTIOUSLY OPTIMISTIC AT DIALOGUE SEEKING AN 
END TO POLITICAL UPHEAVAL. 
Communist leaders in East Berlin and Dresden met opposition activists today for 
the first substantive talks on how to end East Germany's worst political 
upheavals in 36 years. 
The Communist Party leader in the capital, Politburo member Guenter Schabowski, 
conferred with two scientists who helped found New Forum, which claims 26,000 
members and is the largest opposition group. 
In the southern industrial city of Dresden, party leader Hans Modrow organized 
a conference with opposition supporters and other local citizens. Modrow is 
reputed to be the leading advocate of reform in the political establishment. 
After his two-hour meeting with Schabowski, scientist Jens Reich told reporters 
he believes the authorities are serious about starting a dialogue with the 
opposition. 
"We will see, but I would say cautiously that I have a positive impression," 
Reich said. 
He said Schabowski had hinted at more competitive elections and a new law 
permitting street demonstrations. 
But he said Schabowski had told him and fellow scientist Sebastian Pflugbeil 
that it was outside his authority to legalize New Forum. 
The authorities are trying to overcome a crisis in which hundreds of thousands 
of people, inspired by changes in the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary, have 
demonstrated for democracy this month in all big East German cities. 
More than 120,000 of East Germany's 16.6 million people have fled to the West 
this year, about half of them by crossing Hungary's border with Austria, open 
since mid-September, or by seeking refuge in West German embassies in Eastern 
Europe. 
The unrest is the worst since Soviet forces suppressed a workers' uprising in 
1953. It prompted the replacement of Erich Honecker as party leader last week 
by Egon Krenz, who has pledged dialogue with everyone who respects East German 
laws. 
Krenz promised this week that all East Germans would soon have passports and 
the right to travel without restrictions to Western countries and West Berlin. 
But members of New Forum, a group embracing a wide spectrum of non-Communist 
activists, have made clear that free travel to the West will not be enough to 
satisfy their demands for change. 
They want the lifting of media censorship, an end to official privileges, 
legalization of opposition groups, a relaxation of the rigid ideological 
discipline in education and free, competitive elections. 
In East Berlin, East Germany's official lawyers' organization today demanded 
liberal changes to the criminal code. 
