OPENER AT OAK TREE IS A DAY OF SURPRISES; 
MAIDEN PLEASANT TAP WINS FEATURE; AGIRLFROMARS EQUALS TURF RECORD 
Surprises were stacked on top of surprises on the opening day of the Oak Tree 
season at Santa Anita Wednesday. 
Pleasant Tap, a maiden and the second-longest price on the board, won the 
featured Sunny Slope Stakes and before that, in the first race run on the 
track's new grass course, an unheralded filly matched the Santa Anita turf 
record for 1 1/8 miles. 
Agirlfromars, ridden for the first time by Robbie Davis in her 10th start, had 
gone seven races without a win and was on grass only once before. 
Davis hit the 3-year-old California-bred only once with his whip as she won the 
third race by 1 1/2 lengths in a time of 1:45 2/5, which equaled the record 
that Crystal Water set in 1977. 
This was the first race on the turf since Santa Anita spent more than $3 
million on a grass course that is a combination of a Bermuda hybrid grass and a 
polypropylene mesh that reduces divots. It looks like a pool table on top, and 
apparently plays just as fast. 
Trained by Looie Cenicola, who was John Henry's exercise rider, Agirlfromars 
broke out of her slump at Del Mar, winning against maidens going a mile on dirt 
and then beating allowance horses in a 6 1/2-length victory at 1 1/16 miles on 
the grass. 
The fractions for Wednesday's race were :22 2/5 for the first quarter, :48 3/5 
for a half-mile and a scorching 1:32 4/5 for the mile, which would have broken 
the course record by 1 4/5 seconds for that distance. 
"I thought maybe we had gone 1:46 or 1:47, so when I looked up at the time, it 
was incredible," Davis said. "The temporary rail was out about 10 feet, so just 
think what she might have run if that hadn't been there. She didn't act like 
she was doing that much, she did it easy and under wraps almost all the way. 
"The track is so tight that you could ride without goggles if you wanted. 
There'll be a lot of records set here. There's a spring to the track, and while 
certain horses might like it, it might be hard for other horses." 
Agirlfromars, which carried 117 pounds, paid $12.40 to win before a crowd of 
43,639 which bet $7.1 million, an opening-day record. The actual attendance was 
several thousand fewer because many fans went through the turnstiles more than 
once to collect some souvenir mugs. 
Crystal Water, carrying 116 pounds, tied the world record when he registered 
1:45 2/5. The world record is held by Frosty the Snowman, who ran 1:44 4/5 at 
Woodbine in Toronto on June 18. 
In the Sunny Slope for 2-year-olds, Pleasant Tap, giving Eddie Delahoussaye his 
third win of the day, rallied through the stretch to beat Grand Canyon by 
three-quarters of a length, and it was another four lengths back to 
Doyouseewhatisee in third place. 
Pleasant Tap, paying $26.80 to win, covered seven furlongs on dirt in 1:22 2/5, 
which was the fastest winning time for the stake in 10 years. 
Grand Canyon was coupled with Nevada in the betting and they went off 11-10 
favorites, with Nevada finishing last in the seven-horse field, just behind 
Express It, who was trying to make the lead at the quarter pole when his right 
rein snapped. 
Pleasant Tap, a son of Pleasant Colony and Never Knock, a Stage Door Johnny 
mare, was bred and is owned by Thomas Mellon Evans, who collected $46,525 of 
the $80,275 purse. 
Pleasant Tap's only two previous starts came at Del Mar, where he was sixth and 
third and raced greenly. 
On Sept. 9, when he ran third, Pleasant Tap lost to Grand Canyon by 4 1/4 
lengths going six furlongs. 
Trainer Chris Speckert debated whether to run Pleasant Tap in another maiden 
race or in the Sunny Slope. "This horse comes from off the pace, and the way 
the track was playing, I thoughtt was worth a look," Speckert said. 
Delahoussaye was back from a two-week vacation, during which time he rode only 
twice, one day winning the Molson Million at Woodbine with Prized. 
"This colt has improved, and if he keeps improving he'll be a nice colt," 
Delahoussaye said. "In the stretch, Chris (McCarron, riding Grand Canyon) had 
some horse left, but my horse just dug in and outdueled them." 
