ZSA ZSA 'DOESN'T FOOL AROUND': SHE'LL APPEAL, SERVE JAIL TIME TOO 
Zsa Zsa Gabor, still righteously defending her innocence, plans to appeal her 
cop-slapping conviction but will serve her three-day jail sentence and perform 
120 hours of community service anyway just to prove a point, her husband said 
Thursday. 
"We are going to appeal," Prince Frederick von Anhalt, Gabor's eighth husband, 
said in an interview two days after the actress was sentenced at Beverly Hills 
Municipal Court. "But . . . she's also going to serve three days in jail just 
to show the public that she doesn't fool around with anything. 
"She really would love to go to jail, you know, to see what's going on -- if 
people get treated well in jail. She wants to know how people live in jail, how 
the food is and everything. She wants to have that experience." 
Gabor, who has not publicly discussed her legal plans, left early Thursday for 
New York to appear on the "Phil Donahue Show," Von Anhalt said. But before 
departing, the nearly 70-year-old actress talked about the jail sentence with 
her husband and made it clear she will go behind bars no matter what and will 
expect no special treatment once that steel door clangs shut, Von Anhalt added. 
"She wants the (jail) uniforms. She wants everything," he said. "She doesn't 
want special food. She wants the food they get in prison. If she gets specially 
treated, she doesn't get (a realistic) experience." 
As part of her sentence for slapping Beverly Hills motorcycle Officer Paul 
Kramer on June 14, Gabor was ordered to pay $12,937 in fines and restitution, 
to perform community service at a Los Angeles-area center for homeless women 
and to undergo psychiatric evaluation. Her three-day jail term can be served at 
the city or county jail of her choice before the end of the year, Municipal 
Judge Charles G. Rubin ordered. 
Gabor, who regularly does charity work, is eager to perform the community 
service duties, Von Anhalt said. Although she has yet to decide where or when 
she will enter jail, she probably will serve the time soon, he added. 
Meanwhile, the actress will file an appeal in hopes of clearing her name and 
avoiding the fines, her husband said. 
Gabor spent the day after her sentencing taping an interview for the television 
show "A Current Affair," in which she called for an apology from the judge and 
"all of Beverly Hills." During a brief break in the filming, she also referred 
to herself -- again -- as a symbol for battered women everywhere. 
"I'm going to fight as long as I live for that," she said. 
Gabor expressed particular outrage at Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner, who asked for a 
30-day jail sentence. A week after her arrest, Gabor said, she sat with Reiner 
at a dinner party and showed him the bruises inflicted by Kramer's handcuffs. 
Reiner told her not to worry about the arrest, that it was nothing, according 
to Gabor. 
Von Anhalt said he overhead part of the conversation. 
"He said, 'Sweetheart' -- and that's exactly what he said -- 'Sweetheart, don't 
worry, we'll take care of that,' " Von Anhalt recalled, quoting Reiner. " 'If 
that policeman did that to you, he's going to get punished.' 
"Then we stood up after dinner, and he . . . said, 'Ms. Gabor, could you do me 
one big favor? I would love to have a photograph with you.' " 
Reiner, considered a likely candidate for state attorney general, acknowledged 
sitting with Gabor at the party, thrown at the Beverly Hills home of developer 
Stanley Black, but denied talking with her about the arrest or the pending 
trial. 
"There was no discussion whatsoever," he said. "Not a syllable . . . about the 
trial, about the troubles, about anything in the world." 
At a press conference Tuesday, Reiner predicted that Gabor would use her 
celebrity status to make a farce of her community service work, playing "Marie 
Antoinette to these homeless women." 
Gabor responded: "He should know that Marie Antoinette also gets cake for the 
people. He is a bigmouthed man who doesn't do his homework. . . . Marie 
Antoinette said, 'Let the people eat cake.' He (Reiner) should give the 
homeless cake." 
