A DEVILISH EGG SALAD A LA FABERGE; 
S.D. GALLERY COOKS UP IRREVERENT COMPANION TO SOVIET ARTS FESTIVAL 
Someone had to do it. The pomp and heavy hype embellishing the upcoming show of 
Faberge eggs was ripe for a satirical swipe. Few in San Diego were as fit and 
willing to do it as James Dean Healy, proprietor of downtown's Tohubohu 
Studio/Gallery and self-professed renegade of the local art scene. 
Healy put out a call for contributions to the show, "Fabulous Egg Salad," and 
eggs began rolling in from as far as Los Angeles and Arizona. Nearly 50 of the 
artist-designed ovoids will be on view starting Oct. 19, just days before the 
kick-off of the city-sponsored San Diego Arts Festival: Treasures of the Soviet 
Union. 
As the centerpiece of the festival, the precious Faberge Imperial eggs promise 
to send a constant hum of "oohs" and "aahs" through the galleries of the San 
Diego Museum of Art. Meanwhile, their irreverent cousins at Tohubohu will 
prompt plenty of giggles and guffaws. The eggs range from the humorous to the 
political, said Healy, citing the "Steve Garvey Egg," its bases loaded with 
women, and the "Maureen O'Connor Egg." Healy will serve -- what else? -- 
deviled eggs at the show's opening reception. 
"Fabulous Egg Salad" is the most frivolous of the many fringe events running 
concurrently with the San Diego Arts Festival. Other gallery shows may lack the 
levity of Healy's spoof, but they will add their own brand of vitality to the 
festival by presenting a variety of contemporary and historic Soviet art. 
The most ambitious of the independent shows will introduce "unofficial" 
contemporary Soviet art to San Diego. "Contemporary Art from Leningrad: The 
Fellowship for Experimental Art" will contain more than 50 paintings by artists 
working outside of the Artists Union. Without membership in the union, Soviet 
artists are denied the privileges of studio space, ready art supplies and 
exhibition opportunities. 
"The work is very colorful, bold and expressionistic," said gallery owner David 
Zapf, who co-curated the show with Kathleen Stoughton, director of the Mesa 
College Art Gallery. "All of the paintings seem to have some underlying irony 
or political connotation." The show, consisting of cityscapes, nudes, genre 
scenes and other figurative works, will be divided between the David Zapf 
Gallery and the Mesa College Art Gallery. 
The Fellowship for Experimental Art "has used the inadequacies of the current 
rules of culture policy in its own favor," according to a member of the 
Fellowship's council. Artists Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid found these 
rules insurmountable and left their native Russia for Israel in 1977, moving to 
the United States the next year. Working as a team since the early '70s, Komar 
and Melamid were kicked out of the Moscow Union of Artists for "distortion of 
Soviet reality and deviation from the principles of socialist realism." 
"They were some of the leading contemporary artists in Russia before they 
left," said Gerry McAllister, director of UC San Diego's Mandeville Gallery. 
During the San Diego Arts Festival, the gallery will show 23 of Komar and 
Melamid's conceptual, autobiographical works, including paintings and mixed 
media works from their recent series on New Jersey's "Bergen Point Brass 
Foundry." The artists will make their first visit to southern California to 
deliver a lecture in conjunction with the show. 
The Photowest/W. Bradley Lemery Gallery will cast a glance backward in time 
with the show, "USSR in Construction," featuring experimental photographic and 
typographic montages from the 1930s, many of them published in the monthly, 
"SSSR Na Stroykie." Featured artists include Alexander Rodchenko, who regarded 
the artist as a "constructive" force in the design of post-revolutionary Soviet 
society, and El Lissitsky, who taught constructivist principles of art at the 
famed Bauhaus school in Germany. 
In a curious twist on the festival theme, the Acevedo Gallery will present 
"Russian Icons by American Artists," with works by Nathaniel Hauser and Robert 
Lentz. Hauser, 
affiliated with a Benedictine monastery in Oceanside, paints religious subjects 
using the traditional media of egg tempera and gold leaf. Lentz, an American of 
Russian descent, paints 20th-Century heroes and martyrs, such as Martin Luther 
King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi and Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero. His icons 
"celebrate the uncanonized modern-day saint," according to the gallery. 
