ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO; 
HOMEOWNER IS STUCK WITH SKUNK 
Gerry Schaffner believes there is a skunk under the deck of his house near the 
San Juan Hills Golf Course. 
Although he hasn't actually seen it, he says he can tell it's a skunk by the 
cat-sized hole it keeps digging in the ground. Schaffner knows the telltale 
signs: Before he moved here two years ago, four of the critters took up 
residence at various times under the porch of his home in Dana Point. One even 
delivered babies. 
On those occasions, Schaffner trapped the skunks and called in county animal 
control officers to euthanize them and cart off the remains. 
But this time county officers won't come anywhere near. 
As of Aug. 1, skunks were removed from the county's list of animals routinely 
killed upon capture. Even though the animals pose a high risk of carrying 
rabies, it has been years since any local skunk was found to be infected with 
the disease. 
So now animal control officers, mostly busy tracking down potentially rabid 
dogs, turn away the three or four calls they get each day from South County 
residents confronted by skunks. 
County officials say it is a dilemma that illustrates the increasing 
urbanization of Orange County -- wildlife on the run. 
Schaffner, however, views it more as an example of government regulation run 
amok. 
"I pay $3,000 in county property taxes and I don't see why I have to co-exist 
with this animal that may or may not have rabies," Schaffner complained. "I am 
caught in a Catch-22. If I trap an animal, I don't know what I would do with 
it. I don't want to keep it and they (county officials) told me if I kill it, I 
would be breaking the law." 
Kevin R. Whelan, chief of field services for county animal control, said his 
officers will come to the aid of people who fear they have been sprayed or 
bitten by a skunk. But he confirms that officials are mostly concerned about 
handling domestic animals, not wildlife. With about 50 officers to cover 21 
cities and Orange County's unincorporated areas, animal control has received 
about 31,000 calls for help so far this year, the vast majority of them 
involving stray dogs and cats. 
The county conducts tests on trapped skunks each year to make sure there is no 
resurgence of rabies, Whelan explained, but the only wild animal that still is 
immediately killed because of its rabies risk is the bat. 
Before the skunk was removed from the so-called euthanasia list -- partly due 
to pressure from animal-rights advocates -- officers routinely killed skunks 
with chloroform. 
Kent Smith, a spokesman for the state Department of Fish and Game, said the 
skunk is a "non-protected" species that may be killed at any time of the year 
under law, like other pesky birds and animals, among them English sparrows, 
coyotes, weasels, opossums, moles and rodents. 
Whelan said animal control officers are happy to give residents advice on how 
to kill a skunk -- among other things, dry ice can be used to freeze the animal 
or any of several over-the-counter chemical substances can be placed in a trap. 
If Whelan chooses to relocate the skunk rather than kill it, that raises other 
problems. Regulations state that an animal may not be removed from its natural 
habitat. 
"You know what that means," Schaffner scoffed. "The skunk will be back under 
the deck the next night where it is warm and dry. I know enough about skunks to 
know they are hard to get rid of and when you have one, there is a good chance 
you'll have a whole family come spring. 
"I don't know what I am going to do. But I am going to have to do something," 
Schaffner said. "This is a sign of a bureaucracy at its pinnacle. They tax you 
a lot for a service and then tell you to do it yourself." GEORGE FRANK 
