ENTOMOLOGISTS HOPE ATTENTION WILL PLANT BUG IN DECISION MAKERS' EARS 
As a caricature, the entomologist is often portrayed as a wispy, bespectacled 
man wearing tropical shorts and pith helmet chasing exotic butterflies with a 
long-handled net. 
Sure, some of them do things like that. But many others perform painstaking 
work that non-entomologists would see as sheer drudgery -- the meticulous slow 
work of scientists. 
"They save us a lot of grief," says Henry Becker III, an information specialist 
in the Agriculture Department's main science agency, the Agricultural Research 
Service. "They certainly make life easier for us by studying these insects, the 
good ones as well as the bad ones." 
Becker, in a recent telephone interview from his Beltsville, Md., office, is 
one of those attending a two-day conference in Washington on Tuesday and 
Wednesday that will commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Entomological 
Society of America. 
Entomologists are intense about their experiments, he said. For example, when 
they observe a parasite lay eggs in a destructive beetle, for example, "it's 
like they're watching their kids do a virtuoso concert . . . they really get 
excited." 
But some entomological research "is so plodding, such as categorizing and 
cataloguing insects," Becker said. "But, yet, they're very, very interested in 
what they're doing." 
Today's society dates from the founding in 1889 of the American Assn. of 
Economic Entomologists, and the 1906 beginning of the Entomological Society of 
America. The two were merged, adopting the latter's name, in 1953. 
The society, a nonprofit educational group, says it is the largest 
international association of entomologists, with more than 8,700 members. 
Becker, who claims his only experience with entomology is "swatting flies and 
spraying cockroaches," said the society hopes for an attendance of around 350 
at its centennial symposium this week. Some members from Britain, Canada and 
Australia are expected to attend the sessions held at the Smithsonian 
Institution. 
Julius J. Menn, associate deputy area director for the Plant Sciences Institute 
at USDA's research center in Beltsville, said the symposium is unique in that 
it is directed at an intended audience of "decision makers who are not familiar 
with entomology." 
Menn said the sessions will be geared to legislators, federal and state 
officials, industrial representatives, news media and other non-entomological 
persons. 
Allen L. Steinhauer, head of the University of Maryland's Department of 
Entomology, College Park, said more than 15 authorities "on all aspects of 
insect-related research worldwide" are on the program. 
A few of the program highlights provided by the society, which calls itself 
ESA, illustrate what Steinhauer meant: 
In the first session, Carroll M. Williams of Harvard University will talk about 
"unraveling the secrets of insect life." Williams is a pioneer researcher of 
insect development biology. 
"He developed several novel techniques for performing surgery on insects," the 
society said. "One, which uses carbon dioxide anesthesia, was adopted the world 
over." 
Thomas Eisner, Cornell University, is the world's leading authority on insect 
defenses and communication. His topic is the insect as a chemist, describing 
the ingenious ways insects use odors, poisons, plants and disguises to repel or 
injure a predator. 
"Societies: Insect and Human" is the topic of Edward O. Wilson, Harvard 
University, who is called the father of modern sociobiology and is an expert on 
ants. He says biological laws are the basis of social behavior among ants and 
humans. Wilson won a Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction in 1979 for "On 
Human Nature," about the influence of genetically determined patterns of human 
behavior. 
Other sessions will include talks on entomology in the developing world, 
insects in agriculture, the impacts of insects on public health, applying 
biotechnology to entomology, and policies for the future. 
Looking ahead, Donald L. Mclean of the University of Vermont will describe 
entomology in the 21st Century. He is an expert on the relationship between 
several insects and the diseases they cause on many important crops. 
