YOUTH BEAT: TAKE CARE WHEN EXCHANGING CASH; 
MONEY: TRAVELERS WHO EXCHANGE CURRENCY ILLEGALLY IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES LEAVE 
THEMSELVES OPEN TO FINES AND EVEN JAIL SENTENCES. 
When trying to stretch your dollars in foreign countries, beware of attractive 
offers for "easy gains." They can lead to trouble. 
In "Work Your Way Around The World," by Susan Griffith (Writer's Digest Books, 
$12.95), a traveler visiting India reported that when he tried to exchange 
money at a higher rate than the banks were offering, he had an unnerving 
experience at a bazaar in Delhi. 
"After I had agreed to the favorable rate offered to me, I was grabbed by a 
plainclothes policeman while his accomplice grabbed the money changer, who was 
promptly allowed to go." 
The traveler thought he might have been set up. "I wasn't allowed to go until I 
paid an official 50-rupee fine, and I was afraid through my detention that the 
penalty would be more serious." 
Repeatedly Approached 
Before arriving in a country, find out if there are restrictions on taking 
local currency into the country, on taking out that currency, and on exchanging 
at other than official services such as banks. 
For example, in both the Soviet Union and China I was approached repeatedly on 
the street by people who wanted to buy my dollars. In these countries it was 
because dollars or "hard currency" could be used to make purchases in special 
stores that stock luxury items not easily available to local citizens. 
However, you run the risk of getting caught, getting set up or simply getting 
taken. Travelers have sometimes found themselves with a few bills on top of a 
stack of useless paper, and in other cases with counterfeit funds. 
Find out if informal exchanges are illegal. Foreign citizens, also, are subject 
to the laws and penalties of the country they are in. 
Here are some ideas for protecting and stretching your funds: 
Before leaving home, transfer money into traveler's checks. The value of the 
checks will be replaced if they are lost or stolen -- providing you keep good 
records. You can buy the checks through banks. The fee is about 1%. 
When you buy your checks, ask for a list of refund offices. Make copies of your 
check numbers. Keep one set for your luggage, and leave the other with a friend 
or relatives at home. Record the numbers on the checks as you use them. 
If there are no restrictions on where you can exchange money, avoid hotels or 
restaurants. Shop around at banks and traveler's check companies for the best 
rates and lowest commission fees. 
Arriving at Odd Hours 
Last year in Portugal I found that some banks were charging about $4 per 
transaction, no matter if the check was for $20 or $100. If commissions are 
hefty, cash enough to last for several days. 
Consider if you'll be arriving after business hours or on a weekend or holiday. 
If your arrival is at an odd hour, play it safe and buy some of the currency 
before you head for that destination. Airports and major rail stations have 
some sort of exchange service open at odd hours, though they may not offer as 
attractive a rate as the bank. 
Carry your cash, tickets, passport and traveler's checks in a money belt or in 
a neck pouch under your shirt. If you make it difficult to lift your money, 
chances are that a thief will pick on another tourist. 
If you are going to stay in youth hostels or student dormitory hotels, pack a 
padlock because some have lockers that you'll be able to use. If not, slip your 
money belt into your sleeping bag at night. You may trust your roomies, but 
that doesn't mean it's impossible for someone else to intrude. 
Each time you exchange money, you lose a little because of different buying and 
selling rates. So don't exchange more than you'll need. When it's time to 
leave, get rid of your coins; they won't be accepted once you cross the border, 
even at banks. 
If you are going to leave a country by plane, you might need some local 
currency to pay an airport departure tax. Prepare for it. You'll want to avoid 
exchanging a big check into local currency just before boarding the plane. 
