INTO THE NIGHT 
The Scene: A benefit for Childhelp USA, the organization that provides a 
toll-free hot line for runaway kids. The Thursday-evening tribute was for 
designer/artist Zandra Rhodes, with an invitation-only reception at the Dyansen 
Gallery in Beverly Hills, followed by an even more invitation-only supper at 
Jimmy's. 
The Buzz: Zsa Zsa Gabor, the teachers' strike, police confiscating forgeries 
from some of the city's most famous art galleries. There's a lot to talk about 
in Beverly Hills these days. 
Who Was There: Zandra Rhodes; event chair Ellen Byrens; Childhelp founder and 
president June Haver MacMurray; supporters Frances Franklin and Monty Hall; 
B.H. Mayor Maxwell F. Salter and his wife, Janet; B.H. School Supt. Robert 
French and wife Mary; Ted and Rhonda Fleming Mann; Dyansen Galleries chairman 
Harris Shapiro and wife Jane; Gary Collins and Mary Ann Mobley; Cesar Romero 
and Anne Jeffreys, and several hundred of B.H.'s most staunch charity 
supporters. Dress Code: Those brave enough to wear Rhodes' unique creations did 
so; otherwise, it was dangerously understated power suits for the men and 
designer originals for the women. There was also enough full-length mink and 
chinchilla to send Bob Barker into apoplexy. 
Fashion Statement: Rhodes wore a pink and green gown of her own creation. The 
other sartorial splash was made by a man wearing pink pants and a water-filled 
transparent plastic tie containing live goldfish. Both man and goldfish were 
ejected. 
Chow: Hors d'oeuvres at the gallery; an excellent seafood salad, chicken and a 
chocolate souffle at Jimmy's. 
Trend Watch: People were talking about a new drink containing vodka, cranberry 
juice and peach schnapps. It goes by the name of Sex on the Beach. 
Money Matters: Rhodes' watercolors were in the $5,000-to-$10,000 range, with 
20% of the proceeds from the sale benefiting Childhelp. More money came in at 
Jimmy's with a $50,000 gift or two to Childhelp in preparation for a benefit in 
March. 
Triumphs: With so many events these days taking place in the unorganized, 
poorly run atmosphere of the latest bright-lights, big-zero private club, it's 
nice to see that Beverly Hills is still Beverly Hills. The evening was smooth 
sailing from start to finish. 
Glitches: Polite but overzealous security guards kept guests shivering in the 
cold autumn air outside the gallery. Perhaps they should be trained to 
recognize their city's mayor and police chief before the next event. 
Exit Line: Mayor Maxwell Salter to the crowd at Jimmy's: "Now all we gotta do 
is keep our other art galleries honest and we'll be all right." KEVIN ALLMAN 
