FOCUS; 
TODAY'S NEWS, TOMORROW'S 'MURPHY BROWN' 
It's hard enough to separate reality from make-believe on television. On CBS' 
"Murphy Brown," the line between fact and fiction is forever blurred. Real-life 
news broadcasters walk into the fictional "FYI" newsroom as themselves. Last 
season saw TV journaaists Connie Chung, Kathleen Sullivan and Linda Ellerbee in 
guest roles on the comedy series about a make-believe television news magazine 
based in the nation's capital. 
Besides cameos by news personalities, the highly rated program consistently 
draws its scripts from headline stories. 
This season is no different. 
The Sept. 18 premiere of "Murphy Brown's" third season saw the cast and set of 
"FYI" undergo a total overhaul, complete with toupees, short skirts and a Santa 
Fe nightmare of new furniture, all in the name of chatty, user-friendly news 
and bigger ratings. 
The next episode concerned the ever-intense liberal and feminist lead character 
Murphy Brown, played by Candice Bergen, doing an interview with a racist, 
sexist comedian whom she despised (guess who the comedian was modeled after). 
The show's writers also are working on a script tackling the issue of what 
happens when news personalities say regrettable things, a la Andy Rooney's now 
infamous remarks about gays and blacks. 
"People like to see issues from news and things that affect them personally," 
said Diane English, the program's creator, co-executive producer and frequent 
writer. "The topicality of our shows is one of the favorite things about 
'Murphy Brown.' " 
Last month the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences awarded the show an Emmy 
for best comedy series. Bergen also won her second outstanding lead comedy 
actress trophy for her acid-tongued portrayal of a star TV journalist. 
Despite such heady honors, English said the show will remain largely the same. 
Some subtle, unexpected plot twists are being planned, but she wouldn't divulge 
them. 
"We like to have surprises for our viewers," English said. 
And while "Murphy Brown" uses news for entertainment, real-life journalism has 
decided to use "Murphy Brown" for news. 
"PrimeTime Live" co-anchor Diane Sawyer spent a week on the set taping a 
segment on the making of "Murphy Brown," set to air Thursday. If Sawyer's 
schedule would have permitted, English said, the former "60 Minutes" 
correspondent might have made an appearance on the comedy series while doing a 
news story about it. 
In fact, English said, her show has extended several invitations to Sawyer and 
Rall the '60 Minutes' guys" including CB" Evening News anchor Dan Rather (a 
former "60 Minutes" guy) and Mike Wallace. 
Rather is really not sure whether this is a good thing for him to do," English 
said. "He has a great sense of humor, and it would be great if people could see 
that."' 
Cable talk show host Larry King's involvement is being sought for an upcoming 
episode in which Brown is taken hostage by environmentally conscious 
Reco-terrorists," English said. "She's trying to convince people that she's 
really been kidnaped and no one believes her because she's such a practical 
joker," English said. 
In captivity, Brown sees King on television and tries to call in on the talk 
show's viewer line. 
English said she and husband Joel Shukovsky, the show's other executive 
producer, also are considering an episode about management survival trips, at 
the suggestion of Sawyer. 
According to English, Sawyer said ABC had sent her and "PrimeTime Live" 
co-anchor Sam Donaldson into the wilderness to rough it for a few days-a kind 
of management retreat that bigger corporations are increasingly employing. 
English should just film Sawyer and the notoriously pugnacious Donaldson 
hanging out with Mother Nature- now that would be entertainment. 
Although "Murphy Brown" is lauded by critics and has climbed steadily-if 
sporadically-in the ratings, English and Shukovsky were very close to leaving 
the show this year because of protracted contract battles with Warner Bros. 
Television. 
"The negotiations were very long and very tedious and very dismal at times," 
English said. "We had even approved a press release that CBS was going to put 
out in April saying we would not be coming back to the show." 
At the last minute, the studio agreed to give the pair more money, a higher 
ownership percentage in the program and the right to make other shows for other 
networks. 
In return, English and Shukovsky signed on for 100 more episodes. 
"We made this show," English said. "Without us, there was no 'Murphy Brown.' 
And we saw the network coming out way ahead of us. I'm doing everything but 
catering the meals." 
When it comes to monetary issues in the television business, the line between 
reality and make-believe is very clear. 
"Murphy Brown" airs Mondays at 9 p.m. on CBS. The "Murphy Brown" segment of 
"PrimeTime Live" airs Thursday at 10 p.m. on ABC. 
