STUDY FINDS STRESSFUL JOB NOT HARMFUL IN PREGNANCY; 
MEDICINE: HEALTHY, PROFESSIONAL WOMEN ARE AT NO GREATER RISK THAN OTHER 
EXPECTANT MOTHERS, REPORT FINDS. 
Professional women who work long hours in high-stress jobs during pregnancy are 
just as likely as others to have healthy babies, according to a new study that 
researchers say offers reassurance to prospective mothers among the growing 
ranks of working women. 
The study, published today in the New England Journal of Medicine, found that 
physicians-in-training who worked about 70 hours a week while pregnant were at 
no greater risk than others of having their pregnancies end in miscarriage, 
stillbirth or other problems. 
Nor were they more likely to give birth early. 
"We can say that for . . . generally healthy, upper-middle class women, that 
virtually any type of work during pregnancy is probably not going to harm their 
pregnancy," said Patricia Shiono, an epidemiologist with the Center for the 
Future of Children in Los Altos. 
Shiono and the other researchers, headed by a pediatrician from the National 
Institutes of Health, cautioned that their findings apply to healthy, affluent 
women. They did not study lower-income and disadvantaged women or women with 
already complicated pregnancies. 
They also noted that women in the study who worked especially long hours -- 100 
hours or more a week -- were more likely to have a preterm delivery. Babies 
born early and therefore underweight face a greater risk than other babies of a 
variety of health problems. 
"If there is any sign of complications, obstetricians are likely to advise 
women to slow down (their work schedules). We would agree with that," said Dr. 
George G. Rhoads, a co-author of the paper. "These findings should not be 
construed (to mean) that you should work through thick and thin." 
It has long been believed that women who become pregnant during a medical 
residency face an increased risk of complications. Earlier studies have 
produced mixed results, but some have found an added risk of preterm delivery, 
delays in fetal development and other problems. 
The issue is considered important not only because of the extraordinary demands 
made upon medical residents, 28% of whom now are women; it is also of interest 
for what it reflects about the effects of work in general on the ability to 
bear a healthy child. 
Obstetricians say the risk seems to vary from occupation to occupation and that 
it is difficult to generalize about what women should do, but many believe that 
jobs requiring heavy lifting and long hours of standing may be especially 
risky. 
"If it's a sedentary job, people can work until fairly close to delivery unless 
they run into medical complications," said Dr. Palmer C. Evans, an 
obstetrician-gynecologist in Tucson. "But if they're doing very heavy, manual 
work, a lot of times they need to stop sooner than that." 
The study, based on a survey of 4,412 women physicians, is the largest 
conducted, the researchers said. They compared the women to 4,236 wives of male 
residents, many of whom worked during pregnancy but only about half the hours 
of the women residents. 
The researchers, headed by Dr. Mark A. Klebanoff of the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, found that 13.8% of the pregnancies among 
the medical residents and 11.8% of the other women ended in miscarriage -- a 
difference too small to be significant. 
Similarly, the two groups had comparable percentages of stillbirths, 
under-developed babies and ectopic gestations, in which the fertilized egg is 
deposited outside the uterus. The residents were more likely to have had 
preterm labor and preeclampsia (pregnancy-induced hypertension), but not 
preterm birth. 
Klebanoff said it was hard to know what to make of the increased risk of 
preterm labor and preeclampsia without examining each woman's medical records. 
But he speculated that the residents and their obstetricians may have been 
especially alert to symptoms. 
The only group that showed significant differences in rates of preterm delivery 
were the 143 medical residents who worked 100 hours or more a week during 
pregnancy. They were approximately twice as likely as the others to deliver 
their baby early. 
