5 RESTRAINED DRIVER FOR BLOOD TEST, OFFICER SAYS; 
COURTS: PATRICIA LEE GIUNTA, CHARGED WITH RUNNING DOWN A MOTORCYCLIST, HAD AN 
ALCOHOL LEVEL OF 0.29%, THREE TIMES THE LEGAL LIMIT, RECORDS SHOW. 
A Newhall woman on trial for allegedly killing a motorcyclist while driving 
drunk had to be held down by four officers and a jail nurse in order to test 
her blood-alcohol level after the accident, a California Highway patrol officer 
testified Thursday. 
Patricia Lee Giunta, who has had five other drunk-driving arrests and one 
conviction, also struggled with officers when she was arrested after the crash, 
CHP Officer Frank Lewis testified at Giunta's trial on a charge of vehicular 
manslaughter. 
The accident on the Golden State Freeway in Sun Valley on Oct. 4, 1989, killed 
a Canadian student, David Jaggs, 24, and seriously injured his wife of one 
month, Janine, 21. 
Lewis said Giunta, 41, twice agreed to breath and blood tests, but then refused 
to cooperate. Finally, Lewis said, he, another CHP officer, two jail officers 
and a jail nurse restrained Giunta on a gurney while blood was drawn from her 
arm to determine the amount of alcohol in her system. 
According to court records, Giunta's blood-alcohol content was 0.29% -- more 
than three times the level at which a motorist is considered legally drunk. 
Jaggs, ironically, was the son of an Anglican priest who counsels alcoholics 
and drug addicts in Windsor, Ontario. 
CHP Officer Robert Koetting, who investigated the case, said it is "highly 
unusual" for a drunk-driving suspect to resist a blood-alcohol test to the 
point where it must be performed forcibly. 
But refusal was not unusual for Giunta, who prosecutors said was acquitted in 
two previous drunk-driving cases largely because she had refused to submit to 
blood-alcohol tests, which are usually the key prosecution evidence. 
Officers cannot force a drunk-driving suspect to submit to blood-alcohol tests 
unless they are making a felony arrest for an accident in which someone was 
killed or injured, as was the case when Giunta was arrested following the crash 
that killed Jaggs. Refusal to allow such a test, however, is grounds for 
revocation of the suspect's driver's license. 
Department of Motor Vehicles spokesman Bill Gengler said Giunta's license was 
revoked for two years in January for the accident that killed Jaggs and again 
in April for refusing a blood-alcohol test after she was arrested on another 
drunk-driving charge while free on bail in the current case. 
Investigators describe Giunta as a shrewd defendant who knows how to manipulate 
the legal system and play up to juries in order to secure an acquittal or 
dismissal. 
"After five trials, I think she knows what to do," said Deputy Dist. Atty. 
Carol Whyte. Whyte lost the case in August in which Giunta was accused of 
driving drunk while free on bail less than a month after the accident that 
killed Jaggs. 
Robert Fernandez, Giunta's attorney, who also has represented her in three 
previous drunk-driving cases, said authorities are pursuing his client with 
unnecessary vigor and accused past investigators of lying about evidence. 
"There is a mentality that she's slipped through the system and that they have 
to convict her at any cost," Fernandez said. "I do believe they want to put her 
away." 
Fernandez, who declined to talk about the current trial, said Giunta "has not 
beat the system through any kind of tactics. The juries absolved her." 
In all but one of Giunta's five other arrests, she has either been acquitted or 
had the cases dismissed. In 1983, she was sentenced to probation and ordered to 
perform community service. 
The Rev. Ken Jaggs, the dead man's father, who has worked for 23 years 
counseling alcoholics and drug addicts, said Thursday that the death of his son 
has affected his work. 
The elder Jaggs, 62, said he now confronts patients more aggressively with the 
possible consequences of their addictions. He said jail is appropriate for 
repeat offenders provided they receive treatment while locked up. 
Although he refused to comment on the case against Giunta, Jaggs said "we want 
to see justice done." 
Prosecutors interviewed this week said they were discouraged that her previous 
arrests are not admissible evidence in Giunta's trial. 
"She's a danger to society and the sad thing is that you have 12 members of the 
community who don't know what a danger she is," Whyte said. 
