GARDENING; 
DOMESTICATING WILDFLOWERS: SPARE THE WATER; 
FLOWERS: CALOCHORTUS CAN BE GROWN FROM BULBS OR SEEDS, BUT THEY MUST BE 
PROTECTED FROM INSECTS. THEY PRODUCE MAGNIFICENT BLOOMS. 
Attraction is what flowers are all about. Their brilliant colors and unusual 
markings are beacons for insects and other pollinators, but they wind up 
attracting human beings as well. In California's tawny hills such flirtations 
have developed into lifelong infatuations for many people, especially when the 
flowers involved are the ones called calochortus. 
In 1878, Carl Purdy, a 17-year-old Michigan native, was living with his family 
in Mendocino County. As he wandered the oak woods collecting wildflowers for 
his sister, who was recuperating from tuberculosis, he noticed some dainty 
yellow flowers that resembled glowing paper lanterns. He dug up some of the 
plants, which he found grew from bulbs, and mailed them to a New Jersey flower 
broker who dealt in California plants. 
The broker replied that the flower was a type of calochortus, a genus of the 
lily family related tulips, and that he would pay Purdy $1.50 for each 100 
bulbs he could send. From then until his death in 1945, Purdy made a career of 
exporting calochortuses and other California bulbs dug from the wild, in one 
year alone shipping half a million bulbs. 
Perhaps 40 calochortus species are native to California, and they fall into 
three categories. Globe lilies or fairy lanterns have nodding, lantern-shaped 
flowers, while the type star tulips have erect, open flowers, their petals 
sometimes so thickly covered with hairs as to suggest another common name, 
cat's ears. 
But the most famous of the calochortus clan are the mariposa lilies, whose 
petals are often punctuated with spots, streaks and blotches of color 
resembling the markings on butterfly wings. 
All types of calochortus grow in summer-dry environments, a factor few of 
Purdy's customers understood. Because they were watered in summer or planted in 
summer-rainfall areas, most of the bulbs Purdy sold perished in a year or two. 
Fortunately, some of Purdy's customers persisted and became expert calochortus 
growers. 
In his last years, Purdy sold some bulbs to Fred Smith, at that time an El 
Monte traveling salesman. Smith potted the bulbs and was pleased when they 
bloomed the following spring. However, that summer he left them in his mother's 
care while he traveled, and she watered them to an early death. 
Smith was not about to give up, for he had been enamored of mariposa lilies 
since a 1938 high school hike in the Montebello hills. There he found 
Calochortus catalinae, a shapely, tulip-like flower that he recognized as a 
relative of the sego lilies of his native Wyoming. He was hooked, but his urge 
to grow calochortuses lay dormant for years until he saw Purdy's catalogue. 
After his initial failure, Smith started to grow calochortuses from seed, 
experimenting with various soil mixes, containers and watering schedules. Now 
retired and living in Glendale, Smith continues to be fascinated by the globe 
lilies, star tulips and mariposa lilies he grows in redwood boxes arrayed 
around his swimming pool. 
The new generation of calochortus fanciers is represented by Rob Ferber, a 
Caltech biology student whose introduction to the genus is strangely similar to 
that of his predecessors. Ferber's family moved from Pennsylvania to La Canada 
Flintridge in 1978, when he was 9-years-old. His first impression of California 
was, "It's a desert! It's dead!" 
He found little to like until, while visiting relatives in San Diego a few 
years later, he came across what he considered "a really pretty flower." It was 
Calochortus splendens, a lavender-flowered mariposa lily. When his attempts to 
grow them from seed failed due to summer watering, he began to study 
calochortus in earnest. 
Ferber is now researching the molecular genetics of calochortus, trying to 
learn how the 60 or so species which range from British Columbia to Guatemala 
are related to each other and how they evolved. 
Besides unraveling this scientific mystery, Ferber is also making progress on 
how to grow calochortuses. Studying diseased bulbs, he observed that they had 
been gnawed by mites, allowing funguses to penetrate the bulb and rot them. So, 
in addition to keeping bulbs dry in their dormant period, Ferber recommends 
drenching them with the insecticide diazinon and the fungicide benlate during 
the growing season. 
Calochortus bulbs planted now will flower in the spring and, with adequate 
care, will bloom at least every other year thereafter. They should only be 
planted in strictly summer-dry parts of the garden or in containers, most 
growers favoring redwood boxes or clay pots. 
Ferber's soil mix consists of equal parts of plaster sand, perlite and pine 
needle compost, while Smith's formula calls for 40% loamy topsoil, 30% sand and 
30% redwood sawdust. Redwood and pine needles are valuable because they contain 
natural fungicides. 
The bulbs do best if consistently moist, but not soggy, during their growing 
period, and can be fed monthly with half-strength liquid fertilizer. Mariposa 
lilies and star tulips fare best in full sun, but fairy lanterns prefer light 
shade. 
By the time bulbs flower in the spring, their leaves have started to turn 
yellow, indicating that it's time to stop watering until cool weather returns 
in the fall. It helps to cover the containers with a lid to make sure they are 
not watered and to set them out of the hot sun. 
Calochortus seeds and nursery-grown bulbs are available from C.H. Baccus, 900 
Boynton Ave., San Jose, Calif. 95117; Theodore Payne Foundation, 10459 Tuxford 
St., Sun Valley, Calif. 91352; Robinett Bulb Farm, P.O. Box 1306, Sebastopol, 
Calif. 95473. Seed only is available from Ferber and Stenstrom Seeds, 5314 Alta 
Canyada Road, La Canada Flintridge, Calif. 91011. The Calochortus Society 
(annual dues $3), 260 Alden Road, Hayward, Calif. 94541, publishes a newsletter 
which includes detailed information on growing calochortuses. 
