CARIBBEAN STATES WANT U.N. IN DRUG WAR; 
SMUGGLING: JAMAICA AND THE BAHAMAS SEEK TO DRAW ATTENTION AWAY FROM THE U.S. 
PRESENCE IN DRUG-TROUBLED COUNTRIES. 
After more than a decade as the main strategic battlefront in the U.S. war on 
drugs, the mini-states of the Caribbean, led by Jamaica and the Bahamas, have 
opened a campaign to draw the United Nations into an active anti-drug combat 
role. 
The aim is to ease sensitivities over too great an American presence in 
drug-troubled countries such as Colombia, Bolivia and Peru. 
Prime Ministers Michael Manley of Jamaica and Lynden O. Pindling of the Bahamas 
have called for a rapid U.N. deployment force that would interdict drug 
shipments, eradicate drug crops, ferret out anti-narcotics intelligence and 
even mount paramilitary-style raids against drug traffickers -- the way U.S. 
Drug Enforcement Administration, Coast Guard and military units try to do in 
cooperating countries. 
The force would be similar to U.N. peacekeeping forces that have been deployed 
in many of the world's hot spots, according to the two prime ministers. 
Armed with the unanimous support of the Caribbean Community and Common Market, 
made up of the English-speaking countries of the region, the two last week 
sought broader support at the annual meeting of the British Commonwealth 
nations in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
Pindling said in a recent interview that he will also lobby for support at a 
summit of 15 regional heads of state, including President Bush, scheduled to be 
held in Costa Rica on Friday and Saturday. And he said he will press for 
adoption of the scheme at a special U.N. General Assembly meeting on drugs due 
to convene sometime before next February. 
According to Pindling, the multinational force could be formed and in action 
within six months if major powers such as the United States get behind the 
idea. 
"If we are serious, we could pass the resolution at the U.N. this year," 
Pindling said. ". . . If they're serious about a narcotics eradication program, 
they could put it together in three months and have it operational in six. It 
all depends on how serious those countries which have the capability are." 
Because both countries now cooperate closely with American anti-narcotics 
forces, U.S. officials are reluctant to muddy relations by publicly criticizing 
the Manley-Pindling scheme. But some U.S. veterans of the Caribbean front of 
the drug war expressed deep reservations and cautioned that even if an armed 
U.N. force is formed, it would be incredibly expensive. 
"We would probably have to bankroll it, and we wouldn't get as much bang for 
the buck as we get now in bilateral programs such as our joint operations in 
the Bahamas," one official said. "The Bahamas operation alone costs $30 million 
to $40 million annually. I'm not sure there's enough jam to cover all that 
bread." 
Another U.S. specialist dismissed the Bahamian prime minister's support of the 
U.N. proposal as little more than an attempt to scrub up an unsavory image 
imprinted on the Bahamas government by U.S. indictments of several close 
Pindling associates on drug-related charges. "He wants to be seen as part of 
the solution to the drug crisis rather than as part of the problem," the 
specialist said. 
But another American drug expert said the idea is a good one, regardless of 
Pindling's motives, because it would make outside assistance more acceptable to 
politically sensitive Latin nations. 
"A U.N. helicopter squadron would help immeasurably in some places," he said. 
Pindling acknowledged that the idea of forming an armed U.N. force to conduct 
aggressive military operations against the drug barons might be hard to sell to 
the international organization, which has deployed troops only for peacekeeping 
purposes since the Korean War. 
"But if it's not possible to have that kind of (armed) force, at least it may 
be able to take part in the eradication of drug-producing centers and crops," 
he said. "It might be easier to deal with that rather than with 
street-to-street, house-to-house law enforcement." 
Pindling said he envisages a narcotics enforcement support office at the United 
Nations with high-tech intelligence capabilities, such as satellite 
surveillance aimed at pinpointing drug crops and cocaine factories, as well as 
international financial specialists with the power to track down drug 
traffickers and their financial networks. 
The task is urgent, Pindling declared. 
"It's made even more urgent by what is happening now in Colombia," he said. 
"How long will it take before Colombia self-destructs? Before the whole economy 
is shattered? And if it progresses to Bolivia and Peru, it may lead them to 
similar self-destruction. We just can't devastate three countries like that. 
They need help. We need help. It's urgent." 
