NEWS BITES 
The Pleasure Is Theirs 
Once upon a time, people were afraid to go to fancy restaurants because they 
might show their lack of manners. There's nothing to worry about these days, 
though: Top-drawer restaurants now think of etiquette as a motif, sort of like 
Polynesian Night. To announce a special menu they send their "A" list customers 
formal invitations "requesting the pleasure of your company on Friday, the 
fifth of October, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety at eight o'clock in the evening," 
with a bold note in the lower right hand corner spelling out how pleasurable 
your company is going to be: Sixty-five Dollars. 
We're not going to say anything about the restaurants that advertise 
"Complimentary Valet Parking, $2.50," because compliments are cheap. Well under 
$2.50, anyway. 
A Surprise in Every Package 
A company called Popcorn's Pac-N-Ship is promoting the use of popcorn as a 
cushioning material in packing. Unlike the familiar "plastic peanuts," 
proprietor Les Netterstrom points out, popcorn can be recycled as feed for 
birds and squirrels or used to mulch plants. However, a UPS spokesman observes 
that popcorn isn't a new packing material. It was widely used in the 
pre-ecology '50s but was abandoned for three reasons: It absorbs water, doesn't 
spring back when crushed, and tends to recycle itself even before delivery is 
made. The rodent and insect problems in store rooms were immense. For another 
popcorn problem, see H22. 
Observe the Jaws 
In a courageous move, the Red Lobster restaurant chain has become the national 
corporate sponsor of "Sharks: Fact and Fantasy," a museum exhibit consisting of 
a walk-through habitat with 17 life-size models of sharks. 
Question No. 1: Does This Stuff Contain Caffeine? Does It? Does It? 
Celestial Seasonings, the source of all those herbal teas with tender 
philosophical sentiments printed on the package, now offers a toll-free hot 
line dispensing nutritional information and consumer tips about tea. The number 
is 1-800-544-TEAS. Call any time at all -- that's a 24-hour hot line. 
Is American Food Awful? 
A group called International Research Associates recently asked consumers in 
various countries whether in their opinion Americans have good food. The people 
who were most convinced we don't were the Japanese (more than 50%, just edging 
out the French). The country that was most positive about American food turned 
out to be India, where only 5% said our food was bad, but on the other hand 60% 
of the Indians said they didn't know. Probably the only American food 
foreigners are aware of, the report notes, is fast food. 
Don't Bother About Accepting Those Japanese Cards, Though 
Arby's plans to be the first fast-food chain to accept credit cards 
nation-wide. All the restaurants directly owned by the company will take 
plastic and a lot of the franchises (which account for 90% of all Arby's) are 
expected to do the same. The attraction: People spend 40%-60% more when they 
can charge it. The problem, of course, was getting credit card approval time 
(typically 20-45 seconds) up to fast-food speed (one second). 
Chernobyl Milk, Sort Of 
Here's the latest: a frozen milk concentrate that can be reconstituted like 
frozen orange juice, just mix with three cups of water. Technically it's a sort 
of filled milk, with oil substituted for butterfat, but it has a fresh milk 
flavor, says inventor George Bookwalter (plus, of course, no saturated fat). 
Bookwalter originally devised it at the request of international aid officials 
helping out at Chernobyl. And they say nothing good ever comes of a nuclear 
disaster. CHARLES PERRY 
