WALK-ON MAKES MT. SAC GRID PROGRAM BIG IN WIN COLUMN; 
ACADEMICS: FOOTBALL ISN'T THE ONLY THING THAT ATTRACTS LEONARD RUSSELL TO THE 
WALNUT CAMPUS. HE'S HAD TO BUCKLE DOWN IN CLASS -- AND HE LIKES IT. 
It was not the world's best recruiting effort that attracted former high school 
All-America running back Leonard Russell to Mt. San Antonio College in Walnut. 
It was more like a world of good fortune. 
In fact, Mt. San Antonio Coach Bill Fisk didn't even have to step foot outside 
his office on campus to recruit Russell. 
"We were very fortunate," Fisk said. "His parents moved close to our school, 
and on the first day of classes he just walked into my office and asked if he 
could come out." 
Well, it wasn't quite that simple. 
Russell said the academic environment surrounding the football program at Mt. 
San Antonio also played a vital role in his decision. 
"When my mother and father moved out to Walnut, I knew the JC (junior college) 
was right down the street but I didn't know they had a football team," he said. 
"So I came down here and found out they did. My mom talked to the coach and he 
seemed like a good guy and he was concerned about academics, so I came out (for 
the team)." 
Fisk said the presence of the 19-year-old sophomore at Mt. San Antonio has been 
instrumental in the renaissance of the school's football program. 
"It was something we didn't expect," Fisk said of Russell's arrival. "Something 
like that can turn your program around." 
In the case of Mt. San Antonio, it has turned the program around. 
After not producing a winning record since 1982, the Mounties finished at 8-3 
and won the Southern California Bowl last year in Russell's first year with the 
team. Mt. San Antonio was even ranked as high as No. 3 in the state at 2-0 this 
season before dropping its last two games by close margins. 
Fisk said it is no coincidence that the program blossomed as soon as Russell 
joined the team. 
"This is my 24th year of coaching here, and he's probably the best back I've 
had come through as far as the things he can do," he said. "He's a team leader, 
he's our team captain and he's a very hard worker." 
The coach is hardly overstating his point. 
In only 15 games with the Mounties, Russell has already shattered most of the 
school's rushing records. He ran for 1,618 yards and eight touchdowns in 278 
carries last season -- a school record for yards and carries. 
With 723 yards and six touchdowns in 117 carries this season, he has already 
surpassed the school's all-time career record for rushing yardage with 2,341 
and is on a pace to break his own single-season record by the end of the 
season. 
From Russell's perspective, the success on the field has been gratifying. But 
for Russell, the biggest satisfaction has come from his improvement 
academically. 
"As far as the academics, I knew I wasn't as disciplined in the classroom as I 
was on the football field," Russell said. "I wanted to be in a program where 
people pushed me academically, and that's the way it's been here." 
He said the coaching staff is concerned with more than just the results of the 
players on the field. 
"Before I came here I didn't know what to expect, but Coach Fisk and Coach 
(Paul) Russell really care a lot about us," Russell said. "I know some programs 
that just let the player take enough units to keep playing, but at Mt. SAC they 
get you to take the classes you need so you can get your (associate of arts) 
degree and have a choice of (four-year) schools that you can attend." 
Russell said the academic climate is far better for him at Mt. San Antonio than 
it was at his first college stop, Arizona State. 
"I couldn't have asked for a better situation to come into," he said. "I feel 
I'm a better student-athlete -- not just an athlete. I'm a much better student 
than I was before I came here. I was lacking academically before, but now I 
know I've improved a lot. When I came from Arizona State, I came in with a 1.8 
(grade-point average), and I've been here a whole year plus summer school and 
it's now at 2.8 and getting better." 
He said his academic problems started when he was a high school star at Long 
Beach Poly. 
"I was not studying as hard as I could," Russell admitted. "I was going to 
class. I wasn't the type who didn't go to class. It's just that when homework 
was assigned I didn't do it. It was like I wasn't a bad student when I was in 
class. I paid attention and I tried to contribute. It's just that once I left 
the classroom I didn't have the discipline and I didn't take it home with me." 
There was more attention paid to his athletic skills in high school, he said. 
"There was more pressure on me to be a better athlete than a student at Long 
Beach Poly for some reason," Russell said. "Maybe it was because we always had 
such good athletes there and you were always compared to people in that way. 
You never heard about academics. It seemed like there was more pressure to do 
well on the field and academics came later." 
Once he was recruited for college and signed a national letter of intent to 
attend Arizona State, Russell's academic situation did anything but improve. 
Because he didn't have a 2.0 grade-point average in high school, Russell had to 
sit out his freshman season under the NCAA's Proposition 48 guidelines and the 
adjustment to life as a college student was not easy. 
"It was a big adjustment being independent," Russell said. "I had to get up on 
my own, go to classes on my own, and the teachers don't take role. I was away 
from home and I didn't apply myself. I thought: 'Well, I'm finally here. That's 
it.' I thought I could just show up and not have to worry about anything else." 
In retrospect, he says attending a major college such as Arizona State may have 
been a mistake considering his educational background. 
"I probably shouldn't have gone straight to a university," he said. "I should 
have gone to a JC because I wasn't ready for college. I didn't know you could 
go to a JC first. Nobody ever told me that in high school. It was like they 
were just concerned about what I did on the team. 
"It was kind of like, 'Arizona State can get you in even if you don't pass the 
(Scholastic Aptitude Test) test.' So I thought I'd just go there and get good 
grades, and it didn't happen." 
Despite his academic problems at Arizona State, Russell said he was in a 
position to become eligible to play but chose to withdraw from the school. 
"I was going to summer school and I would have had the 24 units I needed, but I 
was feeling down about the whole thing," he said. "I wasn't confident in 
myself, so I just sat down with my parents and decided to come home and get 
myself together." 
Russell said he has changed his priorities for college since attending Mt. San 
Antonio. 
"Before it was like 90% football and 10% academics and now it's 60% academics 
and 40% football," he said. "Football has always come easy to me. I've always 
been a good athlete, but academics has always come harder. Now I'll find myself 
practicing on the field for an hour or two and then I'll go home and study two 
or three hours." 
That is what convinces Russell that he made the right decision to leave Arizona 
State and attend Mt. San Antonio. 
"At the time I didn't know it, but looking back at what's happened at Arizona 
State and here at Mt. SAC, it's the best thing that could have happened," 
Russell said. 
It has also worked out for Russell as a member of the football team. 
Russell said the success of the team has been an added bonus considering the 
program's struggles in recent years. 
"I just kind of heard it around campus that Mt. SAC wasn't a good football 
team," he said. "But when I came in, three other coaches came in, and some good 
players from Pasadena came in and you could just see it turning around. 
"When I came in, coming from a high school like Long Beach Poly that won all 
the time, I just expected to win. But in the environment around me here, it 
just felt like a winning program, and we have won." 
Fisk said Russell has matured on the football field in the same manner that the 
program has developed. 
"He's matured a lot, and I think last year he got better with each game," Fisk 
said. "He's also been on a weight program and he's gotten stronger." 
At 6-2 and 226 pounds, Russell combines his 4.5-second speed in the 40-yard 
dash with exceptional strength. 
"He's a tailback, but he can also block," Fisk said. "He's a big, strong guy, 
but he can run too. I think as the game goes on he wears people down, as most 
big backs will. By the fourth quarter, you can usually see the defenses 
dragging a little." 
It is Russell's strength that he says has improved the most since last season. 
In fact, he bench-presses 475 pounds and squats 550. 
"I worked real hard in the weight room and with my running ability this 
summer," he said. "Before, I didn't have an idea about the weights. It was 
foreign to me in high school. I feel much stronger and healthier on the field 
too." 
He said he also has improved vision on the field this season. 
"As far as my sight, I can see holes I wouldn't have seen last year and my wind 
is much better," Russell said. "I can carry 30 times because I'm much stronger 
than I was last year." 
That is why Russell thinks he can reach the 2,000-yard plateau this season. 
It is also why he has been recruited by most of the top college football 
programs in the nation for next season. 
At this point, Russell says he is still more concerned about finishing the 
season and completing his class work at Mt. San Antonio this season. But he has 
set guidelines for what four-year school he will transfer to next season. 
"As far as trips go, I won't take any until after the season," he said. "I'll 
have only two years to play two seasons, so I want to go to a place where I can 
start and a place that runs 70% of the time and likes to throw out of the 
backfield. I'm not going to a school that runs the wishbone because that's not 
for me. 
"I also want to go to a school that pushes academics, a place where they care 
about whether you get your class work done. Everyone needs a push now and then 
in academics, and the people that do (push) are the ones that really care about 
you." 
Russell says there are a lot of people who never expected him to be saying that 
after he withdrew from Arizona State. 
"A lot of people thought that I was going to quit," he said. "My mom heard that 
from a lot of people, so she told me to just make it. My parents (Leonard Sr. 
and Lillian) pushed me to succeed academically and on the field. Without them, 
I don't know what I'd do. They've kept their faith in me." 
Russell is proving every day that their faith was justified. 
