ONLY IN L.A. 
Dan Brickman of Hollywood received a renewal of his driver's license in the 
mail the other day -- along with the licenses of people named Pineda, 
Shannigan, Natividad, Brodie, Donan, Park, Morra, Manchame and Rahimian. 
Ten licenses in all. Note the obvious similarities in the spelling. 
"When I phoned the DMV they told me to mail them the licenses," Brickman said. 
"I told them maybe they should send someone to pick them up. And they said, 
'Why don't you just keep them.' " 
Perhaps this is the DMV's method of reducing traffic congestion. 
Or maybe it simply has bought another new computer. 
Speaking of computer foul-ups, a Christmasy-sounding letter was sent out to 
"Mr. Santa M. Neighborhood" on the Westside. 
The resident at the address is the Santa Monica Neighborhood Support Center. 
The product being advertised was a computer. 
Ho-ho! 
If that gizmo doesn't get you, the fax machine will. 
In our new Press-Releases-We-Don't-Need Dept. (courtesy of Merv Griffin 
Enterprises): 
"Long Beach resident to appear this week on 'Jeopardy!' " 
It may seem like a quaint concept today, inasmuch as we've passed through the 
Sexual Revolution. But Glen Creason, the map librarian at the L.A. Public 
Library, came upon a truly forgotten city street: 
Lovers Lane. 
An 1871 map shows it running north and south along what is now a railroad track 
just north of Union Station. 
Author Harris Newmark ("Sixty Years in Southern California") described it as 
"willowed and deep with dust" (make of that what you will). 
Whatever, as Creason commented, it's "not a real prime spot for lovers to park 
today." 
Incidentally, records show that the name was changed in 1877, perhaps by a 
prudish official. 
The new name: Date Street. 
Not that all romantic signs have disappeared in this busy-busy-busy era. Take 
the infamous Caltrans notice on Interstate 5, north of Gorman: 
"Trucks and Busses." 
miscelLAny: 
If you're a resident of Paramount, city law permits you to hold just one garage 
sale per lot per year -- unless you die. Then your family is allowed to hold an 
extra sale to get rid of your things. 
