NO. 4 TRAFFICKER IN MEDELLIN SEIZED; 
COLOMBIA: OFFICIALS SAY DRUG KINGPIN ABELLO WILL BE EXTRADITED TO THE UNITED 
STATES. 
Colombian police announced Wednesday that they have arrested the fourth-ranking 
trafficker in the Medellin cocaine cartel. 
Jose Rafael Abello, who was seized Tuesday night as he dined in a Bogota 
restaurant, will be extradited to the United States to answer cocaine charges 
in a federal court in Oklahoma, a police spokesman said. 
The arrest was regarded by Colombian authorities as a milestone in their drive 
against traffickers who use Colombia as the hub for world cocaine distribution. 
Police officers said that Abello, 34, nicknamed "the Monkey," was No. 4 in the 
Medellin cartel and one of three important cartel figures now in Colombian 
custody. The others are Evaristo Porras, who was captured in Ecuador and 
extradited to Colombia on Oct. 2, and Bernardo Pelaez, arrested in Colombia in 
mid-September. 
The three are the highest-level traffickers caught since President Virgilio 
Barco Vargas began a blitz against the Medellin cartel on Aug. 18, a police 
official said. 
The official, who for security reasons asked not to be identified, said agents 
of Colombia's Administrative Department of Security arrested Abello at dinner. 
Although Abello was accompanied by bodyguards, he did not resist arrest. 
Abello, based in the port city of Santa Marta, was the Medellin cartel's chief 
of transportation on the northern coast, where most Colombian cocaine leaves by 
private plane or ship en route to the United States, the official said. 
He said Abello was outranked in the cartel only by fugitive kingpins Pablo 
Escobar, Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha and Jorge Luis Ochoa. 
"He was an intimate friend of Pablo Escobar," the official said. "He had a 
monopoly on transportation from the coast." 
He said Abello had fled Santa Marta after President Barco's crackdown began, 
and that intelligence information helped agents track him in Bogota. 
He said no charges have been filed against Abello in Colombia but that the 
United States had requested his arrest for extradition several weeks ago, based 
on federal charges in Oklahoma of "conspiracy and distribution of cocaine." The 
U.S. Embassy in Bogota refuses to comment on extradition cases. 
In Washington, Justice Department officials said that Abello, born in 1954, was 
indicted in October, 1987, in the northern district of Oklahoma on charges of 
conspiracy to import cocaine and conspiracy to distribute it. He allegedly was 
part of a group trying to ship 500 kilos of cocaine from Colombia to the United 
States. 
The U.S. officials said Colombia had arrested Abello on its own authority but 
that the Justice Department had asked the State Department to present papers to 
Colombia for his provisional arrest, the next step in the extradition process. 
Abello was roughly equal in cartel rank to Porras, the Colombian police 
official said. Porras, 41, was hiding under a false identity in Ecuador when 
police there arrested him last month. He is wanted in Colombia to serve out a 
two-year sentence for illegal possession of arms. The 1986 sentence was upheld 
by the Colombian Supreme Court this week. Porras is also wanted in Peru, where 
he was arrested in 1978 on cocaine trafficking charges. Peru has requested his 
extradition. 
The police said Porras was once in charge of shipping cocaine paste from Peru 
for refining by the Medellin cartel. He was based in Leticia, a town in the 
Amazon lowlands near the Brazil border. 
The Colombian newspaper El Tiempo has called Porras "one of the heads of 
narcotics traffic in Colombia." He is not wanted in the United States, a U.S. 
Embassy spokesman said. The Colombian police official said agents of the U.S. 
Drug Enforcement Administration suspect Porras of being involved in major 
American cocaine deals, but "there is no proof." 
The arrest of Pelaez was announced Sept. 14 by the Administrative Department of 
Security, which said he would be extradited to the United States for trial in 
Detroit on charges of "conspiracy and distribution of cocaine." 
Gen. Miguel Maza Marquez, head of the department, said then that Pelaez was 
"much bigger" in the cartel than Eduardo Martinez Romero, who was extradited to 
the United States on Sept. 6. 
Martinez, charged in Atlanta with laundering money for the Medellin cartel, was 
the first major cartel suspect to be caught in the current Colombian crackdown. 
Escobar and Rodriguez Gacha have eluded police despite a $250,000 reward 
offered by Colombian authorities. 
Times staff writer Ronald J. Ostrow in Washington contributed to this report. 
LOW-PROFILE HEARING: The alleged driver of a truck involved in a record drug 
seizure was arraigned. B3 
