GUNMAN YELLS 'WHITE POWER' BEFORE INJURING 4 AT PARTY IN TARZANA; 
VIOLENCE: POLICE LATER ARREST A CANOGA PARK MAN AND CALL THE ATTACK 'RACIALLY 
MOTIVATED.' TWO OF THE VICTIMS ARE REPORTED IN SERIOUS CONDITION. 
Four people were injured when a gunman shouted, "White power!" and fired into a 
crowd of party-goers outside a house in Tarzana, police said Saturday. 
The incident occurred about 11:45 p.m. Friday in the 4700 block of Hermano 
Drive, a sloping cul-de-sac lined with expensive houses, including a gated 
mansion at the top of the hill, Los Angeles Police Officer Victor Monroe said. 
The attack was "racially motivated," he said. 
A white man on foot shouted the slogan and then fired into a group of people 
outside the house, Monroe said. Two of those injured were hospitalized in 
serious but stable condition, he said. 
About 200 to 300 people attended the racially mixed party, Monroe said. 
Police refused to identify the victims, their race or the hospital or hospitals 
where they were taken. Richard Perelman, a neighbor and the owner of a 
furniture store, said he heard six shots and then teen-agers knocked on his 
door, crying and screaming for him to call an ambulance, which he did. 
"It was tragic -- the kids were really shook up," Perelman said. "We don't 
expect that in this neighborhood." 
Shortly after the incident, police arrested Jeffrey Scott Johnson, 20, of 
Canoga Park at his residence on suspicion of attempted murder. Monroe would not 
disclose what caused police to suspect Johnson. 
Johnson was being held without bail Saturday at the West Valley Jail. 
Harry Palmer, manager of the apartment complex in the 20000 block of Leadwell 
Street where Johnson lives with his girlfriend and infant daughter, described 
Johnson as an affable San Fernando Valley native. Palmer said Johnson worked 
with his stepfather installing air-conditioning devices and that he and Johnson 
had a beer together the night of the shooting. 
"They've got the wrong guy," Palmer said. "To say that Jeff would take a gun 
and yell, 'White supremacy,' well, he just isn't that type of guy." 
