ACCREDITING AGENCY TEAM PAYS SURPRISE VISIT TO KING HOSPITAL 
A team of medical investigators from the agency that accredits most of the 
nation's hospitals paid a surprise visit Wednesday to Martin Luther King 
Jr./Drew Medical Center to review first-hand reports of widespread health care 
violations at the county-operated facility. 
Officials from the Chicago-based Joint Commission on Accreditation of 
Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) said their four-member inspection team would 
survey reported breakdowns in the areas of nursing, dietary care, infection 
control, quality assurance and administration at King. If severe deficiencies 
are confirmed, the hospital could lose its accreditation. 
Federal health care officials have already threatened King with the loss of up 
to $60 million in public Medicare and Medi-Cal funding if the hospital does not 
correct all of its deficiencies by Dec. 21. 
JCAHO officials said the investigation was spurred by a series of articles in 
The Times detailing numerous problems in patient care and administration at the 
hospital and by a state health deparment report in which King was cited for 
massive health code violations. 
"The reports have raised doubts in our mind about the accreditation of the 
hospital," said Donald W. Avant, vice president of accreditation surveys for 
JCAHO. "We're trying to ensure that the hospital is still a credible 
organization." 
Avant said the investigators would release their findings to the accreditation 
commission with a series of recommendations that could include placing the 
facility on six months' probation while it pursues a series of corrective 
measures. He said the agency, which accredits 80% of the nation's hospitals, 
would release its findings within 90 days. 
The county has pledged to correct all of the problems at King in order to 
prevent the loss of the hospital's state license and millions in federal 
funding. County health officials are trying to turn the hospital around before 
the Dec. 21 fund cutoff deadline set by the U.S. Health Care Financing 
Administration. 
Presumably if the hospital corrects those deficiencies to the satisfaction of 
the HCFA, it will be enough to also ensure accreditation. 
The unannounced 8 a.m. arrival of the inspection team follows the release 
Tuesday of a county health department report which acknowledged serious health 
care deficiencies at the 430-bed hospital in Watts. 
"All we know is that they'll be here through Friday and that they're calling 
all the shots," said Sharon Wanglin, a spokeswoman with the county health 
department. "We are cooperating in every way possible and making as many people 
available to them as we can." 
The investigators met with Edward Renford, acting hospital administrator, and 
several other department heads Wednesday and planned to tour the facility 
during the next two days, Wanglin said. Dr. Adella DeLappe, head of the 
inspection team, said she could not disclose the team's findings at this point. 
State health inspectors spent two weeks at King in June spot-checking the 
hospital's entire operation after an analysis of Medicare patient deaths 
nationwide ranked King in the bottom 50 of 5,577 hospitals surveyed throughout 
the country. 
Among the major problems they cited in their report last month was a consistent 
shortage of registered nurses at King, resulting in unqualified nursing 
students and attendants providing "compromised care" to acutely ill patients. 
The investigators also found repeated failures by King's dietary staff to 
assess patients' nutritional requirements, overfilled and uncovered infectious 
waste containers, and poorly serviced medical equipment. 
