HOT PROPERTY: 'CROCODILE' HUNT NETS 3-ACRE HOME 
"Crocodile Dundee" star PAUL HOGAN and his bride and co-star, LINDA KOZLOWSKI, 
have purchased a Country English-style house behind gates in the Beverly Hills 
area. 
Hogan, the Australian hunter in the "Dundee" films, and Kozlowski, the American 
journalist who stole the hunter's heart, were married in May after completing 
their co-starring roles in the Paramount comedy "Almost an Angel," due to be 
released in December. 
Their wedding was held in a $2-million mansion that Hogan, who started his 
working life as a painter on the Sydney bridge, built for Kozlowski at Faraway 
Possum Creek, near the beach town of Byron Bay in New South Wales, Australia. 
Their new Beverly Hills-area home, bought for about $6.5 million, is on three 
acres with rolling lawns and a mountain view just west of Coldwater Canyon. 
Built of stone and wood in 1982, the two-story house has three bedrooms, four 
baths and two maid's quarters in about 7,200 square feet. It also has a tennis 
court, pool, spa and stone waterfall. 
Beverly Hills real estate broker Stan Herman owned the two-story house and 
lived there after buying it two years ago for slightly more than $2 million. 
He refurbished it, changing the floor plan, enlarging the living room and 
creating a second master bedroom, sources say. His firm had the $6.75-million 
listing. 
The buyers were represented by Brett Lawyer of Douglas Properties, who wouldn't 
comment except to say that an overseas corporation purchased the property for 
investment purposes. 
When in town, the couple has been living in a larger Beverly Hills house that 
Hogan bought through an overseas corporation before he and Kozlowski were 
married, another source said. 
Impressionist RICH LITTLE has dropped the price on his Malibu compound by $2 
million since it quietly came on the market a year ago, and now he's offering 
the gated, bluff-top home on about seven acres at $9,995,000. 
The compound includes a 7,000-square-foot, five-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath main house 
on 1.6 acres with a north/south tennis court, swimming pool, koi pond, 
office/gym complex and motor court plus an adjacent 5 1/2 acres with a 
secondary residence and a guest house. The 1.6-acre part of the estate can be 
acquired for $7.5 million. 
"Hollywood Wives," the ABC miniseries based on Jackie Collins' bestseller, was 
filmed there, said listing brokers Paul and Sara Grisanti of Douglas 
Properties, Malibu. 
Little lives most of the time in Las Vegas, where he works. The Malibu home was 
his primary residence, but was put on the market as part of his divorce 
settlement. 
Oscar-winning actress GREER GARSON'S co-op at the Wilshire Terrace, which 
sustained heavy damage from a 1989 fire, has been sold for $960,000, sources 
say. 
"Her unit was totally burned out; what was sold was a shell," one of the 
sources said. Emma Lampel at George Elkins Co., Beverly Hills, represented both 
parties but was unavailable for comment. 
Twenty-two of the 97 units in the 14-story building, on Wilshire Boulevard's 
"Golden Mile," were destroyed or severely damaged in the blaze, which occurred 
while Garson was at her Texas ranch. The 31-year-old building is being 
restored. 
An attorney and his wife bought the sixth-floor co-op, which Garson had owned 
for many years. She combined two apartments into a single 5,015-square-foot 
unit with five bedrooms and five baths. 
"She wanted to sell it, because she doesn't come to California that often and 
when she does, she goes to Palm Springs," a source said. 
The 82-year-old actress still has homes in Palm Springs, Dallas and Santa Fe, 
where she was honored last weekend with a new film studio in her name. 
Although the Southern California real estate market at most price levels is in 
the doldrums, there is one development opening this week just north of Beverly 
Hills where the lots alone start at $3.4 million. 
Welcome to the 325-acre Beverly Park, which such notables as Magic Johnson, Pia 
Zadora, Jon Peters, Sir Gordon White and Richard and Lili Zanuck already call 
home. 
They bought in the 100-acre South Beverly Park, where 16 mansions have been 
built on one-acre sites. Most recent completed home sales there have been in 
the $7-million range. 
Now comes the 225-acre North Beverly Park, which opens Thursday with a 
champagne and hors d'oeuvres party for 1,000. This phase has 64 lots, each with 
two level acres; a four-acre park with three holes of golf, a croquet-playing 
area, a jogging path and a waterfall. 
"We'll have some houses in there in the next couple of years that will be worth 
$10 million to $16 million," said Brian Adler, who plans to build a couple of 
them on spec himself. Adler and Marshall Ezralow are the developers of Beverly 
Park. 
KNBC-TV sportscaster FRED ROGGIN, whose new show "Roggin's Heroes" is scheduled 
for syndication early next year, and his wife, Eileen, have purchased a larger 
house near one they just put on the market in Studio City at $679,000. 
They bought the 26-year-old house, with three bedrooms and 2 1/2 baths, 2 1/2 
years ago and then remodeled it. 
"They moved because, with two children, they needed more room," said listing 
broker Don Pistotnik of Land and Real Estate Investments, Woodland Hills. 
The Roggins' new home is 6,500 square feet in size; their former one, about 
2,300 square feet. 
