HIGH SCHOOL ATHLETE OF THE WEEK: DAMEWORTH BEATS THE COURSE AND COMPETITION AT 
MT. SAC; 
CROSS-COUNTRY: AGOURA RUNNER FINALLY TAKES THE MEASURE OF HIS TOUGHEST FOE AS 
HE WINS THIS INVITATIONAL TITLE WITH A PERSONAL-BEST TIME. 
Bryan Dameworth established himself as one of the top high school cross-country 
runners in the nation during his freshman, sophomore and junior years at Agoura 
High. But it wasn't until the Mt. San Antonio College Invitational last 
Saturday that he finally conquered his most unforgiving adversary. 
For three years, the third mile of the Mt. San Antonio College cross-country 
course had plagued Dameworth in his quest for titles in the prestigious Mt. SAC 
Invitational and the Southern Section 2-A Division championships. 
"Every year I always get beat right there," Dameworth said. 
So the Charger senior decided to put his foot down Saturday. Followed quickly 
by the other foot. 
Dameworth survived a late surge by Arroyo Grande junior Luis Quintana and the 
final mile of the challenging three-mile course to win the team sweepstakes 
race in a personal best of 14 minutes, 41.8 seconds. 
Dameworth's time -- which improved his previous best by 27.2 seconds -- moved 
him to fourth on the all-time course list behind Jeff Nelson (14:32 in 1978) of 
Burbank, Eric Mastalir (14:38 in '85) of Sacramento Jesuit and Eric Reynolds 
(14:39 in '82) of Camarillo. 
Reynolds also was the Kinney national cross-country champion in 1982. 
"I still think I could run better, I always do after I finish that course," 
said Dameworth, who last won the Mt. SAC Invitational while competing in the 
junior high school division as an eighth-grader at Lindero Canyon Middle School 
in Agoura Hills. 
"I'm not very fond of it still," he said of the course. "I just know it too 
well. I used to like it a lot, but it's kind of getting old." 
Although Dameworth has turned in impressive performances on the Woodward Park 
course in Fresno -- site of the state championships and the Kinney West 
regional -- and at Crescenta Valley Park where the Kenny Staub Invitational is 
held, the Mt. SAC course has been his Achilles' heel. 
He placed 13th, fourth and third in the Mt. SAC Invitational during his first 
three seasons at Agoura, and third (1986), fourth ('87) and second ('88) in the 
2-A championships. 
But consider Dameworth's other accomplishments during those years: 
* As a freshman, he became the first ninth-grader to qualify for the Kinney 
national championships. 
* As a sophomore, he won the inaugural state Division I championships. 
* As a junior, he successfully defended his state Division I title and placed 
fourth in the Kinney championships in San Diego, earning All-American honors. 
Agoura Coach Bill Duley, who is also Dameworth's stepfather, said that 
Saturday's race was good for his protege. 
"It really opened up his confidence," Duley said . "Not for the season or 
anything, but for that course." 
Dameworth's time surprised Duley, who had expected his charge to run between 
14:50 and 14:55. 
"When I saw him come down on the airstrip (about 200 meters from the finish 
line) and I looked at my watch and it said 14:10 (running time)," Duley 
recalled, "I said, 'Oh, my God.' " 
