TONIGHT'S FOOTBALL GAMES; 
SADDLEBACK ON TOP OF ITS GAME AFTER TOUGH NONLEAGUE SCHEDULE 
Finding teams to play hasn't been hard for Saddleback High School football 
Coach Jerry Witte. Finding teams that don't play hard, well, that's another 
matter. 
Between 1984 and '87, the Roadrunners rolled up an impressive 42-8-1 record. 
The result was one Central Conference championship and a virtual boycott by 
some of the lesser programs in Orange County. 
Which is why the Roadrunners' 3-3 record going into their second Sea View 
League game may be a little deceiving. Saddleback (1-0 in league play) plays 
Corona del Mar (4-2, 0-1) at 7:30 tonight at Newport Harbor High School. 
"In the past we were able to get a couple teams that were struggling, but after 
the success we had it was tougher to schedule games," said Witte, whose team is 
coming off a 14-7 victory over Tustin in its league opener. "So we've ended up 
playing better schools, some of which are out of Orange County." 
Already this season, Saddleback has played Ocean View, Santa Ana, El Rancho and 
Serra. All four appear playoff-bound. In fact, the combined record of the 
Roadrunners' nonleague opponents is 21-8-1. 
At the same time, Corona del Mar and Estancia -- Sea View League favorites -- 
were beating up on lesser competition. The Sea Kings and Eagles each played 
only one team during their nonleague seasons that has a winning record. 
They also met each other last Friday night, with Estancia defeating Corona del 
Mar, 16-3. 
"The main reason you don't want to play a tough schedule is because you don't 
want to get beat up before league (play)," Witte said. "But you do benefit from 
it, if you can survive physically." 
The Roadrunners have remained healthy and have improved each week. After losing 
to Ocean View (24-7) and Santa Ana (21-0), they have won three of their past 
four. 
Saddleback has allowed only 29 points in its past four games, including a 22-7 
loss to undefeated Serra. 
The experience of playing better competition has benefited the young 
Roadrunners, who returned only four starters this season. Saddleback starts six 
juniors, who were part of a 9-1 sophomore team last season, including 
quarterback Paul Delgado. 
The Roadrunners' offense has scored only 59 points in six games, but Witte says 
it has improved in recent weeks. 
"Before, Paul would make a good read, but the receiver would run the wrong 
route or drop the ball," Witte said. "And the running game wasn't going 
anywhere because we only had one starter back on the offensive line. Now 
everyone is in sync." 
Defense has been the strong point, as safety David Morris and defensive lineman 
Kelly Jackson have helped the younger players develop. Both were starters last 
season. 
"They've been a stabilizing influence," Witte said. "And everything seems to be 
stabilizing now." 
The same thing happened last season, when the Roadrunners played a nonleague 
schedule that included three eventual league champions and another team that 
reached the playoffs. They played three teams from outside the county, 
Dominguez, Serra and Carlsbad. 
Still, Saddleback finished with a 2-2-1 league record and tied for second with 
Estancia. The Roadrunners defeated La Habra in the first round of the Division 
VI playoffs, then lost to Pacifica. 
"I think we snuck up on some people in league," Witte said. "Especially since 
we played so many teams from out of the area. Other coaches didn't know how to 
evaluate those games. They didn't get a true line on us." 
Witte hopes the same is true this season. He said his team has been preparing 
for three seasons -- nonleague, Corona del Mar and Estancia. 
Nonleague is over and the Sea Kings are tonight. 
"They're probably scared because we won last week, and I know we're scared 
because they lost," Witte said. "But our kids have been getting ready for this 
one all season." 
In other games tonight: 
Villa Park vs. Santa Ana at Santa Ana Stadium, Cypress vs. Los Alamitos at 
Veterans Stadium, Garden Grove vs. Pacifica at Bolsa Grande High, Santiago vs. 
Kennedy at Western High, Savanna at Valencia, Costa Mesa vs. Laguna Hills at 
Mission Viejo High. 
