VOTE MAY DECIDE FATE OF EASTERN'S PILOTS; 
BALLOTS TO DETERMINE WHETHER UNION CONTINUES STRIKE BENEFITS 
A nationwide vote of pilots to be counted today could be the proverbial last 
straw for Eastern Airlines' pilots, who have entered their eighth month of a 
bitter strike. 
The Air Line Pilots Assn. ballot on continuing strike payments to the Eastern 
pilots, if negative, would withdraw financial support from the beleaguered 
strikers and force them to pull down their picket lines after numerous setbacks 
in their fight against Eastern boss Frank Lorenzo. 
At the same time, an upcoming Senate vote on Eastern could turn into a 
disappointment for the striking pilots, machinists and flight attendants if 
their request for an investigative commission is defeated. 
The 40,000 or so ALPA members were balloted last month on whether they wished 
to keep paying about 3% of their wages to their colleagues at Miami-based 
Eastern, which is trying to emerge from bankruptcy protection as a smaller 
carrier. 
Pilots at the other airlines have provided strike benefits to Eastern pilots 
averaging around $2,400 a month each since the walkout began on March 4. But 
the number of pilots paying those special assessments has decreased as the 
strike has worn on, according to ALPA, which represents pilots at nearly all 
the nation's major carriers. 
If the ALPA vote is negative, "It would be in everyone's best interest to go 
about their business and relocate to other airlines," said Louis A. Marckesano, 
an airline analyst at the Philadelphia brokerage Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. 
Results Due Wednesday 
"I think the strike basically is over," he said Monday. "Neither side has won; 
they've just sort of mortally wounded each other." 
The mail-in ballots, which had to be postmarked by midnight on Sept. 25, are 
expected to be counted today and the results announced Wednesday. 
Eastern spokeswoman Karen Ceremsak said the airline would have no comment on 
the matter until after the vote had been announced, and ALPA spokesman John 
Mazor in Washington was unavailable because of the Columbus Day holiday. 
The striking Eastern pilots, whose ranks have dwindled to around 2,400 from 
3,600 when the walkout began, remained defiant. 
"I feel confident," said Skip Copeland, head of the Eastern pilots union. Asked 
what might occur if the majority of ALPA members vote to stop the payments, he 
replied: "It can't happen; I can't even give that any consideration. If Lorenzo 
were able to beat us, there's no telling who's next." 
Copeland conceded that the vote likely won't be 100% in favor of sustaining the 
benefits, but he insisted that the majority will opt to do so. If the pilots 
abandoned their Eastern colleagues, ALPA's bargaining position with all the 
carriers would be weakened, he warned. 
The pilot leader cited strong support, especially from counterparts at United 
Airlines and Northwest Airlines. 
Could Wreck Morale 
Also this week, the Senate could vote on a bill, supported by the pilots, to 
set up a commission that would investigate the Eastern dispute. In a cloture 
vote last week, the Senate decided to cut off debate on the bill. 
But the White House and the Transportation Department have lobbied heavily 
against the bill, and President Bush is likely to veto it. In that case, if 
Congress couldn't muster the votes to override his veto, the pilots could 
suffer another crushing blow to morale. 
