ORANGE COUNTY POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
DOOBIES' ROCK IS JUST ALL RIGHT 
Reunite a famous '60s band, and all sorts of questions arise. 
Was it right for the Who, perhaps the best exemplar of that decade's fiery 
creativity, to come back for one last gravy run? 
Could the Jefferson Airplane, which fed off the cultural and generational 
schisms of the '60s, recapture their old passion, now that the times had 
a-changed? 
And how about the Rolling Stones? Are they back to write a new chapter in rock 
or just to cash in with one more collector's edition of a book everyone has 
read? 
But reunite a '70s band like the Doobie Brothers, and there's hardly a need to 
ask anything. 
The Doobies, like many of their high-profile '70s brethren, retreated from the 
'60s vision of rock as a cultural battlefield, or a burgeoning movement to be 
infused with high creative ideals. The Doobies, who took their name from a 
slang term for a marijuana cigarette, saw rock as a backing track for an 
easygoing good time. The one-time bar band from San Jose did not sing about how 
the storm was threatening their very life today or about people putting down 
their generation. 
No, the most telling line from the Doobies' signature song, "Listen to the 
Music," went like this: "What the people need is a way to make 'em smile / It 
ain't so hard to do if you know how." 
Given that limited vision, the reunited Doobie Brothers don't have to carry the 
extra-musical burdens under which the returning '60s vets have labored. The 
only question they had to answer Friday night at the Pacific Amphitheatre in 
Costa Mesa was the one common to all bar bands and nostalgia acts: Do they 
still have the skill and enthusiasm to breathe some momentary freshness into a 
batch of old favorites? 
The answer was good enough to get a few thousand nostalgic thirtysomething 
types up and dancing through much of Doobies' brisk, 1 1/2-hour set of tightly 
and faithfully rendered hits. Led by Patrick Simmons and Tom Johnston, the 
band's two founding singer-guitarists, the nine-man lineup capably reproduced 
the Doobie Brothers' distinctive high-wall-of-voices harmonies, rolling rhythms 
and commercially glossy synthesis of country, soul and rock 'n' roll roots. 
Simmons and Johnston both made the evening a rewarding one for guitar lovers, 
turning out plenty of melodic solos played with facility and bite. 
The Doobies did play six songs from their successful reunion album, "Cycles." 
But the new material hews to the band's old style, the Doobies having been 
sufficiently honest -- and market-savvy -- to stick with proven old ways, 
instead of trying to sound falsely "contemporary." Certain songs from "Cycles" 
convey a depth that the Doobie Brothers' early music lacked, a sense of life 
lived with struggles and disappointments. 
Simmons brought a feeling of troubled yearning to one of those songs, "Take Me 
to the Highway." Otherwise, it was pretty much good times as usual for the 
Doobies, a way to make the people smile. 
While the "Cycles" lineup is drawn from the Doobies' early-'70s incarnation 
that centered on Simmons and Johnston, with their country and down-home rock 
'n' roll influences, the show included a few songs from the later period marked 
by Michael McDonald's sophisticated white-soul style (McDonald, the only Doobie 
Brother who went on to solo success in the '80s, is not part of the reunion). 
Sidemen Cornelius Bumpus (a late-period Doobie) and Richard Bryant helped carry 
the McDonald songs off, but the Doobies were at their best with more rocking 
material, including feisty renditions of such chestnuts as "Rockin' Down the 
Highway," "Jesus Is Just Alright" and "Long Train Runnin.' " 
Simmons and Johnston had little to say in perfunctory song introductions, but 
they probably realized that their songs alone had enough to give the show a 
ready-made sense of connection and familiarity. 
That, of course, is the problem with rock nostalgia: The whole experience is 
ready made. Real excitement comes from watching a band, new or old, that still 
has the capacity to surprise itself and its audience. 
The Doobies can't be accused of playing by rote. But they were a band enjoying 
a smooth outing over a safe, old route, not one trying to find new scenery at 
some risk of getting lost. The Doobies' safe, familiar rock was just alright -- 
and that's about all. 
