GARDENS: GROWING FOR SHOW; 
AT SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA BOTANICAL GARDENS, THE FIRST SIGN OF SPRING IS THE FALL 
PLANTING THAT PROMISES ACRES OF SPECTACULAR COLOR 
Arboretums are places of experimentation, where experts work to discover what 
plants can grow in our climate and how best to grow them. The autumn months are 
an especially busy time at Southern California's botanical gardens. Says 
Francis Ching, director of the Los Angeles State and County Arboretum system: 
"We wish we could plant everything in the fall, but we have to spread the work 
out. So in the fall, we concentrate on those things that must be planted now -- 
spring's flowers and bulbs." Fall is the best time to plant just about 
everything in the California garden -- spring flowers and winter vegetables, 
bulbs, perennials, ground covers, shrubs and trees. Last spring, we 
photographed some of what botanical gardens had planted the previous fall. 
Discussions with four of the gardens' plantsmen led us to some fascinating 
combinations of plants and some surprising cultural tips. 
VOLUNTEERS DO MOST of the fall planting in their own corner of this very large 
and under-funded garden, but not everything is planted at the proper time 
because many of the plants are donated by nurseries after their fall sales. In 
fact, some spring flowers aren't set out until early February. But they still 
manage to bloom in time for spring. 
Full of wonderful and often-unexpected mixes of flowers, this former dump site 
looks like a cottage garden in a storybook. "Because this garden is planted 
entirely by our volunteers, they can do whatever they want," says Norma 
Cantafio, who directs the volunteers' South Coast Botanic Garden Foundation. 
Surprises occasionally come from flowers that return each year from seed. Red 
flax and calendulas are two varieties that make a delightful mix, reappearing 
on their own each winter, if the volunteers simply water and weed. 
A big bed of Tecolote ranunculus planted from tubers in October is also full of 
linaria, which looks like baby snapdragons. (The garden is so wild that the 
occasional weed -- in this case, the sow thistle -- sneaks in.) The same effect 
could be achieved by purposely sowing seeds of these easy-to-germinate annuals 
-- especially the red flax (Linum) and the linaria -- among other plants. 
DESPITE ACRES of camellias, roses, perennials and fall-planted annuals, tulips 
are superintendent George Lewis' favorite spring flower. Not only does he grow 
them on a scale unheard of in California, but he also grows them perfectly -- 
not an easy feat here. 
Lewis and his staff buy bulbs as early as possible and immediately refrigerate 
them for a minimum of six weeks. Loamy clay soil is amended with organic 
matter, plus an amazing addition: A four-inch layer of washed builder's sand is 
mixed in to improve drainage. "Tulips hate wet feet," says Lewis, who 
landscaped rooftop gardens in New York City before joining the Los Angeles 
arboretum system 30 years ago. 
Bulbs are planted 8 to 12 inches deep, much deeper than the usually recommended 
6 inches. (Planting occurs at the end of December, in time for an array of 
blooms for the Spring Garden Show that begins on April 1). A handful of bone 
meal is dropped into each hole, and bulbs are set on top of it. They are not 
watered but survive on rainfall and moisture already in the soil (beds are 
thoroughly watered a few days before planting) until foliage breaks through the 
ground. Withholding water prevents rotting and encourages what Lewis proudly 
terms a "massive" root system. 
After leaves appear, plants are watered frequently -- every other day by March. 
When new growth reaches 3 inches, high-nitrogen liquid fertilizer is applied 
every two weeks. As flowers wither, bulbs are pulled out of the ground and 
tossed on the compost heap. Tulip bulbs grown here are not successfully 
recycled, as they are in the East Coast. "Only three out of 10 would return 
next year," Lewis estimates. 
BECAUSE THIS GARDEN is devoted to native California plants, horticulturist 
Carol Bornstein keeps a close eye on weather forecasts. She plants just before 
fall's first good rain, usually in November. In October, she and her staff 
decide what to plant and ready seed. Then they wait. 
Wildflowers are annual plants and must be sown from seed every fall, but 
Bornstein, who has a master's degree in horticulture, reports that she no 
longer tries to plant huge meadows of them. Instead, she says, her staff is 
"dribbling in wildflower seed in smaller swaths" because weeds can quickly 
smother wildflowers and smaller areas make weeding easier. Permanent clumps of 
native bunch grasses and perennials break up these meadow areas so that they 
don't look completely bare in summer. For example, the buttercup-yellow meadow 
foam, Limnanthes douglasii, disappears for the summer. California poppies and 
blue-eyed grass, a blue-flowered relative of the iris, hang on. 
To plant wildflowers, Bornstein's staff clears several square feet, scatters 
seeds, then gently rakes or waters them in. Plants appear after the first rain 
and bloom all spring. When flowers drop their seed in summer, they are covered 
with a mulch of wood chips to keep weeds and dust down. The following fall, the 
area is cleared away and seed sown again. 
NARY A WEED nor a dead bloom lingers here. This tiny botanical garden, which 
occupies one city block on Coast Highway, is perhaps best known for its 
spectacular, picture-perfect flower displays. "How do you get your plants to 
look so good?" is the question director Wade Roberts hears most often. 
"The answer is simple," says Roberts, who was a landscape designer and Cal Poly 
San Luis Obispo-trained horticulturist before he joined Sherman Gardens 23 
years ago. "We fertilize and water consistently. It doesn't matter what you 
feed with as long as you are consistent," he explains. 
Calendulas, cyclamen, pansies and stock are planted in beds throughout the 
garden in October, but the sunniest flower bed is saved for ranunculus, the 
garden's most dazzling spring crop, which is planted in mid-February. Though 
ranunculus are usually planted in the fall as tubers, here they are planted 
from 4-inch (quart) pots, good news for those home gardeners who don't get 
around to fall planting on time. In October, the bed is planted with Iceland 
poppies, and when they poop out (or get flattened by winter rains), in go the 
ranunculus. Roberts plants a special seed-grown strain, Bloomingdale, that is 
sold and planted already in flower. Though this strategy is more costly than 
planting tubers, he believes it is worth the expense because beds are kept full 
of flowers -- bare dirt never greets visitors. 
Another favorite is Primula obconica, which likes rich soil with ample organic 
matter and grows in the shade. "We plant these from 4-inch pots in mid-October, 
and they last for five or six months, blooming all the time. They're an 
incredibly sturdy flower; even rain doesn't knock them down," Roberts says. 
Weeds and dead blooms disappear quickly, however, "thanks to our tireless 
volunteers who are issued buckets every morning." 
