NO TIME TO GROW COMPLACENT; 
ACTIVISM: THE COLD WAR MAY APPEAR TO BE OVER, SAY THE MEMBERS OF PHYSICIANS FOR 
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, BUT THE THREATS OF NUCLEAR WAR AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
DESTRUCTION ARE STILL VERY REAL. 
The Berlin Wall has fallen. Glasnost reigns. Gorbachev has won a Nobel Peace 
Prize. 
The Cold War, as we have known it for more than four decades, appears to be 
over. And with its demise, many Americans also see an end to the ultimate 
nightmare -- nuclear destruction from a U.S.-Soviet showdown. 
But for anti-nuclear activists like Dr. Robert Wesley of Irvine, the nightmare 
has merely changed its shape, becoming more subtle, more complex, more 
insidious. 
"This (end of nuclear threat) may be the perception, but not the reality," said 
Wesley, a member of the Orange County chapter of Physicians for Social 
Responsibility (PSR), long a prominent organization in the anti-nuclear 
movement. "You may have some treaties signed, Bush and Gorbachev shaking hands 
and smiling, but the fact remains that the nuclear weaponry being retired is 
minuscule while new and deadlier weapons are still being developed." 
And, added the 41-year-old cardiologist and member of the national PSR's house 
of delegates, "Even if the threat of a Soviet-U.S. war now appears unlikely, 
you have the Iraqi-Gulf crisis as proof that conventional wars could escalate 
into nuclear confrontations." 
Consequently, Wesley and other PSR officials are concerned not only about 
declining membership in the Washington, D.C.-based PSR, but about a growing 
feeling of complacency from the threat of nuclear war. 
Physicians for Social Responsibility had a membership of 55,000 in the 
mid-1980s. It was a powerful organization, joining forces with its parent body, 
International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, in actively 
fighting for nuclear disarmament. 
But membership has dwindled to 40,000. Membership in Los Angeles County, one of 
PSR's largest chapters, has dropped from 2,400 to 2,000. The Orange County 
chapter is down from 250 to 180 members. 
So PSR, whose 125 chapters range in size from a handful of members in North 
Dakota to thousand-plus groups in the New York City, Boston, San Francisco and 
Seattle areas, is attempting to revive its membership rolls and broaden its 
appeal. 
And not just through anti-nuclear activism. 
Last Saturday, for example, the Los Angeles chapter joined UCLA Extension and 
the Beyond War Foundation in sponsoring an environmental symposium, "Healing 
the Planet," at the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. 
On Nov. 8, at UC Irvine's University Club, the Orange County chapter will hold 
its first awards banquet, hoping to woo new members, increase exposure and 
raise money. Media/sports mogul Ted Turner will be honored for his efforts as a 
longtime global peace advocate. Next spring, the Orange County chapter will 
co-sponsor a UC Irvine conference on the environment. 
"We are no less concerned with nuclearism. But we are equally concerned with 
all forms of global destruction, including the slower devastation of our 
environment," said Dr. Arthur Strauss of Irvine, another longtime PSR member. 
More than ever, added the 38-year-old pediatrician, "the health, the very 
survival of society and this planet, are endangered. This is no time for 
organizations like ours to go out of business." 
Physicians for Social Responsibility got into business in 1961. Two years 
later, it was among the peace groups that basked in a singular triumph -- the 
U.S.-Soviet signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty that halted atmospheric 
testing. 
But after that milestone, PSR membership dropped until the late 1970s when the 
organization, galvanized by a mercurial new leader, Helen Caldicott, regrouped 
and mounted new campaigns to stop the arms race, ban all nuclear testing and 
promote massive cuts in military spending. 
"People were scared again (in the early 1980s). We had the Three-Mile Island 
accident. And our leaders were following an incredible premise: that a nuclear 
war was survivable," recalled member Dr. Fred Galluccio, 38, a Newport 
Beach-based family-practice physician. 
"Of course, that was tragic nonsense," he added. "No one would survive such a 
holocaust today." 
The success of PSR was instrumental in the formation of similar anti-nuclear 
"social responsibility" groups in other professional fields, such as those for 
educators and for architects. 
And in 1980, PSR became the U.S. affiliate of International Physicians for the 
Prevention of Nuclear War, the global group founded by American and Soviet 
physicians that won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985. 
For some PSR members, including Wesley, the group's activism has helped enhance 
the medical profession's image to skeptics who saw doctors as being too 
absorbed in their own financial status or professional turf to care about 
social advocacy. 
"We know some citizens feel this way about doctors, but that's a bad rap," 
Wesley said. Physicians for Social Responsibility "shows that doctors are 
concerned with ethical and moral issues. We have the same sense of social 
idealism." 
Wesley, who took part in the civil rights and anti-Vietnam War movements of the 
1960s and '70s and now works with the Veterans Administration Medical Center in 
Long Beach, added: "From a medical point of view, the destruction of our 
society is, after all, the ultimate epidemic." 
But PSR is finding that recognition for battling this epidemic does not come 
easily. Perhaps it is because, although it is an organization of activists, it 
is not militant. 
"We're listed in the white pages for people seeking information (about the 
organization), but most people who call us think we're some kind of 
physician-referral service," Arthur Strauss said. 
Strauss, among those arrested for trespassing during a 1986 protest at the 
Nevada nuclear test site near Las Vegas -- the charges were dismissed -- said 
PSR does not conduct marches, sit-ins or other militant protests. "Some members 
have done that on an individual basis, (but) not as a chapter," he said. 
More typical of a PSR demonstration are events such as the one that occurred in 
October, when members gathered outside the White House to present a petition to 
President Bush urging him to avoid using nuclear or chemical weapons in the 
Gulf crisis. 
The efforts of PSR, members say, are principally educational -- seminars, 
research reports, legislative testimony, international exchanges. 
Last year at UC Irvine, for example, the chapter co-sponsored a conference for 
high school students on the economic impacts in a post-Cold War world. The 
topic of next spring's campus conference, again for high school students, will 
be "Environmental Revitalization: An Issue in National and Global Security." 
As many PSR members see it, these other social concerns, including health care, 
substance abuse, homelessness and the educational system, are at least 
economically connected to the PSR's original concerns with nuclearism and 
defense spending. 
"On one hand, we still spend incredibly enormous sums on the whole military 
defense system, even on something as doubtful as the B-2 Stealth (bomber), 
while these urgent social programs go begging for fiscal support," said 
Strauss. "It is so monumentally ludicrous." 
But PSR members say they are not about to abandon the cause that first brought 
them together. 
It is not just the unfinished business of seeking full bans on nuclear testing 
and the dismantling of nuclear arsenals, but protection from contamination and 
accidents from existing nuclear facilities. 
Further, they say, it is being the voice that will prevent the public from 
becoming complacent about the threat of nuclear war. 
"People are once again going through a time of denial (about the threat)," said 
Galluccio, who took part in a PSR exchange trip in 1985 to several countries, 
including the Soviet Union and Japan. 
That fall, his delegation visited Hiroshima, saw the memorial and museum there 
and met with survivors of the August, 1945, bombing. 
"You can't forget what you see, hear and feel. Even now, even with the city 
rebuilt, it is an absolutely horrendous and depressing experience to be there," 
said Galluccio. 
And to those who believe the nuclear threat has passed into history, along with 
the end of the Cold War, Galluccio offered this observation: 
"Compared with the nuclear weapons we possess today, the bomb that was dropped 
on Hiroshima 45 years ago was only a matchstick." 
