U.S. WORKERS WARY AFTER BEING SAVED BY THE BILL; 
BUDGET: A TEMPORARY MEASURE ASSURES JOBS UNTIL OCT. 19, LEAVING FEDERAL 
EMPLOYEES WITH A MIXTURE OF JOY, IRRITATION AND RELIEF. 
Excuse Sandy Denny, the office supervisor at the Social Security Administration 
office in Huntington Beach, if she yawned at work Tuesday. 
She had stayed up late Monday night to watch a broadcast about the fate of the 
federal budget -- and the fate of her job. 
As it turned out, President Bush and Congress agreed on a temporary funding 
bill early Tuesday to end a three-day federal government shutdown. And people 
like Denny trickled into work a few hours later with a mixture of joy, 
irritation and relief. 
"It's very unsettling," Denny said. 
It's not necessarily the end, either. 
The temporary spending measure gives congressional leaders until Oct. 19 to 
complete work on a $500-billion budget package. Another stalemate could develop 
in 10 days. Tense negotiations over specific tax increases and spending cuts 
are expected, with lobbyists clamoring for special treatment by Congress. 
"We are all frustrated, not knowing day to day if we report to work or not," 
said Larry Boland, district manager of the Social Security offices in Ventura 
and Oxnard, who until the last-minute budget reprieve was planning to report to 
work Tuesday just long enough to dismiss his entire staff. 
William V. Evans, an Internal Revenue Service auditor in the Federal Building 
in Los Angeles and vice president of a chapter of the National Treasury 
Employees Union, was more cynical. 
"All along I've felt this (threatened shutdown) was just a tactic to try and 
get something done on the budget," said Evans, 56, who has worked for the IRS 
for 21 years. 
The consternation of federal workers was rooted not only in the machinations of 
Congress but in years of frustration over wages that they believe are too low. 
In the last decade, because of budget cuts, federal salaries have fallen about 
30% behind private-sector pay. 
Improvements appeared possible in congressional budget hearings last month. The 
Senate approved an amendment authorizing a five-year, $5-billion program to 
raise federal pay by linking most government salaries to comparable jobs in 
local markets -- the first time such regional adjustments had been introduced 
to the federal pay system. 
John N. Sturdivant, president of the 700,000-member American Federation of 
Government Employees, called Tuesday for a rally in front of the White House on 
Thursday to urge Bush and Congress "to build a consensus . . . and ensure that 
this (shutdown) is never repeated." 
"We must stop the use of federal workers as pawns in this never-ending game of 
political chess and come up with a compromise package that does not once again 
unfairly place the burden of this country's financial woes on federal workers 
and retirees," Sturdivant said. 
Government workers first began to feel anxious in August when various 
departments notified some employees of potential furloughs if the 
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings balanced-budget law took effect. As the new fiscal year 
approached on Oct. 1 without a budget, talk turned to the possibility of a 
complete shutdown. 
National parks and federal monuments were closed over the Columbus Day weekend 
after Congress failed to pass a bipartisan budget compromise and Bush vetoed a 
stopgap spending bill, leaving the government without legal authority to spend 
any money. 
Most federal workers had been told to report to work as usual on Tuesday, all 
the while aware that "non-essential" workers ranging from IRS auditors to meat 
inspectors would be sent home if no budget compromise had been reached 
overnight. 
At John Wayne Airport, the normal complement of seven or eight air traffic 
controllers would have been reduced to about four if automatic Gramm-Rudman 
cuts had gone into effect. But operations were normal Tuesday and jets took off 
on schedule. 
"I was supposed to be on furlough Tuesday, but I got a call Sunday that I was 
to come in," said Susan Thomas, the control tower area supervisor. 
"We're considered an essential service, so I didn't think anything was going to 
happen to us today," Thomas added. "But it's a big concern to a lot of us here. 
This is a high cost-of-living area. People have car payments and rent to pay. 
The chance of losing half a day or a whole day of pay is a real problem." 
Ed Ramirez, a Social Security claims representative in Huntington Beach, said 
he would have been forced to get part-time work if Gramm-Rudman budget cuts had 
been implemented. 
Like other federal workers interviewed Tuesday, Ramirez said he is reluctant to 
make plans unless a budget is made final before Oct. 19. 
"Some friends had invited me to Colorado, but I've put all my vacation plans on 
hold," he said. "I just hope to God that we're not in the same position on the 
19th and we don't have to go through this nonsense again." 
Added Bonnie Brown, regional director of a small union that represents workers 
at two Navy bases near Oxnard: "The way I look at it, members of Congress are 
the only non-essential workers." 
Baker reported from Los Angeles, Efron from Orange County. Kenneth R. Weiss and 
Joanna M. Miller also contributed from Ventura. 
