MUSIC AND DANCE NEWS: OPERATIC LIFE AND DEATH IN BOSTON 
Boston now has three opera companies -- one rising, one moribund and one newly 
born -- as the historic city closes this decade. 
Newly born is Boston Opera Theater, a company established in the spring of 1989 
by some former leaders of Sarah Caldwell's still-embattled Opera Company of 
Boston, and now raising money and support for a 1990-91 season expected to 
begin in December of next year. 
"It would be misleading to characterize our group as just disgruntled," says 
Opera Theater executive director Robert Cannon, who at one time was president 
of Caldwell's company. 
"Simply, we felt that the time had come to establish a new and dynamic opera 
producing company to take Boston into the next century. Our assessment of the 
previous company was that it could not be reorganized." 
Among the national and international artists who will work with the new 
company, Cannon says, are stage director Peter Sellars and his artistic 
associate, Craig Smith. (In Los Angeles, Sellars declined to say more to The 
Times beyond confirming that he would be involved with Opera Theater.) 
"But this will be more than a company for Peter, who, after all, has a contract 
in Los Angeles. It will be a broad-based company with an international outlook, 
and one that will bring in important productions from the outside, as well as 
mount its own, new work. 
"What we are doing now is raising money and putting the pieces together. We 
expect to make a major announcement of our plans in January." 
Moribund is Caldwell's Opera Company of Boston, which has yet to announce its 
artistic plans for 1989-90, and is beset by a deficit reportedly in the 
neighborhood of $7 million. Repeated calls to the company netted no one willing 
to speak to The Times. 
Rising out of academia is Boston Lyric Opera. Formerly connected with 
Northeastern University, but recently broken off from that connection, Lyric 
Opera opened its 16th season in a new theater, and with high hopes, last month. 
According to general director Justin Moss, a Californian who came to 
Massachusetts from Baltimore Opera, "We have taken a whole new direction with 
this season." 
He says two performances of Puccini's "Tosca" in September were sold out and 
artistically successful; yet to come are concert performances of Wagner's 
"Fliegende Hollander" in January and staged "Traviatas" in March. Is there room 
for three opera companies in Boston? 
"Definitely. As a theater town, for instance, Boston has audiences for 
everything. Opera is no different. We have a very educated and discerning 
population." 
JOFFREY CHANGES: Gerald Arpino, artistic director of the Joffrey Ballet, has 
announced the promotions of Scott Barnard to assistant artistic director and 
Barbara Forbes to ballet mistress, plus the addition of seven new dancers to 
the 1989-90 roster. 
New members are: Daniel Baudendistel, who rejoins the Joffrey after dancing 
with American Ballet Theatre and the Lar Lubovitch Company; Pascal Benichou, 
formerly of the San Francisco Ballet; Alexander Brady, formerly with the 
1988-89 Joffrey II Dancers; James Conlin, who has danced with the companies of 
San Francisco and Berkeley; Pierre Lockett, formerly of Dance Theatre of 
Harlem; Jacob Rice, who has performed with companies in Washington State, 
Connecticut and Virginia, and Amanda Smith, a member of Joffrey II Dancers from 
1987 to 1989. 
CELEBRATING: American Music Week, this year scheduled for Nov. 6-12, will be 
noted locally in different ways: 
KUSC-FM (91.5) will present "American Mavericks," a three-part series of 
hourlong sound portraits. The featured music makers are CalArts composer Mel 
Powell (see article on Page 75) Nov. 6 at 8 p.m., Frank Zappa Nov. 7 at the 
same hour and David Byrne Nov. 8 at 8 p.m. In addition, KUSC will host a 
tribute to the music of Duke Ellington, "My Sparkling Parade," to be broadcast 
at 8 p.m Nov. 9. During the same week, KUSC will carry a four-part series on 
the career of composer Cole Porter, to be broadcast at 7 p.m. nightly, Nov. 6 
through 9. 
A 10-year anniversary celebration of the alternative music festival "New Music 
America" will broadcast live from the Brooklyn Academy of Music at 8 p.m. Nov. 
10. This "New Music America Gala" will feature Laurie Anderson, Meredith Monk, 
Philip Glass and Steve Reich. 
"Music in the Present Tense -- The American Composers Orchestra at Carnegie 
Hall," is a four-part series, including the world premiere of Tania Leon's 
"Kabiosile," plus music of Kurt Weill, John Adams, Earl Kim, Duke Ellington, 
Rand Steiger, William Bolcom, Lou Harrison and Elliott Carter. Broadcast times 
are 9-10 p.m. Nov. 6-9. 
The music department at the County Museum of Art will launch its special 
programming Nov. 6 at 8 p.m. with "The Ear and the Eye: An Aural/Visual 
Celebration of American Music," in the Robert O. Anderson Building. Musicians, 
including trombonist Miles Anderson, violinist Paul Castellanos and cellist 
James Hoskins will be placed at different spots in the building to improvise, 
"as inspired by the Robert Longo exhibit." Information: (213) 857-6010. 
At the Los Angeles Philharmonic, the Philharmonic Chamber Music Society will 
offer a concert, Nov. 6 at 8 p.m. in Gindi Auditorium at the University of 
Judaism, featuring music by Dvorak, Lou Harrison and Ingolf Dahl. 
PEOPLE: Violinist Nina Bodnar has been appointed concertmaster of the St. Louis 
Symphony, effective in January. Winner of several prestigious international 
competitions, including the Jacques Thibaud competition in Paris, the 
California-born violinist, 28, has been concertmaster of the Santa Barbara 
Symphony in recent seasons. . . . Dancemaker Lucas Hoving is in residence at 
Pomona College in Claremont this week, teaching modern dance and acting classes 
and, Friday night at 8 in the Mudd Theater, giving a three-part concert 
recalling his life in dance. . . . Michael Vargas has been appointed general 
manager of the 1990 Los Angeles Festival. In his new post, Vargas will oversee 
production of the three-week festival, beginning in September, and plan all 
performance schedules, as well as housing and local and international 
transportation. Vargas has been associated with the San Bernardino Museum and 
City Theatre Company in Pittsburgh. . . . Milton Salkind, president of the San 
Francisco Conservatory since 1966, will retire at the end of June, 1990. In his 
24-year tenure as head of the conservatory, Salkind has overseen growth and 
development of the institution from a 42-student school of limited resources to 
its present size as a 250-student, degree-granting college with a $9-million 
endowment. . . . Sylvia Kunin, originator of the Musical Encounter television 
series and founder of Young Musicians Foundation, will be honored this week at 
the 52nd annual conference of the National Guild of Community Schools of the 
Arts, meeting in Las Vegas, Friday through Nov. 6. Kunin will receive the 1989 
Colonel Samuel Rosenbaum Memorial Award, given for "exemplifying and promoting 
the ideals to which the guild and its membership are dedicated." 
 Calendar intern Mary Helen Berg contributed to the research for this column. 
