MENTAL GYMNASTICS; 
EXERCISE: IN THE MIDST OF A WORKOUT OR RUN, YOU FIND YOUR MIND'S A MILLION 
MILES AWAY. IT'S CALLED DISASSOCIATION AND ATHLETES SAY IT'S LIKE A VACATION. 
"Another glass of Orvieto, sweetheart?" you ask as you prop yourself on the 
velvet cushions and reach for the ice bucket. The gondolier is averting his 
eyes, but Candice Bergen, looking un-Murphy Brownish, isn't. She smiles as you 
float beneath the Bridge of Sighs, and soft mandolin music drifts by on the 
Venetian summer air . . . 
So why are your legs starting to feel like Jell-O? And where did that burning 
feeling in your throat come from? Why is that stinging sweat rolling in your 
eyes? Why are you wearing Nikes? And what happened to Candice? 
Welcome back to Mile 4 of your daily run, after you've been doing it again -- 
letting yourself sink into the random mental state that seems to occur when 
people perform a repetitive athletic activity. 
You could be riding a stationary bike, swimming laps, or reeling off miles at 
the local track. But your mind is balancing your checkbook, planning your next 
day's schedule or replaying your prom date. 
Athletes call this state disassociation. 
It's the ability -- or tendency -- to take the mind off the business at hand 
and let the body work while the brain takes a vacation. 
"If a runner is going to run 10 miles on a training run over a familiar course, 
for example, he's not going to worry too much about what's going on," said Dr. 
Brent Rushall, a professor of physical education at San Diego State University 
who has studied the effects of concentration -- or the lack of it -- on 
athletic performance. 
"The stimuli will be familiar to him. He can then think about things that 
happened at work, run through problems, plan a paper he's writing, plan a 
vacation -- things totally unrelated to his performance," he said. "Some 
younger people tend to disassociate for a while and fantasize that they're in 
the last mile of an Olympic final. It can be a whole mishmash of thinking to 
get over the repetitive boredom." 
Olympic champion swimmer Janet Evans never knows what thought will materialize 
during long training swims. "When we're doing a really long set in training," 
she said, "sometimes you set a pace and let your mind drift, like to how much 
homework I have to do when I get home, what happened during the day. It gets 
boring to think about swimming during a workout. Sometimes I'll think of things 
that happened a long time ago. They'll just suddenly be there. When I train 
with my teammates, all of a sudden -- I don't know why -- I'll think about a 
meet or something that we were at that happened a year ago -- just a random 
thought." 
The mental meanderings may be largely unexplainable, Evans said, but "I like 
it. It gives me a chance to be myself and work a lot of things out in my mind." 
A running regimen has a similar effect on Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.). Long a 
devotee of running, Cranston said he is primarily a sprinter, but sometimes 
uses one- and two-mile runs to warm up. 
"I just try to use that as relaxation and as an escape from work and 
responsibilities," he said. "Now and then, if there's some problem I haven't 
figured out, I may get an inspiration about how to deal with it. The human mind 
works that way, when you let it work subconsciously." 
Disassociative thinking in repetitive exercise may be almost instinctual, John 
Jerome wrote in his book "Staying With It: On Becoming an Athlete." 
"Primitive societies," he wrote, "know there is considerable power in rhythmic, 
repetitive physical action -- as in nonstop dancing -- to affect the mood, if 
not to move the consciousness into mysterious regions." 
The late Jim Fixx, a prime mover in the '70s running boom, wrote in his "The 
Complete Book of Running" that "while writing two books on games, puzzles and 
human intelligence I often solved problems as I ran. It was hard work (I'm not 
much good at doing math without pencil and paper), but if I concentrated, I 
could usually accomplish something. The kind of thinking I most like to do 
while I run, though, is just to let my thoughts wander wherever they wish." 
This isn't the same as the "runner's high," usually ascribed to a release of 
natural, pleasure-inducing endorphins in the brain after a certain level of 
exertion has been reached. Disassociation, runners and others report, is more 
like daydreaming. 
There are times, however, when athletes must concentrate to avoid injury or to 
improve their performance. 
"You disassociate through a lot of your training," said Olympic champion 
marathoner Frank Shorter. But "in competitions, you don't. There, 
disassociating is not an advantage. When people try to take their minds off an 
activity, they're not the ones who are going to be best at doing it. The elite 
runners think about where they are, what their effort is, how they're doling it 
out, what their competition is." 
Recreational running, however, "is completely thinking about things that don't 
affect performance at all," Rushall said. "The people running in the back of 
the pack in a marathon are building houses in their minds and thinking about 
how people are going to be so surprised that they're in a marathon. But the 
elite runner is really working on the ingredients that fine-tune his running." 
In competitive team sports, where the mind must stay focused even in practice, 
that discipline often remains, even in repetitive training, two Los Angeles 
Rams said. 
"It depends on how you feel about your body," said safety Vince Newsome. "If 
you don't care too much about it, you don't have to work out as hard and you 
can let your mind wander. But for an athlete, even if you don't have to 
concentrate on what you're doing, somewhere in the back of your mind you're 
always kind of concerned, because you don't want to get terribly out of shape." 
During heavy training, said linebacker Brett Faryniarz, "you concentrate on 
what you're doing. You have to concentrate when you're working with weights if 
you want the results." 
Still, said Newsome, "your mind can go off different places and can either help 
you with your lifting or it can hurt you. When some people lift, they think 
about their opponent, but some think about a problem they're having at home. 
Each individual has his own method or thought process." 
Sometimes, Evans said, a little artificial stimulus to the imagination can't 
hurt: "You'll see a lot of swimmers listening to Walkmans before they swim. 
They'll be fast songs that are kind of uplifting. In the race, your mind will 
be focused the whole time, but there'll be this song you'll be singing in your 
head. Swimmers will talk to each other later and say, 'Hey, guess what song I 
was singing during that race.' It's really weird." 
Sometimes it's necessary to keep the mind engaged for no other reason than 
one's personal safety. 
Bill Leach of Irvine, who competed with his wife, Julie, in kayaking events at 
the Montreal Olympic Games in 1976 and now competes in triathlons, warned that 
"it's very scary to let your mind wander when you're on a bike, because you 
could end up having a crash. Sometimes you have to almost force yourself to pay 
attention." 
John Rosmus, of Fullerton, an ultra-long-distance runner who completed 65 miles 
of a 125-mile dash across Death Valley early this summer, said that in 
potentially dangerous situations, "you pretty much think about what's going on 
inside your body and how you're feeling from mile to mile. You think about 
where the next aid is coming up. You're monitoring yourself. 
"You have to keep your mind on the trail and watch for rocks and things," said 
Rosmus, who intends to try his trans-desert transit again. "Otherwise you'll be 
falling all over the place." 
Still, said Rosmus, when the path levels and grows monotonous, "you think about 
things that are just off the wall, just day-to-day things. Sometimes you can't 
figure out what you've seen in the last 10 miles. You've covered the ground but 
you don't know how you've gotten there." 
That sort of fatigue, Evans said, can cause the mind to wander as easily as the 
more relaxing atmosphere of an easy workout: "During a really hard set, where 
we've been going for a long time at about 95% or 100% effort, you have to get 
your mind off swimming and you can get these random thoughts. It's almost like 
you're delirious." 
In extremely long, sustained efforts, Rushall said it is essential for athletes 
to pull their minds away from the task, at least for a while. In advising 
competitors in the grueling Iditarod sled dog races in Alaska, Rushall suggests 
that they think about "how their sled is running, how the dogs are doing. But 
when they come to, say, an eight-mile flat stretch they should disassociate, 
take a mental vacation. They should think of how beautiful the scenery is and 
how it's quite a nice place to be and break off from the sled racing itself." 
The ability to disassociate doesn't come instantly, Shorter said. Those who are 
out of shape, when embarking on a repetitive training regimen, won't be 
thinking about twittering birds and sylvan glades after a mile or so. 
They will be thinking about fatigue. 
"If you're not in good shape to begin with, there's an intellectualization that 
you have to go through," Shorter said. "You have to rely on faith. It's that 
faith that will take you through those first two months to the point where 
it'll be more enjoyable. There's a certain base level of conditioning that you 
have to get to before you can start to not think too much about what's going 
on." 
When Julie Leach of Irvine reached that stage, she went straight past it, into 
the realm in which she concentrated on every aspect of her workout, not only 
for kayaking but for triathlons. She got so good at it that she won the women's 
division of the Ironman Triathlon in Hawaii in 1982. Today she is a 
recreational runner and cyclist. 
In recreational efforts, she said, "you don't need to concentrate on the 
workout and be really serious about it. You can be imaginative. My advice would 
be not to concentrate on things like 'This really hurts' or 'This is really 
hard.' You can mentally control yourself so much by what you suggest to 
yourself." 
And with such thoughts, said her husband Bill, comes the real payoff -- those 
times when the mind is freewheeling, at peace "and you're really relaxed. The 
time goes by and you're not conscious of it. You feel very comfortable. It's 
those times you relish, because that's what it's all about. You're looking for 
that feeling of effortless effort. It's a feeling that's almost euphoric. It's 
almost a bigger-than-life feeling." 
