S.F. DISASTER JOLTS OFFICIALS IN MEMPHIS INTO PREPARING FOR THEIR OWN BIG ONE; 
EARTHQUAKES: EXPERTS WARN THAT A MAJOR TEMBLOR IS ON THE WAY. BUT A FIGHT LOOMS 
OVER NEW BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS. 
If The King ever does show up back here in his hometown, he'd better be 
careful. Graceland hasn't been earthquake-proofed. 
But Elvis Presley's old mansion -- the biggest tourist attraction in this city 
along the Mississippi River -- is hardly alone. 
Nothing else in Memphis is ready for the Big One either, even though this city 
lies close to the site of the most powerful earthquake in American history and 
sits almost directly atop one of the biggest earthquake fault lines in the 
United States. 
Memphis -- like most cities in the central United States -- has no building 
code requirements to guard against earthquakes. Developers in Memphis have been 
successfully fighting such "seismic" building code requirements for years, 
arguing that they would add huge costs to new construction while protecting 
against a threat of which most here are only dimly aware. 
Only now, in the wake of the World Series quake in San Francisco, has the 
seismic code issue been revived. After inspecting the damage to the Bay Area, 
Memphis Mayor Richard Hackett returned home and announced he would push a 
long-delayed seismic code into law by the end of the year. 
"It'll be a tough one to sell, it won't be politically popular," Hackett 
spokesman Ray Pohlman admitted. 
"It's never been a hot issue before. But the San Francisco quake is forcing it 
to be a big issue now." 
The new code may come just in time, earthquake experts here say. 
A serious earthquake in Memphis is on the way -- and soon -- seismologists 
warn. 
In fact, Memphis is at greater risk of suffering a major earthquake sometime in 
the next few years than any other urban area in the eastern half of the United 
States. There is a 40% to 63% probability that a quake of at least 6.0 
magnitude will hit Memphis within the next 15 years, according to Arch 
Johnston, director of the Center for Earthquake Research at Memphis State 
University. 
Yet, today, the city is almost completely unprepared for it. "Our risk to 
people and buildings from an earthquake is high . . . because we've taken 
virtually no precautions here," Johnston warned. He added that most public 
schools in the city are built of "old, unreinforced masonry, which engineers 
will tell you is the worst possible construction in the event of an earthquake. 
If we had a quake during the school day, many of our casualties would be 
children." 
The complacency about earthquakes in Memphis reflects a broader sense among 
most Americans that only Californians need worry about quakes. But, although 
California rightly grabs the headlines as America's earthquake capital, other 
regions of the nation are hardly immune. 
"If you asked people in Memphis where earthquakes occur, they would say 
California," noted Harvey Ryland, executive director of the Memphis-based 
Central States Earthquake Consortium, which was formed in 1983 to increase 
awareness among builders and residents in seven central states of the threat 
from earthquakes. "Most of them don't know (earthquakes) can happen right here 
in their own back yards." 
Indeed, the most powerful earthquakes ever to hit the continental United States 
happened here in the Mississippi River Valley, along what seismologists have 
dubbed the New Madrid Fault. 
Three quakes, with an epicenter near the small farming town of New Madrid, Mo., 
about 70 miles north of Memphis on the Mississippi River, hit in rapid 
succession during the winter of 1811-1812 with more fury than the 1906 quake 
that devastated San Francisco. 
The quakes -- estimated to have been between 8.6 and 8.9 magnitude -- packed 
such force that they briefly reversed the course of the Mississippi, created a 
major new lake that still exists, rang church bells in Boston and knocked down 
construction scaffolding around the Capitol in Washington. The tremors could be 
felt over 1 million square miles. 
"All nature seemed running into chaos," recalled one Frenchmen who was 
traveling down the Mississippi when the first earthquake hit in December, 1811. 
Throughout the winter in New Madrid, the ground shook incessantly, "like the 
flesh of a beef just killed," wrote one resident. 
But the area was so sparsely populated then that only a few people were killed 
-- mostly passengers on small boats swallowed up by the raging river -- and the 
region hasn't been hit by a comparable quake since. 
So, although less severe quakes, at 5.0 or below, occur regularly -- about 200 
barely detectable quakes hit along the New Madrid Fault each year -- few people 
in the Memphis area take the threat of a major quake seriously. 
"There's no memory of a big quake here, that's the problem," said Jeff 
Crenshaw, director of the Memphis-Shelby County Emergency Management Agency. 
"Our problem is that we don't have them often enough for people to know what to 
do." 
As a result, a quake in Memphis like the one that recently hit the Bay Area 
could lead to a greater loss of life, because people don't know what to do and 
buildings haven't been reinforced. In addition, the damage here would extend 
over a larger region, because of the Mississippi River Valley's soft soil, 
which transmits seismic energy more easily than does the thick rock just below 
the surface in California. 
The San Francisco quake has led political leaders here to start taking 
earthquake warnings seriously. Earlier this week, Rep. Harold E. Ford (D-Tenn.) 
wrote a letter to Mayor Hackett calling for a halt in the construction of the 
"Great American Pyramid," Memphis' huge new pyramid-shaped sports complex, 
until it can be earthquake-proofed. 
"It's tragic, but the San Francisco quake has done more to make people aware of 
the threat than anything else," Crenshaw observed. "Now, I'm getting calls from 
the City Council members saying they want to support us" in earthquake 
preparations. 
