ASK THE JUDGE: CHILD'S VIEWS ON PARENTS VISITATION RIGHTS WEIGHED 
Q. I am divorced and have two teen-age sons, ages 15 and 16, who are doing very 
well academically and socially with both peers and adults. The oldest is 
working and driving his own car. They have had a rocky time with their father 
over the past five years. 
Recently, I was served with papers to increase their father's visitation 
rights. Neither of the boys want to see their father more often. Should the 
boys go to court on the date set for hearing, and how can these orders be 
enforced with such independent young adults? 
SH, 
Costa Mesa 
A. Your question is one that is frequently asked. Your sons should be present 
at the hearing because the court is required to consider the wishes of a child 
and give it "due weight" if the child is of "sufficient age and capacity to 
reason so as to form an intelligent preference as to custody." 
There is no magic age as to when a child will be considered capable of making 
such an intelligent decision. Generally, the older the child, the more weight 
will be given to his wishes, although this is not a fast rule. 
Your sons, however, being 15 and 16 years of age, are old enough that they 
should be able to articulate their feelings and desires to the court. 
Generally, most courts would consider the wishes of children their age very 
seriously. 
Q. I am a divorced man and am living with my girlfriend. We have an agreement 
that all expenses such as rent and food are shared equally. 
My ex-wife heard about this and has now threatened to ask the court to raise 
the amount of child support I pay for our child. She says that since I am 
saving money by having a roommate, I should pay more to her for our child. Does 
this make sense? 
P.C., 
Tustin 
A. The law shares her point of view, agreeing that if a non-marital partner is 
contributing to your living expenses, that person's income must be considered 
to the extent that it reduces those expenses. The reasoning behind this is that 
since your expenses have been reduced, you therefore have more money to spend 
on your child. 
B. Tam Nomoto, an Orange County Municipal Court judge, answers readers' 
questions about the law. Ask the Judge runs every other Saturday in Orange 
County Life. 
