COMPTON SCHOOLS LAUNCH EXPERIMENT TO REDUCE DROPOUTS 
Targeting children as young as 5, the Compton Unified School District on 
Tuesday joined with the private, nonprofit group California Tomorrow and three 
area colleges in an unusual, five-year experiment aimed at lowering high school 
dropout rates. 
Key to the project, which also involves Cal State Dominguez Hills, UC Irvine 
and Compton Community College, is a sustained effort to boost parents' 
involvement in their youngsters' education through workshops, a drop-in center 
and, eventually, a "parent leadership institute." Although educators have 
widely discussed the need for early intervention to stem the dropout rate, few 
projects have involved children so young. 
Begun for Ronald E. McNair Elementary School pupils in kindergarten through 
fifth grade who already have been identified as probable dropouts by the time 
they reach high school, the project will be expanded within five years to all 
the district's elementary schools. Eventually, the district and California 
Tomorrow officials hope that the Parent Education and Leadership Program will 
become a model for other school districts. 
In Orange County, Rancho Santiago College formed a partnership with the Santa 
Ana Unified School District to combat dropouts through a variety of programs, 
including working with very young children. Henry Kertman, spokesman for the 
college, said he believes it is the only partnership in the county that 
involves elementary schools and colleges. 
Three years ago, Rancho Santiago adopted Wilson Elementary School in Santa Ana 
as part of the program. For example, the college conducts a program of career 
days at Wilson, where professionals in various fields came to talk with the 
school's youngest students about professional goals and careers. 
"The potential in this unique partnership to truly impact and enhance the 
educational experiences of these young children is almost limitless," said Judy 
Chitlik, an English instructor at the college who chairs the partnership. 
In the Compton program, California Tomorrow, a statewide organization that 
conducts research and sponsors programs focusing on multicultural issues, is 
picking up the program costs -- $95,000 in the first year -- through several 
grants from private foundations. 
"We're working on ways to close the gap between the families and the school 
system," said Linda J. Wong, executive director of California Tomorrow. 
The first phase of the experiment is an eight-week series of Saturday 
workshops, beginning this week, for 25 parents of children deemed "at risk" of 
becoming dropouts. The workshops, to be conducted in English and Spanish, 
include training in such areas as parenting skills, legal issues facing 
low-income families and how to evaluate children's academic performance. Free 
child care will be provided. 
Leadership Development 
Project leaders sent notices, made phone calls and even went door-to-door to 
bring parents into the program. A Tuesday night reception to explain the 
program was expected to draw 100 parents. 
Project director Rhonda Trotter said a drop-in center for parents will open in 
mid-November on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons. The center will provide 
referrals to community service agencies for help with such problems as job 
training, health care and housing as well as counseling for troubled children. 
Beginning next March, the project will sponsor a leadership development 
institute for parents to help them learn to become effective school and 
community leaders, Trotter said. 
The three colleges involved will help evaluate the program, track the 
youngsters' progress and encourage the students to continue their educations 
after high school graduation, Wong said. 
James Catterall, an associate professor of education at UCLA and an expert on 
the nation's dropout problem, said the Compton project "sounds more 
comprehensive" than similar approaches tried in other districts. 
He said that, while many educators have advocated starting earlier dropout 
intervention programs, few have actually done so. 
Noting that it is "hard to connect with many of these parents," Catterall 
cautioned that the program will need strong resources to succeed and must be 
scrupulously evaluated before it can be of use to other districts with similar 
problems. 
With a dropout rate hovering around 30%, Compton is comparable to the state's 
other urban districts with predominantly poor, minority students, according to 
the state Department of Education. Statewide, the dropout average is 22%, while 
the Los Angeles Unified School District has a rate of 39%. 
In Orange County, the dropout rate is 16.9%. But recent state figures showed 
that for Latinos the rate is more than twice as high as it is for Anglo 
students -- 33% compared to 13% -- and it has prompted educators here to look 
for programs aimed at that population. The Santa Ana district, where Latinos 
make up more than 70% of the student enrollment, has instituted a variety of 
programs, such as the partnership with Rancho Santiago, that attempt to target 
young Latinos. 
The Compton district's approximately 29,000 students are almost evenly divided 
between blacks and Latinos (49% and 48%, respectively). The rest are of Samoan 
or other Pacific Islander backgrounds, according to Deputy Supt. Elisa Sanchez. 
The proportion of Latinos in the district is expected to grow dramatically, 
Sanchez said. Furthermore, the district's population has a high rate of 
transiency -- some schools in the district had pupil turnover rates as high as 
80% during a single school year. 
Ask McNair counselor Mae Lockheart how she can identify the young children who 
are likely to drop out of high school and she ticks off a list of sure signals: 
poor attendance records, working below grade level, having trouble getting 
along with teachers and other pupils. 
As someone who has specialized for several years in working with these 
children, Lockheart is convinced that the new program is on target. 
"I believe that parent involvement is very important," Lockheart said. "It 
motivates a child like nobody else can." 
And for parent Shawn Louis, who has three children at McNair and is a member of 
the district's advisory council, the project offers the best hope of "seeing 
more parents and the Compton community involved. . . . We're hoping to see a 
much brighter picture." 
Staff writer Maria Newman in Orange County contributed to this story. 
BACKGROUND 
School districts throughout the nation have been experimenting with ways to cut 
high school dropout rates, which are particularly high in urban districts. Some 
components of the Compton project, such as early intervention and increased 
parent involvement, have been tried in other districts, but many such programs 
have lacked adequate resources or enough evaluation to enable them to succeed 
or to be widely applied. 
