AROUND THE FOOTHILLS: IT'S LIKE KINDERGARTEN FOR MATURE ADULTS. 
Sourik Avedissian met his tutor Monday afternoon in a sweltering classroom in 
south Glendale. 
In an hour and a half with her, he breezed through his ABCs, learned how to 
say, "My name is Sourik" and made her understand that he has two 
granddaughters, ages 4 and 9. 
He also managed to communicate more difficult ideas with hand signals, props 
and a few English words: He came from Iran on Dec. 17, 1988, by air. Back home, 
he worked in a shop, cutting wood on a machine. He drew a picture that looked 
like a band saw and demonstrated, adding a sawing noise with his tongue, how he 
would make seven precise cuts in whatever it was he manufactured. 
For now, that's all there is to know about Avedissian, except that he sits 
formally in a chair, dresses in an Old World way -- he wore an open brown shirt 
with a kind of key design -- has a letter tattooed on each finger of his left 
hand and seems pleased that Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini is dead. He showed his 
feeling by drawing the side of his flattened hand across his throat. 
Surely, by the end of the semester, Avedissian will be able to tell wonderful 
tales to his tutor, Karen King. But first the two of them will spend many hours 
working over the plastic alphabet she bought at Pic 'N' Save. 
It's one of the primary tools of the English-as-a-second-language volunteer. 
King is one of about 60 volunteers who meet privately with recent immigrants 
enrolled in the non-credit program at Glendale Community College. It has 2,500 
students learning English at six sites around Glendale. About 100 are matched 
up with tutors. 
Like her students, she is middle-aged. She has a career, as fund-raiser and 
publicist for the St. Barnabas Senior Citizens Center near MacArthur Park. She 
tutors after work, on her way home to Eagle Rock. 
She became a volunteer on a whim. She saw a notice in the Glendale College 
bulletin and signed up for a 10-hour tutoring class. 
"I thought it could be interesting," she said. "I went to the class and I was 
hooked." 
There is an offbeat appeal to what she does. It's like kindergarten for mature 
adults. 
Her class, which had two students Monday and may grow to as many as four, is 
for those who are at the bottom of Level 1. She calls it the minus Level 1 
group. 
"I get from that group the ones who need even more, more help," she said. "My 
goal is to get them into Level 2." 
King meets with the students Monday and Wednesday afternoons for 90 minutes at 
the college's Adult Learning Center, which opened this semester on Garfield 
Avenue near Chevy Chase Drive. The students also go to class three hours a day, 
four days each week. Some double up, taking six hours a day. 
King's goal is to teach speaking, reading and writing. 
"I put a little more emphasis on speaking because it is a survival skill," she 
said. "They want to know how to speak right now." 
She began the session Monday with the family tree, illustrated with stick 
figures drawn in red marker on a sheet of paper. 
King's other student, Vartoosh Alexanian, had done hers last semester and 
easily pointed out her four children and seven grandchildren. 
King drew a male figure, representing Avedissian. Then she drew a female. 
"Do you have a wife?" 
"Ah, madame," he said, nodding. 
When Avedissian got tied up in the third generation, unable to explain whether 
his two sons each had a daughter or one of them had both grandchildren, 
Alexanian tried to interject a hint in Armenian. 
"Vartoosh!" King exclaimed in mock reproach. She gave her the sign to zip her 
lip. 
King then took the fluorescent-colored alphabet from a zip-lock bag. She spread 
the letters on a tiny table around which she and the two students sat. She 
asked them to organize the letters, which they did almost without help. 
Reading them was more difficult. Neither Avedissian nor Alexanian could 
differentiate entirely between the names and the sounds. 
"What is the name?" King asked, pointing to an M. 
"Ma," Avedissian answered. 
"That's the sound," she said. "Em." 
"Em," he would repeat. 
King finally stopped the exercise short of perfection when fatigue and 
confusion seemed to interfere. 
The triumph of the day was with the personal possessive pronoun, though they 
didn't call it that. 
"What is my name?" King asked Avedissian. She beckoned with her upturned palm 
to indicate she wanted him to answer. 
"My name is Kara?" he said gravely. 
King turned to Alexanian, who smoothly handled "my," "your" and "his," though 
she sometimes dropped the verb. 
Avedissian tried again and got it almost right. 
"Good, you did it," King said. 
She urged them both to practice at home. Alexanian laughed bashfully and made 
an excuse. 
"Busy," she said. "Home much busy. Children, vacuum, wash, cook. . . ." She 
struggled for another word. 
King pantomimed and had her repeat a new word, ironing. 
