ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO; 
DEVELOPER MAY GET BACK SOME DIG FUNDS 
A developer who spent thousands of dollars on city-ordered archeological digs 
before putting up a new development in the historic downtown area should be 
reimbursed part of the money, a city official has proposed. 
City Manager Stephen B. Julian, in a recommendation that will go before the 
City Council tonight, said that developer Paul L. Farber &amp; Associates 
should be reimbursed $277,365 because the archeological investigations were 
ordered by the city before work could begin on the controversial Franciscan 
Plaza development. 
Farber spent $379,047 to pay for the underground exploration before he was 
allowed to build the 18,000-square-foot, upscale plaza that includes 
restaurants, boutiques and a five-screen cinema. Construction was also delayed 
by nine months because of the study, he said. 
The Spanish-style plaza at the corner of Verdugo Street and Camino Capistrano 
will be open by Christmas, Farber said Monday. 
As part of the proposed reimbursement deal that the City Council will consider 
tonight, Julian will also suggest that all artifacts that were uncovered at the 
Franciscan Plaza be turned over to the Community Redevelopment Agency. 
The historic finds include foundations from the former Valenzuela family adobe 
house, believed to date back to the early 1800s, and foundations from the Juan 
Avila adobe, built in the 1840s and destroyed by fire in 1879. Other artifacts 
documented by archeologists were a 1904 eagle nickel and old religious medals. 
"Legally, there are limits to what you can ask a developer to do," Julian said, 
explaining why the city is offering to reimburse Farber. "The costs associated 
with the archeology work were extraordinary." 
If the reimbursement package is approved, the redevelopment agency would pay 
50% of the amount Farber spent in testing the site and 75% of what he will 
spend to preserve the finds. State law requires cities to reimburse developers 
a maximum of 50% of the costs associated with archeology. 
"I think it's very fair," Farber said of the arrangement for the city to own 
the resources earmarked for display in his shopping center. 
"The findings should belong to the community and not to a developer," Farber 
added. "Hopefully, someday, they can be displayed in a museum. I'm very happy 
to hand them over." 
The proposed agreement between the city and Farber would also give the city 
control of 131 parking spaces in a four-level structure adjacent to the plaza. 
The spaces would be available during the day to rail commuters using the nearby 
Capistrano Depot. WENDY PAULSON 
