FOCUS ON THE NEW GERMANY; 
REGIONAL OUTLOOK; 
OLD FEARS AWAIT THE COMING OF ONE GERMANY 
" . . . We remember the unending suffering that has been brought on people in 
the name of Germans. We remember all the victims of war and tyranny. We unite 
with the will that all this never again be allowed to happen." 
 -- West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher speaking in Parliament 
during the Sept. 20 unification debate. 
The teen-age faces were as bright and hopeful as the morning outside, yet the 
words of those who spoke were hedged with doubt. 
Two generations removed from the weight of the Holocaust and the Nazi 
occupation of their country, the Dutch students discussing German unity had no 
fear that a united, democratic Germany might somehow resume its military 
aggression. 
Instead, the concern was more subtle. It was there, but ill-focused. 
"I don't see the Germans as enemies, and I don't think there is going to be 
another war," said Minke de Vroomen, 19, before pausing to add, "But now that 
Germany is becoming one, it's a little worrying." 
The words -- "a little worrying" -- capture the main thread of a remarkably 
broad mix of emotions that flow through Europe on the eve of a new era -- an 
era where an anxious Continent once again hitches its fate to a powerful, fully 
sovereign Germany. 
From the enfant terrible of the French Establishment, Alain Minc, who argues in 
favor of arming a united Germany with nuclear weapons, to the anguished voices 
of the German left, who insist that history and Auschwitz cry out against unity 
of any kind, the Continent braces itself to receive the new nation about to be 
born. 
No one disputes that the new Germany is far different from the nation that 
twice this century took the world to war. 
Germany today is prosperous, confident and, above all, democratic. The 
awareness of both past misdeeds and future responsibilities is enshrined in the 
preamble to the unification treaty and has become a litany in public speeches. 
The conditions surrounding the new Germany's arrival also give reason for hope. 
The nation has no outstanding territorial disputes, it has unilaterally 
renounced nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and has begun a 
self-proposed, self-imposed military manpower cut of 40% to 370,000. 
It begins life in a peaceful, optimistic Europe, firmly anchored in the 
Atlantic Alliance and the European Community, and richer than ever before in 
the Western values of rationalism, pragmatism and egalitarianism. 
"Forty years have brought enormous change," said former Chancellor Helmut 
Schmidt during an interview. "Democracy is deeply rooted in the German 
Parliament. It's not just lip service. They have understood and taken to heart 
how a democracy works." 
But if such ideal conditions prevail, why do doubts about Germany persist? 
Why does Newsweek publish stories under the headlines "Can Germany Be 
Contained?" and (from a German contributor) "We Can Be Trusted"? 
Why does British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher describe German unification 
as "something we'll have to cope with," and why does one of her Cabinet 
ministers openly accuse Germany of trying to dominate Europe? 
Why did the collapse of the Berlin Wall last November prompt a European 
Commission member in Brussels to launch into an anti-German tirade during an 
off-the-record meeting with a group of reporters, or inspire a Dutch comedian 
to suggest that his government might do well to buy the wall and erect it along 
the Dutch-German frontier? 
Size alone explains part of it. 
From this small Dutch administrative town 25 miles north of Amsterdam, a united 
Germany that is more than half again the population of France or Britain is 
Europe's acknowledged economic powerhouse, and, at birth, is the world's No. 1 
trading nation (ahead of the United States and Japan), seems somehow 
frighteningly large. 
"We know we are completely dependent on Germany," said Ilja Roobeek, an 
18-year-old Dutch student. 
History, too, lingers. 
The fact that Norway this year finally relented and allowed German military 
forces to be part of annual Western alliance maneuvers for the first time since 
the war; that officials of European Community nations have given up 
guilt-tripping their German colleagues as a way to leverage more money, and 
that a recent sampling of French opinion found that if a daughter were to marry 
a non-Frenchman, the overwhelming majority of families would prefer a German 
son-in-law -- all this reflects the healing process. 
Yet the wound itself remains. 
"Memories (of the Nazi occupation) are still there," said Norwegian Foreign 
Ministry spokeswoman Mette Owre, explaining the public resistance to the 
participation of German forces in northern Norway maneuvers earlier this year. 
"Emotions are weaker now, but it is still hard." 
There is, however, an additional dimension to Europe's wariness: an uneasy 
suspicion that, for all their postwar success and commitment to the future, the 
Germans remain an unpredictable people, capable of being blown off course with 
frightening speed. 
The shadow of the Third Reich may have faded, but when events in Europe turn 
tricky, the same question invariably percolates to the surface: Can we count on 
the Germans? 
"We Germans remain an endangered people," said Schmidt in the final chapter of 
his recently published book, "Germany and Her Neighbors." "Not because of any 
external threat; there's no fear of that at present. But because of our 
tendency to nervousness, overreaction and arrogance. These tendencies have 
often led us astray in the past." 
Schmidt elaborated on this German volatility not with an anecdote from an 
earlier age, but by citing an example 30 years into Germany's postwar 
democratic experience: the explosive growth and subsequent rapid decline of a 
peace movement whose strength threatened to overturn the decision to station 
U.S. medium-range nuclear missiles in West Germany during the late 1970s and 
early 1980s. 
"It just flared up," he said. "It misled people outside of Germany. They 
thought we'd be too weak to carry that decision out. It misled (former Soviet 
leader Leonid I.) Brezhnev and (former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A.) 
Gromyko. Doubt also grew in the West that they could rely on the Germans." 
From his 13th-floor office overlooking Brussels, Germany's senior European 
Community representative, European Commission Vice President Martin Bangemann, 
addressed the same point. 
"It is true that there's a great deal of emotion and nervousness in German 
society, much of it reinforced by the media," he said. "But this doesn't make 
us more dangerous (to others). It makes us weaker. We are much more dangerous 
to ourselves than others." 
While the Germans are certainly not the only people in Europe with such 
cultural traits, their collective power and geographical position set them 
apart. 
A united Germany, for example, shares its borders with nine other countries. 
Only China and the Soviet Union have more neighbors. 
While Europeans can view instability in, say, Greece, Portugal or Denmark with 
a certain detachment, mood swings in Germany make them jumpy. 
"If we are successful, they are afraid we will become too successful; if we are 
unhappy, they are afraid we'll become too unhappy," said Schmidt. "Due to its 
geographical position in the middle of Europe and the fact it's a country of 80 
million people, Germany is always going to give some concern to its neighbors." 
The German propensity for volatility precedes the tragedies of this century. 
French social observer Alexis de Tocqueville, after dissecting the Americans in 
the 1830s, went on to single out France's eastern neighbor, noting in a letter 
to a friend that "alone in Europe, the Germans possess the particular talent of 
becoming obsessed with what they take as abstract truths without considering 
their practical consequences." 
A century later, in the ashes of the Third Reich, the respected early postwar 
German scholar Friedrich Meinecke made a similar, rueful assessment that German 
temperament had always contained "a stormy inclination to rise up suddenly from 
the limitations of the reality that surrounded it. . . . " 
As a new Germany embarks on the daunting challenge of rebuilding its eastern 
half, outsiders fret over how its democracy will resist such inclinations as it 
moves into the troubled, uncharted waters that seem certain to accompany the 
early years of unification. 
Where compassion, flexibility, patience and innovation are needed now as never 
before in absorbing an emotionally shattered East German population, many see a 
culture overly seasoned with bureaucratic rigidity, preoccupied by the need for 
order and marked by an insensitivity that frequently spills over into 
arrogance. 
"I don't believe in the fated nature of people; it is a form of racism to 
accept this idea of determination of a people," said Simone Veil, who survived 
Auschwitz to become one of France's most prominent and influential postwar 
political figures. "On the other hand, the caricatures often conform to 
reality. For the Germans, this is discipline, respect for authority and 
efficiency." 
In the years of Western Europe's postwar recovery, these strengths first 
propelled West Germany's Wirtschaftswunder, then enabled the country to remain 
the Continent's strongest economy. 
West Germans may lament an erosion in their own work ethic and complain that 
East Germans are lazy, but the fact remains that West Germans maintain one of 
the world's highest industrial productivity rates, and statistics show that the 
East German worker outperformed his counterparts in all the former Communist 
Bloc nations. 
Indeed, the director of the respected Allensbach Institute, Elizabeth 
Noelle-Neumann, cited the unusual relationship to work as one of the common 
elements bonding the two Germanys. 
Amid the growing disorder of his own surroundings, a Soviet foreign affairs 
adviser and Germany expert, Vyacheslav Dashichev, sat in his modest Moscow 
office, rejected the notion of national character, but then almost wistfully 
reeled off a string of adjectives he associated with Germans -- "knowledgeable, 
diligent, hard-working, disciplined, conscientious, responsible, punctual." 
Added Paul Percie du Sert, commercial director of France's Renault Corp., "The 
principal quality of the Germans is their sense of organization. We have 
learned a lot from our contact with them." 
This curious German yearning for order and implicit acceptance of the rules 
needed to enforce it may have been diluted by 40 years of freewheeling 
democracy, but these traits still strike outsiders as unusually strong. 
How else can one explain the well-dressed Berlin woman standing stoically in a 
downpour at a traffic light, waiting patiently for green, even though there are 
no cars in sight? Or the shout of reproach at the foreigner who dares consider 
his options and cross on red? Or the intolerant scream from a cyclist in Berlin 
as he passes a Polish shopper, laden with freshly purchased goods, who has 
inadvertently strayed into the bicycle lane? 
In modern Germany, a fine-tuned, seemingly infinite set of petty laws still set 
the rhythm of life within carefully erected bureaucratic boundaries. 
The government decides when a person can cut his lawn, beat a carpet, when he 
can begin clearing his sidewalk of snow and when he must finish. It even 
intrudes in such intimate personal choices as the naming of a newborn child. 
A Frankfurt couple several years ago were blocked by a court from naming their 
newborn after Schroeder, a character in the "Peanuts" cartoon strip, because 
the name was not on a government-approved list. 
"Names help create a certain order," explained a local government bureaucrat at 
the time. "If a name is on a list and nobody knows if it's a man or woman, then 
difficulties can arise." 
After obtaining the required government -- yes, government -- permission to 
hook up a telephone answering machine, customers get a two-page written 
statement from the telephone authorities laying out exactly what is and what is 
not permitted on the recorded message. (The words "automatic answering 
machine," for example, must be used, while a closing statement is also required 
(although the wording "thank you," while officially recommended, is optional). 
Germans also seem to feel a special need for enforcement. 
An American who inadvertently parked in a West Berlin apartment house driveway 
recently found that residents had not only called the police but had also 
surrounded the vehicle to prevent any premature escape by the offender. 
Following a lengthy discussion about the similarities between the Dutch and the 
Germans, Henk van Dijk, a historian at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, noted 
one glaring difference: Unlike the Dutch, he said, the Germans lack any 
inherent mistrust of state authority. 
The close link between individual and state is steeped in Prussian tradition, 
he explained, and was a jumping-off point for German philosophers such as 
Friedrich Hegel in developing the idea that the whole of a state is greater 
than the sum of its individuals. 
"The state has always taken care of people; they expect it," noted Ralf 
Dahrendorf, German-born warden of Oxford University's St. Antony's College and 
a respected social scientist. "Germany is the exact opposite of the United 
States, which began as a very different society where it was hard to find a 
government at all." 
While the undertone of intolerance and inflexibility inherent in such order is 
something that worries both Germans and outsiders as the country confronts its 
new challenges, there is a widespread conviction that the exposure to Western 
values, and the high degree of Germany's economic, social and political 
integration among Western nations, collectively provide an important damping 
effect on the German national mood. 
"I can see all the 'buts,' but you need to take the long view, I am confident 
about Germany's future," said Dahrendorf. "If there is ever a country that has 
really changed, it is West Germany." 
Others agree. 
"The people in Germany today are totally different that the people I witnessed 
here as a young man," noted Ernst Cramer, the 77-year-old deputy supervisory 
board chairman of Germany's Axel Springer publishing empire, a Jew who survived 
Buchenwald. "Younger people are outward-looking, exposed to all sorts of ideas, 
and react to events in the same way as someone in London, Paris or Los Angeles. 
After the last war, we've created an internationally minded society." 
Commented Juergen Kocka, a historian at Berlin's Free University: "The question 
now is what unity means. Will it modify or relativize this deep break (from the 
past)? After all, we are getting 16 million who have had six decades of 
dictatorship without a democratic role model. 
"West Germany had become a 'post-Sonderweg' Germany," he added, using the word 
that has come to denote Germany's "special way," the political path that has 
led it to such tragedy in the past. "Now we are getting a new mix. There is a 
certain uncertainty, but I'm optimistic." 
For outside observers, the future level of anxiety about the Germans is 
expected to turn largely on two key issues: 
* How Germany's highly prosperous western half revives and integrates an 
outmoded East German economy and absorbs an additional 16 million souls who 
have no collective democratic experience. 
* How strong a united Germany's commitment remains both to the dream of an 
economic and political union among the 12-nation European Community and to its 
three pivotal European bilateral relationships with France, Poland and the 
Soviet Union. 
European worries about the depth of this commitment were initially eased by 
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's forceful reaffirmation of faith in the 
idea of European unity twice in the months after the fall of the Berlin Wall, 
and by Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher's oft-stated goal of building a 
"European Germany rather than a German Europe." 
However, recent developments have brought questions. 
Both the tone and content of Kohl's refusal to go along with French President 
Francois Mitterrand's request at a Franco-German summit last month in Munich to 
pin down the timing of European economic and monetary union, coupled with 
recent cautionary comments by Federal Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl on 
the same issue, have brought tugs of doubt in Brussels, but so far no panic. 
"The general feeling is the German commitment is still there," said Stanley 
Crossick, a respected, Brussels-based political consultant. 
The Munich performance reflects both a personal chill between Kohl and 
Mitterrand and the tough French adjustment that unification has meant for a 
Franco-German relationship that is central to the drive for greater European 
integration. 
Germany's ties with both the Soviet Union and Poland, on the other hand, seem 
rich in potential, and there are signs that economic necessity may help 
overcome the suspicions of the past. It was a senior Soviet official who 
recently proposed that Germany should be the sixth permanent member of the U.N. 
Security Council. 
Last month's Soviet-German friendship treaty left relations between Europe's 
two largest nations better than at any time in memory, while Warsaw still 
struggles to overcome a visceral nervousness that has come with unity. 
Writing in the Solidarity Weekly recently, writer Jan Rylukowski urged Poles to 
break "the psychological barriers" against cooperation with Germany, arguing 
that Poland's links to Western Europe begin with the Germans. 
For many, however, it is the problems of East Germany that represent the real 
test of the health and spirit of the newly united country. 
West Germans, who have built their prosperity on hard work and well-proven 
conservative policies, must for the first time venture into the economic 
unknown to do something no one has ever done: rebuild a Communist economy. 
East Germany's downward spiral threatens to throw as many as 4 million out of 
work -- a full quarter of the population -- sap the morale of the entire region 
and spawn a discontent that could test the stability and fabric of German 
democracy to new limits. 
There are those who fear that if East Germans, who already feel that the 
political left has failed them, suddenly see themselves equally let down by a 
democratic free-market system, they might seek refuge in the extreme right. 
West Germans find themselves tested in other ways, such as in the delicate task 
of knitting together two German peoples who at times seem to have more traits 
that separate them than they have in common. 
In what is more of a West German takeover of the east than a genuine merger, 
the spirit of unification could be influenced by the westerners' ability to 
restrain a victor's mentality so visible in many of their initial contacts with 
the east. 
The way in which many West Germans have pursued property claims in the east or 
the offhand remark by Dionys Jobst, chairman of the West German Parliament's 
transportation commission, that all East German drivers need to go back to 
driving school are only two such examples. 
So far, the West German public seems preoccupied with the costs, not the 
potential benefits, of unity. 
Respected West German newspaper columnist Herbert Kremp recently described his 
countrymen's equivocal commitment to rescue their East German cousins from 
economic collapse as akin to passengers on a luxury liner who, when forced to 
stop for a capsized ship, "lean over the rail to take part in rescuing the 
survivors, but at the same time admonish the captain not to get so close that 
he brings his own ship in danger and that, above all, he quickly continues the 
cruise." 
This sense of detachment may be depressing for those in search of a greater 
national spirit and generosity, but it is cited by many as a positive sign -- 
one more bit of proof that the romantic lure of a German Sonderweg is weak, if 
not altogether dead. 
West Germany's democracy certainly has a good track record. 
With six chancellors in 41 years, it has been a model of stability. 
Highly controversial decisions have been accepted and absorbed, creating a 
political continuity that has been so successful that much of it is now largely 
taken for granted. 
For example, Schmidt, the chancellor whose thinking led to the Pershing missile 
deployment in the early 1980s, voted against German rearmament in 1955. The 
party led for many years by Foreign Minister Genscher, arguably Germany's most 
visible Europeanist, voted against German entry to the European Community in 
1958, while Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrats vehemently opposed West 
Germany's rapprochement with Eastern Europe in the early 1970s, a rapprochement 
he now proudly claims as the basis for Germany's new relationship with the 
east. 
Surviving the student revolution of the 1960s, the terrorist campaigns of the 
1970s and the peace movement in the early 1980s all reinforced Germany's 
democratic process, adding to its sense of self-confidence. 
Despite all this, the twinge of doubt remains. 
"Only a fool would not be concerned," Springer executive Cramer told an 
American acquaintance who asked how Jews should react to German unity. "But I 
don't believe you have to worry." 
A strong proponent of Germany unity, French political figure Veil paused when 
asked the ultimate question: Is the monster that was Germany dead? 
"I hope so," she replied. "I hope so." 
Reunification: The Talk of Europe 
ALAIN MINC, 41 
French businesman-author, maverick in the French ruling class 
"Germany will not become the Germany of old. That's not the problem. Germany is 
a model democratic country. Germany doesn't have to worry about its security in 
the West, where it is not threatened, but the new Germany will be obligated, 
but the new Germany will be obligated to have very good relations with Russia 
in order to ensure its security. This is an important point. Tell me, in 10 
years who will be the master of the Kremlin? Is it always going to be a 
reasonable person like Gorbachev? That's why I think we should give Germany 
nuclear weapons. I regret that Germany doesn't have nuclear weapons. It's 
crazy. I don't fear Germany.... My family is a Polish Jewish family. My parents 
came here in 1931, and all of their family back home perished in the 
Holocaust." 
NICHOLAS RIDLEY, 61 
Ex-British Cabinet minister, fired for these remarks in a magazine interview: 
"(European monetary Union) is all a German racket designed to take over the 
whole of Europe. It has to be thwarted. This rushed takeover by the Germans on 
the worst possible basis, with the French behaving like poodles to the Germans, 
is absolutely intolerable.... The detuschemark is always going to be the 
strongest currency because of their habits... You don't understand the British 
people if you don't understand this point about them.... They can be dared; 
they can be moved. But being bossed around by a German -- it would cause 
absolute mayhem in this country, and rightly, I think." 
EMIEL DEN BOER, 17 
High School student from the Dutch city of Alkmaar 
"Germany will be too big as a single power, although I don't think there will 
be a war. My grandparents were in the resistance, and my mother has memories of 
that. When she sees Germans, she still feels uncomfortable, and I think some of 
that has rubbed off on me. It is difficult to describe, but the feeling is 
definitely there. It is an uneasy feeling to watch Germany today. German 
fascism grew out of poverty and chaos, and that's East Germany today. That's 
where the skinheads are now -- in East Berlin. We must never forget what 
happened to people so systematically." 
MARTIN BANGEMANN, 55 
A West German and vice president of European Commission, Brussels 
"I understand the feelings, especially those of our smaller neighbors who've 
had bad experiences with Germany in the course of their history. There's always 
uncertainty at turning points, and feelings about the future are determined 
much more by the memories of the past than by some clear vision of what will 
happen. But the future also depends on our neighbors. It is possible to have a 
united Europe that gives a much more stable political framework to overcome 
some national weakness. Even if the emotional situation in Germany might lead 
to a certain instability -- then it's much better to handle this inside (an 
integrated) Europe than outside. What's the answer if it is not Europe? What 
else can give the assurances they seek? 
VACHSLAV DASHICHEV, 65 
Head of foreign relations department, Institute of World Socialist Systems, 
Moscow: has advised Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Germany. 
"People in France, Britain, the Netherlands and Poland fear first and foremost 
that Germany will use its economic strength to restore its domination. The 
remedy is the European (unity) framework; that will reduce the dangers to a 
minimum. I've studied German history. They have tried twice to dominate Europe. 
Twice they've failed. The second time ended in a national catastrophe. I think 
in the consciousness of the people, these failures have left them wiser in the 
conviction that they try a third time to go this way, it can promise only a 
failure far greater than in World War I of World War II. This time it can lead 
to the annihilation of a nation. 
Focus On The New Germany 
A comparative look at four Germanys -- from the Third Reich through today's 
divided nations to tomorrow's unified state. 
Area: 
Third Reich: 182,254 sq. mi. 
W. Germany: 95,975 sq. mi. 
E. Germany: 41,768 sq. mi. 
Unified Germany: 137,743 sq. mi. 
Population: 
Third Reich: 65.4 million 
W. Germany: 62.3 million 
E. Germany: 16.4 million 
Unified Germany: 78.7 million 
Exports: 
Third Reich: $2.2 billion 
W. Germany: $377.2 billion 
E. Germany: $50.1 billion 
GNP: 
Third Reich: $43.8 billion 
W. Germany: $1.2 trillion 
E. Germany: $196 billion 
Imports: 
Third Reich: $2.3 billion 
W. Germany: $281.4 billion 
E. Germany: $48.4 billion 
(All money figures are deutchemarks expressed in dollars at a rate of 1.80 to 
$1.00) 
Times staff writer Rone Tempest in Paris contributed to this article. 
