BRUINS RUN AZTECS INTO THE GROUND 
After awhile, the days begin to run together. 
On Saturday, the San Diego State defense goes out and gives up enough yardage 
for two games. 
The next week, SDSU coaches work the defense hard in practice, talk about the 
need to focus rather than make mass personnel changes. . . . 
And then it's Saturday again. And you know what that means. 
UCLA did it to the Aztecs this week, 45-31, before 41,025 in the Rose Bowl. 
Once again, the Aztec offense was a sight to behold, and once again, the Aztec 
defense was graffiti on a wall. 
"UCLA was here." 
"For a good run, call 111-SDSU." 
"Score some points on the Aztecs." 
For the first time, SDSU (2-4) came up with a defensive combination that 
included just two linemen on apparent passing downs and a combination of 
linebackers and defensive backs. It didn't matter. On the first play SDSU used 
the combination, UCLA quarterback Tommy Maddox scrambled 11 yards around left 
end for a first down. That was on second and nine. 
Seven plays later, on second and eight, SDSU tried it again, and this time 
Maddox passed 25 yards to Shawn Wills. 
New look, same old defense. 
The Aztecs didn't intercept a pass, which isn't exactly a news flash. They have 
now played 24 quarters this season and watched 191 passes fly by without 
picking one off. 
And, your weekly SDSU non-defense tidbit Part I: UCLA's Brian Brown finished 
with 175 yards rushing, the most for a Bruin since Gaston Green ran for 220 
against Cal in 1987. He also had two touchdowns. 
Part II: Kevin Smith carried 26 times for 105 yards and a touchdown. This 
marked the first time UCLA had two running backs rush for 100 or more yards in 
a game since Green (266) and Marcus Greenwood (104) did it in the 1986 Freedom 
Bowl. 
UCLA (3-3) finished with 376 yards rushing, and all six of the Bruins' 
touchdowns came on the ground. 
So much for SDSU's game plan of taking away the pass and making UCLA run. 
On the bright side, SDSU quarterback Dan McGwire completed 23 of 46 passes for 
343 yards and three touchdowns. His streak of consecutive passes thrown without 
an interception was broken, however, at 178 when Eric Turner picked off a pass 
on the last play of the game. 
Patrick Rowe caught 11 of McGwire's passes for 224 yards and a touchdown. The 
224 yards was a career best and ranks sixth in SDSU history. 
The Aztecs trailed at the half, 35-21, but it could have been worse. With only 
three seconds to play and SDSU trailing, 35-14, and 38 yards from the UCLA end 
zone, Rowe somehow slipped open -- for just a second -- in the deep right 
corner of the end zone. McGwire found him, cocked, fired and . . . touchdown. 
McGwire-to-Rowe was the hot first-half combination for the Aztecs. McGwire 
completed 13 of 22 first-half passes for 229 yards and three touchdowns, and 
Rowe caught five of those passes for 144 yards and one touchdown. 
SDSU got off to a typical start. Its offense moved forward in the first half, 
and its defense moved backward. In the first 15 minutes, SDSU and UCLA combined 
for 308 yards of total offense -- UCLA 160, SDSU 148. UCLA had nine first downs 
during that time. 
And by halftime, UCLA running back Brian Brown had 100 yards. 
The Bruins scored touchdowns on four of their first five and five of their 
first seven possessions. 
The Aztecs, as has been their custom, remained within striking distance. 
Each team traded two first-quarter touchdowns. UCLA scored first, thanks to an 
SDSU fumble. Dennis Arey lost the ball at the SDSU 28 after catching a 
three-yard McGwire pass, and Stacy Argo fell on it. 
Three plays later, Maddox rolled right and then pitched to Brown, who went in 
for the touchdown. 
A nightmare for the Aztecs? Earlier this week, Luginbill said one of his fears 
was that SDSU might not maintain its impressive record of avoiding turnovers. 
Going into the game, the Aztecs had lost only one fumble. 
"If we come in with offensive breakdowns in ball protection, it would create a 
real problem," he said. 
The fumble came only 39 seconds into the game, and UCLA scored 1:09 later. 
In less than two minutes, the Aztecs already were in the comeback mode. 
The SDSU offense shrugged, and went to work. Six plays later, McGwire passed 11 
yards for a touchdown to Arey, and it was 7-7. 
So UCLA got the ball back, and the most noteworthy thing about that was that it 
took them 12 plays to move 80 yards for a touchdown. That came on a one-yard 
Maddox dive. 
No matter. Two possessions later, the Aztecs unleashed one of their high-speed 
touchdown drives. In three plays, they went 61 yards to tie the game at 14-14. 
The touchdown came on a 10-yard pass from McGwire to tight end Jim Hanawalt, 
which was set up when McGwire faked a handoff to Larry Maxey. 
At that point, the Aztecs' offense broke down, and it was forced to punt on 
each of its next three possessions. 
The UCLA offense, meanwhile, scored on each of its next two possessions. Kevin 
Smith caught an eight-yard touchdown pass to cap another 80-yard drive -- in 10 
plays -- to make it 21-14, and Maury Toy finished a 59-yard drive with a two 
yard run, giving UCLA a two-touchdown lead, 28-14, with 8:37 left. 
Then, Wills broke loose up the middle for a 25-yard touchdown run with 1:36 
remaining before halftime for UCLA's fifth touchdown. 
UCLA's sixth touchdown came in the third quarter, a 37-yard run by Brian Brown 
that increased the Bruins' lead to 42-24. Brown took off around left end, 
SDSU's Morey Paul and Marcus Preciado both missed tackles, and Brown soon found 
a clear path into the end zone. 
This came after SDSU's Andy Trakas kicked a 24-yard field goal, bringing the 
Aztecs to within 11 points, 35-24. 
For an instant, the Aztecs had things going their way. The Bruins decided to go 
for it on fourth-and-one from their 45. The handoff went to Kevin Smith, but he 
was stopped at the line of scrimmage and the Aztecs had good field position. 
Aztec Notes 
Marlon Andrews started at a cornerback spot instead of Damon Pieri. SDSU Coach 
Al Luginbill had said Friday that Pieri would start. . . . Quarterback Dan 
McGwire became a receiver for one unusual moment in the second quarter. It was 
third-and-four from the SDSU 26, the Aztecs were trailing, 28-14, and McGwire 
faded back to pass. He threw, the ball was deflected at the line of scrimmage, 
and McGwire plucked it out of the air and started to run. He was tackled at the 
line of scrimmage. . . . The most interesting run during Saturday's game? Had 
to be the halftime dash by a streaker, who ran straight down the middle of the 
field and into an end zone before he was detained by security. 
