ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: HUNTINGTON BEACH; 
CANDIDATES' FORUM ON SPECIAL EDUCATION 
Eight Ocean View School District board candidates speaking before parents of 
special education students proposed ways of bringing those students into the 
mainstream and improving communication with the students' families. 
The candidates' forum held Wednesday was the first ever sponsored by the West 
Orange County Special Education consortium, which represents five school 
districts in northwest Orange County. 
Carolyn Hunt, a nine-year board member seeking election to an unexpired, 
two-year term, said she advocates "mainstreaming these children into as many 
activities as possible," including lunchtime events and other extracurricular 
programs. 
Hunt's only challenger, Steve Buhrig, said he believes that can best be 
accomplished by channeling more money into special education programs and 
establishing a network among parents of those students. 
Randy Vanderhook, one of nine candidates for three full four-year terms being 
contested, agreed that the special education consortium should expand 
interaction among parents. But, he added, given the statewide budget 
constraints, the group should not rely only on dwindling funds from individual 
school districts. 
Many of the parents said that networking among themselves is difficult because 
districts cite privacy laws in refusing to provide names and addresses of 
parents who have special education students. 
To help improve communication, candidate Tracy Pellman said she favored holding 
district forums among parents and board members -- an idea proposed at a 
previous candidates' forum by challenger Carolyn Kanode. 
At Wednesday's meeting, Kanode suggested that when parents agree to accept 
special education programs for their children, they fill out address cards to 
be distributed to a parents' consortium and other advocacy groups. 
Challenger Julie Engquist suggested that the district establish parent contacts 
at each school to deliver information to other parents of special education 
children. 
Challengers Lottie Hobbs and Flint Morrison also stressed communication. 
Hobbs, referring to her involvement in Ocean View's debate last spring over 
closing three schools, said that "all parents were frustrated with the 
process." When the question is addressed again next spring, she said, parents' 
specific concerns will be better addressed because firm solutions will be 
directly proposed by district staff members. 
Morrison said he supports on-site, school intervention teams to deal with 
special education problems. 
Absent were board president Charles Osterlund, a 15-year member who is seeking 
re-election, and challengers James M. Ball and Randall J. Clifford. JOHN PENNER 
