THE GOOD HEALTH MAGAZINE; 
MEDICINE; 
DIAGNOSTIC WIZARDRY; 
A REVOLUTIONARY TECHNIQUE CALLED MAGNETIC RESONANCE PROBES THE BODY'S INNER 
SECRETS BY LISTENING TO TISSUES 'TALK.' WITHOUT A KNIFE OR X-RAYS, DOCTORS NOW 
CAN DETECT DISEASES AND MONITOR THEIR RESPONSE TO THERAPY. THE PROCESS SHOWS 
DRAMATIC PROMISE FOR TREATING EVERYTHING FROM CANCER AND HEART ATTACKS TO BRAIN 
AND SPINAL INJURIES 
Every few weeks Dr. Brian D. Ross leaves his laboratory in Pasadena and takes 
off for San Francisco on an unusual mission of mercy. On these trips the 
50-year-old physician-researcher is accompanied by a seriously ill though 
mobile cancer patient. When their commercial jet lands, doctor and patient head 
directly for a nondescript factory building on the waterfront near the airport. 
When Ross and his patient -- call him Mr. M -- arrive at their destination, the 
headquarters of Diasonics Inc., a manufacturer of high-tech medical equipment 
in South San Francisco, they go immediately to a back room dominated by a large 
steel-box-type structure. Inside sits a doughnut-shaped contraption about the 
size of a small van. While Ross waits in a nearby control room, hovering over 
video monitors, M sheds his watch and wallet, slips into a loose-fitting 
examination gown and mounts a cushioned platform on which he can be slid into 
the doughnut. As the device swallows him up, only his stockinged feet extend 
out. 
For the next hour, while the huge device thumps and knocks, M lies inside it, 
silent and motionless. Actually, since only a few inches of space are between 
him and the circular all that surrounds him, he can do little else. In the 
control room, Ross intently watches as successive slices of M's brain flash 
onto the screen. Occasionally he shouts words of encouragement to his enclosed 
patient: "Very good, just a few minutes more." 
It's not a particularly cheerful assignment for Ross, a distinguished, affable 
British scientist who recently joined the staff of the Huntington Medical 
Research Institutes. His patient has a malignancy of the brain, a tumor so 
large it cannot be removed by surgery or treated by radiation or chemotherapy. 
For the patient, the conventional weapons of oncology have been exhausted. "I 
suppose you could say that by any existing medical measure," Ross says, "he's . 
. . under a death sentence." 
Yet the Huntington's doctors have not given up on M. As part of a bold 
experimental program for patients beyond the pale of other treatments, he is 
receiving a radical new therapy. Its object: to stir the patient's own immune 
system back to life, so it can fight the growing cancer. 
M's doctors at the Huntington Medical Center have taken some of his white blood 
cells, or lymphocytes -- part of the immune system's weapons against invaders 
-- and mixed them with interleukin 2, a naturally occurring chemical messenger 
used by the body to prod the lymphocytes into renewed activity. Human 
interleukin 2 is so hard to obtain in any quantity that doctors are forced to 
use an identical, genetically engineered substitute. The mixture has been 
in-jected directly into M's tumor in hopes that the revived lymphocytes will 
begin attacking the rapidly dividing cancer cells. 
Is the novel treatment working? Has it reduced the size of tumor? "X-rays can't 
really show us," says Ross. "By the time we could detect a change, it might 
well be too late." The only other method would be to open the skull to take a 
biopsy. But such a surgical procedure is out of the question for the severly 
weakened patient. 
So Ross must use some other means to peer inside M's brain. That is the purpose 
of their trip to San Francisco. 
The examination of M involves an experimental technique called Magnetic 
Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS). It is vaguely reminiscent of a CT(computed 
tomography) scan, which uses X-rays and computer technology to provide views of 
virtually any part of the body a physician may want to see. But the similarity 
is only superficial. The machine doesn't probe with X-rays. It ferrets out the 
body's inner secrets by listening to its own signals -- the faint emissions 
given off by its constituent atoms and molecules, including those of M's 
massive tumor. 
To get the tumorous tissue to "talk" -- to reveal whether it has been affected 
by the experi- mental treatment -- the machine relies on an extremely intense 
magnetic field, thousands stronger then the earth's, accompanied by pulses of 
radio waves. The pulses evoke faint electromagnetic echoes from M's tumor, 
which are a tip-off to its chemical state. 
This diagnostic wizardry is based on a technique known as nuclear magnetic 
resonance. The idea, dating to the 1940s, is old hat to physicists and 
chemists; Stanford's Felix Bloch and Harvard's Edward Purcell shared the 1952 
Nobel Prize in Physics for developing it. It has long been used for studying 
nonliving materials. But only now is it beginning to touch diagnostic medicine, 
studying living things. 
Already the results are little short of revolutionary. 
As Ross explains, "We're able to see aspects of living tissue that have never 
before been visible other than by cutting or other invasive techniques. The 
potential of the technique is enormous. If we can monitor the biochemical 
processes of a disease noninvasively, it will surely give us an early insight 
into the nature of the disease and its response to treatment." 
Magnetic resonance holds promise not only for cancer, but for heart attacks, 
brain and spinal injuries and a variety of muscle-weakening diseases including 
multiple sclerosis, researchers say. 
The revolution of magnetic resonance -- doctors have dropped the word 
"nuclear," lest it unnecessarily frighten their patients -- is taking shape in 
two distinct ways: 
MRS, which pinpoints and measures key bodily chemicals, like those that may be 
feeding the fires of M's brain tumor. 
And MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), which produces actual images, X-ray-like 
slices of the body. 
Though barely a decade old, MRI is clearly one of the hottest areas of 
diagnostic medicine. Some 1,200 scanners are in use around the country (costing 
up to $3 million each), and MRI is rapidly closing the gap with CT scanning as 
a way of probing the body. In the next few years, the number of machines may 
well double as manufacturers such as General Electric, Philips, Pickering and 
Diasonics, all of whom currently manufacture magnetic resonance devices, 
compete for what is already a billion-dollar-a-year scanner market. "It's been 
taking off like a rocket," Ross says. 
The enthusiasm of doctors for the new technology is easy to understand. MRI not 
only avoids potentially harmful ionizing radiation such as X-rays, but also 
produces images of astonishing clarity, revealing the outlines of soft tissue 
like tumors, which are beyond the reach of X-rays and could be studied until 
now only by biopsies or the injection of radioisotopes. 
The idea of magnetically created images was first proposed in the United States 
after the advent of the required superconducting magnets (typically chilled by 
liquid helium down to -450 degrees Fahrenheit, only four degrees above absolute 
zero) and high-speed computer graphics. But the actual development of the new 
technology was left to the British. In 1973 a group in Aberdeen, Scotland -- an 
offshoot of a pioneering team at the University of Nottingham -- obtained the 
first whole-body image of a living creature using magnetic resonance: It was a 
cross-section of a mouse. 
But the British mouse didn't roar for long. Leadership in the field quickly 
passed back to the United States. "We British seem to have a gift for letting 
technology slip out of our grasp," says Ross, who is himself joined the brain 
drain of workers in the field when he came to Huntington last year to direct 
its spectroscopy unit. "Each of the major groups in the States has been headed 
at one time or another by an Englishman," Ross says. 
Under the leadership of Ross's American colleague, Dr. William G. Bradley, 
Huntington's imaging unit had already become the busiest in the world. Since it 
began operating in 1983, it has performed more than 18,000 MRI scans. 
But it is MRS that Ross and his colleagues in the United States and abroad 
believe may hold even greater promise. Though it has actually been around 
longer than MRI, MRS is far less familiar and is in its experimental infancy. 
It doesn't produce images -- "just squiggles," says Ross, but to knowing eyes 
like his, they are as meaningful as any picture. 
Ross's squiggles are the spectra -- or fingerprints, if you will -- of the 
body's chemicals. Jogged by radio waves in the presence of the magnet's 
powerful field, each of the target compounds responds in a uniquely 
characteristic way, transmitting its own jagged spike signature to the monitor. 
Unfortunately, says Ross, that's the sort of thing even trained MDs aren't 
always comfortable with; they are used to -- and prefer -- looking at images. 
"It reminds them of the biochemistry courses that they came to hate in college 
or medical school." 
Partly for this "psychological" reason, but also because it requires more 
powerful magnets, MRS has been much slower to catch on than its younger sibling 
MRI, but Ross and others predict that situation will change. When it does, they 
say, the diagnosis and treatment of certain cancers and other diseases will be 
significantly advanced. 
MRS is available only at a few places, such as the Diasonics plant, the 
Veterans Administration Medical Center in San Francisco and Duke University, on 
an experimental basis to selected patients like Ross's M. (Huntington is 
installing a powerful new magnet, capable of producing a field of 1.5 tesla -- 
about 30,000 times the strength of the earth's magnetic field -- that will be 
shared by both Bradley's imaging team and Ross's spectroscopists.) But if Ross 
and his colleagues have their way, it will soon move out of the experimental 
stage and into medicine's mainstream. 
Dr. Michael C. Weiner, who runs the MRS lab at the VA hospital in San 
Francisco, is sure that day is rapidly approaching. "This technique allows us 
to 'see' how the cells are working," says the 48-year-old transplanted New 
Yorker, "without cutting or needles, without X-rays, without any harmful 
radiation. Just magnetism and radio waves." 
Even if it shuns scalpels, Weiner's lab has certainly been on the cutting edge. 
In close collaboration with the University of California San Francisco Medical 
Center, it is using MRS to unravel the chemistry of heart attacks, of brain and 
spinal injuries, even of muscle fatigue -- the later, surprisingly, still 
largely a mystery even after many years of research. 
In a cleverly designed series of experiments, healthy young men flexed their 
muscles in a specially built exerciser, while MRS scrutinized the metabolic 
chemistry of their exertions. As they exercised, the expected biochemical 
changes were documented: The store of the metabolite phosphocreatine in their 
muscles decreased; the synthesis of ATP, an energy-storing compound that fuels 
cellular activity, dropped off; the concentration of lactic acid rose; 
eventually the muscles no longer would contract. 
Such studies aren't merely helpful to would-be jocks, says UC San Francisco's 
Dr. Robert G. Miller. They may eventually aid those who suffer from such 
muscle-weakening diseases as multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). At last year's annual 
meeting of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, held in San 
Francisco, dozens of doctors flocked to the basement lab to see for themselves 
the big magnet where these and other MRS experiments have been done. 
Of special interest to doctors is the metabolism of cancer cells. While 
chemotherapy and radiation have scored some major successes in controlling 
their rapid growth, oncologists work largely in the dark as they try to 
estimate what dosages and combinations of drugs and radiation will work. 
Huntington's Bradley sums up the situation: "We're still in the Stone Age when 
it comes to treating cancer. The metabolism of cancer cells fluctuates from day 
to day, yet we dose patients with drugs and radiation without any idea of what 
stage the cells are in at the particular moment of treatment." 
That could soon change because MRS can detect shifts in cellular metabolism 
almost as soon as they occur. In a recent experiment on himself, Dr. James W. 
Prichard at Yale University imbibed some Champagne, underwent a brain scan and 
almost immediately found a sharp ethanol (alcohol) spike. It represented the 
chemical changes induced in the cells of his brain by the bubbly. 
Similarly, West German doctors, using magnetic resonance spectroscopy, have 
been able to track chemical changes in the brain's visual center when the eyes 
open and when they close. By looking for chemicalk changes in response to 
physical stimuli, the techniques could be used to map other areas of the brain, 
an organ that still remains something of a mystery. 
In any case, the rapid detection of chemical changes may enable doctors to pick 
the precise moment that cancer cells are most receptive to chemotherapy. And 
almost immediately after the anti-cancer drugs are administered, MRS could be 
used to monitor their effectiveness against the target cells. No longer would 
doctors have to wait weeks or months to look for shrinkage or growth of a 
tumor. 
In fact, it was in quest of just such an assessment that Ross flew to San 
Francisco with his cancer-ridden patient. 
"The examination lets us detect a number of things that tell us something about 
the reaction of the tumor cells to the treatment," he explains. "We can, for 
example, detect the presence -- or absence -- of ATP. We can also pick up other 
metabolites . . . as well as inorganic phosphates and even pH, or cellular 
acidity." 
The relative amounts detected -- as measured by the size of the squiggles on 
the monitor of his machine -- are a precise indication of whether a cluster of 
cancer cells is growing or being held in check. "The key," says Ross, "is 
phosphocreatine because if its levels return to normal you know that the 
patient is most probably responding to the treatment." Phosphocreatine is a 
sensitive indicator of a depleted energy state. Successful treatment is also 
likely to be signaled by a rise in the level of inorganic phosphate since this 
is a breakdown product of dying cells. 
The biochemical intricacies of such measurements do not faze Ross, a specialist 
in metabolic diseases who studied biochemistry under Nobel laureate Sir Hans 
Krebs. His first clinical triumph with MRS came at Oxford in 1981. It involved 
a retired sailor plagued by continual fatigue. Ross suspected McArdle's 
syndrome, a rare genetic disease in which the muscles can't break down the 
sugar glycogen, used as a source of energy to fuel contraction. The disease 
could have been confirmed by biopsy or complex chemical tests. But he was 
determined to provide a diagnosis simply and noninva- sively. Using a magnet 
just big enough to enclose the patient's arm, he charted precisely the expected 
deficiencies in the man's muscle metabolism -- and dramatically confirmed his 
hunch. The man had the muscle- weakening syndrome. 
Ross's diagnostic feat was glowingly received. "The introduction of a new 
technique to the bedside always stimulates intellectual reverberations that go 
beyond the narrow range of the instrument," editorialized The New England 
Journal of Medicine. "Perhaps the most important contribution (of MRS) to 
clinical medicine will be that it will make us start thinking about familiar 
diseases in a new way." 
Bradley, who helped recruit Ross to Pasadena, calls spectroscopy a technique 
looking for an application. "We have hundreds of spectroscopists that would 
like to do their trade in a medical environment. Instead of high-falutin' 
laboratory science, they want to bring spectroscopy down to earth and do it in 
a worthwhile way that will help patients. Brian is trying to do that." 
It's now late in the day. Ross has finished his work with M at the factory 
site, and the men are heading back to San Francisco airport. "What did you 
learn, Doc?" M asks. Ross smiles. "I'd say that for now the news is good. The 
tumor hasn't grown." 
In a few weeks, doctor and patient will return to San Francisco for another 
session with the powerful magnet to see if the news is still good. 
