FAMILY FEUD MAY BE BREWING IN MARCH FONG EU'S HOUSEHOLD 
Things may be getting a little dicey in the household of Secretary of State 
March Fong Eu. 
Democrat Eu is not speaking to her son, Republican controller candidate Matt 
Fong. In fact, Eu has been advised by her campaign staff "to avoid any contact" 
with Fong, said Leo McElroy, the Sacramento consultant running Eu's reelection 
campaign. 
The problem: A 10-second television spot being aired by Fong that includes a 
photograph of him and his mother -- an implied endorsement that Eu's campaign 
claims the four-term incumbent never authorized. 
Caught between party and family politics, Eu has maintained neutrality in the 
contest between her son and fellow Democratic incumbent Gray Davis. Eu's 
campaign hurriedly contacted Davis this week to assure him that Eu had nothing 
to do with the ad. 
"It is our view that she has to avoid any contact with (Fong) to avoid any 
appearance of collusion," McElroy said Friday. "Everybody has to be aware that 
there is no hanky-panky going on between the two campaigns." 
Eu's campaign also notified the Fair Political Practices Commission of her role 
-- or lack of one -- in putting together the ad, McElroy said. 
Eu was described as "a little surprised" this week to see her photograph in the 
ad. Fong's campaign asked Eu's campaign for a photograph about a month ago, 
McElroy said, but the request was denied because "it would be inappropriate for 
a Democratic candidate to assist a Republican candidate" -- even when they are 
mother and son. 
But Gretchen Stockdale, Fong's press secretary, said Fong had told his mother 
about his plans and would not have used the photograph if she had objected. She 
said the ad features a personal photograph Fong had of the two of them. 
Stockdale acknowledged the spot is intended to capitalize on Fong's 
relationship with his mother, but she said it does not violate Eu's pledge of 
neutrality. It includes the voice-over, "A Tradition of Honesty, Competence and 
Commitment," while the photograph is displayed. 
"He is saying that he is carrying this tradition down from his mother, who has 
been one of the most popular vote-getters in California history," Stockdale 
said. 
Stockdale said Eu and Fong "still maintain the same mother-and-son relationship 
that they always have," and that she doubts Eu would cut off all contact with 
her son. 
"Blood is thicker than party," she said. 
