SURVIVORS RECAPTURE LOST CHILDHOODS 
At an age when many Jewish girls are preparing for their bat mitzvah, Gabriele 
Silten was stealing cabbage to survive in a Nazi concentration camp. 
Rita Lurie was wasting away on a diet of raw potatoes and onions in a dark 
attic in Poland where her family was hiding. 
Trudy Hill was watching an SS guard drown a woman in a latrine. 
Saturday, they and four other women in their 50s celebrated surviving the 
Holocaust by participating in the bat mitzvah ritual, which ordinarily marks a 
13-year-old girl's symbolic entry into the Jewish community. 
"We missed out on so much when we were children," said Lurie, 53, of North 
Hollywood, whose mother and younger brother perished during the family's ordeal 
in the attic. "This is a chance for us to undo that a little." 
In a ceremony at Temple Adat Ari El in North Hollywood, the seven women chanted 
Hebrew prayers and made speeches in English with such feeling that many of the 
more than 600 people gathered in the synagogue laughed and cried along with 
them. 
"Hitler must be turning over in his grave at this celebration of being alive in 
spite of being Jewish," said Hill, 56, of West Hollywood, who watched the 
drowning and other atrocities while a prisoner at the Auschwitz concentration 
camp. 
The women conceived the idea of participating in the ceremony during a 
convention of Holocaust survivors about two years ago, said Natalie Gold, 50, 
of West Hollywood. One night, nearly 50 pajama-clad men and women spontaneously 
gathered in her hotel room during the convention and held an impromptu slumber 
party. 
For Gold, whose mother disappeared forever after abandoning her in front of a 
Polish police station to save her life, the slumber party was a rare 
opportunity to be playfully childlike. Gold was brought up in a convent with 
strict rules until the end of the war when her father reclaimed her. 
"We want to recapture our childhoods," she said, explaining why the women chose 
to participate in the ceremony. 
For the past year and a half, with the support of psychologist Sarah Moscowitz 
and temple officials, the women met monthly to practice. Saturday, their 
closeness was evident in the many hugs they exchanged during the 1 1/2-hour 
ceremony. 
Freda Gleitman of Beverly Hills was forced by Nazis to work in ammunition 
factories and laundries when she was 12 years old. She never saw her family 
again because they were exterminated in a gas chamber. Saturday, she said the 
group of seven women was like a family to her. 
"I feel like we're saying, 'Here we are, you Nazis did not succeed,' " she 
said. 
Silten, 57, of Pomona, who stole from the Nazis to survive in the concentration 
camps of Westerbork and Theresienstadt, said the ceremony was "the start of a 
second life as a Jew, like coming back to my people." The only child of a 
pharmacist in her native Holland, Silten paid dearly for being Jewish in the 
camps, where she was forced at age 11 to help dispose of cardboard boxes 
containing the ashes and bones of Jews who died in the gas chambers. 
The ceremony also represented a renewal of faith for Hannah Kagan, 52, of West 
Hills and Gitta Ginsberg, 53, of North Hollywood. Kagan's family was forced 
into hiding, and she is still so haunted by the experience that she prefers not 
to talk much about it. But she said she feels she has come full circle. 
"I was brought up Orthodox, and these are not just words to me," she said. 
Ginsberg was thrown by Nazis into a dark basement where she spent endless, 
terrified days alone before being brought to a convent. Even before the 
experience in the cellar, she had pretended to be Christian in order to 
survive. For her, the ceremony was the expiation of the guilt she felt at being 
baptized, she said. 
Gold said the women are hoping to relive other experiences they missed while 
growing up, either because the Holocaust was occurring or because they were so 
traumatized in the aftermath. 
"We're talking about having a senior prom," she said with a smile. 
