GIVING BIRTH TO A CONTROVERSY; 
PERSONAL HEALTH: SCIENCE MAY HAVE ENABLED OLDER WOMEN TO BECOME MOTHERS, BUT 
SOME EXPERTS WONDER IF OLDER MOMS HAVE THE ENDURANCE NECESSARY FOR 
CHILD-REARING. 
Motherhood, it seems, is not necessarily just for the young. Thanks to medical 
progress, the young-at-heart now qualify, too. 
Just ask Barbara Strong who, at 42, gave birth this year to a daughter, years 
after physicians told her she would never have children because of ovary damage 
from drug treatment for breast cancer. 
On a recent weekday morning, Strong, a psychiatrist, played with Christina, 8 
months old, and Juliana, 1, the daughter she adopted with husband Robert 
Wilson. In a few hours, she'll dash off to care for patients. 
Life is busy and fulfilling, Strong says. 
"I don't think at 40 you're over the hill," she says with a laugh, hauling 
Juliana upstairs. 
Strong became pregnant in June, 1989, after doctors implanted an embryo 
conceived in a test tube from her husband's sperm and an egg from a donor, a 
young woman who lives near Strong in El Monte. 
Although Strong's ovaries were not adequately producing eggs, she and other 
menopausal women are able to bear children successfully if they receive an 
embryo from donor eggs and hormone injections in the first three months of 
pregnancy. 
The results of one study on seven women, including Strong, were published in 
last week's New England Journal of Medicine. Of the seven women, ages 40 to 44, 
four gave birth to healthy babies. 
The use of donor eggs for in vitro fertilization is not new. But what has 
evoked widespread fascination is the discovery that some women who are 
technically menopausal can still carry a child. Some researchers now refuse to 
put an age limit on motherhood. 
But the brave-new-world science raises at least one practical question that 
can't be answered until long after baby leaves the nursery: How will pregnancy 
and raising babies play in middle age? While some argue that older parents have 
numerous advantages over younger ones, others contend that although the spirit 
may be willing, the body just may be not be able to cope with the rigors of 
child-rearing. 
Some experts point out a downside to middle-aged motherhood: The medical risks 
to both mothers and babies increase substantially when the parents are over 40. 
And some sociologists say children of older parents sense a difference in their 
upbringing. 
But according to 40-ish mothers like Strong, babies born as the biological 
clock is ticking are wholeheartedly -- sometimes desperately -- wanted. The 
parents are often financially stable, secure in their careers and calm in their 
management of children. 
Strong and Wilson always wanted to have children, Strong says, but postponed 
starting a family to pursue careers after their marriage in 1975. 
They decided about seven years ago to start a family, when Strong was 36 and 
Wilson was 37. But the long-anticipated plunge into parenthood was sidetracked 
by several traumatic events. 
Strong miscarried her first pregnancy. She became pregnant a second time, but 
just a few weeks before the child was due, she delivered a stillborn baby. The 
couple was determined to try again when Strong discovered she had breast 
cancer. 
The cancer was successfully treated, but the chemotherapy Strong received 
damaged the function of her ovaries -- the organs that produce eggs. Her 
physicians advised her to forget about having children. 
"I still had a little bit of function of my ovaries. But the doctors thought 
that women at 38 are too old to have children," Strong says. "But I didn't give 
up." 
Strong frequently reads medical journals, and one day she saw a brief article 
by USC physician Mark Sauer on the use of donor eggs and embryo transfer for 
women over age 40. 
At the time, the couple was considering finding a surrogate, who would be 
artificially inseminated with Wilson's sperm, to carry a child. 
"I wanted to have a baby so badly," Strong says. "We were thinking about using 
a surrogate, but I thought if I could experience pregnancy and childbirth, I 
didn't want to give that experience to another woman." 
Strong knew the medical risks of having a child increase after age 40, but they 
are not considered extreme. Infant mortality increases to 12 deaths per 100,000 
live births when women reach age 40, compared to 9 per 100,000 at age 30. 
Maternal mortality rates are also higher at 40 (80 per 100,000 live births at 
40 versus 20 per 100,000 at age 30). 
Older women are at greater risk for complications during pregnancy, such as 
hypertension and diabetes, and often require delivery by Cesarean section. 
The risk of genetic defects is also much higher among older women when the 
woman's own egg is used. The risk of Down's syndrome, for instance, is 1 in 30 
at age 45 compared to 1 in 952 at age 30. 
However, when the egg is donated by a younger woman, scientists don't know if 
the rate of genetic defects will resemble that of the younger donor or that of 
birth mother. 
"There is no question that an older woman is going to have a higher risk for 
her and the baby," says Dr. Geoffrey Sher, executive director of the Pacific 
Fertility Centers, which has offices in several West-Coast cities. "There is a 
higher rate of prematurity, bleeding, high blood pressure and of having a 
C-section." 
Because the success rate for in vitro fertilization is much lower for women 
over 40, many infertility programs will not accept these women as patients, 
Sher says. Sher, who has researched several new techniques for evaluating the 
chances of an older woman becoming pregnant, believes that practice is 
discriminatory. 
"Should older women get pregnant? Whose choice is it? If a woman is over 40 and 
wants to have a baby, do you and I have a right to deny her that? We don't have 
that moral or ethical right," he says. 
In hopes of carrying a baby, Strong contacted a Southern California fertility 
clinic that performed the procedure but required the couple to find their own 
egg donor. Strong placed an advertisement in a newspaper, found a donor and 
received an embryo transfer early in 1989. But the transfer failed. 
Strong and Wilson adopted Juliana but later contacted Sauer, who had donors 
available and made her part of his study. Strong got pregnant with the first 
embryo transfer. 
"I really wasn't counting on it working, so I was surprised when I got 
pregnant," Strong says. "I guess all you need is one good egg." 
What one needs for 18 years (at least) of intensive parenthood is more complex. 
But Strong dismisses the idea that younger people have an edge on parenting. 
"I think when you get a little older, you are more relaxed and you have more 
financial stability," Strong says. "I think maybe your family means more to you 
at that point." 
Strong says she and her husband thought about the potential for becoming ill or 
disabled later in life when they are trying to raise teen-agers. But, Strong 
says, "Life expectancy is 77 or so now. You still have a long productive life 
in front of you. And illness can happen to a younger woman as well." 
Other women are equally confident of meeting the challenges of motherhood at 
mid-life. Susan (a pseudonym) is four months pregnant. In her 40s, she thinks 
her age gives her an advantage at parenting -- even if it puts her at a 
disadvantage for getting pregnant. 
She too is carrying a child conceived from a donor egg and her husband's sperm 
and was part of Sauer's study. No one but her doctors and husband knows the 
genetic makeup of the child she will bear in five months. 
"We got married a bit later in life," she says. "We both wanted to have 
children. We have established careers. We're educated, professionals. We really 
want to be parents." 
Susan admits that rising for 2 a.m. feedings might be more difficult than it 
would have been back in the days when she didn't arrive home from a party until 
that hour. 
"I may not have quite the energy I had when I was 20, but I'm sure we're going 
to find a way to cope with that," she says. 
And there is precedent for older parenthood. Men have been fathering children 
into old age since Adam. And women are having babies, naturally, at older ages. 
According to one Census Bureau finding, the number of women 35 and older giving 
birth for the first time has quadrupled in the past decade. 
"I know quite a few people in their later 30s who are having babies," Susan 
says. "I don't feel like I'm alone. I really don't know many people in their 
20s anymore who are having babies." 
Carol Pulitzer, a Mill Valley woman who underwent conventional in vitro 
fertilization (her egg and her husband's sperm) is typical of a growing number 
of women who are ready for motherhood at a time when their bodies aren't. The 
urge to have a baby didn't hit Pulitzer until age 35. 
"I was not crazy to have a child. Then I hit this age where I said, 'Hey, wait 
a minute,' " says Pulitzer, 44. "I started trying and figured I would get 
pregnant right away. I was so surprised that I couldn't get pregnant right 
away. It got to be something that I had to conquer." 
She succeeded on her third attempt at in vitro fertilization and now has a 
19-month-old son. While Pulitzer thinks she is better equipped for parenthood 
now, she worries that her son might have preferred a younger mother. 
"I had a father who was very old. I grew up very worried that my father was 
going to die on me. I think it's something we'll have to deal with. We'd have 
other problems if we'd had (a child) when I was 20." 
But Los Angeles sociologist Monica Morris, one of the few researchers who has 
studied "older" parenthood, has a far less rosy view of what is to come for 
change-of-life babies. 
The author of the 1988 book "Last-Chance Children: Growing Up With Older 
Parents," Morris' study of 22 adults raised by parents older than the norm 
found that many wished their parents had been younger. 
"There is no question that children know there is a difference," says Morris, a 
sociologist at Cal State L.A. "OK, so women can have babies at 39, 40, God help 
us, 50. People are still not asking, 'What will this mean to children? What 
will it mean to have a parent who is as old as your friends' grandparents?' " 
About half the respondents in Morris' survey were largely unaffected by having 
older parents. But the other half, she says "really loathed their position." 
Morris says that while older parents are better off financially, she says it is 
a myth to think that people in their 40s and 50s are as physically fit for 
parenthood as younger people. 
"People will say, 'Well, things are different now. Now we're going to live 
longer and be healthy.' It isn't like that. Fifty isn't 20. You can have a face 
lift if you want, but the body parts are older. You get more tired." 
Still, Morris does not dispute that these children and their parents often 
share a deep love. 
"I wouldn't say don't do it," she says. "I would never tell people not to have 
children. The point I was trying to make is you just can't push these issues 
aside. You have to think about these things and about what you can do." 
For instance, her research revealed that children of older parents tend to be 
happiest if their parents spend a lot of time with them. 
"Go to the football game with your kid, even if you can't play football," she 
says. 
Strong agrees that 40-ish is not a prime time to have children, and, she says 
with hindsight, she would have done things differently. 
"You don't want to limit your options, which is what I did," she says. "You 
don't want to say, 'At 40, I'll have my children.' But I still think this is a 
great opportunity for women in their 40s. Having a child of your own is such a 
great experience." It's even kind of fun to have beaten -- well, fooled -- the 
biological clock. 
Last week, Strong underwent another embryo transfer and will soon find out if 
she is pregnant. And Pulitzer is set to begin medical tests to evaluate her 
chances for a second pregnancy. 
Childbirth at 45? 
"Piece of cake," Pulitzer says. 
