KEATING PLEADS 'ABSOLUTELY NOT GUILTY' 
With a firm voice, Charles H. Keating Jr. told a criminal court Friday that he 
is "absolutely not guilty" of 42 state securities fraud charges stemming from 
his company's bond sales at Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan branches. 
Keating, former chairman of American Continental Corp., appeared relaxed and 
confident as he entered his not guilty plea in Los Angeles Superior Court. If 
convicted, the Phoenix businessman and three co-defendants could be sentenced 
to up to 10 years in prison. 
The other three defendants -- Judy J. Wischer, 42, former American Continental 
president, and Robin S. Symes, 38, and Ray C. Fidel, 32, both former Lincoln 
presidents -- also entered pleas of innocence. 
Superior Court Judge Gary Klausner transferred the case to Superior Court Judge 
Lance A. Ito for trial. The first hearing in Ito's court was set for Oct. 15. 
After the brief hearing, Keating waved to several family members and friends as 
he was led back to the Los Angeles County Jail, where he has remained since 
Sept. 18, unable to post $5-million bail. Keating is waiting for the state 
Supreme Court to act on his request to lower the bail. 
The Phoenix-based American Continental filed for bankruptcy protection in 
April, 1989, and thrift regulators seized its main subsidiary, Irvine-based 
Lincoln Savings, the next day. Regulators estimate that Lincoln's collapse will 
be one of the nation's most expensive, costing taxpayers more than $2 billion. 
The criminal charges stem from the sale of nearly $200 million in American 
Continental debt securities to more than 17,000 people at Lincoln's 29 Southern 
California branches. Many bondholders have said they were misled into thinking 
that the bonds were safe or insured by the federal government. 
Both the company and S&amp;L are headed for liquidation, and the bonds that 
were sold for two years, mainly to elderly Lincoln depositors, are now nearly 
worthless. 
The state grand jury indictment against Keating, 66, and his co-defendants is 
the first criminal case brought against anyone involved in Lincoln since its 
collapse. 
While Keating remains in jail, the other defendants have been free on much 
lower bail. After the hearing, lawyers for Keating and Wischer criticized the 
indictment and the continued jailing of Keating, who claims he is now bankrupt. 
Wischer's lawyer, Abbe David Lowell of Washington, called the indictment unfair 
and poorly drawn. "There's a guy (Keating) sitting in jail over charges that 
are not specific, that do not provide him with any notice and don't even accuse 
him of a crime," he said. 
Keating's lawyer, Stephen C. Neal of Chicago, decried his client's high bail, 
saying there is "no reason in the world" that Keating should be incarcerated 
while awaiting trial. 
"Mr. Keating is looking forward to vigorously defending himself against these 
charges," Neal said, reiterating that Keating posed no risk of fleeing before 
trial. 
The indictment, which lists 20 victims and alleges the defendants violated 
certain state laws to hurt those victims, provides sufficient notice and 
specific allegations to withstand any court challenge, said Sandi Gibbons, a 
spokeswoman for the Los Angeles District Attorney's Office. 
In court, defense attorneys said they would seek a preliminary hearing to 
determine if a crime has been committed and if there was reason to believe that 
the defendants committed the crime. 
The district attorney's office, however, said it would challenge the need for a 
preliminary hearing. 
