COUNCIL EXPANDS AIRPORT TAKEOFF LIMITS 
Torrance residents who live under the flight pattern of the city's municipal 
airport have successfully lobbied the City Council to extend the hours of the 
airport's takeoff curfew. 
Council members voted unanimously to ban takeoffs after 10 p.m. and before 7 
a.m. on weekdays and before 8 a.m. on weekends and holidays. Previously, the 
city had banned departures between 11 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. on any day. Landings 
may take place at any time. 
"It takes just one loud noise over your home to wake you up," Mayor Katy 
Geissert said. There are "far more people . . . are affected by that" than 
there are those pilots and members of the airport community who will be 
affected by the curfew change, she said. 
Pilots who fly certain quieter aircraft may apply for special permits that 
allow takeoffs during the curfew in "life or death" emergencies and for 
pressing business needs. 
The council decision came despite an Airport Commission recommendation against 
any change and recommendations by the Transportation Department and Building 
and Safety Department for more lenient action. 
Airport commissioners voted 4 to 2 in June not to change the curfew. The city's 
Transportation Department had recommended extending the morning curfew from 
6:30 a.m. to 7 a.m., whereas Building and Safety officials recommended the 11 
p.m. to 10 p.m. change. The two departments later compromised to recommend a 7 
a.m. weekday and 8 a.m. weekend curfew, leaving the night curfew time 
unchanged. 
Pilots and business owners at the airport complained that the tighter rules 
would sap the vitality of an already weak airport. 
"Even though it doesn't seem like much for the airport people to give up, it 
really is. The airport already is on the skids," said Ted Stinis, spokesman for 
the Torrance Area Pilots Assn. "We are in a precarious situation. Don't push us 
over the edge of viability." 
After listening to a number of residents complain about the disruptions caused 
by late night and early morning plane flights, council members agreed that 
stricter measures were needed to protect the neighborhoods surrounding the 
airport. 
The council noted that the new rules will bring Torrance Municipal Airport's 
curfew rules in line with those in use at other airports in the area, including 
Santa Monica, Van Nuys and John Wayne airports. 
