KEATING'S LAWYERS ASK FEDERAL COURT TO REDUCE BAIL; 
COURTS: ATTORNEYS FOR THE FORMER HEAD OF LINCOLN S&amp;L'S PARENT FIRM SAY THE 
$5-MILLION BAIL IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL. 
Former thrift owner Charles H. Keating Jr., after exhausting appeals in the 
state courts, sought a court order Thursday in federal court here to reduce or 
lift the $5-million bail that is keeping him in jail. 
Lawyers for Keating, who was indicted on 42 counts of state securities fraud, 
said in the petition that the high bail set at a Sept. 18 hearing violates the 
U.S. Constitution's ban on excessive bail. 
They also argue that the Los Angeles Superior Court's decision to keep 
Keating's bail at $5 million was not supported by any evidence and that two of 
three co-defendants "charged with identical crimes received bail 50 times lower 
than Keating's." 
They contend that Keating is not a flight risk, poses no danger to public 
safety, cannot meet the bail and cannot exercise his constitutional rights to 
due process and right to counsel while in jail. 
The case was assigned to U.S. District Court Judge John G. Davies, who had not 
set a hearing or made any decision by 5 p.m. 
Keating, 66, is the former chairman of American Continental Corp. in Phoenix, 
which owned Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan in Irvine. The company filed for 
bankruptcy protection in April, 1989, and regulators seized Lincoln the next 
day. Regulators estimate that Lincoln's failure will cost U.S. taxpayers more 
than $2 billion. 
Keating and the others are accused of defrauding more than 17,000 people out of 
nearly $200 million through the sale of American Continental debt securities at 
Lincoln's 29 Southern California branches during a two-year period ending in 
early 1989. 
Many of the small investors were Lincoln depositors who claim they bought the 
bonds because of representations that the securities were safe and insured by 
the federal government. Those bonds are now worthless. Both the company and the 
S&amp;L are in the process of being liquidated. 
Keating and the co-defendants -- Judy J. Wischer, former American Continental 
president, and Robin S. Symes and Ray C. Fidel, both former Lincoln presidents 
-- have pleaded not guilty to the charges. 
The indictment against Keating and his co-defendants is the first criminal 
action to be filed in the wake of the collapse of Keating's financial empire. 
When the charges were unsealed last month, Superior Court Judge Gary Klausner 
set the high bail on Keating and $1-million bail each on the co-defendants. 
Klausner later reduced Wischer's bail to $200,000 and Symes and Fidel's bail to 
$100,000 each, and they posted bonds and were released. 
But Klausner said the seriousness of the charges -- the defendants face a 
maximum of 10 years in jail -- and the fear that Keating might flee warranted 
the continued high bail on Keating. Both the state Court of Appeal and the 
state Supreme Court refused to review the ruling. 
