THE OTHER GAMES 
GAME OF THE DAY 
Denver (3-0) at Cleveland (2-1), 10 a.m. 
TV: Channel 4. 
The Broncos, the AFC's last undefeated team, have been a surprise, especially 
since John Elway hasn't played particularly well except for one half against 
the Raiders. Denver has owned Cleveland, winning their last 10 meetings, 
including the 1986 and 1987 AFC championship games, and scored a 30-7 victory 
last season. The Browns don't figure to find much running room against Denver's 
No. 1-ranked rushing defense, but Bernie Kosar could find some holes against a 
secondary that ranks 23rd. Denver has jumped to leads of 17-0, 21-0 and 28-0 in 
its three victories. 
INTERCONFERENCE GAMES 
San Diego (1-2) at Phoenix (2-1), 1 p.m. 
The Cardinals come home after opening with three games on the road. Gary 
Hogeboom and the Phoenix offense looked sharp before running up against the New 
York Giants, but have lost running back Stump Mitchell for the season with a 
knee injury. Jim McMahon got his first victory with the Chargers and tight end 
Rod Bernstine looked like a young Kellen Winslow against Kansas City, which was 
held to 272 yards. San Diego had five interceptions. 
Pittsburgh (1-2) at Detroit (0-3), 10 a.m. 
Rookie Rodney Peete, recovered from a knee injury, finally gets his first 
regular-season start in the Lions' Silver Stretch offense, which has averaged 
324 yards per game. It will be the first time Detroit's prized rookies, Peete 
and running back Barry Sanders, play together. Pittsburgh's Chuck Noll was 
looking at his first 0-3 start before the Steelers upset Minnesota. Quarterback 
Bubby Brister should exploit Detroit's defense, ranked last in the NFL. 
AFC GAMES 
Cincinnati (2-1) at Kansas City (1-2), 10 a.m. 
After Steve DeBerg threw five interceptions last week as the Chiefs lost in San 
Diego, Coach Marty Schottenheimer will go with Ron Jaworski, 38, at quarterback 
-- his first start since 1986. The Bengals don't want to switch quarterbacks, 
but may be forced to go with Turk Schonert if Boomer Esiason can't play because 
of an ankle injury. Cincinnati found a replacement for injured Ickey Woods when 
Eric Ball gained 78 yards against Cleveland. Kansas City pulled off a 31-28 
upset of the Super Bowl-bound Bengals last season as Nick Lowery kicked five 
field goals. 
Indianapolis (1-2) at New York Jets (1-2), 10 a.m. 
Jack Trudeau came off the bench to lead the Colts past Atlanta last week when 
Chris Chandler suffered a knee injury and was lost for the season. Eric 
Dickerson has a hamstring pull but probably will play. Ken O'Brien, who passed 
for 329 yards last week, led New York to 280 yards and 16 first downs in the 
second half against Miami. Al Toon caught 10 passes. The teams split two games 
last season, each winning at home, the Jets ending the Colts' playoff hopes in 
Week 15. 
New England (1-2) at Buffalo (2-1), 10 a.m. 
The Patriots have been sputtering with Tony Eason at quarterback, so Coach 
Raymond Berry has turned to New England's choice, Doug Flutie (6-3 as a starter 
last season). Running back John Stephens will be sidelined for the second week 
because of an ankle injury. Jim Kelly's five touchdown passes pushed the Bills 
past Houston in overtime last week. Buffalo swept the Patriots last season, 
winning both games on field goals by Scott Norwood in the closing seconds. 
Miami (1-2) at Houston (1-2), 10 a.m. 
Dan Marino passed for 429 and three touchdowns but the Dolphins proved again 
that he can't do it by himself in a loss to the New York Jets. Miami ranks No. 
1 in passing, No. 26 in rushing. Mark Duper dropped four Marino passes, two of 
which could have been touchdowns. The Oilers have been falling behind, taking 
their powerful rushing attack out of the game and putting pressure on 
quarterback Warren Moon. Houston's defense is allowing 401 yards per game. 
NFC GAMES 
Washington (1-2) at New Orleans (1-2), 10 a.m. 
The Saints have lost consecutive games they figured to win against Green Bay 
and Tampa Bay, and nearly lost both their quarterbacks against the Buccaneers. 
Bobby Hebert went out with a concussion but had to come back when John Fourcade 
sprained an ankle. The Redskins lead the NFL in total offense and held Dallas 
without an offensive touchdown to get their first victory. Washington beat New 
Orleans, 27-24, last season on Chip Lohmiller's late field goal. 
New York Giants (3-0) at Dallas (0-3), 1 p.m. 
The Giants get a chance to make up for past indignities at Texas Stadium, where 
they've won just two of the last 13 games, including a 12-10 victory last 
season. Lawrence Taylor has 25 tackles and 4 1/2 sacks in three games. Dallas 
rookies Troy Aikman and Steve Walsh each threw two interceptions last week with 
little support from Herschel Walker and the rushing game, which ranks last in 
the league. 
Tampa Bay (2-1) at Minnesota (1-2), 1 p.m. 
Coach Ray Perkins will find out how good his Buccaneers are against the 
Vikings, who have never had much trouble with Tampa Bay. Minnesota beat the 
Buccaneers twice and have won eight of nine. The Vikings are smarting after 
being knocked off by Pittsburgh, which controlled the passing tandem of Wade 
Wilson to Anthony Carter. The Vikings cut kicker Teddy Garcia, who missed three 
field goal attempts against Pittsburgh, and signed Rich Karlis. 
Atlanta (1-2) vs. Green Bay (1-2) 
at Milwaukee, 10 a.m. 
Don Majkowski will try to get warmed up before the Packers get too far behind 
this week. He has been brilliant in the second half the past two weeks, passing 
for more than 300 yards each game while pulling out an upset of New Orleans and 
falling just short against the Rams. The Falcons also seem improved, but 
couldn't hold a 9-0 lead in the second half against Indianapolis last week when 
quarterback Chris Miller suffered a rib injury that will keep him out three to 
four weeks. Miller's replacement will be Hugh Millen, who passed for only 33 
yards after Miller was injured. 
MONDAY NIGHT 
Philadelphia (2-1) at Chicago (3-0) 
TV: Channel 7, 6 p.m. 
Mike Ditka won't answer questions about his feud with former defensive 
coordinator Buddy Ryan even though the Bears are 3-0 against the Eagles since 
Ryan took over in Philadelphia. The Bears knocked the Eagles out of the 
playoffs in the fog last season at Chicago, where the Eagles (0-11) have never 
won. Joe Montana and the San Francisco 49ers taught a few lessons to Randall 
Cunningham and the Eagles last week. Neal Anderson and Brad Muster give Chicago 
the league's top running game after three weeks. 
NOTE: All times PDT. Standings, Page 18. 
