SUIT CLAIMS OFFICE TOWER MADE ITS OCCUPANTS ILL; 
COURTS: LEGAL EXPERTS AGREE THAT TRIAL COULD HELP SET STANDARDS FOR ALLOCATING 
RESPONSIBILITY IN ALLEGING SICK-BUILDING SYNDROME. 
Louise Aldrich says working at one of the Airport Towers in El Segundo made her 
absolutely sick. 
Her eyes hurt. Her head pounded. Her throat and neck glands swelled. 
Aldrich wasn't alone in her suffering, her lawyers charged in a trial that 
opened in Torrance Superior Court last week. 
They say similar symptoms began plaguing many of the 12th-floor occupants of 
Airport Tower C shortly after they moved into the spanking-new building on 
Sepulveda Boulevard in early 1985. 
The alleged effects of fumes trapped in the 23-story building, originally owned 
by Prudential Insurance Co., has become the subject of a multimillion-dollar 
civil trial featuring 14 attorneys, a dozen plaintiffs, 10 defendants and 
nearly 1,500 exhibits. 
Legal experts say the complex trial, expected to last as long as three months, 
could help set standards for allocating responsibility in cases alleging 
"sick-building syndrome." 
The term refers to buildings in which poor ventilation combines with a variety 
of fumes to create indoor air pollution. Environmental experts say the syndrome 
has become more common in recent years. 
Energy conservation measures begun in the late 1970s -- such as sealing windows 
shut and installing extra insulation -- and new man-made construction materials 
that release gases into the air have combined to create indoor pollution as 
much as 100 times worse than pollution outdoors, a recent Environmental 
Protection Agency study has shown. 
Plaintiffs in the Torrance suit say indoor pollution and poor construction 
worked in concert with a poorly designed ventilation system in Airport Tower C 
to drive them from their 12th-floor offices. 
Defendants in the civil suit say that the building is not sick, and that 
hysteria stemming from minor glue fumes and the sight of inspectors wearing 
futuristic protective clothing precipitated the lawsuit. 
Tower C, the third of three high-rise buildings Prudential developed on 
Sepulveda Boulevard, was the only one to allow tenants to move in before all 
construction had been completed. The other two are not named in the lawsuit. 
All three buildings are currently occupied. 
Attorneys outlined the case to jurors during opening statements. 
"This building was a classic and severe case of sick-building syndrome," said 
attorney Helen Eisenstein, who represents two former tenants -- a software firm 
and an accounting firm -- and eight of the 10 individuals who are suing 
Prudential and its contractors. 
"A number of factors came together to make tenants sick here: Inadequate 
ventilation, construction fumes, improper operation of the ventilation system 
and poor choices of building materials," Eisenstein said. 
"Prudential built a sick building and allowed that building to get sicker and 
sicker," she said. 
Attorneys for Prudential and its contractors, however, told jurors that 
"nothing sinister" was going on at Airport Tower C and that the structure does 
not suffer from sick-building syndrome. 
"Through hysteria and through greed, what you and I would equate with smelling 
model airplane glue has grown into a situation where you are faced with making 
a decision in a multimillion-dollar lawsuit," said attorney Scott Hoyt, who 
represents Prudential and its property manager. 
The defendants contend that the initial glue fumes sparked a wave of panic 
among the tenants, who became "habitual complainers . . . who were feeding off 
one another," Hoyt said. 
"The inspector showed up in a moon suit and it scared people," Hoyt told 
jurors. "He'll tell you that that was an overreaction." 
