HYUNDAI RECALLING '86 EXCELS TO TUNE SMOG SYSTEMS 
Hyundai Motor American, fearing that some of the 1986 Excel models it sold in 
California will not pass the state's tough emissions test, announced Friday 
that it will retune the emissions systems on up to 28,450 cars at no charge to 
the owners. 
The recall campaign affects only vehicles registered and sold in California, 
the Garden Grove-based company said. The voluntary action came after the 
California Air Resources Board notified the company that the model exceeded 
emissions standards in routine testing. 
All owners of 1986 Excels sold in California will be notified of the voluntary 
campaign by letter, and Hyundai will be urging original buyers who have sold 
their cars to furnish the name and address of the new owners so the company can 
reach them. 
Without the free service, Hyundai officials said, affected vehicles may be more 
likely to fail the emissions tests that California requires every two years. 
The campaign involves installation of a choke system shim and a new air 
correction jet in the carburetor and cleaning of the sub-exhaust gas 
recirculation valve. The ignition timing will also be reset and the jet mixture 
solenoid and exhaust manifold will be inspected and replaced, if necessary. 
Local Hyundai dealers will inspect and repair returned cars free of charge. The 
service will take approximately 1 1/2 hours. 
Hyundai said the repairs and inspection will improve emissions performance and 
will have no effect on performance or fuel economy. 
Debbie Douglas, a spokeswoman for Hyundai, said the company instituted the 
emissions system repair campaign after being notified by the air resources 
board that a 1986 Excel being tested by the agency was not able to meet the 
state emissions standards. 
Jerry Martin, a spokesman for the state pollution agency, said the potential 
problems with the car were uncovered in routine emissions testing earlier this 
year. He said the agency then tested 10 Excels and the results were averaged. 
The results showed they exceeded state emission standards. 
"We discussed the findings with Hyundai and they voluntarily decided to make a 
recall," Martin said. 
Douglas said the company decided to recall the cars because of the company's 
"willingness to stand behind its products." 
FREE RETUNING 
Hyundai dealers will modify the Excels at no charge, a procedure expected to 
take about 90 minutes. The dealers will: 
Install a shim into the choke system. 
Install a new air correction jet in the carburetor. 
Clean the sub-exhaust gas recirculation valve. 
Reset the ignition timing. 
Inspect and replace the jet mixture solenoid and exhaust manifold, if 
necessary. 
