PRESIDENT WAS WARNED TO RALLY THE PUBLIC TO DEFICIT PACKAGE OR RISK 
HUMILIATION; 
BUDGET: BUSH HASTILY DECIDED TO MAKE TELEVISION APPEAL AFTER DISCUSSIONS WITH 
GOP CONGRESSMEN. HIS BIG PROBLEM SEEMS TO BE WITHIN HIS OWN PARTY. 
President Bush's hasty decision to make a nationally televised appeal for 
support on the $500-billion budget compromise came only after White House 
meetings Tuesday at which congressional Republicans delivered a blunt warning: 
Failure to rally the public with such a personal appeal could bring on a 
humiliating defeat. 
The episode reflects how much Bush has to lose -- or win -- in the struggle 
over the budget compromise and how much his potential vulnerability is due to 
fellow Republicans. If the President should fail, the result could be economic 
chaos for the country and severe political damage for Bush himself. 
Congressional Democrats have pledged to support the controversial budget 
measure, which contains such a broad array of tax increases and spending cuts 
in popular programs that it will inflict at least some pain on almost all 
voters. 
But the Democrats have made their votes conditional on Bush's delivery of GOP 
votes. And it is Republicans who are balking -- many of them still upset that 
Bush abandoned his no-new-taxes pledge and agreed to include tax increases in 
the budget compromise worked out at the eleventh hour last weekend by White 
House and congressional negotiators. 
In putting his personal prestige on the line, Bush has raised the already high 
political stakes of a congressional struggle that conservative Republicans 
complain has been shaped more by Democrats so far than by the President and the 
GOP. 
"This essentially is a Democratic package," charged House Minority Whip Newt 
Gingrich (R-Ga.), who led a GOP revolt and at first vowed to defeat the 
compromise measure. "The Democratic leadership should have the burden to pass 
it. The Democrats got what they wanted, tax increases, no growth incentives, 
cuts in the defense budget and no reductions in discretionary spending." 
Gingrich said in an interview Tuesday night that, with Bush, as well as House 
Speaker Thomas S. Foley (D-Wash.) and House Minority Leader Robert H. Michel 
(R-Ill.), leading the fight, Congress probably will pass the compromise. 
But Gingrich, still an adamant foe of the measure, will continue to lead the 
opposition. 
Democrats said that the ball is now in Bush's court and that he must pull his 
own party along with him or face blame not only for the unraveling of the 
compromise but for any adverse economic fallout. 
"This is an acid test for his leadership," said House Majority Leader Richard 
A. Gephardt (D-Mo.). "If a President can't get his own party members to follow 
him, he's in real trouble. I'm bitterly disappointed in some aspects of the 
compromise, especially in its fairness . . . but we did the best we could. And 
we need the President to convince the American people that the only alternative 
to the compromise is fiscal chaos." 
The support of Republicans is essential for House passage because, under ground 
rules adopted by the negotiators, the compromise package must be approved by a 
majority of each party in each chamber. 
"From Day One, when the President talked to Tom Foley and George Mitchell at 
the White House, the precondition of this whole thing was that both parties 
would have to support it," Gephardt said. "Our clear intention is not to put up 
more than half of our people for this unpleasant package, and the Republicans 
know it." 
Bush himself, in three separate sessions Tuesday with groups of House 
Republicans who oppose the compromise, warned of severe economic consequences 
if the measure fails. 
Although Gingrich had told opponents of the measure that they could hold out 
for a better deal, the aide said that Bush told the House Republicans: "I don't 
think you can get a better agreement. You've got to take the broader view. This 
is what is good for the economy. Some of you think we ought to forget this and 
use the veto strategy. But I don't see how we can get a better deal." 
Rep. E. Clay Shaw Jr. (R-Fla.), one of a group of 14 House members who met with 
Bush in a session that lasted for 90 minutes, said that the congressmen 
"strongly urged the President, because of his popularity, to get on the 
television and explain thoroughly to the American people exactly what the 
consequences would be if we didn't pass the budget compromise." 
Earlier in the budget negotiations, Bush had promised Democratic leaders that 
eventually he would publicly lead the fight on any budget compromise that 
emerged, but he did not make the decision to go on television Tuesday night 
until after the meeting with Shaw's group, the second of his three sessions 
with a total of about 30 House members. 
The House members strongly urged him not to delay making the speech because the 
first test vote on the compromise will be taken Thursday, when both the House 
and Senate vote on the overall budget resolution. The resolution sets the 
outlines for spending, although it does not include the detailed elements of 
the compromise package. 
The final budget package incorporating the compromise is scheduled to be voted 
on on Oct. 19. 
A Bush aide said that he thought the President persuaded about two-thirds of 
the House members who met with him to support the budget package. 
