'WHAT'S ORGANIC' PUZZLES FARMERS, CONSUMERS 
The poster on Christine and Dale Johnson's kitchen wall reads, "Our Veggies 
Don't Do Drugs." 
A jar on the kitchen table holds wasp eggs, future natural predators to be used 
instead of pesticides against the tomato hornworm -- "a nasty critter, a 
voracious eater," Christine Johnson said. 
The Johnsons run an organic farm, growing peppers, squash, kale, cherry 
tomatoes, eggplant, lettuce and other produce on their 65 acres on the eastern 
shore of Chesapeake Bay. 
Many people tell opinion surveys they are willing to pay more for organic food, 
grown without synthetic fertilizers, pesticides or insecticides. 
But growers, retailers, consumer groups and environmentalists say the organic 
food industry has been handicapped by the lack of consistent national standards 
to answer the question: What is organic food? 
"I think the consumer has the right to the assurance that the organic label 
means something," Christine Johnson said. "The consumer can often be deceived 
(and) possibly pay more for a product that's no better than another." 
Twenty-two states -- including California -- have regulations defining organic 
farming. They all follow the same basic idea, but no two are identical. In 
other states organic farms are certified by private organizations, applying 
their own standards. 
"Organic agriculture is a funny word. Organic by definition in Webster's would 
just be carbon-based," said Joseph Dunsmoor, founder of the organic food 
distributor Organic Farms in Beltsville, Md. "You can say organic agriculture 
means you don't use farm chemicals. It's a whole lot more than that." 
But what? 
This year Congress is taking a stab at an answer. The House and Senate both 
approved programs for nationwide organic farming standards as part of the 1990 
farm bill. 
The conference committee that will resolve differences between the two bills is 
waiting for approval of the budget deal so it knows how much money has to be 
cut from farm-support programs, but the organic provisions are expected to 
survive. 
"Organically produced food defies simple definition," the Senate Agriculture 
Committee said when it adopted its version. So a complicated definition was 
offered. 
"Organic food is food produced using sustainable production methods that rely 
primarily on natural materials," the committee began. There are exceptions -- 
some synthetic chemicals traditionally accepted in organic farming, and a few 
natural substances so toxic they are banned. 
Those exceptions are to be spelled out in a list drawn up by a National Organic 
Standards Board, to be made up of organic farmers, wholesalers and retailers, 
consumer representatives and environmentalists. 
Rules for raising organic meat and poultry are even more confusing than for 
vegetables. It's left to the standards board to figure out what livestock 
medications, vaccines and parasiticides are to be legal for organic farmers. 
Within two years, shoppers should be seeing U.S. government-certified organic 
chickens, tomatoes and bell peppers in the stores. 
The legislation allows for state and private organizations to do the inspection 
and certification, so long as they follow the national standards. States also 
would be permitted to enact stricter standards, if they wished, but could not 
block imports of nationally certified organic food from other states. 
The organic-farming provisions were backed vigorously by lobbyists from 
environmental groups, who say overuse of chemical pesticides, fungicides and 
fertilizers is polluting streams and endangering farm workers. 
Chemical manufacturers reject any suggestion their products are unsafe, but 
approve the idea of nationwide standards for organic agriculture, said 
Christopher Klose, spokesman for the National Agricultural Chemicals Assn. 
The small but growing organic farm industry also supported the plan for 
nationwide standards and labeling. 
"For both the consumer and the grower, there are going to be multiple benefits. 
It makes marketing much easier," said Marty Rice, co-director of the Maryland 
Organic Food and Farming Assn., which was founded last year. 
Dale Johnson, driving boxes of organic kale in from his fields in a white 
pickup, said he hoped the government-approved organic labels will boost the 
market for organic foods. 
"People say they want it and are willing to pay more for it, but that hasn't 
translated into a bigger market on the East Coast," he said. 
Supermarkets, however, report falling interest in organic foods. 
"A lot of consumers will buy it one time for the novelty, but the repeat sales 
don't seem to be there," said Nancy Yanish, director of agricultural relations 
for the Food Marking Institute in Washington. "If consumers want it, 
supermarkets will be glad to sell it." 
Two major grocery chains in the Washington area, Giant and Safeway, once had 
organic produce sections in some of their stores. Both dropped the idea in the 
last year after disappointing sales. 
The trade weekly Supermarket News reported similar experiences nationwide, 
asking in an article last May, "Is organic produce withering on the vine?" 
Organic farm organizations, however, report their production up by as much as 
40% over last year. Stores specializing in natural and organic foods seem to be 
doing fairly well, even if organic sales in regular supermarkets are slumping. 
"In the last five years we've gone from a fad to a clear market niche," said 
Bob Scowcroft, executive director of the California Certified Organic Farmers. 
"The establishment of national standards will allow our growers to compete 
fairly in all 50 states." 
