THESE WORDS PACK MEANING 
The collapse of the Berlin Wall would have been a more dramatic sign of 
fundamental shifts in American-Soviet relations than a mere exchange of words, 
but the choice of words probably has more meaning for the long term. 
In Moscow, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign minister, said Monday 
that the Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 violated both 
acceptable international behavior and his nation's own law. 
He said also that a 30-story radar tower in Siberia that was discovered by an 
American satellite in 1983 was built in violation of a 1972 arms control treaty 
to limit ballistic missile defenses. The confession ended six years of denial 
that the station was in violation of anything at all. 
Speaking in San Francisco on the same day, Secretary of State James A. Baker 
III talked of the "folly" of missing the best chance to reduce the risk of war 
"since the dawn of the nuclear age." Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's 
reform movement, he said, makes it possible to achieve the "sound political 
footing" that is essential for enduring arms control agreements. 
Baker's words seemed to end nine months of cautious examination of new Soviet 
thinking. The Bush Administration seems to be saying that Gorbachev is for 
real. And even though Washington spokesmen later rejected a Moscow proposal to 
disband both NATO and the Warsaw Pact, other responses had the ring of an 
agreement to join the Soviets in an armistice in the Cold War. That is a 
stunning development after 40 years of angry arms buildup in a sometimes 
terrifying race to make certain that neither superpower could be certain of 
destroying the other without gambling on obliteration in return. 
Caution probably will remain a central trait of the Bush presidency, but Baker 
Monday talked of caution while moving forward, not the caution of inertia. 
Washington wants movement toward making a surprise strike by either side 
impossible, toward broader arms control discussions and toward a political 
relationship in which it will be possible to see Soviet power first-hand from 
observation flights -- what started under President Eisenhower as an "open sky" 
policy -- rather than from satellites alone. 
Baker also said that uncertainty about Gorbachev's success "is all the more 
reason, not less, for us to seize the present opportunity." Negotiated and 
verifiable reductions of the threat of force could survive, he said, even if 
reform did not. 
A truce in the Cold War will require many changes, not the least of those in 
military planning to shift the emphasis gradually from superpower confrontation 
to regional conflicts and terrorism. The words of Monday must be followed by 
the deeds of negotiators both in arms control and on the environment and other 
problems on which the superpowers might just be able to join forces. For many 
Americans who have known nothing except the Cold War, the most important change 
probably will be in thinking that such changes are within reach. It should help 
that Washington has already started changing the way it thinks. 
