THE GOOD HEALTH MAGAZINE; 
PSYCHOLOGY; 
THE I OF THE STORM; 
BEHAVIOR THAT USED TO BE CONSIDERED UNETHICAL OR IMMORAL IS NOW OFTEN BLAMED ON 
ILLNESS AND NOT THE INDIVIDUAL. WHAT'S THE LINE BETWEEN BEING WRONG AND BEING 
ILL? WHEN DO THE BAD GUYS TURN INTO THE SICK GUYS? 
When I heard that Wade Boggs, the Boston Red Sox third baseman, had publicly 
declared himself a sex addict, it set me to brooding about responsibility. 
Now, I admit I'm inherently lazy. Not enough to avoid thought altogether, but 
enough to keep it within certain channels. Boggs, however, got me thinking 
about some questions I had not taken an interest in since college. For 20 years 
or so I've been thinking about human behavior scientifically -- first in 
anthropology, later in medicine. I was interested in the causes of behavior -- 
normal or abnormal. If you could explain what caused a behavior, you could, if 
you wanted to, try to change it with some sort of treatment. 
But the notion of Wade Boggs as a sex addict brought me up short. I knew about 
sex addiction, but (like most health professionals, including most 
psychiatrists) I was dubious about the category. I associated compulsive 
sexuality as an abnormality with women who were allowing themselves to be 
widely and consistently used. I knew that there were compulsively promiscuous 
men, but I just thought of them as bad guys. In a world where the risk of sex 
is so much greater for women, and where men typically have more power, my 
natural impulse didn't lean toward medical sympathy for fellows like Boggs. I 
suppressed the possibility that a medical explanation existed. 
Of course, this was naive; in a few minutes I myself could have chosen a label 
from the American Psychiatric Assn.'s official diagnostic manual -- probably 
something in the range of impulse-control disorders, although a more pervasive 
personality disorder might produce the same symptoms. But in the case of Boggs' 
celebrated affair with Margo Adams, for some reason I tried to avoid labeling. 
I thought back on others who have come, at a certain point in life, to regret 
the sexual excesses of their youth -- St. Augustine, for instance, and Leo 
Tolstoy. But here something was missing. They were saying words like, I did 
something very wrong. I repent of it now. You should think ill of me, and you 
probably should punish me -- with censure, if nothing worse -- but please, 
ultimately, forgive me. I tried to understand why this bothered me; it was not 
merely the spectacle of a powerful man abusing his power and then requesting 
sympathy. What troubled me was the medical question at the heart of the 
spectacle: How much can the concept of illness expand at the expense of the 
idea of responsibility? When do the bad guys turn into sick guys? 
Although the question ranges far beyond that of illegal acts and into the realm 
of the purely moral, most Americans have had this issue brought to their 
attention in the 1980s by two celebrated criminal cases. First John Hinckley, 
who had attempted to assassinate President Reagan, was determined by some court 
psychiatrists to be mentally ill -- and more important, to be mentally ill in a 
way that meant he was not guilty as charged. Interestingly, a then-new 
technique known as computed tomography -- CT scanning -- was used to study his 
brain, and it showed what some experts called an abnormal shape, pointing to a 
greatly expanded future -- even futuristic -- role for technology in answering 
moral questions. Second, Dan White, who had killed the mayor of San Francisco 
and one of his aides, claimed in his defense that he had eaten a junk food diet 
high in refined sugar, and that this diet had diminished his ability to 
restrain his violent impulses -- the celebrated "Twinkie defense." This 
suggested that almost any medical fad, however poorly supported by evidence, 
could influence the judicial process. 
Both defenses convinced the courts, and there are similar cases all the time. 
They come up within a framework of legal reasoning that emerged in the 19th 
Century, often referred to as the M'Naghten Rule (pronounced "MikNAW-tn"). 
Daniel M'Naghten, in a crime foreshadowing the Hinckley case, had attempted to 
kill the English Prime Minister in 1843. M'Naghten had been in the grip of 
paranoid delusions, but his exculpation produced a public outcry as well -- 
despite the fact that he was committed permanently to an asylum. A committee 
convened by Queen Victoria arrived at the first formal rules for an insanity 
plea: The accused had to not know either "the nature and quality of the act" or 
the fact that "he was doing what was wrong." Later an emotion-based defense was 
added to the essentially knowledge-based approach of M'Naghten. Although it is 
usually called "irresistible impulse," the emotion does not have to be sudden 
for this defense to work. The main point has to do with the loss, due to 
"mental disease or defect," of the power to choose. 
Together these rules made it possible for mental illness to bring a person 
under the protection of two ancient legal concepts: ignorance and coercion, 
either of which, in certain circumstances, could limit guilt for crime. In the 
legal tradition that has come down to us today, mental derangement -- temporary 
or long term -- can be used as evidence that the defendant was in the grip of 
an "irresistible impulse," or that the illness so clouded his judgement that he 
was ignorant of the moral meaning of what he did as he did it -- in the common 
phrase, "he couldn't tell right from wrong." 
Wade Boggs' self-confessed "sex addiction" is no crime, but a wide spectrum of 
acts of questionable morality -- whether legal or not -- are now falling under 
the rubric of "illness." Even as certain categories of human behavior -- 
homosexuality in America, for instance, and perhaps now political nonconformity 
in the Soviet Union -- are being "delisted" from the ranks of psychiatric 
categories, new diagnoses are being added. Increasingly, doctors -- rather than 
pastors or prosecutors -- are taking charge of these acts by labeling them with 
a new kind of language. And with these labels they are shaping our emotional 
reactions to deeds that we once would have said, quite simply, were wrong. 
Consider three cases. Once, in a medical school psychiatry clerkship, I 
attended a hearing in which the state was trying to show that a man convicted 
of homicide but found to be mentally ill should continue to be kept in a prison 
hospital for the criminally insane. His family retained a lawyer who presented 
a theory of why the young man had gone on a rampage assaulting a series of 
people with an ax. The lawyer had read some studies claiming to show that too 
much copper was a cause of irrational violence. Now, the young man was said to 
have drunk enormous amounts of milk as a child. According to other studies, 
milk reduced the absorption of copper. Since, went the theory, an excess of 
copper could cause violence, probably a deficiency of copper could too. 
This extremely far-fetched argument was not successful -- indeed, it was 
difficult to see its purpose, since the young man was already deemed mentally 
ill, and was being given treatment rather than (merely) being imprisoned. Yet I 
was stunned: a completely baseless and self-contradictory "scientific" argument 
was politely heard by all concerned, with no form of reprimand to the lawyer, 
who had no basis for a claim of expertise. 
A year later, returning to the same prison hospital with a 
psychiatrist-teacher, I helped him interview a young man who had confessed to 
killing a woman when she reprimanded him for urinating on her lawn. He had been 
working for a lawn-care company, and was apparently exposed to large quantities 
of organic phosphates, which he was required to handle as fertilizer. The 
psychiatrist was preparing a case based on the notion that the organic 
phosphates in the fertilizer had given the man an uncharacteristic violent 
impulse. I pored through the doctor's stack of copied research papers. Organic 
phosphates in large doses certainly could cause nerve damage, which the young 
man did not have. Rarely, they had apparently caused brain damage too, but 
almost always in association with nerve damage. Nowhere in the literature was 
there a case of brain damage caused by organic phosphates and resulting in 
violence. 
I couldn't help thinking that 30 years earlier a psychiatrist with a Freudian 
orientation would have seized on the interpersonal situation -- a young man 
urinating in the wrong place is surprised and reprimanded by an older woman -- 
and related the violent outburst to deep problems stemming from his childhood, 
complete with Oedipus complex and castration anxiety. Now, in the '80s -- the 
era of biological psychiatry -- we had instead an equally tortuous, and equally 
unsupported, biochemical theory. 
The third case came closest to home. I was approached by a criminal defense 
lawyer and asked to testify on behalf of his client. This was a man who, under 
supposedly extreme provocation, had killed his lover in a fit of jealousy. The 
lawyer had read a book of mine about human nature, in which (among many other 
things) I described situations similar to his client's as occurring in cultures 
throughout the world, and indeed as having parallels in many animal societies. 
He wanted me to testify to these facts of anthropology, which he would then 
argue diminished his client's responsibility for the homicide. This was not an 
insanity defense, but intended instead to show that the man did not have "mens 
reus" -- the criminal intent needed for complete guilt. 
I wrestled with the ethics of this gambit: Would I be wrong to lend myself to 
it? Or, in our advocacy system of justice, would I be wrong to refuse to state 
what I knew?. But then I was let off the hook by the lawyer, who had found 
another defense. This too was instructive: his client had taken barbiturates by 
prescription before the crime, and they had found a psychiatrist who would 
testify that this could have impaired his capacity to act in accord with the 
law. The lawyer did not want to confuse the jury by invoking two sorts of 
exonerating expert testimony, and he was more comfortable with a psychiatric 
theory of an abnormal state of mind than with an anthropological theory of a 
passionate, predictable one. 
ither way, and in every one of these cases, the decision should be made by a 
judge and jury. Only the common sense exercised by the jury and the common law 
interpreted by the judge should count, not the expert testimony. But in reality 
judges and juries are influenced by experts -- including those who go far 
beyond scientific knowledge in their testimony. And in the cases like Boggs' 
noncriminal questions of moral judgement, we as a society, and even ethical 
advisers like ministers, priests, rabbis and teachers are inevitably influenced 
by changing cultural concepts of illness and responsibility. The extremes in 
this controversy were staked out by many years ago. Karl Menninger, a 
distinguished psychiatrist for whom (among other physician family-members) the 
famous clinic in Topeka, Kansas is named, has been a longtime advocate of the 
use of medical diagnoses of criminals. He wrote as early as 1928, "the time 
will come when stealing and murder will be thought of as a symptom, indicating 
the presence of a disease, a personality disease." And almost a half-century 
later, in response to the notion that wicked people exist, he said, "I don't 
believe in such a thing as the 'criminal mind.' Everyone's mind is 'criminal'; 
we're all capable of criminal fantasies and thoughts." 
By the late 1950s psychiatry was at the peak of its power. Freudian 
psychoanalytic theory, in a modified American form, appeared to have won the 
day, and the courts were showing signs of accepting Menninger's thesis. Clergy, 
for their part, were mastering the art and science of psychotherapy. We seemed, 
as a culture, to have gone well down a path toward defining -- medically -- 
wickedness out of existence, and with it, punishment. There would only be 
illness, treatment, and ultimate reintegration of the normalized individual 
into society. The courts and the churches alike were scrambling to avoid being 
left behind as the new science led the community in a race out of the sphere of 
moral judgement, having jettisoned outmoded concepts like responsibility. 
Just at this moment Thomas Szasz -- a psychiatrist who has been his own 
profession's most severe critic -- appeared on the intellectual landscape. His 
1961 book, "The Myth of Mental Illness," challenged almost every aspect of 
psychiatry and publicly declared its legal authority to be illegitimate. The 
book's subtitle, "Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct," was 
significant. "Human behavior," he wrote, "is fundamentally moral behavior." He 
argued that individuals must be allowed to take drugs, commit suicide, and do 
harm to others without prior restraint and take the consequences of their acts 
-- addiction, death, or the full force of the law -- regardless of 
psychological conditions. "The concept of mental illness," he wrote elsewhere, 
"is betrayal of common sense and of an ethical view of man." 
summary added to the book in 1974 stated, "Psychiatric diagnoses are 
stigmatizing labels, phrased to resemble medical diagnoses and applied to 
persons whose behavior annoys or offends others" and, "The introduction of 
psychiatric considerations into the administration of the criminal law -- for 
example, the insanity plea and verdict, diagnoses of mental incompetence to 
stand trial, and so forth -- corrupt the law and victimize the subject on whose 
behalf they are ostensibly employed." Szasz, like Menninger, has been 
consistent over the course of a long career. In 1972, he wrote an article in 
the British medical journal, The Lancet, called "Bad Habits Are Not Diseases." 
And in a letter to the New York Times published on June 12, 1989, he wrote that 
even the most severe crack addicts, if violent, are "criminals first and 
patients second, if at all." 
Partly under his goad, and further stimulated in the '80s by the Hinckley case 
and the "Twinkie defense," a public outcry has altered the insanity plea as it 
stood in common law and in the Model Penal Code of the prestigious American Law 
Institute. The penal code in the 1950s helped standardize the common law 
traditions and affected law in many states but its influence has weakened since 
Hinckley. The American Bar Assn. and the American Psychiatric Assn. both 
proposed an elimination of the "irresistible impulse" rule. In 1984 the Federal 
Criminal Code adopted this suggestion, and also abandoned the wording 
"substantial incapacity" in favor of "complete incapacity." In practical terms 
very few cases were affected -- most crimes are tried under state law -- but 
the message was influential. More than half the states, including California, 
have followed suit on "irresistible impulse." In addition, several states have 
adopted a new verdict: "guilty but mentally ill," which defense lawyers feel 
destroys the insanity plea, undermining a traditional pillar of justice. 
This public reaction against the insanity plea was understandable; highly 
publicized cases had begun to make it seem as if the very idea of right and 
wrong was being abandoned. Yet the reaction was based in part on major 
misconceptions, which could swing the pendulum too far away from the 
psychiatric concept of criminal actions -- a highly legitimate approach in 
certain situations. But before one passes judgement on the insanity defense, 
three things should be considered. First -- contrary to Menninger's sweeping 
prediction, and despite the famous cases -- only a fraction of criminal 
defenses invoke the insanity plea, and only a fraction of that fraction 
succeed. Also, studies of arrests show that few crimes, and even fewer violent 
crimes -- under 5% -- are accounted for by former mental patients. Popular 
fears aside, few mental patients are dangerous. Second, experts are not in 
charge of the decision -- a jury and judges are in charge. They review the 
evidence, hear the expert testimony on both sides, and make the kind of 
judgement that courts have made for centuries before psychiatry was invented. 
Third, a successful insanity defense need not "get the guy off the hook and out 
on the street" promptly, as many fear. On the contrary, this outcome is rare. 
In almost all states a verdict of "not guilty by reason of insanity" requires 
at least the consideration of commitment, and in some, commitment is mandatory. 
The recent near-release of Arthur Jackson from prison shows what can happen if 
a sick criminal is not medically labeled. Jackson was convicted of attempted 
murder in the 1982 assault of actress Theresa Saldana outside her West 
Hollywood apartment. Though he attacked her with exceptional brutality -- 
stabbing her so hard and so many times that his hunting knife bent -- and then, 
while in prison, repeatedly threatened to kill her upon release, Jackson was 
about to be released early from an ordinary criminal sentence, for good 
behavior. In June, however, the California Board of Prison Terms delayed his 
parole for 270 days for breaking prison windows and resisting guards' efforts 
to subdue him. Jackson had a long history of mental illness before the assault. 
Ironically, if he had been found guilty by reason of insanity, his continuing 
psychosis would have allowed authorities to keep him behind bars in a prison 
mental hospital indefinitely. 
The idea of using the concept of illness to lengthen detention beyond what the 
criminal sentence would have dictated is anathema to civil libertarians. Yet it 
was narrowly supported by the Supreme Court in 1983, and it may be the most 
appropriate response in many cases. Some violent crime is the result of mental 
illness. If detention and deterrence are two of the goals of justice, then they 
may sometimes be attained more effectively through a medical approach. 
In the heyday of psychiatric exoneration, psychiatrists claimed to know more 
than they knew. They claimed to be able to predict future behavior, and to be 
able to cure the mental illnesses that cause crime. As is pointed out by Szasz 
and by Jonas Robitscher, who was doubly trained in psychiatry and law, these 
claims were greatly exaggerated. Robitscher's 1980 book, "The Powers of 
Psychiatry," showed some of the limits of the claims, and studies over the past 
decade have proven him right. Prediction is almost impossible, cure is always 
partial at best, and even diagnosis cannot be agreed upon by experts in 
conflict. In Robitscher's words, "the medical basis for psychiatric authority 
must continue to be questioned." 
Nevertheless, such authority must also continue to be considered. If cures for 
most mental illnesses elude us, diagnosis is in a more advanced state -- much 
better, in fact, than it was even in 1980. Judgements must somehow be both 
moral and medical. If a jury identifies a crime, it can, with the consultation 
of experts, also identify an illness. Whether the illness is treatable, 
resulting in a shorter period of incarceration than simple imprisonment, or 
untreatable, resulting in a longer detention, a fair approach to wrongdoers 
cannot omit this consideration. 
Yet medical labeling must not result in the elimination of punishment. This 
threat must enter the mind -- however diseased -- of every person who 
contemplated a wrongful act. In a world of uncertainties, only capital 
punishment seems unacceptable; it obviously differs from institutionalization 
in a way that imprisonment does not. In fact, our frequent inability to rule 
out mental illness is one of the best arguments against the death penalty. That 
penalty aside, the decision as to who shall be incarcerated for detention and 
punishment, and who for detention and treatment, can tolerate a certain amount 
of ambiguity. 
Two stories, one true and one apocryphal, give glimpses of the balance between 
impulse and blame as it may have appeared at the dawn of human consciousness. 
The true one comes from observations by anthropologist Richard Lee of the !Kung 
San of Botswana -- a hunting and gathering people whom I also lived with and 
studied for two years. These are people without lawyers or judges -- without 
any legal forms or authority -- and certainly without psychiatry. Lee showed 
that homicides occur among them in a frequency not very different from our own; 
there is sometimes revenge but there is no legal recourse. However, in one case 
of a man who killed three times, the community concluded that he was incurably 
violent. This, in a sense, was a primitive psychiatric diagnosis, but the 
response in this society without police or prisons, hospitals or psychiatrists, 
was not and could not be incarceration or medical treatment. With no other 
choice open to them, three men premeditated his homicide, lay in ambush for 
him, and killed him. 
The second story comes from a Midrash -- a rabbinic legend -- about the 
conversation between Cain and God in Genesis, regarding Cain's crime of 
fratricide. According to the Midrash, the argument goes on for some time after 
Cain asks insolently, "Am I my brother's keeper?" His final challenge to God is 
the most intriguing one: "You made me as I am. You put the evil inclination in 
me. Therefore I am not responsible." Thus, without mentioning mental illness, 
an ancient legend raised the same philosophical problem: If evil is built into 
some personalities, how can we confront them with blame? But the rabbis were 
not much impressed by Cain's challenge. The Talmud says, "Who is strong? He who 
conquers his inclination." Cain, they conceded, was -- like the rest of us -- 
endowed with an evil inclination, but also with a good one, and with a rational 
ethical faculty designed to set and keep the balance tipped against evil. 
As we enter the 1990s, we as a society will have to accept more and more 
evidence that a large part of what we call wickedness is also mental illness. 
Not only psychoses and depressions with delusional features, but also certain 
impulse control disorders, adjustment disorders, sexual disorders, and 
personality disorders are legitimate psychiatric diagnoses that might tend to 
cause crime or non-criminal wrongdoing. And the frontier of diagnosis is moving 
fast. 
Consider an instance of sexual harassment of a female employee by her male 
boss, while he is under the influence of alcohol. He may blame the alcohol, and 
this tactic would work if he were involuntarily intoxicated. But we expect him 
to know that drinking may lead to such wrongs, and so we hold him accountable. 
Now suppose he is an alcoholic. He has a diagnosable substance-abuse disorder. 
Do we exonerate him because of this illness? Probably not; he should have known 
better than to drink himself into it. But now we have one last, new twist: in 
the '80s it has been decisively shown that some individuals are genetically 
predisposed to the development of alcoholism. Our man turns out to be one of 
them (in a few years time, a test of his DNA may be available to prove it.) 
What do we say now? Do we blame him for an immoral act at the end of a chain of 
events that began with a hereditary defect? I suspect that the answer is yes -- 
that we help him and blame him both -- but clearly the judgement is not easy. 
In the realm of crime, a substantial minority of criminals has what in the past 
was called psychopathy or sociopathy and is currently called antisocial 
personality disorder. Such personalities have been extensively studied by 
psychologists. Compared to average people, they are sensation-seekers whose 
attachments to others are shallow, who experience little guilt, and who are 
relatively unresponsive to the threat of punishment. Strictly speaking, such 
people have a diagnosable mental illness. But the courts have been properly 
reluctant to accept an insanity plea from someone whose main symptom is 
repetitive antisocial behavior. Along the same line, the short-lived Durham 
rule, or "product test," of insanity was applied in the District of Columbia 
for a decade beginning 1954. It stated that the insanity plea was valid if the 
crime was the product of the person's mental illness. This rule was dropped 
because it threatened to widen the insanity plea to encompass most crimes. The 
courts have thus essentially rejected Menninger's view in "The Crime of 
Punishment" that all crime is evidence of mental illness. "Blame and 
punishment," says one recent law text, "are central to the criminal law." They 
are also central to the moral fabric of society. 
There are limits to punishment; a society as complex and capable as ours only 
humiliates itself when it resorts to the same tactic -- removal by death -- 
that the otherwise helpless !Kung were forced to apply. Yet neither can we 
pretend that we have advanced very far in remediating the illnesses that partly 
cause crime. And if we can't cure mentally ill criminals, then we need to 
separate them from potential victims. To refuse to grant them treatment while 
they are incarcerated is simply inhumane to them; but to release them in 
essentially the same disordered state of mind in which they committed crimes 
before is inhumane to their victims -- past and future. 
In the realm of the moral, addictions to substances such as alcohol or habits 
like promiscuity do plenty of damage within the bounds of the law. Say what we 
like / Continued PLEASE RETURN 
TO LAT MAGAZINE 
TO stone 
for page 44 
Continued 
about the people with these problems -- they certainly may have diagnosable 
mental illnesses -- there must, as in criminal cases, be some sense of 
accountability. Even if these individuals have weaknesses that are greater than 
average, or impulses stronger than average, or rational ethical faculties less 
capable than average, we as a society must strengthen their self-control -- and 
our own -- by insisting that we all give an account of ourselves as moral 
agents. No amount of explanation can be allowed to stand in the way of this 
accounting. It is true, as Menninger said, that we are all capable of criminal 
fantasies and thoughts; but only some of us carry them out. 
Whether we are talking about a presidential assassin, a child abuser, a 
street-wise crack addict, a compulsively promiscuous man, or an alcoholic 
celebrity drying out at a famous clinic, some expectation of moral restraint is 
always applicable. The tension between these two views of unwanted behavior is 
far from new. Aristotle's ethics include the observation that "foolish people 
whose folly arises from disease, e.g. from epilepsy, or from insanity, are in a 
morbid state," and implies that they are not responsible for their acts; yet 
speculates that "it is perhaps wrong to say that actions which are due to 
passion or desire are involuntary." The Mishnah, which contains much of the 
foundation of Jewish ethics, observes, "An encounter with a deaf-mute, an 
idiot, or a minor is bad, for you are liable and they are not;" but it also 
says, "Man is always responsible, whether his act is intentional or 
inadvertent, whether he is awake or asleep." 
And James M. Gustafson, one of the leading Christian ethicists of our time, 
although widely known for his compassionate liberal theology, said recently: 
"If all actions for which we might be held responsible are classified as 
addictions or illnesses, then we totally surrender the sense of moral 
accountability." 
A famous phrase of Freud's is usually translated as "Where id was, there ego 
shall be," implying a rendering of the irrational to make it accessible to 
reality. But the passage may really mean "Where 'it' was, there 'I' shall be." 
This message, something like the opposite of psychological exculpation, is a 
far superior legacy for Freud to have left us. We would all like to point at an 
illness -- a psychiatric label -- and say of our weak or bad actions, "That 
thing, the illness, it did it, not me. It." But at some point we must draw 
ourselves up to our full height, and say in a clear voice what we have done and 
why it was wrong. And we must use the word "I," not "it" or "illness." I did 
it, I. I. 
