JUSTICES URGED TO STAY DEATH SENTENCE 
An openly skeptical state Supreme Court was urged Tuesday to overturn the 
conviction and death sentence of a man who, under the influence of drugs, 
killed a West Covina policeman with the officer's own shotgun in 1983. 
An attorney for Michael Anthony Jackson, now 34, told the court that the jury 
should have been instructed to consider the possibility that Jackson acted in 
self-defense -- although witnesses said the victim, Officer Kenneth Scott 
Wrede, had not even drawn his service revolver until after Jackson had wrenched 
a shotgun from Wrede's patrol car. 
Several justices reacted with unusually open disdain for that claim, as well as 
other contentions made by lawyer Gerald H. Gottlieb during arguments in the 
case in Los Angeles. 
'Cost Him His Life' 
"Wait a minute," Justice Edward A. Panelli said at one point in the hearing. 
"If the officer had unholstered his revolver earlier, we probably wouldn't be 
here today. . . . He showed fantastic restraint -- and it cost him his life." 
The court also showed little patience with Gottlieb's surprising contention 
that Jackson's sentence should be overturned on grounds the framers of the 
federal Constitution had not intended to permit capital punishment. That theory 
has been rejected by the U.S. Supreme Court for more than a century, most 
recently in a 1976 ruling upholding the death penalty. 
"I wouldn't waste time on that issue, counsel," advised Justice David N. 
Eagleson. Chief Justice Malcolm M. Lucas added a wry reminder that the state 
court is legally bound by federal high court rulings on federal constitutional 
questions. "You are asking us to reverse U.S. Supreme Court cases, are you 
not?" Lucas asked. "Isn't that a little heroic?" 
State Deputy Atty. Gen. David F. Glassman argued that there were no significant 
procedural errors in Jackson's trial and that his conviction and death sentence 
should be upheld. Officer Wrede had displayed uncommon patience in dealing with 
the suspect in his drug-induced state, Glassman said, "but he was met with such 
violence that he lost his life." 
There was "no possible analysis" of the evidence that would support a claim 
that Jackson was reasonably, or even unreasonably, acting in self-defense, the 
state prosecutor said. 
Wrede was on routine patrol by himself shortly after noon on Aug. 31, 1983, 
when he received a radio call to investigate a man acting strangely at a nearby 
intersection. The officer encountered Jackson, walking down a street barefoot 
and appearing disoriented. According to authorities, Jackson reacted violently 
when Wrede sought to question him, at one point grabbing an eight-foot garden 
stake and brandishing it at the 26-year-old officer. 
Called for Help 
After a struggle, Wrede ran to the patrol car to call for assistance. Witnesses 
said Jackson also went to the car and took the officer's 12-gauge shotgun from 
its holder. Wrede then unholstered his service revolver and crouched on the 
other side of the car. Jackson momentarily rested the shotgun on the roof, but 
then fired the weapon, striking Wrede in the head. 
Moments later, more police arrived but were cursed and threatened with the gun 
by Jackson before he finally was brought to the ground by a police dog, 
authorities said. 
Jackson was charged with first-degree murder and prosecutors sought the death 
penalty, as permitted by law in the killing of a police officer performing his 
duty. 
Admitted PCP Use 
At trial, Jackson, previously convicted of burglary and drug-related offenses, 
testified that he had taken the hallucinogenic drug PCP on the morning of the 
incident and could not remember shooting Wrede or the events leading up to the 
incident. 
His trial counsel argued that Jackson, in his state of intoxication, was not 
aware of his actions. Because he thus could not have intended the officer's 
death, he should be convicted of no more than involuntary manslaughter, the 
lawyer contended. Nonetheless, a Los Angeles Superior Court jury found Jackson 
guilty of first-degree murder and he was sentenced to death. 
'No Intent to Kill' 
Gottlieb, appointed by the high court in 1984 to represent Jackson on appeal, 
argued Tuesday that Jackson had fired into the flashing light bar of the patrol 
car and that the fatal wound to Wrede came from a ricocheting pellet. This was 
an indication, the lawyer said, that "there was no intent to kill -- no intent 
to hurt." 
There was a "high probability" that the officer's death was accidental, 
Gottlieb said. Jackson, he said, could well have been responding to a perceived 
threat to his own life, and he should not have been convicted of murder. "The 
pattern here is not one of action (by Jackson) but one of response," the 
attorney said. 
