TV-RADIO / LARRY STEWART: NO ERRORS FOR CBS AFTER ESPN'S BIG BLUNDER IN BOSTON 
CBS' postseason opener Thursday night was a lot better than ESPN's 
regular-season finale Wednesday night. 
CBS didn't really miss anything in covering Pittsburgh's exciting 4-3 victory 
over Cincinnati in Game 1 of the National League championship series, which is 
more than you can say about ESPN in covering Boston's American League 
East-clinching victory over the Chicago White Sox. 
With two out in the bottom of the ninth inning and the Red Sox leading, 3-1, 
ESPN positioned all but two of its nine cameras to get player and crowd 
reactions. 
The center-field camera was used to show the pitch to Chicago's Ozzie Guillen, 
and that left only the high camera behind home plate to follow the ball to 
right field, where Tom Brunansky, blocked from view in a corner of Fenway Park, 
made his big catch. 
ESPN missed the live shot of this momentous play and, worse yet, had no 
replays. The cable network was left with nothing but egg on its face. 
ESPN, it is hoped, learned something: Never sacrifice game action for reaction 
shots. 
The crowd in Cincinnati demonstrated knowledge of CBS announcer Jack Buck, 
holding up a "Go Crazy, Folks, Go Crazy" banner. That was Buck's radio call on 
Ozzie Smith's home run that gave the St. Louis Cardinals a 3-2 game lead over 
the Dodgers in the 1985 NL playoffs. 
Buck's succinct style works well with Tim McCarver's more animated delivery. "I 
think we're tied," Buck said when the Pirates' Sid Bream hit his two-run homer 
to catch the Reds at 3-3 in the fourth inning. 
The National League's Game 2 begins at 12:18 p.m. today, and Game 1 of the 
American League championship series, Oakland at Boston, is set for Saturday at 
5:30 p.m. The AL announcers are Dick Stockton and Jim Kaat. 
The season is over for the Dodgers, but not for announcers Vin Scully and Jaime 
Jarrin. 
Scully will work the World Series for CBS Radio, and Jarrin will work the 
playoffs and the Series for CBS Radio's Spanish-language network. 
Jarrin's words will go to 40 stations reaching 80% of the 12.8 million 
Spanish-speaking people in the United States, plus 175 stations throughout 
Latin America. The Los Angeles affiliate is KTNQ. 
Jarrin relishes the assignment. But then he relishes about everything these 
days. Mainly, he is thrilled to be alive. 
Jarrin almost died from injuries suffered in an auto accident at Vero Beach, 
Fla., in March. He had a lacerated liver, a ruptured spleen, broken ribs and a 
collapsed lung. He underwent surgery the night of the accident and again a few 
weeks later to clear an intestinal abscess. 
Jarrin didn't return to work until the All-Star game July 10, and didn't return 
full time until July 23. 
He says he's now about 85%. "There's still some pain from the incisions, but I 
feel pretty good," he said. "My weight is coming back." 
Jarrin, who lost 36 pounds, dropping to 138 after the accident, is at 158 and 
looking fit. 
Add Jarrin: The auto accident isn't the only recent tragedy in Jarrin's life. 
Two years ago, his son James died of an aneurysm at 29. 
Jarrin has two other sons -- Jorge, the popular traffic reporter for KABC 
Radio, and Mauricio, a student at UC San Diego. 
Life has been good to Jarrin. The two tragedies made him realize how good. 
"I've learned to appreciate everything just that much more," he said. 
Jarrin, possibly the most popular member of the Dodger organization, came to 
the United States from Ecuador with his wife, Blanca, in 1959. 
He got a radio job with KWKW that year and began covering the Dodgers. In 1972, 
he became the Dodgers' No. 1 Spanish-language announcer and was soon called the 
Vin Scully of the Spanish-speaking community. 
As Fernando Valenzuela's translator in the early 1980s, he became known to the 
English-speaking community, as well. 
While recuperating in the hospital, Jarrin got the chance to listen to Scully 
extensively. "There's no question he is the best," Jarrin said. 
That's what Spanish-speaking listeners also say about Jarrin. 
Even though the baseball playoffs are here and the World Series is next, KABC 
Radio has cut its "Sportstalk" program in half. 
Beginning today, "Sportstalk," which has been running from 4 to 8 p.m., will be 
on the air from 5 to 7 p.m. This is not exactly a good omen for host Ed 
(Superfan) Bieler, and KABC management has reportedly met with other talk-show 
hosts. 
Stu Nahan will continue with his "Stu's Views" segment at 5:45 p.m., and Ross 
Porter will be on three times a week during the second hour with "Dodger 
Focus." 
Buffoon Dept.: Just before going on the air, Victor Kiam, the New England 
Patriots' owner who also makes Remington shavers, mentioned to NBC's Will 
McDonough and Bob Costas that he has already bought Christmas advertising on 
NBC. 
Presumably, it was supposed to soften them up. It didn't work. Costas grilled 
Kiam. 
New show: The Rams' Mike Lansford will kick off "Sports Confidential" on 
SportsChannel Los Angeles Nov. 5, and the show is scheduled to move to the full 
SportsChannel America network in December. Janniene Keahl, who works for an 
Orange County cable channel, will be the co-host. 
Lansford does a radio show Monday and Friday mornings on KEZY and KORG in 
Orange County, and the TV commercial he does for Smogpros is seen everywhere. 
One thing about that commercial: It's not Lansford's voice. Why? "Beats me," 
Lansford said. 
TV-Radio Notes 
Either USC or UCLA has appeared on ABC every weekend this season, and the trend 
continues. The Arizona at UCLA game will be on ABC Saturday at 12:30 p.m., with 
Brent Musburger and Dick Vermeil reporting. And on Oct. 13, ABC will televise 
USC at Stanford, with the same announcing team. . . . Saturday night, USC's 
7:30 home game against Washington State will be on ESPN, with Steve Physioc and 
Neil Lomax reporting. . . . With KNX carrying baseball Saturday night, the 
Trojan radio broadcast will be on KLAC. 
The Rams were 6,559 tickets shy of selling out in time to lift the blackout for 
Sunday's home game against the Cincinnati Bengals. So the NFL lineup will be 
Kansas City at Indianapolis at 10 a.m. on NBC, with Charlie Jones and Todd 
Christensen; Green Bay at Chicago at 1 p.m. on CBS, with Pat Summerall and John 
Madden, and the Raiders at Buffalo at 4:30 p.m. on TNT and Channel 9, with Skip 
Caray and Pat Haden. . . . Joe McDonnell's Sunday night talk show on KFI will 
air after the Raider game. . . . The Rams' game at Chicago on Oct. 14 will also 
have a 4:30 p.m. kickoff. TNT is going with 4:30 starts the next two Sundays to 
get a head start on the baseball playoff games on CBS. There will be no TNT 
Sunday night football on Oct. 21 to avoid competing with the World Series. 
Instead, the New England-Miami game will be televised on Thursday, Oct. 18, a 
Series travel day. 
John Rooney and Jerry Coleman are the CBS Radio announcers for the National 
League playoffs; Jim Hunter and Johnny Bench are handling the American League 
playoffs. Bench will join Vin Scully for the World Series. . . . Chicago White 
Sox Manager Jeff Torborg will be a studio guest on the CBS-TV baseball pregame 
show Saturday night, and Don Baylor will be on the Sunday night show. . . . The 
Dodgers' Rick Dempsey was Channel 2's postgame guest Thursday night, the 
Angels' Wally Joyner will be the American League guest commentator, and St. 
Louis pitcher Joe Magrane will take over on the National League show Tuesday. . 
. . Dodger pitcher Tim Belcher will be a KFWB contributor during the playoffs 
and the Series. 
Channel 2 announced that KMPC's Jim Healy, along with fellow radio 
personalities Ed Bieler, Lee Hamilton and Gabe Kaplan, would be a part of this 
week's "The John Robinson Show," which airs Saturday at 3:30 p.m. and again 
Sunday at 10 a.m. But Healy said he will not be on the show. He said KMPC sent 
along a mug shot of him, but that was it. . . . Kaplan will do his KLAC 
"Sportsnut" programs from Honolulu next week. . . . Talk about a big dropoff: 
Roy Firestone, possibly the best sports interviewer on television, will be 
replaced by Joe Fowler on the Laker pregame shows on Channel 9 this season. Ted 
Green remains as the producer. 
