BAY AREA QUAKE; 
BANKS, THRIFTS OFFER EMERGENCY LOANS, RELAX RULES FOR VICTIMS 
Major California banks and thrifts on Friday moved to provide emergency loans 
and to ease the financial pressure on earthquake victims by giving them breaks 
on mortgage and other loan payments. 
Policies vary at each financial institution, although in general they include 
such things as allowing victims to skip mortgage and credit-card payments 
temporarily, make lower payments or allow borrowers more time to pay off their 
mortgages. 
Two major buyers of mortgages from lenders also said they will provide similar 
breaks for homeowners. 
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- called Freddie Mac -- said it is 
devising a mortgage-relief plan and that it will suspend until Jan. 1 
foreclosure procedures on property in the earthquake area. The Federal National 
Mortgage Assn. -- Fannie Mae -- said it plans to offer a similar program. Both 
agencies advised homeowners to check first with the companies that service 
their mortgages. 
Meanwhile, private lenders began organizing programs to provide homeowners and 
businesses money for repairs. 
A consortium of 46 banks in the state that normally provides money for 
low-income housing may also pool money to make disaster-relief loans, said Hugh 
D. Loftus, first vice president of Security Pacific National Bank. He said 
members of the Burbank-based group, called the California Community 
Reinvestment Co., plan to meet next week to work on plans. 
Some of the state's major financial institutions announced their own loan 
programs for victims or said they will do so next seek. 
Bank of America, the state's largest bank, said it is offering emergency, 
low-interest, 90-day loans without fees to homeowners who suffered damage. They 
will carry an interest rate equal to what the bank is paying for money, which 
now is 8%. Unsecured disaster-relief loans for up to 48 months are being 
offered at 12%. 
Wells Fargo Bank, also in San Francisco, is expected to announce a program 
Monday to provide loans at 9% to renters and homeowners whose residences were 
damaged by the earthquake. The Wells Fargo loans will be offered only to the 
bank's current customers. 
Wells Fargo also is setting up a $75-million pool of money for low-interest 
loans for small business customers with sales from $250,000 to $5 million a 
year. Those loans will have an interest rate 1.5% below the prime rate, now at 
10.5%. 
Union Bank, another San Francisco bank, said it will provide unsecured 
disaster-relief loans of up to $25,000 to quake victims. The 90-day loans carry 
an interest rate equal to the rate Union is paying for money, now at 8% to 9%. 
Union Bank also will provide loans to people whose cars were damaged in the 
quake, with no payment for 90 days, and will waive penalties on early 
withdrawals of money in certificates of deposit. 
Homeowners also may seek low-interest loans through the U.S. Small Business 
Administration, the federal agency that administers disaster-relief loans. The 
agency makes available up to $100,000 to repair damage to homes and up to 
$20,000 for personal property damage, which includes cars and furniture. 
Homeowners pay either 4% or 8% interest, depending on whether they have credit 
elsewhere, and may take as long as 30 years to pay off the loans, depending on 
their ability to repay the money. Bernard Kulik, an SBA deputy assistant 
administrator, said loans may not be used to upgrade a home, unless it means 
bringing the house up to code. 
For businesses, Kulik said, the SBA has two basic loans available. 
The first is a "physical disaster loan" of up to $500,000 for repairs or to 
replace such things as damaged inventory. The interest rate is either 4% or 8%, 
depending on the financial health of the business, and businesses may take as 
long as 30 years to repay the loans. Large businesses may be eligible for more 
than $500,000. 
The second type of loan is an "economic injury loan" that provides a cash 
infusion to a business so it can continue to pay its bills while recovering. 
The rate is 4% for up to 30 years and applies to small businesses -- with fewer 
than 500 employees -- that do not have credit elsewhere. A business may borrow 
a combined total of $500,000 under the physical-disaster and economic-injury 
loan programs. 
The toll-free number for information on the SBA loans is 1-800-462-9029. 
If loans to individuals are insufficient to cover needs, they may be eligible 
for grants of up to $10,000 through the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
That money may be used for a wide variety of needs, including medicine, health 
care costs or funeral expenses. In addition, the agency makes rent money 
available to those who cannot live in their homes because they are unsafe. 
Information on the FEMA programs also may be obtained by calling 
1-800-462-9029. 
