DOING OUR PART 
An impasse is developing on the issue of the debt of developing nations, and 
the plight of some of those nations is now being further complicated by delays 
in assuring new funding for the International Development Assn., the World 
Bank's soft-loan division. Both Washington and Wall Street have roles to play 
in finding a solution. 
President Bush, through his Treasury secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, has been 
giving strong leadership to resolving the debt problem. He has indicated 
willingness to forgive debts owed the U.S. government, primarily by poor 
sub-Saharan African nations. And he has put together a plan of public and 
private, national and international funding to ease the debts owed largely to 
commercial banks, notably by Latin American nations and the Philippines. But a 
rebellion by the bankers now puts the program at risk. 
The banks have failed to forgive substantial enough portions of the Third World 
indebtedness that they themselves promoted, albeit encouraged by the American 
government. And now they are holding back on a critical element of the 
Bush-Brady Plan, the investment of substantial new money. To call this attitude 
short-sighted is to be overly polite. But it is a reality of the moment. 
There are several things that the American government can do to improve the 
situation. 
In regard to the banks, it may now be necessary to provide some incentives, 
either in regulatory shifts to allow more generous bookkeeping by the banks on 
their Third World debts, or in tax concessions for new investment in critical 
areas. It is not far-fetched to defend such concessions in the name of national 
security. The security of the Western Hemisphere could be gravely affected by 
further economic deterioration in the key debtor nations -- Mexico, Brazil, 
Argentina and Venezuela. 
As for the government, the President needs to end his coyness and give vigorous 
leadership to funding the international mechanisms that have been given pivotal 
roles in the debt crisis: The International Monetary Fund, now requesting a 
100% increase in its quota; the World Bank, now being threatened by some 
members of Congress with withdrawal of promised American funds; and the 
International Development Assn., the World Bank arm that helps the poorest 
nations with concessional loans. The United States should fully participate in 
a replenishment of at least $14.5 billion to the IDA, a proposal agreed to by 
all of the other major donors. Incidentally, these are not costly ventures for 
the government because most of the funding is in the form of guarantees rather 
than outright appropriations. 
Will this work? Perhaps not everywhere. The situation in Argentina defies, for 
the moment, any rational solution. Brazil, the biggest debtor of all the 
developing nations, skipped a $1.6 billion interest payment Sept. 18, an 
ominous sign of its tenuous situation. But the rescue package for Mexico is 
still intact, although it has not reversed the egregious flight of the elite's 
capital from Mexico. And in most of the debtor nations, even a modest increase 
in new resources can make an enormous difference at a time when many of them 
are forced to spend most of their export earnings on debt service and 
repayment. 
The President has recognized the importance of addressing the problem of Poland 
and Hungary, a rare opportunity for the international community and 
international agencies like the IMF to demonstrate their commitment to 
development. The issue of Poland's development is seen in Washington in sharply 
defined East-West security terms. Bush now needs to remind the nation, and its 
bankers, that American security and prosperity are vitally linked not just 
across the Iron Curtain, but also south across the border, to the developing 
nations of the world. 
