4 AMERICANS, GERMAN SHARE SCIENCE NOBELS 
Two American molecular biologists who revolutionized scientists' view of the 
nature of the first life on Earth won the Nobel Prize for chemistry on 
Thursday, while two Americans and a German physicist who developed new 
techniques for highly accurate timekeeping shared the physics Nobel. 
Thomas Cech of the University of Colorado in Boulder and Sidney Altman of Yale 
University will share the $460,000 chemistry prize for their unexpected 
discovery that ribonucleic acid (RNA), which was originally thought only to be 
a repository of genetic information, can carry out biochemical functions as 
well. The discovery may make possible new ways to fight the common cold and 
other viruses. 
Norman Ramsey of Harvard University will receive half the physics prize for his 
discovery of the atomic clock, which utilized the element cesium to make modern 
timekeeping possible and, in the process, helped develop a firm underpinning 
for relativity, one of the most esoteric theories in physics. 
Hans G. Dehmelt of the University of Washington in Seattle and Wolfgang Paul of 
the University of Bonn in West Germany shared the other half for their 
development of techniques for trapping charged particles for long periods of 
time, which is expected to lead to the development of clocks that are many 
times more accurate than even the cesium clocks. 
The announcements completed a near-sweep of the science Nobels by U.S. 
researchers this year, continuing U.S. dominance of the prizes. On Monday, 
cancer researchers Harold E. Varmus and J. Michael Bishop of UC San Francisco 
were named winners of the medicine Nobel, making six of the seven recipients 
Americans. 
All the new laureates expressed surprise and delight upon their early morning 
notification of the awards. "I would not say I expected it," Dehmelt said, "but 
I may have hoped or wished for it." 
"It was something that everyone has been telling me would happen," Cech said, 
"but I had no way of knowing when." 
At a morning celebratory party at Harvard, Ramsey poured champagne for two 
previous Harvard Nobel laureates and, before pouring his own glass, paused and 
said: "Well, my day is probably shot anyway." 
Asked about his plans for the prize money, Dehmelt said: "I will spend it." 
Cech, 41, and Altman, 50, helped evolutionary biologists attack an age-old 
puzzle that is often stated in terms of the riddle, "Which came first, the 
chicken or the egg?" In this case, the "egg" is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 
the genetic blueprint that stores all the information from which organisms are 
constructed, while the "chickens" are proteins, which carry out all biochemical 
functions in the cell. 
Biologists reasoned that the first life on Earth had to have both genetic 
information and biochemical functions, implying that both DNA and proteins must 
have been present when the first life arose from the primordial ooze. But 
virtually everyone agrees that a system containing both DNA and proteins is too 
complex to have arisen spontaneously, leaving researchers at an impasse. 
Cech and Altman, working independently, solved the problem by focusing on RNA, 
which until that time had been considered only a simple messenger -- in effect, 
a set of working blueprints, copied from the master blueprint of DNA, that 
serve as a pattern for the construction of proteins. 
In 1978, the Canadian-born Altman was studying an RNA-cutting protein from a 
bacterium when he found that RNA fragments were necessary for the activity of 
the protein. Altman himself had difficulty believing his results and even 
greater difficulty publishing them. Funding agencies were also highly skeptical 
about his claims. 
But in 1981, Cech, who received his doctorate from UC Berkeley, demonstrated 
that the cutting and splicing of RNA from a single-celled protozoan could be 
carried out in the absence of proteins. He and Altman subsequently showed that 
RNA could take the place of proteins called enzymes in carrying out many 
chemical reactions, opening a floodgate of new research on RNA. 
But researchers also believe that the concept of RNA enzymes will have even 
greater importance in the future because they might be used to destroy viruses 
or to remove the genetic information that makes them harmful, leading to new 
treatments for disease. 
Although not as old as the origin of life, the problem of keeping time has 
plagued humans for eons. From the beginning of time until 1967, timekeeping 
methods were based on the rotation of the Earth. 
In that year, the world switched to a newer form of timekeeping based on the 
oscillations of cesium atoms in a so-called atomic clock. That clock was 
largely the work of Ramsey, 74. 
In essence, Ramsey found a way to measure the frequency with which cesium 
atoms, flying through a cavity, switch between two electronically excited 
states. Since 1967, one second has been defined internationally as the time 
required for 9,192,631,770 such oscillations. 
The chief advantage of the atomic clock is that it is accurate to one second in 
300,000 years. 
Precise timekeeping is crucial in a variety of modern applications. In 
satellite-based navigation systems, for example, the time required for a radio 
signal to travel to a ship or plane from satellites can be used to determine 
position precisely, but only if the timekeeping is accurate. Deep space 
communications also require extremely stable frequencies such as those produced 
by atomic clocks. 
The new clocks have also been crucial in confirming Einstein's Theory of 
General Relativity, which predicts, among other things, that time passes faster 
when gravity is lower, but more slowly for objects traveling at high speed. 
But the differences are so small that high accuracy is required. In one 
experiment, for example, a cesium clock was carried in an airplane flying at 
30,000 feet for 15 hours. When the plane landed, the clock had gained about 45 
billionths of a second, confirming the theory. 
But the accuracy of atomic clocks is limited by the necessity of measuring the 
oscillations of the fast-moving cesium atoms, a problem akin to taking a clear 
photograph of a speeding bullet. 
The 57-year-old Dehmelt, a naturalized citizen born in Germany, and Paul, 76, 
devised techniques for trapping single cesium ions (atoms from which an 
electron has been stripped away) or other charged particles in magnetic fields 
for long periods of time. 
Using these techniques, researchers at the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, the nation's official timekeeper, are now developing clocks that 
are 100,000 times as accurate as existing cesium clocks. 
