THE PROPOSITIONS; 
131 WOULD FUND CAMPAIGNS, LIMIT OFFICIALS' TERMS 
Charging that escalating campaign costs have made politicians increasingly 
beholden to well-heeled special interests, backers of one of two term-limit 
initiatives on the November ballot are calling for a dramatic change in the way 
elections are financed. 
Propositions 131 and 140 seek to overhaul state politics by forcing more 
turnover of elected representatives. But the public financing of campaigns, 
called for in Proposition 131, could bring a more immediate change in the 
political behavior of candidates for state office and the financial 
contributors on whom they depend. 
In place of overwhelming reliance on special-interest money, Proposition 131 
would set up a taxpayer-supported fund to pay up to half the costs of a 
candidate's campaign. The new rules would apply in every race for elected state 
office, including governor, attorney general and all members of the 
Legislature. 
Supporters of Proposition 131 contend that public funding would work hand in 
hand with the measure's other provisions -- term limits, a ban on 
non-election-year fund raising, and new restrictions on campaign spending and 
contributions. Backers say this combination of reforms seeks to loosen the grip 
that special interests -- corporations, causes and institutions -- have had on 
legislators. 
"It would be the most comprehensive package of campaign reforms ever adopted in 
this country," said Robert M. Stern, the former general counsel for the Fair 
Political Practices Commission and a backer of Proposition 131. 
Said Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, who drew up the initiative as part of his 
unsuccessful campaign for governor: "It's really going to open up the 
possibility for new faces (in elected office)." 
But opponents of Proposition 131 argue that the campaign-funding provisions 
would increase the influence of special-interest money. They say that when 
limits on political committees are reached, individual corporate executives 
could respond by making sizable personal contributions -- up to $40,000 spread 
over 40 campaigns. Less affluent people would not be able to give as 
generously, according to this argument. 
Opponents also argue the initiative would give tax money to the campaigns of 
extremist candidates, and that by limiting campaign spending it would restrict 
free speech. 
"It is riddled with ambiguous rules, Orwellian regulations . . . and clearly 
unconstitutional provisions," contends a lengthy dissection of the initiative 
prepared by Berman and D'Agostino Campaigns, consultants for the opposition 
campaign, which is backed by legislative leaders and a wide range of 
special-interest groups, such as labor unions, race tracks, trial lawyers and 
oil companies. 
The plan is designed to encourage candidates to look to smaller contributions, 
especially from within their own districts, for the money needed to run a 
campaign. 
"The campaign finance reform will turn Sacramento on its head," said Fred 
Woocher, a deputy attorney general, who worked with Van de Kamp in drafting 
Proposition 131. 
"Those who raise large amounts from large contributors will no longer be 
favored," Woocher said. "Instead, those skilled in shaking down moneyed 
interests will be at a disadvantage." 
The measure would allow taxpayers to voluntarily direct $5 of their state 
income-tax returns to the fund for public campaign financing. That is similar 
to the federal checkoff system, which has provided funding for presidential 
races since 1976. Over the past two years, 21% of federal taxpayers have 
directed $1 of their taxes toward the presidential fund. A similar response 
rate on state returns would mean $20 million a year for California races. 
Each individual contribution to a candidate of up to $250 would be matched by 
the state fund in varying amounts -- providing $3 for every $1 donated by a 
person living within the candidate's district and a dollar-for-dollar match for 
donors living outside the district. 
No public funds would be made available to match contributions from 
corporations, unions, political action committees and political parties. 
The measure would require candidates who accept state money to abide by 
spending limits, which would be lifted only if a non-participating opponent 
exceeds the limit. A candidate for the Assembly who accepted public funds could 
spend no more than $400,000 for the general election. A candidate who chose not 
to accept public financing would be exempt from the spending ceiling. 
All candidates, whether they accept public funds or not, would have to limit 
the total amount they accept from all corporations, unions and PACs. A 
candidate for the Assembly could accept no more than $133,333 from these 
sources. Any additional money would have to come from individuals, at 
contributions of no more than $1,000 each. 
In addition to all these changes, the initiative would create a special 
prosecutor's office to pursue political corruption cases and impose criminal 
penalties on legislators who try to influence government decisions that might 
be of personal financial benefit. 
The measure would also tighten existing law to prohibit state elected officials 
from taking any gift of $100 or more, and it would extend a recently enacted 
ban on honorariums, as well as the gift limitation, to local elected officials. 
The rival to Van de Kamp's initiative -- Proposition 140, sponsored by Los 
Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum -- would put even more stringent 
limits on the terms of state elected officials but contains no provision for 
public financing of campaigns. 
Proposition 131 would limit Assembly members and state senators to 12 
consecutive years in office. Proposition 140 would create a six-year lifetime 
limit on service in the Assembly and an eight-year limit in the state Senate. 
If both measures pass, term limits would be set by the one getting more votes, 
but all the other provisions of the initiatives would be enacted, including 
public funding of campaigns. 
Supporters of the Schabarum initiative say they simply do not like the use of 
public money to pay for campaigns under Proposition 131. 
Republican gubernatorial candidate Pete Wilson, who supports Proposition 140, 
said recently that he could not endorse Proposition 131 "because it in addition 
proposes that you pay for my election campaigns, not as individuals but as 
taxpayers. I don't think that's right. It would make life a whole lot simpler 
and easier for me as a candidate, but I don't think my inconvenience as a 
candidate is an urgent public priority." 
Lewis K. Uhler, president of the National Tax Limitation Committee and a 
co-sponsor of Proposition 140, argued that taxpayers "should not be asked to 
fund campaigns of candidates -- especially those whose opinions they detest." 
When backers of Proposition 131 set out to limit the influence of special 
interests, they had to include public financing because of a 1976 U.S. Supreme 
Court ruling. Under that landmark decision, the court said that states can only 
limit campaign spending if the candidates themselves agree voluntarily to do so 
in exchange for public funding of their campaigns. 
Under the Van de Kamp initiative, a candidate for governor who chooses to take 
public money could spend a combined $11.7 million in the primary and general 
election campaigns. Up to half of that amount could come from the 
taxpayer-supported fund. 
By comparison, in the present gubernatorial campaign, Republican Pete Wilson 
had spent $14.4 million by the end of September. Democrat Dianne Feinstein had 
spent $11.5 million. Both will have spent millions more by Election Day. 
Proponents of the Van de Kamp initiative point out that no candidate for 
governor -- whether they accept public funds or not -- could take contributions 
from corporations and other "non-individual" supporters totaling more than $1.5 
million in the primary and $2.4 million in the general election. 
Stern predicted that the various limits on contributions would give serious 
candidates for office little choice but to apply for state funds and agree to 
the spending limits. Not to do so, he said, would leave these candidates 
trailing badly in campaign funds. 
In their analysis of Proposition 131 drawn up for opponents, political 
consultants Michael Berman and Carl D'Agostino argue that the measure would 
mean paying out "taxpayers' monies to the political campaigns of Lyndon 
LaRouche followers or members of the Ku Klux Klan if such individuals meet the 
qualifications." 
Woocher and other backers argue that the measure contains a number of 
safeguards to discourage extremist groups, such as requiring candidates to 
raise a significant amount on their own before becoming eligible for matching 
money. 
The Berman-D'Agostino analysis also argues that various cults and radical 
groups would be able to take money from individual members, draw on the public 
fund for a 3-for-1 match, then kick back the original contribution disguising 
it, for example, as salary or consulting fees. 
The measure specifically bars a campaign taking public funds from paying money 
to a donor, unless that individual has provided "full and adequate 
consideration" for the payment. 
Opponents predict that public funding will prove the downfall of the Van de 
Kamp initiative. That idea has been "rejected by the people several times," 
said Assemblyman Richard L. Mountjoy (R-Monrovia), who is supporting the rival 
term-limit measure. 
Supporters point out that voters in 1988, by 53% to 47%, approved Proposition 
68, which contained public financing for legislative races. But the electorate 
gave an even larger mandate to Proposition 73, which specifically prohibited 
the use of public funds in election campaigns. That vote invalidated the public 
financing scheme. Public financing of local campaigns was approved by Los 
Angeles voters last June -- to take effect in 1993 -- but the measure faces 
court challenges. 
Proposition 140 is silent on the subject of public financing of campaigns. If 
both initiatives pass, the campaign rules contained in the Van de Kamp measure 
would become law. 
