'FRIDAY THE 13TH' ELECTRONIC VIRUS FAILS TO CAUSE DREADED HAVOC; 
COMPUTERS: ONLY A HANDFUL OF INFECTIONS ARE REPORTED FROM AROUND THE WORLD AND 
EXPERTS DISAGREE IF THOSE ARE FROM THE MUCH-HERALDED THREAT. 
The much-dreaded "Friday the 13th" computer virus, packing the potential to 
wipe out caches of data stored on millions of personal computers, failed to 
wreak the havoc that some expected, with only a handful of infections reported 
around the world Friday. 
"It didn't show up and we're thankful for that," said Mary Howlett, manager of 
office automation at a Hughes Aircraft Co. defense plant in Fullerton. "We did 
a lot of preparation ahead of time and were ready. It was a very good 
experience for us." 
Some experts doubted whether those problems that did pop up were actually from 
the Friday the 13th virus strain, or similar electronic infections that plague 
personal computers. 
"There were no confirmed sightings of Friday the 13th," said Arthur Hill, a 
spokesman for International Business Machines, whose computers were among the 
primary targets of the virus. However, other sources claimed there were some 
certified outbreaks both in Europe and the United States. 
According to one report, the virus was discovered in about 10% of the personal 
computers in the Micro Resource Center at the University of Illinois in Urbana. 
The virus was found and contained before it spread to other machines, 
authorities said. 
In London, the virus apparently struck five or six computers at the Royal 
National Institute for the Blind before steps were taken to halt its spread. 
Winn Schwartau, owner of a computer security company in Nashville, Tenn., said 
he had been contacted by more than a dozen companies, including some with 
hundreds of PC installations, that claimed to have been struck by the virus. 
However, Schwartau, whose security products sell for upwards of $600, declined 
to name the firms and his comments could not be independently verified. 
Although obviously cheered by the outcome, computer security experts said they 
could not decide whether to credit the tremendous advance precautions taken by 
corporations to screen the virus, or whether to believe that the extent of 
virus' spread had been blown out of proportion by those hoping to cash in on 
the paranoia and insecurities it aroused in computer users. 
"It was a dud," said John McAfee, executive director of the Computer Virus 
Industry Assn. and an outspoken critic of the latest flurry of anti-virus 
activities. "It was blown way out of proportion." 
The Friday the 13th virus generated unprecedented publicity and activity since 
its discovery about six weeks ago. The virus, created in Northern Europe 
earlier this year, is considered especially pernicious because it can wipe out 
the instructions governing how information is stored on the hard disks of 
certain PC models, rendering their contents completely inaccessible. 
The virus was aimed at IBM personal computers and compatible models, which 
account for about 90% of the estimated 35 million personal computers now in 
use. 
Electronic viruses are software programs that are deliberately inserted in 
legitimate programs. In addition to containing hidden instructions that can 
cripple the operations of the computer, these rogue programs are capable of 
reproducing themselves endlessly, either through computer networks or the 
sharing of infected computer disks. 
Because rumors of the virus began circulating six weeks ago, many corporations 
and individuals were able to screen their machines well before the virus was 
set to trigger at midnight Thursday. 
An IBM spokesman said the company had received more than 1,700 calls on its 
toll-free hot line set up to advise customers. Ashton-Tate, the Torrance 
software publishing house, checked all of its PC installations last week, and 
security officials at Caltech screened campus machines several weeks ago. 
Many computer users at Hughes Ground Systems Group in Fullerton, a sprawling 
defense plant with about 4,000 IBM-compatible personal computers, also took 
precautions against the virus. And the company was happy with the results, 
Howlett said. 
Hughes' computer specialists distributed copies of a virus-detecting software 
program provided by IBM to hundreds of PC users. They were also encouraged to 
make backup copies of any data stored in their PCs, Howlett said. 
Daniel Bigos, manager of microcomputer services at UC Irvine, said none of the 
campus' several thousand personal computer users reported signs of the virus. 
"We took a very laid-back approach to this," Bigos said. "Most of the 
information we read about this indicated there was a very low probability" of 
infection by the virus. 
But there's at least one fellow in New York who is still wishing he could blame 
his computer problems on the virus. 
It seems that when Charles Brimmer, the New York bureau chief for the London 
Times, turned on his spanking new IBM personal computer Friday morning, he 
discovered that its hard disk instructions had been eradicated, just as the 
Friday the 13th virus would have done. However, the virus did not leave its 
traditional tell-tale message notifying the owner that he had been zapped. 
Nonetheless, Brimmer wants to believe he was struck by the dreaded virus. 
"It happened just as I was writing a story about computer crime," he said. "It 
could be pure chance. But I kind of hope it was the virus. It makes a better 
story." 
