CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS: PROPOSITIONS 128, 130 AND 138; 
INDUSTRY-BACKED MEASURE BATTLES ENVIRONMENTALISTS TO SHAPE FORESTS 
In the midst of a bitter fight between environmentalists and the timber 
industry, California voters will decide the fate this fall of the last redwood 
forests remaining in private hands. 
For environmentalists, the Nov. 6 election offers the chance to save the 
ancient redwoods. For the state's major timber companies, the ballot provides 
the best hope of preserving their industry and maintaining their historic 
control over logging operations. 
There are three initiatives on the November ballot that would change the rules 
for timber harvesting and authorize hundreds of millions of dollars in bonds to 
acquire forests or plant trees. 
But beneath the apparent similarity of the propositions, environmentalists and 
the timber industry are vying to take advantage of increasing public concern 
over the destruction of California's forests. 
Two of the measures, Propositions 128 and 130, were written by 
environmentalists to ban the practice of clear-cutting, in which loggers cut 
down all the trees in an area of the forest. In place of clear-cutting, both 
initiatives would require timber companies to log selectively, leaving behind 
trees of all ages and sizes. 
Proposition 138 was drafted by the timber industry in a bid to capture more 
votes and invalidate the two environmentalist initiatives. It also calls for a 
ban on clear-cutting but contains several loopholes, including one that would 
allow loggers to leave as few as five trees per acre, industry experts concede. 
Arguing that the environmentalists' proposals would put some companies out of 
business, the timber industry is spending millions to improve its image and 
persuade voters it can responsibly protect the state's forests. 
"The forest products industry as a whole is just now becoming aware that the 
perceptions the public holds are harsher than they realized," said Bernie Bush, 
a timber industry forester and spokesman for the Proposition 138 campaign. "We 
feel the forest ecosystem is being managed very well. We have been hesitant to 
give credibility to the fact that the public doesn't agree." 
The timber industry has been widely criticized for cutting down the state's 
forests at too rapid a pace, particularly the huge redwood trees of coastal 
Northern California. 
Environmentalists contend that the industry is contributing to the problem of 
global warming by harvesting forests faster than trees can grow to replace 
them. In addition, critics say clear-cutting of the forests is jeopardizing 
wildlife, including such species as the endangered spotted owl that lives among 
the ancient redwoods. 
"Old-growth forests are disappearing rapidly," said Tom Lippe, an 
environmentalist attorney who helped draft Proposition 130. "All of (the 
old-growth redwoods) on private lands are scheduled to be harvested in the next 
10 to 15 years. This is the last chance Californians have to protect what's 
left of the ancient forests." 
The environmentalists' ballot drive to save the redwoods began with Proposition 
128, the sweeping measure called "Big Green" by its supporters. Among other 
things, the initiative would ban the practice of clear-cutting and require 
loggers to use the "selection method" when harvesting redwoods, leaving behind 
trees of all ages. 
Big Green also would provide $300 million in bonds for the purchase of redwood 
forests and for urban tree planting. The measure would impose a one-year 
moratorium on redwood harvesting to allow the state to purchase some of the 
oldest stands of redwood. 
But the Big Green initiative is modest in its approach compared with 
Proposition 130 -- a separate measure by environmentalists who wanted to go 
further and fundamentally change the way the timber industry operates. 
Called "Forests Forever" by its backers, it would ban clear-cutting and require 
the selection method of logging for all species of tree. It also would prohibit 
loggers from taking more than 60% of the timber volume of the forest in a given 
area. 
Advocates of Proposition 130 argue that their measure would restore a proper 
balance to California's forests by requiring a system of "all-age" management 
in which trees of various ages are left standing. Allowing the forests to 
regenerate in this fashion, sponsors say, actually would help timber companies 
by assuring a supply of lumber that would last indefinitely. 
"Proposition 130 will require timber companies to harvest timber on a sustained 
yield basis so we will end the boom-and-bust cycle that has plagued the timber 
companies for the last century," Lippe said. 
In addition, it would impose a variety of new restrictions on logging 
operations, including prohibiting the use of tractors on steeper slopes and 
protecting air quality by discouraging the routine burning of debris from 
logging. 
Furthermore, Proposition 130 attempts to reshape the state Board of Forestry by 
requiring the appointment of environmentalists to a panel long dominated by the 
timber industry. 
And the measure would authorize $742 million in bonds -- $710 million for the 
purchase of prime forest land and $32 million for the retraining of loggers who 
lose their jobs. 
The timber industry also has cast its initiative as an environmental measure, 
calling Proposition 138 "The Global Warming and Clear Cutting Reduction, 
Wildlife Protection &amp; Reforestation Act of 1990." 
David Fogarty, a spokesman for the Proposition 138 campaign, said the measure's 
restrictions on logging will reduce the timber harvest by 15%. Timber companies 
also would be required to prepare more detailed reviews of wildlife in areas to 
be logged, he said. 
"It's a very tough measure," Fogarty said. "We think it does a good job of 
balancing the human concerns with the economic concerns of protecting our 
forests." 
But the measure also would offer the industry some relief from regulations now 
in effect. 
One provision of Proposition 138 would reduce the state's long-term control 
over the industry by allowing large landholders to harvest trees under "timber 
management plans" that would be good indefinitely. Under current rules, timber 
companies must follow "timber harvest plans" that expire within three years. 
Companies that operate under the new timber management plans would be exempt 
from preparing environmental impact reports. The state would have 60 days to 
reject a proposed timber management plan; otherwise it would take effect 
automatically. 
Although the proposition provides no money for the purchase of forest land, it 
also would prohibit the state from buying any redwood forest land unless the 
owner agrees to sell. Proposition 138 would authorize $300 million in bonds 
solely for reforestation, including $120 million to help small-scale landowners 
improve their timber production. 
Proposition 138's most controversial element, however, is the provision that 
bans clear-cutting in redwood forests and requires a 50% reduction in 
clear-cutting of other types of trees. 
Joseph Remcho, an attorney for the industry, acknowledged that the language of 
the ban contains "ambiguities" and "drafting errors." Critics charge that the 
clear-cutting provision amounts to no ban at all. 
For example, under one section of the initiative, companies that operate under 
the old "timber harvest plans" would be prohibited from clear-cutting redwoods. 
But under another provision, all major timber companies operating under the new 
"timber management plans" would be exempt from the ban. 
Furthermore, opponents say the clear-cutting ban is so loosely worded that 
foresters could leave as few as one tree per acre when logging a forest of 
old-growth redwood. Bush, the industry forester, said such claims are "total 
nonsense." The ban would require loggers to leave at least five trees per acre, 
he said. 
Whatever the number of trees remaining, however, loggers could come back under 
their timber harvest plan and take all the trees within a three-year period, 
acknowledged Bush, a former president of the California Licensed Foresters 
Assn. 
Or, because the harvested area would no longer be considered an old-growth 
forest, loggers conceivably could come back within days under a new harvest 
plan and take the remaining trees, opponents say. 
Nevertheless, Bush insisted that Proposition 138 does prohibit clear-cutting 
and was not drafted to allow the industry to skirt the ban. 
"If there was a loophole, it was unintentional and it will be plugged," said 
Bush, a forester for the Simpson Timber Co. "To suggest there is anything 
created there to let you get around the clear-cutting ban is ludicrous." 
Bush defended the practice of clear-cutting as a valuable method of logging 
that better approximates the natural growth of forests. Without the 
interference of humans, he said, forests tend to grow in sections of trees that 
are the same age. 
"Clear-cutting does more to mimic nature than the all-age method (of logging)," 
he said. "Clear-cutting is a silvicultural practice that certainly has a place 
in forest management." 
Bush also insisted that the timber industry has successfully managed 
California's forests to increase the redwood range and protect wildlife. 
Although the spotted owl has been listed by the federal government as 
endangered, Bush said the bird actually is thriving as a result of proper 
management of the forests. 
"The number of ancient redwoods is actually increasing," Bush said. "The 
spotted owl is neither threatened nor endangered." 
If all three ballot measures pass, it is likely to touch off a prolonged legal 
dispute over which provisions should take effect. 
Under the California Constitution, the initiative that receives the most votes 
prevails wherever it conflicts with other propositions that pass with fewer 
votes. 
Environmentalists say their initiatives are compatible with each other and 
would not come into conflict if both are approved. But if Proposition 138 
receives the most votes, industry spokesmen say their measure would wipe out 
the Forests Forever initiative and the forest section of Big Green. 
Propositions 128 and 130 have the backing of the Sierra Club, the League of 
Conservation Voters, the California Teachers Assn., the California Democratic 
Party and a variety of other groups. In addition, Proposition 128, the Big 
Green initiative, has the backing of Campaign California, the Natural Resources 
Defense Council and has received substantial financial support from members of 
the entertainment industry. 
Proposition 130, the Forests Forever measure, also is endorsed by the 
California State Park Rangers Assn., the National Audubon Society and the 
National Wildlife Federation and has received much of its financial backing 
from millionaire investment manager Hal Arbit. 
Proposition 138 has the support of most of the state's major timber companies, 
including Louisiana-Pacific Corp., Pacific Lumber Co., Simpson Timber Co. and 
Georgia-Pacific Corp. It also has the backing of the Board of Forestry, the 
California Professional Firefighters, the California Chamber of Commerce, the 
California School Boards Assn. and the California State Federation of Labor. 
To a large degree, Proposition 130 was sparked by the accelerated logging of 
Pacific Lumber after it was acquired by Maxxam Group Inc. in a highly leveraged 
junk bond deal in 1985. Pacific Lumber spokesmen refused to discuss the forest 
initiatives or the company's involvement in the campaign. 
The timber industry is devoting most of its energy to defeating Proposition 
130, which it contends would put some companies out of business and drive up 
consumer prices. 
Bud McCrary, an owner of Big Creek Lumber in Santa Cruz County, has long been 
praised by environmentalists for his selective logging methods. But he said the 
Forests Forever initiative would force him to shut down because it is too 
restrictive. In particular, he said, a prohibition on the use of tractors on 
slopes over 50% would make it impossible to log much of his land. 
"We're the last of the small companies and they're going to wipe us out with 
this," said McCrary, who for years has led Sierra Club hikes in the woods. 
He also contends that the 60% limit on the volume of timber harvested is so low 
he would not be able to clear enough trees to let sunlight reach the forest 
floor and help new redwoods sprout. 
But Gail Lucas, a Sierra Club leader and a backer of the initiative, said 
McCrary is misreading the initiative and insisted it would not put him out of 
business. 
Proposition 130 would permit him to clear sufficient space in the forest for 
new redwoods to grow, she said. Furthermore, the reconstituted Board of 
Forestry would have the power to draft regulations implementing the proposition 
and ensuring that provisions such as the limits on tractor logging are not 
unfairly restrictive. 
Opponents of Forests Forever have taken to the airwaves to attack the measure's 
restrictions on burning. They predict that without the ability to easily burn 
branches, chips and other waste, loggers will leave behind debris that would 
fuel catastrophic wildfires. 
Environmentalists, however, point out that the measure allows the controlled 
burning of logging debris if it is necessary to reduce the danger of fire. 
The industry campaign also charges that the $742-million bond in Proposition 
130 for the acquisition of forest land and the retraining of loggers is too 
costly. Opponents say the bond measure would cost the state $1.3 billion in 
principal and interest over 20 years. 
They argue that their $300-million bond in Proposition 138 for reforestation is 
a worthwhile investment, even though it would cost taxpayers an estimated $535 
million over the same 20-year period. 
In another argument against the measure, Bush also maintained that Proposition 
130's reductions in logging would be bad for California wildlife, because it 
would reduce the habitat for hundreds of species that thrive in open areas 
where trees have been cut. 
"They're trying to impose a single inflexible system of management on an 
incredibly diverse ecosystem in California," Bush argued. "They are ignoring 
decades of sound forest research management." 
TIMBER INDUSTRY: COMPARING THE PROPOSITIONS 
 Three propositions on the Nov. 6 ballot would change the way the timber 
industry operates: Proposition 128 and Proposition 130, sponsored by 
environmentalists, and Proposition 138, sponsored by the timber industry to 
cancel out the other two measures. These are the key forest provisions of the 
three initiatives: 
PROPOSITION 128 
Would ban clear-cutting of redwoods. 
Would impose a one-year moratorium on cutting of redwoods to give the state 
time to purchase ancient forests. 
Would require loggers to use the selection method when logging redwoods and 
leave trees of all ages standing. 
Would authorize $300 million in bonds, including $200 million for purchase of 
redwood forests and $100 million for tree planting. 
PROPOSITION 130 
Would ban clear-cutting in all California forests. 
Would prohibit logging companies from taking more than 60% of total timber 
volume. 
Would require loggers to use the selection method when logging any forest and 
require loggers to leave trees of all ages standing. 
Would change the composition of the state Board of Forestry to reduce industry 
influence and add environmentalists. 
Would restrict logging near streams and lakes. 
Would restrict the use of tractors in logging on steeper slopes. 
Would restrict the controlled burning of debris from logging. 
Would restrict the export of logs to mills in other countries. 
Would authorize $742 million in bonds, including $710 million for purchase of 
redwoods and $32 million for retraining loggers. 
PROPOSITION 138 
Would ban clear-cutting of redwoods in name, but leaves various loopholes 
allowing loggers to take all or most trees in a given area. 
Would allow major timber companies to harvest under timber management plans 
that cover unlimited acreage and are valid indefinitely. 
Would require timber companies to conduct wildlife review before logging but 
exempt them from the requirement that they conduct environmental impact 
reports. 
Would restrict the appeal process now used by logging opponents to stop some 
timber harvests. 
Would prohibit the state from buying redwood forests unless the owner agrees to 
sell. 
Would cancel out Propositions 128 and 130 if it gets more votes. 
Would authorize bonds of $300 million for reforestation, including $120 million 
for smaller timberland owners. 
