BILLS LOSE GAME AND KELLY AS COLTS ROMP 
Buffalo's potent offense never had a chance. 
After an early Indianapolis touchdown put the Bills in a hole, the Colts' 
defense forced six turnovers and converted them into 23 points in Sunday's 
37-14 victory. 
"Buffalo was always playing uphill," Indianapolis Coach Ron Meyer said. "We got 
the first turnover and jammed it in, and then we were rockin' and rollin'." 
The Bills came in as the AFC's top offensive team, fourth-best in the entire 
NFL at 400 yards per game. They managed 424 yards against the Colts but were 
killed by four quarterback sacks, four intercepted passes, two lost fumbles and 
a shoulder injury to Jim Kelly, the top-rated quarterback in the AFC. 
A still-sore Eric Dickerson ran for two touchdowns, the only Indianapolis 
scores that weren't set up by Buffalo turnovers, as the Colts (3-2) moved into 
a tie with the Bills for the AFC East lead. 
Kelly suffered a shoulder separation in the third quarter. Early indications 
were that Kelly will be out at least four weeks. 
Dickerson, who didn't start because of a sore hamstring, rushed 22 times for 92 
yards and scored on runs of one yard in the first quarter and four yards early 
in the fourth. 
Safety Keith Taylor intercepted two of the passes, returning one 80 yards for 
the final touchdown with 2:38 remaining. 
Quarterback Jack Trudeau earlier ran for one touchdown and Dean Biasucci added 
three field goals, all following Buffalo turnovers. 
The Bills' first touchdown, a 16-yard pass from Kelly to Andre Reed late in the 
third quarter, was the first touchdown allowed by the Colts' defense in 11 
quarters. Kelly, however, suffered the injury on the play and was replaced in 
the final period by Frank Reich, who passed 17 yards to Kenneth Davis for the 
Bills' second touchdown with five minutes to go. 
"At this point, we do not know his condition," Buffalo Coach Marv Levy said of 
Kelly. "His arm is in a sling and he is in a lot of pain." 
Reich brought the Bills to the Colts' 20 in the closing minutes before Taylor 
killed the drive with his interception return. 
Dickerson carried the ball only once on the game-opening drive, but his 
one-yard run was good for a touchdown and a lead the Colts never lost. 
