ARGENTINE COMPOSER TO OPEN MUSEUM SEASON; 
MUSIC: THE UBIQUITOUS ALICIA TERZIAN AND HER GROUP WILL PRESENT LATIN-AMERICAN 
ART MUSIC AT LACMA AND CAL STATE NORTHRIDGE. 
Forget the unequal opportunities of women. Forget the recognized obstacles to 
popularizing serious new music. 
Neither applies to composer Alicia Terzian, who -- with her Grupo Encuentros de 
Musica Contemporanea -- flies in from Buenos Aires to open the 52nd Monday 
Evening Concert season at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. 
This particular dynamo manages to pretend that she is promoting such widely 
appealing music as the Beatles, rather than the atonal avant-garde variety of 
which she is an exponent. 
"And why not?" asks the artist-impresaria by phone in Argentina. "After working 
in this field for 22 years I should have something to show for it." 
That she does. Much more than other practitioners, especially those "excellent 
(new music) specialists in Los Angeles who are amazingly unknown to their 
public." 
Since founding her 15-member ensemble in 1978, Terzian has gained the 
sponsorship of Buenos Aires' biggest newspaper, El Chronista Comercial, which 
also owns a cable-TV channel and radio station. She feels particularly grateful 
for the support "because my country is so poor." 
She has made two recordings, appeared in 70 festivals throughout Europe, the 
Soviet Union, China and the Americas, and been awarded France's Academie de 
Palmes, among other prizes. 
Last year one of her concerts in Buenos Aires drew more than 1,000 people, 
although average attendance is roughly 300. 
But it is her all-embracing approach, as opposed to the small-cult identity 
many new-music composers take, that has proven so successful. 
"My Encounters Group is not a thing unto itself," she says. 
"I invite philosophers, painters and poets for big discussions on the culture 
of our time. As a result, we attract the most intelligent audiences -- a public 
made up of young people, university students. And even if they do not come 
primarily for the music, we are able to do our proselytizing." 
Terzian, who teaches at three conservatories in addition to finding time to 
compose, rehearse, hold office in various international music societies and do 
the necessary public relations for expanding her horizons, sees herself as "the 
mother of them all." 
She has scheduled one of her own pieces tonight, along with entries by fellow 
Argentines. She will present another concert of Latin-American art music in 
Campus Theater at Cal State Northridge at 8 p.m. Thursday. Both concerts will 
present work by Aurelio de la Vega, a Cuban-American resident of the San 
Fernando Valley. 
"I re-encountered Alicia on a trip to Buenos Aires," says the veteran, 
Northridge-based composer, "and found her truly amazing. To think that she has 
radio programs, teaches all those students, prepares concerts, holds office and 
composes makes one think of Wonder Woman. She has done for Latin-American art 
music what no one else could." 
Once the favored student of Alberto Ginastera, she wrote a violin concerto in 
her second year under his tutelage and she says she has composed no fewer than 
49 other works. 
"Independence was one of the things he admired in me," she says. "I did not 
copy him and I encourage my students to find their own voice, their own 
expression. That's the heart of any creative pursuit as I see it and especially 
of music." 
Asked to explain where all her drive and optimism come from, Terzian doesn't 
have a simple answer. 
"But the quest for personal expression is very powerful in me, and I hope it's 
contagious for others. . . ." 
