VIOLENT DEATH IS RARE FATE FOR DETECTIVES ON HOMICIDE BEAT 
Homicide detectives weren't supposed to die this way, the investigators who 
knew Russell Kuster were saying Wednesday. Street cops, sometimes. Not homicide 
investigators. 
"We're not exposed to the same degree of danger that patrol officers deal 
with," said Detective Rick Swanston. He spent eight years working Hollywood 
homicide under Kuster, slain Tuesday night in a gun battle in a Hollywood 
restaurant. "We usually know what we're dealing with. Folks who get hurt on the 
job, they usually don't know the seriousness of the situation they're getting 
into." 
Homicide detectives are supposed to come in when the gunfire is over, put 
together the evidence and nail the bad guy. Then, after a long career of 
strange, frustrating hours, of cases closed and murders unsolved, they are 
supposed to collect a pension. 
"Everybody wants to do their time and retire," said Detective Leroy Orozco, a 
28-year veteran of the force, 24 years in homicide. Kuster had been a friend 
for more than 20 years. "Then you can all get together, a bunch of old (guys) 
talking about the old days." 
Detective jobs are coveted in police work, and none is more coveted than a job 
in homicide. Kuster's generation has witnessed technical advances such as 
computerized records and DNA fingerprinting, but detectives have also seen the 
growing menace of drugs, gangs and high-powered weaponry. 
In the end, Kuster wound up a victim of the sort of seemingly random violence 
that plagues Los Angeles. He is now part of the 1990 body count that is on a 
pace to exceed the city's record for homicides -- 1,028 in 1980. As of Sept. 
30, 762 slayings had been recorded within city limits. 
Like every other Los Angeles murder case, Kuster is now the subject of a 
three-ring binder notebook in which homicide detectives assemble interviews and 
evidence. Above Kuster's desk hangs a sign that says: 
 Hollywood Homicide 
 Our Day Begins When Yours Ends 
According to investigators, Kuster was in the cocktail lounge at a favorite 
hangout, the Hilltop Hungarian Restaurant in the Hollywood Hills, when the man 
with the 9-millimeter pistol equipped with laser sights came in, terrifying the 
patrons. So Kuster identified himself as a police officer and tried to calm the 
man. The gunman fired four rounds at Kuster. 
As Kuster went down, mortally wounded, he managed to fire seven rounds at his 
killer, striking him three times. 
The homicide detective thus solved his own murder. 
The assailant was identified as Bela Istvan Marko, 37, a native of Hungary who 
lived in Las Vegas. That, too, proved ironic. Hollywood detectives had arrested 
him in 1982 in the fatal shooting of his roommate. Kuster signed the paper 
work. Marko had claimed self-defense and the district attorney chose not to 
file charges. Police said there is no connection between Marko's earlier arrest 
and the shoot-out Tuesday night. 
Retired homicide detective Hank Petroski was one of the detectives who 
investigated the 1982 shooting. Petroski had partnered with Kuster both in 
patrol and in homicide, and worked under his command before retiring this year 
after 25 years with the LAPD. 
"You understand some guys are going to get off, the D.A. is not going to file 
on others. It's frustrating but you can't let it bother you so much you can't 
do your job," said Petroski. 
"If end result is the arrest, you're happy. It's not only satisfaction of work 
done, but relief for the surviving family members," Orozco said. "But then the 
torture really starts because of our court system. . . . That's the toughest 
part of the job, getting into the court system and dealing with the b.s." 
Kuster's slaying wouldn't get that far. Detectives wept at Hollywood Division 
on Tuesday night. One of Kuster's men broke down at a press conference 
Wednesday. At other divisions, detectives felt the loss as well. 
"We've got guys here with tears in their eyes," Lt. John Zorn of the 
robbery-homicide bureau at Parker Center said on Wednesday morning. "They've 
known him for a long time." 
Kuster had put in 24 years on the force, his last 12 as a supervising detective 
in Hollywood homicide. 
"He was the best supervisor I ever had," said Swanston, who now heads the 
homicide unit in the West Valley Division. "He was very fair. . . . He demanded 
a lot from you, but he had a tendency to get the best out of his men." 
Petroski, who now works as an insurance investigator, said Kuster had told him 
he was going to work one more year and retire. 
OFFICERS KILLED IN LINE OF DUTY 
 One of the Los Angeles Police Department's best-known and admired officers, 
veteran homicide detective Russell Kuster, was killed in an exchange of gunfire 
Tuesday night. His death raised to 175 the number of LAPD officers who have 
died in the line of duty since 1907. Of those, 88 officers were killed by 
suspects, 36 in car crashes, 31 in motorcycle collisions, 6 in helicopter 
accidents and 14 in other incidents, including bomb explosions. These are 
officers killed since 1985. 
NAME: Thomas Williams 
DIVISION: N. Hollywood 
DATE KILLED: 10/31/85 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Shot in ambush by an accused robber he had testified against the 
day before 
NAME: Arleigh McCree 
DIVISION: Bomb Squad 
DATE KILLED: 2/8/86 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Killed attempting to defuse bomb 
NAME: Ronald Ball 
DIVISION: Bomb Squad 
DATE KILLED: 2/8/86 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Killed attempting to defuse bomb 
NAME: Marshall Randol 
DIVISION: Valley Traffic 
DATE KILLED: 6/2/87 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Traffic accident 
NAME: James Pagliotti 
DIVISION: Metro 
DATE KILLED: 6/22/87 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Shot by narcotics suspect 
NAME: James Beyea 
DIVISION: N. Hollywood 
DATE KILLED: 6/7/88 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Shot by burglary suspect 
NAME: Daniel Pratt 
DIVISION: 77th 
DATE KILLED: 9/3/88 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Gang-related drive-by shooting 
NAME: Derrick Connor 
DIVISION: Central 
DATE KILLED: 12/12/88 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Police vehicle collision 
NAME: Manuel Gutierrez Jr. 
DIVISION: Central 
DATE KILLED: 12/12/88 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Police vehicle collision 
NAME: David Lee Hofmeyer 
DIVISION: Central 
DATE KILLED: 12/12/88 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Police vehicle collision 
NAME: Norman Eckles 
DIVISION: Administrative Narcotics 
DATE KILLED: 4/24/89* 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Shot while serving a search warrant, later died from chronic 
infections 
NAME: Russell Kuster 
DIVISION: Hollywood 
DATE KILLED: 10/9/90 
CIRCUMSTANCE: Shot repeatedly in the chest by prison parolee 
*Officer Eckles was shot on Dec. 1, 1983. He died on April 24, 1989. His death 
was attributed to complications he developed after the 1983 shooting. 
NOTE: Two other officers died of heart attacks while on duty during this 
period. 
SOURCE: Los Angeles Police Department 
Compiled by Times researcher Cecilia Rasmussen 
