PRAVDA OR CONSEQUENCES 
"Why," asked Vladimir Lenin, "should freedom of speech and freedom of press be 
allowed? Why should a government which is doing what it believes to be right 
allow itself to be criticized? Ideas are more fatal things than guns. Why 
should any man be allowed to buy a printing press and disseminate pernicious 
opinions calculated to embarrass the government?" 
Why indeed? By the time Soviet Union's first leader posed these questions in 
1920, the Communist Party was well on its way to suppressing all political 
opposition, and those who held power intuitively understood the necessity for 
proscribing press freedom. Control what people are permitted to know and you 
control a lot of what they might think. 
Only recently, as Mikhail S. Gorbachev tries in fits and starts to steer the 
Soviet Union toward the 21st Century, is the idea starting to break down that 
state interests demand a rigidly controlled press. There are some in the Soviet 
hierarchy who think this change is coming too fast. Gorbachev himself sometimes 
sounds like one of them. 
A week ago, Gorbachev castigated the country's leading journalists for being 
too free in their reporting and in their commentary, even calling on Vladislav 
A. Starkov, editor of the Soviet Union's top-selling newspaper Argumenty I 
Facty, to resign. Starkov, strongly supported by the staff of the 26-million 
circulation weekly, has so far refused. Defiance or no, Gorbachev's criticisms 
nonetheless have been seen as sending a chill through proponents of a freer 
press. 
One editor who presumably felt no need to button up his ideological overcoat 
was Viktor G. Afanasyev, the conservative and comfortably entrenched editor of 
Pravda, the party's official paper. Entrenched, that is, until two days ago, 
when he was suddenly relieved of his job and replaced by a close Gorbachev 
crony. Berate the radicals, but move against the conservatives: If nothing 
else, Gorbachev knows how to keep people guessing. 
There's good reason to think that Gorbachev in fact is genuinely upset over 
some of the criticism that has appeared in the more liberated press; his 
complaints, in this view, were not just a smoke screen for getting control of 
Pravda. There's also good reason to think that Gorbachev's timing had 
everything to do with next week's scheduled debate in the Supreme Soviet on a 
new law covering press freedom. 
The Soviet Union isn't likely to soon see its own version of the First 
Amendment, though it could see an effort to explicitly guarantee a freer -- 
which is not the same thing as a free -- press. That would be an important 
advance, but one not without some risks. Right now, liberals in the press may 
constantly test the boundaries of what is allowable. Codifying those boundaries 
could provide certain legal protections, but the act of definition also imposes 
limits. The scheduled debate promises to be an interesting test of political 
strength in the Supreme Soviet, and no doubt a test of political prudence as 
well. 
