UNITED AGAINST DIABETES; 
HEALTH CARE: A NEW $1-MILLION FACILITY IN CENTURY CITY PROVIDES EVERYTHING A 
DIABETIC NEEDS TO COPE WITH THE DISEASE, ALL UNDER ONE ROOF. 
When actress Jean Smart does a play, she hides glucose tablets all over the 
set. 
She keeps the tablets nearby in case her blood sugar takes a sudden dip under 
the stress of performance. 
Best known for playing Charlene on the TV series, "Designing Women," Smart is 
one of a million insulin-dependent diabetics in the United States. Smart, who 
has been giving herself daily insulin injections since she found out that she 
had the disease at the age of 13, is free of the devastating complications that 
diabetes can inflict -- in fact, she's never had to gulp even one of her hidden 
glucose tablets. 
But the actress knows what it is like to live with the chronic disease, which 
is why she spoke last week at the opening of a new Diabetes Management &amp; 
Research Center on the Westside. 
An outpatient facility of Century City Hospital, the $1-million center is the 
only one of its kind in Southern California. Offering everything from support 
groups for diabetic senior citizens to a small but fully equipped gym, the 
center is a place where "all the needs of people with diabetes and their 
families can be attended to under one roof," Medical Director Sherman M. Holvey 
said. 
In addition to Holvey and physician Patrick Soon-Shiong, the center has a staff 
of eight, including a nutritionist, an exercise physiologist and a 
psychotherapist. 
Such a facility is long overdue, Holvey said. 
Diabetes, he explained, is a chronic disease in which the body does not produce 
or properly use insulin, a hormone needed to convert food into energy. It 
afflicts more than 12 million people in the United States, almost half of whom 
don't even know they have it. When uncontrolled, it can cause terrible 
complications, including blindness, kidney disease, nerve damage, heart disease 
and impaired blood circulation that can lead to amputation. Impotence is a 
common complication in males. And every year 150,000 people die of the disease. 
Holvey said the center does not wish to replace the patient's regular 
physician. But it does operate with the view that the diabetic is the one who 
must ultimately cope with the disorder. 
"The patient has to be responsible on a day-to-day basis for controlling their 
own disease," Holvey said. "What this center offers is a place where diabetics 
can be comfortable and develop life skills they need to live a healthy life. 
They can't lead a normal life, but it can be a healthy life." 
Education is one of the center's functions. On a recent Friday morning, 
fourth-graders from a Carson elementary school toured the facility. They heard 
talks about the role that diet and exercise play in controlling diabetes and 
learned the warning signs, including rapid weight loss and frequent urination. 
One of their classmates, 10-year-old Evette Rojas, is an insulin-dependent 
diabetic. Like Jean Smart, she has the less common but more severe form of the 
disease, in which the body does not produce any insulin on its own, perhaps 
because of an autoimmune reaction. (In the more common form, which typically 
develops in overweight people over 40, insulin is produced but not utilized in 
the normal way.) 
Evette, who grimaces at the thought of injecting her own insulin, gets a daily 
injection administered by her mother. Evette says diabetes isn't so bad "except 
when people eat candy in front of me, like my brother." 
In addition to hearing about diabetes, the children had a chance to experience 
the complex decision-making process diabetics go through as they juggle food, 
exercise and insulin. The children took turns sitting in front of a video 
display terminal playing what looked like just another computer game. 
The ostensible object of the computerized exercise was to keep an airplane on 
the screen from crashing to earth. But the real object was to give the child a 
vivid sense of the maneuvering a person with diabetes must do to maintain 
normal blood glucose levels. The game is called BG (for blood glucose) Pilot. 
According to Renee Brandon, a registered nurse who is the center's program 
director, people can come to the center for a whole range of services. They may 
want to get instruction in the latest methods for monitoring their blood sugar 
and administering insulin. They may want detailed information on how to bring 
their weight down and the foods they should or should not eat (the center 
includes a test kitchen). Older diabetics may want advice on how they can 
exercise safely. Diabetic women who are considering pregnancy may want 
counseling before they try. 
Smart said pregnancy and diabetes is a special interest of hers. The actress 
said many diabetic women are advised to not even think about becoming pregnant 
because of the potential risks both to themselves and their fetuses. Smart, who 
delivered a healthy boy almost a year ago, was advised by one doctor to 
terminate her pregnancy because of her diabetes. Instead, she said, she 
realized it was time for her to get on top of her disease. "I had no choice," 
she said. "I had a baby inside me." 
Smart began testing her blood -- not one or two times a day but 12 -- sometimes 
getting up at 4 in the morning to make sure her blood glucose level was as 
close to normal as possible. As a result, throughout her pregnancy, she said, 
"my blood sugars averaged the same or a little lower than my husband's." 
Psychological counseling and support is also available at the center. 
Compliance -- or doing what one must do to keep the disease under control -- is 
often a problem, according to staff psychotherapist Barbara Dybnis. Compliance 
can be especially tough for teen-agers. "Engineers make great people with 
diabetes because they love those numbers to be in order," she said. "Teen-agers 
don't." 
Teen-age diabetics may wonder whether they should tell their dates about their 
condition. Parents of diabetics may need help in dealing with their guilt about 
causing a child pain during necessary injections or may seek advice on dealing 
with offspring who resent the attention given a diabetic sibling. 
One of the most unusual features of the center is its gym, staff members said. 
Holvey said the health community has become increasingly aware that 
non-insulin-dependent diabetes can be as serious a disease in terms of its 
consequences as the juvenile-onset type. And yet, non-insulin-dependent 
diabetes can often be controlled through diet and exercise alone. 
The gym at the center is supervised by exercise physiologist Claudia Graham, 
who is diabetic. Diabetics need to approach exercise in an informed way, Graham 
said. Individuals with diabetes-related retinal damage, for instance, should 
avoid certain kinds of weightlifting because it could cause further damage. 
But Graham obviously believes diabetics can and should be active. She once 
trekked the Himalayas, carrying a cache of anti-nausea suppositories to make 
sure the altitude didn't cause her to lose the lunch she had so carefully 
countered with injected insulin. 
Graham said the gym can accommodate both the person who wants to exercise 
regularly in an atmosphere more hip to the needs of diabetics than the average 
health spa and the serious diabetic athlete who wants a challenge, but not at 
the cost of his or her health. 
An example: "We can take a diabetic athlete who wants to run the Boston 
marathon and teach him to train to use certain fuels." 
As Holvey pointed out, some people have an elevated risk of developing 
diabetes. There is a higher rate among African Americans than among whites. 
There is an especially high incidence among Latinos and American Indians, he 
said. 
There is no cure for diabetes. But the center is working on that too. 
Some insulin-dependent diabetics have been able to stop insulin injections 
after receiving a pancreas transplant. Soon-Shiong, who heads the center's 
Islet Transplantation Center, is one of a number of scientists throughout the 
world who are studying an alternative procedure: the transplantation of only 
those cells in the pancreas, called islets, that secrete insulin. 
Soon-Shiong has been making progress toward lessening the likelihood that such 
cells will be rejected or destroyed after transplantation by placing them in a 
microcapsule before they are injected into the portal vein of the recipient. 
Results in animals have been encouraging, said Soon-Shiong, who praised the 
center as "a unique facility that can integrate clinical care and 
state-of-the-art research." 
The center is located at 9910 W. Pico Blvd., Suite 200. For further 
information, call (213) 551-1463. 
