HOUSE VOTES TO EXPAND LIST OF CAPITAL CRIMES 
The House voted Thursday to expand the list of federal crimes subject to 
capital punishment, including major drug crimes during which someone is killed 
even indirectly, and to sharply limit appeals for Death Row inmates. 
Opponents called the amendments too harsh and complained that members of 
Congress were posturing for their constituents. At one point there were 
sardonic shouts of "Kill! Kill! Kill!" from the Democratic side of the chamber. 
"Would it be possible to bring the guillotine directly to the House floor?" 
Rep. David R. Obey (D-Wis.) asked sarcastically during debate on one amendment. 
"This is a tough day for the Constitution," Rep. William J. Hughes (D-N.J.), 
the architect of a more moderate anti-crime bill, told his colleagues. 
Rep. George W. Gekas (R-Pa.) retorted that the measure has the support of 
everyone "from the cop on the beat to the man on the street." 
The tough law-and-order measures, pushed by Republicans and conservative 
Democrats, were approved as House members worked on an anti-crime bill that 
they hope to pass today or early next week. 
Three amendments added 12 federal crimes to those that carry the death penalty. 
They include assassination of the President and numerous other federal 
officials, murder by mail bombings, terrorist bombings in planes, trains and 
cars if someone is killed and the murder of a federally protected witness. 
The anti-crime bill backed by Hughes, chairman of the House Judiciary 
subcommittee on crime, already had proposed the death penalty for espionage, 
treason and the assassination of a President or foreign official visiting the 
United States. But he cautioned that too broad a list of capital crimes might 
invite the Supreme Court to rule such punishment unconstitutional. 
The Supreme Court in 1972 invalidated all death penalty laws in place at that 
time. But Congress and 37 states have passed new laws since then to meet 
constitutional objections. Congress has established capital punishment for air 
piracy where a victim has died and for certain drug-related crimes, but no one 
yet has been put to death for such offenses. 
Hughes complained that an amendment providing the death penalty in certain 
cases for "drug kingpins" would allow a drug defendant to be put to death if 
the offense contributed to a fatal auto accident. 
"Are we planning to execute people just because they deal in drugs?" asked 
Hughes, a former prosecutor. 
House members also approved, by a vote of 285 to 146, a key amendment that its 
sponsor, Rep. Henry J. Hyde (R -- Ill.), said would prevent Death Row inmates 
from being allowed to "delay, delay, delay." 
The current appeals process for capital punishment cases, known as habeas 
corpus, allows prisoners to petition state and federal courts claiming that 
they were denied their constitutional rights. Some Death Row inmates have filed 
repeated appeals, delaying their executions for more than a decade. 
Under the Hyde proposal, an inmate would have only six months after his final 
sentencing to file an appeal and would be limited to one state and one federal 
appeal. 
Passage of that amendment was a victory for the Bush Adminstration, which 
protested an earlier Democratic version that would have set a time limit for 
prisoners to file appeals but also would have guaranteed them competent 
lawyers. 
Another anti-crime measure adopted by the House would permit the continued 
domestic manufacture of semiautomatic assault weapons as long as all the parts 
are made in America. 
The Bush Administration last year banned the importation of foreign-made 
assault weapons, but imposed no restrictions on U.S.-made weapons of an 
identical nature. 
"These are weapons of murder," objected Rep. Sam Gibbons (D-Fla.). "It doesn't 
matter whether they're produced in this country or in China." 
