MINISTER HELD ON SUSPICION OF PASSING BOGUS BILL; 
JAILING: THE PRESBYTERIAN CLERIC FROM SAN CLEMENTE WAS ARRESTED FOR ASSERTEDLY 
PAYING A TOLL WITH A COUNTERFEIT $100 BILL ON THE WAY TO AN ORPHANAGE IN BAJA 
CALIFORNIA. 
By all accounts, Ronald Shackelford is the last person one would expect to find 
languishing in a Tijuana jail. 
Shackelford, a Presbyterian minister for 15 years and father of two children, 
"never jaywalks, has never gotten a traffic ticket," said his wife, Mary Lou 
Shackelford. "This is a good man. I don't think he has even played a bad round 
of golf in his life." 
As family and friends grow increasingly frustrated by what they call an 
innocent mistake, Shackelford spent his fourth night in a Mexican jail Tuesday 
for allegedly passing a counterfeit $100 bill while trying to pay a $1.75 toll 
charge. 
"We're all real tired and stressed out," his wife said. "We feel like a hostage 
family. It's a helpless feeling, but you just have to wait." 
Officials with the San Clemente Presbyterian Church, where Shackelford has been 
associate pastor for three years, have enlisted the help of Rep. Ron Packard 
(R-Carlsbad) and the U.S. Consulate in Tijuana to seek his release. A U.S. 
official said he hoped to have Shackelford released on bail within the next 72 
hours. 
Shackelford is the brother of former UCLA basketball star Lynn Shackelford. 
Shackelford's problems began Saturday morning when he and 22 church members 
were headed for the Welcome Home Orphanage located near the small town of 
Colonia Guerrera Vicente. 
Church officials say Shackelford, 46, stopped at the first of a series of three 
toll booths along the Tijuana-Ensenada tollway and paid the toll with a $100 
bill. 
When he arrived at the second toll booth about 15 miles down the road, Mexican 
authorities questioned him about the apparently bogus bill, then detained him, 
allowing the rest of the party to continue traveling. 
The church has hired a Mexican attorney to negotiate for Shackelford's release. 
The pastor has been visited by fellow parishioners every day since his ordeal 
began. 
Corey Melia, a youth pastor with the church, said Shackelford is disoriented 
and confused by his surroundings but is in generally good spirits. 
"He's fine," Melia said. "He's mentally and physically tired, but it's awkward 
for him because he's never been in this position before. I think he's in a 
patient mode, waiting for justice." 
The main problem, say U.S. officials, is that the wheels of Mexican justice 
turn slowly. 
"There hasn't been a holdup as far as Mexican authorities are concerned," said 
Glen Keiser, vice consul for the U.S. Consulate in Tijuana. "Under the Mexican 
constitution, one is presumed guilty until proven innocent. They can hold him 
for up to nine days before charging him." 
Keiser described a meeting between Consulate General Paul Klein and the Mexican 
chief of federal judicial police on Tuesday as productive and said the chances 
are "very good" that Shackelford will be released within 72 hours. 
"This case is a little unusual," Keiser said. "He's not your normal arrestee." 
Most of the church group, which was traveling in three vans, didn't find out 
that Shackelford had been arrested until late Saturday night. 
"We were shocked and dismayed," said Donald Bare, a member of the San Clemente 
parish. "But we knew he was going to a jail where he was not going to be abused 
and that the consulate was doing everything it could." 
The church has helped construct buildings and donated food at the orphanage 
over the years. 
Bare said he knows that many people in the community are angry over the irony 
of Shackelford being detained while on a charitable mission, but it won't deter 
him from going back to the orphanage. 
"I intend to go down again next week," Bare said. "We're unhappy that the 
wheels of justice go so slowly, but the need for Christian work down there is 
great. Most of us plan to be back at that orphanage." 
