ABOUT WINE: A FOUNDING FATHER'S THEORY AND DREAM OF A WINE COUNTRY IN VIRGINIA 
Thomas Jefferson was right, but it took two centuries to prove it. 
The nation's most aristocratic president and a wine lover of monumental 
proportions attempted to grow grapevines and make wine at his Virginia 
plantation for decades. All efforts failed, but Jefferson continued to believe 
Virginia could make fine wine. 
Trying to solve the mysteries of Virginia's soil and climate, Jefferson 
imported grapevines from Chateau d'Yquem in Bordeaux, as well as vines from 
Burgundy and Tuscany, to see how they would grow. Despite regular failure (due 
largely to the harsh winter climate), he tried for more than 40 years to prove 
his theory right. 
Despite all his failures, the message he left -- that Virginia could become 
hospitable for fine wine grapes -- was not ignored, and today an energetic wine 
industry is thriving in Virginia. Some 40 Virginia wineries produce more than 
80,000 cases of wine, host 100,000 visitors on tours every year, and the 
governor of Virginia has officially recognized the strides made by today's 
Virginia farmers and wine makers. 
Served at Official Functions 
Democratic Gov. Gerald L. Baliles serves Virginia wine proudly at major state 
functions, and he helped coalesce the state's budding wine industry in a 
memorable speech on Sept. 28, 1988, when he called for a unified effort to make 
and market Virginia wine. Baliles also pledged assistance from the state to see 
that it happened. 
"That was an important event for all of us," said Shep Rouse, wine maker at 
Montdomaine Cellars, a winery located near the site of the old Monticello 
property Jefferson once farmed. "The governor brought a lot of folks together." 
Late last month, at the awards dinner for the 1989 Governor's Cup Wine 
Competition in historic Williamsburg, Baliles spoke of the strides made in the 
12 months since his pledge. 
"I saw that an old industry was in the process of being revived by Virginia's 
wine-growing pioneers, and I felt that the state government could draw them 
together," he said. "Wine growing in America was born in Virginia, and when it 
comes to selling it, the state and the winegrowers can work together . . . to 
increase the visibility of Virginia's newest old industry. 
"When history is written, I would hope that the 1990s will be seen as the 
golden age of Virginia wine." 
More Than Mere Local Pride 
Tasting the wines indicates that something more than local pride is at play 
here. The wines are quite good. The Governor's Cup-winning wine, 1988 
Williamsburg Winery Chardonnay, is a stylish, elegant wine with superb fruit. 
It is a bit soft, but impeccably made by Fresno State graduate Steve Warner. 
The white wines of Virginia at present show greater potential than the reds, 
partly because red wine grapes often need a longer growing season, and this 
southeastern area of Virginia can experience some warm, humid days late in a 
growing season. The only other gold medal wine at the event, 1988 Rapidan Dry 
Riesling, is a delightful wine of floral nuances and richness. 
However, superb Merlots from Montdomaine and Accomack, and excellent Cabernets 
from Linden and Montdomaine show that red wine is possible here too. 
Part of Colonial Life 
Wine consumption in pre-Revolutionary times was a daily occurrence so ingrained 
in the upper classes that "no one thought to write about it, it was so widely 
accepted as part of life," said Betsi Drumbore, a tour guide with Colonial 
Williamsburg, the agency that preserves the history of this region. 
In a wide-ranging look at the wine and food of the colonies in the two 
centuries following the 1607 founding of Jamestown, Drumbore and historical 
archeologist William Pittman said wine was an integral part of the lives of the 
colonists. 
The typical midday meal, which often started about 2 p.m. and lasted until as 
late as 5, was heavily oriented toward meats -- beef, smoked pork, rabbit and 
other game. "The poor people ate vegetables," said Drumbore. 
On a sideboard in a typical dining room was wine, generally imported, served 
from decanters filled from the cask or, in some cases, from bottles. 
Occasionally, wine was served from a punch bowl. 
The supper meal, which started late in the evening, was light, but also 
accompanied by wine, and occasionally finished with a glass of sack (Sherry) 
with a dessert that included wine in the recipe. 
Dry wine from France and Madeira were both popular with meals, said Pittman 
(Madeira matched with sweetmeats), and there was no known opposition to wine 
consumption by any organized group. 
A Real Force 
"We see no broadsides against the consumption of alcohol at all until you get 
to the gin age, when Queen Anne took over in England in 1704," said Pittman. 
Until then, wine was the primary beverage in the Colonies; distilled spirits 
played a far less important role. 
But English gin became a force in the Colonies after 1651 when Parliament, 
attempting to control trade with the Colonies, passed the infamous Navigation 
Acts, Pittman said. He said the British government wanted to discourage the use 
of foreign (French, primarily) wine because of a trade imbalance. 
He said excise taxes on wine drove their price up, and that led to greater use 
of gin (which was an English product and which had a lower tax). 
Jefferson opposed what he called "ardent spirits," and actively promoted wine 
as a beverage that, in moderation, enhanced life style and health. 
"Good wine is a necessity of life for me," said Jefferson in one of a series of 
oft-quoted lines from his writings. 
Jefferson liked wine so much that he became the first American wine connoisseur 
and educator, teaching the joys and benefits of fine wine to others, said John 
Hailman. 
Hailman, syndicated wine columnist with Gannett News Service who lives in 
Oxford, Miss., has spent more than 15 years working on a book tentatively 
called "The Wines of Thomas Jefferson." 
His 850-page unpublished manuscript speaks of Jefferson's efforts to grow wine 
in Virginia, not only for reasons of local pride, but because if it could be 
produced in the Colonies, it would not be subjected to higher taxation as were 
imported wines. And he felt that wine was a beverage usually consumed 
moderately with meals, unlike higher-proof products. 
"Jefferson had many disappointments trying to grow grapes to make wine," said 
Hailman. "Even in his last plantings in 1811, he felt that Virginia could 
become a great wine region because of the soil, and he really thought the 
climate was not too severe." 
Tragic Winter Frost 
However, said Hailman, those vines planted in 1811 were nearly wiped out by a 
winter frost and that broke Jefferson's spirit, he said. 
Yet even at age 82 in 1825, the year before he died, Jefferson wrote letters to 
others who sought to make wine, trying to encourage them to keep trying, said 
Hailman. 
Jefferson believed firmly in the healthful benefits of consuming moderate 
amounts of wine, and conversely he was adamant that stronger drinks were 
dangerous to society. 
Hailman says tavern lists of the revolutionary period refer to a drink called 
Termo, which was white Lisbon wine (shipped from Portugal, but whose prior 
lineage was often unknown) with brandy added. He said Jefferson decried Termo 
because of its higher alcoholic content. 
To avoid such high-proof aberrations, Jefferson imported his own wines from 
Bordeaux, Burgundy and elsewhere on the Continent, even though they were 
subject to high import duties, and were threatened with local taxation after 
the Colonies won their independence from Great Britain. 
"I rejoice as a moralist at the prospect of a reduction of the duties on wine 
by our national legislature," he once wrote to a colleague. "No nation is 
drunken where wine is cheap, and none sober where the dearness of wine 
substitutes ardent spirits as the common beverage . . . . 
'Who Will Not Prefer It?' 
"Fix but the duty . . . and we can drink wine here as cheap as we do grog, and 
who will not prefer it? Its extended use will carry health and comfort to a 
much enlarged circle." 
Hailman said much of the wine sold in Colonial Williamsburg was perishable and 
was meant to be consumed rapidly. As the wine (shipped in cask) sat around, it 
deteriorated. Yet Pittman showed examples of wine bottles shipped to the 
Colonies that contained finer wine. These were often found in archeological 
digs around the former homes of the wealthy. 
Tavern wine was, however, variable. In some taverns in Williamsburg, the same 
wine often was quoted at two prices, "straight" at a lower price and with a 
lump of sugar for a higher price. The sugar was presumably to make palatable a 
spoiled wine. 
Moreover, some wine often ended up in cocktails, which Pittman said were blends 
of various wines made by gentlemen for gentlemen (they were not for ladies). 
This may have been done to salvage bad wine by adding something good to it. 
An Educational Effort 
Jefferson, meanwhile, did his best to educate the American aristocracy of the 
greatness of wine with meals. Hailman says Jefferson often gave George 
Washington and John Adams bottles of the wines he imported. 
"Washington was a big claret drinker," said Hailman, "and he introduced (James) 
Madison and (James) Monroe to wine, and he taught John Quincy Adams about wine, 
and how to drink it and serve it." 
Wine also was used in cooking: sack was used to flavor carrot pudding; other 
products were pickled in a combination of wine and vinegar; bread fritters were 
like today's French toast, but made with wine-based batter (and no dairy 
products), and a dessert called syllabub is a concoction of eggs, cream and 
wine that separates into two layers and is served like a pudding. 
Jefferson's legacy has not been forgotten and the wines now being made, 160 
years after his death from the same soil he tilled, pay homage to an American 
all wine lovers should toast. 
Wine of the Week: 1988 Beringer Gamay Beaujolais ($6) -- Lovely deep fruit that 
hints at cranberries and blackberries and a slight jam quality make the aroma 
most appealing. The taste is soft and ripe, and the wine takes a chilling, 
which helps it match with lighter foods, even some seafood. 
