MARKETING: 'BOSS AS STAR' CAMPAIGNS CAN BACKFIRE IF THE EXECUTIVE FALLS FROM 
GRACE 
In just a few weeks, TV commercials for Remington shavers will once again fill 
the airwaves. As always, these pre-Christmas spots will feature the firm's 
perky leader, Victor Kiam II, best known for his laughable line about liking 
the shaver so much that he bought the company. 
That sappy slogan was supposed to cause consumers to like Kiam so much that 
they would rush out to buy the shavers. And for years it worked. Remington 
became a real heavyweight as consumers snapped up the cordless whisker 
removers. 
But several weeks ago, Kiam, who also owns the New England Patriots football 
team, stuck his football in his mouth. After a female newspaper reporter 
complained of sexual harassment in the Patriot locker room by several players, 
Kiam initially stuck up for his players. Only after several women's groups 
threatened a boycott of his company did he relent and run apologetic ads. 
Now, marketing experts say, Kiam's credibility as a product pitchman may have 
turned from shining gold to razor-stubble black. The overnight tarnishing of 
his commercial credibility is not unlike that of hotel queen and convicted tax 
evader Leona Helmsley, whose familiar face has recently disappeared from her 
hotel chain's advertising. 
Indeed, when company leaders become spokesmen they can unintentionally become 
liabilities. Back in 1988, the Wickes furniture chain suddenly found itself 
without a TV spokesman when former Chairman Sanford C. Sigoloff ("We got the 
message, Mr. Sigoloff!") left the company. Meanwhile, William S. Davila steps 
down as president of Vons Grocery Co. in 1992, and the company is still trying 
to figure out how it will replace his friendly and familiar mug in TV spots. 
And at 83, the frail Orville Redenbacher cannot forever hawk the popcorn that 
bears his name. 
In the midst of all this, ad agency executives are asking aloud: Why risk 
placing top executives in ads? 
"The minute these guys go on TV, it starts to corrupt them," said Larry 
Postaer, executive vice president and creative director of the Los Angeles 
agency Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates. "Because of all the money some 
executives put into their faces being on TV, they become celebrities larger 
than their products," said Postaer. "It's a perk that's tougher to walk away 
from than a corporate jet." 
Some industry critics say chief executives are probably the very last people 
who should appear in ads. "I don't understand the perception that viewers will 
believe something if a CEO says it," said Dave Vadehra, president of the New 
York research firm Video Storyboard Tests. "There's no reason to believe a 
chief executive. He has so much at stake that he's the one who is most likely 
to lie. People are much more likely to believe a salesman." 
Perhaps the most familiar executive hawker is Chrysler Corp. Chairman Lee A. 
Iacocca, who has appeared in 68 ads since 1979. A brand new ad featuring 
Iacocca hyping Chrysler's revamped minivans premiered over the weekend. "We try 
to keep him for just the major events," said Arthur C. Liebler, vice president 
of communications at Chrysler. "We don't want him there as just a huckster." 
Many have tried to follow in Iacocca's footsteps. There's R. David Thomas, the 
founder of Wendy's, now seen on TV hawking chicken sandwiches in his bathrobe. 
Likewise, founder Carl N. Karcher has tried to get consumers to nibble on 
Carl's Jr. fast food for years. And even Barron Hilton briefly tried to fill a 
few Hilton Hotel rooms by yakking in some TV spots. 
But the going gets tough when an executive falls from grace. Both Kiam and 
Helmsley declined interviews through the same New York spokesman, Howard 
Rubenstein. The new Kiam ads are being tested during screenings to groups of 
consumers, Rubenstein said. "Oddly enough," Rubenstein said of Kiam's remarks 
about the female sportswriter, "if anything, the situation has only heightened 
the public's awareness of the product and of Mr. Kiam." 
Marketing experts say it is usually ego that leads to executives pitching 
products. 
Even after the Helmsley Hotel's former advertising agency recommended against 
featuring Leona Helmsley in corporate ads, she continued to appear in them for 
months. 
"The corporate policy was (that) her picture should remain in the advertising," 
said Lawrence Aarons, chairman of the New York agency, Taylor-Gordon, Aarons 
&amp; Co. 
"Most agencies only place CEOs in ads because the CEOs want to be in them," 
said Lee Kovel, chairman of the Japanese agency HDM Los Angeles. "But it's 
fraught with peril. It's dangerous for any one person to stand for a company, 
no matter who they are," said Kovel, who, at a previous agency, helped create 
Eastern Airline ads that featured the airline's short-time leader, Frank 
Borman. 
Since that time, troubled Eastern recently turned to its court-appointed 
trustee, Martin R. Shugrue, to star in its ads. But even though Shugrue is 
generally regarded as a convincing spokesman, after just six months Eastern now 
says it will soon stop using him in ads. 
"We don't want him to be the star of the commercials," said George Brennan, 
senior vice president of marketing at Eastern Airlines. "We want our 
advertising to focus on the product." 
Gemstar Fires Agency After Only One Month 
These days it's big news when an agency picks up a new account worth $3 
million. But it's also rather embarrassing when the agency loses the business 
within a month of announcing the win. 
Last month, Gemstar VCR Plus, a Los Angeles maker of remote devices that 
program VCRs, awarded its account to the Los Angeles office of J. Walter 
Thompson. Last week, Gemstar turned around and handed the ad business to the 
Los Angeles office of DDB Needham Worldwide. 
For DDB, the win is the second in three weeks. Last month, it won the ad 
business for the Moto du Monde motorcycle road-racing series. DDB/Los Angeles 
has picked up $40 million in new billings since Jan. 1, said Dave Park, 
president of the office, which now posts annual billings of $176 million. 
Davis Ball Picks Up Avis' Regional Account 
The same agency that handles advertising for Knott's Berry Farm and Marine 
World Africa U.S.A. has picked up a client that can transport people to both 
places -- Avis. The Los Angeles agency Davis Ball &amp; Colombatto last week 
won the Avis Rent-A-Car licensee business for Southern California, Las Vegas 
and Nevada. Although agency executives declined to state the size of the 
business, industry sources estimate it to be worth about $3 million annually. 
"All rental car ads look the same," said Mark Davis, executive vice president 
of the agency. While unwilling to describe his agency's upcoming Avis ads, 
Davis said they would be very unconventional. "Otherwise," he said, "they'd be 
wasting their money." 
Card Maker Come-On: Reggie's Autographs 
What's a baseball card maker to do during the fall, when most people are 
thinking about football? 
Well, how about slipping something extra into baseball card packets -- such as, 
say, 2,500 "Baseball Hero" cards that are numbered and personally autographed 
by former California Angel slugger Reggie Jackson? 
That's what the 2-year-old Yorba Linda company Upper Deck has done. As a 
result, sales are up. Of course, the odds of finding the card aren't good. 
There are 700,000 other Reggie Jackson cards that aren't autographed, said Don 
Bodow, vice president of the company. 
How long did it take Reggie to sign all those cards? An entire weekend. 
