MEDICINE: ARTHRITIS; 
STUDY OF RATS LINKS DISEASE TO DEFECT IN BRAIN'S STRESS RESPONSE 
Individuals who are calm and easygoing, unflappable in the face of a crisis, 
may be more susceptible to arthritis than those who are more excitable, 
according to a new study by researchers at the National Institutes of Health. 
The researchers have traced arthritis susceptibility in rats to a defect in the 
brain's regulation of the stress response, the first time the crippling disease 
has been linked to temperament or behavior. 
If their discovery, recently reported in the prestigious Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, is confirmed in human studies that are now 
beginning, it may lead to new ways to screen for arthritis susceptibility and 
to new treatments directed at stress-sensitive brain circuits. 
The discovery is "a very significant observation" that may also have widespread 
application in the study of other "autoimmune" diseases such as diabetes and 
multiple sclerosis in which the immune system attacks its host, said 
endocrinologist Allan Munck of Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H. 
Arthritis, which is characterized by swelling or deterioration of the joints, 
aches, stiffness and fatigue, is the nation's primary crippler. More than 1 
million Americans develop arthritis each year and an estimated 35 million -- 
one in every seven Americans -- suffer its symptoms. It is two to three times 
as common among women as among men. 
Together, the various forms of arthritis account for 27 million lost workdays 
annually and cost the U.S. economy an estimated $8.6 billion per year, 
including $4.4 billion in hospital and nursing home services, according to the 
Arthritis Foundation. 
Scientists have long known that certain genes associated with the immune system 
create a predisposition to arthritis, in which white blood cells severely 
damage the protective membranes surrounding the joints. Environmental insults 
to the body -- the pounding on the joints caused by jogging, for instance -- 
also trigger arthritis. 
Some people with genetic susceptibility do not develop the disease, however, 
and researchers have long believed that some other factor must be involved. The 
NIH researchers now believe that they have identified that factor. 
Rhematologists Esther M. Sternberg of the National Institute of Mental Health 
and Ronald L. Wilder of the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases in Bethesda, Md., have been working with two strains of rats, 
one of which is highly susceptible to arthritis and one that isn't. 
When cell walls of streptococcus bacteria are injected into the joints of the 
one strain of rats, called the Lewis strain, white blood cells from the immune 
system attack the joints as well as the injected cellular material. They 
produce swelling and inflammation leading to an arthritis that is "remarkably 
similar to the human disease," Wilder said. 
But when the same bacterial material is injected into another strain, called 
the Fischer strain, little or no inflammation occurs and the rats remain 
healthy. Wilder and others have been searching for many years for the 
biochemical difference between these two strains of rats in the belief that the 
knowledge could hold a clue to understanding human arthritis. 
Sternberg, in contrast, has been examining ways in which the brain might be 
involved in arthritis. One way is in the production of hormones called 
corticosteroids, which are the most potent naturally occurring suppressors of 
inflammation. The synthetic corticosteroid cortisone, for example, has been 
used to treat arthritis since the 1940s. 
Corticosteroids are produced by the adrenal glands, walnut-sized organs that 
sit atop the kidneys, in response to a chemical signal secreted by the part of 
the brain known as the hypothalamus. That signal is a hormone called CRH. 
Sternberg's contribution was the recognition that this process of controlling 
the immune response is stimulated by production of CRH in response to a 
chemical released by the white blood cells at the site of the inflammation. 
To test the theory, Sternberg and Wilder gave the rats a chemical that blocked 
CRH production at the same time that they injected the rats with bacterial 
cells. Within hours after the injection, the arthritis-resistant Lewis rats 
began getting developing arthritis. By stopping CRH production, the researchers 
had removed normal restraints on the rats' immune systems, and they were 
ravaged by their own runaway immune responses. 
Subsequent research showed that the arthritis-prone Fischer rats had a similar, 
naturally occurring block in CRH production that caused arthritis. "Although 
the disease is in the joints, the defect is in the brains," Wilder said. 
The defect lies in the region of the brain that controls the animals' response 
to stress. The researchers do not yet know if the defect causes any behavioral 
abnormalities in the Fischer rats because no one had thought to look for such 
abnormalities before. But Wilder is looking now. 
Meanwhile, the researchers are designing studies to determine if the same type 
of defect -- where there is an inadequate response to stress -- is present in 
the brains of humans who develop or are susceptible to arthritis. 
"You run into people who panic under trivial conditions," Wilder said. "Others, 
nothing seems to upset them." Those differences in response might be linked to 
the same type of defect observed in the mice. 
The brain defect may also play a role in other autoimmune diseases, such as 
multiple sclerosis. The arthritis-prone Fischer rats can develop a disease very 
much like MS if they are injected with ground-up nerve tissue. And British 
researchers have recently shown that naturally occurring corticosteroids can 
induce a spontaneous remission from the experimentally induced disease, 
indicating a link between the brain and immune systems. 
Wilder and Sternberg are encouraged about the possibility that a brain defect 
will be found in humans because NIH researchers have recently shown that 
defects in CRH production can cause depression, and persistent depression has 
long been associated with arthritis. 
"A number of drugs that they use to correct depression . . . really do reset 
the immune response," Wilder said. The new results, he added, "give us new 
impetus to look at a large variety of drugs, some in use and some sitting on 
the shelves of research labs at pharmaceutical companies. This gives us a whole 
new way of attempting to correct arthritis susceptibility." 
Clue to Arthritis' Cause 
Researchers create arthritis in susceptible rats by injecting them with 
bacterial cell walls. The rats have a brain defect that prevents the synthesis 
of a hormone called CRH, and white blood cells proliferate freely, damaging the 
joint. In healthy rats, the process works this way: 
1. When researchers inject cell walls into rat joints, white blood cells attack 
the foregin invader. They also release interleukin-1, which travels to the 
brain. 
2. Interleukin-1 stimulates the brain to secrets CRH. 
3. CRH stimulates the adrenal gland to secrete steroids, such as cortisone, 
that suppress white blood cell activity in the joint. The cell walls are 
destroyed, but no joint damage occurs. 
