CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS PROPOSITIONS; 
TERM LIMITS WOULD OUST LAWMAKERS AND A SYSTEM 
Tapping a wellspring of public antipathy to the institutions of government, 
backers of two November ballot measures that would limit terms of officeholders 
appear on the verge of transforming the face of California politics as few have 
done before. 
If either Proposition 131 or 140 is approved -- and polls show both leading by 
wide margins -- state lawmakers, the governor and other state elected officials 
will for the first time face limits on their tenure in office. The result, say 
the initiatives' sponsors, is the Legislature's entrenched leadership 
ultimately will be swept from office and "lifetime politicians" will be 
replaced by "citizen-legislators." 
Critics don't argue with the popular appeal of the measures' anti-incumbent 
message. But they foresee a far different outcome: A Legislature with few real 
experts, where lawmakers are even more obsessed with moving up and few have the 
experience and political savvy to resist lobbyists and the empire building of 
career bureaucrats. 
The term limits would result in the biggest upheaval in electoral politics in 
the state since 1966, when the U.S. Supreme Court's landmark one-man, one-vote 
decision was implemented. With that ruling, large-population counties received 
proportionately more representation in the Legislature, bringing in 22 new 
senators, a majority of the 40-member Senate, and 33 new lawmakers to the 
80-member Assembly. 
The move toward term limits also reflects more widespread political unrest, 
spawned by a common message that is being delivered to incumbent officeholders: 
Serve out the limit and move on. 
"The mood is real simple," said blunt-talking Los Angeles County Supervisor 
Pete Schabarum, chief sponsor of Proposition 140. "And that is the folks are 
really ticked or fed up -- call it what you will -- over how legislative bodies 
are conducting themselves." 
Proposition 140 would limit lifetime service in the Assembly to six years, in 
the Senate to eight; Proposition 131 would force members of each house to move 
on after 12 consecutive years. Both measures limit most statewide elected 
officials to eight years in office, but Proposition 131 would allow them to run 
again after sitting out a term. 
Additionally, Proposition 131 would provide partial public funding of all state 
political campaigns, paid for out of a taxpayer-supported campaign fund. It 
imposes limits on campaign contributions and expenditures, bans off-year 
campaign fund raising, and establishes a special prosecutor's office to pursue 
public corruption cases. Proposition 140 would slash the Legislature's 
operating budget in half, forcing massive staff lay-offs, and would eliminate 
the legislators' retirement system. 
Should both initiatives pass, term limits would be set by the one getting more 
votes, but all the other provisions of both ballot measures would go into 
effect. 
Opponents of the two constitutional amendments say the measures represent a 
kind of coup d'etat by initiative -- a flagrant attack on basic democracy that 
denies voters the right to keep returning to office the most experienced and 
effective politicians. 
"Term limits are a come-on for another agenda," said Jay Ziegler, spokesman for 
the No on 131 and 140 campaign. "In the case of 131 it's clearly campaign 
financing. In the case of 140, it's to turn back the clock 25 years to a time 
when the Legislature was totally dependent on special interests and government 
bureaucrats." 
Some view passage of either measure as a major step in a movement -- begun in 
Oklahoma last month -- to impose term limits on legislators in all 50 states, 
and eventually on members of Congress. 
"This is a national movement and we're the big banana," said Senate President 
Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles), a bitter foe of both ballot measures 
-- and one of a number of mid-term senators who would be forced from office in 
1996 if Proposition 140 prevails. 
In what is proving to be a roaring battle over term limits, both sides in the 
debate agree that either of the measures would change fundamentally the way 
politics is conducted in the nation's most populous state. 
Under Proposition 140, with its shorter term limits, 83% of the politicians who 
take seats in the Assembly and Senate later this year would be swept from 
office by 1996. By 1998, 100% of the legislators would be unseated. 
"It would be wild," said Eugene C. Lee, professor emeritus in political science 
at UC Berkeley. "The consequences are unpredictable." 
Under both measures, the governor, attorney general and most other 
constitutional officers would be held to the eight-year limits -- guaranteeing 
that no one who wins one of the major offices Nov. 6 would be able to serve 
continuously past 1998. 
Supporters of both measures reach for a broom when groping for a symbol of 
their intentions. 
The two ballot initiatives have brought together a curious coalition of forces. 
They are of the right and of the left; laissez-faire conservatives and 
environmental activists; those who want more government regulation and those 
who believe that government has intruded far too much. 
Proposition 131 was crafted by Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, a liberal 
Democrat, as part of his unsuccessful campaign to become governor. 
Schabarum, the best-known author of Proposition 140, is a conservative 
Republican. Sensing a groundswell of frustration with the Legislature, 
Republican gubernatorial candidate Pete Wilson has also endorsed the 
initiative. 
A recent Los Angeles Times Poll found strong support for both term-limit 
initiatives and deep frustration with how the state Legislature is handling its 
job. However, most voters with an opinion said their own legislators deserve to 
be reelected. 
The September poll showed 55% of voters supporting Schabarum's Proposition 140 
and 28% in opposition. Proposition 131 was only slightly less popular, with 50% 
saying they would vote for the initiative, 34% against it. Other polls have 
shown even stronger support for the two measures. 
Although Wilson, Schabarum and Van de Kamp are veteran politicians, supporters 
of the initiatives for the most part are frustrated outsiders trying to crash a 
political system that they view as unresponsive. Their common view is that 
incumbents have all the advantages when challenged at the polls and that it has 
become increasingly difficult to oust them. 
Some observers believe that the term-limit question might have been avoided 
entirely if earlier attempts to change the way legislative districts are 
determined through reapportionment had been successful, opening the way for 
more competitive legislative races. 
"There is a sense of frustration that nothing else has worked," said former 
Assembly Speaker Bob Monagan (R-Tracy). He said the efforts of "entrenched 
incumbents not to do anything about reapportionment" were at least partly 
responsible for strong support for term limits. 
There is so little competition in legislative races that in the past three 
general and primary elections, from 1984 through 1988, only five incumbent 
legislators were defeated at the polls. 
In 15 out of 100 races for state Senate and Assembly this year, incumbents have 
no major party challengers and are virtually certain of reelection. 
Despite all of that, opponents of term limits argue that the natural rate of 
turnover is quite high. Nineteen of 40 state senators in office after the 1980 
election have since left the Senate; 41 out of 80 Assembly members are no 
longer in the Assembly. Put another way, exactly half of the 120 lawmakers 
remain in the same jobs a decade later. 
As might be expected, the top legislative leaders in both parties rank high in 
length of service, headed by Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) 
with 26 years in the Assembly and Roberti, who has served 19 years in the 
Senate. Both have remained in office well beyond the average -- just under 11 
years in the Senate and nearly eight years in the Assembly. 
Not surprisingly, Brown and Roberti, along with Assembly Republican Leader Ross 
Johnson of La Habra and Senate GOP Leader Ken Maddy of Fresno, are publicly 
committed to defeating the term-limit initiatives -- arguing vociferously that 
without experienced legislators to lead the Senate and the Assembly, the 
Legislature would soon be dominated by the governor, executive branch 
bureaucrats and lobbyists. 
Although Brown has been actively and openly raising funds for what is expected 
to be a difficult and expensive campaign, his aides have recently been 
counseling a low profile on the campaign trail, conceding that many voters tend 
to focus their frustrations with the Legislature on the Speaker and his allies. 
Brown has been more active than any of the others in raising money to defeat 
the initiative. As proponents of the two measures are quick to point out, the 
Democratic Speaker has turned to special-interest groups to pay for the 
opposition campaign. 
Brown's initiative campaign committee reported raising $982,489 in the last 
three months -- receiving most of the money from corporations, unions and 
political action committees representing groups that regularly lobby the 
Legislature. Among the largest contributors were the California Teachers Assn., 
$40,000; RJR Nabisco, $25,000, and the California Beer and Wine Wholesalers, 
$20,000. 
Proponents of both measures make it clear that legislative leaders are their 
target. 
"At this point there is a tiny oligarchy running the show," said California 
Common Cause director Jim Wheaton, now on leave to run the Yes on 131 campaign. 
"The people who are left out are people who care about people or causes but 
don't have any money." 
One of the main sponsors of Proposition 140, Lewis K. Uhler, is president of 
the National Tax Limitation Committee -- a group seeking a constitutional 
amendment to balance the federal budget. Uhler has attacked the Democratic 
leadership of the Legislature, people he regards as big spenders. He believes 
that faster turnover in the Legislature would improve the chances for "our kind 
of people" -- conservative legislators willing to cut government spending. 
With passage of either measure, California would join 26 other states that now 
limit the terms governors may serve, as well as the many states that also place 
limits on other statewide offices. 
Since statehood 140 years ago, only one California governor has ever been 
elected three times -- Republican Earl Warren, who left in the middle of his 
final term to become chief justice of the United States. 
But other constitutional officers have had more staying power, including 
several in this century who managed to hold on to their elected jobs until they 
died in office. 
At the heart of the debate over the term limits, especially as they apply to 
the Legislature, is who would be in charge once the new limits take effect. 
Opponents contend that the effect would be to force out of office many of the 
most effective legislators -- seasoned lawmakers who are so well entrenched 
that they can stand up to special interests. 
"I've seen Willie Brown close down those interests," said one Democratic 
legislative staffer. "I've heard him say, in effect, 'I'm more powerful than 
you are. So, no way.' " 
Brown himself, at a press briefing two months ago, contended that inexperienced 
legislators would be easy prey for lobbyists. 
"My guess is that in this one, the sleazy, cold-blooded special interests are 
going to see an opportunity and they're going to be supporting (the Schabarum 
initiative) because, believe me, they will dominate, they will dominate," Brown 
said. 
At the same session, Brown asked reporters: "Would you prefer to be 
administered for your brain tumor by the surgeon who graduated this year, or by 
the surgeon who has been practicing for 10 years and never lost a patient?" 
Consumer activist Ralph Nader, who is campaigning around the state in support 
of Proposition 131, insists that a new crop of legislators would not be 
hampered by their inexperience. 
"If there is one job you can learn fast, it is the job of being legislator if 
you have the people's interests in mind," Nader said. "If you're going to 
balance all kinds of special interests and deal in that kind of intrigue, it 
does take a while to learn the trade." 
While proponents of one initiative are sometimes critical of the other, for the 
most part both camps are saving their harshest rhetoric for the Legislature 
itself. 
They recite a similar litany of problems besetting California government: this 
year's lengthy budget impasse, a widening Capitol corruption scandal that has 
already led to the conviction of two former state senators, and an inability to 
settle important issues facing the state, such as rising insurance rates and 
increasing traffic congestion. 
Although they accuse the legislative leadership -- and in particular Brown -- 
of kowtowing to the special interests, the chief backers of both term-limit 
initiatives insist that the Speaker is not their target. 
"We are not stating here that there are a lot of evil people in Sacramento," 
said San Jose Mayor Tom McEnery, one of the organizers of the Yes on 131 
effort. "What we're saying is that there are people who have turned into 
rascals. They are really kind of caught in the system, where money is the 
end-all of everything." 
But supporters of Propositions 131 and 140 have attempted to capitalize on what 
they see as widespread distrust of Brown. 
Jim Wheaton of the Yes on 131 campaign has attacked Brown as "king of the 
special interests." 
Similarly, backers of Proposition 140 ask in a campaign brochure, above a 
picture of Brown at the Assembly rostrum, "Should this Speaker of the State 
Assembly have the power to directly affect the lives, the property and the 
financial security of every Californian?" 
As Speaker of the Assembly, Brown is the most powerful member of the 
Legislature, able to appoint the committees that can determine the fate of any 
piece of legislation. Because of the power of the office, speakers have 
traditionally been the Legislature's top fund-raisers and the principal 
spokesmen for the majority party in the Assembly. 
In Brown's case, his flamboyant style and quick, sometimes biting wit have made 
him an especially attractive target for critics of the Legislature. For now, 
his aides say, Brown's best way of fighting back is to remain in the background 
if he wants to succeed in preserving the Legislature as he knows it. 
RULING ON FINANCING: High court refuses to reinstate California's campaign 
contribution limits. A28 
RELATED POLITICAL STORIES A28-31, 33-34 
