BIG U.S. TROOP PRESENCE IS BECOMING A LIABILITY; 
SOUTH KOREA: THE ECONOMY IS BURGEONING AND POLITICS ARE BOILING. IN THE 
MEANTIME, THE AMERICAN MILITARY FORCE IS BECOMING A WHIPPING BOY. 
In their talks this week, South Korean President Roh Tae Woo and President Bush 
have been silent about the issue of withdrawing any of the 44,000 American 
troops based in Roh's country. 
Despite the two presidents' reluctance, recent violent demonstrations in Seoul 
only underscore the growing irritant that our troop presence has become in 
U.S.-Korean relations. The rationale for our $2.6-billion annual presence, 
which made sense in the days following the Korean War, has grown weaker each 
year as South Korea's economy continues to boom. 
Today, South Korea's economy is eight times larger than North Korea's and its 
population is twice as large. Clearly, South Korea has matured to the point 
where it can more fully shoulder the burden of defending against a smaller, 
poorer neighbor. But when asked when the United States can begin reducing its 
Korean troop presence, the White House and South Korea both respond, "not now." 
This is the same response that Americans have been hearing for years. Recently 
the South Korean defense minister was more explicit: "We can discuss the issue 
of withdrawing U.S. troops in South Korea only after the year 2000." In his 
remarks, the official indicated he had the year 2004, or perhaps 2006, in mind. 
Certainly, North Korea still poses a threat to South Korea. But no one is 
seriously talking about ending our ironclad security guarantees to the Seoul 
government. Military experts agree that North Korea could not sustain a war 
against the South without substantial Soviet or Chinese assistance. Yet the 
Soviet Union and China are looking inward to their own serious economic and 
political problems. Rather than being an impetus to North Korean ambitions, 
virtually all east Asian observers agree, the Soviets and Chinese help keep the 
brake on. 
In this context, it makes sense now to reevaluate our Korean security policy 
with an eye to what's best for our interests. Let us ask ourselves, if North 
Korea poses such a threat to South Korea, why have the South Koreans allowed 
the share of their gross national product allotted to defense to decline 22% in 
the last few years? In fact, South Korea spends a smaller share of its GNP for 
defense than we do. We have repeatedly urged South Korea to buy more military 
equipment, preferably from us, but Seoul has resisted. 
It would certainly be unwise for the United States to sever its security 
commitment to South Korea totally. But it would be just as unwise to pretend 
that nothing has changed in 25 years. South Korea has a burgeoning economy and 
a $10-billion trade surplus against the United States. If the Koreans can't 
shoulder more of the burden of their own defense now, do we really have to wait 
until the year 2006, when South Korea's economy will be about 15 times larger 
than North Korea's? Can we act only with South Korea's acquiescence? If the 
answer is yes, then aren't we being held hostage? 
Apparently the Pentagon, despite the Administration's rhetoric, agrees that it 
is time to rethink our policy. According to recent press reports, the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff are already preparing plans for the possibility of withdrawing 
all U.S. troops by 1995. They know what a recent Pentagon report states; that 
in South Korea, "the role of U.S. air and naval elements is likely to be more 
critical" than our ground troops. 
Removing 10,000 Army troops by 1992, as I have proposed, would still leave two 
Air Force wings and all current Air Force personnel in place, as well as 
two-thirds of our current Army presence of about 31,000 soldiers. This 
remaining force would be a strong symbol of commitment to South Korea's 
security. Only Germany and Japan would have more U.S. troops. 
Our large troop presence in South Korea is a political liability for us in 
several ways. Our presence is inevitably a lightning rod for South Korean 
protest groups, as the most recent demonstrations show. We have become a 
whipping boy for every social and political ailment in South Korea, real or 
imagined. 
We do not want to be a catalyst for every Korean dissident. Our policy must 
recognize that South Korea's political center of gravity is to the left of Roh, 
who only narrowly won in 1987 against two left-wing opponents, who together 
received far more votes. 
We now have the opportunity to take control of events, rather than let them 
control us. A 25% reduction in U.S. troops in South Korea could save us more 
than $500 million annually and reduce anti-U.S. sentiment while still 
preserving important military capabilities. Let's not wait until 2006 to take 
this sensible step. 
