PERSPECTIVE ON CULTURAL REUNIFICATION; 
TO TAINT ALL, DISCREDIT THE BEST; 
THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST AUTHOR CHRISTA WOLF IS PART OF AN ATTEMPT TO ERASE EAST 
GERMAN CULTURE. 
Christa Wolf, perhaps the most prominent woman writer in post-war Germany, has 
become the eye of a literary storm that threatens the cultural and even 
political identity of the former communist half of the nation. The West German 
literary Establishment, which lavished praise on her work and her role as an 
artist in East Germany for more than 20years, is using Wolf's latest 
publication, a novella titled "Was Bleibt?" (What Remains?) to launch an attack 
on her and all hitherto respected East German authors. 
Wolf has published a dozen volumes of fiction and nonfiction in East and West 
Germany, and her works have been translated in several languages, including 
English and Japanese. In 1980, she won West Germany's most prestigious literary 
award, the Buchner Prize. 
In "Was Bleibt?" Wolf chronicles a period when she was under surveillance of 
the East German security police. Critics accuse her of opportunism because she 
published the manuscript, which lay in her desk drawer for 10 years, only after 
the communist regime was toppled. They relegate her to the status of a 
privileged state poet, withholding material that might have been offensive to 
the regime. In fact, Wolf repeatedly criticized the East German regime, even 
though she was a party member. She represented integrity and a vision of 
socialism imbued with dignity, justice and tolerance. No doubt, Wolf's critical 
voice helped to shape the process of political self-assertion long before she 
addressed mass audiences at public rallies last autumn. The charge of "state 
poet," certainly misses the mark. But it strikes an extremely vulnerable spot 
because it is by far the easiest way to destroy Wolf's status as a spokeswoman. 
It goes without saying that if one of East Germany's most respected writers is 
discredited, all colleagues who shared her vision will be tainted. 
This turnabout of the West German literary Establishment, the vehemence of the 
attack and the suspicious unity of voices in various media is perplexing until 
it is fit into the larger picture of post-Wall German politics. Then, the 
"literary" campaign is consistent with the conservative model of German 
unification, which is intent on replacing East Germany's political and economic 
structures and erasing its culture. Gunter Grass, the most illustrious of 
Wolf's few defenders, made this connection in a recent interview when he 
protested, "We should not repeat in literature that which happens daily in the 
political and especially the economic sphere; namely the colonization of the 
GDR." The literary campaign has yet another version of the "German Question" at 
its core: The cultural and historical identity of the united Germany is at 
stake. 
By styling Christa Wolf as a state poet, the Western literary Establishment 
extends to the cultural realm what is already accepted in politics and 
economics: the dichotomization of East Germans into victims and perpetrators. 
This all-or-nothing categorization erases those East Germans who shaped niches 
of freedom within the authoritarian social order, criticized the regime and 
finally revolted against it. By identifying exclusively with the victims, West 
Germans engage in the collective psychological maneuver of projecting the 
responsibility for German history onto the communists. Suddenly, people who 
ignored traces of National Socialism in West Germany are finding Hitler's 
legacy preserved in East German communists and, by association, in all those 
who refuse to abandon what might be called an East German identity. But East 
German communism was not, no matter what parallels one can find, Hitler's 
National Socialism. Political repression, corruption and intimidation do not 
add up to Auschwitz, a fact to which Wolf's work testifies. 
By discrediting East German literature, the current "literary" campaign erases 
facets of East German reality and history and discourages East Germans from 
finding an authentic identity within the united Germany. Wolf refuses to 
participate in this political, economic and cultural absorption of East 
Germany. Her work preserves the German Democratic Republic in literature. But 
the East was supposed to cease existing Tuesday, except as a nightmare best 
forgotten. West Germany's cultural absorption of the East is yet another 
version of German intolerance to identities other than its own. And literary 
chroniclers like Wolf are perceived as a threat by those intent on presenting 
to the world a Germany healed of its division and unburdened of its National 
Socialist past. 
Wolf's indictment by the West German media is almost unanimous. But then, it is 
difficult to find any reporting on East Germany that does not subscribe to the 
agenda of annexation. Beyond the unmistakable irony that voices such as Wolf's 
might finally be silenced just as the communists vanish for good, the current 
West German appropriation of political, cultural and historical reality 
represents a troublesome beginning for the "new" Germany. 
