AIRLINES, MAIL WILL BE FIRST TO FACE DISRUPTION 
As the federal government begins shutting down operations this weekend because 
of the continuing budget stalemate, Americans will encounter almost immediate 
disruptions of commercial air traffic and perhaps some delays in mail delivery. 
With those exceptions, however, few people are likely to notice the abrupt 
cessation of federal services until Tuesday, when civil servants normally would 
return to work after the Columbus Day holiday. 
That's when virtually all federal workers -- except for the military, law 
enforcement personnel, postal employees and medical providers -- will be sent 
home if Congress and the White House have not managed to resolve the budget 
impasse. 
At every agency, from Social Security offices to agricultural extension 
branches, a small number of workers will stay on board temporarily to begin the 
process of shutting down operations and sealing up offices. 
The shutdown will be far more extensive than the funding cuts and furloughs 
expected under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-cutting law, which would have reduced 
financing for many federal agencies by about a third. 
The Gramm-Rudman cuts could have taken effect if a stopgap funding measure had 
been signed into law in the absence of an acceptable deficit-reduction plan. 
The shutdown is required because no temporary funding measure was signed by 
President Bush. 
Even under a total shutdown, however, a few services associated with government 
will be spared. U.S. Postal Service operations will not be directly affected 
because the agency is self-supporting through stamp sales and fees for various 
services, but it will face disruptions in the heavy volume of mail it moves by 
air. Mail will be delivered as usual today, officials said. 
Amtrak will not be affected for weeks, perhaps months, according to a 
spokeswoman. That is because the $519 million in annual operating funds it 
receives from Washington accounts for less than 30% of its yearly budget. In 
fact, an Amtrak official said late Friday that the railroad was exploring the 
possibility of increasing services -- particularly adding cars to its regular 
runs in the busy Northeast corridor -- to help offset cutbacks in air service. 
In addition, all "essential" federal personnel responsible for protecting life 
and property will stay on the job. That includes security guards at Ft. Knox, 
doctors and nurses at the National Institutes of Health and law enforcement 
personnel of all stripes, including the Border Patrol, Customs inspectors, 
prison guards and the Coast Guard. 
"The San Ysidro crossing will remain open," a U.S. Customs official declared. 
"Goods and people will continue to be processed." 
A Pentagon spokesman said late Friday that all Department of Defense personnel 
involved in national security would remain at work, including many civilians. 
But he refused to be more specific, saying: "We don't have everything all 
spelled out yet." 
Among the other effects of the government shutdown: Lights at the Statue of 
Liberty will be turned off. Tours of the White House will be canceled. National 
parks will be open, but there will be no rangers to patrol them -- or to 
collect admissions fees. 
Judge David H. Souter's swearing-in as the newest member of the Supreme Court 
will still take place Tuesday morning, but a White House reception for him was 
canceled. 
Although negotiations to resolve the budget stalemate continued into Friday 
night, Budget Director Richard G. Darman issued a statement instructing all 
agency directors to prepare closing-down operations this morning. 
One of the few agencies that will be buffered from an immediate and total 
shutdown is the 4,800-employee National Weather Service. It has sufficient 
funds left over from the just-ended fiscal year to continue some operations 
through mid-October, a spokesman said. 
As a result, the service will be able to keep its 250 stations open for 12 
hours a day -- from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. -- rather than closing them entirely. 
Normally, they are open around the clock. 
But, without night weather forecasts normally provided by the service, there 
can be no night flights -- even though the Federal Aviation Administration's 
17,200 air traffic controllers will remain on duty as "essential" personnel. 
"They (pilots) have to have weather reports. Or else they're not going any 
place," said an FAA official. 
The lack of night flights will delay mail service because significant amounts 
of mail are transported overnight, according to a Postal Service spokeswoman. 
At the Social Security Administration, officials were making contingency plans 
to send nearly all 63,000 employees home Tuesday morning. The agency's goal was 
to shut down its headquarters, 10 regional offices and 1,300 local field 
offices by noon Tuesday, said spokesman Frank Battistelli. 
He added, however, that payments to the nation's 42 million recipients of 
Social Security and Supplemental Security Income benefits would not be affected 
by the government crisis -- unless the stalemate persists into early November, 
when the next round of checks is to be mailed. 
The Internal Revenue Service said it, too, would start a "total shutdown" 
Tuesday morning, retaining only security personnel to guard IRS installations. 
At the National Institutes of Health, in addition to doctors and nurses, other 
"essential" personnel will include some who feed and care for the thousands of 
research animals in the laboratories, ensuring the integrity of hundreds of 
ongoing scientific experiments, a spokesman said. 
Staff writers Tom Redburn and David Lauter contributed to this article. 
RELATED STORIES: A22, 23 
