QUESTIONS &amp; ANSWERS; 
ASSEMBLY: 37TH DISTRICT 
Questionnaires were distributed to candidates this month. Answers have been 
edited to fit the available space. 
Family Sick Leave 
Q. Gov. Deukmejian recently vetoed legislation that would have granted workers 
as much as four months of unpaid leave every two years to care for sick 
children, spouses and other family members without fear of losing their jobs. 
Do you favor this type of legislation? 
Wright: No. It is a decision that should be negotiated between employee and 
employer regardless of the total work force. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: No. Private-sector matters should be considered on an individual basis 
-- optional and arbitrated, but not legislated. 
Teacher Salaries 
Q. The Legislature approved a 4.7% cost-of-living raise for school employees, 
and Gov. Deukmejian reduced it to 3%, placing the difference in an account for 
special education programs. Should this money be used for salaries? 
Wright: I do not believe so because under Proposition 98, passed by the voters, 
there is to be a reserve set aside. 
Petrie: Yes. California must value the critical work of our teachers. 
Compensation has to be at a level that keeps educators in the field and 
enthusiastic in their endeavors. We must pay teachers what they're worth. 
Spooner: No. The California education system needs revision, reform and 
competition. All tax-funded pay raises should be put to the voters. 
Big Green 
Q. Proposition 128, the so-called "Big Green" initiative on the November 
ballot, seeks to eliminate ozone-depleting chemicals by the year 2000, phase 
out pesticides known to cause cancer and require that trees be planted in all 
new developments. Do you support this initiative? 
Wright: No. First of all, ozone depletion is a worldwide issue. Secondly, 75% 
of cancer is self-induced by smoking/overeating. Of the remaining 25%, only 3% 
is pesticide-related and only from over-exposure, not from residue on food 
stuffs. It would result in higher food costs and water bills. 
Petrie: Yes. Big Green forces California to address the pressing environmental 
issues we are saturated with. Although it is complex and rigid, it compels the 
state Legislature and citizens to activate efforts toward environmental 
reverence. 
Spooner: No. There would be too much power in an appointed position. Chemicals 
do not deplete ozone. There is a better way to reduce the need and use of 
pesticides and we don't need a statute to plant trees. 
Tree-Cutting 
Q. Proposition 130 on the November ballot would restrict clear-cutting of 
forests, allow the sale of $710 million in bonds to preserve ancient redwood 
forests and provide $32 million to retrain unemployed loggers. Do you support 
this initiative? 
Wright: No. It is too drastic in that it reduces the total timber industry by 
70% and gives government the right to condemn property. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: No. State bonds almost double the tax bill. 
Limited Terms 
Q. Proposition 131 on the November ballot, authored by Atty. Gen. John K. Van 
de Kamp and Common Cause, would limit most statewide elected officials to eight 
consecutive years in office, and senators and Assembly members to 12 years. 
Proposition 140, sponsored by Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum, is 
more stringent, limiting lifetime service to eight years in the Senate and six 
in the Assembly. Do you support limiting the number of terms state legislators 
can serve? If yes, how long should the limits be? 
Wright: No. Fair reapportionment is necessary to make competitive districts and 
then voters could choose. These two initiatives do more than just limit a 
voter's right to choose. Proposition 131 would put in place taxpayer financing 
of 200 legislative campaigns every two years. Proposition 140, by vesting the 
legislators' pensions, would cause taxpayers to pay for the legislators' 
retirement. 
Petrie: No. I don't agree with mandated terms. It is counterproductive to the 
process of democracy. When the public loses its apathetic demeanor and 
participates in the political process, terms will naturally be limited by the 
actions of the voter. 
Spooner: Yes, two terms. Any more would be "write-in" to be selected by voters. 
Sales Tax 
Q. Proposition 133 on the November ballot would raise state sales and use taxes 
by 0.5% for four years to raise $7.5 billion for drug enforcement and 
treatment, anti-drug education, and prison and jail construction and operation. 
Do you support this initiative? 
Wright: No. People don't need any more taxes. There are bond measures 144 and 
147 for prison and jail construction and there is funding in the education 
budget. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: No. No tax increase. 
Liquor Tax 
Q. Proposition 134 on the November ballot would substantially raise taxes on 
beer, wine and liquor, and dedicate the revenue from the tax hike to programs 
for the treatment of drug and alcohol abuse. Do you support this initiative? 
Wright: No. The way the initiative is written, if the projected funds for the 
programs decline, which they are likely to do, the state general fund would 
have to back-fill. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: No. It does not generate enough revenue to cover the expenses 
projected. 
Inmate Laborers 
Q. Proposition 139 on the November ballot would allow private companies to hire 
state prison and county jail inmates as laborers. Do you support this 
initiative? 
Wright: Yes. It is only fair with the rising cost of incarceration that the 
prisoners pay their costs and make restitution to the victims. 
Petrie: No. Prison labor in the work force is an attractive concept. However, I 
am not in support of this particular proposition, as written. 
Spooner: No. This is unfair to businesses not hiring inmates and to the local 
labor market. Inmates would get preferential hiring. 
Death Penalty 
Q. Do you support capital punishment? If so, do you think it should be imposed 
on those convicted of importing or selling drugs? 
Wright: Yes. I support the death penalty and I would support it being imposed 
on drug dealers if they caused the death of one person due to their actions. 
Petrie: Yes. No, for drug offenses. 
Spooner: Yes. Yes. Drug dealers are accessories and conspirators with drug 
gangs and addicts who die from their products. The best and most inexpensive 
way to eliminate import and sales is to legalize it. 
Handgun Controls 
Q. Do you support additional limits on handgun purchase or possession in 
California? 
Wright: No. Law-abiding citizens who choose to own guns should not be penalized 
as law-breakers. 
Petrie: Yes. I support a 15-day waiting period between the purchase and 
delivery of any firearms. I support education on the use and storage of 
firearms. 
Spooner: No. We need the limits on the people who use guns for criminal 
purposes. 
Abortion Rights 
Q. Do you support a woman's right to unrestricted abortions within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
Wright: Not really. The decision should be with the doctor and patient. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: No. It should be a "licensed" option in case of rape, incest or 
life-threatening risk for the mother. 
Abortion Funding 
Q. Do you support government funding of abortions for women who cannot afford 
them? 
Wright: No. Government should not pay for what is a private decision. 
Petrie: Yes. Choice should apply to all women regardless of position or 
socioeconomic standing. 
Spooner: No. 
Day-Care Services 
Q. Do you believe the state should require private employers to subsidize 
day-care services for employees who request them? 
Wright: No. Employers should make those decisions without government 
intervention. 
Petrie: I support the state generating incentives so that private employers 
will consider providing day-care services for employees. 
Spooner: No. It should be optional. 
War on Drugs 
Q. Do you believe our present strategy of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies and imprisonment of users and dealers will ever significantly reduce 
the level of drug use in the United States? If no, what should be done? 
Wright: Yes, but it will take a long time without the education of our young 
people to end the demand for drugs. 
Petrie: Yes, but not in and of themselves. Education and prevention programs 
are needed in addition to increased recreation, after-school activities and 
youth employment opportunities. Strict penalties should be imposed on 
businesses that launder drug money. The export of chemicals used to 
process/produce drugs should be withheld. 
Spooner: No. History has proven a defensive war cannot be won. 
Drug Decriminalization 
Q. Would you consider supporting the decriminalization of drug use? 
Wright: No. 
Petrie: No, not without explicit qualifications. 
Spooner: Yes. 
Oil Exploration 
Q. Do you think the present Mideast crisis justifies opening up additional 
parts of the California coastline to oil exploration? 
Wright: I never was opposed to oil exploration as long as it was done with the 
environmental concerns addressed. 
Petrie: No. Mass-transit programs and conservation efforts throughout the state 
and country is the approach I would take -- move or transition from a 
consumer-disposable society to a preservation or conservationist policy. 
Spooner: No. In my opinion, the Mideast crisis is contrived to raise oil prices 
and shift the source of oil to the Soviet Union. 
Parkland Exchange 
Q. Should the National Park Service exchange 50 acres in Cheeseboro Canyon in 
southeastern Ventura County for about 1,100 acres of the neighboring Jordan 
Ranch owned by entertainer Bob Hope, permitting park agencies to buy another 
4,600 acres of Hope's land in the Santa Monica and Santa Susana mountains for 
$10 million? 
Wright: Yes. I support this transfer because local government would control the 
development through land use. Ideally, the improved development would generate 
enough taxes to replace the loss to local government of the 4,600 acres taken 
out of private ownership. 
Petrie: Yes. This exchange should be given careful and thoughtful 
consideration. A pragmatic posturing would be beneficial. 
Spooner: No. Government should not buy land, only govern its use. 
Mandatory Ride-Sharing 
Q. Do you favor mandatory ride-sharing in an effort to meet government air 
pollution standards? 
Wright: No. I don't feel government has a right to mandate how one should 
change their lifestyle, only to educate the public. Incentives would also be 
good to voluntarily get people out of their cars. 
Petrie: No. The state should work with industry to generate appropriate 
incentives toward ride-sharing. Mass transit in the form of light rail, subway 
etc. must become the state's transportation priority. 
Spooner: No. It should be optional. 
Political Funding 
Q. Do you support full or partial public funding of political campaigns? 
Wright: No. I do not support taking badly needed tax dollars for mental health 
and education and using it to campaign for public office. 
Petrie: No. I support a mandate which would require media to offer space and 
time to candidates at no cost or substantially reduced rates. 
Spooner: No. Funds raised for political campaigns should be put into the 
general fund when campaigns are finished -- not into the incumbents' retirement 
or personal account. 
Income Disclosure 
Q. Are you willing to publicly release your income tax returns and those of 
your spouse prior to the November election? 
Wright: No. The reports now necessary to be made public tell all there is to 
know of my situation while in public office. 
Petrie: Yes. 
Spooner: Yes. 
Porter Ranch 
Q. Do you support development of the massive Porter Ranch project in the hills 
north of Chatsworth as presently configured? 
Wright: Development is land use, the only decision-making left to local 
government without interference from the state. I would hope they would 
carefully scrutinize the plans before approval. Petrie: No. Community and 
economic needs would be better suited if this project were scaled down and 
built in the Simi and Santa Clarita valleys with appropriate infrastructure 
improvements. 
Spooner: No. Massive developments overload public systems, freeways, schools 
and utilities, not to mention the present water shortage. Developments should 
be organized, incremented and built to solve problems, not make them. 
CONTENDERS 
Cathie Wright, 61, a Republican from Simi Valley, was first elected in 1980. A 
staunch conservative, she is a member of the Assembly environmental safety and 
toxic materials, rules, finance and insurance, utilities and commerce, and ways 
and means committees. 
Dennis Petrie, 29, a Democrat from Canyon Country, is making his first try for 
public office. He is program director of Rancho San Antonio, the "Boys' Town of 
the West" in Chatsworth. He has worked for several human rights-related causes. 
John S. Spooner Sr., 63, the Libertarian Party candidate, is a computer sales 
representative who also sells real estate. He lives in Lompoc in a small 
northern portion of the district in Santa Barbara County. He and his wife, 
Bertha, have been married 42 years. 
