SURROGATE PARENT TRIAL NEARS END; JUDGE IS LIKENED TO SOLOMON 
In an emotional summation of a groundbreaking test-tube baby case, the lawyer 
for surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson likened the judge to King Solomon 
Wednesday and warned that denying Johnson parental rights is tantamount to 
murder. 
Attorney Richard C. Gilbert urged Orange County Superior Court Judge Richard N. 
Parslow Jr. to establish a principle never before recognized in the law: That a 
woman who gives birth to a child made from another couple's sperm and egg is as 
much the mother as the genetic parents. 
"You are looking reality straight in the face and you see three parents," 
Gilbert told the judge. "The question is, 'Will you blink and turn your head?' 
Would King Solomon solve a three-parent problem by assassinating one of the 
parents? You have no right to play God." 
Closing his remarks, Gilbert again referred to Solomon -- a king of Israel 
whose wisdom was documented in the Old Testament -- who determined which of two 
women was a baby's true mother by threatening to cut the child in half. 
"And so, King Solomon, what will it be?" Gilbert asked. "I give you three 
parents and a gun. Tell us your wisdom." 
"I think I'm being asked to split the baby," Parslow replied. 
The judge said he will rule Monday whether Johnson, a 29-year-old single mother 
with a 3-year-old daughter, has parental rights to the child she bore Sept. 19 
for an infertile couple, Mark and Crispina Calvert. He must decide whether the 
baby boy has two parents -- the Calverts -- or three, including Johnson. 
Johnson is the first surrogate mother to seek parental rights to a child that 
is genetically unrelated to her. 
The Calverts have temporary custody of the child, and Johnson is permitted to 
visit twice a week. If Johnson is found to be a legal parent, however, Parslow 
will hold a separate hearing to determine whether she is entitled to custody or 
permanent visitation rights. 
The judge could also rule that although Johnson cannot be considered a legal 
parent, she has a lesser right that entitles her to participate in the child's 
life. Such rights are frequently assigned to foster parents, grandparents or 
stepparents who can establish an interest in a child's life. 
Gilbert argued that it does not matter how a woman becomes pregnant or whose 
genetic material composes the embryo. The act of giving birth and the 
inevitable bond a woman makes to the fetus confers the rights of a mother, he 
said. 
"Genetics means crap in determining parental rights," Gilbert said. 
But the Calverts' lawyer, Christian R. Van Deusen, took the opposite view, 
saying a couple's sperm and egg are "the most precious thing they have . . . 
their genetic heritage." He said Johnson was trying to steal the Calverts' 
child, and that permitting it would be against public policy. 
"If the court were to endorse the conduct of Anna Johnson and the deception she 
has worked on these people, it would open the doors to exploitation of every 
infertile couple that comes down the way seeking to have a child by in-vitro 
fertilization," Van Deusen said. 
Van Deusen said the validity of the $10,000 surrogate contract signed by all 
three parties must be upheld. If men are permitted to sell their semen and 
people to sell their blood, a woman must have the right to choose to let 
another couple's child grow in her uterus, Van Deusen said. 
Harold F. LaFlamme, a court-appointed lawyer for the baby, said California law 
does not give Johnson parental rights. 
Although one portion of the state civil code says a birth mother shall be 
presumed to be a baby's natural parent -- a section Johnson's lawyers have 
repeatedly cited -- another allows a woman to bring a court action to determine 
a mother-child relationship, LaFlamme said. That shows that the framers of the 
law knew that birth alone does not necessarily prove motherhood, he said. 
"Simply carrying the baby isn't enough to confer parental rights," LaFlamme 
said. 
If parentage is unresolved, the civil code dictates that blood tests provide 
the conclusive answer, and in that case, Johnson has no claim to parentage 
because she has no genetic relationship to the baby, he said. 
That leaves her with only one other argument, which is the bond she claims to 
have formed with the child, LaFlamme said. That assertion is suspect because 
she has made contradictory claims to others and "suppressed vital information" 
from the Calverts to make certain they used her as a surrogate, LaFlamme said. 
Van Deusen also attacked Johnson's claim of developing a bond with the baby, 
saying she has no sincere interest in raising the child and was pressing her 
lawsuit for national attention as well as a chance to make money off a possible 
book or movie deal. Johnson has said she has made no such arrangements. 
THE SURROGATE MOTHER SUIT 
On Monday, Superior Court Judge Richard N. Parslow Jr. is expected to announce 
if surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson should be considered a legal parent of a 
child she bore Sept. 19 even though he is genetically unrelated. Johnson agreed 
to have a child made from the sperm and egg of an infertile couple, Mark and 
Crispina Calvert. But on Aug. 13, she filed suit seeking custody and parental 
rights over the boy. The Calverts have temporary custody. The case is 
unprecedented because other surrogate mothers suing to keep their children have 
been genetically related to their babies. 
Johnson's claim: 
She contends that carrying and delivering the child, combined with the 
emotional bond she formed with the baby in utero, make her a legal parent of 
the infant. Johnson argues that the Calverts broke the $10,000 surrogation 
contract by paying her late, failing to buy her life insurance and neglecting 
her medical needs during the pregnancy. Her attorney contends that the contract 
is illegal because it amounts to baby-selling. 
The Calverts' claim: 
The Calverts contend that their genetic link to the child makes them the baby's 
only legal parents. They question the emotional bond Johnson claims to have 
with the infant, saying her custody battle is motivated by a desire for money 
and publicity. The couple say Johnson exploited them for money and duped them 
into the surrogation contract by withholding important information from them. 
