FOES CALL INS CHECKPOINT HAZARDOUS, URGE MOVE 
San Clemente city officials, tired of seeing U.S. Border Patrol chases end in 
bloody accidents on their streets, are renewing their call for Congress to 
finance a long-proposed relocation of the immigration checkpoint that is just 
four miles south of the city limits. 
"It's like a time bomb," San Clemente Mayor Brian J. Rice said. "One day the 
chases will result in some innocent adults or children being killed on the 
streets of our city." 
Last month, 10 people were injured after they jumped from a van that Border 
Patrol agents were chasing on Interstate 5 in San Clemente. The chase began 
when the van's driver sped off while he was being questioned at the checkpoint. 
16-Lane Checkpoint Proposed 
The federal Immigration and Naturalization Service, which runs the checkpoint 
near the San Onofre nuclear power plant, proposed three years ago that it be 
moved 5 miles south, into San Diego County. The new checkpoint would be 
expanded into 16 lanes (the existing checkpoint has four lanes), both to 
facilitate traffic on northbound Interstate 5 and to reduce opportunities for 
illegal immigrants to evade arrest. 
The proposal has the backing of Sen. Pete Wilson (R-San Diego) and Rep. Ron 
Packard (R-Carlsbad). The Defense Department, which owns the Camp Pendleton 
Marine Corps base, the site of both the present and proposed checkpoints, also 
approves of the change, according to Packard's office. 
But action has lagged in Congress, mainly because of the $30-million cost of 
the project, Packard said last week. 
"It's hard to get money authorized because of the tight budget situations," 
Packard said. But the cost is justified, he said, because the new checkpoint 
might save lives as well as aid the government's efforts to stop illegal 
immigration and drug smuggling. 
Up to 10 Deaths Last Year 
Charles Geer, patrol agent in charge of the checkpoint, said that he had no 
exact statistics on fatal accidents at the site but that "about eight to 10" 
people have been killed there in the last year. 
San Clemente Fire Department paramedics, who respond to such accidents, said 
the victims usually are illegal immigrants who jump from vehicles stopped at 
the checkpoint and are struck as they dart into southbound traffic on the San 
Diego Freeway. 
In addition, Geer said, some motorists fail to slow down in time at the 
existing checkpoint and slam into the line of stopped vehicles. 
"There would be a minimum traffic backup," Geer said, referring to the 
multilane design of the proposed new checkpoint. And the chances for high-speed 
chases running into San Clemente would be reduced at the new location, he said. 
"I think a new checkpoint would help our situation," San Clemente Police Chief 
Al Ehlow said. "The configuration makes it more difficult for a high-speed 
chase to begin. Then, too, if a chase were to start, the new checkpoint would 
be five miles farther south from San Clemente, giving them more time to head 
off the suspects before they got to our city. We've had problems with those 
chases for many years." 
Packard said he has pushed the safety angle in trying to drum up congressional 
support for a new checkpoint. At one time, he said, the relocation proposal 
seemed to have broad support in Congress. 
"But now it seems to be in limbo," Packard said. 
Last year, Packard and Wilson succeeded in getting $2.7 million earmarked for 
engineering and design studies. But at the last minute, a congressional 
conference committee deleted the designation, and money was spent elsewhere. 
'Back to Square Zero' 
"Now we're back to square zero," Packard said. "Sen. Wilson and I are now 
hoping we can get the funding for the checkpoint inserted into one of the 
anti-drug bills. If not, I'll try to get the funding into a highway 
appropriation bill." 
The checkpoint near San Clemente is the busiest in the nation, according to the 
INS. In 1988, agents there captured 54,678 deportable illegal immigrants and 
arrested another 800 who were involved in smuggling operations, according to 
Packard's office. 
The checkpoint also recovered stolen property -- including cars and items 
burglarized from homes -- valued at more than $2 million last year. A total of 
128 narcotics seizures were made. 
