A WISE DECISION ON STRIP SEARCHES 
A federal appeals court has ruled unconstitutional any strip search by police 
unless they have reason to suspect that a person in custody is hiding drugs or 
weapons. 
In any other circumstance, the court ruled, body-cavity searches are simply 
"dehumanizing and humiliating," a judgment we applaud. 
The case involved a woman, Karen Kennedy, who hid as security a television set 
and two chairs belonging to a roommate who walked out, leaving $694 worth of 
rent and utility bills in dispute. Kennedy was arrested, booked on suspicion of 
grand theft -- a felony because the property was valued at $400 or more -- and 
subjected to a body-cavity search by Los Angeles police at a Van Nuys jail. She 
filed suit against the officers and the city, won the case and was awarded 
$39,000. The U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals decision upheld that verdict. 
As 9th Circuit Judge Cynthia Holcomb Hall pointed out, "No weapons, no drugs, 
no contraband, no violent acts of any kind were involved." 
California law allows body-cavity searches on felony charges, but limits the 
practice on misdemeanors to charges involving weapons, drugs or violence. In 
the wake of the ruling, the state Legislature will want to consider extending 
that limit to felony cases. 
In drafting new policies to conform to the ruling, police in Los Angeles and 
other parts of the state will want to consider the New York Police Department's 
guidelines, which authorize strip searches only when an arresting officer has 
probable cause to suspect that a person is hiding weapons, contraband or 
evidence that may not be discovered by frisking or emptying pockets. 
Strip searches are certainly a legitimate police practice as authorities try to 
stem the increasing flow of drugs, particularly when the drugs are flowing into 
jails. Body-cavity searches are also warranted to protect police and other 
prisoners. But, in many cases the searches are unnecessary, and, as the federal 
appeals court has affirmed, unconstitutional. 
