COURTS: RULING PLACES 17-YEAR-OLD IN COUNTY JAIL. DEFENDANT FATALLY SHOT A BOY 
IN A SIMILAR INCIDENT FOUR YEARS AGO. 
Richard H. Bourassa Jr., the 17-year-old Anaheim youth charged with murdering a 
classmate four years after he fatally shot another school friend, will be tried 
as an adult, a Juvenile Court judge ruled Monday. 
"The court finds that Richard Bourassa is an unfit subject to be processed in 
the Juvenile Court," said Juvenile Court Judge C. Robert Jameson. "I'm 
extremely offended at this offense and find it to be quite serious." 
Bourassa, prosecutors allege, killed Christian Wiedepuhl, 17, on May 24 while 
acting out a form of Russian roulette in the same room of his family's Anaheim 
Hills home and at the same hour of day that he fatally shot 13-year-old Jeffrey 
A. Bush. Bush's death on Sept. 13, 1986, was called an accident by police. 
Bourassa on Monday was transferred from Juvenile Hall to Orange County Jail and 
was being held in lieu of $200,000 bail. 
During the two-day hearing to determine whether Bourassa should stand trial as 
an adult, Deputy Dist. Atty. Kathi Harper described the youth as having a 
fixation with guns. She alleged that Bourassa wrote a school English paper on 
them and was found to have advertisements for pellet guns in a duffel bag that 
also contained a picture captioned "Kill Saturday" and a letter with the 
reference, "Get that S.O.B." 
Harper declined to elaborate on the markings. Defense attorney Edward W. Hall 
said he believed that they did not relate to the victim and were merely doodles 
besides others such as "Richard and Allison forever." 
Hall had argued that there was no evidence that Bourassa intentionally killed 
his friend, and he tried unsuccessfully to discredit a probation officer who 
recommended that Bourassa be tried as an adult. 
The shooting, which was on a Thursday, involved a "high degree of 
sophistication and planning," Harper said, from the time he first thought about 
getting his stepfather's gun from his parents' bedroom before the shooting to 
the "whole big lie" he twice told police to "cover up" after the shooting. 
Harper contended that Bourassa retrieved the loaded five-chamber, .38-caliber 
handgun, removed one of the bullets and pointed the weapon at Wiedepuhl in a 
"reverse Russian-roulette" scheme. But, because he is dyslexic, he may have 
miscalculated the chamber's rotation and fired a live round when he thought he 
would hit the empty chamber, Harper explained outside court. 
This scenario, Harper said, would warrant a second-degree murder charge, for 
which the prosecution must show "implied malice" -- a wanton and willful 
disregard for the life and safety of another human being that resulted in 
death. 
Hall said that even in that scenario, which his client denies, the prosecutor's 
evidence shows that the shooting was "very close to an accident, misadventure, 
misfortune, a tragic situation." 
After the shooting, Bourassa told police that it was Wiedepuhl who got the gun 
from the bedroom and was pointing it around when Bourassa took the gun away. 
The gun accidentally fired as Wiedepuhl bent down to pick up the gun's holster, 
striking him in the head, Hall explained outside court. 
Hall told the judge that Bourassa, "rather then being someone who potentially 
plans things out and potentially covers them up, he is an individual involved 
in a tragic situation." 
Hall added that Bourassa's taped statements to a 911 dispatcher after the 
shooting indicated that he did not plan the incident. "He told the dispatcher 
'he's starting to turn over, what should I do?' and he made statements like 
'Oh, Christian how can I help?' and words to that effect. It would seem that 
someone who had planned (the shooting) would not have necessarily had that 
attitude." 
Harper, however, said that Bourassa was also recorded as saying, "My God, will 
I be in trouble for this?" 
"Who was Richard Bourassa concerned about? Christian Wiedepuhl or Richard 
Bourassa," Harper said. 
Hall discounted the remark as taken out of context and only reflected concern 
normal of "human nature." 
Bourassa is scheduled to be arraigned today in North Orange County Municipal 
Court. 
