DRUGS FOUND AMID APPLES SHIPPED EAST FROM L.A. 
Federal agents in New Jersey have found almost 900 pounds of cocaine hidden in 
a 13 1/2-ton load of apples being trucked from a produce market in Los Angeles 
to northern New York state, officials reported Tuesday. 
"It was a combination of things that led us to it," Bob Van Etten, special 
agent in charge of the U.S. Customs Office in Newark, N.J., said. "One of those 
things was where those apples were going -- to Albany, in Upstate New York. 
That's like carrying coals to Newcastle." 
Two men were arrested in New Jersey in connection with the seizure. Officials 
said the cocaine -- with a street value estimated at $40 million to $150 
million, depending on its purity and how it was marketed -- apparently was 
intended for distribution in northern New Jersey. 
Van Etten said that as a result of intelligence reports, investigators on the 
East Coast have been closely watching shipments of produce from Southern 
California. 
Los Angeles is one of the major transshipment points for cocaine from Mexico 
and Central America, and refrigerated trucks carrying produce are often used 
because they are relatively difficult to inspect, according to the Drug 
Enforcement Administration. 
Agents from Customs and the DEA seized the cocaine late Sunday night after a 
drug-sniffing dog detected the narcotics in a refrigerated, 45-foot 
truck-trailer parked in front of the Franklin Hotel in Port Newark, N.J. 
Officials said the cocaine, packed in 1-kilo bricks, was concealed in cartons 
buried beneath boxes of apples on a pallet at the front of the trailer. 
Segundino Reyes Flores, 36, a Cuban national living in Miami, Fla., was 
arrested at the hotel. Agents said he was the driver of the truck. 
Carlos Arturo Ceron, 33, a Colombian living in Miami Springs, Fla., was 
arrested a few hours later at a motel in nearby Secaucus, N.J. 
Ceron and Flores were being held without bail pending arraignment in federal 
court. 
Van Etten said the 27,000 pounds of apples from Northern California and the 
state of Washington probably were purchased from a legitimate wholesaler in Los 
Angeles and that the cocaine was concealed later under the fruit. 
