TRAVELING IN STYLE; 
'NOW BOARDING AT GATE 12, SPACE AIRWAYS' FLIGHT 1-A, NONSTOP TO THE MOON'; 
LUNAR HOLIDAY; 
ALTHOUGH PURELY SPECULATIVE, THIS ARTICLE IS BASED ON RESEARCH SUGGESTING THAT 
SUCH A SCENARIO IS BOTH LOGICAL AND PROBABLE AND ALSO INVOLVES THE AUTHOR'S 
EXTENSIVE EXPERIENCE IN BOTH THE AEROSPACE AND TRAVEL INDUSTRIES. 
When we see the Space Shuttle launched, view color images from Neptune or 
listen to tales of space travel, it's a reminder that one day in the 
not-too-distant future we could be taking vacations on the moon. 
Does that prospect seem outlandish -- or out-worldish? 
If you're a prudent bettor, don't wager against it. Odds are you'll lose, just 
as a half-century ago you'd have lost if you had bet that transoceanic 
vacations would never become commonplace. 
The fact is, it's well within the realm of possibility to create a lunar colony 
and a transportation system to support it. 
In science fiction, rockets have been the favorite way to ride the imagination 
to the moon and beyond, although wooden vessels suspended from balloons and 
blown by cosmic winds have had their partisans. 
By the late 1940s, engineers, scientists and aerospace executives were starting 
to make serious proposals for real rocket ships and real space cities to be 
served by them. 
Today, rocket launchings monopolize space flight, and there are a lot of them; 
in 1988, the Soviet Union alone launched 89 space missions. Rockets that will 
be bigger or better or both are on the way. 
Yet the chances are that when you take your holiday on the moon, you'll not be 
borne there on the flame and thunder of a rocket. A better way is being dreamed 
up in labs and workshops around the world -- in Great Britain and the United 
States, in the Soviet Union and Japan. The better way is a moon plane that, 
within Earth's atmosphere, will behave much like the airplanes you ride today. 
In appearance the moon plane will combine the familiar with the alien. Its 
shapes and surfaces will be somewhat unfamiliar, but you will be able to 
recognize it as a plane. 
Over the objections of today's airmen, it will have no windows, not even a 
windshield. You can have a sturdier, simpler hull, easier to build, if you do 
without them, and for surveillance, electronic scanners and other sensors will 
better serve the purpose. 
When you board you'll find no conventional seats. Instead, you'll see what look 
like the progeny of a marriage between a recliner, and, well, a mummy case, one 
for each passenger. Each module will be operable by its occupant as well as by 
the flight attendants. 
In addition to being an unconventional seat (or, at your preference, a bed) 
your moon-flight module will serve as a substitute for the anchor of gravity, 
to keep you from going adrift. It will also be your purveyor of services. 
Within your self-contained module you'll access food and drink, manage your 
ambient temperature, operate the built-in sanitary facilities, select a range 
of postures, control your view screen, select entertainment channels and, of 
course, communicate with the cabin crew and with your traveling companions. 
You'll go to the moon by plane rather than be lofted by rocket because rockets 
have the oddity that they cannot "breathe" the oxygen in the atmosphere as a 
jet engine can. 
So even with oxygen all around them in the atmosphere, they must carry a large 
amount with them to power their ascent. They must stand poised on tiptoe, focus 
their energies beneath them and blast themselves off like controlled bombs. 
Their lift-off is a managed explosion. 
Few transportation professionals are content with the prospect of trying to 
offer fare-paying passengers regularly scheduled service aboard that sort of 
volcanic contrivance. 
With an air-breathing power plant, the moon plane will make a conventional 
takeoff, gently transferring its load from wheels to wings and then ascending 
at a comfortable gradient through the atmosphere. 
To maneuver in airless space, the plane will use small thrusters similar to 
those on some of today's spacecraft. 
Once in space you'll not be confined to your module. You'll be encouraged to 
emerge from it to experience the fun of floating with the aid of guidelines and 
handholds and under the tutelage of the flight attendants. With a little 
practice, turning a somersault in mid-nothing will become almost as easy as 
opening and closing your eyes. 
But that will be only your second-favorite in-flight entertainment. Your first 
will be watching Earth recede and moon approach on your vision screen. 
Long-range scanners will let you glimpse such sights as low-orbit space 
stations or a space tug outbound to retrieve a crippled satellite for repair. 
Generally, though, your flight path will stay well clear of other activities 
and objects. At space speeds, even a collision with an object the size of an 
aspirin tablet could be catastrophic. 
Regularly scheduled passenger flights will traverse space ways that are 
cleaned, protected and controlled. That means that the principal space-faring 
nations will have devised an agency to operate space ways and to guard them 
from space litter, of which, believe it or not, there already is a dismally 
large accumulation. 
The moon plane will take about 20 hours to reach the orbiting transfer station, 
from which tourists will descend by ferry to the lunar surface. 
You will not be dragging along suitcases full of clothes. Weight, energy and 
storage space will not be wasted that way (a concept many a traveler has wished 
could be applied to Earth transportation). You can keep what you wore to the 
moon and wear it back, but on the moon you will wear simple garments of 
space-age fabrics that stay there and are recycled there. 
We do not yet know whether there is ice on the moon to convert to water. What 
is certain is that it will be more efficient to convert moon matter for use 
than to transport necessities such as water from Earth. Energy probably will be 
supplied from solar sources. You will inhabit ecosystems that will function 
through recycling and renewal rather than through consumption and replacement. 
In truth, they will be small re-creations of our Earth environment, but to 
preserve them we shall have to treat them far more sensibly than we now do 
Earth's environment. In doing so, we will perhaps learn how to treat Earth's 
better, too. 
The moon's gravity is about one-sixth that of Earth's. If you can drive a golf 
ball 200 yards on Earth, you'll be dismayed when you hit it quite out of sight 
on a lunar course -- unless you're allowed to use brightly colored, 
basketball-size golf balls. 
A golf course on the moon? Maybe, maybe not. But don't forget that in addition 
to its educational and recreational value, moon tourism, like tourism on Earth, 
will be important to economic development. 
Moon tourism will be fostered because it will help to pay the expenses of other 
activities, such as the movement of cargo -- supplies outbound and products 
inbound. The vast scale of investment that will be made in tourist plant and 
services on the moon is foreshadowed by those made, for example, in today's 
theme parks. 
Moon tourists will have opportunities to observe science experiments, 
manufacturing processes, medical research and the workings of life-support 
systems. 
There will be tours of the austere landscape, but the visit that almost 
everyone will want to make will be to the spot where Neil Armstrong and Edwin 
(Buzz) Aldrin in 1969 became the first representatives of the human race to set 
foot on the moon -- and where they left a United States flag to mark the 
occasion. 
On some of the excursions tourists will wear spacesuits that will be 
self-contained, single-person mobile habitations. Most excursions, however, 
will be conducted in vehicles with complete life-support systems for groups of 
tourists. 
But the main attraction will be Earth-viewing, not only for its heart-stopping 
beauty but for the chance to view and learn about our planet in ways never 
before possible. 
Today's Space Shuttle must bore a long, super-hot tunnel through the atmosphere 
until the friction of re-entry retards the craft enough to permit a landing. 
The moon plane will make re-entry humdrum, perhaps by using power brakes, 
perhaps by losing energy by skipping, like a stone on a pond, upon the surface 
of the atmosphere. Then its air-breathing engines will let it land just like an 
airplane. 
Already, preliminary work is in progress in a number of countries on such a 
moon plane, or at least its forerunner. 
The British call their space plane concept HOTOL for Horizontal Take Off and 
Landing. The British government has authorized two companies, British Aerospace 
and Rolls-Royce, to seek an international partnership to turn the concept into 
reality. 
The American forerunner is called the X-30 and is funded by the Department of 
Defense, NASA and individual private manufacturers. The Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency, which manages the program, says that a prototype 
could fly by 1999. 
The Soviets and, lately, the Japanese -- the latter already having come up with 
artists' renditions of imagined lunar hotels -- also are working toward regular 
moon flights. 
To preview that future, think back a moment to the aerial conquest of the 
Pacific. The air space over the Pacific was more mysterious then than cislunar 
space (between Earth and the moon) is now. Flying the Pacific seemed more 
impossible than the project to put humans on the moon later was to appear. 
Newspaper, radio and newsreel accounts of the day reflected amazement, even 
disbelief, that the deed could be done at all. 
In less than a lifetime, the impossible became the commonplace. And that's the 
realistic way to look at your own prospects for vacationing on the moon. 
