MARY ELAINE KEATING OBJECTS 
It has been 21 days since my husband has been held in the Los Angeles County 
Central Jail. Now I'm beginning to wonder just how long this living nightmare 
is going to last. To think that this is happening in our United States is still 
totally unbelievable to me. I guess I'm still very naive. 
To think that our court system is allowed to keep an untried, non-threatening 
man in a "holding cell" runs counter to everything I always believed in the 
Constitution and civil liberties in America. America has long forgotten her 
once firm belief of "innocent until proven guilty." Do you ever once wonder if 
our government and our media might single you out because you stand for 
something they disagree with? 
Our government has effectively silenced all savings and loan executives by what 
they have done and are doing to my husband. Good, solid citizens, who have been 
stripped of their businesses and their jobs, are sitting back quietly -- ever 
fearful of becoming another Charlie Keating. Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Ira 
Reiner said my husband's photo should be hung in every board room in America to 
warn executives not to be like him. Try to tell me that Charlie is not being 
used as a weapon of fear? Try to convince me that he is not being treated as a 
convicted felon? 
Yes, corporate America is scared. Do you blame them? Everyone told us, "Never 
fight the government." My husband, however, still believes he is right. Because 
of his beliefs, he has earned shackles and chains. He is lied about and mocked 
in the press and the media. Every day we read more and more horror stories 
about things we've never done. Once one paper runs a story others repeat it 
like it's gospel truth. 
My six beautiful children, their spouses, 23 grandchildren all love their 
father and "Papa." We all know him as a loving, caring and honest individual, 
who has time for all our concerns and needs, as well as those of the needy of 
the world and tried to instill these virtues in his family. He is not the man 
the media make him out to be, that is a desperate fugitive, a man without a 
country and a serious risk because he may flee his responsibilities. Charlie 
Keating has never fled from anything. Why should he start now? His belief in 
his innocence certainly has not changed. Yes, we're scared to death of the 
power of government which is looking desperately for a scapegoat on whom to 
blame the destruction of our American banking system. 
The scapegoat is Charlie. He spends every day in a tiny concrete cell with an 
iron door. Except for court appearances, he does not see daylight. He is 
chained and shackled (his arms tied to his waist) when he is escorted to the 
attorney room to meet with his lawyers. He is allowed one visit per day, which 
consists of talking on a phone through a plexiglass wall while he is chained to 
a chair and guarded. Life is difficult. We are strong and we are together as a 
family. We must get him out! He cannot fight this immense battle from a holding 
cell. Our government knows this and delights with it. The games they have been 
playing with him are ludicrous. And this is justice? 
MARY ELAINE KEATING 
Paradise Valley, Ariz. 
