SAN DIEGO COLLEGE NOTEBOOK; 
NAIA IS QUESTIONING BOYUM'S ELIGIBILITY 
With only one match remaining in its finest soccer season, Point Loma Nazarene 
(6-6-1) might have to forfeit five of its victories because of the use of an 
ineligible player. 
The National Assn. of Intercollegiate Athletics is expected to rule sometime 
this week on the eligibility of midfielder Charles Boyum, who played in 10 
matches and scored only one goal. 
At question is the interpretation of the rules and whether Boyum should have 
been treated as an incoming freshman or a transfer. 
PLNC contends that Boyum is a transfer because he attended a community college 
-- College of Lake County in Grayslake, Ill. -- for a semester before coming to 
PLNC. The NAIA District III eligibility committee, which originally cleared 
Boyum to participate before the season, contends that Boyum should have been 
classified as an incoming freshman since he did not complete the necessary two 
terms to be considered a transfer. As an incoming freshman, Boyum does not meet 
NAIA eligibility requirements. He does as a transfer, however. 
"There was an oversight on the form that stated the number of terms he 
completed at the other school," said Nate Wright, chairman of the NAIA District 
III eligibility committee. "We're a screening process, but if there is an 
oversight, that does not whitewash the incident. 
"We've made our recommendation to the national committee. What they choose to 
do with it is their business. The recommendation is that (PLNC) played with an 
ineligible player and they should forfeit the games in which he played. I'm 
sure our recommendation is not popular with Point Loma Nazarene, but we have to 
stay within the rules." 
Wright categorized the incident as "an opinionated case." 
A PLNC spokesman said, "It is a matter of the interpretation of the rule." 
When Lesle Gallimore took over as San Diego State women's soccer coach before 
this season, Chuck Clegg, the men's coach who headed the women's program in its 
inaugural season last year, good-naturedly informed her about a certain streak 
the Aztecs have: Never has the school had a losing soccer team. 
Last week, with the women's team assured of a winning record -- it finished 
7-5-2 after going 5-4 in 1989 -- it was Gallimore's turn to rib Clegg, whose 
team was 7-5-2 at the time. "Now, Chuck, the pressure's on you." 
Clegg and the Aztecs held their own, winning two of three matches during the 
week. And with three matches remaining, against St. Mary's, Santa Clara, which 
tied for the NCAA championship last year, and perennial power UCLA, the Aztecs 
are 9-6-2. 
Even if SDSU wins those three remaining matches, it probably will not make the 
playoffs for the first time in four seasons, but 1990 will not be a 
disappointing season for Clegg. 
"I'm very pleased with this year," said Clegg, in his ninth year at SDSU. "We 
had eight new (starters) this year, and we lost some really top-notch players. 
We haven't really been dominated by any one team this year." 
Among the seniors last year, Clegg lost World Cup participants Marcelo Balboa 
and Eric Wynalda, goalie Bryan Finnerty and defensive captain Brad Walsh. 
As for the women's team and Gallimore, Clegg said: "She did a great job. It was 
hard for her because she didn't have any time to recruit. She had to go with 
what was already here. I look for them to achieve the success the men's team 
has had." 
The University of San Diego, 16th in one national poll, will play sixth-ranked 
Santa Clara (10-2-3) Friday night at Torero Stadium in a key West Coast 
Conference soccer match. 
A big part of the PLNC women's volleyball team's success this season has been 
the Simpsons. 
Not the TV show, but sisters Roberta and Debbie. Roberta is leading the team, 
which last week clinched its first Golden State Athletic Conference title, with 
210 kills and 72 blocks. Debbie is leading in digs (316) and is third in kills 
(177). 
Now they might not be as twisted as Bart and Homer, but things can get rather 
confusing with the Crusaders' Simpsons. 
Roberta, a sophomore, is younger but taller than Debbie, who is a freshman. 
Explanation: Roberta, 18 and 6 feet, skipped a grade in junior high school and 
played for PLNC last year. Debbie, 19 and 5-9, redshirted last year. 
"Now that I stopped growing and I'm not so dopey, I might be catching up," 
Roberta said. "But she has always been better in sports. She always got MVP, 
and I never did. Maybe I would have had I stayed with my age group, but I guess 
we'll never know." 
Demetrius Laffitte, a standout forward for U.S. International, Grossmont 
College and Monte Vista High, begins his professional basketball career this 
week in Argentina. Laffitte, 6-6, set a USIU record by shooting more than 57% 
from the field and averaging double figures in points and rebounds the past two 
years. 
John Jerome, who in his one season at USD set the Toreros' single-season 
scoring record with 504 points, is playing in Holland. 
