L.A., PALMDALE SCRAMBLING FOR TRAIN; 
2 CITIES CRITICIZE REPORT THAT FAVORS ORANGE COUNTY FOR RAIL LINE TO LAS VEGAS 
Los Angeles and Palmdale officials Monday challenged a consultant's finding 
that Anaheim was a better bet than the northern San Fernando Valley for the 
terminus of a proposed "gambler's special" high-speed train linking Las Vegas 
and Southern California. 
"I don't think they factored in how much traffic would be generated if we got 
that airport going up there in Palmdale," said Los Angeles City Council 
President John Ferraro, referring to the city's long-closed Palmdale Air 
Terminal. Los Angeles wants Palmdale to be an intermediate stop on the rail 
route between Las Vegas and the Valley. 
"We desperately need that airport opened," Ferraro said, "and we'll keep 
pushing for it." 
And a top Palmdale official said his Antelope Valley city would soon release 
its own report indicating that routing the train through Palmdale would be less 
costly than through heavily congested San Bernardino and Orange counties. 
The Palmdale report will project continued rapid population growth in both the 
Antelope and Santa Clarita valleys and suggests that future commuter ridership 
between Palmdale and the San Fernando Valley "can be expected to greatly 
increase," said Palmdale Mayor William Knight. 
The futuristic $4-billion rail project is the brainchild of Las Vegas gambling 
interests, which view it as a vehicle for boosting the number of gamblers at 
Nevada hotels and casinos. 
Approval Needed 
Technologies under consideration are a still-experimental West German magnetic 
levitation system, the French TGV high-speed train and the Japanese bullet 
train. 
The train would be built with private funds, but would require approval of the 
California Legislature because most of its 230 miles of track would be in the 
Interstate 15 right of way. 
The consultant's report released Friday was prepared by the California-Nevada 
Super-Speed Ground Transportation Commission, which was created by the two 
states' legislatures to select a route. 
Ridership for an Anaheim-to-Las Vegas line was projected to be as high as 5.7 
million round trips annually by the year 2000, and would be 6.5 million if the 
train also stops in Ontario, the consultants said. 
In contrast, a line between Las Vegas and the northern San Fernando Valley 
would draw a maximum of 2.3 million round-trip riders a year, the report said. 
The rival routes were much closer in the number of commuters they would draw. 
A separate commuter service using the same tracks between Orange and San 
Bernardino counties would draw 433,000 round-trip passengers annually, while a 
similar commuter service between the northern Valley and Palmdale would draw 
418,000 riders, the report predicted. 
The Los Angeles plan, strongly supported by Mayor Tom Bradley, envisions the 
high-speed train originating in Mission Hills or Sylmar as a vehicle for 
relieving congestion at Los Angeles International Airport by encouraging 
passengers to use the Palmdale Air Terminal. 
The air terminal, which has been unused since 1985 for lack of an airline 
willing to offer service, is scheduled to go back into operation in January 
when America West Airlines commences four daily flights to Las Vegas. 
Orange County leaders say the train would provide transportation for the small 
army of workers who commute daily to Orange County jobs from their homes in San 
Bernardino and Riverside counties, where housing is cheaper. 
Tourism Boost 
In addition, said Orange County Supervisor Don R. Roth, an Anaheim terminus 
would boost tourism by encouraging vacationers to combine visits to Orange 
County, which attracts 34 millions tourists annually, with a trip to Las Vegas, 
which has 17 million visitors a year. 
Roth, a former mayor of Anaheim and chief booster of the Orange County 
proposal, said "it's tourism that will make the Anaheim proposal work, because 
it will provide the ridership. The commuter relief will be an extra benefit, 
although it's an important one." 
Roth, a member of the bistate commission, said he is investigating whether an 
Anaheim-Las Vegas train might also ferry passengers to George Air Force Base in 
Victorville, which is slated to be closed within three years and might be 
converted to a civilian airport. 
The base, located a few miles west of Interstate 15 and about 30 miles south of 
Barstow, "could be used to relieve John Wayne Airport and increase patronage on 
the train," Roth said. 
Palmdale's Knight, acknowledging that Anaheim has the ridership edge, said 
proponents of the Palmdale route might have to take their case to the 
Legislature. 
"Which is the greater need for Southern California?" he asked. "I think it's 
commuter relief and relief at Los Angeles County airports." 
The bistate commission is scheduled to use its consultant's report as a basis 
for selecting a route, possibly as early as its Oct. 27 meeting in Los Angeles. 
