RECYCLING PROGRAM INVESTIGATION IS URGED; 
POLITICS: TWO FEUDING STATE OFFICIALS HAVE ASKED A TOP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY 
TO CHECK INTO POSSIBLE FRAUD IN THE RETURN OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS. 
A top-level law enforcement official disclosed Friday that two feuding state 
officials have separately asked for investigations of payments made to 
businesses they suspect of defrauding the California beverage container 
recycling program. 
Whitt Murray, acting chief of the Department of Justice's bureau of 
investigations, said the investigations of suspected fraud by recyclers were 
requested by state Controller Gray Davis and Director of Conservation Randall 
M. Ward. 
"I'm looking at all the materials gathered by both the agencies and trying to 
determine what the focus of my investigation will be," Murray said in an 
interview. 
He refused to identify the "targets" named by Davis and Ward, and he would not 
estimate how much time the investigations would take to complete. He said, 
however, there was "some overlap" of the cases submitted to him. 
Likewise, he refused to say whether the cases involved businesses that Davis 
charged in an audit report had improperly received more than $12 million in 
state funds from the recycling program over the last year. Ward maintains that 
Davis provided no evidence for the allegation. 
Murray indicated that while he knew both the state controller and the 
Department of Conservation have been looking into potentially improper payments 
to some recyclers in the redeemable beer and soft drink container program, 
Davis' request for an investigation came "most recently." 
The disclosure that the state Justice Department, headed by Atty. Gen. John K. 
Van de Kamp, has received requests for criminal investigations seemed to 
indicate an intensified resolve to root out recyclers suspected of cheating the 
22-month-old program. 
Virtually from the outset, the penny-per-container program has been the target 
of some recyclers who seek to collect the penny on beverage containers smuggled 
from out of state that are not redeemable in California. In addition to the 
penny from a special $120-million state fund, they are paid by processors for 
the scrap value of reusable glass, aluminum and plastic. 
Under the self-financing program, distributors of beer and soda pop pay a penny 
into the fund for each redeemable container. That penny is, in effect, added to 
the cost of the beverage at the checkout stand. Consumers, in turn, can return 
the container to the recycler and be paid a penny for each. 
Davis, a politically ambitious Democrat who is a potential gubernatorial 
candidate, called a press conference Friday to formally release the previously 
leaked audit report that accused the Department of Conservation of mismanaging 
fiscal controls and paying out funds without proper documentation. 
Davis, while insisting that "I don't want any credit" for exposing the alleged 
abuses, demanded that Ward immediately "tighten" fiscal controls before actual 
payment to recyclers is made. The department now relies heavily on post-payment 
audits to discover wrongdoing, much as the Internal Revenue Service does with 
income tax returns. 
Davis charged that unless the Deukmejian Administration's department takes 
remedial action, such as beefed-up prepayment controls, the agency "will turn 
this important effort into an industrial welfare program for unscrupulous 
recyclers." 
"We do have fairly serious prepayment controls," Ward retorted at a separate 
press conference later. 
He conceded that there are "fraudulent claims, absolutely. We recognize there 
is a problem." But he insisted that his agency is vigilant in guarding against 
payment of such claims and if the controller "has information regarding 
fraudulent activity, give it to us." 
Ward said he did not understand Davis' motivations for holding a press 
conference to announce the audit report before Ward had an opportunity to 
prepare a response, but rhetorically asked, "I'm not sure, but is there an 
election year coming up here?" 
