ON AGING: AT PLAY IN THE FIELD OF HEALTH-CARE COST 
These days, about the only thing you can count on in the health care-financing 
field is change. Plenty of it. 
Case in point: When California Assemblyman Willie Brown (D- San Francisco) 
drafted state legislation in 1989 requiring small companies to provide health 
insurance for workers, he stipulated that the law would not take effect until 
1993. Why the lengthy delay? To give Congress time to enact a national 
health-insurance plan and thus render the Brown plan unnecessary. 
Brown is not the only one anticipating change. With at least 35 million 
Americans uninsured and hospital and medical costs climbing at twice the rate 
of inflation, almost everyone -- from government decision makers to people on 
the street -- agrees that something must be done to improve our present 
health-care system. 
Flurry of Activity 
Consequently, there's been a flurry of activity at national and state levels to 
implement solutions. If enacted, any of the proposals described below could 
profoundly impact your health-insurance needs, although it's too early to 
predict exactly how. Here's what the future might hold: 
 -- Changes to the Medicare Catastrophic Act. In response to angry protests 
from some retirees opposed to paying higher taxes for expanded Medicare 
benefits, legislators have introduced more than 20 bills designed to amend, 
delay or repeal the catastrophic program. Among the amendments is a proposal 
that would allow Medicare beneficiaries to drop the catastrophic coverage by 
giving up all Medicare Part B (physician) benefits and one that would reduce 
the supplemental premium, a surtax ranging up to $800 for some seniors. 
President Bush and House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D-Ill.) 
oppose any changes to the act. 
 -- A Prospective Payment for Doctors. A coalition of Democrats and 
Republicans, with tentative support from the Administration, is writing federal 
legislation that would limit the amount doctors could charge Medicare patients. 
The proposed legislation, which would take effect in 1991, includes a national 
fee scale for each procedure, service and operation performed by doctors. 
Medicare payments would be based on the fee scale, and doctors would be 
prohibited from charging more than 25 percent above the Medicare-approved 
amount. Although the proposed bill has broad congressional support, organized 
medicine vigorously opposes it. 
 -- A National Health Insurance Plan. What do Chrysler Chairman Lee Iacocca, 
Princeton economist Uwe E. Reinhardt, a national physicians' group, and former 
Presidents Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon have in common? They all 
support some type of universal health-insurance plan to guarantee coverage for 
all Americans. 
Of course, they have yet to agree on details. For example, should it be 
financed through existing funding sources, income and excise taxes, or new 
taxes on workers and businesses? 
 -- An Accounting of Future Obligations for Retiree Health-Care Insurance. 
Under a plan proposed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the nation's 
main accounting body, employers would be required to charge to their earnings 
the estimated future cost of retiree health-care insurance, a change that could 
drastically cut profits at some companies. Currently, employers report only 
what they pay out for health-care insurance premiums in any given year. 
The proposed plan, designed to take effect in 1992, "has companies scurrying to 
revamp their benefits and limit coverage," reports the Wall Street Journal. One 
possible result: less generous health-care coverage for future retirees. 
Question: Will you settle a family dispute? We'd like to know whether 
Alzheimer's disease is hereditary or if environment is a cause. 
Answer: In some cases, Alzheimer's runs in families. But according to Dr. 
Melvin Kanner of Emory University, there is no simple inheritance pattern. This 
may be due to the different ages of onset. When some family members die of 
other causes before they are old enough to develop Alzheimer's, the line of 
descent can be difficult to follow. 
If you have one sibling who developed the disorder after age 70, your risk is 
no higher than that of the general population. (Five percent of persons over 
age 65 are afflicted with Alzheimer's disease, and 20 percent of those over 80 
experience some type of irreversible dementia, over half of which is caused by 
Alzheimer's.) 
If you have a parent and sibling who both get it before age 70, your risk may 
approach 50 percent. A sufferer's identical twin is also at high risk. 
Since 1987, the genetic explanation has received support from studies of 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the chemical substance of heredity. The pair of 
chromosomes numbered 21 (among the total of 23 pairs in human cells) is 
abnormal in some families with Alzheimer's disease. People with the most common 
form of Down's syndrome, for example, have a triplet chromosome 21 instead of a 
pair, and they typically develop Alzheimer's if they live into their 40s. 
Nevertheless, there have been many identical twins in which only one had 
Alzheimer's. 
The environment may play a role in Alzheimer's disease, but precisely how 
remains unclear. Infection by slow-acting viruses or an excess of aluminum in 
the diet has been suggested, based on unsubstantiated theories. 
