FLORIDA RESTAURANT LOAN SCHEME GOES SOUR 
Law enforcement authorities say pension-fund officials who have little loyalty 
to their members are especially vulnerable to the sort of approach that Florida 
businessman Leonard J. Mercer Jr. used on his friend, Joseph J. Higgins. 
Mercer, a Ft. Lauderdale hotel owner, told Higgins that he needed $375,000 to 
purchase the Ta-Boo, a Palm Beach restaurant. 
Higgins had access to that much money and more. He had been retained by New 
Jersey Teamsters Local 701 to invest $20 million worth of union pension funds 
in residential and commercial loans. 
But Higgins told Mercer that union rules, which were designed to protect 
members, restricted how Higgins' company, Omni Funding Group Inc., could invest 
the Teamsters' pension funds. In particular, no funds could be placed in 
high-risk ventures such as bars, restaurants and bowling alleys. 
According to federal court records, Mercer then devised a scheme for Omni 
Funding to advance him the money under the guise that it would be used to 
refinance his hotel. 
Omni provided the loan and submitted false reports about it to the Teamsters 
local, which forwarded them to the U.S. Labor Department. In return, Mercer 
paid $42,500 in kickbacks to Higgins in the form of cash, free hotel suites, 
meals and other gifts. 
Reporting false information about pension-fund loans is a violation of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act, which Congress passed in 1974 to 
tighten up supervision over pension funds. 
Acting on an insider's tip, the Labor Department's Office of Labor 
Racketeering, in conjunction with the U.S. attorney's office in Miami, launched 
a criminal investigation into Mercer and Higgins that led to guilty pleas by 
both men and their eventual imprisonment. 
Mercer pleaded guilty to kickback charges as well as perjury for lying to a 
federal grand jury when he testified that Higgins had paid for his stays at 
Galt Ocean Mile Hotel, which Mercer owned. Identified by the Pennsylvania Crime 
Commission as a longtime associate of Philadelphia mob figures, Mercer received 
four years in prison and a $40,000 fine. 
In a separate court appearance, Higgins pleaded guilty to perjury, wire fraud 
and mail fraud and was sentenced to eight years in prison. 
Two trustees and two lawyers for the Teamsters' New Jersey pension fund also 
were eventually implicated in similar corrupt dealings with Higgins. One of 
those implicated pleaded guilty and the other three were convicted of 
racketeering and mail fraud. 
And nothing worked out for Mercer. Before he went off to jail last spring, his 
hotel and restaurant went bankrupt. 
