STATE UNVEILS RENEWABLE ENERGY PLAN 
In a major push to encourage use of renewable energy sources, the California 
Energy Commission Wednesday released a plan to meet almost half the state's new 
electric-power needs with wind, biomass, solar and geothermal generation. 
If the plan is approved by the Public Utilities Commission, California would 
become the first state to require that a specific portion of its power needs be 
met by such sources. Under the proposal, renewable-energy companies would no 
longer have to compete head-to-head with fossil-fuel generating plants but 
would have a share of the business reserved exclusively for them. The plan 
would set aside for renewable energy companies contracts to provide as much as 
1,700 megawatts of the projected 3,500 new megawatts of electric power the 
state will need over the next 10 years. 
"This is the biggest boost that the industry has ever had," said V. John White, 
executive director of the Coalition for Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Technology, or CEERT, a group of independent power producers, environmentalists 
and energy efficiency services formed last April. 
"We have become the first state in the nation to formally institutionalize 
environmental costs in resource options," said Charles R. Imbrecht, chairman of 
the Energy Commission. "What we have done is a first step." 
Renewable-energy companies and environmentalists have long argued that 
utilities do not give proper weight to the environmental benefits of renewable 
fuels. This makes it harder for the companies to win long-term contracts, 
especially when they compete against cheap fossil-fuel energy sources such as 
natural gas. 
As a result, the renewable-energy firms have trouble attracting the investment 
they need to build plants and improve their technologies. 
"A lot of people around the country assume that we will have renewable energy 
available in 10 to 20 years, but this is the first policy decision by a state 
regulatory commission to ensure that," said Tim Duane, a consultant to the 
coalition and a Sierra Club member. 
California's utility companies generally oppose the plan. 
"We are very supportive of the basic issues," said Vikram Budhraja, manager of 
electric-system planning for Southern California Edison. "But our approach does 
not go as far as the total set-aside. . . . We would rather see it go through a 
competitive bidding process." 
Edison said it already takes account of environmental benefits when it 
considers bids from various electrical power companies. 
The set-asides are likely to be phased out as renewable-energy sources gain a 
larger share of the state's market for electric power, Imbrecht, the Energy 
Commission chairman, said. 
"The set-aside is designed to ensure that we continue to make progress in 
diversifying our energy sources in California," he said. 
The Energy Commission plan is part of its 1990 Electricity Report, a projection 
of future energy needs made by the commission every two years. 
Edison and other utilities actually give out the contracts -- to provide 
electric power over periods from 20 to 30 years -- to independent energy 
companies, under guidelines set by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
The PUC must decide, in hearings beginning Nov. 1, whether to include the 
Energy Commission plan in its Biennial Resource Planning Update, which 
determines how California utilities acquire their electrical energy. The PUC 
update will be released for review in February, 1991. 
"We give great weight obviously to the Energy Commission's biennial resource 
plan," said PUC Commissioner Stanley W. Hulett, "but we have other statutory 
requirements, particularly those that look at the needs of the ratepayers." 
"But speaking for myself," added Hulett, "to encourage a significant diversity 
in our resources, we may well have to look at set-sides of some kind to make 
sure that we're not putting all of our energy eggs in one basket." 
Meanwhile, Lizbeth McDannel, director of policy and planning for Luz 
International Ltd., a West Los Angeles-based solar company with nine large 
solar power plants in the Mojave Desert near Boron, considered the move "very, 
very significant." 
"You can't expect to put us on a shelf for 10 years and in the year 2000 pull 
us off and expect our costs to have gone down and our technology to develop," 
said McDannel. "In other words, we might not have been around when they decided 
we were needed." 
Luz had been looking at options in other states to expand its 1,600-employee 
business. 
"We need to develop projects," said McDannel. "That's how we improve -- by 
going out and building power plants, wherever we need to go. This means we can 
stay here in California." 
