BREWERS BARRELING TOWARD PRICE WAR; 
MARKETING: WITH BEER INDUSTRY SALES GOING FLAT, ANHEUSER-BUSCH GOES AFTER A 
BIGGER MARKET SHARE BY CUTTING PRICES. 
Beer drinkers have reason to rejoice: A price war is brewing between the 
nation's beer makers. 
But anti-alcohol forces can rejoice some, too: The price-cutting is further 
evidence that Americans are drinking in moderation. 
A big shot was fired in the beer war Wednesday when Anheuser-Busch made a 
surprise announcement that it would "reluctantly" begin discounting its brands, 
which include the premium Michelob and best-selling Budweiser. A statement like 
that is important because it comes from the world's largest brewer. In the 
United States, the St. Louis giant commands 42% of the $50-billion beer market. 
"There has been a beer war in this country for the past 18 months, but we've 
really tried to stay above the fray," said Jerry Ritter, Anheuser-Busch's chief 
financial officer, in the wake of the company's disappointing third-quarter 
earnings report. "Now, we are joining the fray." 
Despite its huge share of the beer market, Anheuser-Busch has suffered like 
other brewers from beer consumption that has been as flat as stale ale for most 
of the 1980s. So the only way to build future earnings, the company said, is to 
increase its share of the market. 
A spokesman for Miller Brewing, a Philip Morris unit based in Milwaukee, denied 
that the company had cut prices but said Miller did enjoy record sales in 
August. 
The Anheuser-Busch announcement surprised many industry observers. 
"That's a very dramatic development," said Paul Gillette, publisher of Beverage 
Hotline in Los Angeles. "It was quite unexpected." Julie Neimann, a securities 
analyst for Stifel Nicolaus in St. Louis, predicted "flat-out war." 
Still, beer drinkers will likely find only modest reductions, perhaps 5%, or 
about 20 cents a six-pack, predicted Jerry Steinman, publisher of Beer Market's 
Insight. "It'll mean some slight savings for consumers, but they'll never bring 
it down a tremendous amount." 
Six-packs of Budweiser, Miller Genuine Draft and Coors generally cost about 
$3.50, although the companies frequently knock the price below $3 in selected 
markets. 
The price cutting is likely to rile the nation's "neo-prohibitionists," said 
Max Kerstein, editor of Beverage Bulletin in Beverly Hills. 
Patricia Taylor, who directs the alcohol project for the Washington-based 
Center for Science in the Public Interest, said she would be concerned if the 
reductions spark a sharp increase in beer consumption and alcohol-related 
health and safety problems. But, she added, the longer-term significance may be 
that moderation is spreading among U.S. consumers. 
"The beer companies are reacting to larger forces in our society that are 
speaking out against alcohol and alcohol-related problems," Taylor said. 
The Center for Science in the Public Interest played a key role in prodding 
Congress to enact legislation last year requiring that health warnings be 
placed on alcoholic beverages and posted where they are sold. 
The price-cutting announcement by Anheuser-Busch came as the company reported 
that third-quarter profit increased a modest 5.2% to $238.3 million while sales 
rose 6.1% to $2.7 billion. 
A number of analysts reacted by lowering their earnings predictions for 
Anheuser-Busch. And investors responded by making Anheuser-Busch the second 
most actively traded stock Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 
price dropped $4.375 to $38.50 a share. It shed another 50 cents on Thursday 
and was the most actively traded stock, with nearly 4.3 million shares changing 
hands. It was followed by Philip Morris, owner of Miller Brewing, with 3.66 
million shares traded. Philip Morris closed at $41.625, off $1.875. 
Anheuser-Busch President August A. Busch III said the brewer was "very 
reluctant" to discount beer prices but added: "We cannot permit a further 
slowing in our volume trend." Busch said discounted prices will further slow 
earnings growth next year but predicted that the strategy would increase market 
share and eventually swell profits. 
BEER DRINKING 
U.S. per capita beer consumption 
In gallons per person (21 years and older) 
1970: 30.7 
1988: 34.0 
Source: Impact Magazine 
