DISNEY TO GET FILM FINANCING FROM JAPANESE 
In the largest such deal in Hollywood history, Walt Disney Co. announced 
Tuesday that it has teamed with some Japanese institutional investors to form a 
new U.S. limited partnership that will provide $600 million in financing for 
its upcoming motion pictures. 
Called Touchwood Pacific Partners I, the partnership will be backed by $420 
million in credit provided by two Japanese banks and two U.S. banks, as well as 
$180 million in proceeds from the sale of limited partnership interests by 
Yamaichi General Finance Co., an affiliate of Yamaichi Securities, one of 
Japan's leading securities firms. 
The deal represents Walt Disney Co.'s first major film financing from Japan, 
and it is the largest injection of Japanese financing into a major Hollywood 
studio other than an outright acquisition. 
Disney said Touchwood would be the primary financier for all of Disney's 
live-action films once funds from its existing limited partnership, Silver 
Screen Partners IV, are exhausted. The partnership could pay for most of 
Disney's motion picture production for at least the next 12 to 18 months, a 
Disney official said. 
The partnership will allow Disney to continue financing films without adding 
debt to its balance sheet -- and apparently on better terms than it would have 
been able to get from Silver Screen Partners, which paid investors an estimated 
18% annual rate of interest on their investment. 
Yamaichi Finance's sales of $180 million in limited partnership interests could 
be a boon to Japanese institutional investors. 
The partnership could then borrow as much as $420 million from its 
participating group of international banks, which includes Fuji Bank Ltd., The 
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan Ltd. and Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co., led by 
Citibank N. A. as agent. 
The deal is only the latest in a growing list of Japanese investments in 
Hollywood. 
Last year, Sony Corp. bought Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. for $3.4 
billion. And Victor Co. of Japan agreed to invest $100 million in Largo 
Entertainment, a film company headed by former 20th Century Fox President 
Lawrence Gordon. 
More recently, MCA Inc. has been talking with Matsushita Electric Industrial 
Co. about a buyout worth as much as $8.6 billion. 
