BLUE LINE BEEFS UP SAFETY MEASURES AS OFFICIALS TRY TO AVERT COLLISIONS 
Los Angeles County transportation officials, seeking to stem a rash of fatal 
collisions between Blue Line trolleys and automobiles, announced Friday that 
new lights would be added to the trolleys as part of a series of safety 
measures. 
The new train lights, called "cyclops lights," will be installed at the top of 
trolley engines so that they will be visible above picket fences along the 
line, said Neil Peterson, executive director of the county's Transportation 
Commission, which oversees the safety and security of the 22-mile commuter 
line. 
Peterson and other county officials said there also will be new public service 
announcements, toughened security at rail crossings -- to prevent cars and 
pedestrians from ignoring lowered rail guards -- and requests to railroad 
freight companies to alter their train schedules. 
At least 17 accidents -- and three fatalities -- have occurred since the Los 
Angeles-to-Long Beach line began running last August. Transit officials and 
trolley engineers have complained that the high-speed trolleys are obstructed 
each day by cars accelerating through closed intersections, pedestrians and 
bicyclists illegally crossing the tracks and vehicles parked in front of 
oncoming trains. 
The new lights will cost $100,000 and will be installed "as soon as possible," 
said Norman Jester, the commission's vice president of operations. 
While announcing the new safety measures, transit officials defended the rail 
system's existing safeguards. 
"Every possible action that we could have taken has been taken," Peterson said. 
"The (state) Public Utilities Commission sets strict safety standards and we 
have exceeded those standards." 
Peterson said that the new safety measures were "short term," and might be 
expanded when a safety evaluation is completed by Nov. 12. He said that the 
county also hopes to build a network of volunteer crossing guards to monitor 
dangerous Blue Line intersections on Halloween night. 
"The issue isn't whether our safety devices are adequate," Peterson said. "It's 
educating the public and making them aware that these trains run up to 50 
m.p.h. and can be very dangerous." 
But earlier Friday, an attorney for the family of a woman who was killed by a 
Blue Line train on Sept. 19 leveled new criticism at rail officials in the form 
of a lawsuit. The suit seeks $22 million in damages from the county and state. 
Donald H. Cohen, a lawyer for the 11 children of Rosa Cebellos, a Watts woman 
who was struck and killed by a trolley as she crossed tracks near her home, 
claimed that the rail line provided only "inadequate notice, inadequate 
warning, malfunctioning lights and gates and dangerous conditions." Cohen said 
that "no danger or pedestrian signs are located at the crossing" where Cebellos 
was killed. 
Transit officials have said that some motorists try to slip through closed rail 
crossings on the assumption that they are maneuvering past slow freight trains. 
Instead, they risk collisions with the trolleys. 
That was the case Wednesday night, investigators said, when Graciela Marinero, 
26, of Los Angeles, and Willie Torres, her 4-year-old son, were killed when 
their car was struck at a crossing near 41st Street and Long Beach Avenue. Only 
12 hours later, four Cambodian immigrants were hurt when their car collided 
with a trolley on Burnett Street. 
Blue Line engineers have complained repeatedly about illegal crossings, 
claiming that they have witnessed as many as six on a single Los 
Angeles-to-Long Beach run. On one Thursday afternoon trolley round trip, there 
were eight illegal crossings or violations, ranging from pedestrians hurrying 
across a closed intersection to two vehicles parked on the tracks. 
