NEW RECRUITS IN FIGHT FOR GAY RIGHTS; 
ACTIVISM: ORANGE COUNTY SUPPORT GROUP BECOMES A POLITICAL FORCE IN SUCCESSFUL 
BID TO STAGE CONVENTION FOR THE LOVED ONES OF HOMOSEXUALS ON THE HOME TURF OF 
ANTI-GAY LEADERS. 
Sandra Moore never paid attention to jokes about gays. Then her son, Sean 
Holden, told her that he was homosexual. He was 21 and scared to death she 
would reject him. 
Moore reassured Sean that she loved him no matter what, and from that day on, 
she became an activist. 
Recently, Moore, an executive secretary at an Anaheim-based electronics 
company, was making small talk when a co-worker made an offhand remark about 
the weather that included a derogatory term for gays. 
"His words got me right in the pit of my stomach," Moore said. "He thought he 
was making a joke, and the words hurt me incredibly. I told him it wasn't 
funny, and we didn't talk after that." 
Moore is typical of the people who have joined Parents and Friends of Lesbians 
and Gays, an organization that in recent years has transformed itself from a 
support group for gays' loved ones into a key player in the struggle to secure 
equal rights and societal acceptance for gays. 
This week, in a sign of its new aggressiveness, PFLAG is holding its 
international convention in Orange County, the back yard of such anti-gay 
figures as the Rev. Lou Sheldon, head of the Traditional Values Coalition, and 
U.S. Reps. Robert K. Dornan (R-Garden Grove) and William E. Dannemeyer 
(R-Fullerton). 
"The conservative politics and the hate tactics used against our children have 
pushed us to fight back," said Elena Layland, president of the group's Orange 
County chapter. "We love our children. And we're coming out of our own closets 
to show them just how much we love them." 
"We want the conservatives to know that they don't have a monopoly on the 
family," added Paulette Goodman, national president of PFLAG. "Parents of gays 
and lesbians are just as traditional. We really don't believe what people like 
Dornan and Dannemeyer are saying. We are very much part of the traditional 
family. And nobody is going to tell us otherwise." 
More than 500 people from throughout the United States and abroad are expected 
to attend the four-day convention, which begins Friday at the Hyatt Regency 
Alicante in Garden Grove. 
The theme of the ninth annual convention is "Reaching Out Into the '90s." 
Thirty-two workshops with subjects ranging from "Gay and Lesbian Youth" to 
"Breaking Down Stereotypes" will be offered. Last year, 300 people attended the 
national convention in Detroit. 
To win the right to host the convention, the Orange County chapter had to vie 
with one in Charlotte, N.C., which had sought the gathering because of 
Charlotte's visibility as the hometown of ultraconservative U.S. Sen. Jesse 
Helms (R.-N.C.), one of the gay community's most ardent opponents. 
Orange County's PFLAG won the convention in part because of its fight to keep 
its speakers' bureau from being barred at Corona del Mar High School, where 
teacher Mike Marino had invited gays and lesbians to his psychology class for 
more than a decade. A handful of parents had attacked the bureau in 1988 and 
1989, claiming that the speakers were "recruiting" into the gay community. 
Though the PFLAG speakers have not been invited back into the school, the fight 
energized the chapter and won extensive local press coverage. Indeed, in making 
its case to be selected to host the convention, the Orange County chapter 
provided the national federation with a 20-page scrapbook that detailed its 
role in this and other controversies. 
The speakers' bureau controversy was the catalyst for Orange County's PFLAG to 
become more active and "radical," said Layland, who joined the chapter four 
years ago with her husband, Raymond, when their 15-year-old son, Todd, told 
them that he is gay. 
People don't think of parents as being outspoken and radical about gay rights, 
Layland said. 
"Most people think of us as being rather meek," she said. "They think of us as 
being a group that sits around and holds hands for an hour. Well, that's not 
the case. We're fighters now." 
To get the convention started, chapter leaders realized that they had to 
attract more members. 
A year ago, there were only 45 dues-paying members in the Orange County 
chapter, said Mel Trickery, a retired Los Angeles County probation supervisor 
who has two gay children. Though the group was meeting regularly each month, it 
was not attracting new members. 
"The chapter was from the old school of thinking; they didn't want to stir any 
waters," Trickery said. "Some members wanted everything to be kept at a status 
quo. But with the attack on the (speakers') bureau, members realized that they 
had to fight back for their children." 
So the chapter's leaders became more visible by attending gay community 
functions and appearing on national talk shows such as "Geraldo!" PFLAG members 
also attended every gay pride event in Southern California. 
As members of OC-PFLAG, Sandra Moore and her son Sean, now 22, marched side by 
side in the Long Beach and West Hollywood pride parades, their arms wrapped 
around each other. 
"Here I was with my mom, telling the world I was proud to be gay," he said. "To 
have her next to me was something I had never even thought of. It was emotional 
for both of us." 
Today, membership for the chapter has more than quadrupled, with more than 204 
members. The chapter is still growing, Layland said. It is now the largest 
chapter in Southern California, with more members than Los Angeles and San 
Diego. (PFLAG, which also welcomes membership from gays, grew out of the 1979 
gay and lesbian march on Washington and now has 200 local chapters nationwide.) 
With more members, the Orange County chapter has been able to concentrate on 
raising the $40,000 the convention is expected to cost and on organizing the 
event, Layland said. Finding a hotel was one hurdle. Layland found herself 
explaining to hotel management how much controversy the convention might 
attract because of the group's membership. Many hotel managers were 
accommodating; others were not. 
One hotel manager in Newport Beach wanted to know how many gay people were 
attending and wanted to charge an exorbitant amount for the rental of 
convention rooms, said Layland, who declined to identify the hotel. Hotels do 
not regularly charge for convention rooms and instead make money with dinners 
and drinks, said Layland, who has organized conventions in the past. 
"The hotel management was homophobic," Layland said. "They made it known that 
they did not want such a convention in the hotel premises. I was stunned." 
In August, the chapter faced its most difficult hurdle when Rick Heckenlaible, 
one of the chapter's leaders and head of its speakers' bureau, died of AIDS. A 
cheerleader for the organization, Heckenlaible, 41, had kept morale high for 
the convention. 
Several days before he died, Heckenlaible was still worried about the 
convention and was asking questions about how well it was going, Layland said. 
"Rick's death left us wondering, 'How do we continue with the convention?' " 
Layland said. "The convention was a dream Rick had for all of us. But we know 
we all have to go on." 
Already, Heckenlaible's dream is fast becoming a reality for PFLAG member and 
volunteer David Fuller, 22, who arrived in Orange County from Ellensburg, 
Wash., a year ago. As a teen-ager, he never thought of being truly open about 
himself. 
"A PFLAG convention in Orange County proves that the county isn't as 
closed-minded as people may think," Fuller said. "Gays and lesbians can be 
loved and supported in Orange County just like anywhere else." 
