ASSEMBLY: 35TH DISTRICT; 
QUESTIONNAIRES WERE DISTRIBUTED TO CANDIDATES AND RETURNED THIS MONTH. ANSWERS 
LONGER THAN SPACE ALLOTTED HAVE BEEN EDITED TO FIT THE AVAILABLE SPACE. 
Family Sick Leave 
Q. Gov. Deukmejian recently vetoed legislation that would have granted workers 
as much as four months of unpaid leave every two years to care for sick 
children, spouses and other family members without fear of losing their jobs. 
Do you favor this type of legislation? 
O'Connell: I supported the recent bill that would require family leave for 
larger employers of 25 or more people. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. 
Teacher Salaries 
Q. The Legislature approved a 4.7% cost-of-living raise for school employees, 
and Gov. Deukmejian reduced it to 3%, placing the difference in an account for 
special education programs. Should this money be used for salaries? 
O'Connell: As the voters dictated when they passed Proposition 98, the full 
4.7% COLA should go to school districts, so that those local districts can 
spend funds according to their own localized priorities. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. Teachers are still underpaid, and special programs now are 
so numerous that they get in the way of the basics. Current graduates are not 
as well versed in the basics as they should be. 
Big Green 
Q. Proposition 128, the so-called "Big Green" initiative on the November 
ballot, seeks to eliminate ozone-depleting chemicals by the year 2000, phase 
out pesticides known to cause cancer and require that trees be planted in all 
new developments. Do you support this initiative? 
O'Connell: Yes. While it is not a perfect piece of legislation, it is an 
ambitious attempt at setting comprehensive environmental policy for California. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. The bill tries to do too much with too few financial 
resources. Also, it is unclear what the full cost will be, and how it is to be 
fully covered. 
Tree-Cutting 
Q. Proposition 130 on the November ballot would restrict clear-cutting of 
forests, allow the sale of $710 million in bonds to preserve ancient redwood 
forests and provide $32 million to retrain unemployed loggers. Do you support 
this initiative? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. 
Limited Terms 
Q. Proposition 131 on the November ballot, authored by Atty. Gen. John K. Van 
de Kamp and Common Cause, would limit most statewide elected officials to eight 
consecutive years in office, and senators and Assembly members to 12 years. 
Proposition 140, sponsored by Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum, is 
more stringent, limiting lifetime service to eight years in the Senate and six 
in the Assembly. Do you support limiting the number of terms state legislators 
can serve? If yes, how long should the limits be? 
O'Connell: No. I agree with former President Reagan that all voters should 
continue to have the option to support whomever they believe is best 
representing their interests. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. I agree with 140, with limits of eight and six years. 
Sales Tax 
Q. Proposition 133 on the November ballot would raise state sales and use taxes 
by 0.5% for four years to raise $7.5 billion for drug enforcement and 
treatment, anti-drug education, and prison and jail construction and operation. 
Do you support this initiative? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. I am against all new taxes. The objective is noble, but 
there is so much fiscal waste in Sacramento that eliminating the waste would 
pay for it. If addicts can afford drugs, they can afford treatment. 
Liquor Tax 
Q. Proposition 134 on the November ballot would substantially raise taxes on 
beer, wine and liquor, and dedicate the revenue from the tax hike to programs 
for the treatment of drug and alcohol abuse. Do you support this initiative? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. 
Inmate Laborers 
Q. Proposition 139 on the November ballot would allow private companies to hire 
state prison and county jail inmates as laborers. Do you support this 
initiative? 
O'Connell: No. I supported a more equitable and moderate prison workfare 
measure in the Legislature last session. Proposition 139 is not the best 
approach because it allows prisoners to work off-site, creating potential 
security and public safety concerns. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes, assuming half the compensation would go to defray the costs 
of running the prisons and jails. 
Death Penalty 
Q. Do you support capital punishment? If so, do you think it should be imposed 
on those convicted of importing or selling drugs? 
O'Connell: Yes, I support capital punishment. I support the death penalty for 
drug dealers when it involves the biggest kingpins of the drug underworld, who 
should be held directly responsible for causing so much pain and anguish as a 
result of peddling their deadly wares. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes, I support capital punishment. Yes, I support capital 
punishment for importers and sellers of drugs. 
Handgun Controls 
Q. Do you support additional limits on handgun purchase or possession in 
California? 
O'Connell: The Legislature and the governor last year successfully beat back 
the gun lobby to pass landmark gun control measures -- an effort that resulted 
in unsuccessful recall attempts being launched against me and some of my 
colleagues. I believe the Legislature should now take some time to properly 
review and evaluate the effectiveness of those measures. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. The current laws are not being enforced now. 
Abortion Rights 
Q. Do you support a woman's right to unrestricted abortions within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. This is not even an issue for government to be concerned 
about, in my opinion. 
Abortion Funding 
Q. Do you support government funding of abortions for women who cannot afford 
them? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: Partial funding: 50%. 
Day-Care Services 
Q. Do you believe the state should require private employers to subsidize 
day-care services for employees who request them? 
O'Connell: I have supported, and will continue to support, measures designed to 
provide incentives for employers to provide child care. This is in the best 
long-term interests of the businesses involved because employer-sponsored child 
care has been shown to increase employee morale and productivity, as well as 
reduce absenteeism. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. A private employer is a private employer. However, some 
consideration should be given to employers for this. 
War on Drugs 
Q. Do you believe our present strategy of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies and imprisonment of users and dealers will ever significantly reduce 
the level of drug use in the United States? If no, what should be done? 
 O'Connell: Yes. But I would add the strong argument that we all must strive to 
educate our youth about the perils of drugs in order to reduce the demand for 
drugs. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. We need more enforcement. We need much more anti-drug 
education. 
Drug Decriminalization 
Q. Would you consider supporting the decriminalization of drug use? 
O'Connell: No. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. 
Oil Exploration 
Q. Do you think the present Mideast crisis justifies opening up additional 
parts of the California coastline to oil exploration? 
O'Connell: No. The small amount of oil available, as well as the fragile nature 
of the California coastline, does not make this source a viable alternative to 
disrupted Mideast oil. Instead, the U.S. needs a comprehensive national energy 
policy to best utilize present resources as well to develop new sources of 
energy. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. Our oil business is in shambles, thanks to importation of 
too much foreign oil. Let's restrict imports, as we have the second biggest oil 
facility ready to operate, at Point Arguello, but is hamstrung due to Mickey 
Mouse-style environmental trifles. Alternative fuels research is fine for the 
long term, but we need oil now, not blackmail in the East. 
Parkland Exchange 
Q. Should the National Park Service exchange 50 acres in Cheeseboro Canyon in 
southeastern Ventura County for about 1,100 acres of the neighboring Jordan 
Ranch owned by entertainer Bob Hope, permitting park agencies to buy another 
4,600 acres of Hope's land in the Santa Monica and Santa Susana mountains for 
$10 million? 
O'Connell: This is an issue of local control best decided at the local level, 
and I will oppose any effort at preemption by the state. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes, but don't raise taxes to do it. 
Mandatory Ride-Sharing 
Q. Do you favor mandatory ride-sharing in an effort to meet government air 
pollution standards? 
 O'Connell: Pollution caused by automobiles necessitates our looking at ways to 
reduce their use. We must look to enhanced ride-sharing incentives (private and 
public), and to mass transit to help break our dependence on the automobile. 
O'Shaughnessy: No. The real problem is underpromotion. Make it enticing and 
people will ride-share. Use positive incentives. Mandates irritate voters. 
Political Funding 
Q. Do you support full or partial public funding of political campaigns? 
O'Connell: In order to level the playing field for all potential political 
candidates, and to remove any questions of impropriety, at least partial public 
funding, coupled with spending limits, should be available. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes, provided it were on a matching basis: raise so much, get so 
much. The public funding must be limited to amounts paid into a special fund by 
taxpayers on a voluntary basis. 
Income Disclosure 
Q. Are you willing to publicly release your income tax returns and those of 
your spouse prior to the November election? 
O'Connell: Yes. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes, subject to confidentiality controls, and my opponent's 
willingness to do the same. 
Water Pipeline 
Q. Do you support a new pipeline linking Ventura County to the state water 
system that brings water from Northern California? 
 O'Connell: While much of Ventura County is already connected to state water, I 
support other local purveyors' rights to connect to state water if local 
citizens decide that is most desirable. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. 
Drug Users' Tent City 
Q. Do you support the Ventura County sheriff's proposal to incarcerate 
"recreational" drug users in a tent city on an area Navy base and require them 
to attend extensive counseling, drug-education sessions and monthly drug 
testing? 
O'Connell: I believe we must make every effort to convince the casual drug 
user, as well as the drug dealer, to stay away from drugs. 
O'Shaughnessy: Yes. 
Assembly District 35 
The district has more registered Democrats than Republicans and includes the 
cities of Fillmore, Santa Paula, most of Oxnard, a portion of Ventura and 
southern coastal area of Santa Barbara County. 
CONTENDERS 
Jack O'Connell, 39, a Democrat, was first elected to the Assembly in 1982. A 
Carpinteria resident, he was a teacher at Oxnard High School and an aide to 
former state Sen. Omer Rains (D-Santa Barbara) before becoming a legislator. 
Connie O'Shaughnessy, 41, a Republican, is a businesswoman and philanthropist 
in Santa Barbara. She is president of the Santa Barbara County Republicans' 
Lincoln Club and has been active in many Republican campaigns. 
