NEW NORTH-SOUTH HARMONY 
After several years in which relations between Mexico and the United States 
ranged from testy to downright unfriendly, it is refreshing to report that last 
week's state visit by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was decidely upbeat. 
More importantly, Salinas' talks with President Bush laid the groundwork for 
future cooperation in two areas of vital concern to both nations -- trade and 
the environment. 
The most noteworthy achievement at the summit was an agreement to begin 
negotiations aimed at reducing trade and investment barriers between the two 
countries. That's always a good place to start, because even when Mexico and 
the United States have been estranged politically, they have been pulled 
together by their mutual economic dependence. Mexico is the third-largest 
market for U.S. goods and sells 75% of its exports to this country; trade in 
both directions totaled $44 billion last year alone. Mexican labor helps keep 
many U.S. farms and factories going. And most economists agree that foreign 
investment, particularly from the United States, will be needed to help revive 
Mexico's economy from its recent recession. 
Administration officials said the trade talks could lead to a "significant 
evolution" in trade relations between the two nations. Because of the disparity 
between their two economies, the United States and Mexico are still a long way 
from signing a free-trade agreement like the one recently signed between this 
country and Canada. But the planned negotiations should help lower the tariffs 
and other barriers that keep Mexican goods like auto parts and winter crops out 
of the United States. They could also lead to further revisions of the 
nationalistic laws that keep non-Mexicans from investing in Mexico. And a 
healthier Mexican economy would relieve the United States of concern about 
political unrest south of the border, and could help slow the movement of 
Mexican illegal immigrants to this country. 
On the environmental agenda, Bush agreed to send U.S. experts to provide 
technical advice to officials struggling to reduce air pollution in Mexico 
City, whose air is even dirtier than that of Los Angeles. And Salinas agreed 
that Mexico would cooperate with U.S. efforts to reduce water pollution along 
the border, a particular problem in San Diego, where beaches are sometimes 
dirtied by untreated sewage from Tijuana. 
There are still some areas of disagreement. While pledging to cooperate with 
the Administration's highly touted war on drugs, Salinas said Mexico will still 
not let U.S. law officers, or this country's military, operate in Mexican 
territory even when they are in hot pursuit of suspected smugglers. And, like 
other Mexican presidents before him, Salinas criticized this country's 
treatment of Mexican migrant workers, telling Congress to "get rid of myths" 
that illegal aliens take jobs from U.S. citizens. So, obviously, the summit was 
a success because both presidents chose to focus on the issues they could agree 
on while putting potential disagreements aside. But if the formal agreements 
they signed help bring the two "distant neighbors" closer, the subjects they 
disagree on could be easier to deal with in the future. 
