BAIL ORDERED WHILE MILLER AWAITS NEW SPY TRIAL; 
ESPIONAGE CASE: THE FORMER FBI AGENT WHOSE CONVICTION WAS OVERTURNED HAS BEEN 
IN JAIL FOR FIVE YEARS. 
The U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals on Friday ordered a Los Angeles judge to 
hold a bail hearing for Richard W. Miller, a former FBI agent whose conviction 
on charges of spying for the Soviet Union was later overturned on appeal. 
The decision by the three-judge panel in San Francisco paves the way for 
Miller's release from prison for the first time in five years. He is being held 
at a medium-security prison in Rochester, Minn. 
The court issued an order granting Miller's motion that he be released on bail 
while awaiting a new trial on espionage charges. 
Last April, the same panel overturned Miller's conviction, saying he should be 
retried because jurors were allowed to hear too many details about lie detector 
tests that Miller failed. 
In mid-July, U.S. District Judge David V. Kenyon denied Miller's bid to be 
freed on bail pending his third trial. Kenyon said he based his decision on the 
weight of the evidence against the former FBI agent and the risk that Miller 
would flee. 
The appellate judges, however, said the government "failed to show by a 
preponderance of the evidence" that Miller constituted a flight risk. 
In their opinion, 9th Circuit Judges Dorothy Nelson, Stephen Reinhardt and 
Diarmuid O'Scanlain said they were persuaded by a federal probation report 
prepared last May that if Miller were properly supervised, he would show up for 
his new trial. 
Prosecutors declined to comment Friday. But Joel Levine, one of Miller's 
defense lawyers, said he is pleased by the ruling. 
"It's been a long time coming," Levine said. "Richard Miller has been in 
custody five years, and to date he has not received a fair trial. Finally, he 
has a chance of vindication and freedom." 
Levine said probation officials indicated that they would be satisfied if 
Miller put up as bond three pieces of property valued at $350,000 to $400,000 
that are owned by his friends. But the officials also said Miller should be 
kept under "close supervision" pending his third trial. 
Miller, 52, was convicted by a Los Angeles federal court jury in June, 1986, 
for passing FBI secrets to the Soviet KGB during an adulterous affair with a 
married Russian emigre named Svetlana Ogorodnikova. 
The U.S. government has expended enormous resources prosecuting Miller. His 
three-month trial in 1985 ended in a mistrial when jurors deadlocked after 
three weeks of deliberations. His second trial lasted four months, and Kenyon 
sentenced him to two life terms plus 50 years. 
Miller, an excommunicated Mormon and father of eight, had numerous problems as 
an FBI agent. He asserted that his relationship with Ogorodnikova and her 
husband was an attempt to become a secret double agent by penetrating a KGB spy 
ring. 
But prosecutors contended that Miller had agreed to pass a confidential 
intelligence document to Ogorodnikova in exchange for sex, $15,000 in cash, 
$50,000 in gold and a $675 Burberry trench coat. 
The appeals court overturned the conviction because prosecutors were allowed by 
Kenyon to present evidence that Miller, during five days of rigorous 
interrogation by his FBI superiors, failed several lie detector tests. 
The reversal of his conviction was a significant blow to the government. It 
constituted the first time a major espionage conviction had been overturned in 
more than five dozen prosecutions since World War II. 
Meanwhile, Ogorodnikova and her husband pleaded guilty to espionage charges and 
were sentenced to prison. 
The U.S. attorney's office has not said whether it will appeal the reversal of 
Miller's conviction to the U.S. Supreme Court. 
