POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
SHEER ENERGY PROPELS A RECONSTITUTED NPG 
A lot has changed for National People's Gang lately, but the Orange County rock 
band's first concert with a revamped lineup made it clear Wednesday night that 
its high-energy, intense theatrics and considerable promise remain intact. 
NPG's 50-minute set at Bogart's was its first show without founding guitarist 
Chad Forrello, who left the band about two months ago. His replacement, Michael 
Glines (younger brother of NPG's bassist, Deyo Glines), brought a new, 
metal-edged dimension to the band's sound. 
Also playing his first show as a member of National People's Gang was Scott 
Dibble, who has given up his old job as the group's sound man in favor of an 
on-stage role playing keyboards and percussion. While Glines' guitar style 
signals a prominent shift, Dibble's playing accounted for small, subtle but 
useful shades of difference that reinforced NPG's customary tribal rhythms and 
broadened the sound. 
One thing that hasn't changed is the central role of Chad Jasmine, who is 
probably the most charismatic and least conventional front man on the Orange 
County rock scene. Jasmine is essentially a performance artist with a 
heightened sense of the bizarre, who also happens to command a strong, unusual 
singing voice. At Bogart's he was at the top of his form in terms of sheer 
energy and his ability to hold an audience rapt with contortions of voice and 
body. 
With only two weeks of rehearsal behind it, the reconstituted NPG played a 
short set of 10 songs, only three of which were drawn from its two albums. The 
new material was wide-ranging, occasionally fascinating, but short on the 
melodic hooks that give the albums, "The Hard Swing" and "Orange," a sense of 
balance between art-rock and more accessible pop. 
NPG's new approach emphasized sonic intensity over melody. Glines is a fast, 
accurate, detail-minded guitarist whose metallic flurries and wails recalled 
the style of Living Colour's Vernon Reid. He and Jasmine made a fine tandem in 
several instrumental breaks that featured Glines' guitar lines weaving rapidly 
around the thin, sustained snake-charmer tones that Jasmine called from his 
soprano saxophone. 
Glines revealed another dimension, though. On several slow, moody pieces that 
were among the best of the new songs, he set aside his metal-style spray gun 
and dabbed on textures judiciously. 
Some of Jasmine's song lyrics and spoken performance set pieces were nearly 
unfathomable (one new number is about a pair of dinosaurs who encounter 
romantic difficulties and neuroses akin to those suffered by modern humans). 
Others were obvious and a little heavy-handed in their irony -- for example, a 
spoken set piece about the endangered Earth. Still, the songs all came across 
with grabbing force, even when it was hard to figure out what they were getting 
at. And some of the performance bits, even when heavy-handed, employed 
memorable imagery (Jasmine spinning a globe on his finger, then fumbling it, to 
illustrate the planet's environmental fragility). 
NPG's musicianship was better than ever. The only question now is whether it 
can come up with strong enough songs to expand on the base it has built with 
extensive touring over the past two years. 
Forrello, who was in the audience, said he decided to leave NPG because of 
differences over the band's musical direction. He and Jasmine had launched 
National People's Gang together 8 years ago. "I still love him -- we'll always 
be family," Forrello said. The guitarist said he is now looking for a new 
partner who can sing and write lyrics. 
Hindu Rope Trick, a five-member band that includes NPG's former bassist, Chuck 
Morris, played a set of songs that were so airy they just floated away. 
Harmonica was the main solo instrument, but the clean, dissonant rise and fall 
that seemed distinctive at first soon lapsed into sameness. 
Also on the bill was Soul Scream, which featured a strong, steady flow of moody 
saxophone soloing by Kirk Tracy. The band could have used another lead 
instrument to help fill out the sound and provide some needed contrast and fire 
-- the two guitars both played subordinate, too-polite rhythm roles instead of 
challenging Tracy's sax. Half-sung, half-intoned vocals from Dave Tetreault and 
Larry Weatherford also were a bit short on presence but there were hints of 
potential for dramatic expression if the singers can muster a bit more muscle 
and fervor. 
Soul Scream sometimes recalled such British bands as the Smiths and Blue 
Aeroplanes, but it also achieved an unusual jazzy, sultry, nighttime feel in 
its playing without sacrificing a low-key rock pulse, thanks to drummer Dave 
Tabone, who also plays in Eggplant. 
