COUNTY, L.A. TO SOLICIT PRIVATE TRANSIT PROJECTS REJECTED BY STATE; 
TRANSPORTATION: OFFICIALS EXPECT THE LAX-PALMDALE LEVITATION RAIL TO BE AMONG 
THE PROPOSALS. THE PRIVATIZATION PLAN MAY REQUIRE LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL. 
Spurned by the state in a recent competition to select privately built 
transportation projects, Los Angeles city and county officials Wednesday 
announced their own program under which firms will be invited to build toll 
highways and rail projects on public land. 
The program, which might require approval by the Legislature, is patterned 
after one launched last month by Caltrans under which four toll roads were 
chosen for state approval from eight projects submitted by private bidders. 
To the dismay of Los Angeles officials, the state transportation agency passed 
over the lone Los Angeles County entry -- a $1.3-billion magnetic levitation 
rail line from Los Angeles International Airport to Palmdale. 
Local transit officials said they hoped that the consortium which proposed the 
futuristic train -- which would be built on pillars in the right of way of the 
San Diego, Golden State and Antelope Valley freeways -- also will enter the 
project in the county's privatization program. 
Another project that officials expect to see proposed by private firms is an 
elevated monorail along the Ventura Freeway in the San Fernando Valley. 
"Those are the most likely two," said Nikolas Patsaouras, president of the 
Rapid Transit District board of directors, "but we want projects from 
throughout the county. We want to see what the private sector comes up with." 
Although the county privatization program has not yet been discussed by the Los 
Angeles County Transportation Commission, which would administer it, Neil 
Peterson, commission executive director, predicted "very strong -- probably 
unanimous -- support." 
Inviting private firms to build transportation projects on public land is an 
idea that has caught on quickly among California officials searching for ways 
to meet the demand for traffic relief with scarce public funds. 
And support comes from all points on the political spectrum. 
The program was endorsed Wednesday by Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley, 
Supervisors Mike Antonovich and Ed Edelman, the RTD's Patsaouras and 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), who chairs the Assembly Transportation 
Committee. 
"Our transportation needs are greater than the public resources available to 
address them," said Edelman. 
An unresolved question is whether state legislation is required before Caltrans 
can allow private transportation projects to use freeway land. 
Jerry Baxter, Caltrans Southern California district director, said Wednesday he 
thinks it is, but he added, "I can't imagine why we would not support such 
legislation if it's a project that improves transportation. That's what we're 
here for." 
The "maglev" line was proposed by a consortium formed by the 
Massachusetts-based Perini Corp., the Los Angeles engineering firm of Daniel, 
Mann, Johnson &amp; Mendenhall and the HSST Corp. of Japan. 
