CHAPMAN UPSETS NO. 1 RIVERSIDE 
There were many times Wednesday night when the Chapman College women's 
volleyball team looked ready to fold. And that would have been understandable. 
Sure, the Panthers are the fifth-ranked team in the nation according to the 
National Collegiate Athletic Assn. Division II poll. But on Wednesday, they 
were playing No. 1 UC Riverside -- a team that had lost only once all season 
and had won 11 consecutive matches. 
But when all was said and done, the Panthers looked more like No. 1 than No. 1 
did. 
Chapman withstood every challenge in the final two games to defeat Riverside, 
12-15, 15-2, 8-15, 15-10, 15-10, in a California Collegiate Athletic Assn. 
match in front of 300 spectators at Chapman. 
The victory left the Panthers (22-2 overall, 6-0 in CCAA play) alone in first 
place in the conference and should improve their national ranking. 
But more than that, it may have been a moment when Chapman's players realized 
how good they can be. 
"When we were able to hold off Riverside in Game 4, I think we started to 
believe in ourselves a little more," Chapman Coach Mary Cahill said. "I told 
the girls to be ready in the next game, because they were going to come after 
us." 
Riverside did, taking a 4-1 lead. The Highlanders were still in front, 6-4, 
when the Panthers made their move. 
"All I could think about was we had to play tough," said Chapman's Dana 
Beardsley, who had a game-high 25 kills. "We just had to hang on." 
The Panthers did. Rather tenuously at times, but they did hang on. 
Rena Strange made three blocks as Chapman took a 10-8 lead. Karen Burley then 
finished Riverside off with two blocks and a kill. 
"We are such a close team, that no one can keep us down," Beardsley said. "We 
kept telling each other that all through the match." 
After splitting the first two games, the Highlanders (15-2, 5-1) looked every 
bit the No. 1 team in Game 3. The Highlanders trailed, 8-5, but scored 10 
unanswered points behind the play of Sheri Benson, who had 22 kills in the 
match. 
But the Panthers held on in Game 4. They saw a 10-4 lead evaporate, but with 
the score tied 10-10, Debi Waller (15 kills) scored on a kill, then made two 
blocks to force a fifth game. 
"I don't think Riverside took us too seriously," Cahill said. "I don't mean 
that in a bad way. But they never saw us play, never scouted us. We saw them 
and knew what to expect. I think we got a little more respect tonight." 
