DENIAL OF MOST SANTA CLARITA VALLEY HOUSING TRACTS PREDICTED 
Jo Anne Darcy, a Santa Clarita city councilwoman and aide to Los Angeles County 
Supervisor Mike Antonovich, says the county will reject "more than half" of 43 
proposals to build 38,000 houses, apartments and condominiums in the 
unincorporated areas of the Santa Clarita Valley. 
Darcy made the remark late Tuesday while the Santa Clarita City Council 
discussed how the developments might affect the young city. Council members 
have expressed concern that such development would eventually overburden the 
city's infrastructure, particularly roads. 
The 43 proposals all require amendments to the valley's general plan, which 
guides development in the area. The county is updating the general plan and 
will hold the first hearings on it in January. 
If the 43 are allowed under the new plan, developers would be able to build 
38,000 units on land zoned for 7,000 dwellings. 
Council members expressed shock Tuesday after a consultant, hired to analyze 
the proposed projects, explained the potential growth outside the city 
boundaries. Alan Fishman of Tierra Planning &amp; Design said most of the 
projects would overburden public services and provide few benefits to the 
valley. 
Councilman Howard P. (Buck) McKeon asked how such growth could be allowed. "How 
do you provide police and fire protection to all those areas?" he said. 
Then Darcy, apparently trying to calm her colleagues, said the county would 
deny more than just a "small percentage" of the developments. "They'll cut it 
more than half," she said of the list of proposed projects. Darcy did not say 
which projects might be affected. 
However, Darcy later said that she did not know how the county's Regional 
Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors will assess the projects in the 
end. 
County policy allows up to 270,000 residents in the Santa Clarita Valley by the 
year 2010. County Planning Director James E. Hartl has said the county will 
have to reject some of the 43 projects to stay under that ceiling of 270,000 
residents. 
But the county also has the authority to raise that ceiling, and Hartl and 
other planning officials have declined to say definitively whether the county 
will keep the ceiling or whether it will scale down or reject the proposed 
developments. The population ceiling will be addressed when the county revises 
the valley's general plan. 
Estimates of the valley's population vary, but it hovers around 130,000, 
according to county and Santa Clarita officials. The 43 projects would add 
another 114,000 residents to the valley, Fishman said. 
The projects represent only a portion of the potential growth in the valley, 
Fishman said. The county has already approved more than 13,000 housing units 
that have yet to be built. Those developments would bring about 41,000 
residents into the valley, he said. 
Fishman said the City Council should not endorse any of the 43 projects until 
their potential impact on roads and the environment is studied in greater 
detail. 
