PARTY-GOER'S SIDE OF THE STORY 
I have just returned from the court where the charges against me were never 
filed by the district attorney. Why? Because there were no complaining parties. 
The police tried to file the charges on four separate occasions, including 
trying to file downtown after failing to file in Pasadena!! Why? Because they 
had to cover themselves. 
They knew that they had no cause for arrest, the DA proved that. Then you must 
ask, why were we arrested? The citizen that called the police did not want 
anyone arrested, even after the police called here at 2 a.m. when they realized 
that they had no cause to enter the property! The police say that we were 
disturbing the peace. A direct quote from the district attorney's letter says, 
"An officer from the South Pasadena Police Department initially went to the 
neighborhood but left when he could not find a disturbance." He could not find 
a disturbance! 
Your professionals, the police, gave the police report and citizen complaints 
to the Los Angeles Times (Oct. 4), in violation of confidentiality. If the 
report was accurate I wouldn't care. For example, the report says that we were 
intoxicated! How would they know? They did not take field tests nor did they 
take any tests in the station! Why were we not arrested for intoxication? Is it 
simply that they saw beer and therefore we were intoxicated! What is going on? 
They knew we were all adults. 
Why did the police feel it was necessary to enter private property? This was a 
gathering of young adults, all over 21, no minors, to wish a friend well who 
was going off to college. What was our crime? Everyone at the gathering was 
South Pasadena born and raised. The police knew all of us. Why was it necessary 
to force the color of authority on us? Is it because we were not wearing 
tuxedos or suits or because of our age? 
How would you react if the police responded to your house where you are having 
a gathering for your birthday or promotion or graduation or just drinking beer 
in your back yard watching television and ordered you to send everyone home 
including those who were spending the night at your house? Maybe that's OK and 
the police will not do anything because you are over 40 or 50 or just over 25. 
Double standard? When does a party become a party? We are all adults, not the 
typical teen-age party. When I was told to go home, I did. The police report 
shows that I was arrested on the next block! Why? I was going home like I was 
told to! 
Quoting from the district attorney's office letter, "In addition, subsequent 
investigation has shown the noise generated by this party was not of a general 
disturbance to the immediate neighborhood." Not of a general disturbance! Again 
from the letter, "Therefore, insufficient evidence exists to prosecute the 
suspects. . . . " Insufficient evidence! In case you were wondering, let me 
further quote from the letter, "At no time did the suspects challenge the 
officers to fight." No challenge to fight! 
There is so much more that I could get into, like excessive force and why do 
the police who are sworn to protect us, turn over to the press information that 
they know is confidential? Are they fighting because they are afraid they will 
be exposed to a civil rights lawsuit? Now add libel and slander to that list. 
Perhaps they are just trying to strike fear into the hearts of anyone trying to 
file a complaint against them. When a report was being filed, the person was 
threatened with arrest! Others wanted to file complaints but they were afraid 
to! Think about that! 
Suffice to say, please don't judge us until you have all of the facts. I am an 
adult responsible for my own actions. If I were not the son of the city 
manager, would the police still be this interested in me? 
I felt that someone had to witness the outrageous physical and mental abuse 
given to us by the police. Someone had to witness it, but the police would not 
allow us a phone call! 
I had no intentions of taking the issue any further. After the fiasco circus 
that the police association and their attorney put on at the City Council 
meeting Wednesday night, I have to wonder. The president of the police 
association was present at the scene. Why is he so afraid of an investigation? 
I, as a resident of this community, am the target of attack by our own police. 
Why, because I filed a complaint against them? I did absolutely nothing wrong. 
No charges! If I did not believe in what I was doing, I would not have filed. 
Now I must pay the price. Am I afraid? Yes! 
JOHN BERNARDI JR. 
South Pasadena 
