ROCKET FIRM LAYS OFF WORKERS AFTER LAUNCH FAILS 
American Rocket Co., a Camarillo company whose first attempt to launch a 
58-foot-tall rocket failed when the rocket caught fire on the launch pad Oct. 
5, has laid off about 40 workers since the incident. 
But the company is looking for long-term financing and plans to develop and 
launch a second rocket, said company president James Bennett. 
Most of the laid-off workers, about 45% of American Rocket's work force, were 
hired as the company began flight preparations early this year. After the 
launch, the firm had no work for them, Bennett said. 
The new version of the rocket would build on the lessons the company learned 
assembling and designing the first rocket, which was destroyed when a faulty 
liquid oxygen valve led to a fire just as the vehicle was to lift off from 
Vandenberg Air Force Base. 
If that launch had succeeded, the American Rocket would have become only the 
third company to launch a private rocket. 
Bennett said the new rocket will probably be simpler to operate and be more 
marketable to aerospace customers than the first, which was designed to give 
American Rocket information that would help in developing subsequent models. 
Bennett said the company is talking with several potential customers who would 
pay to place payloads on the new rocket. The original rocket carried 
experiments for the Defense Department's Strategic Defense Initiative and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Among the changes being considered, Bennett said, is one that could save 
American Rocket tens of thousands of dollars it must pay the U.S. government 
for use of a launch pad and tracking facilities. Those costs totaled about 
$100,000 on launch day alone, Bennett said. 
Feeding liquid oxygen into the rocket's motor using a pump -- instead of 
relying upon pressure to force the oxygen into the engine -- would be less 
costly, Bennett said, because pressurizing the liquid oxygen before liftoff 
uses precious time while the rocket is on the launch pad. 
American Rocket might also develop a system for saving a new rocket in case of 
a fire like the one that destroyed the original. 
Like the first rocket, the new one will probably be designed for suborbital 
flight. And the rocket's propulsion module -- essentially the rocket minus the 
guidance system and the body -- could be used to form a multistage orbital 
rocket. 
The first rocket was named the "Koopman Express" for the company's co-founder 
George Koopman, who died in an auto accident in July. 
Bennett said that, like that rocket, "whatever we fly next will have George's 
name on it." 
