MORE BOGUS CASH FOUND AT CSLB; PROBE NARROWING 
Two new counterfeit bills were discovered at Cal State Long Beach this week, 
putting the campus at the center of a federal investigation that began a month 
ago after university plumbers found $1 million worth of soggy bogus money 
clogging a sewer line. 
As a result of the new find, Secret Service agents say they plan to visit the 
university in the next few days to examine campus printing presses as possible 
sources of the phony money. 
"This is more than playing around," said Wayne Presley, a special agent with 
the Los Angeles Secret Service office. "You put two and two together and you 
have to wonder whether something's going on." 
In mid-September, campus plumbers investigating a clogged sewer line climbed 
down in a manhole and found sopping wet $100 bills stuffed into a pipeline that 
runs beneath the campus. 
While investigators had dismissed the earlier find as the discarded work of 
amateurs, Presley said he expects this new batch of bills -- which is of much 
higher quality -- to begin appearing soon at area banks and commercial outlets. 
"There are bills of much less quality being passed out there right now," 
Presley said. "It's a good possibility that these are the same people, but that 
they've just gotten better." 
When the first batch of bills was found, authorities said they were looking 
into the possibility that the money was printed on campus. Now their 
investigation is zeroing in on the campus, officials said. 
While acknowledging that some equipment capable of being used in the production 
of phony money does exist on campus, university officials maintain that it 
would be extremely difficult for anyone to use it for illegal purposes without 
being seen. 
"It would have to be a late-night operation and we walk foot patrols all 
night," said Ron Perron, field operations lieutenant for the campus police. 
The most recent discovery was made about 4 a.m. Monday when a campus custodian 
came upon two crumpled $20 bills on a sidewalk near the university's nursing 
department on the west side of campus. "Because we had the previous incident 
involving counterfeit bills he thought he would take a close look at them," 
Perron said. "It was obvious that they were counterfeit in that they both had 
the same serial number." 
Presley speculated that the new bills may have been accidentally lost by their 
maker. 
To add to the confusion, another counterfeit $20 bill -- apparently unrelated 
to the first two finds -- was discovered Wednesday morning when a seemingly 
unaware student tried to spend it at the campus bookstore. According to 
Presley, the bogus bill is part of an older batch that has been in circulation 
in the Los Angeles area for more than a year. "We really have no idea where it 
came from," he said of that bill, adding that he had not ruled out the 
possibility of a connection between the three finds. 
Campus officials, meanwhile, said they were distributing bulletins to area 
businesses warning them of the newer counterfeit bills, which bear serial 
numbers of A54782926E. 
