MANY PUPILS TOO FAT, SCHOOL STUDIES REVEAL 
When all the information was analyzed, assessed and charted, Montebello Unified 
School District trustees were not really surprised to find their worst 
suspicions confirmed. 
Many Latino and Asian children are not shedding their baby fat. Like their 
Anglo and black playmates, many are just getting fatter. Worse, some are 
walking around with high cholesterol levels. 
"We are looking at children and seeing they are overweight and are in poor 
health before they become adults, and that's frightening," said Eleanor Chow, 
president of the Montebello Board of Education. 
At a recent meeting, school board members were given the results of a 3 
1/2-year study by a team of scientists from Cal Poly Pomona and the UC Irvine 
School of Medicine. The 18-page fitness report, one of the first of its kind in 
the nation to focus on Latino and Asian children, described how 1,000 students 
at Montebello's La Merced Intermediate School were examined each year. 
What the research team found made the trustees cringe. 
Many children were overweight and had low cardiovascular endurance and high 
cholesterol levels. They were weak and, in general, becoming less healthy every 
year, the study concluded. 
Of the 800 children who agreed to have their blood cholesterol level checked, 
three out of eight had levels considered above normal for children. Thirteen 
percent had levels above normal for adults. On the average, over the 3 1/2-year 
period, the research team rated 40% of the boys and 45% of the girls moderately 
to severely obese by current health standards. This means that about one-third 
of their body weight was fat. 
Without treatment or intervention, some of these children are destined to 
become obese adults susceptible to heart attacks and other health problems, 
according to medical authorities. 
"It's not good," said Dr. Stanley Bassin, a Cal Poly Pomona researcher who 
headed the team. "What we found is that children are more unhealthy than 
previously thought." 
Until now, the school district's assumptions about the health of Latino and 
Asian children have been based on tests of Anglo and black youngsters, Bassin 
said. The study did not find that Latino and Asian children are much different, 
she said, but it gave educators and the medical community their first direct 
look at these groups. 
Chow said it has long been suspected that schoolchildren who spend free time 
sprawled on the floor in front of the TV, eating pizza and microwave burritos, 
are in poor health. 
Nonetheless, upgrading physical education programs has not been a high priority 
for school administrators and trustees wrestling with budget constraints, said 
Bonnie Mohnsen, the district's new health and fitness coordinator. 
"That's what's outstanding about this report. It has given credibility to what 
we have been trying to say for a long time," Mohnsen said. "Our kids have a 
problem." 
She said the district will conduct fitness tests at all six intermediate 
schools and three high schools. A salad bar already has been added to La 
Merced's cafeteria, and parents have been encouraged to feed their children 
healthier foods at home. 
The district is also looking into buying its own cholesterol screening machine 
to check all fifth-graders for high cholesterol. Perhaps most important, 
Mohnsen hopes to teach children to take responsibility for their own health and 
decide how to improve it -- a kind of physical education homework assignment. 
