PUBLIC'S FURY RISES QUICKLY AS DOORS SLAM 
By the busloads, tourists young and old from all over the country confronted a 
federal government out of business in the nation's capital on Saturday -- and 
plenty of them didn't like it. 
"Where can I go to picket?" asked Jeff Runz, a visitor from Pottersville, N.J., 
as he stood outside the National Air and Space Museum, which stood closed in 
the face of the government shutdown resulting from the budget deadlock between 
Congress and the White House. 
"We're ready to start a protest," Runz said, as his wife, Karen, and three 
children sat on the front steps of the nation's most popular museum. "This is 
so Mickey Mouse." 
Despite the glorious, summer-like day, many other visitors seemed to share in 
such sentiments as they found the art galleries, museums and shrines on the 
National Mall closed. 
"People are mad -- fighting mad, and I mean it," said Fred Peterson, a burly 
Smithsonian Institution guard who stood sentry in front of a darkened Hirshhorn 
Museum and Sculpture Garden. 
Across the nation, taxpayers got a first, sour taste of government cutbacks and 
grumbled about what might close next after the long holiday weekend was over. 
The first to feel the pinch were tourists locked out of everything from the 
Statue of Liberty to the White House. But come Tuesday a whole range of federal 
services long taken for granted -- from weather prediction to border inspection 
and even air traffic control -- were in doubt. 
That uncertainty left many people fuming about what they called the cowardice 
and ineptness of the leaders they had elected to office. "The bottom line is: 
here we are saying to the Soviet Union that we have a better system . . . and 
we can't achieve fiscal responsibility at the government level," complained 
Daniel Yanosky, an accountant in Marietta, Ga. "That's pitiful." 
President Bush and the 535 members of the House and Senate remained deadlocked 
over the outline of a tax and spending plan to run the government for the 
fiscal year that began Oct. 1. If the stalemate continues into Tuesday, when 
2.4 million federal employees across the country are due to return from the 
Columbus Day weekend, all but those considered "essential" would be sent home. 
Such a move could further incite public outrage, warned John N. Sturdivant, 
head of the American Federation of Government Employees. "If our people get 
sent home on Tuesday, we're going to tell them not to go home, but to go to the 
White House and protest," Sturdivant threatened. 
Paul Denham, an assistant administrator at the Department of Health and Human 
Services regional office in Denver, said federal workers are bitter. "The 
feeling is that it's out of our hands, but we're being made to pay for it," he 
said. 
Roy Givens, a ranger at the 800,000-acre Big Bend National Park in Texas, 
agreed. "Morale here is very low," said Givens, part of a skeleton crew of park 
workers kept on only to tend to emergencies. "We've all got families to support 
and to be sent home without pay when we are physically able to work is very 
hard to accept. . . . This is really going to hurt us." 
Aggravating public frustration was a sense that the pain would not be shared by 
those most responsible for creating it. "Tell (the President) to take the 
congressmen's limousines and the senator's limousines and make them drive their 
own cars," suggested a tourist in Atlanta, locked out of a national monument to 
Martin Luther King. " . . . They're giving (themselves) raises. That makes me 
mad." 
In Washington, most tourists were clearly surprised to find the museums closed. 
And when they learned that the closings resulted from the White House-Congress 
stalemate over a new federal budget, many criticized all sides unstintingly. 
"Our government at work!" rasped Norman Benito, owner of a Santa Cruz mortuary. 
"Our representatives -- they should think more about the people." 
"We're fed up," said Michael Camporeale, a Mount Vernon, Pa., assistant 
scoutmaster who had hoped to take his 27 charges for a tour of the White House. 
"Can't we sweet-talk them?" Paul Grassi, 11, asked his leader, referring to the 
no-nonsense White House guards. 
"Imagine it, the White House -- closed. It's really disappointing," said Anne 
Andrews, who was escorting a group of 23 senior citizens from Salem, Va. "It's 
terrible," added Lois Hurdle, one of the women in the group. 
Group members, bearing a letter from their congressman, had expected a VIP tour 
of the executive mansion. Instead, they clustered around Michael Mathews, their 
Insider Tour guide, on the sidewalk in front of the White House, straining to 
hear his talk. 
"You only get to see five rooms in there anyway," Mathews told them. 
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said White House layoffs, should they 
take effect, would slice the payroll from 383 workers to only 65, mostly 
guards, Secret Service agents and top policy staffers. Despite the cash crunch, 
however, Bush hinted that one apparently essential White House function might 
escape the budget ax: presidential campaign trips. 
Asked whether he would cancel a Monday swing through North Carolina, Georgia 
and Florida to stump for Republicans, Bush told reporters: "I don't know. I've 
got to cancel everything that has to do with the government, I guess, but . . . 
maybe that's a good chance to get out there in the political process." 
Despite the impasse, it was business as usual for many government services that 
would normally be operating on weekends. But, blaming budget problems, the 
White House pulled the plug on its "comment line," possibly scuttling what had 
the potential to be a record talley of calls from the public. 
Predictably, that didn't go over very well on Capitol Hill, where members such 
as Rep. Mary Rose Oakar (D-Ohio) seemed to take umbrage at the implication that 
Congress might be to blame. "That's an outrage," she said on hearing of the 
shutdown. "It's time the President heard from the American people. Open the 
White House line -- override the veto." 
Anyone who called one of dozens of park service facilities across the country 
got a recording, such as this one played in St. Louis: "The Gateway Arch and 
the Old Courthouse facilities are closed pending the approval of the federal 
budget." 
Still, air traffic controllers continued to direct a full schedule of planes 
across the nation's skies. And meteorologists at the National Hurricane Center 
in Miami promised that nothing would hinder their ability to track dangerous 
storms, such as Hurricane Klaus that was downgraded to a tropical storm 
Saturday after skittering across a wide swatch of the Caribbean. 
There was confusion, though, about how these services might be affected later 
in the week. For example, as "essential" workers, air traffic controllers might 
be exempted from cutbacks. However, significant delays or cancellations of 
flights could still develop if the National Weather Service was forced to 
furlough some of its forecasters. 
"If there is no one available to take surface weather observations, let's say 
at Orlando International Airport, then we can't make a terminal forecast, 
meaning no flights could go there," explained Paul Hebert, meteorologist in 
charge of the Weather Service office in Miami. 
So far, such a prospect doesn't appear to have deterred many travelers, said 
Dexter Koehl, a spokesman for Carlson Travel Cos., one of the nation's largest 
travel agencies. Koehl said airline ticket sales have remained fairly stable 
over the last few weeks, unaffected by widely reported talk of flight delays. 
Similarly, most air cargo services seemed to be planning a weekend of business 
as usual. 
Meanwhile, a scattered range of federal services prepared to curtail operations 
over the next few days, even though some of the actions might seem to be 
self-defeating for a government starved for cash. 
For instance, the Federal Reserve system, which had scheduled a sale of 
three-month and six-month treasury bonds on Tuesday, will not hold the auction 
without a new budget, said Sandra Conlan, a spokeswoman for the Reserve's Los 
Angeles Branch. 
Also contributing to this story were Times staff writers James Gerstenzang, 
Ronald J. Ostrow and David Lauter in Washington, special correspondent Mike 
Clary in Miami and researchers Tracy Shryer in Chicago, Ann Rovin in Denver, 
Lianne Hart in Houston and Edith Stanley in Atlanta. 
THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN 
Agencies and services affected over the holiday weekend. 
WHAT'S OPERATING 
Operation Desert Shield 
Air Traffic controllers 
Postal Service 
Amtrak 
National parks (limited services) 
Uniformed military personnel 
Key Pentagon support personnel 
Federal prison guards 
Meat and poultry inspectors 
Customs agents 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
U.S. Weather Service 
National Hurricane Center 
Veterans Administration hospitals 
Medical institution personnel 
Secret Service agents 
White House guards 
White House senior staff 
Lincoln and Jefferson memorials 
Arlington National Cemetery 
National Zoo 
Mount Vernon 
WHAT'S NOT 
Statue of Liberty 
Ellis Island 
Washington Monument 
Library of Congress 
Smithsonian museums and galleries 
White House tours 
Liberty Bell 
Independence Hall 
St. Louis Arch 
Vanderbilt Mansion 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt home 
Farmers Home Administration offices 
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service 
