STUDY OF TWINS EMPHASIZES IMPORTANCE OF HEREDITY; 
SCIENCE: GENES ARE CALLED FAR MORE INFLUENTIAL IN SHAPING BEHAVIOR THAN FAMILY 
ENVIRONMENT. 
A landmark study on identical twins raised apart offers new reassurance to 
parents who worry about the adequacy of their child-rearing efforts and 
rekindles the age-old debate of nature vs. nurture. 
The long-awaited study, the most definitive in a long series trying to separate 
the effects of genetics and environment in a child's development, comes down 
heavily on the side of genetics. It indicates that the broad outlines of 
personality and behavior are put in place in the brief instant when the 
mother's and father's genes mix during conception, establishing the basic route 
that the child will take during the rest of its life. 
Nurture -- the family environment -- plays a much smaller role, according to 
the study, published today in the journal Science. 
"For most every behavioral trait so far investigated, from reaction time to 
religiosity, an important fraction of the variation among people turns out to 
be associated with genetic variation," wrote the University of Minnesota 
researchers, led by psychologist Thomas J. Bouchard Jr. This work "does not 
show that parents cannot influence those traits, but simply that this does not 
tend to happen in most families." 
Psychologist Robert Plomin of Pennsylvania State University called the 
Minnesota twin study "the single most important finding in behavioral genetics 
in the last decade." The results in general agree with many previous studies of 
the role of genetics in producing behavior. 
But the new research finds a stronger connection between genetics and behavior 
than the previous studies, said Norman Krasnegor of the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development. "It's a powerful statement and one which 
people will debate for a long time," he said. "It will cause some good 
controversy and make people work to come up with new data or alternate 
explanations." 
Psychologist David Rowe of the University of Arizona agreed heartily with the 
new study. "Parents probably deserve less credit for when things go well, and 
much less blame for problems," he said. 
But the study "does not imply that parenting is without lasting effects," the 
group wrote. "Parents can produce . . . effects if they grossly deprive or 
mistreat all their children. It seems reasonable that charismatic, dedicated 
parents determined to make all their children share certain personal qualities, 
interests, or values, may sometimes succeed." 
The researchers found that 70% of the intelligence quotient -- IQ -- is 
accounted for by genes, the strongest correlation found for any characteristic. 
Genetics also accounts for about 50% of personality differences, including 
traits such as extroversion; 50% of religiosity, including how often someone 
attends religious events, and about 40% for job interest variations. 
Environment accounts for the rest of the differences, but the researchers note 
that even two children in the same family may not share the same environment. 
"The environment molds your personality, but your genes determine what kind of 
environment you . . . seek," said Minnesota psychologist David T. Lykken, one 
of the study's authors. 
Studies of genetically identical twins -- which occur about once in every 240 
births when a fertilized egg splits into two embryos during development -- are 
especially valuable to researchers. If the twins are adopted into different 
families at birth and raised separately, then the study provides a unique tool 
to separate the closely entwined effects of nature and nurture. 
Three previous studies of such twins have been conducted, but the Minnesota 
study, begun in 1979, is by far the largest, now enrolling more than 100 sets 
from around the world. The study has been widely profiled in the news media 
because of the eerie similarities that have been observed in reunited twins. 
Jerry Levey and Mark Newman, for example, were twins who did not meet until the 
age of 30. When they were reunited, both had similar mustaches and hairstyles, 
aviator glasses, big belt buckles and big key rings. Each was a volunteer 
firefighter and made his living installing safety equipment. Each drank 
Budweiser and crushed the cans when he finished. 
Levey and Newman are the rule, not the exception, Bouchard has found. 
"We think of each pair of identical twins as one piece of music played by two 
different musicians," Bouchard said. "The music can be played fantastically, or 
it may not run right. But you'll always be able to recognize the piece. That's 
because nature writes the score. Environment is responsible for the playing 
technique." 
Now, the Minnesota researchers report in today's Science paper, they have been 
able to quantify the contribution of genetics. 
But Bouchard also cautions: "Just because something's genetically influenced 
doesn't mean it's chiseled in stone. . . . If I see a child who has problems 
with aggression, I don't curse genetics. I recommend a therapist." 
