JOURNALISTS FLEE COLOMBIA FOR U.S. SANCTUARY 
The soldiers came to Olga Behar's apartment in late 1985, shortly after she 
published an uncompromising book, now in its 11th edition, on the four decades 
of political violence that had racked her native Colombia. Behar, a television 
and newspaper reporter who has won Colombia's equivalent of the Pulitzer Prize, 
was away at the time but the search of her home -- purportedly for weapons -- 
crystallized her free-floating suspicion and distrust into rock-hard fear. 
For Mauricio Gomez the signs were less concrete but equally disturbing. At 
least twice, the former television anchorman and news director of the national 
TV news program "24 Hours" says he was followed around Bogota, apparently by 
minions of drug dealers he had been covering. Strangers asked questions about 
him at his apartment building. His home phone rang at odd hours. The callers 
never spoke more than a sentence but it was more than enough: "Congratulations, 
you also will be eliminated." 
Behar and Gomez, colleagues who once worked together on "24 Hours," chose to 
leave Colombia, where the homicide rate was seven times greater than that of 
the United States even before the latest round of bombings and shootings in 
that country's cocaine war. They are among an estimated 40 or more Colombian 
journalists who have fled the country in recent years out of fear for their 
lives. 
Behar estimates that about five Colombian journalists have come to this 
country, including Fabio Castillo, author of a book about drug lords called 
"The Cocaine Jockeys," who is in deep hiding in the eastern United States and 
makes only rare public appearances. Other Colombian journalists -- including 
Daniel Samper, brother of a presidential candidate Ernesto Samper -- have fled 
to France, Spain, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela, she says. 
Although both Behar and Gomez say they intend to return, they concede that 
moment is two or three years away, at best. 
In the meantime, Behar, who is a fellow this year at USC's Center for 
International Journalism, says she tries to live as normally as possible. At 
the moment normality means filing commentaries via her portable computer from 
her Los Angeles apartment to El Mundo, a newspaper in Medellin, the heart of 
Colombian drug dealer country. 
"I can't assume the way of living of an exile, always dreaming of going back," 
she explains. "You ask an exile, 'Why don't you buy a television set?' and the 
exile says, 'No, no I'm going home very soon.' " 
Immigration Ban Lifted 
Ironically, Behar, who had been living in Mexico, almost didn't make it to USC 
because her name turned up in the so-called "Lookout Book," a secret list of 
aliens prohibited from U.S. entry. The list is maintained by the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service. After vociferous protests from center director 
Murray Fromson and the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights, the 
ban on her was lifted last month but the reasons for Behar's inclusion in the 
book remain a mystery. 
During her reporting career in Colombia, Behar covered the M-19 guerrilla 
organization, one of a half-dozen armed groups active throughout the country. 
She has written two books about her country's political turmoil, "The Wars of 
Peace" and "Night of Smoke," both critical of military conduct and including 
documentation of human rights abuses, she says. Behar suspects that her contact 
with government opponents as well as her writings led to her being put on the 
U.S. list at the request of the Colombian government. She notes also that 
circumstantial evidence indicates she was placed in the "Lookout Book" about 
the time a Colombian government delegation was visiting Washington. 
Arthur Helton of the lawyers committee says that being listed in the lookout 
book can be dangerous because it can be used by enemies as evidence that the 
person listed is politically suspect, perhaps even subversive. 
Helton, who went to bat for Behar, is also representing Patricia Lara, another 
Colombian journalist barred from this country, who remains in Colombia. Lara 
apparently has been kept out of the United States because she too had contacts 
with Colombian guerrilla leaders. 
In September, Helton won a court order for an unprecedented look at the the 
list. Although he hasn't seen the list yet, Helton says early indications are 
that it contains at least 327,200 names. 
Compared with Behar and Lara, Gomez's problems are straightforward. A former 
news director and anchorman and the son of a former diplomat, Gomez had no 
problem coming to this country early last year. He lives in Atlanta where he 
has been working, off and on, for Cable News Network. "I had plans a month and 
a half ago to get back to Colombia by early next year, but now I know I can't 
go back because, definitely, things have gotten worse," he says. 
The synergism of politics and drug crime have made journalism dangerous work in 
Colombia for much of this decade. A recent study by the Committee to Protect 
Journalists, a global organization that monitors threats to press freedom, 
reported that 16 Colombian editors and reporters had been slain since January, 
1984 -- by far the highest toll in Latin America. Just last month a part-time 
reporter was killed when more than 200 pounds of dynamite heavily damaged the 
offices of El Spectador, one of Colombia's most important newspapers. Last 
March El Spectador columnist Hector Giraldo Galvez was shot dead, apparently by 
drug dealers. And last week, El Spectador's president said the paper may be 
forced to close because some smaller advertisers had pulled out and the daily 
had begun losing money. 
The current round of violence has become so acute that former Colombian justice 
minister Monica de Greiff is thought to be in hiding in this country. De Greiff 
resigned last month after repeated threats against the lives of herself and her 
family by drug dealers. 
The experiences of Behar and Gomez offer one measure of the pervasiveness of 
violence and intimidation within Colombian society. Both say that they had 
grown accustomed to telephone and other verbal threats and left the country 
only after the threats had escalated into overt actions against them. 
Although Colombia's then-President Belisario Betancourt apologized on 
television for the military raid on her apartment, Behar says that she decided 
to leave the country after the president told her in person that he could not 
protect her life. 
While Behar has no idea just who her shadowy enemies are, Gomez says that in 
the course of his work he apparently angered one of Colombia's top three drug 
kings, Jorge Luis Ochoa, also known as El Gordo, the Fat One. 
Before he left Colombia in February, 1988, Gomez's life began to resemble 
episodes from seemingly far-fetched Latin American novels such as those by 
Nobel Prize-winner Gabriel Garcia Marquez, another former Colombian journalist 
who has long been in exile in Mexico. 
For instance, not long after Gomez left Colombia, his father, a former 
presidential candidate and ambassador to the United States, was kidnaped by the 
M-19 guerrillas and held for two months before being released unharmed. 
The elder Gomez, who edits a paper called El Siglo, was fortunate, his son 
says. 
"Most of the people who are kidnaped you don't hear from the anymore," he says, 
"and if you do, you find them dead." 
