THEY'VE SEEN HIM ATTAIN GOALS; 
GRETZKY FAMILY: KING STAR DID NOT FORGET HIS PARENTS ON HIS PATH TO NATIONAL 
HOCKEY LEAGUE STARDOM. 
Walter and Phyllis Gretzky arrived in Edmonton Sunday morning in plenty of time 
to see their oldest son break Gordie Howe's National Hockey League scoring 
record. 
With Walter busy escorting Wayne's horse, Golden Pheasant, to the prestigious 
Arc de Triomphe race in Paris last weekend. And with a longstanding commitment 
to be at a wedding Saturday, they took a chance that Wayne would not get five 
points against the Vancouver Canucks Friday night. They were right. He made 
three points to close to within two, saving the record for the city in which he 
scored most of his points. 
"It had to happen in Edmonton," Walter said with a knowing nod. "For one thing, 
that's the way Wayne had it figured. Besides, it's more fitting, and that's 
just the way things happen for Wayne. 
"It's as if his life has been prewritten. If you go over all the things that 
have happened in his life, one thing after another, it's as if it was destiny. 
"Actually, it's a bit eerie. It's unbelievable." 
His own father finds his golden touch unbelieveble? "I'm amazed at him," Walter 
said. 
And proud of him. Not only for the goals and the assists, but for the way he 
has handled himself through all the success. 
Walter likes to tell of the night that Wayne scored his 50th goal in the 39th 
game of the 1982 season. 
The family had planned to be at the game Wayne scored his 50th goal, knowing 
that it would be well under the milestone of 50 goals in 50 games. But Wayne 
was five goals away going into the 39th game, and Walter figured he wouldn't 
get it at the game at Edmonton. 
After the game, Wayne phoned home to Brantford, Ontario, with the news. He told 
Walter, who said something like, "You did it, heh?" And then Wayne said he had 
better get going because "all those people" were waiting. 
Gretzky had let reporters, TV crews, the owner and all wait while he called 
home. 
"I was so happy, but when I thought about it, I was more happy about the call 
than the record," Walter said. "Think about it. He was a young man who had just 
done something incredible, and everyone around him was all excited. But he took 
time, first, to call his mum and dad. 
"I've wondered from time to time if I would have done the same thing. I would 
have remembered them, but I don't know whether I would have thought of them at 
that particular moment." 
The Gretzky family is close, and has always been closely involved with the 
boys' hockey. 
Walter played junior hockey, but was too small to make it as a pro. Which is 
what everyone used to tell Wayne. But Walter, who is a telephone company 
technician, taught his son all the tricks a little player needs. He taught him 
to play smart. 
Beyond that, he tried to instill in Wayne a work ethic. He stressed the value 
of perseverance and dedication. 
In a TV special after Gretzky's first season as a King, Walter said: "I've seen 
him spend hours and hours and hours that no other boy would do, just practicing 
one little move. Sometimes he spends a year or two before he'll even try 
something in a game." 
Wayne was practicing shooting even before he could skate. 
"Wayne used to slide around on a slick pine wood floor in his socks, pretending 
that he was skating, and he'd use a little souvenir stick to shoot a ball into 
a goal in the house. 
"My mum, (Wayne's grandmother Mary, who died last December) would sit in a 
chair with a goalie stick playing goalie for him. She was a hockey fanatic long 
before Wayne came along." 
Walter built a rink in the back yard and taught Wayne to skate. The Gretzkys 
have film of Wayne skating at 2, not at all unusual for kids in Canada. And he 
was playing hockey when he was 4. 
Once he scored his first goal, at 6 in a league for 10-year-olds, it started to 
happen. Everything started to fall into place. 
There was a manifest destiny to Gretzky's hockey career. 
Walter swears he wasn't a pushy father. He didn't make Wayne log all that time 
in the back yard. 
"He wasn't the kind of kid you would have to send out to practice," Walter 
said. "With Wayne, you'd have to make him come in. I'd be out there yelling, 
'Don't be shooting at the side of the house. Look what you've done to the 
foundation!' " 
It wasn't long before his brothers were out there with him. 
Only one brother, Glenn, who works in real estate in the Edmonton area, was at 
the game Sunday night to see Wayne set the record. Glenn's hockey days are over 
now. Keith (The Great One's brother who has been dubbed The Good One) is with 
the Buffalo organization and playing with the Phoenix Roadrunners of the 
International Hockey League. Brent, who is another good one, is still playing 
Junior A hockey in Belleville. 
Wayne's sister Kim was not in Edmonton Sunday, although Walter's sister, Ellen, 
was. Ellen, who has Down Syndrome, lives with Walter and Phyllis since the 
death of her mother. Gretzky's wife Janet Jones also was in attendance. 
The home of Walter and Phyllis Gretzky is unpretentious, but has turned into 
something of an unofficial Gretzky museum. 
Lined up among the wall-to-wall trophies, plaques and framed photographs are 
more than 200 of what Walter calls "special" sticks commemorating records or 
titles or hat tricks . . . 
Walter will be toting home more memorabilia after the ceremonies here Sunday 
and the ceremonies scheduled at the Forum Tuesday. 
King owner Bruce McNall found Walter Sunday morning in the lobby of the hotel 
where the team was staying, before Walter had had the opportunity to make 
contact with his son. McNall started to fill him in on the plan for the 
ceremony, saying, "Wayne wants me to take you down so that you can go out on 
the ice . . . " 
Walter collapsed into the chair behind him. "No!," he said. "Wayne wants me to 
go out on the ice? Me? It was Wayne's idea? Oh, my goodness." 
