ALLAIS: "WALL STREET HAS BECOME A VERITABLE CASINO."; 
MARKETS: NOBEL LAUREATE MAURICE ALLAIS SAYS THE WEAKNESSES ON THE GLOBAL 
EXCHANGES ARE THE SAME AS THOSE THAT LED TO THE 1929 CRASH. 
Loose credit practices, insufficient margin requirements and computerized 
trading on a nonstop world market have produced the volatile climate that now 
characterizes Wall Street, French economist Maurice Allais said in an interview 
with The Times. 
 "Wall Street has become a veritable casino," said Allais, 78, a market 
theorist who won the 1988 Nobel Prize for economics. "In fact, the weaknesses 
of Wall Street today are the same as those that led to the crash of 1929. They 
are simply more marked." 
 Allais, retired professor at the elite Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines in 
Paris, is recognized as one of the leading researchers into the functioning of 
markets. 
 "Allais is a fountain of original and independent discovery," American 
economist Paul Samuelson said of the French scholar at the time of the Nobel 
award. "Had his earlier writings been in English, a generation of economic 
theory would have taken a different course." 
 Despite his influence on younger French economists, Allais has rarely been 
interviewed outside France. The questions in the following interview were posed 
by Los Angeles Times London bureau chief Dan Fisher. Allais' responses were 
translated from the French by Times Paris bureau chief Rone Tempest in 
consultation with the economist. 
Question: In view of the 190-point drop in the Dow on Friday, Oct. 13, and a 
sharp climb of 88 points on Monday, Oct. 16, do you think the Wall Street 
system has gone mad? 
Answer: I wouldn't say that Wall Street has gone mad. The reality is that the 
institutional framework in which Wall Street operates is fundamentally 
inappropriate, and it inevitably generates violent fluctuations of the market. 
What must necessarily happen, inevitably does. 
Q: Do you see this as reflecting some flaw in the American character? Or are 
the violent swings in the Dow Jones average just a price we have to pay for the 
world's increasingly interrelated financial markets? 
A: It is not a flaw particular to the American character. The European and 
Asian markets suffer from the same flaws. 
The interrelations between today's nonstop 24-hour financial markets are 
totally excessive and harmful. They are not at all necessary for the working of 
the world economy. 
I note, for example, that more than $400 billion is exchanged every day on the 
foreign exchange markets, while the flow of commercial transactions is only 
about $12 billion. 
Q: What do you see as the main weaknesses of the American markets? 
A: First, excessive financing of speculation by means of payment created ex 
nihilo by the mechanism of credit; second, insufficient margin requirements for 
all the futures speculators; third, the continuous trading market, which is an 
aberration from an economic viewpoint and generates a potentially permanent 
instability favoring fraud and manipulation of the market -- I think a single 
daily price quotation in each place for each stock would be by far preferable 
and would benefit both small and large investors, fourth, the automatic 
computerized buy and sell orders associated with continuous trading. 
Because of these four factors, Wall Street has become a veritable casino. 
In fact, the weaknesses of Wall Street today are the same as those which led to 
the crash of 1929. They are simply more marked. 
It is understandable that the Fed injects cash to avoid the collapse of the 
stock market, but basically it is bad policy for monetary authorities to 
intervene to save speculators from bankruptcy. This is not their role. 
Speculation would be useful if, and only if, these four major structural 
defects I mentioned are remedied. 
Today's system is anti-economic and basically unfavorable to the American 
system. It benefits only a very small minority. 
Q: What do you think about the whole takeover phenomenon? Junk bonds? 
A: Takeovers are fundamentally useful, but legislation concerning them should 
be reformed. 
It is undesirable that they should be financed by means of payment created out 
of nothing by the banking system, or by the issuing of junk bonds. 
In principle, junk bonds are basically useful, but they are used excessively 
and irrationally, notably in takeovers. 
Q: How do you think that the American system could be changed to correct its 
flaws? 
A: The American system could be reformed in the following ways: 
* Making it impossible to create means of payment ex nihilo by the credit 
mechanism. 
* Considerably increasing margin requirements on buying and selling. 
* Eliminating the continuous trading market and replacing it everywhere with a 
single daily trading price for each stock in each market. 
* Ending automatic, computerized buying and selling. 
Q: How is the French system, for example, different from the American one? What 
is the impact of Wall Street on the French system? Is it growing or lessening? 
A: The European criticisms of the American financial system could be addressed 
just as valuably to the European systems. 
The French system suffers from the same defects. They are simply less 
pronounced. 
Unfortunately, the French imitate the worst aspects of the American market, as 
in, for example, the continuous trading market. 
The impact is increasing. The effects are very bad: basically, the creation of 
a potentially permanent instability and the greater and greater disassociation 
of the financial system from the real economy. 
