COLOMBIAN JUDGE SLAIN IN DRUG TRAFFIC CAPITAL 
A federal judge was gunned down today as he waited on a Medellin street corner 
for a ride to work, and an anonymous caller said drug traffickers killed him in 
retaliation for extraditions to the United States. 
Courts were paralyzed in Medellin after the slaying and judges announced a 
72-hour strike to press security demands. 
Police said Judge Hector Jimenez Rodriguez was shot six times by a passenger on 
a motorcycle. 
The gunman got off the motorcycle, walked up to Jimenez and shot him, the 
Colombian radio chain Caracol quoted witnesses as saying in Medellin, the base 
of the country's most notorious cocaine cartel. 
An anonymous caller to Caracol said the judge was slain by "The Extraditables," 
a group of suspected drug traffickers being hunted for extradition to the 
United States. 
The government of President Virgilio Barco Vargas has extradited four 
Colombians to the United States, including three last Saturday, since a 
crackdown on drug trafficking began Aug. 19. 
"The Extraditables" said in a communique soon after the crackdown began that 
they would kill 10 judges for every Colombian extradited. Jimenez was the first 
judge killed since the drug sweep started. It was not immediately known if 
Jimenez had been involved in any recent extradition cases. 
Court activity in Medellin came to a standstill as judges met behind closed 
doors to decide what to do, an executive of the Assn. of Judicial Employees 
said. 
Hours later, the National Judicial Assn. announced a three-day strike beginning 
Wednesday to protest the government's "lack of protection granted to judges," 
an association spokesman said. 
Colombia's 4,379 judges last month had threatened to go on strike unless they 
received assurances about concrete measures to protect them. 
Supreme Court President Fabio Moron urged the government today to "quickly 
adopt those measures," which include armored cars and guards assigned to 
judges' homes and offices. 
There are varying figures on the number of judges that have been killed in 
Colombia, but the Justice Ministry says about 50 judges and 170 judicial 
employees have been killed since 1982. 
In another development, a suspected drug trafficker sought for extradition by 
the United States escaped from a hospital in the Caribbean port city of 
Barranquilla Monday, apparently with the complicity of an army corporal, police 
said. 
Humberto Gomez Zapata, 36, who had been detained Sept. 21 and was to be 
transferred to Bogota to await extradition to Florida, vanished without a trace 
from the city's main hospital where he was recovering from an appendectomy. 
Hospital workers said the corporal gave drugged coffee to 14 people, including 
nine soldiers, who were guarding Gomez. He apparently left the hospital dressed 
as a soldier. 
