MOVIE REVIEW; 
'IMMEDIATE FAMILY' A PREDICTABLE DRAMA ON ADOPTION 
What in the sweet name of goodness is "Immediate Family" (citywide) doing in a 
movie theater? You expect writing this leaden from the grimmest ghettoes of 
television: earnest, unbuoyant talk that takes a subject like childlessness and 
teen-age adoption and flattens it into drama that's predictable down to the 
smallest reference, which in this case is a flowering plum tree. 
Obviously, the film's cast of heavy hitters -- Glenn Close, James Woods and 
Mary Stuart Masterson -- has boosted it over the fence and into the local 
14-plexes. Don't let that sway you. Mush is still mush, even when it's directed 
by "Heart Like a Wheel's" Jonathan Kaplan. 
Cast as the film's warm, loving center, neither Close nor Woods seems 
comfortable or even ideal for the assignment. You keep waiting for Woods' vet, 
a specialist in canine microsurgery, to develop a mean streak and to drop that 
kitty he's holding; instead, he perseveres as the year's most unlikely Mr. Nice 
Guy. You wait, too, for Close to retire that radiantly artificial smile and 
those brimming eyes and just be for one single moment. It never happens. 
The film poses a virtually undebatable question: Where will a baby from an 
unplanned pregnancy get its best shot in life? Will it be with its birth 
parents, struggling under-class teen-agers (Masterson, Kevin Dillon), or with a 
pair of have-it-all, childless professionals (Close, Woods). 
Given this setup, the answer should be pretty clear-cut, but Barbara Benedek's 
screenplay turns our feelings around, unintentionally. As we meet Close's rigid 
realtor, on her way to an upscale child's birthday party, she complains that 
animals hate her, children don't like her and she always buys the wrong 
present. We're supposed to feel just the opposite, to see her charm, to get to 
know her human qualities. Unfortunately, the more we're shown, the more we side 
with the animals. 
Her character is relentless -- socially obtuse, self-pitying and preachy. 
"You're asking me the secret of a happy marriage?" she muses to Masterson, who 
didn't exactly ask. "Respect, affection, a lot of laughs, a sense of yourself 
and only one person gets to be crazy at a time." (One friendly component in a 
marriage doesn't even place on that list?) 
Not all the performances are so achingly high-minded. Take a look at what 
Masterson has done with this pregnant waif who choses "open adoption" -- in 
which both adoptive parties meet before the birth -- as the best way for her 
baby. Masterson's teen-ager, the child of a 17-year-old mother herself, is by 
turns cocky, lost, suspicious, yearning and coming to maturity almost before 
our eyes. Even her smallest emotion is pure and real. 
As the baby's sweet, faintly dim father, another damaged kid, snub-nosed Kevin 
Dillon gives the picture's other solid performance. But the pure likability of 
these two creates the movie's only real conflict: We have a decent too-young 
couple who must give up their baby and, as the lucky recipients, a pair of 
cool, remote adults, two of the last people on earth you could see in mixing in 
the messy dailyness of parenthood. 
Even the music is specious. This isn't a musical score, it's connect-the-titles 
time -- every song asks a musical question that the screen then answers. When 
Close and Woods go through their infertility regimen, the song is "Creatures of 
Love." As Masterson slumps in dejection, Ray Charles croons "Young girls do get 
weary . . . try a little tenderness." The young couple slips away on a lyrical 
drive to "Motherless Children." And Van Morrison's "Into the Mystic" does 
double duty, but its most excruciating use comes when Close and Masterson dance 
to it, in a moment of ineffable bonding. 
This, from the usually thoughtful producing team of Midge Sanford and Sarah 
Pillsbury ("River's Edge," "Eight Men Out"), under Lawrence Kasdan's production 
banner, and from Kaplan, who has in the past looked at women with such detailed 
sensitivity ("Heart Like a Wheel," "The Accused"). How does the song go? "Say 
it isn't so. . . ." 
'IMMEDIATE FAMILY' 
A Lawrence Kasdan production in association with Sanford/Pillsbury Productions. 
Executive producer Kasdan. Producers Sarah Pillsbury, Midge Sanford. Director 
Jonathan Kaplan. Screenplay Barbara Benedek. Editor Jane Kurson. Camera John W. 
Lindley. Production design Mark Freeborn. Music Brad Fiedel. Costumes April 
Ferry. Art director David Willson, set decorator Kimberley Richardson. Sound 
Sandy Berman. With Glenn Close, James Woods, Mary Stuart Masterson, Kevin 
Dillon, Jane Greer, Jessica James. 
Running time: 1 hour, 35 minutes. 
MPAA-rated: PG-13 (parents strongly cautioned; some material may be 
inappropriate for children under 13). 
