BAY AREA QUAKE; 
TIPS ON SURVIVAL -- DURING AND AFTER THE TREMOR 
Here are some frequently asked questions about earthquakes, and some answers 
provided by Times Staff Writer Mark Landsbaum. 
Question: What should you do if an earthquake hits while you are at home, work 
or school? 
Answer: As in all circumstances, remain calm. Get away from windows, mirrors 
and light fixtures, tall bookcases or China cases that may topple. Stand in a 
doorway or under a table or crouch against a solid wall. Get into a 
duck-and-cover position using sofa cushions or pillows to protect your head. Do 
not run outside. 
Q. What if a quake hits while you are in a car? 
A. Pull to the side of the road if possible and stop the car. Do not park under 
trees, light posts, signs, bridges or overpasses. 
Q. What should you do if you are outdoors? 
A. Get into the open, away from buildings, power lines and other sources of 
falling debris. 
Q. What should be done once the shaking stops? 
A. Check for injuries. If necessary, administer first aid. Do not move 
seriously injured persons unless they are in immediate danger. Keep the injured 
warm with blankets. Check utility lines and appliances for damage. Even the 
smallest sparks can cause explosions, so do not operate electrical switches or 
even a telephone if you smell gas. Do not eat or drink from open containers 
near broken glass. 
Q. Where can you find safe water to drink if service is cut off? 
A. Emergency water supplies can be found in water heaters, toilet tanks, melted 
ice cubes and canned vegetables. Water can be disinfected by first draining it 
through a clean cloth to remove solids, then by using a 5.25% household bleach 
solution. Use one drop to one quart for clear water and four drops to a quart 
for cloudy water. Water also can be purified by boiling. 
Q. What should you do if you smell gas after an earthquake? 
A. Know where your gas meter is and have an adjustable wrench for turning off 
the valve. Southern California Gas Co. advises that gas should be turned off 
only when there is an odor at the meter or at a connection, such as at the 
water heater. Never try to test for escaping gas with a lighter or flame 
because of a possible explosion. 
Q. What plans can members of your household make? 
A. Everyone should know the safest places in the house, away from large panes 
of glass, heavy furniture, appliances or veneers such as fireplaces. Know the 
location of gas, electric and water main shut-off valves. Have a plan to 
reunite the family if members become separated. Know the location of the 
nearest fire station. 
Q. What can you do about structural flaws in your home? 
A. Check your foundation for cracks larger than 1/8-inch that indicate 
potential weakness. Check to see that your house is attached with sill bolts to 
the foundation. Make sure children's play areas are away from walls that lack 
sheathing and from walls of brick or masonry veneer without steel 
reinforcement. Seek the advice of an architect, engineer or local building 
official on needed repairs or strengthening. 
Q. What supplies should you have stored in your home for such an emergency? 
A. Items that should be stored in a barrel or trash can: Flashlight, portable 
radio, extra batteries, first-aid kit and handbook, two quarts of water for 
each family member; enough canned, powdered, freeze-dried or dehydrated foods 
to last one week; toothbrush, toothpaste, soap, towel, razor, any needed 
prescriptions, antiseptic cream, adhesive tape, alcohol, aspirin, bandages, 
gauze, gloves, plastic trash bags, aluminum foil, household bleach, tissues, 
pocketknife and can opener, mini-barbecue grill, matches, candles, Sterno 
canned heat, screwdriver, wrench and crowbar, sleeping bags, blankets, pencil 
and paper. Keep important papers and cash close by. 
Q. What supplies should you store in your car? 
A. Store these in a nylon, metal or plastic container in the trunk: first aid 
kit, 2 quarts of water, toothbrush, comb, soap, towel, razor, any needed 
prescriptions, antiseptic cream, aspirin, pocket knife, leather gloves, bottle 
opener, matches, flashlight with extra batteries, blanket, dehydrated or canned 
food, jumper cables, screwdriver and crowbar, plastic trash bags, pencil and 
paper and Sterno. 
Q. Any final suggestions? 
A. Cooperate with public safety efforts. Use telephones only to report 
emergency situations. Don't wander the streets or go in to danger areas unless 
your assistance is needed. 
 Sources: Southern California Earthquake Preparedness Project, Governor's 
Office of Emergency Services, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Orange 
County Fire Department, Pacific Bell, the Red Cross, CEPP Corp., Lafferty &amp; 
Associates and the Emergency Lifeline, Santa Ana. 
How to Help Quake Victims 
Donations for San Francisco earthquake victims should be sent to: 
American Red Cross 
602 N. Golden Circle Drive 
Santa Ana, CA 92711 
Salvation Army 
900 W. 9th St. 
Los Angeles, CA 90015 
Salvation Army 
201 E. Cypress St. 
Anaheim, CA 92805 
Salvation Army 
818 E. 3rd St. 
Santa Ana, CA 92701 
