HOPE FOR HOMELESS STUDENTS; 
YOUNGSTERS TO HAVE A ROLLING CLASSROOM 
Since August, 7-year-old Sean Young has been in a decidedly less-than-desirable 
school environment. His "classroom" has no walls. Its floors are made of dirt 
and brush. Its ceiling is the sky. 
Like other homeless children, Sean has had to make do with picnic tables or 
cramped campers when Ann Robinson -- a county Department of Education teacher 
who travels to parks, motels and other areas frequented by the homeless -- 
comes around with his lessons. 
But thanks to a $300,000 grant from the U.S. Department of Education, Sean and 
his sister, Shana, 6, will soon have their phonics, math and penmanship lessons 
in a comfortable classroom on wheels. 
The county Department of Education plans to use the grant, funded under the 
federal Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act, to purchase a motor home 
and stock it with books, computers and screening facilities to monitor the 
students' health. 
"I think it's fantastic," said Sean and Shana's father, Doc Young, 38, who has 
been living in Featherly Regional Park and other county campsites with his 
wife, Tracey, 26, and five children since August. "They'll have something 
that's more of a school atmosphere. On a rainy day, (the classes) won't have to 
crowd inside a camper or a tent or meet in a restaurant. It's much more 
conducive to studying." 
County Department of Education officials gathered reporters outside of Young's 
campsite in Featherly Park Wednesday to discuss plans for expanding Project 
HOPE -- Homeless Outreach Program for Education -- and to show off a mobile 
school being used in another county education program that is similar to the 
motor home to be purchased for Project HOPE. 
Red Balfour, principal of the county's Community Home Education Program, said 
the new mobile school should be ready in about six weeks. The federal grant 
also will enable the county to buy a van and hire another full-time teacher and 
add two more instructional aides to serve homeless youngsters. Ultimately, 
Project HOPE will have two mobile homes and two vans staffed by two teachers 
and three instructional aides, he said. 
About a third of Orange County's estimated 6,000 to 10,000 homeless people are 
children, according to a survey released in February by the Orange County 
Homeless Issues Task Force. Project HOPE -- believed to be the only mobile 
education program in the United States -- is the only program available that 
ensures at least some continuity in education for the homeless, Balfour said. 
The project keeps track of homeless families through an 800 number, which 
parents phone whenever they are about to move so that Robinson can visit them 
at their new locations, which she said includes parks, motels, warehouses and 
sometimes just a street corner. 
Balfour said Robinson is responsible for assessing the children's grade levels 
and putting together "a comprehensive educational program for them." The 
students are then grouped by age and grade level, and Robinson teaches 
appropriate lessons to each group. 
"It's like the old one-room schoolhouse," Robinson said, adding that she tries 
to get to see each child two or three times a week. An instructional aide 
visits the students on other days to check on their work and provide tutoring 
if necessary, Robinson said. 
"We're hoping this will be a pilot for the rest of the state," Balfour said. He 
added that Orange County education officials are working with coordinators of 
homeless programs in Los Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino counties to 
launch similar programs to better serve homeless families who often move from 
one county to the other. 
The Youngs said that cooperation among the counties would be beneficial to 
their family because they have been shuttling between Riverside and Orange 
counties since they were evicted from their Corona apartment in June. 
Restricted to two-week stays on county campsites and in most motels, the Youngs 
began to fear that their children would never be allowed to enroll in school 
because of their lack of a permanent address. But shortly after moving into 
Featherly Park, they heard about Project HOPE, and, coincidentally, Robinson 
heard that there was a new family in residence with school-age children. 
"Ann was literally looking for us at the same time we were looking for her," 
said Doc Young, an unemployed truck driver who, ironically, said he was once a 
high school physics and algebra teacher in Massachusetts. "Ann is an incredible 
teacher. You can literally see tears in her eyes when children have done a good 
job." 
Project HOPE hit the road last December after nearly a year of planning, and 
since then Robinson has loaded her Chevrolet pickup each morning with boxes of 
books and supplies. She has been using whatever facilities are available -- 
picnic sites, libraries, and even restaurants -- to instruct the 31 youngsters 
in grades kindergarten through eight currently enrolled in the 
independent-study program. 
In addition to being unable to carry around all of the materials needed for 
proper schooling, Robinson said the biggest problem has been that classes are 
at the mercy of the weather. 
The mobile school will also be valuable because, with tables that can be used 
as makeshift desks and bookshelves lining the vehicle, students will feel more 
like they are in a real classroom, easing the transition back into regular 
schools, Robinson said. 
Robinson has definitely had an impact on Sean and Shana Young. Shana said she 
prefers hunting tiny lizards to going to school but nevertheless looks forward 
to returning to an ordinary classroom. "But I still want my teacher," she said. 
And Sean, who sports a mane of shoulder-length blond hair, said he diligently 
does his homework assignments because he fears that Robinson will spend less 
time with him if he doesn't. 
"When I don't do my homework, I get freaked out," he said. 
