UNLIKE THE BERLIN WALL, NO SIGN CASTRO WILL FALL; 
FOREIGN POLICY: THE SOVIET UNION HAS CUT ITS HELP TO FIDEL, BUT HIS MAGNETIC 
APPEAL CONTINUES TO HOLD A MAJORITY OF HIS COUNTRYMEN. 
"Fidel doesn't fall, not even from his bed." 
So goes a popular Cubanism, often repeated throughout the island after one of 
Washington's habitual predictions of Castro's imminent ruin. But the bed is 
starting to wobble from the pounding Cuba has been taking in recent months as a 
result of dwindling economic help from its main partner, the Soviet Union. 
Castro is long accustomed to U.S. efforts to weaken his regime. But now, the 
United States has been joined by new and unexpected allies. The supply shortage 
from the Soviet Union and the weaker but still very effective economic 
sanctions imposed by some European countries have seriously affected Cubans. 
"It's sad to see the deterioration of the economy and daily life in Cuba," 
wrote Froylan Lopez, a columnist for the Mexican newsmagazine Proceso. "The 
only socialist government in America has been forced to ration the consumption 
of essential goods." 
Until now, the U.S. economic blockade, the ideological war launched through 
Radio and T.V. Marti, the "hostile acts," as Castro calls Washington's military 
maneuvers near his island, the endless verbal attacks from government officials 
-- none of these American efforts has had the desired effect. 
There are moments in the history of any country when events converge to produce 
serious and profound change. This seems to be one of those moments in the life 
of Cuba, with or without U.S. influence. 
The island cannot continue being what it has been when its main supporter, the 
Soviet Union, is putting in place purely capitalistic principles. The words of 
Vladimir Zheranovski, one of Moscow's rising leaders of the opposition, reflect 
some of the forces shaking Castro's bedsprings. 
"Sharing is not lucrative," he said recently. "Efforts should be oriented (to) 
produce something in exchange. The national interest must be placed ahead of 
solidarity with underdeveloped countries." 
What seems clear now that the peak of Castro's latest crisis is passing is that 
changes in Cuba are not going to happen while he still holds power. Castro 
remains the country's undisputed and charismatic leader, followed by the vast 
majority of his people and admired by important intellectuals and politicians 
worldwide. With his enthusiasm, his faith, and his magnetic appeal, he can move 
his people as he likes and maintain the revolutionary pride in Cuban 
sovereignty. 
"The truth is that the paternal figure of Fidel continues to exert an unlimited 
fascination over the majority of Cubans," exuded a leading Latin magazine not 
long ago. However, Cuba's unavoidable transformation must be separated from the 
spreading joy over the worldwide "triumph of capitalism." Castro's defeat would 
be nothing to crow over. It would signify the end of the socialist ideal and 
its dream of a better life in which wealth is shared by all, in which the 
wealth of the rich is transferred to the poor. 
That dream has never been a feature of the capitalist promise. 
The tendency to magnify capitalism's virtue is making people believe there is 
no other possible way. But in the capitalist world, there is much that is not 
worth celebrating. 
Seen from the point of view of many south of the U.S. border, for example, the 
Latin poor fill the coffers of the U.S. banks through crushing and oppressive 
external-debt payments. 
If it is true that some Latins can live well with capitalism, the majority do 
not. It is a dangerous mistake to convert capitalism's vices into virtues 
simply because the Marxist regimes have failed to fulfill their socialist 
ideals. Most of Latin America's capitalist democracies are characterized by 
injustice, poverty, unemployment, hunger, illness, electoral fraud, political 
and racial murder and torture. And those ills are suffered by the majority of 
the population throughout the continent. 
For that reason, it is still valid to ask which is worse: The "capitalist 
freedom" offered by these countries? Or the "ideological rigidity" of Castro's 
Cuba, where until now nobody has died from starvation, people live longer and 
healthier than anywhere else in Latin America, education is universal, housing 
and jobs are available, and people can afford to feed their families? Behind 
the arrogance and intransigence of which his detractors accuse him, Castro is 
the last leader on the world stage who still believes in the promise of 
socialism. The idealism that many in the United States interpret as destructive 
blindness has permitted Castro to maintain his regime -- and his country's 
pride -- until now. 
Pride was the foundation of the Cuban revolution, and remains so to this day, 
37 years later. It would be a mistake to pigeonhole Castro as another communist 
failure. His revolution, his regime, his communism are too different from the 
East European models to expect him to fade because they have. Castro's 
revolution, remember, was conducted for and by Cubans, not imposed from 
outside. And that is why it is wrong to try to force Cuba into the inevitable 
wave of reform sweeping Marxist regimes elsewhere. 
Sooner or later, international pressure, age, death, political upheaval at home 
-- any or all will bring Castro down. And that will be the end of an ideal. But 
what must be avoided is that Castro's end becomes a catastrophe for Cuba. 
Unfortunately, in the eyes of many analysts, Cuba's problems spring solely from 
Castro's intransigence. They ignore all the international factors that are 
bearing down on his country. 
Washington's stubbornness and its insistence in its right to intervene in other 
countries could convert natural and healthy political change in Cuba into 
disaster. Instead of attacks, Cuba needs support now that world conditions are 
pressing it for change. 
As Mexican opposition leader Cuauhtemoc Cardenas has proposed, the last best 
hope for Cuba may lie with its closest neighbors. Latin American countries must 
open their doors to new possibilities of regional integration with Cuba. 
It may be the only way Cuba can repair Castro's wobbling bed. 
