NAMIBIANS SAY THEY ARE SLOWING ILLICIT IVORY TRADE 
Conservation officials in Namibia believe they are beginning to stem a surge in 
the illicit ivory trade that followed the withdrawal of South African troops 
under a U.N.-sponsored independence plan. 
They scored their latest success Sept. 16 when police smashed a major 
international smuggling syndicate after months of investigation, arresting 25 
suspects. 
Officials seized 980 elephant tusks, weighing about seven tons and valued at 
nearly $2 million, in what they believe was Africa's biggest haul of illegal 
ivory. 
"This is the biggest haul made in Africa," said Col. Johan Meintjies, head of 
the police diamond and narcotics squad, which also investigates poaching, after 
the raid in the farming town of Okahandja, 43 miles north of Windhoek. 
The tusks were found hidden behind a load of vegetables in a refrigerated 
truck. 
"These tusks came from more than 500 elephants, but we believe most of them 
were from animals killed in countries either to the north or the northeast of 
us," Brian Jones, a spokesman for the Department of Nature Conservation, told 
Reuters. 
South Africa Police Help 
Gerhard Roux, spokesman for the South African administrator-general of Namibia, 
Louis Pienaar, said: "It was with the assistance of the South African police 
that the police in Namibia were able to achieve this result." 
Environmentalists say ivory is smuggled from Angola, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe 
by way of Namibia or Botswana. It is then shipped to Taiwan and Hong Kong for 
processing. 
Some of the men detained in the raid could face 10 years in jail under 
penalties that have been tightened since the latest poaching spate began. 
Poaching has increased this year since the number of South African forces in 
Namibia was reduced under the U.N. independence plan for the huge desert 
territory, which had been ruled by Pretoria since World War I. 
Since July only 1,500 South Africa troops have remained in Namibia, confined to 
two bases in the north under the U.N. plan. 
Police say poachers had previously been deterred by the South Africans, who 
were trying to prevent infiltration from Angola by pro-independence guerrillas 
of the South West Africa People's Organization. 
Smugglers Watched 
Before the latest arrests, police had followed the smugglers through Namibia 
from Rundu, a small town on the Angolan border in the northeast, watching them 
since July 16. 
"We waited until we thought we had the biggest and most fish before we 
pounced," said Meintjies. 
Rundu, on the Kavango River, has been a conduit for ivory from Angola and arms 
supplies to the rebel movement there, the National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola. 
The area on either side of the river teems with elephants and other game, now 
threatened by poachers. 
Some of the seized elephant tusks were huge, weighing as much as 80 pounds, 
while others were tiny, taken from baby elephants. Police also seized 14 
rhinoceros horns and a few hippopotamus teeth. 
Conservationists fear that one of Namibia's most precious resources, its 
abundant wildlife and especially its threatened black rhinoceros, faces a major 
menace from poaching. 
"Since July this year we have captured at least 80 poachers," police Chief 
Inspector Kierie du Rand said. 
In some areas the police are using former bush fighters from Koevoet -- the now 
disbanded counter-insurgency unit -- to hunt the ivory dealers. 
Namibian police say the anti-poaching units have had a marked effect. But the 
South West Africa People's Organization opposes the use of the units, saying 
all former Koevoet members should be banned from police duty because they 
intimidate SWAPO supporters. 
