MONEY BATTLES AT UCSD SPUR PRENATAL FLAP; 
MEDICINE: DOCTORS' FEES LED TO A DECISION -- NOW APPARENTLY RESCINDED -- TO 
DROP A PROGRAM THAT USES NURSE-MIDWIVES TO GIVE PRENATAL CARE AND DELIVERY 
SERVICES TO POOR WOMEN. 
To the outside eye, UC San Diego's Medical School, Medical Center, Department 
of Reproductive Medicine and doctors and nurses are one and the same. But 
divisions between competing interests -- particularly financial ones -- in the 
institution can run deep. 
Nowhere was that more apparent than in the recent fiasco over whether UCSD was 
going to shut down its pioneering program that uses nurse-midwives to give 
prenatal care and delivery services to poor women. 
At least in part, you could call it a case of the right hand not having access 
to $961 that was in the left pocket. 
First, the Department of Reproductive Medicine, a division within the medical 
school, issued an Oct. 16 memo saying the program would end because of 
financial difficulties. Chiefly blamed for the shutdown were anticipated losses 
of $250,000 to $350,000 a year in physicians' fees. 
These are fees that wouldn't be paid to faculty obstetricians for their help 
with Caesarean section and other problem deliveries of women in the perinatal 
program, said the former director of the Comprehensive Perinatal Program (CPP), 
Ann Bush-Sheresh. Instead, under a standing agreement between the CPP and the 
medical school's Reproductive Medicine Department, such fees have long gone to 
the perinatal program to help it operate. 
But if the women were not receiving prenatal care through the CPP, the faculty 
obstetricians would receive up to $961.20 from Medi-Cal for each woman who 
walked into the emergency room in labor. 
Bush-Sheresh left CPP in April because, she said, she couldn't bear to see the 
program she spent 10 years building dismantled. 
Suspicions about this potential financial incentive for killing CPP was one of 
several reasons that the shutdown plan brought a storm of anger and disbelief 
when it was revealed publicly last Tuesday. 
How, critics asked, could a state-funded institution deliberately add 1,000 
babies a year to the 4,000 in San Diego County whose mothers get no medical 
care at all during their pregnancies? Fragile premature babies, hooked to tubes 
and wires instead of safe inside their mothers' wombs, are often the result of 
the lack of prenatal care. 
The end of the Comprehensive Perinatal Program also surprised key parts of the 
hospital's bureaucracy -- emphasizing the separate roads that different parts 
of the UCSD medical establishment can choose to travel on the same issue. 
Not only did the action make the hospital look like it was backing away from 
caring for the poor (an issue on which administrators are particularly 
sensitive) but it also came when the hospital was trying to work out agreements 
to get more -- not less -- prenatal care for poor women. 
Two days later, the administrators' "damage control" messages had intensified: 
The decision to close the perinatal program hadn't ever really been made, UCSD 
spokeswomen contended. It was a departmental move, not an administrative 
decision, they said. 
All this backtracking made it apparent that there had been little coordination 
in making the decision between the Reproductive Medicine Department and 
hospital administrators. 
Contacts also were lacking with county officials and other university 
departments, such as the joint UCSD-UC San Francisco master's program that 
trains nurse-midwives as part of the CPP program. 
"I have already gotten calls from across the country asking, 'Is your program 
closing?' " said Judith Fullerton, director of graduate nursing programs at 
UCSD. 
The midwives can be trained at other area hospitals, but Fullerton said she is 
concerned that in the meanwhile, the CPP crisis will scare away potential 
students. 
"I think it was a decision that was made in a vacuum," said County Supervisor 
Brian Bilbray of the CPP closure. 
Bilbray and other county officials were particularly upset because the county 
subsidizes UCSD Medical Center every year for care to poor people. That 
amounted to $8.5 million in 1989-90. The county also helped make the hospital 
eligible for $2.6 million in state aid under AB-75, the tobacco tax bill. 
"We backfilled millions of dollars by being willing to bite the bullet in other 
areas and provide for (UCSD) programs that had been funded in the past," 
Bilbray said. 
But this money for uncompensated care -- $11.1 million total last fiscal year 
-- goes to the medical center, not necessarily to the medical school 
departments or doctors. So state Medi-Cal reforms that helped hospitals didn't 
end UCSD obstetricians' continuing complaints that they weren't being paid for 
individual medical procedures. 
On the other hand, Bush-Sheresh points out, the physicians can expect little 
sympathy from the public. They are state-paid faculty at an academic 
institution, complete with the research opportunities, prestige and job 
protection of tenure. 
"These are faculty physicians at a university, and their base salary is being 
paid by the university," she said. "They're public employees. These people are 
being paid regardless." 
In addition, there are questions about another reason given for shutting down 
CPP, that the hospital's obstetrical facilities are too crowded. But at the 
same time, the university has been actively pursuing arrangements to deliver 
babies for private practices or community clinics whose patients would come 
with their own doctors and insurance or Medi-Cal funding. 
Any public perception of UCSD's hospital or doctors as greedy or insensitive to 
the community's needs comes at a particularly inopportune time for the 
university. 
UCSD is building a luxurious new hospital in La Jolla that critics had feared 
symbolized a lessening of UCSD's commitment to the poor. The lavishly decorated 
rooms at the new hospital will feature large picture windows, polished wood 
floors and other amenities that make them look like comfortable hotel rooms. 
In that context, those concerned with medical care for the poor ask, how much 
commitment to the poor is enough? Hospital officials say that, through their 
emergency room and clinics, they provide a great deal of free care already. 
But more than free care, the university has to provide responsibility and 
leadership in finding solutions to the poor's medical care problems, Supervisor 
Bilbray and others said. Killing CPP did the opposite, they said. 
"The UC system can't expect to be an ivory tower set aside from the realities 
of the people and the communities that they serve," Bilbray said. "The 
taxpayers, rich and poor, pay the bills for that operation, so the taxpayer 
should gain a cross-section benefit of those expenses." 
By the end of the week, high-level UCSD hospital and medical school officials 
were behaving as though they agreed. Discussions on how to save CPP, with 
fiscal responsibility outside of the medical school, were continuing. 
But university officials did not return repeated phone calls and spokeswomen 
refused to release any details of the financial underpinnings of the initial 
decision to close CPP. 
"There's nothing in the discussions that indicates that the service that has 
been provided is going to change, but to restructure it so that the fiscal 
responsibility for it lies elsewhere, outside the department of medicine," 
public information chief Leslie Franz said. 
She denied that physicians had any financial incentive to shut CPP down, but 
did not provide any details. More information won't be released until an 
agreement is reached, she said. 
"This whole thing has been turned into mass confusion because of the bits and 
pieces coming out in the press," Franz said. "If there's egg on our face, 
that's the point at which it will be wiped off." 
