SURROGATE CONFESSES HER SECRET; 
TRIAL: ANNA L. JOHNSON ADMITS CASHING CHECK FROM UNBORN CHILD'S PARENTS AFTER 
SHE'D DECIDED TO SEEK CUSTODY. SHE DENIES TELLING THE TIMES SHE DIDN'T FEEL 
BONDED TO BABY. 
Surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson, who is waging an unprecedented battle for 
custody of a baby she bore for an infertile couple, testified Wednesday that 
she accepted payments from the pair even after she secretly decided to keep the 
child. 
Johnson, 29, who has attracted national attention in her effort to win the 
3-week-old boy, admitted that she cashed a $2,100 check from Mark and Crispina 
Calvert in early June and another, for an unspecified sum, in early August, but 
that she no longer intended to give up the baby. 
Johnson's comments came during aggressive questioning by the Calverts' 
attorney, Christian R. Van Deusen. Van Deusen tried to determine the exact 
point at which Johnson decided to keep the baby, and to imply that she is not 
telling the truth when she claims she "bonded" to the child early in the 
pregnancy. 
Johnson also admitted that the Calverts had made major payments earlier than 
required on at least two occasions. One of Johnson's key claims in trying to 
win custody of the baby -- and one she repeated many times -- is that the 
Calverts breached the $10,000 surrogation contract by consistently paying her 
late. 
Crispina Calvert took the witnessstand briefly Wednesday to explain her 
understanding of the contract with Johnson. She stated that Johnson had 
received legal counseling before signing it. 
Johnson, a licensed vocational nurse and single mother, testified on the second 
day of a hearing to determine whether she can legally be considered the baby's 
mother, even though she has no genetic connection to him. The Calverts provided 
the sperm and egg from which the baby grew. 
The proceeding in Orange County Superior Court is now expected to extend into 
next week. Since the baby's birth Sept. 19, the Calverts have had temporary 
custody. 
During more than two hours of intense examination by Van Deusen, Johnson denied 
telling The Times in an interview in early August that she felt no connection 
to the baby she was carrying because she knew it did not belong to her. 
In fact, Johnson told a Times reporter that she did not feel bonded to the 
child because it was not made from her genetic material. 
"If it had been my egg, it would have made a real big difference," Johnson told 
The Times. "But with (in-vitro fertilization), there's no connection to me. . . 
. There's been detachment from the baby from Day 1." 
Johnson told The Times that the sole reason she was seeking custody of the baby 
was that she believed the Calverts had lost interest in him and would make 
unfit parents. Her aim, she said, was to protect the child from being put into 
a bad environment. 
Since she filed suit Aug. 13, Johnson has concentrated much more on her 
"bonding" to the baby, contending she should keep him because the act of 
carrying and delivering him makes her the child's mother. She has virtually 
dropped any discussion of whether the Calverts are unfit parents. 
Commenting on that change during a court recess Wednesday, her lawyer, Richard 
C. Gilbert, said: "Did you ever hear of a Trojan horse?" 
On Wednesday, Johnson admitted she "might have" told someone else earlier in 
the pregnancy that she had not become attached to the baby, but if she did say 
that, it was because she was "in a state of denial," struggling with a bond she 
had developed even though she had signed a contract promising to surrender the 
child. 
Van Deusen had Johnson describe a series of events purportedly showing that, 
for many months after she became pregnant, she did not consider the child to be 
her own. 
He introduced a sonogram picture, taken Feb. 10, less than a month after 
Johnson was implanted with the Calverts' embryo. Johnson scribbled on the 
photo, "Cris' baby, Day 23," and pinned it up in the nurses' lounge of the 
hospital where both she and Crispina Calvert worked. 
The baby's court-appointed lawyer, Harold LaFlamme, also questioned Johnson 
about when she came to feel the baby was hers. He pointed to language she used 
in a July 23 letter to the Calverts, in which she refers to the fetus as "the 
child of someone else" and uses the phrase, "before your child is born." 
"I wrote the letter, yes, but in the state of mind I was in, I was confused, I 
was anxious and I was desperate," Johnson testified. 
Johnson said that she changed her mind and decided to keep the baby on June 10, 
at 6:30 p.m., when, she claims, she had to take a taxi to the hospital during a 
round of premature contractions because Mark Calvert refused to give her a 
ride. (Calvert denies that Johnson asked him for a ride.) 
But in a string of apparent contradictions, Johnson also testified that when 
she endorsed the June 2 check, she did not intend to give the Calverts their 
child. She also said that when she wrote the July 23 letter, she intended to 
surrender the baby. Later, she testified that by that point she was planning to 
keep it. 
