BUCS' CHRISTIE MAKES COACH LOOK GOOD; 
NFC: HE KICKS GAME-WINNING FIELD GOAL IN OVERTIME AFTER THE MAN HE BEAT FOR THE 
JOB, DONALD IGWEBUIKE, MISSES CHANCE TO WIN THE GAME FOR VIKINGS. 
Steve Christie made Tampa Bay Coach Ray Perkins look like a genius when he 
kicked a 36-yard field goal 9:11 into sudden-death overtime to give the 
Buccaneers a 23-20 victory over the Minnesota Vikings. 
Perkins was criticized for selecting Christie, a free-agent kicker, over Donald 
Igwebuike, an established NFL veteran, during training camp. 
"I had an idea that, with Iggy and myself in this game, it might come down to 
field goals," said Christie. 
It did. Christie was perfect on three field goals and two extra points while 
Igwebuike had two of each. But Igwebuike missed one that could have won it for 
the Vikings from 48 yards just 3:53 before Christie won the game. 
"I feel for him," said Christie. "He could have made it as easily as he missed 
it. I thought he'd make it because I know how good he is." 
The trajectory on Igwebuike's attempt was low and tipped by Tampa Bay's Paul 
Gruber. 
"I didn't think he'd make it," said Perkins. "I told our guys that he wouldn't 
make it. It was too far out for him. He missed one last year against the 
Vikings from that same distance." 
Tampa Bay (3-1) is off to its best start since going 4-0 in 1979, when it won 
the NFC Central title. Minnesota is 1-3 for the first time since 1972 and saw a 
13-game home winning streak snapped. The Vikings hadn't lost at home since Oct. 
16, 1988, to Green Bay. 
Igwebuike blamed himself for the loss. 
"I wasn't trying to get back at anybody," he said. "I'm not worried about 
Tampa. I lost the game. All the guys busted their (behinds) for 60-something 
minutes, then I come in for a few seconds and couldn't get it done." 
Christie's winning kick was set up by Wayne Haddix, who intercepted Rich 
Gannon's pass at Minnesota's 26. Gannon, making his first start at quarterback 
after three years as a third stringer, played well in place of injured Wade 
Wilson. He completed 19 of 36 passes for 253 yards. 
The Bucs trailed 20-13 before Vinny Testaverde passed for all 74 yards on the 
tying drive, capped by his 11-yard touchdown pass to Bruce Hill with 24 seconds 
left. Testaverde, who had only 88 yards passing before the drive, said the 
huddle was unusually quiet. 
"I didn't say anything. I looked at them and they looked at me like, 'We're 
ready,' " he said. 
Gannon threw two touchdown passes in a 3:06 span late in the fourth quarter, 
rallying the Vikings to a 20-13 lead. 
The Bucs controlled the first 3 1/2 quarters and led 13-6 midway through the 
fourth when Reggie Cobb broke loose for a 17-yard run into Minnesota territory. 
But he fumbled when hit by Joey Browner, and Mike Merriweather recovered. 
Gannon's seven-yard touchdown pass to Carter tied the score at 13 with 4:35 to 
go. After the Vikings' defense forced a punt, Gannon threw a 41-yard scoring 
pass to Hassan Jones. 
