EMBEZZLER GETS 30-DAY TERM, FINE 
A San Fernando Superior Court judge rejected a prosecutor's plea for a more 
stringent sentence Tuesday and ordered an insurance broker to spend 30 days in 
County Jail for embezzling clients' insurance premiums. 
Judge Malcolm Mackey also ordered Gary Martin, 53, of Tujunga to perform 300 
hours of community service, imposed a $10,000 fine, ordered him to pay 
restitution to his victims and avoid working in a capacity in which he would be 
responsible for other people's money. 
A jury convicted Martin, president of Welmar Insurance Service, Sept. 18 of six 
felony charges for stealing about $23,000 from three clients who had paid him 
to buy auto insurance policies. The clients were left without insurance 
coverage. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Steven J. Ipsen had urged that Martin be sentenced to two 
years in prison, but Mackey said the community would be better served if Martin 
worked and paid restitution. 
"Sending everyone to jail is not a panacea," Mackey said. "The punishment must 
fit the crime." 
Failing Business 
Mackey described Martin, who used the money to pay the operating expenses of 
his ailing insurance company, as a small businessman who got in financial 
trouble and did not deserve to be punished as if he had set up a business 
deliberately to defraud people. 
But Ipsen said Martin, whose broker's license previously had been suspended for 
six months for misusing funds, got off too lightly. The prosecutor said the 
sentence reflects the court system's leniency toward white-collar criminals. 
"If they appear to be 'one of us' -- white, Anglo-Saxon, educated people -- it 
becomes difficult to send them to state prison," Ipsen said. "If it were 
someone not wearing a tie and not wearing a jacket who had stolen similar 
dollar amounts and shown a similar lack of remorse, there is no way he would 
have gotten probation." 
No Criminal Record 
But the Los Angeles County Probation Department agreed with the judge's 
assessment. It had recommended that Martin not be sentenced to state prison, 
noting that he has no criminal record. 
After his conviction, Martin told a county probation officer that he was 
innocent. He said the theft was planned by his former partner, Clark Wells, who 
pleaded guilty to two charges of theft in 1987 and was sentenced to three years 
probation. 
Martin was arrested in June, 1987, after a San Fernando businessman tried to 
add a car to an insurance policy that Martin had been paid to buy. The 
insurance company notified the businessman that the policy had been canceled 
for non-payment. 
