COURT FREES 4 JAILED IN BRITISH PUB BOMBINGS 
In a landmark decision, a British appellate court Thursday exonerated three 
Irishmen and an Englishwoman serving life sentences for terrorist pub bombings 
near London in 1974 that killed eight people and injured 90. 
The three-judge panel acted after an attorney representing the government said 
the convictions of the so-called Guildford Four were based on evidence 
"concocted" by police investigators. 
The decision touched off calls for reviews of other cases of terrorist activity 
on behalf of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, which opposes British rule in 
Northern Ireland. It also spurred demands for new legal procedures that would 
give greater protection to accused criminals, particularly in cases that hinge 
on confessions. 
The Guildford Four, so called because the most lethal of the bombings took 
place in a town by that name southwest of London, originally confessed but then 
-- at their 1975 trial -- recanted and accused the police of coercion. 
Prosecutors offered no corroborating physical evidence. 
The convictions were upheld in 1977 even after three other people, all IRA 
members, confessed to the attacks. 
The four defendants were set free after Thursday's hearing. However, one of 
them, Paul Hill, 35, was immediately rearrested in connection with a life 
sentence he is serving concurrently for the murder of a British soldier in 
Northern Ireland. 
The appellate court's action followed a long campaign on behalf of the four by 
such prominent groups and individuals as Amnesty International, two former home 
secretaries and the Archbishop of Canterbury. The British news media said it 
was the first time that an IRA terrorist conviction has been reversed in 
England. 
Defendant Gerard Conlon, 35, was the first to emerge from the courtroom. 
Shaking with emotion and flanked by his two sisters, Conlon shouted: "I've been 
in prison for 15 years for something I didn't do, for something I didn't know 
anything about." 
Patrick Armstrong, 39, and Carole Richardson, 32, were also released but 
avoided reporters. 
