SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
OCEAN CABLES CALLED ON FOR NEW ROLE; 
SEISMOLOGY: OUTDATED TRANS-PACIFIC TELEPHONE LINES WILL BE DONATED TO 
SCIENTISTS. THEY WILL BE USED TO MONITOR EARTHQUAKES AND CONDUCT OTHER 
RESEARCH. 
Scientists who have been frustrated for decades by their inability to place 
permanent seismic and oceanographic monitoring stations on the ocean floor are 
on the brink of realizing their dream by using transoceanic telephone cables 
that have outlived their original purpose. 
On Thursday, AT&amp;T and its Japanese counterpart, Kokusai Denshin Denwa Ltd., 
will donate part of the first cable system to span the Pacific to two 
scientific organizations that plan to use it to supply electricity and a 
communications link to ocean-floor systems in the western Pacific. 
The vital link, which has been replaced by a fiber optics system, will allow 
scientists for the first time to install permanent seismic monitoring stations 
on the ocean floor between Guam and Japan. Eventually, scientists hope to 
extend the program as other cables become available. 
"There's a great deal of excitement" over the potential of the program, said 
Rhett Butler, a seismologist with the Incorporated Research Institute for 
Seismology (IRIS) of Arlington, Va., one of the organizations that will receive 
title to part of the trans-Pacific cable next month. The institute, which 
coordinates seismic research for 70 U.S. colleges and universities, will be 
joined in the program by the Earthquake Research Institute of the University of 
Tokyo. 
"It's a tremendous opportunity for scientists," said Alan Chave, an 
oceanographer with AT&amp;T's Bell Laboratories. The cost of laying cable 
across the oceans is so great that "we could never possibly do it" for 
scientific purposes alone, he said, but since the cables are there already they 
provide a chance to create a true global network of monitoring stations at a 
bargain-basement price. 
For the first time, scientists will be able to study offshore seismic activity 
on a continuing basis, including movement along faults, changes in the contour 
of the ocean floor that could indicate an imminent quake, and electromagnetic 
emissions from the Earth before and during quakes. The program could also aid 
research in a number of other areas that are global in scope. 
Oceanographic applications hold great promise for such areas as global changes 
in the oceanic environment, a matter of concern to scientists who fear that the 
planet may be warming because of the greenhouse effect. 
The only way to find out if that is true, Chave said, is to monitor the entire 
planet simultaneously, and collect data continuously over a period of many 
years. One crucial tool in that effort could be the cables that are being 
abandoned around the world. 
The program is so new that no price tag has been set yet, but scientists 
believe they have come across a resource that is so valuable it cannot be 
wasted. 
"This will give the cables another life after retiring from telephone use," 
said Butler. 
In most cases the cables are in extremely good shape, although the link between 
California and Hawaii was somehow severed off the coast of California about a 
year ago. That cable could still be usable from Hawaii to the point where it is 
broken near the California coast, and it could eventually be reconnected to the 
mainland if that proved worthwhile. 
Except for that problem, the trans-Pacific cable "is just about as good as it 
was when it was first put down in the early 1960s," said Bell's Chave. The 
cable should be useful for "at least another 20 years," he added. 
Chave said the cable can provide three things for science: a line to transmit 
power to ocean-floor instruments; a communications link to extract data 
immediately from those stations; and an ability to operate a wide range of 
instruments remotely. 
"We can't do any of those (without the cable)," he said. 
Historically, scientists were able to put instruments in the sea for up to two 
years, but the life of the instruments was limited by their batteries and it 
was not possible to retrieve data as it was collected. 
And eventually, "you have to drive a ship out there and pick it up," Chave 
said. All of that adds to the cost and reduces the effectiveness, and it 
creates gaps in the data. 
During a "workshop on scientific uses of undersea cables" in Hawaii earlier 
this year, Junzo Kasahara of the University of Tokyo singled out the primary 
problem in today's research when he noted that scientific data is collected 
"unequally" over the Earth because two-thirds of the planet is covered by 
oceans and little data is collected there. 
"We have estimated the nature of the Earth using these incomplete data," 
Kasahara told the workshop. 
Retired undersea telephone cables could help fill those gaps by allowing 
scientists to put permanent facilities on the floors of the oceans and collect 
data as it is generated. That is particularly important in seismic research, 
because scientists generally see only the part of the picture that happens on 
land. 
"Right now, there is a huge gap," said Butler, who has been active in the 
effort to convert the cables for several years. He noted that there are many 
seismic stations in California, but "once you leave the coast, the next station 
is in Hawaii." 
There are still many bugs, including financing, to be worked out, however. 
Bell's Chave said the biggest problem is finding a way to install instruments 
along the cable at a reasonable cost. When AT&amp;T crews needed to install 
repeaters, for instance, they did it by cutting the cable, lifting both ends to 
the surface and splicing their equipment into it. 
"That's half a million dollars a pop," he said, and that kind of money is hard 
to come by in scientific circles. 
So the program is expected to get off to a slow start and will initially be 
centered in the seismically active zone between Guam and Japan. U.S. 
participants hope to build the equipment in Guam that will power the 
instruments at a cost of "several hundred thousand dollars," Butler said. The 
system was designed to transmit power from Guam, not Japan, and it is not 
reversible, he added. 
Japan plans to install three stations on the sea floor. Two of those will be 
purely for the study of seismic phenomena, such as the propagation of seismic 
waves along the ocean floor after an earthquake. The third will also include 
electromagnetic and oceanographic sensors to monitor such things as changes in 
water temperature and electromagnetic signals emitted by the Earth before and 
during earthquakes. 
Chave said there is also considerable interest in a cable that stretches from 
Rhode Island to Spain, because that could monitor the Atlantic, including a 
giant geological structure called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge that bisects the ocean 
floor and marks the area where the tectonic plates are pulling apart. That 
cable will become available in 1993. 
"There are going to be a lot of opportunities coming up like this in the next 
10 years," Chave said. 
The Incorporated Research Institute for Seismology is putting together a 
proposal for funding from the National Science Foundation. Although the biggest 
cost of the project has already been paid by the companies that installed the 
cables, it will not be cheap to build sophisticated ocean-floor systems and 
install them. 
Chave said several cost-cutting concepts are being studied, including the 
installation of "junction boxes" along the cables. That would require a 
one-time splicing into the cable for each box, and instruments could be added 
at any time by simply "plugging them in." 
And ways will have to be found to attach the instruments firmly to the ocean 
floor so that such things as seismometers will not be confused by currents and 
shifts in the mud at the bottom of the sea. 
The program is so new that there is no consensus on how those objectives would 
best be met. But U.S. scientists believe they will be able to learn much at 
bargain basement prices in the initial effort, because the government of Japan 
plans to spend $10 million on the three ocean-floor stations, far more than the 
U.S. obligation. 
Since the power to run the cable between Guam and Japan must originate in Guam, 
it will be up to American scientists to provide that at a cost far less than 
the Japanese investment in the program. In exchange, U.S. scientists will share 
fully in the research and results from the Japanese stations. 
"This is an instance where we can learn a great deal about working with cables 
for very little money," said Chave. "The Japanese are budgeting $10 million. If 
we can learn whether this is worth doing (for the cost of providing the 
facilities in Guam), then it's a good deal." 
SEISMIC RESEARCH NETWORK 
Telephone cables that span much of the world's oceans will become available for 
other uses within this decade, and scientists hope to see at least some of them 
to run seismic and oceanographic instruments on the ocean floor. 
This map shows cables that are expected to be replaced by fiber optics systems 
by the end of this century. Part of a cable that links the United States and 
Japan will be turned over to research organizations on Nov. 1. That cable runs 
from Guam to Japan, and scientists plan to use it to supply power and extract 
data from three subsea stations along that route. 
Source: AT&amp;T 
