MOVIE REVIEW; 
'EATING': RICH TALE OF BEING TOO THIN 
With "Eating" (only at the Park Theater in San Diego) the ever-idiosyncratic 
independent filmmaker Henry Jaglom continues his intimate, spontaneous, witty 
but always compassionate observations of compulsive, neurotic human behavior -- 
and reveals his ongoing fascination with women. He clearly has always inspired 
great trust in actresses, and in this instance his all-female cast rewards him 
with some shining portrayals. 
Mary Crosby reveals depths heretofore unsuspected, and from Gwen Welles, one of 
his regulars, he elicits her most harrowing, complex performance yet. But if 
"Eating" had accomplished nothing else, it would have been remarkable for the 
performance of Frances Bergen, one of Hollywood's enduring, elegant beauties, 
in what is surely the best part of her career. 
In essence, "Eating" is "The Women" of the '90s. The Norma Shearer role of the 
perfect wife goes to capable Lisa Blake Richards as an attractive Hancock Park 
matron who decides to throw a party to mark her 40th birthday, then expands it 
to celebrate the impending birthdays of two of her best friends: Crosby, a 
happily married housewife who is about to turn 30; and Marlena Giovi, a 
Hollywood agent who is fast approaching 50. By the time the party and the film 
are over, no less than 38 actresses (and no actors) will have appeared on the 
screen. 
When one of the women remarks, "Twenty-five years ago the secret subject of 
women was sex . . . today, it's food!," she's hit upon the heart of the matter. 
Except for Bergen, who plays Richards' serene mother, virtually every woman 
present is obsessed with dieting, in at least one instance to the point of 
bulimia. 
In this group, thinness has become the absolute measure of desirability and 
self-worth, even for the women who know better intellectually, but remain 
vulnerable emotionally to this rigid standard. Who can deny that the anxiety of 
these by-and-large sophisticated, highly attractive women mirrors our society's 
distorted values, reinforced so intensively by messages in the media? This is 
scarcely news, but what is new is the way Jaglom makes this phenomenon so 
personal; serious, yet occasionally so funny. 
Around the issue of food, the usual storylines start unreeling, involving acts 
of infidelity and betrayal as well as gestures of loving support. In order to 
thoroughly -- one might well say exhaustively -- explore women's attitudes 
toward eating and dieting, Jaglom has given Richards a house guest, a French 
documentarian (Nelly Alard) who questions Richards and her guests on those very 
subjects under the guise of making a study of what she calls "Southern 
California behavior." 
Ironically, this voluptuous beauty herself finally reveals a terrible, wildly 
distorted self-image. However, as the film's various storylines take hold, the 
constant cuts to the documentarian's question-and-answer sessions become 
intrusive, repetitive -- how many things can you say about eating and dieting? 
-- and tend to make the film seem long and drawn out. Yet, on balance, amid so 
many glancing insights and so many radiant presences, this is not a serious 
flaw. Resolutely chic and contemporary, "Eating" (Times-rated Mature for adult 
themes) really isn't, in its grasp of human foibles, so different from "The 
Women" after all. 
'EATING' 
An International Rainbow Pictures presentation of a Jagfilm production. 
Producer Judith Wolinsky. Writer-director-editor Henry Jaglom. Camera Hanania 
Baer. Associate editors Michelle Hart, Mary Pritchard. With (in alphabetical 
order) Nelly Alard, Frances Bergen, Mary Crosby, Marlena Giovi, Marina Gregory, 
Daphna Kastner, Elizabeth Kemp, Lisa Richards,, Gwen Welles. 
Running time: 1 hour, 59 minutes. 
Times-rated Mature (adult themes). 
