POLLING PLACES WILL BE FEWER AND FARTHER APART 
Voters accustomed to visiting their neighborhood polling places may have to go 
a little farther to cast their ballots Tuesday, when less than half the usual 
number of polling places will be open for the off-year election. 
County officials say there will be 872 polling places open on Tuesday, compared 
to about 2,150 in a primary or general election with national or statewide 
races, and fewer than in any countywide election this decade. 
The number of polling places has been reduced mainly because in an off-year 
election, only about 10% to 12% of the electorate goes to the polls, compared 
to about 70% in a general election. 
The 872 polling places are about 300 to 400 fewer than in past off-year 
elections, when up to 1,271 polls have been open. County Registrar of Voters 
Donald Tanney said that after monitoring voting patterns for the past two 
years, he determined that fewer polls were needed. 
Reducing the number of polling places by 300 should not have an adverse effect 
on voting and will save the county about $75,000, he said. 
"That to me is significant money," he said. "In the past, with 1,200 polls and 
10% turnout, (poll workers) sat around with nothing to do all day." 
Tanney said voters were informed of their polling places on sample ballots 
mailed recently by his office. 
"We just presume that they will look at it," Tanney said. "If they go to the 
wrong place, they'll figure it out. It'll be different, not necessarily 
harder." 
There are several municipal issues on Tuesday's ballot, including Irvine's 
controversial Measure N, which seeks to remove gays from the protection of the 
city's human rights ordinance, and La Palma's Measure Q, which would impose a 
4% utility user's tax to raise money for city services. There also are 
elections in eight local school districts and in the Coast Community College 
District, and a recall election in Fountain Valley. But for about 45% of the 
county's voters, Measure M will be the only item on the ballot, Tanney said. 
Measure M would increase the county's sales tax a half-cent to raise about $3.1 
billion over the next 20 years for widening and improving highways, creating 
"super streets" and synchronizing traffic signals, as well as other 
transportation projects. 
Proponents of Measure M, who have raised more than $1.8 million for their 
campaign, have been most concerned about voter turnout. Polls have shown 
consistently that while supporters of Measure M outnumber opponents, those 
against the half-cent tax are are more likely to go to the polls. 
In a typical off-year election, about 10% to 12% of the county's voters go to 
the polls. Measure M proponents have indicated that the countywide proposal is 
in jeopardy if turnout drops below 25%. 
For that reason, the smaller number of polling places has been something of a 
hurdle, the measure's supporters say. How much of a problem it is "we'll know 
on election day," said Alan Hoffenblum, manager of the Measure M campaign. 
"We're doing everything we can." 
To combat the normally low turnout for off-year elections, the Measure M 
campaign has launched a major effort to get people to vote by absentee ballot. 
ON THE BALLOT 
Measure M, the proposed sales tax for transportation projects, is the only 
countywide issue facing all 1.15 million registered voters on Tuesday, but more 
than a fourth of the Orange County's voters also will have a chance to decide 
school board races, cityhood and other matters. 
Elections in Orange County on Tuesday include: 
* Countywide: Measure M, a half-cent sales tax increase to pay for an estimated 
$3.1 billion in traffic improvements. 
* Irvine: Measure N, an initiative sponsored by anti-gay-rights activists 
seeking to remove homosexuals from protection under the city's Human Rights 
Ordinance. 
* Laguna Niguel: Measure O, a cityhood proposal for residents who now live in 
an unincorporated area administered by the county. Also on the area ballot is 
Measure P, which asks voters to decide whether City Council members should be 
elected by district or at-large, if a majority of voters approve cityhood. 
Voters also will be asked to choose five City Council members from among 23 
candidates. In addition, residents will be asked to vote for two incumbents to 
continue serving on the Laguna Niguel Community Services District, should 
cityhood fail. 
* La Palma: Voters will consider Measure Q, a proposed 4% utility users tax to 
raise money for the city's general fund and the Police and Recreation 
departments. 
* Newport Beach: Measure R would authorize the city to extend for 10 years the 
current lease on property at Coast Highway and Newport Boulevard to encourage 
private redevelopment of the site. The current lease to private businesses 
there expires in 2008. Also in Newport Beach, voters will consider Measure S, 
which would allow the sale of an unused, vacant, $350,000 city-owned lot on 
River Avenue to raise money for libraries and parks. 
* Fountain Valley: Voters will decide whether to recall City Councilman Fred 
Voss, who was arrested last January for soliciting sex from an undercover 
police officer during a crackdown on prostitution. Voters also will decide 
whether Voss' successor shall be elected or appointed if the recall is 
successful. 
* Voters will elect two trustees each in the Coast Community College District 
and Garden Grove Unified, Irvine Unified and Santa Ana Unified school 
districts. 
* Three trustees each will be selected in the Newport-Mesa Unified, Huntington 
Beach Union High, Anaheim City and Lowell Joint school districts. 
* In the Orange Unified School District, voters will choose four trustees to 
serve four-year terms, and one to fill the remaining two years of an unexpired 
term. 
* Voters will elect four trustees in the Silverado-Modjeska Park and Recreation 
District. 
* Property owners in the Los Alisos Water District will choose two directors 
from among three candidates. The district includes parts of Lake Forest and El 
Toro, and land owners cast one vote for each dollar of their assessed property 
value by mail-in ballot. 
