ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: SANTA ANA; 
ADULT EDUCATION IS BOOMING AT COLLEGE 
A record number of students have enrolled in continuing education classes 
offered by Rancho Santiago College this fall, making the program one of the 
largest of its kind in the state, campus officials said. 
The wide array of classes, which are not for college credit, include seven 
levels of courses in English as a second language, parenting classes, 
vocational training, literacy classes, high school subjects for those wanting 
to earn their diploma, and citizenship classes for immigrants who have applied 
for amnesty. 
Enrollment in these courses has jumped to 15,232 students, almost 1,500 more 
than were enrolled last year, officials said. 
This increase is consistent with growth patterns during the last five years 
that have seen enrollment in the classes more than double, said Jan Parks, dean 
of continuing education for the Santa Ana area. 
"Our demographics are very similar to those of the Santa Ana Unified School 
District," Parks said. "When they have a tremendous increase in students, which 
they have had in recent years, we have a tremendous increase because we get 
many of the parents of the new children." 
About 75% of the students enrolled in the classes are Latino, 15% are Southeast 
Asian and the remaining 10% are split among other ethnic groups. 
The classes are taught at more than 100 locations throughout Santa Ana and 
Orange, including elementary schools, community centers and the program's two 
administrative headquarters. 
There are 350 part-time faculty members working in the Santa Ana area and 160 
working in the Orange area. About 40 faculty members teach courses at the 
Orange County Jail and the county's other correctional facilities. 
Funding provided by the federal government for amnesty classes has helped the 
program expand. But Parks said that federal aid is decreasing and that soon 
there will be fewer classes available in the already overcrowded program. 
"There is such a large need for these types of programs in this area, and 
unfortunately, we have to turn people away all the time. But those who are 
persistent and really dedicated usually end up with a spot," Parks said. 
Many students originally enroll for 40 hours of amnesty classes and, after they 
complete them, are eager to enroll in other classes, Parks said. 
"It's one of the most exciting and rewarding areas to be working in because 
what you do has such significant and immediate effect on the lives of people," 
Parks said. "You are giving them tools to lead a quality life." GREG HERNANDEZ 
