SENATE DROPS EFFORT TO WIDEN ABORTION RIGHTS 
Bowing to presidential veto threats, the Senate Thursday dropped efforts to 
provide government-paid abortions for poor women in cases of rape or incest. 
In another abortion-related decision, however, the House Thursday joined the 
Senate in defying the possibility of a presidential veto by voting to approve a 
$14.6-billion foreign aid bill that earmarks $15 million for the United Nations 
family planning agency. 
The House's 207-200 vote was a reversal from an earlier decision that 
effectively blocked funding for the family planning agency. The Senate voted to 
approve the family planning funds Wednesday. 
Opponents warned that the President would veto the measure even though the bill 
includes high-priority aid to Poland and Hungary as well as billions for other 
nations, including Israel, Egypt, Pakistan and the Philippines. 
"This bill is absolutely unacceptable," said Rep. Christopher H. Smith 
(R-N.J.), who, along with Bush, charged that the U.N. agency has promoted a 
program of coerced abortions in China. To meet this objection, the House added 
an amendment to provide that the $15 million would be returned if any of it 
were used in China or for abortions anywhere. 
In the measure involving government-paid abortions in the United States in rape 
and incest cases, the Senate approved by voice vote a $157-billion 
appropriations bill for major health, welfare and education programs without 
the language on expanded abortion rights. Bush had rejected the bill the first 
time around because it called for expanded abortion rights. 
Conforming to the President's wishes, the legislation -- which has now passed 
both chambers of Congress -- provides Medicaid funding of abortions for 
low-income women only if the life of the mother is endangered by the pregnancy. 
Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), manager of the money bill in the Senate, said swift 
passage of the measure was needed to prevent spending cutbacks in such popular 
programs as Head Start, student loans, Meals on Wheels and health care for the 
elderly. 
If Bush were to veto the bill after Congress has adjourned for the year, 
spending on these programs would revert to lower levels provided in the 
previous fiscal year, Harkin indicated. 
"But we'll be back next year," Harkin said, referring to the rape-incest 
provision he authored in the first version of the bill that was unexpectedly 
accepted by the House in a 216-206 roll call Oct. 11. 
Abortion rights advocates in the House agreed with the Senate's decision to 
avoid another confrontation over the issue at this time. They said they lacked 
the votes to override a second Bush veto on the rape-incest provision. 
Congressional sources said anti-abortion forces in the House were prepared to 
allow Medicaid-paid abortions for rape and incest victims if they reported the 
crimes to police within 48 hours. Pro-choice lawmakers said the notice period 
was too short because victims of rape and incest often were extremely reluctant 
to talk about the offenses to anyone for days, if not weeks or months, 
afterward. 
The issue has become highly political since the Supreme Court decision in July 
authorized states to do more to limit abortions. 
Many moderate Republicans -- especially those seeking statewide office -- have 
appealed to the President to soften his stand against abortion payments for 
poor women in rape and incest cases, but so far he has stood fast. 
Taking a sharply different stance than the President, for example, Sen. Pete 
Wilson (R-Calif.), a candidate for governor next year, announced that he would 
sponsor a "freedom of choice" bill to guarantee a woman's right to have an 
abortion. 
"The decision to terminate a pregnancy is so intensely personal that no one but 
the woman can be permitted to make it," Wilson said in a statement. "Government 
does nothing wise or good if it enacts laws that force this decision 
underground and compel otherwise law-abiding citizens to resort to illegal and 
dangerous back-alley medical treatment or self-performed abortions." 
The California Constitution, Wilson noted, includes a guarantee of abortion 
rights, but federal law is necessary to protect women in other states where 
there is no such constitutional guarantee. 
