COLLEGE STILL SEEKS TO USE KING'S NAME 
Allegations of plagiarism against the late Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. have 
not dampened enthusiasm for renaming UC San Diego's Third College after the 
slain civil rights leader, college officials said. 
A Stanford University historian this week said King had plagiarized numerous 
passages in his doctoral dissertation and other academic papers. 
Third College "Provost Cecil Lytle remains very supportive of Dr. King's 
achievements and contributions to society as whole" and continues to strongly 
advocate the college's renaming after King, said Mae Brown, the college's 
director of academic advising. 
A proposed agreement between the college and the Martin Luther King Jr. Center 
for Non-Violent Social Change in Atlanta nearly is completed, about a year 
after college officials proposed the renaming and several months after the 
college began negotiating for an endorsement from the King Center. 
No date has been set for concluding those talks and deliberations are 
continuing, Brown said. 
King Center officials were not available for comment. 
The King Center is asking the college to issue a statement in support of 
nonviolent social change and establish a scholarship fund or an endowed chair 
in King's name, Brown said. 
Coretta Scott King, King's widow, is concerned about the depth of San Diego's 
support for her late husband after proposals to name Market Street and the 
convention center after King failed in recent years, Brown said. 
College officials expressed confidence that Third College will be able to 
incorporate King's theories of nonviolent social change into its framework, but 
said raising funds for scholarships or an endowed chair will offer a more 
difficult challenge. 
Third College, established in 1970, was the third undergraduate college created 
at UCSD. The issue of renaming it arose several times until 1985, when the UC 
Board of Regents made the Third College name official. 
In 1989, however, Lytle, who was named provost a year earlier, rejuvenated the 
issue and supported using King's name. 
The civil rights leader's name received the most votes last year from a review 
process involving students, faculty and administrators, and a university 
committee approved the proposal, Brown said. 
The measure's outcome depends on the college satisfying the King Center's 
requirements and the final approval by UCSD Chancellor Richard Atkinson and the 
UC regents. 
