FOR EASTERN, PILOTS' RETURN IS NON-EVENT; 
AIRLINES: THE COMPANY IS ADDING FLIGHTS BUT ITS PROBLEMS AREN'T OVER. 
When the pilots of Eastern Airlines joined with the carrier's machinists and 
went on strike last March, the impact was enormous. 
Without crews in the cockpits, any hope that Eastern could maintain something 
close to its normal flight schedule was dashed. The crippled airline was put 
into Chapter 11 bankruptcy less than a week after the walkout began. 
But now that Eastern's pilots have called off their strike, the impact is 
almost nil. For, while it is true that members of the striking Air Line Pilots 
Assn. (ALPA) have voted to put away their picket signs, Eastern doesn't need 
them anymore. 
A slimmed-down Eastern has all the pilots that it needs and its corporate 
strategy is well in place. Neither Wednesday's end to the pilots strike nor 
Thursday's conclusion to the flight attendants strike is likely to change the 
course of Eastern Airlines. 
The airline said it employed 3,500 pilots when the strike began. It currently 
has 1,850 on the payroll. Of those, just under 900 are original Eastern pilots 
who either never joined the strike or have crossed the picket lines since 
March. The rest are newly hired pilots. Eastern said it currently has a list of 
about 100 pilots who had struck and are awaiting a call to return. 
"The strike ceased to affect our ability to operate a long time ago," Karen 
Ceremsak, an Eastern spokeswoman, said Friday. 
Opinions vary on who came out ahead in the 264-day strike. 
"It is a victory for management," said John W. Mattis, an airline analyst with 
Shearson Lehman Hutton, a New York brokerage firm. "It (now) gives the company 
total flexibility." 
When the strike came, Eastern's daily schedule dropped from 1,050 flights to 
practically zero. Since then, it has slowly increased its activity. It now has 
780 flights a day and has told the bankruptcy court that it expects to reach 
about 900 flights by early in 1990. 
But the head of Eastern's striking pilots, Charles (Chip) Stokes, said Friday 
that it was a hollow victory for the Miami-based airline. 
"It is Pyrrhic victory at best," he said in an interview. "The long, bitter 
battle cannot be called a win for Eastern management. Its creditors, its 
employees and its customers will all feel the effects of (Eastern parent) Texas 
Air Corp.'s scorched earth policy for many years to come." 
Stokes said he did not know how long the pilots who stayed with the strike will 
continue to receive $2,400-a-month payments from special assessments of ALPA 
members nationwide. He said the payments would continue for at least 60 days. 
Eastern has benefited in some ways from the long walkout. For one thing, it 
hired its new pilots and flight attendants at much lower salaries than it was 
paying its veterans. For instance, pilots with top seniority earn just over 
$70,000 a year, while the newly hired pilots are making about one-third that 
amount. And Eastern is paying its newly hired flight attendants about half of 
the $2,300 a month that veteran flight attendants earn. (By law, new hires 
cannot be laid off to make way for returning strikers.) Moreover, the 
machinists' work is being contracted out at about one-third of what it cost to 
pay the machinists who went out strike. 
The higher productivity that the airline is getting from its employees, coupled 
with the lower wages it is paying, has resulted in a much lower cost structure 
than before and one of lowest in the industry. Only non-union Continental 
Airlines and the newly founded carriers, America West Airlines and Midway 
Airlines, have lower costs. 
And as result of this improvement, Eastern executives predict that the carrier 
will make a profit next year. If so, it would be the first time since 
deregulation a decade ago that it ended up in the black. 
But Eastern clearly has a long way to go before it is profitable. It had a net 
loss of $569.7 million on revenue of $1 billion in the first nine months of 
this year. This compares to a net loss of $233.7 million on revenue of $3 
billion in the like period of 1988. 
The airline also must satisfy its creditors with its business plan and 
resulting repayment schedule so that it can emerge from Chapter 11, which it 
has said it expects to do early next year. 
Eastern said in its original plan that it would dispose of $1.8 billion in 
assets. So far, among other things, it has sold its highly profitable 
Northeastern shuttle to hotel magnate Donald J. Trump for $365 million and is 
negotiating with American Airlines to sell its South American routes, which 
analysts say are worth $300 million to $400 million. 
Not everyone thinks that Eastern is out of the woods. 
Nicholas Glabkowsky, a professor of business at the University of Miami who 
specializes in Eastern, said that despite its return to its near-strike 
operations and despite its predictions of future profitability, the airline 
will not survive. 
He said Eastern is still losing $2 million daily. 
Even though Eastern expects to earn a profit from operations soon, Glabkowsky 
said, its interest payments -- as much as $300 million a year on its 
$2.4-billion debt -- will still drag it into the red. And while it is true that 
such payments are temporarily suspended until it is out of Chapter 11, the 
interest is "piling up." 
"If anyone believes that Eastern is going to become profitable," Glabkowsky 
said, "I've got a bridge I want to sell them." 
The professor said all that is keeping Eastern afloat right now is its ability 
to lure passengers with discount fares. 
For example, on flights to Nassau, where Glabkowsky often travels on business, 
Eastern offers a round-trip discount fare of $64, nearly half the fare charged 
by its competitors. 
In October, the airline flew with average loads of 63%, a percentage point 
higher than it predicted in its reorganization plan. But those numbers would 
not hold up after a price hike. 
"If Eastern raises its fares in an effort to begin making some money, travelers 
will stop torturing their schedules to fly Eastern," Glabkowsky said. 
He said Eastern is losing so much money that its profits from the sale of the 
shuttle have already been spent on operations, and if it sells the South 
American routes, "that money will be gone in six months." 
As a result, he said, Eastern's suppliers of such things as fuel and food 
catering services extend it very little credit. 
"People want cash on the barrel head from Eastern," he said. 
Historically, disagreements between unions and airlines have come down to the 
strike deadline and then it generally has been the pilots who actually walk 
out. That was because they were the ones who could quickly bring an airline to 
its knees. Because of their clout, the pilots tended to lead the pack. Usually, 
within a few weeks, the unions would have made their point and the strike would 
be settled. But the most recent walkout against Eastern was actually more a 
vendetta against an individual than a typical union action. 
The Eastern unions have described the action as a fight to the death against 
Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Eastern and its parent, Texas Air Corp., whom they 
called a trade union wrecker because of his actions in breaking the pilots 
union at Continental Airlines, the other Texas Air subsidiary. "This was a 
total union war against the union-busting devil incarnate," said one observer. 
Whether a rift will now develop between the unions because the pilots and the 
flight attendants have voted to end their strikes remains to be seen. A rift 
between pilots at United who staged a 1985 walkout and those who crossed the 
picket lines has still not been reconciled. Even in the cockpit, crew members 
often do not talk to each other. 
