WELLS FARGO CARVES OFF RETAIL DIVISION FOR ORANGE COUNTY 
Wells Fargo Bank said Wednesday that it has created new retail divisions in 
Orange and San Diego counties, carving up its huge Los Angeles-based Southern 
California division in an effort to decentralize operations and improve 
customer service. 
The restructuring is part of a statewide plan that will give California's 
third-largest commercial bank seven divisions to coordinate 558 branches, once 
it completes the acquisition of 92 offices of troubled Great American Bank. 
The new Orange County retail division, with headquarters in Irvine, will 
oversee 70 branches -- 37 Wells Fargo offices in Orange County, 21 Wells Fargo 
branches in southern and eastern Los Angeles County and 12 Great American 
offices in Orange County. 
Six more branches will be added to the Irvine division at the end of the year, 
when Wells Fargo's acquisition of Citizens Holdings in Anaheim is expected to 
be completed. Citizens owns Citizens Bank of Costa Mesa and El Camino Bank in 
Anaheim. 
Senior Vice President Larry Crabtree, 42, a graduate of Cal State Long Beach 
with a degree in criminal justice, will manage the division. He joined Wells 
Fargo as a branch manager in 1983 after serving 13 years on the Downey and Los 
Angeles police forces and, later, as the head of his own security company. 
At Wells Fargo, Crabtree has managed four branches and four districts in the 
Los Angeles area, including most recently the Wilshire district, which covers 
West Los Angeles. 
Wells Fargo appointed Senior Vice President Drew Tanzman, 33, to manage the San 
Diego division, which will have 77 offices, and Executive Vice President Lois 
Rice, 50, as head of the 85-branch Los Angeles division. 
"We're giving each division a manageable number of branches because we don't 
want the division heads out of touch with district managers and branch 
operations," said Kathleen Shilkret, a Wells Fargo spokeswoman. "This 
emphasizes our renewed importance on the retail side of the bank." 
Retail banking is aimed at providing such financial services as checking 
accounts and auto loans to the general public. 
Wells Fargo has agreed to buy Great American and its 130 branches. It hopes to 
acquire 92 Great American branches in Orange, San Diego and Riverside counties 
by Nov. 30. 
Previously, Wells Fargo had three divisions -- Northern, Central and Southern 
California -- but its recent growth through acquisitions has forced it to 
realign its branch network, Shilkret said. 
