CHRONICLES: GOLD FEVER; 
FINDS IN CUYAMACA MOUNTAINS SPAWNED AREAWIDE RUSH 
While few people know Southern California for its mineral wealth, northern San 
Diego County -- from the Laguna Mountains in the east to the foothills of 
Escondido -- has contributed millions of dollars in gold to the Golden State. 
San Diego's best known mining period -- the Julian gold rush of 1870 -- began 
when rancher Fred Coleman spotted gold in a creek in the Cuyamaca Mountains. 
When Coleman spread word of his discovery, scores of prospectors raced to the 
hills to pan for placer gold in the mountain streams. The miners formed a 
mining district, and a town of tents emerged called Emily City. 
In San Diego, skepticism over the strike vanished when a load of 1,500 pounds 
of gold ore arrived in town in March, 1870. The San Diego Union reported the 
event: 
 The arrival of so large a quantity of rich gold-bearing quartz created intense 
excitement in town. A stampede immediately ensued and the road has now for 
several days been lined with teams of every description and men mounted and on 
foot in route to the mines. From persons who returned yesterday we learned that 
there are now on the ground not less than 600 persons and the number is daily 
increasing. 
 Julian gold fever soon infected the whole of the Southwest. Miners poured into 
the region from San Francisco via steamer or overland from Los Angeles. 
The miners found lode gold in several hillside areas. The claims bore formal 
names such as George Washington, Mount Vernon, The Monroe, and U.S. Grant, as 
well as novel titles such as Shoo Fly, April Fool, You Bet, and Don't Bother 
Me. 
The first significant town site was laid out by homesteader Drury Bailey and 
named "Julian City" after his cousin, Mike Julian. A tent city at first, Julian 
grew in two years to a population of nearly 2,000 -- half the size of San 
Diego. At its gold-rush peak, the town boasted two hotels, two cafes, five 
stores, two blacksmith shops, two livery stables, a school, a race track, and 
uncounted saloons and dance halls. The town became important politically after 
Mike Julian was appointed county assessor (an attempt to move the county seat 
to Julian from San Diego failed). 
Neighboring mining camps grew up in the region: Branson City, Eastwood, and 
Coleman City (Emily City). Banner, located a few miles southwest of Julian, 
became a sizeable town. 
The mining boom of Julian-Banner lasted less than five years. In 1873 the camps 
produced $500,000 in gold, but late in the year, plans for the long-anticipated 
Texas and Pacific Railroad collapsed. A severe recession gripped the region. 
Gold production began to decline and, by 1876, most of the mines had closed. 
The population of Julian fell to less than 100 people, and Banner became a 
ghost town. Between 1870 and 1875 the mines had produced about $2 million in 
gold. 
The late 1800s saw a major revival in mining, helped by the completion of 
railroad connections to the north. The new rail and stage lines promoted fresh 
interest in mining ventures. The most successful activity came from the 
Stonewall Mine south of Julian. Purchased by California Gov. Robert W. Waterman 
for $75,000, the mine yielded $1 million in gold between 1888 and 1891. 
Gold mining was not confined to the mountains of the northeast county. 
In the 1890s, prospectors found gold in the Escondido region. The 
Cleveland-Pacific, Oro Fino, and Cravath mines -- located only 2 miles 
southeast of the Escondido city hall -- produced about $150,000 (at $20 per 
ounce) in the early century. 
The Cleveland-Pacific Mining Company developed the most important site from 
1896 through 1911. A 350-foot incline shaft followed a vein of gold-bearing 
quartz. Ore was processed at the site using a five-stamp mill and 10-foot high 
tanks of cyanide. Slow activity continued from the 1920s until about 1932, when 
all mining stopped and the shafts were dynamited shut. Citrus and avocado 
groves soon covered all traces of the mines. 
Reminders of the San Diego County gold producing days still exist, though. 
Old mine dumps near the junction of San Pasqual Valley Road and Bear Valley 
Parkway can be seen today as low hills. 
The site of the Stonewall Mine near the southeast shore of Cuyamaca Reservoir 
is clearly marked within Cuyamaca State Park and easily reached by visitors. 
The Eagle-High Peak Mine of Julian produces gold to this day and even provides 
guided tours of the diggings. 
