PEOPLE WHO MAKE A DIFFERENCE; 
A LOOK AT SOME WHO HELP TO MAKE RECYCLING A SUCCESS 
At home, in the office and at school, individuals in North County have 
successfully launched recycling programs. Here are some of their stories: 
Lauren Seals 
Encinitas 
When Lauren Michele married Kenneth Seals two years ago, she inherited twin 
boys, five barrels of trash a week and a mission. 
Through a concentrated effort, the Seals family reduced their trash from five 
to just one 33-gallon barrel a week. The rest is recycled through Solana 
Recyclers. 
"Like marriage, it's been a compromise," Lauren Seals said. "In the beginning, 
it sounds like you are asking a lot, but you really aren't. It's just a matter 
of awareness and organization." 
From her kitchen command post, Seals found a place for reusable plastic bags, 
aluminum foil and tin. Each room in her house contains separate trash cans for 
recyclable and nonrecyclable items. 
Solana Recyclers provides a biweekly curbside collection program for paper 
(white, colored, computer, bags, junk mail, magazines, telephone books, 
catalogues, towels), plastic (milk, soda and mineral water bottles), aluminum 
(cans, foil, frozen dinner trays, pie pans, old baking pans and scrap), glass 
(beverage bottles and food jars) and newspapers. 
The family also recycles cardboard (cereal and cracker boxes, empty toilet 
paper and paper towel rolls, corrugated packing boxes) and plastic bags (fruit 
and vegetable bags, freezer bags and dry cleaning bags), which they take to the 
recycling center themselves. 
Seals returns used motor oil to a local gas station and waits for a community 
collection day to rid her home of toxic containers, like paints and pesticides, 
which are collected at an appointed site. 
"I give reusable items like clothing, shoes, toys, household and building 
materials to (a local charity)," Seals said. 
Seals uses her own bags for shopping items, returns hangers to the dry cleaners 
and totes reusable containers for take-out food. She combines errands with 
trips to the recycling center each week. 
"Ken and I used to fly out of the house in our robes when we'd hear the trash 
truck coming," Seals said. "Now, it's no big deal. We hear the recycling truck 
coming, that's when we fly out of the house. When I realized that, I knew we 
were making a difference." 
Pat MacCarthy Yeakley 
Leucadia 
Dubbed the "Queen of Recycling" by her friends, Yeakley recently taught a class 
on composting, a controlled decaying process for kitchen waste and plant 
matter. 
Yard waste is a major contributor to landfills amounting to 22.2% of the waste 
collected at the San Marcos facility, the only landfill in North County, 
according to San Diego County figures. Within the past six months, an 
innovative grinding program at the San Marcos landfill reduced 9,000 tons of 
yard waste to mulch, said Richard Anthony, principal solid waste manager for 
the county. 
Yeakley and two friends, Sue Eckley and Bobbie Carnes, began Environmental 
Express, which is affiliated with the American Assn. of University Women, Del 
Mar-Leucadia branch. The trio alert the membership to environmentally conscious 
activities. 
"Once you become aware, you become a terrible pain," Yeakley said. "Things you 
never thought about become obvious. Most people want to do the right thing. But 
you can't ask people to change unless you give them an alternative." 
Yeakley tells the story of taking an exercise class at the local YMCA. Thirsty 
after her workout, she headed for the refreshments. 
"I had 75 cents clutched in my hand when I spotted this enormous beacon of 
Styrofoam cups," Yeakley said. "My mission changed." 
She talked YMCA personnel into providing paper cups. Styrofoam (the more common 
name for polystyrene) is made from styrene and benzene, which the Environmental 
Protection Agency ranked among the top six chemicals whose production creates 
hazardous waste. 
Yeakley is a member of North County Coastal Styro-Free Task Force, a group 
organized in August by Solana Recyclers and the North County Coastal Greens to 
reduce the use of polystyrene. The organization is currently involved in a 
campaign to educate businesses on alternative packaging products. 
Jack McRoskey 
Carlsbad 
McRoskey, chairman of Republic Tool, buys plastics for reprocessing at his 
Carlsbad-based plant. Republic Tool produced a few thousand pounds of recycled 
plastic two years ago, but today processes more than 3-million pounds. 
"We're accepting plastics from the consumer waste stream that we reprocess into 
safety barricades that we sell to cities and states for traffic control," 
McRoskey said. "Without present capability, we could go to 5-million (pounds) 
and install new equipment to a factor of 10 million. We'd be able to expand the 
amount of processing as we expand the sale of the product." 
Start-up costs to recycle the plastics were in excess of $1 million, McRoskey 
said. Although Republic Tool is the only North County business that processes 
recyclables, McRoskey feels state, county and city capital investment would 
entice more business owners to follow his lead. 
"We do it because we're patriotic, apple pie and mother," McRoskey said. 
Larry Feiler 
Terry Welsh 
Escondido 
At Escondido City Hall, Feiler, a microcomputer specialist, and Welsh, a 
computer programmer, championed a recycling program. 
The two began a program two years ago for office paper, computer paper and 
aluminum cans, which generates approximately 2,500 pounds of recyclables a 
month. 
City employees have desktop bins that they empty into a larger collection bin 
in each department for collection by the custodial staff. 
"We had to start out small and eventually involved the whole scene," Feiler 
said, adding that the Escondido police department and the public works 
department participate in recycling efforts. "We (the city) also purchase 
recyclable paper -- computer, letterhead, envelopes and Xerox copy paper." 
Philip Arena 
Hazel Gerken 
Escondido 
Arena and Gerken collect recyclables in an organized program for the 2,500 
homes in the nearby Lake San Marcos community, according to resident George 
Boas. 
"The program started 20 years ago by the Mormon Church," said Boas, who helped 
organize the Lake San Marcos program. "About five years ago, (the church) no 
longer wanted to pick up papers so the Noon Optimist Club of Escondido agreed 
to take it over. When they got out of the recycling business, this couple took 
it over." 
The program, which boasts an 80% participation rate, collects newspaper, 
aluminum cans and plastics biweekly, said Boas. 
John Deaver 
Poway 
At Poway High School, Deaver began an aluminum can recycling plan that 
generated more than $4,000 for student programs in 1989-90, the first year of 
operation. 
"Hundreds and thousands of aluminum cans are thrown away each day," said 
Deavers, associated student body adviser. 
There are 36 specially-marked containers on campus with four holes the size of 
a soda can drilled in the lids by wood-shop students. A student delivers the 
recyclables to a redemption center each week. 
Last year's proceeds were used for special programs at the school, including 
assemblies featuring a Russian rock band and an Olympic gold medalist. 
"If we could recycle 100% of the aluminum, we could make $12,000. The education 
system needs to teach the kids to recycle," Deavers said. 
