SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE 
Television producer Norman Lear, saying he has been called atheist, secular 
humanist and Christian-hater by leaders of the religious right, sounded 
anything but that in a speech Monday before the American Academy of Religion's 
annual convention in Anaheim. 
Lear has incurred such wrath because nine years ago he founded People for the 
American Way, a civil libertarian lobby that attacked the political views of 
televangelists and opposed anti-evolutionists, most recently in California, in 
attempts to gain an entree for creationist views in public school science 
classes. 
But in his Anaheim talk, Lear said he had "a deep concern about the unhealthy 
reticence that exists today to (discuss) ultimate meanings and spiritual life 
in the media, in the social arena and especially in our schools." 
He appealed to university-level educators and seminary professors to join 
broad-based efforts by a range of educational and religious groups to persuade 
textbook publishers to end what People for the American Way called "an 
appalling neglect and misinformation about religion" in school books. 
U.S. Supreme Court rulings have affirmed the legality of teaching about 
religion and religious history in public schools even as justices prohibited, 
on church-state separation grounds, the introduction of devotions, prayers or 
teaching designed to inculcate religious belief. 
Yet, Lear said, "among secularists, the aversion toward discussing moral values 
-- let alone religion -- can reach absurd extremes." In a culture "dedicated to 
consumerism and obsessed with material well-being, it should not be surprising 
that the life of the spirit atrophies," he said. 
Lear credited the "rank and file" of the religious right for focusing attention 
on moral and spiritual values. "But (that) crusade goes awry when it insists 
that the only valid spiritual or moral values are fundamentalist Christian 
ones, and that the secular laws of government ought to embody such sectarian 
beliefs," he said. 
DATES 
An American Indian worship service and "meal of thanks" will be held Sunday 
starting at 2:30 p.m. in Norwalk at the Native American United Methodist 
Church. The event is sponsored by Catholic, Episcopal, Lutheran, Nazarene, 
Presbyterian, United Methodist and United Church of Christ representatives of 
an ecumenical ministry called the Gathering Table. 
Father Peter-Hans Kolvenbach, superior general of the worldwide Jesuit order of 
priests, will visit Loyola Marymount University Friday, addressing the campus 
community and others in an 8 p.m. talk at the Sacred Heart Chapel. The Dutch 
native is making his first trip to California as head of the Society of Jesus. 
House Majority Whip William H. Gray III (D-Pa.) will be the featured speaker 
Sunday at the 8 a.m. and 10 a.m. Men's Day services at Second Baptist Church of 
Los Angeles. JOHN DART 
