ISRAELI SOLDIERS KILL PALESTINIAN IN GAZA PROTEST; 
MIDEAST: 43 OTHERS ARE WOUNDED AS ARABS TAKE TO THE STREETS, ANGERED BY THE 
DEATH OF A JAILED ACTIVIST. 
Israeli soldiers killed a Palestinian protester Saturday and wounded at least 
43 others who took to the streets with stones in the occupied Gaza Strip to 
protest the death of an activist in jail. 
A wave of street unrest has continued with few breaks since Oct. 8, when police 
in Jerusalem shot to death 20 Arab rioters at the Temple Mount, known as Haram 
al Sharif (noble sanctuary) to Muslims. 
Since then, at least a dozen Palestinians have been fatally shot by police and 
soldiers, and three Israelis died in a knife attack in Jerusalem. 
The steady toll of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip 
appears to put a major dent in tactics designed by Defense Minister Moshe Arens 
to reduce Palestinian casualties and dilute criticism of Israel's handling of 
the Arab uprising, which is nearing its third anniversary. 
The fatality in Gaza and the heavy toll of wounded Saturday came two days after 
U.N. General Secretary Javier Perez de Cuellar called for the 164 nations that 
signed the Fourth Geneva Convention to meet and discuss how to protect 
Palestinians living under Israeli rule in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as in 
annexed Arab neighborhoods of Jerusalem. 
Several provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which Israel is pledged to 
uphold, apply to the security of civilians in time of war. 
Israel rejects U.N. intervention on the grounds that it throws into question 
its sovereignty over Jerusalem and its claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
Israel is "doing everything" to ensure the safety of Palestinians, a spokesman 
for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir told an Israeli newspaper. 
"If there is any lack of security, it derives from the violent activities of 
the Arabs against Israelis and their own brethren," said the spokesman, Yossi 
Ahimeir, in the Davar newspaper. 
In the Gaza Strip on Saturday, residents of the Beit Hanoun refugee camp poured 
into the streets when word spread that Attiyeh Zanin, a detained uprising 
activist, had died in prison. Zanin was suspected of belonging to the outlawed 
Palestine Liberation Organization. Police told his family that the prisoner, 
who was jailed two weeks ago, hung himself Friday with a noose made from strips 
of a blanket. 
His family demanded an independent autopsy. Four Palestinians have died in the 
Gaza Strip jail while under interrogation. Three were reportedly suicides, and 
one died from blows to the stomach. Under government guidelines, Israeli police 
and domestic intelligence agents are permitted to use "limited" physical 
pressure on inmates during interrogation. Critics say the guidelines sanction 
torture. 
In Beit Hanoun, enraged groups of young men and boys stoned army patrols, which 
responded by firing rubber-coated metal pellets and regular lead-tipped 
bullets. The fatality, a 36-year-old man, was shot in the head. 
Unrest spread to other towns and refugee camps in the crowded Gaza Strip. 
Police beat back rioters with tear gas and rifle fire, witnesses said. They 
also used an automatic gravel thrower to clear the streets. Among the injured 
hit by the mechanically flung stones was a 4-year-old boy, who was knocked 
unconscious and taken to a Tel Aviv hospital. 
Palestinian hospital officials said 113 people were wounded; the army put the 
figure at 43. 
