NIBBLES AND BITS 
Newport Harbor Art Museum and the Laguna Art Museum will be observing "Day 
Without Art" on Dec. 1. The event at art museums and galleries across the 
nation coincides with the World Health Organization's third annual AIDS 
Awareness Day and celebrates the achievements of colleagues stricken with AIDS 
and mourns the losses to the arts community. Newport Harbor will offer free 
admission, information on HIV infection and special programs throughout the 
day. 
At 11 a.m. Michael Kearns and Dale Raoul will perform "Forget Me Not: A 
Collection of AIDS Letters," a compilation of letters written by persons with 
AIDS, their families and loved ones. The theater piece was compiled by 
playwright James Carroll Pickett, directed by Libby Appel and produced by 
Artists Confronting AIDS. 
At 1 p.m., there will be an audio presentation of AIDS/US II, a theater piece 
performed by people whose lives have been affected by the AIDS crisis, also 
produced by Artists Confronting AIDS (courtesy of KPFK Pacifica Radio, Los 
Angeles). Information: (714) 759-1122. 
The Laguna Art Museum's observance of the event, sponsored by the Laguna Beach 
AIDS Task Force and the Laguna Beach Arts Commission, consists of supplying 
information on the disease. Information: (714) 494-6531. 
The LJB Gallery in Newport Beach will close its showroom at the end of the 
month when its lease runs out. Associate director Steve Johnston says that weak 
sales and high rent are forcing the closure. However, he added, another, larger 
site for the 15-month-old gallery will be sought, and an administrative space 
behind the gallery may be kept open beyond February, when its lease expires. 
Meggie Brown, 5, of Santa Ana and Tysen Robert Quaintance, 4, of Azusa will 
alternate in the non-speaking role of Trouble in Opera Pacific's production of 
Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" Jan. 12-19 at the Orange County Performing Arts 
Center. Brown and Quaintance were selected from about 35 children who 
auditioned last week for the role. 
