ASBESTOS VICTIMS' COMPENSATION PLAN ALTERED; 
HEALTH: THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE MANVILLE TRUST WILL SLASH ATTORNEYS' FEES AND 
SPEED PAYMENT OF CLAIMS. 
A plan was unveiled today to restructure the Manville trust set up to 
compensate victims of asbestos by slashing attorneys' fees and paying victims 
according to the severity of their disease. 
The long-awaited plan is designed to speed payments to tens of thousands of 
workers nationwide who contracted cancer and other diseases inhaling fibers 
from Manville-made asbestos. Thousands have died before being compensated. 
The restructuring plan, submitted today to U.S. District Judge Jack B. 
Weinstein, includes up to $520 million in new contributions to the trust by 
Manville Corp., which was driven into bankruptcy court in 1982 by its asbestos 
liability. 
It also provides for dismissal of tens of thousands of lawsuits against the 
trust pending in state and federal courts across the country, potentially 
eliminating a huge backlog that has jammed judges' dockets. 
Weinstein is expected to approve the restructuring. He initiated a class action 
today consolidating all the pending Manville trust cases for resolution. 
The plan caps a year of turmoil that began when the Washington-based trust ran 
out of cash to pay new claims and said some victims would not be paid until 
well into the 21st Century. 
The trust has paid out more than $1.1 billion to settle nearly 26,000 claims to 
date. But an additional 130,000 claims are pending, and more are being filed 
daily. 
Average payments to date by the trust have been more than $43,000. Under the 
plan, they are expected to fall 45% from what the trust had been paying for 
serious diseases. 
Asbestos is a white mineral with natural insulation and heat resistance that 
was used widely for decades in shipbuilding, construction and other industries. 
A high incidence of cancer and other respiratory ailments attributed to 
asbestos began to appear in the 1970s. 
Payments to all Manville claimants except those with urgent health or financial 
needs were suspended by Weinstein in July. They will not resume until the 
restructuring plan is reviewed by Weinstein and court appeals of the plan are 
completed. 
But the plan marks a major step toward resolving asbestos litigation and is 
intended as a blueprint for dozens of other companies facing bankruptcy because 
of asbestos liability. 
"These steps . . . will more effectively, efficiently and equitably compensate 
those injured by asbestos exposure," Tom Stephens, Manville chairman and chief 
executive, said in a statement. 
The plan provides for annual payments to claimants based on a percentage of the 
trust's available resources. Claims are split into two groups: those for cancer 
and other serious asbestos ailments, and lesser diseases. 
Payments will be made only to claims from the first group, known as Level One, 
during the first two years of the plan. An estimated 23,000 serious claims are 
expected to be paid in the first two years. 
Level Two cases, of which more than 100,000 are pending, will begin to be paid 
in the third year of the plan. 
