NO TEAM DESERVES TO BE CROWNED MYTHICAL NATIONAL CHAMPION 
Reading Time: Two Minutes. 
The longer the college football season goes -- there are instances of it 
stretching to nearly 20 weeks for some teams -- the more apparent it becomes 
there should be no mythical champion this year. 
Altitude sickness? Jim Palmer's already in the Hall of Fame, so what's all this 
light-headed foolishness coming out of Denver about him sneaking back on the 
field at age 45? Many's the time his manager and teammates complained that 
Jimbo didn't take the mound when he appeared to be fit. Some have suggested 
Jim's been wearing Jockey shots marked S. 
What ninny came up with the Kodak All-America team, naming Notre Damers Chris 
Zorich, Todd Lyght and Mike Stonebreaker? The trio plays defense, which has 
been an anathema to the Irish all season. Besides, all have gotten by on 
reputation this year, having had bad years or been injured most of the time. 
The sports books in Las Vegas certainly don't waste any time when it comes to 
setting horse racing lines. Hot off the presses are the early odds for the 1991 
Breeders' Cup next October. Unbridled and Summer Squall have drawn the 
co-favorites role for the featured Classic. 
Some experts: For the second year in a row, not one living (or reasonable 
facsimile thereof) baseball writer correctly named all hands on the 10-man 
Topps Major League Rookie All-Star Team. 
Perhaps in an attempt to get fans' minds off the team, come Saturday night at 
the Capital Centre when the Washington Bullets take on the Indiana Pacers, 
numerous pro team mascots will be on hand to celebrate team mascot Hoops' 
birthday. Invited guests include the Oriole Bird, Hugo the (Charlotte) Hornet, 
Stuff the (Orlando) Magic Dragon, Big Shot (76ers), Spuds McKenzie, et al. 
What, no Denny the Detonator from the Blast? 
For you folks who never had the pleasure of watching Johnny Rodgers (circa 
1972) frolic on the gridiron, be advised Rocket Ismail is his mirror image and 
will probably join the Nebraska star as a Heisman Trophy recipient. 
There can be little doubt that the Poulan Weed Eater Independence Bowl will be 
much the worse off not extending an invitation to the Maryland Terrapins and 
the legion of fans that would have followed them to Shreveport, La. 
Business opportunities: Sure, times are tough, but the Rose, All American, 
Freedom, Hall of Fame, Liberty and Peach bowls are still without a title 
sponsor and it just doesn't seem right. 
No sooner does Monica Seles get done co-headlining the First National Bank 
Tennis with Jennifer Capriati in Baltimore next Tuesday at the Arena when she's 
off to Argentina for an exhibition series against Gabriela Sabatini, whom she 
beat for the Virginia Slims title in five grueling sets the other day. 
It's just a guess, but one suspects the reason a site hasn't been selected for 
the Sugar Ray Leonard-Terry Norris bout from among Las Vegas, Atlantic City and 
New York is each probably hopes one of the others gets it. 
The pump-em-up-as-quick-as-you-can style of the Denver Nuggets actually works 
against Paul Westhead's 1-9 juggernaut. The opposition is subjected to the 
48-minute sprint just every so often, not 82 times like the Nuggets will be. 
Teams are consistently shooting 60 percent against Denver because they're 
treated to so many layups. 
How tough is it to win on the road in the NBA? Through the first three weeks of 
the campaign it has been Napoleonic, just four of the 27 teams having a winning 
mark on the suitcase circuit. It's no picnic in the NHL either, just five of 21 
teams having their noses above water. 
There should be some sort of award for Houston Coach John Jenkins for 
mercifully pulling quarterback David Klingler midway through the fourth quarter 
and not allowing him to pad his 41-for-58 and 11 touchdown passes performance 
against an always dangerous and fast-closing Eastern Washington powerhouse. The 
final was 84-21. Recall, the Cougars stacked up 95 points in a game last year. 
