GORBACHEV'S HOPEFUL UNION TREATY UNVEILED 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, fighting to keep his continent-sized 
country intact, unveiled his blueprint Saturday for a new and voluntary union 
of "sovereign" Soviet republics, but his brand of federalism concentrates so 
much power in Moscow that some republics have already rejected it. 
In the meantime, Boris N. Yeltsin, the populist and crowd-pleasing president of 
the Russian Federation, continued to steer his own political course, 
single-handedly revoking a Soviet government decree that would have led to 
price increases on a wide array of luxury goods. 
A draft constitution that Yeltsin helped prepare for Russia was also made 
public. Echoing the words of the American Founding Fathers, it solemnly begins: 
"We, the multinational people of the Russian Federation . . . ," and declares 
Russia's laws superior to national ones. It also proclaims Russia's right to 
raise its own army. 
Friday night at the Foreign Ministry press center, Gorbachev's frustration over 
Yeltsin's independent actions, and those of other recalcitrant republic 
leaders, was plain to see. In a fervent pitch for his political power-sharing 
scheme, Gorbachev told a news conference that the breakup of the Soviet Union 
along ethnic lines would produce "a tragedy for the people, civil conflicts 
with grave consequences." 
Major state-run newspapers on Saturday printed the 59-year-old Soviet leader's 
formula for healing the nation's ethnic and economic wounds and ending the 
paralysis of its government -- a proposed treaty establishing the "Union of 
Sovereign Soviet Republics" to replace the Dec. 30, 1922, accord that founded 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
Besides jettisoning the label socialist at a time when the Soviet Union, goaded 
by Gorbachev, has set itself the goal of creating a market economy, the 
23-article treaty contains many provisions that are truly revolutionary when 
compared to the last 73 years of Soviet rule. 
It proposes, for the first time, the creation of a vice presidency, puts 
Gorbachev in control of a Cabinet that will replace the Council of Ministers, 
and creates a Constitutional Court that for the first time in Soviet history 
would exercise independent judicial review over laws to ensure their 
constitutionality. 
More significantly, given the eruption of nationalism and ethnic hatreds in the 
country, the treaty makes significant concessions to the Soviet republics, 
which were long ruled directly from Moscow or by its plenipotentiaries under 
the Leninist concept of "democratic centralism." 
"Membership of a republic in the U.S.S.R. is voluntary," Article 1 states, a 
tacit repudiation of the 1922 accord that simply welded other 
Communist-governed territories onto Bolshevik Russia. "Each republic that joins 
the union is a sovereign state enjoying full state power over its territory." 
The pact's concessions, however, will be too little for many republican 
nationalists. For the treaty, which is being circulated to lawmakers in the 
Supreme Soviet legislature and the republics, retains a great sphere of 
responsibilities for central authorities, although some republics -- including 
the independence-minded Baltic states -- now claim such powers for themselves. 
For instance, the national government, the treaty says, will defend the 
"sovereignty and territorial integrity" of the U.S.S.R., guard its borders, run 
the KGB and armed forces, declare war and conclude peace. Although the 
republics, along with the Kremlin, would jointly hammer out economic 
development strategy, it would be in the context of a single financial, credit 
and banking system and a common currency. 
Such centralization, especially in economics and trade, flies in the face of 
many of the demands for "sovereignty" that have been made by 14 of the 15 
Soviet republics, including Yeltsin's Russia, the biggest and most populous. 
Although the republics would be made masters of their lands and natural 
resources, Moscow would have final say over the nation's gold and diamond 
reserves, air and rail service, the pipelines that carry natural gas from 
Siberia to Europe and space research. 
"I want to remind you that 12 out of 14 representatives of the republics 
speaking on the Union Treaty did not express their readiness to sign it," 
liberal member of Parliament Alexei Yablokov said, summing up criticism 
expressed in the Soviet legislature. 
The proposed pact, which took up about half a page in Moscow dailies, also 
omits any mention of a republic's constitutionally established right to secede, 
a fact that advocates of local sovereignty or independence will find ominous. 
As one indication of the jitters now being felt over Gorbachev's intentions, 
Lithuania's President Vytautas Landsbergis warned his countrymen Friday that 
"our motherland, the Lithuanian Republic, is in danger," and charged that 
Gorbachev has become the leader of Soviet rightist forces. 
Landsbergis predicted many Soviet republics would spurn the Union Treaty. 
Lithuania declared outright independence from Moscow in March, the only 
republic so far to do so. 
On Friday, Georgia's Parliament, now dominated by nationalists and 
anti-Communists, declared that republic on the road to "restoration of full 
national independence." Like Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, Georgia has 
informed Gorbachev that it will not sign the treaty. 
The proposed Union Treaty did not say how many republics would have to adopt it 
before it went into force. Pressed on the matter Friday, Gorbachev replied: 
"Let the very process of change and life itself answer this question." 
Asked whether a republic could secede, Gorbachev told reporters, "I didn't say 
I wouldn't allow it. I said I had come to the firm conclusion that we could not 
divide." 
His tough tone left no doubt that he would continue to combat local 
separatists. 
Like some other republican leaders, including Ukrainian President Leonid M. 
Kravchuk, Yeltsin has expressed support in principle 
for new and looser union arrangements, but he wants to go about it in a 
different way, by first concluding bilateral treaties with other republics. 
Before approving Gorbachev's treaty, Yeltsin wants an agreement with the 
Kremlin defining who will own Russia's gigantic trove of natural resources -- 
the main source of the Soviet government's bankroll -- and guarantees that 
Russia's sovereignty will be protected. 
Yeltsin again showed his low regard for the Soviet central government Saturday 
by ordering Russian Federation officials not to obey a Kremlin decree that 
would allow the prices of furs, jewelry, caviar and other luxury goods to float 
to their market level, in many cases 10 or 20 times the state price. 
The Yeltsin-sponsored draft for Russia's constitution, to be debated at an 
emergency session of the Russian Congress of People's Deputies which opens 
Tuesday, also makes it clear who should wield power. Russia, it proclaims, 
"independently fixes and manages its domestic and foreign policies, enacts its 
constitution and laws, which take priority on its territory." 
Although the proposed constitution, written by a committee that met in a forest 
cottage outside Moscow, allows Russia to cede some powers to the national 
government, it proclaims Russia's right to "control" policies in those areas 
and to take part in their execution, a formula tailor-made to cause endless 
jurisdictional disputes. 
In remarks to the Supreme Soviet legislature, Gorbachev had already disclosed 
many of the major proposals made by the Union Treaty. Lawmakers on Friday had 
endorsed the restructuring of the executive branch that the plan presupposes, 
and gave Gorbachev 14 days to draw up specific proposals. The Union Treaty 
itself is to be considered by the Soviet Parliament, the Congress of People's 
Deputies, in mid-December. 
Under the treaty, the president would be the nation's chief executive and 
commander-in-chief, as he now is, but would have to be elected in a nationwide 
ballot instead of by the Congress. To win, a candidate would have to receive 
both a majority of votes in the popular election and also carry a majority of 
republics. 
For the first time in the Soviet Union, a vice president would also be elected 
to exercise functions assigned by the president and, in the clearest provision 
made yet to ensure the orderly succession of Soviet power, "to replace (the 
president) in the event of his absence or his incapacity to fulfill his 
functions." 
A Cabinet of Ministers, headed by a prime minister and under the control of the 
president, would replace the Council of Ministers, although this may be little 
more than a name change. The Federation Council, an advisory body of the 15 
republican leaders chaired by Gorbachev, would take on a major policy-making 
role. 
BLUEPRINT FOR A NEW SOVIET UNION 
Here are highlights of the Union Treaty published Saturday: 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
Each republic is sovereign, with full state power on its territory. 
Republics have the right of self-determination and self-government, resolution 
of all problems of the republic's development. 
STRUCTURE OF THE UNION 
Membership in the union is voluntary. 
A citizen of a republic is a citizen of the U.S.S.R., or "Union of Sovereign 
Soviet Republics." 
POWERS OF THE UNION 
Protecting sovereignty and territorial integrity; defending state border; 
protecting state security; directing armed forces. 
Setting foreign policy; regulating union's foreign economic activities and 
coordinating foreign economic activities of republics. 
Determining, jointly with republics, strategies of economic development; 
creating market conditions; creating a single fiscal and monetary policy based 
on one currency. 
Administering, jointly with republics, power, fuel, transport, defense 
industries, space research, communications, ecological policy; establishing 
guidelines for using natural resourses. 
POWERS OF THE REPUBLICS 
Ownership of land and natural resources on their territory, and of state 
property except that needed for exercising powers of the union. 
Forming own budgets and determining taxes. Union taxes are for the union's use. 
Republic laws are supreme unless they cover issues of union's authority. 
Disputes are resolved in commissions or the Constitutional Court. 
SHUFFLE OF AUTHORITY 
The president is the union's chief executive and commander in chief, but must 
be elected nationwide instead of by Congress. 
A vice president is elected to exercise functions assigned by the president and 
to replace the president in his absence. 
The Federation Council, an advisory body of the 15 republican leaders, takes on 
a major policy-making role. 
