43% FEEL BUSINESS SHOULD FOOT BILL FOR CLEAN AIR, POLL FINDS 
A new poll commissioned by business interests in the state has found that 43% 
of Southern Californians believe business and industry, more than individual 
consumers, should pay for cleaning up the air. 
Moreover, nearly 60% of those polled said they would support air pollution 
controls even if it meant banning certain businesses and industries from the 
basin that comprises Los Angeles, Riverside, Orange and San Bernardino 
counties. 
Indeed, Southern Californians appeared to be so disturbed by smog that 58% said 
they had seriously considered moving out of region during the past year. 
The poll was conducted at a time when business and industry are facing costly 
new air pollution controls as part of the South Coast Air Quality Management 
District's 20-year plan to bring the region into compliance with federal clean 
air standards. Before the plan was adopted earlier this year, opponents 
repeatedly had warned that it would drive businesses and jobs out of the basin. 
Results of the survey, which was conducted by the Wirthlin Group, a public 
opinion pollster, were released Monday at a forum sponsored jointly by Hitachi 
Ltd. and the California and Los Angeles Area chambers of commerce. Financed by 
Hitachi, the telephone poll was conducted in September among 400 respondents. 
The findings were seized upon immediately by air quality officials as proof of 
public support for the AQMD's tough new anti-smog controls. 
"If I were a member of business, I would be concerned," said AQMD Executive 
Officer James M. Lents. "They need to realize the public is supportive of 
cleaning up the air and the public is supportive of us cleaning up business." 
But one top-ranking chamber official said there was no reason for "any great 
apprehension." 
"Business is already paying very substantially for cleaning up the air and is 
anticipating paying even more," said Kirk West, president of the California 
Chamber of Commerce. Ray Remy, president of the Los Angeles Area Chamber of 
Commerce, voiced similar views. 
Although most of those polled said they would be willing to make certain 
changes in life styles such as car-pooling or riding public transit if it were 
available, fewer than half said they would abide by regulations that outlawed 
back-yard barbecues, aerosol sprays and gasoline-powered lawn mowers. 
When they were asked who should be "most responsible" for paying to clean up 
the air, 43% answered major industry, 22% state government, 14% federal 
government, 10% consumers and 5% local government. 
When asked which steps they would be "most willing" to take to reduce smog, 25% 
said car-pooling and 24% said using public transit if it were available. 
Another 18% said they would drive vehicles powered by cleaner alternative fuels 
and 18% said they would work flexible hours to reduce traffic congestion. 
But only 9% said they supported increases in taxes or fees to pay for air 
pollution controls. 
While the AQMD is not calling for a ban on back-yard barbecues and aerosol 
sprays, there is a perception -- based largely on statements by opponents to 
the air quality plan -- that such restrictions are being contemplated. 
When asked if they would follow a law banning back-yard barbecues, aerosol 
sprays and gasoline-powered lawn mowers, 46% said they would abide completely 
by the rule, 43% said they would partially abide, and 9% said they would 
completely ignore the restriction. Another 3% had no opinion. 
Based on that finding, Jack Torobin, manager of the Wirthlin Group's Los 
Angeles office, told a press conference: "There is a level of inflexibility we 
probably did not expect to see." 
Torobin said later, however, that the willingness among those polled to 
car-pool or use public transit was encouraging. 
"The interesting angle here is the fact that we're not totally wedded to our 
cars or existing systems of transportation. There's some flexibility there. . . 
. People see transportation solutions as a way out of the (smog) problem," he 
said. 
Significantly, 57% said they would support increasing the gasoline tax 5 cents 
a gallon -- provided the money was earmarked for transportation and highway 
improvements. 
Torobin called the 58% of residents who had seriously thought about leaving the 
Los Angeles area during the past year "sizable." A similar poll conducted in 
the San Francisco Bay Area before the recent earthquake found that only 34% had 
considered leaving, principally because of housing costs. 
But even though many had thought of leaving, 65% of those polled believed their 
overall quality of life was good. Among those, 16% said the quality of life was 
very good and 49% said it was somewhat good. 
The margin of error in the poll was 5% in either direction, Torobin said. 
BACKGROUND 
Last March, the South Coast Air Quality Management District approved a 
far-reaching clean air plan for the Los Angeles Basin that is intended to bring 
the four-county region of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino 
counties into compliance with federal clean air standards by the year 2007. The 
plan envisions more than 120 different air pollution controls on industry, 
consumer products and motor vehicles. Business interests have worried that the 
plan will be too stringent and will cost as much as $12.8 billion a year, 
driving out jobs and businesses. That point has been vigorously disputed by the 
AQMD, which has estimated compliance costs at $2.9 billion a year for the first 
five years. The AQMD also has said the plan will bring 80,200 more jobs into 
the region by 2007. 
