ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: SANTA ANA; 
'LAST CHANCE' MAKES DROPOUT DIFFERENCE 
Pedro, 18, was just like dozens of other students that teacher Dorothy Fortune 
had seen before. 
He was a gang member, inarticulate in both Spanish and English, and appeared to 
be on the road to nowhere. 
The teen-ager had not yet dropped out of high school, but all signs indicated 
that it was only a matter of time before he did. 
As a last resort, he was placed in the Student Transition and Retention (STAR) 
program, a joint effort between Rancho Santiago College and the Santa Ana 
Unified School District that tries to help potential high school dropouts chart 
a new course in life. 
"When they come to us, it's kind of their last chance," said Fortune, who 
teaches English as a second language to program students. 
"Once a kid is 18," she said, "high schools don't have to keep them any longer. 
We tell them that they can finish their education and make something of their 
lives." 
The STAR program, which has a successful graduation rate of about 80%, began in 
1988, with a grant from the U.S. Department of Education. Classes for the 
two-year program are held at the college. 
The program helps students earn their high school diplomas and provides them 
with vocational job training. Students are also encouraged to transfer to a 
four-year college. 
About 75% of those enrolled in STAR are Latinos, the rest of Southeast Asian 
parentage. Most of the students have limited English, which in many cases is 
the root of their academic problems. 
"We encourage them," Fortune said, "to overcome the many obstacles they may 
have in their lives, such as the language barrier, economic disadvantages and 
cultural adjustments." 
The program has helped about 200 students by offering one-on-one counseling, 
academic course work, vocational training, group advisory meetings and other 
services, such as child care, bus passes and part-time jobs. 
To qualify, students must be 17 to 21 years old, one year behind their class 
and have been identified as a potential dropout by assistant principals, 
counselors and teachers. 
"It's a fantastic program," said Robert D. Jensen, chancellor of the Rancho 
Santiago College District. 
"It's one of the strongest, most viable programs in the country that 
effectively deals with the dropout problem," he said. "It's an example of what 
two educational bureaucracies can do when they get together and share resources 
to attack educational issues." 
Rudy M. Castruita, superintendent of Santa Ana Unified School District, agreed. 
"Without this program, most of these students would be either dropouts or 
working low-paying jobs," Castruita said. 
"They deserve all of the attention we're giving them," Fortune said. "They 
respond to us and are going to be functioning, positive parts of our community. 
That's all we can ask of them." GREG HERNANDEZ 
