SCHOOL NEWS: STUDENTS RESTOCK HURRICANE-RAVAGED LIBRARY 
When Hurricane Hugo ripped the roof off the library at Mt. Pleasant Academy, a 
public elementary school in Mt. Pleasant, S.C., the building was destroyed. 
Perhaps more devastating, the books inside had to be thrown out because of 
water damage. 
To help restock the library, students at Vine Elementary School in West Covina 
are sending Mt. Pleasant Academy about 500 books. 
Students at Vine School were asked to give books they had at home to students 
at the academy. Many of them wrote notes in the books in an effort to start a 
pen-pal program. 
Third-graders Brian and Eric Goldstein wrote a note saying, "I'm sorry your 
school got ruined," and sent it with a few of their books. 
Brian and Eric's mother, Nancy Goldstein, a PTA member who began the aid effort 
after seeing reports of Hugo's destruction, said other children have sent 
similar notes along with their pictures and addresses. 
Vine School Principal Gary Lawson said writing the notes will teach the 
students about other regions. He hopes it will lead to an extended 
letter-writing program that will increase the students' appreciation of writing 
and correspondence. 
Students in the upper grades at Vine School are writing and illustrating books 
to send to their new sister school after the beginning of the year. The books 
are being written by and or on computers. 
Fifth-grader Brian Galleano wrote and illustrated a math book with story 
problems. He said he likes helping Mt. Pleasant Academy because he would feel 
bad if his school's library were wrecked. 
Goldstein and Lawson decided to adopt a school in the area hit by the hurricane 
to get as much aid as possible directly to its victims. 
Mt. Pleasant Academy was chosen because it was one of the hardest-hit schools 
in the area but was not offered as much aid as others that were flooded, said 
Ann Birdseye of the Charleston County School District. 
When Goldstein contacted Mt. Pleasant Academy, Principal Jane Smith said the 
school needed books. 
In the last month, books worth about $2,000 have been been donated by students, 
parents and others. 
Businesses and local service groups have have been asked to donate money for 
new books. Mrs. Nelson's Toy and Book Shop in Covina has agreed to sell books 
for the effort at discount prices. Publishing houses also have been approached 
for donations. 
The first shipment of books is scheduled to leave Monday. Because of the 
positive response, more books may be shipped throughout the year as they come 
in, Lawson said. The first 500-pound shipment will be shipped free by an 
airline that wished to remain anonymous, Goldstein said. Subsequent shipments 
may be more difficult because of the cost. Angel D. Ayala 
