POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
MIKE SCOTT FLASHES SIGNS OF GREATNESS 
The Waterboys' Mike Scott demonstrated Monday night at the Wiltern Theatre that 
he is a wary but immensely worthy rock hero. 
In his first local appearance in four years, the Scottish-born 
singer-songwriter came armed with inspiring songs and uplifting musicianship, 
but early in the show, he and the other six members of his band 
self-defeatingly broke the momentum. 
Yet Scott showed in the end that he has the conviction, purpose and talent to 
put him near the forefront of contemporary rockers. The most significant aspect 
of the concert was that Scott seems comfortable in that role. It wasn't always 
the case. 
When Scott burst on the scene in England in 1983, he seemed too eager to be 
accepted as the latest in the rock-as-inspiration tradition of Bob Dylan and 
Van Morrison. By the time of the third Waterboys album, 1985's "This Is the 
Sea," Scott had moved toward warmer and more convincing expressions of 
spiritually accented idealism and hope, and he stood on the brink of U2-like 
adoration in England. 
But Scott backed away for some soul-searching, eventually moving from London to 
Ireland, where he put together a new band that enabled him to work with the 
bright, flavorful Irish folk trimmings. The result was 1988's much-admired 
"Fisherman's Blues" album, which had a far more personal tone that better 
served his reflections on the search for social and spiritual fulfillment. 
Monday's show at the Wiltern -- where Scott will appear again tonight and 
Wednesday, before a concert Thursday at UC San Diego -- was an extension of 
that breakthrough. 
"We're livin' in a strange time / Workin' for a strange goal / We're turnin' 
flesh and body / into soul," he sang in the evening's second number, "Strange 
Boat," virtually defining his musical destination. But at times the Celtic 
coloring (provided by such instruments as accordion, mandolin and fiddle) 
neutralized the emotions of the songs, and the use of traditional numbers broke 
the momentum of the Waterboys' own punchy songs. 
At about the half-way mark, however, Scott picked up an electric guitar and 
went into a series of explosive rockers that had the audience on its feet, 
fully engrossed. By this time, the mixture of folk warmth and rock bite was so 
unified that it seemed only natural when Scott brought out the nearly two dozen 
members of the Scottish Fiddlers of Los Angeles for a jam that offered the 
warm, communal feel that is such a winning feature of Los Lobos concerts. 
Scott needs a few more songs of the level of the "Fisherman's Blues" material 
before he can be reasonably ranked with the models he so much admires, but he 
flashed signs of greatness on Monday. 
A complete review of the Waterboys' concert will appear in Wednesday's Calendar 
section. 
