SOME HERO'S WELCOME: RESCUERS SUED; 
COURTS: OFFICER AND PASSERBY CAME TO THE AID OF THREE PEOPLE IN FREEWAY CRASH. 
BUT ONE VICTIM ALLEGES THAT HE WAS STRUCK BY ANOTHER CAR BECAUSE OF NEGLIGENCE. 
Jim Campbell received the kinds of honors Thursday that often go to public 
heroes who risk their lives to help others. 
Campbell, a Lancaster carpenter, went to a luncheon, accepted several framed 
plaques and endured repeated handclasps with public officials -- all because he 
stopped on his way to work last Jan. 30 and aided three people trapped in an 
overturned car. 
What Jim Campbell did not expect for his brief heroism was a lawsuit. 
Campbell and Los Angeles Police Motorcycle Officer Loran Dale Turner -- awarded 
the department's highest honor for his actions that morning -- are being sued 
by one of the three crash victims, who was injured by a second car that veered 
into the overturned vehicle. 
"I'm pretty calm about it now," Campbell said just before he was honored with 
nine other men by the Mid-Valley Community Police Council. "But when I first 
heard about it, I was real upset." 
According to the Police Department and the citizens' group that presented 
honors at the Sportsmen's Lodge in Van Nuys, Campbell, 31, and Turner, 42, are 
heroes for coming to the aid of Ricardo Garcia, his wife, Norma -- who was in 
labor -- and a cousin. 
As gasoline gushed from the overturned car, the two men carried Garcia's 
pregnant wife to safety and went to the aid of the cousin, who was struck by 
another vehicle. 
But in a lawsuit, filed Sept. 25 in Los Angeles County Superior Court, the 
cousin, Anzelma Sanchez-Sianez, 17, claimed that she was struck by the second 
car because of negligence. According to her lawyer, Paul Jay Bershin, 
Sanchez-Sianez alleges "that the police officer failed to put up a flare 
pattern to stop the vehicle" that hit the Garcias' overturned car. 
The lawsuit, which seeks unspecified damages and also names Ricardo Garcia and 
the driver of the second car as defendants, claims that after helping 
Sanchez-Sianez out of the car, Campbell put her "in an unsafe place." She 
suffered a ruptured spleen, Bershin said. 
Turner, awarded the Police Department's Medal of Valor in September, declined 
to answer the specific allegations in the lawsuit against him. But he angrily 
defended Campbell, claiming that the civilian was simply reacting with grace 
under extreme pressure. 
"Had Jim Campbell not taken the actions he did that morning, there wouldn't be 
a 10-month-old girl and a mom and a dad alive today," Turner said. "I wish 
there were more Jim Campbells out there." 
Turner said that he would not have noticed the overturned car if Campbell had 
not already stopped to help. "I saw his car parked next to the center divider, 
and then I saw him jump over," Turner said. "If he hadn't been there, I would 
have kept on driving." 
Other cars passed by, but he stopped, Campbell said, because "it was the right 
thing to do." 
According to a police account, the car was northbound on the San Diego Freeway 
near Roscoe Boulevard in Van Nuys, on its way to a hospital, when it turned 
over in the fast lane of the freeway. Campbell parked his pickup truck on a 
"breakaway" lane on the southbound side of the freeway and by the time Turner 
made it to the divider, Campbell could hear the pregnant woman yelling: "My 
baby! My baby!" 
"Gas was pouring out of the car right by her head," Campbell said. 
The two men assisted the expectant mother and the teen-ager from the car, 
Turner said. Ricardo Garcia emerged from the vehicle on his own. Then the two 
men, unaware that the frightened woman was referring to her unborn child, began 
searching for an infant. Precious moments passed, both men said, before they 
realized that the woman was in labor. 
"I could see headlights coming -- high beams, low beams," Turner said. "I could 
see the next vehicle coming and I told (Campbell) to grab the lady's legs and 
we lifted her up onto the center median barrier." 
Turner and Campbell said that they turned back to help Sanchez-Sianez, but it 
was too late. 
"A (second) car crashed into the overturned car, there was a fireball and the 
second car veered hard left and took the teen-aged girl 180 feet down the 
freeway," Turner said. 
According to Turner, there was no time to even think about setting up flares. 
Even if there had been time, he said, the gallons of gasoline spilling out over 
the car and its occupants would have made using flares a fatal act. 
"This whole thing took maybe 80 seconds," Turner said. "There was no time to 
lay a flare pattern and you wouldn't want to do it with gasoline pouring out 
all over the place." 
Since the incident, Turner has turned to City Councilman Joel Wachs for help in 
devising state legislation that might protect good Samaritans from legal 
liability when they help others as Campbell did. 
"It's the least we can do to thank people like Jim Campbell," he said. 
Jim Campbell sought a more private gesture. After the accident, he went to the 
hospital several times, he said, to check on Sanchez-Sianez's progress. 
"Last time I was there was on Valentine's Day," Campbell said. "I just wanted 
to see how she was doing. But I never heard from her." 
