VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: PORT HUENEME; 
PUPILS PARADE THEIR INTEREST IN READING AS BOOK WEEK ENDS 
Two dozen first-graders wearing paper-bag masks "roared their terrible roar, 
gnashed their terrible teeth, and rolled their terrible eyes" on the blacktop 
behind Richard Bard Elementary School, acting out Maurice Sendak's classic 
children's book, "Where the Wild Things Are." 
Thirteen classrooms, totaling 400 children from kindergarten through the sixth 
grade, each turned a book they have read into a parade or a skit Friday as the 
grand finale of their National Book Week activities. 
During the week, students listened to a poetry reading, wrote letters to U.S. 
troops stationed in Saudi Arabia, and congregated on the schoolyard lawn at 
lunch to hear stories read by parents. 
The week's activities "get the parents involved," which is one goal of the new 
literature-based curriculum in California public schools, said Sue Measures, a 
reading specialist. 
Last year, students began reading "really good literary works" rather than 
textbooks, said Principal Debbie DeSmeth. It was the first time the school 
participated in National Book Week, she said. 
In October, each classroom chose a book its students liked, then made costumes 
fashioned to look like story characters and practiced parading on the 
playground. The older grades selected from books they read as part of their 
curriculums; younger children had books read to them. 
"St. George and the Dragon," a folk tale retold by Margaret Hodges, was the 
story chosen for the parade by a third-grade class. 
In the re-enactment, children rolled out a cardboard palace built on a utility 
cart. A pint-sized prince with an aluminum-foil sword battled with a dragon -- 
another boy wearing a green and yellow felt suit and a huge green paper tail 
with black scales. 
The audience squealed with laughter as the narrator announced that the prince 
and a princess -- wearing a white satin dress -- married and lived happily ever 
after. 
Measures and DeSmeth were pleased that one class had chosen a non-fiction work 
as its favorite book. 
"Life Cycle of the Whale" "tells true facts about where they live, how they 
travel and what they eat," a second-grade narrator said of the book by Paula Z. 
Hogan. 
Besides sparking interest in books, the new reading curriculum attempts to 
integrate science, math and social studies into the reading program, DeSmeth 
said. 
A group of first-graders wearing cat masks made of paper plates and yarn 
marched in a circle chanting from Wanda Gag's "Millions of Cats": "Cats here, 
cats there, cats and kittens everywhere. Hundreds of cats, thousands of cats, 
millions and billions and trillions of cats." KIM KASH 
