COLOMBIA REBELS REPORTEDLY SEIZE 3 AMERICANS 
Leftist guerrillas were blamed Monday for the abduction on Sunday of five 
petroleum engineers, including three American citizens working in Colombia. 
The Medellin cocaine cartel, meanwhile, freed a kidnaped journalist after using 
him and at least nine other hostages to try to pressure the government into 
abandoning its anti-drug fight. 
The state oil company Ecopetrol said that two men and a woman saying they 
belonged to the National Liberation Army, or ELN, abducted three U.S. petroleum 
engineers and two of their Colombian colleagues near the northern town of Tibu. 
The group released one of the Colombians and told him to carry news of the 
abductions to officials, William Giraldo, an Ecopetrol spokesman, said. 
He identified the three Americans as Robert Hogan, Larry Sams and John Bagbey 
and said they are employed by an Oklahoma mining company under contract to 
Ecopetrol. 
The official added that Ecopetrol had not established the motive for the 
kidnapings. The ELN has terrorized the petroleum industry for years to try to 
pressure the government into nationalizing it. 
A statement from "the Extraditables," as the Medellin drug bosses call 
themselves, said they were releasing the journalist Juan Vitta, who is about 
60, because he was suffering heart pains. 
Vitta's freedom came just four days after the Medellin traffickers offered to 
surrender in exchange for government concessions. Cartel members demanded that 
authorities protect their safety, prevent their extradition and drop a demand 
that they confess their crimes. 
Justice Minister Jaime Giraldo responded by repeating that the government would 
respect the rights of surrendering traffickers and prohibit their extraditions. 
But he insisted that drug suspects confess at least one of their offenses. 
Giraldo and other officials called on the cartel to release its hostages as 
proof of its desire for peace. 
Hours after gaining his freedom, Vitta also called for the release of six other 
journalists still held by Medellin drug bosses. 
"At this moment, I cannot find a logical and just reason for the Extraditables 
to continue to hold the other journalists in their power," he said in a live 
radio interview after flying to Bogota from Medellin, where he was freed. 
Vitta said his captors had driven him all night in a black four-wheel-drive 
vehicle before dropping him off in Medellin. 
Vitta, editor of the weekly news magazine Hoy por Hoy, had been held for 86 
days when he was freed. The freed hostage said he was treated well by his 
captors but added that he and the other six journalists were kept in separate 
rooms and he could not vouch for the condition of the others. 
