ARMS CONTROL ISSUES LOOM OVER MALTA SUMMIT; 
DIPLOMACY: THE SUBJECT IS NOT OFFICIALLY ON THE AGENDA, BUT GORBACHEV MAY HAVE 
A SURPRISE FOR BUSH. 
Even though arms control is not formally on the Malta summit agenda, some Bush 
Administration officials expect Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to make 
new offers to speed up the negotiations now under way on reducing long-range 
nuclear arms and non-nuclear weapons in Europe. 
But for Gorbachev, there is a significant risk, these officials say. Any such 
dramatic move could trigger a negative reaction from President Bush. Viewing it 
as grandstanding, the President is likely to respond by slowing the 
negotiations to prevent Gorbachev from stealing the credit for progress or by 
showing his displeasure in some other aspect of U.S.-Soviet relations. 
"One thing Gorbachev hasn't learned yet is not to play games with us in these 
kinds of circumstances," a senior State Department official said. "I suspect 
he'll play some game, either some big START (strategic nuclear arms) initiative 
. . . or some CFE (Conventional Forces in Europe) initiative plunked on the 
table -- all of it aimed at either getting us to buy it or look uncooperative 
and uncreative when we leave Malta." 
Not everyone expects a dramatic Gorbachev move. "This is not a summit in which 
you try something and want to run the risk of getting it thrown back in your 
face," one U.S. official said in discussing the likely Soviet approach to 
Malta. "This is a win-win summit. You do not want to risk bold steps that end 
up casting a pall over the meeting after it's over." 
Whatever Gorbachev's strategy at the summit, the concern of Administration 
officials about the potential impact of any step involving arms control -- long 
the centerpiece of U.S.-Soviet summits -- reflects the unique power that issue 
still has to force itself into the spotlight in a significant, even disruptive 
way. 
One factor pushing Gorbachev toward taking risks at Malta is that his political 
priorities may be different and his requirements more urgent than Bush's, 
particularly in the wake of the East European upheavals in the weeks since the 
Malta meeting was announced. 
Even before that, the Soviet leader clearly was more anxious for a START 
agreement than Bush has been, according to U.S. officials. 
Soviet negotiators also have acknowledged greater emphasis on START than on the 
CFE talks. While the Soviets admit that more savings can be achieved through 
conventional force cuts, according to American officials, they believe START 
will free more high-technology manpower for civilian work -- a critical element 
in reviving the Soviet economy. 
More subjective factors may also be in play, such as Soviet awareness that 
nuclear weapons pose a greater threat to their homeland than tanks and ground 
troops. 
Bush set ambitious deadlines of mid-1990 to complete both the START agreement, 
which would cut offensive nuclear arms by about 50%, and the CFE treaty, which 
would cut manpower, tanks and other weapons of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization and the Warsaw Pact to lower, equal ceilings. Soviet ground forces 
would be cut more than 50%, while NATO forces would be reduced about 10%. 
The almost unanimous view of U.S. officials, however, is that neither of the 
negotiations are likely to be completed by mid-1990. A few matters of principle 
still separate the U.S. and Soviet sides in START, but the delay results mainly 
from difficulties in ironing out technical details. With CFE, the United States 
and its European allies are still arguing about exactly what NATO should 
propose to the Warsaw Pact. 
Moreover, Bush did not express the timetable for finishing START very 
forcefully. He said he hoped the treaty would be ready by the time of the arms 
control summit that he and Gorbachev have scheduled for late next spring or 
early summer in the United States. 
Key U.S. arms negotiators said they did not interpret his words as marching 
orders. And while not ruling out completion by then, they said the START treaty 
would more likely be finished in late 1990 or early 1991, in time for signing 
at a third Bush-Gorbachev summit, expected to be held in the Soviet Union in 
mid-1991. 
Formal completion of START a year before the U.S. presidential elections has "a 
certain political logic to it," as one official said. 
Similarly, Bush in May called for a CFE agreement in six to 12 months. But his 
new chief negotiator at those Vienna talks, R. James Woolsey, later said the 
clock on that deadline did not begin running until September because four 
months were needed for NATO to convert Bush's words into a formal new proposal 
to the Warsaw Pact. 
As for CFE, even before the upheaval in Eastern Europe, the consensus among 
U.S. officials was that the conventional arms treaty would not be completed by 
mid-1990, as Bush initially envisioned. White House officials have offered only 
a 50-50 chance that the agreement will be finished even by the end of 1990, and 
some experts forecast completion in 1991. 
These conventional force talks are more complex than START in several respects. 
One major difficulty is defining what weapons to include in the proposed 
agreement and designing verification measures to police the treaty. A 
particular sticking point is the Warsaw Pact proposal to limit only "strike," 
or ground attack, warplanes, thereby excluding more than 5,000 of its warplanes 
because those aircraft are officially assigned air defense and training 
missions. Since the aircraft could in fact be used in offensive roles as well, 
NATO strongly opposes this approach. 
"If Gorbachev insists on his one-sided definition of aircraft," said Ronald 
Lehman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, "it's highly 
unlikely that we'll get a CFE treaty." 
Another complication, less tangible but equally significant, is that the CFE 
talks are bloc-to-bloc rather than one-on-one negotiations. Proposals must be 
coordinated in time-consuming consultations among the 16 NATO nations and seven 
Warsaw Pact countries. 
The NATO members have always been independent; the age-old animosity between 
Greeks and Turks continue to delay agreement on the NATO position, for example. 
Now, Soviet allies are becoming increasingly independent within the Warsaw 
Pact, and this is creating new problems for Gorbachev that are expected to be 
reflected in his maneuvering at Malta. 
"Gorbachev will push hard (at Malta) . . . to really rev up the CFE process 
quickly," one highly placed U.S. expert on Soviet affairs predicts, because 
"that negotiation is about to be overtaken by events in Eastern Europe. In some 
ways, it already has," he said, citing the end of "ideological coherence" in 
the Warsaw Pact nations and the increasing divergence from Moscow of the 
foreign and security policies of East European states. 
"There's still a window . . . probably a year or two" before the CFE 
negotiations become irrelevant, he added. Before the window of opportunity 
closes, Gorbachev would like to nail down the deal to help stabilize conditions 
in Eastern Europe and legitimize the Soviet presence there while the agreed 
force reductions are carried out, the official said. 
The best way for Gorbachev to speed up the CFE talks, he continued, would be to 
drop aircraft from the list of conventional weapons to be reduced. Moscow 
insisted on including aircraft in the first place, and it could now be the one 
to set the issue aside for subsequent talks. 
The Soviet leader may also try to speed up CFE by persuading Bush to ease U.S. 
verification demands for the treaty, thereby simplifying and smoothing the way 
to agreement. 
The Pentagon is insisting on tough measures that affect mainly West Europeans, 
whose territories lie in the Atlantic-to-the-Urals zone covered by the 
negotiations. The potential impact of verification inspections on U.S. 
facilities would be minimal. The West Europeans would prefer on-site 
inspections only after reductions have occurred, to ensure that no cheating 
occurs after the cuts, and would forgo monitoring the reductions as they occur. 
"The Soviets could live with the European view" on CFE verification measures, 
the official added, if Bush can overrule the Defense Department on the matter. 
In the START talks, Gorbachev may seek to give new impetus to the current 
negotiations by outlining his vision of the next phase of strategic talks -- 
START II, as some experts refer to them. 
An obvious proposal would be to call for a second 50% cut, which would reduce 
the arsenals of each superpower to 3,000 long-range offensive nuclear weapons. 
Or, if Gorbachev continues to hold utopian views on disarmament, he could 
expound on the goal of a "minimum deterrence" force of only 500 nuclear 
warheads on each side. 
"Just discussing broad goals for START II, and setting a schedule of 
ministerial talks (between Secretary of State James A. Baker III and Foreign 
Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze), will increase pressure on the bureaucracies 
on both sides to finish START I," the official added. For beyond the well-known 
skepticism toward arms agreements in the Pentagon, U.S. negotiators in START 
believe the Soviet military is also foot-dragging in discernible ways. 
START I needs no huge breakthroughs to be completed, officials said, thanks 
largely to Soviet concessions in September. One or two important political 
issues need to be solved, however, and ideas may be exchanged at Malta on how 
to tackle them in preparation for the arms control summit next year, when they 
can be formally resolved. 
Most important of these issues is how many air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) 
will be attributed to each bomber. "We think it's not a treaty buster," said 
one U.S. official, both on its merits and because Gorbachev has said the ALCM 
issue is "ripe" for solution. 
Of the 6,000 offensive nuclear weapons permitted under START, no more than 
4,900 can be warheads on ballistic missiles. The rest would be bombs and 
warheads on bombers and cruise missiles. 
Since aircraft are comparatively slow flying and recallable, the United States 
argues they are less threatening than ballistic warheads and that their 
construction should be encouraged in future forces. 
This can be done by "discounting" these weapons in the START treaty, i.e., 
counting ALCM-delivered warheads less than ballistic missile warheads. So the 
United States wants to "attribute" to each aircraft a fixed number of ALCMs -- 
10 to the B-52, for example -- no matter how many they in fact carry. But the 
Soviets want to count every missile each bomber carries, which for the B-52 is 
as many as 22. 
Times staff writer Doyle McManus contributed to this story. 
