SILVER WARES; 
SHINING EXAMPLES OF HAND-ENGRAVED CRAFTMANSHIP COMING TO SAN JUAN IN TRAVELING 
TIFFANY EXHIBIT 
In 1889, Charles Tiffany and other New York merchants presented a signed scroll 
to President Benjamin Harrison marking the 100th anniversary of the 
inauguration of George Washington. 
A century later, the scroll isn't nearly as significant as the vessel it came 
in: an intricately decorated silver cylinder. Tiffany silversmiths were 
obviously proud of the piece they had created, for on the bottom of the 
cylinder they added the words: 
"This cylinder was made and inscribed in less than a week's time!" 
The silversmiths can be forgiven for tooting their own horn. Today, the highly 
detailed floral pattern sculpted or "chased" on the cylinder is a premiere 
example of a virtually lost art. 
Tiffany &amp; Co. has included the cylinder in "A Celebrated Tradition: The 
Silver of Tiffany," a traveling exhibit that will stop at the Decorative Arts 
Study Center in San Juan Capistrano from Dec. 1 to 24. 
The show spans 150 years of silversmithing and features 30 pieces organized 
around five major themes -- birth, marriage, sport, achievement and state. 
"The exhibit talks about the celebratory nature of silver," says Edward 
Wawrynek, vice president of product development for Tiffany &amp; Co. in New 
York City and an authority on American decorative silver. 
Proof that fine silversmithing still exists is Tiffany's recently completed 
Tattersalls Tiffany Highflyer Stakes Cup, to be presented at horse races this 
summer in England. 
"It's unique in modern times, in that it's so massive and required virtuoso 
silversmithing and chasing," Wawrynek says. 
The massive 40-pound bowl has two horses protruding from either side. From hoof 
to hoof, it measures three feet wide and stands two feet tall. The trophy took 
10 men 2,000 hours to complete. 
Another racing trophy, this one made in 1873, is equally impressive. The trophy 
features a sculpture of a running horse and a Comanche Indian, who has scarcely 
a toehold on the animal. 
"It's more sculpture than trophy," Wawrynek says. "It has so much kinetic 
energy." 
Many pieces in the exhibit have some small historical significance. 
One of the children's table sets was given as a gift in 1881 to Ulysses S. 
Grant III from his "Grandpapa," Ulysses S. Grant, then 18th President of the 
United States. Each piece in the set has a die-rolled scene of marching 
children playing musical instruments. 
An 1878 Japanese-style tray might not be the grandest piece in the exhibit, but 
for Tiffany &amp; Co. it is the most significant, Wawrynek says. The tray's 
design, which forms a spider's web using copper, gold and platinum, helped earn 
Tiffany the Grand Prix at the 1878 Paris Exposition Universelle. 
"At the time it was revolutionary to leave hammer marks in the piece and to mix 
some less noble metals," he says. 
Chasing is the art of sculpting the silver by pounding it out with hammers. 
Inside the Benjamin Harrison cylinder can be seen the impressions left where 
the silversmiths' small punching tools pushed out the metal. 
Chasers can achieve greater depth and detail than engravers, because they are 
not limited by the thickness of the metal. Where engravers cut away the metal, 
chasers displace and shape it to achieve more of a three-dimensional design. 
"When you can count the petals on a flower, that's pretty remarkable," Wawrynek 
says. 
Because it demands both skill and time, chasing has become an endangered art. 
The public didn't appreciate the extra work. 
"People weren't willing to pay higher prices for the additional hand labor," he 
says. "Lack of demand determined scarcity of supply." 
Between 1870 and 1930 there were dozens of chasers in the United States. Today 
Wawrynek counts only four who have truly mastered the craft. One of them, Alan 
Jones, works as head chaser at the Tiffany Silver Workshop, creating a number 
of Tiffany's presentation pieces including the Tattersalls trophy. 
Silver engravers are another endangered group of artisans. Tiffany employs 12 
of them. 
Norman DiSalvo, director of engraving and crystal etching for Tiffany &amp; 
Co., has etched gifts for U.S. presidents from Eisenhower to Bush. He has 
worked on pieces for royalty and the world's social, political and financial 
leaders. He engraved a silver box with the Romanian seal that was presented to 
Nicolae Ceausescu by President Richard M. Nixon in 1969. 
Hand-engraving is an art that goes back more than 100 years, DiSalvo says. 
"It's one of the oldest crafts with no change in the way we do it." 
During his 35 years with Tiffany, he has been called on to do finely etched 
drawings of buildings, horses, oil derricks and tall ships. 
"I love doing picture work," he says. 
DiSalvo and the other engravers work out their designs from a sketch. The area 
where the design will be engraved is painted white so the design can be copied 
onto the actual piece. 
Engravers use tools with different points and shapes to cut away the metal. 
When the design is finished it is checked over for mistakes. If a word is 
misspelled, the piece can be smoothed and recut. Occasionally, the engravers 
must start over with a new piece. 
DiSalvo has the same pride in his work enjoyed by the silversmiths who created 
Benjamin Harrison's cylinder. 
"I'm as proud of the little key rings I engrave as I am for something for the 
President," he says. "Whether it costs $9 or thousands, I give it the same 
detail." 
He doesn't want anything inferior leaving his shop. 
"Once it leaves, it's history," he says. 
The Decorative Arts Study Center is at 31431 Camino Capistrano, San Juan 
Capistrano. (714) 496-2132. 
