SALVADORANS IN ORANGE COUNTY ENGAGED IN OWN STRUGGLE OVER HELPLESSNESS 
When Fernando Jacob, a recent emigre from El Salvador, walked into a popular 
Salvadoran restaurant and meeting place Friday afternoon, he wanted a lot more 
than lunch. 
The 34-year-old Santa Ana resident was looking for fellow countrymen to talk 
about the violence in their war-torn country and to curse the hundreds of miles 
between them and loved ones back home. 
"My dream, now more than ever, is to have my family here with me," said Jacob, 
whose wife and three children live just outside the battlegrounds of San 
Salvador in Sonsonate. 
Speaking through an interpreter, Jacob and other Salvadorans from Orange County 
crowded around tables at El Carbonero restaurant and talked about how troubled 
they are by bloody events in their country. All said they are fighting feelings 
of helplessness and loneliness as family and friends struggle with the renewed 
fighting in El Salvador. 
"I call my wife every day," said Jacob, who left El Salvador three years ago 
after rebel forces demanded the crops of a farm where he was an accountant. 
After he gave in to the rebels' demands, the government's military threatened 
his life. 
The recent offensive by the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and the 
killing of six Jesuit priests Thursday only confirmed his belief that "neither 
side is fighting a just cause," he said. 
To make matters worse, Jacob said, he is worried about his wife, whose life 
recently was threatened by government troops. "What can I do? I feel alone, 
very alone." 
Others at the table shared his feelings, saying they could not reach relatives 
back home because of jammed phone lines and a mail service shutdown. 
Antonieta Chinchilla, who has lived in the United States 14 months, said she 
has a plane ticket to go to El Salvador on Monday to visit her mother and 
sisters. 
"I can't go now," the 29-year-old Santa Ana resident said. Over a plate of 
pupusas, she added, "If the rebels take over, I will never go back. . . . This 
violence is not logical." 
Most of those interviewed Friday said they cared more about a peaceful 
resolution to the conflict in their country than about the politics of the 
struggle. 
"I don't support either side," said Jose Sanchez, who lives in Los Angeles and 
works in Santa Ana. "They both persecute people." Then he smiled and said that 
someday, when all the fighting is over, he will return to El Salvador. "It is 
my homeland," he said. "I love it." 
Several said they fear the slaying of the religious leaders means that a 
resolution is nowhere in sight. 
Jacob said Father Ignacio Ellacuria, rector of the Central American University 
who was shot to death Thursday, was a "very brilliant man and a great loss to 
the country." Because of his murder the violence may "go on for a long time," 
he said. 
Next to the Santa Ana restaurant on Main Street, at the El Salvador Imports 
shop, manager Flor Sandoval, 32, said the news from the country has "gripped 
everyone in the community." It is all her customers have talked about lately, 
she said. 
Across the street at El Cairo Express, a mailing service that specializes in 
sending letters to El Salvador, secretary Miriam Aquino said: "Business is real 
slow. . . . People know that the mail is not being delivered and is sitting at 
the airport. . . . This is a real sad time for all of us." 
Dorothy Edwards, executive director of the American Immigrant Foundation, said 
her office has been flooded with calls and visits from worried Salvadorans. 
"Most of them just want to know what is happening back home and how their 
families are doing," said Edwards, who acted as interpreter at the restaurant. 
She said the conflict has a bittersweet side effect for many Salvadorans who 
are living illegally in the United States. "With the violence going on, it will 
be harder to deport them," she said, adding that it might even make it easier 
for them to get political asylum. 
"It's ironic that it takes something like this in their country to make it a 
little better for them here," she said. 
