MERGER OF CATHOLIC GIRLS, BOYS SCHOOLS TO CUT COSTS 
In 1960, when David Escarcega was a sophomore at Cantwell High School, the 
girls of Sacred Heart of Mary High School, just across Hay Avenue, were 
tantalizingly near. 
Under the watchful eyes of the Sacred Heart of Mary sisters, the Catholic boys 
of Cantwell High came no closer to the girls during school hours than a 
lingering glance through the chain-link fence. 
"The sisters were very restrictive," recalled Escarcega, whose wife, Christine, 
attended Sacred Heart of Mary while he was at Cantwell. "Though we used to look 
at the girls from afar, the best we could do was cruise by." 
Escarcega's memory of how it was between young men and women in Catholic 
schools in the Montebello area is all that is left of a 40-year tradition that 
will come to an end next year. 
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles has announced that dwindling 
enrollment and the soaring cost of a private education have forced it to merge 
Cantwell High School with Sacred Heart of Mary High School. 
The coeducational school will be called Cantwell-Sacred Heart of Mary High 
School. 
In a similar move in the San Gabriel Valley, the all-boys La Salle High School 
in Pasadena will admit girls for the first time next September. The La Salle 
move does not, however, involve a merger. 
La Salle is a Catholic School run by the Christian Brothers, and officials have 
cited a desire to offer an alternative to mostly single-sex Catholic high 
schools, as well as broadening their enrollment base, as reasons for going 
co-ed. 
Sacred Heart of Mary, which has been owned by the order of the Religious of the 
Sacred Heart of Mary since 1942, will be closed, said Sister Joan Treacy, the 
provincial superior of the order. 
Treacy said that the order's decision to keep tuition costs low to allow more 
students to attend the school has created such a financial burden that the 
order can no longer afford to operate it. 
For many, especially the alumni of both schools, the consolidation means the 
end of an era. 
But students, parents and alumni said that there is little option, given the 
bleak enrollment figures and studies that reveal a shrinking pool of students 
will enter Catholic schools. 
"I hate to see it go," said Escarcega, whose son, Marc, is now a senior at 
Cantwell. "At one time I thought that, if I wanted my son to have a co-ed 
education I would have sent him to a public school or to Amat (Bishop Amat, a 
co-ed school), but I'm more open minded now. . . . I look at it as one chapter 
closing and another opening." 
The possibility that Cantwell would become a coeducational school had been 
rumored for years, but it became a matter of serious discussion about three 
years ago when the archdiocese commissioned a study of the problem of dwindling 
enrollment in its schools. 
Cantwell has a capacity for 600 students, but is now only serving 250 students, 
a 50% drop in the number of students enrolled five years ago. Most of the 
students come from the East Los Angeles, Montebello and San Gabriel Valley 
area. 
Bill Rivera, a spokesman for the archdiocese, said the study by the archdiocese 
recommended several options to buoy enrollment, including an aggressive 
recruiting campaign and the consolidation with Sacred Heart of Mary. 
In April, the leadership of the Sacred Heart of Mary announced that it could 
not afford to continue operating the high school. The archdiocese then made its 
decision to consolidate, Rivera said. 
Sister Laura Siebert, the principal of Sacred Heart of Mary, said that as long 
as five years ago the order realized it could not continue operating the school 
as it had, and shortly thereafter began talks with the archdiocese. 
During the past two years, students have been told that the school might become 
co-ed, and students who wanted to attend an all-girls' school were encouraged 
to transfer. 
"We haven't made any secret about it," Siebert said. 
Many Sacred Heart of Mary teachers are expected to continue working at 
Cantwell-Sacred Heart of Mary, Rivera said. 
Several committees have been formed to oversee such details as the writing of 
Cantwell-Sacred Heart of Mary's new school philosophy statement and its 
modification of curriculum. 
Siebert said that her students, for the most part, are looking forward to the 
consolidation. 
"There has to be a lot of change . . . but out of the combination we will come 
up with things that will make both schools better," she said. "We could have 
programs that neither school could afford on its own, such as fine arts or 
drama." 
Some Cantwell students initially resisted the idea of sharing their classrooms 
with girls. Many said they didn't want the school's name, its colors and mascot 
to change, or endure having its creed of "Act Manfully" neutered. Others said 
they feared that camaraderie among the boys would disappear as soon they began 
competing for the attentions of their new classmates. 
The name change is still a sore spot with Cantwell alumni and some students, 
but most are looking at the consolidation of the schools as a practical matter, 
a necessity that must be faced to keep a good Catholic school in Montebello. 
And, students said, a coeducational classroom could be a lot of fun. 
"We're not mad about it," said sophomore Gabriel Arenas. "A lot of guys are 
happy that girls are going to be at the school." 
