COLLEGE FOOTBALL UPDATE; 
TOP BC RUSHER DECLARED INELIGIBLE FOR USING DRUG 
Running back Tim Frager, Boston College's leading rusher this season, has been 
declared ineligible for the remainder of the season for violating NCAA 
regulations regarding a prescription medication. 
The school said Wednesday that Frager's medication was on the National 
Collegiate Athletic Assn.'s list of 20 banned substances. The school didn't say 
what the substance was, but emphasized it was not cocaine, marijuana or 
steroids. 
Frager was randomly tested by the NCAA last week for steroids when the banned 
substance was found. The school said Frager was tested by the school's own 
random-testing program three times this season, and all tests were negative. 
The school appealed the NCAA finding on Monday, but the appeal was denied. 
Head Coach Jack Bicknell said the drug was not prescribed by the team 
physician. 
"I never sat down with the kids and said this is the 20 or so things on the 
list," Bicknell said. "I just said no steroids and no drugs. In the appeal we 
were as forceful as we could be. . . . Looking back, it was probably doomed 
from the start because it was on the sheet of banned substances and Tim signed 
the sheet. It's just a shame." 
Frager, who had gained 252 yards on 77 attempts for 3.3-yard average through 
seven games, is on schedule to graduate with his class this spring. He will 
continue his education and remain on scholarship, school officials said. 
Syracuse defensive back Darrell Jones has been charged with sexual abuse and 
trespassing for allegedly fondling and harassing a 19-year-old student in her 
apartment, school officials said today. 
The junior backup from Somerset, N.J., also has been suspended from the team 
and will not attend practice until allegations surrounding the incident are 
resolved, said sports information director Larry Kimball. 
Jones, 21, was arraigned on second-degree criminal trespass and third-degree 
sexual abuse charges in city court Tuesday. He was released on his own 
recognizance pending a pretrial hearing Nov. 20. 
A Syracuse University judicial board has scheduled a meeting to discuss the 
incident, which allegedly occurred Oct. 19, Kimball said. 
"Right now he's going to school and trying to clear up his name and 
reputation," football Coach Dick MacPherson said. 
