STAGE REVIEW; 
'CYMBELINE' IS WORTH THE TRIP; 
THE SAN DIEGO REP'S PRODUCTION OF THIS RARELY DONE SHAKESPEAREAN WORK IS 3 1/2 
HOURS WELL SPENT. 
Shakespeare must have been in a generous mood when he wrote "Cymbeline." 
Generous about length -- the swift-paced production at the San Diego Repertory 
Theatre's Lyceum Space runs 3 1/2 hours. 
Generous about story lines; he provides several where one would do. 
But, most important, generously gentle in spirit. The characters in "Cymbeline" 
err at least as much as those in the tragedies, but in this wistful, magical 
romance, nearly all elude the consequences of their mistakes. Even when a war 
is fought and won so that King Cymbeline of Great Britain can avoid paying 
tribute to Rome, in the end he decides to pay the tribute anyway in order to 
maintain good relations. 
All the villains, save the two who die, repent. Every still-standing fence is 
mended. Even those whose blood burned hottest learn to turn the other cheek. 
As the wronged and once-rash Posthumus says upon freeing the shackled man who 
nearly cost him his life (as well as that of his wife), "Live and deal with 
others better." 
The length and complexity of "Cymbeline," one of Shakespeare's rarely done 
plays, might prove daunting to many companies. 
But not the San Diego Rep -- not even during this time of stressful financial 
crisis. 
If the company hadn't previously proved itself deserving of community support 
during its 15 years of adventurous producing, this play would be a reminder of 
what the company stands for. 
Artistic director Douglas Jacobs' direction shows an ardent belief in the 
play's message of forgiveness, a belief in the healing power of theater and, 
ultimately, a stubborn belief in the integrity of Shakespeare's text. 
Bravo for not trimming the story. And bravo for the simple, bare set and 
staging that keep attention focused on what counts: the play and the excellent, 
visceral ensemble acting. 
San Diego newcomer Terres Unsoeld, a tiny, intense slip of a thing, shimmers 
like an incandescent light as Cymbeline's beautiful, vibrant and amazingly 
mature daughter, Imogene. 
Shakespeare stacks several plots against this heroine: a Lear-like father who 
rejects her for her constancy to her husband (whom Cymbeline banishes); an 
Othello-like husband, Posthumus, who is taunted by the Iago-like Iachimo into 
believing her false and so orders her death, and a Lady Macbeth-like 
stepmother, who will stop at nothing, not even murder, to wrest Cymbeline's 
inheritance from Imogene so that she can give it to her own son, the cloddish 
Clotan. 
Unsoeld's glowing performance shows that she is equal to it all -- and then 
some. In one jeweled moment, reminiscent of the crypt scene in "Romeo and 
Juliet," Imogene awakes next to what she believes is the corpse of her beloved 
husband. But, despite the intensity of her grief, Unsoeld never loses touch 
with the essential strength of her character. Unlike Juliet, she never sees 
suicide as an option. Imogene is a survivor with remarkable reserves of 
strength -- qualities Shakespeare rewards with the happy ending. 
Imogene and her journey are at the center of the play, but the ensemble defines 
the world in which she operates persuasively and movingly. 
Old Globe associate artist and Shakespeare veteran Jonathan McMurtry -- here in 
his San Diego Rep debut -- anchors the play with quiet virtuosity as the angry, 
addled Cymbeline. Rosina Widdowson-Reynolds conveys the duplicity of the 
conniving stepmother with such charm that one almost admires her despite her 
evilness. Thom Murray is so brilliantly petulant and spoiled as Clotan that he 
makes amusing work of what could have become a one-note caricature. 
J. Michael Ross's deft performance as Iachimo renders the man more thoughtless 
than evil, so bent on winning a bet that he doesn't realize until too late that 
he is gambling with people's lives. Bruce McKenzie seems appropriately tortured 
as Posthumus, a wildly praised and generally beloved guy who nevertheless seems 
to be a bit of a lummox, flailing from one near-fatal mistake to another. 
The common problem shared by these disparate characters is their susceptibility 
and suggestibility. They jump to wrong conclusions. They have difficulty 
distinguishing truth from deceit. 
The play should come with warning labels: Things are not as they seem. Observe 
for yourself. Have faith in those you love. Give the benefit of the doubt to 
those who have earned your trust. 
Even Imogene, among the wisest of Shakespearean heroines, falls victim to 
duplicity when she jumps to conclusions after receiving a gift of poisoned 
medicine from her straight-arrow servant, Pisanio, who is stolidly and 
forcefully portrayed by Bill Dunnam. 
But what goes around comes around, a point made abundantly clear by Brenda 
Berry's set design -- a simple round stage with minimal props on which the 
action moves fluidly. 
Instead of furniture, Berry gives us luscious, sumptuous lighting. The 
simplicity of the staging, accentuated by Jonathan Sacks' original 
medieval-style music and Catherine Meacham Hunt's unfussy medieval costumes, 
eases one into the world of the imagination. 
And what a rich and rewarding trip that is. Some may balk at a 3 1/2-hour 
commitment to an unfamiliar work. But those with patience and an affection for 
mental and spiritual adventure will find the journey well worth the wild and 
delightful treats that are in store. 
"CYMBELINE" 
By William Shakespeare. Director is Douglas Jacobs. Set and lighting by Brenda 
Berry. Costumes by Catherine Meacham Hunt. Original music by Jonathan Sacks. 
Fight choreography by Christopher Villa. Sound by Will Parsons. Vocal direction 
by Linda Vickerman. Movement coaching by Judith Greer Essex. Stage manager is 
Jerome J. Sheehan. With Darla Cash, Walter Murray, Rosina Widdowson-Reynolds, 
Bruce McKenzie, Terres Unsoeld, Jonathan McMurtry, Bill Dunnam, Thom Murray, 
Eric Grischkat, John Joseph Freeman, J. Michael Ross, Damon Bryant, John 
Highkin and Ian Ross. At 8 p.m. Tuesday-Saturday and 7 p.m. Sundays, with 
Sunday matinees at 2 through Dec. 1. At the Lyceum Space, 79 Horton Plaza, San 
Diego, 235-8025. 
