RETURN TO ARMS; 
BALLROOM DANCING MAKES A COMEBACK, SOMETIMES WITH A WEST COAST SPIN 
Three feet. That was the lean margin that saved Betty and Gene Taylor's lives 
the night that two elevated walkways above the lobby of the posh Hyatt Regency 
Hotel in Kansas City collapsed during a crowded swing dance contest, killing 
114. 
Dancing to the Duke Ellington standard "Satin Doll," Gene Taylor had just 
"thrown" his wife out into a twirl when the Santa Ana couple heard a roar and 
turned to see a huge cloud of smoke arise from the crashing debris. 
"We were just three feet from where the skywalks fell," recalls Betty, who 
can't talk about the narrow escape, even nine years later, without getting 
goose bumps. Waiting under freeway overpasses for lights to change gives her 
the jitters, too. 
Grave as it was, however, the hotel disaster did not dampen a zest for dancing 
that Betty, 62, and Gene, 70, have kept alive since high school. 
"Tired? No, just warm," said Gene, after nimbly leading his partner through a 
round of under-the-arm dance turns at Costa Mesa's Red Lion Hotel on a recent 
Sunday afternoon. 
"We write it down on the calendar: 'Go dancing,' " he said above the brassy 
strains of the 19-piece Tracey Wells Big Swing Band. "I feel 40 years younger 
when I'm dancing. I really do." 
The Taylors' passion for social or ballroom dance is shared by enthusiasts 
nationwide who have fueled a resurgence in the avocation's popularity over the 
past several years. 
In Orange County, where a throng of 1,000 is typical at one monthly dance fest, 
the pastime is practiced day and evening by devotees who flock to busy 
nightspots, dance academies and competitions, whether to rumba, swing, fox trot 
or waltz. 
"Our mailing list has grown by leaps and bounds over the past two years," said 
Ken Allan, who books big bands into the Irvine Marriott Hotel's Rendezvous 
Ballroom about once a month. 
"I go dancing every day and twice on Sunday," said Bettye Murphy, part of a 
capacity crowd that filled the spacious lounge at Fullerton's Dia mond 
Restaurant by 8:30 on a recent Tuesday evening. 
"I love it. It's good exercise, it's good for meeting people and I love the 
music," said Murphy, 55, whose partner, Joe Ciraulo, had just brought her head 
within inches of the floor in a slow, sweeping dip. 
Rock 'n' roll may have temporarily rendered touch-dancing passe, but couples 
have begun to return to each others' arms, said Kevin Richardson, co-owner of 
the Fred Astaire Dance Studio in Costa Mesa, where enrollment has quadrupled in 
the last two years. 
"Whether it's husbands and wives, girlfriends and boyfriends, boyfriends and 
boyfriends or whatever, couples are wanting to dance together because it's 
something they can share, and they don't have to compete with each other," 
Richardson said. 
Swing, which became California's official state dance last year, is 
particularly popular. While other fads -- such as the pelvis-friendly lambada 
-- have come and gone, the lively dance widely known by its jitterbug and Lindy 
Hop variations seems here to stay. 
"I've been into clubs all over the country for the last 30 years, and in the 
last two to three years, I haven't seen lambada danced at all," said Robert L. 
Bryant, president of the Phoenix-based United States Swing Dance Council. 
"Swing has been around for at least 50 years, and it's getting nothing but 
stronger and stronger." 
Swing dance conventions or competitions -- often up to three on a weekend -- 
are held just about every month throughout the country, where members of about 
200 swing clubs meet regularly to dance, Bryant said. 
Orange County hosts the annual U.S. Open Swing Dance Championship, the nation's 
biggest contest of its kind, to be held for the eighth time over Thanksgiving 
weekend at Anaheim's Disneyland Hotel. And about 1,000 individuals belong to 
the county's two swing clubs. 
Kenny Wetzel of Anaheim is president of the 10-year-old Rebels Swing Dance 
Club, whose initiates dance to the discs he spins on weekends at Westminster's 
Press Box. 
Wetzel, 61, one of five inductees into the U.S. Swing Dance Council Hall of 
Fame, says swing temporarily took a back seat to the twist in the '60s and the 
hustle in the '70s. "But it bounced back, and it's probably bigger than ever 
now," he said. "It never died." 
Swing first surfaced in the 1930s in New Orleans, Wetzel said, then found its 
way into Mississippi "juke joints" and finally to New York City's Harlem. 
During World War II, when big bands reigned, swing "really became the dance of 
the U.S. because it represented freedom of movement, and that's what we were 
all about: freedom," he said. 
Several Orange County spots for swing and other social dances attract a 
clientele that's 40 and over. The 55+ Club meets at the Red Lion Hotel's Sunday 
afternoon big-band dances, says club founder J. Bud Morris, who organizes the 
socials. The average age at Press Box weekends is 45, Wetzel said. 
But swing has lured younger followers, too, such as Keldee Bjerknes, 21, who 
eschews the freestyle solo dancing she used to do. 
"This is a lot more challenging, and you're working with another person, which 
makes it a lot more fun," said Bjerknes, dabbing the sweat from her brow as she 
took a break at a recent Press Box dance. 
One of about a dozen people there who were under 35, Bjerknes loosely adhered 
to a basic swing pattern. But the Lancaster resident, sporting a short 
blue-jean skirt and bare midriff, gave a contemporary spin to traditional 
swing. Whether to '40s big-band classics, R&amp;B tunes or Top 40 hits, she 
added so-called body waves -- undulating from her hips to the top of her head 
-- as well as freezes and hip rolls, which look like they sound. 
Bjerknes, a mother and secretary, also prefers the friendly, unthreatening 
atmosphere she finds when she goes out to swing dance. As is typical of other 
local social dance spots, she finds that few patrons drink, smoke or stay 
seated. 
"It's not a meat market. People come to dance," she said. 
Another magnet for younger dancers is Anaheim's Band Stand, where 700 patrons, 
most aged 25 to 35, regularly jam three dance floors on Sunday country-Western 
nights. Some stick to the Texas two-step made famous by the movie "Urban 
Cowboy," but plenty perform an updated swing, letting bolos fly, ruffled 
miniskirts swirl and cowboy boots kick. 
Bellflower-based swing teacher and dancer Phil Adams said the dance has evolved 
since its early days. 
"Old-time" swing dancers emphasize footwork, smoothness of style and a more 
rigidly erect torso, said Adams, 32. "But we don't care if we're facing 
shoulder to shoulder or not. The music makes us want to move, so why stay so 
conformed? We're having more fun." 
Nationwide, the number of dancers taking to West Coast Swing, the style most 
practiced locally, "is probably growing greater in the country community than 
anywhere else," Adams said. He explained that the versatile dance can be done 
to any sort of music, from blues to Top 40 to country-Western, that "gives you 
that pumping, bouncy feeling," and he added that country-Western fans dance as 
couples to begin with. 
Another swing arena attracting younger -- sometimes much younger -- dancers are 
dance competitions. 
About 15 Orange County couples have entered November's U.S. Open Swing Dance 
Competition, more than half of them in a Young America category for 6- to 
18-year-olds, said Jack Bridges, director of the event. 
"The Young America Division was the first to fill up this year," Bridges said. 
"You have a whole generation of kids that never learned how to dance, they just 
stand apart from one another and gyrate. They never had the fun and intimacy of 
partner dancing." 
Bret Dieball of Costa Mesa, a 10-year swing veteran at 18, won the U.S. Open in 
1987 and will compete this year. It all started in elementary school when a 
classmate begged him to appear in a dance recital as Little Boy Blue. 
"I was kinda sketchy on it because a guy dancing is thought to be a weirdo or 
something," Dieball said. "But I went and tried it out and enjoyed it, so I 
stayed with it." The Orange Coast College student, who likes to dance at 
Disneyland where big bands play on Saturday nights, said it's great for his 
social life, too. 
"With swing, you get to lead the ladies and they like it. It's new for them," 
he said. 
