STUDENT SLEUTHS RATE THE RESORTS; 
TOURISM: THE GROUP GIVES ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., A LUKEWARM 3 1/2-PINEAPPLE SCORE 
AFTER RUN-INS WITH A JITNEY DRIVER AND A WAITRESS. 
The jitney driver in Atlantic City, N.J., who snarled at Geraldine Reynoso when 
she took up an extra seat on his local bus, would have been wise to hold his 
tongue. His words would come back to haunt him. 
Reynoso, as it turned out, was a detective. Hospitality detective, that is. 
She and a dozen fellow honors students at Johnson &amp; Wales University were 
in the resort recently to sample restaurants, hotels, transportation, casinos 
-- all the city had to offer its visitors. 
When the sleuthing was done, a news conference was called and the hospitality 
verdict delivered: 3 1/2 pineapples. 
On a scale of one to five pineapples (the students' symbols of hospitality) 
that was not bad. But the marketing director for the Atlantic City Convention 
and Visitors Bureau said it clearly showed room for improvement. 
"We are talking to the jitney association to see if they can spruce up their 
temperaments a bit," John Fox said. "We're in a strong state of transition 
here. There is no excuse for not being polite, but I think we have some of the 
same problems as big cities do around the country." 
Atlantic City was the first to be officially put to the test by the students at 
Johnson &amp; Wales, a Providence, R.I.-based school that specializes in 
travel, tourism and culinary arts. 
It will not be the last, though. The students plan to visit about 20 cities 
with well-established tourism industries or plans to develop them. Ultimately, 
their efforts will yield a book informing readers whether a town offers 
top-drawer service (five pineapples) or is simply a traveler's nightmare (one 
pineapple). 
"The 1980s was a marketing era," said Paul Lacroix, chairman of the Travel 
&amp; Tourism Department at Johnson &amp; Wales and the guiding force behind 
"America's Most Hospitable Cities Survey." 
"Everyone went marketing," he said. "Now we have the customers, and my question 
to students is, 'What do we do with them?' I think the '90s is going to be an 
era of service. I think it's a very natural follow-up to what has happened in 
the '80s." 
Lacroix began toying with the idea of a nationwide hospitality survey in the 
fall and students developed the mechanism in class work, Lacroix said. 
They tried it out in Providence, a city trying to build its tourism industry, 
then modified it considerably before setting off for Atlantic City. 
Johnson &amp; Wales sent four faculty advisers and 13 students to the resort 
city, where the students were set loose. 
"I call them my SWAT team," Lacroix said. "They're my pineapple SWAT team." 
In all, students stopped at nearly 700 restaurants, casinos, hotels and other 
tourist attractions, and racked up 1,748 "service encounters." 
Reynoso, from River Vale, N.J., said the casinos, hotels and tourist 
attractions such as historic Smithville made Atlantic City worth the trip. But 
she and other students discovered several service problems. 
Reynoso had a brusque encounter with the driver of a jitney, a small bus 
resembling a milk truck that is common in Atlantic City. The driver became 
angry when Reynoso's easels and packages took up an extra seat. Another group 
of students recalled that a waitress mocked them because she thought the tip 
they left was inadequate. The students were actually not finished and planned 
to leave more, Reynoso said. 
"I liked it attraction-wise, but for service it was around average," Reynoso 
said. "They could use a lot more training." 
Student sleuths each spent $300 to $400 of university money checking out the 
city, making them the envy of a number of fellow students back in Providence. 
But, Reynoso said, the survey was more work than they could have imagined. 
"We were very tired," she said. 
Students involved in the hospitality survey kept a daily log and reported on 
each service encounter. At the end of the weekend, they called a news 
conference, gave their pineapple rating and discussed their findings. 
"I thought the review was quite fair," Fox said. "Atlantic City is a city in 
strong transition." 
Lacroix declined to say where the next hospitality survey will take place but 
revealed that it will probably be in New England. The program will concentrate 
on smaller cities such as Worcester, Mass.; Hartford, Conn.; Portland, Maine; 
Manchester, N.H.; and Newport, R.I., before taking on cities such as Atlanta, 
Los Angeles, New York, and Miami, he said. 
Lacroix expects that the guidebook based on the visits will be as helpful to 
the service industry and the cities as it is to consumers. 
"As far as I know, one like it does not exist," he said. "There are a lot of 
articles in terms of service quality slipping in America, but nothing as far as 
an organized program like this." 
