SHAKY SOUTH EL MONTE TAKES IT IN STRIDE 
The way most residents figure it, you do what you can and try not to worry 
about what you can't. 
Wedged between the San Gabriel River and the Rio Hondo, this tiny San Gabriel 
Valley industrial city is built on sandy, alluvial ground -- "old river bed," 
as Assistant City Manager Steve Henley decribes it. 
State experts say a major earthquake -- the big one -- could liquefy the city's 
base, churning up the ground and the subterranean water table like a Manhattan 
in a cocktail shaker. 
"Most engineers we've talked to say there's not much we can do about it," said 
Henley, who also is the city's emergency services coordinator. "The ground 
shakes, and the water and sand mix. The only thing we could do is excavate the 
sand, putting in a sturdier base, or get rid of the water. Neither are 
practical." 
Knowledgeable residents in this city of 19,800 tend to shrug off the extra 
dangers. 
Seven miles east of downtown Los Angeles, South El Monte has more than 1,300 
businesses, one for every 15 residents. Companies such as chicken wholesalers 
Zacky Foods and Foster Farms and sportswear manufacturer Joni Blair have 
established home bases there because of the city's central location and its 
fiscal policies, with no property taxes, utility taxes or business license 
fees. 
In recent years, the city has also become a Latino enclave. Three-quarters of 
the population is Spanish-surnamed, according to city officials. Many are 
particularly worried about earthquake dangers. 
"Because of a lot of bad experiences by family members in Mexico City (during 
an 8.1-magnitude quake in 1985), they're more sensitive than a lot of other 
people," said Patrick Sayne, superintendent of the city's Valle Lindo School 
District. 
Still, residents have some reason for consolation. Although parts of the city 
are barely a mile from the epicenter of the Oct. 1, 1987, Whittier Narrows 
5.9-magnitude earthquake, damage was negligible. 
Damage in the city was so slight -- about $50,000 worth -- that the city had to 
return a $150,000 state disaster assistance loan that was rushed through after 
the quake. "Nobody ever qualified for the money," Henley said. 
