EFFECT OF IRAQ EMBARGO A YEAR OFF, PANEL TOLD 
Sen. Sam Nunn today questioned whether it is really in the vital interest of 
the United States to liberate Kuwait from Iraqi invaders, while a former CIA 
director said it may take a year for sanctions against Iraq to be effective. 
As his Armed Services Committee opened hearings on the Persian Gulf crisis, 
Nunn (D-Ga.) said President Bush's decision to send 200,000 more troops to the 
gulf signals a fundamental shift in policy that raises a number of serious 
questions. 
"Is it in our vital interest to liberate Kuwait? How long can we sustain more 
than 400,000 troops? Has President Bush limited his options by creating a 
use-it-or-lose-it situation?" Nunn, the committee chairman, asked at the start 
of hearings prompted by Bush's decision earlier this month to send more troops 
to the region and build an "offensive military option" with a force that will 
total about 430,000 by January. 
Ex-CIA Director James R. Schlesinger, meanwhile, told the panel the government 
has concluded it will take about a year for international sanctions against 
Iraq to take full effect. 
Schlesinger said that was "an official estimate" that panel members would hear 
more about later, perhaps in a closed-door intelligence briefing later today. 
"A year, to me, seems to be in the right ballpark," Schlesinger said in 
response to questions. That will be time enough "to drain off the cash that is 
now sustaining the smuggling operations that bring in food," he added. 
"The (Iraqi) economy will be in severe difficulty in 10 months to a year's 
time," he said. But it may take somewhat longer for those difficulties to lead 
President Saddam Hussein to change his mind and withdraw from Kuwait, he said. 
Schlesinger, who also is a former defense secretary, said he believed the 
economic sanctions could have their desired effect. 
Several committee members said they believed Bush should give the embargo time 
to work before deciding to use military force to bring about an Iraqi 
withdrawal. 
Nunn indicated his support for a possible U.N. resolution authorizing military 
force against Iraq unless Hussein's troops leave Kuwait. The Security Council 
is expected to act on the measure this week. 
However, he said, "this is not a substitute for fully informing the American 
people." 
