COLUMN ONE; 
TRACKING DISEASE THE OLD WAY; 
PHYSICIANS USE DETECTIVE WORK, INSTINCT AND SOME INCREDIBLE LUCK. RECALL OF 
TRYPTOPHAN PRODUCTS IS THE RESULT. 
Over the summer, the 37-year-old woman had been sail boarding and winning 
tennis tournaments. Then she began to experience insidious pains in the temples 
and jaws. Later the pain spread throughout her body. It became so intense that 
"it hurt to put my sunglasses on," she recalled. 
Her doctors had found extremely high numbers of the uncommon white blood cell 
known as the eosinophil in her blood stream. But despite an exhaustive medical 
workup, including exploratory abdominal surgery, they "were completely 
baffled." 
When Dr. William Blevins, a Taos oncologist, reviewed the case at St. Vincent 
Hospital in late October, he was struck by a tantalizing clue: From July until 
September, the woman had taken supplements of the essential amino acid 
L-tryptophan each night to help her sleep. 
At the same time, a 44-year-old Los Alamos housewife and a 37-year-old Santa Fe 
restaurant hostess were seeking medical treatment for severe muscle pains. They 
too had been taking tryptophan pills for insomnia and were found to have 
strikingly high eosinophil counts. 
Within days, Blevins and three other physicians -- a medical school classmate 
who was treating the Los Alamos housewife, a rheumatologist who was consulting 
on two of the three cases, and a Mayo Clinic immunologist who is a leading 
authority on eosinophils -- had made the connection between preparations of the 
amino acid and a potentially fatal condition, now known as the 
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. 
Physicians increasingly rely on complex technology and testing procedures to 
diagnose disease. But the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome illustrates how some 
clinical advances are still made the old-fashioned way -- by talking to 
patients and carefully piecing together their histories. Like many medical 
discoveries, this one combined instinct, detective work, and some incredible 
strokes of luck. 
As of Nov. 22, there had been 427 reported cases nationwide of the previously 
unrecognized disorder, including 69 in California, and two confirmed deaths, 
according to the Centers for Disease Control. About a third of the first 85 
reported patients have been hospitalized. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has ordered a recall of products in which 
tryptophan is the sole or major component, and several states, including 
California, have banned tryptophan sales. The public has been warned not to 
take tryptophan capsules or tablets until it is determined if the amino acid 
itself, a chemical or microbiological impurity, or perhaps a predisposition for 
some individuals to develop the disorder is to blame for the epidemic. 
Medical progress, such as the discovery of the AIDS virus or the tick-borne 
bacterium that causes Lyme disease, often results from exhaustive 
epidemiological and laboratory research. But these developments were possible 
because connections were made between puzzling patients -- the gay men in Los 
Angeles in 1981 with the unusual lung infections or the cluster of children 
with rashes and arthritis in the region of Lyme, Conn., in 1975. 
On the other hand, many apparent clusters of illnesses, such as cancers, turn 
out to be coincidences and not true associations. As a result, sometimes 
potential clues to new knowledge are prematurely dismissed as "red herrings," 
while in other instances, physicians or the public cling to discredited 
relationships. 
In New Mexico, "it was clear at the outset that something unusual was going 
on," said Dr. Phillip Hertzman, the Los Alamos family practitioner. "But I 
think it was luck that we talked to each other." Otherwise, Hertzman said the 
connection might have gone unrecognized for "months." 
"I have been in this game a while and when I see lightning strike once, I get a 
little suspicious, twice, more suspicious, and three times, we better take it 
very seriously," said Dr. Gerald J. Gleich, the Mayo Clinic immunologist who 
discussed the cases by telephone with the New Mexico doctors and first notified 
New Mexico and federal health officials of the illness cluster. 
The majority of cases have been in women, who appear more likely to take 
tryptophan-containing products than men. Because some estimate that tens of 
thousands to hundreds of thousands of people may be using the supplements, 
health officials expect many more cases to develop. 
Tryptophan supplements have been increasingly used during the 1980s, not only 
for insomnia and premenstrual syndrome, but also for depression and stress 
reduction, attention deficits in children, and weight loss. 
Most of the illnesses seem to have developed since July, although there have 
been sporadic reports of problems that began earlier. Some patients had only 
taken tryptophan for a matter of weeks before they became ill; others had taken 
it for several years. 
"The problem has probably been going on at a low-grade level and for some 
reason spurted this summer," said Dr. Henry Falk, director of the CDC's 
environmental hazards and health effects division. Recent studies in New 
Mexico, Minnesota and Oregon "appear to have very strongly linked the actual 
taking of these tablets and capsules with the disease." 
Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. Tryptophan is one of the 
essential amino acids that is a necessary part of the diet because it cannot be 
synthesized by humans. 
In adults, the average daily dietary intake of tryptophan is slightly more than 
one gram (0.04 ounces). The amino acid is contained in proteins found in meat, 
eggs, dairy products and other foods. The syndrome has developed in people who 
were taking from as little as 200 milligrams of tryptophan supplements daily to 
as much as 18 grams a day, according to Falk. The average amount has been about 
two grams. 
Many researchers are suspicious that some form of contamination will eventually 
be identified, perhaps involving one of a handful of Japanese companies that 
make virtually all of the tryptophan contained in products that have been sold 
in the United States or some of the many American companies that repackage and 
distribute the products. 
Of the tryptophan users who have become sick, a few -- like the Santa Fe woman 
who was hospitalized -- have been more seriously ill than others. Some 
"basically have sore flesh" while others "have serious organ damage," according 
to Dr. Joseph Duffy, a consultant in rheumatology at the Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester, Minn., where about a dozen patients with the syndrome have been 
treated. 
All the patients, however, appear to share common features -- high eosinophil 
counts and marked muscle inflammation caused by an invasion of muscle tissue by 
eosinophils. Other causes of high eosinophil counts, such as parasite 
infections or tumors, have been excluded. 
The sicker patients include those whose nerves, skin, or heart muscle have been 
afflicted, Duffy said. One Mayo Clinic patient with severe impairment of her 
breathing muscles has been on a respirator for more than 10 days. A patient who 
died in New York had such severe nerve and muscle damage that she became a 
quadriplegic, and eventually her heart stopped beating. 
The severe cases of the illness resemble "toxic-oil syndrome," a disease that 
was epidemic in Spain in 1981. Toxic-oil syndrome was caused by a denatured 
cooking oil that was sold for food use, although it was intended for industrial 
use. Nearly 20,000 cases and 315 deaths were reported over a one-year period. 
Some patients seem to improve when they discontinue tryptophan and are 
prescribed high doses of steroids, which are powerful anti-inflammatory 
medications. But Duffy cautioned that many of the sickest patients have not had 
a "dramatic response" to steroid therapy and those that improve may relapse if 
the dose is reduced. The long-term prognosis of the syndrome and its biological 
mechanism are not known. 
This illness can "potentially be fatal in extreme cases," said Hertzman of Los 
Alamos. "Hopefully, if you catch it early it can be reversed." 
While the three northern New Mexico women may not have been the first to become 
ill, in the lexicon of disease investigators, they are the "index" cases that 
allowed other cases of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome to be quickly identified. 
The first case involved a woman who always had been healthy and athletic until 
she developed the debilitating muscle ailment. 
After she was hospitalized in Santa Fe in early October, her condition 
deteriorated and her abdomen and lungs filled with fluid. Her doctors thought 
she might have some rare southwestern fungus, an exotic parasite, Lyme disease 
or perhaps leukemia, she recalled in an interview last week. 
On Oct. 25, the woman's physician went on vacation and turned her care over to 
Blevins, the Taos oncologist. Just the day before, he had been thinking about 
tryptophan because a physician had recommended it to his wife for premenstrual 
syndrome and he had read the pamphlet that she brought home. 
When Blevins reviewed the perplexing case, "he immediately hit on it" and 
"decided it was an interesting thing to pursue," the woman said. 
Blevins said: "I spent a lot of time with her. Every test had turned out 
negative, she had even had surgery and there was no explanation. So it was one 
clue that maybe drugs (were involved). . . . I kind of suspected it but I 
didn't know, I didn't have another case." 
But Blevins was concerned enough that he called his wife and said "don't take 
the L-tryptophan. There is a case at the hospital which has this bizarre 
allergic phenomenon and I presume it is the drug." 
The next day, Hertzman referred his patient to Dr. James W. Mayer, a Santa Fe 
rheumatologist. Over the course of a month, the housewife had developed 
incapacitating muscle aches, mouth ulcers and severe fatigue and was "feeling 
worse and worse," Hertzman recalled. 
Mayer, it turned out, was also consulting on Blevins' patient. Immediately, he 
noticed "the possibility of similarities." Mayer telephoned both Blevins and 
Hertzman, telling them that "we have another patient who is also on 
L-tryptophan, maybe something is going on." 
Hertzman immediately telephoned Blevins, a medical school classmate whom he had 
not talked to in six years. Soon the three physicians were reviewing the 
situation with the Mayo Clinic's Gleich, whose advice had been sought earlier 
in October by the physician Blevins was covering for. 
The third case was identified when Blevins received a call on Oct. 30 from the 
Women's Health Clinic in Santa Fe about a restaurant hostess with severe muscle 
pains and high numbers of eosinophils. 
"I said is this patient on L-tryptophan?" Blevins recalled. 
The answer was "Yes, she is. I immediately called Gleich." 
Gleich knew that very few eosinophilia cases would remain unexplained after the 
detailed evaluation that the first two patients had received. He "was already 
getting excited when he heard that there were two cases within 30 miles before 
anybody ever said a word about L-tryptophan," Hertzman said. "And then there 
was a third case within three days and he was off the wall. He was calling five 
times a day." 
Still another case was identified the next day when Blevins was discussing 
eosinophilia over coffee in the doctor's lounge at the hospital. "(An 
infectious disease specialist) overheard me and said, 'I've got a case,' " 
Blevins said. "It was this networking, this collaboration." 
On Nov. 3, New Mexico health officials sent a computer message to other states 
alerting them to look for cases. On Nov. 7, the Albuquerque Journal ran a 
front-page story on the illness cluster. 
Case reports soon began to flow in from across the state and across the 
country. Judy Kody Paulsen, an athletic 38-year-old Albuquerque woman with a 
similar problem, was on her way to the Mayo Clinic to see Duffy. After reading 
the paper, she packed her tryptophan tablets and called Duffy and Gleich from 
the airport. 
Within days, it became clear that what appeared at first to be a northern New 
Mexico curiosity was in fact a national public health emergency. "We were 
beginning to collect patients daily," Duffy said. It was "astonishing when they 
kept saying, yes, yes, yes (when asked about tryptophan use). We never expected 
that. It just had to be a cause/effect relationship." 
Researchers do not know how to explain isolated but apparently similar cases 
that have cropped up in previous years. One example is a 1986 case involving a 
woman taking "numerous self-prescribed vitamin and mineral supplements" that 
Duffy and two colleagues described in a January, 1988, article in the Mayo 
Clinic Proceedings. 
At the time, the Mayo Clinic physicians had no specific reason to ask the woman 
specifically about tryptophan use. But when Duffy telephoned her earlier this 
month, he found out that she had been "on it for years" and was continuing to 
"do poorly." Asked if he thought tryptophan products were to blame for the 
patient's years of illness, Duffy said, "I would believe so." 
The three "index" New Mexico patients are all much improved. The patient who 
was hospitalized stopped taking tryptophan supplements before entering the 
hospital and her doctors started her on steroid therapy before they suspected 
the association with the amino acid product. 
The fluid in her abdomen and lungs has disappeared and she is "getting stronger 
every day." But she is apprehensive about the future. Physicians "don't know 
whether this will turn itself off or whether I will relapse," she said. "We 
really don't know what will happen next." 
WHAT ARE EOSINOPHILS? Eosinophils, a type of white blood cell, are part of the 
body's immune system. The cells are so named because of their marked affinity 
for the rose-colored stain called "eosin," making them appear pink under the 
microscope. 
Eosinophils play an important role in defense against infection, because they 
can kill many types of microscopic parasites and worms. On the other hand, in a 
variety of illnesses, including asthma, some skin ailments and some heart 
diseases, the cells release toxic proteins that may damage tissues. 
"The eosinophil is a kamikaze cell," said Dr. Gerald J. Gleich of the Mayo 
Clinic. "When it goes into tissue, it loses its (cellular) identity and blows 
up," dispersing the highly toxic proteins. 
This appears to be how disease is caused in the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. 
But researchers don't understand why the body makes more eosinophils, and why 
they in turn attack the muscles and other tissues. 
Eosinophilia is the medical name for conditions characterized by an elevated 
number of eosinophils in the blood stream. The list of such conditions is very 
long. It includes allergies, asthma, parasitic diseases, other infections, 
rheumatologic diseases, and tumors. 
Normal eosinophil counts range from 50 to 350 cells per cubic millimeter, or 
just a few percent of all white blood cells in the circulation. By comparison, 
some of the patients with the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome have had counts of 
10,000 cells per cubic millimeter or more, or more than 50% of all white blood 
cells in their circulation. 
