FOREIGN ENVOYS MAY N.Y., BUT THE FEELING ISN'T ALWAYS MUTUAL; 
DIPLOMATS: WHEN THE HOST CITY AND ITS GUESTS CONFLICT, ONE WOMAN IS RESPONSIBLE 
FOR SMOOTHING THE WATERS. 
Mayor Ed Koch, told that Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, were coming 
for a visit, said: "Great. Invite them to dinner. I'll take them to my favorite 
Chinese restaurant." 
Although the reaction says something about the mayor's natural exuberance, it 
also says a great deal about this polyglot city that is host to the world's 
largest diplomatic corps, about 40,000 men, women and children from widely 
divergent cultures. They staff 159 missions to the United Nations and 87 
consulates. 
If it's not easy living with 8 million New Yorkers, it's no piece of cake for 
the New Yorkers either. 
Many of these guests live within the sometimes shelter of diplomatic immunity. 
Their various embassies are considered foreign territory, immune from New 
York's police force and city inspectors, as is the United Nations itself. And 
their 1,000 cars have special areas to park, one of their privileges, which 
doesn't stop them from parking illegally almost anywhere they choose. 
Last year, 65,000 parking violations were issued to cars with diplomatic 
plates, down from 154,000 a decade earlier, an indication of better 
cooperation. 
The Vienna Convention does specify that the diplomats should respect the laws 
of the host country. So diplomatic vehicles can be towed away by the city if 
they threaten health and safety, but unlike everyday New Yorkers, the erring 
diplomat can retrieve his or her car without cost in most circumstances. 
The city concedes that there is not enough diplomatic parking space. Fifty-five 
missions and consulates don't have any. But it is the one battlefield where the 
host New Yorkers and their guests cross bayonets. 
Not long ago, the Mexican ambassador pulled up to his designated diplomatic 
parking spot in front of his residence just as a New Yorker was backing into 
it. The ambassador asked him to move and he wouldn't. It heated up from there. 
Finally, the ambassador pulled a gun and won back his parking place. 
The person who adjudicates, mediates and calms the angry waters is Gillian 
Martin Sorensen, head of the city's Commission for the United Nations and 
Consular Corps. She is the wife of Ted Sorensen, a New York attorney who served 
in President John F. Kennedy's White House. 
Their home phone rings at all hours of the night. The diplomatic 911 number 
seems to be "Call Gillian." 
"Not that it happens every night, because it doesn't," she said. "But it still 
makes me jump because I know if they're calling at that hour, it's important. 
They know someone will respond." 
It can be anything -- including a bomb threat, a diplomatic suicide, a runaway 
child or a heart attack. "The daughter of the Indian ambassador died the other 
day of an asthma attack in a matter of minutes," she said. 
"If it's a towed car, we let it wait until morning." 
For her, it is an obvious labor of love. "I learned how deeply diplomats care 
about their work," she said. "I learned how the image of diplomats as 
high-living, socializing, striped-pants types is far from the truth." 
As commissioner, she is a sometimes housemother to people who are far from 
home, in an alien environment and vulnerable. 
They have their share of stolen cars, stolen car radios, even stolen license 
plates. A car belonging to Bangladesh was hijacked at knifepoint in October. 
Sorensen points out that the red, white and blue diplomatic plates make them 
highly visible. 
To counteract this, one diplomat put an "I love New York," sticker on his 
bumper. So she made them available to any embassy or consulate that wanted 
them. China, Haiti, India, Jordan, the Holy See and Hungary were among the 
first to order. Hundreds went out. 
New York is not an easy environment. 
During the telephone strike, there were about 80 calls from diplomats who 
couldn't get their phones installed and were out of communication with their 
home governments. 
Sorensen said she and her staff of 14 "were able on a selective and emergency 
basis to get their phones hooked up." 
Then there was the time a water main burst and flooded the Bulgarian Embassy's 
basement, where they keep important files. The water department responded 
quickly. 
"Another time, the Chinese Consulate in Manhattan called in consternation," she 
remembered. "They looked out their windows and to their shock there were 
flaming cars speeding by." 
It turned out to be a movie crew filming a chase scene. The crew had a permit, 
but nobody had notified the Chinese. "World War III is not breaking out," she 
reassured them. 
Part of her staff's job is to cut through municipal red tape, provide advice on 
everything from leases to insurance, from child care to provisions for the 
handicapped. 
Over time, there have been a sprinkling of minor crimes, an occasional 
shoplifting, a few assaults, usually involving teen-age sons of diplomats. But 
she insists that as a group the diplomatic corps is responsible and 
law-abiding. 
There is a curious pattern in the parking violations, which are tracked by 
computer. 
"We have a handful who tend to be chronic," Sorensen said. "And then I 
discovered from friends in London that the worst chronic offenders here are, by 
nationality, the worst chronic offenders there." 
It often reflects the attitude toward the law they have at home. When a new 
ambassador comes in and cracks down, making them pay for their own parking 
tickets, even when they are not required to pay under international law, the 
parking violations clear up quickly. 
Diplomatic immunity is a sometime thing. Heads of mission and their immediate 
family generally are immune from all local laws. But as one's grade in post 
descends, one's immunity erodes. 
Even if they didn't have to confront local or state law, they would have to 
face various degrees of censure from their home countries and the United 
Nations. For a while, debt was a large problem, so bad that some New York 
landlords wouldn't rent to diplomatic missions. Probably the premier case 
involved Zaire, which is not a poor country. 
When Zairian President Mobutu Sese Seko came to New York on a courtesy visit, 
Mayor Koch received him. After some polite conversation, the head of state 
asked Sorensen about Zaire's debt in New York. She told him that his nation 
owed more than $150,000 in rent and other bills. 
"The president was furious and berated his ambassador and his foreign minister, 
who were there," she recalled. "When he heard the sum involved he said, 'You 
come with us when we leave here.' So I took a City Hall colleague with me and 
we went to the president's hotel. Then and there, from suitcases, they 
literally paid us in cash, bundles of cash." 
Then there are the political demonstrations on the streets. 
"We've had occasions when we've had two opposing views, the pro on this side of 
the street and the con on that side of the street," she said. 
New York gives wide latitude to demonstrators, but the police firmly enforce 
the limits, broad as they are. 
"Sometimes it bothers the neighbors and sometimes it bothers the people in the 
mission or consulate being picketed," she said. "We let it be a lesson in 
democracy, a lesson in free speech. I think that is not a bad lesson. They know 
they are in New York in the United States of America. They know what the rules 
and regulations are, that people can carry any flag they like and they can say 
anything, even outrageous things. 
"They may not like it and it may not be allowed at home, but those are the 
rules we go by, so they accept it." 
It's not the only lesson New York teaches the foreign diplomats. 
"It's heartwarming to me to see that the foreigner's attitude and understanding 
toward this city and toward democratic society does change with time," she 
said. "They arrive in New York somewhat intimidated and afraid of the city. Our 
reputation is kind of frightening. When they leave, I find a lot of them love 
New York. They love the options. They love the rhythm. They love the diversity 
and the mix. They love the freedoms that we take for granted. And they leave 
with regret." 
She said the New York experience stays with them. "We know that service in New 
York is an essential step on the career ladder of diplomats. And the younger 
the country, the younger the diplomat, the more true it is. And we'll see them 
again, either as ambassador or minister or, in some cases, head of government." 
In her dozen years tending to diplomats, Sorensen has seen everything from a 
terrorist assassination to a head of government who wanted to hire a chef at 
the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and take him home with him because he liked his 
pancakes. 
The Gorbachev visit on Dec. 6, 1988, marked the end of frosty and somewhat 
formal relations with the Soviet Union. 
"Not only was the Soviet Union changing its historic role and becoming active 
and engaged and constructive in the U.N., but also the citizens of New York 
(were changing), with construction workers hanging out a huge sign that said, 
'Hard Hats Welcome Gorby.' It was proof that you should never give up, that 
things can change and that diplomacy is not just a highfalutin term but a 
vehicle for that change." 
A footnote to the Gorbachevs' quick trip: It took 5,000 extra police to provide 
security and traffic control, for which the city was reimbursed $2.5 million. 
When the Gorbachevs had to cut short the visit on Dec. 8 because of the 
Armenian earthquake, it was a great disappointment to a fourth-grade class 
where Raisa Gorbachev was to visit. The 8-year-olds were all dressed up, their 
welcome sign was up and the refreshments were ready. 
"This is where it goes beyond diplomacy to touch real people and change a view 
of another power, no longer an evil empire, but somebody's country, a people to 
know and understand and to learn about," Sorensen said. 
To her, the whole experience has been extraordinary -- and sometimes touching. 
When the sultan of Brunei arrived to celebrate his country's joining the United 
Nations, he asked what the city needed. He wanted to present a little gift. 
Of the hundreds of needs in New York, Sorensen named a few. When the Sultan 
called on the mayor, "he was about as shy as anyone I've ever seen. You could 
hardly hear him. He almost spoke in a whisper, so there was a slightly awkward 
exchange with the mayor. Then he reached into his pocket and took out his 
little gift. It was a check for $500,000 made out to 'Meals On Wheels.' " 
Economic Impact of Playing Host to the United Nations 
How much the presence of United Nations headquarters costs and benefits New 
York City in 1988 (thousands of dollars) 
Cost to New York City 
Direct Costs; 
$645 Budget of special city agency 
$3,900 Public school education for families of diplomats and staff 
$7,000 Extraordinary police protection 
Foregone revenue: 
$1,557 Unpaid parking fines, towing charges 
$20,400 Property taxes 
Total: $33, 502 
Benefit to New York City 
$133,562 Spending by subsidiary programs 
$233, 645 Spending by member missions 
$7,000 Reimbursement for extraordinary police protection 
$138,090 Spending by consulates 
$352,000 General UN program spending 
Total: $864, 297 
Source: N.Y.C. Commission for the U.N. and Consular Corps 
