BUSH MAKES SHARP TURNS ALONG THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL; 
POLITICS: THE PRESIDENT LAUNCHES FIERY ATTACKS ON THE DEMOCRATS, THEN SOFTENS 
HIS TONE. HE INSISTS THAT HE HAS HAD NO 'CHANGE OF HEART.' 
Much as he is sending out dual messages on the Persian Gulf -- determined not 
to yield an inch to Saddam Hussein but expressing the hope that not a shot is 
fired -- President Bush is sending out multiple messages on the domestic 
political front as he winds up yet one more campaign. 
At one moment he appears to step back from his angry attacks on Democrats; at 
another he charges into the fray by denouncing their "demagogic . . . 
soaking-the-rich" approach. 
At stop after stop as the President made his way along the East Coast on 
Thursday and across the Midwest on Friday in the closing days of the 
congressional and gubernatorial election campaigns, it was much the same: All 
takers, be they Saddam Hussein or Democrats and Republicans, were offered the 
rose or the fist, take your pick. 
Earlier this week, Bush railed against Democrats who would build campaigns 
around "tax-the-rich, class warfare . . . garbage." 
Since he used the line about "garbage" in Oklahoma City on Monday, he has -- 
for the most part -- not been nearly as tough on his party's Democratic 
opponents. A change of heart? 
"It's not a change of heart," he said. Rather, "I'd like to finish on a 
positive note in these campaigns." 
Besides, he said Thursday evening, "it's a little early to say that there will 
be no more flamboyant rhetoric about the Democrats, because I'm absolutely 
convinced if we had more Republicans, things would be a lot better." 
So the message is mixed. No longer, Bush said at one stop, with dramatic anger 
creeping into his voice, will government programs be funded with red ink. Not 
after the budget compromise that was hammered out in a summer-and autumn-long 
game of chicken between Capitol Hill and the White House. 
"I have the veto pen, and I will use it over and over and over again," Bush 
declared, his volume rising and his left hand pounding the lectern -- this time 
in Cincinnati -- the first stop on a day that also took him to Rochester, 
Minn., and Sioux City, Iowa. He arrived in Thousand Oaks, Calif., on Friday 
night. 
Willie Horton, the furloughed convicted murderer who Bush made a symbol in the 
1988 presidential campaign, may be gone from the speech texts, but there are 
still daily reminders of the threat of street crime that the image of Horton 
had provided, with the President invariably making a link to "liberal 
Democrats" who opposed the anti-crime bill he supported. 
"Handcuffs belong not on the cops and the courts; handcuffs belong on the 
criminals," Bush said. 
The problems that plagued the President's campaign efforts two weeks ago at the 
height of the outcry over the final work on the 1991 budget have disappeared. 
Unlike his tour of New England on Oct. 23, when one candidate for whom Bush was 
campaigning openly voiced his opposition to the President's acceptance of a tax 
increase, and another found it more convenient not to appear on the same 
platform as Bush, the President has found no shortage of candidates willing to 
stand with him in public. Today, he is making his second appearance in a week 
with Sen. Pete Wilson, the GOP's gubernatorial candidate, at a rally at 
California Lutheran University in Thousand Oaks. 
In some recent public opinion surveys, those saying they approve of the way 
Bush is doing his job has fallen from an extraordinarily high rating in the 
mid-70% range to slightly below 50%. But Bush, an astute politician known to 
consult closely with his political advisers, professes to be taking the long 
view. 
"I told you when things were soaring like eagles: 'Don't believe the polls.' 
And I think now I'm entitled to say: 'Hey, we're going to come on back, don't 
worry about it. They'll be all right,' " he told a news conference on the first 
day of his six-day political journey, which is intended to lend the prestige of 
the presidency to candidates for offices ranging from state auditor to 
governor. 
