AUTHORITIES GET 2 CONFLICTING CONFESSIONS TO PAINTING'S THEFT 
Los Angeles County sheriff's investigators believe they have one confession too 
many in the theft of a 17th-Century Dutch painting recovered at the apartment 
of two Lancaster men who were arrested for stealing the $18,000 artwork. 
The roommates, one of whom is an art student at Antelope Valley College where 
the painting was stolen Nov. 6, have both confessed to taking the painting off 
the wall of the college art gallery and walking out with it, Detective J. 
Siebert said Wednesday. 
But Siebert believes only one person stole "Nymphs Gathering Flowers in a 
Landscape," painted by Gerard Hoet the Elder before 1700. Each suspect says the 
other is innocent, Siebert said. 
"They're probably trying to protect each other," he said. "Both say they don't 
want the other one to get in trouble for something he didn't do. I believe one 
is the thief and the other is an accessory." 
Jereld Sharitz, 23, a student at the college, and Timothy Cain, a 27-year-old 
grocery clerk, were arrested Tuesday on suspicion of grand theft. Cain was 
arrested at their apartment in the 43300 block of Gadsen Avenue in Lancaster 
and Sharitz surrendered shortly afterward at the sheriff's station, the 
detective said. 
Siebert said he has been notified by the owner's lawyer that the work, which 
was recovered in good condition, is worth about $18,000 -- considerably lower 
than the tentative estimate of $50,000 to $100,000 made by college officials. 
Deputies served a search warrant Tuesday afternoon after an acquaintance of the 
suspects told Siebert he had seen the painting in their apartment and 
recognized it from news reports. 
Sharitz was released on $1,500 bail, and Cain remained in custody Wednesday in 
lieu of the same bail amount, Siebert said. 
The theft last month abruptly ended the college's first major art show "Great 
European Masterpieces," an exhibit featuring 18 paintings owned by Lancaster 
businessman Kenneth McDonald. The show was monitored by a student aide and 
occasionally by security guards. The gallery alarm functions only when the 
building is closed for the night. 
Sharitz told investigators he took the painting because he liked it and because 
it was nearest to the gallery entrance, Siebert said. Cain, meanwhile, said he 
stole the painting as a gift for Sharitz, Siebert said. 
Gallery director Pat Hinds described Sharitz as a student with a "healthy 
interest in art. I was surprised. He's a very nice person." 
Sharitz has been taking courses at the college since 1983, college officials 
said. This semester he is enrolled in a ceramics class taught in a room next to 
the gallery, they said. 
