CHARGER NOTES; 
PLAYERS PUT DINNER ON 100 FAMILIES' TABLES 
The Chargers made Thanksgiving a happy holiday for 100 needy families in San 
Diego Wednesday. 
Strong safety Martin Bayless came up with the idea, and he and 32 teammates 
distributed turkey and ham dinners at homes designated by police agencies and 
the Salvation Army. 
Funds were contributed equally by the Charger players, the team's front office 
and the Big Bear food-store chain. The players chipped in $1,800. Charger owner 
Alex Spanos matched that, as did Big Bear, which provided the food. 
After Wednesday's workout, the players loaded the food into their cars and made 
the rounds of selected homes in Logan Heights, San Ysidro, Linda Vista and 
Southeast San Diego. 
"It's something we used to do when I was with the Buffalo Bills (1984-86)," 
Bayless said. "I asked the guys in a meeting last week if they wanted to go 
along with it, and I got 100% cooperation. 
"It gives me a great feeling to do something for people who wouldn't otherwise 
have a good Thanksgiving. I've seen some of the environments and conditions 
people have to live in, and I realize how lucky I am to be where I am. 
"We paired guys up two to a car and gave them maps. Most of the families knew 
ahead of time that Chargers were stopping by to wish them a happy Thanksgiving, 
but they weren't aware that food was going to be included." 
Bayless also took part in a charitable venture Tuesday, accompanying linebacker 
Billy Ray Smith on Smith's fifth annual visit to Neighborhood House. With 
Bayless and Smith were linebacker Gary Plummer and defensive end Leslie O'Neal. 
The players bought lunch for 160 senior citizens there. 
Running back Marion Butts will miss Sunday's game against the Colts in 
Indianapolis because of a knee injury suffered in the Pittsburgh Steeler game 
Sunday. 
Coach Dan Henning said Butts, the Chargers' No. 2 rusher with 377 yards, would 
be out at least three weeks. Henning said that with only five games remaining, 
Butts might eventually be put on injured reserve but probably not this week. 
A stronger immediate candidate for injured reserve is H-back Rod Bernstine, who 
has missed six games because of a knee injury and has shown no indication when 
he might be able to play. If a roster spot were made available, running back 
Victor Floyd could be activated from the developmental squad. 
Tim Spencer, who gained a career-high 87 yards against the Steelers and leads 
the team with 432, is scheduled to start Sunday with Darrin Nelson and Dana 
Brinson in reserve. But Spencer has a sore knee and a chest bruise. 
Both Butts and Bernstine were listed as questionable on the Chargers' injury 
report. So were nose tackle Joe Phillips (ankle), linebacker Cedric Figaro 
(back), defensive end Lee Williams (knee) and free safety Vencie Glenn (knee), 
all of whom are expected to play. 
Plummer (shoulder) and tight end Andy Parker (concussion) were listed as 
probable. 
Charger Notes 
Free safety Vencie Glenn attributed his knee injury to the artificial turf in 
Pittsburgh. Also on the subject of artificial turf, cornerback Gill Byrd said, 
"Every time I play on that stuff, I get all torn up. I don't see how those 
teams can practice on it and play on it day after day. It shortens your 
career." . . . The Colts listed cornerback Eugene Daniel (virus) as doubtful, 
wide receiver James Pruitt (ankle) and cornerback Chris Goode (hamstring) as 
questionable and offensive tackle Kevin Call (calf), cornerback John Baylor 
(ankle) and linebacker Duane Bickett (hamstring and shoulder) as probable. 
