BEAUHUNKS AND GOOBS OF PRETTY PEOPLE U; 
SLANG: A UCLA LINGUISTICS PROFESSOR HAD HER STUDENTS COLLECT CURRENT HIP 
PHRASES. THE RESULTING BOOK IS THE TALK OF THE CAMPUS. 
Not too long ago, linguistics professor Pamela Munro didn't know a "beauhunk" 
from a "goob." 
Then she started assigning her students at UCLA to collect slang terms. And 
last fall, after students in her Linguistics 88A seminar had collected and 
compiled an extensive list, they decided they had the makings of a book. 
The result, a dictionary called "U.C.L.A. Slang," is a hot item in the 
bookstore at "Pretty People University" (UCLA). Now, even the most uncool 
"remos" (nerds) on campus who may "jones for" (really want) popularity can use 
the dictionary to learn what's hip. 
More than 2,300 copies have been sold locally. The dictionary has been so well 
received that Harmony Books, which is a part of Random House, has picked it up 
for publication and will release a more comprehensive version under the title 
"Slang U," expected to reach bookstores by early February. 
Although excited over the dictionary's success, Munro is taking the hoopla -- 
not to be confused with "brewhaha," which at UCLA means beer -- in stride. 
"I think everybody is interested in slang," she said. "A lot of the expressions 
in the dictionary are funny." 
The dictionary is popular not just among the school's "beauhunks" (gorgeous 
men) and "bettys" (gorgeous women), "goobs" and "dweebs" (nerds of any sex), 
and "way fashionable studs." Parents are also getting in on the action. 
"I've had a number of parents say they bought the dictionary so they could 
understand what their child is saying," Munro said. "Some read it and say they 
can't believe people are saying these things." 
A linguistics professor at UCLA since 1974, Munro said she was turned on to the 
richness of slang in 1981 by Connie Eble, a professor at the University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill who publishes papers on campus slang each year. 
The use of slang is nothing new, Munro noted. One of its functions is to help 
define distinct social groups. 
Munro said the ephemerality of slang is unpredictable. "Some slang words stay 
around and some don't," she said. "It's really hard to say which ones will 
last." 
Although some of the entries in the dictionary are common to campuses across 
the nation, Munro said many are unique to "Joe and Josephine Bruins" (UCLA 
students). 
Slang, she said, comes from a variety of sources. Some terms are adaptations of 
existings words, some are compounded or come from standard vocabulary, and 
others are words picked up from television and movie characters. 
For example, Munro cited a popular saying that is not listed in the campus 
dictionary but will be in the Harmony Books version: "Sally," a name given to a 
woman who is compulsive and meticulous. It comes from the movie "When Harry Met 
Sally," Munro said. 
Although the study of slang is only a small portion of her work, Munro said it 
has been enlightening. 
"If you study any kind of language, you learn a great respect for the human 
brain," she said. "There are clever minds that come up with these slangs, and 
you think, 'How did someone come up with this?' " 
No doubt the students at UCLA think it's "no biggie." They come up with slang 
terms "24-7" (all the time, derived from 24 hours a day, seven days a week). 
