NARCOTICS CASES CLOGGING UP COURTS, DELAYING CIVIL MATTERS AND OVERCROWDING 
JAILS 
Drug cases have clogged urban courts, delayed civil matters, overcrowded jails 
and stirred new debate over the best possible solution -- legalization or more 
judges. 
"If you want to look at the largest single cause of caseload glut, drugs are 
it," said Albert Alschuler, professor at the University of Chicago Law School. 
"We're having fewer and fewer trials, particularly on the civil side. No one 
can afford to wait. The system's just become unworkable." 
Much of the impact is on state courts, which process about 97 percent of drug 
arrests. But the federal system also is feeling the crunch. Consider: 
* Drug cases in federal courts increased by 280% since 1980, Chief Justice 
William H. Rehnquist said last December in his annual end-of-the-year report. 
He urged Congress to act immediately on a proposal to create new judgeships. 
In July, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved a measure to create 77 new 
judgeships. The bill is pending in the Senate. 
* Federal drug cases represented more than 26% of new criminal filings, and up 
to 60% in some districts, Rehnquist said. Nearly 55% of criminal appeals 
involved drug offenses, compared with 30% in 1980. 
* The drug caseload rose by 56% in 17 big-city courts between 1983 and 1987, 
according to a 1989 report, "The Impact of Drug Cases on Case Processing in 
Urban Trial Courts." Among the major increases: Boston, 175%; Jersey City, 
N.J., 114%; the Bronx borough of New York City, 109%, and Oakland, 95%. 
* Drug-related cases made up about a quarter of felonies disposed of in 26 
big-city courts in 1987, the report said. It noted that number actually is low 
because it doesn't count incidents in which drugs were involved but didn't 
constitute the most serious charge. 
The situation has turned even grimmer since then; in Detroit, the percentage of 
state court drug cases more than doubled from 1987 to 1989, said John Goerdt, 
the report's co-author and senior staff attorney at the National Center for 
State Courts. 
Drug cases, he added, are "starting to show up in family courts, in juvenile 
courts, with abused and neglected kids." 
When courts are stressed, "nobody can render the same quality of justice," said 
James Fyfe, a criminal justice professor at American University in Washington, 
D.C. "We all know the old saw that justice delayed is justice denied. Evidence 
disappears. Recollections grow dimmer." 
Complicating matters, experts say, are new mandatory sentencing laws, leading 
some defendants to seek trial rather than pleading guilty, adding to the 
backlog. 
In Goerdt's report, jury trials in the 26 big-city courts disposed of only 6% 
of all felonies in 1987. 
