DR. JOYCE BROTHERS: DON'T BURDEN SON WITH GUILT TRIP 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: My 8-year-old son is going to spend several weeks with my 
ex-husband and his wife. This will be the first time this has happened since 
our divorce and I'm depressed and frightened by the prospect. I'm wondering how 
he'll adjust and if there's anything I can do to help him. 
F.W. 
DEAR F.W.: Try not to cry or complain about how sorry you are to see your son 
leave. This will make him depressed and he will be apt to feel guilty if he 
enjoys himself. An 8-year-old, and even children much younger, can worry about 
leaving their parents, especially boys who may feel that they're supposed to be 
responsible for their mother's well-being. 
Incidentally, all single parents need to stress that their children shouldn't 
worry about the parents' moods, nor should they feel responsible for making 
them happy. When single parents ignore this, they are burdening their 
youngsters unfairly and this will have unfortunate repercussions later. 
Children who switch between parents adjust more easily if the divorced parents 
have managed to respect each other's feelings and don't have a lot of 
unresolved conflicts. Children may try to test parents by questioning and 
comparing discipline. Divorced parents need to back each other up with house 
rules spelled out in advance. It's a good idea to go with your child to select 
a small gift that he might take to his father. This will let him know that it's 
all right to enjoy himself and that he won't have to feel disloyal when he 
does. 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: My daughter is in love with a nice young man but is afraid 
of marrying him because she thinks marriages inevitably fail. I realize part of 
this is because, unfortunately, both my marriages have ended in divorce. Is 
there anything I can do to help give her a more positive view of matrimony? 
T.S. 
DEAR T.S.: It would be unwise to try to push her into a marriage until she is 
ready. Her cynical attitude about marriage isn't unusual in children who've 
experienced divorce firsthand. There are some recent statistics that might help 
to allay her fears, however. 
While disenchantment plagues young working wives who are trying to juggle jobs 
and demands of parenting and homemaking, sociologist Andrew Greeley gives 
marriage high marks. He reports that, despite the difficulties of young working 
wives, the most unhappy Americans are women who haven't yet married or those 
who've separated or divorced and haven't remarried. 
So it seems that married women, even with their problems, "are still better off 
on the average in terms of 'happiness' than their sisters who haven't married 
or who are separated or divorced and not remarried." 
More goods news from the National Opinion Research Center: Not only are fewer 
marriages ending, but married people -- close to two-thirds of them -- report 
they are "very happy." Most married couples have few regrets. About 85% say 
they would remarry their spouse if they had it to do over again. 
