NOTRE DAME POSTS FIRST PLAYOFF WIN 
Although the modest offensive output of Notre Dame High was hardly befitting a 
team that has buried recent opponents, the Knights' 10-3 victory over Righetti 
on Friday undoubtedly will be inked in the annals of school history. 
Before this Southern Section Division VII playoff opener, Notre Dame had not 
won a postseason football game since the school opened in 1947. 
"That was kind of a monkey on my back -- everybody talked about it so much," 
said Notre Dame Coach Kevin Rooney, adding that he will have to further sharpen 
his offense to survive in the playoffs. "I don't think we can drop a bunch of 
passes and get penalized like we did and win again." 
Notre Dame will play San Marino, a 14-6 winner over South Torrance, next week 
in the second round of the playoffs at a site to be announced. Righetti 
finishes 6-5. 
Notre Dame (10-1) mounted the game-winning drive late in the third quarter 
after linebacker Anthony Fanara batted down Pat Risher's pass on a fake punt on 
fourth down. 
The Knights took over at their 41-yard line and moved the ball into Righetti 
territory on a nine-yard run by Errol Small and a 19-yard pass from Greg 
Andrachick to Guillermo Eguez. 
On third and seven at the Knights' 28, Tim Elliot caught an eight-yard pass, 
was hit and fumbled. Notre Dame's Setefano Malieitulua recovered at the 16 to 
sustain the drive. 
Five plays later, with 8:52 to play, Andrachick faked a handoff to Small, 
rolled right on a bootleg and dived into the end zone. Chris Afarian added the 
point-after touchdown. 
Small led all rushers with 73 yards in 20 carries. 
"He's a little bigger than we've faced," Righetti Coach Tom Hawkins said of 
Small, who has gained 1,117 yards on the ground. "We had problems wrapping him. 
But as far as shiftiness, I don't think he's going to be a big-time running 
back. He's a good-looking athlete, though." 
The game was delayed for several minutes shortly before the intermission so 
Notre Dame's Anthony Rodriguez, whose leg was injured, could be taken from the 
field on a stretcher. 
On the next play, Anthony Martinez was chased out of the pocket and unloaded a 
pass that was intercepted by Fanara at midfield and returned to the Righetti 
15. 
Because there were 10 seconds left after Fanara's return, Notre Dame had time 
for one play. 
Andrachick's pass barely glanced off the fingertips of Eguez, who was in the 
end zone. The Knights settled for a 31-yard field goal by Afarian to tie the 
score, 3-3. 
