STRUCTURE IS LARGEST YET SEEN IN UNIVERSE; 
ASTRONOMY: A NEWLY DISCOVERED SHEET OF GALAXIES STRETCHES FOR 500 MILLION 
LIGHT-YEARS. HARVARD SCIENTISTS CALL THEIR DISCOVERY THE GREAT WALL. 
Scientists have discovered the largest structure seen so far in the universe, a 
narrow sheet of galaxies stretching more than half a billion light years across 
space. 
The scientists, who have pioneered in the effort to determine the large-scale 
structure of the universe by creating three-dimensional images of space, have 
called their discovery the Great Wall. 
Margaret Geller and John Huchra of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for 
Astrophysics in Cambridge said the string of galaxies is 500 million 
light-years long, 200 million light-years wide, and about 15 million 
light-years thick. (A light-year is the distance light travels in a year, about 
6 trillion miles.) They reported their discovery in today's issue of the 
journal Science. 
The Great Wall is more than 200 million light-years away from Earth, and it 
cannot be seen with the unaided eye. In fact, it does not even show up in 
normal astronomical photographs because it is revealed only through a 
three-dimensional effect. 
Geller and Huchra are engaged in an ambitious research project that has 
revolutionized the thinking on the shape of outer space. By measuring the 
distance between Earth and 10,000 galaxies in a pie-shaped wedge of the 
northern celestial hemisphere, they have been able to plot the galaxies with a 
computer and they have produced some startling results. 
Four years ago they announced that their first three-dimensional image revealed 
that the universe is structured around giant voids that look somewhat like soap 
bubbles in a dishpan. Galaxies are strung along the skin of the "bubbles," and 
scientists have debated fiercely over how the bubbles could have been created. 
Some of the bubbles are huge, measuring 150 million light-years in diameter. 
That is so big that scientists are at a loss to explain how the matter that 
makes up galaxies could have been swept clear of such a large area in the 10 to 
20 billion years since the universe was born. 
Early explanations, including the suggestion that massive explosions sent 
matter flying out from the center of the voids to create the bubble effect, 
have not gained acceptance because scientists cannot explain how matter could 
have traveled far enough to create the giant voids in the lifetime of the 
universe. 
Today's announcement only adds to the mystery and was described by the two 
scientists as "one of the most sobering results" of their research. 
It may well be that there are even much larger structures waiting to be 
discovered, further complicating the lives of cosmologists who are already 
struggling to explain why the universe should have enormous areas that are 
devoid of galaxies. 
"The size of the largest structures we detect is limited only by the extent of 
the survey," Geller said. 
Although earlier attempts to determine the structure of the universe suggested 
in the 1970s that space had some areas that were devoid of galaxies, Geller and 
Huchra were the first to carry the surveys far enough into space to see the 
large-scale structures, including the bubbles and the Great Wall. 
They have used the 60-inch telescope at the Smithsonian's Whipple Observatory 
on Mt. Hopkins, Ariz., to measure the "red shift" of galaxies in a pie-shaped 
"slice of the universe." As a galaxy speeds away from the Earth, the light it 
emits is shifted to the red end of the electromagnetic spectrum. By measuring 
the red shift, the scientists are able to determine the distance to the 
galaxies. 
The first results suggested that voids were present. Subsequent surveys, 
looking twice as far into space as previous efforts, revealed that the patterns 
continued farther out. 
The Great Wall became a distinct structure as the scientists finished their 
fourth "slice of the universe." 
