BUSH VETOES AID BILL; ABORTION FUNDING CITED 
President Bush on Sunday vetoed a $14.6-billion foreign aid bill that included 
emergency economic aid for Poland and Hungary because the legislation provides 
$15 million for a United Nations family planning agency. 
The President contends that the agency finances compulsory abortions in China. 
The President's action marked the third time that he has vetoed a major bill 
containing funding for abortions. Neither the House nor Senate is expected to 
have the votes to override the veto and Congress thus may be forced to strip 
the provision from the bill and send it to the President again. 
The bill would provide foreign aid for the 1990 fiscal year, including $532 
million to help the troubled economies of Poland and Hungary. 
A new bill to replace the one that was vetoed was scheduled to come before the 
House today. 
The foreign aid legislation "would clearly place the United States in the 
position of supporting a program that in turn supports coercive abortions, a 
program that is inconsistent with American values," Bush said. The veto drew 
quick responses from both sides of the abortion debate. 
Douglas Johnson, legislative director of the National Right to Life Committee, 
said that Bush's veto tells population control agencies that "if you trample on 
human rights by supporting compulsory abortion programs, you'll get no help 
from the U.S. government." 
Werner Fornos, president of the Population Institute, criticized the President. 
"He's selling out poor women throughout the world for his domestic political 
advantage, a dubious political advantage," said Fornos. "Certainly the rest of 
America is not marching with him in this insensitive, callous action." Bush's 
major objection is $15 million earmarked in the bill for the U.N. fund that 
provides money to China's population control activity. The Chinese have been 
accused of requiring sterilization and forced abortions in efforts to limit 
families to one child. 
The President also opposes a section in the bill that prohibits using foreign 
aid to encourage other countries to carry out military activities in violation 
of U.S. law. This section was prompted by the Iran-Contra scandal, in which 
American officials solicited other nations to provide funds for the Contras in 
Nicaragua. The Congress previously had cut off U.S. aid to the Contras. 
Administration officials said that the legislation would improperly restrict 
the President's ability to conduct foreign policy. 
The biggest beneficiaries of foreign aid in the bill would be Israel, which 
would receive $3 billion, and Egypt, which would get $2.1 billion. 
The Senate passed the foreign aid bill last week, despite the White House veto 
threat. The House originally had bowed to presidential pressure and decided to 
effectively block funding for the U.N. agency. However, on Thursday, the House 
reversed itself and passed the measure in the same form as had the Senate. 
In other abortion vetoes, the President on Oct. 21 vetoed a bill providing 
funds for two Cabinet agencies, the Department of Labor and the Department of 
Health and Human Services. The funding bill, for the first time since 1981, 
would have permitted federal funding of abortions for victims of rape and 
incest. The House tried to override the veto, but fell 51 votes short of the 
two-thirds majority needed. 
A new bill was prepared, allowing federal funding of abortions only when the 
life of the mother "would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term." 
This single exception for permissible abortions has been contained in the 
Labor-HHS spending bills for the last eight years and presumably is acceptable 
to the Administration. 
The President also vetoed an appropriations bill for the District of Columbia, 
because it would have permitted the district government to use locally raised 
funds to pay for abortions. 
