BUILDER PROPOSES NEW SLEEPY HOLLOW PLAN TO CUT DOWN GRADING 
Developer Ken Doty, whose proposal to build 25 hillside houses was rejected by 
the Planning Commission and criticized by neighbors, has unveiled an 
alternative plan that he says will require less grading on sensitive 
ridgelines. 
The Glendale City Council will review the alternative plan and Doty's original 
proposal for the 30-acre tract off Sleepy Hollow Place during a special meeting 
that begins at 7 p.m. today in council chambers at City Hall, 613 E. Broadway. 
"We've tried to address as much as possible the major concerns," Doty said last 
Friday, when he announced the alternative plan. 
Doty said he prepared the second plan to give council members another option, 
but added that he has not withdrawn his original building proposal. He said his 
new plan eliminates a main cut in the hillside facing Glenoaks Canyon. 
The new plan also eliminates one view lot that was criticized by city planners 
because it required excessive grading. But by reconfiguring the tract, Doty 
said he has retained room for 25 lots. 
The developer said the only way to avoid hillside grading in Sleepy Hollow is 
to haul a large quantity of dirt into the canyon by truck -- an option that is 
opposed by homeowners. 
Planning commissioners cited the ridgeline grading and the loss of oak trees in 
urging the council to deny Doty's original plan. Glenoaks Canyon residents have 
also charged that the tract would destroy scenic terrain, create traffic 
hazards and add to crowding at local schools. 
"It's impossible to completely meet all the demands," Doty said. 
Wolfgang Krause, a Glendale city planner, said Doty's alternative plan is "not 
radically different" from the original proposal. 
Leaders of the Glenoaks Canyon Homeowners Assn., which opposes the Sleepy 
Hollow project, have refused Doty's invitation to discuss the alternative plan. 
"It would be inappropriate at this time for a few people to sit down behind 
closed doors and agree to anything without the entire association knowing it," 
said Dave Weaver, association president. 
He said the new proposal should undergo the same rigorous environmental review 
that the city ordered for Doty's original plan. 
Weaver said his association has been distributing flyers, hoping to produce a 
large turnout of hillside development foes at today's meeting. 
