VALLEY YOUTHS GET AN EARFUL OF HEAVY METAL GLASNOST 
Birmingham High School students got a blast of glasnost Tuesday from a Soviet 
rock band that is touring the United States to promote cultural exchange and, 
on this day at least, to engage in a bit of old-fashioned capitalism by 
promoting its new album. 
Four members of Gorky Park, a band that played with U.S. heavy metal favorites 
Motley Crue, Bon Jovi and Ozzy Osbourne at the Moscow Music Peace Festival in 
August, performed one song and showed videos of several more for 500 
enthusiastic students at the Van Nuys high school. 
The band is the first Soviet group under contract to a U.S. recording company. 
"I don't even like rock -- I listen to rap -- but these guys are great," said 
Jay Mamaghani, a Birmingham ninth-grader, echoing the sentiments of many of 
those in the crowd. 
Members of the group told students that rock music can overcome many of the 
barriers that have separated U.S. and Soviet citizens. 
"Nobody ever hated the American people in Russia; it was all propaganda," said 
band member Alexei Belov. He drew the largest round of applause from the 
students when he explained the similarities between the two countries by noting 
that "people are the same, they make love the same all over the world." 
The event, billed as a cultural exchange, also had an anti-drug message with 
band member Belov warning the students to stay away from drugs and alcohol. 
The band members have apparently learned a lot from exchanges with their U.S. 
counterparts. They arrived by limousine, had long hair, wore lots of black 
leather and hailed the Beatles and Led Zeppelin as the greatest rock bands 
ever. 
Lead singer Nickolai Noskov was a no-show: He was asleep back at the hotel 
during the 1 p.m. performance, band members said. 
Even though the group plays a hard-edged brand of rock, it performed for the 
students a 500-year-old traditional Russian folk song called "Oh Frost." The 
electric guitars were being reserved for a show Tuesday night at a local 
nightclub, band members said. 
The group showed a video of members performing a remake of the 1960s song "My 
Generation," originally by The Who. "The feelings that they were singing about 
25 years ago is what started happening in Russia five years ago," Belov said. 
It was then that Belov and fellow Gorky Park musicians were able to emerge from 
underground rock clubs and no longer risk arrest for playing the type of rock 
music that until recently was banned by authorities, Belov said. 
Belov, the group's lead guitarist and a classically trained violinist, said he 
was arrested several times for performing in "unofficial bands" before 
restrictions were eased under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost 
policy. The band gives thanks to Gorbachev in a message on the cover of its 
PolyGram album entitled "Gorky Park." 
Glasnost has also had an economic impact. In past years, popular musicians 
employed by Soviet authorities earned only a small salary and no royalties for 
their work, Belov said. 
"Now we make as much in one concert in Russia as a regular guy makes in eight 
years," Belov said. 
