MASSIVE U.S. TROOP CUTS IN EUROPE PLANNED 
American defense planners are preparing massive new troop cuts in Europe, 
reducing the U.S. presence here by as much as two-thirds over the next several 
years, a senior U.S. official said Tuesday. The current 310,000 U.S. troops in 
Europe will be cut to 100,000 to 150,000 in response to a sharply reduced 
Soviet military threat and in recognition of severe budgetary pressures at 
home, said the official, who asked that his name not be used. 
The new cuts would be conditioned on equal Soviet reductions and strict 
verification measures to ensure compliance with the agreement, U.S. officials 
said. 
In Washington, President Bush on Tuesday sought to dampen speculation over the 
upcoming U.S.-Soviet summit meeting by declaring that the weekend talks in 
Malta will produce no deals on troop reductions in Europe. And here in 
Brussels, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney reassured West European allies that 
the United States will not unilaterally reduce forces committed to the Western 
military alliance. 
Meanwhile, White House budget officials have proposed deep cuts in the 1991 
defense budget that would require substantial troop cuts relatively soon, The 
Times has learned. 
Richard G. Darman, White House budget director, has proposed cutting the 
defense budget to $290 billion, a slight reduction from the 1990 level and a 
4.6% cut from the level that would be required to keep pace with inflation. The 
Pentagon is fighting to hold the line at $301 billion to avoid a rapid 
scale-back, sources said. 
Bush is expected to make a decision on the issue after returning from the 
superpower summit. 
Senior planners here have concluded that it is safe to gradually "draw down" 
U.S. forces to substantially lower levels. 
Bush may propose the new numbers to Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at 
the Malta meeting, the officials here said. White House Press Secretary Marlin 
Fitzwater said Monday that Bush is considering "a wide range of military 
options that involve a number of different force levels." 
The new cuts would be negotiated with the Soviet Union beginning immediately 
after completion of the current round of arms talks in Vienna known as CFE, or 
Conventional Forces in Europe. 
CFE II, as the new talks are already being called, would build upon the 
principles of the first round, which began earlier this year. U.S. negotiators 
are under a firm White House deadline to complete the CFE I talks in time for a 
Bush-Gorbachev summit next June, officials here said. 
The current round of talks would reduce U.S. and Soviet troop levels in Europe 
to 275,000 on each side. That represents about a 10% cut for the Americans and 
a 50% cut for the Soviets. The second round would at least halve those numbers 
but use the CFE framework as the means to accomplish the cuts, officials said. 
The proposed CFE treaty provides for constant monitoring of each side's forces 
to assure that they are within the overall ceilings and are deployed and 
equipped in compliance with the treaty language. 
"With CFE, you're getting two for one," a senior U.S. official at the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization said. "In addition to cuts everyone wants to make 
anyway, you're also getting a security structure in the bargain." 
Talk of unilateral U.S. force reductions or a separate U.S.-Soviet peace 
outside of NATO leave European leaders profoundly uneasy. 
Gen. Uigleik Eide of Norway, chairman of NATO's military committee, said at a 
press conference Tuesday: "Defense planning must be in accord with the arms 
control process. . . . The committee strongly recommends a step-by-step process 
of controlled and verifiable progress, thus avoiding unilateral Western 
disarmament." 
Although expressed in NATO code language, his comments were meant as a sharp 
warning to Bush and Cheney not to bypass the alliance in their haste to 
conclude arms deals with Moscow and to trim the Pentagon budget. 
Eide said that despite the symbolism of the Berlin Wall cracking apart, the 
military might of the Soviet Union and its allies remains formidable. 
Ironically, the Norwegian's language echoes that of Cheney just a few weeks 
ago, when the American defense chief was virtually the last voice in the Bush 
Administration warning of a continuing Soviet menace. 
Today, Cheney appears to be among the Administration's foremost advocates of 
disarmament. Aides suggest that Cheney has adopted a conciliatory tone in part 
to reassure Gorbachev that the Administration speaks with one voice and in part 
to convince Congress that he's serious about cutting military spending. 
The arms control process provides several opportunities for reducing the 
Pentagon budget. 
A U.S. official assigned to NATO noted that arms control verification measures 
and improved surveillance of the Soviet Union and its shaky Warsaw Pact allies 
have provided the West with much greater warning of an impending Soviet attack. 
The increasingly remote possibility of a surprise invasion of Europe will allow 
the Pentagon to scale back expensive overseas deployments and keep the forces 
in reserve in the United States in the event they are needed, U.S. military 
planners say. 
The longer lead times will allow the Pentagon to save money on transporting 
troops back to Europe, if needed, shifting the job from expensive aircraft to 
cheaper ships. 
Times staff writer Melissa Healy, in Washington, contributed to this story. 
SUMMIT IMPORT GROWS -- East Bloc upheaval could turn summit into a landmark. 
A12 
