COMMENTARY; 
L.A. NO FIELD OF DREAMS FOR STRAWBERRY 
The trail of broken hearts reaches from Roosevelt Avenue to Elysian Park 
Avenue, from area code 718 to 213. Darryl Strawberry always leaves 'em weeping. 
What are the Mets without him? What is he without the Mets? 
He remains most clearly a mixed bag -- a puzzle wrapped in an enigma. Why 
should it be any different that he broke so many hearts when he chose to leave 
the Mets, when he broke so many hearts while he was here? 
Whether he understands it or not, he takes his baggage with him to Los Angeles. 
The fields are always more elysian in the other fellow's ballpark, especially 
through the eyes of an agent. 
I don't see anything that suggests life will be any better for Strawberry with 
the Dodgers. 
Strawberry's psyche is as firm as the bog under Shea Stadium. Playing for the 
Dodgers was his childhood dream but not playing there may have been his adult 
blessing. 
When he played in Los Angeles as a visitor it may have been a reunion with his 
family; it was hardly a celebration on the field. The enormous pressures to 
satisfy his own ego needs as well as the needs of mother, family and friends 
was a curse. Sometimes he appeared frozen. 
Over eight seasons Strawberry hit .225 in Los Angeles (39-for-173) with six 
home runs and 20 runs batted in. That's not what the Dodgers think they bought. 
Strawberry thrived this season after his crisis of alcohol rehab because of a 
bounty of aftercare. A divorce action is reported close -- perhaps awaiting 
only the input of his new contract. 
He gave credit for this summer's well-being to Dr. Allan Lans, the emotion 
coach for the Mets. Strawberry got support from the presence of Dwight Good-en 
and from the fact that Strawberry had earned status and respect from teammates 
who had learned what to hear and what to ignore. They know when "Darryl is just 
being Darryl." It's Strawberry's makeup that he needs love when teammates most 
wanted to kill him. 
Tommy Lasorda will have to blow a lot of smoke to replace Lans. Strawberry, on 
his own, has to form a whole new alliance with teammates who have to be shown. 
Maybe there is a useful link with Hubie Brooks that is left from their Mets 
days together, but both Brooks and Strawberry are right fielders -- unless the 
Dodgers are foolish enough to take up Strawberry's offer to play the minefield 
of center field. 
If he was eager to leave the critical New York media, he'll find that the Los 
Angeles media is not the docile housecat it used to be. In effect, New York 
became his home; this is where he grew up. People are much more tolerant of 
their own children than they are of outsiders. 
But what are the Mets to do without him? If they continue to harrumph at the 
free-agent marketplace, Cashen, Harazin, Wilpon and Doubleday will join 
M.Donald Grant on the list of one-way thinkers. M. Donald Grant, remember, lost 
Tom Seaver and then declared that he had a wonderful team. 
This is really a two-sided failure. One is that the Mets lost Strawberry not 
out of intention -- there doesn't seem to be any plan to guide them -- but by 
default. The other is that Strawberry is leaving not by intention so much as by 
spite. 
However much Strawberry hates the word "potential," that's what the Dodgers 
bought. They offered the king's ransom not for what he did in 1989 but for the 
two enchanting five-week segments of 1990. Ten weeks out of 25 isn't bad in 
this day and age. 
The Mets' failure was a failure to understand and cope with the nature of the 
man and his day and age. It didn't do any good for Frank Cashen to hold up 
Strawberry's statistics against Stan Musial's and see that Musial's production 
was virtually identical against lefties and righties, at home and on the road. 
So then Cashen evaluated Strawberry in public as a ".260 hitter with 30 homers 
and 80 RBI." 
The fact that it was a valid observation is what keeps this from being a civic 
tragedy. Strawberry has never had a Mickey Mantle Triple Crown year and never 
will. But Cashen's comments scarred Strawberry's touchy psyche. 
There was good reason not to renegotiate too hard for Strawberry after he came 
out of rehab because nobody knew what he would be. But for the Mets to make 
what amounted to a low-ball offer during the season and then break off talks 
was a mistake of arrogance. Strawberry suggested that the Mets could have kept 
him with an offer comparable to $15 million for four years, which bought Kevin 
Mitchell, or $19.8 million for five years, which bought Don Mattingly. 
Maybe, or maybe not. The Mets' negotiators didn't grasp that Strawberry was 
free to walk away and the market was signaling the Mets' limit of three years 
was a deception. Wilpon and Doubleday should have been emphatic that this 
should not happen. 
The agent, Eric Goldschmidt, has given Strawberry bad advice before, notably 
when he took him out of training camp two springs ago, but the team treated 
Goldschmidt like a twirp. That may be about right, but hell hath no fury like 
an agent scorned, and Strawberry was not one to make an independent decision. 
Strawberry is not a great player. He is too erratic and too one-dimensional. He 
was, however, the most compelling player in New York. Without him the Mets have 
no real punch. Without him the Mets are not a contender. 
The real failing is not that they lost Strawberry but that they have no way to 
replace him. They needed him more than they understood. They have all that 
investment in pitchers who are now at the crest of their careers. They have all 
that meat but no potatoes. 
Perhaps they could restructure around pitching with speed and defense, but they 
have no speed and not much defense. Any argument that the Mets -- after six 
years of more than 3 million tickets sold, and a big TV contract -- were acting 
out of fiscal responsibility is self-serving wind. 
The wind just blew Darryl out of town. 
