NEIGHBORS OF FREEWAY SOUND OFF FOR A WALL 
After robbing a local supermarket some years ago, the suspect dashed past 
Francine Ryan's apartment building near the freeway, clambered over a 
chain-link fence and escaped in a getaway car down the freeway. 
On other occasions, motorists who ran out of gas on the San Bernardino Freeway 
would scale the fence, knock on doors at the Royal Gardens Apartments and ask 
to use the telephone. 
"I have kids in the house," resident Christine Olguin said. "I can't open the 
door to just anybody." 
Olguin, Ryan and a dozen neighbors at the West Ramona Road apartment complex 
confronted transportation officials last week, demanding that the state install 
eight-foot walls between their buildings and the freeway, which is less than 50 
yards away. 
Residents say such a wall would reduce traffic noise as well as protect the 
neighborhood from unwanted visitors and cars that may careen off the freeway. 
"There is no denying that it's noisy," said Oscar C. Villacorte, a senior 
engineer for the state Department of Transportation. But he said the residents 
do not qualify for a sound wall because their building was erected after the 
freeway was. 
To qualify for a wall, the residents would have to get their state legislators 
to change the law, Villacorte said. 
Even if they can do that, they may still have a long wait, Villacorte said. 
More than 200 communities statewide are already on the waiting list for the 
walls. 
Michael Rotstan, a resident leading the fight for a wall, said he and his 
neighbors deserve to be at the top of the waiting list because, in addition to 
noise pollution, they also face safety problems. 
"Children climb over the fence," Rotstan said. "Cars almost careen through the 
fence." 
Most residents have at least two young children, Ryan said. It is impossible 
for parents to always keep an eye on them, especially since there are no locks 
on the building gates, she said. 
Rotstan, who lived at the county-subsidized complex in the early 1980s and 
recently moved back, said he knew about the noise problem but, as with many of 
his neighbors, could not afford to live elsewhere. Residents pay rent on a 
sliding scale according to income. "We do not have a choice," said Elizabeth 
Mejia, a 24-year-old mother of two toddlers. "Our choice is to move here or be 
homeless." 
Although the buildings were designed so that no windows face the freeway, the 
rumbling of passing trucks -- and trains on tracks between the east and 
westbound lanes -- often shake the buildings, Mejia said. 
Michael Duffy, an assistant to state Sen. Joseph Montoya (D-El Monte), said the 
senator has asked Caltrans for a report on the risks to residents' safety. 
The sound-wall waiting list is outdated because it does not take into account 
environmental changes since the freeway was built, Duffy said. For example, 
commuter bus lanes added in recent years have changed the environmental impact 
of the freeway, he said. 
Marta Maestas, a spokeswoman for Assemblyman Charles Calderon (D-Montebello), 
said Calderon will try to address the residents' concerns by focusing on the 
safety issues rather than their complaints about sound. 
