FAA CHIEF LAUDS EFFORTS TO FIND NEW AIRPORT; 
TRANSPORT: INACTION IN BUILDING MAJOR U.S. AIRPORTS WILL CAUSE WORSENING FLIGHT 
DELAYS MEANING LOST PRODUCTIVITY, INCREASED COSTS, MISSED CONNECTIONS AND 
WASTED TIME, AN OFFICIAL WARNED. 
The head of the Federal Aviation Administration on Tuesday applauded efforts in 
Orange County to seek an alternative facility to John Wayne Airport, saying new 
commercial airports are urgently needed nationwide in order to meet growing 
demand. 
FAA Administrator James B. Busey IV, speaking to a group of private pilots at 
the Westin South Coast Plaza hotel, said no new commercial airports have been 
opened in the country in 15 years, despite a doubling of air traffic during the 
same time. 
There are 21 major airports that are now severely congested, Busey said, and 
that number will double in the next eight years unless more airports are built. 
The result of inaction, he said, will be ever-worsening flight delays. 
"Delays are costing us billions of dollars a year in reduced productivity, 
increased fuel costs, missed connections (and) wasted time," Busey told 310 
members of the Orange County Aviation Council, an influential private pilots 
organization. "More congestion will mean higher transportation costs for 
everyone. American travelers will pay more, and American businesses will find 
it harder to compete in today's global markets. Our entire economy would be 
affected." 
Busey, 56, a retired Navy admiral, was speaking for the first time on the West 
Coast since being confirmed by the Senate on June 23 as the nation's 
top-ranking air safety official. He succeeded T. Allan McArtor, who resigned 
earlier this year to return to the private sector. 
Tuesday morning, Busey visited the Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center 
in Palmdale, which handles high-altitude aircraft in Southern California. In 
the afternoon, Busey toured the new terminal under construction at John Wayne 
Airport and met with controllers in the control tower. 
In his speech, Busey complimented Orange County officials for their 
perseverance in seeking a site for a new commercial airport to relieve 
congestion at John Wayne, which ranks as the nation's fifth busiest airport in 
terms of total flight operations. 
The county's Airport Site Coalition, which has been studying a number of sites 
for a regional airport in recent years, is due to make its final recommendation 
by the end of the year to the county's Board of Supervisors. The sites under 
consideration are Potrero Los Pinos in the Cleveland National Forest, Norton 
Air Force Base in San Bernardino County and south Camp Pendleton in San Diego 
County. 
"Obviously, you folks (in Orange County) have your eye on the future," Busey 
said. 
Busey noted, however, that the FAA has little control over airport site and 
selection, as those decisions are made on the local level. He added that 
support groups such as the Orange County Aviation Council, which has been in 
existence since 1974, are instrumental in influencing local policy makers on 
airport site decisions. 
Busey said the kind of community opposition that has greeted some of the Orange 
County site proposals is widespread across the country and has stymied the 
opening of new airports. A new airport scheduled for ground breaking in Denver 
in two weeks is the first to be built nationwide since the Dallas-Ft. Worth 
Airport opened in 1974, Busey said. 
"In many communities, we don't have the solid, dependable base of public 
support that we need in order to build or improve airports," Busey said. "The 
unhappy fact is that a lot of people are indifferent to aviation. They would 
have no objection if a shopping mall replaced the local airport. Others are 
supportive of airports, but 'not in my back yard.' " 
Airport opponents are so vocal that they influence local decision-makers more 
than airport proponents, Busey said. 
"If we want to build support for airport improvements, then, we must speak for 
airport development as others speak against it," he told the aviation council 
members. "I urge you to make yourselves heard in the political arena where it 
counts." 
In a news conference afterwards, Busey elaborated on his prepared remarks, 
saying that some existing airports could close because of the proliferation of 
noise abatement procedures set up by local government bodies at John Wayne and 
other airports around the country. 
The procedures are so stringent, he said, that only specially equipped jets can 
abide by the noise requirements. Busey said the FAA is considering a national 
noise policy which would supersede the varying local noise limits. 
On the subject of crowded skies, Busey told the aviation council that the 
common public perception of "winglock" or "gridlock" in the skies is 
exaggerated. He said the FAA allows only so many aircraft aloft as can be 
safely handled by the air-traffic-control system. 
Others are kept on the ground until they can be cleared for takeoff, he said. 
The FAA is trying to speed the flow of traffic by changing control procedures 
and redesigning airspace in high-density air corridors along the East Coast and 
in Southern California, Busey said. The FAA is also investing $15 billion into 
an ambitious plan to overhaul aging air-traffic-control equipment. Much of that 
equipment, Busey said, has already been replaced or is about to be replaced. 
Besides speeding up aviation traffic, Busey said the new equipment is improving 
safety in the skies. 
"None of us want another midair collision like the (Aug. 31, 1986) Cerritos 
disaster," Busey said. 
The collision over Cerritos between an Aeromexico jetliner and a single-engine 
plane killed 82 people, including 15 on the ground, and brought great pressure 
to bear on private pilots because the small plane was found to have strayed 
into controlled airspace, causing that disaster. 
Responding to complaints by private pilots that the restructuring of the 
region's airspace is driving them out of the skies, Busey said the FAA would 
make sure to leave enough special corridors open to private pilots so they can 
bypass restricted areas. 
