CONSUMER AFFAIRS / S. J. DIAMOND: MATTRESS PRICING BOUNCES BUYERS AROUND 
There's something very odd about the mattress business, and it's not just the 
fact that mattresses are always on sale. (Has anyone ever bought a mattress at 
regular price?) It's also the number of seemingly different models. In the 
Sealy Posturepedic line alone, one can have a Posturepedic Constitution, 
Grandeur Autograph, Palatial, Anniversary, Maxima, Crown Jewel or Hampshire. 
Can there really be that many choices? No, just different names for the same 
thing, thanks to an industry tradition of giving some retail stores exclusive 
names for the mattress models they carry. What one store calls the Constitution 
is the Anniversary at another store. One store's Palatial is another's Crown 
Jewel. The Grandeur Autograph is the Maxima. 
The effect on the consumer is obvious. Who knows whether a Spring Air Back 
Supporter Societe on sale for $152 at Bullock's in Los Angeles is a good deal 
when one can't find it elsewhere? And it takes some sleuthing to find out that 
it's the same as the Heritage 2000 about to go on sale at the nearby Robinson's 
for the same $152, and for $128 at a one-day sale at May Co. "That's the 
point," says a May Co. salesman. "It makes comparison shopping impossible." And 
that in turn, says Maryland's assistant attorney general, Jim Abbott, has "a 
serious adverse impact on the marketplace because it makes it difficult for 
price competition to take place." 
Indeed, the name gambit got started as a way to defeat price competition. Some 
say it started when manufacturers could no longer set retail prices, and 
mattresses began to be discounted. Some say it goes back to specific trade wars 
a decade ago among the various local factories licensed to make Sealy 
mattresses, when several different licensees would be competing in the same 
market. Some sold to discounters, and retailers, "in order not to be 
embarrassed, asked for exclusive covers and exclusive labels," says Roy Unger, 
president of Serta mattress in Des Plaines, Ill. 
"The product lends itself to this because it's difficult for the consumer to 
differentiate one from another," says Nancy Butler at the Better Sleep Council, 
an industry-supported organization in Alexandria, Va. The differences between 
one store's model and another's are generally minor -- a different choice of 
insulating material or upholstery or quilting, or just a different cover fabric 
or name. And it's the last difference that means nobody has to compete on 
price. 
Not that they don't, in their way. Mattress prices bounce around something 
fierce. That Spring Air Back Supporter Heritage 2000 had four different prices 
in a week at May Co. California stores, sales-priced at $128 each twin piece on 
Nov. 18, up to $199 per piece on Nov. 20, down to $158 on Nov. 24, with another 
10% off ($142.20) for some unexplained reason. 
This up-down pricing has gotten the mattress industry in some trouble recently, 
particularly for the retail advertising of phony "sale" prices, in which a 
store competes with its own "regular" prices rather than with another store's 
prices. Maryland's attorney general, for one, filed actions against several 
retailers, including Woodward &amp; Lothrop, Hecht's, and Montgomery Ward, for 
"using as comparatives 'regular' prices that were deceptive and misleading," 
says Jim Abbott, "because they were not prices at which the goods were ever 
sold." 
As for the multiple names, which inhibit price competition among stores, 
"there's no statute that says (the same mattresses) have to have the same 
names," says Herschel Elkins, an assistant attorney general in California. "The 
obvious purpose is to confuse, but it's not a violation of anything." 
One would think the combination of different names and constant price changes 
would make the process of choosing a mattress hard for the consumer, but the 
industry seems to believe that they've never had it so good. The mattresses 
themselves, says Unger, are a better value, more supportive, more comfortable, 
built to last. 
The industry also seems to feel that the consumer, undistracted by price 
comparisons, can focus on more important considerations -- the store, the 
brand, and the feel of the mattress. Consumers shouldn't go from store to 
store, "getting involved in what I call nuts and bolts," says Gary Pleasant, 
vice president of sales for Sealy Mattress Co. in Cleveland. "They shouldn't be 
concerned about how it's made as long as it's a reputable store and a reputable 
product and it's comfortable." 
Oddly enough for an industry that doesn't want prices discussed or compared, 
price -- and always sale price -- is the only thing advertised, because the 
industry knows that price is what sells mattresses. "The first thing people say 
they want is comfort and support," says Pleasant, "but when someone advertises, 
'We have comfortable mattresses that support your body,' nobody comes in." So 
the industry keeps advertising sales, and consumers "see so many sale ads," 
says Unger, "that they want to be sure they're getting a good value." 
It's hard work, but it can be done, and with help from unusual sources. Calling 
the local number of major mattress companies will often get one a customer 
service representative who will provide matching model names for a whole area. 
Sometimes the caller has to guess, but a stack of recent ads provides all the 
possible equivalents. 
One can even get such information from retailers, particularly discounters. 
When asked the price of Serta's Perfect Sleeper Legato, Dial-A-Bed, a national 
discount distributor, immediately provided a list of counterparts (Perfect 
Sleeper Bronze Medallion, Supreme, Paragon and Emerald), all $299 per set, with 
free delivery. Retail stores doubtless have such information as well, says 
Abbott, and consumers "ought to put salespeople on notice that they know there 
are comparable models and they want to know which. And if the retailer is 
unwilling to tell them, they should leave." 
