FUSION SCIENTIST SURFACES, SAYS WORK IS CONTINUING 
The University of Utah chemist who says he produced nuclear fusion at room 
temperature emerged Thursday from a mysterious absence to defend his disputed 
work before the state oversight panel he angered by failing to appear last 
month. 
Stanley Pons told the Utah Energy-Fusion Advisory Council that he remains 
committed to fusion research and dismissed concern about his whereabouts. 
The state, which has appropriated $5 million to fund his fusion work, became 
concerned when Pons failed to appear before the panel amid reports he had taken 
his son out of school, sold his home and left the country. 
Pons said the furor surrounding his absence was regrettable. "People who want 
to contact us do not seem to have any problem," he added. 
Pons said he wanted to take a leave of absence to work full time on fusion 
research. 
"I have requested sabbatical leave from the university to enable me to donate 
my full attention to our research," Pons said, adding that he would split his 
time between the university and working in France. "I intend to pursue our work 
in several labs with Martin Fleischmann" of England's Southampton University. 
Pons and Fleischmann stunned the scientific community in March, 1989, when they 
claimed to have produced a nuclear fusion reaction at room temperature in a 
relatively simple table-top experiment. The claim raised hopes that such a 
reaction could supply a cheap, plentiful source of power. 
The claim has since been dismissed by most scientists because they have been 
unable to reproduce the results, although some continue to report unexplained 
findings from their experiments. 
Pons said his recent work with Fleischmann "has led to the filing of a new 
patent application which we consider to be very important. We have also written 
two new papers describing this work which we expect to submit as soon as their 
release does not negate granting of patent protection." 
Fritz Will, director of the National Cold Fusion Institute at the university, 
said Pons' research would be separate from but complementary to work at the 
institute, which has a staff of about two dozen scientists. 
