ERMA BOMBECK: LAST CHANCE AT AWAKENING MARRIAGE 
I am always looking for new things to extend my marriage. Take the dual-control 
electric blanket, for example. It came along just in time. I was on the verge 
of donating my frozen body to science. 
There was a time when I thought peace and harmony in our union was threatened. 
Then my husband got an exercise bicycle with portable wheels on it. Now I just 
wheel it out of sight every chance I get and his heart rate accelerates just 
trying to find it. 
You cannot imagine my giddiness when I noted last week that there is a new 
alarm clock on the market called Shake Awake. It's touted as being for the 
"morning-impaired." 
Morning-impaired people are not physically impaired in any way. They are just 
endowed with convenient hearing. They can lie in bed and hear a water faucet 
drip outside the house. They can't hear the dog tunneling under the door when 
he wants out. They can hear the score of a ballgame when they're fast asleep in 
front of the TV set. They can't hear a baby crying at 2 a.m. in the next room. 
They can hear the tires on their car screech when it is being parked in a 
garage a block away. They cannot hear an alarm clock when it is 2 feet from 
their face. 
Shake Awake is a dream come true. You stick the clock under the pillow of the 
awakee, and when it's time for the alarm to go off, it pulsates and vibrates as 
though it's shaking you out of a coma. 
I don't want to get my hopes built up, but I think this time I'm on to 
something. We've had alarm clocks in the past that did everything from play 
music to begin with a hum and build to a crescendo that threatened to crack the 
walls. I once got an alarm clock that nagged my husband to death. As soon as he 
turned it off, it would wait five minutes and then go off again. He became 
quite hostile and one morning drowned it in the washbowl. 
One year, I bought him a clock that looked like a yellow tennis ball. When the 
alarm went off, the only way you could stop it was by slamming it against a 
wall. He eventually threw it into the driveway and ran his car over it. 
Shake Awake is my last chance. Other than having an alarm clock that grabs a 
person around the throat and shouts, "Wake up or you're a dead man!" I don't 
know what to do. 
Why am I smiling? 
