JAZZ NOTES: BRIL IN TOWN, RICHIE COLE TOURING RUSSIA; WOO ELECTED TO BOARD OF 
PACIFIC PUBLIC RADIO 
Glasnost is in the air this Thanksgiving. Soviet pianist Igor Bril appeared 
Tuesday at Bon Appetit in Westwood and Northern California-based saxophonist 
Richie Cole is currently in the midst of a tour of the Soviet Union. According 
to a press release, Cole -- whose latest Milestone LP is "Pop Bop" and who 
coincidentally lives in the Russian River town of Duncan Hills, Calif. -- 
played Moscow on Friday, Leningrad on Saturday and Sunday and will play 
Petrozavodsk, Thursday, before wrapping up his engagements in Kazanj, Sunday 
and Monday. 
Cole's repertoire -- built mostly around classic Russian tunes outfitted with 
new harmonies and modern jazz rhythms -- includes "The Internationale" (the 
communist anthem), "Let There Always Be Sunshine," which was a big hit in the 
Soviet Union in the '70s and the old favorite, "Midnight in Moscow." Cole has 
also written some originals for the occasion, "Glasnost Toast &amp; Jam," among 
them. 
The saxophonist, who many know from his work with the Manhattan Transfer and 
with the late singer Eddie Jefferson, is playing with Soviet musicians 
throughout his tour. 
Los Angeles City Councilman Michael Woo has been elected to the board of 
Pacific Public Radio (PPR), the parent nonprofit corporation with operates 
KLON-FM (88.1), now the Los Angeles basin's only 24-hour jazz outlet. 
"He's long been an advocate of jazz, he's been out there and listening and we 
hoped he might take a more active role as a member of the board," said Rick 
Lewis, president of PPR and general manager of KLON. "So we asked him to join 
us and he gave an immediate 'yes.' " 
Lewis, who said that KLON's long-awaited power increase from 1,200 to 30,000 
watts may receive action from the Federal Communications Commission in the next 
30 days, said that Woo's presence on the PPR board will give the corporation 
and KLON at least one board member who is not from the Long Beach area, where 
KLON operates. "We want to make sure our expanded audience area is presented, 
and Michael Woo ensures that happening," Lewis said. 
A chance to better understand the role of the drum set in jazz will be just one 
of the highlights of "Max Roach: A Life in Sound," which airs at 4:30 a.m. 
Saturday on KPCC-FM (89.3). Roach, who rose to the top of the modern jazz 
spectrum playing with Charlie Parker in the mid-'40s and who recently appeared 
with his Double Quartet at Catalina Bar &amp; Grill in Hollywood, talks about 
everything from his solo drum performances to his compositions for various 
stage productions in this half-hour program produced by Benjamin Shapiro. 
*** 1/2 "Happy Anniversary, Charlie Brown" (Various Artists, GRP Records). 
Released to coincide with the 40th anniversary of Charles Schulz' beloved 
"Peanuts" comic strip, this amalgamation of jazz and jazz/pop artists is 
particularly welcome for its appeal to children, an aspect most jazz recordings 
lack. Many of these now-familiar themes were written by the late pianist Vince 
Guaraldi for various "Charlie Brown" TV specials, and they have a buoyant, 
smiling feel. David Benoit captures the Guaraldi sound to a tee on "Linus and 
Lucy," Joe Williams lends a bluesy air to "Little Birdie" and Chick Corea's 
trio prances through "The Great Pumpkin Waltz." Others on hand: Dave Brubeck, 
Kenny G, Lee Ritenour and B.B. King. 
Records are rated from one to five stars. ***** means a swinging must-have for 
the jazz lover; * means save your pennies, Benny. 
