SAN DIEGO SPOTLIGHT : CLASSICAL MUSIC; 
TALMI RETURNS TO CONDUCT POWERFUL BRUCKNER PIECE 
San Diego Symphony music director Yoav Talmi returns to the podium Friday night 
to lead the orchestra in Anton Bruckner's mighty Seventh Symphony. This will 
launch the Israeli maestro's traversal of all nine Bruckner symphonies, one of 
the three cycles he has planned to unify his programming over the upcoming 
seasons. 
He is already two symphonies into his cycle of the complete Mahler symphonies, 
and last month he inaugurated an open-ended cycle of Requiems by various 
composers with the Faure Requiem. 
Talmi has cannily paired the hour-long Bruckner with the always-popular 
Mendelssohn Violin Concerto, with soloist Ida Levin. Bruckner has not been a 
staple with the local symphony, although a performance last season of his 
Fourth Symphony (the "Romantic") under German guest conductor Christoph Perick 
was both well-performed and well-received by the audience. 
"My choice of music takes into account not only my wishes," Talmi explained, 
"but also the expectations of the people we have here. I cannot launch a 
Bruckner series as if I'm in Chicago and New York, where they have a tradition 
of performing this music." 
To get local audiences accustomed to the Austrian composer's hyper-Romantic 
idiom, Talmi has promised just one jolt of Bruckner per season. In the 1991-92 
season, he will conduct the Bruckner Ninth Symphony, which won him the coveted 
Grand Prix du Disque when he recorded it with the Oslo Philharmonic. 
Talmi will discuss his programming preferences and the orchestra's current 
season at 8 a.m. Tuesday on classical music station KFSD-FM. He will co-host 
the hour with station program director and genial morning host Kingsley 
McLaren. 
Fan of Mozart. San Diego's Mainly Mozart Festival bursts on the local music 
scene at the beginning of each June with a flurry of concerts and then 
disappears for another year. To raise the festival's profile during the rest of 
the season, a pair of recitals will be presented at the Kingston Hotel, the 
festival's primary sponsor. 
Cellist Felix Fan, the 15-year-old La Jolla prodigy will perform Sunday, Dec. 
2, at 6:30 p.m. accompanied by pianist Karen Follingstad. Earlier this year, 
Fan won first prize in the American string Teachers Assn. solo competition in 
College Park, Md. He studies under Eleonore Schoenfeld of the USC music faculty 
and is a sophomore at La Jolla High School. Fan's program will include 
Beethoven's "Magic Flute" Variations and works by Schumann and Bartok. Cynthia 
Phelps, principal violist with the Minnesota Orchestra and regular soloist with 
the Mainly Mozart Festival, will give a recital Feb. 24. 
Mainly Mozart music director David Atherton will attend Fan's performance and 
the dinner afterward in the hotel restaurant. Atherton had not been scheduled 
to return to San Diego until late next month, but minor back surgery caused him 
to cancel his December London conducting engagements and return to San Diego, 
where he maintains a home, for recuperation. 
Singers' circuit. Swedish baritone Hakan Hagegard, who will appear in San Diego 
Opera's season-opening production of Mozart's "Cosi fan Tutte" in January, was 
well-received last month as the count in San Francisco Opera's new production 
of Richard Strauss's "Capriccio." Earlier this month, tenor John Duykers 
stirred audiences of the Lyric Opera of Chicago's "The Voyage of Edgar Allan 
Poe" by American composer Dominick Argento. Duykers will make his San Diego 
Opera debut in April as Enoch Pratt in Carlisle Floyd's "The Passion of 
Jonathan Wade." 
Stephen West, another singer familiar to San Diego Opera patrons (he sang the 
wily Rangoni in last season's "Boris Godunov"), sang another key role in the 
surreal Argento work. (The set for "Poe," by the way, was constructed locally 
in the San Diego Opera scenic shop.) 
Local soprano Virginia Sublett is singing the role of Nightengale and Fire in 
the current New York City Opera production of Ravel's "L'Enfant et les 
Sortileges." 
Conductors: Karen Keltner, San Diego Opera associate conductor, spent last week 
at Florida's Orlando Opera, where she conducted three performances of 
Offenbach's "The Tales of Hoffmann." 
The San Diego Symphony has confirmed that Michael Palmer, music director of the 
New Haven Symphony, will fill in for the ailing Robert Shaw in January's 
performances of the Mozart Mass in C Minor, K. 417. 
Unusual this week. The 500-voice UC San Diego Gospel Choir will perform under 
the direction of Ken Anderson at 8 p.m. Tuesday in Mandeville Auditorium. . . . 
In its television debut, the San Diego Early Music Ensemble will present "Songs 
of Courts and Cathedrals" on KPBS (Channel 15) Wednesday at 10:30 p.m. The 
ensemble sings Renaissance vocal music in a variety of local settings, from the 
Renaissance Room of the San Diego Museum of Art to the courtyard of the Mission 
San Diego de Alcala. . . . 
At the Poway Center for the Performing Arts, Mozart's rarely heard one-act 
comedy with music "The Impressario" will be given in concert form by the 
International Orchestra under guest director Karen Keltner. The sole 
performance will be a 8 p.m. Friday. San Diego Opera general director Ian 
Campbell will narrate, assisted by singers Virginia Sublett, Kerry O'Brien and 
William Eichorn. 
