HOW NIKE PLANS TO FOLLOW UP ITS 'BO KNOWS BASEBALL' TV AD 
Can Nike top Bo? 
Just about everyone knows the "Bo Knows Baseball" TV commercial for Nike. It 
features dual sports star Bo Jackson testing his skills at everything from 
playing hockey with Wayne Gretzky to strumming guitar with Bo Diddley. On 
Tuesday, production crews were in Los Angeles filming Nike's follow-up ad that 
will premiere Jan. 28, during the Super Bowl telecast on CBS. 
Jackson is in this commercial too. But the ad is not Bo II. This time, he not 
only shares the spotlight with the likes of Gretzky, Michael Jordan, Curtis 
Strange and John McEnroe, but also with some of the top-name broadcasters for 
each of their professional sports. Among these announcers are ABC's Al 
Michaels, CBS' Pat Summerall and Marv Albert of NBC. 
The commercial -- which will be dotted with quick cuts from athletes to 
announcers -- will trace the combined flight of a baseball, football, 
basketball, golf ball, tennis ball and hockey puck. The ad, which will show 
each athlete at the peak of performance, will also show many of the stars at 
the height of their anger. McEnroe, for example, throws his racket to the 
ground in disgust. And Jordan argues heatedly with a referee. 
At the same time, each of the sports announcers will say one word to complete 
the sentence "I have never, ever seen anything like it." Some observers say 
this "Just Do It" corporate ad for Nike may be one of the most complex, costly 
-- and entertaining -- sports commercials in years. 
"When something really great happens in a sport, everyone somehow becomes a 
part of it -- even the announcers," said Joe Pytka, who is directing the 
commercial for Nike, and who directed the popular "Bo Knows Baseball" ad. 
On Tuesday morning, the tennis portion of the commercial that features McEnroe 
was filmed at the Los Angeles Tennis Club. In an interview following the 
filming of his portion of the commercial, McEnroe admitted he's no Bo -- but he 
also said that Bo's no McEnroe, either. 
"In America, football is a much bigger sport. I can't fight against that," said 
McEnroe. "Sure, it can be frustrating, but I'm much better known in places like 
Europe, South America and Japan. In 10 years, I wonder how much they'll be 
saying about Bo." 
Recently, a Nike billboard on Hollywood Boulevard that features a picture of 
McEnroe was replaced by an illustration of Bo Jackson -- stretching a bat 
behind a pair of shoulder pads that he is wearing. "My poster was on that spot 
for four or five years," said McEnroe. "But Bo's not a bad guy to be replaced 
by." 
With this campaign, Nike is clearly swinging for the fences. Nike officials 
will not reveal the cost of the latest ad, but advertising executives estimate 
that production costs alone could exceed $1 million. At the same time, 
broadcast media buyers say that 60 seconds of commercial time on this year's 
Super Bowl costs about $1.2 million. 
"The Super Bowl is the most important TV event there is," said Pytka, moments 
before filming McEnroe on the courts. Pytka estimates that he and his crew will 
spend 100 to 150 hours filming and editing this ad. "After all," posed Pytka, 
"What's bigger than the Super Bowl?" 
Not much. In fact, the TV show with the most viewers in history was the 1986 
Super Bowl between Chicago and New England. Last year's Super Bowl had about 
110 million viewers. That's why a number of companies have already announced 
major campaigns that will break during the Super Bowl. 
Budweiser has already said it plans to broadcast the "Bud Bowl II" -- a series 
of animated ads that, for the second year in a row, will pit the Bud Light camp 
against the Budweiser brigade. Meanwhile, Miller Brewing Co. has signed "Night 
Court's" popular bald bailiff, Richard Moll, to appear in a series of ads with 
a Super Bowl theme for Miller Lite. Even Nissan has created a costly Super Bowl 
commercial that features a car being chased by a jet bomber. 
Super Bowl aside, Nike has plenty at stake with its latest campaign. Since the 
"Bo" ad campaign began, sales of Nike's "Cross Trainer" brand of shoes have 
rocketed. And one industry analyst recently projected in a trade publication 
that Nike will overtake Reebok in U.S. athletic footwear sales by the end of 
this year. While Reebok has continued to struggle to develop a consistent 
image, Nike has closely linked itself to a handful of the top-performing and 
best-known athletes in country. 
The writer who created the "Bo" campaign -- and who also wrote the Super Bowl 
ad -- said he is already feeling the pressure for his newest creation to be a 
success. "Everyone keeps asking me, 'How are you going to top the 'Bo' ad?' " 
said Jim Riswold, associate creative director at the Portland ad agency Wieden 
&amp; Kennedy. "If this one works out, I don't know how I'll top it. Maybe I'll 
become a monk." 
