CONFIDENT O'NEAL SAYS NOBODY DOES IT BETTER; 
CHARGERS: DON'T FEEL SAD FOR THE REST, BUT THIS OUTSIDE LINEBACKER BELIEVES 
HE'S REACHING THE TOP OF HIS PROFESSION. 
Leslie O'Neal is confident enough in his enormous abilities to say this: "I 
feel there is no one better than me." 
Strong stuff. 
Specifically, O'Neal is talking about the National Football League. More 
specifically, he is talking about the outside linebacker position the Chargers 
shifted him to this year. Before that, he was a defensive end. The change in 
nomenclature is deceiving. Essentially, O'Neal is a pass-rusher. 
And he is wise enough to qualify his contention that nobody does it better. 
"There are still some steps that I must climb to let everyone know that I am 
the best," he says. 
Smart stuff. 
The names that usually come to mind in any discussion about outside linebackers 
are the New York Giants' Lawrence Taylor, Buffalo's Cornelius Bennett and New 
England's Andre Tippett. Most people remember O'Neal as the rookie defensive 
lineman/comet who flashed into the NFL in 1986 and was leading the Chargers 
with 12 1/2 sacks before a knee injury ended his year in Week 13. Still, the 
voters named him the NFL's defensive rookie of the year. 
Few people remember the agonizing rehabilitation that forced O'Neal to miss the 
1987 season and the first six games of 1988. 
But in the past two weeks, O'Neal has collected 5 1/2 sacks and is tied with 
Denver's Simon Fletcher for the AFC lead in that category at 9 1/2. During 
those same two weeks, the Charger defense that had 15 sacks in the first seven 
games has added 10 more. 
In the past two weeks, a lot of people have remembered they had forgotten about 
O'Neal. And they are wondering if it's the same guy. The answer: It is, and it 
isn't. 
O'Neal, the eighth player selected in the 1986 draft, still looks the same. His 
playing weight still fluctuates between 250 and 260 better and more valuable 
guy now than what he was." 
One thing O'Neal hasn't lost is the pass-rushing technique he brought with him 
from Oklahoma State. Charger outside linebacker Billy Ray Smith says it's the 
stuff of training films. And Gunther Cunningham, the Charger defensive line 
coach, uses film of O'Neal for just that purpose. If you are a defensive 
lineman and you join the Chargers, Cunningham will show you film of the way 
O'Neal rushes the passer. And he will tell you that's the way you should do it, 
too. Even when O'Neal was still a rookie, veterans were trying to copy his 
moves. 
"Leslie does things on the pass rush that almost have to be shown in slow 
motion to be appreciated," Smith says. "Things like the way he uses his hands 
and the way he maximizes body leverage at the point of attack." 
And that's not all. O'Neal is relentless, a trait appreciated by one of the 
hardest-working Chargers, free safety Vencie Glenn. Glenn is the son of a 
former football coach, and "work ethic" is as important to him as "trust fund" 
is to a scion of the Rockefeller fortune. 
"Leslie O'Neal is a workaholic," Glenn says. "Leslie's always going to be in a 
dogfight with you." 
Moreover, O'Neal usually finds a way to fight the dog on his own terms. When 
the rehabilitation from his knee injury took more time than originally 
predicted, O'Neal remained calm. As late as March of 1988, he talked openly 
about the possibility he would never play again. 
"If I have to walk away from football, I think I will be able to do it with a 
cool head," he said at the time. "I didn't ask to be hurt, but it happened. I 
deal with it. I had fun the year I was playing, being around, meeting different 
people, being in the limelight. That was fun. But eventually it comes to an end 
anyway." 
O'Neal finally returned in the middle of last season. But he wasn't close to 
the player he had been. 
"I wasn't playing the game," he says. "I was more or less surviving it." 
The knee swelled up after each game and limited his practices to one a week. 
Still, he managed four sacks. And he refused to have his knee drained each 
week. The surgeon of his choice, Dr. Richard Steadman of South Lake Tahoe, told 
him that arthroscopic surgery after the season was the answer instead. 
"Leslie didn't let anybody rush him," Glenn says. "He did it his way. That's 
the way he is. He's his own man. Very independent. He believes in himself." 
Steadman turned out to be correct. The arthroscopic surgery he performed in 
January eliminated almost all the swelling. O'Neal missed very little training 
camp last summer, and now he practices every day. O'Neal says the surgery also 
ended the nagging "popping and grinding" he felt in the knee. 
"I look back at the beginning of this year and see how much stronger I feel 
now," he says. "I think I will even be stronger by the end of the year. And by 
next year I expect to see another vast improvement." 
Scary stuff. 
After O'Neal chased fleet-footed Philadelphia quarterback Randall Cunningham 
all over the field last Sunday in the Chargers' 20-17 upset victory, Cunningham 
singled O'Neal out for praise that was higher than even Cunningham realized at 
the time. 
"O'Neal's a great ballplayer," Cunningham said. "He should be in the Pro Bowl 
again. He's big and fast. He came off that serious injury. He played a great 
game." 
All true. Except for one thing. O'Neal had never played in the Pro Bowl. He 
almost certainly would have been a choice in 1986, but the injury ruined his 
chances. In fact, even though O'Neal has been around since 1986, the same year 
Lynn arrived, he has played in only 31 regular season games -- many of those in 
a limited capacity. 
"That's a compliment," O'Neal said, eyes twinkling, when informed of 
Cunningham's remarks. "I take it he feels like I'm playing at a Pro Bowl level 
now." 
For his efforts against Philadelphia, O'Neal received the "gold card" award 
from his teammates. This award gives O'Neal "taping" privileges (he doesn't 
have to wait in line), free coffee, juice and donuts and the honor of riding to 
and from the practice field in a golf cart. Gold cards are voted on only after 
victories. 
O'Neal caught a break in the schedule this year because the Chargers didn't 
play on artificial turf until the eighth week. Three of their last seven games 
are on the non-grass playing fields that are so hard on surgically repaired 
knees. Still, O'Neal expects to keep getting better. The NFL sack leader after 
nine weeks is Minnesota's Keith Millard with 13. 
O'Neal isn't the only one who thinks his play can improve. After looking at the 
Eagles' game film, the Charger coaches decided O'Neal could have had six sacks. 
And they told him so. 
"I'd say he is already back past where he was physically before the operation," 
says Charger offensive lineman James FitzPatrick. "He's always had that raw 
physical talent. But the thing that separates him from everybody else is the 
pride he takes in improving his technique. It's like a double-edged sword." 
O'Neal says he is just happy to be playing again. And an examination of his 
past quickly provides part of the reason why. When O'Neal was 5, his father was 
disabled by an industrial accident in the family's home town of Little Rock, 
Ark. O'Neal's father struggled through several operations. And his condition 
actually regressed at one point when a hip replacement operation went bad. 
"Yes," O'Neal says, "I am a different person than I was before my injury. The 
injury reinstalled the thought that on any given play, it can be over. You 
don't realize what you had until after it's gone and you get it back." 
