A 'REINVENTED' JANE FONDA LOOKS AHEAD; 
CELEBRITY: AFTER HER BREAKUP WITH TOM HAYDEN, THE ACTRESS HAS A NEW MAN IN HER 
LIFE AND THE EXCITEMENT OF NEW FILM PROJECTS. 
Last February, Jane Fonda's 16-year marriage to Tom Hayden fell apart, and she 
embarked on the most painful period of her life. She hadn't been seen onscreen 
for three years, unless you count the home video where she huffs and puffs and 
helps America blow the fat away. Choice roles that once might have been hers 
were going to younger actresses named Weaver, Winger and Field. She became 
depressed, dependent on friends and family. 
This was certainly not the feisty woman who thrust herself into the protests 
against the Vietnam War. Nor was it the prescient woman, open to the values of 
a new generation, who went on to make millions from her exercise tapes as 
standard-bearer of the health and fitness era. But now, time has brought forth 
a vital Jane, a reconstituted Jane. At 51, she says, laughing, "I've reinvented 
myself -- again." She's happier than she's been in years. For one thing there 
is a new man in her life, an Italian actor 17 years her junior, Lorenzo 
Caccialanza. She met him last May at a birthday party, and according to 
friends, he seems to be the right medicine for the moment. 
Then there is her excitement about two new films: The recently released "Old 
Gringo" and the upcoming "Stanley &amp; Iris." 
Although close friends were surprised that Fonda and Hayden called it quits, 
there had been reports of Hayden's flirtation with booze and women for years 
(Hayden denies the boozing and refuses to comment on his private life.) Says 
one friend of the marriage: "Most of us assumed it was an arrangement of sorts. 
They were getting what they needed from each other -- at least publicly. But 
clearly, they had fewer things in common the last few years." 
The final straw was apparently Hayden's serious involvement with a political 
speech writer, and Fonda, who always fights until she has nothing to lose, gave 
up. 
Subsequently, she had to come to terms with three things she had rarely 
experienced: solitude, rejection and failure. "You don't understand a 
relationship until it's over," she says. "I've gone through so many changing 
emotions over the last nine months that I can't offer any final judgments. In 
the beginning I thought it was women who do most of the work to keep marriages 
together. But now I would just say everyone has to work really hard to make 
them succeed. You keep going until the will is gone." 
Leaned on Friends 
Their group of friends didn't see much of Hayden for a while, but they were 
touched by how Fonda reached out to them. "Leaned on them is right!" she says. 
Her children, too, Vanessa, 21, and Troy, 16, rallied in a way that surprised 
even their mother. Vanessa returned from Africa, where she was making a film 
with her fahter, director Roger Vadim. "I didn't realize how wise she was," 
says Fonda. "It was an interesting role-reversal where the kid became the 
parent. The funny thing is we're all much closer now. Separating is the most 
painful thing I've ever been through, largely because you're constantly 
wondering: How much emotion do I show the children? There is a delicate balance 
between not using the kids as a battlefield and not shutting them out. You 
always have to think of them first." 
It was a hard transition from the time when the dynamics between Fonda and 
Hayden were, well, dynamic. Intellectually ravenous, Fonda delighted in his 
brilliance and, of course, he benefited financially and publicly with her 
behind him. He waged an unsuccessful campaign for the U.S. Senate and 
eventually won a seat in the California Assembly. And when pressing commitments 
left them with less and less time to spend together, Hayden joked that if they 
found themselves alone at night, it was because one of their secretaries had 
screwed up. As a public presence, though, she clearly overshadowed him. Yet 
friends recount feeling that she seemed smaller and more sullen with Hayden, 
less willing to let herself go. "She seemed," says one, "afraid to crack a joke 
or speak her mind without being put down." 
At the softball games at the couple's Santa Barbara ranch, Tom dominated. 
Longtime friend Sam Hurst, a TV producer, recounts: "A few weekends ago I was 
up there with Jane and a group, and when she got in the game I realized it was 
the first time in 15 years that I'd seen her on the field. She struck out, but 
she just laughed. Until then she had never put herself in a situation where she 
might fail." 
Casual Living 
And, indeed, she is the picture of ease, sitting in her Santa Monica house, 
which has been described as "criminally modest" for a multimillionaire movie 
star. It is casually decorated with rugs, family photos and art by Henry Fonda. 
Warhol's portraits of the woman who has had far more than her allotted 15 
minutes of fame line the stairs. 
"Old Gringo" is on her mind as she prepares for a trip halfway around the world 
to promote the film. Her characterization of the spinster, Harriet Winslow, 
obsessed her, she says. She pored over history books, researching women in the 
post-Civil War era. They were among the first to go off to college, only to 
come home and find that no one wanted them to get smart. Fonda kept a journal, 
much as she imagined Harriet would, but the character really took shape for her 
when she put on the costumes. 
"When you wear a corset for a long period of time, you can't show much emotion 
without passing out," Fonda explains. "Sex must have been interesting too. 
Every shoe had 100 buttons, and there were three layers of underwear. Either it 
ruined the moment or they had to find creative ways of making those moments." 
Fonda's co-workers are struck by this painstaking professionalism. "She works 
very hard to make every scene perfect," says Gregory Peck. "But she's also able 
to laugh, and we developed a very warm relationship over four months. I've told 
her what a gift she's given me with this part, because there aren't many 
romantic roles for a man over 70." 
'A Bear for Work' 
"Stanley &amp; Iris" director Martin Ritt, whose previous direction brought 
Oscars to Sally Field and Patricia Neal, calls her "a bear for work." Ritt had 
his work cut out for him because Fonda and costar Robert De Niro have very 
different working styles. She likes to rehearse a lot and hang out with the 
gang. De Niro likes hanging out with himself and doing the work as fresh and 
raw as possible. 
"It was lonely working with him," admits Fonda, but says, "when the camera was 
on, we were very involved, and there was something exciting about working with 
someone so brilliant, doing it his own way." The next step for the versatile 
actress will be to find roles that accurately reflect the lives of women in her 
age group. "Frankly, there wouldn't be enough parts for me if I didn't produce. 
There are fewer parts for women in general unless you're of a certain age and 
really hot. But around 45 to 65, most actresses' careers stop." 
One of her concerns is to give what she calls a "cultural face" to middle age, 
to change the popular image of mature women, and show them as vital, sexual 
beings. "I can't play glamorous anymore," she claims. "It's not what you do at 
my age. But I can still play sensual women. The definition of movie stardom is 
sex, and there has to be some of that in you." 
She has had her share of good sex on the screen. Kris Kristofferson and Donald 
Sutherland come quickly to mind. In "Gringo," there is a prolonged love scene 
with Smits, whom she is convinced will emerge from this film a major sex 
symbol. "At Cannes, no one knew him when they went in to see the film, but when 
it was over, the women were coming on to him in droves." 
Tabloid Headlines 
Staying sexy in a business that constantly falls in and out of love with its 
stars can produce many a vulnerability. Fonda was pained this year when the 
tabloids not only screamed details of her husband's infidelity but also 
reported that she'd had breast implants. It is an issue she won't discuss but 
it even troubles and confuses her closest friends. "Here's the fitness guru of 
the nation who's obviously somewhat frightened," says a longtime neighbor in 
Santa Monica. "We were shocked when she showed up with these pointy mountains. 
I think many of us felt she's a feminist who shouldn't have to do this. But we 
loved her, and it only shows that in some ways Jane still doesn't know exactly 
who she is." 
But overall, what many thought would happen to her post-Hayden -- that she'd 
turn more Hollywood than political as a way of distancing herself from the 
concerns she shared with him -- has not. She can still be seen more often at 
political meetings than at Spago. On this particular morning, she is folding up 
tables from the night before when a group gathered at her house to discuss the 
issue of aid to El Salvador. 
And so, Fonda's mixture of vulnerability and toughness still surprises. What to 
make of a woman steely enough to push through and produce difficult film 
projects, who asks for rewriter after rewrite of a script, and yet whose fears 
never seem far from the surface. 
What Fonda sees herself doing in the not-too-distant future is staying close to 
nature and paring down her way of life. In two years, when Troy finishes high 
school, she will consider leaving Los Angeles, possibly moving to Montana where 
her brother, Peter, spends his time. "I just love the feeling of carrying 
everything I want on my back," she says. "I spent a lot of my childhood 
wandering in the wilderness which was where we lived, in an area above Sunset 
Boulevard. I guess we're always trying to return to our roots." 
