HOWARD ROSENBERG: 'THE BIG ONE': AN 8.0 ON THE HOKEYNESS SCALE 
Dig out those earthquake-preparedness kits. 
Today's subject is "The Big One: the Great Los Angeles Earthquake," NBC's 
virtual remake of the 1974 theatrical movie "Earthquake." While watching it, 
you do feel something splitting. Unfortunately, it's your head. 
"The Big One" airs in two parts, at 9 p.m. Sunday and Monday on Channels 4, 36 
and 39. And it would be something if this disaster of a disaster story were to 
be an even greater catalyst for national earthquake awareness than that recent 
real-life disaster, the San Francisco quake of 1989. But don't bet on it. 
Of more immediate interest to NBC than public service is just how big the "The 
Big One" -- aptly named for a sweeps-month spectacular -- will loom in the 
Nielsens at a time when the ratings race among the Big Three networks is much 
tighter than in recent years. 
The original movie had the distinction of being able to demolish all of Los 
Angeles without budging the toupees worn by several of its male stars. Beyond 
that, it was comically bad, with Victoria Principal being assaulted among the 
ruins by a creepy sex fiend and Charlton Heston having to rescue Ava Gardner 
from a sewer. 
"The Big One" is equally bad, with the added bonus of being still slower and an 
hour longer than the original, even without commercials. 
As in "Earthquake," a government seismologist activates the plot in "The Big 
One," her prophesies of doom initially going unheeded. Claire Winslow (Joanna 
Kerns) calculates that Los Angeles is on the verge of a giant quake that will 
cause mass destruction and thousands of deaths, and she wants to warn the 
public. But her warnings are scoffed at, and -- shades of jeopardy movies from 
"Jaws" to "China Syndrome" -- economic interests take precedence over public 
safety. 
Claire gets the brushoff from the mayor's top aide (Joe Spano), who's secretly 
on the take from a furtive Donald Trump-style land developer (Robert Ginty) who 
fears that a scare over the Big One would drive down property values and cost 
him millions. 
She gets the brushoff from her plodding husband (Dan Lauria), who doesn't want 
to jeopardize his lucrative landscaping contract with the same land developer. 
"Go easy," he tells her. 
She gets the brushoff from her volatile daughter (Holly Fields), who, 
handicapped by being a teen-ager, is too busy sneering at her mother to worry 
about earthquakes. 
She gets the brushoff from her wealthy parents (Stephen Elliott and Bonnie 
Bartlett), who live in a posh high-rise that they insist is "earthquake-proof." 
Meanwhile, Claire is hounded by an unscrupulous TV reporter (Richard Masur), 
her sister (Lindsay Frost) is carrying on with a motorcycle cop (Alan Autry) to 
the dismay of her snobby mother, and her maid (Sylvana Gallardo) has hocked her 
music box to buy her son a watch. 
And, oh yes, an Aryan-looking assassin is in town, getting a bead on a visiting 
black South African dignitary (Brock Peters) who is being touted as the next 
prime minister. 
Californians don't have to be told that underestimating the threat of 
earthquakes is a mistake, and just where and when the Big One is coming has 
been debated by experts for years. But a hackneyed treatment like this -- so 
predictably plotted that the only real suspense comes in speculating who will 
get bopped on the head or swallowed by the earth -- seems only to trivialize 
the danger. 
You get the inevitable rumble, rumble, Blowie!, a whopping 8.0 on the Richter 
scale. You also get some stupendous hokeyness that registers about an 8.0. 
For example, the assassination subplot is an epicenter of foolishness and has 
to be seen to be believed. Even as the city is in the throes of a 7.2 
aftershock, the miraculously surviving assassin continues to hold his position 
-- on the roof of a building that is rocking back and forth -- and blast away 
at his intended victim from long range. Great, an earthquake comedy. 
There's another brief sequence that may amuse Angelenos. When word of the 
impending Big One finally does leak, the city panics and the freeways jam up 
with motorists trying to flee. The ensuing gridlock may shock viewers 
elsewhere, but residents here will recognize the pictures as actual footage of 
just another day on the Los Angeles freeways. 
Meanwhile, here's some advice: Ignore Sunday's Part 1 and skip to Monday's 
rocking and rolling, for even on a small screen, Larry Fuentes' special effects 
have an impact. Otherwise, loosen your seat belts. 
By skipping Part 1, you'll also miss the NBC News program that follows at 10:50 
p.m., with Maria Shriver interviewing experts about issues raised by the 
fictional TV drama. Undoubtedly, the news program will be crammed with crucial 
information, as much as you can cram into 10 minutes. 
Although hardly new at NBC, this kind of unnatural pairing -- attaching a brief 
news addendum to a larger fictional drama to give the latter credibility -- is 
yet another example of entertainment being the dog that wags the news 
division's tail. 
Moreover, Kerns got the obligatory show-promoting interview on NBC's "Today" 
program Friday ("Are the experts going to know this as much in advance as you 
do?" Deborah Norville asked her about Claire, as if Kerns herself were an 
expert). And you can just bet that those smoothies at KNBC Channel 4 have been 
dreaming of ways to tie their local newscasts to "The Big One" as well. The 
possibilities are endless. 
What to do when your aphrodisiac fails during an earthquake? Tune in. 
