SADIE ALEXANDER; PIONEERED OPPORTUNITIES FOR BLACKS 
Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander, the first American black woman to get a Ph.D. 
in economics and to become a lawyer in Pennsylvania, has died in her 
Philadelphia retirement community. She was 91. 
Mrs. Alexander died Wednesday in Cathedral Village of pneumonia. She had been 
hospitalized there with Alzheimer's disease since 1983. 
A civil rights leader for more than half a century, Mrs. Alexander was 
appointed by President Harry S. Truman to his Committee on Civil Rights in 
1948, and by former President Jimmy Carter as chairman of his White House 
Conference on Aging in 1981. 
She was active nationally in the American Civil Liberties Union, Americans for 
Democratic Action and the National Urban League. 
Born Jan. 2, 1898, to a distinguished black family in Philadelphia, Mrs. 
Alexander was the nation's second woman to earn a doctorate, following the 
first by a single day. She became the first black woman to earn a law degree 
from the University of Pennsylvania, a generation after her father, Aaron 
Mossell, was the first black man to do so. 
During her college career, Mrs. Alexander founded Penn's chapter of the Howard 
University-based black sorority Delta Sigma Theta, and became its first 
national president. 
"I was embarrassed and thrilled at the same time," she once said of her 
ceremonial march to receive her historic doctorate. "Coming up the stairs to 
the platform I heard a voice say, 'Here she comes.' It was the president of 
Bryn Mawr. At that time Bryn Mawr didn't admit black students." 
Mrs. Alexander married Harvard law graduate Raymond Pace Alexander and 
practiced law with him until he became a judge, initiating legal battles that 
opened up restaurants, hotels and movie theaters to blacks in Philadelphia. 
During the 1940s she served as assistant city solicitor. 
She and her husband, who died in 1974, helped found the National Bar Assn., an 
organization of black lawyers. In 1986, the Philadelphia Bar Assn. named its 
public service center in the couple's honor. 
Mrs. Alexander was the granddaughter of Bishop Benjamin Tucker of the African 
Methodist Episcopal Church, which was founded in Philadelphia. She was a niece 
of Henry Tanner, the 19th-Century artist. 
She is survived by two daughters, Rae Alexander Minter of New York and Mary A. 
Brown of Washington, three grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. 
