CONGRESS VOTES TO RAISE LIMIT ON U.S. DEBT; 
LEGISLATION: BUSH IS EXPECTED TO SIGN IT TODAY. EFFORTS ARE BEING MADE TO SCALE 
BACK THE MEDICARE CATASTROPHIC CARE PROGRAM. 
Congress approved legislation Tuesday night that would ensure the government 
does not default on its debts, although lawmakers were unable to immediately 
resolve differences over how to scale back the Medicare catastrophic care 
program. 
The debt bill was approved by the House on a 269-99 vote after being passed by 
voice vote in the Senate. President Bush was expected to sign the bill today, 
allowing the Treasury Department to schedule a Thursday auction of securities. 
The effort to approve the must-pass legislation foundered temporarily because 
of an 11th-hour objection from Sen. John Heinz (R-Pa.), who demanded that the 
bill include his proposal to remove Social Security from calculations of the 
budget deficit. 
Heinz removed his roadblock to the debt-limit bill when he was promised a 
separate vote on his proposal, which some lawmakers fear would open the 
burgeoning Social Security trust fund to raids from groups seeking to add new 
or expanded programs with the $3 trillion in extra funds that are expected to 
accumulate over the next 30 years. 
Without an increase in the debt limit to more than $3.1 trillion, the federal 
government could run out of cash on Thursday, potentially forcing the Federal 
Reserve to order banks not to honor checks issued by the Treasury. Officials 
warned that a default could plunge credit markets into chaos and tarnish the 
government's standing with international lenders who finance the U.S. deficit. 
"It is important to our economy and our country that we not risk the adverse 
consequences of default by the government," said Senate Majority Leader George 
J. Mitchell (D-Me.) in pleading with colleagues for a quick settlement of the 
problem. 
Because increases in the debt-ceiling are necessary periodically to keep the 
government operating, lawmakers frequently attempt to attach their pet projects 
to such bills in an effort to ensure they become law. 
With its authority to borrow temporarily expired, the Treasury Department on 
Tuesday suspended sales of savings bonds and special state and local bonds and 
postponed auctions of $40 billion in securities. 
An amendment to the bill would repeal a provision of the 1986 tax revision law, 
bitterly fought by business, that was designed to prevent companies from 
discriminating against lower-paid workers in providing fringe benefits such as 
health insurance. 
An agreement worked out by congressional leaders also called for lawmakers to 
move quickly on a new bill aimed at resolving the controversial issue of 
catastrophic care for the elderly. 
Negotiators from the Senate and House would be ordered to work out a compromise 
between the House position, which favors total repeal, and the Senate stance, 
which eliminates unlimited coverage for doctors' bills and prescription drugs 
but retains benefits for extended hospital care. Under both bills, the surtax 
of up to $800 imposed on the most affluent 40% of the elderly would be 
eliminated. 
Meanwhile, Bush prodded lawmakers to pass a separate deficit-reduction bill 
that is needed to remove $16.1 billion in across-the-board cuts imposed last 
month. 
An acceptable bill, Bush told reporters at a news conference, would narrow the 
deficit gap by at least $14 billion, considerably more than either house has 
yet approved. Moreover, Bush said, "if it's all loaded up with special 
projects, I won't sign it." 
The immediate problem facing Congress, however, was the debt bill, which would 
raise the government's borrowing limit from $2.8 trillion to $3.1 trillion for 
the remainder of the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30. 
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady told congressional leaders in a series of 
meetings and phone calls on Tuesday that the government could not tolerate 
further delay on the legislation. 
The government has bumped up against its current credit limit and is unable to 
repay owners of about $13.8 billion worth of Treasury bills that fall due 
Thursday unless the higher debt ceiling is approved by then. 
Brady told the lawmakers that action on the debt bill is needed by early today 
"at the latest." 
