COMPUTER NETWORK SERVES AS GLOBAL CLASSROOM 
Several times a week in his room at Oberlin College in Ohio, junior Matt 
Trawick talks to Michael Haass and Eva Steininger about the paradoxical 
behavior of objects moving near the speed of light. 
That's not unusual since all three students take the same course on Einstein's 
theory of relativity. What is unusual is that Haass attends the University of 
West Florida and Steininger is at the University of Vienna in Austria. 
They are part of a 13-week course -- the first of its kind -- linking 26 
students and five physics professors at seven colleges in the United States and 
Europe. 
Trawick's desktop computer is tied to Oberlin's main computer, which in turn is 
tied to an international campus network called Bitnet, made up of 2,500 
computers at 800 schools and normally used only as a data bank. He gets physics 
assignments twice a week from course headquarters at the University of West 
Florida. Twice a week, he sends back completed problems. 
In the meantime, Trawick is involved in a rich give-and-take with the members 
of his "class" all over the Western Hemisphere. He gets and sends about 10 
messages a day from fellow students and professors -- in what often becomes a 
protracted "bull session" in which students try to poke holes in Einstein's 
theories. 
Students explore and explain in writing why, for example, time slows down as 
speed increases, and why it's impossible for particles to reach the speed of 
light. They have to articulate new concepts every step of the way. 
Richard Smith of the University of West Florida, the course organizer, hopes it 
will lead to more "multiversity" computer courses in which undergraduates 
exchange ideas and come into contact with top-ranking professors. Edwin Taylor 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who, with famed theorist John 
Archibald Wheeler, wrote the textbook that students use, participates in the 
course. 
But getting students to reflect, think through problems and especially write 
ideas is the key, said Smith. It's what separates the course from a typical 
classroom. 
"Science students in general are rotten writers," he said. "They don't have 
familiarity with words, and they are too anxious to plug into equations without 
thinking about the reality of the ideas they are working with. We want them to 
get into the habit of thinking before they punch numbers into a calculator." 
Trawick says it's one of the best courses he has taken: "Einstein's ideas are 
very complex and sneaky and have all these lurking paradoxes. By writing them 
out rather than fiddling with them in your head, you come to understand them." 
Trawick has found himself solving problems simply by "stating the questions 
clearly enough." 
"John Wheeler says if you think through a problem long enough, you don't have 
to compute anything -- the answer becomes self-evident," Smith said. "Of 
course, he's a big gun. But that's the direction we are trying to move in." 
Other students such as Haass found that writing about physics makes it less 
intimidating. He came to find that the speed of light, for example, operates as 
a simple function in physics -- not some magical number. 
Physics, with its exploratory, problem-solving focus, is a course tailor-made 
for computer networking. Not all are, however, experts say. Lecture courses in 
history, English or math may not be as suited for free-floating study, they 
point out. 
Computer courses are not new. Other colleges have experimented with them -- the 
New School for Social Research and New York Institute of Technology, for 
example. The operating cost of such courses is high, however, because of phone 
bills that the Bitnet system, with its series of interlinking campuses, can 
avoid. Nor do they involve a wide range of colleges. 
The course doesn't save time, Taylor said. It doesn't save money or cut down 
the number of teachers needed. "But it forces kids to clarify their thinking 
and communicate ideas. You want to see that." 
Oberlin junior Anthony Anderson likes the fact that "you don't have to be in 
class at a scheduled time." He was excited by a recent discussion on 
"space-time intervals," in which he suggested that an imaginary number be used 
in an equation instead of a minus sign typically used in the Pythagorean 
Theorem: "It wasn't an original idea, exactly; Stephen Hawking has an equation 
where time is imaginary -- but it caused a lot of stir." 
Still, it's the free-ranging discussions that students like most. 
The "relativity of simultaneity theory" sparked the best bull session so far. 
In this theory, events that appear to someone standing still to happen at the 
same time appear to an observer moving at high speed to happen at different 
times. 
One student conjured a scenario in which two rabbits beside a railroad track 
are struck by lightning. To a stationary observer, both rabbits seem to be hit 
at the same time, but to the person watching from a passing rail car, one 
rabbit is struck first. 
What would happen, the student asked, if a supersensitive carbon dating test 
were applied to both rabbits: Would this "objective" test show them to have 
been hit at the same time or not? 
"We finally figured that out, but I'm not sure I can explain it," Trawick said. 
Other participating schools include Boise State University in Idaho; Dickinson 
College in Carlisle, Pa.; New Mexico State University in Las Cruces, and Towson 
State University in Baltimore. 
