SECURITY GUARD HELD IN UNIVERSAL STUDIOS FIRE 
A security guard who has worked at Universal Studios less than two months was 
arrested on suspicion of arson this morning in connection with the blaze that 
swept through the Universal Studios' back lot, destroying movie sets and 
causing millions of dollars in damage, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's 
Department said. 
Michael J. Huston, 40, of Tujunga was booked at the sheriff's West Hollywood 
station for structure arson, spokeswoman Deputy Britta Rodela said. 
Huston was arrested about 4 a.m. today "based partially on statements he made" 
to arson investigators, Rodela said. Investigators have not determined the 
exact cause of the blaze, nor have damage estimates been tallied. 
Universal Studios officials said early this morning that the fire destroyed or 
damaged 20% of the 420-acre complex's lot, but they said damage to the studio 
tour attractions -- such as the King Kong exhibit -- was less than originally 
believed. 
"Kong lives," said Ron Bension, president of Universal Studios-Hollywood. He 
said the fire damaged the exterior of the building where the giant ape 
attraction is housed, but the computers and the mechanical creature were not 
damaged. 
Bension said the damage was centered in the outdoor sets, such as the 
two-block-long New York Street, where such productions as "The Sting," "Dick 
Tracy" and "Kojak" were filmed. Bension said it appeared that the fire started 
on New York Street, but Fire Department officials said that has not been 
confirmed. 
"We are in pretty good shape," Bension said. "It was pretty scary, but we are 
fairly relieved." 
The fire did nothing to deter tourists today. Leaving promptly at 9:30 a.m., 
trams full of visitors rolled around smoldering remains of sets from such 
popular films as "The Sting," "To Kill a Mockingbird" and the "Back to the 
Future" series. 
"The show must go on. The show will go on," said one tour driver who gave his 
name only as Larry. 
"The idea is to show you all of our back lot; only a small portion was actually 
damaged." 
The only main attraction not operating today was the King Kong exhibit, but 
studio officials said it should be open in a matter of days. 
Some visitors said the fire gave the tour, the third most popular theme park in 
the nation, added appeal. 
"It encouraged us to come," said Carolyn Garrahan of Cape Cod., Mass., who took 
the tour with her husband, Tom. "We wanted to see the damage. We wanted to see 
what's left of the place." 
Chris Bridge, who traveled with his family of four from western Australia, came 
to Universal City especially for the studio tour. 
"We saw all the smoke last night," he said. "It was a great show. Much better 
than the elections." 
Sgt. Dale Underwood of the Sheriff's Department arson unit said Huston was on 
duty when the fire ignited on the back lot. During a routine interview by 
investigators, Huston made statements that "obviously" raised suspicions, 
Underwood said, refusing to disclose a possible motive. 
Huston was being held in lieu of $1-million bail. 
