NEW SITE OKD FOR MONUMENT TO KOREAN VETS 
A proposed monument to Korean War veterans came one step closer to fruition 
last week when the Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Commission gave its approval to 
plans that call for a heavily landscaped monument at a new site, some 300 yards 
from the Korean Friendship Bell at San Pedro's Angels Gate Park. 
"It was great news," said Jack Stites, who heads the veterans group that is 
sponsoring the monument. "It was like a monstrous weight off my shoulders. 
We're well on our way now." 
Last week's unanimous commission vote was an important step for the veterans, 
but it is by no means the last hurdle the group will have to jump. 
Before construction can begin, three other public agencies -- the Los Angeles 
Recreation and Parks Commission, the state Coastal Commission and the state 
Office of Historic Preservation -- must also approve the monument. Once those 
approvals are obtained, the Cultural Affairs Commission and the Recreation and 
Parks Commission each will review the plans again -- this time for final 
approval before construction begins -- in case any changes have been made. 
The Cultural Affairs Commission's preliminary approval last Wednesday came 
nearly six months after that city board first heard -- and rejected -- a 
different plan for the Korean War memorial. 
Since then, the veterans group has changed the site of the memorial and its 
design has been altered significantly. The new plan calls for opening up an 
unused entrance to the park along Paseo Del Mar. 
According to Niki Lupo, the commission's executive assistant, some of the 
changes were instituted by a landscape architect who volunteered his services 
at the request of commissioner Michael Chan. 
"The commissioners were just ecstatic about the developments in the site plan," 
said Lupo. The new landscaping "just made a world of difference." 
The International Korean War Veterans Memorial -- so named because it will 
honor veterans from 22 countries that participated in the United Nations forces 
-- is proposed for a site near the Osgood- Farley Battery, not far from the 
Korean Friendship Bell. 
The veterans initially wanted to place the monument next to the bell, but the 
commissioners rejected that plan, saying the monument would interrupt the 
peaceful atmosphere of the bell. The initial plans called for a central 
sculpture of 12 soldiers in battle atop a granite base, encircled by the flags 
of each nation whose veterans were being honored. 
According to Stites, the new plans call for a sculpture of 11 male soldiers in 
battle and a separate sculpture of a female nurse gesturing toward the 
soldiers. (At a previous hearing, the cultural affairs commissioners had 
insisted a woman be included in the memorial.) 
The central sculpture will sit atop an earthen berm and will be ringed by a 
horseshoe of low-growing pine trees, Stites said. Two landscaped paths will 
lead to the monument, one from the parking lot next to the bell and another 
from a new, 15-space parking lot that the veterans propose to build off an 
existing road that leads from the Paseo Del Mar entrance to the monument site. 
Stites said his group hopes to have all its approvals in time to begin 
construction this spring. 
