ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: ANAHEIM; 
11-YEAR-OLD HERO WINS RECOGNITION 
The few minutes that two robbers hesitated before blindfolding their victim was 
a costly error that landed them behind bars and made a hero of 11-year-old John 
Le. 
During those moments, as Le was being hogtied, he saw enough to later 
positively identify two gang members as his assailants and become the 
prosecution's only eyewitness. 
"Without his testimony I had no case," said Orange County Deputy Dist. Atty. 
Jacqueline M. Arroyo, who prosecuted the case last month. "He's an extremely 
bright and remarkable boy . . . a hero." 
Wednesday, in front of about 300 of his fellow students at James Madison 
Elementary School, the 4-foot-tall sixth grader was showered with awards from 
throughout the community and praised for his bravery and courage for testifying 
against his attackers. 
"It was just something I had to do," Le said, shrugging off the attention. 
"We're all very proud of him. He is a good role model, and maybe his actions 
will motivate other students to act bravely," said Lynn Crutchley, the school's 
principal. 
Le's ordeal began on June 4, a Sunday morning, when he was home alone while his 
parents worked at a nearby swap meet selling electronic merchandise. "I heard a 
knock at the door and went to answer it," he said. 
When he did, two teen-age boys belonging to a gang forced themselves inside, 
jumped on Le and looted the house, according to authorities. They kicked him 
and threatened him with a knife as they tied his hands and feet together with 
telephone cord. But before they were able to blindfold Le, he was able to get a 
good look at the two, remembering such details as scars, jewelry, hair styles 
and voices. 
"It was outstanding observation on his part, unlike most crime victims in that 
situation," said Anaheim Police Detective Kahle Switzer. "He's a pretty cool 
kid." 
For more than two hours, Le lay bound on the floor as the robbers ransacked the 
house. They left with $4,000 in cash and various electronic equipment. 
After the two fled, the family dog, Lisa, gnawed at the telephone cord to help 
free Le. Once untied, he called his parents who in turn summoned police. 
Switzer said that law enforcement agencies usually have trouble handling such 
cases people of Vietnamese descent because the victims have a cultural fear 
that the police are corrupt, he said. 
"A lot of times they go unreported. Most the time they fear their own kind," 
Switzer said. "But John did an excellent job of coming forward and testifying." 
Le said that after he identified the robbers to the police, he felt he had to 
testify, despite his mother's objection. "I knew if I didn't put them away they 
would probably get me back," he said. 
Arroyo said Le showed "amazing courage and poise on the witness stand. . . . If 
it wasn't for his testimony, they'd be free right now." The two robbers, 15 and 
17 years old, were sentenced to eight years at a California Youth Authority 
facility. A third attacker, who entered the house after Le was blindfolded, has 
not been captured. 
At the school assembly Wednesday, Le was given awards from the school, the 
county district attorney's office, the office of State Sen. John Seymour 
(R-Anaheim) and Westec Security Inc., which gave him a $500 savings bond. 
When asked if he felt like a hero, Le looked down at the assembly platform, 
smiled and softly said: "Kinda." MATT LAIT 
