MOVIES OF THE WEEK 
The 1986 TV movie Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry (Channel 9 Sunday at 8 p.m.) is 
another welcome step in consciousness-raising concerning the elderly. The key 
word is dignity, and Katharine Hepburn and Harold Gould have exactly that as a 
couple whose romance is being met by opposition. George Schaefer directed from 
James Prideaux's script. 
Rear Window (Channel 13 Sunday at 8 p.m.) is that Alfred Hitchcock classic in 
which James Stewart, laid up with a broken leg, witnesses a murder in the next 
building. Grace Kelly is his elegantly sexy leading lady. 
Top Gun (NBC Sunday at 9 p.m.) is the wildly popular 1986 picture, a 
male-bonding adventure that's both mind-boggling and vacuous. Allegedly based 
on the Navy's crack fighter pilot program at San Diego's Miramar Naval Base, it 
sucks us into a high-tech world of multimillion-dollar aircraft and 
hell-for-leather fliers. Tom Cruise is Maverick, an egotistical hotshot pilot; 
others involved are Kelly McGillis, Val Kilmer and Anthony Edwards. 
In the new TV movie Blind Witness (ABC Sunday at 9 p.m.) Victoria Principal 
plays a blind woman obsessed with vengeance after intruders murder her husband. 
In one warming stroke Rocky (Channel 5 Monday at 7:30 p.m.) revived the 
tradition of the modestly budgeted movie that creates new stars (and new myths) 
and commands the arousing affection of its audiences by proclaiming the 
possibilities of love, hope and triumph in the lives of ordinary men and women 
-- a description that would never fit Sylvester Stallone's more recent efforts. 
Sixteen Candles (Channel 13 Monday at 8 p.m.) is an uneasy mix of the 
sympathetic and the synthetic, the raucous and the racist -- pity poor Gedde 
Watanabe, cast as a sex-starved exchange student. It also asks us to believe 
that an entire family would forget Molly Ringwald's 16th birthday. 
In the new TV movie Little White Lies (NBC Monday at 9 p.m.) a policewoman (Ann 
Jillian) and a doctor (Tim Matheson) swap fibs on a flight to Rome, where 
romance blossoms. 
Rocky II (Channel 5 Tuesday at 7:30 p.m.) preserves the emotional wallop of 
"Rocky." It is better set up than most sequels because the original epic fight 
between Rocky (Sylvester Stallone) and Apollo Creed (Carl Weathers) demanded a 
rematch. The film also works because Stallone, who has written and directed 
this film, knows the terrain -- the lows after the highs of phenomenal success. 
Talia Shire is the shy girl who becomes Mrs. Rocky Balboa. 
None of the "Police Academy" movies were funny after the hilarious original; 
the premise of the grim Police Academy 4: Citizens on Patrol (CBS Tuesday at 9 
p.m.) involves training citizens at the Police Academy to serve as auxiliary 
corps. Steve Guttenberg stars. 
Three O'Clock High (Channel 5 Wednesday at 8 p.m.) is an enjoyable 1987 
nightmare comedy about a hapless student (Casey Siemaszko) facing after-school 
extinction at the hands of a newly transferred psychopath (Richard Tyson), the 
leather-jacketed terror of every school he's ever attended. 
The Manhattan Project (Channel 11 Thursday at 8 p.m.) is a sophisticated yet 
hopelessly implausible suspense film in which a brilliant Ithaca teen-ager 
(Christopher Collet) builds his own atom bomb, triggering a major manhunt and 
bringing most of the northeastern United States close to annihilation. 
Director Hector Babenco and scenarist Leonard Schrader's profoundly moving film 
of Manuel Puig's Kiss of the Spider Woman (Channel 13 Thursday at 8 p.m.) finds 
William Hurt's homosexual and Raul Julia's political prisoner stuck in the same 
Latin American jail cell, where Hurt's endless descriptions of a '40s movie are 
not always appreciated by Julia. As we enter that '40s movie, whose star is a 
slinky Sonia Braga, "Kiss of the Spider Woman" becomes a duel between two very 
different worlds, that of Hurt's campy imagination and the grimly real world of 
Julia, who nevertheless comes to respect Hurt's special brand of heroism. For 
his flamboyant yet touching performance, Hurt won an Oscar. 
Although tedious and stagnant, Perry Mason Returns (Channel 5 Saturday at 8 
p.m.), in which Raymond Burr's Mason comes to the rescue of his former 
secretary Della Street (Barbara Hale), was so popular as a two-hour movie it 
has led to a seemingly endless series of Perry Mason TV movies. 
