BUSH PROMOTES A CANARD 
President Bush, with a veto, removed American support of the United Nations 
Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) from the foreign aid budget in the 
groundless belief that some of the dollars might find their way into coercive 
abortion programs in China. It is a regrettable extension of his decision to 
perpetuate the population policy of former President Ronald Reagan by seeking 
to impose restrictions on the use of abortion in poor foreign nations that are 
far more stringent than the standards in the United States. Worse, the action 
perpetuates canards about a successful, effective and principled U.N. program 
at a time when world population growth is at a crisis level. 
In the legislation vetoed by the President, $15 million of $220 million for 
population programs was to go to the UNFPA. Under a carefully crafted 
bipartisan amendment, none of the U.S. contribution would go to UNFPA's work in 
China. That was to avoid even the appearance of giving support to the Chinese 
population program, which is under fire for allegedly including coercive 
abortion and sterilization. Never mind that there is no evidence that UNFPA in 
any way aided or abetted the controversial elements of the Chinese program. 
Never mind that the new UNFPA-China agreement reinforces that separation. And 
never mind that there would be no better way to discourage abusive programs 
than to enhance contraceptive campaigns, a main thrust of UNFPA. 
Fortunately, the United States stands alone on this issue. All of the other 
major nations, led by Japan and including the Soviet Union, have stepped in to 
make up the declining American funding. The UNFPA, once dependent on the United 
States for 25% of its support, now spends even more with no U.S. support. But 
the missing dollars have hurt. Some of the replacement money received is not 
readily convertible. And the absence of U.S. leadership and cooperation serves 
to weaken the effort. 
President Bush leads the world's richest, most powerful nation, a nation that 
has gained effective control of its own population. But his nation is part of a 
world whose population is out of control. There were 1.6 billion people 90 
years ago. There are 5.2 billion now. And there will be 6 billion by the end of 
the century. A quarter of those now living are hungry, and even more are 
malnourished. It is a situation that calls for vigorous leadership and more, 
not less, funds for effective world programs. Everywhere. Not least in China. 
