LEBANON PLAN MAY END IRAN, SYRIA AFFAIR 
Syria and Iran may be parting company over the Taif Agreement, the peace plan 
for Lebanon reached last month in Saudi Arabia. A split between the two 
countries would be a development of major regional importance. 
Syria has been Iran's only ally in the Arab world, and the link between Persian 
Farsi Shia Iran and Semitic Arabic Sunni Muslim Syria was an unusual, perhaps 
even unnatural, alliance that was nevertheless fairly solidly based on mutual 
benefit. 
For both countries, it brought pincer-like pressure on the common enemy, Iraq. 
Syrian hostility along Iraq's southern border, and especially its military 
assistance to dissident Iraqi Kurds fighting Baghdad in its northern area, was 
a serious distraction for Iraq during the Gulf War. But the alliance isolated 
Syria from its Arab brethren and particularly angered Syria's two paymasters, 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia -- they cut off or reduced their funding. This was 
offset to some extent by Iran supplying Syria with oil free of charge or at 
reduced rates. 
The Syrian link benefited Iran not only by distracting Iraq but by showing that 
Iran was not cut off from the Arab and Muslim world. It also helped Iran in an 
all-important ideological objective, exporting the Islamic Revolution. Syria 
permitted Iranian Revolutionary Guards to establish a base in the 
Syrian-occupied Bekaa Valley in Lebanon, through which Iran was able to channel 
money, arms and medical supplies to the devoutly pro-Iranian Shia militia, 
Hezbollah, in the Beirut area and in southern Lebanon. 
The balance of benefits thus clearly did not favor Syria and in the last three 
or four years Damascus became increasingly aware of this fact. The end of the 
Gulf War a year ago deprived the alliance of its raison d'etre -- there was no 
longer any reason why Syria should not loosen its links with Iran, unpopular 
both inside Syria and abroad, and follow Egypt's example in embracing the Arab 
family, which could also bring renewed financial assistance. For the past two 
years the oil deal also lost importance: Syria now produces 400,000 barrels of 
oil a day, exporting 150,000 while receiving just 20,000 a day from Iran. 
When the Arab League decided to push for a negotiated end to the Lebanese civil 
war, Syria decided that aiding this process would help it regain Arab 
respectability. Indeed, since March, Syria has been conferring closely with the 
United States (expanding a long-standing, semicovert working arrangement) on 
Lebanon, to convince the United States of its sincere desire to pull out its 
troops. 
Syrian concessions and guarantees enabled the three weeks of talks in Taif to 
come to a satisfactory conclusion, enabling election of a new Lebanese 
president. 
The Iranian regime was displeased, seeing the agreement as leading to a 
slackening of pressure on Iraq. Hard-liners such as Iran's spiritual head, 
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, still a power though out of office, and the late 
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomenei's son, Ahmed, were especially irate. In the intense 
power struggle going on since the death of Ayatollah Khomenei, this hard-line 
group has so far managed to contain and almost neutralize the pragmatists 
around President Hashemi Rafsanjani. 
The Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, considered a neutral in the 
Iranian power struggle, two weeks ago established his headquarters in the 
Iranian embassy in Damascus and from there orchestrated the Lebanese opposition 
to the Taif Agreement. After meeting with all Iran's friends in Lebanon, both 
Shia and Sunni and with left-wing Palestinian dissidents, he said that it was 
"the duty of Lebanese Muslims to frustrate the Taif Agreement and Iran will 
support them in doing so" -- all this in clear opposition to Syria's official 
position on that agreement. 
If there is a peace in Lebanon, then Hezbollah -- having denounced the Taif 
Agreement as "an American plot" -- would need to be suppressed, which would 
almost certainly involve armed conflict. To complicate matters, Hezbollah and 
its attached groups are the ones holding the Western hostages. 
Syria -- long wanting to be rid of the hostage embarrassment and claiming to be 
the upholder of law and order in Lebanon -- would have to take firm 
counteraction against a Hezbollah uprising, which would be joined by 
Hezbollah's local Shia competitor, the militia of the Amal movement that is 
more Lebanese nationalist than pro-Iranian in its loyalties. The fate of the 
hostages would then become even more perilous. 
For now, however, both Syria and Iran are stating but not pushing their 
different views. But the hard fact is that those differences have an 
inescapable dynamic of their own. 
The future of the shaky Syrian-Iranian connection has been clouded by actions 
of the secessionist Maronite Gen. Michel Aoun, who has refused to recognize the 
election last weekend of Rene Mouawad as Lebanon's new president. 
If Aoun continues to maintain his partitionist Christian enclave, Marounistan, 
because of opposition to the Taif Agreement, Hezbollah will not need to take 
any anti-Taif action on its own, and will not be seen as acting in concert with 
its hated Maronite enemy. But if the general is eliminated and a pro-Taif 
Lebanese regime is consolidated, then Hezbollah, to avoid a show of impotence, 
will have to take action, political or military, with Iranian support, thus 
throwing down a challenge to Syria. 
The latter seems more likely, because Aoun has been universally rejected, 
especially after the attack by his forces on the house and person of Nasrallah 
Sfeir, the patriarch of the Marounite Church. 
A Syria-Iran breach would affect the whole region. Iran's dream of exporting 
Islamic revolution would become more fantasy-like than ever. And Iran would be 
far more isolated in the region, either in voluntary withdrawal or with a 
violent and revengeful act against those isolating it. 
