ARCHITECTURE REVIEW; 
RESTRAINED ELEGANCE; 
AT SUNDOWN, UCI'S FUNCTIONAL CONCRETE BARCLAY THEATRE TURNS SEDUCTIVE 
Like a medical researcher who ends her workday by doffing her white lab coat 
and slipping into a black cocktail dress, the new Irvine Barclay Theatre at UC 
Irvine undergoes a seductive transformation when the sun goes down. 
Clearly in its element at this hour, the building becomes structure as event, a 
commanding signal to both community and campus. It invites. For all the go-go 
action in the restaurant/club scene at the UCI Marketplace across the street, 
the theater is the new pulse of the area. 
The building -- near a footbridge spanning Campus Drive -- beckons to both town 
and gown, on a site at the edge of UCI's campus that was selected more than a 
decade ago to appeal to students and the community at large. 
"The site had to be highly visible," said Douglas Rankin, the theater director. 
"The building would not have been effective if it had been hidden somewhere in 
the interior of the campus. It had to be there to straddle both the school and 
community." 
The building is sheathed mainly in cast-in-place ribbed concrete. Its mass and 
boxy volumes aren't taken in one gulp and are, therefore, less formidable than 
the original 1960s campus structures. 
Dusk temporarily brings out the more alluring mauve hues of the concrete until 
dramatic night lighting yields icy washes of color ranging from cool white-gray 
to pink. The dark green glass, which dominates during the day, falls back into 
itself to minimize its harshness. 
Even the exposed mechanical apparatus on the second-level roof line -- jarring 
in daylight -- lends intriguing shadows to the commanding evening presence. 
Lighting on the outside plaza is handled with a deft touch. 
Essentially, there is a legibility to the building and its function not fully 
grasped before dark. 
Seventeen years in the making, the facility sits comfortably amid surrounding 
architectural styles ranging from middle-of-the-road corporate to last-gasp 
postmodern kitsch. 
With all the hoopla attending each architectural arrival to the UCI campus in 
the last decade, it is significant that the recent notice given to the Irvine 
Barclay Theatre has been primarily for its functional achievements. 
"It was never about architecture with a big A," said the theater's architect, 
Larry Cannon. "Our basic task was to make a good performance hall. When it came 
down to architecture versus technical emphasis, we didn't give in to whim. 
"With all the mass we had to deal with, the buzzwords were restrained 
elegance," he said. "We sandblasted the concrete to bring out its character and 
give it a very fine texture. Even though it is concrete -- and there is lots of 
it -- we made it not crude." 
The color is apt: a compatible shade of sandstone blending the light neutrals 
of the campus with the more vibrant takes on neo-Mediterranean strewn 
throughout the marketplace. 
The circulation plan starts at a small, recessed plaza at the forefront of the 
building and at the base of the bridge hub. Composed of an oddly 
unsophisticated patchwork color jumble of concrete brick, the limited expanse 
of paving extends the theater and marks its actual entrance. 
The plaza cries for amenities. Conducive landscaping, seating, the basics. 
These are expected to be provided as budgets permit. But if you're going the 
no-frills route, why the rather gratuitous gestures such as the curlicue-pipe 
hand railings and the bronze donor plaques set in the ground? 
For that matter, fewer mushroom-shaped lights dotting the exterior arcade would 
have saved a few cents and made for some visual relief. 
The lobby too has a major problem: The color scheme of its facade is dark green 
glass, plus darker metallic-blue aluminum panels. The skin for the two-story 
lobby and upper gallery should be a counterpoint to the concrete surfaces of 
the rest of the building. Instead, its shading drags down the other materials 
and paints a far-too-serious face on what, after all, will be a fantasy world. 
The city dwellers are used to this kind of applied severity to their buildings. 
But unless the message to the student body is that it's a hard, cruel world out 
there, a warmer, lighter surface might have been used for the jutting form. 
In defense of his choices, Cannon said that the green glass is necessary for 
controlling the heat on the south side of the building and that he went with as 
light a shade as possible. And for the panels, he's nothing if not pro-blue. 
Graceful touches can be found even where budget concerns held forth. The 
painted gypsum board for the foyer walls is honest and direct, making more 
sense here than most applied finishes would. The metal-strip ceiling has both 
acoustical deadening capacity and a nice way of throwing off warm light. 
In the auditorium, Chen Hall, the design challenges were obviously more 
complex. 
"The toughest thing was to fit the architecture to the geometry defined by the 
acoustician," Cannon said. 
Sight and sound requirements took care of the curve of the balcony, the angling 
of the walls and the height of the stage. Everything beyond the technical 
imperative was done, according to the architect, to provide warmth and 
intimacy. 
The auditorium has 756 seats, the farthest out a cozy 60 feet from the 
proscenium arch. The full-quality professional stage is 40 feet deep and 80 
feet wide. Acoustics can be regulated to favor either speech or music. 
The real high point of the auditorium, whose primary purpose was to bring down 
the scale of the hall, is the nickel-plated meshing that loops low to foil 
large ceiling gaps. 
The theater is dark -- even when an event is planned. According to theater 
designer Paul Landry, the wall color -- a dusky rose -- was chosen because it 
is unobtrusive and doesn't reflect light. 
"The most important thing to happen in a theater is not the sidewalls but the 
event," he said. "If the walls were all white, you'd never get rid of them." 
Curtain warmers and house light manipulation will resolve the matter of ambient 
color for each performance. 
A quibble? 
There's just too much trim. All the molding -- the applied half-round verticals 
and the classic egg-and-dart pattern -- detract from the simple focus of the 
room. They seem superfluous. Except that maybe this was the only place the 
architect could play, given the many technical limits he faced. 
As in any newly completed building, there are kinks to be worked out -- minor 
imperfections for the most part indiscernible to the average theatergoing eye. 
At a cost of $17.6 million for 55,000 square feet, the theater was expensive to 
build. As monetary constraints snipped and reduced amenities, so too must these 
be added when funding permits. 
A planned second phase of construction will bring a smaller studio theater with 
separate lobby entrance to the southwest edge of the building. Management 
offices are also slated for that end at a later time. 
As for the design of the theater in relation to other campus offerings of the 
past several years: "It was just one approach," Cannon said. 
"Architecturally," he said, "UCI is a mixed bag. There are some very good 
buildings and some not good. Some are going to look like dinosaurs in a few 
years, and not at all withstand the test of time. We went for permanence and 
presence and rejected the trendy." 
No deliriously poetic exercise, the building is a dynamic and will have a long 
run in a pivotal role. 
