EASING ACCESS OF THE DISABLED TO A COLLEGE EDUCATION 
Psychologist Robert Scott may have received his formal education in a 
university classroom, but some of his most valuable training came from a less 
likely source -- doing magic tricks in front of audiences that weren't always 
receptive. 
"During college, I used to go into hospitals and clinics for physically and 
developmentally disabled kids and work as a magician. I always wondered why 
magic could transform some of those kids into a world of make-believe and joy, 
while others seemed to have so totally lost hope and their ability to 
fantasize," Scott recalled. "I thought, 'What is it that makes a person believe 
that something can disappear?' " 
Today, as director of the Disabled Student Services Program at Los Angeles 
Valley College, Scott frequently asks himself the same question as he tries to 
make barriers vanish for disabled students who are trying to get an education. 
His cramped office, filled throughout the day with visitors, in wheelchairs or 
ambulatory, serves about 500 disabled people enrolled at Valley College. 
If reports from these students and faculty are any indication, he accomplishes 
that task as if pulling a rabbit from his hat. 
Take the time two years ago, for example, when a quadriplegic student with a 
severe speech impairment couldn't write term papers -- she could neither type 
nor dictate -- and was on the verge of withdrawing from classes. To solve the 
problem, Scott organized a campus fund-raiser to buy a state-of-the-art 
computer that, through electrodes, allows a student to type with movements as 
minimal as the blink of an eye. 
Or take the time a disabled student signed up for a course only to discover 
that the classroom wasn't physically accessible. Not to worry. Scott has been 
known to move an entire class to another room so that a single disabled student 
can attend. 
And there have been scores of cases in which disabled students have had 
difficulty keeping up with the pace of a class, taking written tests in the 
time allotted or simply making their special needs known to an instructor. 
Scott has stepped in to help. 
"Disabled students here are very welcomed and accepted, but he also educates 
some teachers," Valley College President Mary Lee said. "He works very hard to 
keep students in classes." 
In some instances, doing that may mean just lending an ear to their problems or 
helping them through an emotionally difficult time, the students say. 
Encouraged by an open-door policy, students regularly stop by Scott's office in 
the college administration building. 
"Some days I've gotten so frustrated when I couldn't say a word, and he'll just 
say, 'Let's get you hooked up to the computer, and you'll feel better,' " said 
Marti Brand, a 33-year-old student with a connective tissue disorder called 
Marfan's syndrome. Last year, Brand suffered several strokes that left her with 
a speech impairment that varies in severity from day to day. 
"He's just incredibly supportive," she added. "He even went with me to a 
meeting with a cardiologist and a geneticist one night when he could have been 
home with his wife and kids." 
Scott's involvement with the disabled isn't limited to the college campus. In 
addition to conducting a busy private counseling practice in Encino, the 
39-year-old administrator is chairman of the Los Angeles County Disaster 
Response Team, a group he set up two years ago to provide emergency 
psychological services to disabled people and others in the event of a major 
disaster. He also is a member of the state Community College Chancellor's 
Office task force for serving students with psychological disorders. 
"What he brings is a unique combination of knowledge, from being a support 
service coordinator, along with his knowledge as a clinical psychologist," said 
Catherine Johns, head of the Sacramento-based psychological disorders task 
force. "He has seen in his own program how offering support services can help 
retain these students, and he even helped put together a videotape for other 
colleges to show them the role those services can play. That was completely a 
volunteer effort on his part." 
Diane Ambrose, a supervising counselor with the North Valley Regional Center, a 
nonprofit agency for the disabled that frequently refers clients to Scott for 
private counseling, expressed a similar opinion. 
"There are plenty of good clinicians. The difference with him is that his 
involvement in so many different areas affecting the disabled population has 
really put him in a place alone," Ambrose said. "The Department of Mental 
Health is overwhelmed, and a lot of other counseling facilities have closed, 
but he is always willing to help our clients when he can. That makes him an 
extremely valuable resource." 
Not all obstacles Scott tackles on behalf of disabled students come from 
external sources, though. Some, he said, are those that students have imposed 
upon themselves. 
"A lot of disabled people come here for the first time with an idea already 
ingrained in them about what they can't do. And very often, that idea has been 
reinforced by society," Scott said. "I try to get them to see that they may not 
be able to move their bodies, but that they can move their minds. There are 
ways that they may not have thought of." 
In a class he teaches on dealing with disabilities, Scott confronts what he 
believes are the emotional stages most disabled people -- whether disabled by 
injury or from birth -- must go through to get on with the business of living. 
In many ways, he said, those emotions are similar to the stages of death and 
dying identified by psychologist Elisabeth Kubler-Ross several years ago. 
"There are some very real and powerful emotions people have about their 
disabilities, including anger, resentment or grief at having lost a part of 
them that no longer works," Scott said. "And unfortunately, there's not always 
a happy ending, either. People sometimes get stuck in one of those stages and 
never move on. It's sad. 
"They never get a chance to learn a new approach to life," he said. "They just 
drop out instead." 
But, he said, there are success stories as well. 
There is the woman whose husband went into a cocaine-induced hallucination and 
stabbed her repeatedly in the neck and head, causing paralysis and brain 
damage. Scott said the woman is now attending classes and "really fighting to 
come back." 
There is the woman who fell out of bed during a dream and broke her neck, and 
the man who slipped on a popcorn kernel and damaged his spinal cord. Both are 
now close to earning their degrees. 
"The disabled population is the fastest-growing minority group in the country," 
he said. "I like to remind people that it is the only minority group you can 
join." 
Part of Scott's sensitivity to the needs of the disabled may have come from 
having been a fringe member of that group for most of his life. The son of an 
employment counselor and a housewife, Scott grew up in North Hollywood, where 
he was diagnosed with congenital scoliosis, or back deformity, when he was 13. 
For several years, he said, he was kept out of sports and other physical 
activities. He wore a lift in one shoe, as he still does, to compensate for 
that leg's being shorter than the other. 
"I saw myself in terms of what I couldn't do," he said. 
During high school, over the objections of his doctor and parents, Scott 
learned to surf. The exhilaration of the experience, he said, made him aware 
that there might be other activities he had incorrectly ruled out. 
In 1976, at age 26, Scott received his doctorate in psychology from UC Irvine, 
writing his thesis on the needs of special populations. 
"One student came here a few years ago, and her disability was so severe that 
everyone who met her automatically assumed she was retarded. Today she's 
getting straight A's, and they are not from sympathy," he said. "The groundwork 
was laid for her, and then she just took it from there." 
Scott laced his hands behind his head and leaned back in his chair. 
"That's really what is so thrilling for me," he said. "You get to watch someone 
be unlocked." 
