ELECTION ENDORSEMENTS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
Note: The Times does not ordinarily endorse in the contest for governor because 
this race attracts sufficient attention to enable voters to reach informed 
decisions, and it chooses not to endorse in every political race but to endorse 
in partisan elections selectively. 
State Offices 
Lt. Governor: Leo McCarthy (D) 
A hard-working problem solver. Quiet, persistent, decent and level-headed. 
Attorney General: Arlo Smith (D) 
A career prosecutor -- non-ideological, professional. His opponent is a former 
congressman whose conservative political views may get in the way of an 
evenhanded approach to this important job. 
State Treasurer: Kathleen Brown (D) 
Her opponent, Tom Hayes, has done a good job as the incumbent treasurer, but 
Brown offers a vision of the office that's both imaginative and responsible. 
Secretary of State: March Fong Eu (D) 
A knowledgeable career public servant with a very capable staff. 
Controller: Gray Davis (D) 
Well-qualified to continue to watchdog the state's $55.7 billion budget. 
Insurance Commissioner: Wes Bannister (R) 
Independent insurance agent Bannister, who has agreed to put his agency into a 
blind trust if elected, offers impressive knowledge of the industry and ability 
to critically evaluate its weaknesses. 
State Board of Equalization 2: Brad Sherman (D) 
Brad Sherman, a tax lawyer and a certified public accountant, would bring a 
high level of professionalism, vigor and integrity to the board. 
State Board of Equalization 4: No endorsement 
The race for this seat is between Paul Carpenter, a man who cannot serve 
because he is a convicted felon, and Joseph H. Adams, who does not have the 
broader background needed to exercise the duties effectively. 
U.S. Congress 
30th District.: Reuben Franco (R-Monterey Park) 
Young, aggressive challenger in a district represented by a low-energy 
incumbent. 
36th District: George E. Brown Jr.(D-Colton) 
Top science and technology booster, important at this critical juncture; in a 
stiff challenge. 
Propositions 
124 -- YES: Hospital Districts, Constitutional Amendment 
Community-owned hospitals, especially in rural areas, need freedom to use 
innovative and economical ways to broaden their services. Would authorize local 
hospital districts to acquire stock -- currently prohibited by the state 
Constitution -- in corporations engaging in health-care-related businesses. 
125 -- YES: Rail Transit Funding, Constitutional Amendment 
Right now using state gasoline tax revenues to buy commuter rail cars and 
equipment is constitutionally prohibited. This unnecessary encumbrance would be 
lifted. 
126 -- NO: Alcoholic Beverages Tax, Constitutional Amendment 
This poison pill to the "Nickel a drink" proposition (134) would hike liquor 
taxes somewhat, but the taxes collected would simply be dumped into the general 
fund, and two clauses designed to neutralize 134 and other liquor taxes are 
offensive. 
127 -- YES: Earthquake Property Tax Exclusion, Constitutional Amendment 
Would exclude existing buildings that are retrofitted with earthquake 
improvements from property tax increases. A sensible change in the law. 
128 -- NO: Environment, Public Health Initiative (Big Green) 
This grab bag of a ballot measure would in some areas aim to do a lot and in 
others not do very much. It proposes, among other things, to ban pesticides; 
require the state to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions by as much as 40% by the 
year 2010; ban clear-cutting of ancient redwood forests; accelerate the 
timetable for eliminating use of ozone-depleting chemicals; write into state 
law an existing ban on new offshore oil drilling in state waters; tax oil 
companies to pay for future offshore oil spills; curb discharge of toxic waste 
into bay and coastal waters; create the post of environmental advocate to 
enforce environmental laws. It all sounds pretty good, but on closer 
examination it duplicates a lot of what's being done and adds some things that 
might be more symbolic than real. More wish list than effective environmental 
policy. 
129 -- NO: Drug Enforcement, Prevention, Treatment, Prison Initiative 
This is a political leftover from the June primary -- a relic of Atty. Gen. 
John Van de Kamp's unsuccessful run for governor. Proposition 115, passed in 
June, covers a lot of this. What's not covered, by and large, is better handled 
in Proposition 133 or better left alone. 
130 -- YES: Forest Acquisition Initiative (Forests Forever) 
By far the best environmental proposition on the ballot. Would ban 
clear-cutting in all forests; authorize a $742-million bond issue for the 
purchase of redwood forests; prohibit timber operators from harvesting more 
trees than could be grown on their land in any 10-year period; restrict burning 
of debris from logging; restrict export of California logs; reconstitute the 
state Board of Forestry and require appointment of environmentalists. Go for 
it. 
131 -- YES: Term Limits, Ethics, Campaign Financing Initiative 
This is the thinking person's term-limit measure. It doesn't have the 
cannibalistic appeal of 140, but it might very well enhance the quality of 
state government and electoral politics. Would limit terms to 12 years for 
state Senate, Assembly and State Board of Equalization members, eight years for 
governor and other statewide officers; officeholders reaching the limits could 
run again for the same seat after sitting out at least one term. Would set up 
partial public financing of campaigns by creating a taxpayer-supported fund 
that would provide $3 for every $1 a candidate collected from contributors 
residing in the candidate's district; would ban off-year fund-raising and place 
limits on contributions and expenditures; a new special prosecutor's office 
would pursue political corruption. A good deal all around. 
132 -- NO: Marine Resources Initiative 
Do we need to graft onto the state Constitution a ban on gill and trammel nets? 
Good cause, wrong remedy; go back to the state Legislature. 
133 -- YES: Drug Enforcement and Prevention Initiative 
Would, through an increase in the sales tax by 1/2 cent, put badly needed money 
where it desperately needs to go. Creates a $7.5-billion fund for drug 
enforcement, treatment and education programs over over a four-year period. 
Also would prohibit the early release of criminals convicted twice of murder, 
manslaughter, rape or drug offenses. Thinking person's crime measure. 
134 -- NO: Alcohol Surtax Initiative (Nickel-a-Drink) 
The stiff rise in alcohol taxes that's proposed -- from $2 to $8.40 on a gallon 
of hard liquor -- would go to an earmarked array of drug and alcohol treatment 
and prevention programs and law enforcement. Seems like a good idea, but it 
freezes parts of the state budget in an inflexible way and dumps a new state 
tax on top of federal alcohol taxes that are due to go up again. To be avoided. 
135 -- NO: Pesticide Regulation Initiative 
The agribusiness massive counterattack on Big Green. Seeks to invalidate the 
pesticide provisions of Proposition 128 and adds nothing to the assault on 
pesticides except dumping new spending requirements on taxpayers. A hoax. 
136 -- NO: State and Local Taxation Initiative 
A mess that would allow a minority to muck up effective government. It would, 
among other things, require a favorable vote by two-thirds of the electorate 
(instead of a simple majority, as currently required) to pass a special local 
tax, or a tax increase by initiative, and contains a "ballot virus" provision 
that could nullify votes on some other measures on the ballot. Would require 
cities with charters, such as Los Angeles, to get a majority vote on any new 
general tax increases. All those who believe in rule by majority, vote no. 
137 -- NO: Initiative and Referendum Process Initiative 
Would require that any proposal, no matter how technical or minor, to revise 
the initiative or referendum process be submitted to the voters for their 
approval. Unnecessary, absurd. 
138 -- NO: Forestry Programs, Timber Harvesting Practices Initiative 
The counter to tough, excellent 130: Proposes a ban on clear-cutting in ancient 
redwood forests that's weak and would restrict state purchase of redwood 
forests by requiring approval of the landowner. Forget it. 
139 -- NO: Prison Inmate Labor Tax Credit 
Would repeal the constitutional prohibition against use of convict labor by 
private employers and authorize businesses to contract with state prison and 
county jail administrators for an inmate work force. Sounds good, but a million 
pitfalls, and it's bad penology. 
140 -- NO: Term Limits, Legislators' Retirement, Legislators' Operating Costs 
Paradoxically supported by many longtime incumbents, this is the neutron-bomb 
approach to political reform. Would impose unreasonable lifetime term limits 
for legislators and most other state-elected officials (for instance, Assembly 
members could serve only six years, state Senators eight). The state-run 
retirement system for legislators would be eliminated, and the Legislature's 
operating budget would be cut by about 38%. Competes with the better term-limit 
measure 131. 
141 -- YES: Toxic Chemicals Discharge. Public Agencies. 
Would extend to most government agencies the provisions of Proposition 65, the 
1986 anti-toxics initiative that applies to businesses. And they would be 
required to issue a warning if they expose the public to such chemicals. Close 
a bad loophole. 
142 -- YES: Veterans' Bond Act of 1990 
Would authorize a self-financing $400 million bond issue to finance the Cal-Vet 
program of home and farm purchases by veterans. Good cause. 
143 -- YES: Higher Education Facilities Bond Act of November 1990 
$450 million for public colleges and universities to use to construct new 
buildings on existing campuses and renovate buildings and equipment. Arrest the 
decline. 
144 -- NO: New Prison Construction Bond Act of 1990-B 
Would allow the state to borrow $450 million to continue expansion and 
renovation of the state prison system. There's a lot of state prison funding 
already in the pipeline. Enough for now. 
145 -- YES: California Housing Bond Act of 1990 
Would authorize $315 million in bonds to provide first-time home buyers with 
low-interest loans, and housing assistance for elderly tenants, poor families, 
homeless men and women and farm-workers. Thousands of Californians would 
benefit. 
146 -- YES: School Facilities Bond Act of 1990 
$800 million in additional elementary and secondary classrooms, and renovation, 
at stake here; average class size at stake, too. Good one. 
147 -- YES: County Correctional and Juvenile Facility Bond Act of 1990 
$225 million to construct, remodel and replace county jails and juvenile 
facilities in counties that meet certain planning standards and are prepared to 
pick up 25% of the costs. Much needed. 
148 -- YES: Water Resources Bond Act of 1990 
$380 million for various water projects including water storage, drought 
assistance projects, an international waste-water treatment plant and flood 
control (it would fund one such notable project in Orange County). Unavoidable 
and overdue. 
149 -- YES: California Park, Recreation and Wildlife Enhancement Act of 1990 
$437 million in bonds to acquire, develop and restore parks, beaches and other 
recreational areas throughout the state; would also pay for building or 
improving forest fire stations, museums and zoos. A big space-maker -- and 
improver. 
150 -- YES: County Courthouse Facility Capital Expenditure Bond Act of 1990 
$200 million in bonds to provide money for construction and remodeling of 
county courthouse facilities. An anti-court-gridlock measure. 
151 -- YES: Child Care Facilities Financing Act of 1990 
$30-million bond issue to build or refurbish child-care facilities, provide 
loans to state and local government agencies and to nonsectarian organizations 
that provide child care; would set up a Child Care Facilities Authority. A good 
start. 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY 
County Offices 
County Assessor: Kenneth P. Hahn 
Hahn has the competence, experience and temperament to reinvigorate an agency 
troubled by administrative inefficiency and low morale. 
Santa Monica Municipal Court Office No. 3: 
David B. Finkel 
David Finkel's record of community service and his tough-minded but 
compassionate approach makes him the best choice. 
Measures 
A -- NO: 1/2 Cent Sales Tax for Prisons 
Would raise the county sales tax 1/2 cent in Los Angeles County for 
construction of county jails and juvenile facilities. Well-intentioned, but the 
solution it proposes (mainly a program of jail construction), the method it 
would use to finance it (an increase in the sales tax) and the huge discretion 
it gives to the appointed controlling agency is worrisome. 
B -- YES: Park Bonds 
This largest bond issue in county history would boost property taxes $10 a year 
on average for the next 20 years to raise $816 million for more than 75 
recreational and cultural projects. Without these improvements, quality of life 
will decline. Must pass by two-thirds. 
C -- YES: 1/2 Cent Sales Tax for Transit 
For new mass transit projects -- and to replace federal funds that once could 
be relied on to pay for major transportation projects. Will help get this 
county moving again. 
CITY OF LOS ANGELES 
Measures 
J -- YES: Bonds for Police Communications/911 Improvements 
Special property tax to finance a $235-million bond issue to improve the city's 
severely overburdened 911 network. For the cost to the average homeowner of $14 
a year over the 20-year life of the tax, a worthy investment. Must pass by 
two-thirds. 
K -- YES: Bonds to Preserve Affordable Housing, Loans to Low-Income, First-Time 
Home Buyers and Homeless Shelters. 
$100 million to preserve affordable housing by providing low-interest loans to 
nonprofit developers to finance the purchase and reinforcement of seismically 
unsafe apartment buildings; would also fund homeless shelters and help 
first-time home buyers. Must pass by two-thirds. 
L -- YES: Anti-Apartheid Contracting Policy 
Los Angeles now bars some city contracts with firms that do business in South 
Africa. This would amend the charter to expand the ban on contracts with firms 
that do business with South Africa. Send a message. 
M -- YES: Civilian Pension Benefits 
A pension simplification measure. New federal and state laws make the city's 
current technical requirements moot. Sensible. 
N -- YES: City Election Recount Procedures 
Would change the law so that the results of a general election can be 
challenged via a procedure that obviates the need to file a lawsuit. Sensible. 
ORANGE COUNTY 
State Assembly 
72nd District: Tom Umberg (D) 
Vigorous challenger to incumbent Assemblyman Curt Pringle, Umberg, a federal 
prosecutor, should offer spirited leadership in a district that needs it. 
County Offices 
2nd District Supervisor: Harriett Wieder 
An adequate incumbent legislator who has a weak challenger. 
Schools Superintendent: John Dean 
Brings drive, imagination and experience. 
District Attorney: Mike Capizzi 
Appointed incumbent who has the necessary administrative experience. 
County Measures 
M -- YES: 1/2 Cent Sales Tax for Transportation 
Failure to pass Measure M in Orange County would boomerang on the voters, 
dooming them to endure an inadequate transportation system that could be vastly 
improved with passage. More than $400 million in matching funds awaits the 
county by the turn of the century if it will approve the 1/2 cent sales tax 
measure. Go for it. 
City Measures 
C -- YES: Lease of Huntington Beach Land 
A-preserve-the-shoreline measure. 
D -- NO: Sale of Huntington Beach Land 
Deceptive countermeasure to C; could jeopardize public beach access. 
E -- NO: Irvine -- Repeal of Direct Election of Mayor 
Irvine needs a mayor accountable to the voters. 
H -- YES: Laguna Canyon Bonds 
$20-million issue for preserving a beautiful canyon. 
L -- YES: City of Orange -- Fireworks Ban 
Fireworks of any kind are dangerous; the ban on them should include all cities. 
W -- NO: Costa Mesa -- Permits Fireworks Sale and Use 
Advisory measure; send a message to the City Council to ban all fireworks. 
Z -- YES: Fullerton -- Bans Fireworks Sale and Use 
Most county cities now ban all fireworks; Fullerton should, too. 
SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
State Assembly 
75th District: Deirdre Alpert (D) 
While she has only limited experience, Alpert is energetic and a quick study. 
Promising alternative to the incumbent who has been criticized for questionable 
financial behavior. 
County Offices 
Sheriff: Jim Roache 
Career Sheriff's Department employee promises reform of an agency badly in need 
of it. 
San Diego Unified School District, District B: Sue Braun 
Braun has broader and more sophisticated knowledge about the district than does 
her opponent. 
San Diego Unified School District, District C: 
Scott Harvey 
Clear differences in this race on key issues; Harvey supports school 
integration, curriculum reform, and school-based health clinics. 
San Diego Community College District A: 
Maria Senour 
A professor at San Diego State University, Senour understands the community 
colleges' role as a bridge to a better life for the disadvantaged. 
San Diego Community College District C: 
Yvonne Larsen 
Larsen has served as city school board president, trustee of California State 
University and vice chairman of the National Commission on Excellence in 
Education, which wrote the path-breaking study "A Nation at Risk." 
San Diego Community College District E: 
Denise Moreno Ducheny 
Activist attorney shows the kind of fire needed on a board undergoing a 
complete revamping. 
Propositions 
A -- YES: Citizens Review Board for Law Enforcement (County) 
County needs an independent body to investigate complaints of misconduct by 
law-enforcement officers. 
B -- YES: Creation of a Department of Corrections (County) 
Passage would authorize county supervisors to remove jails from Sheriff's 
control and create a separate Corrections Department. 
C -- YES: Pound Animal Research (County) 
Public should support continued provision of pound animals for research. 
Measure is advisory only. 
D -- NO: Growth Management (County) 
Builder-sponsored initiative exempts much development from controls and caps 
fees for road construction at an inadequate level. Deceptive. 
E -- YES: Open Space Bond (SD City) 
$100 million bond for purchase of open space and parkland is crucial to 
preserving city's character. 
M -- NO: Growth Management (SD City) 
Identical measure to Proposition D. 
N -- YES: Library System Upgrade (SD City) 
Advisory measure recommends that the city develop a master plan and financing 
for library system. 
VENTURA COUNTY 
Measures 
A -- YES: 1/2 Cent Sales Tax for Transportation. 
Would raise $500 million over 20 years to improve freeways, state highways and 
major streets within the county and for public transit projects. Much needed. 
B -- YES: Moorpark Schools Bond Issue 
$25.5 million for classrooms and other facilities. 
C -- NO: Moorpark Ambulance Service Special Tax 
Good cause, questionable deal. 
D -- YES: Fillmore-Piru Memorial District Tax 
Support this community service. 
E/F -- YES: Santa Paula Library Tax 
Libraries relief act. 
