VIKINGS SACK BEARS FOR 41-13 VICTORY; 
NFC: MINNESOTA ALSO CONTROLS THE NFL'S BEST RUSHING ATTACK AND STRENGTHENS ITS 
BID FOR A PLAYOFF SPOT BY DOMINATING IN ITS FOURTH CONSECUTIVE VICTORY. 
The Minnesota Vikings continue to turn their season around. 
The Vikings won for the fourth consecutive time Sunday by recording seven sacks 
and stifling the NFL's best rushing attack in a 41-13 romp over the Chicago 
Bears. 
The Vikings (5-6), who are trying to make the playoffs for the fourth 
consecutive year, have not been beaten since they ended a five-game losing 
streak that began with a 19-16 loss to the Bears (9-2). 
"The Bears are the No. 1 team in our division," Viking Coach Jerry Burns said. 
"I've said all along that we've been getting better. I just hope it's not too 
late." 
The Bears -- who rushed for 215 yards in their first game against the Vikings 
on Sept. 23 and had been averaging 170 rushing yards a game -- were limited to 
107 yards, most of which were gained after Minnesota had the game well in hand. 
"They'll be tough from here on out," said Bear Coach Mike Ditka, whose team 
will have to wait at least another week to clinch its sixth NFC Central title 
in seven years. "We gave them a lot of confidence, and I'll be surprised if 
they are not in the playoffs." 
Minnesota looked like the team that led the league in defense in 1988 and 1989. 
The Vikings held Anderson, who entered the game as the NFL's sixth-leading 
rusher with 758 yards, to 48 yards. 
"Every time I had the ball," said Anderson, "there were quite a few of them 
around me." 
Linebacker Mike Merriweather led the Vikings with 12 tackles, 1 1/2 sacks and a 
fumble return for a touchdown. 
"Everybody just did their jobs," said Merriweather, who gave the Vikings a 41-3 
third-quarter lead when he stripped the ball from Anderson and ran 33 yards for 
a touchdown. "I don't want to tell on myself, but I was trying to do too much 
last time. This week, it was emphasized that everyone should concentrate on 
their own assignments." 
The Vikings also played extremely well on offense, scoring on all six 
first-half possessions en route to their most decisive victory over the Bears 
since winning, 35-7, in 1982. 
Quarterback Rich Gannon completed 12 of 19 passes for 146 yards and three 
touchdowns. All three scoring plays in the first half came during a streak in 
which Gannon connected on nine consecutive attempts. 
Gannon's performance helped him keep the job that he inherited when Wade Wilson 
was injured in the first game against the Bears. Wilson was reactivated Sunday 
but didn't play until 4:12 remained. 
"Gannon is our quarterback," said Burns, who had said earlier in the week that 
Wilson didn't deserve to lose his job because of an injury. 
Said Wilson: "Rich is playing outstanding and we're winning. He should stay in 
the lineup." 
Gannon agrees. 
"I think I'm playing well. We're winning," said Gannon, who had no passes 
intercepted for the second consecutive game. "I'm not going to worry about 
Burnsie yanking me. I can't play like that. 
"The only thing I can do about a quarterback controversy is go out and play 
well. I'm not going out there against Green Bay next week looking over my 
shoulder." 
Gannon didn't play well early, completing only one of his first five passes and 
the Vikings settled for field goals by Fuad Reveiz of 41 and 45 yards on their 
first two possessions. 
But Gannon got hot and connected on touchdown pass plays of 17 yards to 
Herschel Walker, five yards to Hassan Jones and 22 yards to Anthony Carter. 
Gannon's clutch passing also kept several drives alive as the Vikings surged to 
a 34-3 lead at halftime. 
Walker, who helped key last week's victory over the Seattle, gained 58 yards in 
16 carries and scored on a two-yard run that gave the Vikings a 13-0 
first-quarter lead. 
Walker also returned three kickoffs for 101 yards, including a 64-yarder on the 
opening kickoff. 
"The opening kickoff return by Herschel set the tone," Wilson said. "It was the 
most complete victory we've had this season and our most dominating in awhile." 
Chicago's only points in the first half came on a 40-yard field goal by Kevin 
Butler after the Vikings already led, 27-0. The Bears, the NFL's fifth-ranked 
defensive team, did not force a punt until six minutes into the second half. 
Chicago, which had won six consecutive games, scored its only touchdown on a 
10-yard touchdown pass play from Jim Harbaugh to Mark Green that made it 41-10 
with 2:27 left in the third quarter. 
Harbaugh completed 17 of 26 passes for 157 yards. 
"Once the truck hit me, I did not bother getting up," Ditka said of the 
blowout. "I just laid there and watched." 
