SIEGE AT AIDS HOME FURTHER DIVIDES NEIGHBORHOOD 
With police surrounding the block near 12th Avenue and Venice Boulevard, and 
the reeking smell of tear gas still heavy in the night air, neighbors Jose 
Rivas and Jose Vidal stood on a curb and screamed at one another. 
They were screaming about a home for AIDS victims that has operated on their 
block since early last year, dividing the neighborhood between those who want 
the place shut down and those who support the six-bed home and the two dozen 
patients who have lived there. 
This was Tuesday night, and Rivas' and Vidal's neighborhood had been hit anew 
by an ugly incident involving one of the home's tenants. For three hours 
Tuesday, Alberto Alvizuri had shot at police officers, who in turn evacuated 
the block and settled in for a siege of tear gas that ended when Alvizuri took 
his life. 
"They go crazy," Rivas, 19, said of the AIDS patients. "They walk down the 
street screaming and crying. They talk to themselves. They go down to the 
doughnut shop every morning screaming and crying." 
"You're wrong," shot back Vidal, a father of three who lives across from the 
Casa de Nuestra Senora facility. "They are good people. They are our neighbors 
too." 
The neighborhood rift has festered for months. Petitions were circulated to 
have the facility removed. A second petition was discussed when rumors surfaced 
that a similar facility would open nearby. Some residents who had been tolerant 
of their sick neighbors changed their minds Tuesday after witnessing the gun 
battle. 
The conflict in the racially mixed Mid-City neighborhood is not unlike others 
that have played out across greater Los Angeles. When an AIDS hospice prepared 
to open in Silver Lake, for instance, an angry resident dispatched a nasty 
letter attacking gays, whose population generally has been hit hardest in this 
country by AIDS. 
"You guys are like a cancer that just keeps creeping along and rotting 
everything it touches," the letter said. 
When the Hughes House hospice prepared to open on Ogden Drive in Hollywood two 
years ago, one community leader received 25 phone calls a day from angry 
neighbors concerned about their property values. 
More residents complained, city inspectors visited the site three times and 
Inspector R. L. Steinbach concluded that while the facility was "a little 
unusual for the average single-family neighborhood," it did not violate local 
zoning laws. 
But residents persisted. They maintained lengthy logs of activity at the 
shelter, jotting down notes every time a new medical supply truck pulled up 
outside or a hearse drove away. The neighbors took their case to the Board of 
Zoning Appeals, but lost when the panel voted to allow the shelter to continue 
to operate. 
Advocates of hospices for AIDS patients say the facilities provide a less 
institutional and more informal setting than a hospital, along with medical 
care that is less costly. 
Christie Cowell, a county AIDS program official, said there are 18 hospices or 
shelter facilities in Los Angeles County. While some cater to terminally ill 
residents, others provide care for specific patients, such as children with 
AIDS or people with AIDS and other problems, such as mental illness or drug 
dependency. 
She said the county spends $2 million a year on funding the hospice programs. 
Since 1981, she said, there have been slightly more than 10,000 confirmed AIDS 
cases in the county. 
Although she is sympathetic to the concerns of residents who live near an AIDS 
hospice, Cowell said it defies current medical knowledge for people to fear 
that they will become infected. 
"You don't get AIDS by living next door to someone who has it," she said. 
Nonetheless, along 12th Avenue, many residents were complaining Tuesday night 
that AIDS patients use public telephones on the corner, eat at a popular 
doughnut shop around the block and allow children to play in the front yard of 
the shelter. 
Despite such concerns, Nancy Delgado, a supervisor for the county AIDS Program 
Office, said her agency has never received a formal complaint from neighbors 
against the Casa de Nuestra Senora, which she said began operating under a 
contract with the county about a year and a half ago. She said a staff member 
visited the shelter half an hour before the shooting started and saw no signs 
of impending violence. 
"Everything was fine," Delgado said. "It was a really well-organized 
operation." 
Representatives of some AIDS hospices said Wednesday that they have been 
welcomed into neighborhoods. Lee Rubio, residential manager for the Padua 
House, an AIDS hospice in Long Beach, said "we've had no form of harassment." 
"The way clients come into the house is not a problem and when they expire and 
leave the house, they go out the back door," Rubio said. "The mortuary car 
pulls in the back and nobody sees what's going on." 
Keith Malone, director of government relations for the AIDS Health Care 
Foundation, which operates a hospice in Elysian Park and an annex in Hollywood, 
said the key to winning neighborhood acceptance is candor. 
"You want to let people know you're there, to be up front about it," he said. 
He added that while the incident Tuesday apparently was an isolated episode of 
violence, the potential for such tragedies has been in the minds of many AIDS 
care providers. 
