MOVING OUT; 
S.D. POLICE FLOUT THEIR OWN POLICY AND SCATTER MIGRANT SQUATTERS WITH A WARNING 
Concerned about the possible presence of thieves in an immigrant squatter 
encampment, San Diego police recently requested that a landowner provide 
authorities with a letter authorizing officers to cite the 100 or so residents 
for trespassing on the otherwise-vacant parcel east of Del Mar. 
Police also visited the site and warned squatters of an impending cleanup, and 
issued a similar warning to a nearby nursery that employs some camp dwellers. 
Police told the general manager at Village Nurseries that U.S. immigration 
authorities might shortly be raiding the site, according to a nursery official, 
prompting the nursery to circulate a memo advising workers of "arrests and 
possible deportations." 
Although police and the landowner say no actual cleanup was planned -- and a 
police lieutenant now describes the episode as a "major misunderstanding" -- 
the effect of the multiple warnings was to panic many of the 100 or so camp 
residents and send many packing into more isolated nearby canyons, where they 
built new dwellings. 
"Why are they chasing us off?" asked Crispin Duran, a 40-year-old father of six 
from Mexico's Guerrero state who was among those who moved his shack down the 
hillside in anticipation of bulldozers and police officers. "We can't afford to 
live anywhere else." 
Officially, San Diego police have a hands-off policy on immigration issues. 
They do not detain anyone solely because of his immigration status, nor do 
officers actively enforce trespassing laws on migrant encampments or move 
squatters out of the sites without first being contacted by landowners or 
obtaining court orders authorizing action. 
Immigrant advocates have long pressed local police agencies to adopt such 
hands-off policies on issues involving immigrants. Critics say police lack the 
needed expertise and training and that cooperation with U.S. immigration 
authorities could prompt immigrants to avoid contact with police on other, more 
serious matters. 
"Our policy is we don't get involved with immigration matters," said Manuel C. 
Guaderrama, deputy San Diego police chief in charge of all field operations. 
"Our position is we're not going to go around soliciting permission from owners 
to move migrants." 
That, however, is exactly what happened recently at the approximately 2-acre 
encampment off Black Mountain Road and Lansdale Drive in the North City West 
community, east of Del Mar, in an area being rapidly developed. 
Police officials defended the action, maintaining that it was motivated by 
fears that thieves may be residing in the encampment -- not by the immigration 
status of camp-dwellers. 
"That was good, pro-active police work," Lt. Randy L. Nisleit of San Diego 
police Northern Division said of one of his officer's decision to request the 
letter from the landowner, contact the nursery and visit the camp warning 
residents of a cleanup. "We want our officers on the beats to respond 
pro-actively to crime problems, and I'm sure that's what the community wants." 
But he conceded that no police cleanup of the site was planned, despite an 
officer's warnings to camp dwellers of such an action. The lieutenant also 
conceded that police had identified no specific suspects residing in the 
encampment. He described the panic induced at the site as a "major 
misunderstanding." 
Chief Guaderrama said there was nothing wrong with contacting a landlord when 
potential thieves had been identified among a group of migrants. "It didn't 
have anything to do with immigration; they had a crime problem up there," 
Guaderrama said. 
However, Guaderrama also acknowledged that the effect of the trespassing 
warnings would likely have been only to move the residents -- including any 
suspected thieves -- to more isolated spots. "They're going to move to another 
canyon nearby," Guaderrama said. 
When suspected criminals are identified as living in a camp, Guaderrama said, 
the standard police response is to question the suspects -- not to issue 
trespassing citations and move all the residents elsewhere. "If 
we hear shots are fired, we try to find out who fired the shots," Guaderrama 
said. 
The parcel is part of a 9.4-acre undeveloped lot owned by The Children's 
School, a 180-student private elementary and preschool in La Jolla. The 
encampment, one of dozens in northern San Diego County, is unusual in that its 
wood-and-plastic dwellings are visible from the road. 
On Friday, Oct. 26, school officials said, officer Shari Ortega from the San 
Diego police northern division telephoned Peter Christian, the school's 
business manager, and requested that he provide a letter authorizing police to 
cite the squatters for trespassing. Police routinely keep such letters on file, 
although the documents are usually sent after landowners contact authorities 
about a problem, said police Lt. Nisleit. 
"Police contacted the school and requested that the school write a letter 
authorizing them to clear the land," said Michael Steres, president of the 
school's board of trustees. 
School authorities were unaware of the camp's presence until the police call, 
Steres said. The school now plans to provide the letter to authorities, Steres 
said. 
"It seems appropriate for us to cooperate with the police," Steres said. 
On Oct. 27, camp dwellers said, two police officers visited the site and warned 
residents of a cleanup that was scheduled in a few days. "Everyone was really 
scared," said Honorino Villa, 26, who drives a catering truck and supplies food 
to the camp. 
