GALLO TAX EXEMPTION WORKS FOR THE VERY RICH; 
REGULATIONS: A GRANDPARENT MAY GIVE $2 MILLION TO EACH GRANDCHILD AND PAY NO 
MORE THAN THE STANDARD GIFT-ESTATE TAXES, BUT ONLY UNTIL DEC. 31. 
In writing the Tax Reform Act of 1986, Congress devoted a lot of time to 
closing loopholes for the rich. 
One that was given particularly harsh treatment was the "generation-skipping 
transfer," a once-common device by which wealthy people shifted assets to their 
grandchildren, thereby cutting out one level of estate tax. 
But nobody loves a loophole as much as Congress. In a provision that was 
particularly beneficial to the wealthy winemaking Gallo family of California, 
Congress wrote in a temporary exemption for generation-skipping transfers of up 
to $2 million per grandchild. 
Under the "Gallo exemption," as it is known, a grandparent can give during life 
or bequeath at death $2 million to each grandchild and pay no more than the 
standard gift-estate taxes. Those taxes are not insignificant, especially on 
large amounts, but they are still a lot less than the double whammy that will 
be accorded such transfers after the exemption expires. 
That expiration date is coming up in just a little less than two months. Assets 
transferred across generations after Dec. 31 will bear the full brunt of the 
1986 law. 
There will remain an exemption of $1 million per grandparent for transfer after 
Jan. 1, which applies to other descendants, while Gallo is restricted to 
grandchildren. 
For very large transfers, the generation-skipping tax can be staggering. On an 
estate of $20 million left entirely to a grandchild, taxes could reach almost 
$16 million, said Jack Porter of the accounting firm BDO Seidman in Washington. 
The $20 million would be subject to a 55% ordinary estate tax -- the impact of 
graduated rates applicable to lesser amounts can essentially be ignored when 
the estate is this big, he said -- cutting it to $9 million. 
Then a 55% generation-skipping tax would be applied to the $9 million, reducing 
it to $4.05 million, Porter said. 
"The moral is, if you have a generation-skipping will or estate plan, it would 
be advisable to die before Jan. 1," he said with a laugh. 
The impact at lesser sums is not as spectacular but still worth avoiding when 
intergenerational transfers are contemplated. For most people, other planning 
avenues will be sufficient. 
"It takes great wealth even to consider" using the Gallo provision, said 
William G. Brennan of Ernst &amp; Young. The $1-million-per-grandparent, 
generation-skipping transfer tax exclusion, an exclusion from the tax for 
payments of tuition and medical expenses -- along with the exclusion of $10,000 
per recipient per year from all taxes -- will cover as much asset shifting as 
all but the very wealthy are likely to make. 
"The real point about Gallo," said Sam Radin, president of National Madison 
Group, an estate planning firm in New York, "is if it may apply, consider it. 
Make an informed decision to take advantage of it or ignore it, but don't lose 
the opportunity through the passage of time." 
Experts agree that the Gallo provision also has serious disadvantages, said 
Greg A. Nelson of Arthur Andersen &amp; Co., and so "a lot of people don't seem 
to be rushing out and using" it. 
The first problem is that the grandparent would have to pay gift tax on amounts 
of more than $600,000 (or $1.2 million in the case of two grandparents). These 
rates are stiff, Nelson said, and "nobody tends to be interested in writing 
large checks to the IRS unless they have to." 
He added, though, that with assets likely to appreciate substantially, the 
value of escaping estate taxes on the later appreciation may well exceed the 
present value of the current gift taxes. 
Giving away a large insurance policy -- which will appreciate at the death of 
the insured -- can be a useful strategy, he said. 
Another problem is that outright gifts create wealthy grandchildren -- 
something that may not be desirable if they are very young or no good at 
handling money. 
It is possible to leave assets in trust and still qualify, but the rules are 
very strict, and the trust must begin paying income when the beneficiary turns 
21. 
The rules under Gallo prohibit providing the intermediate generation with an 
income interest, so the grandparent cannot leave the assets in trust for the 
grandchild with the income to go to the grandparent's children. 
