EISENHOWER WORK WITH CANVAS AND OILS SHOWN; 
ART: SOME OF THE FORMER PRESIDENT'S PAINTINGS GO ON DISPLAY AT THE NIXON 
LIBRARY IN YORBA LINDA. HE DID THEM FOR RECREATION AND TO RELIEVE STRESS. 
Mamie Eisenhower, chin in hand and hair upswept, smiles subtly from the canvas 
hanging on the wall. Not far away, oil paintings of snowy landscapes hang amid 
desert scenes, mountain vistas and several more portraits -- a young boy, a 
military leader, Abraham Lincoln, even a self-portrait. 
The artist is the same but the signature in the lower right corner of each 
piece varies a bit: "DE" on one. "DDE" on another. On most it reads simply 
"Eisenhower." 
Dwight David Eisenhower never fancied himself to be a serious artist, but an 
exhibit of his art, opening today at the Richard Nixon Library, shows the 
nation's 34th President had talent with a brush and a canvas. 
"I think he was very good," said Amanda Fish, acting curator at the library and 
an artist herself. "I think people will be surprised." 
The exhibit is made up of 22 paintings and one drawing -- a sketch of an 
unidentified man made when Eisenhower was President -- that show the gentle, 
expressive side of a man who rose to power commanding U.S. troops in World War 
II. 
"He called them his daubs," Fish said. "He did this as pure enjoyment. You can 
see how peaceful and serene they are. 
"He always resisted any efforts to read philosophy or hidden meanings into his 
paintings," said John H. Taylor, director of the Nixon Library. Eisenhower 
often did not even date the paintings, give them titles or identify the places 
he depicted, Taylor said. "He described them as a way to relieve pressure. They 
were pure relaxation, pure recreation for him." 
Most of the paintings are of landscapes. The family farm in Gettysburg, Pa., 
was a favorite subject -- one painting shows the house surrounded by green 
trees, with a putting green in the foreground; another shows the home's old 
brown barn, swathed in snow. There are several paintings of lakes, with 
villages or mountains nearby. The desert scenes possibly are depictions of the 
sights near Palm Desert, where Eisenhower had a home, Fish said. 
Another painting shows Eisenhower's grandson, David, at about age 7, with a 
golf club, squinting into the sun as he prepares to hit a golf ball. That 
painting, and several others, are on loan from David and Julie Nixon 
Eisenhower. 
And there are five traditional portraits -- wife Mamie, granddaughter Anne, a 
self-portrait, Viscount Montgomery of Alamein and Abraham Lincoln. 
The Lincoln portrait was painted in 1953, Eisenhower's first year in the White 
House. Eisenhower probably based his painting on another portrait of the 16th 
President but may have drawn inspiration from his surroundings, Taylor said. 
The artwork is displayed next to a permanent exhibit at the library that 
chronicles Nixon's years as vice president under Eisenhower. Taylor denied a 
report that two new Watergate tape shows were delayed to make way for the 
Eisenhower art exhibit. "It was not an either/or proposition," he said. 
One Watergate tape is now available for listening at the library, and Taylor 
plans eventually to offer two more tapes. But the current Watergate exhibit 
offers "a complete Watergate story. We feel utterly confident of that. And we 
decided we wanted to concentrate on other areas. . . . My aim is to put on 
diverse, exciting exhibits here." No date has been set for offering the other 
two Watergate tapes. 
Taylor said Eisenhower's first venture into oil painting came at age 58. While 
he was president of Columbia University, Eisenhower watched as artist Thomas 
Stephens painted a portrait of Mamie. After Stephens left the room, Eisenhower 
reportedly picked up the pallet and brush and, using Stephens' artwork as a 
model, began painting his own portrait of Mamie on the back side of a crate 
that was handy, Taylor said. 
Stephens, upon seeing Eisenhower's first attempt, pronounced it quite good and 
a few days later sent Eisenhower a full set of oils. Eisenhower left the set 
alone for a while, "but then he went at it," creating about 260 paintings in 
the last 20 years of his life, Taylor said. 
Eisenhower kept a studio on the second floor of the White House, and despite 
his busy schedule, kept up his hobby while President. 
All of the paintings in the exhibit are privately owned by friends and family 
of the Eisenhowers -- with the exception of the portrait of Lincoln, which 
belongs to a Gettysburg museum, and the one of Montgomery, which is on loan 
from the British Embassy in Washington. 
The exhibit will be presented in the museum's Lobby Gallery through Jan. 27. 
