LINES KEEP DIABLOS ON RIGHT PATH 
Mission Viejo High School made some big plays and stopped one big running back 
to roll to a 34-6 quarterfinal victory over Dominguez in a Southern Section 
Division II playoff game at Dominguez. 
But even though Mission Viejo did score on two spectacular pass plays, the 
story of this game was rather mundane. Dave Clark, Mission Viejo's offensive 
line coach, cut to the heart of the matter when he said, "This game was won in 
the trenches." 
Mission Viejo dominated both sides of the line, opening up huge holes for 
running backs Mark Gaw and Ryan Darke, each of whom gained more than 100 yards, 
and giving quarterback Tim Snowden plenty of time to throw long. 
Even more impressive was the Mission Viejo defense, which held Dominguez's 
massive 6-foot-4, 240-pound fullback, Bruce Walker, to just 39 yards on nine 
carries. Consider that 25 of those yards came on a carry late in the game; 
consider also that Walker came into the game considered one of California's top 
prospects, having gained more than 1,300 yards this season. 
Then consider Walker's words. 
"That's the best defense I've played against all year," he said. "They were 
blowing our line away. They were a lot bigger and a lot stronger than anyone 
else we've played." 
Especially for Walker, Mission Viejo employed a new defense that featured an 
extra lineman. 
"He's such a great player, we were obviously worried about what he could do," 
Clark said. 
But Walker was never a factor. Dominguez's only score came on an 87-yard pass 
from quarterback Anthony Young to Deon Johnson early in the second quarter. The 
conversion kick failed, which meant Dominguez trailed, 7-6. 
Mission Viejo had a 21-6 halftime lead and had almost totally shut down 
Dominguez (8-4). The Dons, predominantly a running team, gained only nine yards 
rushing in the first half. Walker was held to four yards on four carries. 
Darke and Gaw would each score again in the second half, Gaw on a 13-yard run 
in the third quarter and Darke on a two-yard run in the fourth that was set up 
by Gaw's 83-yard scamper. 
Though Walker came into the game with the bigger name, not to mention body, it 
was Gaw and Darke who got the big yards. Gaw rushed for 164 yards on just 12 
carries, Darke for 102 on 12. 
Snowden completed six of 13 passes for 157 yards and the two touchdowns. 
