CENTRAL LIBRARY: CHECK IT OUT; 
A SURPRISE DONATION IS A CHALLENGE TO ALL ANGELENOS 
A rather fabulous gift -- part challenge grant -- has put the Los Angeles 
Central Library -- one of the jewels of the city -- in the spotlight again. 
That's good. 
The $1-million donation -- to defray some of the expense of improving the 
library -- comes from philanthropist Mark Taper. Four years ago the historic 
Central Library was devastated by fires, more than 400,000 books needed to be 
replaced and modernization was urgently needed. Now the empty, still 
fire-damaged building at 5th and Flower streets is scheduled to reopen when a 
major $221-million expansion and restoration project is completed in 1993. 
That will be a milestone, but more work will need to be done. A library is an 
ongoing learning laboratory, and learning all one needs to know in a place as 
diverse as Los Angeles can be an expensive proposition. Preschoolers are 
introduced to the Central Library, which is housed in temporary quarters at 433 
S. Spring St., with puppet shows and story hours. Young adults are attracted to 
the video and audio collections. 
Many users come simply for the joy of learning. Immigrants can learn English in 
the new Language Learning Center, which was funded by the Southern California 
Gas Co. They can use computer terminals, audiocassette decks, videocassettes 
and books available in 28 languages. They can also borrow from the extensive 
collection of foreign-language publications. Businesses also depend on the 
library. The patent collection, for instance, which was replaced after the 
fires, is heavily used. 
The Central Library circulated 800,000 books and answered 10 million reference 
calls in the year before the fires. After the arsons, generous corporations and 
individuals contributed to a special fund to replace the burned books. 
Additional donations will be needed to anticipate new multicultural demands, 
provide special programs and change from old paper services to new library 
technology. The Taper donation, in part a challenge grant, should encourage 
others to give. 
