RELATIVES LEARN TO COPE WITH ALZHEIMER'S OVER THE HOLIDAYS 
The elderly Hollywood man was talking about Thanksgiving at a recent workshop 
on helping families cope with Alzheimer's disease during the holidays. 
"The holidays are great," said the man, 80, who takes care of his 
Alzheimer's-afflicted wife of 51 years. Thanksgiving is not only good for the 
person with the disease, he said, "it's also good for the care-giver because it 
gives them a chance to relax with other people." 
The man smiled. And then he burst into tears. 
The holidays are often hellish for families dealing with Alzheimer's and other 
conditions that produce dementia or loss of cognitive abilities. 
The Hollywood man, for instance, was uncertain whether he and his spouse would 
be able to join their son in San Diego for Thanksgiving. 
His wife has been suffering from a bladder infection recently, and her 
progressive brain disorder is constantly producing new deficits and 
complications. Since she became ill, the woman is anxious whenever she travels. 
Her husband worried that the unfamiliar pounding of the wheels of the train 
would unnerve her. 
It is almost too much to bear, especially alone, the man made clear. When you 
have Alzheimer's in the family, he said before his tears drove him from the 
room in embarrassment, "everybody walks away." 
At a recent workshop in Century City, the Los Angeles chapter of the 
Alzheimer's Assn. and the Westside Consortium of Senior Services offered 
Alzheimer's care-givers practical advice and the bitter solace of knowing that 
others are suffering, too. 
"The holidays are often a very joyful time, but they can also be very, very 
difficult," said Lynn Morishita, program director for the Center for Geriatric 
Health at Century City Hospital. 
The grown-up children of people with Alzheimer's routinely feel cheated, the 
experts said. The children gather around the table, remembering when Mom or Dad 
successfully stage-managed beloved holiday traditions, and they see only loss. 
"Holidays carry a lot of emotional wallop," said Nina Luce, a Santa Monica 
marriage and family counselor who specializes in geriatric issues. "We remember 
how it was, and if we don't get it, we're crushed." 
Holidays often precipitate a crisis among siblings, the speakers pointed out. 
Family members who live elsewhere often come home for the holidays only to 
discover that a parent or grandparent is much worse than they had realized from 
long-distance phone calls. Brothers and sisters sometimes blame the sibling who 
does most of the care-giving, who in turn typically feels overburdened. 
The experts agreed that a good first step in dealing with Alzheimer's is to 
have a family consultation with a caseworker or someone else with expertise in 
dementia and the medical, emotional and legal problems it creates. The earlier 
the family begins to think about these issues, the better, they said. For 
example, the Jewish Family Service, Santa Monica, is a nonprofit agency that 
provides such services to anyone on a sliding fee scale. 
The experts also recommended that the family arrange to have the affected 
individual evaluated at a good geriatric health center. Some of the 
deficiencies associated with Alzheimer's are treatable, they said. For example, 
better diet may help a little. "A lot of older people are living on toast and 
tea," Luce pointed out. A complete evaluation will not only reveal what's wrong 
with the affected person, but also help the family take full advantage of those 
abilities that remain, Morishita said. 
Two sisters at the workshop admitted they dreaded the thought of Thanksgiving. 
They planned to fly to Arizona, where they were to have a turkey dinner with 
their father, then visit their mother, 66, who has been institutionalized with 
Alzheimer's for almost a decade. 
"It's real depressing," the younger sister said. "They have all these (holiday) 
cards and ads on TV, and they just make you feel worse." 
Morishita said such sadness is normal. The person with dementia "is here, but 
they are not the person they were." Their loved ones, she said, "are grieving 
all the time." 
One reason the holidays are so difficult is that they underscore the role 
reversal that is one of the most painful aspects of dealing with dementia. 
As Joyce Brunelle, who does public relations for the Westside consortium, said: 
"Two things that life never prepares us for are parenting and parenting our own 
parent." Unfortunately, she noted, the intense emotion that Alzheimer's 
triggers in a family often complicates the coping process, which involves 
making difficult decisions about everything from where the patient will live to 
who will control his or her money. 
"You have to be very practical at this stage," Brunelle said. "You have to be 
very dispassionate about it." 
The speakers urged care-givers to give themselves a break over the holidays. 
Less is more, the experts said. Don't try to replicate the lavish holidays of 
the past, but pick a few favorite traditions and concentrate on them. 
Simplified holiday activities are also easier on the person with Alzheimer's, 
who is often unsettled by changes in routine and unusual bustle and clutter. 
Start to prepare the affected person for the coming holiday well in advance by 
marking the calendar, having daily discussions of what the family will do, 
playing holiday music and, when feasible, making holiday foods. 
As Thanksgiving gives way to Hanukkah and Christmas, gifts become a problem. 
People with dementia often enjoy videotapes of family members, the experts 
said. And Brunelle noted that some people like to give a donation in the name 
of the person with Alzheimer's to a charity that was especially important to 
him or her before life changed forever. 
