COMMUNITY COLLEGE NOTEBOOK; 
TRIP BACK IN TIME HAS GIVEN EBERHART A NEW PERSPECTIVE 
Joli Eberhart got a new perspective on herself as a volleyball player this 
summer, but it took a time warp of sorts for it to happen. 
Eberhart, an outside hitter for Golden West College, spent part of her summer 
coaching a group of seventh-graders for the Orange County Volleyball Club. 
Her charges were flighty at times, and didn't always realize why their coach 
asked them to do things in a particular fashion. They also reminded her of 
herself a few years ago. 
"It made me understand how come coaches ask you to do things certain ways," 
said Eberhart, 20. 
She spent the remainder of her summer working harder than ever for the upcoming 
season. And things have gone very well for Eberhart and the Rustlers. 
Golden West (14-1, 9-0 in conference) is a victory away from clinching the 
Orange Empire Conference title, and Eberhart has led the way. 
She was voted the most valuable player of the Santa Barbara Tournament of 
Champions, one of the most competitive tournaments in the state. 
"She always worked hard," Golden West Coach Al Gasparian said. "Now she is just 
better focused." 
For Eberhart, mention of the word "focused" brings a smile. 
"That's the word," she said. "Maybe I'm getting a little more serious. Before, 
I would be a little spacey, but coaching this summer did me a lot of good. I 
see things a lot better." 
Eberhart, 5 feet 7, also found inspiration from first-year assistant Nancy 
Hillman, who is also 5-7. Hillman was a four-year starter for USC at outside 
hitter, a position usually played by women three to four inches taller. 
But Eberhart has risen above her competition because of her keen desire and 
powerful legs. She realized she wasn't going to be 5-10 or so when she was a 
freshman at Mater Dei High School, so she devoted time to working on her leg 
strength. But having Hillman at practice each day also gave her great 
incentive. 
"It gets me going," Eberhart said of Hillman. "Just seeing her hit on the other 
side of the net, I get motivated, especially because she is my size." 
Eberhart came to Golden West after turning down a scholarship to Idaho State. 
She also was recruited by Chapman out of high school. Arizona showed an 
interest in her after last season, but she opted to stay at Golden West. 
She is currently being recruited by several colleges, including St. Mary's, 
Loyola Marymount and Iowa. 
The ever-evolving Orange Empire Conference men's soccer race developed into a 
tie Monday, thanks to action on and off the field. 
Orange Coast, the defending state champion, and Irvine Valley, in its first 
year in the league, are tied for first place with 19 points each. Both have 
8-1-3 records. 
Irvine Valley was a point back after Friday's games, but picked it up thanks to 
a forfeit from Cypress. Cypress announced Monday it had to forfeit four 
victories and two ties, including one to Irvine Valley, because one of its 
players violated the state athletic code by playing on a club team during the 
college season. 
The announcement came six days after Rancho Santiago, which was tied for first 
place last Monday, had to forfeit 14 victories and two ties for having two 
players who also played with a club team. OCC and Irvine Valley picked up 
forfeit victories from Rancho Santiago. 
Rancho Santiago since has disbanded its team for the season's final two 
matches. OCC plays at San Bernardino Valley today and at Cypress Friday. Irvine 
Valley plays today at Fullerton and will finish Friday with a forfeit victory 
over Rancho Santiago. 
The top two teams from the conference advance to the playoffs. Fullerton 
(7-3-2) is in third place with 16 points. 
