ART BOOKS; 
FROM BELLINI TO BRAQUE 
During a long and prolific career, Giovanni Bellini (early 1430s-1516) oversaw 
the transition in Venice from the International Gothic style to the High 
Renaissance style perfected by Titian, his pupil. The succession of Bellini's 
masterpieces reveal a suave mastery of color and a profound enthusiasm for 
landscape that constitute his artistic legacy. 
Unlike earlier authors who describe the artist's life and works in 
chronological sequence, Rona Goffen, who is Distinguished Professor of Art 
History at Rutgers, has adopted an unusual, fugal format in GIOVANNI BELLINI 
(Yale University Press: $60; 355 pp.) . In separate chapters, she traces the 
evolution of his private devotional images, public altarpieces, portraits, and 
secular and mythological subjects. Although some redundancy is unavoidable, 
this strategy highlights the characteristics that are unique in Bellini's 
treatment of each genre while emphasizing common trends. 
Goffen focuses less on stylistic issues and more on content than her 
predecessors. Supported by a detailed examination of their iconography, 
Goffen's reading of Bellini's spiritual paintings is especially acute and 
sensitive. Though she offers a lucid description of the intellectual and social 
context in which they were created, her discussion of his mythological 
paintings is more tentative. Although it is possible to quibble over occasional 
details, this thoroughly documented and generously illustrated volume is 
written in a manner as accessible as Bellini's paintings and should be a 
delight to the amateur and connoisseur alike. 
Inspired by a visit to the Spanish Riding School in Vienna and the product of 
11 years research, THE ROYAL HORSE AND RIDER: Painting, Sculpture and 
Horsemanship 1500-1800 (Abaris Books: $59.50; 336 pp.) offers an innovative and 
fascinating survey of equestrian portraits and monuments created between 
1500-1800. Because these images mirror the most distinctive activity of the 
ruling class, the book also offers new insight into the self-image and ideals 
of European's aristocracy. 
In a lucid and meticulously documented essay, Walter Leidtke, curator of Dutch 
and Flemish paintings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, traces the evolution 
of the genre in terms of both pictorial style and social significance. To 
reacquaint most of us with now forgotten subtleties of horsemanship, the book 
includes a helpful essay on "Riding in the Renaissance and Baroque Period" by 
Alexander Mackay-Smith, curator and chairman of the board at the National 
Sporting Library in Middleburg, Va. 
Leidtke suggests that equestrian portraits resumed their classical importance 
during the Renaissance. Antique prototypes were refined conceptually, though 
not in practice, by Leonardo da Vinci. His ideas, however, provided the basis 
for the accomplishments of Giambologna and Pietro Tacca, Florentine sculptors 
active in the second half of the 16th Century. They developed an image of the 
mounted ruler that matured in the 17th Century into a dynamic symbol of public 
authority. Giving greatest emphasis to the masterpieces of Rubens, Velazquez, 
and Van Dyck, Leidtke adds new depth to our understanding of individual 
paintings while clarifying the artistic relationships between the artists. 
A subtext of this discussion is Leidtke's thesis that "equestrian portraits and 
monuments of the late 16th and 17th centuries are intimately related in form 
and meaning to the contemporary art of riding." Making effective use of prints, 
especially those recording the "airs" of haute ecole horsemanship that spread 
from Italy throughout Europe during this period, Leidtke specifically 
identifies the equine movements depicted in the portraits. These details are 
given broad significance, especially in his second chapter which analyzes the 
symbolic connotations of the equestrian portrait. Liedtke's essay, supported by 
a rich bibliography, offers new material for interpreting Baroque portraits. It 
may also serve as a successful model for the integration of social and art 
history. 
Pierre Skira's STILL LIFE: A History (Skira/Rizzoli: $85; 240 pp.) is a far 
less successful genre survey. Although this genre, too, dates back to 
antiquity, it has suffered from relative scholarly neglect in spite of the 
almost hypnotic appeal exerted by many of the images and the plethora of 
masterpieces produced by many of our greatest artists. In part, this neglect is 
due to that fact that the still life -- defined by the absence of humanity and 
focusing largely on the detritus of life -- was considered ignoble by the 
Greeks and occupied the lowest position in the hierarchy of genres formalized 
by 17th-Century academicians. 
Unfortunately this volume fails to fill the void. It does not supersede Charles 
Sterling's "Still Life Painting From Antiquity to the Present Time" (1959) 
which, regrettably, was reprinted in 1981 with only black-and-white 
illustrations. 
Ostensibly tracing the history of the genre from its tentative appearance on 
the walls of Egyptian tombs to the present, the text meanders on the periphery 
of narrative, failing to deliver the chronological analysis promised by the 
title. Instead, the text offers only the prolix ruminations of the author, 
which fail to suggest the magic, beauty, or significance of the images under 
consideration. The text is enlivened, however, by occasional vivid descriptions 
("the incandescent pears and marmoreal cheese of Nicolaes Gillis") as well as 
by seemingly random digressions on various themes. A seven-page excursus on the 
pomegranate (in which a capricious choice of allusions is undocumented) left me 
bewildered as I pondered the meaning of such statements as: "Thus the 
pomegranates, in the ardor of their demonstration, draw from the depths of a 
dark autism, a nourishing, equivocal action, between the disquieting figure of 
Hera and the taste of Delights." Can one blame the translation from the French? 
That Skira, a practicing still-life painter, has a passionate enthusiasm for 
the subject is evident in the way he guides the reader's eye in a detailed 
reading of various compositions. Unfortunately, such useful exercises only 
occasionally interrupt a text hampered by the author's habit of piling up 
synonyms and adjectives the way Frans Snyders piles up slaughtered animals. 
This book is disappointing because still life, with its long history, deserves 
more insightful analysis. Although there are now useful studies of the 
still-life tradition in Italy, France, Spain, Holland, and America, there 
exists in English no survey incorporating new research scattered in articles 
and catalogues. Until an appropriate volume appears, however, the curious 
reader is advised to use Sterling's text and refer to Skira's volume only for 
its gorgeous illustrative material. 
Jacqueline and Maurice Guillaud, who became famous in France for their 
startling and idiosyncratic exhibition installations, have translated their 
innovations into book format. 
RAPHAEL: Grace of an Angel (Guillaud Editions/Clarkson Potter: $100) is the 
latest in a series devoted to the greatest painters and distinguished by 
extraordinary reproductions. This volume is devoted to Raphael's major fresco 
suites in the Vatican. Except for the brief essay on the conservation history 
of these rooms by Fabrizio Mancinelli, director of Medieval, Byzantine, and 
Modern Art department at the Museum of the Vatican, the text is minimal. 
The book itself is an exercise in advanced printing technology. Unfortunately, 
the novelty of the garishly colored dividing pages and diecut windows is 
quickly wearing. These elements end by distracting from the crisp images which 
have been otherwise left to speak for themselves. And they, of course, are 
glorious. 
The reproductions on the Guillaud's distinctive onionskin paper approximate the 
surface appearance of the frescoes. The reader is left to pore over a multitude 
of luscious details (although the order of plates is somewhat idiosyncratic) 
that are otherwise inaccessible except to angels and conservators. For 
biographical and interpretive information, look elsewhere. This expensive book 
is useful, however, in facilitating an appreciation for Raphael's matchless 
artistry. 
The extravagantly illustrated FRANS HALS (Prestel Books/te Neues Publishing: 
$60; 437 pp.) is the catalogue published in association with a dazzling 
retrospective exhibition that opened recently at the National Gallery in 
Washington, D.C. The show travels to London and concludes at the Frans 
Halsmuseum in Haarlem, where the painter spent his career. 
Edited by Harvard professor Seymour Slive, author of the three-volume Hals 
catalogue raisonne (1970-74) as well as the richly informative entries 
describing the 86 pictures in the exhibition, the book includes the first 
English translation of Arnold Houbraken's biography of the artist (1718), a 
valuable compilation of 190 documents, and a series of authoritative essays 
describing his patrons, their clothing, and the artist's working methods. 
Perhaps most interesting for the amateur is the essay by Frances Jowell, which 
summarizes the critical fortunes of the painter. Though his reputation today 
rivals that of his younger contemporaries Rembrandt and Vermeer, Hals 
(1582/3-1666) died in poverty after enjoying continuous patronage during his 
life. He was quickly forgotten and his paintings relegated to attics when his 
vigorous brushwork was no longer fashionable. Credit for his rediscovery must 
go to Theophile Thore, who in the mid-19th Century recognized Hals as "the true 
predecessor of the realism just beginning to come into fashion". 
Characterized by this critic as an "adroit swashbuckler" who "painted as if 
fencing," Hals' ineffable capacity to capture the "essential vitality of his 
sitters" and his unrivaled virtuosity in giving form and vibrancy with the 
merest brush stroke influenced artists as distinct as Manet, Van Gogh, and John 
Singer Sargent. They were impressed -- as we remain today -- by the uncanny 
immediacy of the portraits to which Hals devoted his career, and they emulated 
Hals' audacious technique for their diverse purposes. 
With ravishing color plates (including a plenitude of details), the appearance 
of this book is especially welcome today when contemporary artists are 
experimenting again with painterly representation. In addition to providing a 
large audience an opportunity to enjoy (vicariously) Hals' immensely 
pleasurable paintings, it also provides a focus for studying the techniques of 
a quintessential master of the loaded brush. 
If the museum has sometimes been described as a laboratory, PICASSO AND BRAQUE: 
Pioneering Cubism (Museum of Modern Art/Little, Brown: $70; 464 pp.) documents 
what is unquestionably one of the most complex and rigorous experiments ever 
performed at New York's Museum of Modern Art. The bulky catalogue is primarily 
a picture book. Supported by a multitude of documentary photographs, it 
includes hundreds of color reproductions of the paintings, drawings, sculpture, 
collage, and papier colle created by Picasso and Braque between 1907-1914. 
Gathered under the leadership of William Rubin, director emeritus of MoMA's 
Department of Painting and Sculpture, they have been brought together for the 
first time to help answer the myriad questions still surrounding the invention 
of Cubism, which he describes as "the most passionate adventure in our 
century's art." 
Like the exhibition itself, the book provides material for studying the 
formation of this style and its evolution from Analytic to Synthetic Cubism. 
Conclusions resulting from the encounter with this material will be published 
in a subsequent volume containing the proceedings of a seminar conducted by 20 
specialists in the period. 
Insisting that art historical judgments can be properly drawn only from direct 
experience with the objects under consideration, Rubin's introduction merely 
suggests "starting points for comparing the work of the two artists . . . 
without attempting to engage prematurely those complex issues that the seminar 
will confront when the works themselves" are present. The objects themselves 
are given only minimal labels, but there is a meticulous 108-page "Documentary 
Chronology" compiled by Judith Cousins. 
In one sense, therefore, this is not a book for the timid. Whether elegant or 
frivolous, the fragile studies and dense finished works that emerged from the 
intellectual intercourse of Braque and Picasso are intensely thought-provoking 
and there is in this volume no user-friendly analysis to guide the reader, who 
is dumped squarely in medias res. However, this strategy has the benefit of 
providing the adventurous with an opportunity to eavesdrop, as it were, on the 
brief but immensely fruitful dialogue between two distinct and creative 
personalities. 
