GERMANY: FACING THE FEARS; 
REUNIFICATION: A SYMPOSIUM ORGANIZED BY THE GOETHE-INSTITUT AND UCLA QUESTIONS 
HOW THE NEW GERMANY WILL DIFFER FROM THE OLD, DIVIDED ONE. 
Is Germany going to frighten the world again? 
Jorg von Uthmann, a New York-based correspondent for a German newspaper, 
attempted to answer his own question with a reassuring assessment of the new 
Germany's future. 
"Germans have discovered that to dine in Strasbourg or to own a house in 
Tuscany, they do not have to conquer the soil." 
No sooner were the words out of his mouth, then a wit in the back of the room 
called out a new option: "Buy it!" 
The laughter was immediate and hearty, one more indication that fears of the 
newly reunified Germany's economic power co-exist with -- and for some, 
overshadow -- fears of a militarist state. 
Such fears were on the agenda of "Educating Fritz," a symposium on 
German-American relations organized by the Goethe-Institut Los Angeles in 
collaboration with UCLA's history department. 
The three-day gathering of scholars, politicians, political activists and 
writers at the Beverly Hills library closed Sunday with more questions than 
conclusions. But the frankness of the questioning -- with fears, prejudices and 
traumatic memories aired so openly -- was an indicator to most who attended 
that the symposium was a success and such questioning is urgently needed. 
Humor surfaced repeatedly, in spite of the fact that many panelists presented 
their remarks in the form of scholarly papers -- heavily referenced and 
detailed -- read in monotone. Humor, however, never obscured the seriousness of 
the occasion. The symposium took place, as one member of the audience reminded 
everyone at the closing session, "in the shadow of the Third Reich." 
Stereotypes about Germans were explored. Anton Kaes, a professor of German 
literature and film at UC Berkeley, listed such characteristics as 
aggressiveness, arrogance, recklessness, self-pity, insensitivity and a desire 
to be liked. He reminded the audience that such traits were attributed to 
Germans recently and at a high level, during a meeting between British Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher and some of her top advisers. 
In book after book on the Germans, Kaes said, a radical distrust is evident. 
Three major wars in 70 years (1870, 1914, 1939), he said, have led many 
historians to describe "being German as an incurable disease." Even Time 
magazine got into the act, he said, offering a cover story on a "prescription 
for Germany," diagnosing a bad case of psychocultural aggressiveness, paranoia, 
and megalomania. 
"Fear is on the agenda again," Kaes said. 
Several panelists alluded to the question: Are German and Nazi interchangeable 
terms? Many Americans and West Europeans seem to think so, according to several 
speakers. 
Marion Countess Donhoff, an 82-year-old self-described "Prussian" whose family 
was active in the resistance against Hitler, gave a historical overview. Chief 
editor of the German weekly, "Die Zeit" since 1973, the countess said the 
Allied Powers refusal to distinguish between Germans and Nazis seriously 
damaged the opposition's strength. 
Looking toward the future of a reunified Germany, she acknowledged: "Our allies 
are scared. Each state is anxious that with such economic power, Germany may 
succumb to the temptation of converting economic power to political power." 
But Donhoff reminded the audience that two postwar generations have been 
educated to think in terms of freedom and tolerance rather than 
authoritarianism, based on education policies set by the British and Americans 
during the occupation, and said the majority of Germans do not aspire to 
dominate, but to merge into Europe. 
"Don't let judgments that were once justified become prejudices," at such a 
crucial time, she urged, lest "they become self-fulfilling prophecies." 
Although scholarly in presentation, the symposium was open to the public. The 
general public, however, did not show up. Rather, people with some personal, 
and traumatic, attachment to the subject were drawn there. 
Eleanore Boer of Los Angeles stood up and announced she had been a member of 
the Hitler Youth Movement in east Prussia, now Poland. 
Grimacing and breaking into tears, she said, "It is a most horrible thing for a 
young person to realize all of a sudden you had been lied to. 'You are nothing. 
Your people are everything,' we were told." 
Calling out to her from across the room, while the scholars looked on, Anna 
Fischer, a Holocaust survivor from Poland, asked her, "Did you honestly believe 
you were ubermenschen (supermen)? I was a slave laborer. I was all the time 
thinking about the young people -- what were they thinking? You were being 
indoctrinated about the evils of the Jews." 
The two women continued on for a few dramatic moments, Boer at one point 
singing some lines of a racist song that she shocked her mother with as a young 
girl. 
" 'What are you thinking about when you sing that?' my mother asked me. "I'm 
not thinking about anything. It's just a song,' and it was true. I didn't 
think." 
Kurt Margulies, an Austrian-born Jew, who lost many of his family members 
during the Holocaust, repeatedly asked: "So, can there be another Hitler?" He 
is convinced there can be, and quoted Germans who, he said, had themselves 
predicted such a calamity if two conditions were met: reunification, and 
wide-scale unemployment. 
"Absolutely not," was the consensus of the experts in the room, whether 
Germans, Americans, Jews or Gentiles. 
"Germany is really different (now)," Henryk Broder, correspondent for the 
Jerusalem Post in Germany and Poland, said. A German-born Jew himself, Broder 
said the question of another Hitler was irrelevant. 
"The only question now important," Broder said, "is how Germany will deal with 
its own history, its own future." 
His observation echoed that of another Jew, Michael Nutkiewicz. As director of 
the Martyrs' Memorial and Museum of the Holocaust at the Jewish Federation of 
Los Angeles, Hitler and the Holocaust are never far from his consciousness, yet 
hearing the same question about another Hitler on Friday, he said, "I find it 
an odd question at this point. It's a question only an older person would ask. 
The most dangerous question I can ask of Germany is, 'How tolerant is the 
society? Is it possible to become pluralistic? If not, how will they treat 
non-German elements?' " 
Nutkiewicz said that one of the great ironies of postwar reality was that a 
similar conference could be held on Israel. "The postwar mentality, pluralism, 
statehood -- they have very similar problems. . . . Both peoples, coming out of 
a very common experience, are incredibly self-critical, hypersensitive about 
history, and that's all for the good." 
The one panelist who saw the most indicators in modern Germany of nationalism, 
fascism and totalitarianism was Petra Kelly, member of Germany's Parliament and 
leader of the Greens party. She delivered a staggering negative list of signs 
and portents that added up to an indictment: Forbidden lyrics from the past 
heard being sung on Hitler's birthday; omissions of any reference to the 
Holocaust in the reunification treaty; echoes of Hitler's "1,000-year reich" in 
current references to the "next 1,000 years of peace and prosperity"; 
limitations on the immigration of Soviet Jews; deportation of Vietnamese 
students and workers from East Germany, with people speaking openly of being 
"Vietnamese-free"; and, "most painful, the West German merchants of death, who 
are without morals" in their dealing with Iraq, and, before, Libya, selling 
them chemicals for warfare. 
Without denying any of it, Donhoff argued it was unfair of Kelly to offer her 
description as "the only picture" of Germany. 
Taking Kelly on, political scientist Joyce Mushaben of Georgetown University 
told her, "Democracy presumes a positive concept of human nature. If you do not 
believe in the possibility of human change and reform, you should resort to an 
enlightened despot." 
Throughout the proceedings the Germans underscored their gratitude to America, 
starting with occupation policies that helped them rebuild and become the power 
they are today. With some irony, Americans, smarting over their current 
economic decline, were reminded of early plans, discussed seriously during the 
war, to decentralize Germany and turn it into an agrarian and pastoral society. 
As much as the financial help, however, the Germans seemed grateful for the 
lessons in tolerance, freedom and the capacity to look to the future that 
Americans brought them. 
