SOME CALL ARMS INCINERATOR ATOLL HOME 
Every visitor to remote Johnston Atoll, a tiny low-lying coral island in the 
South Pacific, must prepare for chemical warfare. 
Every visitor is given a gas mask and carries a nerve gas antidote in a 
syringe, which he must be ready to use within seconds of an exposure alarm 
sounding. 
It is here, 720 miles southwest of Hawaii and in an otherwise idyllic Pacific 
setting of palm trees and coral islets, that the United States has built the 
world's largest chemical weapons destruction station. 
In the first-ever media tour to the remote atoll U.S. Army staff recently 
assured reporters that the operation is safe. 
So safe that 79 missiles with the lethal nerve agent Sarin were burned while 
the group of 80 reporters visited furnaces, each wearing on his belt a gas mask 
and syringe pouch. 
During one of the tours, a temperature fluctuation in one furnace chamber 
forced a plant shutdown for 44 minutes. 
It was one of the many nagging glitches which have kept the $340-million 
incinerator operating for only 24% of the time expected. 
Six times since trial burning began in June, contamination alarms have sounded 
throughout the facility, only to prove to be false readings. Some conveyor 
belts within the complex that carry non-lethal munitions parts have repeatedly 
broken down. 
"When the plant operates, it operates very well. However, we are seeing more 
problems than we had expected," Charles Baronian, technical director of the 
U.S. Army's chemical disposal program at Johnston, told a briefing. 
"Because the problems are mechanical, I would primarily characterize it as a 
design flaw, but not a basic flaw." 
Baronian stressed that the breakdowns do not endanger safety and mostly occur 
in conveyor belts and other transfer points. Shutdowns occur mainly because 
site managers take no chances. 
On the atoll are 54 storage bunkers, most brimming with missiles and mortars 
filled with chemical gas and liquid. 
Nerve agents such as Sarin, which are odorless and colorless, can seep through 
clothing and skin, restrict breathing, cause involuntary urination, convulsions 
and finally death. 
Mustard gas raises watery blisters hours after contact and inflames the nose 
and throat. 
All the atoll's 1,400 residents carry gas masks and walk around with a pouch 
containing a syringe filled with a nerve gas antidote that must be injected 
within seconds of an exposure. Masks must be fitted within nine seconds. 
Throughout the island, automated detectors take 29,000 readings daily from 106 
monitoring stations. They scan the air in workplaces and around the island, 
sounding an alarm when they detect the presence of nerve agent or blister gas. 
Despite a feeling that the possibility of death is only a malfunction away, 
life is still pleasant on Johnston. 
Palm trees and wire fences, softball fields and decontamination rooms, armed 
military police and a nine-hole golf course -- they are the contrasts of the 
atoll. 
The constant breeze through the palm trees and the beauty of the setting hide 
the fact that the atoll is not a resort. 
One section of Johnston Island, the largest in the atoll, is sealed off due to 
a large spill of Agent Orange. 
In another area, the failed launch of a nuclear missile left plutonium in the 
water. 
But this does not always bother its residents, who are mostly from the United 
States working under contracts of six months to one year. 
"We've got a six-lane bowling alley, movies every night, and softball is really 
popular," said Curtis Rodgers, a civilian technician. "A lot of people fish out 
there. Scuba diving is excellent, and you can sail and water ski. 
"I've been living on the island two years and if I thought there was any danger 
I wouldn't be here." 
