BEST BETS 
We didn't feel like going to work the other day. But we had a good excuse. 
"We're dead," we told our boss over the phone. 
"OK," she said. "Feel better." 
Being dead had other advantages. As a ghost, no one could see us. This raised 
some pretty lurid possibilities, the kind you have when you're young and 
sitting around with your friends and one of them asks what you would do if you 
suddenly woke up one morning and discovered you had X-ray eyes. "I would go 
into the girls' bathroom at school," Jake the Face would always say, a little 
too excitedly. 
Instead, we found other ways to enjoy being invisible. Like speeding on the 
freeway without the CHP officer seeing us, and going to work to sit on our 
boss's desk making faces, and helping ourselves immensely in the cookie aisle 
at the local supermarket. Or walking into the movie theater for free -- utterly 
naked. 
Finally, we got bored. We began to feel guilty. If we really did die, we 
couldn't live with the thought that our epitaph didn't match our deeds. They 
would have to write: "Rest Not in Peace -- You Disgusting Cheat, Sneak and 
Liar." No, no. Not for us. It's like something out of "Spoon River Anthology," 
Edgar Lee Masters' collection of verse that the Poetriad will perform tonight 
at 8 at the Westchester Elks Lodge, 8025 W. Manchester Ave., Playa del Rey. 
Admission is free. Reservations are required. Call (213) 301-9300. 
So we came back to the land of the living, and made a point never to speed 
again or walk around naked in inappropriate places. And we paid for the cookies 
and movie, and left some flowers on our boss's desk, and reminded ourself to 
get down to the Santa Monica Library at 11:15 a.m. Friday to have author Ray 
Bradbury sign a copy of his latest book, "A Graveyard for Lunatics." The 
library is located at 1343 6th St. For information call (213) 458-8600. Only 
books purchased at the library can be signed. 
And we said confession at the local church. It couldn't hurt. R.D. 
