MELVIN DURSLAG: HYPOCRISY IMPERILS THE FUTURE FOR ROSE 
In January -- maybe even in December -- Pete Rose will stroll from the 
jailhouse where he has been consigned for a memory flaw. 
He forgot to pay his taxes, an oversight not recommended, but not uncommon. 
Re-entering society, Pete will create a dilemma for (a) those in baseball asked 
to decide whether he should be given employment and (b) those voting for the 
Hall of Fame, pressed to determine whether one doing time, and suspended from 
the game, belongs in their shrine. 
It is possible that one decision will be linked to the other, which is to say, 
unless Rose is readmitted to baseball, Hall of Fame voters might find him unfit 
for approval. 
Pete has done a lot of things in life distressingly stupid, but he has been 
smart enough to keep a low profile during his incarceration. 
He has reduced the profile, in fact, to non-existent, rejecting all publicity 
on the ground that news of him might enhance the status of those gathering it, 
but not of Pete. 
Jail is an ugly experience. Rose wants out and obviously he wants to return to 
baseball, which he knows something about. 
At anything else, he has to be a bust. He can't build bridges. He can't write 
poetry. He can't sell. And in today's competitive market, it isn't likely he 
could make a go of saving souls. 
Baseball's piety in connection with the Rose case is the least bit repulsive. 
The game has been grandstanding, creating the impression that forgiveness of 
its wayward sons is a bigger deal than it is in other sports. 
Ben Johnson is back on the track. And what sin greater than cheating in the 
Olympics, holiest of athletic endeavors? 
Johnson cheated. He used substances banned by Olympic law. His victory was 
negated. He brought disgrace to his country. 
But he is back in business, because punishment needn't be forever. 
Dexter Manley, a three-time drug loser, is back in football, forgiven with tons 
of others, in all sports, for drug violations. 
Lester Piggott, England's most successful jockey -- the Bill Shoemaker of his 
land -- is back at work. Lester served a year for income tax evasion, a god 
giving racing the blackest of eyes. 
Muhammad Ali ducked the draft at a time America didn't consider it good form. 
He not only was forgiven, but Louisville named a street after him. 
And during his early and middle years in pro basketball, was Kareem 
Abdul-Jabbar saint-like? He went around punching guys. One night, he 
sneak-punched a player named Kent Benson, injuring him badly. In an off-season 
pickup game, he punched some nondescript, breaking the man's jaw. 
Yet, in the end, Abdul-Jabbar departed a conquering hero, if not a patriarch. 
Need you be reminded that one Super Bowl Sunday, the wife of Darryl Strawberry 
told police her husband came home and broke her nose? 
If this happened, as charged, how would baseball, so tenderly sensitive to the 
game's image, compare wife-beating as a sin to betting? 
And would those Hall of Fame voters, guarding the ramparts of baseball 
integrity, turn down a guy who bet and vote in one who busted up a wife? 
Did George Steinbrenner, making a burlesque of baseball, not do more to damage 
the game than Pete Rose? And look how long George survived before getting the 
foot. 
The mad course followed by Rose hardly is recommended here, but when the 
jailhouse doors open and he comes to baseball, which he served most of his 
life, asking for a job, we don't see it as a major concession if he gets one. 
We don't even see the need for deep and profound soul-searching. 
Ted Turner was forgiven for an act of lunacy that all but got him chased across 
the border. 
Guest speaker at a breakfast of the National Sportscasters and Sportswriters 
Assn., Ted outlined his objection to player agent Jerry Kapstein. Then he 
added: "You should have some reason to dislike a guy besides the fact he wears 
a full-length fur coat and is a Jew." 
Mind you, here was a baseball owner, a basketball owner, a guy licensed by the 
government to televise. 
He would apologize, gain forgiveness and grow from that point to the corporate 
giant he is today. 
So, reflecting on the Rose case, you want to discourage finger-wagging. Too 
many who wag are vulnerable. 
