MUTINEERS CLAIM SEIZURE OF PHILIPPINE AIR FORCE HQ 
Mutinous troops claimed today to have seized the headquarters of the Philippine 
air force and appeared to be in control of two broadcast stations in a bid to 
topple President Corazon Aquino. 
The government called on all mayors to mobilize local police forces to defend 
the Aquino administration. 
In an emotional radio appeal, in which he said he was on his knees, Manila 
Archbishop Cardinal Jaime Sin urged his countrymen "to support the duly 
constituted authority." 
It was not immediately clear how widespread the mutiny was or whether it had 
the power to topple the government. Loyalist troops took up positions around 
the palace, where Aquino has her residence and offices. 
Defense Secretary Fidel V. Ramos said the coup attempt began when two companies 
of mutinous Marines tried to enter Villamor Air Base, headquarters of the 
Philippine air force, in the southern suburbs of Manila. 
He claimed that they were blocked by loyalist troops. But air force troops who 
had been guarding the gate left about 2 a.m., and the mutinous marines took 
over security at the base perimeter. 
It appeared that no shots had been fired. 
One marine captain, who refused to give his name, said about 2,000 troops are 
taking part in the mutiny. Air force troops sealed off the adjacent domestic 
airport and refused to let passengers enter the terminal. 
Two truckloads of soldiers, wearing white bands and carrying red flags, were 
seen entering the government radio and television station and the adjacent 
private ABS-CBN station at about 2 a.m. They appeared to be mutineers. 
At the state television station, scattered shooting broke out. Soldiers kept 
reporters away from the area, and it was impossible to determine whether 
mutineers or government troops were in control. 
The soldiers who entered the state-run station were wearing the same white 
armbands and carrying the same red flags as the mutineers at Villamor. The 
significance of the red and white colors was not immediately apparent. 
