RACING NOTES; 
TROTTER MACK LOBELL AIMS AT PERFECT RECORD 
Mack Lobell, the world's fastest trotter, was supposed to retire at stud in 
Sweden when American Lou Guida sold him to John-Erik Magnusson for $6 million 
in 1988. 
But as a 6-year-old, Mack Lobell continues to come out of stud service and 
continually win on the competitive Swedish harness racing circuit. 
"I believe that Mack Lobell is still the world's No. 1 trotter, even when he's 
not in top shape," driver Thomas Nilsson said. 
On Saturday, Mack Lobell beat Mr. Moxy by nearly two lengths in the feature 
race at Solvalla Racetrack outside Stockholm for his 14th consecutive victory 
in Sweden. 
Nilsson, one of Sweden's leading drivers, has not lost a race with Mack Lobell. 
They will try to close the year with a perfect record Dec. 22, Mack's next 
scheduled start. 
The U.S.-bred Mack Lobell has turned into a gold mine at stud and is not doing 
badly on the race track either. With one race left this year, Mack Lobell has 
won more than $454,000. 
Magnusson, who said Mack Lobell is fully booked for next stud season, also has 
big plans for him on the track next year. 
"I may enter him for the Prix d'Amerique, but I'd like to see Peace Corps in 
that race, too," Magnusson said. "It would probably be too much to race Mack 
Lobell alone against the best French trotters." 
Peace Corps, the U.S. Trotter of the Year in 1989, was purchased by Swede Bjorn 
Pettersson's U.S.-based stable in 1988 and was brought to Sweden this year. 
Mack Lobell easily beat Peace Corps in the May 27 Elitloppet over one mile at 
Solvalla in the first meeting between the world's fastest male and female 
trotters. 
The Dec. 22 race is expected to get Mack Lobell ready for the Prix d'Amerique. 
Europe's premier harness race will be held at the Vincennes track in Paris in 
late January. 
Mack Lobell, whom Guida purchased for only $17,500 in 1985, has set eight world 
records. He was the 1987 U.S. Harness Horse of the Year and is a three-time 
Breeders Crown champion. 
Dance for Lucy led wire-to-wire, weathering a late rally by Betty Lobelia to 
win the first division of the $60,425 Cardinal Handicap by a nose Sunday at 
Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky. 
Dance for Lucy, ridden by David Penna, picked up her third win in 11 starts 
this year. 
