OPERA REVIEW; 
'MAGIC FLUTE' AT UC IRVINE TRULY MAGICAL; 
STAGE: MUSIC, DRAMA AND DANCE DEPARTMENTS COMBINE TO INJECT NEW LIFE INTO 
MOZART'S TIME-TESTED MASTERPIECE. 
Mozart's "The Magic Flute" is an imperishable masterpiece by any lights, but 
how many of us have sat through interminably draggy, supremely unmagical 
performances by major opera companies and gone home feeling it would be just 
fine never to see it again? 
Surprise! The antidote to those secret "I-hate-the-'Flute' " blues is being 
produced right now at UC Irvine. This joint effort of the music, drama and 
dance departments opened Thursday night in Fine Arts Village Theater on the UCI 
campus and proved conclusively that you don't need a huge budget or great 
voices to capture splendidly the essence of this 
spiritual-comic-serious-fantastic opera. 
Stage director Robert Cohen, designers Douglas Scott-Goheen, Elizabeth Novak 
and Liz Stillwell, choreographer Janice Gudde Plastino and conductor Zelman 
Bokser see to it that all aspects of the work -- musical, scenic and dramatic 
-- are given proper weight. 
Stunning, always apt, never inept effects abound. The chorus doesn't clomp on 
and off in formation; panels on either side of the stage open from floor to 
ceiling to reveal the gold-robed figures in boxes stacked one on top of 
another, three stories high. 
The Queen of the Night rises from the earth to a height of 20 feet in a 
metallic blue gown strung with penlights, while Sarastro enters in a chariot, 
drawn by dancing "lions." The three beguiling Knaben fly in on a giant Masonic 
eye, later a crocodile, the three Ladies are blue, green and purple, and so it 
goes, imaginatively and wonderfully. 
Dramatically, amalgamating the Speaker, 2nd Priest and 2nd Guard into one "High 
Priest" lends special continuity to Tamino's scenes with those governing his 
initiation rites. Monostatos, less gross caricature than usual, actually has 
moments that evoke empathy, and at opera's end, the Queen is forgiven by 
Sarastro -- and it works. 
Of course, some sing much better than others, but every cast member performs 
well in the occasionally awkward translation by Robert and Lorna Cohen. 
Most adept are Donald Christensen (Papageno), Steve Dunham (Tamino), Laurel 
Boyd (Pamina) and Kerry O'Brien (Queen). The UCI Symphony provides scrappy 
moments and great spirit under Bokser's sometimes hasty direction. Counting 
tonight, seven opportunities remain not to miss this charming production. 
 "The Magic Flute" continues through Nov. 18 in the Fine Arts Village Theater, 
UC Irvine, Campus Drive and Bridge Street, Irvine. Performances Saturday and 
Tuesday through Nov. 18 at 8 p.m. Matinee at 2 p.m. Sunday. Tickets: $11 to 
$15. Information: (714) 856-5000. 
