JURY DEADLOCKS, JUDGE DECLARES MISTRIAL IN TRIPLE-MURDER CASE 
A judge reluctantly declared a mistrial Tuesday in the Thomas Maniscalco 
triple-murder case, the longest in Orange County history, after jurors said 
they were hopelessly deadlocked on the 26th day of deliberation. 
Some jurors, who told Superior Court Judge Kathleen E. O'Leary they were split 
10-2, with most voting for a guilty verdict in the 10-year-old case, said they 
questioned the credibility of some of the witnesses for the prosecution. 
"The prosecutor did the best he could, but I think it is a very, very weak 
case," said Diane Martinez of Fullerton, one of the two holdout jurors. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Richard M. King told O'Leary he was ready to immediately 
retry the Westminster attorney and biker leader, and a Nov. 13 date was set for 
a new trial. 
The Maniscalco trial began with jury selection more than 17 months ago. The 
jury's marathon deliberations continued over two months, surpassing the 
previous record for a trial by at least 11 days. 
"I guess to just say thank you is rather hollow at this point," O'Leary told 
the jurors. 
By the time Maniscalco is retried, and co-defendant Daniel Duffy is tried at 
the end of 1991, the cost of bringing them to court will run in the millions of 
dollars, although the specific costs have not yet been calculated. 
Maniscalco, 45, who helped found the Hessian motorcycle gang, is accused of 
leading a band of killers to the Westminster home of his former best friend, 
Richard (Rabbit) Rizzone, 36, on Memorial Day weekend, 1980, to kill him and 
any witnesses. More than a week later Rizzone, Thomas Monahan, 28, considered a 
Rizzone bodyguard, and Rena Miley, 19, Rizzone's girlfriend, were found dead at 
Rizzone's tract home. Miley had been raped and then shot. The other two were 
also shot to death. 
Prosecution witnesses said Maniscalco, who describes his legal career as 
"dedicated to counterculture people," mainly bikers, was also running drug and 
counterfeit money operations. Maniscalco was upset with Rizzone, prosecutors 
claim, because he was skimming profits from the illegal operations. 
