NHL ROUNDUP; 
BLACKHAWKS RALLY TO BEAT PENGUINS 
The Chicago Blackhawks rallied from a three-goal deficit with the help of Dirk 
Graham's two goals to beat the Pittsburgh Penguins, 4-3, Thursday night at 
Chicago. 
Graham's goals included a short-handed breakaway to tie the game, 3-3, at 4:06 
of the final period. Adam Creighton and Steve Larmer also scored for the 
Blackhawks, Larmer's power-play goal at 12:04 of the final period ending up as 
the game-winner. 
Dan Quinn scored twice and Mario Lemieux once as the Penguins took a 3-0 lead 
in the first period. 
The victory lifted the Norris Division-leading Blackhawks' record to 12-6-1 and 
25 points, most in the NHL. 
Quebec 7, N.Y. Islanders 5 -- The Nordiques broke their club-record eight-game 
losing streak with a victory at Uniondale, N.Y. 
Peter Stastny scored three goals as the Nordiques won for the first time since 
a 7-2 victory over Minnesota Oct. 21. The Nordiques have the league's worst 
record at 4-12-1. 
Toronto 4, Philadelphia 1 -- Gary Leeman scored the tie-breaking goal early in 
the third period and the Maple Leafs went on to win at Philadelphia. 
Leeman took his own rebound behind the net and slapped a five-footer past Pete 
Peeters to put Toronto ahead, 2-1, at 6:49. 
Philadelphia's Gord Murphy was given a five-minute high-sticking major for 
cutting Leeman after his goal. 
Boston 6, Edmonton 2 -- Bob Sweeney had the first three-goal game of his NHL 
career and Ken Linseman scored in his first game back from an injury as the 
Bruins won at Boston. 
Sweeney, a former Boston College star, scored once in each period to run his 
goal total to eight as the Bruins completed the season series with the Oilers 
at 2-0-1. 
Linseman, playing for the first time after recuperating from surgery for a 
circulatory problem, scored the final Boston goal. 
St. Louis 1, Montreal 1 -- Paul MacLean's second-period goal gave the Blues a 
tie at St. Louis, extending their unbeaten streak to seven games. 
St. Louis, 4-0-3 since losing, 6-1, to Philadelphia on Oct. 24, also tied the 
Canadiens, 3-3, Monday night in Montreal. The unbeaten streak is the Blues' 
longest since a club-record seven-game winning streak in 1987-88. 
Russ Courtnall scored on a first-period breakaway for the Canadiens, who are 
4-1-2 in their last eight games. 
Minnesota 5, Detroit 1 -- Dave Gagner and rookie Mike Modano each scored two 
goals as the North Stars extended the Red Wings' winless streak to nine with a 
victory at Bloomington, Minn. 
The last-place Red Wings, are on their longest winless streak (0-6-3) since 
they went 0-10-2 from Dec. 29, 1984, to Jan. 21, 1985. 
