COLUMN ONE; 
ASK NOT WHAT THE CRITICS SAY; 
SERVE YOUR COUNTRY, EARN AN EDUCATION OR A DOWN PAYMENT. IT SEEMED LIKE A 
SIMPLE IDEA. BUT ALL THAT'S BEING VOLUNTEERED IS SCORN. 
At recess time at St. Edmond's parochial school in south Philadelphia, the 
youngsters crowd around to watch blue-uniformed volunteers from the 
Philadelphia Youth Service Corps swarm over the 75-year-old structure, painting 
the trim and patching the concrete. 
"The building looks wonderful," says Sister Nancy Marie Firn, the principal. 
"But the best thing about this is that it gives the children a chance to see 
people working together to help someone else." 
In a rudimentary way, the 2-year-old Youth Service Corps is a testing ground 
for a nationwide scheme that would be much more ambitious -- and has turned out 
to be far more controversial -- than similar programs here and in other big 
cities. 
Some Democrats in Congress are proposing to channel the energies and skills of 
young people into federal social programs by enlisting them in a national 
"citizen corps" of perhaps 500,000 volunteers. 
The proposal's sponsors, Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia and Rep. Dave McCurdy of 
Oklahoma, are promoting it as a new approach to government activism in an age 
of big deficits and tight budgets. Not incidentally, they are also seeking to 
pump new life into their political party. 
Though some of the plan's backers see a concept as unassailable as motherhood, 
it has touched off fierce opposition and raised the fundamental question of how 
much Americans now can realistically expect from their government -- and vice 
versa. 
The breadth of opposition to the proposal and the range of epithets used 
against it may represent some sort of unofficial record. 
Among liberals, Rep. William D. Ford (D-Mich.) called the approach "reminiscent 
of Stalinist industrialization in the 1930s." Conservative critics recalled 
that economist Milton Friedman once likened a version of the national service 
concept to the Hitler Youth. 
Pentagon officials fear that a citizen corps would complicate recruiting for 
the armed forces. And the War Resisters League branded the idea as "coercive" 
and "a guise for the return of a draft." 
"It's the organized left and the organized right who are against it," Nunn 
said. "The left basically wants everything to be in addition to, not instead 
of" current government benefits. "The right doesn't want government involved in 
a big way in people's lives." 
The citizen corps was first proposed early this year under the aegis of the 
Democratic Leadership Council, an organization of party moderates, as a way to 
advance its goal of moving the Democrats toward the middle of the road. 
"This is not a guaranteed benefit, it's a guaranteed opportunity," Nunn said. 
Like the GI Bill, the program would offer tangible benefits -- tuition payments 
and housing assistance -- in return for service. It would also phase out most 
other forms of federal aid to college students. 
As the program was originally contemplated, volunteers for civilian service 
would receive a $10,000 voucher in return for a year of work in education, 
health care, conservation or public safety. They could use the voucher toward 
college tuition or a down payment on a home. 
Under another option, a recruit could choose military service and get $12,000 a 
year. The cost of the program has been estimated at $5 billion a year even 
after most current federal education aid programs were phased out. 
Advocates say that what distinguishes the citizen corps and gives it political 
potency is that it would reach middle-class youth, much as the Peace Corps has, 
while other youth programs have been aimed mainly at lower-income groups. 
Democratic National Chairman Ron Brown called the Nunn-McCurdy measure "the 
first major new social program that has been advanced in Congress in well over 
15 years. We are talking about a government program that will make this nation 
better by reestablishing a special relationship and responsibility between our 
government and its people." 
Probably the most serious and intense objections to the proposal have been 
stirred by the idea of replacing most federal aid to education with the option 
of earning part of tuition costs as a citizen-volunteer. 
"The Nunn-McCurdy bill is based on the false premise that access to education 
beyond high school should be a privilege for the few who have 'earned' it, as 
reward for their public service," wrote Ford, a senior member of the House 
Education and Labor Committee. "The reality is that we need to 'give' as much 
education as we can to as many students as are willing to take it." 
Rep. Augustus F. Hawkins (D-Los Angeles), chairman of the Education and Labor 
Committee, said: "They are attempting to take money away from the school aid 
program, and we don't want to interfere with that group of students." 
McCurdy says that the opposition the proposal is encountering is symptomatic of 
many politicians' current determination to avoid responsibility for the cost of 
benefit programs and other government services. 
"The (Ronald) Reagan Administration for eight years gave us no pain and easy 
answers," he said. "The Democrats are afraid to touch entitlement programs." 
Backers of the bill modified the original proposal by making it possible for 
volunteers to serve in the corps while going to school. It would also allow 
current federal aid programs to continue for young people with disabilities or 
heavy financial obligations. 
"The only young person who would fare more poorly under national service than 
under existing programs," Nunn said during a Senate hearing, "would be an 
able-bodied high school graduate with no disabilities or other compelling 
personal circumstances who simply did not want to perform any service 
whatsoever." 
In answer to critics of the proposed phase-out of current federal programs, 
Nunn-McCurdy backers say that earnings from the national service in most cases 
would exceed amounts available through federal grants, and that national 
service would offer financial support to the estimated 50% of American youth 
who now do not attend college. 
Advocates of national service say they are encouraged by the success of local 
volunteer programs such as the Philadelphia Youth Service Corps. 
"The lesson is that service programs can work, particularly that we can manage 
programs with low-income kids," said Charles C. Moskos, a Northwestern 
University sociologist who is one of the driving forces behind the Nunn-McCurdy 
proposal. 
If the Youth Service Corps here is any indication, one key to success is a 
tough, no-nonsense approach. 
"This is a hard program and a demanding one," instructor Ann Kreidle told a 
group of new recruits, all high school dropouts, some fresh from scrapes with 
the law. "You've got to get here every day, and you've got to get here on time. 
If you are ready to do that, fine. If not, we don't want you." 
Supervisor Daryl Hinton said that only about half of each incoming group makes 
it through training, and that staff members continue to weed out 
"knuckleheads." 
One such troublemaker was 18-year-old Chris Dozier, who was suspended for 
writing on the wall at his job site but was given the chance to go through 
training again. Asked why he had returned, Dozier, who first joined the corps 
after he was arrested for his involvement in a gang fight, said: "So I can 
better my hopes for the future. They gave me a second chance to get my life 
together." 
Anthony Fairbanks, executive director of the corps, said he considers it "an 
embryonic version of a national service corps," but he doubts that Congress 
will approve the Nunn-McCurdy proposal, with its phase-out of existing 
education programs, any time soon. "There is no way in hell the education lobby 
is going to let that happen," Fairbanks said. 
For all their accomplishments, the Philadelphia corps and similar service 
programs in cities such as New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Oakland 
have difficulty attracting middle-class youngsters. 
One reason is the low compensation they offer, usually minimum wage or less. 
Another, said Northwestern's Moskos, "is that they lack the glamour of an 
organization like the Peace Corps." 
For youngsters from low-income families, on the other hand, the urban corps 
programs -- which include courses and other help -- offer the prospect of 
getting the equivalence of high school diplomas, which many lack. 
Gail Kong, director of the New York City Volunteer Corps, the biggest such 
program in the country, acknowledged that only "a small number" of her 450 
volunteers are middle class, and that 75% of them are high school dropouts. 
The low-income volunteers generally get high marks for their conscientiousness 
and commitment. 
At Chinatown Day Care Center in Manhattan, about 10 City Volunteer Corps 
members who serve as teachers' aides were busy last Halloween showing young 
witches and goblins how to bob for apples. "They are a big help," teacher 
Victoria Mangubat said of her aides. "The children respect them because they 
know how to discipline them." 
But sometimes their limited experience and education are handicaps. 
Hugh Simmons, a college-educated former Peace Corps volunteer who is team 
supervisor for the volunteer contingent at the Chinatown center, said that the 
volunteers could accomplish more and have a bigger impact on the children "if 
their skill levels and abilities were higher." 
Low-income volunteers probably would be more effective and their experience 
would be more gratifying if they were teamed with better-educated volunteers, 
Moskos said. That would be a goal of the Nunn-McCurdy proposal. 
"Working with middle-class kids usually helps lower-income kids raise their 
performance level," Moskos said. 
Middle-class volunteers would also benefit from a diverse experience, said the 
Philadelphia corps' Fairbanks. "Both middle-class and lower-class kids have 
much to 
learn from each other," he said. 
Advocates of national service initially welcomed President Bush's early 
emphasis on volunteerism -- what he calls his "thousand points of light" -- 
because it would help focus attention on the idea of service. 
But some have come to view Bush's "YES" proposal, for Youth Entering Service, 
as a hindrance. The White House has yet to spell out details of his proposal, 
and some Republicans seem reluctant to act on any kind of service measure until 
they know what the President has in mind. 
From what is known, Bush's proposal would seek only about $25 million in 
federal funds to establish a foundation to promote community service. 
A similar proposal by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) for support of service 
programs run through schools, is included in a Senate bill that was approved 
last summer by the Kennedy-chaired Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee. 
The bill would also provide $100 million to start and expand local youth 
service corps programs. 
And still another section of the Senate bill, inspired by the Nunn-McCurdy 
proposal, would provide an additional $100 million for state-administered, 
five-year demonstrations of the national service corps approach. Volunteers 
would be eligible to receive vouchers good for buying homes or paying tuition, 
though other types of educational aid would continue. 
The House Education and Labor Committee is expected to produce its own national 
service bill this month. McCurdy says he hopes for the best. 
"With the pilot program, we can allow states to demonstrate that it can 
actually work," he said. "Then, I think, there will be a a move to supporting 
it. I'm not discouraged. When you go outside (Washington area), there is a lot 
of support for it." 
