MAHATMA'S DISCIPLES WORK, PRAY FOR INDIA'S MORAL REVIVAL 
Mohandas K. Gandhi would be aghast to see his old neighborhood today. 
Less than a mile from the national shrine at the Sevagram Ashram, where Gandhi 
spent 12 of his last years developing the principles that made him India's 
enduring symbol of purity, simplicity and nonviolence, a pint of whiskey can be 
purchased illegally for 25 rupees (about $1.50), prostitutes sell their 
services for 50 rupees a night, lottery tickets go for half a laborer's daily 
wage and high-caste Hindus occasionally clash with the Untouchables to whom 
Gandhi dedicated his life to protect. 
But there is more. Soon there will be a steel plant in Gandhi's old back yard. 
The Indian government laid a foundation stone for the new steel plant in 
September despite a futile, yearlong drive by Gandhi's disciples to block it 
under Indian laws that bar the location of such factories near national 
shrines. 
Now, it seems, the only thing that remains unchanged at Gandhi's historic 
Sevagram Ashram is Haribau Shende, loyal servant of the Mahatma, as Gandhi was 
known to his followers. Shende still sits outside Gandhi's thatched-roof hut as 
he has every day since his master was assassinated by a religious fanatic 41 
years ago. 
"Bapu's age is gone now," the toothless Shende sadly told a visitor recently, 
speaking of Gandhi with a word reserved for Indian saints. "Everywhere there is 
change in the way people are living. 
"Bapu has not taken anything with him. It is all still here. His things are 
here. His ideas are here. But, if the people do not want to follow them, what 
can be done?" 
Pointing to a nearby sign that lists what Gandhi called the Seven Social Sins, 
among them "politics without principles," "pleasure without conscience" and 
"science without humanity," Shende added: "Unfortunately those sins are still 
with us, too. 
"But what is to be done?" 
Four decades after Gandhi was instrumental in achieving India's independence 
from British colonial rule, the remaining handful of his disciples at Sevagram 
Ashram here in the heart of India concede that their nation has never been 
further from the principles he laid down. 
Political corruption is widespread and reaches into the highest levels. 
Consumerism and greed have penetrated every level of society. Religious 
fundamentalism is growing among the Hindu majority and the Muslim, Sikh and 
Christian minorities. And Gandhi's formula for a simple life of self-reliance 
has been replaced with dreams of owning color TV sets, videocassette recorders 
and imported luxuries. 
"We thought in the post-independence period, the government would work in the 
Gandhian model, but, of course, it did not," said Thakurdas Bang, president of 
the Sevagram Ashram Trust and a committed Gandhi disciple. 
"In general, the way we have been going for the past 50 years is toward more 
and more materialism and more and more consumerism in the name of science or 
technology or whatever. So now we face rampant corruption, unemployment and 
destruction of our environment, and, what is worse, the evil of drink is 
increasing tremendously." 
And the Gandhians, Bang conceded, are now in "a microscopic minority." 
"If humanity is to be saved in our country, Gandhiji will have to be 
resurrected," Bang concluded, using a respectful form of address. 
Bang conceded that resurrecting Gandhi's ideals will be difficult. 
One need not look far from Gandhi's ashram for a case in point. The steel 
plant, Bang said, is a classic confrontation between Gandhiism and progress in 
contemporary India. 
When the federal government endorsed a private-sector proposal to build the 
plant in the town of Wardha, which includes the Sevagram village ashram, Bang 
and other ashram trustees objected. 
"We wanted only that the Indian government obey its own laws," Bang said, 
referring to statutes prohibiting industrial development within 15 miles of 
national shrines and monuments. 
But the government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi paid little heed to the 
protests. Wardha is the home district of a key member of Gandhi's Cabinet who 
was sponsoring the project to provide jobs and win votes in time for this 
year's national elections. 
Still, the Gandhians continued their fight. 
Threats and harassment soon followed. Sources confirmed that Bang and other 
trustees received death threats and, late last year, a fire was set near 
Gandhi's historic hut, apparently as a warning. 
To bolster local support for the plant, the government ordered an environmental 
study of the steel project, which showed that little pollution would result. 
And officials produced maps indicating that the plant actually would be built 
just a few feet outside the protected radius for historic sites. 
Encouraged by the survey and the government's promise of new jobs, the majority 
of the residents supported the project. 
Alone in their resistance, the handful of Gandhians were forced to back down. 
"Unless the people are convinced in that direction, what is the point of an 
ashram or an individual taking up a position based solely on ideology?" Bang 
asked. 
Reminded that such a course was precisely the one chosen by Gandhi in 
British-ruled India, Bang readily agreed, adding, however, that despite their 
defeat in their own back yard, the Gandhian struggle is continuing -- even 
growing somewhat -- nationwide. 
"Mind you, we are facing a huge tidal wave of hedonism," he said. "But there is 
the beginning of a small wave in India among intellectuals and even some common 
villagers to again turn to Gandhiji's model." 
As examples, he cited a continuing protest movement to stop a huge dam project 
in Gujarat state, where hundreds of villagers surrounded local government 
offices and barred officials for a week. 
Just 50 miles away from Sevagram, Bang added, hundreds of village women, 
angered by rampant alcoholism among the men there, traveled house to house and 
village to village, seizing and smashing liquor bottles in protest. 
In the eastern state of Orissa recently, the opposition in the state 
legislature protested a ruling party decision by spending the night on the 
assembly floor, facing a portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. 
And the Gandhian disciples themselves are, for the first time, endorsing 
"value-based" candidates this year in half a dozen parliamentary districts as 
an experimental, though largely symbolic, attempt to raise India's political 
consciousness. 
Still, when asked where Mohandas Gandhi would be in India today had he managed 
to survive all these decades, Bang shook his head and smiled. 
"I am sure," he said, "that Bapuji would again find himself in jail." 
