NEWS ANALYSIS; 
EUPHORIC NOTION IN EUROPE: ALMOST ANYTHING POSSIBLE 
Thursday's decision by a desperate East German government to throw open its 
long-locked borders constitutes the latest and most dramatic of a dizzying 
series of events that in a few months has transformed the political landscape 
of Europe. 
For the continent as a whole, it effectively neutralizes the most horrific 
symbol of its 40-year division -- the Berlin Wall. 
Demands to tear down the wall that began with President John F. Kennedy 
suddenly no longer apply. 
East Germans now can walk through it or around it. 
Events in East Germany also raise more urgent questions about the prospects of 
German reunification, the pace of West European unity and the future of the two 
military alliances that preserved a status quo since 1949 and is now crumbling. 
Just as the wall evolved as a powerful symbol of division, so does its demise 
carry an equally strong message to all Europeans that -- suddenly -- almost 
anything is possible. 
Those who dream of a continent undivided felt their goal a giant step closer to 
reality Thursday as they watched another major chunk of the Iron Curtain fall 
away. 
The long-held belief that Moscow would never permit East Germany, the 
westernmost cornerstone of its empire, to spin out of its orbit seems as dated 
as the wall itself. 
As millions of East Germans paraded through the streets demanding an end to 
Communist rule, the 350,000 Soviet troops stationed in the country were 
conspicuous only by their absence from sight. 
Few European political analysts believe Czechoslovakia can resist pressures for 
similar change much longer. 
For East German leader Egon Krenz and the Communist leadership that clings to 
power in East Berlin, the provisional ruling to open the borders is more an act 
of despair than statesmanship. 
It is a gamble that effectively gives East Germans their first free election. 
Theoretically at least, all 17 million are now free to vote with their feet as 
have thousands before them under far riskier circumstances. 
In a very real way, the volume of those departing in the coming days will 
determine both the fate of Krenz and the viability of the country he leads. 
Even before the hemorrhage of refugees began eight weeks ago, East Germany was 
a nation critically short of skilled manpower, saddled with an aging population 
and the world's lowest birthrate. 
The 200,000 or so who have left up to this point may be only 1% of the 
population, but they are the young, the healthy, and the skilled who are 
critical to the country's future. 
East Germany has long been the only country in the Soviet Bloc that could boast 
of some economic success. 
If large numbers of its citizens fail to heed pleas from both East and West 
German leaders to stay and help build a new society, this limited success would 
be seriously jeopardized. 
Such a development would undoubtedly ripple through other hard-pressed East 
European economies. 
For West Germany, as for other members of the Atlantic Alliance, events are 
moving at an unnerving, yet exhilarating pace. The Alliance's long-term 
planners suddenly stare at a set of conditions they believed only a short time 
ago would take at least another decade to arise. 
In West Germany, a mixture of elation and disbelief swept the country Thursday 
evening as news broke of the new open border policy. 
The euphoria that an era of family divisions seemed at an end was tempered by 
fears that the action would trigger a new wave of refugees. 
Before the recent flood of East Germans began, West Germany had absorbed nearly 
half a million settlers of German extraction from Eastern Europe as a result of 
relaxed emigration requirements. 
While West Germany is the richest nation in the region, it has always been 
plagued with self-doubt about the fragility of its democracy and its ability to 
withstand political instability. 
"It is in our interest that they stay," West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl 
commented. 
Thomas Kielinger, editor of the respected newspaper Rheinische Merkur, seemed 
to speak for many West Germans who see Thursday's decision as a potential 
watershed. 
"We're hoping that this is the turning point that will give East Germans the 
incentive to stay and build their country," he said. 
For those in Western Europe, Thursday's announcement, coupled with Krenz's call 
for free elections, raises other concerns. 
It has brought the prospect of a new and closer relationship between the two 
German states one giant step closer to reality. 
Kohl's words to the West German Parliament on Wednesday that "we have less 
reason than ever to be resigned to the long-term division of Germany" seemed 
far truer 24 hours later. 
For if the borders remain open and free elections result in a non-Communist 
government, the very existence of two separate German states comes into 
question. 
Despite Kohl's protestation that no one need fear a united, democratic Germany, 
Europeans are unsettled about the possibility of such a powerful entity. 
While French President Francois Mitterrand bravely reaffirmed his support for 
the German right to reunification, many other Europeans privately applaud the 
words of an earlier Frenchman who said he loved Germany so much that he was 
happy there were two of them. 
Those nurturing the European Community's dream of economic and political unity 
worry about West Germany either becoming distracted by events in the east or 
placing a higher priority on its relations with East Germany than with the 
community. 
Under a French lead, the European Community is already considering accelerating 
the pace of integration among its 12 member states in order to fill the 
political vacuum it sees developing in Central Europe. 
How a closer relationship between the two German states might affect the EC's 
drive toward unity remains unclear. 
But in a week that has seen the mass resignation of the East German Communist 
Party's Central Committee and its Politburo, the West German chancellor hint at 
German reunification in a speech before his Parliament, Krenz throw open the 
country's borders and call for free elections, all followed by a nod of 
approval from Moscow, political analysts have little idea what might come next. 
