WHEN WAR ENDS, THE OLD ORDER GOES; 
POLITICS: WINSTON CHURCHILL LOST HIS JOB WHEN WORLD WAR II ENDED. GEORGE BUSH 
MAY FIND THAT THE END OF THE COLD WAR DOES THE SAME THING TO HIM. 
Republican euphoria at the prospect of a huge diplomatic victory for President 
Bush when he meets with Mikhail Gorbachev, the beleaguered master of the 
crumbling communist empire, is tempered by one historical fact. When wars end, 
governments change. 
If the Bush-Gorbachev summit off Malta next month conveys the message that the 
Cold War really is over, the political environment here at home will be 
profoundly altered -- and in ways that may not be conducive to continued 
Republican-conservative control. 
As a teen-ager, I shared the shock most Americans felt when the British voters 
dumped Winston Churchill just as World War II was ending. It seemed -- and 
probably was -- rank ingratitude, but the British clearly felt that they could 
dispense with their great leader. 
Nor should we have been surprised. Two years after the end of World War I, 
American voters pitched out the Democrats who had led the nation through that 
struggle. And they turned out to be as restless as the British after World War 
II. In the mid-term election of 1946, just 15 months after the Japanese 
surrender, our voters ended 14 years of Democratic control and elected a 
Republican Congress. These examples all deal with real wars, not the Cold War, 
and so, it may be argued, they do not count as precedents for the current 
situation. But consider what contributed to the postwar political upheavals and 
the parallels become significant. 
One cause was exhaustion -- the public's recognition that politically and 
intellectually, the people in power had run out of gas. They had expended so 
much of their energy in figuring out how to wage war that they just didn't have 
fresh resources to meet new challenges. 
Unwittingly, that's exactly the signal Bush sent voters with his lackadaisical 
reaction to stunning scenes of the breaching of the Berlin Wall. On a reporting 
trip I took to the Midwest last week, that topic came up more than any other, 
with supporters and critics alike asking, "Why didn't Bush react?" It might be 
that after a quarter of a century in the trenches of the Cold War, Bush is 
intellectually tired. 
He was a hawkish congressman in Vietnam days, a diplomat keeping tabs on 
communists at the United Nations and in China and a spymaster running the CIA. 
Then he was Ronald Reagan's lieutenant in the last big military buildup. 
Insiders say Bush is eager to start dealing with Gorbachev, but after what they 
have seen, the voters can be forgiven for thinking he may have trouble 
readjusting his sights to a radically altered world. 
The second reason for earlier postwar political upheavals has been economic 
disruption. Typically, it's taken the form of a surge of inflation from pent-up 
consumer demand. Our economy seems relatively inflation-proof at the moment, 
but a sharp deceleration of military spending, now accepted as certain by 
everyone, including Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, will have strong -- and 
uneven -- impacts. 
Already, politicians in states like Texas and California are beginning to worry 
about what may happen to communities dependent on military bases and production 
lines. Just as the Sunbelt benefited most from the Reagan-era military buildup, 
it will probably feel the sharpest effects of the Bush-Cheney slowdown. If 
Sunbelters have to start worrying about their economic future, the GOP has 
trouble. 
The third and final element of past postwar upheavals has been a shift of 
public focus from one set of challenges to another. Economic competition with 
Japan is now seen as a greater threat to the United States than military 
competition with communism. 
What is the Bush Administration answer to this challenge, symbolized by the 
Japanese purchase of Rockefeller Center? Not to raise trade barriers, thank 
goodness. But if the United States is not to turn protectionist, then competing 
in world markets almost certainly requires improving our education system, 
stepping up research and development, modernizing our transport network -- the 
kind of activist government investment policy that Democrats find far easier to 
espouse than Republicans. 
All this is suggestive of basic political change, though not conclusive. 
Certainly one cannot argue that Republicans are doomed to defeat or Democrats 
fated for a comeback. 
But one thing I would bet: The chances of such a turnabout are much higher if 
the Cold War really is over than they would be if Bush could soldier on in the 
familiar battle with communists for another seven years. 
