JAPANESE BUILDING FIRMS, U.S. SETTLE BID-RIGGING CASE 
A group of Japanese construction firms has agreed to pay the U.S. government 
$32.6 million to settle a dispute over alleged bid-rigging of projects at an 
American military base near Tokyo, U.S. officials said Thursday. 
The U.S. side had threatened lawsuits both in Japan and the United States 
unless a settlement was reached. 
Representatives from seven Japanese construction firms and American officials 
signed the memorandum of intent on behalf of 99 Japanese firms, the U.S. 
Justice Department said in a statement. 
The memorandum stipulates that the payment be made by Dec. 20, according to the 
statement, which was released by the U.S. Embassy. 
Officials from the Japanese companies involved in negotiations were not 
available for comment because of a national holiday in Japan. 
The U.S. government alleges that 140 Japanese construction and related firms 
were involved in the bid rigging and the statement said the Justice Department 
would continue to seek damages from the 41 not covered by the memorandum. 
Some executives among the 41 firms have said they should not have to pay 
compensation since they did not bid on the disputed sections of the project. 
The 41 firms are expected to hold separate talks with the U.S. side. 
In the negotiations, the U.S. side demanded a total of $34.8 million in 
compensation from the 140 firms, which participated in construction projects at 
the U.S. Navy base at Yokosuka, southwest of Tokyo, between April, 1984, and 
September, 1987. 
During the period, the U.S. Navy awarded 140 firms a combined total of $134.9 
million worth of orders, including construction of a housing complex for 
military personnel. 
The U.S. side claimed that there were improper charges and bid-rigging in 
connection with the construction at the base. 
In December, Japan's Fair Trade Commission issued warnings to 140 Japanese 
firms for their alleged prior consultations, or "dango," in setting prices of 
projects undertaken at the base. The commission levied a collective fine of 
about $2 million (289 million yen) on 70 companies in the cartel. The 
Construction Ministry also imposed sanctions, suspending the rights of 104 of 
the companies to bid on public works contracts for one to two months. 
At the time, critics in the U.S. construction industry dismissed the penalties 
as insufficient. 
The dango system, long established in Japan's construction industry, is 
considered an anti-competitive practice that prevents firms outside the group, 
including foreign firms, from getting contracts. 
Major firms such as Taisei Corp., Shimizu Corp. and Sumitomo Construction Co. 
were among the companies that banded together in the mid-1980s as the "U.S. 
Military Construction Safety and Technology Assn." in Yokosuka. 
The association, which nicknamed itself the "Friends of the Stars" -- a 
reference to the American flag -- became a forum for fixing prices and 
assigning contracts under the guise of competitive bidding, according to 
Japan's Fair Trade Commission. 
