HAHN HOLDS BACK ON VICTORY CLAIM 
Kenneth P. Hahn apparently won election as Los Angeles County assessor late 
Tuesday night. And Wednesday morning, he laid claim to his own political name. 
Many observers attributed Hahn's 51.5% to 48.5% advantage over incumbent John 
Lynch to the name he shares with County Supervisor Kenneth F. Hahn. But Hahn, 
the assessor, said he has heard enough of that. 
"It's my name and I'm happy to share it with the other Kenny Hahn," he said 
Wednesday, with a laugh. "I've done this on my own." 
Although Hahn celebrated -- and his home phone machine answered "Assessor-elect 
Kenneth Hahn" -- he declined to claim victory outright Wednesday. The 10-year 
veteran of the assessor's office said he thinks his 42,000-vote lead will hold, 
but added he is being cautious because about 100,000 absentee ballots still 
remain to be counted. 
Lynch stayed home Wednesday and declined to speak to the press. His spokesman, 
Robert Knowles, said Lynch "expects to make a concession statement today or 
tomorrow. He just feels it wouldn't be prudent to make a statement before the 
absentee ballots are counted." 
The county registrar's office said it will not have absentee results until next 
week, at the earliest. 
Both sides agreed, however, that Lynch would be hard pressed to close the 
margin, since a large percentage of voters fail to vote in the assessor race. 
While he may have been reluctant to claim victory Wednesday, Hahn, who is not 
related to the county supervisor, acted very much the winner in every other 
way. 
After staying up the entire night tracking results, the political neophyte 
received congratulatory calls Wednesday morning and then toured the assessor's 
offices in the County Hall of Administration. He received a hero's welcome, as 
more than 200 employees flooded a hallway to cheer and slap their new boss on 
the back. 
Workers said the spontaneous demonstration was a mark of disdain for Lynch, who 
had a reputation for volatility. "Everyone was just extremely happy and 
relieved," said one worker, who asked not to be named. 
Hahn, 51, also toured city and county offices Wednesday, receiving 
congratulations from Mayor Tom Bradley, Supervisor Ed Edelman, City Controller 
Rick Tuttle and Councilman Richard Alatorre. 
It was a heady day for Hahn, who spent most of his career as an appraiser 
specialist answering public complaints at the assessor's Santa Monica office. 
On Dec. 3, he will move from a tiny office cubicle in Santa Monica, with its 
view of a used car lot, to the assessor's expansive executive offices downtown. 
Hahn will leave a job in which he supervises no one and is paid $42,000 yearly, 
to one that controls 1,600 employees and draws a salary of $130,869. 
He will oversee the largest property-tax jurisdiction, in land value, in the 
United States. 
"The enormity of the task is mind-boggling at this time," Hahn said, as his 
victory began to settle in. "But what it needs is a clear head." 
Hahn said he is not intimidated by the task and his supporters pointed out that 
he holds a higher rank than Lynch did when he rose from the ranks of the 
assessor's office to the top job in 1986. 
Observers credited the victory of the then-unknown Lynch to his endorsement by 
tax crusader Howard Jarvis. 
The last time around, seeking the office vacated by Assessor Alexander Pope, 
Lynch said he surprised himself by defeating several better known candidates. 
He even managed to beat a Hahn -- Gordon Hahn, the former assemblyman and 
brother of the county supervisor. 
Kenneth P. Hahn may think he has made a name for himself, but the man who 
manages the county's mail is not so sure. Mac McConnell, chief of mail 
services, said he will insist that the assessor use his middle initial to make 
sure his mail reaches his third-floor offices. 
Otherwise, he said, it will end up on the eighth-floor offices of the other 
Kenny Hahn. 
