MOVIE REVIEW; 
'I VITELLONI' IS FELLINI AT HIS IRONIC BEST 
"I Vitelloni," the title of Federico Fellini's third film, loosely translates 
into "The Overgrown Teen-Agers" or "The Big Loafers." Taken from the Italian 
word for veal, it's a gentle idiomatic put-down of men in perpetual 
adolescence, hanging out on the corner, stalking girls, avoiding as much 
responsibility as they can. 
In typical Hollywood fashion, "I Vitelloni" (screening at UC Irvine tonight) 
was saddled with the title "The Young and the Passionate" when released in 
America after its 1953 European premiere. That title doesn't work -- Fellini's 
movie is about youth and passion, but it's hardly heroic or arch, as that one 
implies. 
"I Vitelloni" is, perhaps, Fellini's most ironic movie. Just about everything 
this expressionistic, humane and inventive (sometimes to the point of 
distraction) filmmaker has created is ironic, from the unjust human comedy of 
"La Strada" (1955) to the picaresque freakishness of "Fellini Satyricon" 
(1970). But this one is especially sardonic in its soft-edged way. 
Many think it's among his two or three best films primarily because of the 
strength of the ensemble acting and the personalized feel of the story. Fellini 
has been accused of making impersonal movies, but that's not the case here. The 
five actors who compose Fellini's vitelloni offer characterizations that seem 
more like living than performing. 
Fellini uses a narrator to introduce them to us. We first spy them cruising 
through a town square, possibly Rimini, Fellini's hometown. The director has 
said that much of the movie is autobiographical and captures those he knew in 
Rimini. The narrator tells us that Fausto (played by Franco Fabrizi) is the 
group's "leader and spiritual guide"; it's a sarcastic aside, considering that 
the womanizing Fausto is, at that moment, trying to pick up a young lady. 
His comrades are Moraldo (Franco Interlenghi), a character usually identified 
with Fellini himself; Alberto (Alberto Sordi); and Leopoldo (Leopoldo Trieste) 
and Riccardo (Riccardo Fellini, the director's brother). "I Vitelloni" follows 
them through pointless days and nights. At one point the narrator says, "In the 
next few months, the most important things that happened were that Riccardo 
grew a mustache and Alberto grew sideburns, while Fausto shaved his mustache 
off." 
When not shaving, Fausto gets his girlfriend (Eleonora Ruffo) pregnant and they 
have to marry. He still chases other women, his pals often at his side, trying 
to do the same. Later, Fellini gives us a drunken carnival scene -- the image 
has become his most familiar trademark, a metaphor turning up in many of his 
movies, most notably "8 1/2" (1963) -- that highlights these men in all their 
abject foolishness. 
The imagery is vivid and salty. But while Fellini can't resist making fun of 
them, he never becomes censorious. His customary use of camera angles to locate 
intimacy is obvious in this scene and throughout "I Vitelloni." By dwelling on 
them just so, he involves us in their lives -- you agree that they're silly, 
but condemnation seems far too harsh. 
 Federico Fellini's "I Vitelloni" will be shown tonight at 7 and 9 at UC 
Irvine's Student Center Crystal Cove Auditorium as part of the UCI Film 
Society's Directors' Personal Portraits series. Tickets: $2 to $4. (714) 
856-6379. 
