SOCIETY / DAVID NELSON: TREES BRANCH FORTH AS HOPE FOR CHILDREN 
Dianna Broady sounded rather like a department store executive at the gala 
preview party she chaired Tuesday for the five-day Fantasy of Trees benefit at 
Sheraton Harbor Island. 
"I've been doing Christmas since April," she said with a tone of cheerful 
resignation. "In fact, since this is the fourth year for Fantasy of Trees, I 
feel like I've been doing Christmas year-round since 1987." 
With Thanksgiving finally in the background, the Christmas season has struck -- 
and with a vengeance that belies the period's gentle tone -- at this most 
eventful celebration of holiday decor sponsored for the benefit of Children's 
Hospital and Health Center by the hospital's immense, countywide auxiliary. 
As one might reasonably infer from the benefit's title, the chief feature is a 
collection of Christmas trees. There are 27, most of them decorated according 
to the extravagant fancy of professional designers. The trees are augmented by 
nearly as many wreaths, a collection of gingerbread houses and other seasonal 
decorations. Most items are subject to silent bidding, but some will be offered 
tomorrow at a live auction. The highest bid carries off a tree. Last year, a 
tree that included a diamond tennis bracelet among its ornaments fetched a bid 
of $9,000, which probably made it the costliest decoration in any of the 
county's living rooms. 
All of the benefit's myriad happenings -- if truth be told, this is more a 
spectacular than an event -- are being held in the Sheraton's Exhibit Hall, a 
multipurpose, basement space that at other times serves as a parking garage. 
For Fantasy, however, the hotel spread carpeting, and overall event chairwoman 
Barbara Ann Watson and her committee further disguised the hall to suit 
Fantasy's 1990 theme, Winter Wonderland. 
For Tuesday's opener, Broady talked Sheraton executive chef Bob Brody into 
inventing a coffee drink called Santa's Fantasy. Amaretto, cherry brandy and 
vanilla ice cream spiked the basic brew, which was stirred with a candy cane 
swizzle, and those who tried it said it had the kick of a reindeer. Santa 
strolled among the 300 guests handing out extra sugar canes to those for whom 
one never is enough. 
The preview looked ahead to a flurry of events that continue through Saturday. 
Several are sold out, but tickets still are available for Friday night's 
dinner-dance, which costs $100 per person. 
On a more affordable level, anyone who wants to see the trees or shop in the 
auxiliary's holiday boutique may attend open houses today, from 10 a.m.-12:30 
p.m. or 5-8 p.m. Open house tickets are $3 and are available at the door. 
Fantasy of Trees concludes Saturday with an 8:30 a.m. breakfast with Santa. It 
includes a puppet show, roving elves and photographs with Old St. Nick and Mrs. 
Claus. Tickets are $15 per person. For information on any of the events, call 
the Children's Hospital Auxiliary at 495-4988. 
Watson said that a total of 6,000 people are expected to visit at least one of 
Fantasy's various functions. 
"I didn't get my gray hair from this event, but it's been a challenge," she 
said of the unusually demanding logistics presented by a five-day benefit. 
"They netted $86,000 at last year's Fantasy, and we'll do at least as well. The 
people attending know that they're doing something for the children at 
Children's Hospital." 
The miniature forest includes a number of spectacular trees, including one, 
titled Gilded Renaissance, in blazing gold and crimson lit by the dancing 
flames of electric candles. Other notable trees include Mexican Fiesta, so 
bedecked with paper flowers and foil snowflakes that the tree underneath is 
virtually hidden from sight; the elegant Megumi No Ki, (or The Giving Tree), a 
Japanese fantasy that looks like something out of a period Art Deco living room 
on New York's Sutton Place, and Ski Switzerland, a rather simply decorated tree 
donated by Swissair. The kicker to this particular fir is that the purchaser 
also will receive a ski trip to Switzerland that includes business-class air 
tickets. 
Fantasy of Trees committee includes auxiliary president Sunny Golden, Sue 
Stadler, Marsha Bouman, Susan Johnson, Laurie McKeown, Connie Gorman, Grace 
Allen, Jan Baranowski, Meg Sesko, Lois Lucas, Gene Jensen, Sharrie Woods, Lou 
Turner, Judy Cliffton, Trudy Snell, Debbie Dulgar, Darlyn Davenport and Sharon 
Guadagnola. 
The season actually will offer several more tree festivals, including the 
immensely popular multievent Christmas Tree Lane, to be given by the Escondido 
Boys and Girls Club at the Rancho Bernardo Inn the weekend of Dec. 7. For those 
already looking past the Christmas holiday, several major events will close the 
month and year. 
The Holiday Bowl's annual Poinsettia Ball, given as a prelude to the game (this 
year's contest, between Brigham Young University and Texas A&amp;M, will be 
played Dec. 29 at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium, will be Friday, Dec. 28, in 
the Marina Ballroom of the San Diego Marriott. This year's theme is Fantasy 
Under the Sea. The black-tie affair will feature magicians, the Bill Green 
Orchestra, a sports-related comedy act performed by ESPN television personality 
Roy Firestone and dancing to Lil' Elmo &amp; The Cosmos. Tickets are $150 and 
$200 per person. For more information, call 283-5808. 
It is difficult to believe that the decade of the 1960s is now so antique that 
it actually can be viewed and celebrated with nostalgia, but some of those who 
survived the era intend to do just that at "The Happening," a New Year's Eve 
gala to be given at the San Diego Museum of Art by the Contemporaries, a young 
professionals' organization formed to support the museum and its exhibits of 
contemporary artists. The event begins at 8 p.m. and offers the option of black 
tie or '60s attire, for those who still own bell bottoms. Period music will be 
played by the band Rockola, and artworks created for the party will be 
auctionned. A paint booth will allow guests to create their own psychedelic 
works, and there will be a buffet dinner, raffle and champagne toast at 
midnight. Tickets are $60 and $75 per person. For more information, call the 
San Diego Museum of Art. 
A New Year's Eve gala will be given by The Whittier Friends, a professionals' 
organization that supports the Whittier Institute for Diabetes and 
Endocrinology of Scripps Memorial Hospitals. Once Upon a Blue Moon, to be given 
at the Sheraton Grande Torrey Pines, will begin at 8 p.m. and will include a 
Big Band, a jazz band, casino games and an hors d'oeuvres buffet. Dress is 
black-tie. For more information, call the Whittier Institute. 
