DR. JOYCE BROTHERS: MENTAL ILLNESS AND CREATIVITY 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: My 24-year-old son who is a brilliant student of music and a 
talented composer became very depressed recently because a cousin of mine told 
him that his aunt, my sister, had been institutionalized for manic-depression. 
I knew he was unusually sensitive and I'd prefer that he hadn't been told this; 
however, I'm going not to lie about this now. How can I help him not to be so 
disturbed by this news? -- H.S. 
DEAR H.S.: There's nothing to be ashamed of about mental illness, and the fact 
that your sister is suffering from this disease certainly doesn't mean that 
your son will be a victim. While manic-depression seems to be a genetically 
inherited characteristic, it can skip generations within a family. It's an 
illness that can be treated -- often successfully -- with medication. 
You son might be interested in knowing that recent research suggests a link 
between manic-depression and creativity. The relatives of those who are 
mentally ill, or those who exhibit only mild signs of mental illness, often are 
unusually creative. Experts theorize that there may be a genetic or biological 
predisposition for creativity, so that a person who is susceptible to mental 
illness may also be predisposed to creativity. 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: My husband and I are truly shocked that my younger brother 
and his wife could go on with their plans to take an extended European 
vacation, even though our 80-year-old father passed away last week. This seems 
so insensitive to me, and we interpret it as a strong indication that he didn't 
really love his father as much as he claimed. -- B.T.V. 
DEAR B.T.V.: You and your husband are being needlessly harsh on your brother. 
How a person treats someone when he or she is alive is a much stronger proof of 
love than how he behaves at the funeral or after their death. The fact that 
your brother is continuing with his vacation plans is absolutely no indication 
that he didn't love his father. 
People express grief in different ways. This is especially true when elderly 
people die. Their death is usually anticipated and may even come as a relief to 
family members. This doesn't mean they don't love the aged person, but it may 
mean that they don't wish to see him suffer, or they wish to spare him some of 
the indignities that so often come with aging in our society. 
Dr. Camille Wortman, a psychologist at the University of Michigan, points out 
that it isn't inevitable that severe distress or depression must follow a loss. 
People don't realize how common it is for grief to be borne lightly, nor is 
there any evidence that, when it is, the people are denying the loss or didn't 
truly love the person. 
