BECKER TURNS MISFORTUNES INTO VICTORIES AS HE SHOOTS FOR NO. 1 
Boris Becker says it's difficult to get to the top, but that it's even harder 
to get back there. 
"People see me playing tennis and nobody knows the real cost of winning," 
Becker said. "Sometimes it is necessary to grow and learn as a human being. 
That's what I did in the past two years." 
Becker, playing with increased confidence after struggling over the past two 
years, looks as if he is ready to stake his claim as the best tennis player in 
the world. 
The 21-year-old West German beat Stefan Edberg and John McEnroe, the No. 3 and 
No. 4 ranked players in the world, in less than 24 hours to win the Paris Open, 
which attracted 17 of the top 20 players in the world. Becker downed Edberg 
6-4, 6-3, 6-3 after stopping McEnroe in Saturday's semifinals 7-6 (7-2), 4-6, 
6-3. 
Against a slightly off-form Edberg on Sunday, Becker raced through the final in 
two hours for his fifth tournament title of the year and 24th of his career. 
Becker, the U.S. Open and Wimbledon champion this year, has a good claim on the 
No. 1 ranking for the year although he still trails Ivan Lendl in the computer 
rankings. 
Because he had won two Wimbledons and advanced to the No. 2 ranking in the 
world by the time he was 18, Becker was expected to move into the top spot 
three years ago, especially when his victory at the 1986 Paris Open capped a 
three-week, three-tournament, three-continent victory march. 
"I was playing great tennis in 1985 and 1986, but I didn't go through any 
difficult moments," Becker said. "In order to be the best, you have to go 
through those moments. That's what I did in '87 and the beginning of '88." 
Becker's troubles started in the beginning of 1987 when he broke with former 
coach Gunther Bosch at the Australian Open -- where he lost to Wally Masur in 
the fourth round. 
Becker righted himself a bit in 1988, making the Wimbledon final but losing to 
Edberg. Foot injuries plagued him all year long. 
"All that helped me this year. That is the reason I am playing so well," Becker 
said. 
Becker's fortunes turned in last year's Masters when he beat Lendl in five 
sets, winning the deciding point on a let cord in the tiebreaker. 
Since then, he won Wimbledon for the third time, beating Edberg, and took the 
U.S. Open by beating Lendl in the final. 
