RESTRUCTURING OF CANADIAN SENATE GETS LIFT IN ALBERTA 
Canadians got a look last month at their first-ever elected Senate nominee, an 
election some observers view as the nation's first cautious step toward 
restructuring the century-old upper chamber of Parliament. 
The election in Alberta of Stan Waters as the province's Senate nominee is, 
said Alberta-based political scientist David Elton, spurred by a feeling of 
alienation in western Canada. 
Alberta is a relatively small province that has little influence at the federal 
level. Its citizens are fed up, Elton said, with a parliamentary system that 
fails to mediate regional concerns and is dominated by the provinces of Quebec 
and Ontario to the east. 
Alberta insisted on holding elections to express the widespread desire for 
Senate reform, Elton added. 
Canada's Parliament is made up of 295 elected members in the House of Commons 
and 104 appointed members of the Senate. The number of seats in the Senate does 
not change, although there are frequent vacancies as members retire. Quebec and 
Ontario dominate both chambers because of their huge population base. 
Those in favor of an elected Senate believe that an equal number of 
representatives from each province would remedy the imbalance in the House of 
Commons, since western provinces or any other region could vote as a bloc in 
the Senate. 
The concept of an elected Senate is supported by the majority of Canadians and 
elected politicians and most of the current senators. 
The general perception of Canada's Senate is one of aging political cronies who 
rubber-stamp government legislation without submitting it to any "sober second 
thought," as was originally envisioned when the country's parliamentary system 
was established. 
The senators serve until age 75, most of them reportedly doing little to earn 
their $60,000-a-year salary and free airline travel. 
No attendance records are kept, which allows senators to have full-time 
employment elsewhere. One senator, Ed Lawson, for years has served as head of 
the Teamsters Union in Canada. 
The upper chamber is prevented by the Constitution from blocking money bills, 
but does have the power to amend or even kill other legislation. 
The sometime frivolous nature of the Senate was reflected this year in a leaked 
report, commissioned by the senators, that recommended that their 
mahogany-trimmed offices be equipped with bathrooms, dressing rooms, closets 
and three-quarter-length mirrors. A private dining room was also a must, the 
report said, as well as a gymnasium with locker rooms, sauna, showers, exercise 
equipment and beds. 
While Senate reform is generally favored, there is disagreement on how the body 
should be structured and whether its powers should duplicate those of the House 
of Commons. 
Waters, a retired army commander and former chief of a major construction 
company, has made it clear he favors a "triple E" Senate: elected, equal and 
effective. Waters was backed in his bid for the nomination by the Reform Party, 
a fringe political party in western Canada that opposes bilingualism and wants 
a balanced federal budget by 1991. 
At this point, it is unclear if Waters will even be allowed to take his seat in 
the upper chamber. 
In Canada, the prime minister has traditionally had the right to choose members 
of the Senate. Under the terms of the so-called Meech Lake Accord negotiated 
two years ago by the provinces and the federal government, it was agreed the 
provinces could submit lists of nominees for Senate vacancies, leaving it to 
the prime minister to make the appointment. 
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney promised that if the accord was ratified, he 
would begin negotiations aimed at Senate reform. But at least two provinces 
have held back approval because the accord recognizes Quebec as a "distinct 
society" and principal home in Canada of French-speaking people. 
Elton believes the accord will eventually be approved but only if it contains a 
framework for Senate reform. 
The deadline for ratification of the accord is next June. 
