IMMIGRANTS CHERISH NEW FREEDOMS ACHIEVED UNDER AMNESTY PROGRAM 
If Viviana Holguin's adult English class in Boyle Heights is any indication, 
the real success of the government's landmark amnesty program in Los Angeles is 
measured in the intangibles of everyday life. 
The students said Tuesday that qualifying for amnesty has put an extra bounce 
in their steps and given them a confident air as they go about the smallest of 
tasks, such as going to the grocery store. 
"I do everything now with a little bit of confidence that I never had before," 
said Juan Manuel Tenorio, echoing the feelings of fellow classmates who are 
studying English and U.S. history to complete their 40 hours of class work 
required for permanent residency. 
"I go to the store without looking over my shoulder. I don't worry about 
hassles at work. I'm very calm these days. I now know I have rights in this 
country." 
The students' observations -- aired as they grappled with an English grammar 
class at the nonprofit One Stop Immigration &amp; Educational Center -- added a 
personal dimension to the findings of a two-year independent study released 
Tuesday that generally praised the amnesty efforts of the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service in Los Angeles. 
In the report, the Santa Monica-based RAND Corp. and Urban Institute of 
Washington, D.C., concluded that the INS overcame the historic mistrust in 
Southern California's burgeoning immigrant communities to persuade nearly 1 
million aliens in Los Angeles and the surrounding counties to sign up for 
amnesty. An estimated 3.1 million applied nationwide. 
The report credited the agency with setting up an aggressive public relations 
campaign and community-based offices to accept amnesty applications from 
eligible aliens who could prove they had lived illegally in the United States 
before Jan. 1, 1982. 
As a result of INS efforts, more aliens signed up in Los Angeles than anywhere 
else in the country, the study concluded. 
While the 117-page report used cumbersome language to explain the Los Angeles 
program's success, the 30 students in Holguin's class said it was the little 
things that made amnesty a success for them. 
Words such as soy libre ("I am free") and confianza ("confidence") frequently 
popped out in their comments. 
"With this status, I can feel free to do what I want," said 30-year-old Dimas 
Rivera. "I can help my people freely." 
Tenorio, 27, explained that the amnesty program even affected a decision 
whether to leave his Eastside home for a stroll with his two preschool 
children. 
"Before, I couldn't even leave the house sometimes because I was afraid of la 
migra," he said, using the Spanish slang term for the immigration service. "I 
don't have to worry now. I go everywhere now with confidence. What's to worry 
about?" 
"But the most important," interjected fellow Mexican native Jose Vargas, 26, 
"is that we are no longer afraid. Not at work. Not walking down the street. 
Nothing." 
Vargas, like others in the class, is hoping that the legal U.S. residency 
gained through amnesty will allow them the opportunity to legally bring members 
of their immediate families to this country. 
"I want my family here with me," said Vargas, who works for a janitorial 
service. "It's bad enough when you're alone and scared." 
Some of the amnesty applicants said the program also meant more pay for them. 
Furniture store worker Heriberto Sorieno, a native of the Mexican state of 
Zacatecas, said his hourly wage shot up from $6 an hour to $8.50, partly 
because his boss felt that he was worth more money since the threat of 
deportation no longer hung over him. 
"More money puts more food on the table and pays for other things," Sorieno 
said. 
Some of the confidence and other intangibles gained through amnesty quickly 
evaporated as Holguin led her English class through the complex world of 
prepositional phrases. 
"OK, Marta," began Holguin, a junior math major at UCLA. "What's correct? Do 
you take sugar in your coffee?" 
Marta, faltering while listening to whispering near her seat, struggled for a 
bit but finally offered up the correct answer in English. "Yes," she said 
quietly. 
It was not lost on any of the students on Tuesday -- Election Day -- that they 
one day could also participate as U.S. citizens. 
"That's a very major benefit," said Ofelia Torres, who held her baby daughter, 
Myra, during class. "You can have more benefits as a citizen and voting is one 
benefit I want to have." 
Added classmate Sorieno, "No one can take advantage of you, truly, if you're a 
citizen." 
