AMERICAN ALBUM: A ONCE ROLLICKING CITY CLEANS UP, WHILE SOME DISGRUNTLED BAR 
OPERATORS SAY IT'S A SIN. 
It was Saturday night in Sin City, but you couldn't tell it from the crowd at 
the Nite Life Lounge. 
The place was empty, except for two women in bikinis who sat chatting with the 
barmaid, a heavy-set woman in hot pants. She was so bored that she'd gone to 
look out the door a few minutes earlier to see where everybody was. 
Times have changed. Newport used to be called the Sin City of the South. 
Gambling halls and brothels flourished on Monmouth Street, the main strip. Some 
of the biggest entertainers of the 1940s and 1950s, people like Pearl Bailey 
and Martha Raye, performed there. And folks are still around who'll tell you 
they know for a fact that Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin played blackjack at 
local tables. The joints were packed in those days. 
All the barmaid saw that night, though, was a lone man shambling down the 
street in a heavy coat. His dark eyes caught her casting about for signs of 
life. Embarrassed, she burst into giggles and ducked back inside. 
The man poked his head in the door after a while and she had a giggling fit 
again. "Come on in," she beckoned. But he turned away. The air inside was heavy 
with the scent of sadness and cheap perfume. He closed the door and moved on 
down the street. 
Times have been hard for bar owners here since 1982, when a newly elected city 
commission banned nude dancing and then began strict enforcement of liquor and 
vice laws. 
Officials in Newport and Covington, Newport's adjacent sister in sin, have 
since made an all-out effort to build their first substantial legal economies. 
Among the development projects the depressed Ohio River communities have 
attracted are a $120-million hotel-office complex being discussed for the 
Newport waterfront, an $80-million hotel-office complex under construction in 
Covington and a number of high-priced condominium developments. 
"Our real estate property tax has gone down 11% over the last five years 
because of all the new development," said Laura L. Long, Newport's economic 
development director. 
In addition, both cities say a rising number of professional people are moving 
there and repairing old homes. On weekdays, groups of people in business suits 
may be seen commuting to work by foot across the bridges that connect 
Cincinnati's downtown to the two Kentucky cities. 
Amid the changes, remnants of the old order are slowly fading. 
"I've been here for 25 years," said Nick Acabucci, the owner of the Talk of the 
Town, one of about a dozen go-go bars remaining. "I was here when all the town 
was wide open. It was like Las Vegas." 
But now business is so bad, he said: "I had to cut my place in half. I closed 
the back room. . . . I ain't been full in eight years." 
One recent night, the bar up front was packed with drinkers watching a woman in 
eyeglasses, pasties and a G-string gyrating on stage. A larger back room, 
though, was empty. 
Vice once was northern Kentucky's biggest industry. In the 1950s, gambling was 
estimated to be an annual $10-million business, supplying between 2,500 and 
5,000 jobs and bringing a steady stream of tourists into the two towns, which 
today have a combined population of 70,000. 
"Gambling was so wide open . . . that the casual visitor would get the 
impression it was legal in Kentucky," the Kefauver Commission said in a report 
issued in the 1950s, after conducting a 16-month investigation of organized 
crime. 
The inventor of the Tommy gun was born in Newport. And for 40 years, starting 
with Prohibition, the sort of gangsters who made John T. Thompson's invention a 
household word held this town in their grip. Old-timers still talk of mob hits 
they witnessed in the 1940s, and the area's reputation for public corruption 
continued unabated until the start of this decade. 
In 1961, former Cleveland Browns quarterback George Ratterman ran for sheriff 
on a reform platform. His campaign was nearly derailed when he was arrested on 
vice charges. Five people, including the Newport police chief, were later 
charged with drugging him and propping him up in bed in a hotel room with a 
stripper known as April Flowers. 
By the mid-1960s, the gambling halls and brothels all had been closed. They 
were replaced by a multitude of nudie bars. 
Despite efforts to stamp out prostitution -- the newspaper this year started 
publishing the photographs of men convicted of soliciting -- the sex trade 
still flourishes. 
In Newport's Kit Kat Club one recent night, two barely clad women sandwiched a 
man in a booth to explain what his money could buy. For a $60 drink, they said, 
he could move with one of them to a darkened corner of the room. "I'll be 
straight with you . . . we can't have sex in here," said one woman, who said 
her name was Jerra. 
But with insinuating words and a deft touch of her hand she suggested that 
there were other things they could do. Later, the other woman, beseeching him 
to call her at home, assured him: "Don't worry, we're clean. We don't have 
diseases or anything." 
Some bar owners contend that the cities should exploit their reputations for 
sin rather than fight them. They should turn Monmouth Street into a Kentucky 
version of New Orleans' Bourbon Street, they say. No one believes it will 
happen. "They're trying to run us out of business," groused Acabucci. 
City officials won't say that outright, but they make no secret of their 
distaste for the area's sordid image, which they say makes it hard to attract 
new businesses. 
"A lot of my friends who live in other cities say to me 'where will we go to 
have fun now?' " said Jim Parsons, Newport's city manager. "They don't want it 
in their communities, but they don't mind it being someplace else. . . . I 
don't think these are the things we need in this city." 
