LAW SCHOOL DAVIDS TAKE ON GOLIATHS; 
ENVIRONMENT: STUDENTS AT THE ENVIRONMENTAL LAW CLINIC OF THE USD LAW SCHOOL ARE 
OFTEN OUTNUMBERED UNDERDOGS WHEN THEY TAKE ON WELL-HEELED LEGAL OPPONENTS. 
Even amid the framed diplomas, the Bill of Rights and the basketball hoop that 
hang on Richard (Corky) Wharton's office walls, the tattered orange-crate label 
stands out. 
There's something ominously luminescent about the green hillside it shows near 
the Pacific Ocean, where the trees bear fat fruit that's just a little too 
orange. "San Onofre Radioactivity," says the mock label, "Full o' Juice." 
The spoof, which hangs prominently above Wharton's cluttered desk at the 
University of San Diego School of Law, is a souvenir from the early 1980s when 
Wharton, one of San Diego County's leading environmental lawyers, represented 
the Friends of the Earth and other foes of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating 
Station. Their challenge of the plant's license application on the grounds that 
the plant is dangerously close to earthquake faults made headlines for months. 
These days, Wharton has a lower profile but an abiding crusade: USD's 
Environmental Law Clinic. 
Hailed by lawyers as the county's only public-interest environmental legal 
watchdog, the clinic teaches from five to eight law students each semester by 
sending them into the field -- not to mention the stream, the bay or any other 
place that the students find needs defending. The 11-year-old institution 
charges no legal fees but, under Wharton's leadership, it has taken on some 
powerful opponents, from Southern California Edison to the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers. And lately, it's challenging San Onofre again. 
Next month, law students Michael Brennan and Michael Haberkorn will appear 
before the state Regional Water Quality Control Board to present allegations 
that San Onofre is violating its national pollutant-discharge permit. Among 
other things, they allege that the plant's cooling system has reduced by 60% 
the area covered by the San Onofre kelp bed -- about 200 acres. 
In another case, three more students are helping represent the Sierra Club, 
which is an intervenor in a pending lawsuit that could help decide when San 
Diego will upgrade its Point Loma sewage treatment plant. The federal 
Environmental Protection Agency filed the suit against San Diego last year 
after the city failed to comply with the federal Clean Water Act by the 1987 
deadline. 
The projects reflect the convictions of Wharton, whose energy fuels the clinic, 
even when money is tight. A fan of paisley and home-brewed beer, he likes to 
talk about what he believes is a growing activism among his students -- even as 
he admits that his own college education in the 1960s was dominated by " 
'Animal House'-type goings on." In the buttoned-down legal world, many agree 
that Wharton stands out. 
"When a lot of people think of lawyers, they think of someone in a suit and 
power tie," said Thomas A. Penfield, an attorney who once worked at USD. 
"Corky's more likely to show up in corduroys, a flannel shirt and soft shoes, 
and driving an Isuzu 4-wheel drive." 
Wharton, who does wear a suit to court, traces his environmentalism to one of 
his first jobs, working for a New York paper company he describes as "a 
polluting nightmare." (The origins of his nickname, meanwhile, can be found on 
the comic page: as a child, Wharton resembled mechanic Corky Wallet of Gasoline 
Alley). 
Now 46, he says his tenacity and determination were tested at an early age. 
When he was 24, the U.S. Army suddenly put him in charge of 140 troops and $1 
million of equipment in Vietnam, right after his dictatorial predecessor had 
been "fragged" (killed by a grenade) by his own men. 
"Needless to say, I was quite good to my troops," he said, laughing. "But after 
that, everything else was easy. If things get really tough, I just say, 'At 
least they're not shooting at me.' " 
The son of a Philadelphia shipfitter and a school crossing guard, Wharton likes 
to say he came West for good after "it snowed on Easter Sunday and I took it 
personally." He graduated from USD law school and set out to emulate his hero, 
Ralph Nader, who Wharton admires for "pressing issues and defending rights that 
otherwise are not represented." 
Similarly, Wharton looks for cases that have regionwide significance that would 
not otherwise be taken by a private attorney -- usually because there's no 
money to be won. They're not hard to find. 
When the Corps of Engineers wanted to build a breakwater off Imperial Beach in 
1986, for example, the clinic sued on behalf of the Surfrider Foundation to 
halt the project, because it was feared the breakwater would cause beach 
erosion. Two barges, one loaded with boulders and one bearing a crane, were in 
position, ready to begin building the $6.9-million wall of rock, when Wharton 
and his students won a court order halting the construction. The breakwater was 
never built. 
"We won that case in three weeks, working round the clock," Wharton said, 
estimating that if a private firm had been hired to do the job, their fees 
would have exceeded $40,000. "But nobody won any money. If we hadn't done that 
case, it wouldn't have gotten done." 
Other lawyers agree that Wharton's clinic meets a crucial need. Compared to 
other California cities of comparable size, San Diego has "an obvious paucity 
of environmental lawyers," said John Reaves, one of San Diego's relatively few 
environmental attorneys. 
"A lot of people who call me with a public-interest gripe, but who don't have 
any money, I send them to the clinic." 
Wharton's students clearly prosper by getting their feet wet. 
"There are a lot of subtleties to law that you don't learn in law school" 
classes, said Haberkorn, one of Wharton's current students who plans to 
specialize in environmental law. He describes the clinic as "a tremendous 
opportunity to learn proper conduct and proper strategy. I just wish it was the 
only thing that I do." 
For Haberkorn, Wharton is an inspiration. "You need somebody who's really 
impassioned about what they're doing, and Corky is," he said. "He's a true 
environmentalist." 
Judging by where other students have ended up, they seem to have been inspired 
as well. 
Two former students are with the federal Environmental Protection Agency, one 
is on the Council of Environmental Quality, one works with a legislator in 
Sacramento and others work in private practice in San Diego. And Wharton loves 
to help them learn to do it right. 
"In detail. I want it in detail," he excitedly told Haberkorn and Brennan as 
they drafted a list alleging the San Onofre power plant's violations of its 
federal discharge permit. "Page numbers, line numbers. Everything should go in 
this baby. Give them everything we've got." 
Later, Wharton said he believes practical education should always go hand in 
hand with theoretical study. 
"We put them in the middle of the case. They meet deadlines, face the stresses 
of dealing with real people, argue in front of real judges, with real 
verdicts," he said. "Live ammunition, not blanks." 
Perhaps one of the most important things the clinic teaches, however, is how it 
feels to be outnumbered and outspent. 
In 1981, when Wharton took on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission over the San 
Onofre power plant, he faced 11 attorneys and 24 paid experts. Wharton's troops 
consisted of two law students and six volunteers. They lost. 
"We're always up against huge money, and we don't have any. It's almost like 
we're going out of business every other year," Wharton said. "But you still 
win, every once in a while. And you're always there to keep them honest. That's 
the important thing." 
