COUNTY ORDERED TO RESTORE $7.6 MILLION IN HEALTH CUTS; 
COURTS: JUDGE'S RULING CASTS DOUBT ON LEGALITY OF PLAN TO SLASH ADDITIONAL 
$12.6 MILLION FROM MEDICAL SERVICES. 
A Superior Court judge on Wednesday ordered that $7.6 million in health care 
cuts be restored by Los Angeles County, throwing into question the legality of 
the county supervisors' plan to cut an additional $12.7 million in medical 
services next month. 
The development intensifies pressure on the supervisors to come up with money 
they had hoped to receive from the Proposition 134 liquor tax before voters 
defeated it last week. On Tuesday, supervisors voted to seek the help of 
legislators from the county in lobbying Gov.-elect Pete Wilson to restore state 
aid to public and mental health services. 
Representatives for Supervisors Deane Dana and Mike Antonovich said they would 
have to confer with county lawyers before commenting. "I don't know where we 
are supposed to get the money," said Katherine Barger, Antonovich's deputy for 
health affairs. 
Supervisor Ed Edelman said he would favor tax levies by the county or 
reductions in other departmental budgets if Wilson's transition team rejects 
the county's bailout pleas. 
Deep cuts in allocations to counties were ordered by Gov. George Deukmejian 
last summer to deal with the state's deficit. The health cuts, in adult 
outpatient clinics of the county's public hospitals, have substantially limited 
patient access to those clinics and lengthened the waiting times for those who 
are treated. 
The Los Angeles County mental health system also faces $41.9 million in cuts, 
which advocates say will effectively destroy the system. 
The preliminary injunction issued Wednesday in the public health case was 
sought by groups representing poor patients dependent upon county health 
services. Judge Dzintra Janavs found that cutting $7.6 million in services from 
the already overburdened county hospitals unacceptably reduced the 
accessibility and quality of medical care. State law mandates medical services 
for the poor be comparable to those available to non-indigent people. 
The Western Center on Law and Poverty and the Legal Aid Foundation of Los 
Angeles, who filed the class-action lawsuit last August, now must submit their 
own plan for reinstating the eliminated services. Melinda Bird, the Western 
Center's lawyer in the case, said she would do so by Friday. 
The county then must file a response, which typically contains objections to 
the timing or feasibility of the advocates' proposal, Byrd said. It will be up 
to the judge to resolve those differences in an instructional order to the 
Department of Health Services. The injunction also could be appealed to a 
higher court, Bird said. 
County Counsel Patrick Woo, who handled the case for the Department of Health 
Services, could not be reached for comment. 
Bird said the injunction's most immediate effect may be to deter the county 
from going ahead with additional cuts. If the supervisors order those cuts -- a 
hearing is scheduled Dec. 13, followed by a vote on Dec. 18 -- Bird said her 
organization will ask the court to block their implementation. 
Edelman said he has no intention of voting for more cuts, just as he opposed 
the first round. 
Irving Cohen, director of administration for the Department of Health Services, 
said he was awaiting instructions from county lawyers before beginning the 
process of restoring medical services to their pre-August level. 
It will not be easily done. 
About 70 employees were laid off and more than 100 others were transferred. 
Simply sending the latter group back to their previous assignments could lead 
to service disruptions where they now work, Cohen said. 
"Usually when you get an injunction, it is before you cut so you don't have to 
restore anything," Cohen said. "But now we hope the judge will give us enough 
time to figure out how to restore all this." 
Of the six county hospitals, only High Desert Hospital in Lancaster was spared 
cuts in its outpatient services. 
Generally, the effect reduced the number of patients seen each month in 
cardiac, neurology, eye, joint and other clinics, and increased the wait for 
appointments. Already averaging 12 weeks for a first appointment, the cuts in 
clinic hours and staffing added at least four weeks to the process. 
Janavs found that these delays left "a number of indigents without minimum 
medical assistance and in some cases with perhaps none." 
She cited the example of the gynecological oncology clinic at Women's Hospital, 
where patients are referred who already have abnormal PAP smears, an indication 
of cancer. Women's Hospital is part of Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center, 
which was hard hit by the cuts, along with Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical 
Center. 
According to evidence in the case, the clinic was forced to reduce patient 
visits from 1,000 to 500 per month. The Department of Health Services had 
argued that patients who couldn't be seen at the hospital clinics would be able 
to get care at county-operated health centers. 
But there are no gynecological oncology services at the health centers, and 
comparable clinics at other county hospitals could not take the overflow from 
Women's Hospital, the judge said. Accordingly, the cuts in service and 
treatment delays constituted "irreparable harm" to women with gynecological 
cancers, the judge said. 
Janavs also cited testimony from Dr. James Houghton, King/Drew medical 
director, that the hospital's neurology clinic was so curtailed that new 
patients now wait five months for an appointment. The waiting period in 
obstetrics and oncology is four months, he said. 
The judge found that King/Drew's emergency room was already operating at a 
"minimally adequate level" when cutbacks at the clinics forced a new load of 
patients on the emergency room staff. That, too, constituted irreparable harm 
to patients, the judge ruled. 
In a related development, state auditors on Wednesday said the county 
Department of Mental Health has failed to adequately monitor millions of 
dollars in contracts with private clinics. 
More than half of the contractors failed to make changes in procedures ordered 
by the department during a two-year period, according to the report by the 
office of the state auditor general. Such lack of oversight reduces confidence 
that mental health clients are receiving good care at reasonable cost, the 
auditors said. 
In a written response, county Mental Health Director Roberto Quiroz said he 
generally agreed with the auditors' conclusions, and has taken steps to improve 
contract monitoring. 
Anthony W. Harris, executive director of the Assn. of Community Mental Health 
Agencies, which represents clinics under contract to the department, said he 
has no problems with the report or the prospect of more scrutiny. 
"We just hope there is a mental health system left in Los Angeles County to 
audit," he said, referring to the $41.9 million in funding cuts the supervisors 
are scheduled to vote on Tuesday. 
