COMMENTARY; 
EMIGRATION OF POLITICAL PRISONERS IN VIETNAM CALLS FOR HELPING HANDS 
July 29, 1989, was for most of us no different than any other day. But for 
Vietnamese-Americans, July 29 ushered in a new era of hope and brought to this 
community an answer to almost 15 years of prayers and endless waiting. 
On that historic date, our government reached an agreement with the government 
of Vietnam on a program for emigration of former re-education camp detainees, 
otherwise known as political prisoners. 
Under the terms of this agreement, Vietnamese who were incarcerated in 
re-education camps because of their affiliation with the United States and 
South Vietnamese governments will be permitted to emigrate to the United 
States, many to rejoin their families. 
After the fall of Saigon in April, 1975, an unknown number, but estimated to be 
several hundred thousand, possibly 1 million, Vietnamese citizens were sent to 
re-education camps. 
Over the years thousands escaped; many died attempting escape or while in 
camps, some were released, and during 1987 and 1988 thousands of the remaining 
were released in a limited amnesty program. Over time, pressure on the 
Vietnamese government has steadily intensified to let these former prisoners 
emigrate to any country which would accept them. 
Somehow, in our attempts to put the Vietnam war behind us, the plight of these 
men and women, many decorated war veterans, has been ignored. The prisoner 
releases and subsequent steps leading to the July 29 accord did not garner 
front page coverage and the accord itself was overshadowed by another legacy of 
our Vietnam involvement, Cambodia. 
But the July 29 accord is good news for us all and should not be overlooked. 
The first of the former prisoners, known in the community as POWs, will be here 
within weeks and we should be prepared to provide them the assistance they need 
for a successful transition. We now have another opportunity to welcome Vietnam 
veterans. 
Seeing these men and women finally arrive here has special meaning for me as I 
reflect upon the time I shared with those I met in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly 
Saigon, on my April, 1989, family reunification trip -- a community-sponsored 
trip I made as chairman of the State Legislative Joint Committee on Refugee 
Resettlement. 
I remember quite well praying in the cathedral in Saigon with a former 
political prisoner I shall call Mr. Lam, husband and father to an Orange County 
family. I was touched by his strength of spirit, despite what I knew to be the 
harsh circumstances of his life and the continual frustrations he faced in 
realizing his dream of reuniting with his family soon. 
I went to Vietnam because I knew we had to keep letting the Vietnamese people 
know we cared. The former political prisoners I met there let me know how 
important our interventions were to them. For the 350,000 Vietnamese in 
California, 25% of whom live in Orange County, I knew our mission was 
important. Our efforts joined the work of many pushing the cause of the 
political prisoners and family reunification. 
Although released, they have no role, no job, no income. The impasse on 
negotiating to let them leave left them with little option but to risk escape 
and perhaps die, either at sea or the hands of pirates. 
The United States and Vietnam set up the orderly departure program as a safe 
option to emigrate to the United States. But that door was shut to former 
political prisoners for so long -- either negotiations were stalled or 
conditions were deemed unacceptable. 
For me, and for so many new Californians, this breakthrough has great meaning. 
I think of Mr. Lam and now have hope for him and his family. And I believe the 
story of these brave men whose fight for freedom did not end in 1975 brings us 
face to face with our own blessings as free Americans. 
As the Vietnam veterans who preceded them faced problems coming back, they too, 
will find the road rocky as they build their new lives here. 
But we can help. We can appreciate their sacrifice and extend the hand of 
friendship. 
We can build upon the hope and great spirit that kept them alive and work 
together to help rebuild their lives. 
