ON CAMPUS : PIERCE COLLEGE; 
LASER SYSTEM BENEFITS ARGUED 
A $21,000 laser system designed to beam programs from Pierce College's Media 
Center to specified classrooms on campus has been criticized by many 
instructors, and the school's newspaper, the Roundup, has reported that the 
system may not work. 
The system is designed to transmit 40 channels, 40,000 microbits of computer 
data and 40,000 telephone lines, as well as simultaneously send 12 separate 
signals from the Media Center to different campus locations. 
The laser project was initiated about a year ago by Cathy Cameron, dean of 
academic affairs. It has the backing of campus officials such as Dan Love, 
acting vice president of administration. 
But critics say the $21,000 for the program was appropriated at a time when the 
college had to cut $1.7 million from its budget. 
William deRubertis, chairman of the political science and economics 
departments, said the pictures transmitted by the laser are inadequate for 
viewing. 
Craig Meyer, an earth science professor, said the system "isn't practical and 
it wasn't thought out." 
Meyer said showing a film on a videocassette recorder in class is better than 
the laser system because the teacher can start and stop a video tape at will. 
Because there is no communication between any classroom and the Media Center, 
this would not be possible if the tape was being played there, he said. 
"It does not pay to install a television in every room," he said. "They should 
just give a few televisions and VCRs to each department, which would allow 
teachers to play tapes without having to go through the Media Center." 
The system also was designed to transmit live satellite pictures to a 
classroom. 
"Do you know what the odds are of having a live broadcast scheduled the same 
time as a class? I hope that not another dollar is spent on it," Robert 
Zappala, an astronomy professor, said. 
According to an article in the Roundup Oct. 24, Cameron and two other key 
people involved in the project disagree on whether the system works. 
Kevin Kopas, Media Center director, said that the system does not work. Cameron 
said she is not sure if it works. 
Richard Schick of Canyon Cable, the contractor for the project, said he 
believes the system works. 
Love agreed to demonstrate the system for the newspaper, but despite several 
requests has not yet done so. DAN DOW 
