TURNOUT BELOW 40% EXPECTED ACROSS NATION 
After all the polls, the commercials, the fund-raisers, flip-flops and cheap 
shots, the election is finally in the hands of the voters. 
But which voters will decide it? 
Experts are again predicting that less than 40% of the 186.4 million eligible 
Americans will make their way to the ballot box today, continuing a virtually 
uninterrupted 25-year slide in turnout. But that pattern could vary 
dramatically from state to state and between demographic groups -- with 
decisive partisan implications in some races. 
For Republican strategists in particular, turnout is a pressing concern: Polls 
have shown the GOP's standing eroding dangerously over the last month among 
senior citizens, who vote more heavily in midterm elections than younger 
voters. 
"Most of the (downward) shifts you're seeing in President Bush's approval 
rating and in the GOP standing in generic questions of who you would vote for 
in Congress are happening among older voters," one Republican pollster said. 
"It's got to be a concern to the Republican Party when you don't have the 
compensating turnout among younger voters." 
Young voters have been a vital component of the GOP coalition for the last 
decade. But they are much more interested in flashy presidential contests than 
off-year congressional elections. 
In the 1986 midterm election, voters 18 to 24 years old came out at only half 
the rate they did in the 1988 presidential election. Put another way: In 1988, 
senior citizens were twice as likely to vote as young people; in the off-year 
of 1986 they were three times as likely. No other group falls off as 
dramatically in participation from presidential elections to midterm elections 
as young people. 
Some Republican strategists worry that disenchantment over President Bush's 
reversal of his no-new-taxes pledge may further discourage young people -- and 
other GOP partisans -- from turning out today. 
At the same time, analysts say, senior citizens have been angered by the 
inclusion of Medicare cuts in the final budget package passed last month. In 
one recent Republican poll, over 80% of voters 65 and older said they 
considered the country to be on the wrong track. 
Also, Democratic appeals to economic fairness appear to be attracting older 
voters back into the fold. "The people in that age group are the last of the 
Truman- and Roosevelt-era Democrats," said the Republican pollster, "and, when 
you talk about Republicans and economic fairness, it strikes residual chords 
that just aren't there with the under-35 group." 
Shifting preferences among senior citizens could be an important factor in 
several races. 
In Texas, Democratic tracking polls have shown the party's gubernatorial 
nominee Ann Richards strengthening her position among seniors (as well as 
women). 
But, in Minnesota, Republican Sen. Rudy Boschwitz rushed out several hundred 
thousand pieces of mail to senior citizens and accused his Democratic opponent, 
Paul Wellstone, of advocating Medicare cuts. The barrage occurred after polls 
showed "slippage" by Boschwitz among older voters, one Republican source said. 
Although Democrats remain optimistic, Boschwitz has solidified his position 
with seniors and reopened a 9-point lead in public polls. 
Overall turnout is of less interest to the parties than to political 
scientists. But observers and practitioners alike are expecting a sparse 
showing today. Anything else would be a shock: Turnout in midterm elections 
sank below 40% in 1974 and has not resurfaced since. By contrast, off-year 
elections invariably drew more than 43% of eligible voters from 1948 through 
1970. 
Despite the strong anti-Washington mood visible in the electorate, few analysts 
are expecting Americans to break that historical pattern today in a fervor to 
clean house. 
"My guess is that turnout . . . will not be very much different than the 36.4% 
of eligible voters that turned out in 1986, which was the lowest since 1942," 
said Curtis B. Gans, director of the Washington-based Committee for the Study 
of the American Electorate. 
Registration figures undergird that prediction. In 22 of 29 states surveyed 
last week by People for the American Way, a liberal Washington group, a smaller 
percentage of eligible voters was registered than in 1986. Several states -- 
including Oregon, Washington, Pennsylvania, and Maryland -- suffered steep 
declines; California, Florida, Ohio and Illinois fell off more modestly. The 
combined totals show a slight national decline from 1986. 
"This year, like 1988, there were no significant voter registration efforts 
around the country," said Sanford Horwitt, director of the Citizen 
Participation Projection at People for the American Way. 
But Gans and other experts caution that turnout may rise in some states with 
closely fought races. 
Registration is up in North Carolina -- where Republican Sen. Jesse Helms faces 
Democrat Harvey Gantt, who is attempting to become the first black senator from 
the South since Reconstruction -- and the polls are expected to be crowded 
today. 
Registration is also up in Texas, the site of a compellingly lurid 
gubernatorial struggle between Richards and Republican Clayton W. Williams Jr. 
In Massachusetts, observers are expecting large numbers of voters to register 
their verdict on polarizing Democratic gubernatorial nominee John R. Silber in 
his campaign against Republican William F. Weld. 
