YOUTH BEAT: LIFTCENTER MIGHT BE TICKET TO RIDE 
On the second floor of 256 N. Z. Voorburgwal, near Dam Square here, is a budget 
agency that can save you money. 
The International Liftcenter offers a variety of budget travel services, 
including one that matches drivers who want to cut expenses with passengers 
willing to contribute to fuel costs. 
For example, if you're in Amsterdam and want to go to Paris, you could call or 
drop into the office to check if any Paris-bound drivers are seeking riders. 
They may know several days in advance about a car heading that way, or just 
hours in advance. It's always wise to check more than once. 
If they can arrange the ride, you'll be charged a service fee of 14 guilders 
(about $7) and a maximum of 30 guilders toward fuel costs. That fuel charge 
could be reduced if several riders share the trip. 
Chances are, economical rides can be found to several European destinations. 
The fee for a ride to Barcelona or Florence, for example, is a 24-guilder 
service charge plus a maximum of 90 guilders for fuel. From Amsterdam to Lisbon 
the charges are 27 guilders and 140 guilders, respectively. To Athens it's 27 
and 150. 
The Liftcenter is linked to Eurostop, a network of similar services in 37 
European cities. Together they produce a 64-page booklet that lists about 80 
offices providing this type of service, in seven countries. 
The publication, which costs 2.50 guilders, also includes information on budget 
accommodations, restaurants and tourist information offices in the cities where 
the offices are. Copies can be bought at the Amsterdam office. 
The Amsterdam Liftcenter, which has been in business for four years, also 
arranges alternative forms of budget transportation. For example, they have 
made arrangements with luxury bus services to fill their unsold seats at 
reduced rates. 
While I was visiting the Liftcenter it was possible to buy a one-way fare to 
Barcelona for 105 guilders; the regular rate was 190. Sometimes these fares are 
available a week in advance, sometimes it's just a day or two. 
Other last-minute bus destinations include the six-hour trip to Paris for 55 
guilders, London for 75 guilders, Innsbruck for 105 guilders, Lisbon for 255 
guilders, Florence for 125 guilders and Rome for 135 guilders. 
Another type of inexpensive bus fare you can buy at the Liftcenter is called 
Budget Bus. Luxury buses are used on most routes, but don't expect them on the 
Greece and Yugoslavia runs. 
Budget Bus has an office of its own in Amsterdam at 10 Rokin, also near Dam 
Square. It offers a variety of cheap one-way fares; for example, Amsterdam to 
Greece for 225 guilders if you are under 26, and 250 guilders for older 
passengers. It also offers five "Capital Tripper" fares that allow you to spend 
up to six months to cover a designated route. For example, a ticket from 
Amsterdam to London, Paris, Lisbon and Barcelona plus return to Amsterdam is 
360 guilders. 
The Liftcenter also sells Transalpino rail tickets. These are special reduced 
rail fares for international trips that are sold throughout Europe to people 
under 26. You have up to two months to complete a journey. 
While you are in Amsterdam you can get help with information on what to see, 
the transportation system, entertainment, budget lodgings and emergency 
services in a free copy of "Use It," available upon request at the tourist 
information office outside Central Station. 
