HUNTER ENJOYED 'JOY RIDE' WITH DOMINELLI, U.S. PROSECUTOR CLAIMS 
Nancy Hoover Hunter was intimately involved in the giant fraud perpetrated by 
the failed La Jolla investment firm J. David &amp; Co., knew about it at every 
step along the way, and created false documents to lure investors, a federal 
prosecutor argued Friday. 
Hunter enjoyed a "4 1/2-year joy ride" with J. David (Jerry) Dominelli, the 
founder of J. David, Assistant U.S. Atty. S. Gay Hugo said, adding that the 
ride was fueled by money they had gotten from investors who had been "enticed 
by false track records." 
Once enticed, about 1,500 investors were lulled into believing the $80 million 
they had invested in J. David over those 4 1/2 years was earning fabulous 
returns because they were mailed "monthly, fictitious, non-existent trading 
results," Hugo said. 
"That joy ride came to a screeching halt in 1984," she said. 
That summary of the case, meanwhile, was about all that Hugo got to tell jurors 
Friday as she began her closing argument in Hunter's 197-count federal 
tax-evasion and fraud trial. Hugo ran out of time as she began to go over what 
she called the highlights of eight months of evidence. 
The charges against Hunter stem from her role as a top executive in J. David 
from 1979 until February, 1984, when company checks began to bounce and nervous 
investors forced the firm into bankruptcy. 
Prosecutors have contended since the trial began in March that Hunter played an 
active role in the J. David affair, a huge Ponzi scheme. Her defense attorneys 
have maintained that she was blinded by her love for Dominelli and was unaware 
of any illegal activities. 
Dominelli pleaded guilty in 1985 to four counts of fraud and income-tax evasion 
and is serving a 20-year sentence in federal prison. 
Closing arguments in Hunter's case had been scheduled to begin early Friday 
morning, but last-minute witnesses testifying to minor details delayed the 
start of Hugo's argument until late in the day. 
Hugo began with her summary of the case, then described Hunter, saying she was 
"sophisticated, well-traveled and intelligent." 
"Here is a woman who, when she sets her mind to something, she accomplishes 
it," Hugo said of the former Del Mar mayor. 
Next, Hugo began her review of the sets of charges against Hunter. But U.S. 
District Judge Earl B. Gilliam Jr. called court to a close after Hugo had 
gotten through her claim that prosecutors had proven that Hunter, or someone 
acting at Hunter's direction, used the mails to send investors the statements. 
Use of the mails must be shown to prove mail fraud as well as fraud by a 
commodities pool operator, two of the sets of charges against Hunter. 
Gilliam ordered that Hugo resume her argument Tuesday. Defense attorneys will 
follow Hugo, then the jury will get the case. 
Because of court scheduling, however, only two days of trial are set for next 
week. Jury deliberations are not likely to begin until the week after. 
Gilliam said Friday that he had decided not to sequester the jury, though he 
had "seriously considered" such a move because of press attention to the case. 
