LOOKING AHEAD: IT'S AN ERA OF 'INFORMATION APPLIANCES' 
The personal computer is quickly becoming the horseless carriage of the 
information age. Before the decade is out, the PCs on our desks will be 
replaced by workstations and PCs everywhere else by a host of "information 
appliances" -- inexpensive, radically accessible, high-performance information 
tools utterly unlike today's PCs. 
Today's personal computers are general-purpose tools into which most 
information is entered via keyboard and cleaned up on screen before being 
reduced to paper. The features that matter most on these machines are power, 
ease of use and the availability of software programs designed for particular 
kinds of tasks, such as word processing and spreadsheet calculation. For the 
most part, our PCs are stand-alone devices connected to little else than a 
printer or modem. Local area networks are becoming more common but more often 
than not are used simply to share a laser printer among multiple PCs. 
Workstations are generally more powerful than PCs, but the real difference is 
connectivity. Unlike PCs, workstations derive an ever-growing value from what 
they are connected to. The connection might be to a file server shared with a 
dozen other workstations or to a corporate database on a remote mainframe. 
Workstations thus become tools for examining and manipulating electronically 
delivered data, windows to a larger information world. 
Eventually, workstations will be like telephones, their usefulness defined 
above all by what they link us to. A telephone on a desk unconnected to any 
other telephone isn't a telephone at all, but a paperweight. Workstations that 
fail to link us to the right information bases or networks will seem equally 
useless. There will be no shortage of variety in the power and features offered 
by workstation manufacturers, but we will choose among these options in much 
the same way that we select telephone desk sets. Some users will want the 
equivalent of a light, button-studded speaker phone; others will opt for a 
simple handset. 
The term information appliance is emerging as the shorthand for a new class of 
computing devices that, unlike PCs, are inexpensive, specialized and 
dramatically easier to use than the friendliest computer. 
Imagine a hand-held device the size and shape of a thick legal pad. Its entire 
surface is a screen, on which users write with a stylus, their handwriting 
converted to computer-readable text on the fly. Add a cellular modem, and the 
device becomes a tool for trading information with one's office while on the 
road or using a plain-paper fax machine down the hall as a remote printer. 
At first this sounds like the ultimate laptop for executives who dislike using 
keyboards, but the "feel" of these appliances will be so different from today's 
PCs that no one will bother to make the comparison. Some functions will mimic 
paper-based tools such as calendars and note pads. Other activities will be 
new, such as a software "agent" that manages office messages or monitors 
external data such as stock prices and breaking news events. 
It will take the better part of the decade to turn this vision into reality, 
but the first stylus-based laptops are already being sold. Meanwhile, Silicon 
Valley and the consumer electronics industry are hard at work on other 
information appliance concepts. 
Sony recently introduced the Data Diskman, a $400 hand-held optical disk reader 
that displays words and numbers on a small liquid-crystal screen. The Diskman 
is a bit dull, but it hints at surprises to come. Imagine a pocket-sized 
aircraft maintenance "manual" that uses graphics, sound and motion video to 
display repair procedures, or an interactive encyclopedia employing the same 
technology to hold the attention of fifth-graders. 
It won't happen overnight, but the PC is headed the way of the Model T. 
Workstations will invade our desktops, and information appliances will slip 
into our pockets, our briefcases and our living rooms. Together, these new 
devices will deliver the computer revolution promised a decade ago. 
