GRAY BEATS CRIMSON, 188-177 IN LOYOLA SCRIMMAGE 
Loyola Marymount's basketball scrimmage at Gersten Pavilion may have been as 
notable for who was missing as who was on hand Saturday. 
With two probable starters injured, the Lions managed to score 365 points as 
the Gray team beat the Crimson, 188-177. 
That was accomplished with point guard Tony Walker and 6-foot-10 center Richard 
Petruska -- both expected to start -- as well as forward Christian Scott 
sitting out with injuries. 
Junior Terrell Lowery and redshirt sophomore Brian McCloskey scored 54 and 41 
points, respectively. 
However, with several veterans sitting out, the talented freshman class got to 
show off, with Kareem Washington matching Lowery's 54 points and Rahim Harris 
getting 45. Junior transfer Craig Holt, expected to add three-point punch, got 
34 points and led both teams with eight three-point baskets. Another freshman, 
Ross Richardson, scored 15 points and hit four of six three-point shots. 
Freshman point guard Greg Evans had 17 assists. 
"We played some guys we probably won't play (a lot)," Lion Coach Jay Hillock 
said. "I like the freshmen. . . . we've got four solid freshmen." 
The Gray team, which never trailed, led 97-94 at halftime. Senior Marcus Slater 
had 30 points and 24 rebounds for the winners. 
Walker, who had off-season wrist surgery, aggravated the wrist in practice and 
is sitting out seven to 10 days. He will then be re-examined. 
Walker reported some improvement Saturday. Petruska, who has a groin injury, 
will return to practice Monday on a limited basis. Scott, who suffered a broken 
nose in practice, will return with a mask Tuesday. 
Hillock, who got on his team for committing fouls when they were tired, said: 
"Were playing hard. We've got a lot of work to do. A lot of things will smooth 
out starting this week. We've got to get in better shape, and we've got to 
install an interior game. Obviously, with Petruska out, we didn't have much of 
an inside game. That will be our emphasis the next few weeks." 
The Lions will get a better idea of where they stand when they play their first 
exhibition game Saturday against a touring Australian team. 
In the women's scrimmage, Coach Todd Corman's starting team defeated the 
reserves, 77-29, led by center Tricia Gibson's 19 points and 12 rebounds. Guard 
Lynn Flanagan and forward Jamie Jesko scored 17 apiece. Lisa Humphreys led the 
reserves with 12 points. 
