TV REVIEWS; 
'ONION FIELD' TOUCH TO 'COP FOR THE KILLING' 
The TV movie "In the Line of Duty: A Cop for the Killing" (Sunday at 9 p.m. on 
NBC Channels 4, 36, 39) doesn't quite know whether it wants to be "The Onion 
Field" or "The A-Team." 
Its ostensible subject is the grief affecting other cops after a policeman's 
murder. But, unfortunately, the ambushed officer who goes down in a hail of 
bullets -- Charles Haid ("Hill Street Blues") -- is by far the most believable 
one on screen, and after he's gone we scarcely have enough invested in his 
cartoonish partners to care about how they work through their pain and 
reintegrate into the undercover narcotics squad. 
There's a stereotypical internal affairs investigative unit that tries to ply 
the surviving members apart. And they have their own problems: Lieutenant 
Wiltern (James Farentino) feels guilt over initiating the drug bust that led to 
the murder. Matt (Steven Weber), the longhair on the narc detail, is starting 
to act as spaced-out as the druggies he's supposed to be arresting, and keeps 
showing up at strip joints instead of work. 
Less problematic for the team, but more for realism-oriented viewers, is 
gorgeous Julie (Susan Walters), who's way too fabulous a babe to be doing this 
grunt-work; she should be posing for swimsuit issues, not knocking down doors 
downtown. Charlie's Angels live! 
How do they deal with their grief? Ultimately, by telling each other things 
like "Sometimes things just happen" or "You just gotta deal with it," whatever 
that means, followed by finally going out and seriously kicking some 
drug-dealer butt. 
It takes the message in the final freeze-frame -- "Last year in the U.S., 145 
officers were killed in the line of duty" -- to remind you how serious this all 
is supposed to be. 
The script by Philip Rosenberg and Rick Husky offers nothing but cliches, but 
kudos to director Dick Lowry for investing this with a tense, solid urgency it 
doesn't really deserve. Lowry may have been working with a D.O.A. teleplay, but 
he dealt with it. CHRIS WILLMAN 
