HEADING UP THE EUROPEAN INVASION; 
AS A NATO OFFICER, BILL ROEDY KNEW THEORETICALLY HOW TO TAKE OVER EASTERN 
EUROPE, BUT AS MTV EUROPE'S DIRECTOR, HE'S ACTUALLY DOING IT 
When Bill Roedy commanded a NATO nuclear missile base in Northern Italy for 3 
1/2 years in the 1970s, he was playing his part to keep the Cold War alive. 
In the last 18 months, he thinks he's done his share to help it end. But Roedy 
isn't in uniform these days -- he's chief executive and managing director of 
MTV Europe, which, like its American parent channel, broadcasts music videos, 
rock concerts and music information aimed at 16- to 34-year-olds. 
MTV Europe reaches 16.4 million households in 26 countries -- and the massive 
changes in the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries in the last year have 
opened up a market of vast potential. In the wake of perestroika, glasnost and 
the momentous fall of Communist regimes, the Eastern Bloc nations have been 
unanimous: They want their MTV. 
"Back then, I had a very different perspective toward Eastern Europe than now," 
Roedy said. "It was strictly NATO versus Warsaw Pact. Now I think TV's a much 
more effective instrument than missiles. My old colleagues at West Point may 
not love to hear that. But I really do believe it." 
Indeed, when Roedy recently attended a reunion of his West Point class, 
opinions on his new career were mixed. "Some people were enthusiastic, almost 
envious," he said. "Others said, 'You do what?' They're so service-oriented." 
Ironically, Roedy has been closer to the historic action in Eastern Europe than 
many of his old friends who stuck with the military. As the man charged with 
finalizing deals with Eastern European governments to accept MTV Europe within 
their borders via cable or satellite, he has assumed a role equivalent to that 
of a cultural ambassador. 
"In Budapest last year, I signed an agreement for Hungary to receive MTV in the 
presence of 20 government officials," he said. "The ceremony took place in a 
beautiful hotel restaurant overlooking the Danube. There were white tablecloths 
and Champagne. We gave speeches all night. There was an exchange of pens. It 
was like signing a peace treaty. I had to keep reminding myself this was only 
music television." 
Roedy was addressing a music industry conference in East Berlin late last year 
and had succeeded, through labyrinthine negotiations, in hooking up MTV for 
cable TV in the city for the first time. 
An hour into the conference, the East German Politburo resigned. Within 48 
hours, the dismantling of the Berlin Wall began. A group of East Germans 
heading for liberty in the West were stopped and asked how they knew the wall 
was down. "We saw it on MTV," they said. 
Then last month, MTV, after lengthy talks with government officials, broke 
through on Soviet TV for the first time. The channel will broadcast for an hour 
every Friday night on "Vzglyad" (Glance), a popular youth-oriented program. 
It's a modest beginning, but because it's on Gostelradio 1, the most-watched 
national channel in the U.S.S.R., MTV Europe will be beamed into 88 million 
homes, from the Baltic states to Siberia. 
Roedy has souvenirs of his foreign adventures in his London office -- photos of 
the ceremony in Budapest, pieces of the Berlin Wall. On his own wall, a map 
with thumbtacks marks those cities conquered by MTV Europe. Roedy now has a 
Harvard MBA and a successful career in the entertainment industry, but old 
military habits die hard. 
MTV's successes behind the former Iron Curtain have been attention-grabbers, 
but its real achievement is the stranglehold it has secured on all of Europe 
after only three years. Not only is the channel in every major European 
country, but it acts as a kind of index for pan-European trends and fashions 
among its target audience. 
One is equally likely to see young people wearing MTV sweat shirts in Lisbon or 
Leningrad, in Barcelona or Bucharest. Additionally, the kinds of products 
advertised on MTV Europe -- Benetton clothes, Swatch watches, Nike or Reebok 
sneakers -- are popular across the Continent. 
MTV, then, has become a complex cultural phenomenon with far-reaching 
influence. Not everyone is thrilled by this: Critics charge that the music it 
plays and the fashions and trends it espouses all combine to create a bland, 
Anglo-American flavored "monoculture," which will erode national youth-culture 
differences in the various countries it serves. 
An article in the current issue of the London-based style magazine Blitz poses 
the question of whether MTV's real mission is to stamp out "indigenous 
creativity." 
MTV Europe initially encountered some resistance, notably from the European 
record companies that, after all, provide the bulk of the channel's programming 
in the form of music videos. "There was a lot of anti-American feeling at the 
start," says executive producer Brent Hansen. 
Yet Roedy takes pains to point out that MTV Europe is not an American 
organization. (It is a partnership between Viacom International, which also 
owns MTV in the United States, and London-based media baron Robert Maxwell.) 
"We employ 106 people in five countries," Roedy says, "but only six are 
Americans." 
Certainly MTV Europe does not look like the typical American corporation. Its 
head 
quarters are a converted 1880s warehouse in a narrow, gloomy, cobbled north 
London thoroughfare, recently renamed Mandela Street by the radical chic ruling 
group on the local council. "For this I gave up a home on the beach in Santa 
Monica and a 42nd-floor corner office in Century City with an ocean view," says 
Roedy, who was previously a sales and marketing vice president with HBO. 
The differences go deeper. On MTV Europe's payroll are employees from 14 
nationalities, according to press director Christine Gorham. She is Austrian; 
Hansen is a New Zealanders. Maiken Wexo, who is arguably the channel's 
best-known veejay, is Danish; her colleague Kristiane Backer is German. 
"We encourage people to speak more than one language when they work here," 
Gorham says, "even if they don't speak it perfectly." 
Still, the charge of cultural imperialism has stung Roedy enough for him to 
address it head-on when he talks to officials from different countries who are 
considering taking MTV on board. 
"I tell them we're not here to blend or blur cultures, we're here to enhance 
cultures," he says. "When I'm in France, which is the most extreme on this 
issue, I quote De Gaulle: No one can expect to bring together a country which 
has 265 different kinds of cheeses." 
But De Gaulle also envisioned a Europe that stretched from the Atlantic to the 
Urals. MTV's burgeoning empire stretches 3,000 miles further east, to 
Vladivostok. How can one playlist encompass music to accommodate the youthful 
population of such a huge land mass? 
"We're positioning ourselves as a multicultural channel," says Hansen, 35, 
whose curly shoulder-length mane contrasts with Roedy's trim, military bearing. 
"But what we are looking for are potential artists we can break in an 
international arena." 
This might seem to confirm the critics' worst fears of MTV Europe gravitating 
toward a bland, smooth-edged brand of "Euro-pop" with no discernible geographic 
roots. Hansen concedes that before he joined the channel, "I regarded MTV as 
the enemy" for precisely those reasons. Now, he says, he sees things 
differently. 
"We're not an access channel, and I'm not in favor of playing a video that 
doesn't look great," he says. "That's patronizing. Just because there's a group 
from Czechoslovakia with a video doesn't mean they'll get on MTV Europe. If the 
video isn't as good as it should be, they'll embarrass us and they'll embarrass 
themselves. 
"But, for instance, there is a group from Yugoslavia, called Laibach, who did a 
good cover of the Stones' 'Sympathy for the Devil.' They might conceivably 
release something we would put on the playlist." 
Rather than trying to find a bland lowest common denominator in the music 
offered by the channel, Hansen says his job involves "making sure that 
something will work in Britain and in Yugoslavia. Or in Finland and in Greece." 
He gives MTV Europe credit for helping break the Creeps, a Swedish band whose 
"Ooh I Like It" found favor with MTV Europe viewers from many countries. The 
workers in Mandela Street believe they helped launch the career of the visually 
arresting Sinead O'Connor. Hansen thinks the channel helped black rock singer 
Lenny Kravitz: "I think we also encouraged MTV in the States to focus on him," 
he says. 
The notion that MTV Europe takes its creative cues from its American parent 
channel makes Hansen bridle. All but three shows on MTV Europe are its own 
original programming. "I fiercely believe we have a better MTV than they do in 
the States," he says. Hansen also points out that MTV Europe had its own rap 
show, called "Yo!" since its inception three years ago, before the idea caught 
on for MTV's "Yo! MTV Raps" in the United States. 
For his part, New York-based MTV boss Tom Freston warmly praises MTV Europe as 
the most flourishing growth area in the channel's rush toward global 
domination. Certainly young Europeans have proved enthusiastic about MTV 
Europe, and in heavily cabled countries like Belgium and Holland, Wexo, Backer 
and English vee-jay Paul King are capable of stopping traffic. Meanwhile 
Roedy's team concentrates on consolidating such key Western European 
territories as Germany and Britain -- with some success. In the month of 
September alone, MTV Europe added more than 1.1 million households to its 
empire -- the largest growth for any single month to date. 
But Roedy, the former Cold Warrior and Vietnam vet, cannot resist returning to 
the implications of the channel's ventures in Eastern Europe. "I took the tack 
that we're European, not American," he says, "but in Eastern Europe, they 
didn't care at all. They actually wanted more American programming -- because 
they'd had so much Russian programming rammed down their throats for so long." 
Recalling the minutiae of the Soviet deal, Roedy says: "I told them, 'If you 
are serious about glasnost and perestroika, and you want to send a signal to 
Western business and industry leaders, there's no better sign to say how 
serious you are than embracing MTV.' " 
This was well received. Mark Conneely, a network development manager who 
participated in the lengthy discussions, reports that the Soviet delegation 
glowingly described MTV as "the Coca-Cola of music television." 
The channel's entry into the Soviet Union, Roedy reflects, was "more than a 
cultural breakthrough -- it's an economic breakthrough too. They gave us a nice 
amount of troubles. But we are selling eight minutes an hour to advertisers, 
and we are turning around and giving two minutes back to the U.S.S.R. They get 
hard currency, which they badly need, and we get exposure in 88 million 
households. 
"The advertisers jumped on it -- L.A. Gear, Stimorol chewing gum, Benetton, 
Renault cars, Wrangler jeans. What I find significant is that not all these 
companies even have distribution in the Soviet Union yet. We have a one-year 
deal in the Soviet Union, so clearly they're laying the seeds for the future." 
MTV Europe also takes some credit for encouraging corporations and their 
advertising agencies to buy air time on a pan-American basis, reflecting the 
channel's scope, rather than doing deals country by country. 
Its advances continue, apparently unchecked. Israel and Iceland are the latest 
territories to sign on the dotted line with MTV Europe; Roedy has big hopes for 
Israel, which is heavily cabled. Talks are now being held with Turkey; the next 
region for channel to conquer is the North African coast. 
If pressed, Roedy will claim that TV has played its part in the astonishing 
political changes in Eastern Europe in the last 18 months. "I do believe 
there's been a hand in the changes caused by TV and satellite 
telecommunications and deregulation -- which mean you simply can't have the 
barriers you once had. 
"In Russia, you could watch TV and be fooled. You could have all your military 
and space achievements and heroes and not realize you were living in what's 
almost a Third World country. But not any more. Now there's a free flow of 
information -- and it can't be blocked out." 
