HEALTH SERVICES SOUGHT FOR NIGERIA'S TEEN-AGE MOTHERS; 
AFRICA: CHILDBIRTH INJURIES LEAVE MANY AS OUTCASTS. RISKS ARE GREAT FOR ALL 
PREGNANT WOMEN IN RURAL AREAS. 
Larai married at 11 and almost died in childbirth at the age of 13 when she 
collapsed with a ruptured womb after two days in labor. 
She lost her baby and joined thousands of young Nigerian women made outcasts in 
their teens each year -- crippled and incontinent because of poverty, tradition 
and a lack of basic medical care. 
"When we began our work in 1985, we found 300 girls like Larai roaming the 
hospital waiting for an operation performed only 10 times a year," said Amina 
Sambo, coordinator of the Vesico Vaginal Fistula (VVF) program for the National 
Council of Women's Societies. 
She is based in Kano in predominantly Muslim northern Nigeria, where the 
frequency of pregnancy among girls not physically ready for it increases the 
incidence of VVF -- tearing of the uterus into the bladder or bowels because of 
obstructed labor. 
Victims either die or go through life with urine, feces or both leaking 
uncontrollably into the vagina. 
They are frequently sent packing by their polygamous husbands. Many turn to 
prostitution. 
Sambo led a fund-raising campaign to build an operating theater in Kano that 
now patches up 24 VVF sufferers a month. 
"We must call on our men . . . to refuse to put immature girls in the family 
way. It may be the first and last time they will ever become pregnant," Health 
Minister Olikoye Ransome-Kuti told a conference on safe motherhood in 
September. 
An internationally recognized advocate of cost-effective, basic health 
services, he has pressured the military-led federal government to promote birth 
control and improve care for mothers and children. 
Progress is painfully slow, for cultural as well as financial reasons, Sambo 
said. 
"We concentrate on raising awareness -- explaining the dangers of child 
pregnancy, that pregnant women of whatever age need medical care and that girls 
should stay at school until they are old enough to marry," she said. 
Motherhood carries 400 times as much risk in Nigeria as in Europe or North 
America, said experts at the conference in Abuja, the country's planned future 
capital. 
Nigeria accounts for a tenth -- 75,000 a year -- of all world deaths from 
motherhood. 
Every few minutes a Nigerian woman dies in pregnancy or childbirth from 
bleeding, infection, obstruction, rupture, hypertension or abortion 
complications. 
Most would not die if they had the knowledge, the social status and the 
financial means to avoid getting pregnant too young, too old and too often, and 
to benefit from the advice and care of trained medical staffs. 
But few do, certainly not the 70% or more who live in rural areas far from the 
towns where this vast country's few doctors, nurses and midwives cluster. 
Clara Ejimbi, a community physician in northern Kaduna state, said she covers 
35,000 people without the help of a single gynecologist. There is not even an 
ambulance. 
"Ninety-nine percent of deliveries are handled at home by TBAs -- traditional 
birth attendants," she said. 
These are usually older women in the community, illiterate and without any 
formal medical training, but well able to help a healthy mother with a normal 
delivery. 
It is when complications arise -- as they often do with undernourished and 
overworked mothers living without such basic amenities as sanitation and safe 
water -- that things can go badly wrong. 
Irene Thomas, one of Nigeria's first woman doctors and a veteran campaigner for 
safe motherhood, is working to educate TBAs against traditional practices that 
endanger women from different ethnic and religious groups all over Africa. 
Ritual genital mutilation -- so-called female circumcision -- leaves scars that 
obstruct childbirth. Taboos on certain foods may deprive pregnant women of a 
healthy diet. 
Women continue working during pregnancy, and signs of danger are accepted as 
normal, or as omens of another kind -- swollen feet as a sign of twins, for 
example. 
If labor drags on -- five days is not uncommon -- the family is more likely to 
consult an oracle than a doctor. 
Or the local barber may be called to make cuts, slashing at the vagina or 
cervix with an unsterilized blade, often damaging the child as well as the 
mother. 
"No scientific reasons are provided to substantiate these practices, the pain, 
trauma . . . disability and even death of the victims notwithstanding," Thomas 
said. 
Women have little say in determining their own fate, having to defer to 
fathers, husbands and traditional chiefs. 
Even if people accept that they need trained medical help, the cost of 
transport, drugs and the treatment itself may be more than the family can bear. 
Kelsey Harrison, a pioneering gynecologist whose work in the northern city of 
Zaria first raised the alarm in 1985, says motherhood is becoming more 
hazardous as debt-burdened Nigeria and 100 million people sink deeper into 
poverty. 
"Resort to traditional forms of care . . . with all its attendant risks is 
gaining ground," he said. 
"People said that things would have to change after our Zaria study, and they 
have -- for the worse." 
