LAGUNA HILLS HIGH CLIMBS BACK ON TOP IN DECATHLON 
Laguna Hills High School, a perennial winner in county, state and national 
Academic Decathlon competitions, was the top school again this year in the 
Orange County Academic Decathlon for 11th- and 12th-graders. 
Laguna Hills, proclaimed the county champion at an awards banquet Tuesday night 
at the Anaheim Marriott, won the title with a combined score of 44,492, besting 
its nearest competitor -- Sunny Hills High School of Fullerton -- by nearly 
2,000 points. The competition was held Nov. 17 at El Dorado High School in 
Placentia. 
The Laguna Hills team, which won the state championship last year and went on 
to capture second place in the national Academic Decathlon in Des Moines, Iowa, 
in April, took the county championship despite falling 500 points short of 
Sunny Hills in the Super Quiz, the event's final test and often the deciding 
factor in academic decathlons. 
Laguna Hills will represent Orange County and attempt to defend its state 
championship at the California Academic Decathlon next March in Riverside. The 
national finals will be held in April at Occidental College in Los Angeles. 
Following Laguna Hills and Sunny Hills in overall scores were University High 
School of Irvine, with 41,714 points; Esperanza High, Anaheim, 41,037; Los 
Alamitos High, 40,232; Mission Viejo High, 40,145; Trabuco Hills High, Mission 
Viejo, 39,871; Dana Hills High, Dana Point, 37,940; Troy High, Fullerton, 
37,622; and Irvine High, 37,431. 
Among individual winners, Winston Chang of University High School scored the 
highest point total in the honors division with 8,467 points, including a 
perfect 1,000 on the essay portion of the test. Todd Faurot, a member of the 
national runner-up Laguna Hills team last year, scored the highest in the 
scholastic division with 7,428 points, and Kirk Brown, a newcomer to the Laguna 
Hills team, topped the varsity division with a score of 6,885. 
The Decathlon, created 20 years ago by outgoing county Supt. of Schools Robert 
Peterson, tests students in economics, essay-writing, fine arts, interview 
skills, literature, mathematics, science, social science and speech, and is 
capped by the Super Quiz, a "Jeopardy!"-style quiz segment. Forty-eight high 
school teams took part this year. 
