TOP BONN DIPLOMAT GIVES BUSH A PIECE OF THE WALL 
West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, at the White House for a 
preview of the Malta summit, gave President Bush a brick from the Berlin Wall 
on Tuesday as a symbol of the growing strength of democracy in Eastern Europe. 
After meeting with the President and Secretary of State James A. Baker III, 
Genscher said he had been assured that the United States will continue to 
support the wave of reform sweeping across Poland, Hungary and East Germany. 
"It is in the interest of the West that the reform policy in the Eastern 
European states . . . may be carried out successfully and without any hindrance 
from our side," he said. He added that if the West tries to take advantage of 
the changes, it may undermine the reform effort. 
Bush, in a brief appearance before reporters in the Oval Office, said he would 
treasure the piece of the Berlin Wall, which was broken away earlier this month 
after the East German authorities relaxed their once-Draconian travel 
regulations. During his trip to Hungary last summer, the President was given a 
piece of barbed wire from the now-dismantled Hungary-Austria border fence. 
Genscher declared, "The wall now is open, and the German Democratic Republic is 
on the way, really, to becoming a democratic republic." 
Turning directly to Bush, he said: "I would like to express, Mr. President, our 
great gratitude for the support, the help and the firmness of the American 
nation in the past decades -- in good times, but also in difficult times." 
White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said the focus of Bush's meeting 
with Genscher was on next month's Malta meeting between Bush and Soviet 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. 
At his news conference, Genscher hailed the changes that have taken place in 
East Germany and sought to reassure those who fear West Germany's growing 
economic and political power. 
"The Germans in (East Germany) have shown such a high amount of dignity, and of 
soberness, and of responsibility," he said. "We think that this commitment by 
all Germans to freedom and democracy is an enrichment for the whole of Europe. 
. . . Freedom and democracy have never been a threat to anyone." 
Almost forgotten in the euphoria of Eastern European reform was the controversy 
over proposed modernization of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's 
short-range nuclear missile force. Bonn objects to the project because most of 
the missiles would be stationed on West German soil, positioned to hit targets 
in East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia or Hungary. 
The relaxed tensions in the area have increased speculation that the weapons 
will not be built. However, Genscher deflected questions on the issue, saying 
that NATO has agreed to make a final decision in 1992 and that there is no need 
to talk about the matter before then. 
