GOVERNOR'S RACE CLOSE AT THE WIRE; 
ELECTION: THE FEINSTEIN-WILSON BATTLE SETS A SPENDING RECORD. ON THE LAST 
WEEKEND BEFORE VOTERS MAKE UP THEIR MINDS, MANY CONTESTS STRUGGLE FOR 
ATTENTION. 
The 1990 race for governor enters the record books Tuesday as the most 
expensive contest for chief executive in the history of the state, potentially 
cashing out at nearly double the cost of the previous record in 1982. 
And it will be up to voters to decide whether history of another sort is made 
with the election of Democrat Dianne Feinstein as the first woman governor of 
the state. 
To command victory, Feinstein -- one of five women vying for state 
constitutional offices -- will have to set back Republican Pete Wilson, the 
incumbent U.S. senator and former mayor trying for a political hat trick. 
As candidates made their last-ditch efforts to impress voters, both Feinstein 
and Wilson appeared to be within striking distance of success. Other statewide 
races were close, too, particularly the bitterly fought contest for attorney 
general and the expensive duel for state treasurer. 
Through the weekend, campaigns were sending slate mailers, candidates were 
pushing for precious seconds before overdosed television viewers and money was 
flying fast and furiously. 
Between Jan. 1 and Oct. 20 -- before the final two weeks of television time had 
been bought -- Feinstein and Wilson together had spent $30.5 million in pursuit 
of the governorship. That figure does not count millions more, including nearly 
$4 million by Wilson alone, that was spent in 1989. 
Together with the $5 million spent by Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp in the 
Democratic primary, the major candidates thus had spent more than $35 million 
in 1990 before the final pre-election crunch. 
Until this contest, the most expensive race for California governor was in 
1982, when George Deukmejian and Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley fought in a race 
that cost $25.4 million, including spending by minor candidates. 
"If the country is entering a recession, you would never know it by the amounts 
of money that are being spent," said Herbert Alexander, a USC political science 
professor who studies political financing. 
The current race apparently is the most expensive gubernatorial election in the 
nation in the last few decades, surpassing the $33.5 million spent in 1986 in 
Texas. The only races that might have exceeded that total, when inflation is 
counted in, were the New York governor's contests in which Nelson Rockefeller 
spent millions of dollars, Alexander said. 
All through a long and contentious summer and fall, the Wilson-Feinstein battle 
has shaped up as the closest duel since the last change of power in the 
governor's office in 1982. 
That year, too, the Democratic candidate was aiming at history. But Bradley 
failed in his attempt to become the first elected black governor of the state. 
During much of this general election campaign, Feinstein, the 57-year-old 
former mayor of San Francisco, played down the historic nature of her 
candidacy. But as Election Day approached, she authored pointed reminders. 
"Are you ready to elect the first woman governor in the state?" Feinstein asked 
cheering senior citizens last week at Laguna Hills' Leisure World. 
Feinstein's fond hope was that her gender would personify "change," that 
illusive image that both she and Wilson tried to corral. But Wilson also 
pressed a case that he represented change, if not by gender at least by design. 
He alternated not-too-subtle suggestions that he would be a different sort of 
Republican than conservative George Deukmejian with outright assertions that 
Feinstein would be one of the incumbent capitol crowd. 
"Change is desperately needed," said Wilson, who also is 57. "But you can't 
bring it if you're wedded to the status quo." 
Wilson made heavy use of the status quo in his campaign, benefiting financially 
from repeated campaign visits by President Bush, former President Ronald Reagan 
and Vice President Dan Quayle. 
Both Feinstein and Wilson have presented themselves as more activist than 
Deukmejian, more willing to balance the needs of the state's unfortunates with 
the fiscal imperatives of cost-cutting. She describes herself as "tough and 
caring," while he calls himself the "compassionate conservative." 
Neither, however, has addressed in depth how they would handle a more than 
billion-dollar deficit expected in the next state budget. Feinstein has vowed 
to call a budget summit of interested parties the day after the election, and 
said she would raise taxes on wealthy Californians if need be. 
Wilson opposes any increase in income taxes and demands wholesale budget 
reform. That means all items would be on the table, including education funding 
now guaranteed by 1988's Proposition 98. Feinstein calls the proposition, which 
gives education at least 41% of the state's general fund revenues each year, 
"inviolate." 
Bowing to reality, neither has taken a "no new taxes" vow. While that breaks 
with the past, the other issues in the race have come from the traditional 
campaign playbook. 
The most consistent issue has been crime, and throughout the long campaign the 
candidates have battled back and forth to see which can claim to be toughest. 
Both support the death penalty and both have proposed stiffer sentences for 
drug users and traffickers. 
Feinstein worked the Los Angeles Police Department's slogan -- "to protect and 
to serve" -- into almost all of her campaign speeches, and has proposed a 
return to the indeterminate sentencing system for violent criminals, a move 
that she said would keep dangerous convicts in prison indefinitely. 
She also has been plugging Prop. 133, the ballot initiative sponsored by her 
running mate, Lt. Gov. Leo T. McCarthy, that would pump $7.5 billion into 
anti-drug programs over four years by raising the state sales tax a half-cent. 
Wilson at first said he might vote for the measure, but has since come out 
against it. Like Feinstein, he has called for tougher sentencing laws and said 
California should no longer give inmates time off for good behavior. 
Although he denied he was using it to appeal to women, Wilson emphasized the 
crime of rape throughout the campaign, to the exclusion of other crimes such as 
murder and drive-by shootings. 
Beyond crime and taxes, the campaign also saw a resurgence of candidate 
interest in other basic needs. 
Feinstein rarely appeared in public without fanning support for her "early 
childhood education" program, which would offer schooling to 4-year-olds by 
shifting some of the receipts of the California Lottery. 
Wilson talked regularly of a California with "much longer graduation lines and 
much shorter unemployment lines," although his plans for improving education 
rest largely on voluntary efforts by private citizens. He also touted a 
prenatal care plan that would help provide aid to women not covered by 
insurance. 
Voter initiatives did their part to commandeer the governor's race. In key 
areas, the candidates adopted differing positions on initiatives, which then 
came to eclipse their own programs. 
The furor over term limits is the most recent chasm to divide the candidates. 
Wilson announced his support for Proposition 140, which would limit state 
senators and constitutional officers to eight years of service and assembly 
members to six years. 
Feinstein castigated the initiative, saying its success would leave a neophyte 
Legislature to fend off the assaults of veteran lobbyists and bureaucrats. But 
Wilson contended that it was certainly a way to shake up the Sacramento 
Establishment. The fact that Wilson himself is a career politician did not seem 
to rattle voters. 
Another proposition, the sweeping environmental initiative known to its 
proponents as "Big Green," split the candidates from the primary onward. 
Throughout the campaign, Feinstein, whose loyalties were at first suspect among 
environmentalists, tried to use the initiative to batter a senator who prided 
himself on environmental moderation. 
Both candidates also approached California's burgeoning growth as an 
environmental issue. Feinstein proposed a state growth management commission 
and a series of regional commissions that would regulate growth. She suggested 
that future growth in California could be channeled to less populated areas, 
lured by an enhanced "rail spine" down the center of the state and by tax 
incentives for businesses. 
Wilson blasted Feinstein's plan as unworkable and unwise. Instead, he said, the 
governor's Office of Planning and Research should help plan a concerted attack 
on unbridled growth -- but decisions should rest with the localities. Wilson, 
too, pointed with pride to his role in crafting a growth management plan for 
the swelling city of San Diego. 
Some traditionally important issues merited little note during this campaign 
cycle, at least at the governor's level, because the candidates were in sync. 
Both opposed offshore oil drilling, and that issue was rarely discussed. Both 
supported the death penalty and both said they were advocates of abortion 
rights -- and disputes over who was the stronger advocate of each measure 
seemed not to sway many voters. 
Ultimately, both candidates were speaking of a California whose golden allure 
has been tarnished. However sublimely the message was sent, its focus was clear 
-- that the state is no longer the cutting-edge, visionary place it likes to 
think it is. 
"It's time we turned California around and made it what it can be," Wilson said 
frequently. 
If the candidates for governor were often miffed that their message was lost 
amid national concerns over Mideast tensions and the faltering U.S. economy, 
their complaints were meager compared to those of other statewide candidates. 
For them, campaign 1990 was an exercise in scratching for money and begging for 
attention. 
That was true even in the bitterest of the races -- for state attorney general 
-- where Democrat Arlo Smith and Republican Dan Lungren hold diametrically 
different views on major issues. 
Smith, the 11-year San Francisco district attorney, favors abortion rights and 
said he would go so far as to refuse to defend in court any abortion-limiting 
bills approved by the Legislature. Lungren, a former five-term congressman, 
staunchly opposed abortion and in 1987 co-sponsored a proposed federal 
constitutional amendment which would have outlawed all abortions except when 
the mother's life was threatened. 
Smith also said he would fight offshore oil drilling in court, while Lungren 
said he would support oil drilling on a case-by-case basis. Each vowed to be 
tough on crime, but argued the other's qualifications. 
The race for lieutenant governor also hinged largely on crime, with incumbent 
Democrat McCarthy making his bid for a third term while touting Proposition 
133, the drug-war initiative that he sponsored. McCarthy also tried to separate 
himself from his Republican opponent, state Sen. Marian Bergeson of Newport 
Beach, by stressing his support of abortion rights. 
But Bergeson, an abortion opponent, countered by jabbing McCarthy for his past 
support of abortion restrictions and emphasizing her conservative positions on 
crime. Behind in fund raising and in the polls, however, Bergeson was hoping 
for big coattails from Pete Wilson to help her into office. 
The race for treasurer featured a little-known Republican incumbent and a 
well-known Democrat with the liabilities and assets of a family political 
dynasty. 
Kathleen Brown, the daughter and sister of former governors, skated through the 
Democratic primary, while incumbent Thomas W. Hayes fought off a spirited 
challenge by GOP activist Angela M. (Bay) Buchanan. His campaign treasury was 
left dry, giving Brown the decided edge in late campaign spending. 
The contentious race turned up a surprisingly deep list of differences between 
Brown and Hayes. Brown wanted to speed up the sale of bonds, while Hayes urged 
caution. Brown promised to press for social responsibility in corporations in 
which the state invests; Hayes said government has no place in corporate 
boardrooms. 
While that contest was neck-and-neck in the polls, the race for state 
controller threatened to be an easy ride for Democratic incumbent Gray Davis, 
challenged by Republican Matthew Fong, a first-time office seeker and son of 
four-term Democratic Secretary of State March Fong Eu. 
While mother and son represented different parties and were officially neutral 
in each other's races, attorney Fong took advantage of his lineage. One Fong 
television spot showed what appears to be a family portrait, over which an 
announcer intoned: "A tradition of honesty, competence and commitment." 
Incumbent Davis seized on such issues as protecting the environment and 
abortion rights to depict himself as an activist controller not satisfied with 
merely tending ledgers. A former assemblyman and chief of staff to Gov. Edmund 
G. Brown Jr., the 47-year-old Davis is also a champion campaign fund-raiser and 
easily outdistanced Fong in money raised. 
Fong's mother, incumbent March Fong Eu, spent most of the campaign for 
secretary of state ignoring Republican challenger Joan Milke Flores, but a 
hard-hitting television campaign by Flores has apparently caught Eu's 
attention. 
Flores last month began running a series of ads accusing Eu of waiving 
thousands of dollars in fines against her own campaign committees and against 
some powerful political players. Although independent statewide polls show 
Flores trailing by a large margin, Eu last week began running television ads 
that her campaign consultants a week earlier said would not be necessary. 
In the state's first race for an elected insurance commissioner, Democrat John 
Garamendi, a veteran legislator who recently resigned his state Senate seat, 
was a heavy favorite to defeat Republican Wes Bannister, a Huntington Beach 
insurance agent and former city councilman. 
Garamendi raised 10 times more than Bannister in contributions and dominated 
advertising in the race. The candidates differed on a wide range of issues, 
particularly no-fault insurance, with Bannister favoring it and Garamendi, who 
once sponsored no-fault legislation, against it. 
Less noticed -- though not lacking in controversy -- were the races for seats 
on the State Board of Equalization. Two focused more on criminal allegations 
than the tax issues the board oversees. 
The Democratic candidate in Los Angeles' District 4, Paul Carpenter, has been 
convicted on federal racketeering, extortion and conspiracy charges and is 
awaiting sentencing. The Democratic candidate in Northern California's District 
1, William Bennett, is being investigated by the Sacramento district attorney 
for allegedly cheating on his state travel claims. 
In any other contest the legal issues would probably mean certain victory for a 
challenger. But so little-noticed are these races that Republican candidates 
Joe Adams and Jeff Wallack were struggling just to get the word out about their 
opponents' legal difficulties. 
In District 2, which includes a corner of Los Angeles County, Democrat Brad 
Sherman and Republican Claude Parrish were sending out a flurry of campaign 
materials as they vie for a seat vacated by board Chairman Conway Collis. But 
in District 3, encompassing eight Southern California counties, Republican 
incumbent Ernest J. Dronenburg Jr. is so confident of victory that he is 
spending most of his time campaigning for the other Republican candidates for 
the board. Dronenburg's Democratic opponent is Floyd L. Morrow, a businessman, 
attorney and educator from San Diego. 
Contributing to this story were Times staff writers Virginia Ellis, Paul 
Feldman, Carl Ingram, Dean Murphy, Kenneth Reich and Douglas P. Shuit. 
