HEALTH CLINICS AT HIGH SCHOOLS 
Health clinics are now operating at three Los Angeles high school campuses, and 
evidence is accumulating that their supporters were right and the worst fears 
of their critics were unfounded. 
All three provide general health care and offer birth-control information on 
request. With the necessary permission of their parents, thousands of students 
have made use of the health centers at Jordan High School in Watts, Los Angeles 
High School in the Mid-Wilshire District and San Fernando High School in the 
Valley. Hundreds of students use the privately funded clinics, which have been 
in operation for two years, but few seek contraceptives. 
One statistic that should put the fears of critics to rest is that only 15% 
seek birth-control pills or condoms, according to a report provided recently to 
school board members. Another statistic to cheer those who support the clinics 
is that an impressive 95.5% of those students who do request birth-control 
information do not get pregnant. That pregnancy rate cannot be compared with 
the general school population because overall statistics are not yet available. 
That is encouraging because nearly 1 million teen-agers get pregnant every year 
and teen pregnancy is the leading cause of the failure of young women to finish 
high school. That, in turn, means wretched futures not only for young parents 
but often for their children. There is no simple solution, but certainly 
greater access to birth-control information and contraceptives is an important 
element. 
Most teen-agers use the student clinics for routine medical attention such as 
immunizations, sore throats and earaches. More serious problems are referred to 
county health centers. A significant percentage also seek counseling for 
typical teen-age difficulties with parents and weight, or more serious concerns 
involving gangs, drugs, alcohol -- even suicide attempts. 
One depressing statistic is that nearly 70% of the students come from families 
with no health insurance. They have few options for routine medical care or 
birth-control information. But at least on three campuses, help is now at hand. 
