A CRONY ON THE COURT; 
ABE FORTAS BY LAURA KALMAN (YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS: $29.95; 544 PP., 
ILLUSTRATED) 
When President Lyndon Johnson nominated his close friend and longtime political 
associate Abe Fortas to be Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in 1968, it 
raised a lot of eyebrows in Washington. Fortas had been on the court since 
1965, where he had generally formed a part of the Warren majority on 
civil-rights and constitutional-liberty issues, but his recognition in the 
corridors of the capital was not as a jurist, but as a crony of the President. 
There was no major L.B.J. decision, it was generally agreed, that had not been 
at least discussed -- if not cleared -- with Fortas, whether the presidential 
response to the ghetto riots in Watts, Detroit and Newark, the advisability of 
a bombing pause in Vietnam, or the dispatch of American troops to meet a bogus 
communist threat in the Dominican Republic. 
When Fortas appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee for his confirmation 
hearings, some of the Senators opposed to the nomination wanted to know if this 
practice had continued while Fortas sat on the Supreme Court. 
Fortas denied any contact with the President on a variety of matters, 
statements Prof. Laura Kalman, in this biography of Fortas, flatly calls 
"lies." The pattern of dishonesty, Dr. Kalman says, included denials that 
Fortas ever had recommended a candidate for a judgeship or other public 
position (he was, she says, "among the White House's most fertile sources of 
recruitment advice"). Further, Fortas said he had only had a limited role in 
counseling with respect to the Vietnam war (although perhaps only Secretary of 
Defense Clark Clifford had been more active in advising the President), and 
flatly denied having drafted L.B.J.'s response to the Detroit riots (he had). 
This book is what is called an "authorized" biography. Kalman had access to 
family members and documents, the surviving members of his law firms threw open 
their files, and Carolyn Agger, Fortas' widow, spoke often and freely -- as did 
his many friends (and some "confidential" interviewees who were clearly not 
friends). 
His friends and family must wish now they had not cooperated. Fortas' 
reputation as L.B.J.'s "fixer," first earned when he supplied the legal 
strategy that enabled Senate candidate Johnson to survive charges of ballot and 
electoral fraud in a Texas primary in 1948, stands up in the book. It was 
Fortas who thought to go to Justice Hugo Black, supervising the Fifth Circuit 
(which included Texas), for an order vacating a state court injunction which 
effectively would have kept L.B.J. off the ballot. It was smart law, and it 
proved successful, and Kalman cites a Fortas (and L.B.J.) detractor who thought 
Fortas must have been to see Black first. 
There is plenty of material in this book to make that ugly charge seem, if not 
true, at least in character. One example should suffice. Fortas, according to 
the author, shared L.B.J.'s hatred of Robert Kennedy. Nothing else would have 
justified his behavior, as set forth here, in the curious case of Fred Black 
and J. Edgar Hoover. 
In 1966, the Supreme Court -- on which Fortas sat -- declined to review a 
conviction for income-tax evasion of lobbyist Fred Black. Shortly thereafter, 
however, the Solicitor General advised the court that the FBI, in an unrelated 
criminal investigation, had bugged Black's room at the Mayflower Hotel and 
recorded conversations between Black and his attorney. None of the information 
thus obtained, the memorandum said, had been used to convict Black. 
The court then threw the FBI a nasty curve: It asked the Justice Department to 
file a memorandum giving legal authority for the microphone surveillance. The 
problem (as with other illegal FBI bugs such as those used to record Martin 
Luther King) was that the required authorization of then Attorney General 
Robert Kennedy had not been obtained. 
Hoover, never one to let truth interfere where the reputation of the bureau was 
threatened, tried to get the Department of Justice to say Kennedy knew, or at 
least ought to have known. Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach refused. So 
Hoover, anxious to get President Johnson to overrule Katzenbach, went through 
Fortas. He knew his man; Mr. Justice Fortas, according to Hoover's faithful 
deputy Cartha DeLoach, not only agreed to talk to the FBI about the matter -- 
behavior Kalman calls "clearly improper" -- but he agreed to help cook the 
books against Kennedy. He even confided to the FBI that the court had met on 
the Black case and agreed to hear testimony on the bugging. Fortas offered to 
take the FBI "facts" to President Johnson and persuade him to appoint a special 
arbitrator to hear the evidence and report his "verdict" to the court. 
This extraordinary revelation -- that a sitting Supreme Court Justice connived 
with a government agency to persuade his friend, the President, to appoint an 
arbitrator who would shield the FBI and damage a political opponent by 
providing the court with false information -- is surely the high point of this 
well-researched and insightful book. 
The picture of Fortas that emerges is a strange one. We hear and read of his 
devotion to civil liberties -- sometimes at considerable risk and cost. We read 
of his substantial impact on a whole range of New Deal issues as one of the 
really bright and dedicated young men who came to Washington in the '30s to 
save capitalism and the American Dream through the New Deal. But we also read 
of truly unpleasant behavior, to colleagues and underlings. 
Kalman's book is not quite a chronicle of a typical Washington life. There is 
success here, and achievement, and the smell of power. But at nearly every 
stage of his life, Abe Fortas seems to have been, as the British say, "too 
clever by half," and it did him in. 
Even in Washington, the driven capital, integrity seems to matter. 
