LOUISVILLE IS SET TO FACE SEC FOE; 
FIESTA BOWL: TEMPE, ARIZ., WILL REMAIN THE SITE FOR THE GAME. THE HALFTIME SHOW 
MIGHT HAVE A CIVIL RIGHTS THEME TO ALLAY CONTROVERSY OVER KING HOLIDAY. 
Barring any more last-minute surprises, 20th-ranked Louisville will play one of 
three Southeastern Conference teams -- Tennessee, Alabama or Auburn -- in the 
Fiesta Bowl at Arizona State's Sun Devil Stadium. 
An official announcement is expected today, but bowl sources said Monday that 
Louisville, which finished the season 9-1-1, has agreed to accept the Fiesta 
invitation. The situation with the remaining bid is slightly more complicated. 
Here are the conditions: 
 -- If Mississippi wins the SEC title and the automatic Sugar Bowl bid, then 
the Fiesta selection committee will choose between Tennessee or the 
Auburn-Alabama winner. 
 -- If Tennessee wins the SEC championship, then the Fiesta will choose the 
Auburn-Alabama winner. 
 -- If Auburn or Alabama wins the SEC title, then the Fiesta would offer 
Tennessee the bid. 
Only three days ago, embattled Fiesta Bowl officials were seriously discussing 
canceling this season's game. At issue was the failed referendum calling for an 
Arizona state holiday honoring Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Because of the vote, 
much-wanted schools such as Virginia declined to play in the Tempe-based bowl. 
And only two days ago, Fiesta officials spent their entire Sunday calling at 
least a dozen teams, probably more, in search of two programs that would be 
willing to accept a bid. The Fiesta offered its estimated payout of $2.5 
million and assurances that significant efforts were under way to diffuse the 
King situation. 
Among the possibilities is a halftime show that would feature a civil rights 
theme. NBC, the network responsible for the broadcast, has indicated to Fiesta 
organizers that it might consider enlisting the help of some of its 
entertainers. Also being discussed is an additional $200,000 fee paid to the 
participating universities. The money would be earmarked for a school's 
minority affairs program or minority scholarship fund. 
For Louisville, the Fiesta invitation marks the first time since 1977 the 
Cardinals will play in a bowl game. Coach Howard Schnellenberger called each of 
his team's 24 seniors at 6:30 a.m. Monday and met with them an hour later. 
Later that day, after talks involving Schnellenberger, university President 
Donald Swain and Athletic Director Bill Olsen, the bid was accepted. 
Meanwhile, the presidents of Tennessee, Auburn and Alabama, were gathering 
information regarding the Fiesta Bowl. Satisfied with the Fiesta's efforts and 
intent, approval was given to play in the New Year's Day game. 
Should the alliance somehow fall apart, the Fiesta also has talked to Baylor 
and North Carolina. The Fiesta made a brief run at Colorado State, but Colorado 
State decided Monday to stay with the Freedom Bowl, which said it will invite 
the Western Athletic Conference school. 
The effects of the Fiesta's actions were immediately felt. Southern Mississippi 
will probably take Louisville's place in the All-American Bowl. North Carolina 
could take Southern Mississippi's spot in the Independence Bowl. 
The SEC deal leaves Mississippi, if it doesn't win the conference title, to 
play in the Gator or Peach bowl. The Gator would get first choice between the 
Rebels or the Auburn-Alabama loser. 
