FIRE RAVAGES UNIVERSAL STUDIOS' BACK LOT 
A spectacular fire ravaged Universal Studios' back lot Tuesday night, forcing 
authorities to evacuate restaurants and theaters on the grounds and to 
temporarily close entrances where Republican Party faithful were trying to get 
to the Universal City Hilton for election-night celebrations. 
Tour groups and about 200 studio employees were still on the lot when the fire 
broke out about 7:15 p.m., but no injuries to civilians or firefighters were 
reported. 
There was no immediate estimate of damage, but the loss was expected to be in 
the millions of dollars. 
Lew Wasserman, chairman of MCA, Universal Studios' parent company, said he was 
"talking to our people every 15 minutes. We won't know how serious it is until 
they knock the fire down." 
More than 400 Los Angeles city and county firefighters, assisted by 
water-dropping helicopters, contained the blaze about 10 p.m. 
The cause of the fire was under investigation. 
The blaze destroyed sets known as New York Street; an adjacent alley scene; 
Brownstone Street; Courthouse Square, where "Back to the Future" was filmed; 
the Dick Tracy Building, where that hit movie was made, and the set where "Ben 
Hur" was filmed, said county Fire Inspector Jim Gandee. 
The most intense flames were in the set facades, which Gandee described as 
"just like kindling." 
The fire also heavily damaged the King Kong exhibit on the Universal Studios 
tour and the tour's Earthquake exhibit, fire officials said, but firefighters 
saved the studio's film archives. 
"There were no sound stages lost, but we lost a lot of sets," said county fire 
Battalion Chief P. Michael Freeman. "We had a firestorm in there. The fire was 
whirling with the wind. It was blowing through the whole back lot with . . . 
gusts up to 50 m.p.h. 
Studio officials, however, said damage to tour attractions was "minor" and the 
facility will be open today. 
It was not known how the fire might affect the proposed $8-billion purchase of 
Universal and MCA Inc., by Japan's Matsushita Electric Industries Corp., also 
known as Panasonic. The studio and other facilities are worth an estimated $500 
million. 
Traffic on the nearby Hollywood Freeway and area streets was snarled for hours 
after the fire erupted as police closed streets, temporarily keeping hundreds 
of GOP supporters away from their election-night headquarters. 
Hundreds of onlookers lined Barham Boulevard, which runs alongside the 
Universal property, to watch the flames. Emergency vehicles trying to get to 
the fire also were caught in the snarl. 
Gusty Santa Ana winds cleared skies over Los Angeles on Tuesday, making a 
column of smoke from the studio blaze visible in Northridge 10 miles away. 
Flames shooting as high as 150 feet into the night sky provided a dazzling 
light show for motorists on the Hollywood and Ventura freeways. 
The fire began in a warehouse-type building, then quickly spread on gusty winds 
to at least two other structures and to dry brush on nearby hillsides, Los 
Angeles Police Sgt. Richard Thomas said. 
The flames raged over a four-acre area, forcing the evacuation of an 
undetermined number of tourists and about 200 employees before it was 
contained, Thomas said. 
A witness who declined to be identified told reporters he was at the top of the 
hill near an office building and was looking down on the set of "Oscar," the 
new Sylvester Stallone movie, when he saw the fire start. "There was a little 
flame that just started spiraling straight up the hill," he said. "The wind was 
blowing so hard that it just shot up the hill. I can tell you there is a lot of 
damage. It's a multimillion-dollar fire." 
One man employed on "Oscar," a John Landis production, said he walked onto the 
set while firefighters were putting out the last embers. "That New York set is 
gone," said the man, who asked not to be identified. "We left 40 cars out 
there, antique automobiles, and they're gone. The whole thing is leveled. It 
was a beautiful set, too." 
Half a dozen fire helicopters flew within 100 feet of the fire and dropped 
water on the blaze through wind-driven smoke that billowed as high as 4,000 
feet. 
Near the Universal City Hilton, where the GOP's election-night party was being 
held, a huge traffic jam limited access, forcing Republican attorney general 
candidate Dan Lungren and his wife, Bobi, to walk up a hill from Lankershim 
Boulevard to the hotel. 
Secretary of state candidate Joan Milke Flores said her driver went the wrong 
way down a one-way street in order to reach the hotel. Others already in the 
hotel watched the flames with an air of incredulity. 
GOP gubernatorial candidate Pete Wilson told the crowd at the hotel that 
snarled traffic because of the fire had made it "very difficult for people to 
gain entry, so you'll have to be very careful and probably a little patient as 
you depart. But let me just say this. Our good wishes and our thanks go to 
those firefighters. Please be very cooperative with them." 
Vehicle access to the hotel was restored shortly after 8 p.m. 
In the 23rd-floor suite of state controller candidate Matt Fong, guests 
listened to Chinese musician Li Guang-Zu play a violin-type instrument called 
the pi-pa as the fire raged in their view beyond the windows. 
One Fong supporter, John Woo, a South Pasadena real estate developer, asked: 
"Is it a real fire? I thought it was movie-making. You know, this is still 
Universal Studios." 
Glendale High School's band and cheerleaders were stuck in traffic on their bus 
for 20 minutes before finally getting into the hotel. 
"We were stopped out there on Lankershim in the left turn lane," said one 
student, Dolly McDonald, 18. "The fire was huge. We were afraid we were going 
to have to go home." 
In 1987, fire destroyed the three-story "Spartacus" set and three other 
buildings at Universal. 
Times staff writers Frank Clifford, Michael Connelly, Paul Feldman, Andrea 
Ford, Nieson Himmel, John Kendall, John H. Lee, Patt Morrison, Bob Pool and 
Richard A. Serrano contributed to this story. 
