CHARGER NOTEBOOK / BOB WOLF; 
RAIDER GAME TO BE SHOWN ON LOCAL TV 
For the first time in two years, the Chargers have sold out a home game without 
outside help. 
Jack Teele, the Chargers' director of administration, Wednesday declared a 
sellout for Sunday's game against the Raiders at 5 p.m. at San Diego Jack 
Murphy Stadium. As a result, the game will be shown locally both on ESPN (which 
is carrying it nationally) and Ch. 10. 
The blackout also was lifted a year ago for the Sunday night game against the 
Raiders, but only after ESPN, Ch. 10 and Cox Cable bought remaining tickets 
before the deadline (72 hours before kickoff). 
"We just have singles and a few pairs left, so it's essentially a sellout," 
Teele said. "We'll distribute over 59,000 tickets. Capacity is over 60,000 
(60,750), but the bleacher seats added after the baseball season don't count. 
Neither do the obstructed-view seats or the ones at the east end near the 
scoreboard." 
The last time the Chargers met the blackout deadline on their own was Nov. 29, 
1987, for a game against Denver. They also sold out the Raider game two weeks 
before. 
"Our win last week over a competitive team (the Philadelphia Eagles) and the 
Raiders' recent success have been key factors," Teele said. "And, of course, 
the rivalry with the Raiders. We've sold about 6,000 tickets since Sunday's 
game." 
The agent of quarterback Jim McMahon, Steve Zucker, didn't enhance his 
popularity in the Chargers' locker room with a remark he made last Sunday about 
their offensive line. 
Not only that, Zucker probably cost himself a new client. 
After the Chargers' 20-17 victory over the Eagles, Zucker demeaned the men 
charged with protecting McMahon. 
Said Zucker: "I really think Jim's playing well, especially considering that 
line in front of him. I mean, look at it. You won't hear it from him, but how 
can you get anything done with that line?" 
When tackle Brett Miller read Zucker's words, he said, "He was interested in 
representing me, but after that comment, he can . . . " 
Miller added, "Agents are a bunch of leeches, anyway. The majority of them are. 
They milk you for what they can get and wait for the next guy." 
Larry Beightol, who coaches the offensive line in addition to serving as 
offensive coordinator, said, "(Zucker) doesn't know whether the ball is blown 
up or stuffed," 
Of the linemen he coaches, Beightol said, "They're getting better each week. 
They're not ready for the Hall of Fame, but I've never had a group work harder 
to get things done." 
Cornerback Sammy Seale is confident of avoiding a rerun of his disastrous 
season opener, in which Willie Gault burned him for four catches totaling 131 
yards and a touchdown in the Raiders' 40-14 victory at the Coliseum. 
"I tried to do it by myself that day," Seale said. "I tried to be Superman, and 
I'm not Superman. I'm going in with a more realistic attitude this time." 
Charger Notes 
H-back Rod Bernstine is expected to miss his fifth game in a row because of a 
sprained knee. He didn't practice Wednesday, and Coach Dan Henning said, "I 
don't think there's a real good chance he'll play." He was listed as 
questionable on the Chargers' injury report for Sunday night's game against the 
Raiders. So were offensive tackle Brett Miller (knee) and defensive end Lee 
Williams (thigh), but Henning said they probably would play. . . . Running back 
Darrin Nelson (hamstring) was listed as probable, but Henning said, "If he goes 
hard tomorrow and pulls the muscle again, he'll be back in the same boat." . . 
. The Raiders listed quarterback Steve Beuerlein (neck) and linebacker Jerry 
Robinson (head) as questionable and safety Eddie Anderson (hamstring) and guard 
Steve Wisniewski (back) as probable. Regardless of whether Beuerlein is ready, 
Jay Schroeder will start. 
