CONGRESS: 35TH DISTRICT; 
QUESTIONNAIRES WERE DISTRIBUTED TO CANDIDATES THIS MONTH. ANSWERS HAVE BEEN 
EDITED TO FIT THE AVAILABLE SPACE. 
Mideast Crisis 
Q. Do you generally support President Bush's handling of the Mideast crisis 
precipitated by Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait? Briefly 
explain any differences you have with Bush's actions. 
Johnson: No. I believe in a neutral foreign policy. 
Ultimate Goal 
Q. Should the ultimate goal of the United States be to force Iraq to withdraw 
from Kuwait? Or should it be to remove Hussein from power or at least greatly 
reduce his military capacity, either through war or negotiations? 
Johnson: No. Same as above. 
Weapons Sale 
Q. Do you support the Bush Administration's proposal to sell billions of 
dollars' worth of additional weapons, including F-15 fighters, TOW missiles and 
Apache helicopters, to Saudi Arabia? 
Johnson: No. The United States should control these weapons. 
Deficit Reduction 
Q. President Bush and congressional leaders recently agreed to a compromise 
package of tax increases and spending cuts designed to reduce the federal 
budget deficit by $40 billion this fiscal year and $500 billion over the next 
five years. This deal, if it gains final congressional approval, would increase 
taxes on gasoline, cigarettes and alcohol; raise Medicare premiums; impose a 
new tax on luxury goods, and reduce itemized deductions that can be taken by 
taxpayers with incomes over $100,000. Do you support his plan? If no, why not? 
What specific actions would you support to cut the federal budget deficit? 
Johnson: No. Spending should be cut, specifically in the area of military and 
economic aid to foreign countries. 
Campaign Spending 
Q. Do you support efforts to restrict campaign spending and reduce the amount 
of contributions that can be made by special-interest groups? 
Johnson: No. People should be free to spend as much or little as they desire. 
Capital Punishment 
Q. Do you support capital punishment? If so, do you think it should be imposed 
on those convicted of importing or selling drugs? 
Johnson: Yes, I support capital punishment, but not for drug dealers. 
Abortion 
Q. Do you support a woman's unrestricted right to an abortion within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
Johnson: Yes. 
Abortion Funding 
Q. Do you support federal funding of abortions for women who cannot afford 
them? 
Johnson: No. 
Unpaid Leave 
Q. President Bush in July vetoed legislation that would have required 
businesses employing at least 50 people to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid 
leave per year for childbirth, adoption or serious illness to employees or 
immediate family members. Do you favor this or similar legislation? 
Johnson: No. Private employers have a right to make their own decisions. 
Oil Exploration 
Q. Do you think the present Mideast crisis justifies opening up additional 
parts of the California coastline to oil exploration? 
Johnson: No. Private property rights justify oil exploration in California, 
however. 
Assault Rifle Ban 
Q. Do you favor extending President Bush's ban on the import of semiautomatic 
assault rifles to the domestic production of such weapons? 
Johnson: No. 
Arts Support 
Q. Do you think the federal government should continue to support the arts 
through the NEA? 
Johnson: No. Let the "arts" sink or swim on their own. 
Anti-Crime Legislation 
Q. Do you support anti-crime legislation passed by the Senate in July that 
would re-establish the federal death penalty, limit Death Row inmates' appeals 
and relax the exclusionary rule that prohibits the use of illegally seized 
evidence in criminal trials? 
Johnson: No. 
Immigration Reform 
Q. Do you support immigration reform that would increase the number of visas 
allowed for family members of those who are already in the United States, as 
well as for skilled workers? 
Johnson: Yes. 
Reducing Drug Use 
Q. Do you believe our present strategy of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies, and imprisonment of users and dealers is significantly reducing the 
level of drug use in the United States? If no, what should be done? 
Johnson: No. Decriminalize drugs. 
Congressional District 35 
The predominantly Republican district includes the Antelope Valley communities 
of Palmdale, Hi-Vista, Wilsona and Redman in Los Angeles County. It also covers 
most of San Bernardino County. 
CONTENDERS 
Jerry Lewis, 56, a Republican from Redlands, was elected to Congress in 1978. 
Before that, he served 10 years in the Assembly and was a member of the San 
Bernardino School Board. He declined to respond to The Times' questionnaire. 
Barry Norton, the Democratic challenger, is a businessman from Montclair. He 
did not respond to The Times' questionnaire. 
Jerry Johnson, the Libertarian candidate, is a data processing coordinator from 
Redlands. 
