STUDENT LEADERS CONFRONT TOUGHEST TEEN HURDLES; 
SELF-ESTEEM: EUNICE KENNEDY SHRIVER'S FOUNDATION HELPS HUNTINGTON BEACH 
DISTRICT FASHION YOUNG ROLE MODELS. 
Nathan Hashbarger was not thinking about drugs or the problem of teen 
pregnancies when he arrived at the school district's headquarters for a meeting 
early Thursday morning. 
But Hashbarger, 13-year-old student body vice president at Isaac L. Sowers 
Middle School in Huntington Beach, and two dozen other middle school students 
were shortly to confront those issues and other difficult questions. 
They started by meeting Eunice Kennedy Shriver, sister of President John F. 
Kennedy. They then were whisked off to a daylong workshop aimed at improving 
each student's sense of self-worth as a way of grappling with tough teen 
problems. 
Shriver, after an accidental encounter with Huntington Beach City School 
District Supt. Diana Peters at a January statewide superintendents' conference 
in Monterey, offered to help set up a self-esteem program in Huntington Beach 
through the Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Foundation. 
The temptations of drugs and sex for young people can be overcome only through 
a healthy sense of self-esteem, said Shriver, who is well known for her work on 
mental retardation and for the Special Olympics. 
The foundation is picking up the $6,000 tab to get the Community of Caring 
program started. The Long Beach Unified School District is the only other 
school system in the area to have such a program. 
After attending initial workshops, teachers and students will develop 
activities to carry back to the classroom. 
Hashbarger and the other students who attended workshops Wednesday and Thursday 
are not problem children. They will become role models to others later, back at 
their home schools. 
Shriver mingled with about 100 guests, including program co-sponsors from the 
Huntington Beach Chamber of Commerce, over coffee, juice and rolls before 
Thursday's workshop. 
In an interview, Shriver said the Kennedy Foundation started the program after 
finding that teen-age mothers give birth to more retarded children, 
proportionally, than do adult mothers. 
"We were in the business of trying to prevent retardation, and there was 
evidence that some parents of retarded children lack parenting skills -- they 
don't take care of their own health, getting into drug abuse and alcohol, and 
so the health of the fetus becomes impaired. 
"It became clear that giving young mothers and fathers a sense of values and 
responsibility in order to make choices was something we needed to do. 
"We don't inflict any values," Shriver said, "but we ask the participants to 
examine their own values and see how they apply to difficult situations." 
Some of the students did not fully appreciate who Shriver is. So Robert E. 
Anastasi, a former school principal from Maryland who directs the Community of 
Caring program for the Kennedy Foundation, told them that Shriver is the 
mother-in-law of actor-muscleman Arnold Schwartzenegger and mother of TV news 
anchor Maria Shriver -- in that order. There was instant recognition and 
applause. 
In one of several videotapes shown during the day to challenge the students to 
be critical thinkers, two teen-agers were shown arguing about sex. The boy is 
pressuring his girlfriend to sleep with him, using arguments such as "If you 
really loved me . . ." and "You can't get pregnant the first time anyway." The 
girl's mother refuses to talk about sex. 
Hashbarger was in a group of two girls who, by the expressions on their faces, 
were obviously skittish. 
"I guess," one girl said when asked whether she would feel comfortable asking 
her mother or a trusted teacher about sex. 
Asked whether he has heard any "smoothies" in the videotape that he would use 
on girls, Hashbarger replied: "If you really love me." 
Breaking up with a boy who is too insistent "isn't very easy if you're going 
with somebody," said Shelley Caplan, a student at Ethel Dwyer Middle School. 
Hashbarger said, "What this program is striving for is getting people to talk 
and plan, and not to deal only with the moment." 
Nervously fingering a ring she had removed, Caplan said: "Yeah, he (the boy in 
the videotape) should think about the future. . . . They should talk to each 
other and decide whether they're ready to have a family." 
There was no happy ending. Restarting the videotape, the students saw that the 
girl gets pregnant and her boyfriend splits. 
"Hsss!" "Boo!" said the kids. 
