3 EX-POLICEMEN BLOW WHISTLE ON ALLEGED SOUTH AFRICA DEATH SQUAD; 
APARTHEID: FORMER OFFICERS CLAIM THEY WERE PART OF A TEAM INVOLVED IN KILLING 
CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVISTS. POLICE DENY SUCH SQUADS EXISTED -- BUT IF THEY DID, 
'THEY WERE ROGUE UNITS.' 
It wasn't until the months of waiting on Death Row had dwindled to hours that 
former policeman Almond Nofomela began to panic. His former superiors had 
promised to win him a reprieve. But there he sat in Pretoria Central Prison, 
only a day away from the gallows -- and a dirty secret about the police was 
about to die with him. 
Nofomela felt the chill of betrayal when two police officers visited and 
"informed me that I should take the pain." 
That's when Nofomela began to talk. 
Now the desperate allegations of that condemned man have begun to pull back the 
curtain on a mysterious and sordid part of South Africa's past, implicating for 
the first time a top-secret police unit in some of the dozens of unsolved 
murders of anti-apartheid activists. 
Nofomela, who is black, a second black ex-policeman and their white captain 
have admitted being part of a formal political hit squad, operating under the 
command of generals in the South African police, that assassinated government 
opponents both here and abroad. 
Among the squad's alleged victims were white activist Ruth First, killed by a 
parcel bomb in neighboring Mozambique in 1982, and black civil rights lawyer 
Griffiths Mxenge, abducted and stabbed to death in Durban in 1981. 
Nofomela's detailed affidavits describe several brutal assassinations, by 
knives, poison and silencer-equipped pistols, from 1981 until 1986. All victims 
were men and women the police suspected of being members of the outlawed 
African National Congress. 
Much of Nofomela's account was corroborated last week by the published 
statements of his former superior officer, Capt. Dirk Johannes Coetzee, who 
left the force in 1986. 
"My men and I killed and eliminated political enemies of the government," 
Coetzee, 44, told Vrye Weekblad (Free Weekly), a respected Afrikaans-language 
newspaper, last week after fleeing the country for the island of Mauritius and 
then Europe. "I never hesitated to carry out an order. I thought, 'There are 
people who want to take this land, and they must be killed.' " 
Coetzee, saying he now is troubled by his conscience, has identified a dozen 
ranking officers of the police force, including a current police general, who 
knew about or participated in the squad's missions. 
Maj. Gen. Herman Stadler, a senior police spokesman, denies the existence of 
any official hit squads in the national police force. If such squads existed, 
he said, they were rogue units, operating on their own, and any police officer 
who has "taken the law into his own hands . . . will have to be punished." 
But anti-apartheid leaders, long suspicious of the lack of arrests made by 
police in attacks on government opponents and their property, say the 
allegations by Nofomela and Coetzee, as well as other new evidence, point to 
high-level police involvement. 
"This was done in an organized way, and it goes all the way to the top (of the 
police force)," said a member of a panel of anti-apartheid leaders who is 
familiar with the growing body of evidence gathered by human rights lawyers. 
The group, formed to investigate increasing attacks on political activists, has 
collected Nofomela's affidavits and evidence from the inmate's home, including 
false passports, photographs of alleged hit squad victims and ammunition. 
The police have launched their own investigation, directed by the chief public 
prosecutor in the Orange Free State and police Lt. Gen. Alwyn Conradie. But 
Coetzee claims officers have been destroying evidence at police headquarters, 
including internal log books, and he says officers in the unit have been told 
to deny everything. 
Many community leaders have demanded an independent inquiry into the charges. 
Even the Citizen, a pro-government daily newspaper, called Monday for a 
judicial probe "to put the public's mind at rest." 
Nofomela, 32, sentenced to death for murdering a white farmer while on a 
month's leave from the force in 1987, has won a temporary stay of execution 
while the investigation continues. A second black member of the unit, David 
Tshikalange, confirmed Nofomela's account before leaving the country. Capt. 
Coetzee is in hiding in Europe. 
More than 100 anti-government activists have been murdered in the past 15 
years, about half of them inside South Africa, according to human rights 
groups. In only one case has anyone been charged. Dozens of other activists 
have disappeared, many after being taken into custody by the authorities. 
The government usually attributes the killings of ANC operatives to internal 
ANC power struggles. Incidents inside the country are often blamed on shadowy 
groups of white supremacists. Coetzee, in his interview with Vrye Weekblad, 
admitted that he directed a team of black policemen, known as "Askaris" or the 
"A-team," who worked from a secret headquarters at Vlakplaas, a farm near 
Pretoria. 
They abducted ANC operatives inside and outside South Africa and, during hours 
of interrogation, attempted to "turn" them into anti-terrorist police officers. 
Those they couldn't "turn," Coetzee said, were often killed, their bodies 
burned. On occasion, he said, he and his men received orders from senior 
officers in Pretoria to carry out assassinations. 
Police have acknowledged the existence of the anti-terrorism unit at Vlakplaas, 
but they deny it was ever used to assassinate government opponents. Stadler, 
the police spokesman, said Vlakplaas is home base for former ANC guerrillas who 
are now "proud South African policemen." He added police were "perturbed" that 
Coetzee had put the lives of those officers in jeopardy by identifying the 
farm. 
The most damning allegations made by Coetzee and Nofomela concern the death 
eight years ago of Griffiths Mxenge, a prominent civil rights lawyer who was 
stabbed 45 times and had his throat cut. 
Mxenge's wife, Victoria, also a lawyer, vowed to bring the killers to justice. 
But in 1985 she was shot in front of her home by four black men who chased her 
to the front door and finished the job with an ax. No one was arrested in 
either case, although a witness later testified in an unrelated court case that 
Mrs. Mxenge's assailants included a police sergeant. 
In his affidavits, Nofomela says Brig. Willem Schoon and Capt. Coetzee ordered 
him and three other black policemen in 1981 to "eliminate" Mxenge, whom the 
police suspected of handling the financial affairs for the outlawed ANC. 
Coetzee "instructed us specifically not to shoot Mxenge, but to kill him with a 
knife." 
Nofomela and his three colleagues parked their truck in the middle of a road 
near Mxenge's home and put the hood up. Mxenge, driving a white Audi, pulled up 
behind the men and "asked whether he could help us," Nofomela said. "I 
approached the car and said, 'Yes, please.' He then switched off his ignition 
and I produced my firearm." 
The men drove Mxenge to an empty stadium and ordered him out of the car. 
"We started assaulting him with kicks and punches, until he fell to the ground. 
We then all stabbed him several times. He immediately died, and we carried on 
butchering his body," Nofomela said. Obeying Coetzee's instructions, they 
removed Mxenge's watch and billfold "to simulate a robbery." 
The radio-tape player was removed from Mxenge's car, which was driven to the 
Swaziland border and burned in a field. The radio was later installed in Brig. 
Schoon's police vehicle, according to Nofomela's statement. 
The next day, Coetzee handed each of the four men 1,000 rand, about $400, which 
he said was from Schoon "for successfully eliminating Mxenge." (Schoon retired 
from the police force three weeks ago at age 55.) 
Nofomela said he participated in eight other assassinations, including killings 
in neighboring Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, and many kidnapings during his 
stint in the unit. 
In his interview with Vrye Weekblad, Coetzee admitted ordering Nofomela and his 
colleagues to murder Mxenge and make it look like a robbery. He also 
acknowledged paying them each a 1,000-rand bonus "for their good work." 
Coetzee also claimed that: 
His unit broke into the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in 
Mbabane, Swaziland, and stole files, telexes and a variety of envelopes bearing 
the commission emblem. One of those envelopes was later used to hide the parcel 
bomb that was mailed to Maputo, Mozambique, and killed activists Ruth First, 
wife of South African Communist Party General Secretary Joe Slovo, a senior 
member of the ANC in exile. (First's life with her daughter was the subject of 
the film, "A World Apart.") 
He and other officers used a sleeping potion developed by the police forensics 
lab to drug two suspected ANC members and then shot them in the head with a 
9-millimeter Makarov pistol equipped with a silencer, burned the bodies and 
tossed the ashes into a river. 
A bomb used to blow up the ANC offices in London in 1982 was smuggled into 
Britain in the South African Embassy's diplomatic pouch. 
Police Maj. Gen. Stadler has portrayed the claims as the "wild and untested 
allegations" of a Death Row inmate trying to save his life and a disgruntled 
white police officer who was suspended from the force. 
Coetzee, who suffers from diabetes, was allowed to retire early and keep his 
rank after his conviction at a departmental hearing on charges of sending a 
telephone-tapping report to political opponents of the government and asking a 
fellow officer to help him bring $150,000 illegally into the country. 
Coetzee told Vrye Weekblad that he decided to leave the country and admit his 
role in the police hit squad because "I have no future in South Africa. I owe 
it to my wife and children to begin a new life." 
For his role in the assassinations and bombings, he said, "I think of myself 
with contempt." 
