SPORTSCOPE: SAN PEDRO TEAM TO COMPETE IN SOCCER CHAMPIONSHIPS 
The Young Guns of San Pedro, an American Youth Soccer Organization team for 
boys ages 14-15, will compete in the AYSO Sectional Championships Nov. 10 in 
Redlands. 
The team advanced to the playoffs by winning the South Bay area championship 
with an 11-1 record. 
The South Bay area is made up of 12 teams from Torrance, Rolling Hills, San 
Pedro and the entire Palos Verdes Peninsula region. Players on the Young Guns 
are Sean Jose Perez, David Suarez, Richard Cooper, Thomas Martinovich, Anthony 
Crovello, Kevin Spangler, Stacy Martin, Daniel Kordich, Kevin Bryant, Chris 
Barley, Robbie Bryant, Cesar Salazar, Bob Elliott and David Barley. The team is 
coached by Gabriel Perez, Robert Elliott and Ante Martinovich. The team mother 
is Patricia Spangler. Perez, Cooper, Martin, Kordich, Bryant and Barley have 
been chosen to the regional all-star team. 
Torrance United, a club soccer team for boys under age 15, finished second at 
the recent Pinewood Cup tournament in London, England. The team, which won four 
of its five matches, is coached by Roy Janes. 
A team of tennis players from Torrance advanced to the second round before 
being eliminated in the U.S. Tennis Assn. Volvo Tennis League 5.0 National 
Championship Oct. 11-14 in San Antonio, Tex. The Team from Torrance was made up 
of Denise Delgado, Tracey Palmieri, Stacey Chapman, Judy Schultz and Thea Vota. 
The Dojo Young Forrest Demonstration Team, a martial arts program sponsored by 
the city of Inglewood, is accepting applications from new students. The team 
trains at Rogers Park three times a week. The cost is $50 a month for residents 
and $5 more for nonresidents. Information: (213) 412-5508. 
Greg Browning, an amateur surfing competitor from Manhattan Beach, is in Brazil 
this month on a cultural exchange program. Browning, 16, is one of 19 members 
of the National Scholastic Surfing Assn. National Team visiting Florianapolis 
to train and compete. He attends Redondo Union High School. 
The final month of CRA sprint car racing begins Saturday night at 8 at Ascot 
Raceway in Gardena. Friday night offers CMC Motocross at 7:30. Information: 
(213) 321-5321. 
