SOCIAL TREMORS STILL SHAKING S.F.'S SOUTH OF MARKET AREA; 
EARTHQUAKE: THE CITY'S SECOND-MOST-AFFECTED DISTRICT HAS BEEN ALL BUT FORGOTTEN 
IN THE DISASTER'S AFTERMATH. 
Market Street divides a corner of San Francisco into different worlds. One is 
the prosperous financial district, largely untouched by the earthquake; the 
other is South of Market. 
An intriguing mix of old and new, shabby and chic, South of Market is little 
known by outsiders. And in the days since the Oct. 17 disaster, it has been all 
but forgotten even here although it was one of the areas hardest hit. 
South of Market, where warehouses, residential hotels and wholesalers in recent 
years have been joined by fashionable restaurants, offices and artists' 
studios, was the second-deadliest place during the quake. 
Five people died under a torrent of bricks when the 15-second upheaval wrenched 
off the top of a four-story building and sent it tumbling onto a narrow street. 
Only the Nimitz Freeway collapse in Oakland, with 41 known deaths, claimed more 
lives. 
As for damage, "South of Market is the second-most-affected area of San 
Francisco," said Michelle Pla, spokeswoman for the city's Bureau of Building 
Inspection. Pla said dozens of buildings were "red-tagged" as unsafe. 
The most affected city district was the Marina, an affluent neighborhood where 
entire apartment buildings crumpled and burned. 
"Everyone feels sorry for the people in the Marina," said Eric Pryor, whose 
South of Market residential hotel was red-tagged. "But the people here are also 
victims of what I call the social disaster in the city -- the real victims." 
For some of the most unfortunate of the neighborhood's displaced, the quake 
also took their jobs. Goodwill Industries was forced to lay off about 150 
people after incurring $2 million in property damage and $3 million in 
equipment damage at its 83-year-old headquarters. 
"We've laid off the disabled, the disadvantaged -- the working poor, South of 
Market people that we serve with our rehabilitation, job training and 
placement," said Goodwill spokeswoman Charleen Harty. 
"A lot of them live in the area. . . . They now stand to lose jobs and homes in 
one shot. Some of them aren't English-speaking or have hearing or vision loss. 
They cannot go through the normal channels to get help," she said. 
City and relief officials had no count of South of Market residents made at 
least temporarily homeless. For many, a traumatic time has been made worse by 
being moved to different shelters. 
"There's a certain amount of confusion to being in one place for only a couple 
of days, then have to go (to) the next place and the next. It makes things even 
more difficult," said Michael Robb, a registered nurse working in the mental 
health center of a Red Cross shelter. 
The shelter, one of several in the city, started out at the Convention Center. 
Then single men were moved to a Navy helicopter carrier, then to a large 
building a few blocks from City Hall. Women and families were moved to the 
Presidio, an Army base. 
Although its residents differ from those of the Marina, South of Market is like 
that neighborhood in that areas most devastated are built on fill -- rubble, 
mud and sand extending the original shoreline into San Francisco Bay. 
South of Market was hard hit also because many of its buildings are decades 
old, often unreinforced. One historic warehouse facing possible demolition 
dates to 1867. 
In some places, narrow buildings lean slightly and the top lines of broader 
structures appear to wave, following the buckling of the street and soft earth 
below. Others show little or no damage from the outside but are blocked off by 
yellow plastic tape and a warning on the front door. 
"A lot of these buildings look OK, but go inside and step on some of the 
floors, and I'd be surprised if you don't fall through," Pryor said. 
South of Market's wholesale sellers of every product from flowers to expensive 
furniture, its discount clothing outlets and its restaurants and bars were 
mostly spared serious damage. 
Still, there is a decline in traffic, affecting "mostly the service industries 
that depend on walk-in business -- retail, restaurant, car repairs," said 
Patrice McCarthy, spokeswoman for the South of Market Business Assn. 
