HOTEL LA PALMA; 
HAPPY ENDINGS: A GROUP OF DAY LABORERS HAS REASON TO CELEBRATE THANKSGIVING 
WHEN A GOOD SAMARITAN ARRIVES WITH A HOLIDAY MEAL. 
Thanksgiving Day began inauspiciously for the men of "Hotel La Palma," the day 
laborer camp under a palm tree on the concrete bed of the Los Angeles River in 
Canoga Park. But in the end they got their turkey dinner. 
By 7 a.m., the 40 to 50 Mexican men who live at La Palma had rolled out of 
their one tent and the nylon covers that shelter many of them at night and were 
on nearby street corners, looking for work. 
As they had expected, hardly anyone wanted day laborers on a holiday. By 10 
a.m., about a dozen had made their way back to the camp and prepared to pick up 
a turkey they thought was waiting for them at El Centro de Guadalupe church on 
Hart Street a few blocks away. 
Five of them -- the man nicknamed "Camel" and Lino Flores and three others -- 
volunteered for the bird hunt. 
The night before, Rodrigo Urquiza had been in charge of fetching dinner. Those 
who had worked that day chipped in $2 or $3 each. Anastasio had been working 
for three straight weeks at a construction site, so he was gently embarrassed 
into contributing $5. The other half of the commune was broke, but they would 
not go hungry. Anastasio returned with a chicken, potatoes, onions, tortillas, 
cilantro, tomatoes and lemons. 
The resulting tacos were delicious. 
On Thursday, however, the turkey seemed to be on everbody's mind. 
"You know," confided Hernan, one of several campers who did not want their full 
names revealed, "back home we're not really into turkey. They really don't have 
much taste, but when they want to give us something, that's great, bring it 
over." 
Flores and the rest came back from the church empty-handed. All the turkeys had 
been given away Saturday. 
"We had to save the food baskets for needy families," explained Gabriel 
Hernandez, who runs the church's holiday food distribution program. "For single 
men, we're serving food right here". 
The campers reasoned they had misunderstood the invitation, given them by two 
police officers who dropped by La Palma the day before. They sat resignedly at 
a table and picked at Thanksgiving food without enthusiasm. "It's not the same" 
without the others, mourned "Camel," the soft-spoken construction worker who 
many recognize as the commune's leader. His long nose, strong jaw and cool 
demeanor earned him the nickname. 
"We're like a family, and we like to hang out. We're in peace by the river and 
we don't bother anybody." 
Fermin Correa picked two girls' dresses and a baby's overalls from the pile of 
free clothing outside the church dinning room. "For my relatives in Zacatecas," 
he said as he thanked Hernandez. 
Before leaving for home, they greeted Paul Bernal and John Walker, the two 
police officers who had mentioned the church's free turkey the day before. 
"For the most part these are hard-working men," said Bernal, as he waved 
goodby. "They've even helped us solve a couple of crimes." 
Bernal and Walker were assigned last month to the "Centro Amistad" a city- and 
county-sponsored community center aimed at improving relations with the Latino 
community, Bernal said. Through the center, they hope to find the campers a 
better home. 
"We've received some complaints and they will have to leave the riverbed, but 
we won't do anything until we find them a place to live," Bernal said. 
Back in La Palma, there were more than 20 men waiting for dinner. Camel and the 
others told them about the turkey mix-up and Bernal's search for a roof for 
them to live under. 
Some liked the idea, but many others did not. At La Palma they sleep on wooden 
pallets to avoid getting wet when the river rises. When it rains, said young 
Lorenzo Magallanes, "We don't have to take a bath." 
When it's cold, they go to the Salvation Army shelter in Canoga Park. When 
police drop in, they say hello. When the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service stops by, they say, about half of them -- the ones without green cards 
-- run. 
"We want to stay together," said Miguel Alvarez, 45, as they sat in circles on 
upended paint buckets. "It would be nice to have a place, and we could even 
pitch in a little for rent as we do with the food. But the apartments would 
have to be nearby, so we can see each other and be together. Besides, who's 
going to rent an apartment to five Mexican men?" 
No one seemed too interested in talking about moving. 
"So what happened to the turkey?" asked Magallanes in Spanish, the only 
language spoken at the camp. "Let's go buy one for the tacos tonight." Some 
pitched in $2, others $3. 
Juan passed the hat around a group that was singing ranchera songs to the music 
of an old guitar, collecting cash for beer. 
Magallanes came back with a bag of food, but no turkey. "The bird cost $29 and 
something and I only had $27 and something, so I brought some beef," he kept 
apologizing to anybody who would listen. Alvarez said he preferred red meat 
anyway. The rest nodded in agreement. 
Juan tried to break a 4-by-4 to start a fire. Some brought scavenged aluminum 
cans and tossed them into plastic bags. "If you don't find work, you go out 
looking for cans," said Camel. "Or firewood. Everybody helps." 
The camp has been in place for at least two years, said Lino Flores. The faces 
change. During the summer, the camp gets smaller as workers follow the harvest. 
In December, those who do well return to Mexico for the Christmas fiestas. 
They talked about Pancho Villa's heroics and his encounter with Emiliano 
Zapata. They talked about their hometowns and their families. 
Suddenly someone shouted "here comes the turkey!" and all heads turned toward 
the river bridge. 
Making his way down the Hotel La Palma entrance -- a narrow opening by the 
railroad bridge in the fence enclosing the riverbed -- was Richard Osborne from 
the Valley Vineyard Christian Fellowship. He was carrying a pile of plastic 
dishes loaded with food that his wife, Joan, had passed to him over the fence. 
They recognized him in a second. He's the guy, they said, who hands out ham 
sandwiches to the day workers on nearby Vanowen Avenue. 
"Buenos dias," said Osborne in halting Spanish. He passed around dishes. No one 
refused. Each got a turkey sandwich and a serving of stuffing. 
Alvarez stepped forward. "Thank you, thank you very much. Like you, we are all 
sons of our Lord Jesus Christ." 
Osborne had trouble understanding the greeting, but when he did, a big smile 
lit his face. He noticed he was three dishes short, so he rushed back to his 
wife. When he returned, he was smiling again. "Tres mas," he said, as he looked 
for the men without plates. 
"Well, how about that," said Magallanes with a grin as he watched Osborne 
leave. "We ended up eating our turkey after all. I guess miracles do exist." 
The beef tacos would keep until today. 
