3 MEN KILLED IN EARLY MORNING CAR ACCIDENTS; 
FATALITIES: TWO DRIVERS WERE JAILED ON SUSPICION OF VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER. 
FAILURE TO HEED A RED LIGHT OR STOP SIGN WAS BLAMED IN BOTH CRASHES. 
Traffic accidents claimed the lives of three men in the west San Fernando 
Valley early Saturday, Los Angeles police said. 
Two passengers died in a two-car collision after a driver failed to stop at a 
red light at a Northridge intersection. The third death occurred in Granada 
Hills when a Los Angeles Times deliveryman's car was struck by a suspected 
drunk driver. 
In the first incident, Efran Reyes Ordones, 26, of Northridge, was driving west 
on Parthenia Street about 12:30 a.m. when he sped through a red traffic light 
at Lindley Avenue, Officer Ed Pedneau said. Ordones' car was broadsided in the 
intersection by a car driven by Bernard Davidson, 68, of Chatsworth, police 
said. 
Ordones' car careened into a power pole. Two passengers in his car, Nectali 
Reyes Ordones, 23, the driver's brother, and Nelson Javier Colindres, 24, also 
of Northridge, died at the scene, Pedneau said. 
Colindres, who was in the back seat, was thrown through the car's rear window 
when the two vehicles collided, police said. The younger Ordones was killed 
when the car hit the pole. 
The driver, who suffered a broken collarbone, was arrested on suspicion of 
manslaughter after being treated at Northridge Medical Center, Pedneau said. He 
was being held at Van Nuys Jail in lieu of $20,000 bail. 
Davidson was not seriously injured, police said. 
In the second incident, a 28-year-old Sylmar man was delivering newspapers 
shortly after 4 a.m. on Louise Avenue when his Chevrolet Baretta was struck by 
another car at Nugent Street, Officer Lee Glozier said. 
The man, whose name was withheld until relatives could be notified, was thrown 
from his car, Glozier said. He died of head injuries later at Holy Cross 
Medical Center in Mission Hills, police said. 
Rodney Clarkson, 20, of Granada Hills, the driver of the second car, was 
arrested on suspicion of vehicular manslaughter, Glozier said. Clarkson was 
being held at Van Nuys Jail in lieu of $20,000 bail, police said. 
Clarkson, who had been drinking, hit the vehicle after failing to obey the 
four-way stop sign at the intersection, Glozier said. Tests were being 
conducted to determined if he was legally intoxicated at the time of the crash, 
police said. 
