PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: SOME MEDICINES CAN INDUCE DISTRESSING SWINGS IN MOOD 
The woman thought she was going crazy. Hallucinations, severe insomnia and 
extreme restlessness that would not let her sit still for a minute sent her to 
a psychiatrist. 
He recognized a toxic reaction to the medicine her family physician had 
prescribed for heartburn. Once she stopped taking the drug, she returned to 
normal. 
A surprising number of medications can produce symptoms that mimic mental 
illness. Depression, anxiety, insomnia, panic and even hallucinations can be 
brought on by certain prescription or over-the-counter medications. 
Prozac (fluoxetine) is one of the most controversial medicines in the pharmacy. 
It has been heralded as a breakthrough against psychological depression and has 
undoubtedly saved many lives. But some people experience serious psychological 
side effects. 
We have heard from some people who suffered depression while on Inderal 
(propranolol) for their heart, and didn't realize that their black mood was 
caused by the drug until their doctors changed the prescription for some other 
reason. Others have experienced much the same reactions from beta blocker eye 
drops prescribed for glaucoma. 
Alarming reactions sometimes occur with apparently innocuous medicines. A 
reader using a Transderm Scop patch for motion sickness caused by deep sea 
fishing found that she became extremely tired and incoherent. 
Sometimes stopping a medicine can cause a psychiatric reaction. One woman was 
prescribed Xanax (alprazolam) because of anxiety associated with heart surgery. 
When her cardiologist eventually told her to quit the medicine, she went 
through hell. Anxiety, panic attacks, insomnia, muscle twitching and 
disorientation were intolerable. 
Suddenly stopping benzodiazepines such as Xanax, Halcion (triazolam) or Valium 
(diazepam) after long-term use can produce serious symptoms that may make a 
person question his sanity. To avoid difficulties, gradual withdrawal is 
advised. 
We have prepared a special brochure for readers of this column describing 
medications that have psychiatric side effects. If you would like a copy of the 
Graedons' Guide to Drug-Induced Mental Illness, please send a large (no. 10) 
self-addressed stamped envelope and $1 to: Graedons' People's Pharmacy, Dept. 
M, P.O. Box 52027, Durham, NC 27717-2027. 
