PROP. 128'S EFFECT ON WATER SUPPLY 
Much has been written about the Hayden Initiative, Proposition 128, in recent 
weeks. However, very little has been said about its effect on Southern 
California's water. 
I am particularly concerned about the very real possibility of a substantial 
reduction in the water available to Southern California from Northern 
California. Your readers should know that in much of Southern California, 100% 
of all domestic water is imported either from Northern California via the State 
Water Project or from the Colorado River. 
Proposition 128 mandates "full protection and propagation of fish, shellfish 
and their habitat." This would undoubtedly mean diversion of water to San 
Francisco Bay from the State Water Project, thereby reducing water available 
for distribution to consumers. Real people will be shortchanged. People need 
water. 
After four years of drought, water is already in short supply in Southern 
California despite aggressive voluntary conservation. Mandatory cutbacks will 
be required if our drought continues into its fifth year. Public water 
suppliers are developing alternates to imported water; however, many of these 
are unreasonably costly or are limited in quantity. 
One successful alternative currently used to reduce our need for imported water 
is to reclaim water for non-domestic purposes. This is both economical and 
available. Proposition 128's stringent restrictions on the use of chlorine will 
tend to eliminate the use of reclaimed water as an economic alternative. This 
would further compound our shortage. 
The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, the Coastal Municipal 
Water District, the Municipal Water District of Orange County (the major 
wholesale suppliers), most of the retail water agencies in Orange County, the 
Assn. of California Water Agencies, and the Water Advisory Committee of Orange 
County have all adopted resolutions opposing Proposition 128 for these reasons. 
Other parts of the proposition may be desirable, but its negative effect on 
Southern California water would be pervasive. Your readers should know the 
facts before they decide. 
HUNTER T. COOK 
General Manager 
Coastal Municipal Water District 
