ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: WESTMINSTER; 
HARMONY FESTIVAL PROMOTES DIVERSITY 
A year after several racial incidents sent shock waves through this city, 
residents again joined in a celebration created to soothe the tensions of the 
ethnically diverse community. 
The second annual Westminster Harmony Festival "visibly expresses the 
community's support for cultural and religious diversity and also promotes 
mutual respect and understanding among the people of Westminster," Mayor 
Charles V. Smith said at the opening ceremonies Sunday. 
The festival was begun last year after the fatal shooting of a Latino youth by 
Westminster police who said the youth and others at a neighborhood party had 
threatened to attack them. The same year, a cross was burned in front of a 
black family's home, and swastikas were painted on the property and doors of 
Temple Beth David. 
"Throughout the ages, prejudice against race, religion or creed has destroyed 
the lives of human beings and brought civilized nations to ruin," Smith said. 
"In the spring and summer of 1988, we witnessed these illogical acts of 
prejudice. And once again we gather to reaffirm that these acts of terrorism 
will not be condoned." 
More than 100 people roamed the grounds of the civic center, viewing dances and 
music of the Orient and tasting delicacies from around the globe. 
"I think that is a great thing for people to come out again this year and show 
how they feel about bigotry," resident Janet Cole said. "When I read last year 
about all the horrible racially motivated things that were happening, I was 
upset because I thought we as a nation had grown a lot more than that." 
Along with music and food, festival-goers were treated to an array of dancers, 
including L.A Chinese Folk Dancers, Belody Dancers and Vietnamese Dragon 
Dancers. 
As many as 15 organizations had booths at the festival, which is funded through 
the city and private donations. 
Opening ceremonies also paid tribute to one of the founding organizers of the 
festival, Rabbi Henri Front of Temple Beth David, who died in August of cancer. 
So far this year, city officials say there have been no reports of racially 
motivated incidents. ALLISON SAMUELS 
