SAFEGUARDS URGED IN PENSION FUND ASSETS; 
RETIREMENT: THE CHAIRMAN OF A HOUSE PANEL CALLS FOR PROTECTIONS AS HEARINGS 
OPEN ON POTENTIAL FRAUD AND MISMANAGEMENT OF SAVINGS. 
The chairman of a House panel today called for stronger measures to protect 
private pension fund assets so workers do not lose their retirement savings to 
fraud and mismanagement. 
"We must develop greater safeguards to adequately protect the nation's private 
pension fund assets," Rep. William J. Hughes (D-N.J.) said as he opened a 
hearing by the House subcommittee on retirement income and employment. 
"Our workers and retirees have a right to expect that the pensions they have 
worked so hard to earn and which they are counting on to meet basic living 
expenses during their retirement years are not eroded away by waste, fraud and 
corruption," he said. 
The hearing stemmed from reports issued by the Labor Department's inspector 
general office that pointed to the vulnerability of $2 trillion in assets of 
pension plans covering 76 million Americans. 
The latest inspector general's report, obtained by the Associated Press, says 
billions of dollars in private pension money is not being fully audited because 
the money was invested in such institutions as savings and loans. 
Some Labor Department officials dispute the extent of the problems, saying the 
department's acting inspector general, Raymond Maria, has exaggerated the 
potential for fraud. Maria has likened the potential to the recent savings and 
loan crisis, which some estimates say will require a $100-billion taxpayer 
bailout. 
David George Ball, assistant labor secretary for pension and welfare benefits, 
told the hearing: "The pension system, by any objective measure, has never been 
healthier." 
Maria, in his testimony, said, "Our goal is not to unnecessarily frighten 
people but to stimulate concern where such concern is needed and to avoid 
potential future crisis." 
He said inadequate regulations and reliance on civil rather than criminal 
remedies have "created a window of opportunity for those who would embezzle and 
steal from plan participants." 
