MORE HOME BUYERS TURN TO CONDOS; 
HOUSING: 'STICKER SHOCK' ON NEW-HOME PRICES TURNS ATTENTION OF SHOPPERS BACK TO 
CONDOS, THE PRICES OF WHICH ARE STARTING TO RISE. 
With fewer home buyers able to afford to pay the high prices of new San Diego 
County houses, budget-conscious buyers are increasingly turning their attention 
to the condominium market. 
According to recent market data, San Diego County condominiums are posting 
healthy price rises this year. Year-to-year unit sales are down, but observers 
blame that on diminished inventory. 
The condo market is benefitting from "sticker shock" experienced by new San 
Diego residents after seeing the county's steep housing prices, industry 
observers say. Interest shown by the "move-up condominium buyer" is also 
contributing to the condo price increase. 
"We're beginning to see a new breed of home buyers," said Gerald T. LaFlamme, 
managing partner of Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Co., a public accounting firm that 
closely monitors the real estate market. 
"About three years ago, somebody may have bought a condominium for $80,000 to 
$100,000 with plans to eventually buy a single-family, detached home," LaFlamme 
said. "But, as (the buyer) looks around now, he's finding himself priced out of 
the market. 
"Nowadays, instead of buying a new home, the buyer is purchasing bigger and 
better condominiums," LaFlamme said. 
According to a recent survey conducted by Market Profiles, a San Diego-based 
research firm that tracks subdivision sales, the average price of attached 
housing, including town homes and condominiums, during the three months ended 
Sept. 30 was $170,553; up 18% from the $144,562 average price posted during the 
same period in 1988. 
Although the number of new units sold during the third quarter of 1989 dropped 
to 816 from last year's 1,381, the units sold figured as a percentage of 
available inventory has steadily increased in recent years, said Russell T. 
Valone, president of Market Profiles. 
The percentage of available units sold through the third quarter of 1989 was 
66%; up from 58% in 1988 and the 47% recorded in 1987. 
Valone says family-oriented condominiums, rather than smaller apartment style 
units, should fare well in the coming years because it will be a less costly 
alternative to pricey, single-family detached homes. 
Deborah Krivoshia, a Meyers Group consultant said: "New homes prices are 
leveling off, but I don't think they're going to go down. That's why, at 
$150,000, condos are still a good deal. You can't buy any kind of home for that 
price." 
During the three months ended Sept. 30, the median price of a new condominium 
was $153,950, up 29% from $118,900 during the same period in 1988. 
"The condominium is becoming the only choice for a larger and larger 
cross-section of the home-buying public," said LaFlamme of Kenneth Leventhal. 
"Condominiums are coming back into vogue again. 
"They lost their appeal back in the 1960s," LaFlamme said "It was new product 
at the time and single-family homes could still be bought at a reasonable 
price. In the 1970s, we had the inflation problem that made compact housing 
more of a necessity. If you remember, apartments were rapidly converted into 
condominiums. That created a oversupply, and prices came down. (Condominium 
prices) have been relatively flat ever since, but now they're starting to 
increase again." 
Resale prices of condominiums are going up, too, LaFlamme said, though at a 
slower rate than those of single-family dwellings. 
Comparing July median resale prices of the last three years, LaFlamme said the 
prices have increased from $100,600 to $112,500 to $120,000. 
LaFlamme added: "Just between June and July of this year, the median resale 
price of condominiums went up from $115,000 to $120,000." 
Lack of available land and growth control measures should prevent overbuilding 
and a drop in condominium prices, observers say. 
"It's one of the better condominium markets in the United States," said Sanford 
Goodkin, executive director of Pete Marwick Main &amp; Co./Goodkin Real Estate 
Consulting Group. "With land prices continuing to inflate, there will be more 
condominiums. They have become a legitimate product in the marketplace." 
