POLICE MOUNT PATROLS FOR HOLIDAY CRIME 
It's horses, not reindeer, that signal the start of the Christmas season at 
shopping centers in the San Fernando Valley. 
On Monday, Los Angeles Police announced that mounted and foot patrols are being 
added at major shopping plazas in the area in an effort to cut down on crimes 
that usually increase with holiday shopping volume. Shoppers often are victims 
of robberies, purse snatchers, automobile thefts and break-ins during the peak 
shopping period. 
In North Hollywood, police said four officers on horses and another two on foot 
will patrol the commercial corridor along Laurel Canyon Boulevard near Victory 
Boulevard during the next six weeks. The area is bounded by Laurel Plaza on the 
south and Valley Plaza on the north. 
Police said four officers on foot beats already have begun holiday season 
patrols at the Northridge Fashion Center, and six mounted officers will be 
added later. The same is planned for other Valley shopping areas, including the 
commercial strip on Topanga Canyon Boulevard in Woodland Hills from the 
Promenade Mall to Topanga Plaza. 
Sgt. Kent Setty said the department plans to use all 16 of its available 
mounted officers in the Valley during the shopping season. 
It is the third consecutive year that mounted patrols have been used in North 
Hollywood in the roughly 10-square-block area shared by small shops, department 
stores, movie theaters and parking lots. 
Compared to previous years, horse patrols have cut in half the number of 
shopper-related crimes such as robberies, car thefts and break-ins, said Capt. 
Rick Dinse. He said the high-profile patrols have worked so well that the 
department may consider adding permanent foot or horse patrols in the highly 
concentrated commercial area. 
"Any time you have a horse patrol, it is very visible," Dinse said. "It is 
going to have a deterring effect" on crime. 
"We are looking at expanding" to permanent patrols, Dinse added. "We think we 
might be able to justify it." 
Police said the horse and foot patrols give officers better maneuverability in 
areas with crowded parking lots, heavy pedestrian traffic and many adjoining 
shopping areas. 
Officer Robert Brannon, one of the mounted police assigned to the North 
Hollywood area, said a horse gives him a better view of the area than he can 
get in a patrol car. 
"From up here, I can see from one end of the parking lot to the other. I am 
also very visible. That's the deterrent," Brannon said. "We can cover a lot of 
ground." 
The return of the holiday patrols was welcomed by North Hollywood merchants. 
Nick Imp, a sales manager at the Sears store in Valley Plaza, said the 
increased police presence improves security for customers and employees at the 
stores and has an added positive effect. It's a "great attraction" for 
shoppers, he said. 
"People like seeing them here. They want their kids to see the horses and the 
police officers. It helps make the area more attractive." 
