LISTEN: TWIN SHOPPING 
"Twin Peaks" stars Kyle MacLachlan (Agent Cooper) and Lara Flynn Boyle (Donna) 
were spotted shopping in Santa Monica recently. And, no, they weren't stocking 
up on doughnuts and berry pies. They were in Na Na buying practical items for 
MacLachlan: A pair of Doc Marten shoes, some E.G. Smith socks, surplus long 
johns, T-shirts and cotton sweaters. Boyle was more adventurous. She bought a 
Na Na cat suit. 
A CAUSE TO SHOP: "In my 22 years as a designer, I've never seen Seventh Avenue 
come together so enthusiastically as a group for one cause," says Donna Karan, 
a co-chairman of 7th on Sale, the three-day shopping extravaganza that starts 
today in Manhattan. Proceeds benefit the New York City AIDS Fund, which seems a 
particularly apt cause for the fashion industry to support. The list of 
designers who have died of the disease is long: Halston, Willi Smith, Angel 
Estrada, Perry Ellis; and in Los Angeles, Rick Beach, Antony Moorcroft and John 
Leitch of Axis. Others widely rumored to have died of the disease, though 
officially friends and associates have denied it, are Patrick Kelly, Giorgio di 
Sant'Angelo and Isaia. The sale includes over 100 designer booths at the 69th 
Regiment Armory. And items account for more than $4.5 million in merchandise, 
some marked below wholesale prices. The Council of Fashion Designers and Vogue 
magazine, which is underwriting the event, were near their $1-million goal long 
before the sale began today. A gala $1,000-per-seat preview dinner last night 
raised more than $800,000 and more than 13,000 tickets for the sale at $10 each 
sold out last week. 
WHEN HARRY MET ALEX: The stylish jazz pianist Harry Connick Jr. is being 
accompanied by Alexander Julian on threads. For his current tour, Julian put 
Connick in a charcoal blazer, navy-striped pants and a white button-down oxford 
cloth shirt (open at the neck) and the band in double-breasted, glen plaid 
suits and the trio in shades of navy. "It's a swinging look," says Julian. At 
opening night of his two-week run last Friday at the Lunt Fontanne Theatre in 
New York, Connick was so keyed up over his wardrobe he had Julian stand and 
take a bow from the audience. 
BEAUTY PARLOR GOSSIP: Donna Mills has joined the growing list of film 
celebrities to shed long hair for short. Beverly Hills stylist Allen Edwards 
describes the cut as having "a '60s feeling." It tapers from short in back to 
jaw-length around the face. The retro aspect gets an assist from short, wispy 
bangs and a slightly layered, back-combed crown. How does Mills look without 
her long, wavy Hollywood hair? "More defined," Edwards says. "This brings out 
her bone structure." 
NECKTIE PARTING: L.A. neckwear designer, collector and historian Stephen 
Sotnick's garage has become so overstuffed with his rare collection of some 
3,000 vintage ties that he has decided to make a donation to the Costume 
Council at the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art after the L.A. County Museum 
turned down his offer. Sotnick says he will be cataloguing more than 100 ties 
(10 examples from each decade since 1890) and delivering them to the Met by the 
end of the month. The rarest of the offering will be a group of neckties from 
1935 to 1942 "the most influential period of neckwear history," according to 
Sotnick. 
