JUSTICES BAR N.Y. BAN ON HOTEL DEMOLITION; 
HOMELESSNESS: THE COURT RULES THAT THE CITY VIOLATED DEVELOPERS' RIGHTS IN ITS 
BID TO RETAIN HAVENS FOR THE POOR. 
The Supreme Court refused today to allow New York City, and perhaps other 
communities, to enlist unwilling developers in the fight against homelessness. 
The justices, without comment, left intact a victory for developers who said 
New York City violated their rights by banning conversion or demolition of 
hotels that offer a haven for the poor, elderly and ill. 
The court let stand a ruling that a law banning conversion or demolition of New 
York City's single-room-occupancy, or SRO, housing unconstitutionally 
confiscates private property. 
The New York Court of Appeals ruled, 5 to 2, last July that the law has the 
effect of seizing property without just compensation. 
"No one minimizes the tragic reality of homelessness," the state court said. 
"But the city's response -- to foist its responsibility on certain private 
property owners . . . simply does not meet the requirements of the federal and 
state constitutions." 
Remedying homelessness is the duty of all taxpayers, not a handful of 
developers, the state court said. It also said the city failed to produce 
enough evidence that the law would actually benefit the homeless. 
The state court ruling is binding only on cities in New York. But the Supreme 
Court's refusal to disturb that decision may discourage communities in other 
states from emulating New York City. 
Notable Supreme Court rulings recently have expanded the rights of property 
owners faced with government regulations. 
The justices in 1987 limited government power to grant public access to private 
property and ruled that property owners must be compensated when government 
regulations bar them even temporarily from using their property. 
New York Mayor Edward I. Koch called the state court ruling on SRO housing a 
"devastating blow" to efforts to help the homeless. But some city officials 
said rent-control regulations barring unjustified evictions may restrain 
widespread demolition. 
Nevertheless, they warned, in time hotel tenants may be bought out or harassed 
into leaving to clear the way for razing the buildings or converting them. 
Many tenants live on the edge of poverty and homelessness, limited to single 
rooms and sharing kitchen and bathroom facilities. 
The SRO preservation law of 1987 required building owners to rehabilitate and 
rent every unit, not leaving any vacant. 
Landlords could have "bought out" of the law by paying $45,000 to the city for 
each unit destroyed or converted. A typical hotel owner would have had to pay 
about $10 million to destroy or convert the building. 
The state court said such payments amounted to an extortionate "ransom . . . to 
avoid the illegal confiscation." 
The law was meant to prevent about 52,000 units of SRO housing from being 
demolished. Tens of thousands of similar units were razed in the 1960s and 
1970s as the city encouraged new office buildings and luxury apartments. 
The city cited studies showing that the loss of such housing contributes to 
rising homelessness. Surveys indicate that at least 25%, and perhaps as many as 
45%, of the people living in the city's homeless shelters at one time lived in 
such hotels. 
