DUFFY EXPLAINS DETAILS OF HIS OUTSIDE INCOME; 
POLITICS: SHERIFF HOLDS PRESS CONFERENCE TO TALK ABOUT HIS JOBS AS A 
CONSULTANT. 
Sheriff John Duffy assembled selected reporters Thursday for a detailed 
walk-through of his outside consulting work since 1983, asserting that there 
has been nothing improper in the conduct of his personal finances. 
Duffy confirmed that he had listed none of the income from consulting on his 
annual state disclosure forms, but said he believes none of it was required to 
be listed. 
Duffy, who has announced that he intends to seek reelection next year, also 
said he already had made more money this year in outside work than in any of 
the six previous years he has been consulting. But he said he is not worried 
that voters will perceive that he isn't spending enough time at his elected 
position. 
In a two-hour meeting, Duffy also produced tax information showing that he and 
his wife had paid only 6% of their gross income in 1988 in federal and state 
taxes -- or $8,166 out of a joint income of $137,028 -- but said that was 
because they took legitimate interest deductions. 
Duffy called six newspaper and two television reporters to his office for the 
meeting in the wake of reports in The Times that he had worked for at least two 
private companies on law enforcement-related projects but didn't disclose his 
outside income. 
The San Diego County district attorney's office announced last week that it had 
begun a review of state laws concerning what kind of outside income elected 
officials must publicly disclose and whether Duffy should have reported his 
outside income. 
In addition to that review, one local attorney said last week he would ask the 
state Fair Political Practices Commission to look into Duffy's reporting 
practices, and another said he would ask for an inquiry from the sheriff's 
internal affairs division. 
Duffy repeated Thursday what he said last week, that he did not report on his 
annual Statement of Economic Interest forms the outside income he earned over 
the past six years because he did not have to. 
"You think I'm going to fill out forms I don't need to fill out?" he said. "I 
mean, I got enough trouble, any elected official, any public official, has 
forms to fill out up the bazoo." 
Duffy produced a form he had prepared indicating he had earned $8,222 from 1983 
through 1988 working as a consultant on projects for the National Institute of 
Corrections, an arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, and for the private, 
for-profit firm Koba Associates in Washington. 
Duffy was hired by Koba to work on seven consulting projects for the National 
Institute of Justice, earning $150 a day to review research projects. The money 
he earned on jail study projects since 1985 with the National Institute of 
Corrections ranged from $229 a day in 1985 to the current rate of $290 daily, 
Duffy said. 
Since 1983, Duffy said, he has been compensated for 50 days' work with the two 
organizations. Before this year, the most he had earned in outside work in any 
one year was $2,338, in 1985, he said. 
Duffy said his tax records indicated the money he earned on National Institute 
of Justice projects was paid to him by Koba, and income from the National 
Institute of Corrections studies was paid to him by Gubler &amp; Associates, a 
Salt Lake City firm. 
Nevertheless, he contended he was not obliged to report that money on his 
disclosure forms because those funds actually were supplied by the federal 
government, merely passing through the two firms. Taxpayers' money is not 
required to be disclosed, he said. 
For the same reason, Duffy also said he did not plan to report how much money 
he ends up earning this year consulting for the two companies. 
So far in 1989, Duffy said he was gone on one job in April through Koba, again 
at $150 a day, for an estimated five days. He also said he had worked at least 
one day at $290 through Gubler for an NIC meeting in Colorado and would make 
the same rate with it again this weekend at a conference in San Diego. 
Duffy also has been paid $4,000 this year by a third company, Ralph Andersen 
&amp; Associates in Sacramento, for a consulting job that began late last year 
and concluded this February, reviewing the management structure of the 
Arlington, Tex., Police Department. 
Although Duffy said he is "confident" he does not have to officially disclose 
money from the first two companies, he said he does not know whether he will 
have to list that $4,000 on next year's form. 
The reporting rules require Duffy each year to list income of $250 or more from 
any source that is located in San Diego County, owns real estate in the county 
or conducts business in the county. 
The Andersen firm contracted with county officials this year to stage a 
personnel classification seminar at the same time Duffy was working for the 
company on the Arlington consulting project. 
"I hope (the state Fair Political Practices Commission) rules on this one 
because (Andersen is) not located in S.D. County (and), other than some news 
report I read about that they once invited the county Personnel Department up 
to Newport Beach for some seminar, they have not done any business with San 
Diego County government," Duffy said Thursday. 
If the FPPC rules that he has to report the $4,000, Duffy said, he will abide 
by that decision. 
Duffy said he was not worried that the recent reports about his outside work 
will hurt his re-election chances next year. 
"I think I can make a pretty good case during the campaign that my travels to 
Washington, D.C., my travels out of the county, many times directly and often 
indirectly benefited the citizens of San Diego County," he said. 
Duffy stressed that he has listed all of his income with the Internal Revenue 
Service and the state of California for tax purposes. 
He also produced another form he had prepared that indicated he and his wife, 
Linda, had paid at least $22,000 in taxes from 1984 through 1987. But, in 1988, 
they paid only the $8,166, he said. 
The dramatic difference was because of $84,000 they took in interest 
deductions, Duffy said. That figure was largely attributable to interest from a 
construction loan used to build their new house but also included interest from 
the mortgage on the house, a loan processing fee for the house and interest 
from the mortgage on their former residence, Duffy said. 
Duffy has denounced The Times for its reports on his consulting work and for an 
earlier article about the amount of time he has spent traveling out of the 
county. He refused to allow Times reporter Richard A. Serrano, who wrote those 
articles, to take part in the interview Thursday. 
