PREP FLASHBACK; 
THIS WEEK IN COUNTY PREP SPORTS HISTORY; 
10 YEARS AGO 
When Edison faced Fountain Valley, the game was considered the biggest in the 
county because: 
 -- It was for the Sunset League championship. 
 -- For the seventh consecutive season, it was played at Anaheim Stadium to 
accommodate the 15,000 fans the game averaged. 
 -- It got top billing over the Rams-Miami game on the message board at Anaheim 
Stadium. 
 -- Edison was the CIF champion in 1979, Fountain Valley in 1978. Many involved 
in the game would have rather won it than a CIF title. One sportswriter called 
it "The Super Bowl of CIF." 
"Winning the CIF title in 1978 was great," Fountain Valley Coach Mike Milner 
said. "But beating Edison is better. I think our game with Edison outdrew the 
CIF finals two years ago." 
The best thing was that the game lived up to its billing. Edison won, 15-14, 
with an exciting, almost bizarre, ending. 
Fountain Valley opened a 14-0 lead behind the passing of junior quarterback 
Matt Stevens, who wore a towel that said "FV Air Force." 
But Edison came back and pulled within one when quarterback Ken Major scored on 
a three-yard run with 15 seconds left. Edison then called the same play to 
score a two-point conversion. 
Fountain Valley did not give up. Stevens completed a 61-yard pass to Keith 
Richards as time ran out, moving the ball to the Edison six. A penalty flag was 
thrown because Edison piled on during the tackle. 
A game cannot end on a defensive penalty, but official Jim Patterson said: 
"The clock had run out when the ball was in the air, and the game ended when 
(Richards) hit the ground." 
5 YEARS AGO 
The Marina special teams were known for the quality of their play, and for 
their size. 
Marina's special teams' players averaged 5-feet-8, 155 pounds, fairly small by 
football standards. 
"Westminster was laughing at us on the sidelines," said special teams player 
Dean Loghry. "They were saying, 'Who are these little guys?' " 
Accordingly, the group decided to call itself the Smurf Patrol, after the 
popular cartoon series. It was also an allusion to the diminutive Washington 
Redskin receivers who called themselves the Smurfs. 
"When you see them out there, you don't think they can hurt anybody," defensive 
back Sean Barbosa said. "But they put some good licks on people." 
Apparently. Marina opponents averaged just 13.5 yards per kickoff return, with 
a longest of 38, as the Vikings went 6-3-1, 4-1 in the Sunset League. 
The players weren't chosen because of their (lack of) size. It just worked out 
that way because Coach Dave Thompson believed in using players who didn't start 
on offense or defense for his special teams. 
"That's a good place for a kid to get on the field," Thompson said. "If he's a 
junior, he'll get a lot of hits and gain a lot of confidence. If he's a senior, 
he'll at least feel like he's contributed to the team." 
1 YEAR AGO 
Running it up: Rancho Alamitos' Dana Riddle gained 144 yards in 34 carries to 
end the regular season with 2,082 yards, the fourth-highest total in county 
history behind Servite's Derek Brown (2,301, 1988), Edison's Kerwin Bell 
(2,226, 1979) and Valencia's Ray Pallares (2,085, 1985). 
Tough ticket: As expected, Capistrano Valley's stadium was packed for the 
showdown between top-ranked El Toro and No. 2 Capistrano Valley. Fans began to 
fill the stadium at 5 p.m., and the 3,500 bleacher seats were taken by 6. 
Just ask Mission Viejo Mayor William Craycraft how hot a ticket it was. 
Earlier in the day, Craycraft had telephoned Capistrano Valley Principal Tom 
Anthony and asked if Anthony could reserve a couple of seats and a parking 
space at the school for his family. 
Anthony politely declined. 
The mayor missed a good game. Capistrano Valley won, 22-21. 
