HOUSE BARS MILLIONS FOR U.N. FUND BUSH SAYS PAYS FOR FORCED ABORTIONS IN CHINA 
After a dramatic seesaw battle, the House on Tuesday voted in effect to prevent 
U.S. payment of $15 million to a U.N. population fund that President Bush has 
accused of financing compulsory abortion in China. 
The House avoided a threatened presidential veto of the $14.6-billion foreign 
aid appropriations bill by voting 219 to 203 to bar any government money for 
the U.N. fund unless Bush certifies that it did not support or manage a program 
of "coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization" in China. 
Earlier Tuesday, the House had voted 244 to 178 to approve funding for the U.N. 
unit. By changing its position, the House provided a victory for Bush. The 
harder line on family planning policy was first instituted by former President 
Ronald Reagan in 1985. 
Tuesday's vote saved Bush from the prospect of vetoing the entire 
appropriations bill, which includes about $600 million in aid for Poland and 
Hungary during the current fiscal year, as well as substantial military and 
economic aid to Israel, Egypt and other nations. 
The decisive roll call came immediately after the House had voted to go along 
with a Senate-passed provision that earmarked the $15 million for family 
planning services by the United Nations Fund for Population Assistance (FPA) in 
130 poor countries, but banned any payment for abortions or use of any of the 
funds in China. 
The legislation will go back to the Senate to see whether it will accept the 
amendment requiring presidential certification before funds can be sent to the 
U.N. group -- a requirement that almost guarantees that no funds will go to the 
FPA. Bush has made it clear that he opposes U.S. support for the organization 
because of its past backing for China's severe population control measures. 
There was no immediate explanation for the sudden reversal of 41 votes on the 
issue. Some observers speculated that many House members were anxious to avoid 
a Bush veto of the appropriations bill as they rush to adjourn the 
congressional session before Thanksgiving. 
During the stormy debate, foes of abortion lined up against abortion rights 
advocates over the issue, although the funds in the bill were earmarked for 
family planning services. 
Rep. Robert S. Walker (R-Pa.) said the U.N. agency contributed significantly to 
China's ability to force women to have abortions or undergo sterilizations 
against their will. "You're on the extreme side if you support coerced 
abortion," he said. 
Proponents, however, said the U.N. fund was the only global agency providing 
family planning services to the world's poorest countries that were growing the 
fastest and needed assistance to curb their populations. 
"If you oppose abortion, how can you oppose family planning?" asked Rep. 
Richard J. Durbin (D-Ill.). Rep. Jan Meyers (R-Kan.) argued: "Family planning 
saves the lives of women." 
In other abortion-related action Tuesday, four Republican women members of the 
House met with Bush to urge him to reconsider his strong stand against 
government payment for abortions for poor women in cases of rape or incest. 
The President vetoed the $157-billion appropriations bill for the departments 
of Labor and Health and Human Services because it authorized, for the first 
time in nearly a decade, Medicaid-paid abortions for rape and incest victims. 
Although the House failed to override the veto, a clear majority of 231 members 
voted to do so. 
The four women, who voted against Bush on the issue, suggested possible 
compromise language that would allow government payment for abortions in rape 
and incest cases, Rep. Olympia J. Snowe of Maine said. 
Although no conclusions were reached during the 45-minute meeting, Snowe said, 
she thought it was worthwhile to open a line of communication to Bush on 
abortion rights. 
"We don't want people to view the Republican Party as totally intransigent on 
the issue," Snowe said. "This would totally alienate about half the population 
. . . . We want to avoid political losses." 
Rep. Claudine Schneider of Rhode Island said after the 45-minute meeting with 
Bush: "I think there may be some room for him to reconsider (his veto) but he 
didn't say so. This is just reading his attention and thoughtfulness." 
Meantime, the House Appropriations Committee approved by voice vote a new 
version of the Labor-HHS money bill without the abortion provision that 
triggered the veto. That provision may be added by the Senate, however, forcing 
yet another vote in the House -- a vote that abortion rights advocates predict 
they can win. 
Similarly, the appropriations panel also approved a new version of a money bill 
for Washington, D.C., which includes a ban on use of federal funds for 
abortions but allows the local government to use its own tax resources to pay 
for abortions if it wishes. Bush vetoed a previous D.C. appropriations bill 
because it did not forbid government payment for all abortions except in cases 
where the life of the mother is endangered. 
