DOWNTURN CUTS AN UNEVEN PATH ACROSS NATION; 
ECONOMY: NEW ENGLAND AND NEW YORK ARE ALREADY IN A RECESSION, BUT SOME ANALYSTS 
BELIEVE THAT THE NORTHWEST AND SOUTHWEST MAY BE SPARED A SERIOUS SLUMP. 
The widely predicted economic downturn appears to have begun in earnest, but 
its impact so far appears to be spotty. 
Pockets of the country, notably the Southwest and Midwest, so far have avoided 
a severe slump, while New England, New York and a few other areas have already 
fallen into a recession, a report by regional Federal Reserve banks showed 
Wednesday. 
California, meanwhile, seems to fall in between. The state's economy continues 
to grow but at a much slower pace than a year ago, economists said. 
The patchiness of the current slump appears to be almost the reverse of the 
so-called bi-coastal boom that the American economy experienced in the 1980s, 
when the Northeast and California were growing far more rapidly than the rest 
of the nation. 
The Fed's new report confirms that the Northeast and the Middle Atlantic states 
began to experience a downturn early. "The East Coast looks pretty terrible 
right now," said Gordon Richards, economist at the National Assn. of 
Manufacturers in Washington. 
Still, although economists say that the overall national economy is probably in 
a recession, many analysts believe that at least a few regions -- including 
parts of the Midwest, the Pacific Northwest and the long-suffering Southwest -- 
may be spared any serious slump. 
Some economists believe that these wide variations among individual regions may 
help prevent the current downturn from turning into a deep recession, because 
so many areas are expected to hold up well and thus buoy the overall economy. 
The good economic news is coming from some surprising places: Cleveland, for 
example, which lost many jobs during the recession of the early 1980s, is 
enjoying fast growth in its manufacturing industries, which are benefiting from 
strong export sales. 
Texas also seems a likely candidate to avoid the worst of the current downturn. 
Its economy began turning up in the late 1980s, after real estate, energy 
prices and employment all hit bottom. 
Now, that state's economy is far more diversified than it was during the energy 
crisis of the late 1970s and early 1980s and should be able to avoid another 
boom-bust cycle. 
"The slump in the rest of the nation has hit worst in areas closely tied to the 
financial services and real estate markets, and we have already hit bottom in 
those areas and now we have stabilized," said Harvey Rosenblum, an economist 
with the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The Pacific Northwest is clearly the 
strongest area in the nation, led by the surging economy of Seattle. Job growth 
in the Seattle area has been running at a 6% annual rate, led by gains in the 
computer software and aerospace industries. 
"The Northwest is going to cool off but I still think it is going to be the 
hottest region throughout the 1990s," said Jerry Jordan, chief economist at 
First Interstate Bank in Los Angeles. 
California, despite the ongoing slump in real estate and job cuts in defense, 
is also still showing some strength. 
A new forecast by First Interstate predicts that the Los Angeles-Long Beach 
area and the state as a whole will continue to add jobs throughout 1991. The 
rate of employment growth in Southern California "is coming down fast, but 
growth is still positive," Jordan said. 
Areas such as the Great Plains states and the Great Lakes, which never 
experienced the real estate speculation of the 1980s, so far have avoided the 
steep declines in property values that have depressed investment and spending 
on the East Coast. 
By contrast, in New York and New England, economists are bracing for a deep and 
long recession. The new Fed report found that homes in New England now remain 
on the market an average of 150 days before being sold -- compared to an 
average of 30 days in the mid-1980s. 
"We expect the recession in this region to continue until the summer of 1991 at 
least," warned Sara Johnson, an economist at DRI-McGraw Hill, an economic 
forecasting firm based in Lexington, Mass. 
She noted that the economic woes of the Northeast are not confined to 
Massachusetts and New York. New Hampshire, for example, has suffered a 7% 
decline in the number of jobs since the end of 1988. 
Yet, even within some regions, there are wide variations in economic 
conditions. 
Although Cleveland and Chicago both remain healthy, other Midwestern cities -- 
especially Detroit -- are feeling the effects of layoffs in the auto industry 
resulting from the downturn in consumer spending. 
"Michigan is in a slump," David Littman, an economist at Manufacturers National 
Bank of Detroit, said flatly. 
"The residential real estate market has remained relatively strong in the 
state, because we never had the excesses that plagued the Northeast," Littman 
added. "But it is still very difficult for Detroit and the Midwest in general 
to continue to grow for long if national consumer spending stops." 
"I would describe the economy now as like an engine, with some pistons rising 
while others are falling," said First Interstate's Jordan. 
"The New England states and New York are certainly already in a recession," 
Jordan said. "They are losing employment. But the West Coast, especially the 
Pacific Northwest, is quite strong. And I was just in Dallas, where people 
(are) saying: 'Hey, we already had a recession -- two years ago.' " 
