MYTHS OF FEMALE WEAKNESS; 
DON'T KNOCK THE SAUDIS. IT CAN BE ROUGH FOR WOMEN HERE, TOO. 
The images from the sands of Saudi Arabia offer a stark contrast: American 
servicewomen work in fatigues, while Saudi women are glimpsed briefly, shrouded 
head to toe in the veil. While the Americans were driving heavy equipment, a 
group of some 40 Saudi women staged a protest -- dismissing their drivers and 
piloting their luxury cars through the streets of downtown Riyadh. Their 
demand? The right to drive, forbidden to women in their country. From all 
appearances, it's the modern, liberated society vs. the Middle Ages, as far as 
women are concerned. 
But before we Americans start congratulating ourselves on how liberated we are, 
we might check recent headlines. Nobody's asking American women to dress from 
head to toe in black, but the mythology about women as "the other," in her 
strange and wondrous forms, has hardly vanished from the landscape. Peculiar 
notions about woman -- as flawed weakling, sexual predator, neglectful mommy or 
breed mare -- float about like toxic smoke as the subtext of recent 
controversies. 
First, there was the incident in which a female sportswriter was surrounded in 
the locker room of the New England Patriots by naked players, who made obscene 
comments and suggestions. 
Many of the cries of outrage were directed at the victim. Patriots' fans 
screamed obscenities at sportswriter Lisa Olson as she walked into the stadium. 
A Cincinnati coach declared people were tired of bitches and bra-burners; some 
players said their wives didn't like the idea of women in the locker rooms. 
The implication of sexual threat -- or misbehavior -- by women lurked behind 
all of these comments. Does a woman "ask for it" if she goes about her job 
wearing something less body-obscuring than the veil? The notion that any woman 
who strays from proper female territory into male turf is a sexual aggressor 
and deserves any punishment she might encounter may be ancient history -- but 
it's not as dead as we thought. 
Invoking other women to validate the alleged threat should also be ancient 
history. Do players' wives really worry about sportswriters -- when motel 
lobbies are filled with nubile groupies whose self-esteem is so low that they 
need to prove they are somebody by sleeping with celebrities? Do wives really 
believe that a sportswriter is rushing into the locker room each night worried 
not about a good quote to lead the next day's story, but breathless for a peek 
at sweaty, half-naked men -- of which she has doubtless seen more than enough 
already? 
Not many women get jobs as sportswriters, so another story -- also about doors 
that could be closing to working women -- is more ominous. Johnson Controls, 
one of the nation's largest car-battery manufacturers, barred all women 
employees of childbearing age -- not just those who were pregnant -- from jobs 
that would expose them to high levels of lead potentially damaging to a fetus. 
This is the Woman-as-Vessel theory. Women have no value, no lives, no purpose, 
except as breed mares. So, they should be barred from any activity with even a 
remote chance of impairing this. 
More than half the jobs in the company were suddenly off-limits to women 
employees. Eight women sued, and the U.S. Supreme Court recently heard 
arguments. If the court backs the company, about 20 million American jobs -- 
most of them well- paid -- could be off-limits to women. Other companies that 
use toxic substances in manufacture have already put "fetal protection" 
policies into effect. 
If women can be barred from working with any toxic substance, can they also be 
kept away from jobs in scientific research? Could they be prohibited from 
newspaper copy desks because rays from word processors might affect fertility? 
Construction workers handle solvents and chemicals. Should women be banned from 
that field? Women will be protected out of well-paying jobs -- but no one is 
going to "protect" women from low-paying jobs slinging hash, scrubbing toilets 
or emptying bedpans. 
The genes in male sperm can be damaged by toxins. But no one ever talks about 
taking jobs away from men, even though what's toxic for the goose may also be 
toxic for toxic for the gander. 
Even as some declare that these vessels must be protected at all costs, others 
are saying the womb is simply a container and not very important at all. A 
California judge recently declared that a surrogate mother who bore a baby for 
a childless couple had no claim on the child. The embryo was the result of a 
union of the donor couple's egg and sperm, implanted into the surrogate mother. 
The surrogate argued that while the child was not genetically hers, she had 
carried it for nine months and had formed a mother's bond with the child 
growing inside her. Nope, said the judge, that doesn't count. The ruling 
implied that the experience of birthing the child was of no significance. The 
mother was nothing more than a parking lot for the baby. 
When some women are seen primarily as vessels -- either to be protected at all 
costs or used as rental space -- all women are demeaned. In the former case, 
women lose their jobs; in the latter, motherhood itself becomes a job. And if 
you cost it out by the hour, the rate of pay is slightly lower than that at the 
notorious Triangle Shirtwaist factory in 1909. 
In the 19th Century, it was accepted medical belief that women should not be 
educated because the brain could not develop at the same time as the ovaries. 
Today, women are still suspect because they don't have the right "math genes" 
or think with the wrong side of the brain or will turn into 
premenstrual-syndrome-crazed witches once a month. 
Women in politics are especially up against this myth of female weakness. A 
woman has to prove she is competent to win; a man often has to prove he is 
spectacularly incompetent to lose. Dianne Feinstein added a pro-death-penalty 
stance to her liberal persona to prove she was tough, and many of her ads 
showed her on the job, busily managing. See, a woman can run things. But she 
still lost. 
In Texas, sexism wasn't subtle at all. Republican gubernatorial nominee Clayton 
Williams suggested that rape was something women ought to enjoy, and there was 
talk of "honey hunts" on his ranch during which cowboys chased prostitutes. He 
treated Democrat Ann Richards as if she were a helpless twit, wondering aloud 
when she was going to start drinking again. Only after his behavior showed him 
to be a colossal fool did he begin to slip in the polls. A woman who displayed 
such behavior would have been laughed out of the race early on. 
In Massachusetts, Lt. Gov. Evelyn Murphy was running for the gubernatorial 
nomination. She had the misfortune to be photographed in a bathing suit during 
the campaign while vacationing in the Caribbean. The picture was not 
flattering, and the state of her thighs became the subject of much media 
discussion; the anatomy of the male candidates was not subjected to such 
commentary. 
Massachusetts Democrat John Silber created a stir when he suggested that the 
"overweening materialism" of some working mothers could lead to child abuse and 
neglect. It cost him votes among younger women, but many other voters privately 
agreed. Despite years of research consistently showing that children of working 
mothers do not lag behind children of at-home mothers in any area of child 
development, the "neglectful working mom" image is still readily accepted. 
For 50 years, researchers have been trying to find the horrible effects of 
maternal employment that have never emerged. And the baby-boomers -- reared 
almost exclusively by at-home mothers -- have more divorces, drug problems and 
unstable career patterns than other generations. But mom at (gasp!) work still 
pushes all the buttons. 
Why? Before the industrial revolution, everybody was at home -- and everybody 
worked. It was only after industrialization that the grim reality of factory 
life created the notion of home as a respite from work's cruelties and women as 
the ministering angels of the hearth. Motherhood was turned from a natural 
human function into some strange variety of sainthood. Saints aren't supposed 
to park their halos and go to work. 
For women, the message is clear. Just because you can wear green-and-beige 
desert camouflage instead of chador black, it doesn't mean things on the home 
front are just fine. In the parlance of the locker room, never drop your left; 
you could get sucker-punched. Where sex discrimination is concerned, there is 
no such thing as yesterday's news. It keeps turning up in tomorrow's headlines. 
