IT'S TIME TO DO YOUR END-OF-THE-YEAR REAL ESTATE TAX PLANNING 
The end of 1989 is rapidly approaching. But you still have time for your 
year-end real estate tax planning to minimize your 1989 income taxes. Here are 
some suggestions if you want to lower your taxes: 
Buy a home. If you don't already own a home, acquiring one can cut your income 
taxes while you get to enjoy the benefits of home ownership. Uncle Sam now 
allows you to deduct the interest on a home "acquisition mortgage" up to $1 
million when you buy, construct or improve your principal residence or second 
home. Deducting mortgage interest is usually better than paying non-deductible 
rent. 
Deduct the mortgage loan fee. When buying a home, if the mortgage lender 
charges a loan fee to approve your loan for buying, constructing or improving 
your primary residence, you can deduct the loan fee as itemized interest. 
However, the IRS says you must pay the loan fee by separate check if you want 
to deduct the entire amount in the year paid. But if you allow the lender to 
subtract the loan fee from your loan proceeds, then the IRS says you can only 
deduct the loan fee over the life of the mortgage. 
Obtain a home-equity loan. In addition to the interest deduction on your 
home-acquisition mortgage, you can also deduct the interest on a home-equity 
loan up to $100,000. Many shrewd taxpayers are now paying off their mostly 
non-deductible credit card, auto and personal loans, and replacing them with 
deductible home-equity loans. However, if you borrow for business purposes, 
regardless of the amount, then your interest becomes deductible as a business 
expense. 
Sell your home and buy a replacement. Another way to maximize your 1989 real 
estate tax deductions is to sell your primary residence and buy a replacement 
home. Internal Revenue Code 1034 allows you to defer paying tax on your sale 
profit if you purchase a replacement principal residence of equal or greater 
cost within 24 months before or after the sale. If you buy a home that requires 
a larger mortgage, you will be increasing your deductible mortgage interest and 
property tax deductions. 
Deduct your moving expenses. If you move because of a change in job locations, 
whether or not you change employers, you may qualify to deduct your moving 
expenses. However, the tax law says your new job site must be at least 35 miles 
farther away from your old home than was your old employment location. 
To illustrate, if your old job was 10 miles from your old home, your new job 
must be at least 45 miles (10 plus 35) from your former residence. In addition, 
you must be employed in the vicinity of your new job location at least 39 weeks 
during the next year after your move, or 78 weeks in the next two years if you 
are self-employed. 
By completing the residence change in 1989, you can deduct all your household 
moving expenses plus up to $3,000 of indirect costs, such as all or part of 
your real estate sales commission for selling your old home, house-hunting 
trips, and even temporary living expenses. 
If you are 55 or older, sell your home and claim up to $125,000 of tax-free 
profits. The "over 55 rule" of Internal Revenue Code 121 allows you to claim up 
to $125,000 of tax-free profits when selling your principal residence if you or 
your co-owner spouse are 55 or older on the day of sale, have owned and lived 
in the principal residence any three of the five years before the sale, and 
have never used this tax break before. 
Make a tax-deferred exchange. Investment or business property can qualify for 
an IRC 1031 tax-deferred exchange for other "like kind" property. Reasons for 
making such exchanges include: trading for property with a greater depreciable 
basis, avoiding tax on profits, acquiring a more desirable property and 
disposing of an unsuitable property. 
Delayed "Starker" exchanges are also available under IRC 1031(a)(3) if you want 
to sell your property and have a third-party intermediary hold the sale 
proceeds while you designate within 45 days a property to be acquired within 
180 days. 
Defer a property sale into next year. If you want to sell a property that does 
not qualify for tax-deferral or tax exemption, you can push the sale into 1990 
or a later tax year by using a lease with option to buy. An installment sale 
will partially accomplish the same tax result. 
Deduct a casualty or theft loss. You can deduct a loss that was "sudden, 
unusual or unexpected," such as fire, flood, hurricane, earthquake, accident, 
theft, windstorm, water pipe breakage or tornado damage. However, casualty 
losses are tax-deductible only on the loss that exceeds 10% of your adjusted 
gross income. 
Deduct expenses for your real estate business activities. If you own business 
or investment real estate, don't forget that you can deduct applicable expenses 
such as operating costs, legal fees, accounting charges, business travel costs 
and other applicable expenses. These tax-deductible expenses will help minimize 
your 1989 taxable income. For further details on maximizing your 1989 real 
estate tax deductions, please consult your tax adviser. 
