MOM NUDGED MORRISON BACK TO BASKETBALL; 
COACHING: FORMER USC MENTOR ENDS THREE-YEAR ABSENCE. HE'LL BE ON HOME BENCH AT 
SAN JOSE STATE. 
This is a story of Mother Knows Best. Exit Robert Young, stage right. Enter 
Louise Moran. 
While her son, former USC basketball Coach Stan Morrison, worked himself sick 
in picturesque Santa Barbara, Moran decided she should pick up the telephone. 
"She called one day and said, 'What are you running from?' " Morrison recalls. 
"She thought I was burying myself in my work because I was so pained by not 
coaching. There was a great deal of truth in that." 
So a gentle reminder from his 70-year-old mother helped nudge Morrison back 
toward a basketball court. He lives there now, amid the squeak of high-tops on 
hardwood, shrieking whistles and winded players. 
When San Jose State christens its new arena and new season Friday night against 
South Alabama, Morrison will drag his coach's grimace out of the closet and 
plant himself on the home bench. It will end a three-year absence from coaching 
for California's basketball vagabond. 
Morrison was a sophomore on Cal's 1959 NCAA championship team. He later coached 
at Sacramento's El Camino High School, guided the freshman team at San Jose 
State, assisted at USC, took over at Pacific, then returned to USC as head 
coach. 
When that job came to a puzzling crash landing in 1986, Morrison slid up the 
coast to UC Santa Barbara. As athletic director there, he ignored the beaches, 
worked way too many hours and eavesdropped on basketball Coach Jerry Pimm's 
halftime speeches. 
But the powerful grip of coaching eventually prevailed. By the time Oct. 15 
arrived -- Morrison's 50th birthday -- he began San Jose State's first practice 
with typical enthusiasm. 
"It was unbelievable," Morrison says. "I had chills when I blew the whistle on 
Oct. 15. Major-league goose bumps." 
That was a natural reaction. But Morrison had a more urgent concern than 
basketball practice in 1988. While in Santa Barbara, persistent fatigue and a 
disturbingly pale complexion sent him through months of medical tests. 
Doctors were perplexed. They ultimately took bone marrow from his lower back, a 
painful process with more painful ramifications: They suspected leukemia. 
Eight days later, on Dec. 8, the news came back. Pernicious anemia. Treatable, 
with regular Vitamin B-12 shots. No leukemia. 
"I cried," Morrison says. 
Morrison spent a strange seven years at USC, a decidedly football school, twice 
directing the Trojans into the NCAA Tournament and sharing the Pacific 10 
Conference title in 1985. 
Eventually, he ran straight into an immovable obstacle named Mike McGee. 
McGee became USC's athletic director in the summer of 1984. Two years later, 
after an 11-17 showing, Morrison resigned under pressure and became an 
associate athletic director at the school. 
Within months, he fled to Santa Barbara. 
Morrison will not specifically address the USC issue, but it seems clear that 
he and McGee simply did not get along. McGee also replaced football Coach Ted 
Tollner and encouraged baseball Coach Rod Dedeaux into retirement. 
"Mike's not an easy guy sometimes, especially if you're not one of 'his 
people,' " San Jose State Athletic Director Randy Hoffman says. "And he always 
wanted his own people in the football and basketball positions." 
Says Morrison: "I know when you carry bitterness, it's such an energy-sapping 
process. I just knew I needed to leave USC." 
So he did. Despite his administrative responsibilities, Morrison spent much of 
his time in Santa Barbara with a round, leather ball occupying his thoughts. 
Hoffman remembers conference meetings in which Morrison drew basketball plays 
on napkins. Pimm, a longtime friend, did nothing to discourage his new boss's 
obvious addiction. 
"I gave him a coach's shirt, invited him into the locker room before games, at 
halftime, after games," Pimm says. "I did everything I could to feed his 
coaching hunger." 
Only someone like Hoffman could offer the real meal. He fired Bill Berry last 
March, capping a tumultuous season in which 10 players walked out in protest of 
Berry's coaching methods. 
Hoffman hired Morrison last April. 
Morrison takes ebullience to new levels when talking about the Spartans. He 
inherits a team that went 5-23 last season, was rocked by dissension and has 
only three players with major-college experience. 
"I didn't come in with my eyes closed, but I didn't know the high detail of the 
situation here," he says. "Three of our top four post players didn't play at 
all last year. But that's part of what I'm about, taking on a great challenge." 
The returning "star," guard Dwain Daniels, could not collect playing time until 
most of his teammates left in a huff. He averaged 9.1 points. 
"We are not the Boston Celtics, by any stretch of the imagination," Morrison 
says. "I really am at square one, moving toward square two. I just don't know 
how many squares there are." 
