BATTLE GROWS OVER SCHOOLS' MERGER; 
EDUCATION: THE COURTROOM SHOWDOWN PROMISES TO SHOW THE INNER WORKINGS OF A 
GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO LIKE THEIR PRIVACY. 
After voting 16 to 5 to merge with Harvard School on Monday night, trustees 
from Westlake School adjourned to Jimmy's restaurant to celebrate a "wonderful 
dream" come true. 
"What this is about is creating a wonderful school," exulted Westlake Trustee 
Sheldon Sloan, predicting that it will "set standards not just for the West but 
for the United States. We're going to have a first-class prep school in this 
town the likes of which has not been seen before." 
Absent from the festivities at the tony Beverly Hills eatery were a small group 
of trustees who viewed the merger as the death of a dream that was Westlake 
School. 
In their effort to preserve the independence of the prestigious Holmby Hills 
school whose graduates include actress Candice Bergen and astronaut Sally Ride, 
merger opponents, including two trustees, have filed suit seeking to block it. 
The suit contends that the merger was ill-conceived and was brought to a vote 
without sufficient consideration of the options. The opponents contend that the 
deal was engineered by a group of wealthy, socially prominent people led by 
Peter and Helen Bing. The Bings, West Los Angeles residents who are active in a 
variety of local philanthropic efforts, have close ties to both schools. 
A third trustee, David May II, a scion of the department store family, quit the 
board after 24 years as a trustee to protest the merger, contending that 
Harvard's ties to the Episcopal Church were not compatible with Westlake's 
non-sectarian traditions. 
Opponents say the merger would essentially cede Westlake's $50-million Holmby 
Hills property to Harvard, whose ex officio board president is Frederick H. 
Borsch, bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Los Angeles. In their lawsuit, they 
point out that an article in the November issue of the diocesan newsletter 
quotes Harvard Headmaster Thomas C. Hudnut as confirming a continued 
relationship with the church in the merged junior and senior high school. 
Since the surprise announcement in October that a merger had been agreed upon 
in principle, the Westlake community has been in an uproar. A coalition of 
alumnae, parents and students oppose the merger for reasons varying from a 
preference for single-sex education to a concern that the venerable girls' 
school had underestimated its value and made a bad business bargain. 
A majority of Harvard parents favor going co-ed, in keeping with a national 
trend among private boys' schools. 
The suit seeking to block the merger was filed by Westlake parents and has been 
joined by Trustees Anita May Rosenstein, David May's daughter, and Rodney 
Berle. 
The courtroom showdown promises to reveal in considerable detail the inner 
workings of a group of people who like to keep their business private, 
particularly the Bings. Helen Bing is a Westlake trustee and benefactor, and 
Peter Bing, a physician, serves in a similar capacity at Harvard, whose campus 
is in Studio City. 
Asked for her thoughts on the merger and her role in it, Helen Bing said, "I 
really don't have any comment to make." 
Sworn declarations filed in Los Angeles Superior Court allege that the merger 
was the work of a cabal of Bing associates on the Westlake board, and that 
other board members were unwilling to challenge the deal because of the Bings' 
social prominence and financial power. 
According to the declarations, Trustee Sloan is an attorney for the Bings, as 
is Daniel Belin, husband of Trustee Daisy Belin. Helen Bing's personal 
physician, Gary Gitnick, is a trustee, the documents said. Sloan declined to 
comment on his professional ties to the Bings. Belin and Gitnick could not be 
reached for comment. 
A letter to the board from David May included in the lawsuit documents notes 
that in 1981 Helen Bing donated the money to buy a home for Westlake Headmaster 
Nathan Reynolds and his family, who had been living in what May said were 
deplorable conditions on campus. 
May also noted that Bing had vowed to withdraw her financial support for 
Westlake if she did not get her way about the merger. 
A blistering attack on the manner in which the merger was handled is included 
in one letter from May to Helen Bing that is included in the documents. "I feel 
that everything that you and Peter want to accomplish could have been done very 
easily if it was done in a businesslike and tasteful manner that you had every 
right to expect." 
May characterized the handling of the merger as "incompetent," lacking in 
"prudent judgment, tasteless, insensitive and heavy-handed." 
Later in the same letter, May said two expressions he had never before used 
came to mind in describing the terms of the merger: "male chauvinist" and 
"sexist." 
Under the signed merger agreement, the new school will be named 
Harvard-Westlake, the board will be controlled by current Harvard trustees and 
Hudnut will run the school. Reynolds, who is nearing retirement age, will be 
provost. Harvard's Studio City facilities would become the campus for high 
school-age students and lower grades would be housed at Westlake. 
Sloan and Reynolds used exactly the same words to respond to the lawsuit's 
charges that the merger was engineered by the Bings and boosted by cronyism on 
the Westlake board. 
"That's nonsense," the two men said in separate interviews. 
Sloan said the real issue -- education -- has gotten lost amid the fight over 
the process, which he concedes was imperfect. "There's nothing nefarious. No 
secret deals. No smoking guns," he said. 
Helen Bing is by all accounts a tireless worker for Westlake and a major 
benefactor. "She's an incredible human being," Sloan said. 
Indeed, even as he criticizes the merger in his letters, May describes Helen 
Bing as the school's "most valuable trustee," even without considering her 
financial support. 
In addition to serving as a Harvard trustee, Peter Bing serves on the Stanford 
University board and is a director of the Times Mirror Co., which publishes the 
Los Angeles Times. 
Peter Bing's mother is Anna Bing Arnold, whose philanthropic activities are 
legendary in Los Angeles. The family fortune came from the New York real estate 
holdings of Arnold's first husband, Leo Bing. 
In an effort to thwart the merger, the Westlake parents have raised $4.7 
million in cash and pledges, with Trustees Berle, television mogul Aaron 
Spelling and film executive Samuel Goldwyn offering to cover the school's 
deficit for the next four years if the merger is thwarted -- the assumption 
being that Westlake may lose some students if Harvard goes coeducational on its 
own. 
The lawsuit questions, however, whether Harvard is actually poised to go co-ed 
on its own, and whether Westlake must immediately decide to merge or be left 
behind. 
According to a letter from Hudnut to Harvard parents, the Studio City school 
has no timetable to become co-ed. 
In the letter, Hudnut estimated that the cost of going co-ed without Westlake 
at $30 million and said that if the Westlake merger does not occur, Harvard 
would be back to "square one," faced with the prospect of raising the money, 
finding property and building a second campus. 
