NEA AND THE ARTS: THE TURMOIL CONTINUES; 
ART REVIEW; 
'WITNESSES' SHOW PRESENTS AIDS AS A COMPLEX ISSUE 
"Witnesses: Against Our Vanishing," a modest and touching exhibition about AIDS 
at Artists Space, has been catapulted into the national spotlight by a raging 
controversy over government support of the arts. 
This may be a very good thing -- coming, as it does, on the heels of a record 
auction season. The clamor will surely draw crowds to an exhibition that would 
get little notice under calmer conditions. If nothing else, visitors will see 
that art can be more than a commodity. It can also be an expression of profound 
emotion, created from experience with no thought of profit. 
The exhibition, which opens here tonight and runs through Jan. 6 at the gallery 
in Manhattan's TriBeCa district, was organized by photographer Nan Goldin, who 
confronted the devastation of AIDS when she tried to reconnect with old friends 
after she recovered from drug addiction. 
Goldin originally conceived of a more celebrity show than the one that 
developed. But the reality of death in her artistic community changed her 
vision from one that was essentially life-affirming to a more sober examination 
of vulnerability and loss. Theory gave way to personal experience as she 
enlisted works from artists who had lived and worked on Manhattan's Lower East 
Side. 
In the catalogue essay, Goldin says she views the exhibition not as "a 
definitive statement about the state of art in the era of AIDS but as a vehicle 
to explore the effects of the plague on one group of artists in a way that 
hopefully will speak to all survivors of this crisis." 
The result is typical of theme shows often staged in such "alternative spaces" 
-- noncommercial galleries that struggle along on low budgets but often manage 
to pull off significant projects. 
What we see in "Witnesses: Against Our Vanishing" is a varied array of works -- 
photographs, paintings and sculptures in assorted media -- linked by a social 
issue. Some of the works are so abstract or oblique in their references to AIDS 
that an unwitting observer might miss the connection. Other images confront 
sexuality and disease directly. 
This mixed bag of art is aesthetically incoherent -- and purposefully so. The 
idea was for artists of different sensibilities to respond to the theme, either 
through works they had already made or by creating pieces specifically for the 
exhibition. Some didn't live long enough to see the show, others are sick and 
still others are physically healthy but emotionally wounded. 
The late Vittorio Scarpati contemplated death with agonizingly imaginative 
clarity in a series of ink drawings done in his hospital bed. Wiry angels, 
mortals and dissected bodies limned on sketch book pages surround a juicy red 
drawing of a heart, rather like petals of a flower, in a display of his work. 
Painter James Nares has charted "Heartbeats" as wavy ribbons of pigment on 
canvas and paired them with depictions of ordinary people pushing shopping 
carts or congregating on street corners. The rhythm of their collective heart 
is writ large while their bodies blend into crowds. 
Homosexuality is a theme of some of the work but never the whole story. Allen 
Frame's casual photos of gay people talk about long-term friendships, for 
example, while David Armstrong's photographs are probing portraits of 
individuals. 
Dorit Cypis has bared her body and soul in a series of small photographic 
self-portraits set on shelves. Their clarity contrasts sharply with a large, 
shadowy photograph of a reclining woman, framed (or entombed?) above the 
shelves. This would be an intriguing treatment of human vulnerability in any 
exhibition; in the context of AIDS, the piece, called "Yield," presents the 
body as a highly problematic container that can be diseased and lost while the 
mind watches. 
Another effective group of works, Shelburne Thurber's color photographs of 
empty, mundane bedrooms, evokes betrayed secrets and a sense of loss. 
Other approaches to a troubling theme are Tom Chesley's gritty paintings of 
drifting cages, bridges and hospitals; Ken Tisa's paintings of isolated figures 
searching for their spirits and Greer Lankton's sculptural "Skins," portrayed 
as broken shells of bodies. 
There is an undeniable message here, and it is political to the extent that it 
questions a power structure that has been slow to take AIDS seriously. But 
there is no sloganeering and there is nothing that suggests easy answers. Art 
is not proposed as a solution, only a way of examining feelings and issues as 
artist have done through the ages. 
Perhaps the best aspect of "Witnesses" is that it presents AIDS as a complex 
issue that elicits a wide range of responses. Rage, denial, grief and 
transcendence are all filtered through the artists' perceptions and made 
visual. 
BACKGROUNDThe AIDS exhibit at Artists Space was originally supported by a 
$10,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. The grant was withdrawn 
Nov. 8 in the wake of the controversyNEA's funding of allegedly obscene 
photographs. Endowment chairman John E. Frohnmayer's explanation of the action 
cited the politically charged nature of the exhibit; this raised concerns that 
a new Endowment provision aimed at denying federal funds to artwork judged 
obscene will be broadened to effect political censorship. 
