BILL BOYARSKY: POLITICAL PERIL IN THE MOUNTAINS 
Perennially threatened by fire and slides, the Santa Monica Mountains are well 
known as a dangerous place to live. What you may not know is that the mountains 
are just as dangerous to govern. 
Incumbent homeowners ferociously resist the arrival of newcomers. The rugged 
topography raises safety issues that must be decided by elected officials 
relying on conflicting technical advice. Environmentalists are major players, 
for the mountains are a playground for the entire region. 
A playground, but also a political graveyard. Two decades ago, then-City 
Councilman Jim Potter was beaten by Joel Wachs because homeowners felt he'd 
allowed too many houses to be built in the Santa Monicas. Two years ago, 
anti-development homeowners in the far western portion of the mountain range 
put together a rebellion against Los Angeles County Supervisor Mike Antonovich, 
giving him a real scare before he finally won reelection. 
So it's easy to understand the potential dangers awaiting Los Angeles City 
Councilman Michael Woo in a small -- but symbolic -- dispute with one of his 
mountain constituents, Andrew Suser. Suser owns a home in the Hollywoodland 
subdivision on a narrow street in Beachwood Canyon, in the portion of the 
mountains known as the Hollywood Hills. 
Property owner Russell Belinsky owns the lot on the steep hillside above 
Suser's. With his lot zoned for single-family residences, Belinsky in 1989 
applied for a permit to build a three-story house. As his lawyer later 
explained, Belinsky and his wife are a young couple simply attempting to follow 
the law and build a house. 
However, citing recent city restrictions on home construction in the area, 
Planning Department officials at first turned Belinsky down. But when 
Belinsky's geologist reported that construction would be safe, the department 
reversed itself and supported his application, subject to several safety 
conditions. 
 Woo, a cautious man respectful of procedure, went along with the city 
bureaucrats. As Woo explained it to me, if he overruled the officials, the city 
could be hit with a huge lawsuit from an outraged property owner. As is the 
custom, the other council members deferred to the councilman from the district 
and approved the project. 
About that time, Suser called me. He told me the construction threatened his 
house and the safety of his family. 
I try to avoid these stories. I'm as confused as the politicians by the 
conflicting geological claims. But Suser kept calling. He besieged me with 
documents, some of them arriving in envelopes marked with red "rush" and 
"confidential" labels. He didn't get mad at my failure to report on them. Nor 
did he lose his temper when I confessed that one of my cats had chewed up the 
construction site photographs he had loaned me. 
Finally, impressed by his persistence, I went to see him. 
Suser gave me his geologist's report:"Although it may be feasible to construct 
two residences on the steep slopes ascending from your property, there appears 
to be inadequate data to substantiate safety. . . ." 
He showed me the proposed building site, on a narrow, unpaved hillside road 
that serves as a hiking trail into Griffith Park. The city spread out below, 
from downtown's towers to the Westside to Santa Monica Bay in the distance. 
Behind us was the park. 
While the hillside was too steep for me to live on, I could see why Belinsky 
wanted to build there. For all the political complications, it's a beautiful 
spot. 
Although only one house is involved, the building site's close proximity to 
Griffith Park has made the issue important to Santa Monica Mountains 
preservationists -- so important that it might come to haunt Woo if he decides, 
as expected, to run for mayor in 1993. 
The Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, a state agency created to stop 
overdevelopment, unsuccessfully intervened early this year. In attempting to 
persuade the City Council to block the construction of the house, conservancy 
official John Diaz said, "The proposed project would adversely impact the 
Griffith Park watershed, disrupt a natural watercourse and wildlife corridor 
and obliterate one of the few remaining active trails in the area." 
Diaz told me that there are about 170 such Hollywoodland vacant lots adjacent 
to Griffith Park, and if this house is approved, it may clear the way for other 
projects. 
The battle over the Belinsky house, combined with similar disputes, could unite 
environmentalists and homeowners against Woo. Woo was elected to the council as 
a slow-growth environmentalist. But if he puts an environmental plank in 
mayoral platform, Hollywoodland homeowners would be certain to shred it. 
No wonder politicians think the Santa Monica Mountains may be a great spot to 
visit, but not a safe place to represent. 
