ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
UPS' 757 PASSES AIRPORT NOISE TEST 
United Parcel Service successfully flew a Boeing 757 out of John Wayne Airport 
Tuesday -- without violating noise-abatement standards. The cargo carrier is 
seeking permission from Orange County officials to begin cargo flights to 
Kansas City when the new, $50-million John Wayne passenger terminal opens in 
April, 1990. 
On Monday, Midway Airline passed the noise tests with a McDonnell Douglas 
MD-87. Under the airport's proposed new flight allocations for April, Midway 
would be entitled to one flight each day to Chicago. 
Meanwhile, Federal Express, which has led the fight by air cargo carriers for 
access to John Wayne, plans to test a Boeing 727 on Friday in hopes of getting 
permission to originate a nonstop flight to Memphis, Tenn., in April. 
So far no cargo carriers have been allocated flights because of Orange County 
officials' longstanding opposition to air cargo operations at the 
space-squeezed, noise-sensitive airport with a runway that ends near a Newport 
Beach residential neighborhood. 
Federal Express has threatened to sue the county if it cannot gain access to 
John Wayne. 
Airport officials have been skeptical about the 727's ability to meet the 
county's strict aircraft noise standards and have argued that both UPS and 
Federal Express have demanded ground facilities for which there is no room. 
The airport's flight allocations will be up for review at a public hearing to 
be held by the County Airport Commission at 7 p.m. Nov. 8 in the County Hall of 
Administration. 
American Airlines has lobbied strongly to retain its current flight allocations 
in the face of stiff competition from other air carriers who want a bigger 
share of the Orange County market. American recently sent thousands of letters 
to members of its frequent flier program urging them to write or call the Board 
of Supervisors. 
"I've heard that this tactic isn't going over too well with county government," 
said airport spokeswoman Kathie Rutherford. 
American Airlines officials could not be reached for comment late Tuesday. 
JEFFREY A. PERLMAN 
