ANN CONWAY: THEY BLEND HOSPITALITY WITH MYSTIQUE 
Sometimes it isn't easy, living in a landmark by the bay. 
The tour boats cruise by, says Beverly Cohen, and the guides announce: "This 
was John Wayne's house. 
Now it's Bob and Beverly Cohen's house and they're in Europe for three years." 
"It's as if people need to feel his home is untouched," Beverly says, 
whispering. "That it's still his. We have to be very careful. . . ." 
So the party-loving Cohens, who bought the Newport Beach bay home last year for 
a breathtaking $6.5 million, are making changes slowly. They've raised the roof 
in the sprawling, buff-tone living room. Installed a magnificent archway 
entrance to the dining room. Created a plant-filled breakfast room on the 
patio. And there are plans for a second-story master suite and guest quarters 
for each of their three grown children. 
But the marble bathroom sinks that were built tall for the tall actor remain. 
And, for now, so do the bayside bedrooms the Duke shared with his wife, Pilar, 
and their three children. 
Those details still thrill visitors to the Cohen house. And nobody knows it 
better than Beverly, who divides her time between Newport Beach and Beverly 
Hills (where she holds court with Bob in a 4,000-square-foot penthouse in the 
Four Seasons Hotel, which they own). "You get the feeling that people don't 
want any part of the house destroyed," she says. 
The Wayne mystique and the Cohen hospitality make for grand party-giving. Last 
year, Beverly staged celebrity-studded soirees almost every night of the 
Newport Beach boat parade (Author Joseph Wambaugh was a guest; so were composer 
-- the "Rocky" theme -- Carol Connors, hair mogul Vidal Sassoon, songbird 
Marilyn McCoo and fashion arbiter Mr. Blackwell.) 
This year will be no exception, with two of Beverly's pet-charity bashes having 
premier price tags. On Dec. 19, supporters of Heritage Pointe -- a Jewish home 
for the aged -- will donate $10,000 per couple to dine and watch the boat 
parade. And on Dec. 17, couples will pay $1,000 to attend a fund-raiser for 
Parent Help USA, an organization dedicated to the prevention of child abuse. 
"They just recently called me," Beverly says of Parent Help, her newest cause 
(annually, Beverly helps raise more than $600,000 for the Sephardic Hebrew 
Academy in Los Angeles.) "And when I met them, I could see they're giving their 
time freely to help children. That is what impresses me about an organization 
-- that they feel so strongly about a cause they spend every minute of every 
day helping others. 
"My children are my life. I can't imagine anybody having children and then 
abusing them." 
Her dream for a drop-dead party guest on the 17th? None other than Sly 
Stallone. "I go to his acupuncturist," Beverly says with a wide smile. "I'm 
working on it." 
Having a party is like putting on a play, Beverly says. "People love to come to 
a fantasy, mingle with stars. You've got to think big." 
Ted Turner with his head-turner: Local members of Physicians for Social 
Responsibility (PSR) bestowed their first Eisenhower Award upon media mogul Ted 
Turner at UC Irvine's University Club last week. The award will be given 
annually to a citizen who has made outstanding contributions to the cause for 
world peace. 
"Ted Turner's network has carried innumerable programs regarding the nuclear 
threat, arms control and citizen-to-citizen diplomacy," said PSR activist Dr. 
Robert Wesley of Irvine. Wesley and his wife, Shirin, dined alongside Turner 
and his fiancee, Jane Fonda (Turner bought the princess of fitness an opal and 
diamond engagement ring last week). Afterward, Wesley presented the chairman of 
Turner Broadcasting System with a handsome plaque embellished with an 
Eisenhower silver dollar. 
The couple, who did plenty of kissing and hand-holding during dinner, dug into 
their broiled salmon dinner with gusto but declined dessert -- ice cream and 
fudge cake. "They told me they never eat dessert," said Wesley, a cardiologist. 
Fonda dressed sedately for the affair in basic black with pearls. 
Among guests were Dr. Lawrence Probes, a member of PSR's board of directors; 
William Morning, executive director of International Physicians for the 
Prevention of Nuclear War; and Dr. Martin Coleman, a member of the PSR's 
steering committee. Proceeds from the banquet will be used to support a yearly 
educational conference for Orange County high school students. 
Crazy about Costner: Emerald Bay's Deeann and Al Baldwin were among the more 
than 1,000 guests living it up with actor Kevin Costner at the Los Angeles 
party following the premiere last week of his new movie, "Dances With Wolves." 
After a screening at the Cineplex Odeon Century Plaza Theaters, the Baldwins 
joined party-goers in a cavernous tent that showcased scenes from the film on 
its walls. "It was amazing," Deeann said. "When we walked in, the walls were 
covered with herds of buffalo. Then, a few minutes later, they were covered 
were scenes from inside a tepee. Wonderful." 
Deeann, special events coordinator for the Angels of the Arts -- the elite, 
all-women support group of the Orange County Performing Arts Center -- said the 
party wasn't unlike Orange County bashes. "It was bigger, of course. But, just 
like here, everybody ate, then got up and left." 
But not before they schmoozed with Costner. "Gorgeous," Deeann said. "I didn't 
want the movie to end." 
