HOME DESIGN; 
INTERIOR LIVES 
For the past ten years, Southern Californians have been obsessively interested 
in home design. This is not surprising: "style" runs a predictable course. In 
the teenage years through the twenties, your average person is usually 
interested in personal adornment -- clothes -- and by extension, the 
accoutrements of a successful personal appearance: watches, fancy datebooks, 
prestigious cars. In the thirties years when a career has been launched, 
private rather than public values become important. This usually means an 
attempt at decorating an apartment. Then comes the desire to own (and 
redecorate) a house -- the stage now commanding the attention of the baby boom 
generation. 
No matter at what stage you find it, however, style is expensive, especially 
home style. Chose the expensive bathroom fixtures and there goes the vacation. 
The fact that the eight international style books produced by writer Suzanne 
Slesin and designer Stafford Cliff combine home design with armchair travel may 
be one reason why they continue to fascinate. Another reason, of course, is 
that they have what's known in the decorating business as "sigh" quality. These 
books show beautiful, real life interiors, demonstrating what some decorating 
magazines have learned and many decorators have not: that a perfectly decorated 
room, or a room without a sense of the owner, looks cold and forbidding no 
matter the weave of the fabric or the cost of the chairs. 
This year, the duo have brought forth two splendid works -- Indian Style, 
photographed by David Brittain (Clarkson Potter, $45), and Spanish Style, with 
stylist Daniel Rozensztroch and photographer Gilles de Chabaneix (Clarkson 
Potter, $45). Both are books about true style -- that is, they show a look, not 
a pricetag. 
The cover of "Indian Style" tells the story. It pictures a small, ochre-colored 
house in the walled city Jaisalmer. Laundry is draped over a second floor 
balcony and a hasty coat of turquoise paint dribbles down the architectural 
details. It may be the house of a poor family by our standards, but it is 
gorgeous. And then some 700 photos peer inside maharajas palaces, Kashmiri 
houseboats, even painted mud huts in the countryside. One photo simply shows a 
tall English cupboard unceremoniously topped with cardboard boxes. Perhaps 
better than in any of their other books, Slesin and Cliff convincingly 
demonstrate that elegance and sophistication doesn't have anything to do with 
money, yet the owner of a mansion as well as an apartment rentor will carry 
away ideas. 
Likewise the just-off-the-press "Spanish Style" is a visual tour de force 
behind closed doors. For the most part, interiors are pin-neat; you can imagine 
stylist Daniel Rozensztroch working behind the scenes to arrange lemons in 
compotes and straighten a collection of antique iron keys adorning a kitchen 
wall. And as they have begun to do in "Indian Style," Slesin and Cliff expand 
their coverage beyond interiors with a bit of Spanish history and color. 
Similar in format to "Spanish Style," Miami Hot &amp; Cool (Clarkson Potter, 
$35) by Laura Cerwinske and Steven Brooke pokes through a variety of Florida 
houses from the beach to the everglades. Though smaller in scale than the 
Slesin-Cliff books -- there are 400 photos compared to some 700 in "Indian 
Style" -- "Miami Hot &amp; Cool" is directly revelant to home decor in Southern 
California. Glancing at the modern beach cottages with their collections of 
Bauer ware, you almost think you are in Southern California. But then there are 
memorable places -- and important decorating lessons in use of color, for 
instance -- in homes such as a tropical tree house raised high in the palms of 
the Florida Keys. 
If cool minimalism is to your taste, The New Moderns by Jonathan Glancey and 
Richard Bryant (Crown, $35) is an international survey of new residential 
architecture. Interiors are constructed to take advantage of light and provide 
ample open space; there's no Post-Modern fussiness here. Although these 
interiors are extremely difficult to photograph because their simple and 
unadorned geometric shapes don't impart the warmth that the residences have in 
real life, Bryant's photographs manage the task quite well. 
Remarkably, Mary Emmerling's passion for the American country look never 
becomes cloying, making it appealing even to fans of modern minimalism. Her 
latest tome, Mary Emmerling's American Country Classics (Clarkson Potter, $40) 
updates American Country, her classic work of ten years ago. Some of these 
interiors are familiar to readers of decorating magazines -- for instance, the 
Malibu residences of Bruce Dern and Peter Guber's Aspen lodge -- but this book 
is a fine montage of country styles, running the gamut from pure country to 
Western cowboy. 
As though to fill the shelves of newly renovated homes, the season also brings 
an excellent book on collectibles. Jaya Jaitly and Kamal Sahar's Crafts of 
Kashmir, Jammu &amp; Ladakh (Abbeville Press, $55) is an intriguing look at a 
variety of crafts from this richly creative area of India. The jeweled nose 
rings and silver necklaces almost make me wish that personal adornment -- not 
family habitat -- was my own stage of Style. 
