'LIAR'S POKER' PROVING TO BE ONE HOT COMMODITY ON WALL STREET; 
SECURITIES: A NEW BOOK RIDICULES TRADING PRACTICES AT SALOMON BROS. A SPOKESMAN 
FOR THE FIRM CALLS IT 'AN AMUSING CARICATURE.' 
Before closing the 1980s annals of excess, add a book by a somewhat 
directionless 1982 art history graduate from Princeton who ended up working for 
Salomon Bros. and who makes the bond-trading business look like a cross between 
"Animal House" and Greed Inc. 
He describes his own voyage from lowly "geek" to venerated king of the trading 
jungle, a perilous journey during which he avoided death in the form of flying 
telephones on the trading floor and a fate worse than death: selling equities 
in Dallas. 
The author is Michael Lewis, age 28 and now retired from the world of finance, 
and the book is "Liar's Poker," which has become harder to get hold of on Wall 
Street than a hot stock. Lewis, who has the well-scrubbed appearance of a 
choirboy and the Louisiana drawl of a good ol' boy, seems an unlikely candidate 
to blow the whistle on Wall Street practices. 
Wall Street is taking it in stride. A Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. trader says he 
bought and read the book the first day it was in the stores, before going to 
the office. He soon found himself on a business trip seated between two Morgan 
Stanley Inc. partners who were reading the book and laughing out loud. A former 
Salomon Bros. employee is annotating his copy, supplying real names for the 
handful of pseudonyms used and adding details to stories. 
The book's title comes from a game played by as few as two people and as many 
as 10. Each player holds a dollar bill and uses the serial number as his 
"hand." Each then bids and attempts to fool the others about his serial number. 
The spirit of the game is similar to the card game "I Doubt It," a test of 
luck, bluff and the ability to size up your opponent. 
Traders view the game as a test of their cunning and risk-taking acumen. For 
that reason, Salomon Chairman John Gutfreund was constantly matching himself 
against the firm's master of the game, John W. Meriwether. 
So this is the story that sets the tone for the book. He writes: "The code of 
the Liar's Poker player was something like the code of the gunslinger. It 
required a trader to accept all challengers." One day Gutfreund walked over to 
Meriwether's desk and said: "One hand, 1 million dollars, no tears." 
Meriwether replied: "No, John, if we're going to play for those kind of 
numbers, I'd rather play for real money. Ten million dollars. No tears." Was 
Meriwether bluffing, or was Gutfreund? Gutfreund could afford such a wager, 
having made about $40 million when Salomon Bros. was sold to Phibro Energy Inc. 
Gutfreund reportedly thought it over, then declined, saying: "You're crazy." 
The chairman slunk away in ignominious defeat. 
The mere possibility of such a wager, according to Lewis, was a symptom of the 
madness of a Wall Street trading room where multimillion-dollar gambles were 
taken all the time -- though usually with other people's money. 
"Large institutions can create cultures where people do things they would never 
do otherwise," Lewis said in an interview. "There is a subculture on Wall 
Street where behavior bears no relation to conventional social behavior." 
This, said Lewis, became clear to him from the moment he entered the Salomon 
Bros. training program: "It resembled nothing as much as my sixth-grade class 
on a day we had a substitute teacher." 
Bob Baker, a public relations spokesman for Salomon Bros., begins his response 
to the book in diplomatic fashion. "I think it's an amusing caricature," he 
says. "I think the first half of the book is very, very funny. We all read it." 
With a little gentle encouragement, Baker elaborates. "A caricature takes 
certain features and exaggerates them. It's 'Animal House.' Was 'Animal House' 
accurate? Is David Levine's work accurate (referring to the New York Review of 
Books political cartoonist)? Well, yes and no. But if you're Margaret Thatcher 
or Francois Mitterrand or Salomon Bros., you expect it comes with the 
territory." 
Wasn't the book true, then? 
Says Baker, "I feel Michael's being as honest with his reader as he was with 
his employer." 
Now he is picking up steam. He offers a literary critique. "I think it's very 
hard to write in the first person. The person who's speaking has to be flawed 
or ironic. Otherwise, that person becomes a divinity. Michael writes wonderful 
dialogue and knows how to set a scene -- and that's not easy. But where the 
book fails is at the end. He loses his point of view. In the first half, he's a 
greedy little (expletive) like everyone else, and at the end he's like Jim 
Bakker, 'born again,' righteous, so full of virtue that he can't sully his 
hands with comers." 
Baker now sounds like a Bible-thumping sermonizer himself. "At the end you 
don't care about this little guy. He violates Rule 6: Don't take yourself too 
seriously. He becomes tiresome. At the end, this little creature becomes so 
saccharine, you feel sorry for him." 
The spokesman for mighty Salomon Bros. concludes with a high-pitched giggle. 
Even Bob Baker concedes that Michael Lewis was one of the most successful 
members of the Salomon Bros. trading class of 1985. When Lewis joined the 
training program, it consisted of 127 people, from the teacher's pets in the 
front row to Japanese trainees who snoozed during class to the back-row boys 
who howled and hooted and hurled paper missiles at the front-row nerds and, 
occasionally, at the firm's managing directors. Lewis sat somewhere in the 
middle. 
The level of maturity didn't improve much out on the trading floor. A fearsome 
trader known as the "Human Piranha" uses a certain expletive as noun, verb, 
adjective and adverb. The traders in the mortgage-backed securities department 
are portrayed as Salomon's "baddest dudes," who play pranks such as snatching 
the clothes from the suitcase of a colleague headed on a vacation and stuffing 
the bag with soggy paper towels. 
On Fridays, the department indulged in an afternoon "feeding frenzy," putting 
clients on hold while traders gorged themselves from five-gallon drums of 
guacamole. Once, the department head, Lewis S. Ranieri, cut the bow tie off the 
blouse of a new female trainee with a pair of scissors, then handed her a $100 
bill and suggested she buy something else. 
Ranieri said through a spokesman that he has read the book but doesn't want to 
comment. 
If an incredulous reader wonders whether Lewis conjured up these descriptions, 
take heed of a former Salomon trader who confirmed the gist of the portrait, 
adding that: "If you fired a shotgun full of M&amp;Ms over the mortgage 
department, not a single one would hit the ground." 
What fed this bond-trading frenzy was the increase in collective borrowing by 
government, corporations and consumers -- from $2.8 trillion in 1977 to $7 
trillion by 1985. In addition, a 1979 decision by Paul A. Volcker, then 
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, to maintain a steady money supply led to 
wild swings in interest rates -- and thus in the prices of previously staid 
bonds. 
As king of the bond market, Salomon Bros. for a time became the most profitable 
firm on Wall Street. 
Though many Ivy League college graduates aspired to this world of high finance, 
the blond-haired, animated Lewis took a circuitous route. 
He majored in art history at Princeton, taking only one pass-fail class in 
economics. 
After graduation, he worked seven months as a stock clerk for a private art 
gallery in New York and four months as a woodcutter in Frenchtown, N.J. 
Then it was off to Britain. He followed his girlfriend (now his wife) to 
London, where she intended to study politics at the London School of Economics. 
Lewis enrolled in the economics program. 
While in London, he was invited to dinner with the Queen Mother, a scene 
described in the book. It turned out to be a fund-raising event with hundreds 
of other people. Seated next to him was the wife of a Salomon Bros. managing 
director. After cross-examining him during dinner, she urged Lewis to come to 
work for her husband's firm. She subsequently arranged his admission to the 
Salomon Bros. training program. 
"Wall Street paid top dollar for what I could do, which was nothing," Lewis 
writes. He started at $45,000. "I didn't really imagine I was going to work, 
more as if I were going to collect lottery winnings." 
Lewis says he decided to write the book after two years on the job, when the 
firm laid off 1,000 people just before the October, 1987, crash. Two entire 
departments were sacked; some people with 15 years' experience were told to 
leave before the end of the day. 
He originally planned a less personal account of Wall Street in the 1980s, but 
his own odyssey -- "Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street" is the book's 
subtitle -- took over most of the narrative. 
Lewis recounts his experience at the London bond-selling office: "My job was to 
get people to do things. When my advice was completely spurious, people would 
take it anyway." 
His first customer, disguised in the book as "Herman the German," lost $140,000 
and his job after Lewis unwittingly unloaded on him Salomon's position in weak 
AT&amp;T bonds. Lewis said when he discovered the poor quality of the bonds and 
complained to the trader who urged him to sell them to the German, the trader 
responded: "Look, who do you work for, this guy or Salomon Bros.?" 
On another occasion, Lewis "jammed" -- or dumped -- $86 million worth of 
Olympia &amp; York bonds Salomon wanted to unload on a French client. He 
received calls of congratulations from New York, including one from the Human 
Piranha. But Lewis was uncomfortable. "As a rule, the greater the praise 
lavished upon a salesman within Salomon, the greater the eventual suffering of 
the customer." 
Far from destroying every buyable copy, Salomon's London office is considering 
a bulk purchase for its employees, and Chairman Gutfreund bought copies and 
gave them to the firm's managing directors. 
"This is interesting for several reasons," said a former Salomon Bros. trader. 
"First, it isn't as though the other managing directors couldn't afford to buy 
the book. Second, it shows that they don't care whether the book casts them in 
a favorable light because they figure, 'Hey, it's about us.' And finally it 
shows that they think customers have short memories." 
If there is a lesson in "Liar's Poker," it may be that another sucker, another 
"market fool," is born every minute. As Lewis writes about the firm's clients, 
"the truly incredible thing about them . . . was that no matter how roughly 
they were treated they kept coming back for more." Or as a senior trader joked 
with the training class: "Some people are born to be customers." 
It is that sentiment that leads many Wall Street financiers to believe that 
Salomon Bros. isn't likely to suffer a great deal from its portrayal. And 
despite Lewis' protestations of his own financial naivete, many people still 
seek his guidance. 
"There is nothing people want to believe more than that someone out there can 
turn their money into more money," Lewis said. "People are more gullible in 
financial matters than with most other things. Salomon Bros. was profitable, so 
people looked to us for advice. What they didn't realize was that we were 
profitable by taking money from them. 
"I tried to demonstrate in the book how careful people must be about the advice 
they receive. Yet when I go to promote the book, people still ask me what they 
should do with their money!" 
For the record: Lewis conservatively invests in money-market funds and in 
Japanese and German securities. 
Despite the fact Lewis' salary, bonus and benefits totaled $275,000 a year at 
Salomon, he decided to leave his job at the beginning of 1988 (just after bonus 
payment) because it became routine, he said in his epilogue. While he said his 
father grew up with the belief that money is a rough guide to one's 
contribution to the prosperity of society, Lewis had learned otherwise. 
"Never before have so many unskilled 24-year-olds made so much money in so 
little time as we did this decade in New York and London. There has never 
before been such a fantastic exception to the rule of the marketplace that one 
takes out no more than one puts in." As a result, he says, money no longer is 
connected to his feeling of self-worth. 
Lewis wrote that in leaving Salomon Bros. he wanted to take a risk. But he 
conceded that "I walked away from the clearest shot I'll ever have at being a 
millionaire." 
There is, however, no need to take up a collection. Not only is Lewis' wife a 
London-based investment banker, but he says almost every major studio has 
called to negotiate movie rights. One has offered to let Lewis do the script. 
The paperback rights will probably fetch six figures. The German publisher paid 
about $147,000, and Japanese publishers are making inquiries. 
