SOUTHERN SECTION BASKETBALL CAPSULES; 
SAN FERNANDO VALLEY LEAGUE 
Bell-Jeff 
COACH: Steve Wahl, 1st season 
LAST SEASON: 9-15; 4th in league, 5-5 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Wahl replaces Joe Dunn, who stepped down after 12 seasons in 
August because of personal reasons. Three junior starters, swingman Brian Lee 
(6-foot-3), point guard Bryon Camacho (5-7) and guard Ignacio Castro (6-0) 
return. Wahl calls Lee the top all-around player. "He can play forward, guard 
or center and score and rebound," Wahl said. Camacho averaged 11.6 points a 
game last season and is the catalyst for an offense that will play an up-tempo 
game. "He makes everything go," said Wahl, who also coaches the boys' and 
girls' tennis teams. "We have good team speed and we want to take advantage of 
it." Two juniors, forward Damien Scott (6-2) and center Joe Bunning (6-5), 
round out the starting lineup. Scott and Bunning will be the dominant forces 
under the boards. 
OUTLOOK: The team, which did not participate in summer league because of Wahl's 
late hiring, has eight underclassmen on its 12-man roster. "It's been difficult 
just trying to get it going with a new philosophy, but I think we'll come 
around once they catch on," Wahl said. Wahl believes Harvard and St. Francis 
and possibly El Segundo could contend for the league championship, but he 
believes that Bell-Jeff should finish no lower than third. 
Harvard 
COACH: Greg Hilliard, 6th season 
LAST SEASON: 23-3; 1st in league, 10-0 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Seven players return from last season's San Fernando Valley 
League championship team, which advanced to the Southern Section 3-A Division 
semifinals. Forward Andres Carlo (6-4) and center Spencer Miller (6-8), both 
seniors, are returning starters. Carlo played in all 26 games, averaging 10 
points, 8.8 rebounds, 2.8 steals and 1.5 blocks. Carlo and Miller should be 
strong inside forces, but Hilliard said that Carlo also is an effective outside 
threat. Iheanyi Uwaezouke (6-2), a Division I football prospect, and Marcus 
Puhvel (6-5) received significant playing time as juniors. Newcomer Tarlin Ray 
(6-2), a junior point guard, rounds out the starting five. Hilliard said that 
Puhvel probably is the best outside shooter and that Uwaezouke and Ray are the 
best ballhandlers. Harvard averaged more than 85 points a game last season and 
Hilliard thinks this year's team can duplicate that effort. "We're definitely a 
running team with a full-pressure defense," Hilliard said. 
OUTLOOK: "Our strength is our conditioning and we have good athletes that have 
yet to be proven," said Hilliard, who has guided Harvard to two league titles 
and four playoff berths in five seasons. "Last year's team was tight and 
cohesive and how well we come together will be the determining factor." 
St. Francis 
COACH: John Jordan, 4th season 
LAST SEASON: 7-15; 5th in league, 2-6 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Kyle Barrett (6-3), Dave Landa (5-3) and Marty Konrad (6-3) 
return and are expected to play key roles. Barrett is the Golden Knights' main 
offensive threat and averaged 16.4 points last season. Landa, who averaged 
eight points and 5.1 assists, will play point guard. Konrad averaged seven 
rebounds last season. Junior Tory Carruthers (6-3) also will start. Four 
sophomores and two juniors with no varsity experience round out the team. 
"Hopefully, we can build around (Barrett, Landa and Konrad) and find some other 
kids to help them out," Jordan said. 
OUTLOOK: Jordan believes that the basketball team will benefit from the move 
from the Del Rey League to the San Fernando Valley League in the same manner as 
the football team, which improved from 1-9 to 7-4. But Jordan is unsure of what 
to expect. "I have no idea what we'll do," Jordan said. "We're so young. I'm 
not sure what kind of character this team is going to have." 
St. Genevieve 
COACH: Scott Smith, 3rd season 
LAST SEASON: 2-20; 6th in league, 0-10 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Senior guards Jeff De La O (5-9) and Josh Smith (5-10) 
started last season and are among seven returning players. De La O, who 
averaged 10 points, will be relied upon for his offensive output. Smith will be 
the primary ballhandler. Junior center Pat Rodriguez (6-2) and junior John 
Hoffmann (6-2) and senior Victor Dionisio (5-11), both forwards, also will 
start. Pete Miranda (5-10), Dominic Parero (5-9) and Mike Robinson (6-1), a 
transfer from Crespi, also will be given extensive playing time. "We don't have 
any size so everybody is going to have to crash the boards," Smith said. "Once 
we get the ball, we'll be all right." Smith says quickness is the team's most 
valuable asset and that he will utilize a motion offense. "We'll set screens 
and try to roll out of them." 
OUTLOOK: St. Genevieve should be improved, but Smith believes the league, in 
particular St. Francis and Harvard, is very strong. "It was a long season and 
we didn't get any wins (last year)," Smith said, "but we have only one way to 
go. We don't have any outstanding individual, but we work well as a team." 
