LEGISLATORS EXPLORE FIGHT ON TERM LIMITS 
Legislative leaders, angered by voter approval of a measure to limit their 
terms, Wednesday began exploring legal challenges to Proposition 140, 
contending it is unconstitutional to let voters at large kick out lawmakers 
elected by constituents in their home districts. 
At the same time, lawmakers, their staffs and lobbyists were pondering what the 
fed-up California electorate had wrought by sending most incumbents back to 
Sacramento while handing every member of the Legislature a political pink slip. 
In addition to limiting Assembly members to six years in office and state 
senators to eight, the landmark ballot initiative also caps at eight years the 
service of statewide officers, slashes the Legislature's operating budget by as 
much as 50% and eliminates the lawmakers' pension program, all in a move its 
authors predict will return power to "citizen politicians." 
But the professionals who were the target of the term-limit movement complained 
bitterly that the measure will usher in an era of amateurism in which the 
public's elected representatives will be outsmarted and outlasted by 
big-business lobbyists and lifetime bureaucrats. 
"I find it personally insulting and stupid," said one of the Assembly's senior 
members, Democrat John Vasconcellos of Santa Clara. "Now we won't have an 
independent, well-informed legislative branch of government." 
There also was more than a hint of retribution. Assembly Speaker Willie Brown, 
the powerful San Francisco Democrat who has ruled the Legislature's lower house 
for a decade, said he will take out his anger on a handful of Republicans who 
backed the measure. 
"The first people to experience staff cuts will be the people who supported 
it," Brown said. 
The measure passed by a margin of about 242,000 votes out of more than 6.6 
million cast. 
Some Assembly Republicans, meanwhile, were said to be plotting the overthrow of 
minority leader Ross Johnson of La Habra, who opposed term limits. The party 
had a net loss of two seats to the Democrats on Tuesday, reducing their number 
to just 32 in the 80-member Assembly and providing an ignominious conclusion to 
the GOP's once proud goal of seizing control of the Legislature by 1990. 
Assemblyman Bill Jones of Fresno said Wednesday that he has secured commitments 
from enough Republicans to oust Johnson at a meeting scheduled for today in 
Sacramento. But Johnson said he expected to keep his post. 
Just five of the 92 incumbent legislators on Tuesday's ballot were defeated. 
Assembly Republicans on the losing end included Sunny Mojonnier of Encinitas, 
Jeff Marston of San Diego and Curt Pringle of Garden Grove, although Pringle's 
result could change as the last of the absentee ballots are counted. Democratic 
Assemblyman Norm Waters of Plymouth in Northern California also was defeated. 
In the Senate, Democrats gained a seat for a total of 25 with the defeat of 
Republican Jim Nielsen of Rohnert Park by former legislative aide Mike 
Thompson. If the one remaining Senate vacancy goes to the Democrats as 
expected, they would be just one vote short of the two-thirds majority needed 
to override gubernatorial vetoes. In the Assembly the Democrats would need the 
votes of six Republicans to override the governor. 
For the vast majority of incumbents who were returned to office, the question 
is whether Proposition 140 will send them packing in six years. Speaker Brown 
and Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti declined to discuss the issue 
with reporters Wednesday. Roberti sent a memo to fellow senators indicating he 
was ready to implement the budget cut part of the measure. 
But Roberti's memo also said that the legal issues surrounding implementation 
of the initiative "are under review." Several sources close to Brown and 
Roberti said a legal challenge to term limits was certain to be filed. The 
plaintiff in such a lawsuit would probably be a citizen claiming a violation of 
federal Constitutional rights. 
"What it comes down to is an infringement on the right of the people in any 
district to vote for their own representation," said Joseph Remcho, a San 
Francisco lawyer who has represented Democrats in past efforts to overturn 
voter-approved initiatives. 
Remcho said it is one thing for the state's voters to agree to limit the terms 
of statewide officers, such as the governor, whom they elect jointly. But it is 
unfair and unconstitutional, he said, for the voters in one district to decide 
who can or cannot represent voters in another district. 
Said Remcho: "The voters in Orange County have told the voters in San Francisco 
that they can't elect Willie Brown. They have told the voters in a whole bunch 
of other districts that they can't elect the representatives of their choice. I 
don't see that they have articulated a state interest compelling enough to 
justify that restriction on my right to vote." 
But Lewis K. Uhler, president of the National Tax-Limitation Committee and one 
of the authors of Proposition 140, said a legal challenge by incumbent 
legislators would be "almost an obscenity." And Los Angeles County Supervisor 
Pete Schabarum, who co-wrote the measure, said he would personally lead the 
effort to defend the initiative. 
"I am not enthusiastic, given the way the courts have been acting these days, 
that we have a guarantee of this whole proposition being sustained," Schabarum 
said. "But we'll do the best we can." 
If Proposition 140 does withstand challenge, it will take effect in stages. 
First will come the elimination of future pension benefits for anyone elected 
in Tuesday's balloting and from now on. Then, next year, the Legislature's 
operating budget will be cut an estimated 50%, to no more than $950,000 per 
member. The reduction is expected to result in widespread layoffs, a source of 
anxiety to many Capitol staffers. 
The real blow from Proposition 140 will come in 1996, when anyone elected to 
the Assembly this year, along with 20 state senators who now are in the middle 
of a term, will be forced to leave office. Two years later, the rest of the 
state Senate and all statewide officeholders elected this week will be forced 
out. 
Times staff writers Max Boot, Mark Gladstone, Carl Ingram, Paul Jacobs and 
Richard Simon contributed to this article. 
