NEWS ANALYSIS; 
CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS GOVERNOR; 
BATTLING NECK AND NECK FOR VOTES; 
WILSON: HE PLAYS IT SAFE, AVOIDING NEW ISSUES OR POLITICAL RISKS THAT FEINSTEIN 
COULD USE TO HER ADVANTAGE. 
Republican Sen. Pete Wilson plodded methodically Thursday toward the 
governorship he expects to win Tuesday, playing a safe end game devoid of new 
issues or political risks. 
In fact, except for his Oct. 7 endorsement of legislative term limits, Wilson's 
campaign is ending with the very same policy positions with which it began five 
months ago: Tough on crime, for choice on abortion, cautious on taxes and 
fiscal management, pro-environment and for better education. Most of that 
platform was outlined well before the general election campaign began. Wilson's 
course has been consistent ever since. 
In these waning days of the campaign, former San Francisco Mayor Dianne 
Feinstein is struggling to find some weakness in the Wilson defense, any issue 
to exploit. The Wilson campaign is determined not to give her the slightest 
opening. 
In an address Thursday to the Commonwealth Club on Feinstein's home ground, 
Wilson delivered a speech that was a virtual duplicate of all those he has 
given since June. Even the jokes were the same. 
In Anaheim later in the day, Wilson maintained his cautious style but continued 
his tough-on-crime stance, when he attended a reception sponsored by 150 crime 
victims who worked to pass Proposition 115, also known as Crime Victims Justice 
Reform Act, which was approved by voters in June. Wilson had served as honorary 
chairman of the committee that advocated the measure. 
About 150 people lined up inside the Stadium Club at the Anaheim Stadium and 
each presented the Republican gubernatorial candidate with a red rose to show 
appreciation for his contribution to the measure. 
Wilson, Orange County Dist. Atty. Mike Capizzi and other speakers said the new 
law speeds up the court process, protects crime victims from "unnecessary 
trauma" and saves taxpayers millions of dollars. 
"It's not just the savings," Wilson told the gathering, "but what it is going 
to mean will be lives saved. We're going to finish the job. . . . We have to 
lengthen the sentences to keep dangerous people from decent people." 
The only significant change in the gubernatorial campaign has been Wilson's 
endorsement during the one and only debate Oct. 7 of Proposition 140, the 
initiative to limit officeholder terms, sponsored by Republican Los Angeles 
County Supervisor Pete Schabarum. 
Even then, Wilson's decision was not a big surprise. He had been hinting at it 
for days. Two things changed his mind, he said: The failure of a ballot measure 
in the June primary to take reapportionment of legislative districts out of the 
Legislature's hands, and a federal judge's decision to remove campaign spending 
limits. 
With those two actions, Wilson said, the only way to achieve change in the 
Legislature's entrenched membership was through term limits. 
Feinstein, meanwhile, adopted a number of policy positions that were designed 
to demonstrate to voters that she is the candidate who will get California 
"moving again" after more than 20 years of governors who were stingy with 
budgets and reluctant to experiment with new programs. Some of Feinstein's 
policy decisions brought her the support of interest groups that now endorse 
her candidacy. 
She got the backing of the California Teachers' Assn., and declared that she 
would not tamper with the education spending mandates of Proposition 98 of 
1988, which is part of the CTA gospel. 
She endorsed Proposition 128, the "Big Green" environmental initiative 
sponsored by a coalition of conservation groups and won the support of the 
Sierra Club and the League of Conservation Voters. 
Wilson and Feinstein have battled neck and neck in the public opinion polls all 
summer long and into the fall. It seemed that nothing Feinstein could do would 
put her out front, despite the high hopes of supporters after her dramatic 
primary victory over Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp won her national attention. 
Now, late in the campaign, the issues seem to have swung in Wilson's direction. 
While Democrats may be reaping political capital by accusing President Bush of 
saving the wealthy from an income tax surcharge to help cut the federal 
deficit, Wilson boasts of voting against the budget package because of the 
gasoline and excise taxes that he claims would most hurt the average working 
man and woman. 
On Thursday, Wilson also defended his vote against the proposed Civil Rights 
Act of 1990 as a matter of political integrity. In response to a question from 
a Commonwealth Club member, Wilson said, "I despise discrimination" of any 
sort. He added that "it would have been easy and expedient" to vote for the 
bill and not risk upsetting minority groups. "But I voted against this one, 
whatever it is called, because it was a quota bill." 
While Feinstein has tried to exploit his vote as anti-civil rights, Wilson is 
confident the issue works in his favor because opinion polls indicate a 
majority of Americans oppose quotas. 
While he is enthusiastically endorsing term limits to rid state government of 
entrenched interests, Wilson nevertheless makes constant use of his unbroken 
record of 24 years in office -- in the state Assembly, as mayor of San Diego 
and the last eight years as the junior U.S. senator from California. The 
apparent inconsistency does not seem to have shown up in the polls as a 
liability for Wilson. 
Times staff writer Davan Maharaj contributed to this report. 
