APPLAUSE FOR A PILOT PROGRAM 
In an effort to reverse the disturbing decline in the number of minority 
teachers, Cal State Dominguez Hills is going beyond platitudes about 
encouraging more minorities to become teachers. The university, one of the few 
in the state with a student body that is 60% black, Latino and Asian, is 
working as part of a nationwide network to ensure that future schoolchildren -- 
one in three of which will be minority by the turn of the century -- can find 
role models in the classroom. 
Cal State Dominguez, along with New York's Fordham University, City College and 
Hostos Community College of New York, and Xavier University in New Orleans have 
been brought together for a pilot project by the Ana G. Mendez Educational 
Foundation, which operates three colleges in Puerto Rico. The schools all have 
large minority enrollments and a demonstrated interest in training minority 
teachers. The pilot project will make it easier for the consortium members to 
share information about each one's recruitment programs and to disseminate the 
information nationwide to show others what works best. 
This consortium of colleges and universities is working to attract more 
talented black, Latino and Asian students to the teaching profession by 
exposing high school students to the special satisfactions of the classroom. At 
present, minorities make up only 9% of all teachers, compared to 17% in the 
mid-1970s. As career and economic opportunities expanded for minorities and 
women, many chose not to become teachers. But teacher salaries are finally 
rising. And now educators must lure students back to the profession by exposing 
them early to the rewards of teaching and to the lasting impact a good teacher 
has on students. 
Cal State Dominguez is already in the third year of its own Saturday Future 
Teachers Institute, supported by the Carnegie Corp. of New York, in which high 
school students are paid $15 per Saturday to teach math and science to 
elementary school students for 10 weeks. The Saturday program is the first time 
many youngsters have ever set foot on a college campus; soon the idea of 
attending college, or maybe eventually teaching in one, becomes less 
intimidating. Tracking of some former "teachers," now college students, 
indicates that half of them remain strongly interested in becoming professional 
teachers. It is already an accomplishment that more bright students are 
seriously considering a lifetime in the classroom to lead a new generation. 
