COMMON QUESTIONS ABOUT MEASURE M 
Measure M, the half-cent sales tax increase proposal for transportation 
projects, is the only countywide issue facing voters Tuesday. The measure would 
earmark $3.1 billion for a variety of freeway, transit and surface street 
projects over a fixed 20-year period. 
In recent weeks, campaign letters and brochures have been mailed by both sides 
in the Measure M election battle, with both sides making varied claims. 
Here is a list of frequently asked questions about Measure M, what the 
ordinance says, and what supporters and critics say about it: 
Q. 
Will it relieve traffic congestion on Orange County freeways? If so, for how 
long? 
What Measure M says: Freeway capacity will increase from an average of 160,000 
vehicles a day on the Santa Ana Freeway in 1988 to more than 260,000 daily by 
the end of the 20-year period, and improvements on the Costa Mesa, Orange, 
Riverside and San Diego freeways would be similar but less dramatic. 
Completion, in some cases, would be 10 years sooner than would be possible 
otherwise. 
Supporters: Yes, within a 20-year period. Even with improvements, though, some 
slowing will occur during peak travel periods, with speeds below 30 m.p.h. 
Opponents: After all improvements are in place, congestion will occur at some 
places such as the junction of the Santa Ana and San Diego freeways in Irvine. 
Q. 
How much will it cost me? 
Measure: The ballot language does not estimate how much would be collected from 
individual taxpayers or families in an average year. 
Supporters: Economists estimate that a half-cent increase in the sales tax, 
from the current 6 cents to 6 1/2 cents, will cost $50 to $75 a year for each 
man, woman and child living in the county. 
Opponents: No estimate on sales tax per resident. 
Q. 
What impact will the measure's growth management policy have? 
Measure: It "emphasizes good planning, improved cooperation between neighboring 
cities, and requires that new development pay a fair share for measures to deal 
with traffic generated by that new development." 
Supporters: Any city that fails to submit a growth management plan meeting 
Measure M requirements will become ineligible for sales tax proceeds. This will 
give cities an incentive to phase new development so that it does not outpace 
needed traffic improvements. 
Opponents: One camp of opponents says the growth controls are too weak to 
prevent more congestion and that they merely reflect existing state planning 
laws; the other contends that there should be no controls at all because they 
infringe on the rights of property owners. 
Q. 
Is there a heavy reliance on car-pool lanes in the freeway projects outlined in 
Measure M? If so, why? 
Measure: More car-pool lanes than regular lanes will be added to freeways. 
Supporters: State and federal governments virtually demand car-pool lanes as a 
condition for giving highway construction funds. Also, the installation of such 
lanes on the Costa Mesa and San Diego freeways has improved traffic flow. 
Opponents: Measure M pours hundreds of millions of dollars into the 
installation of car-pool lanes at a time when their effectiveness is being 
challenged by citizens' groups. 
Q. 
Will the traffic improvements planned in Measure M benefit all areas of the 
county equally? 
Measure: The measure does not evaluate the geographic spread of highway and 
transit projects. 
Supporters: There are enough projects in Measure M to ensure that almost every 
commuter will experience some relief from congestion, though perhaps not all 
the time, in every corner of the county. Much of the money will go for street 
maintenance and improvements in the cities, which bargained to get $450 million 
in street projects from the revenue when Measure M was being written. Most of 
the cities -- and most of the local streets to be fixed -- are in the north. 
Opponents: Except for freeway projects, many of the improvements will occur on 
arterials used primarily by South County residents, and this would be at the 
expense of residents in the north. 
Q. 
What power will the citizens' oversight committee have to ensure the money 
raised is spent properly? 
Measure: The panel can demand explanations of any spending plan deviation from 
the chairman of the local transportation authority (in this case, the Orange 
County Transportation Commission), who must respond within 60 days, and any 
amendments or changes in spending must be approved by a two-thirds vote of 
citizens' committee members. 
Supporters: The citizens' committee will be an effective check on the power of 
transportation officials, especially because its opinions are expected to 
receive wide publicity. 
Opponents: The committee has no authority to actually block disbursement of 
funds. Its only real power is to alert the news media and encourage citizen 
lawsuits. 
Q. 
What effect will the half-cent sales tax have on jobs and the county's overall 
economic health? 
Measure: It does not refer to jobs or economic conditions specifically, but it 
does state that it is intended to "preserve the quality of life of Orange 
County residents," and it characterizes some traffic improvements as critical 
to mobility. 
Supporters: A few retail sales jobs may be lost because of the slight decrease 
in consumers' purchasing power, but that will be offset by employment gains in 
the construction trades. Further, enhanced mobility will reduce accidents and 
will discourage companies leaving the county for less congested areas. 
Opponents: The county's well-being will be jeopardized with the funneling of 
additional tax revenue into the wrong mix of projects. Congestion will only get 
worse, increasing fuel bills and leading to more accidents and additional 
insurance costs. 
Q. 
What options besides a sales tax were considered? Why were they rejected? 
Measure: Does not explain. 
Supporters: Experts analyzed additional developer fees and also county gas, 
employee, parking and vehicle registration taxes and levies, but each of these 
alternatives posed either an insurmountable legal or political problem or was 
shown in projections as raising insufficient funds for the projects in Measure 
M. For example, to raise the same amount as the half-cent sales tax, a gasoline 
surtax of 19 cents would be needed, and it also would require approval of 
two-thirds of the voters. 
Opponents: Alternatives such as user fees and gasoline taxes were not given a 
sufficient airing before citizens' groups. One critic of Measure M advocates, 
simply on principle, gasoline tax increases, even if those mean certain defeat 
at the polls. Another argues that user fees, or tolls, could be levied on 
trucks using specific roads, even though changes in state laws would be needed 
to implement such a proposal and it also could face court challenges. 
Q. 
Does Measure M aid developers? 
Measure: "Retail tax revenues shall not be used to replace private developer 
funding which has been or will be committed for any (transportation) project." 
Local governments also are prohibited from substituting new sales tax revenue 
for funds already used for traffic improvements. 
Supporters: The two provisions above, plus growth management requirements in 
the measure, are aimed at ensuring that the tax proceeds will be used to 
correct existing traffic problems, not those caused by future development, 
which under Measure M is required to pay its own way. 
Opponents: Some of the traffic improvements in Measure M will make it easier 
for people to get to developers' new projects, and it thus will promote 
additional growth. For example, the planned Riverside-Irvine commuter rail link 
will stimulate job growth, commercial and industrial development and traffic 
congestion in the Irvine Spectrum complex, a an Irvine Co. development near the 
already jammed junction of Interstates 5 and 405. 
Source: Measure M, supporters and opponents 
