'NEGLIGIBLE RISK' IS STILL MUCH TOO GREAT; 
PESTICIDES: RATHER THAN ALLOWING ANY EXPOSURE, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE 
MOVING TO PHASE OUT THE USE OF CARCINOGENIC CHEMICALS IN FOOD. 
Back in 1958, Congress followed the urgings of Rep. James J. Delaney of New 
York and prohibited cancer-causing pesticides in processed food. But a failure 
of government to apply the law to hundreds of pesticides that were already on 
or coming on the market left the public unprotected. 
Now the Bush Administration, in its pesticide proposal unveiled last month, has 
joined Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles) and Sen. Edward M. Kennedy 
(D-Mass.) in calling for the repeal of the "Delaney Clause" in exchange for a 
misleading and ill-conceived "negligible risk" standard concerning pesticide 
residues in food. 
The differences in the safety standards of these proposals are a matter of 
nuance -- all give the highly politicized Environmental Protection Agency 
discretionary authority to allow pesticide residues at levels posing 
"acceptable" cancer risks, as determined by the highly questionable 
mathematical models and rubber numbers of risk assessment, without adequate 
protections for vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly. 
The Administration's "negligible risk" proposal allows one or more additional 
cancers per 100,000 people for one pesticide on one food item, equivalent to at 
least 35 excess cancers annually in the U.S. population. The Waxman-Kennedy 
proposal claims to allow one additional cancer per 1 million people. 
Even though most fruits and vegetables are contaminated with residues of many 
carcinogenic pesticides, neither the Bush nor the Waxman-Kennedy proposal 
considers aggregate cancer risk from a total diet. Under the Administration's 
proposal, and based on EPA's own estimates, residues of 60 carcinogenic 
pesticides on 30 foods would result in about 64,000 excess cancers a year, more 
than 10% of all current cancer deaths. Waxman-Kennedy might yield a somewhat 
lower risk because this proposal does require a partial look at aggregate risks 
from individual food commodities. However, both proposals ignore additional 
exposure to carcinogenic pesticides in water and air, other environmental and 
occupational carcinogens and the unpredictable synergistic interactions from 
these multiple exposures. The proposal further ignores other toxic effects. 
Worse, the Bush Administration proposal would also deny states the right to set 
higher standards of protection than the federal government. State authority in 
this area serves as an important check on the federal branch, and in most cases 
precipitates belated and reluctant federal action. Florida acting on ethylene 
dibromide in 1983 and Massachusetts acting on Alar in 1986 served to draw 
national attention to issues on which the EPA had been dragging its feet for 
decades. An environmental coalition in California, reacting to an unprotective 
federal government, is now promoting a state measure, the Environmental 
Protection Act of 1990, to phase out cancer-causing pesticides. 
The Bush proposal represents a caving in to special interests that have long 
sought to strip states of their power to act where EPA has not. This is 
especially important in light of California's finding, under its Birth Defects 
Prevention Act, that EPA has reached wrong safety conclusions on as many as 58 
of 99 pesticides reviewed. 
In the end, the Administration proposal will reverse major trends in reducing 
the use of agricultural pesticides in general and carcinogenic pesticides in 
particular. The Administration plan gives more discretionary authority to 
federal agencies that have abused the public trust on safety issues. These 
agencies will then be free to fling open the regulatory floodgates to 
"negligible risk" levels of innumerable carcinogens in food, water, air and the 
workplace, and thus contribute still further to the cancer epidemic now 
striking one in three and killing one in four Americans. 
Consumers have already seen through this political shortsightedness. Sales of 
apples fell off dramatically when consumers became aware of Alar residues. Some 
stores have committed to shifting out of the sale of foods treated with 
cancer-causing pesticides. Others have instituted their own monitoring system 
to detect residues. 
It is the federal government that must now join in a major drive to rapidly 
phase out the use of carcinogenic and toxic chemicals in pest management and 
the production of the nation's food. 
