SOVIET CITIZENS CAN NOW SUE GOVERNMENT; 
THE LAW: UP UNTIL NOW, PEOPLE WITH COMPLAINTS COULD ONLY SUE INDIVIDUAL 
OFFICIALS, NOT THE BUREAUCRACIES. 
Soviet citizens won the right Thursday, for the first time, to sue government 
agencies to seek redress of their grievances. 
The Supreme Soviet, the national legislature, enacted the law as part of a 
sweeping reform of the Soviet legal system. The law will permit people to bring 
complaints against state organizations into independent courts for a hearing 
and judgment. 
Artem M. Yakovlev, a member of the Supreme Soviet's Legal Affairs Committee, 
described it as one of the most important and practical measures to protect 
individual rights and to transform the country into a society governed by law 
rather than bureaucratic regulation. 
Until now, people with complaints against the government could only sue 
individual officials, charging them with violating regulations, bias or 
wrongdoing. 
The powerful, faceless bureaucracies that control so many aspects of Soviet 
life could not, even under a law adopted in 1987, be taken to court to answer 
for their decisions or actions. Many complaints were turned over for 
investigation and resolution to the very agencies that brought on the 
complaints. 
In the Soviet legal system, the classic European concept of "sovereign 
immunity" under which the state could not be sued was reinforced by such 
socialist principles as the "dictatorship of the proletariat." This made all 
government decisions unchallengeable except within the country's political 
forums, where the bureaucracy has a strong voice. 
As a result, Soviet citizens have been able to turn only to legislative bodies, 
such as the Supreme Soviet, for review of their complaints, and these are now 
recognized as incapable of investigating and assessing the thousands of 
grievances brought to them. 
The main grievance -- unlawful dismissal by a state-owned enterprise -- could 
not be heard unless a worker could argue that an enterprise official fired him 
out of malice or in violation of law. Most cases simply never got to court 
because the official could not be identified or his wrongdoing proved. 
With other legislation under consideration to broaden civil rights here, 
Yakovlev told his colleagues that the courts had to be authorized to review 
complaints of infringement. Among the pending legislation is a bill ensuring 
"freedom of conscience," particularly religious belief, another establishing 
press freedom and still others protecting the rights of free speech, political 
assembly and association. 
Several deputies called for the effective date of the new law to be brought 
forward to Dec. 1 from next July, but Yakovlev told them the courts need time 
to prepare for the expected flood of cases, especially those certain to be 
brought by dismissed workers. 
In other action, the Supreme Soviet gave preliminary approval to a law that 
will increase state pensions to the retired, who number nearly 60 million, a 
fifth of the population, by an average of 40%. 
Premier Nikolai I. Ryzhkov said the equivalent of $46 billion a year at 
official exchange rates will be needed to pay the higher pensions. But he 
described the move as essential to lift the elderly and disabled out of their 
deepening poverty. 
