FREE THANKSGIVING MEALS, VOLUNTEERS ARE BOUNTIFUL 
The holiday -- and the volunteering -- season begins this week with 
Thanksgiving, and, although San Diego is responding with its usual generosity, 
area service groups say what they need more of is off-season charity. 
Officials with shelters, churches and community groups preparing to serve 
Thanksgiving meals to thousands of homeless and disadvantaged people say they 
have been flooded with calls from people volunteering to cook, serve and clean 
up during the holidays. 
"People began calling in August to volunteer at Thanksgiving and Christmas," 
said Mary Ruth Hansen, volunteer coordinator for the Salvation Army. "They've 
just been so gracious. They always are, too." 
Many shelters reported having more than enough volunteers to help during 
Thanksgiving and Christmas. But officials said there often is a shortage of 
help during the rest of the year, particularly the summer. 
"We have plenty of volunteers now, and we appreciate all the offers to help, 
but we need more volunteers year-round," said Dan DiCarlo, volunteer director 
for the St. Vincent de Paul Center. "We have all kinds of programs where 
volunteers are needed." 
Karl Whicker of the San Diego Catholic Worker echoed: "We have plenty of 
volunteers now -- we've even had to turn a few away -- but we could use many 
more year-round." 
Shelter officials encouraged those volunteering during the holidays to keep 
their giving spirit through the year by volunteering on a regular basis, 
perhaps once a month, or on non-holidays when the number of volunteers usually 
is lower. 
Free Thanksgiving meals will be offered at many sites in San Diego County. On 
the menu are tons of turkey, ham, stuffing, cranberries, yams, rolls and other 
traditional fare. Much of the food was donated by businesses, community groups 
and churches, which also are contributing donations and volunteers to prepare 
the meals. 
Among those offering Thanksgiving meals are: 
* San Diego Catholic Worker, which expects to serve about 1,500 meals, complete 
with all the traditional fixings, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. Wednesday at St. 
Vincent de Paul Center, 1501 Imperial Ave. 
* San Diego Rescue Mission, 1150 J St., which will host a Thanksgiving prayer 
service from 11:30 a.m. to noon Wednesday. The Stewart and Stewart gospel 
singers will perform from noon to 1 p.m. The mission's 36th annual Thanksgiving 
meal will be served starting at 1 p.m. Up to 1,000 homeless and needy people 
are expected to attend, mission spokesman Mike Cage said. 
* Super Junior Market, 1036 7th Ave., which will serve complete takeout meals 
starting at 11 a.m. Thursday. Meals will be served until there are no more 
takers, said market owner Victor Salem, who has provided the meals to the 
homeless since 1982. Salem's employees and other volunteers will prepare the 
estimated 1,000 pounds of turkey, dressing, rolls and other fixings. About 730 
meals were distributed last year, and the market is preparing to serve the same 
number Thursday. Salem declined to reveal how much the spread costs him each 
year, saying he does it "to give something back to the downtown community. It 
has been good to me, so this is our way of saying thanks." 
* St. Vincent de Paul Center, which will serve a Mexican brunch to transients 
from 9 to 11 a.m. Thursday. The food will be donated and served by El Indio 
Mexican Restaurant. From 4:30 to 5:30 p.m., the San Diego Trial Lawyers Assn. 
will serve dinner to homeless people enrolled in the center's social service 
programs. The day's fare will include 1,800 pounds of turkey and other 
Thanksgiving fixings. The center expects to serve 1,300 meals during the day. 
* The Salvation Army, which will prepare 2,600 pounds of turkey for 
Thanksgiving meals at two locations from 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. Thursday: 
downtown at Golden Hall in the Civic Center, 202 C St., and in Escondido at the 
Knights of Columbus Hall, 515 W. Valley Parkway. An estimated 2,700 needy 
people were served last year, and 3,000 are expected Thursday. 
* Our Lady of Angels Church Hall, 653 22nd St., which will serve a traditional 
Thanksgiving meal to about 200 senior citizens at 12:30 p.m. Thursday. A $2 
donation is requested. 
* St. Jude's Nutrition Center, 3751 Boston Ave., which expects about 50 senior 
citizens to attend its Thanksgiving meal from noon to 1 p.m. Thursday. A $1 
donation is requested. 
* Samahan Senior Center, 2952 Market St., which will provide holiday music from 
10 a.m. to noon and a Thanksgiving meal from noon to 1 p.m. About 90 people are 
expected. A $1 donation is requested. 
