ENVIRONMENT 
Notes about your surroundings. 
Tours and Trips -- Dec. 1 is the day for several environmentally related tours 
and trips. They include: 
* Hawk Watch -- A field trip to the Antelope Valley to look for desert raptors 
is scheduled for that day. Sponsored by the Sea and Sage chapter of the 
National Audubon Society, the outing starts at 7 a.m. 
Birds that people will be looking for on the trip include the prairie falcon, 
merlin, American kestrel, golden eagle, black-shouldered kite and northern 
harrier. Several hawks -- including the ferruginous, red-tailed, rough-legged, 
Cooper's and sharp-shinned -- might also be spotted. 
Those wanting to participate should meet on the west side of California 14 at 
Avenue A. From Orange County, take the Santa Ana Freeway north to California 14 
and continue north through Lancaster. 
For more information, contact trip leader Pete Bloom at (714) 544-6147. 
Zoo Breakfast and Tours -- The Friends of the Santa Ana Zoo will be hosting 
"Breakfast With the Beasts" for old and new zoo members on Dec. 1. Old members 
will meet from 8 to 9:30 a.m., while new members will be meeting from 8:15 to 
10 a.m. 
Participants will be given an early-morning guided tour of the zoo before it 
opens to the public. Reservations are required. For more information, call the 
Friends of the Santa Ana Zoo at (714) 953-8555. 
Wetlands Tour -- The next free public tour of the Bolsa Chica wetlands will 
also be on Dec. 1. Sponsored by the Amigos de Bolsa Chica, tour groups at the 
ecological reserve will leave every 20 minutes between 9 and 10:30 a.m. The 
reserve is one mile south of Warner Avenue on Pacific Coast Highway. 
Museum's New Site -- A new and larger interim site for the Museum of Natural 
History and Science will open to the public Dec. 15. The new building will have 
enough room for expanded exhibits, such as robotic dinosaurs and mock space 
equipment, as well as a hands-on Discovery Room. The museum's new site, at 150 
Columbia in the Koll Corporate Center in Aliso Viejo, is about one mile from 
the Pecten Reef gateway to Aliso and Wood Canyons Regional Park, which will 
eventually be the museum's permanent home. 
