COSTNER TAKES A STAND; 
HE'S MADE A WESTERN. IT'S THREE HOURS LONG. IT HAS SUBTITLES. AND HE LIKES IT 
LIKE THAT. 
IT IS NEARLY 100 DEGREES in the flats of Hollywood. Kevin Costner is sitting in 
his modest, un-air-conditioned office on the lot of Raleigh Studios, next to a 
table fan working overtime. Propping his rawhide-tipped, two-tone cowboy boots 
on the desk, white polo shirt setting off his steel-blue eyes and California 
tan, the 35-year-old actor leans back and gives his icy assessment of the movie 
industry. Record heat notwithstanding, he's the epitome of cool. 
"I'm not in the hit business," he says, in that engaging, straight-on manner 
that evokes comparisons with another paragon of cool, Gary Cooper. "To me, a 
flop is a bad movie, not one that fails at the box office. There were five 
flops this summer that will make $80 million each." 
The topic of conversation is movie-making and risk-taking -- more specifically, 
Costner's biggest gamble yet: co-producing, directing and starring in "Dances 
With Wolves," an $18-million epic scheduled for release Friday. Mere mention of 
the word gamble, though, is enough to set Costner off. A testiness shows around 
his eyes. The confident tone veers toward cocky. As he sees it, he has simply 
made the movie he wants to make -- now, as always, playing the Hollywood game 
his way. 
Defying a business that's based on dues-paying, Costner has jumped from 
featured actor to auteur in near-record time. Five years of notable roles such 
as the rambunctious cowboy in "Silverado," an antiseptic Eliot Ness in "The 
Untouchables," a steamy double agent in "No Way Out," an over-the-hill, 
bush-league catcher in "Bull Durham" and the Iowa farmer in last year's 
sleeper, "Field of Dreams," dropped him on the brink of superstardom. But 
unlike such Hollywood eminences as Paul Newman and Robert Redford, he didn't 
stop to solidify his status before moving behind the camera. 
And if he slowed down to listen to Hollywood's conventional wisdom, it's clear 
he didn't heed it. "Dances With Wolves," the story of a U.S. cavalry officer 
living among the Sioux Indians in the 1860s, ignores the industry's edict that 
Westerns are out. A full third of the dialogue is spoken in Lakota, the Sioux 
language, so audiences will have to wrestle with subtitles. And for good 
measure, this movie is long: The film logs in at a couple of minutes under 
three hours -- a full 50% longer than profit-oriented studios and theater 
owners deem ideal. 
By deferring his actor/director salary to the tune of several million dollars, 
Costner has put not only himself but his bankbook on the line. He's already met 
the skeptics head-on. When word leaked out last year that his film was over 
budget and behind schedule, the press dubbed the project "Kevin's Gate," a 
reference to "Heaven's Gate," the industry synonym for an epic flop. 
Jim Wilson, a producer and director of low-budget features who created Tig 
Productions with Costner in 1989, knows what the insiders are saying. "These 
are Kevin's golden years. Hollywood is paying huge sums of money to leading 
men, of which there are not many. Kevin has taken 18 months of his life, made 
himself unavailable to do anything else, just to make this movie. It's a 
high-wire act in full view of the industry." 
Costner is forced to agree -- at least in part. "It's a dumb first movie," he 
says with a grin. "Full of kids, animals, first-time actors speaking in a 
foreign language. A period piece on top of that. But I'm just offering up the 
film, letting the people decide. 
"My only concern is whether the movie is good. And I think it is," the actor 
continues, dead serious. "I have no control after that. My friends are afraid 
I'm going to be eaten up. They know I've put my heart in it, up there on the 
block for anyone to do with what they will. But I don't care what Hollywood 
thinks. You can underline that." 
IT'S NO COINCIDENCE THAT Costner is staking his reputation on a Western. Part 
Cherokee on his father's side, he has always been drawn to the image of a man 
on a horse, self-sufficient, all his worldly possessions in a bedroll. At 18, 
he built a canoe, and he and a friend traveled the country, boat strapped to 
the top of their car, driving and paddling some of the routes taken by Lewis 
and Clark. A high point of the trip was a stop at the site of Custer's Last 
Stand in southern Montana. Still, Costner wasn't on the lookout for a story 
about Native Americans. This one literally fell into his lap. 
It was 1986, and Michael Blake -- a screenwriter and friend of Costner -- was 
sitting on the actor's living-room floor complaining that the scripts he'd 
written were never picked up. "Write a novel," advised Costner, pointing to a 
stack of 20 scripts piled in the corner. "If you write a screenplay, it'll just 
end up there." 
Blake was penniless and had nothing to lose. So he spent the next eight months 
writing -- while Costner, Wilson and their friends fed him and gave him a place 
to stay. Each night Blake read aloud to his hosts, who became increasingly 
convinced that there was a great film in his story of Lt. John J. Dunbar and 
his adventures among the Sioux. Still, they made no promises. When Blake 
finished the book, he moved on to Arizona to take a job as a dishwasher. "Next 
thing I knew," he recalls, "there was a call from Kevin telling me to get 
started on a screenplay. He was involved every step of the way." Costner, Blake 
and Wilson sat down and worked through six drafts of the script for 2 1/2 
years, laboring over it line by line until it rang true to Costner's ear. 
They took the first draft of the screenplay to Nelson Entertainment, where it 
languished for half a year; then they approached Island Pictures, which kept it 
for another six months. In both cases, the companies were interested but 
couldn't come up with the budget. Finally, Costner and Wilson decided to raise 
the production money themselves. They peddled the foreign rights first and, 
with enough cash in hand to finance 40% of the film, went into pre-production. 
Two weeks before shooting began, they signed a deal with Orion Pictures. 
Costner came away with the money to finish the film and the right of final cut 
-- what appears on the screen will reflect the director's choices, not the 
studio's. 
Costner resists the notion that he's on unfamiliar turf. "I've worn two hats 
whether I've had the title or not," he asserts. "I'm always involved in the 
overview. Directing isn't a statement as much as a logical extension of what 
I've been doing all along. The film has always come first. I've never aspired 
to be the head flea on a dead dog." 
"Kevin has the ability to see himself in the third person," says Roger 
Donaldson, who directed him in the 1987 thriller "No Way Out." When the 
question of Costner's hairstyle in the film arose, the actor and the director 
spent a week trying to decide whether Costner should wear it short, befitting a 
Navy officer, or longer, to enhance his golden-boy good looks. "Vanity didn't 
enter into it," Donaldson says. "It was as though we were having a creative 
meeting about someone else." In the end, Costner opted for close-cropped 
realism. 
Costner sees himself as a storyteller; to him, the script has always been 
sacred. "I'm very careful about what gets altered," he says. "If you don't give 
the material a chance, you cheat yourself and the audience. No one slips 
changes under my door." 
In "Dances With Wolves," he lets his characters talk and allows the plot to 
unfold slowly, European-style. One scene lingers on two characters quietly 
talking as a mutual attraction takes hold. No quick cuts, no special effects, 
just two faces, a conversation and chemistry. "I'm a more-is-better type of 
director," he says. "If something is good, I don't want it to end. All the 
camera work in the world can't disguise the lack of story. We've become 
factories, giving up the idea that good stories are good for us. I try to keep 
things as intimate as possible instead of dazzling people with my camera work. 
Anyhow, technical skill is something I don't possess . . . so I'd get caught." 
Costner talks a lot about "getting caught." A perfectionist, he's obsessed with 
making things conform to his vision -- and seeing that those around him do, 
too. The point he emphasizes is that even in the illusion business, truth is at 
the center of every good story. Certainly, he acknowledges, movies are "the 
purest form of marketing. We're not talking about chairs or desks here but 
ideas pulled out of thin air that can make $100 million. If that's not Barnum 
&amp; Bailey, I don't know what is." But what Hollywood hasn't realized yet, he 
says, "is that truth is as marketable as lies." 
And truth for Costner is in the details. "I promised myself that I'd never 
shoot a gun more than six times because a gun only holds six bullets," he 
explains. "And I don't like girls running in high heels -- I'd rather have them 
kick them off." In "Dances With Wolves," Costner carries realism to a level 
that scares the accountants. You won't find a single Jeff Chandler swathed in 
rust-colored greasepaint: Native Americans are cast as themselves -- and speak 
in their own tongue. "We explored doing it another way, but it just didn't 
jell," says the director. "We're dealing with a love between two people -- a 
U.S. cavalryman and a white woman raised by Indians -- who are unable to 
communicate. If they both speak English, it's a fraud." 
Costner, say his colleagues, likes shooting the breeze and thrives on debate. 
He's no intellectual, he'll tell you, but both on and off camera he has ideas 
about things that he's not shy about sharing -- about law ("a convenience for 
people but also used to destroy"), about movies ("Just because they're called 
talking pictures doesn't mean you have to be afraid of silences"). 
But ask him to talk about the plot of "Dances With Wolves" or to provide 
insight into the character he plays, and the actor suddenly comes up dry. You 
play a cavalryman, he's prompted after a substantial pause. "Who goes west on 
his own," the actor adds haltingly. Period. End quote. "I've never been gifted 
with the ability to do a poster," he explains, with a reference to "Field of 
Dreams." "I'm not a 'Ray Kinsella is searching for his dreams, and one day his 
dreams come searching for him.' I don't think in shorthand." 
He'd obviously prefer to let the movie speak for itself. Smiling suddenly, he 
gets up to pull out a videocassette, a teaser for the film. "Want to see some 
of it?" he asks rhetorically. "Just watch," he warns as I pick up a pen and 
prepare to take notes. "One man, two worlds," a voice blares over lyrical 
travelogue footage of South Dakota and Costner riding, as he puts it, "like the 
wind surrounded by thousands of buffalo." 
Later, he offers to screen the second reel of the film. From that and 
conversations with his less-tight-lipped colleagues, a bare-bones synopsis 
emerges. Costner plays Lt. John Dunbar, who is decorated after a skirmish in 
the Civil War. Offered any assignment he wishes, he heads west to see the 
frontier. There, among the Indians, he encounters a medicine man who, 
foreseeing white expansionism, counsels communication and cooperation; a 
warrior who resists any attempt at conciliation, and a white woman brought up 
by Indians after her parents were killed by another tribe. She serves not only 
as a bridge between the two cultures but emerges as Costner's love interest as 
well. 
Costner didn't consider "Bull Durham" a baseball movie, and he hesitates to 
call this one a Western. "I've said it's about how the West was lost," he 
admits. "But I'm not trying to set the record straight. Like all of my movies, 
it's about behavior. About a people ill-equipped to deal with what was coming. 
About the bigoted mentality of the soldiers in the West. We've had a lot of 
films portraying Indians as the enemy, a few showing that they were cheated. 
This film explores how they felt being cheated. It's a very intimate approach 
to a very big subject." 
Shot in the outback of South Dakota in 106 days (a month over schedule), the 
film is epic in scope. The cast of 500 includes 48 speaking roles and parts for 
150 Civil War soldiers and 175 Sioux. The Native Americans were recruited 
through ads in the Lakota Times and auditions held throughout the United States 
and Canada. He found a few of his actors closer to home. "That's my dad," 
Costner says with evident pleasure as the face of silver-haired Bill Costner 
flashes on the screen. "Cindy (Kevin's wife) and my three kids are also 
featured extras. All of them are wiped out -- so they won't be in the sequel, 
that's for sure." 
Though there was no doubt who was boss, collaboration between director and cast 
was encouraged. "Kevin knows what an actor can bring," says Mary McDonnell, the 
female lead. "Instead of protecting his ego, he'll adopt other ideas if he's 
convinced they're better than his." 
Costner built in a three-week rehearsal period, as he'd seen Lawrence Kasdan do 
with "The Big Chill," expecting his actors to use the time to learn their 
Lakota dialogue and enough archery to shoot a bow and arrow while on a horse. 
Then there was the matter of professionalism among a largely inexperienced 
cast. When the Native American cast members showed up without knowing their 
lines, says Costner, "I reminded them that this was a project about their 
people, that if it didn't turn out, they'd be embarrassed, not me. I warned 
them that if they were cavalier with my time, there had better be good reason." 
He stops mid-thought. "I guess I can be tough." 
"The crew took the lead from him," Wilson recalls. "If he was willing to get up 
at 5, turn in at midnight and go out in his shirt sleeves in subzero weather, 
you follow the idiot." Blake agrees: "Kevin gives the impression he's just a 
regular guy, which puts people at their ease -- but he's an adventurer, curious 
to see how far he can go. 'Dances' pushed him to his outer limits." 
Physically, as well as mentally, it seems. Costner was on horseback, directing 
a buffalo-hunt scene, when an Indian rider lost control of his horse and 
crashed into him. The impact knocked Costner out of the saddle and twisted him 
around backward midair. "He hit the ground as hard as you can hit it, bounced 
two or three feet in the air and rolled over like a sack of grain," Blake says 
with a shudder. "If a buffalo had been behind him, he would have been killed. 
If the horse rolled over him -- which it nearly did -- he would have been 
seriously hurt. Everyone held their breath as Kevin sat up, brushed himself 
off, got on another horse and continued. He never said a word." 
Actually, says Costner, Day 1 was his most profound test. "Everyone told me to 
make sure I knew where to put the camera so the crew would feel I was in 
charge," he says with a smile. "I'd set up the first two shots weeks in 
advance, but two minutes into things, I knew that the geography was working 
against me, that my calculations were wrong. Instead of locking in, I proceeded 
to move the camera to another spot. That was the moment I knew I could do it, 
that I wouldn't be constrained by any insecurity." 
COSTNER'S FRIENDS describe him as "street smart," an outgrowth, no doubt, of 
his early years. Because his father, an executive with Pacific Bell, was 
frequently transferred, Kevin attended four different high schools around the 
state and felt perpetually on the periphery. "The fact that I was 5-2 as a 
sophomore didn't help," he says. "I'm 6-1 now but still relate to those 
feelings. I didn't date in high school and didn't get my growth until college. 
I never got over being short." 
Always what he terms "performance-oriented," Costner sang in an all-boys choir. 
"That's when I first realized I could manipulate audiences," he says. "Music 
has always made me very happy. You get an immediate response from people." 
Sports, too, were an ego boost for Costner, who earned varsity letters in 
baseball and basketball. "I did feel special as a kid," he says. "Not better, 
but special. . . . And there's no crime in that." 
After graduating from Villa Park High School in Orange County, Costner enrolled 
at Cal State Fullerton, arbitrarily choosing marketing as his major. Pledging 
Delta Chi, he met Cindy Silva at a fraternity party. She was the first woman, 
he says, that he "really dated." The two of them became inseparable and were 
married 2 1/2 years later, while they were still in college. 
Costner didn't consider acting until his senior year. Fighting sleep in an 
accounting class, he picked up a copy of the college newspaper, saw a 
casting-call notice and decided to try out for "Rumpelstiltskin." "I had grown 
a bit, so I knew I couldn't play the dwarf," he deadpans. "But I knew there had 
to be a prince. I lost the audition because I had no tools. Good looks didn't 
help me at all, which is why I never counted on them. I knew right then, 
though, that I wanted to be an actor more than anything, to be behind that 
door. There seemed to be something magical there." 
He headed for the South Coast Actors Coop once, then twice, then five times a 
week. In his first serious effort -- Arthur Laurents' "Invitation to a March" 
at the Costa Mesa Civic Playhouse -- "I was horrible," he says. "But in acting, 
you reserve the right to improve -- and I've always gotten fueled by my 
disasters." 
Costner took a job in a family construction business -- a position he disliked 
immediately and abandoned after 30 days. While Cindy stayed in Orange County to 
finish school, he headed for Hollywood, attending a film-budgeting class at 
UCLA and sleeping in the back of a truck in a parking lot at Sunset and La 
Brea. Cindy soon followed -- albeit with trepidation. "The vows say 'for better 
and for worse, richer or poorer,' " he says. "She probably thought it was 
'worse' and 'poorer' from the outset." 
Costner became a stage manager at Raleigh Studios, an independent, all-purpose 
production facility that makes commercials, features and videos, where he 
coordinated the equipment for each production. Answering ads in Drama-Logue, he 
lined up bit parts in two low-budget, lower-caliber films. The experience was a 
turning point, of sorts. "They started with the lowest common denominator -- 
and settled for less than that," he says. "There was a noticeable lack of 
invention. From that point on, I resolved to hold out for only the best. It's 
easy to have convictions when you're powerful, much less so when you're a 
nobody, which is when it counts." 
Costner started saying no early on. Hired to pose as a young Luther Adler for a 
photograph to be used in the 1982 film "Frances," he was ultimately offered a 
small walk-on role. His one line -- "Good night, Frances," delivered to Jessica 
Lange -- would have earned him a Screen Actors Guild card, a prerequisite for 
union auditions that had eluded him for six years. When it came to delivering 
the line, however, Costner balked. "Frances had all these autograph hounds 
around her, and I didn't want to interrupt. I didn't know how to make the line 
work. It drove everyone crazy. 'Just say it,' they yelled -- and finally I did. 
But so quietly that the sound guy shook his head." 
Later, Costner passed on a chance to read for the Tom Berenger role in 
"Platoon" for fear of offending his brother, a decorated Vietnam War vet. He 
also turned down the role of J. Robert Oppenheimer in "Fat Man and Little Boy" 
because he doubted that anyone would believe he had an I.Q. of 160. "Like Steve 
McQueen, with whom we both share an infatuation," says director Kasdan, "Kevin 
has always had a clear sense of his abilities and what was right for him." 
It was Kasdan who gave Costner his first big break, casting him as the suicide 
victim who sets the plot in motion in 1983's "The Big Chill." Though only a 
shot of Costner's forehead and hairline survived, Kasdan made up for it by 
casting him as Jake in "Silverado" -- which brought him to the attention of the 
general public and caught the eye of a number of critics. It was a role, says 
his former agent, J. J. Harris, that reflected "a lot of the real Kevin, the 
uninhibited, wild side that he doesn't get to express in real life because he 
has to be responsible." That his subsequent movies -- "No Way Out," "Bull 
Durham" and "Field of Dreams" -- made him a star, Costner says, matters less 
than that he likes them. He acknowledges that he has more misses than hits and 
characterizes his career as "flawed." "What's most important is that you convey 
the sense it's the first time you're ever doing a role," he says. "Most of the 
time I fall short." 
In the case of "The Untouchables," some critics agreed, which came as no 
surprise to Costner. "Eliot Ness was the toughest role I ever played," he says. 
"I had to be a hero without the usual quotient of charisma and power." 
When it comes to the physical, however, Costner knows he's a natural. "I'm a 
run-and-jump actor," he says. "I like to swing from things, to go get the bad 
guys and have them chase me." Donaldson was impressed by Costner's athleticism 
in "No Way Out": In a scene in which he was being chased by some CIA types, it 
was actually Costner smashing into the windshield head-on. "He hit harder than 
expected, and I was pleased," says Donaldson. "But the producers whispered a 
few comments in my ear" about wanting their actor to survive. 
Stunts are one thing, sex quite another. When discussing the film's red-hot 
limo scene, in which he's seduced by Sean Young, Costner displays the 
vulnerability critics say makes him play "masculine" instead of "macho." It's a 
quality that, as the cliche goes, makes men like him and women love him. "I 
feel comfortable on a horse or on the windshield of a car -- but not in the 
back seat," he admits. "I guess I'm modest. I didn't even feel comfortable 
taking my shirt off in that bedroom scene. It's difficult for me to compete 
with someone who spends years in the gym. I'm no slouch, but I don't have the 
figure you see in commercials." 
A love scene with McDonnell in "Dances With Wolves" proved equally traumatic. 
"I had to set up the shot, take off my clothes and walk out there, relying on 
other people to tell me if you could see too much," Costner recalls. "Then I 
had to watch it all in the dailies." His co-star remembers it well. "Kevin was 
so sweet," she says. "He came up to me after the shot and said: 'The woman 
always starts out nervous, then she's fine. I don't think about it -- and by 
the third take, I'm a wreck.' Part of Kevin's confidence is his ability to be 
open. I love that he can admit things like that -- even when he's directing." 
COSTNER has struggled to stay normal in what is essentially an abnormal 
business -- to keep his personal life separate from the hype. He makes his home 
with Cindy and their children, Annie, 6, Lily, 3, and Joe, 2, near Pasadena, 
instead of in hallowed Beverly Hills or Malibu; heads for local movie theaters 
every weekend instead of private screening rooms, and, in the trendiest of 
towns and glitziest of industries, cultivates a look that is far more L. L. 
Bean than G Q. 
Still, Costner admits, "something has seeped away with success" -- the obvious 
things: a certain spontaneity, privacy, time for himself. Though he is 
reluctant to complain about his "high-class set of problems," he allows that 
directing has turned up the heat. "A movie is a glacier moving along inches at 
a time. It's a 24-hour-a-day gig," he says. Yes, he acknowledges, the job takes 
its toll on his family, but he seems increasingly comfortable with the choices 
he's made. "Cindy is smart and knows that I had to grow up and do something 
with my life and that this life opens doors for her, too," he says. "I have a 
genuine love of getting my hands dirty with film. Still, the baggage that comes 
with it no one could have counted on." 
"Dances With Wolves" must weigh heavily on Costner. In unguarded moments he'll 
joke about his worst-case scenario: The critics will pan it, and no one will 
come. At the mention of "Kevin's Gate," he defensively calls this movie a 
bargain, even at $2 million over budget. "I got a lot on the screen for that, 
far more than a studio could have," he says. 
"I don't know why I set myself up for such scrutiny," he says softly. "In the 
privacy of my room, I'll wonder if I've bitten off too much and whether I'll 
make it. There's a nauseousness that goes along with it. I have to answer for 
all this." 
Would he direct again? "Sure, if something interested me," he shoots back. 
"Directing is about passion . . . not about the next available moment." He's 
already traded in his spurs for tights, playing Robin Hood in "Prince of 
Thieves," a $30-million venture directed by Kevin Reynolds in England. (The 
actor is reportedly getting close to an $8-million advance against a percentage 
of the film's gross revenues.) 
Meanwhile, Orion has sent out posters to movie theaters, heralding the release 
of "Dances With Wolves." One features a surreal nighttime shot of four 
stampeding buffalo and the high-concept tag line Costner can't -- or won't -- 
attempt for himself: "Inside everyone is a frontier waiting to be discovered." 
Particularly appropriate, in this case. 
