JUDGE NEGATES $7.5 MILLION FOR VICTIM OF RAPE; 
COURTS: ATTORNEY DID NOT PROVE PARALYZED WOMAN IN NURSING HOME SUFFERED DAMAGE, 
JUDGE RULES. HOSPITAL STAFF FOUND NOT TO BE NEGLIGENT. 
A judge Wednesday set aside a $7.5-million jury award to a paralyzed woman who 
became pregnant after being raped at a North Hollywood nursing home, ruling 
that the woman's attorney did not prove that she suffered damage from the 
incident. 
San Fernando Superior Court Judge David M. Schacter also found insufficient 
evidence to support the jury's verdict that negligence by the staff of the 
Laurelwood Convalescent Hospital led to the rape of Andrea Nerpel, 38, who had 
lived there since suffering major brain damage in a car accident when she was 
19. 
"There was no basis for the jury's finding other than mere speculation, 
sympathy, or compassion," Schacter said. 
"All of us are aware that a terrible wrong was done to Andrea Nerpel by an 
unknown person. Any rational person would have feelings of sympathy for the 
plaintiff, and disgust and rage against the unknown perpetrator. However, 
vengeance on the nursing home, which is the apparent basis for the jury 
verdict, is not the solution," he said. 
Nerpel's family sued the nursing home for negligence on her behalf and a jury 
awarded her $7.5 million in damages after a month-long trial. 
Unable to move or communicate meaningfully since the 1969 accident, Nerpel 
became pregnant in 1982. Her grandmother, Elian Rose, learned of the pregnancy 
about three months later during a visit to the nursing home. Nerpel, who is fed 
through a tube in her stomach, had an abortion and was sterilized. The rapist 
was never identified. 
In his closing argument, the family's attorney, Alan J. Schultz, said the 
cost-conscious nursing home did not provide security for its patients. He urged 
them to punish the nursing home's parent corporation, Western Medical 
Enterprises Inc., by granting Nerpel substantial damages. 
Explaining his decision to overturn the verdict, Schacter chastised Schultz for 
failing to produce evidence to support his contentions that the nursing home -- 
where Nerpel continues to live -- was negligent in caring for the patients, 
hiring reliable employees, or maintaining security on the premises. 
The judge called Schultz's closing argument "inflammatory" and said it violated 
the judge's earlier order that he not ask for punitive damages. He also said 
Schultz offered no evidence that Nerpel suffered damage as a result of the 
incident. During the trial, nursing home attorney Richard B. Castle argued that 
Nerpel was totally unaware of her surroundings and did not know she had been 
raped. 
"Even her grandmother admitted she did not know if Miss Nerpel knew or was 
aware what had happened to her, either at the time of the sexual activity or 
later," Schacter said. 
Schultz said he plans to appeal the judge's ruling. 
