PANEL URGES MORE TRIBAL CONTROL OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
Individual tribes should be allowed to assume control of Indian affairs 
programs administered by the government as a way to end "massive fraud, 
corruption and mismanagement" by the federal officials who oversee them, a 
Senate panel recommended Friday. 
The report, the product of a two-year investigation by the investigations unit 
of the Select Committee on Indian Affairs, disclosed widespread abuses by the 
federal agencies assigned to oversee existing programs. 
The panel reported that federal officials knew of possible oil theft from 
Indians but refused to stop it, hired teachers at reservation schools despite 
known records of sexual abuse of children and failed to heed warnings that 
minority contracting programs were dominated by fraudulent shell companies. 
Committee investigators also documented kickbacks and other illegal financial 
dealings by some tribal officials. 
"Not only do American Indians, but the American taxpayer as well, suffer from 
this extreme waste," said Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.), the investigations 
unit chairman. "Year after year, all American taxpayers must foot the bill for 
a negligent and unresponsive bureaucracy from a limited federal budget." 
The report, which advocates a "New Federalism for American Indians," proposes 
that individual tribes negotiate agreements with the President to establish 
self-governing bodies that will function "in the same sense as state 
governments." 
For those tribes that reach such agreements, the government would provide 
tribal officials with an annual entitlement grant equal to the amount that the 
tribe would have received through existing federal programs. 
The grants would be used by the tribal governments to provide services for 
their members. In return, the tribes would be accountable to a constitution 
ratified by a majority of all adult tribal members. 
Officials at the Interior Department, which supervises the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and administers the federal government's $3.3-billion Indian affairs 
budget, said they had not yet read the report. But they praised the committee 
for its work and noted that agency officials already are working with Indian 
tribes to achieve self government. 
"The report reflects a trend currently growing stronger within tribal 
communities -- the assumption of greater self-determination by tribal 
governments," said Eddie Frank Brown, assistant Interior secretary for Indian 
affairs. 
The special report is harshly critical of the government's current supervision 
of Indian affairs. 
"Paternalistic federal control over American Indians has created a federal 
bureaucracy ensnarled in red tape and riddled with fraud, mismanagement and 
waste," the report said. "Worse, the committee found that federal officials in 
every agency knew of the abuses but did little to stop them." 
DeConcini said that congressional intervention is necessary to stem the abuses, 
adding that he would send draft legislation to the Select Committee on Indian 
Affairs. 
DeConcini said that not all of the $3.3 billion annually earmarked for Indian 
programs reaches the nation's Indian population. "In fact, the total household 
income for American Indians from all sources, including the federal government, 
is actually less than the entire federal budget of $3.3 billion," DeConcini 
said. 
If the panel's recommendations were adopted, the Bureau of Indian Affairs would 
continue to provide services to those tribes that chose not to switch to 
self-governance. 
Officials predicted that as tribes negotiate agreements and began to receive 
direct federal grants, the Bureau of Indian Affairs would play a smaller role 
in tribal affairs. 
