BARGAIN CORNER: FIRMS OFFER INEXPENSIVE PUB STAYS IN AUSTRALIA 
Australian Pubstays and Backpackers Headquarters have lined up inexpensive 
accommodations at about 100 pubs in Australia, including some in Sydney, 
Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane and Hobart. Many of these pub/hotels are old 
buildings that have seen much of the country's history. Some have been 
upgraded. Most offer from five to 10 rooms. 
There are four room categories, with varying degrees of comfort. Two categories 
lack private bathrooms. All, however, include a full breakfast. 
Pub stays can be booked through U.S. tour operators, Guthrey's Pacific Travel 
and Continental Newmans Vacations. 
Guthrey's Pacific is offering the pub stays at from $32 to $60 double, $24 to 
$52 single. Guthrey's sells the pub stays only if participants also make other 
arrangements through it, such as car rentals. 
Continental Newmans is selling vouchers for the pub stays. A minimum of five 
vouchers must be bought, with the rates $28 to $60 single and $37 to $69 double 
occupancy. 
Making reservation for the first night's stay -- always a good idea -- can be 
done in the United States. You also can book all five or more nights. The 
vouchers are good for six months. Refunds are given for unused vouchers, minus 
a $50 administrative fee. 
Dormitory-type hostels with multiple bunks are used by Backpackers 
Headquarters, with a rate of $8 a night. The hostels usually contain communal 
kitchens, dining rooms, bathrooms, TV lounge and laundry room. Currency 
exchange and tour information/bookings are among the services offered. 
There are five hostels in Sydney and one each in Port Macquarie and on Magnetic 
Island. 
For more information on Australian pub stays, contact travel agents, Guthrey's 
Pacific Travel at (714) 752-8322 or Continental Newmans Vacations at toll-free 
(800) 525-2560. Backpackers Headquarters is at 79 Bayswater Road, Sydney. 
You can also get more information from the Australian Tourist Commission, 2121 
Avenue of the Stars, Suite 1200, Los Angeles 90067, (213) 552-1988. JACK ADLER 
