PARENTS' REVOLT DELAYS MERGER OF 2 SCHOOLS; 
EDUCATION: BATTLE OVER WESTLAKE SCHOOL FOR GIRLS AND HARVARD SCHOOL FOR BOYS IS 
AN UPHILL STRUGGLE. 
A proposed merger of Westlake School for girls and Harvard School for boys has 
been delayed a month amid a continuing revolt by parents. 
The 30-day delay of the final vote, announced on the eve of the Westlake Board 
of Trustees meeting last Thursday, is the first indication that the merger of 
the two prestigious schools, promoted as a "done deal," might come undone. 
Conceding that they face an uphill struggle, parents have mounted a 
multi-pronged attack on the plan that, if approved, would mean the end of the 
85-year-old all-girls school. 
They are poised to ask the state attorney general to block the merger as 
ill-conceived and hastily announced. In a draft of a letter to Atty. Gen. John 
K. Van de Kamp, which has not been sent, they charge that the board has acted 
capriciously on anecdotal advice, without the due diligence required under the 
California Corporations Code. 
A surprise announcement last month that the two schools would be merged into 
Harvard-Westlake School in 1991 triggered an intense backlash among Westlake 
parents that has not abated despite efforts by the board and administration to 
downplay its depth. 
The brouhaha is a battle royal involving many of the city's movers and shakers. 
Philanthropist couple Helen and Peter Bing, the largest benefactors of Westlake 
and Harvard, are enthusiastic backers of the merger. The Westlake Board of 
Trustees is dotted with names such as Sam Goldwyn, Aaron Spelling and David May 
II, of the department store family. 
At a recent parents meeting held in an auditorium named for director Garry 
Marshall, singer Howard Keel boomed out his dismay about the proposed merger. 
A number of players have ties at both schools and in the community. Richard 
Close has a daughter at Westlake and a son who graduated from Harvard last 
year. Wearing his hat as president of the Sherman Oaks Homeowners Assn., Close 
said he fears that the merger will bring more traffic to Coldwater Canyon 
Boulevard in neighboring Studio City, home of Harvard, which will provide the 
high school campus under the merger plan. The junior high grades will be taught 
at the Holmby Hills Westlake campus. 
If either school came to the city seeking conditional-use permits or zoning 
changes, the matter could come before one of two key city commissions. A 
Westlake father sits on the Planning Commission, and a Harvard father sits on 
the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Despite the postponement, Harvard sent out a bulletin to its parents this week 
saying the merger was expected to go forward. Harvard Headmaster Thomas C. 
Hudnut said in an interview that he based his optimism on assurances from his 
counterpart at Westlake, Nathan Reynolds, who did not respond to several 
requests for comment. 
According to Hudnut, Reynolds said the delay would provide more time "to bring 
more trustees up to speed" about the disputed issue. 
Opponents of the merger are skeptical that it is a now-or-never matter that 
must be speedily enacted while a "window of opportunity" is open, a posture 
that makes Westlake the suitor. They question the premise on which the merger 
was based -- that Westlake could not compete with a Harvard expected to go 
coeducational on its own. Underlying the dissension is a philosophy -- 
demonstrated in research and fostered by the headmaster who now favors a merger 
-- that single-sex education is superior for girls. 
Even those who are not opposed to coeducation take issue with the deal's terms, 
which give Harvard a 2-1 majority on the board of trustees. "This is not a 
merger, it's an acquisition," said Rod Berle, a member of the Westlake Board of 
Trustees. 
Another festering issue is religion. Harvard, whose bylaws will govern the 
merged institution, falls under the jurisdiction of the Episcopal Diocese, a 
relationship some Westlake parents do not like. 
The intense opposition has been fueled by revelations large and small. A wire 
service report from 1978 was unearthed in which the Harvard headmaster extolled 
the benefits of his membership in an exclusive Washington, D.C., males-only 
club. 
The Westlake administration's private opinion about Harvard boys -- that they 
are "obnoxious" -- also was revealed in a confidential memo distributed to 
members at a board retreat in June and obtained by The Times. 
On a page entitled "Problems for Harvard if They Go Co-Ed," under the 
subheading "Intimidating Atmosphere at Harvard," an administrator whose name is 
not contained on the document wrote the following: 
"Only the most socially aggressive and confident girls will feel comfortable 
after visiting Harvard. The admissions office doesn't encourage families to 
visit now because the boys are so obnoxious. Imagine the possibilities when 
little girls start to visit for the first time." 
The memo mentions an incident involving a Westlake student who appeared at a 
Harvard assembly to promote a joint production of "Jesus Christ Superstar" and 
who complained of harassment from the boys. 
Hudnut said the incident was an "eye of the beholder" situation. Women faculty 
members in the front row did not detect any disrespect in the boys' behavior, 
their headmaster said. 
As for his membership in the Cosmos Club, which has since changed its policies 
to admit women, Hudnut said, "It is irrelevant." According to Hudnut, belonging 
to the club was a "very useful adjunct" in Washington that did not detract from 
his ability to educate both sexes. 
Opponents of the merger have been rankled by what they perceive as the 
presumption of the pro-merger forces. At an emotional meeting in which parents 
repeatedly asked to have a voice in the merger decision, Westlake board 
President Alan Levy replied testily, "This is not a shareholders' meeting. 
There are no stockholders in this corporation." 
Although that is technically correct, because the power is vested in the Board 
of Trustees, such statements have galvanized opponents of the merger, who are 
not accustomed to being dismissed so summarily. 
According to Berle, the Westlake board has hired former Los Angeles Unified 
School District Supt. Harry Handler to evaluate the data about the predicted 
dearth of high-quality applicants for Westlake if Harvard goes co-ed without 
it. A number of committees seeking parent reaction have also been formed. 
"Window dressing," Berle said. 
Parents are also critical of a letter that went out this month on pre-printed 
"Harvard-Westlake" stationery to elementary schools where sixth-graders might 
apply for admission. 
Attorney David Higgins, a Westlake parent, said the mailing was a "dangerous 
thing for the board to allow to happen," creating liability by presenting 
something that had not yet been approved by the board. 
Meanwhile, a fund-raising campaign is under way to demonstrate to the board 
that Westlake will be economically viable if students do defect to a Harvard 
that goes coeducational on its own. 
Nearly $100,000 was raised by those at the meeting. In addition, Berle said, he 
has presented a pledge for a $1-million cushion to protect the school from the 
loss of large benefactors who might fall away if the merger collapses. 
In particular, many parents, though not for attribution, say Helen Bing as a 
source of funds would be lost if Westlake remains as it is. Bing's generosity 
is a mainstay of the school. 
Though merger opponents are far from claiming victory, Berle said, there are 
many more "borderline" board members than there were three weeks ago. 
Nevertheless, Hudnut predicted that despite the scrutiny, the merger will hang 
together. "I think the overriding benefits of it will be sufficiently clear to 
the people whose responsibility it is to make the deal go forward," he said. 
