JUDGE ASKS LAWYERS TO TOTAL FRAUD LOSSES IN MILKEN CASE 
A federal judge Wednesday asked lawyers for the government and Michael Milken 
to calculate the total amount of fraud in Milken's crimes to help authorities 
determine how much prison time he must serve. 
Federal parole officials need an estimate to recommend when Milken will be 
eligible for parole, and the number could affect the length of incarceration by 
more than two years. 
U.S. District Judge Kimba M. Wood last week sentenced the former Drexel Burnham 
Lambert Inc. financier to 10 years in prison for six felony counts related to 
illegal securities trading. 
At a hearing in Manhattan federal court Wednesday, Wood said that because of 
the nature of Milken's crimes it was not easy to calculate losses to victims. 
She said the parole commission "never had anything like this in mind." 
While the parole commission makes its own calculation on such losses, Wood said 
she wants to present officials with a number agreeable to both sides. 
Under parole guidelines, a first offender such as Milken would face a minimum 
prison term of 24 months to 36 months if victims' losses ranged from $200,000 
to $1 million. If the fraud exceeds $1 million, Milken's recommended prison 
term before parole would equal 40 months to 52 months. But the parole 
commission is not bound by the guidelines. 
Milken attorney Arthur L. Liman said at the hearing that he believed the amount 
would not exceed $1 million. Wood scheduled a Dec. 6 hearing on the matter. 
As part of his plea deal, Milken agreed to pay $200 million in criminal fines 
and penalties and place $400 million into a fund to compensate investors hurt 
by his crimes. But that figure does not constitute an estimate of losses. 
Milken's lawyers have 10 days from the date the sentence judgment was entered 
formally in U.S. District Court to appeal the 10-year term. Court officials 
said the sentence judgment was to occur Wednesday, after Wood allocated $1.5 
million as a criminal fine and the remainder of the $200 million as a penalty, 
completing details of the sentencing. 
Liman declined to comment on a published report Wednesday that he planned to 
appeal the sentence. 
