INS RAIDS LATINO RIGHTS GROUP'S OFFICE IN AMNESTY FRAUD 
U.S. immigration agents have raided the Las Vegas offices of the president of 
the nation's largest Latino civil rights organization as part of an 
investigation into possible fraud involving amnesty applications from aliens in 
Southern California, authorities said Tuesday. 
Officials for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, who asked that their 
names not be used, said the investigation centered on allegations that Jose 
Velez, 53, president of the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), 
reportedly received about $300,000 for helping in the filing of about 800 
amnesty applications. 
Velez allegedly turned in only 17 applications to the INS for processing, 
leaving the rest to collect dust in his immigration consulting office near the 
Las Vegas Strip, the officials said. 
The applications, mostly from aliens of Asian descent, were reportedly given to 
him by a West Covina woman, Aurora Barrientos, who was interested in seeing 
these aliens receive amnesty under the historic Immigration Reform and Control 
Act of 1986. 
Some components of the amnesty program have been plagued by allegations of 
fraud, but Monday morning's raids were believed to be the first high-profile 
attempt to uncover fraud affecting Los Angeles applicants. 
INS spokeswoman Virginia Kice said the raids were conducted by Los 
Angeles-based INS agents at Velez's office and the adjacent Nevada state 
offices of LULAC. 
"I can only say that this is a far-reaching and sensitive investigation into 
allegations of possible fraud within the legalization program," Kice said. She 
declined to elaborate. 
Although INS officials would not say what was seized during the three-hour 
search, Velez said immigration agents took the amnesty files of 14 aliens -- 
all of them from Los Angeles. 
Velez, who became national president of LULAC in June, said the raids were 
politically inspired by the INS, which he said wants to silence him because of 
his organization's anti-INS posture. 
"The INS is looking for a big story, 'National president of LULAC indicted,' " 
Velez said when reached at his office Tuesday. 
He denied that he was involved in any wrongdoing in his handling of the 
applications given to him late last year by Barrientos, who operates a bowling 
alley in San Bernardino. 
He said Barrientos gave him only 308 applications and that he was paid only 
$400 for each processed application. He added that he submitted all but 17 of 
them that were withheld because of insufficient documentation. 
"I have documentation to prove all this," Velez said. 
Barrientos could not be reached for comment. 
Velez also accused INS officials of "Gestapo tactics" by threatening aliens 
with deportation unless they testified against him. 
Kice said the raids were not politically motivated. 
"I don't think there's any foundation for that allegation," she said. "The INS 
conducts investigations based on the intelligence and data we gather, not 
politics." 
LULAC, founded in Texas in 1929, is a national Latino civil rights organization 
that in recent years has been an ardent foe of the INS. It filed a class-action 
lawsuit two years ago to extend the amnesty deadline for some aliens, 
contending that the INS summarily rejected the applications from some aliens 
who were eligible for amnesty. 
The group won the right for these aliens to apply under an extended application 
period and successfully fought off INS attempts several weeks ago to cut off 
the application period for these aliens. 
About 100,000 aliens nationwide are believed to be affected by the LULAC 
lawsuit. 
Velez is considered to be one of the leading immigration consultants in 
southern Nevada, having handled an estimated 3,000 amnesty applications since 
1987. 
No stranger to controversy, Velez became president of LULAC last June in a 
chaotic election during the 100,000-member group's convention in Albuquerque, 
N.M. He assumed the LULAC presidency when another candidate dropped out. But 
opponents claimed his election was invalid since the group's executive council 
did not ratify it. 
