FEINSTEIN-WILSON RACE TIGHT; 
'BIG GREEN' LOSES; TERM-LIMIT MEASURE 140 LEADS; 
ELECTION: EXIT POLLS SHOW GUBERNATORIAL CONTEST IS TOO CLOSE TO CALL. THE 
OUTCOME MAY HINGE ON ABSENTEE BALLOTS. 
Democrat Dianne Feinstein and Republican U.S. Senator Pete Wilson were locked 
in a tight battle for the governorship early today after a historic campaign 
that saw Feinstein driving to become the first woman governor in California. 
Early absentee returns gave Wilson a slim lead, but exit polls, including one 
by The Times, showed the race too close to call. Ultimately, the outcome may be 
determined by as many as 500,000 absentee ballots that election officials will 
not begin to count until today. 
According to the Times exit poll, which surveyed 6,960 voters in 150 precincts, 
Feinstein won among those who voted in person. Wilson, however, appeared to 
have won the heavy absentee vote, which election officials said may total 20% 
of the overall tally. 
Victory, therefore, hinged on just how large a margin Wilson held in absentees 
-- a scenario reminiscent of the 1982 race for governor, in which Los Angeles 
Mayor Tom Bradley, the Democratic nominee, won the Election Day vote only to 
lose to Republican George Deukmejian when the absentee votes were counted. 
In San Diego, where he flew after an earlier appearance in Los Angeles, Wilson 
expressed confidence but warned his backers to prepare for a long night. 
"Stay tuned, save some of that lung power for later," he told cheering 
supporters. "But for now, let me just tell you, it is not too early for me to 
declare all of you winners." 
Feinstein, talking to Los Angeles supporters by telephone from San Francisco, 
encouraged them to keep their hopes up. 
"It isn't over yet," she said, "but frankly speaking, I'm very optimistic." 
The ballot-counting was marred by an early foul-up that brought tallying to a 
halt and drove the candidates and campaign workers to fits of worry. 
Melissa Warren, a spokeswoman for the secretary of state's office, said the 
computer system that totals returns in Sacramento stopped at 9:08 p.m., just an 
hour after the polls closed, and came back 45 minutes later. The problem was 
traced to an overload in a file, but results came in sluggishly throughout the 
night. 
The secretary of state's office said the percentage of registered voters who 
turned out was in the low 60s, with absentee ballots accounting for about 20% 
of the votes. 
Both campaigns were setting up for a long night. 
"We're going to keep our fingers crossed and see what happens when the 
absentees come in," said Wilson's campaign director, Otto Bos. 
Feinstein's campaign director, Bill Carrick, expressed similar confidence in 
the Democratic get-out-the-vote effort. 
"It was a good, targeted, disciplined effort and I think it'll be reflected in 
the returns tonight," he said. 
The Republican gathering at the Universal City Hilton was disrupted by the huge 
fire on the nearby Universal Studios lot. Some supporters left the ballroom to 
look at the glow in the sky. Traffic also was disrupted in the vicinity. 
Democrats were dominating the other statewide contests, but there were tight 
races for attorney general and state treasurer. 
Democrat Arlo Smith held a slim advantage over Republican former congressman 
Dan Lungren in the race for attorney general, a post John K. Van de Kamp 
relinquished to pursue a losing run for governor this year. 
And Democrat Kathleen Brown, sister of one former governor and daughter of 
another, held a narrow lead over incumbent state Treasurer Thomas W. Hayes, 
appointed to the post by Deukmejian and seeking his first four-year term. 
The first race for state insurance commissioner went to Democrat John Garamendi 
of Walnut Grove, who resigned his seat in the state Senate in the midst of his 
general election campaign against Huntington Beach insurance executive Wes 
Bannister. 
Bannister spent only $85,000 on his campaign, including money pumped in by the 
Republican party, and was openly sheepish about his chances. 
"It'll be the biggest fluke in the whole world if I win," he said, adding, "I'm 
not a household name." 
Democratic Lt. Gov. Leo T. McCarthy of San Francisco apparently won a third 
term, holding a comfortable lead over State Sen. Marian Bergeson of Newport 
Beach. 
And in a bid for her fifth term, Democratic Secretary of State March Fong Eu 
appeared to defeat Republican challenger Joan Milke Flores, a Los Angeles City 
Council member., 
Gray Davis, the Democratic incumbent controller, won his second term over 
Hacienda Heights attorney Matt Fong, Eu's son, but he expressed concern about 
the voter mood this year. "I never worked so hard to nail down what everyone 
thinks is a sure thing," he said, "because I think there is understandable 
unease and in some cases anger." 
And with nearly half the vote counted, the Democratic candidate for District 4 
of the Board of Equalization, former state Sen. Paul Carpenter, was winning -- 
despite his recent conviction on federal racketeering and other charges. Even 
if Carpenter wins, he would not be able to serve and replacement would be 
appointed by the governor. 
At more than 26,000 polling places across the state, voters arrived armed with 
thick sample ballots containing a daunting array of issues. Besides the 
governor's race, at stake were six other state constitutional offices, 28 
ballot propositions -- some of which canceled out each other -- 45 
congressional seats, 80 posts in the California Assembly and 21 seats in the 
state Senate. 
And that did not even count such regional decisions as the four seats on the 
State Board of Equalization and various city and county issues. 
Early indications were that voter turnout was on target with the projections of 
Secretary of State Eu that 62.1% of those registered would cast ballots. All 
told, 19 million Californians are eligible to vote by virtue of their age. 
The governor's race was guaranteed a place in the history books because of its 
cost. By Election Day, the major participants had spent more than $40 million 
in pursuit of the chief executive's job, not counting millions more spent by 
candidates who did not make the final cut. 
The winner is expected to vault onto the nation's political stage. The 
country's national political parties were holding their breath at the outcome, 
for the governor will have a major role in the reapportionment process. 
California is expected to gain seven congressional seats and the lines for 
legislative seats also will be redrawn. 
The candidates closed out their races with traditional arguments, Wilson 
alleging that Feinstein would hike taxes and spend frivolously, Feinstein 
countering that Wilson would favor the rich at the expense of the bulk of 
California. 
Both embraced the notion of change, with Feinstein arguing that she represented 
a leap from the policies of current Gov. George Deukmejian, and Wilson 
asserting that he would be a more activist and flexible governor than his 
predecessor. 
Largely lost in the air wars between the candidates for governor and the 
various initiatives were those running for lesser statewide offices. 
Smith and Lungren, engaged in the most bitter of the races, bashed each other 
on abortion rights -- which Smith favors and Lungren opposes -- and offshore 
oil drilling, which Lungren favors and Smith opposes. Their fiercest salvos 
were reserved for late accusations by each that the other simply was not 
qualified to serve as attorney general. 
The race for lieutenant governor between McCarthy and Bergeson centered mostly 
on crime. McCarthy touted his Proposition 133, the drug-war initiative that 
would add a half-cent to the sales tax and set aside the money to fight drugs 
and crime. 
Bergeson emphasized her conservative positions on crime and, although she 
opposes abortion rights, criticized McCarthy for once having shared her 
position. 
Brown made the most of her family's political traditions and skated through her 
primary race for the treasurer's office. But Hayes, out-financed and battered 
by a competitive primary, fought back by accusing Brown of intending to play 
politics with the state post. 
Incumbent Democrats Eu and Davis were challenged by first-time statewide 
candidates. 
Eu spent most of the campaign for secretary of state ignoring Republican 
challenger Flores, but in the closing days went on the air to counter 
hard-hitting Flores commercials. 
Eu's son, Democrat-turned-Republican Fong, played up his family lineage despite 
the fact that his mother was technically neutral in the race. He also hit Davis 
hard, linking him in television ads with controversial investment banker 
Michael Milken. 
But Davis presented a largely positive image, keying on issues such as the 
environment and abortion rights and portraying himself as an activist. 
In the insurance commissioner's race, Garamendi out-raised and out-spent 
Bannister, who virtually defined the concept of "low profile." The candidates 
differed on a wide range of issues, particularly no-fault insurance, with 
Bannister favoring it and Garamendi, who once sponsored no-fault legislation, 
against it. 
