WILL STATIONS HAVE TO 'EAT' THE NEW GAS TAX? 
A new nickel-a-gallon federal tax on gasoline and diesel fuel goes into effect 
Saturday, but it's unclear how much of that increase will find its way to the 
corner gasoline station. 
On one hand, service station operators say they can't afford to swallow any of 
the tax and must pass the 5-cent hike onto consumers. On the other hand, 
service station operators may not want to risk losing any more customers, 
especially since demand for gasoline has already fallen dramatically in the 
face of high prices resulting from the Aug. 2 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, 
analysts note. 
"You're damned if you do and damned if you don't," said David Carney, who 
operates Hillside Chevron in Torrance. 
The 5-cent tax was approved by Congress in October as part of the budget 
reconciliation act, with half of the anticipated $5 billion in new revenues 
going to reduce the federal budget deficit and half to finance transportation 
projects. It boosts total federal gasoline taxes to 14 cents a gallon. 
Scott Jones, an industry analyst and president of AUS Consultants Inc. in 
Philadelphia, said his firm's research indicates most retailers will hike 
prices the full nickel at first, but then back off in the next two or three 
weeks, with dealers ultimately eating two cents of the increase. 
"Picture four service stations at an intersection," Jones said. "Given the 
current market situation, with sellers of gasoline vying for decreasing demand, 
it will be too enticing for one of those four stations to raise their prices 
only four cents a gallon while the other three raise theirs a whole nickel. 
Then it starts." 
There is another scenario: refiners or oil companies could decide to drop the 
wholesale prices of gasoline sold to dealers to offset the tax hike. 
"There's a possibility that retailers will appeal to branded refiners and say, 
'Look, the competition is forcing us to lower our prices; you guys have to give 
us some help,' " Jones said. But, he added, "Normally this sort of thing falls 
full force on the retailer." 
None of seven major oil company spokesmen interviewed Thursday would comment on 
future price changes, saying only that the companies would remain competitive. 
Chevron Corp., however, recently dropped posted wholesale prices of gasoline 4 
cents a gallon in California. But there was no net effect on wholesale prices, 
because the change simply reflected a discount already being offered to 
dealers. 
Texaco Inc. said it has dropped Los Angeles wholesale prices of its regular 
unleaded gasoline 5 cents a gallon and diesel fuel 6 cents a gallon in the last 
two weeks. 
Jerry Kaplan, a Shell dealer in Sherman Oaks, said he believes Shell Oil Co. 
may drop its wholesale gasoline prices 2 cents a gallon, though a Shell 
spokesman would not comment on that. 
But whatever Shell does, Kaplan said, consumer wrath would still fall on him. 
"We collect every kind of tax you can think of, and my customer looks at me and 
says, 'You ought to get your hand slapped for what you're doing,' " he said. "I 
think it's totally unfair." 
In addition to the 5-cent hike on Saturday, federal taxes will rise another 0.1 
cent per gallon to raise money for a fund to deal with leaking underground 
storage tanks. 
For Californians, the tax increases follow a state hike of 5 cents a gallon on 
Aug. 1 -- the day before the invasion -- and precedes another penny-a-gallon 
state tax hike coming Jan. 1. By then, the price of a gallon of gasoline will 
include 38 cents in taxes. 
Generally speaking, the taxes are paid by wholesalers of gasoline and built 
into the cost of the fuel sold to retailers: service stations, bulk 
distributors and others. 
Whether they pass that cost onto consumers depends on a variety of factors. 
Already, retail prices of gasoline have skyrocketed about 30 cents a gallon 
since the Iraqi invasion, although they have stabilized in the last five weeks 
or so. This week, the national average price of a gallon of regular, self-serve 
unleaded gasoline -- the most popular grade -- was $1.366 a gallon, according 
to the American Automobile Assn. 
Until recently, the run-up in retail prices had not kept up with the rise in 
the cost of crude oil, from which gasoline is made, or in some cases with the 
wholesale cost of gasoline sold to dealers. That meant that many dealers were 
seeing their operating margins squeezed at the same time demand fell off. 
Operating margins for retailers nationally fell from 13.9 cents a gallon on 
July 6 to 8 cents a gallon on Aug. 24, according to the widely read Lundberg 
Survey. That margin has recovered to about 13.4 cents a gallon now, Lundberg 
reported. Out of that margin, dealers must pay overhead, income taxes and other 
expenses before seeing a profit. 
Lou Bacca, who operates Chevron stations in Costa Mesa and Santa Ana, said his 
sales volume has fallen about 15% and his profits are down 25% since the 
invasion. "I'm going to do my best to pass (the new tax) on, because our 
profits are pretty slim right now," he said. 
But there are real concerns that another steep hike in gas prices will further 
discourage motorists from buying. 
Carney said sales volume at his Chevron station in Torrance fell 30% from Aug. 
1 to Aug. 4 -- first, because of the new 5-cent-a-gallon state sales tax, then 
because of a 5-cent-a-gallon price increase due to the Iraqi invasion. Sales 
have not yet bounced back, Carney said. 
Nationwide, gasoline demand was 2.7% lower in October than a year before. 
GAS PRICES 
Immediately after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the American Automobile Assn. 
began reporting national gasoline prices daily. After the first few weeks, it 
began reporting prices weekly. 
