ART REVIEW; 
SOLID TRIBUTE TO AN ELUSIVE MASTER PAINTER 
Sigmar Polke is a terrifically important artist, and "Sigmar Polke" is a 
terrifically important exhibition. 
Just about the only disappointment attached to the sprawling retrospective, 
which opened Thursday at the Museum of Modern Art here, is that it won't be 
traveling to Los Angeles. (After San Francisco, it moves to Washington, D.C., 
Chicago and New York.) That, and the museum's notoriously awkward gallery 
spaces, which make coherent installations of many an artist's work exceedingly 
difficult to accomplish. 
The problem is especially vexing for Polke, the elusive German painter whose 
development since the early 1960s has been broadly influential for both 
European and American artists, but whose work has not been shown in much 
abundance in the United States. (Almost never is it in evidence on the West 
Coast.) 
The retrospective is large -- more than 90 paintings, from 1963 on, as well as 
an extensive group of often wonderful drawings and a new installation, 
featuring a gigantic ladder leading to an escape hatch through a skylight, made 
specially for the museum's Beaux-Arts rotunda -- and it offers nearly as 
complete a survey as one might hope for. Certainly there are gaps (the '70s are 
not well represented), but it's safe to say a substantive effort such as this 
isn't likely to come this way again for a very long time. Miss the show only at 
your peril. 
Still, piecing together how Polke got where he did, which is one aim of any 
retrospective assessment, isn't easy in the show. The entry galleries present 
the artist at his most consistently compelling -- the richly disorienting work 
of the 1980s -- while his formative pictures from the 1960s occupy a string of 
galleries to the side, displays that here and there are punctuated by more 
recent canvases. The trajectory is jumpy. 
Of course, with Polke, a strictly chronological survey may not be exactly 
essential. He's the kind of artist who periodically doubles back on himself, in 
paintings whose two principal trademarks are, first, multiple layers of 
imagery, one painted atop another, sometimes on commercial fabric also printed 
with patterns; and, second, decidedly unusual materials -- goopy stuff such as 
alcohol-diluted pigment and beeswax on canvas, or acrylic on Turkish blue 
Lurex, or silver, silver nitrite, iodine, cobalt chloride and artificial resin 
on canvas. (Reading the labels can make you feel like Ralph Nader at the 
supermarket.) Together, they yield anything but paintings with linear 
narratives. 
And, for an artist known to have made paintings that use mineral pigments whose 
color changes with the climactic conditions of the places in which they are 
shown, the idea of a tight, strictly ordered historical presentation doesn't 
really compute. 
The catalogue, too, is appropriately quirky. While the quality of the color 
reproductions is sometimes disappointing (near as I can tell, given paintings 
whose color isn't always fixed), the texts are often good. They're also all 
over the map, with contributions by the show's organizer, John Caldwell, the 
new curator at the museum whose debut this is, as well as by a critic, a 
historian, another artist, a filmmaker and even a collector. Each has something 
worthwhile to say, and the unusual diversity of voices serves Polke's 
internally diverse paintings well. This is an art that attempts to ground 
metaphysical experience in the muck and mire of the everyday -- a swamp that 
includes painting itself -- and the cacophony in the catalogue oddly fits. 
For Americans, Polke's art from the last 10 years is his most familiar, and for 
three notably interrelated reasons. He has been among the leading artists to 
have emerged in the recent internationalization of the contemporary art world 
(Polke was awarded the Golden Lion Prize for painting at the 1986 Venice 
Biennale). His work is the aesthetic offspring of perhaps the two archetypal 
artists of the post-1960 milieu, Germany's shamanistic Joseph Beuys (with whom 
he studied) and American Pop-meister Andy Warhol, whose influences were 
everywhere to be seen in the last decade. And his art's arrival on these shores 
was preceded by the widely publicized paintings of the younger American artists 
David Salle and Julian Schnabel, who couldn't have done what they did without 
having seen Polke's example on European sojourns. 
So Polke has celebrated forebears and followers, yet his own widely acclaimed 
work has been remote. We "know" it chiefly through means other than direct 
experience. Which is to say, we know it the way we know so much else in 
contemporary life, a distended knowledge that is itself central to Polke's art. 
Polke was born in Silesia (once part of East Germany, now part of Poland) in 
1941, and he immigrated to West Germany at the age of 12. Imagine growing up in 
a historically torn and ravaged land, physically and psychically, and to 
unprecedented degree, that was simultaneously being rebuilt in the image of the 
youthful culture of America. Something of both will be found in Polke's best 
work, which features evanescent imagery disappearing into the paintings' 
dilapidated material stew. 
Polke's paintings from about 1963 to the beginning of the 1970s feature the 
consumer goods, kitschy decoration and benday dots of Pop art, but they're 
vastly different from Warhol and Lichtenstein. Awkward and grubby, they don't 
possess the flashy urgency or cheerful anarchy of the Americans' work, seeming 
more like ancient talismans than reverential icons of the new. Together with 
Gerhard Richter and Konrad Fischer (then an artist, now an influential dealer), 
Polke dubbed this putative movement Capitalist Realism, a wry if provincial 
response to Pop by artists more than familiar with the enforced conventions of 
Socialist Realism. 
Most of these paintings are insistently ugly -- and it's hard to take your eyes 
off them. The paradox might partly be explained by the reliance on 
down-and-dirty, banged-up execution to render conventional concepts of beauty: 
tropical islands, flowers, birds, Playboy bunnies, young lovers and such. 
Drained of pop-culture slickness, the subjects seem damaged and oddly poignant. 
Polke followed these with several works examining other new conventions. A 
painting of simple mathematical equations that don't add up slid the rug out 
from under Conceptual art, while others took on the lowly decorative element of 
high-toned gestural abstraction and the godlike perfection of hard-edge 
painting. They bear a decided affinity to the contemporaneous early work of 
John Baldessari (the artist, incidentally, who contributed brief notes to the 
catalogue). 
These ruminations on the nature of art merged with Polke's prior concerns to 
form the great work of the 1980s (anticipated in some earlier gems, like the 
pivotal "Alice in Wonderland" from 1971). Here, pungent acknowledgement of the 
traditional structure of the object called a painting comes together, wildly, 
with the new pictorial structure of mass-culture imagery. 
Stretcher bars are a painting's skeleton, canvas its skin. Polke began dousing 
his canvases with resin, which turned the surface into a yellowed, cracked and 
translucent "flesh," through which the painting's "bones" are eerily glimpsed. 
Elsewhere, quilted cloth or patterned fabric substitutes for canvas, to 
"clothe" the painting's "body." 
This patterned fabric also offers one tumble of images on which other layers of 
painted pictures cavort. For Polke, a painting seems not to be a blank canvas 
or an empty field on which new images are invented. Instead, it has the feel of 
a metaphoric body existing as a blank screen, across which phantoms, specters 
and mysterious shades are projected. 
The transformative yet Earth-bound mysticism of Joseph Beuys and the 
receptive-to-anything "blank body" of Andy Warhol stand behind this uncanny 
quality. Polke's achievement has been to harness them together in his art -- a 
transfiguration that appears to stand behind the curator's firm commitment to 
Polke's work. 
Following a prescient 1987 show at the Milwaukee Art Museum grouping Warhol, 
Beuys and Polke, John Caldwell paired work by the two older, late artists in a 
much-remarked installation at Pittsburgh's 1988 Carnegie International. This 
corner room was matched, at the opposite end of a string of galleries, by a 
special installation of five, large paintings by Polke, variously composed from 
meteorite dust, silver leaf and Paleolithic tools scattered across glowing 
pools of resin. Those five paintings are now in San Francisco, one in the 
collection of the museum, four in Bay Area private collections. "Sigmar Polke" 
is their trenchant validation. 
 "Sigmar Polke" remains at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art to Jan. 13, 
before traveling to the Hirschhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, 
D.C. (Feb. 12-May 7); the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago (July 20-Sept. 8) 
and the Brooklyn Museum Oct. 11-Jan. 6, 1992). 
