BALLPARK PLAN, LIVE-IN PARTNER LAW TRAIL IN S.F.; 
ELECTIONS: POLITICAL AFTERSHOCKS PUT BOTH BALLOT PROPOSALS IN DOUBT. OWNER HAS 
THREATENED TO MOVE THE BASEBALL GIANTS. 
More aftershocks -- this time the political kind -- rumbled through San 
Francisco on Tuesday, but incomplete election returns made it unclear whether 
earthquake-weary residents were in a mood to authorize construction of a new 
baseball park or grant live-in lovers some rights enjoyed by married couples. 
With many precincts still to report -- and thousands of absentee ballots yet to 
be counted -- both measures were losing but only slightly late Tuesday. 
"We want to stay in San Francisco," Bob Lurie, owner of the National League 
Champion San Francisco Giants said Tuesday night as the nerve-wracking vote 
count continued. But "if this measure goes down, there is really no place to 
play" in San Francisco, he said. 
San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos -- a leading stadium backer -- refused to concede 
defeat but acknowledged that "there's no question that the earthquake affected 
the emotions of the community." 
Also too close to call was a controversial proposal in San Francisco to approve 
a so-called domestic partners ordinance, which sought to grant official 
recognition to relationships among gays and unmarried heterosexuals but was 
fought doggedly by religious leaders. 
Elsewhere in California, a proposal to raise the sales tax by a half-cent to 
pay for transportation improvements was leading in San Bernardino County with 
about one-fifth of the vote counted. But a similar measure was trailing in 
traffic-clogged Orange County, incomplete returns showed. 
Two measures fought bitterly by homosexuals -- a proposal to deny gays 
protections under a civil rights law in Irvine and an effort to repeal an 
ordinance banning discrimination against AIDS victims in Contra Costa County -- 
were winning by narrow margins, early returns indicated. 
In the days after the Oct. 17 quake, Northern California campaign workers 
focused their efforts on relief. But no 7.1 temblor could put politics on hold 
for long. Although voter interest and fund-raising lagged, campaigns were 
kick-started back to life within a week. 
Giants owner Lurie, advocating the new $115-million baseball stadium, renewed 
his statement that he would sell or move the franchise rather than continue to 
field the team at Candlestick. 
A day before the election, Mayor Agnos angrily attacked a last-minute mailer 
critical of the stadium, charging that the financing came from Sacramento Kings 
owner Gregg Luckenbill and represented an attempt to lure the Giants away. San 
Francisco Dist. Atty. Arlo Smith vowed to investigate. 
Maurice Read, Luckenbill's spokesman, insisted that no money came from 
Luckenbill "directly or indirectly," and said Agnos' claim was part of a ploy 
to increase voter interest. 
Backers said a vote for a new stadium would prove to outsiders that San 
Franciscans remain committed to the city. For a small investment, they argued, 
the public could reap several million dollars a year from the stadium's 
operation. 
Opponents claimed the city could not afford a new ballpark in the light of 
quake-related damage and more pressing needs, such as caring for AIDS victims 
and homeless people. Foes also emphasized that the stadium would be built in 
China Basin, an area of landfill near downtown, and thus might be damaged in an 
earthquake. 
Political consultants said the earthquake also shifted attention away from San 
Francisco's other pressing issue this fall -- whether live-in lovers should 
have some of the rights afforded to married couples. 
In May, the San Francisco Board of Supervisors adopted a so-called domestic 
partners ordinance, making the city one of only a handful to recognize 
relationships among gays and unmarried heterosexuals. 
But religious fundamentalists gathered 27,000 signatures, thereby forcing a 
vote on the ordinance before couples could pay $35 and register themselves as 
being part of an "intimate and committed" relationship. 
Telephone Appeals 
Louis Sheldon, director of the Anaheim-based Traditional Values Coalition, 
revealed Tuesday that he took a role in challenging the ordinance, "doing a lot 
by telephone" to direct strategy for the San Francisco pastor and rabbi who 
spearheaded the petition drive. 
Echoing arguments put forth by the Anaheim group, San Francisco Catholic 
Archbishop John R. Quinn said the domestic partners measure would undermine 
family and marriage and give live-in lovers rights associated with marriage 
without the obligations. 
The ordinance sought to allow unmarried couples to register with the County 
Clerk as domestic partners and obtain certificates similar to marriage 
certificates. City employees could get bereavement leaves upon the deaths of 
their lovers, and would be assured the same visitation rights in hospitals as 
married couples when their lovers were near death. 
"It simply allows us to identify who we are. That seems very modest to me," 
said San Francisco Supervisor Harry Britt, who is gay and sponsored the 
ordinance. 
The measure at issue Tuesday did not address a separate action taken by the San 
Francisco supervisors that directs the mayor to study the possibility of giving 
domestic partners the same health benefits as married couples. A task force is 
studying that idea. 
In the waning days of the campaign, supporters of the handful of money measures 
around California feared a statewide quarter-cent sales tax increase for 
earthquake victims -- signed by Gov. George Deukmejian Saturday -- could doom 
their chances at the polls. A statewide gasoline tax scheduled for the June, 
1990, ballot was also viewed as a threat to the local measures. 
San Bernardino and Orange counties were among six counties where voters were 
asked to open their wallets to pay for highway improvements and transit 
projects. 
Supporters hoped promises of congestion relief would entice disgruntled 
commuters into agreeing to raise the sales tax one-half cent on the dollar. 
Opponents, meanwhile, argued that highway improvements are the state's 
responsibility, and they predicted the statewide sales tax increase would spark 
an anti-spending mood among voters. 
In Orange County, much of the $3.1 billion to be generated by the tax over its 
20-year life was earmarked for the widening of a section of the congested Santa 
Ana Freeway from six to 12 lanes. The expansion of commuter rail service 
between Los Angeles and San Diego was among $775 million worth of transit 
projects planned. 
The transportation wish list drawn up in San Bernardino County -- where a 
similar measure was defeated in 1987 -- included freeway widening and extension 
projects and the development of rail service to Los Angeles and Orange 
counties. 
In addition to the live-in lover issue in San Francisco, two other local 
measures pitted California's gays against religious fundamentalists, and both 
were backed by Sheldon's Traditional Values Coalition. 
One -- a proposal in Irvine to exclude homosexuals from protection under a 
municipal civil rights law -- was being monitored nationwide as a test of gay 
political influence. When the ordinance was passed about a year ago, Irvine 
became one of about 60 cities and towns in the country to forbid discrimination 
against gays and lesbians in jobs, housing and public services. 
But Sheldon and other religious leaders charged the law legitimized an immoral 
life style and warned it would force schools to recruit gay teachers and make 
Irvine "another San Francisco." 
Voters in the Contra Costa County city of Concord approved a measure to repeal 
a local ordinance banning discrimination against people with AIDS. 
And at least two communities -- Laguna Niguel in Orange County and Temecula in 
southwestern Riverside County -- became cities as voters overwhelmingly 
approved incorporation proposals. 
For leaders of two existing but financially strapped Southern California 
cities, Tuesday's results were less encouraging. Imperial Beach, one of San 
Diego County's poorest cities, and La Palma in Orange County, had asked voters 
to approve a utility user tax to help rescue the municipal governments from 
near bankruptcy. Both measures were defeated. 
In Imperial Beach, located near the U.S.-Mexican border, the financial picture 
is so bleak that Mayor Henry Smith has suggested that his city be adopted by 
its affluent neighbor, Coronado. 
