MUSHROOMING GROWTH LEAVES MANY DELIGHTED 
Whether you are choosing everyday button mushrooms for your pizza, exotic 
oyster mushrooms for a gourmet salad, or shiitakes for a special sauce, you can 
buy ones grown just down the road in North County. 
Exotic and staple varieties of mushrooms are quitely being cultivated from 
Bonsall to Escondido. White button mushrooms are raised in growing beds stacked 
in dark, warehouse-like buildings; oyster mushrooms are grown on trees made of 
straw. 
While the white button mushroom has long been a fixture on supermarket shelves, 
several exotic varieties -- such as shiitake, enoki and oyster mushrooms -- are 
now attracting attention. North County growers are finding a market for both 
types in local stores and across the country. 
The new-found popularity of the exotic mushroom varieties is due in part to the 
Golden Gourmet Co. in San Marcos. 
The company, in business for just over three years, has become the largest 
supplier of specialty mushrooms, as well as the largest year-round producer of 
oyster mushrooms in the United States. Shiitakes are also being tested for 
large-scale commercial production. 
In addition to supplying markets and specialty stores in North County, Golden 
Gourmet ships more than a million pounds of its exotic mushrooms a year to 
supermarket chains nationwide. 
The crop is grown inside spotless labs as warm and humid as a tropical forest. 
Row upon row of "trees" made of sanitized and steam-cleaned straw mixed with 
millet grain serve as the growing medium for the oyster mushrooms. 
Two or three weeks after the grain is injected with the mycelium, or mushroom 
spores, mushrooms the size of a pinhead begin to sprout. 
Betty Ivanovitch is director of the spawn laboratory, research and quality 
control for Golden Gourmet. She has fond memories of mushroom hunts while 
growing up in Yugoslavia. "Mushrooms are very nutritious," she said. "They are 
part of the daily diet in many European countries. I would love to see them 
become as popular among American consumers." 
Mushrooms, she said, are high in protein and contain all the essential vitamins 
and minerals. They are also low in calories. "Each mushroom has its own 
identity," she said. The oyster mushroom, which she says tastes a little like 
bacon when sauteed on medium high heat for a few minutes, remains one of her 
favorites. 
What: Exotic mushrooms. 
Who: Golden Gourmet Mushrooms. 
Where: P.O. Box 369, San Marcos 
Calls: 471-7300. 
Sales: Available at most major supermarkets. Oyster mushrooms about $2 for 4 
ounces; shiitake mushrooms about $4 for 3 1/2 ounces; enoki mushrooms about 
$1.80 for 3 1/2 ounces. 
One of the most common mushroom varieties is the button, or "agaricus 
bisporus," actually a hybrid that was bred for its familiar white color. 
Originally brown, the "white button" was developed to appeal to consumers, 
according to Jeanne Marlowe, microbiologist at the San Luis Rey Mushroom Farm 
in Bonsall. 
In a year, the farm produces a million pounds of mushrooms. 
While Jeanne Marlowe supervises the early stages of production, her husband, 
Alan, manages the later stages of the 23-week mushroom growing cycle. 
Marlowe grows her own mushroom spawn rather than buying it from a commercial 
lab. "We make our own spawn because we can better control the quality and also 
because it is much more advantageous commercially," she said. 
The spawn is cultivated in test tubes filled with "agar," a gelatin-like 
medium. It takes two weeks to determine if the culture is stable. Production is 
chancy at best: There is no way to predict size or quantity of the eventual 
crop except by careful monitoring of the spawn. 
If it passes muster, it is transferred from test tubes to gallon jars filled 
with millet or sorghum to continue developing. Eventually, the spawn is mixed 
with sterilized compost and placed in growing beds. 
The farm uses nearby raw materials to create its compost: grape pomace (a grape 
residue) from neighboring vineyards, chicken waste from a chicken farm, 
cottonseed meal and straw from the San Luis Rey Downs stables. (At the end of 
each mushroom harvest, the compost is recycled to area gardeners who line up to 
fill their trucks at $6 a cubic yard.) 
The tiny mushrooms, called "pins," must have just the right amount of fresh air 
to allow them to pierce the compost, which has been mixed and pasteurized to 
destroy any detrimental organisms. 
During the final growth, clusters of mushrooms develop in the moist darkness, 
transforming the beds into a gray, lunar-looking landscape. The mushrooms are 
then harvested according to size. 
What: White button mushrooms. 
Who: San Luis Rey Mushroom Farm. 
Where: 1923 Dentro de Loma, Bonsall. 
Calls: 941-6855. 
Sales: Available in local supermarkets and at the farm, where the top grade is 
$1.15 to $1.45 per pound; No. 2 grade, $1 a pound. 
White button mushrooms are also the specialty at Mountain Meadow Mushroom farm 
in Escondido. Bob Crouch, who left a career in aerospace to become a mushroom 
grower, took over an established farm six years ago. 
"I got tired of the rat race," he says, "so I bought a mushroom farm. Besides, 
this is much more interesting." 
Mountain Meadow produces upwards of 5,000 pounds a day out of 17 growing rooms, 
for distribution to local restaurants and markets. 
Mushroom sizes range from the classic button to the extra large variety, ideal 
for stuffing. 
Mountain Meadow welcomes visitors and sells directly to the public. The farm is 
open daily from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. 
What: White button mushrooms. 
Who: Mountain Meadow Mushrooms Inc. 
Where: 26948 North Broadway, Escondido. 
Calls: 749-1201. 
Sales: Available in local supermarkets and at the farm. Small button mushrooms, 
$1.25 per pound; medium $1.50 per pound; large $2 per pound; jumbo $2.50 per 
pound. 
