ERMA BOMBECK: GETTING A LINE ON UNREACHABLE SON 
Erma Bombeck is on vacation for two weeks. This Best of Bombeck release 
originally appeared June 22, 1986. 
 About three years ago, my son, who lives in another state, got an answering 
machine. At first I resented it. I knew as sure as God made little green apples 
the kid was lying in bed with the machine turned on, listening to me having an 
anxiety attack and loving it. 
But after awhile, the machine began to take on a human quality. It had such 
fine manners. It would say softly, "Hi, I'm not here right now, but if you 
would leave your name and your phone number, I'll get back to you as soon as I 
can. At the sound of the beep, you have 10 seconds. Have a good day now." My 
son never would have said that! 
Somehow I couldn't bring myself to say what I had called for. ("You bum! Is 
your arm broken? I have stretch marks around my knees and you don't have five 
minutes to talk to your mother!") So I ended up saying: "I know you're busy. I 
was just checking to see if you're alive. I hardly hurt at all today. You have 
a good day, too." 
Throughout the years, the machine and I continued to communicate on a regular 
basis. As I told my husband, "I've never had a relationship that was so 
satisfying. That little monkey is always there for me when I need it. You know 
how you call some people and the phone rings and rings? Not this one. Why, even 
our son used to brush me off. Someone was always honking a horn, or a buzzer 
was going off, or his car was being stolen as we spoke. But not the machine." 
On Christmas in '84 it actually played "Silent Night" for me, and before the 
beep it wished me a merry Christmas. It meant the world to me. It was such a 
sweet, simple thing to do. No whining about how the gift was in the mail or how 
the airlines were booked and he couldn't get home, just a sincere little 
electronic Christmas card. 
Then one day -- I think it was the spring of '85 -- I dialed the machine and 
heard it say, "You have reached 555-4455. I promise I'll return your call." 
(God, I love integrity!) "Got a little problem. The beep is broken, but if 
you'll just count to five and leave your name and number, I'll call you right 
back." 
You'd have thought my son would have had the decency to tell me the recorder 
was sick. I know him. He had probably abused it in some way, like dropping it 
from the stove or cutting off its current. You know how kids are. They think 
only of themselves. 
I called the recorder yesterday, and a voice said, "Yeah?" 
I said, "Who is this?" 
The voice said, "It's your son." (It had been three years since I had heard his 
voice.) "How's it goin'? Are you there, Mom?" 
I told him I was waiting for the beep. He said I just caught him on his way 
out. 
I called the recorder a little later. We had a nice chat. 
