POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
MAYALL PROVIDES A WELCOME DOSE OF AUTHENTICITY 
After a week of media immersion in Milli Vanilli's fudging, it was a relief to 
hunker down with some certified-honest goods Friday night at the Coach House. 
John Mayall and the Bluesbreakers. Real roots. Real guitars. Real harmonica. 
Real singing. Oh yes, and some lip-syncing. 
Lip-syncing!!! Et tu, Mayall? 
Don't worry, folks. The blues republic hasn't fallen. When it comes to 12-bar 
traditionalism, Mayall is still the noblest Briton of them all. This was honest 
lip-syncing -- a fun bit of musical ventriloquism in which guitarist Coco 
Montoya played a mouth-flapping Charlie McCarthy while his sweet Stratocaster 
made like Edgar Bergen. While his fingers elicited deep, masculine harrumphs 
and falsetto female protestations from the guitar, Montoya's lips silently 
mimicked a couple in the midst of an animated domestic tiff. 
The humor went down well with the near-capacity crowd, and so did the more 
serious, high-impact fretwork that Montoya displayed during the rest of his 
long solo spot. The fact that the guitarist got the biggest ovation of the 
nearly two-hour show called to mind another Mayall tradition: The bandleader's 
long career has been as much a forum for his guitar-hero sidemen as for 
himself. 
Nevertheless, the latest Bluesbreakers lineup, which also includes bassist 
Freebo and a very solid drummer, Joe Yuele, has Mayall steppin' out a bit more 
than he did during the mid- to late '80s. During those years, Mayall's band was 
a five-piece with two dominant guitarists, Montoya and Walter Trout. The 
Huntington Beach-based Trout left in 1989 to front his own band full time. 
Rather than replace him, Mayall went on with a four-piece lineup, giving 
himself more room to move, as it were. 
Mayall, who turns 57 on Thursday, moved with plenty of good-natured vigor as he 
blew lots of harmonica, played some nice chingy-jangly rhythm guitar and took 
extended glides along his digital keyboard, which alternately sounded like an 
organ and a piano (not to mention some passable flute tones and some 
too-gimmicky ersatz sax). But the concert was mainly a low-keyed, easygoing 
affair that could have used more of a jolt. While it rolled along enjoyably, it 
lacked the searing, emotive moments that can turn a blues show from an amiable, 
toe-tapping night out into something more intense and revealing. 
The material may have had something to do with that. Mayall drew most of it 
from his current album, "A Sense of Place," a collection of swampy, down-home 
tunes with a prevailing back-porch blues feel. Having recently regained 
major-label status after a long spell of recording for small companies, Mayall 
clearly wasn't in a mood for looking back. He opened with "All Your Love," from 
the classic 1965 "Bluesbreakers" album, and closed with his signature 
harp-riffer, "Room to Move." In between, everything but Montoya's spotlight 
number was drawn from Mayall's two recent Island Records releases. That wasn't 
a real problem, because the material on "A Sense of Place" and the 1988 album, 
"Chicago Line," is varied and stands up well. But Mayall could have profitably 
resurrected one or two early songs in place of a number like "Congo Square," a 
voodoo-themed New Orleans piano strut that didn't come close to replicating the 
distinctive bounce and roll of such native New Orleans players as Art Neville 
and Dr. John. Mayall played to a stronger suit with the old-time barrelhouse 
piano style of "Send Me Down to Vicksburg." 
Mayall's singing also failed to summon up the psychological drama of the 
highest-intensity blues. With its high, reedy, cottony quality, Mayall's voice 
is distinctive enough to be readily identifiable, but it is far from trenchant. 
On "Sensitive Kind," in which the singer counsels another man to deal tenderly 
and considerately with women, Mayall's mild delivery made the advice sound 
temperate, almost fatherly. It was left to Montoya to raise the emotional 
stakes. After underscoring the tender mood, and women's sadness, with 
cushioned, string-massaging tones, he moved to taut, rapid runs that elevated 
the drama. 
Mayall's encore offered a nice treat: a guitar duet (as opposed to duel) 
between Montoya and Debbie Davies, whose band had opened with a solid hour 
given mainly to blues standards that showcased her clean, nimble guitar style. 
Montoya and Davies live together, and they played together with fine 
responsiveness. At one point, the left-handed Montoya let loose with a flying 
speed run. In many circumstances, the next player up would take that as a 
challenge, a feat to be duplicated or outdone. Instead, Davies chose to play 
something contrasting and complementary -- some chunky, rhythmic Chuck Berry 
licks. The interlude ended with a tandem harmony passage that made you think 
that love really is grand, especially when two sharp guitar players are 
expressing it together. 
Having gotten Vanilli goo all over itself, the recording arts academy that runs 
the Grammy Awards would do well to look toward Mayall for a much-needed helping 
of musical authenticity. In the quite possible event that "A Sense of Place" is 
nominated in the category of best contemporary blues recording, the Grammys 
should can the lip-sync brigade and turn over a good chunk of its telecast to 
Mayall and his eminent alumni association (the leading lights being Eric 
Clapton, Mick Taylor, Peter Green, John McVie and Mick Fleetwood). Since 1990 
marks the 25th anniversary of "Bluesbreakers," the first great blues-rock 
guitar album, it would make a lot of sense. 
