FREE GLASSES AND EYE SURGERY OFFERED TO UNINSURED WORKERS 
Members of the California Optometric Assn. are urging the uninsured working 
poor to take advantage of a statewide program this month that offers them free 
eye examinations, glasses and surgical care. 
Applications for the California Vision Project are being accepted through the 
end of November, and eye exams will continue through December, said Robert 
Gordon, president of the association. 
About 2,000 optometrists, in cooperation with the Salvation Army, are 
participating in the project, donating their time to examine patients who are 
working but not insured, Gordon said. 
"The goal of the project is to examine 10,000 to 15,000 uninsured working poor 
and their families and to provide them with eye exams and glasses, if needed," 
he said. 
According to a report published in 1986, there were 2.5 million uninsured 
working poor people in California, Gordon said. 
"We decided we wanted to put on a charitable program," he said. "People who are 
unemployed get medical care from welfare. People over 65 get medical care also. 
Somebody needed to show the Legislature that there was a need to help the 
uninsured working poor." 
Gordon predicted that the eye examinations will also detect a number of 
diseases, such as high blood pressure and diabetes, that affect the entire 
body. 
If the project is successful, the optometrists plan to repeat it every year, 
said Dr. Lynn Caffrey Gabriel, president-elect of the association. 
"We just wanted to give something to (the poor)," she said. "So many of them 
just make enough money to provide for food and rent but can't afford medical 
care." 
Planning for the California Vision Project began in September, 1988, Gordon 
said. The California Lions Clubs of Lions International will absorb the cost of 
treating patients who require more than basic eye examinations. The Optical 
Manufacturers Assn. and the Optical Laboratory Assn. will donate frames and 
lenses. 
San Gabriel Valley residents who need eye care can apply at Salvation Army 
offices in Pasadena, (818) 795-8639; Covina, (818) 331-4871, and Pomona, (714) 
623-1579. 
The Salvation Army will forward the applications to the Optometric Assn., which 
will assign patients to the nearest available doctor. 
