VISITORS FIND SOVIET TRIP CAN BE RISKY BUSINESS; 
TOURISM: CRIMES AGAINST TRAVELERS TO THE SOVIET UNION ARE UP THIS YEAR. AMONG 
THE WORST CITIES ARE MOSCOW AND LENINGRAD. 
Tourists beware: The Soviet Union is not the "safe" travel destination it once 
was. 
Crime is up 33.3% this year, according to Tass, the official Soviet news 
agency. The news is worse when you look at the figures for violent crimes (up 
42.4%), property crimes (up 54.1%) and street crimes (up 77.1%). 
And more bad news: Among the areas where street crime is the worst are the 
prime tourist cities of Moscow and Leningrad. 
Tass reported that between January and July of this year, 2,000 crimes were 
committed against foreigners. Eighty-five percent of those were property 
crimes, it said. 
The situation is so serious that authorities recently decided to set up a 
special police force to deal with crime against foreigners in 46 cities in the 
Soviet Union, the official Communist daily paper, Pravda, reported. 
"They have to do something. They're anxious not to lose tourists," said Mark 
Sanna, regional security officer at the American Embassy in Moscow, which works 
closely with the local police. 
How to stay safe? Police here warn tourists not to enter into negotiations with 
black marketeers or prostitutes for the sale of foreign currency or other goods 
such as clothes or electronics. Most of the crimes against foreigners were 
committed during these negotiations, Tass reported. 
But Western diplomats consider taxis the most dangerous items for tourists. The 
mildest crime tourists may encounter with taxi drivers is their demand for 
foreign currency. It is illegal to deal in foreign currency in the Soviet Union 
and for Soviets to own it. 
But tourists leaving hotels more often than not find that drivers refuse to 
take them anywhere in exchange for rubles. And they are demanding exorbitant 
rates: $15 to $20 for a 3-ruble (about 50 cents U.S.) ride. 
"Tourists, especially those at the Cosmos Hotel on the outskirts of the city, 
feel trapped," one Moscow-based Western diplomat explained. "They don't know 
the language. Because they can't read the (Cyrillic) alphabet, it's difficult 
for them to ride the subways, so they are more dependent on taxis than they may 
be in other countries." 
More frightening was the diplomat's account of reports at other embassies of 
theft at knifepoint by taxi drivers. "One taxi will take you from the airport. 
About halfway to the city, another taxi will cut off the one you are a 
passenger in. The other taxi driver threatens you at knifepoint while your 
driver looks on helplessly. We expect they are operating as a team," the 
diplomat said. 
Indeed, Brazilian journalist Jose Arbex reported his story to the Soviet weekly 
newspaper Moscow News after he was robbed in this fashion, to warn other 
foreigners. He lost $1,370 in the robbery. 
And Sanna said he receives six to seven reports a month of embassy staff being 
robbed in taxis. 
It's more expensive, but tourists may want to book drivers from the Intourist 
agencies at the airport and the hotels, one diplomat advised. She added that in 
another twist on the taxi scam, gangsters watch passengers getting into cabs 
with saleable items such as VCRs, then follow the taxi to the customer's home 
or hotel. That home or room then becomes the target of a break-in. 
The problem has grown to such an extent that Tass recently reported that the 
manager of the Soviet taxi agency promised to put lookouts at hotels and other 
tourist spots to watch for potential problems. 
Though foreigners who live here are less likely to use cabs because they often 
have their own cars and drivers, they still risk being robbed either on the 
street or through break-ins of their apartments or cars. 
Sanna said embassy personnel frequently have their pockets picked along a 
bridge leading from the embassy to the Ukraine Hotel, an Intourist hotel that 
attracts criminal elements who want foreign currency. He warned that tourist 
sites such as Novodevichy Convent, where former Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev 
is buried, are other popular pick-pocket areas. 
Sue Meadows, director of day care and the preschool center at the American 
Embassy, was a robbery victim while shopping at the Georgian market -- another 
hot tourist spot -- in Moscow. 
She was "jostled and pushed while she was carrying our 2-year-old and walking 
with our 7- and 8-year-olds," her husband Doug said. "When she got to our car, 
she realized that her purse had been unzipped and her wallet with all her 
credit cards and foreign currency stolen." 
That wasn't the first time the Meadowses have been victims of crime in Moscow. 
Foreigners posted to Moscow live in compounds guarded by militia men whose job 
it is to report on their activities. However, as Soviet society continues to 
open through glasnost, some of these "mili men," as Westerners call them, have 
been withdrawn from residence compounds. 
Said Meadows, manager of the agricultural product department at DuPont's Moscow 
office, whose building has no mili man: "Our car has been broken into three 
times this year and our radio/cassette player and speakers stolen. In addition, 
we heard there was a break-in in an apartment on the top floor of our 
building." 
The weekly newspaper Nedelya recently reported that there were 4,000 break-ins 
in private apartments in Moscow last year. For foreigners with VCRs that can be 
sold for up to 11,000 rubles on the black market, the fears of break-ins are 
growing. 
Residents at a new foreign compound in Moscow that opened this summer without a 
mili man organized a petition after several break-ins of apartments and cars, 
and finally got 24-hour guard duty. 
Said John Lombard, Moscow bureau chief for the Australian Broadcasting Corp., 
whose wife Jean organized the petition: "The rising crime rate is quite 
significant. I don't feel personally threatened when I'm outside, but if you're 
a single woman walking back from the metro out here, you probably aren't too 
comfortable." 
Carey Goldberg, a Moscow-based free-lance reporter for the Boston Globe who 
lives in the same building, agrees. "I feel less safe now than I used to. It 
used to be a plus to look like a foreigner. I felt as if it gave you immunity 
to crime. Now I play it down. 
"I bought dull-colored coats to try to look more Soviet because I'm more afraid 
of robbery now, though I'm not worried about being assaulted. I think people 
here are greedy for foreign currency, but they are not violent." 
But Sanna of the American Embassy said he has had reports from two American 
students who were raped here since January. And, he said, another diplomat was 
attacked on the street. Her assailants tried to push her into a cab, but she 
bit one of them on the wrist and escaped. "But she was traumatized," he said. 
In a country where Westerners have access to food, clothing, electronic goods 
and other consumer items that Soviets do not, it is not surprising that the 
crime rate is increasing as Soviets become frustrated with their plummeting 
standard of living. "The gap is growing. You feel like the aristocracy now. 
It's uncomfortable," Goldberg said. 
Robert Tonsing, a Moscow-based free-lance photographer from California, said he 
and his wife, Ann Imso, a correspondent with the Associated Press here, are 
lucky. 
"Nobody's even stolen our windshield wipers (a much-in-demand commodity)." 
But, he added, "I have a foreign car; I'm a marked target. I don't worry too 
much about being robbed, but I don't go to bad parts of the city, either. 
"One friend visiting us had his car broken into and his wallet and papers 
stolen within five minutes of parking his car in a bad section of the city. 
Though his car was a Lada, it was identified by its plates (which have 
different colors for foreigners) as being a foreigner's car." 
Once aware of the potential problems, most here agree, tourists should be able 
to avoid them by being careful. And as several Americans said: "I still feel 
safer walking around here than I do in New York City." 
