NFL FINES PATRIOTS IN HARASSMENT CASE; 
PRO FOOTBALL: KIAM, THE CLUB AND THREE PLAYERS ARE TOLD TO PAY A TOTAL OF 
$72,500. 
The National Football League fined the New England Patriots $72,500 Tuesday for 
sexual harassment of Boston Herald sportswriter Lisa Olson, penalizing the club 
$50,000 and three players a total of $22,500. 
Although he suspended no one, NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue said the players 
were guilty of harassing Olson Sept. 17 and that the club "appeared to condone 
the misconduct." 
The principals all refused to speak for the record but one source said that 
others in the league concluded quickly that the fines were surprisingly modest. 
In TV revenue alone, the Patriots are averaging $30 million annually, and NFL 
players' salaries average $400,000. 
Tagliabue said he was dividing the $72,500 in fines as follows: 
 -- Victor K. Kiam II, club owner, $25,000. 
 -- Zeke Mowatt, Patriot tight end, $12,500. 
 -- Michael Timpson, cornerback, $5,000. 
 -- Robert Perryman, a Patriot running back last September, now with the Dallas 
Cowboys, $5,000. 
In addition, the club has been assessed $25,000 to provide a wider range of 
print and videotape materials for NFL personnel advising "responsible dealings 
with the media." 
Among the players, Mowatt's fine was the largest, Tagliabue said, because "his 
conduct involved both verbal and demonstrative actions" when "two or three 
players . . . paused and 'modeled' themselves briefly (near Olson)." 
The quotes are from special counsel Philip Heymann's 60-page report, which 
Tagliabue endorsed. 
"We believe Olson's account," Heymann, a Harvard law school professor, said in 
his report. 
Mowatt's account, he added, "is not credible." 
Continuing, Heymann, who in the 1970s was a Watergate prosecutor, said: "Nine 
of the (70) people interviewed saw (Mowatt) walk toward (Olson in the locker 
room). . . . 
"Other players were laughing (and shouting) in the background. . . . (There 
was) a good deal of responsive banter. One player estimated that at least 10 
players were involved in (the) joking concerning (Olson's) presence down by the 
shower. . . . 
"No one tried to bring the humiliating activity around Lisa Olson to a stop. 
Neither players nor management personnel said or did anything (to stop it)." 
Heymann was unavailable for comment. So were Kiam, Olson, Tagliabue and the 
players. Prepared statements by all were faxed to the press. 
A Patriot spokesman said that Kiam, who reportedly has threatened to fire some 
of his employees in connection with the charges and the investigation, will 
have "no more comments today, tomorrow or next week." 
In his one-paragraph statement, Kiam said: "The Patriots will certainly abide 
by (Tagliabue's) judgments. We regret that the incident occurred. The team and 
I previously expressed our apologies and we repeat them once again." 
Said Olson: "My satisfaction with the investigation and subsequent sanctions is 
surpassed only by my wish the disgraceful incident had never occurred in the 
first place." 
Tagliabue, in a letter to Kiam, said: "This entire episode was distasteful, 
unnecessary and damaging to the league and others. . . . There was a serious 
lack of direction, control and supervision by the Patriots. . . . 
"(Heymann's) report is thorough and balanced. . . . The Patriots' organization 
and its players have learned a hard lesson." 
The Assn. for Women in Sports Media, in a statement by its president, Michele 
Himmelberg of the Orange County Register, said: "(The) penalties should send a 
clear message to every coach and athlete: Sexual harassment will not be 
tolerated in the NFL." 
Members of the association, however, as well as many male reporters throughout 
the country, were reportedly disturbed by the comparatively small fines. 
But in her statement, Himmelberg said: "AWSM is less concerned (with the size 
of) the penalties than we are with the message they deliver." 
Heymann said in his report, which included many pages of earthy locker-room 
dialogue, that the harassment incident began when Olson sought to interview 
Maurice Hurst after a Patriot practice. 
"Olson (was) crouching directly in front of Hurst 'like a baseball catcher,' in 
the words of one player. At some point, Olson sat down on the floor while in 
that location. 
"In both instances, Olson was keeping her back to the general locker-room 
population. 
"A number of players commented to each other that Olson was crouching or 
sitting on the floor rather than standing or sitting on the bench." 
That started it all, according to the report, which continues: "When (Patriot 
publicist) James Oldham arrived in the locker room and saw Olson seated on the 
floor, he approached her and whispered, 'Stand up, Lisa,' because he thought it 
was inappropriate for her to sit on the floor. 
"She then moved to the bench and sat to the right of Hurst (and) continued the 
interview facing Hurst (and) the shower room entryway. There was no room on the 
bench on the other side of Hurst, facing away from the showers. 
"At least 22 players saw (her there). A number of them commented (on) her 
presence near the . . . shower entry." 
The harassment followed. 
