CUT YOUR UTILITY BILLS: BUY SURGE SUPPRESSORS TO PROTECT APPLIANCES 
QUESTION: A high-voltage surge damaged my TV and microwave oven. I plan to get 
surge suppressors to protect them. How do I select among the many surge 
suppressors available, and do they use much electricity? 
ANSWER: Electric surge suppressors are a must for today's homes. Almost every 
electric device, including your radios, TVs, furnace, air conditioner, clothes 
washer and dryer, cordless telephones, etc., has electronic circuitry that can 
be damaged by common super-high-voltage surges. 
These high-voltage surges in your house wiring can reach 6,000 volts and occur 
thousands of times each year. Although the surges occur for only a few 
millionths of a second, they can instantly burn out or slowly destroy any 
electronic circuit. Even if the television or microwave is turned off, a strong 
surge can jump the switch and still harm the electronics. 
High-voltage surges are generated both from outside and inside your home. 
External surges come from lightning, accidents involving electrical poles and 
nearby businesses. Inside your home, they occur when a clothes washer, air 
conditioner, refrigerator, any device with a motor, turns off. 
You should mount a whole-house surge suppressor on the circuit breaker box. 
This blocks external surges from getting into your home. Plug small surge 
suppressors into outlets where you plug in electronic equipment. These protect 
it from internal surges. You can also get surge suppressors to protect your 
telephone line and TV cable from high voltage. 
The level of protection varies significantly among similar-looking surge 
suppressors. Different types of electronics require different levels of 
protection. Good suppressors should respond within 1 billionth of a second to 
block surges. The shortest response time specification is best. 
Another important specification is the clamping voltage. This indicates at what 
voltage level the surge suppressor begins to block the surge and dissipate it 
harmlessly. It can range from about 330 volts upward and should meet 
Underwriter's Laboratories standards. A lower clamping voltage offers better 
protection. 
The total surge energy capability indicates how powerful a surge the suppressor 
can dissipate. A higher number is better. A whole-house suppressor is highest, 
up to 400 joules, to block the very powerful external surges. A surge 
suppressor uses very little electricity itself. 
When you purchase surge suppressors, compare the specifications. Some also 
offer a guarantee covering your electronic equipment repair costs if it is 
damaged by a surge. You can get whole-house kits containing suppressors for the 
breaker box, wall outlets, telephone and TV antenna or cable. 
You can write to me for Utility Bills Update No. 356 listing manufacturers of 
surge suppressors, types of suppressors they offer, specifications, guarantees 
and information on the whole-house suppressor kits. Please include $1 and a 
self-addressed stamped business-size envelope. Send your requests to James 
Dulley, c/o Los Angeles Times, 6906 Royalgreen Drive, Cincinnati, Ohio 45244. 
