ASK THE HANDYMAN: HOW TO GET MORE MILEAGE FROM GARDEN RUBBISH? COMPOST IT 
Question: What's the best way to turn grass clippings and leaves into compost? 
Do I need to buy any kind of additives? 
M.N., Santa Ana 
Answer: "You'll need to build some kind of chicken wire or screen cage to put 
in your back yard," says Kelly Kong-Green of Flowerdale Nursery in Costa Mesa. 
"Try to find an inconspicuous place for it, since it will smell, then fill it 
with your leaves and clippings. You can even put things like banana peels, 
apple cores, any kind of fruit or vegetables. Then cover it with newspaper or 
plastic to help it retain heat and turn it or mix it every few months until 
it's fully decayed. 
"You can add aluminum sulfate to speed up the decaying process, but it's not 
really necessary. Composting occurs faster when there's some humidity in the 
air, so if it's been dry for a while, try wetting your pile down and covering 
it." 
Q: In paneling a room, I'd like to know how to make exactly the right hole for 
the electrical, phone and cable outlets. I'm afraid of just guesstimating, 
because I may end up with a hole that's not right on target. 
B.B., Westminster 
A: "Try putting the outlet screws in their holes just enough so they're 
straight," says carpenter Brad Martin of La Mirada. "Then put a little paint on 
the screw heads, line up the panel where it's going to be placed and press it 
against the wall and the outlet. When you pull the panel off again, you find 
the paint left by the outlet screws and, from there, you can make an outline of 
the hole you'll need to make." 
Q: I'm starting to repair some old chairs we have. In looking for materials, 
I've noticed both white and yellow carpenter's glue. What's the difference 
between the two and wouldn't a hot-glue gun be better than either of those? 
L.O., Fountain Valley 
A: "Yellow glue has special resins in it that make it set faster," says Robert 
Espland of Espland Furniture Repair in Orange. "When I have a gluing job that's 
a little tricky, and I'm not sure I can get the clamps on it right away, I'll 
use the white glue, because it gives you about five minutes before it really 
sets. With the yellow glue, you have about a minute. 
"The glue gun glues are really a mistake when you're working with wood. They're 
never fully dry, and they stay rubbery. And when you're doing a glue job, 
remember the most important thing is not the glue but your clamps. It's the 
pressure applied to the job, not the amount of glue used that makes the 
difference. Without my C-clamps and pipe clamps, I'd be out of business." 
Q: I've got to replace the fill valves in both toilets in our home. While I've 
heard that those plastic valves work great, they look cheap. Should I get one 
or should I stick with the brass-type valve that I'm replacing? 
C.K., Seal Beach 
A: "The good plastic-fill valves have just one moving part, and while they 
might look cheap, they're really good quality," says Dave Van de Aveer of 
Tustin Hardware. "They adjust to fit almost any toilet, and they're real simple 
to install. Not only that, they're a lot cheaper than the old-fashioned valves, 
now that the price of brass has gone up." 
