CAMPAIGN JOURNAL; 
HELPING VOTERS WHO WERE CASTING ABOUT; 
AN ORANGE BUSINESSMAN, CITING HIS 'CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY,' DISTRIBUTED A SMALL 
GUIDE THAT PUT THE MEASURES' PROS AND CONS IN PLAIN ENGLISH. 
It might have been a moneymaker, but Daniel J. Scinto was faxing it away for 
free: an informed, opinionated, independent guide to the 28 ballot propositions 
-- and only three pages long. 
"This may sound really silly but I really felt I had a civic responsibility to 
do that," the Orange businessman said Tuesday. "The ballots are getting to be 
overwhelming and very few people have the time to really sit down and study the 
issues." 
Scinto, a 41-year-old Republican with a Libertarian bent, distributed the tip 
sheet to his 25 employees, then faxed it along to friends. Even voters who 
disagree with Scinto's ideology might have found the guide useful Tuesday as 
they lamented the devilishly confusing wording of the propositions and tried to 
avoid stumbling over the "evil twin" measures designed to cancel each other 
out. 
One such stumped voter was Republican Sandra Fishman of Capistrano Beach, who 
spent 4 1/2 hours Monday night trying to decipher her mammoth voter information 
package. 
"The ballot was ludicrous, absolutely ludicrous," Fishman said. Even armed with 
the 143-page California Ballot Pamphlet, the 79-page Supplemental Ballot 
Pamphlet, the 35-page Orange County voter information pamphlet, a list of her 
party's recommendations and a college education, Fishman said, "I simply 
couldn't figure out if it's what I wanted to vote for or not." 
Among the measures Fishman wrestled with were Propositions 135 and 128, each of 
which promised to regulate pesticides. "If you vote for both of them they 
cancel each other out, so you want to vote for the one you want to vote for, 
and against the other one," Fishman explained. "But it was difficult for me to 
decipher which one was which!" 
When she walked out of her polling place, "everybody there was just shaking 
their heads, using works like 'ludicrous, ridiculous, asinine, makes you feel 
like a dummy,' " Fishman said, adding, "If we are going to get people to come 
out and vote, we are going to have to simplify the ballot so people can 
understand it." 
Even some voters who did their homework stubbed their toes on the nine-part 
ballot. 
One Orange County newsman, who asked not to be named to spare himself the scorn 
of his colleagues, arrived at the polls with a crib sheet in hand. The 
green-minded voter had intended to vote for Proposition 130 and against 
Proposition 138 but became confused and "accidently voted so that the timber 
industry can clear-cut away half of California." 
Voters who realize they have erred while still inside the booth may request new 
ballots. But the newsman was home before he realized his mistake. He quickly 
called his mother and asked her to vote the opposite way to cancel out his 
vote. 
Scinto's self-styled people's guide to the propositions was intended to avoid 
such pitfalls -- as well as the disinformation contained in slate mailers that 
turned out to have been paid for by candidates or special interests. 
"Having trouble voting on all the propositions?" Scinto's missive begins. 
"Please do not look at the commercials. All of them are so misleading. 
Especially the ones who have actors and actresses. 
". . . If you are in love with 'Flipper' then vote yes," he advised on 
Proposition 132, the Marine Resources initiative, which would ban gill and 
trammel nets. "Otherwise vote no. You decide." 
As one might expect, the Harvard MBA and former accountant recommended voting 
against the 10 bond issues, increasing motor vehicle fuel taxes, "Big Green," 
and the "Save the Redwoods" timber initiative -- but the self-proclaimed 
teetotaler suggested a "Yes" vote on the alcohol taxes. 
"This gives me the opportunity to vote for a tax that I do not have to pay. . . 
. " Scinto said. "If you are a heavy drinker, you should vote NO." 
And, despite the confusion and extra effort voters needed to sift through the 
complex initiatives, Scinto recommended voting yes on Proposition 137, the 
initiative that would reform -- foes say hinder -- future initiatives. 
"This referendum will make it impossible for the Legislature to stop us voting 
on referendums," Scinto declared. "This reserves the right for Californians to 
vote. This is without a question a 'Yes' vote." 
