BERLIN'S WALL IS BEING CUT AWAY -- CHIP BY CHIP; 
EUROPE: A FEW GERMANS ARE SELLING SMALL CHUNKS OF THE WALL AS SOUVENIRS. 
All day Sunday, the cold, clear air along the Berlin Wall rang with the clang 
of hammer on chisel and the crunch of rock against concrete. 
Little by little, the Berlin Wall, for 28 years a symbol of Europe's division, 
is being whittled away. 
As a million or more East Germans headed for the shopping districts of West 
Berlin over the weekend, thousands of others promenaded along the 
graffiti-decorated western face of the wall -- and watched hundreds, perhaps 
thousands taking their turn at chipping away at that symbol. 
For while the Berlin Wall has been dramatically outdated by free passage 
through new checkpoints, it still stands as the detested barrier between East 
and West. 
A few West Berliners were selling small chunks of the wall as souvenirs; others 
wanted to knock a hole in it to look through; and some said they wished to be 
part of history by helping the wall crumble. 
"Man, I just want to help a little to remove the wall," said Dan Epstein, 23, 
of Berkeley, Calif., a student in London. 
"This is a pretty exciting thing for the world," he said. "I think a lot of 
people are here swinging away just to make a statement about the wall." 
Epstein carried a large chisel. His friend, Aaron Singer, 22, of Colorado 
Springs, wielded the hammer. They came to Berlin by train last Monday and have 
been watching events at the wall ever since. 
"Nov. 9 was my birthday," said Singer. "I heard the wall was opened and decided 
to come over. This is the biggest historical event in Berlin since World War 
II." 
"The wall is not easy to chip away," added Epstein. "It has got to be the 
sturdiest piece of construction in all of East Germany." 
The two Americans said they had been watching the various techniques used for 
breaching the wall. Many of the amateur demolition workers have hammers and 
chisels but some simply pick up rocks to flail away at the structure. 
"Most people pick a particular spot and keep plugging away at it," said Singer. 
"We have a pretty good place but it's not easy." 
Singer and Epstein were working at a stretch of the wall that runs south and 
then east from the Brandenburg Gate to Checkpoint Charlie. It is fashioned of 
concrete with reinforced steel rods, 12 to 15 feet high and formed of 
one-meter-wide panels. 
So for about every three feet along the wall there are joints sealed with 
mortar, and it is at these connection points that the hammers and chisels are 
levered to best advantage. Right now there are hundreds of small openings bored 
through the wall but no major breach -- except those made by the East Germans 
for the new border-crossing posts. 
Other wall-breakers concentrate on the circular rim of the wall, installed to 
prevent escapees from gaining a firm hold on the top of the barrier. 
The West Berlin police seem to take a casual attitude toward most of the 
amateurs trying to knock through the west side of the wall, but they quickly 
turn away anyone with professional equipment like power drills. 
As evening approached, however, West German police at some locations began 
confiscating hammers and other tools being used to chip at the barrier. Someone 
asked a policeman if he was embarrassed about taking away wall-breaching 
implements, and he replied, "Yes, but this is East German property." 
Sunday strollers stopped to watch energetic wall-breachers, many of whom gave 
away the small pieces or sold chunks for a mark or two. 
From Hamburg came reports of a much more ambitious commercial scheme. Ten tons 
of freight, described in official documents as "Pieces of the Berlin Wall," 
were put on an American Airlines flight for Chicago via New York, according to 
United Press International. UPI said reporters who saw inside the 19 
rectangular, plain wooden cases strung with nylon netting said they contained 
brownish-black pieces of stone covered with sand and plant roots. The shipment 
was brought to Hamburg airport Saturday on a truck, and sources there told UPI 
that the shipper was a "private citizen in West Berlin." American Airlines said 
it knew nothing about shipper or consignee. 
Here in Berlin, the most prized bits of wall are those surface pieces with 
graffiti paint, rather than simply a colorless lump of interior concrete. 
"Down with the wall!" called out one youth in English as he slammed a large 
hammer against the concrete. 
Nearby, a lively business has sprung up with vendors selling gluehwein -- 
spiced, mulled red wine. 
For those peeking through the holes in the wall, there is not much to see -- 
just the barren cleared ground and a few gray barracks-style buildings in East 
Berlin. 
In the distance is the second, inner wall, where East German armed guards still 
patrol. For now, that is an unattainable target for the amateur demolitionists 
of West Berlin. 
