TRAIN KILLS WORKER AT PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE; 
ACCIDENT: ENGINEER COULDN'T STOP IN TIME TO AVOID HITTING CHERRY PICKER 
CARRYING THE MAN, WHO WAS PREPARING TO PAINT OVERPASS IN BUENA PARK. 
A man in a cherry picker working on a pedestrian bridge was fatally injured 
Saturday by an Amtrak train that clipped the construction lift, knocking him 30 
feet to the ground, authorities said. 
Police said the victim's left leg was severed at the knee in the 8:47 a.m. 
accident, which occurred on the tracks outside Nutrilite Products Inc. The 
company owns the passenger bridge just east of the 5600 block of Beach 
Boulevard. 
The victim, 22, was taken by helicopter to UCI Medical Center in Orange, where 
he died about 11 a.m., officers said. 
His name was not released pending family notification, but police said he lived 
in Paramount and worked for Borbon Inc. Painting and Wall Covering Contractor 
in Buena Park. Company officials were en route to Tijuana, Mexico, to inform 
the victim's mother. 
Buena Park police Lt. Terry Branum said Nutrilite, a vitamin manufacturer, 
contracted with Borbon to paint its bridge, which is 30 to 40 feet high and 
links the company's buildings on either side of the tracks. 
When the accident occurred, Branum said, the victim was preparing the belly of 
the bridge for painting from a lift extending over the tracks. 
The train was en route to Los Angeles from San Diego and traveling at about 70 
m.p.h. when police said the engineer spotted the workman about 200 yards away. 
Branum said the engineer blasted his horn and applied the brakes, but the train 
could not stop in time, nor could the man get out of the train's path. 
It was not clear whether the victim had been told to expect the train and when. 
Borbon officials could not be reached for comment, and Branum said there had 
been little or no contact with police. 
"You would think someone would be on the lookout so the picker would be 
retracted in time," Branum said. "There is not good visibility there because 
there is a bend (in the track) east of Beach Boulevard that would leave the 
engineer with only 10 or 15 seconds to react." 
An Amtrak security officer who asked not to be identified said the train did 
not appear to be traveling at an unusually high rate of speed. 
He said the train was delayed 67 minutes at the Buena Park crash site while 
police conducted their investigation. 
The train arrived in Los Angeles about 10:20 a.m. 
