ENERGY / NEW CHALLENGES; 
GULF CRISIS SPURS INTEREST IN RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ELECTRICITY; 
SOLAR, WIND, GEOTHERMAL AND OTHER METHODS ARE ALREADY PRODUCING A SMALL 
PERCENTAGE OF THE NATION'S POWER. 
Ever since Iraq overran the rich oil fields of Kuwait, the phone in Kathleen 
Flanigan's Westwood office has not stopped ringing. 
"People keep calling just to ask about our technology," explains the 
spokeswoman for one of the country's most successful solar power producers, Los 
Angeles' Luz International. "It's really picked up since Aug. 2." 
There is no doubt that the Iraqi invasion and the subsequent energy crisis have 
focused new public attention on renewable energies -- technologies such as 
solar, wind, geothermal, biomass and hydroelectric that generate electricity 
without the environmental side effects of most fossil fuels. 
But, although producers of renewable energy are grateful for the new attention, 
many are irritated that the public still thinks renewable energy is only a 
dream for the future. 
"It's out there already," Flanigan says. "And it does work." 
Despite sharp cutbacks in federal research and tax support for renewable energy 
technologies, most of them have left the laboratory and are out in the field 
generating electricity. 
Nationwide, 5% of current production of electricity and one-third of all new 
power capacity installed since 1985 has come from solar, wind, geothermal and 
biomass facilities. In California, a full 12% of the state's electricity needs 
are already provided by these sources. 
All the same, although industry advocates and producers are proud of their 
progress in the past few years, they point to technological, government and 
business challenges that will confront each of the new technologies in the 
coming decade. Solar Solar technologies can generally be divided into two 
groups: solar thermal systems, which use sunlight to heat water or other 
fluids, and photovoltaic technologies that convert the sun's light directly 
into electricity. In the 1980s, solar thermal technologies made the leap from 
small, modular units designed to heat individual buildings to large, commercial 
electricity-generating systems. Luz International has had the greatest success 
with such systems, using acres of concave mirrors in the Mojave desert to heat 
a special conducting fluid that then superheats water to spin steam turbines. 
Luz supplies a total of 354 megawatts of power to Southern California Edison, 
enough electricity to meet the needs of half a million residential customers. 
As it unveiled a new 80-megawatt plant last month, Luz reported that its costs 
have fallen from 24 cents per kilowatt hour in 1984 to 8 cents today -- a price 
that is becoming competitive with gas, oil and nuclear power, which cost 
between 3 and 7 cents per kilowatt hour. But, although solar thermal power has 
enjoyed some commercial success, it represents only about 0.1% of U.S. electric 
consumption and is not expected to climb much higher. Experts agree that the 
real advances for solar power will come in the second area of solar technology, 
photovoltaics. Photovoltaic technology uses mirrors to concentrate photons of 
sunlight onto silicon cells. The impact of the photons shakes loose silicon 
electrons, whose movement generates electric current. Although the cost of 
photovoltaics has fallen from $1.50 to 30 cents per kilowatt hour over the last 
decade, photovoltaic systems remain much more costly than other energy sources. 
Still, photovoltaic technology is so promising that the government is 
concentrating most of its solar research dollars on it. But solar shares a 
problem with other renewable energy systems: Although they are usually cheap to 
operate, they are expensive to build. This is because the resources -- 
sunlight, subterranean water, wind -- cost almost nothing, but the high-tech 
facilities that change them into electricity are expensive. Facilities that use 
fossil fuels, on the other hand, are cheap to build but require a continuous 
supply of costly oil, gas or coal.Wind Wind energy got an undeservedly bad name 
in the 1970s, proponents insist. As investors rushed to take advantage of the 
tax shelter the federal government offered for renewables, many projects were 
rushed to completion. "The technology simply wasn't ready," says Randall 
Swisher, president of the Washington-based American Wind Energy Assn. "We moved 
wind into manufacturing too rapidly." But in the mid-1980s, after making small 
but crucial improvements, such as washing the turbine blades periodically to 
remove insects, the industry got back on its feet. Now California's 15,000 wind 
turbines operate reliably enough to provide 1,500 megawatts of power to the 
state, enough to supply the residential needs of the City of San Francisco. As 
with solar, the coming challenges for wind power are not primarily 
technological but commercial. In 10 to 20 years, Swisher estimates, wind power 
could go from supplying 0.2% of the nation's electric needs to a full 10%. But 
Tom Besich, power contracts manager for Southern California Edison, says that 
despite its competitive costs (about 7 cents per kilowatt hour), wind is 
unlikely to get much larger, in part because residents find the turbines 
unsightly and in part because the power source is not sufficiently reliable. 
"The problem is that wind isn't predictable. The wind just doesn't blow when 
you need it,"Geothermal Geothermal technologies, which use the heat of the 
Earth's molten core to generate electricity, are also operating commercially in 
California. The largest system is at The Geysers, a sprawling facility 90 miles 
north of San Francisco in Sonoma and Lake counties, that generates 1,350 
megawatts of electricity for Pacific Gas &amp; Electric. It is the 
second-largest source of renewable energy for California and the cheapest -- it 
costs PG&amp;E only 2 1/2 cents per kilowatt hour, far less than the 6 to 8 
cents it costs for natural gas or oil. But geothermal still supplies less than 
0.3% of the nation's electric power and is not expected to grow much more. One 
reason is that there are not many regions of the country where the 
Earth'Biomass Technologies that fall into this category are a hodgepodge 
ranging from plants that burn wood, agricultural and municipal waste to 
high-tech facilities that gasify shrubs. Some, built on top of landfills, 
create electricity from the methane gas that rises off buried garbage. Taken 
together, biomass technologies form the largest source of renewable energy in 
the United States -- a full 5% of national electric use. But environmentalists 
have mixed feelings about biomass. Because it is based on combustion -- the 
same process that generates heat from coal, gas and oil -- it creates more 
pollution than other sources of renewable energy.Hydroelectric Hydroelectric 
power remains the oldest source of electricity from renewable energy in the 
United States and is a close second to biomass in national output, supplying 
about 4.8% of U.S. energy needs. It is also one of the cheapest sources of 
electricity, costing about 2 cents per kilowatt hour. But hydroelectric power 
generation has fallen out of favor in recent years, particularly among 
environmentalists. Many are concerned about disrupting local fish migration and 
causing erosion. The Energy Department says more than 180 hydroelectric 
projects will come up for relicensing in the next five years, and officials 
expect opposition from residents who would prefer to return dammed areas to 
their natural states. Nonetheless, the department says only 5% of the dams in 
the United States are used for power generation and many more could be tapped 
for energy without increasing environmental risks to the surrounding areas. 
