MICHAEL CRAWFORD TO RETURN TO 'PHANTOM' ROLE; 
THEATER: THE ORIGINATOR OF THE TITLE ROLE IN 'THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA' WILL 
RETURN TO THE AHMANSON ON DEC. 31 TO PLAY THE PART AGAIN FOR AT LEAST THREE 
MONTHS. 
A big New Year's Eve party is being planned for Michael Crawford fans in Los 
Angeles. 
The originator of the title role in "The Phantom of the Opera" will return to 
the part at the Ahmanson Theatre on Dec. 31 for a run of at least three months. 
The original Phantom left the show with a grand flourish on April 29, after 
1,070 performances in London, New York and Los Angeles. He donated three pairs 
of house seats at his April 29 performance to charities; the top bidder paid 
$27,500 for a pair of seats at what was billed as his final bow. 
But now it appears that it wasn't so final. 
When Crawford left the role, he was planning on starring in the film version, 
with shooting scheduled for the fall. However, shooting of the movie has now 
been delayed until next summer. 
In a statement issued through a spokeswoman, Crawford said he is "delighted to 
have the opportunity to return to the Los Angeles company . . . Due to the 
delay in filming the movie version of the Phantom, it is now possible for me to 
do this. I've missed all my friends at the Ahmanson very much, and can't wait 
to see them all again." 
Four North American companies of the Andrew Lloyd Webber maxi-musical are 
reportedly selling nearly $3 million worth of tickets each week. 
When Crawford left the Ahmanson, he was replaced by Robert Guillaume, whose 
contract expires Dec. 30. Asked on Thursday how Guillaume felt about the return 
of Crawford, Guillaume's manager Hillard Elkins quipped, "He (Guillaume) 
couldn't have picked a better guy to go in and follow him." 
Does that mean Guillaume is ready and willing to leave the role? 
"Enough, already," replied Elkins. "He's going to go out and make some money." 
He added that while Guillaume was "delighted" to have played the Phantom, 
"there is a reason why the producer (of 'Phantom') is a millionaire and Michael 
Crawford is just a rich guy." 
Elkins said a television project featuring Guillaume is being assembled at 
Disney. 
