RECENT ORANGE COUNTY TRAIN INCIDENTS 
1990 
April 5: Juan Carlos Martinez, 18, had to have his legs amputated after he 
slipped on the tracks and fell under a train traveling along a sharp curve 
behind the Capistrano Beach business district. The train was returning to San 
Diego from Barstow. 
April 28. Larry Charles Peterson, 43, of Buena Park was struck and killed by a 
Santa Fe Railroadfreight train in the 1800 block of West Commonwealth Avenue in 
Fullerton after he refused to heed a train conductor's warning to get off the 
tracks where he had been seated. 
Sept. 25. A nine-car Southern Pacific freight train carrying thousands of 
rounds of live artillery shells jumped the track at the Hoover Street crossing 
in Westminster, about 2 miles from Seal Beach Naval Weapons Station. Railroad 
officials suspect vandalism. 
1989 
Jan. 19. Santa Fe Railroad worker Joe Otero pulled Lorraine Ruiz, 26, of Buena 
Park and five children from a car stranded on a railroad crossing seconds 
before a passenger train struck it. The car was on Dale Street off Artesia 
Boulevard in Buena Park. 
Jan. 21. Laura and Javier Nunez of Anaheim were injured when their car was hit 
by a train on State College Boulevard just north of Orangethorpe Avenue in 
Fullerton. Their car had been thrust into the railroad crossing after being 
rear-ended by another vehicle. 
April 4. Three railroad workers were injured near La Palma Avenue and Weir 
Canyon Road in Yorba Linda when they leaped off an eastbound freight train 
traveling at an estimated 45 m.p.h. moments before it crashed into the side of 
a westbound train carrying cars and trucks. 
In an unrelated incident, a Santa Fe freight train traveling north in Fullerton 
smashed head-on into a truck rigged to run on the rails. Two Santa Fe contract 
workers spraying herbicides and insecticides were able to leap to safety as 
their truck burst into flames on impact. 
April 27: Jose Gonzalez de Anda Jr., 48, was rushing across the tracks in the 
1700 block of East Orangethorpe Avenue in Placentia when he was hit by a Santa 
Fe freight train. De Anda was critically injured. 
May 31. Guadalupe Palma, 27, of Garden Grove was injured when the pickup truck 
he was driving was hit broadside by a northbound Amtrak passenger train at 400 
W. Walnut St. in Orange. Palma had driven past six stopped cars and around the 
lowered crossing gates. 
June 28. Guadalupe Magadalena, 21, suffered minor injuries when she was struck 
by a northbound train as she was walking along on the pedestrian passage way 
near the tracks approaching the Fullerton Amtrak station. 
Oct. 17. Mary A. Shaw, 47, of Irvine was killed when a northbound Amtrak 
passenger train traveling at 70 m.p.h. hit her car on Culver Avenue in Irvine. 
The car had been stuck on the tracks during heavy morning commuter traffic. 
1988 
March 30. James Boyle, 10, of Orange was killed as he and three other boys, two 
of whom were his brothers, tried to outrun a southbound Amtrak train on a 
railroad trestle in Santa Ana near Santiago Park. 
April 16. Bryan George Tully, a 31-year-old transient, was killed when a 
southbound Amtrak train hit him as he walked on tracks on Oso Road near Camino 
Capistrano in San Juan Capistrano. 
Aug. 15. Transient Harley Edward Duggan, 50, had been lying on the tracks at 
Las Vegas Avenue east of San Juan Creek and north of Coast Highway at 
Capistrano Beach when he was struck by a northbound Santa Fe locomotive 
traveling between 40 and 50 m.p.h. The head injury that caused his death may 
have occurred before he was hit by the train. 
Sept. 22. Jose Guerrero, 21, of Santa Ana had his legs severed when he tried to 
jump off a freight train near 1400 S. Village Way in Santa Ana. 
Nov. 6. A man in his mid-20s was killed when an Amtraktrain hit him about half 
a mile east of Red Hill Avenue, Tustin. The man had failed to move out of the 
train's path although he had been warned several times by the train's horn. 
Determined a suicide by the coroner's office. 
Dec. 9. Transient Ruben S. Martinez, 31, had apparently been asleep on railroad 
tracks at 500 S. Grand Ave. in Santa Ana when he was struck and killed by an 
Amtrak passenger train. 
Note: Coroner's report lists only three of the 1988 incidents mentioned above 
under the category of accidental deaths caused by being struck by a train. 
Another of these deaths has been called a suicide. 
