DEPUTIES DESCRIBED AS CORRUPT; 
TRIAL: THE PROSECUTOR SAYS SEVEN LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TURNED THE DRUG WAR 
INTO THEIR OWN PERSONAL PIGGY BANKS. 
Seven Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies, accused of skimming more than $1.4 
million during narcotics raids, were portrayed by a prosecutor Tuesday as 
corrupt officers who "turned the war on drugs into their own personal piggy 
banks" and used stolen drug cash for spending sprees. 
The officers -- who worked together on an elite narcotics investigation team -- 
stole huge sums of money from drug traffickers and money launderers to finance 
cars, boats, vacation homes and other luxuries, Assistant U.S. Atty. Jeffrey C. 
Eglash told jurors in Los Angeles federal court. 
The prosecutor described the defendants as veteran deputies who had sworn to 
uphold the law but, in the end, "flaunted the law" by succumbing to the 
temptation of drug money. 
The evidence "has established one terrible, but indisputable, fact: The 
narcotics officers . . . were a group of corrupt, dishonest thieves," Eglash 
said in his closing statement in the seven-week trial. 
"(They were) thieves who turned the war on drugs into their own personal piggy 
banks from which they could satisfy their greed," he added. 
Eglash's statement came as both prosecutors and defense attorneys began final 
arguments before the jury. 
The seven deputies, who were suspended last year in the worst corruption 
scandal to hit the Sheriff's Department in recent history, are accused of a 
variety of charges -- including conspiracy, theft, tax evasion, money 
laundering and extortion. 
Six defendants -- Deputies Terrell H. Amers, James R. Bauder, Eufrasio G. 
Cortez, Ronald E. Daub, John C. Dickenson and Daniel M. Garner -- had worked 
together on the team, known as Majors II, while defendant Macario M. Duran 
worked as an undercover officer on another elite investigative team known as 
Majors III. All have maintained their innocence. 
And attorney James Riddet, who represents Cortez, told jurors Tuesday that they 
should vote for acquittal because the federal government has failed to prove 
its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
"When you review the evidence, there's not just reasonable doubt but 
overwhelming doubt whether any of these defendants committed a crime," Riddet 
said. 
As the first defense attorney to make a closing statement, Riddet attacked the 
prosecution's case as one built on the testimony of admitted drug dealers, 
incomplete financial information and dependent upon one witness, the 
defendants' former boss, Robert R. Sobel. 
Calling the former sheriff's sergeant the key to the government's case, Riddet 
argued that Sobel -- who has already pleaded guilty to conspiracy and tax 
evasion -- was an admitted liar and thief who has falsely accused his former 
subordinates to save himself from a lengthy prison term. 
"When we talk about Robert Sobel, we are talking about a person who is morally 
bankrupt," Riddet said. 
While Eglash acknowledged that Sobel was "a corrupt cop," he said the former 
sergeant was truthful in describing how he and his deputies stole money on more 
than 20 drug raids during 1988 and 1989. And he argued that the prosecution's 
case went beyond Sobel's testimony. 
Eglash said that a videotape of an FBI sting showed deputies stealing money and 
that the prosecution also presented bank records, sales receipts, income tax 
returns and other financial documents that disclosed how deputies spent money 
well beyond their sheriff's salaries -- and conducted many of those 
transactions in cash. 
"There's only one question left to answer," the prosecutor told the jury. 
"Where did all this money come from and how did all these members of Majors II 
get so rich?" 
