OPERA REVIEW; 
SAN FRANCISCO FORCES 'CAPRICCIO' INTO FLAPPER ERA; 
KIRI TE KANAWA DOMINATES A LAVISH PRODUCTION OF RICHARD STRAUSS' 'CONVERSATION 
PIECE FOR MUSIC' THAT IS SET IN THE 1920S, NOT 1777. 
Richard Strauss' "Capriccio," which has been given a lavish new production in 
San Francisco, is hardly the composer's most accessible opera. 
Completed in 1942 amid the chaos of the Third Reich, it represents the aging 
composer's final theatrical ode to a romanticism in decay. It is a fragile, 
thoughtful, sophisticated yet forbidding little philosophical debate that goes 
on for well over two hours. 
It brims with clever arguments, nostalgic quotations and subtle in-jokes as it 
mulls, but refuses to answer, this earth-shattering question: Which comes first 
in opera -- and in art and life -- the word or the melody? 
Significantly, Strauss didn't even call this valedictory essay an opera. He 
preferred to label it a "conversation piece for music." 
For better or worse, it is a static conversation piece predicated on intimacy 
and elegance. It demands to be played in a small theater, where the smallest 
verbal and facial nuances can convey their own dramatic urgency. It demands the 
aura of finesse dictated by courtly Baroque manners. 
Even under the best of circumstances -- say in Rudolf Hartmann's legendary 
production at the tiny old Residenztheater in Munich with Lisa della Casa in 
the central role -- "Capriccio" is a difficult challenge. Clemens Krauss' talky 
text, inspired by the uncredited Joseph Gregor, appeals more to the intellect 
than to the emotions. At 78, Strauss took a leisurely, circuitous route to his 
last, glorious final scene. 
The current San Francisco staging -- the first since the local premiere in 1963 
-- suffers from basic communication problems. The cavernous War Memorial Opera 
House is too big. The German text represents an obstacle to audience 
involvement. The supertitles distract attention from the stage, and reduce 
comprehension to a reading experience. 
Most damaging, perhaps, is John Cox's chic but irrelevant decision to move the 
inaction from 1777 to the terrible 1920s. The introspective, essentially 
dignified Countess becomes a cool flapper. The crucial contemporary references 
to Gluck and the operatic reforms of the 18th Century become nonsense. 
The director's temporal distortions are compounded by glitzy costumes 
commissioned from a fashion designer, Gianni Versace, and by some awkward stage 
business. Cox raises the curtain prematurely and moves the string sextet from 
the orchestra pit to the Countess' dark and empty salon. In the process, he 
destroys narrative logic. Later, he places the prop harpsichord so far upstage 
that Flamand becomes all but inaudible when he improvises the all-important 
sonnet at the keyboard. 
Cox does create interesting character portraits, and he has an eye for telling 
detail. He paints pretty stage pictures within the gentle scenic splendors 
designed for a Brussels production by Mauro Pagano -- whose untimely death 
three years ago is still mourned in the world of opera. In the final analysis, 
however, Cox seems to have miscalculated the delicate nature of the opera and 
blurred the crucial class distinctions. A coarse "Capriccio" must be an 
oxymoron. 
Stephen Barlow, the young British conductor who inherited the baton from the 
late John Pritchard, conducted on Tuesday with lyrical verve and ample wit, if 
not with much refinement. He accompanied the endless conversations attentively 
but loudly, and stressed extrovert prose in the marvelous orchestral 
interludes. 
The cast, though uneven, respected the fundamental ensemble values. It was 
dominated by Kiri Te Kanawa as the happily agonized Countess. She looked 
excruciatingly glamorous as she searched for the meaning of life in an 
invisible full-length mirror. She sang the closing monologue with arching, 
ethereal pathos. She also allowed a trace of vulgarity to mar a 
characterization that Strauss had marked with infinite nobility. 
Both of her suitors were eloquently delineated. William Shimell as the 
passionately edgy yet vulnerable poet, Olivier, seemed a bit more persuasive, 
however, than Keith Olsen as the poised and confident composer, Flamand. 
Victor Braun blustered sympathetically as La Roche, the practical man of the 
theater, although he could not produce the booming basso tones dictated by a 
tradition that began with the peerless Georg Hann. Hanna Schwarz exuded 
sensible erotic allure as the actress Clairon, one preposterous costume 
notwithstanding. Hakan Hagegard played the convivial Count for laughs, mangled 
the spoken dialogue and sang with nice baritonal point. 
Michel Senechal made a sweet cameo appearance as Monsieur Taupe, the drowsy 
prompter. Reri Grist mugged shamelessly and sang a bit unsteadily as the 
Italian soprano (shades of "Rosenkavalier"), accompanied by a bel-canto tenor 
of staggering promise: Craig Estep. 
Hans Hotter, who had taken a leading role at the world premiere nearly half a 
century ago, had been scheduled to return in the fleeting part of the major 
domo. He apparently had second thoughts, and the role was enacted with uppity 
cheer by Dale Travis. 
Isabelle Creste and Jim Sohm danced an anachronistic ballet parody 
choreographed by Val Caniparoli. It proved most notable for the ballerina's 
hideous cartoon costume and, in moments of extension, for a recurring crotch 
gag. 
Strauss would not have been amused. 
