SANCTIONS HAVE GOOD CHANCE OF WORKING, EXPERTS SAY; 
EMBARGO: THEY COULD REDUCE IRAQ'S ECONOMY BY NEARLY HALF, THEY SAY. THE KICKER: 
IT MIGHT TAKE 18 MONTHS TO TWO YEARS FOR THEM TO BE FULLY EFFECTIVE. 
International sanctions against Iraq have an unusually high likelihood of 
succeeding, but it might take 18 months or two years before they could persuade 
Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait, a Washington economic think tank said 
Thursday. 
The Institute for International Economics estimated that the global oil embargo 
eventually will reduce Iraq's economy by nearly half -- an amount 20 times the 
average impact of past "successful" embargoes in this century. 
The report, prepared by a team that studied 115 other cases of embargoes since 
World War I, also concluded that eventually Iraq's civilian population will 
suffer severe hardships, its industrial base will be crippled and its military 
capacity will be wrecked. 
The conclusions echo those of two former military chiefs -- retired Air Force 
Gen. David C. Jones and retired Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. -- and other defense 
experts who have urged the Bush Administration to avoid rushing prematurely to 
war in the Persian Gulf. 
The report cautions, however, that the definition of "success" has to be 
somewhat narrow. If the goal remains the withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait and the 
restoration of the Kuwaiti government, then sanctions will eventually prevail, 
the report said. 
Depending on circumstances, however, sanctions might have to be paired with 
some concessions to Hussein, such as loan forgiveness by Saudi Arabia and 
Kuwait and greater access to Persian Gulf waters, said the institute, which is 
headed by C. Fred Bergsten, a Treasury official during the Carter 
Administration. 
The report warned that more ambitious demands -- such as payment of 
reparations, retribution for war crimes, the overthrow of Hussein or the 
eradication of his nuclear and chemical weapons programs -- could not be 
achieved through sanctions. 
At the same time, Bergsten and the authors of the report -- Georgetown 
University economics professor Gary C. Hufbauer and institute trade specialists 
Jeffrey J. Schott and Kimberley Ann Elliott -- said that they do not rule out 
the threat of military action as a way to enhance the sanctions. 
The sanctions against Iraq are almost unique in this century in being virtually 
airtight, they pointed out. Also, the U.S.-led military coalition in Saudi 
Arabia poses a credible threat of military action should the sanctions 
eventually fail. 
"The cooperation is unprecedented," said Elliott, declaring that there has been 
virtually zero leakage through the international embargo on Iraqi and Kuwaiti 
oil. The report estimates that the ultimate cost to Iraq would amount to 48% of 
its gross national product. 
"This is the most effective alliance (in an international sanction) mounted in 
this century," added Hufbauer, who pointed out that an isolated Iraq has no 
credible ally, or "black knight" capable of mounting an effective breach of the 
embargo. 
"If war is the only alternative to maintaining the sanctions," Bergsten said, 
"then the sanctions seem more likely to work. The conventional view that time 
is on Hussein's side is, in our view, not correct." 
Explained Bergsten at another point: "If you talk about political pressures 
working against Bush or against the coalition, I'd ask: 'Compared with what'? 
If the alternative is tens of thousands of casualties, then the chances of 
keeping the sanctions in place are much higher." 
By that logic, Hufbauer added, Bush's controversial recent decision to double 
the deployed U.S. forces over the next few months should have the short-term 
value of making the military alternative still more credible and therefore more 
effective. 
The group was unanimous in warning that the sanctions process, even under these 
uniquely favorable conditions, would take at least a year, more likely 18 
months to two years. 
"Sanctions are not surgical," said Schott. "Rather, their effect is corrosive, 
over time. It takes time for sanctions to reach a level of intensity, and then 
they have to be maintained at that level before they can work." 
Hufbauer estimated that the standard of living of the average Iraqi has already 
declined by 10% -- a far more drastic impact than U.S. citizens feel in most 
recessions, when a contraction of 2.5% is more usual. 
Typically, Hufbauer said, the sanctions should be felt most widely in three 
areas crucial not only to industry and national output but also to military 
capability: transportation, electrical utilities and telecommunications. 
