SUPT. PAYZANT'S BIRTHDAY STIRS A BROUHAHA 
Depending on which city teacher you talked to this week, Kay Wagner had either 
a "cute idea" to make Supt. Tom Payzant smile or one of the more "Mickey Mouse" 
notions of late out of the district's central office. 
Wagner, the city district's fine-arts coordinator, suspected she was navigating 
uncharted waters when she sent a memo earlier this month suggesting that 
teachers and students might want to draw portraits of Payzant in honor of his 
50th birthday today. 
True to her suspicions, Wagner found out this week that not even the birthday 
of the schools' chief proves immune from the political and philosophical 
crosscurrents of urban education. 
On one hand, elementary teachers from about 40 schools responded positively to 
the idea of having their first- or second-graders spend an hour putting 
together caricatures of Payzant, "roughly based" on copies of photos Wagner 
attached to the memo. 
"I thought the idea was harmless and real cute -- since kids like to draw -- 
and we should be supportive of our superintendent," Rhoda Kaldowksi, a teacher 
at Bethune Elementary in Paradise Hills, said of the charcoal sketches and 
pop-up pictures her students made. 
But, at the secondary level, the corps of fine arts teachers, with few 
exceptions, found the proposal both a ridiculous diversion from their already 
crammed curriculum and ironic, given the diminishing district resources 
allotted to their subject the past several years. 
"It's really stupid, to be honest with you," said Toni Green, art teacher at 
Marston Middle School. "Lots of teachers aren't exactly crazy about the man we 
fight with over salary every year, and the kids don't even know who he is -- 
they want to draw something meaningful, to get recognition or prizes for their 
art." 
Sighed Wagner this week, "I thought of this activity to get (Tom's) attention 
on the arts and to celebrate something that is really significant for everyone 
here, his 50th birthday." 
Some schools returned Wagner's memo to her with various sarcasms scrawled 
across the margin, accusing her of hero worship, and the like, in wanting to 
post the portraits outside of Payzant's office this morning. 
"I know there's a lot of anti-Payzant sentiment out there, but I've worked with 
a lot of superintendents, and Tom has been as supportive of the arts as any of 
them," although that would not always be saying much, Wagner said. 
"But goodness sakes, it's his birthday and, despite those sour feelings, 
wouldn't they have gotten into the spirit of things?" 
At Zamorano Elementary, the district's fine-arts magnet school, some teachers 
laughed, thinking the idea was a "joke" to make Payzant into a "Martin Luther 
King" Jr. icon or something, vice principal Beth Stern said. 
But a few were intrigued, she added. 
"It's a great way to make him smile when he walks through the door today," 
teacher Leslie Barnes said. "I talked with the children about his job, and how 
to make gifts and how to show people we appreciate them. 
"We talked about facial shapes, and where the chin goes, and we took yellow 
pieces of paper and cut and fringed it to look like his hair, and then the 
children put ties on him, or drew flowers in a pocket or put glasses on him." 
For art teacher Sandra Buck at Crawford High School and many of her colleagues, 
however, Wagner's idea only fit the concept of "a quickie assignment" for grade 
schools. 
"We've got our own curriculum, and this was by no means important enough to 
take time out and paint portraits of Payzant," Robert Coons of University City 
High said. 
Added Ernestine Bradley at Point Loma High: "It's bizarre -- Payzant gets this 
huge big raise (a four-year, 54.5% pay increase last May) and we get $1,000 for 
the year for arts supplies. So why should we bow ourselves to Dr. Payzant and 
honor him with our school work when he's done so little for the arts?" 
Wagner agreed that district funding for the arts "is not overwhelming" but 
asked, "By not doing something, is that going to get him to support arts more?" 
One of the few secondary teachers who did take on the assignment as a class 
project was Catherine Carrick at Mira Mesa High, whose outspoken principal, Jim 
Vlassis, has not always been known as a Payzant fan. 
To balance matters, however, Carrick promised a similar effort for Vlassis when 
he retires in two years. 
