AN ARCHEOLOGY SPECTACULAR; 
UNEARTHING THE SET OF DEMILLE'S 1923 'TEN COMMANDMENTS' 
An ancient Egyptian eye, unblinking in the sandy wind, stared up at Peter 
Brosnan. And Peter Brosnan, a bearded Angeleno with $10,000, a borrowed 
ground-penetrating radar system and a crazy dream, stared back. 
"Take a look at this guy," said Brosnan. "That's the Pharaoh." 
And that's why Brosnan, 38, a screenwriter, teacher and documentary filmmaker, 
started digging in the dunes near this Santa Barbara County city of 5,500 in 
1983. This is where Cecil B. DeMille filmed the silent movie version of "The 
Ten Commandments" in 1923, and where DeMille buried and abandoned one of the 
largest sets in feature film history -- the City of the Pharaoh, with walls 
that rose 110 feet and sprawled 750 feet in width, its entrance flanked by 21 
sphinxes and four 35-foot Pharaoh statues. 
Brosnan was at the site Monday to announce his most substantial progress so far 
in unearthing the city: a $10,000 grant from the Bank of America, most of it 
already committed to covering costs of equipment rental and consultation from 
experts. 
Archeologist John Parker, who labored with Brosnan, geophysicist Lambert T. 
Dolphin and a handful of others, reported radar readings that indicate several 
large objects beneath the sand just where the old sphinxes should be. Parker 
said several other findings match with old charts and suggest that while many 
objects have been dismantled or damaged, most features remain largely where 
they were in 1923. 
"We knew this was up here, but we figured it was rubble," said Ed Edwards, a 
volunteer on the site and a member of the Santa Maria Valley Archeological 
Society. 
"This is utterly unique, and it gives you a sense of time having passed -- that 
movies are now a part of history," Jarell Jackman, executive director of the 
Santa Barbara Trust for Historical Preservation. "Some archeologist may be 
uncovering Disneyland 500 years from now." 
"It would be an awfully interesting acquisition. And it would be nice to send 
somebody out there," said Ellen Hughes, historian with the Smithsonian 
Institution's National Museum of American History. Any decision, however, 
Hughes said, would require further study. 
Bank of America officials were quick to note their company's own history with 
the film and the site. DeMille, a former bank employee and personal friend of 
bank founder A.P. Giannini, finished making the $1.4-million production by 
persuading Giannini to make him a loan. (Shortly before his death, DeMille 
remade "The Ten Commandments," released in 1956, with sound, a genuine Egyptian 
setting, and Charlton Heston in the role of Moses.) 
"We're hoping the Hollywood community will take this on as a family project," 
said Duncan Knowles, vice president and director of organizational 
communications for Bank of America. 
If Brosnan has his way, the team will make a detailed mapping and extensive 
excavation of the site, use that data to attract more donations, and eventually 
either pack the choicest artifacts off to an American museum or use them as 
centerpieces for an educational center at the dunes site. Hollywood Heritage 
Inc., a Los Angeles preservation group, is acting as the umbrella organization 
handling donations and inquiries. Last and not least, Brosnan hopes to complete 
his documentary video on DeMille and his sand-bound legacy. 
But the imponderables remain nearly as imposing as the walled city once was. 
Until this week's findings could be analyzed in detail, neither the scientists 
nor the bankers were willing to estimate the cost of a more ambitious 
excavation. The Nature Conservancy manages the property, and has the fate of 
the dunes and the local shore birds to consider. No museum has made any 
commitments to display anything. And while the film industry has been generous 
with data surrounding the old film, Brosnan acknowledged, it has been less so 
with financial support. 
Brosnan's own history with the site dates back to a late-night conversation in 
1983 with Bruce Cardozo, a former New York University film school confederate 
who mentioned the remains of the old set. Brosnan traveled to the site, quickly 
unearthed a DeMille horse's head, and was soon embarked on a campaign. 
The campaign stalled, however, while the property's owners made the complicated 
arrangements that gave control of the site to the Nature Conservancy. It was 
1989, Brosnan said, before he again began investing substantial amounts of time 
on the project. The one certainty, he added, looking down at the detritus in 
the dunes, is that many such hours lie ahead. 
"It's a hobby," said Brosnan, "that got out of control." 
