INTERPRETER'S LIFE IN POLITICAL WATERS; 
DIPLOMACY: A UNITED NATIONS OFFICIAL LOOKS BACK AT HIS PAST CAREER AS A 
TOP-LEVEL SOVIET TRANSLATOR. 
It was the most dramatic clash of Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev's 
coast-to-coast tour: The mayor of Los Angeles stood up and informed the visitor 
that his people would never bury America, as the fiery Soviet leader had 
threatened to do. 
As a banquet audience gasped, Khrushchev tossed aside a prepared speech and 
ripped into Mayor Norris Poulson with a scathing reply. 
For young Viktor Sukhodrev, the interpreter, it was a nightmare. 
"He started quoting Ukrainian proverbs, and I don't speak Ukrainian," Sukhodrev 
said in an interview during a break from his new job as a General Assembly 
official. "I still talk about it when I give lectures to young foreign service 
officers, telling them how you have to expect anything." 
Sukhodrev said Khrushchev was already irritated when the Soviet entourage 
arrived in Southern California just after noon on Sept. 19, 1959, because of 
Cold War regulations that had placed Disneyland off-limits to him. 
And he was further annoyed that the main event of the day was a visit to the 
set of "Can Can" at 20th Century Fox, rather than an inspection of an aerospace 
plant or some other more serious activity. 
When the group reached the Ambassador Hotel that evening and was greeted by a 
less-than-friendly Poulson, the premier turned purple. 
"I was looking at Mrs. Khrushchev's interpreter, and all I could see was her 
eyes widening in horror," Sukhodrev said. "I can remember this proverb, 
something about, 'Your eyes have seen what you're buying but you can't swallow 
it,' and others that I really had to guess about. At one point, he turned to 
young Tupolev, the son of the aircraft designer, and asked how many hours it 
would take to fly back to Moscow, and I thought we were on the way, but 
somebody in the back of the room saved the day. 
"As Khrushchev was shouting that he had come to Los Angeles with his hand 
extended, a voice -- it must have been that of an emigre -- called out in 
perfect Russian, 'We take it.' " 
Sukhodrev was picked as the junior partner to Oleg Troyanovsky, now the Soviet 
ambassador to Beijing, for the interpreting team to go along on the first U.S. 
visit by a Kremlin chief. 
He had entered the foreign service only three years before after graduating 
from the Moscow Foreign Languages Institute, and gone to work almost 
immediately for Andrei A. Gromyko, the poker-faced foreign minister who would 
be elevated to the presidency in 1986. 
His first assignment for Gromyko, Sukhodrev said, was to interpret at a meeting 
with Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. 
"I could hardly believe that I was in a room with the man we all regarded as 
the architect of the Cold War," he recalled. "He noticed me and said to Gromyko 
'You've got a new interpreter. You always had Troyanovsky.' Gromyko answered, 
'He's a good substitute,' so I knew that I had made the grade." 
The veteran interpreter -- his once jet-black hair now slightly gray -- later 
traveled with Leonid I. Brezhnev, and his final service for a Soviet head of 
government was with Mikhail S. Gorbachev last December for the meeting with 
President Reagan in New York. 
"That was my voice you heard when Gorbachev spoke on television," he said, 
shaking his head. "It was especially strange to hear myself on all the news 
broadcasts later. That was sort of a new experience for me." 
Other interpreters have long recognized Sukhodrev as a master of his craft, 
able to slip from British- to American-accented English and back without a 
slip. 
As reporters observed during his frequent appearances at the Geneva peace talks 
over the years, he polished his vocabulary and stayed current with slang 
through voracious reading of the Western press. 
It was not all learned in school, he confessed. 
As a youth, he accompanied his mother to London at the beginning of World War 
II. She worked with a Soviet trade mission there until 1945. Although he 
attended an embassy school, he played in the street with English children. 
"I think I can still hold my own with a London taxi driver," he said with a 
grin. 
Although Soviet diplomats have customarily displayed better language facility 
than Americans, Sukhodrev said, he believes U. S. diplomats have improved 
substantially in the more than three decades he has dealt with them. 
"In my first contacts with the embassy in Moscow in 1956, there were just a few 
who could barely manage to communicate," he said. "Now, any U.S. official whose 
job is to maintain contact with the government can speak Russian." 
In his new post at the United Nations, Sukhodrev works directly under Ronald 
Spiers, the undersecretary for political and General Assembly affairs, who 
until his retirement earlier this year was undersecretary of state for 
management. 
"It's a reflection of the new atmosphere between our countries that I think we 
work well together," he said of Spiers. 
