HOME RESTORATION; 
HEED PROJECTS THAT ARE POTENTIAL DISASTERS 
Restoration is a process for healing injuries to an aging home. 
Ironically, it involves the possibility of serious injury to the one doing the 
work. It's risky operating power tools, disturbing certain building materials, 
handling chemicals required in routine restoration activities, or simply 
walking around the debris indigenous to a job site. 
So, before tackling another project, take heed of these potential hazards: 
Ladders -- Each year about 100,000 Americans are injured in falls from ladders, 
according to the National Safety Council. It's smart to know these basic rules 
of the rungs: 
Always use the right ladder for the job. Never lean a stepladder against a wall 
for use as a straight ladder. Never use an extension ladder as a plank between 
two stepladders. 
Never use the top of a ladder as a step. 
Never use aluminum or wet wooden ladders in areas where live electrical wires 
are present. 
For a complete review of ladder safety, write for "Five Rules for Ladder 
Safety" from the National Safety Council, 444 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 
60601. 
Power tools -- Above all, study the voluminous safety and operating notes 
provided with most new tools. Though not great literature, reading this 
material is time wisely invested. Spend some time memorizing operating 
procedures. 
Apply common sense. Always wear safety glasses. Use tools with grounded plugs. 
Always unplug a device if planning to change blades or bits. Never remove 
fences or guards supplied by the manufacturer. Never wear loose clothing that 
may become entangled with equipment. Use only sharp blades or bits with your 
tools. 
Most important, don't act casually once some mastery with the tool is gained. 
The moment safety is neglected is the moment injuries can occur. 
Hazardous materials -- Breaking into the fabric of an old home can be just like 
opening Pandora's box. Go slowly and make sure two very unfriendly substances 
aren't disturbed: asbestos and lead. Asbestos can be found throughout an old 
structure: wall and pipe insulation; vinyl floor tiles; patching compounds; 
furnace castings; textured paints and roofing and siding materials. 
According to published advice from the Environmental Protection Agency, the 
best way to deal with asbestos-based materials is not to disturb them. If 
removal is unavoidable, call a licensed professional for the job. 
Lead, once a common ingredient in paint, is another troublesome material. There 
is no good way to remove it other than with a chemical paint stripper. Scraping 
will create a fine, dangerous powder. When burned, the lead atomizes and can be 
inhaled. 
For more information, contact the nearest EPA regional office. 
Another hazard nearly every renovator faces is dealing with chemical strippers, 
paints, varnishes and solvents. All of these products may contain materials 
that are known or are potential carcinogens -- cancer-producing agents. Perhaps 
of greatest concern are strippers that contain methylene chloride, the active 
ingredient that breaks down old paint and varnish film but is brutal on the 
body. Fumes can be inhaled or it can be absorbed through the skin. Used in a 
closed room, it has the power to render one unconscious because it limits the 
body's ability to carry oxygen. Extreme exposure can cause death. 
When using these products, always read instructions on the can before opening. 
Generally, try to work in an area with adequate ventilation and to avoid direct 
contact between the material and the skin. 
Always wear neoprene gloves (rubber and latex are useless) when using remover 
or cleaning paintbrushes. Immediately wash off material with soap and water if 
it splashes on the skin. Limit exposure times and always quit work if feeling 
light-headed or dizzy. Keep containers tightly sealed and stored away from any 
heat source. 
