HOME INVASION SHOTS STILL REVERBERATING; 
CRIME: NEIGHBORS OF A MAN WHO FIRED ON THANKSGIVING INTRUDERS FEAR RETALIATION. 
ONE OF THE THREE WOUNDED TEEN SUSPECTS HAS DIED. 
Two days after a retired police sergeant opened fire on armed intruders inside 
his home, a burglar alarm salesman Saturday was peddling his wares on North 
Hanover Street. 
Probably nowhere else in Orange County could the salesman have found a more 
receptive group of potential buyers. There, on Thanksgiving night, their 
neighbor, Earl Swoap, used his 12-gauge shotgun to shoot down three of four 
intruders who allegedly had broken into his home. Nearby residents said 
Saturday they fear the quiet neighborhood might be the target of a violent 
retaliatory action in the future. 
"The fear stays with you," said one neighborhood woman who declined to be 
identified. "I'm glad he (Swoap) did what he did. I think it's a smart idea to 
get a gun. I don't want to give my name because I'm afraid they'll come back." 
No charges have been filed against Swoap, but Orange County Dist. Atty. Michael 
R. Capizzi said Saturday that his office will review the incident to determine 
whether the 53-year-old man acted properly when he fired on the intruders, 
killing a 16-year-old boy and wounding two others. 
The boy, who was not identified by authorities, was pronounced brain-dead 
Friday; he later was removed from life-support systems and died that night. 
Capizzi said the case "would be treated like any other incident." 
"It's routine when there has been a shooting for a review of the legal 
implications of the shooting," the district attorney said. 
The wild events of Thursday night began when the Hughes Aircraft security 
guard, who retired from the Yakima, Wash., police force 13 years ago, was 
startled by a loud crash in his home. He told police that he grabbed his 
shotgun and found four intruders inside his home, three of them armed. 
In a series of events still under investigation, police said Swoap blasted away 
at the intruders as they attempted to escape out the back door. Police said he 
chased the intruders outside and fired again as they attempted to escape in a 
car parked in the man's driveway. The shotgun blasts blew out the car's rear 
windows and two of its tires. 
The two wounded suspects, a 17-year-old Garden Grove boy and 19-year-old 
Phouxay Vanhnarathof Costa Mesa, were in critical but stable condition at UCI 
Medical Center in Orange, police said. The two have been arrested on suspicion 
of attempted robbery. 
A fourth suspect, Sayavong Nanthavongdouangsy, 18, of Anaheim, was not injured. 
The names of the juveniles were withheld because of their ages. 
Nanthavongdouangsy, also arrested on suspicion of attempted robbery, was being 
held at the Anaheim Temporary Detention Facility. 
Anaheim police declined further comment on the case Saturday, saying only that 
it was still under investigation. Police are trying to determine whether the 
incident was one in a number of so-called home invasions in Orange County 
involving teen-agers recruited by Asian gangs. 
At Swoap's home Saturday, a relative who would not identify herself said 
neighbors have been offering support for the man's action. The woman said Swoap 
had not been at home for some time but was staying at an undisclosed location. 
"What makes me feel bad is that others seem to feel sorry for the ones who held 
them up," the woman neighbor said. "It's a shame for their parents, but we all 
wonder why they picked his house. I'm afraid they might come back by and shoot 
at the house like they do in L.A." 
Down the street, Adela Castenada said she had been afraid to return to her home 
shortly after the incident and now will lock the iron gate that shields her 
front door. 
"We just moved here one year ago," Castenada said. Her family was returning 
home and had just turned the corner to North Hanover Street after celebrating 
Thanksgiving out when they saw the police lights and the wounded suspects lying 
on the ground, covered with blood, she said. 
"It was terrible," she said. "I hope it never happens again." 
Meanwhile, in an interview Friday, Nanthavongdouangsy's father, Donechanh 
Nanthavongdouangsy, claimed that his son was not involved with the break-in and 
was falsely arrested. 
Through an interpreter, the Laotian immigrant said his son was at home about 10 
p.m. when he got a phone call from Vanhnarath, who reportedly told young 
Nanthavongdouangsy that he was wounded and needed a ride to the hospital. The 
shooting took place about 9:35 p.m. 
Police have declined to comment on the father's claim. 
