SELIG UNDAUNTED AFTER SELLING HIS SEATTLE SKYSCRAPER 
When maverick Seattle skyscraper developer Martin Selig fell behind on his 
light bill last winter, his competitors figured that he might be in trouble. 
And when nearly $1 million in mortgage checks on five of his buildings bounced 
this summer, they were pretty well convinced. 
But by mid-October, Selig was back in the black, although he was no longer 
literally on top of this city's hot commercial real estate market. He solved 
his cash problems by agreeing to sell Seattle's tallest building, the 76-story 
Columbia Seafirst Center, for $354 million. 
The sale was the latest twist in the unlikely saga of a controversial 
52-year-old businessman who started with nothing and who remains, even after 
the deal, Seattle's biggest property holder. 
The sale of the skyscraper to tenant Seafirst Corp., a subsidiary of 
BankAmerica Corp., was the biggest real estate sale in Washington state 
history. The 986-foot building was the tallest on the West Coast when it was 
completed in 1985, although the First Interstate Tower in Los Angeles later 
topped it by 73 feet. 
Selig's practiced positivism was in full bloom after the sale. "The sale of 
this building is not a setback, it is a phenomenal victory," he proclaimed. 
After all, he reasoned, the sale price is $102 million more than the mortgage 
he holds. Just starting construction of the 1.5-million-square foot building in 
a city Seattle's size was "a significant risk," Selig said, and now it must be 
viewed as a winning gamble. 
But the necessity of selling, caused by depressed rents from a temporary glut 
of new skyscrapers, has to hurt. Selig once called the 10-year process to plan, 
build and fill the tower "an Olympian feat." 
"The Space Needle told people where Seattle was," he once remarked. "Columbia 
Center tells people Seattle has arrived." 
"I don't think there is another building of this size in the world owned by an 
individual," Selig boasted when the tower was completed. 
A flurry of new buildings from competitors forced Selig to keep his rents down 
at Columbia Center and at his other buildings, and postpone his bills. At one 
point he owed $640,000 to Seattle City Light for electricity, since paid. 
Both Selig and his skyscraper remain controversial. Critics have charged that 
the black-glass, curved edifice is out of scale with Seattle and that several 
other Selig buildings are too derivative of Houston-style architecture. The 
tower and the swank private club that Selig installed at the top was a project 
driven by ego instead of civic need, they sniped. 
Citizen activists who preferred the days when the horizon was dominated by 
Mount Rainier launched a campaign that resulted in new city zoning that makes 
it impossible to build a skyscraper as high as Columbia Center again. This 
year, voters also approved a lid on future downtown office construction. 
Enthusiasts, however, think that the spire nicely punctuates a newly cocky 
skyline in a city trying to cash in on Pacific Rim trade. 
Selig, an avid collector of modern art, said of his buildings: "You have to 
look at them as sculptures." 
"It was an opportunity," Selig said of the building code in force in the late 
1970s. "I wanted to build the maximum building I could build at that time." 
The present cap, he said, could make existing buildings more valuable but may 
hurt future downtown growth. 
The sale of the skyscraper has also provoked controversy. It was assessed for 
tax purposes at only $195 million. The big price tag in Seattle's hot real 
estate market has prompted county officials to propose recalculating 
assessments of all commercial and residential properties. 
Turmoil is nothing new to Selig. He and his parents emigrated to the United 
States in 1940 as Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany, when he was 3 years old. 
His drive was apparent early. Shortly before the 1962 Seattle World's Fair, he 
gave construction workers some Space Needle sweat shirts that he was hawking in 
return for a ride to the top of the new landmark. And he bought his first 
commercial property while a student at the University of Washington. He 
borrowed part of the down payment and sold the property a year later for a good 
profit. 
With aggressive borrowing, attention to construction details and personal 
service to tenants, he has averaged about one new building per year since the 
mid-1960s. 
The result is a local empire of big office buildings that he puts in "the high 
20s" with an assessed value of more than half a billion dollars. Observers 
believe that the true market value of his holdings is at least 50% higher. 
But while immensely successful, Selig has remained somewhat aloof from 
Seattle's clubby establishment. He keeps a low profile on most civic issues, 
will not discuss his personal life with the media (he is married with two 
children) and is reluctant to talk about what makes him tick. 
Instead, he concentrates on making Seattle's profile higher with buildings. "I 
love Seattle and am pleased to be able to play such an active role in its 
evolution," he said in a statement issued with the sale. 
Plans are under way for additional Selig buildings of 10, 19 and 36 stories. 
"We absolutely are still here," he said. 
