ART REVIEW; 
WILL THE REAL LEONARDO PLEASE STAND UP?; 
'THE CRAFT OF THE FORGER' AT POMONA COLLEGE IS DRAWN MAINLY FROM THE HOLDINGS 
OF A GULLIBLE COLLECTOR. 
Which twin is the phony? 
That is one question posed by "Artful Deception: The Craft of the Forger." Just 
opened at Pomona College's Montgomery Art Gallery (to Dec. 2), it's one of 
those unusual exhibitions that attracts specialists and regular folks. 
Fakes and forgeries fascinate everybody. They appeal to a basic, childlike urge 
to fool people. Bogus art is particularly compelling because art is hallowed as 
the very shrine of originality and authenticity. A delicious illicit kick comes 
from seeing some skillful dodger make suckers of the pious guardians of the 
temple. According to popular lore, all those critics, connoisseurs, scholars 
and collectors are a bunch of pompous poseurs anyway. 
The exhibition is drawn mainly from the holdings of Baltimore's Walters Art 
Gallery. Opened in 1934, its founding patron was Henry Walters, a collector 
whose mistakes cost him about $100,000. He never tried to sweep this under the 
rug, and once told the New York Times that a museum of fakes should be 
established for the education of the public. This show is a belated echo of 
that wish. 
A didactic section begins with a copy of Leonardo Da Vinci's revered "Mona 
Lisa." It was not intended to fool anybody and a good thing, too, as it is 
transparently unconvincing. Rather, it reflects a once-widespread practice 
among wealthy folks, who had copies of great masterpieces decorating the 
mansion to show off their superior taste. 
A gallery of works from the Claremont Colleges' collections makes the point 
that not all artistic look-alikes are fraudulently intended. Here are student 
copies done for instruction, harmless impersonations made in homage to a master 
and reproductions so convincing that they are valued as fine examples of the 
printer's art. 
But enough of that. We want real fakes, not fake fakes. 
Some examples are so bad they couldn't fool you with the lights out. A scene of 
a fallen deer supposedly by Gustave Courbet looks like somebody put it through 
a mangle. A so-called J.M.W. Turner "View of the Grand Canal" looks OK across 
the room but up close turns to melting whipped cream. How could Walters have 
been such a twit? 
Well, nobody is easier to fool than somebody blinded by desire. If you want 
something badly enough you will find it. This is a genuine Rolex watch which I 
was lucky enough to buy in an alley for 40 bucks. The guy was very nervous but 
the watch is real. 
It's also easy to fool people with an object that appeals to their established 
taste. A "Late Medieval" stained-glass panel is a perfect joke. It makes no 
attempt to hide the modern techniques behind its glaring glass and the subject 
is drawn from a Hans Holbein portrait done in the 16th Century. The thing got 
by because it was made by a Victorian forger for Victorian taste. 
Most fakes give themselves away by a combination of mechanical deadness and 
expressive sweetness. They operate like con men. Nobody is really taken in 
unless they want to be. Anybody who is fails to come away with a terrible sense 
of self-betrayal and stupidity. Living a lie is only fun until the sun comes 
up. 
There are those rare counterfeiters skillful enough to vamp the experts. A "St. 
George Slaying the Dragon" was once ascribed to an unknown Pietro Carpaccio by 
the renowned Bernard Berenson. It doesn't look so great today but there are 
works that do, like a gold ground Italian painting by master forger Icilio 
Frederico Joni. He was finally unmasked because, like a real artist, he had 
personal characteristics that got into all his fakes, such as long elegant 
noses and a weakness for elaborate halos always produced with the same stamping 
tools. 
Other artistically adept forgers made silly mistakes. There is a superb little 
ivory miniature long accepted as a Gothic devotional plaque until a scholar 
smelled a rat. It depicts a lowly saint seated in a position of authority over 
the apostles Peter and Paul. No medieval monk would have committed such heresy. 
A French turn-of-the-century imitator known, oddly, as "The Spanish Forger" did 
stunning pastiches of late medieval manuscript pages. Crafty enough to use 
authentic vellum pages with calligraphic text, he was also dumb enough not to 
match the illustration to the story. Eventually somebody noticed. Other common 
forger's gaffes include making mismatched meldings of differing styles like an 
"Italo-Byzantine" monumental Crucifixion where Christ is Byzantine to the waist 
and then goes Romanesque. Looks like a Volkswagen with tail fins. 
Clearly, the circle of forgery involves foolishness on the part of maker and 
seller alike. 
The most entertaining and slightly intimidating section of the exhibition is 
"Now YOU Be the Judge." It invites visitors to compare half a dozen sets of 
similar objects, one genuine, one bogus, and decide which is right. 
I got five correct and it was relatively easy. Basically, originals have 
vitality and assurance. That knowledge guides the eye to the real halves of 
pairs of Egyptian heads, water colors given to Gavarini and two Gothic 
devotional scenes in ivory. The rest are tougher because they are closer to 
crafts objects, which have a built-in mechanical edge. A pair of supposed 
Chinese "Famille rose" ceramics yields the imitation when you notice that one 
is a trifle grosser and its pictured scenes use Westernized perspective. The 
real half of paired "Renaissance" pendants wins by sheer exquisiteness of 
workmanship. 
I missed the call on a pair of Sevres-style ormolu clocks, but a gallery 
representative says everybody does. If I were a forger, I'd stick to the 
decorative arts, where it seems to be possible for a copy to be aesthetically 
superior to the original. 
Maybe the real lesson of the section is that it's much harder to be fooled if 
an uncertain work is compared to a known original. 
"Artful Deception" is a fascinating show on its own hook, but may also 
represent a dark cultural phenomenon. Last summer, the British Museum did a 
similar, much grander show and people flocked to it. Stories of fakes are much 
in the press. We live in a time of blatant doubt of authenticity. Are our 
politicians corrupt? Is our economy sound? Do the media tell us the truth? 
The interest sparked by such an exhibition gets beyond itself. It comes to be 
about a society that wants to look deception in the eye so it can see reality 
again. 
