PREVIEW / DEMOCRACY AT RISK; 
GUATEMALA IN RIGHTS CRISIS ON EVE OF VOTE 
The most striking feature of Sunday's presidential election, only the second 
time Guatemalans will have gone to the polls under an elected government, is 
not differences between the parties, or vicious rhetoric from the candidates. 
It is the death count. In Guatemala, negative campaigning means killing 
opponents. 
Americas Watch, a New York-based human rights organization, says the election 
is being held while "the nation is in the grips of the worst human rights 
crisis since the military turned over government to civilians in 1986." 
Since July, when campaigning began in earnest, there have been at least 15 
political murders. The victims, all directly involved in the campaign, included 
nine candidates or party leaders, three journalists and two political 
activists. The Guatemalan Congressional Human Rights office lists another 421 
politically related deaths and disappearances so far this year. 
There have been no arrests, let alone convictions. Human rights groups blame 
military units or death squads tolerated by the government for most of the 
murders. But President Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo has dismissed some of the 
killings as "isolated" incidents with "origins in local issues," or has blamed 
them on Guatemala's tiny leftist guerrilla movement. 
'State Terrorism' 
It is rationalizations such as this, viewed as an attempt by the unpopular 
Cerezo to downplay the human rights violence that has marked his five-year 
administration, that provokes public scorn and fright. 
"We are returning to the dark past . . . when we lived amid virtual state 
terrorism," said Cesar Alvarez Guadamuz, assistant director of the 
Congressional Human Rights Office. 
At stake Sunday are the presidency, vice presidency, 116 congressional seats 
and 300 city halls. If, as expected, none of the 12 presidential candidates 
achieve a majority, a runoff between the top two finishers will be held Jan. 6. 
If there is no military revolt -- a risky assumption in a country that has held 
only three successful elections in its history -- the Jan. 13 inauguration will 
be the first time an elected president has turned over office to an elected 
successor. 
Top Contenders 
Of the 12 presidential candidates, only four are important: conservative 
newspaper owner Jorge Carpio Nicolle of the National Centrist Union; right-wing 
businessman and former Guatemala City Mayor Alvaro Arzu of the National 
Advancement Party; one-time military supporter Jorge Serrano Elias of the 
Solidarity Action Movement, and Alfonso Cabrera Hidalgo of the Christian 
Democratic Party. 
Cabrera is Cerezo's handpicked candidate and a former foreign minister who is 
suspected by U.S. drug experts of involvement in the narcotics trade. 
The latest public opinion poll puts Carpio ahead with 29% of the vote, followed 
by Arzu with 22%, then Serrano with 21% and Cabrera with 14%. 
What that doesn't show is the popularity of the candidate who isn't there, Gen. 
Efrain Rios Montt. 
The one-time leader of a bloody coup, a military dictator and architect of "the 
Guatemalan solution" for cleansing the country of leftist rebels by killing 
thousands of presumed sympathizers, Rios Montt is the nation's most popular 
politician, according to the polls. 
However, he was taken off the ballot by Guatemala's courts because of a 
constitutional provision banning from the presidency anyone who had held power 
as the result of a coup. 
Rios Montt's attraction is based perversely on the bloodiness of his past. Some 
people are drawn by his call for an unrestrained law-and-order campaign against 
a surging crime rate. 
True to his belief that democracy resides only in his person -- "I am democracy 
here," he said in a recent interview -- Rios Montt has said the election is 
illegitimate and has called for his followers to nullify ballots by writing in 
his name. He has issued less than subtle hints that he might try to disrupt the 
voting violently. 
One poll showed that 18% of voters intend to either leave their ballots blank 
or deface them. As a measure of the support for Guatemala's infant democracy, 
this is alarming, particularly since it coincides with another poll indicating 
that half of the people prefer military rule, while only a third think 
democracy is the best system for the country. 
'Almost No Differences' 
Among the presidential candidates left after Rios Montt's disqualification, 
there is little to choose from in policy or ideological terms -- "There are 
almost no differences among us," is the way Arzu put it -- and none has 
developed a strong personal following. 
Given the politicians' collective fear of the military, which forced Cerezo to 
cede much of his power to the armed forces after a series of coup attempts, and 
their shared right-wing economic views, there seems little chance of a change 
in the country's two most crushing problems -- human rights and one of the most 
unbalanced distributions of wealth in Latin America. 
