STEINBERG SEEKS OK TO BUY MORE THAN 15% OF UAL CORP. 
A company controlled by New York corporate raider Saul P. Steinberg sought 
government permission on Wednesday to buy more than 15% of UAL Corp. shares, a 
move that could spark another round of takeover turmoil for the parent of 
United Airlines. 
Steinberg, a veteran of takeover battles for Walt Disney Co. and Penn Central 
Corp., had no comment on why his Reliance Group Holdings wants to accumulate 
UAL shares. UAL also had no comment. 
Analysts familiar with UAL were uncertain of Steinberg's motives. Many doubted 
that Steinberg, a close friend of UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf, would make a 
hostile move against the company. 
Edward J. Starkman, an analyst with Paine Webber in New York, speculated that 
Steinberg had joined with Wolf in a new effort to acquire UAL. Last month, Wolf 
tried to buy the company with United's pilots and top managers, but lenders 
refused to finance the historic $6.75-billion bid. 
Starkman said Steinberg and Wolf might "find a new way to get it done," and 
said an alliance between the two men "was not out of the question." 
Arbitragers, or professional stock speculators, have expected a new bidder to 
emerge for UAL. It is believed that Coniston Partners, a New York investment 
firm, owns a large block of UAL shares and may be preparing a bid. 
Another possible buyer is Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis, who is seeking 
union support for a new offer for UAL. United's machinists union has said it 
won't support Davis, who started UAL's takeover activity last August with a 
$240-a-share bid. 
A source familiar with the situation said Steinberg doesn't own any UAL shares. 
The New York investor had owned 6.9% of UAL's stock, but sold his holdings 
after the takeover battle drove UAL's stock price as high as $294. 
UAL's shares have skidded since the Wolf group's bid fell apart. UAL stock 
closed Wednesday at $177 per share, up $1.50, on the New York Stock Exchange. 
Word of Steinberg's interest came after the market close. 
Several analysts said that Steinberg might simply want to buy UAL shares as an 
investment. A takeover move from either Davis or Coniston would likely push 
UAL's stock price higher, handing Steinberg a profit. 
"He might believe the stock has room to go up and wants to invest in it," said 
Robert Decker, an analyst with Duff &amp; Phelps in Chicago. 
It is also possible that Steinberg wants to make the investment to guard UAL 
from an unwanted takeover. 
Others said it would be difficult for Steinberg, or any other investor, to buy 
UAL because its pilots would resist any transaction that doesn't give it a 
majority stake in the airline. The bid by the Wolf group would have given 
employees a 75% stake, and management 10%. "They were a hair's breadth from 
owning the airline," said one analyst who asked not to be identified. "They are 
adamant about having control." 
This analyst said Steinberg isn't likely to mount a full-blown takeover bid and 
take a minority interest. "His pattern has always been either he acquires 
control and takes the company private, or he takes a passive interest with no 
intention of buying the company." 
For example, the analyst said, Steinberg owned 16.5% of Los Angeles-based Tiger 
International until it was sold to Federal Express last December. Wolf was 
chairman of that Southland air cargo carrier before he joined United. 
Steinberg is no stranger to takeover activity. In July, his Reliance Group 
Holdings agreed to pay $20.8 million to settle a "greenmail" lawsuit that arose 
from his raid on the Walt Disney Co. in 1984. The suit claimed Disney unfairly 
paid Steinberg greenmail, or an above-market price, for his Disney stock to 
persuade Steinberg not buy the entertainment company. 
Steinberg's request for permission to buy more than 15% of UAL came in a filing 
with the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department. 
