MARINOVICH'S FATHER IS ACCUSED OF BERATING FAN 
USC is looking into complaints that Marv Marinovich, father of quarterback Todd 
Marinovich, berated a fan during last Saturday's game at the Coliseum, a USC 
athletic official confirmed Friday. 
Marv Marinovich allegedly lashed out verbally at the fan, who had derided 
Marinovich's son and called for a backup to replace him. USC received two 
letters about the incident, one from the unidentified man who allegedly was 
confronted by Marinovich, and another from fans who sat nearby and said they 
had witnessed the confrontation. 
"Apparently, they had their own opinions on who they were rooting for as far as 
the quarterback (was concerned)," said Jim Hefner, an assistant athletic 
director at USC and director of game management. "From what I can gather, there 
was a verbal display of emotion from both people -- mostly from Marv." 
A source who spoke with several eyewitnesses said Marinovich pointed at the man 
and loudly cursed him. Asked about the allegations, Marinovich at first denied 
that he was involved, but later said he had words with several fans. 
Angry words? 
"Well, yeah, sure," he said. 
The crowd's negative reaction to his son upset him, he said. "What's the big 
deal about it?" Marinovich said. "Could any parent sit up there and listen to 
that kind of crap? Not me. What would you do if somebody was booing at your son 
for no reason?" 
It has been confirmed that Todd Marinovich was held out at the start of last 
week's game as punishment for arriving late to a team meeting on the morning of 
the game. When he did arrive, he was locked out of the meeting by Ray Dorr, who 
coaches USC's quarterbacks. 
Marinovich will start today's game at Oregon State, Coach Larry Smith said 
Friday. 
Senior Shane Foley was USC's starter in last week's 31-31 tie with California 
but was replaced by Marinovich after leading the Trojans to a touchdown and a 
7-0 lead in their first possession. 
The younger Marinovich, suspended a week earlier for cutting class, was greeted 
by scattered boos, which became louder and more prevalent as the Trojans fell 
behind, 24-10, in the third quarter. 
Later, after he had passed for 291 yards and two touchdowns, Todd Marinovich 
told reporters: "I thought we were playing at Cal." 
Said his father: "I was definitely upset when fans were booing, no question 
about that. I have never seen booing like that in a college game. To me, it was 
utterly ridiculous, particularly (by) the people who don't know anything about 
what they're booing." 
Marv Marinovich said he had not been contacted by USC. It is possible that 
Marinovich will be moved to another section of the Coliseum for the Trojans' 
final home game, but Hefner said: "I want to get both sides of it before I make 
any decision on that." 
