U.S. VS. SEARS: COURTS END DECADE WITHOUT A DECISION; 
LAW: THE RESULT HAS BEEN CALLED A 'JUDICIAL TRAGEDY.' THE CASE BOUNCED THROUGH 
THE HALLS OF JUSTICE FOR NEARLY 10 YEARS AND NEVER CAME TO TRIAL. 
Nearly a decade ago, the U.S. Justice Department indicted Sears Roebuck &amp; 
Co., the nation's largest retailer, on charges of evading customs duties on 
thousands of Japanese televisions that were suspected of being "dumped" on the 
American market. 
Sears faced $130,000 in fines and considerable public embarrassment if the 
federal government proved that the Chicago-based corporation concealed more 
than $1.1 million in rebates and credits it allegedly received from Japanese 
suppliers between 1968 and 1975. 
The 13-count fraud indictment, handed down in Los Angeles -- the port of entry 
for many of the televisions -- sent shock waves through the electronics 
industry because several American companies were accepting such rebates from 
Japanese firms. 
The government alleged that Sears tried to avoid duties imposed by the U.S. 
Customs Service on merchandise sold in this country for prices below those 
charged in their home market, a practice known as "dumping." Sears vigorously 
denied the charges. 
From early 1980 until late in September, when it was quietly settled, the case 
of United States vs. Sears was one of the most controversial in local federal 
court history. 
It evolved into what some observers called "judicial Ping-Pong," with the case 
bouncing back and forth 10 times between the district court in Los Angeles and 
the appeals court based in San Francisco -- but never got to trial. It also 
caused considerable embarrassment for the U.S. Justice Department because of 
the initial prosecutor's questionable conduct before the grand jury. 
Ultimately, it became "a judicial tragedy," according to Donald C. Smaltz, a 
Los Angeles lawyer who was involved in the case briefly and followed it closely 
for years. 
The Justice Department quietly dismissed the case in return for Sears' making 
only a written admission that some of its employees had not complied with the 
Customs Service's interpretation of what a company had to do when importing 
goods into the United States. 
After 10 years, hundreds of hours of arguments and thousands of pages of legal 
briefs, the case ended "with a whimper, not with a bang," as one former 
prosecutor put it. 
That scenario seemed unlikely when the highly publicized charges were first 
lodged against Sears on Feb. 26, 1980. 
But Sears chose to fight. 
Other companies of its mammoth size and prestige might have quickly settled and 
launched advertising campaigns to stress a positive corporate image, but Sears 
counterattacked. 
Stephen D. Miller, the company's Los Angeles-based defense lawyer, asserted 
that the Customs Service "actively misled" Sears into following importing 
practices that led to the indictment. 
He further contended that Customs officials had for years quietly approved 
purchasing practices that both American and Japanese firms were using to skirt 
unwieldly Japanese trade laws. 
Thus began a legal war that included charges of prosecutorial misconduct, the 
dismissal of the indictment four times by two federal judges and the 
restoration of charges four times by a federal appeals court. 
The Sears saga also featured an unseemly clash between Manuel L. Real, the 
chief judge of the U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, and some of his judicial 
brethren on the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, who ordered him to give up 
the case to another federal judge to preserve "the appearance of justice." 
Despite all the sound and fury, United States vs. Sears never got to trial. 
Both sides informally agreed not to discuss the details of the case, but a 
review of thousands of pages of affidavits, briefs, motions and transcripts 
show that although the government won several legal skirmishes, it probably 
lost the war because of tactics early on by an overzealous prosecutor. 
That prosecutor's name was Paul G. Gorman. 
At the time, Gorman was a young Justice Department lawyer working in Washington 
who was sent to Los Angeles with the important task of taking the Sears case 
before a federal grand jury. But Gorman's actions inside the grand jury 
hearings would haunt the Justice Department for years. 
Prosecutors routinely are given broad latitude in how they conduct grand jury 
proceedings and how they introduce evidence and question witnesses. 
But Sears' lawyers alleged that Gorman went much too far. They accused him of 
engaging in prosecutorial misconduct by being excessively hostile when 
questioning Sears' employees, keeping from the grand jury information that was 
favorable to Sears, expressing his personal views on the evidence, and 
permitting a key witness to make inflammatory statements that were prejudicial 
to Sears. 
One witness that Gorman vigorously questioned was Jerome F. Brennan, who was 
Sears' senior buyer of televisions from 1967 to 1974. 
Under questioning by Gorman, Brennan made what the government considered a key 
admission: Sears officials told Customs agents that they had paid more to 
Japanese suppliers than they really had because they had received rebates. 
However, Brennan also insisted that Sears "didn't think we were doing anything 
wrong." 
But in an affidavit given last June, Brennan said that he had met with Gorman 
prior to appearing before the grand jury and that "it quickly became apparent" 
to him that Gorman was "not interested in learning my honest thoughts and 
perceptions concerning the matters under investigation or hearing my testimony 
in my own words." 
Court records also show that Gorman misquoted statements Brennan made to him in 
an interview outside the grand jury room and then presented the inaccurate 
statements to the grand jury and pressed Brennan to confirm them. 
Another witness whose testimony later tainted the prosecution's case was John 
J. Nevin, the chairman of Zenith Radio Corp., one of Sears' major competitors. 
Nevin testified before the grand jury at great length about the devastating 
effects that Japanese industry had had on the American economy. 
Several judges would later question the relevance of Nevin's testimony. At the 
time, Zenith was a plaintiff in a major antitrust case pending in Philadelphia 
against a number of importers and exporters of Japanese televisions, including 
Sears. 
Herbert Hoffman, a Justice Department lawyer who took over the case from Gorman 
in 1981 and was the lead prosecutor for four years, said in a recent interview 
that it was "definitely wrong" for Gorman to have brought Nevin before the 
grand jury. 
"I never would have called him," Hoffman said, but stressed that there were 
several other witnesses who gave more relevant testimony. 
Soon after the indictment was filed, Sears' attorney Miller argued that the 
case should have been dismissed on the grounds of prosecutorial misconduct. But 
U.S. District Judge Robert J. Kelleher, the first jurist to preside over the 
case, denied the motion and the appeals court upheld him. 
From that point on, the Sears case took a tortuous path. 
It was transferred to Real, who in the fall of 1981 dismissed the indictment. 
He agreed with Sears that Gorman had engaged in several types of prosecutorial 
misconduct. The prosecutor, Real wrote, commanded Sears employees to answer 
"yes" or "no" to complex, unintelligible or argumentative questions that were 
peppered with sarcasm. 
"Blind zeal in the prosecution of any criminal defendant . . . cannot be 
tolerated in an ordered society," Real wrote. 
He characterized much of Nevin's testimony as "irrelevant ramblings" that had 
no place in a grand jury proceeding. 
Chief Assistant California Atty. Gen. Andrea Ordin, who was the U.S. attorney 
in Los Angeles at the time, acknowledged that neither her office nor the 
Justice Department in Washington adequately supervised Gorman. 
"He did make mistakes," said Ordin, but added that prosecutors should have been 
allowed to go to trial. 
The 9th Circuit agreed. Two years after Real first dismissed the charges, a 
three-judge appeals court panel reinstated the indictment. The judges said that 
Gorman's "behavior before the grand jury was, at times, abusive" but ruled that 
the misconduct was not serious enough to have tainted the grand jury's 
deliberations. 
In the meantime, other prosecutors took over the case but the impact of 
Gorman's conduct lingered. 
In 1984, Real dismissed the indictment a second time, saying that he had 
discretionary, supervisory power to do so. Again, the appeals court reversed 
him. 
Four years had passed and still there had been no trial. 
A frustrated Justice Department convened another grand jury, and again Sears 
was indicted. 
Real weighed in a third time, dismissing the case on grounds that the statute 
of limitations on when the alleged crimes occurred had run out. 
"I think this is one of the most egregious cases I have ever known about in my 
career as a lawyer," wrote Real, who served as U.S. attorney in Los Angeles 
from 1964 to 1966. "I think if I had been the U.S. attorney (at the time of the 
original indictment) I would have fired him (Gorman) on the spot." 
Gorman declined to comment on the case when reached by telephone at his Toledo, 
Ohio, residence. 
The Sears case was not the last time allegations of misconduct were raised 
about Gorman. In 1985, while working as a federal prosecutor in Ohio, he was 
convicted of criminal misconduct in a case unrelated to Sears. The misconduct 
included accepting an illegal gratuity. Gorman was sentenced to a year and a 
day in federal prison. 
Despite Real's belief that the Sears case had been poisoned from the beginning, 
the government pressed on. "I always thought it was a good case," said former 
prosecutor Hoffman, now a San Diego Superior Court judge. "I think it became a 
matter of principle." 
In March of 1986, prosecutors secured a third reversal of Real from the 9th 
Circuit. This time, the appeals court not only reinstated the indictment but, 
in a rare move, ordered Real off the case. The appellate court said it had the 
right to remove judges in the interest of "the appearance of justice," but 
stressed that their decision "does not imply any personal grievance against the 
judge." 
Nonetheless, some court observers said the Sears case came to be dominated by a 
clash of wills between Real and the appellate judges. 
"I think this was a really exaggerated case where the appeals court thought the 
trial judge was out of control and he thought they didn't understand what was 
going on in the case," said Jeffrey S. Brand, a University of San Francisco law 
professor, who publishes a journal on federal courts and characterized the case 
as "judicial Ping-Pong." 
Real appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, but the justices rejected the request. 
In July of 1987, an angry Real surrendered the case and it was reassigned to 
Judge A. Andrew Hauk. 
In 1988, Hauk dismissed the indictment a fourth time, saying that Sears' right 
to a speedy trial had been violated. But the appeals court disagreed and 
reinstated the indictment. 
With that ruling, it appeared that the Sears case would finally go to trial, 
even though some events that led to the indictment had occurred 21 years 
earlier. 
By now, Brennan -- the former Sears purchasing official and a potential key 
witness -- was in ill health and was excused from testifying. Sears then won a 
ruling from Hauk that Brennan's decade-old grand jury testimony would be 
excluded from the trial, and the judge told prosecutors that their case was now 
"bereft" of key evidence. 
At that point, both sides decided it was time to call it quits and reached a 
settlement. 
On Sept. 20, Sears admitted in a court document presented to Hauk that some of 
its employees "though acting in good faith, acted unwisely" in not fully 
complying with Customs Service interpretations of the agency's rules. The 
corporation said that it had long ago changed its importing procedures. 
"Sears recognizes its obligation to set the highest standards of business 
conduct in its dealing with government agencies and its customers," the 
document said. "Sears will continue to maintain these same high goals in its 
future relations with government and its customers." 
The judge said Sears' statement was not an admission of guilt but "sort of an 
admission that the government wasn't on an absolutely wild goose chase." 
Judge Real said in a recent interview that he was pleased by how the case 
ended. 
"I'm vindicated," he declared. "The case should never have gone past the first 
appeal." 
UCLA law professor Peter Arenella, a criminal law expert, questioned the wisdom 
of the Justice Department's decade-long pursuit of Sears. 
"The government got nothing (for its years of effort in the case)," Arenella 
said. "For all this time, energy and expenditure of resources, the government 
gets a statement from Sears that Sears could run in a television commercial." 
