COLUMN RIGHT; 
HER VIRTUE WAS THATCHER'S DOWNFALL; 
BY SACKING HER, THE TORIES HAVE FOLLOWED THE REST OF BRITAIN, PREFERRING 
MEDIOCRITY TO EXCELLENCE. 
When the Athenians sent Themistocles into exile in 470 BC, they conveniently 
forgot everything he had done for them. It was he who had created the Athenian 
navy, held the Persians at Artemisium and finally defeated them at Salamis. It 
was he who had fortified Athens and made it the most prosperous city of the 
Aegean. His work was continued by Pericles, (without whose energy and public 
spirit the democratic traditions of Athens would certainly have been 
destroyed). But Pericles also was driven from office, tried on trumped-up 
charges and threatened with exile. 
Democracies have a natural tendency to turn against their saviors. It happened 
to Winston Churchill. It happened to Charles de Gaulle, and now it has happened 
to Margaret Thatcher. It was not the faults of those great leaders that caused 
their downfall but their virtues. Thatcher, like Themistocles, has been 
overthrown by the resentment of her inferiors. For in a democracy, inferior 
people have power. 
When she took office in 1979, it looked as though Britain was in a state of 
terminal decline. The trade unions, with power to bring down the elected 
government, were busy accumulating privileges for their largely idle 
membership. The country had no foreign policy to speak of, had irresolutely 
entered the European Community without any conception of the political cost and 
could no longer be relied upon to defend itself. Socialist mandarins reigned in 
the civil service, in the schools and in the universities, while more than half 
the gross national product was absorbed in public expenditure. Industry was 
crippled by strikes, and whole sections of the economy, run by central 
government, were protected from competition and maintained in a state of 
bankruptcy. 
When it came to communism, our leaders either maintained an embarrassed silence 
or made craven offers of friendship. For the Labor Party, the Soviet Union was 
a "socialist" state that had slightly deviated from its good intentions while 
remaining a friend of the working class. The threat to peace came from our 
habit of defending ourselves, in the face of which the poor Soviets could only 
reply in kind. 
In short, Britain was ready to surrender all that it stood for: its pride, its 
enterprise, its ideals of freedom and citizenship, even its national defense. 
The country wallowed in collective guilt feelings, reinforced by the dependency 
culture of the welfare state. 
Thatcher changed all that. She compelled the British people to recognize that 
the individual's life is his own and the responsibility of living it cannot be 
borne by anyone else, still less by the state. She released the talent and 
enterprise that, notwithstanding decades of egalitarian claptrap, still exist 
in British society. She broke the power of the unions, exposing such men as 
Arthur Scargill, leader of the mine workers, for the Stalinists they are. She 
restored our national pride and sense of sovereignty, first by resisting the 
Argentine invasion of the Falklands, second by countering the Soviet threat and 
exposing the peace movement as a part of it, and third by defying the ambitions 
of the Eurocrats. She began to reform the education system, opposing the 
socialist apparatchiks who control it and holding up their "progressive" 
curriculum to scorn. She even took on the welfare state itself, trying to 
persuade people that their lives could be better, freer and simpler without 
this great cancer on the national economy, which benefits nobody so much as 
those appointed to control it. 
Those achievements led to her downfall. Anyone who threatens the dependency 
culture in Britain threatens the Establishment: the media, the universities, 
the schools, the welfare services, the vast heap of redundant civil servants. 
The chattering classes rose up in alarm, recognizing that Thatcher's triumph 
would be their destruction. Nobody was more disturbed than my university 
colleagues: For decades they have enjoyed financial security with no real 
obligations. They are natural believers in the state that nourishes them, and 
natural socialists when it comes -- as occasionally happens -- to exercising 
their minds. Acting together with their friends in the media, such people have 
created the myth of Thatcher as an "uncaring" and bossy woman, armed with 
Victorian values and a handbag. In fact she threatens nobody but the parasites. 
But the relentless campaign of denigration has at last paid off. The Tories, in 
a fit of nerves, have followed the rest of the nation in preferring mediocrity 
to excellence. And, like the Athenians, they are sure to regret it. 
