REPORT IS BLOW TO OIL LEASES OFF CALIF. COAST 
A National Academy of Sciences panel has concluded that the Interior Department 
lacks sufficient information to proceed with projected oil drilling leases in 
two sites off the California coast, according to a report to be made public 
today. 
Its finding that knowledge about the consequences of oil exploration there is 
"inadequate and unreliable" marks a major blow to Administration hopes to set 
policy for the controversial sites by the end of the year. 
The report by the prestigious National Research Council could result in further 
postponements of leasing steps already delayed by a recent congressional 
moratorium barring lease sales until next Oct. 1. 
The report, commissioned by the White House, found that the government had not 
gathered enough information about either Southern California oceanography or 
the effects of drilling on the region's social and economic life to go forward 
with a leasing decision. 
It similarly faulted the Interior Department for failing to take into account 
the socioeconomic consequences of an oil lease off Northern California. 
The finding comes just two months before a Cabinet-level task force is due to 
recommend to President Bush whether drilling in the two California sites and in 
a separate Florida tract should proceed. 
The report, made available by an Administration source, is to be presented to 
the panel at a public meeting today. Interior Department officials expressed 
disappointment with its findings. They acknowledged that it could weaken the 
impact of the task force report severely. The report had been expected to 
recommend drilling in at least some sites. 
In the aftermath of the research council criticisms, the scheduled 
Administration policy recommendation almost certainly will have to be 
accompanied by the caveat that more research is needed, representatives from 
both sides of the issue agreed. 
The need for further study could delay leasing steps beyond the dates set by 
the moratorium, which prohibits even prelease activity in Southern California's 
Lease Sale 95 until June 1. No actual lease sale in that tract or Northern 
California's Lease Sale 91 tract could take place until at least next Oct. 1 
under the congressionally imposed restriction. 
Robert Kallman, executive director of the task force, said through a spokesman 
that the findings of the research council will be "incorporated in our final 
report to the President." He did not elaborate. 
Opponents of offshore drilling hailed the report as a bold action that raises 
questions not only about the three lease sales in question, but about the 
entire process that sets aside parts of the nation's outer continental shelf 
for oil exploration. 
"It's a very damning report," said Andy Palmer, a spokesman for the American 
Oceans Campaign. "I think it calls into question the whole viability of the 
offshore leasing program." 
"It basically confirms what environmentalists have been saying for years," said 
Ann Nothoff, a senior project planner for the Natural Resoures Defense Council. 
"We've gone ahead making these decisions (about offshore drilling) without 
having adequate information." 
The NAS Research Council concluded that, for all lease sale areas, the 
available scientific information about potential environmental impacts does not 
provide a sufficient basis for the government to decide whether to proceed with 
oil drilling. 
In addition, it found some of the available information so flawed as to provide 
inadequate grounding even for a decision to proceed with leasing, an earlier 
and less drastic step in the oil exploration process. 
The council raised the most questions about the adequacy of data available for 
the proposed Lease Sale 116 off the Gulf Coast of Florida, where it said the 
Interior Department had inadequate information about ecological and social 
consequences of drilling and only marginal data about oceanographic 
characteristics. 
"Physical oceanographic information is sufficient to predict that any oil spill 
in the sale area would probably soon hit the coast," the report said. 
For Southern California, the council found information about the ecological 
consequences of drilling to be adequate for an informed decision on leasing. 
But it strongly criticized as inadequate and unreliable the available data 
about the physical oceanography of the lease sale area, where it said the flows 
of currents that could bring spilled oil ashore are not sufficiently 
understood. And it said that it is doubtful whether the Interior Department has 
adequately considered information about the socioeconomic consequences of 
drilling. 
The proposed Lease Sale 91 off Northern California received less criticism from 
the council, which decided that both ecological and oceanographic data for the 
region provide adequate grounds for a leasing decision. 
But the council said that socioeconomic matters -- such as estimates of beach 
attendance and the degree to which it would be influenced by the presence of 
oil derricks -- were treated "more generally, abstractly and incompletely" than 
other factors. 
On another score, however, the research council offered a stamp of approval to 
the leasing process. It concluded that the government has available adequate 
data to estimate the amount of hydrocarbon reserves likely to lie beneath the 
ocean floor in the proposed lease areas. 
Staff writer Larry Stammer in Los Angeles contributed to this story. 
