ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COSTA MESA; 
3 PLEAD GUILTY IN HIRING-FEE SCAM 
A former executive of Digital Equipment Corp. and two others pleaded guilty 
Tuesday to siphoning nearly $300,000 from the computer company and agreed to 
repay the money in lieu of a prison term, Costa Mesa police said. 
The executive, Steven William Hunt, 43, of Arcadia, and his accomplices, John 
Francis Mazarella, 54, of Mission Viejo, and Danielle Ann Marie, 42, of Laguna 
Niguel, were each sentenced to eight years in prison and three years' 
probation. They each pleaded guilty to 12 counts of felony grand theft and 
fraud. The prison sentences, handed down in a Harbor Division courtroom, will 
be delayed pending repayment of the embezzled funds, Costa Mesa Police 
Detective Steven R. Labbitt said. 
The three were arrested in June after a clerical error revealed that Hunt was 
falsely steering referral fees to Mazarella and Marie, who had set up bogus 
executive employment agencies. 
Under the scheme, Hunt scanned applications from newly hired employees in 
high-paying, high-tech positions, Labbitt said. Hunt separated those who had 
been referred to Digital Equipment Corp. by legitimate executive search firms 
from those who responded to newspaper advertisements or applied on 
recommendations from other workers, Labbitt said. 
Hunt forwarded information detailing annual salaries and positions of those 
employees not referred by head-hunting agencies to Mazarella and Marie, Labbitt 
said. Mazarella, an independent consultant hired to screen employees for 
Digital Equipment, and Marie, who was not connected to the company, set up a 
phony employment agency and used the information supplied by Hunt to bill 
Digital. 
"Hunt would receive the invoice and authorize its payment, and it would then go 
to the finance department," Labbitt said after the arrest. "They would see his 
authorization for payment and, because it was his responsibility for processing 
the invoices, they would cut a check and send it out to any one of the four 
fictitious businesses (the suspects) had set up." 
Each invoice typically requested 15% of the new employee's annual salary, which 
ranged from $50,000 to $80,000, Labbitt said. The suspects allegedly collected 
fees totaling nearly $300,000 between 1986 and 1989 by claiming that they had 
referred 30 new employees to Digital. 
The amount of restitution to the company will be determined at a hearing next 
month, Labbitt said. TONY MARCANO 
