HOWARD ROSENBERG: ABC TAKES STRIDES WITH 'RED, HOT' -- AND BOLD -- SPECIAL; 
TELEVISION: THE NETWORK GAMBLES WITH A STRAIGHT-TALKING MUSIC-VIDEO SPECIAL ON 
AIDS AWARENESS FEATURING COLE PORTER TUNES. 
Use your mentality 
 Wake up to reality 
 -- From "I've Got You Under My Skin"by Cole Porter 
The actor facing the camera is Richard Gere, and can he really be saying what 
he is saying on network television? 
"Now here's the most important thing you need to know. If you have sex, wear a 
condom. If you're stupid enough to shoot drugs, for God's sake don't ever share 
the needle." 
Red, hot and bold -- that's what "Red, Hot and Blue" is by United States TV 
standards. It's a stride forward for which ABC should be applauded. No other 
U.S. network would gamble on it, according to its originators, New York lawyer 
and art critic John Carlin and London filmmaker Leigh Blake. 
A 90-minute music-video special, "Red, Hot and Blue" airs at 11:30 p.m. 
Saturday (which is World AIDS Day) on Channels 7, 3, 10 and 42. 
World AIDS Day is also being recognized elsewhere on TV, including cable's 
Bravo, whose telethon "Unfinished Stories II: Artists and AIDS" airs from 2 
p.m. Saturday to 3 a.m. Sunday, and again from 2 p.m. Sunday to 3 a.m. Monday. 
The event features celebrities galore and, at 5 p.m. Saturday, a 60-second spot 
titled "A Moment Without Television," during which viewers will be asked to 
reflect on the AIDS epidemic. The spot is also being carried on numerous other 
cable systems. 
Then at 8:30 p.m. Saturday, CBS is broadcasting an episode of "The Hogan 
Family" in which David Hogan learns that a close friend has AIDS. Curiously, 
David never asks how his friend got AIDS, but he does give some valuable advice 
to a high school assembly at the end of the episode: "If you're gonna do it, 
use a latex condom." 
Not part of this mix, unfortunately, is the excellent AIDS-related episode of 
NBC's "Lifestories" that was to have been shown Sunday night, only to be yanked 
by the network for reasons that remain ambiguous at best. NBC should run this 
episode as soon as possible, for it's arguably the most honest and educational 
AIDS story ever produced for American TV. 
And that returns us to "Red, Hot and Blue." 
While going much further than most in addressing the causes of AIDS with a 
bracing candor deserving of cheers, "Red, Hot and Blue" is still entertainment 
foreplay compared with a much better and blunter British version to be shown in 
Europe. 
The differences in the two programs spotlight a wide attitudinal gap separating 
British TV and American TV on this issue. The latter is still hesitant to fully 
confront the AIDS crisis and its sexual reverberations, apparently for fear of 
alienating some viewers. When it comes to AIDS, American TV for the most part 
still wears a Victorian corset. 
"You can say much more and be more experimental on British TV than you can on 
U.S. TV," Blake said, "because generally in Europe, one is allowed to have more 
of a political view. It's also because we are used to thinking for ourselves 
much more than being told what to think." 
Both "Red, Hot and Blue" programs utilize the music of the great American 
composer Cole Porter, with top rock and pop performers having donated their 
services, along with prominent directors, to make video adaptations of classic 
Porter tunes whose romantic lyrics assume an eerie and powerful relevance in 
the context of today's AIDS epidemic. 
And both programs will benefit AIDS by drawing attention not only to the 
epidemic itself but also to a companion album and video whose proceeds will go 
to AIDS charities. 
The major differences are tone and focus. 
The British program is essentially a testament to the urgency of the AIDS 
crisis, supported by Porter music. 
The U.S. program is essentially a testament to Porter, with AIDS in the 
background. 
"I would definitely say this is an entertainment special designed to celebrate 
Cole Porter through musicians of today," said Malcolm Leo, the producer 
assigned by ABC to assemble videos supplied by Carlin and Blake into a 
late-night program for its U.S. audience. The AIDS message was secondary, he 
said. "The problem was finding the right balance so that the show wasn't a 
polemic." 
The results are mixed. Ranging from Jody Watley's romantic rendition of "After 
You, Who?" to k. d. lang's melancholy "So in Love" to Neneh Cherry's driving, 
liberty-taking version of "I've Got You Under My Skin," some of the videos are 
striking as well as provocative. 
Erasure's rousing "Too Darn Hot," for example, at times superimposes printed 
AIDS statistics and other messages on news footage of AIDS activists clashing 
with police. And the last of the 12 videos -- Annie Lennox singing "Ev'ry Time 
We Say Goodby" -- is either an aching reminder of those lost to AIDS or simply 
a torchy lament, depending on your perspective. 
And perspective is just the problem. 
Typical of American TV, the ABC program uses stars -- Carrie Fisher, Kyle 
MacLachlan and Whoopi Goldberg in addition to Gere -- to introduce the videos. 
The British one doesn't. 
"We really wanted this to be very modern and different, where you just go from 
film to film," said Carlin. "We felt people didn't really need to have their 
hands held, but the network felt the people would have been very confused." 
It's the presentation that's sometimes confused. With the exception of Gere, 
and Goldberg on one occasion, these stars emphasize Porter, not AIDS, in their 
introductions (MacLachlan actually sits at the piano and briefly plays). And 
this, combined with extensive use of archival footage of Porter, blurs the 
focus on AIDS to the point that the impact of the videos themselves is somewhat 
diminished. 
The archival material is charming and would be grand on just about any show. 
Except this one. 
Partly because this material is included, and partly because the U.S. version 
is 12 minutes shorter due to having more commercials, ABC's "Red, Hot and Blue" 
contains six fewer videos than the program being aired on Britain's Channel 4 
(and also getting weekend screenings at the Museum of Modern Art in New York). 
Two of the missing videos are among the most interesting and provocative: In 
the Jungle Brothers rendition of "I Get a Kick," a huge condom is stretched 
across a face, and in Jimmy Sommerville's interpretation of "From This Moment 
On," men romantically embrace. 
"I would have preferred those be in, but ABC wanted more marque names," Blake 
said. "Actually, it was the Erasure piece that we never expected to get on the 
network because it expresses a lot of real issues that pertain to the epidemic. 
But Launa Newman Vincent (director of variety and late-night development at 
ABC) insisted that it go in." 
Yet the video appears in the ABC program minus some of the toughest printed 
statements that appear in the British version, such as: "The U.S. spends more 
in one hour on defense than in one year on health care." That was dropped 
because "it couldn't be documented," an ABC spokeswoman said. 
In many other respects, the British program is simply more informational and 
much more of a health-awareness program, while also containing provocative 
statements from some of the rock artists who don't appear in the ABC program. 
David Byrne: "Sex is not only safer with a plastic condom, it's my . . . 
opinion that it feels better also." 
ABC was "shocked when they first got some of the material we produced, because 
some of these videos are more downbeat than what we would ever see on the 
network," Carlin said. "But after their initial shock, they slowly came 
around." 
Although Carlin and Blake say they had strong differences with supervising 
producer Leo, both laud Vincent and Michael Brockman, ABC's president of 
daytime, children's and late-night entertainment, for "pulling this program 
through." 
"We hung in there, and the network really turned out to be all right," Carlin 
said. Using its mentality, waking up to reality. 
