TURKEY A L'ORANGE; 
HERE ARE SOME CHOICE CUTS: FROM OPERA'S BAIT, SWITCH TO DEADHEAD TRAFFIC JAMS 
Well, unlike last year, we didn't hear any Orange County city officials 
decrying Shakespeare as "too high-brow" for the citizenry. But that doesn't 
mean that 1989 hasn't supplied plenty of material for the annual Turkey Awards, 
which we hand out for the lapses in taste, bad calls and downright 
air-headedness that too often have made us want to reach for the ax. 
So with a drum(stick) roll -- let the Turkeys begin! 
First and foremost to local arts groups that try to sell tickets based on hype, 
rather than performance. Here's a sample from one of the ads touting New York 
City Opera's appearance earlier this year at the Orange County Performing Arts 
Center: "Treachery and murder. Mystery and magic. Passion and love. Delightful 
tales and sinister plots abound. . . . This magnificent week of soaring music, 
masterful song and opulent settings is destined to be one of the most exciting 
and memorable events of 1989!" I'm sure it was, though I really can't remember 
. . . 
An award to organizations that sell one thing, then deliver another -- the arts 
world version of bait and switch. Opera Pacific was a prime example. When 
tickets were put on sale last February for its 1989-90 production of Puccini's 
"Turandot," only the name of tenor Lando Bartolini was in the ads, leading any 
reasonable person to assume that if you bought a ticket, you'd be hearing 
Bartolini in the lead role as Calaf. But just last week, the company slipped 
out a press release announcing that in three of the six performances, Calaf 
will be sung by one Giorgio Tieppo, who is an unknown even to opera experts, 
much less to the average opera-goer. Worse, the release referred to Tieppo's 
"New York Metropolitan debut," implying an association with the Metropolitan 
Opera in New York (whose officials had never heard of Tieppo) instead of 
calling it his "New York metropolitan-area debut" -- at Long Island University, 
which, come to think of it, isn't technically the New York metropolitan area, 
either. The release was unequivocally misleading, if not deceitful. In 
response, Opera Pacific general director David DiChiera explained that he had 
"always intended on double-casting" the role. Too bad he hadn't "always" let 
ticket-buyers in on the secret. 
To numerous local rock clubs that continue to enforce the abominable "pay to 
play" policy, in which struggling bands buy a predetermined number of tickets, 
or fork out cash outright for the privilege of getting exposure. 
To the producers of "Elvis: A Musical Celebration," not so much a "celebration" 
as a theatrical grave-robbing of the late King of Rock 'n' Roll's legacy. If 
Elvis were alive and saw this show, which played the Center in March, he might 
wish he were dead. 
To Cypress College administrators who deleted a photo of an artwork by Rafael 
Serrano at the last minute from a flyer announcing the show because it used 
phallic symbols as part of its anti-war imagery. 
To the Deadheads who show up for Grateful Dead concerts at Irvine Meadows 
Amphitheatre without tickets and clog traffic, parking lots and surrounding 
strawberry fields, seemingly forever. Another helping to city officials who 
think the answer is banning the band, instead of the offending ticket-less 
fans, from Irvine Meadows in the future. 
To Music Plus, the first major Southland record chain to drop vinyl LPs 
completely from its stores. It, and others who have followed in treating vinyl 
as malaria of the music world, cite declining demand and consumer preference 
for CDs (which just happen to give record companies about double the profit 
margin). Of course sales of vinyl are dwindling -- you can't buy what you can't 
find. 
To security guards at South Coast Plaza, who snapped into action and hustled 
out a couple of trouble-making . . . artists. It seems a couple of local women 
who like to paint Orange County scenes one day a week decided to while away one 
rainy day making sketches of the mall's indoor carousel. Little did they know 
they hadn't applied for the proper papers, so they were told, politely but 
firmly, they would have to stop. This in Costa Mesa, the self-proclaimed "City 
of the Arts." Boy, lucky for the artists they weren't actually doing something 
illegal within city limits -- like standing on a street corner seeking gainful 
employment. 
To magician David Copperfield for his lascivious stage manner in shows at the 
Performing Arts Center, where he'll return in January. His bump-and-grind form 
of entertainment smacks more of Harbor Boulevard "tricks" than magic from the 
time-honored Houdini school. 
To the Laguna Beach City Council for declaring that a beer permit for Club 
Postnuclear would constitute a public danger, unlike all the other 
establishments in the area that do have liquor licenses. 
To Cal State Fullerton students and Associated Students officers, for the 
recent campus flap over the appearance of Morton Downey Jr. A turkey to the 
students who named Downey as their No. 1 choice in a survey of potential guest 
speakers, and stale stuffing to the Associate Students for following up this 
bone-headed choice by spending $5,000 collected in student fees to pay Mr. Big 
Mouth. The payoff? Only 150 students (of 25,065 enrolled this semester) bought 
tickets. Bravo to the good taste exhibited by the remaining 24,915. 
To the Beach Boys, for their by-the-numbers performance (yet again) at the 
Pacific Amphitheatre in May. Maybe they should call the producers of "Elvis" 
and commission a stiff musical in which they would star as themselves, paying 
homage to how wonderful they once were. Oh, wait -- they already do that. 
To poet and author Donald Britton for his pretentious series of articles 
entitled "The Dark Side of Disneyland." Writing in Art Issues magazine last 
summer, he described the Happiest Place on Earth as "less an amusement park 
than a moving elegy for dead children," stopping just short of dubbing it "The 
Tragic Kingdom." Don -- get a life. 
To the Orange County Performing Arts Center's tired batch of road shows that, 
with one notable exception (see below), masqueraded as the best of current 
musical-theater: "Anything Goes," "Fiddler on the Roof," "Cats" (for the third 
time) . . . May we expect singing waiters and chicken-fried steak dinners 
before show time in the near future? 
To the Orange County Board of Supervisors for for contributing precisely zilch 
to the arts in recent years. Now they have a new plan starting in 1990 to 
support art -- at the John Wayne Airport. Maybe this is for all our 
fly-by-night art lovers? 
To actor-turned-would-be-rock-star Dennis Quaid for thinking even for a 
millisecond that he could emulate Jerry Lee Lewis in a suffocatingly bland show 
at Club Postnuclear in Laguna Beach last March. There's more to rock 'n' roll 
greatness than a wicked smile and the ability to pound a piano. A modicum of 
talent please, maestro? 
To the Pacific Symphony for keeping ticket holders waiting for more than two 
months while they dawdled around deciding what to play on a concert program 
after canceling Verdi's Requiem. Again, the concert-goer gets the message: 
"We've got your money, we'll give what we decide to give, if and when we decide 
to give it." 
To any and all others who treat Orange County audiences with disdain, as 
credit-card numbers instead of culture-hungry denizens deserving of respect. 
Well, now that the turkeys have been thoroughly carved up, it's only fair to 
offer Thanksgiving Day toasts to those who have made our lives a little tastier 
and culturally satisfying this year: 
To the San Francisco Ballet, whose October engagement at the Performing Arts 
Center featured some refreshingly bold works of cutting-edge choreographer 
William Forsythe. All that classical ballet is swell, but it's also nice to 
look forward now and then. Ditto for the appearance of the Lewitzky Dance 
Company for introducing some modern dance on the sacred Segerstrom stage in 
October, courtesy of the Master Chorale of Orange County. 
To the Celebrity Theatre's bold bookings of everything from rap and comedy to 
country and punk. If only we had a 1,000-seater run by people with similar 
sense of adventure and open-mindedness. Next best thing: any 1,000-seat pop 
music venue. 
To the Imagination Celebration, for managing to get blues musicians John Cephas 
and Phil Wiggins into the Performing Arts Center as part of the annual arts 
program for children. But a Bronx cheer to whoever wrote the impenetrable, 
overly intellectualized program. If you have to explain the blues like a 
doctoral dissertation, you jus' ain' got no kulcha. 
To the Costa Mesa City Council, which created a new agency to provide greater 
and more stable funding for artsrecognizing that the arts can not only be an 
aesthetic asset to the community, but good business, too. Imagine that. 
To the San Francisco-based Landmark Theatre Corp., which in 1989 bought the 
Port Theatre in Corona del Mar and leased the old Fox Theatre in Fullerton, 
which will now be completely refurbished. The company might be able to make 
greater profits showing "Friday the 13th, Part 39 -- Jason Takes Mylanta," but 
it prefers to cater to the smaller, under-served audience for foreign films, 
independents and other "art" films. 
To comedian Jerry Seinfeld, a regular on the Orange County comedy front, for 
showing, a la Jay Leno, that you can still get people to laugh without verbally 
or physically abusing your audience, ethnic minorities, people who are 
overweight or in any way different from the performer. Seinfeld's school of 
comedy celebrates the things we all have in common, rather than reinforcing 
those things that separate us. 
To Alternative Repertory Theatre in Santa Ana, Illusion's/New View Theatre in 
Brea (though it recently closed), Way Off Broadway Playhouse in Santa Ana for 
noble efforts, even when artistically unsuccessful, at establishing some sense 
of a storefront-theater scene in Orange County. 
To KOCE Channel 50, Orange County's public television station, which nearly 
qualified for a turkey for its heavy promotion of the popular BBC series 
"EastEnders" in a March fund-raising drive, then turned around in April and 
canceled the show because they "couldn't afford it." But they earned thanks for 
rescuing the show from oblivion with a last-minute reprieve in the form of 
corporate underwriting from the Queen Mary-Spruce Goose Entertainment Center in 
Long Beach. This followed an unprecedented flood of hundreds of letters and 
phone calls protesting the cancellation. 
To the Fullerton Museum Center for its "Document Orange County" exhibit, 
especially the entertaining segment called "Looking Forward," which presented 
local kids' notions about the face of Orange County Yet to Come. Some were 
quite dark, but you couldn't help predicting that the fourth-grade kid who 
envisioned a futuristic "Computer Mug (that) will be used for drinking coffee 
and doing work at the same time" is soon gonna be a millionaire. 
To Bogart's in Long Beach, for providing at least one relatively close outlet 
for invigorating, eclectic shows, most of which never find their way to Orange 
County, and for providing a desperately needed outlet for aspiring Orange 
County rock bands. 
To "Into the Woods" at the Performing Arts Center. This engaging Stephen 
Sondheim musical had a message, even a heart, instead of the empty visual flash 
of "Cats" and all the other Andrew Lloyd Webber tripe that is so much the rage 
in the musical theater world. 
To Nicholas Slonimsky, the beloved and seemingly immortal critic and raconteur. 
During his UC Irvine talk in January, Slonimsky always had an insight or witty 
retort aimed at keeping artistic standards high and stuffed-shirts deflated. 
To South Coast Repertory for, among other things, a lively staging of Shaw's 
"You Never Can Tell." (A separate toast to those continually amazing eyebrows 
of actor I.M. Hobson.) Also, for its endlessly imaginative Second Stage 
production of Charles Dickens' "Hard Times," in which five actors miraculously, 
and convincingly, managed to conjure up dozens of distinct characters, proving 
again that invention and imagination will always triumph over spectacle and 
special effects. 
To Neil Young for a riveting performance in August at the Pacific Amphitheatre. 
Built around a powerhouse new "Freedom" album, Young's show demonstrated again 
that the best socially conscious rock is compelling, not simply suffocatingly 
well-intentioned (are you listening, Bono?). But was it just another persona 
donned by rock's stylistic carpetbagger? Answer: when the result is this 
powerful, it doesn't matter a whit. 
To the Grove Shakespeare Festival, which is as adept outdoors (in fine summer 
performances of "Romeo and Juliet" and a particularly admirable performance by 
Charles Lanyer as "Cyrano de Bergerac") as it is indoors (in a moving 
production of Rod Serling's "Requiem for a Heavyweight"). 
To Dr. Dream Records, the tiny label in Orange that is putting dozens of local 
rock acts on tape and vinyl, providing tangible evidence of a still-exciting 
original-music scene. The company released albums by noteworthy performers 
including Imagining Yellow Suns, Eggplant, National People's Gang, Ann De 
Jarnett and the late, lamented El Grupo Sexo. 
And, lastly, to any and all who conceive of, promote and disseminate the arts 
as art first, commerce second. 
Happy Turkey Day! 
