CAL LUTHERAN DISCONTINUING INTERIM SESSION; 
COLLEGES: THE DECISION TO KILL THE ONE-MONTH TERM HAS MET WITH MIXED REACTIONS 
FROM STUDENTS AND FACULTY. 
Undergraduate students at California Lutheran University traditionally spend 
January retracing St. Paul's footsteps in the Mediterranean, dabbling in 
improvisational theater, or perhaps working as interns in local schools or 
hospitals. 
But all that's ending at the 3,000-student campus in Thousand Oaks. 
This is the last year that the private, liberal arts university is offering an 
interim session. The 20-year tradition is dying not only at Cal Lutheran but 
throughout the country. 
The one-month sessions between the fall and spring semesters were required at 
least three of a student's four undergraduate years. The decision to kill the 
interim session has met with mixed reactions from students and faculty. 
Frank Ponto, a premed junior from Camarillo, said he enjoyed interim classes in 
personal financial management and film noir and is looking forward to taking 
Japanese in January. 
"They were something different from the regular courses," Ponto said. "The 
whole goal of interim is to do something other than your major." 
But other students and some professors questioned the scholarly value of the 
interim session, and many faculty members complained that they had no time to 
prepare adequately for their spring semester classes. 
"I think interim had been abused," said Michael Arndt, drama professor and 
chairman of Cal Lutheran's faculty. 
"Students found ways of getting by without doing much work, and some classes 
were not the same quality" as courses offered during the regular semester, he 
said. 
The decision to eliminate the interim session stemmed from an accreditation 
study conducted two years ago by the Western Assn. of Schools and Colleges, 
which recommended that the university "take definite steps to reduce faculty 
workloads." 
"By dropping interim, we were able to meet this goal," said Hoda Mahmoudi, 
associate dean for institutional planning and director of interim. 
Professors currently teach nine courses a year -- four each in the fall and 
spring semesters and one in the interim -- and also are expected to do research 
and scholarly work. 
Mahmoudi said the university surveyed the faculty members and held hearings to 
get student opinions. Most professors favored the elimination of interim, and 
student opinions varied, she said. 
"Some students thought it was a wonderful experience," Mahmoudi said. "But we 
also had a number of students who said the course was too easy, or 'I'm an 
adult and I'm working and it's difficult.' " 
Started in 1970 as a move away from the quarter system and toward the system of 
other liberal arts colleges throughout the nation, the interim session offers 
dozens of classes in all major disciplines. 
In January, for instance, students can pick from more than 70 courses, some of 
which are tailored to this year's theme, "The Earth as Teacher." 
The classes, all pass-fail, range from traditional art, humanities and science 
topics to unconventional offerings such as "Crossword Construction for Profit 
and Fun," "Cinematic Jesus" and "Some Fun Things to Do with Math: Games of 
Chance, Fractals, Secret Codes." 
Also offered are trips such as "In the Footsteps of Paul: Greece &amp; Turkey," 
"Earthscape," a study of Northern European architecture, and "Tour with the 
Arts," a performance-study excursion for the university choir. 
In addition, students have the option of doing independent study projects, 
getting credit for internships, or studying -- at no extra cost, except travel 
expenses -- at one of 25 exchange colleges and universities throughout the 
nation that offer the interim session. 
Mahmoudi said the interim has offered a good opportunity for professors to 
experiment with courses -- some of which later become part of the regular 
curriculum -- and to try different teaching styles. 
But the system's advantages were outweighed by the workload, she said, and a 
traditional two-semester calendar was adopted for 1991-92. 
The decision to drop the interim classes at Cal Lutheran is apparently not 
unusual. In 1973, interim sessions were offered at 393 institutions of higher 
education throughout the nation. That had dropped to 250 by the 1989-90 
academic year, Mahmoudi said. 
Despite the end of interim at Cal Lutheran, the travel trips may continue to be 
offered, though for only three weeks, and they may be limited, she said. 
Donaldo Urioste, a Spanish professor who has led interim excursions to Mexico, 
said he "loved to take students on these trips -- it's living language." But he 
said he also favored eliminating the interim "because the workload is 
tremendous." 
Karin Nussle, a senior majoring in athletic training and physical education, 
said she thought the travel courses had no educational benefit. 
"A lot of people feel interim is a waste of time," she said. "I used it to my 
advantage." 
Unlike most students who take courses outside their disciplines, Nussle took 
athletic training courses and this January will do an independent study with a 
ski patrol in her home state of Washington. 
On the other hand, senior Gunvor Hatling, a Norwegian student who has taken two 
interim trips to her home country to study marketing and advertising, said the 
travel sessions are particularly valuable for American college students. 
"It's great for them to see the rest of the world," she said. "It's not just 
California that's the world." 
Perhaps Cal Lutheran's biggest mourner of the interim's demise is Fred Tonsing, 
a professor of religion and Greek who is leading the "Paul's Footsteps" trip in 
January. 
"I'm very sad about it for a number of reasons," Tonsing said. "It's been for 
me one of the most delightful class periods of the year because the students 
can concentrate on one class. And you have time for field trips." 
Tonsing, who in 17 years has taught courses on apocalypse and on daily life in 
the time of Jesus, said the interim schedule allowed all-day trips to such 
places as the J. Paul Getty Museum and Los Angeles County Museum of Art. 
"The other thing that was delightful was it attracted students from throughout 
the country," he said. 
Tonsing doesn't believe that eliminating interim really addresses the faculty's 
workload because it does not reduce the number of classes required to be taught 
each semester. And he disagrees with critics who contend that interim classes 
are not scholarly. 
"I regret that some professors didn't take it seriously," he said. "That 
attitude was communicated to the students, who then believed it. 
"To have fun in a class, to be intrigued by subject matter, to be excited about 
it, doesn't mean it's not scholarly." 
