ANONYMITY MAKES ELECTRONIC BOARDROOM WORK; 
MANAGEMENT: A NEW MEETING SYSTEM THAT ALLOWS EMPLOYEES TO BRAINSTORM THROUGH 
COMPUTERS IS PROVING TO BE PRODUCTIVE. 
Brainstorming and consensus-building are two goals of business meetings that go 
by the boards once a dominant personality turns a gathering into his or her own 
private sounding board. Less forceful participants -- and their ideas -- are 
likely to fade into the background, depriving the business of valuable input. 
A new and somewhat revolutionary computer network product is designed to make 
business meetings more democratic and productive. The "electronic meeting" 
system developed at the University of Arizona creates a freer and faster flow 
of ideas by enabling participants to respond electronically, simultaneously -- 
and anonymously -- on computer terminals. 
"What we have found is that when people are addressing superiors, they tend to 
qualify what they are saying, to couch it in terms that are more palatable when 
in fact what they want to say is, 'This is never going to work,"' said Jay 
Nunamaker, the University of Arizona computer science professor who directed 
the system's development. 
The anonymity of the system, which was developed with financial support from 
International Business Machines, makes such employees free to express 
themselves candidly, Nunamaker said. It allows ideas to be judged by others in 
the group on merit alone, not according to the source. 
"The problem (with conventional meetings) has always been that some ideas don't 
get discussed by people who might be intimidated. And the dominant ones can 
change the focus or expand the meeting away from its original purpose," said 
George Easton, who with his wife, Annette, runs a system that was installed 
recently at San Diego State University's business school. 
Both Eastons are SDSU assistant professors who helped develop software for the 
system at the University of Arizona as graduate students. SDSU's electronic 
meeting system recently became operational and is being made available to San 
Diego-area groups and businesses. 
The system consists of a dozen or more computer terminals arranged around a 
table and tied electronically by local area network (LAN) software. A 
facilitator helps the group set priorities and to vote -- also on an anonymous 
basis -- on which ideas are best. An overhead projector displays the topics at 
hand and the group's decisions. 
Proponents of the system say it leads to a more focused discussion and brings 
the group toward decisions more quickly than would a conventional meeting. 
Marketing of the systems, which sell for up to $120,000, has just begun but the 
organizations that have used them -- including Southern New England 
Telecommunications, the U.S. Army, Greyhound Financial Corp. and Phelps Dodge 
-- all describe it as a highly useful management tool. 
Each customer hastens to add that the systems are simply management tools and 
that they will never completely replace conventional, face-to-face meetings. 
There are settings in which verbal skills -- the ability to express oneself 
logically and persuasively -- are paramount. But the electronic systems fill 
the bill when a free flow of information and ideas is desired and when the 
decisions to be made cut across organizational lines. 
For example, Southern New England Telecommunications, a New Haven, Conn.-based 
telephone utility and holding company, used the system to arrive at a consensus 
on what kind of desktop publishing and networking software to use in five of 
the company's departments. 
A team of 10 people representing the five departments were put on the system 
and in one day "defined their software problem, set down specific goals and 
objectives and ended up with action plans that were actually carried out in 30 
days," said Ray Fletcher, general manager of information systems for the 
utility. "All that was done in one meeting day and everyone ended up happy with 
the result," Fletcher said. 
Had a traditional face-to-face meeting format been used, Fletcher said, four 
meetings would have been required for a decision and two months to carry out 
the plan. 
Fletcher believes that the electronic meeting system's imperative of planning 
meetings in terms of "problems, goals and objectives" are a key to its 
efficiency. Also, participants usually leave the meetings with their marching 
orders: hard copy "output" with written goals or decisions. 
The systems, which are being marketed both by IBM and a company called Ventana 
that is partly owned by the University of Arizona, deals head-on with the 
age-old management problem of how an idea can "take on more or less value 
according to who said it," Nunamaker said. 
The professor, who is also Ventana's board chairman, said another key to the 
system's efficiency is its "parallel processing" feature, allowing participants 
to communicate at once by typing their comments simultaneously into the system, 
rather than waiting for a turn to speak, as is the case in conventional 
meetings. 
"In a conventional one-hour meeting, if you have 15 people and everyone 
participates equally, each gets four minutes of air time. You are doing a lot 
of listening," Nunamaker said. "With this system, if you have everyone 
participating at once, you get 60 minutes of everyone's time. That's a big 
change in productivity." 
James D. Gantt, chief of the U.S. Army's management information systems 
division based in Ft. Huachuca, Ariz., said the system has proven particularly 
effective in his "highly hierarchical organization" because of the freedom it 
affords lower-ranking Army personnel to speak their minds. 
Gantt said the system has proven a big help in strategic planning and in making 
budgetary decisions because both are situations in which "you want a lot of 
give and take of ideas . . . and (to make) trade-offs among a lot of different 
people representing different viewpoints." 
Greyhound Financial Corp. of Phoenix was so pleased with its use of the 
University of Arizona's electronic meeting system that it is building its own 
special facility, said president Sam Eichenfield. The electronic meeting system 
is tailor-made to resolve sensitive issues and conflicts between departments 
with different goals, such as sales and credit departments, he said. 
Ultimately, 90% of Greyhound Financial's 160 employees will have access to the 
system. "I want to make certain that I'm really getting what people really feel 
-- not just what they think I want them to say," Eichenfield said. 
