EX-PRISONER WHO EXPOSED 'RAMBO SQUAD' GETS $40,000 
Orned (Chicken) Gabriel, a martial-arts expert whose complaints about inmate 
abuse at the El Cajon jail exposed the so-called "Rambo Squad" of deputies, has 
accepted a $40,000 settlement from the county for what he said was a severe 
beating by jail deputies nearly three years ago. 
Gabriel, 40, jailed between February and September 1988 for failing to pay 
child support, contacted reporters and the American Civil Liberties Union 
shortly after he entered jail and complained about numerous civil rights 
violations, from inmate beatings to illegal lockdowns. 
His allegations sparked investigations by the Grand Jury and the FBI, and 
eventually led Sheriff John Duffy to discipline 10 deputies, including several 
high-ranking officers, as part of what inmates called the "Rambo Squad." Duffy 
at first contended that Gabriel made up the story. 
Gabriel's lawsuit against the county alleged that deputies grabbed him from his 
jail cell in March 1988, handcuffed him, pushed his face into a wall and pulled 
him by handcuffs down several flights of stairs into solitary confinement, 
where they ran his head into a bedpost. Gabriel said that, although seven 
deputies were involved, three actually were responsible for the beating. 
"They told me they'd wipe the smile off my face, (but) I'm still smiling," 
Gabriel said Thursday. "They told me the most I could hope for was $20,000. I 
got $40,000. They told me I couldn't beat the county. I beat the county." 
Three county attorneys, all involved with the case, did not return several 
telephone calls left at their offices Thursday. Duffy also did not return 
telephone calls. 
Sheriff-elect Jim Roache, who takes office Jan. 7., said the settlement was 
good for the county. 
"We got off quite cheap, frankly," he said. "Undoubtedly, protracted litigation 
would have cost us more than $40,000. I'm sure the county felt it was more 
expeditious and less costly to settle out of court." 
Gabriel's settlement with the county Wednesday came during the third federal 
magistrate's hearing to seek a resolution before the case went to trial next 
month. County attorneys, arguing that Gabriel greatly exaggerated the extent of 
his injuries, offered him $20,000. Gabriel had asked for $70,000. 
A black-belt karate expert who once operated five martial-arts studios in the 
county, Gabriel saw the popularity of the sport diminish in the 1980s. During 
that time, Gabriel said he became heavily involved with drugs and could not 
meet about eight months of child support payments, which landed him in jail. 
Almost from the moment he entered jail, Gabriel said, he was harassed by 
deputies, who knew he was skilled in karate. Shortly after he contacted the 
ACLU, Gabriel said some of his mail was intercepted and opened. Gabriel also 
sought to contact Sagon Penn, a former student and family friend, who was twice 
tried and acquitted in the 1985 slaying of a San Diego police officer and the 
wounding of another officer and a civilian ride-along. 
Betty Wheeler, legal director for the American Civil Liberties Union who helped 
investigate Gabriel's claims, praised the settlement. 
"I think $40,000 is a substantial amount of money in many respects," she said. 
"It is one more reminder of the substantial cost government officials must pay 
when they don't comply with the Constitution and don't make sure that the civil 
liberties of inmates are protected." 
"Mr. Gabriel played a very important role in bringing to light what was 
happening in the El Cajon jail and the jail system overall," she said. "He took 
on quite a great deal of risk and was publicly held up to ridicule by Sheriff 
Duffy to make Mr. Gabriel look like a liar and a bad person when, in fact, his 
complaints were validated by the Grand Jury." 
In May, 1988, two months after Gabriel filed his claim, Duffy announced that 
Gabriel and other inmates had "deliberately contrived" their story for 
publicity. At the time, Duffy released a five-page summary of the Sheriff's 
Department's internal affairs investigation into the matter, concluding that 
deputies used no excessive force. 
Gabriel would not have been entitled to punitive damages against the deputies 
involved with the "Rambo Squad" because his former attorney did not file the 
lawsuit naming the deputies before the statute of limitations expired, George 
de la Flor, Gabriel's attorney, said. Gabriel, therefore, was limited in suing 
only the county, and, by law, could not collect punitive damages. De la Flor 
said he has filed a malpractice lawsuit against Gabriel's former lawyer. 
During previous settlement hearings, De la Flor said county attorneys 
questioned Gabriel's injuries because he had only $500 in medical bills and 
participated in karate tournaments after he left jail. De la Flor argued that 
Gabriel received free medical care. Gabriel said he was forced to enter 
tournaments to make money. 
Gabriel was reluctant to go to trial, he said, because he did not have the 
money it took to hire an orthopedic surgeon who might substantiate his injuries 
to a jury. The county already had hired its own expert, who was willing to 
testify that Gabriel was not severely hurt. 
Gabriel said he would take $30,000 of the settlement and pay $10,000 to De la 
Flor. De la Flor said he is entitled to one-third of the settlement, or 
$13,333. Both said they could work out the disagreement. 
