ON CAMPUS : ANTELOPE VALLEY COLLEGE; 
CENTER MAY LEAD TO 4-YEAR SCHOOL 
College students in the high desert appear to have an unquenchable thirst for 
education. And drinking from the fountain of knowledge promises to be easier 
with the creation of a California State University education center on the 
campus of Antelope Valley College. 
The center, consisting initially of a two-classroom relocatable building, will 
offer CSU campuses a place to hold classes and test for potential enrollment. 
Eventually, plans call for a more permanent facility at the two-year college. 
Funding is expected to come from $25,000 that Palmdale and Lancaster provided 
to the Antelope Valley Board of Trade to attract a four-year college. 
The desire to attract a four-year campus to the Antelope Valley has been 
particularly frustrating, especially when the CSU system picked Fresno as the 
next university site earlier this year. But the relocatable education center 
could accomplish proponents' objective by showing university officials that 
demand is greater than expected. 
"And what I'm hearing now is yes, they are real pleased with the kind of 
response they are getting," said Rae Yoshida, Antelope Valley College's 
president of academic affairs. "This gives them two years to decide, since 
that's the shelf life of a relocatable classroom. 
"So maybe by '92-93, Cal State could start the ball rolling to put some kind of 
mobile unit on campus that would be more permanent than the temporary 
classrooms. It just takes people with a little vision." 
The temporary classrooms are already used by Cal State Los Angeles. And Cal 
State Bakersfield and Cal State Northridge are expected to follow after 
renovation and remodeling are completed this semester. 
"We're asking CSUN to wire the relocatable unit so we can catch the signal out 
of Northridge's interactive television facilities," Yoshida said. 
Students would watch classes conducted at CSUN or at another location and ask 
instructors questions through a telephone hookup. 
And the demand for higher-education classes closer to home is expected to 
continue growing, Yoshida said. Antelope Valley College, which now has 9,800 
students, is expected to have 18,000 within 10 years. 
The state university classes are also seen as an economic development activity. 
STEVE DELANEY 
