DOG WITH DANDY NOSE FOR DRUGS; 
CRIME: GERMAN SHEPHERD IS A LEGEND AMONG NARCOTICS OFFICERS. HE'S SNIFFED OUT A 
BILLION DOLLARS WORTH OF THE STUFF. 
Twenty-one tons of cocaine is nothing to sneeze at. So, before police stormed 
the Sylmar warehouse that in September yielded the biggest drug bust in 
history, they turned to the best nose in town. 
It just happened to be dark and moist and attached to the snout of Dandy Vom 
Sargau, a graying, 9-year-old German shepherd who works nights for the Monrovia 
Police Department. 
When the dog was asked to sniff a tattered cardboard box that had been 
discovered outside the warehouse, he exploded in a snarling fury that police 
said could only mean he had detected a trace of narcotics. 
"One of the officers knew that Monrovia had a great dog," said Drug Enforcement 
Administration spokesman Ralph Lochridge. "His alert on that box was a part of 
the overall probable cause that led to the search warrant." 
While another well-trained hound probably could have also followed his nose to 
the same conclusion, those who know Dandy say that his experience and 
consistency have made him top dog in the drug-sniffing department. 
Virtually every San Gabriel Valley law enforcement agency -- even those with 
their own canine units -- have asked Dandy for help. He has also performed 
searches for the Los Angeles Police Department, Los Angeles County Sheriff's 
Department, California Highway Patrol, the Postal Service, Secret Service and 
FBI. 
"I don't think he's ever made a mistake," said Jake Jahelka of Canine K-9 
Scents Inc., whose academy in Canyon Country has provided narcotics training 
for Dandy and about 50 other dogs in police departments across the western 
United States. "His heart and intensity stand way out." 
For the 85-pound shepherd, who understands commands only in German, it is all 
just one big game. 
In his youth, Dandy was trained to search for a terry-cloth towel that officers 
would lace with the scent of cocaine, heroin or marijuana. When he found the 
towel, it was his to chew on. 
Now, when he is asked to find the real thing, the dog thinks it's another 
version of hide-the-towel, says his handler, Monrovia Police Officer Rick 
Miglia. 
In his six years of duty -- which will end in January when the dog retires -- 
Dandy has played the game at least 450 times, leading to seizures of cash and 
narcotics valued at more than $1 billion, Miglia said. The Sylmar bust alone is 
expected to earn the Monrovia department $55,000 as its cut of the drug cash 
that was seized. 
"He thinks it's fun," said Miglia, a 10-year veteran. "He doesn't know what 
coke or heroin or marijuana is. All he knows is that towel." 
Not that his training hasn't had its rigors. Dandy isn't allowed to eat 
anything other than the dry dog food Miglia feeds him, a rule that helped keep 
him under control when he was once asked to search a meat market. 
Sex is strictly prohibited, thus limiting distractions in the event that a 
female dog in heat should cross his path while on the job. 
"I'm in awe when I watch him work," said Monrovia Police Officer Scott Wiese, 
who handles Deister Vom Derbickelwiese, the department's other police dog. "It 
just freaks me out; he's so smart." 
Back in 1982, when Dandy was just a pup in his native West Germany, the Kiwanis 
Club of Monrovia launched a fund-raising drive to bring a canine patrol to 
their small city east of Los Angeles. 
A local junkyard chipped in, a restaurant held a benefit dinner, and dozens of 
five-gallon water bottles at businesses around town were filled with the spare 
change of shoppers. 
The $20,000 raised was enough to purchase Dandy and a canine partner, Arko, who 
retired a year ago after putting the bite on a rapist. 
Despite such occasional incidents, the dogs are not vicious, their handlers 
say. They merely respond to the aggressiveness of the suspect, and then only 
when given a command to attack. 
Miglia, who takes Dandy home with him every day and will get to keep him when 
the dog retires, describes Dandy as a hard-working, well-mannered animal -- 
even if he does occasionally slobber on the windshield of their patrol car. 
"The cliche is that the handler's personality goes right down the leash to the 
dog," he said. "And it's unbelievably true." 
