HOLLYWOOD LOSES A VIETNAM; 
INDIAN DUNES: TV AND MOVIE PRODUCERS MOURN THE IMPENDING NEW ROLE OF THE 
POPULAR VALENCIA SHOOTING LOCATION. 
Vietnam is leaving Valencia. 
Indian Dunes, the popular 200-acre movie and television location just north of 
Six Flags Magic Mountain, will turn from filming into farming by the end of the 
year. From stargazing to cattle grazing. From sets for "China Beach" and "Call 
to Glory" to land for barley and broccoli. 
Lisa Rawlins, director of the California Film Commission, has already fielded 
complaints from numerous production companies who had hoped to film at the site 
-- two miles west of the Golden State Freeway and east of California 126. 
Rawlins said the jungle-like overgrowth and creek tucked in the middle of brown 
desert terrain "has a great Vietnam look." 
And it has a tragic history. In 1982, actor Vic Morrow and two child actors 
were killed by a helicopter during the filming of a Vietnam War battle scene in 
the film, "Twilight Zone." 
The incident brought publicity and lawsuits -- director John Landis and four 
others were acquitted of manslaughter charges -- but didn't diminish the 
attraction to Indian Dunes. 
In recent years, Steven Spielberg's "The Color Purple" (1985), and Jack 
Nicholson's "The Two Jakes" (1990) have staged scenes at the site, and ABC's 
"China Beach" does most of its location shoots there. The TV movie and series 
"Call to Glory" used Indian Dunes from its debut in 1984 until it was canceled 
a year later. 
Larry Franco, executive producer of Disney's "Rocketeer," which wrapped up 
shooting last week as the final film to use Indian Dunes, said the site 
afforded filmmakers plentiful options. "It was a place with all kinds of 
freedom," Franco said. "You have wide open spaces, and you can easily stage 
pyro effects." 
Indian Dunes is also prized, Franco said, because nighttime scenes can be 
filmed without city lights showing in the background, plus there's a long 
landing strip. "You can be high up," he said, "and not see anything behind it. 
And you can't land a glider on a real roof in a big city." "Rocketeer," due to 
be released next year, tells the story of a World War II aviator who discovers 
a rocket pack, allowing him to fly anywhere. 
The ABC-TV drama "China Beach" began filming at Indian Dunes in 1988, its debut 
season. Rob Harland, the show's production executive, said it will miss the 
running stream that helped lend the location its Southeast Asia appearance. "It 
was hard to find that water, and it will be hard to duplicate it, especially in 
the zone," Harland said. 
The "zone" is the studio zone, the imaginary line 30 miles from Beverly and La 
Cienega, the former headquarters of the Alliance of Motion Picture and 
Television Producers, who negotiate labor contracts with the studios. Once 
outside the zone, companies have to pay union cast and crew transportation 
costs. Production executives will do everything possible to shoot their movies 
within the zone, which made Indian Dunes so attractive. 
"It's a huge factor," said Franco, who also produced "Escape From New York" in 
1979 at Indian Dunes. "If you're not in the zone, it becomes an ordeal to 
transport people to the location area. Then you have to pay for their time to 
drive to the location, and you get behind on your shooting day. Indian Dunes is 
expensive, but by being close, it far outweighs the cost of shooting there." 
Harland said companies might have to make compromises to offset the loss of 
Indian Dunes. "China Beach," for example, might be forced to shoot without the 
stream next year. 
Added Franco: "You have to ask yourself if it is worth it to shoot something 
outside the zone versus L.A." 
Lindsley Parsons Jr. may not shoot anywhere. His scheduled film, "The Day 
Before Midnight," based on a novel by Stephen Hunter, has been delayed, and may 
never start production. Parsons, the producer, spent thousands of dollars and 
more than two months searching Western states for the ideal site for his story 
about a terrorist group who seizes control of a United States missile site. In 
July, he settled on Indian Dunes. 
"I sent location scouts to almost every Western state," Parsons said, "and had 
stills sent back from all over the country. Indian Dunes worked for us. I 
photographed it from the air. I went there many times by car. I made sketches. 
It had water, brown hills, cliffs. It had a place where we could build a 
missile site." 
Already, Rawlins said, the commission has begun searching for alternative 
filming sites. She said one of them, the Polsa Rosa ranch in Acton, which has 
already been used for episodes of the daytime TV soap opera, "Santa Barbara," 
offers many of the natural advantages of Indian Dunes, such as mountains and 
greenery. But she admits that it's not another Indian Dunes. "In terms of sheer 
size for the mesas that Indian Dunes has, you can't truly match it." 
Marlee Lauffer, a spokeswoman for the Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co., which 
owns Indian Dunes, stressed that the company has 10,000 other acres in the 
Valencia area available for filming, but, according to Rawlins, "it doesn't 
have the unique appeal" of Indian Dunes. 
Until the early 1980s, mostly commercials were shot at Indian Dunes, Lauffer 
said. The television show, "Rawhide," starring Clint Eastwood, filmed at the 
location from 1959 to 1966. 
From the mid-1960s until the mid-1980s, it was primarily used as Indian Dunes 
Park, a motorcycle and off-road vehicle track. Because of insurance liability 
problems, the Newhall company decided to use the terrain only for filming. Its 
most recent decision to convert it to farming came about gradually, Lauffer 
said, as the demand for crops began to increase. 
"Our primary purpose is, and always has been, farming," said Lauffer. "We have 
a demand to increase our crops, and this is good land." 
But Harland and Franco suspect that the company plans to use the land for real 
estate development. "They're going to develop the spot immediately, believe 
me," Franco said. Lauffer admitted that the company hopes to develop other 
areas of the Newhall Ranch, but now has no plans for Indian Dunes. 
"China Beach" has a contract to use the site through the end of its fourth 
season of shooting next spring. Only "China Beach," she said, will continue to 
do filming as farming begins. 
Harland said it's too early to search for new sites. He may never need to 
start; unless ratings improve, the show might be canceled this season. Harland 
said the crew will miss Indian Dunes for emotional and practical reasons. "I'm 
sure it will be difficult for them," he said. "They became attached to the 
area. 
"And I can remember the mornings when it was colder than a well digger's toe, 
and by afternoon, you're sweating your tail off. We'll miss that variety of 
climates too." He said the show also frequently benefited from using other sets 
on the property, such as the one constructed for "Tour of Duty," which aired on 
CBS from 1987 till this year. "But everyone's always been flexible, and if the 
network wants us, we'll find a way to adjust." 
Franco worries about the effect on the film industry. 
"The first place anyone thinks of when you want to be in the zone and have a 
lot of choices is Indian Dunes," he said. "You drive right there and you have 
got everything. I don't know where the next best place will be." 
Rawlins said the full extent of the loss won't be known for months. 
"The complaints we're getting now are from people who wanted to shoot there in 
the near future," she said. "I think it will be missed a lot when people in six 
months call to ask about it and find out it can't be used anymore." 
