13 OFFICIALS TO GO ON FREE EUROPE TRIP TO STUDY TRANSIT INNOVATIONS; 
TRAVEL: TWO STATE BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS AND HOSTS IN PARIS, BERLIN AND OTHER 
CITIES WILL PICK UP THE TAB. 
Thirteen of the state's most influential transportation and environmental 
officials will leave Wednesday on an all-expense-paid, 12-day trip to Europe to 
study high-speed railroads, high-tech automobiles and highways and exotic 
alternative fuel systems. 
The trip to Paris, Berlin, Stockholm and other cities is being sponsored by two 
California business organizations that say they try to preserve a cautious 
"environmental balance" while combatting environmental extremists. 
The California Foundation on the Environment and the Economy, an offshoot of 
the California Council for Environmental and Economic Balance, will pay all 
expenses on the $4,000-a-person trip that are not picked up by European 
industrial hosts, according to foundation director Pat Mason. 
Serving as staff for the trip will be two officials of the California Institute 
for Technology Exchange, Don Camph and Yvonne Ryzak. Mason and Camph said in 
separate interviews that far from being a junket, this and other annual trips 
the foundation has sponsored in recent years have been hard-working looks, in 
Mason's words, "at how other countries have dealt with 
technological-environmental issues." 
"I wonder when I'm going to get a nap," said Mason of the forthcoming trip. 
Said Camph: "Our premise is that one of the ways public policy is formed and 
facilitated is direct exposure of policy makers to what is going on in various 
societies. . . . I'm not going to tell you we're not going to have some fun. 
But it's basically work." 
He noted that the group will fly economy class and stay in moderately priced 
hotels. 
Among those scheduled to go are three state transportation commissioners who 
have been skeptical of expenditures for rail right of way acquisitions and 
commuter rail projects, commission Chairman W. E. (Bill) Leonard and members 
Bruce Nestande and Joe Duffel. 
Nestande said, "We have a very jammed schedule. . . . We are in Berlin for less 
than a day." 
The four legislators are Republican state Sen. Becky Morgan, vice chairman of 
the Senate Transportation Committee; Republican state Sen. Bill Leonard, 
chairman of the Senate Republican Caucus; Assemblyman Jim Costa, a Democrat, 
and Democratic Assemblywoman Delaine Eastin. Costa recently sponsored 
legislation authorizing Caltrans to help privately funded rail and road 
projects with gifts of public rights of way. Easton is a member of both the 
Assembly transportation and toxic materials committees. 
Sen. Morgan said she is enthusiastic about the trip because she went with the 
same group to Indonesia and Australia in 1985, looking at oil and gas 
exploration facilities, and learned a great deal. 
"There was no effort to sell me on anything," she said of the earlier trip. 
Others going include retired Senate President Pro Tem James Mills, now chairman 
of the San Diego Metro Transit Development Board; Norton Younglove, a Riverside 
County supervisor who is chairman of the managing board of the South Coast Air 
Quality Management District; Chris Reed, a Santa Monica city councilwoman who 
is chairman of the Southern California Assn. of Governments; Henry W. Wedaa, a 
Yorba Linda city councilman who is vice chairman of AQMD; Rod Dierdon, a Santa 
Clara County supervisor who is chairman of the San Jose area's Metropolitan 
Transportation Commission, and Nello Bianco, chairman of BART, the Bay Area 
Rapid Transit system. 
Also going are two businessmen, Jack Coffey, manager of state affairs for 
Chevron, and Steve Baum, senior vice president and general counsel for San 
Diego Gas and Electric Co. 
Camph said that while in Europe the party will ride French, German and Swedish 
high-speed trains, but will not go to a German testing facility for the kind of 
magnetic levitation train proposed to run between Las Vegas and Anaheim, 
because it has been shut down for safety work. 
He said the party will meet with European experts on automatic vehicle 
navigation systems, vehicle identification technology, automatic toll 
collection and congestion pricing, a system for charging people escalated tolls 
for entering certain congested areas at certain hours. 
