ONLY BUMS WILL RUN, ONLY BUMS WILL RULE; 
THE POLITICOS: BY POISONING THE CLIMATE FOR POLITICIANS, WE'RE DRIVING OUT THE 
GOOD PEOPLE THAT TERM-LIMIT PROPONENTS HOPED TO ATTRACT. 
This has been a banner year for anti-politicians. Ralph Nader has raised huge 
sums of money with direct-mail appeals bashing Washington; Jim Wheaton, head of 
the California chapter of Common Cause, spearheaded the state's term-limitation 
drive; businessman Jack Gargan began a national movement and organization to 
throw all incumbents out. 
Some of the anti-politician talk has been cynical manipulation of the polls and 
public sentiment for partisan and individual advantage. But a great deal of it 
has been motivated by real concerns that our system is not working, that we 
need different and better people running for office and in office. Those with 
pure motives will sadly find their efforts not just futile but 
counterproductive. 
America's distaste for politicians has a rich historical tradition. But in 
years and decades past, we still reserved some considerable respect for those 
willing to devote a portion of their lives to public service. Reasonable 
people, accomplished people, good people, could still find many good reasons to 
run for elective office and to devote some time, energy and attention to public 
service. 
These days, however, the distaste for politicians has deepened, whipped up with 
intensity by anti-politicians like Nader, Wheaton and Gargan. The result is a 
soured climate in which all politicians and the field of public service 
generally have been tainted with a broad brush of venality, corruption, 
selfishness, cowardice and immorality. Add to this the web of 
conflict-of-interest regulations, the zeal of press and pundits for poking into 
private lives and the financial and family sacrifices required for many to move 
to Washington or state capitals for service in elective office. Does anybody 
really expect that the result will be a large, fresh group of our best and 
brightest jumping up to run for office in the future? 
Not many rational people of accomplishment and means are going to make 
substantial sacrifices to compete for a job in which they will immediately be 
labeled criminals or worse -- including those noble citizens who 
term-limitation proponents hope to make "citizen legislators." By poisoning the 
climate for politicians generally, anti-politicians are busily ensuring that 
our future candidates for office are more likely to be deadbeats or demagogues 
who will exploit the anti-political climate for their own ambitions, with 
little concern for the consequences of what they do in their limited terms of 
office; taking short-term advantage of policies that may have great long-term 
costs will be more, not less, tempting for them. 
The anti-politicians' burn-and-slash approach punishes politicians by limiting 
terms, capping pay, cutting pensions and destroying perks, but does nothing to 
enhance real competition in elections or to encourage top-flight political 
challengers. Their major contribution is to take away whatever limited 
incentives now exist and poison the climate even more. 
As "throw the bums out" moves from selectively separating the bums from the 
good guys and toward identifying all politicians as bums, we will come ever 
closer to a self-fulfilling prophecy -- only the bums will run, and rule. 
