TV REVIEW; 
'GLORY' A STRONG DRAMA ON SCIENTIFIC SLEUTHING 
"Glory Enough for All" is such a singularly strong television drama that you 
hesitate to report that it's about the discovery of insulin, lest heads start 
to nod. 
This Canadian-produced, true-life, medical research adventure story set in the 
1920s is a "Masterpiece Theatre" plum. The two 90-minute parts (Sunday at 9 
p.m. on Channels 28 and 15, 8 p.m. on Channels 50 and 24; concluding Nov. 12) 
will deeply touch anyone who has had to confront diabetes. More broadly, the 
production implicitly signals contemporary topics ranging from AIDS to animal 
medical research to Nobel Prize squabbling. 
The parallels are all there in material rich in period detail and, 
particularly, the irascible performance of Canadian actor R. H. Thomson. He 
stars as later-Nobel winner Dr. Frederick Banting, whom we meet as a World War 
I front-line surgeon sewing doughboys together, a "MASH"-like scene that 
establishes his gritty texture. 
Once home, this irascible, socially awkward and almost-failed doctor, dumped by 
his fiancee, pitches his bloodied tent in a primitive University of Toronto 
lab. There, in the hot summer of 1921, swatting flies and going through 91 dogs 
whose carcasses pile up, he and his young colleague (an engaging performance by 
Robert Wisen) inject an experimental extract into a dog with a diabetic 
pancreas. The moment becomes a medical milestone. 
Finally, once the insulin is purified for humans and a cure is out there, 
victims are turned down because there's not enough of it. At the same time, 
petty jealousies and politics among rival doctors who want the credit for the 
breakthrough consume an egotistical establishment. 
The bitterness and backbiting is topped off when the Nobel Prize Committee 
commits a gross miscarriage of honor. Banting wins but refuses to go to 
Stockholm to collect his prize because his Nobel co-winner and Banting's 
longtime nemesis at the University of Toronto, Dr. J.J.R McLeod (John 
Woodvine), didn't earn the honor. (Years later, in 1950, the Noble people 
rectified the mistake and awarded the co-prize for discovering insulin to 
Banting's colleague, Charles Best.) 
As "Masterpiece Theatre" host Alistair Cook cautions at the top of the show, 
"Rarely is there a single hero (in medical discoveries)." And rarely does 
medical history make such telling drama. The production was directed by Eric 
Till and written by Grahame Woods. RAY LOYND 
