HARRICK VERY FAMILIAR WITH THIS OPPONENT 
Jim Harrick begins his second season as UCLA basketball coach tonight against 
an old friend and a familiar foe, but not necessarily against a friendly foe. 
Santa Clara Coach Carroll Williams, Harrick's West Coast Athletic Conference 
nemesis when Harrick coached at Pepperdine, will provide the opposition at 
Pauley Pavilion. 
What can be expected from the Broncos, who were 20-11 last season and reached 
the final game of the WCAC tournament for the third consecutive year? 
"They just slug it out -- knock you down and put an elbow into you," Harrick 
said. "(They) walk it up the floor and pound it inside. (They're) slow and 
physical. 
"And they foul you every time down and hope (the officials) only call half of 
them." 
Williams, who enters his 20th season at Santa Clara with 305 victories, learned 
the style, Harrick said, as an assistant under former coach Dick Garibaldi. 
"That's the way they've always played," Harrick said. "They had big, strong, 
slow guys and they were just the most physical teams. The old Santa Clara-San 
Francisco games were blood baths." 
While Harrick was at Pepperdine, his teams were 12-7 against Santa Clara, but 
the Waves rarely enjoyed their visits to Santa Clara's Toso Pavilion, where 
they were 4-5. 
Santa Clara was less successful on the road -- including a 1-8 record at 
Pepperdine during Harrick's tenure -- but five years ago, the Broncos upset 
UCLA, 68-60, at Pauley Pavilion as Harold Keeling and the late Nick Vanos 
combined for 42 points. 
It is still Santa Clara's only victory over UCLA in 12 games since 1959. And 
Harrick was there. 
"He came in here and just spanked the Bruins," Harrick said of Williams. "I 
mean spanked 'em and ran a clinic. I scouted the game from press row, and he 
ran a clinic, pal, on how to run the flex and take what the defense gives you." 
Harrick and the Bruins hope to do the spanking tonight. 
Bruin Notes 
UCLA has lost only one of its last 36 home openers. Brigham Young beat the 
Bruins in 1981, ending a string of 28 victories. . . . Another Bruin team will 
make its debut tonight, on KMPC radio: play-by-play announcer Paul Olden and 
analyst Ann Meyers. . . . Santa Clara's Jeffty Connelly, a 6-foot-5 forward who 
averaged 11.9 points and 5.6 rebounds last season, played at USC as a freshman 
with Tom Lewis, Bo Kimble and Hank Gathers. 
While he was at Pepperdine, Jim Harrick recruited Santa Clara's 7-1, 285-pound 
center, Ron Reis, out of Monta Vista High in Cupertino. "He's pretty agile," 
Harrick said. "He's not very hostile, but he's mobile." Reis' father, Ron, was 
a reserve center for the Cincinnati teams that won NCAA championships in 1961 
and '62. 
Darrick Martin has responded well to the challenge of replacing Pooh Richardson 
as the Bruins' point guard, Harrick said. "He's the kind of guy who makes you 
sleep a little better at night, knowing you've got him for three years," 
Harrick said. . . . Besides Martin, UCLA's starting lineup will include 
forwards Don MacLean and Trevor Wilson, center Kevin Walker and guard Gerald 
Madkins. 
In two exhibition games, UCLA freshman reserve forward Tracy Murray attempted 
28 shots in 38 minutes. "If you notice, he's always in position to score," 
Harrick said. "He's always open. He's like Reggie Miller. Miller was always 
open, no matter where he was on the floor -- 35 feet (out), 30 feet." 
Harrick, on his decision to redshirt 6-11 freshman Rodney Odom: "I wanted him 
to play both forward and center and, fundamentally, he's a little away from 
doing that. If he's going to play center and defend guys like (Stanford's) Adam 
Keefe -- there's no way. He told me I'd regret it, and I hope I do. That will 
mean he's really good." . . . UCLA will play Pacific-10 Conference games next 
week at Washington and Washington State. 
