HOSPITAL TREATS PATIENTS TO AN EDUCATION; 
SCHOOLS: RANCHO LOS AMIGOS HOSPITAL SCHOOL INSTRUCTS STUDENTS AGES 3 TO 21 WITH 
PHYSICAL DISABILITIES. SOME TEACHING IS AT BEDSIDE. 
When her class sits down to eat lunch, 14-year-old Jennifer sits with them, but 
instead of eating her food she pours it into a tube to her stomach. 
Since birth, Jennifer has been unable to eat normally because she was born with 
a brain dysfunction that prevents her from swallowing food. 
At a regular school, Jennifer's actions might draw attention, but during lunch 
at the Rancho Los Amigos Hospital School in Downey, no one seems to notice. It 
is a school for physically handicapped students, ages 3 to 21. 
The school, in the pediatric ward of the county-operated medical center, has 
been part of the Downey Unified School District since 1962. It was started as a 
county project in the mid-1930s for youngsters who needed care at the hospital. 
Last year, the hospital celebrated its 100th anniversary. It is internationally 
known for its work in rehabilitating people with disabilities ranging from 
severe spinal injuries to nerve and brain damage. 
Under a contract with the county Board of Supervisors, the county provides the 
building, utilities and maintenance, and the Downey school district is 
responsible for instructional material and staff, said Shirley Zanger, 
principal of the school. Enrollment usually averages 45 to 55 children. Most of 
the students live in the hospital and are undergoing rehabilitation because of 
illness or injury, and the rest are bused in. 
If a child's physical condition prevents him from attending class, a bedside 
teacher is provided. When his medical condition is stabilized, he is sent to 
the pediatric ward of the hospital for rehabilitation, Zanger said. As soon as 
he can sit in a chair for three or four hours, he is sent to school. 
School hours are 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., during which time in-patients go to 
occupational, physical and speech therapy at the hospital. They also may have 
medical, dental and vision appointments, or may be scheduled to meet with a 
psychologist. 
Therapists follow a strict schedule in picking up students and dropping them 
off throughout the day, but teachers are flexible. They often have to be able 
to pick up where they left off with a student, Zanger said, making their time 
with the patient very individualized. 
"Our primary goal is to get students rehabilitated and medically stable," said 
Caleb Wong, the teacher in the head and trauma class, which focuses on 
stabilizing memory. "Teachers and therapists work together as a team and share 
information. We come up with plans that best help the students overcome 
physical, emotional and behavioral problems." 
If you took away the wheelchairs, respirators, helmets and other medical 
equipment, the four rooms would look like any other schoolroom. On the wall in 
the preschool classroom are numbers, alphabets and artwork. The elementary, 
high school, and head and trauma classrooms are filled with audiovisual 
equipment and computers. 
Except for the head and trauma class, the other classes follow a regular 
school's curricula, including reading, math and language arts. High school 
students receive instruction in career education to assist them in finding a 
job after graduation. 
When the pediatric building was built, the doctors felt the school was an 
important part of the rehabilitation process and decided to rebuild it in a 
wing of the pediatric ward, Zanger said. 
"It is primarily for hospital patients because some of them stay a long time, 
years even," Zanger said. Other physically handicapped students, who live at 
home and need special equipment to attend school, are transported on specially 
equipped buses. 
Gary, 15, comes from Monterey Park each day. The former straight-A student is 
in the head-trauma class. 
Gary suffered brain damage in an automobile accident about a year ago and has 
forgotten everything, Wong said. He was also unable to speak. But Wong is 
feeding sentences written on strips of paper into a computer that reads the 
sentences aloud and enables Gary to learn them. 
Wong considers music to be therapeutic, and said he uses it every morning to 
get students going. 
"Gary is like Mel Tillis (a country singer), he stutters so terribly, but he 
can sing a song. He couldn't say a sentence, but he could sing half a song." 
Wong said he works with students at their ability level. "I try to give them a 
sense of accomplishment or satisfaction of being able to do something, because 
after an accident, a lot of them feel very depressed, very worthless, because 
they're not able to do what they used to do. Some couldn't even write their 
names, couldn't even say their names, and that's very demoralizing." 
When Gary first came to the school, he had a low self-image, Wong said. Gary's 
sentences were incoherent. But now he is coming out of his shell and learning 
to enjoy life again, Wong said. He beamed as he told the story of how Gary 
would laugh each time he won at shuffleboard. 
Before Gary left for his therapy session, he raised his arms and cupped his 
hands as if he held a basketball. Wong said that meant Gary wanted to play 
basketball, probably because Gary had beaten him the day before. But Wong told 
him he must learn his sentences before he could play. 
Because it is a special-education school, the four teachers are specially 
trained. They are assisted by a full-time attendant who takes care of the 
student's physical needs and helps the teacher in the educational program. Some 
of the students come to school in wheelchairs or on gurneys. 
Six-year-old Juan, who has cerebral palsy, comes to his elementary class in his 
wheelchair. He is a spunky first-grader who greets strangers with a smile and a 
hello. 
He recently came to the school after his mother died, Zanger said. He lives 
with his aunt and uncle in Downey. She said he had not been out of the house 
since he was an infant. When he came to the school he could not speak English, 
she said. Now he speaks it fluently. 
Juan cannot walk without the help of leg braces, but during playtime he is able 
to speed around the playground on a little red bike. 
Without the school, parents would have a difficult time taking care of these 
special children. And Jennifer's mother appreciates it. 
"It's nice to have a place to send Jennifer. A place where she's accepted. And 
I don't have to worry about her," said Susan Goforth. "She's getting a good 
education. When Jennifer was small there was no way I could get a baby-sitter 
unless I found a parent who had a child with a (tracheotomy)." 
Goforth said she is pleased with the staff at Rancho and feels comfortable with 
Jennifer's care there, which started when she was 7. Goforth remembers when 
Jennifer first went to preschool, and she had to stay with her for two months 
until the teacher's aide learned how to take care of her. 
Goforth now describes Jennifer as "a bubbly, outgoing and giving person." 
"Jennifer has gone through a lot," said the divorced mother of two. "She used 
to be leery of everyone and said that everyone hurt her. She only wanted me." 
Over the years, Jennifer has slowly gained independence. Goforth has taught her 
to feed herself and take care of her trachea. She seemed confident at school 
recently, washing for lunch and putting on her sterile gloves. 
Jennifer is one of the few students who can take care of herself. Most of the 
students are on respirators, incontinent or quadriplegic. 
Zanger, who has been principal at the school for nine years, said it takes a 
"special person to work in a place like this." 
Anna Mescavage, an attendant in the high school class, said the experience is 
"very rewarding." 
"The children are so high, so positive. Sometimes you see someone take steps, 
who didn't think they could do it. They're inspirational and live life in an 
uplifting way," Mescavage said. 
