JURY BELIEVES TORTURE TALE, ACQUITS RADER 
A Vista Superior Court jury Thursday acquitted Alberta (Ann) Rader of all 
charges in the killing of her husband of less than a year, saying afterward 
that they believed her story that she acted in self-defense after being 
subjected to a night of torture at the hands of her fourth husband. 
Rader, 51, cried, hugged her attorney and pronounced, "There is a God," after 
the clerk read "Not guilty" to each of the charges the jury considered: 
first-degree murder, second-degree murder, voluntary manslaughter and 
involuntary manslaughter. Her family, sitting in the first row of Judge Richard 
Murphy's courtroom, gasped in relief. 
"I think I'll be stronger than ever," Rader, a real estate agent, said as she 
left the courthouse. "I've made Vista my home, and now I love it more than 
ever." 
Jurors said that Deputy Dist. Atty. Walt Donovan failed to prove his allegation 
that Rader fabricated a scene of torture and then deliberately killed her 
husband, Thomas, because she was angry that he was going to drop her and 
because she wanted to collect about $350,000 in life insurance. 
"We truly believed Ann Rader was terrified to the point where she had to defend 
herself," jury foreman Kevin Verduyn said. 
Juror Donald L. Krout Jr. said, "There wasn't enough evidence to lean any other 
way." He said that Rader would have to have "an awfully creative mind" to have 
staged the scene of the killing. 
Rader testified in her own behalf during the three-week trial, saying that her 
husband, angry after she told him she was going to leave him, held her in 
bondage in bed, raping her, putting a gun in her mouth and cutting her stomach 
and neck with the point of scissors. When he fell asleep, she said, she reached 
for the handgun resting between them and shot him three times in the left side 
of his head. 
The prosecution alleged that Rader shot her husband once in the head while he 
was asleep, hoping it would appear to be a suicide, then shot him twice more 
after the first shot didn't kill him. Afterward, she self-inflicted the cuts, 
Donovan charged, and contrived the story of torture. 
Donovan said he would not second-guess his case and said the jurors "didn't 
clearly see through the extraordinarily complex evidence." 
But, he added: "They made a thoughtful decision. The jury system was in 
operation. They believed her. What can I say?" 
The jury deliberated for nearly three days. 
