PRINCIPLED PRINCIPAL SUCCEEDS IN HARLEM 
The textbook budget is only $25 per student. In some classrooms, students can 
barely hear, what with carpenters' power saws whining in the halls. 
Then there's the science teacher assigned by the Board of Education. A 
disaster. He has survived in the system because other principals chose to pass 
their problem along rather than endure an exhausting dismissal process. 
Small problems, perhaps, as things go in New York public schools. ("School 
Opens With a Murder" was the Newsday headline the day after summer vacation 
ended.) But Lottie Taylor isn't one to settle for less bad. She's on the phone, 
as she often is, wheeling and dealing like a general manager in the National 
Basketball Assn. 
Maybe she can find a graduate student to "assist" the disappointing teacher. 
She raises money herself for just such emergencies, so she can avoid delays and 
red tape. It's not strictly by the book. But her students can't wait while the 
bureaucrats play games. 
"You do what you have to do to get the material across to your kids," she says. 
Taylor is principal of the A. Phillip Randolph Campus High School in Harlem. 
Randolph, hailed by former Education Secretary William Bennett and the subject 
of a TV documentary, is an inner-city school that works. 
Randolph is a minority school. Three-quarters of the students are black, the 
other quarter Latino. Families of almost half the students receive public 
assistance. Yet more than 95% of Randolph graduates go to four-year colleges, 
many to the very finest. The dropout rate is less than 2%. 
While concerned parents and a bright student body certainly help, Taylor is by 
all accounts the guiding force. "She makes you believe anything is possible for 
these kids," says Martha Harvey, president of the school's Parents Assn. 
Yet Taylor's plaudits have not spared her the daily harassments and absurdities 
of New York's public school bureaucracy. Her story shows that to make an urban 
school work, it's not enough to fight television and crack. One has to fight 
the system as well. 
"It can wear you down," Taylor says. "Yet I can't let that be an excuse to not 
educate the students the best that I can. 
"If they want to fire me -- no sweat," she says. "I will go out into the 
community and work with the parents." 
The first thing a visitor notices at Randolph is the order. The school occupies 
an old (1924) stone building on the fringe of City College next to the drug 
warren of St. Nicholas Park. Originally, Randolph was to be a model school, run 
jointly by the school system and the college. But 10 years of planning and 
union pressures diluted the idea. 
The previous principal, a white male, fell victim to bitter racial politics. By 
the time Taylor arrived, "things were just falling apart," recalls Margaret 
Ketly, a guidance counselor at the school. 
Today, the wood is polished and the lockers work. Major renovation work is in 
progress. Visitors are greeted politely by a uniformed guard in a starched 
white shirt. Classes are purposeful and planned to the last detail. 
Students waiting to speak with a visiting reporter (who arrives, sheepishly, 15 
minutes late) are put to work stuffing envelopes. "There is something to do 
every minute," Taylor says. 
But this is not the macho order of principal Joe Clark of Newark, N.J., with 
his trademark bullhorn. Taylor shows that mothering qualities are no less 
important. 
To be sure, she is a "a tough, good lady," as one admirer put it. Taylor walks 
the halls between classes, admonishing young men who tower over her to remove 
their baseball hats and show some respect. The curriculum is demanding, and she 
drives her teachers hard. She is legendary for standing firm against the city 
and union bureaucracies. 
"They can't touch me because I'm steel," she says, without exaggeration. "Some 
people translate that into another five-letter word." 
But Taylor also attends to her students' smallest daily needs. Some live in 
disordered households and have trouble getting up in the morning. So Taylor 
raised money to provide computerized wake-up calls. (Music followed by "Hi. 
This is Mrs. Taylor. I'm here to remind you that you have a date at 8 so don't 
be late.") 
When the Board of Education ordered the schools to devote a day to workshops on 
drugs, AIDS and the like, Taylor asked, "One day?" She raised the money -- 
again, outside school channels -- to install a full-time medical clinic. 
She arranged the school year so that students who do poorly in the first 
semester can redeem themselves in the second. She has started an academic 
summer camp. 
"We are going to save these kids because they are mine," she says. "You come to 
Randolph, and you are mine." 
Teachers get the same kind of attention: special programs, extra cash, pats on 
the back. The approach here does not fit neatly into conservative or liberal 
agendas; it's based simply on aspiration and respect. At the outset of each 
class, teachers, students and parents all sign a contract laying out what they 
expect from the course and what they will do in return. 
"Children have rights too," she says. "That's a hard thing for a lot of 
teachers to accept." But with rights come responsibilities. Before they 
graduate, students devote 80 hours to community service -- to give back a 
little of what the school gives them. 
"From the very first day you step into this school, everyone here wants to 
accomplish something, wants to go someplace higher," says Vaughn Malone, the 
student body president. Malone wants to become a lawyer because, as he explains 
it, "a lot of my brothers are in jail." 
There are city educators who think Taylor has gotten more than her share of 
glory. Yes, she's a good principal, they say. But look at what she has to work 
with: a school without entrenched faculty politics and with a link to City 
College that is a magnet for grants. Randolph was planned to have a complete 
cross-section of students, but Taylor has tilted the mix toward the best and 
brightest. There are grumblings about skimming the cream and leaving local 
"zoned" schools to deal with the rest. 
"They do a good job, but they are not a typical school," says one school 
official who asked not to be named. 
To be sure, Randolph isn't typical. Last year, 3,000 students applied for 115 
places in the school's special pre-med program, funded by the Macy Foundation. 
The intellectual, Spike Lee look is common in the corridors. 
But Randolph also accepts underachievers and special-education students and 
lifts their sights as well. "That's the success of it," says Harvey. 
Taylor has fierce protective instincts. The whole "skimming" issue sets her 
off. 
When she was a youngster in Harlem, she recalls, her parents had to lie about 
their address to send her to a first-rate high school. What's so wrong with 
providing that kind of school for bright Harlem kids today? Randolph has a 
higher percentage of blacks than any other high school in Manhattan, she says. 
"When I march (at graduation) I march with a whole class of minorities," Taylor 
says, with not a little indignation. "What happened to these kids before A. 
Phillip Randolph existed?" 
The key, she says, is giving principals the authority to do their jobs. "Change 
will come at the school level with principals who say, 'The heck with this 
bureaucracy.' " 
