THE MILKEN SENTENCING; 
LOWELL'S ROLE LIKELY TO REMAIN A MYSTERY 
One brother's prison sentence means that another brother will go free. 
Michael Milken's guilty plea to six felony counts last April was clinched when 
the government agreed to drop all charges against his brother, Lowell, and give 
him immunity from further prosecution. 
Lowell, 41, watched along with other family members Wednesday as his brother 
was sentenced to 10 years in prison. 
Lowell was a key aide to his older brother in Drexel Burnham Lambert's junk 
bond headquarters in Beverly Hills. The fact that now he will never be tried on 
the criminal charges brought against him in a March, 1989, indictment leaves 
unanswered many questions about the government's case against him. 
The possibility of criminal wrongdoing now will never be tested. But witnesses 
in Michael Milken's pre-sentencing hearings in October testified that Lowell 
was centrally involved in major decisions in the junk bond department and had 
at least some involvement in Drexel transactions that prosecutors alleged 
involved criminal wrongdoing. The testimony portrayed Lowell as playing a far 
more influential role in the department than the bit part long ascribed to him 
by his defense lawyer. 
Some criminal law experts have written articles condemning Michael's deal with 
the government, asserting that the government shouldn't have given Lowell away 
as a bargaining chip if prosecutors really did have evidence that he broke the 
law. Alternatively, they said, if the purpose of indicting him was only to use 
him as leverage against his brother, then he never should have been charged. 
Lowell's lawyer, Michael Armstrong, continues to argue that Lowell "was a 
completely innocent hostage who was taken for the purpose of putting pressure 
on his brother." 
At least three witnesses in the pre-sentencing hearing, however, testified 
extensively about Lowell's authority in the department and stated that the 
brothers frequently conferred on major transactions. Craig Cogut, a lawyer who 
worked for the Milkens and Drexel, testified that Lowell supervised the scores 
of private partnerships set up by the Milkens to benefit themselves and other 
Drexel employees. 
Cogut said Lowell was also a "trouble shooter" who had direct contact with 
major Drexel clients when problems arose. And Cogut said that, when he was 
assigned to help structure securities that Drexel was issuing in the buyout of 
Storer Communications in 1985, he was supervised by Lowell. 
The Storer deal -- at the time the largest leveraged buyout ever -- was one of 
the transactions in which prosecutors alleged criminal wrongdoing by Michael 
Milken. In the pre-sentencing hearings, they charged that Milken improperly and 
secretly kept extremely valuable Storer warrants for a partnership he 
controlled. They also charged that Milken used the warrants as de facto 
personal bribes to investment fund managers and corporate executives to reward 
them for having their companies buy other, much riskier Drexel securities. 
Cogut also testified that Lowell at times appeared to give his brother 
directions. Cogut said he overheard a conversation between the brothers during 
the Storer deal on Drexel-underwritten preferred stock that was proving 
difficult to sell. "Lowell indicated that Michael had better get involved in 
selling the preferred stock or we would be (holding) a whole lot of preferred," 
Cogut said. 
Cogut strongly implied that Lowell had misled him on how the warrants were 
being used and claimed that Lowell had become "testy" when Cogut suggested that 
the distribution of the warrants should have been publicly disclosed. 
Cogut and Lowell had both been attorneys at the Los Angeles law firm of Irell 
&amp; Manella before joining Michael Milken at Drexel. Cogut testified that he 
had had extreme confidence in Lowell's judgment and honesty. But when asked 
during the hearings if he still had the same level of trust, Cogut said: 
"Obviously, there have been a lot of events that have unfolded and it has been 
unfortunate, and I have questions, obviously." 
James Dahl, a former top Drexel bond salesman, testified that Lowell had 
directly contacted Thomas Spiegel -- chief executive of one of Drexel's top 
junk bond buyers, Beverly Hills-based Columbia Savings &amp; Loan -- about 
buying Storer securities. Spiegel is the target of a federal criminal 
investigation concerning, among other things, his involvement with Drexel. 
Evidence in the hearings suggested that Spiegel had directed Columbia to buy 
risky Storer preferred stock from Drexel at the same time that he was allowed 
to buy the valuable warrants. 
Terren Peizer, another former junk bond department executive, testified that 
Michael had directed him to go to Lowell for an explanation of a secret list of 
transactions between Drexel and David Solomon of Solomon Asset Management. 
Milken's dealings with Solomon, in which prices of securities sold to Solomon's 
fund were inflated to the detriment of Solomon's investors, was the basis for 
one count of Michael's guilty plea. 
