WINE NOTES: BRANDY, MISTELLE OFFERED; REPORT ANALYZES MARKETING OPPORTUNITIES 
Germain-Robin Fine Alambic Brandy, the premium California brandy producer based 
in Ukiah, has released its Lot 5 brandy as well as a new dessert wine, a 
mistelle. 
The Lot 5 brandy has an elegant, rich, faintly nut-like aroma with the accent 
on fruit. The finish is creamy and elegant. It retails for $28 and compares 
very favorably with Cognacs that sell for $15 more. 
The Mistelle of Cabernet Sauvignon is a grape-like drink that is made by adding 
brandy to unfermented Cabernet Sauvignon grape juice. The taste is fairly 
sweet, but the alcohol is modest, only 17%. Price is $13 a half bottle. Only 
140 cases were produced. 
Also, Germain-Robin has released special barrel lots acquired by retail 
accounts and made to their specifications. Among the accounts receiving cask 
lots were the Brentwood Bar and Grill, Wally's in Westwood, the Duke of Bourbon 
in Canoga Park, and the St. James Club in West Hollywood. 
Innovative Wine Marketing, a Southern California-based retail wine research and 
consulting company, has released the first of five specialty reports on the 
restaurant trade. 
The reports, entitled "Scorecard Restaurant Survey," sell for $250. The first 
report, on the restaurants of La Jolla and north San Diego County, analyzes the 
wine market by restaurant, including the price posted at each for each wine and 
has statistical charts to determine what each of the various restaurants is 
charging for a specific product. 
For information on the Scorecard reports, call Dan Wilson at (714) 960-1369. 
The American Institute for Wine and Food will stage its first International 
Wine Auction this Saturday at the Four Seasons Hotel. 
Included in the evening will be a Champagne reception, a supper prepared by 
chefs from some of Los Angeles' greatest restaurants, a silent auction of 190 
lots of wine, and the live auction. Dennis Foley of the San Francisco auction 
house Butterfield and Butterfield will act as auctioneer. 
One of the more prestigious lots to be auctioned is a collection of 51 bottles 
and six half-bottles of Meritage wine -- wines conforming to the new 
Bordeaux-oriented standard from wineries belonging to the new Meritage Assn. 
Admission to the event is $250 per person, and proceeds go to the AIWF. 
For details contact the AIWF office at (800) 274-2493 or (415) 255-3000. 
