U.S. TRIES TO STEM SURGE OF CHINESE ILLEGAL ALIENS; 
SMUGGLING: UNREST SINCE THE STUDENT MASSACRE SPURS MANY TO FLEE CHINA. PAYING 
UP TO $30,000 TO SMUGGLERS, THE REFUGEES OFTEN BECOME INDENTURED SERVANTS. 
The frightened Chinese immigrant spoke from his Mission Viejo hospital bed in 
broken English. 
"Who are you?" Zheng Kangxin, 32, finally managed as a telephoning reporter 
asked why he was with nine Latino immigrants in a van that was chased down 
recently in San Clemente by the U.S. Border Patrol. 
Injured when he jumped from the moving van and tried to run, Zheng apparently 
was so startled by the telephone call that he bolted from his hospital bed that 
same night -- despite doctors' advice. 
He succeeded in disappearing back into a shadowy smuggling network that U.S. 
officials say is carrying ever-increasing numbers of Chinese into the United 
States. 
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service officials say that although Chinese 
smuggling routes are old and well established, several factors, including 
unrest in China, are fueling the migration to America. 
"If you are arrested by the (Chinese) government, it is almost a death 
penalty," a Chinese pro-democracy activist who asked to remain anonymous told 
an immigration hearing Oct. 13 in Seattle about his decision to flee to the 
United States earlier this year. "If I leave the country, at least it is not a 
death penalty." 
Though exact numbers are impossible to document, INS officials say the number 
of major Chinese smuggling operations under their investigation, those 
involving large numbers of smugglers and international connections, has grown 
from about five a year ago to 30 this year. 
INS intelligence reports indicate that the Chinese rings are operating out of 
Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, El Centro and Tucson, said Ron Smith, an 
INS anti-smuggling agent in Laguna Niguel. 
On July 1, the INS in Washington launched Operation Dragon aimed at cracking 
Chinese smuggling rings worldwide. Operation Dragon pools INS resources with 
those of other federal agencies to gather intelligence on the Chinese 
traffickers. 
Though alien smuggling is hardly a new phenomenon, the upward trend involving 
Chinese has immigration officials particularly concerned from a humanitarian 
standpoint, said Robert Penlon, assistant commissioner in charge of the INS 
anti-smuggling program. 
With smugglers charging up to $30,000 to sneak an immigrant out of China, 
across the Pacific and into the United States, Penlon said, many of the 
immigrants wind up in indentured servitude. They work off their debt with 
manual labor or run errands for Chinese who pay the smuggling fee. 
"They (employers) give them a hovel to live in and pay them next to nothing," 
said Penlon, who is based in Washington. 
Penlon added that the immigrants rarely complain. 
"The vast majority of these people brought in are not sophisticated. They're 
used to taking orders," he said. "For them to venture out into our society, 
they might as well be going into the Gobi Desert." 
Other immigrants are smuggled in after relatives in the United States put up 
the money. 
U.S. seizure of Chinese immigrants has increased from 261 in 1987 to 318 in 
1988, and immigration officials say they have noticed a particular surge in the 
last year. 
Most noticeable, officials say, has been the activity along the U.S.-Mexico 
border. Last year 79 illegal Chinese were captured, compared to 49 in 1982, 
according to Border Patrol figures. 
These figures represent only a fraction of the number of Chinese actually 
coming across, U.S. officials say, because smugglers take great care in making 
sure the illegals do not get caught. The smugglers route their charges through 
Mexico and Canada where INS officials say visa entry is easier for Chinese than 
it is in the United States. 
Chinese who are caught entering the United States illegally usually are quickly 
released on bond, which is routinely set at $10,000, said Ron Smith, who 
coordinates Chinese smuggling investigations for the INS Western Region 
headquarters in Laguna Niguel. 
The bonds almost always are posted immediately, Smith said. Smith said INS 
intelligence reports suggest that the bonds are put up by the same Chinese 
syndicates that smuggle the immigrants into this country. 
Once bond has been posted, immigrants generally disappear into the smuggling 
pipeline, Smith said. They settle in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and 
other major cities with established Chinese communities. The vast majority, 
Smith and other U.S. officials said, are headed to the New York City area. 
After the June 3-4 massacre of pro-democracy students in Beijing, President 
Bush granted a one-year refuge to Chinese citizens who were in the United 
States as of June 5. 
The Beijing massacre accelerated the emigration from China but did not start 
it, Penlon and many other immigration officials said. The pro-democracy 
activist apprehended in Seattle, for example, said he fled his homeland after 
speaking out on behalf of the pro-democracy students. The man, 34, said his 
name wound up on a police list as a leader in the pro-democracy movement, 
prompting him to run for his life. 
"When they massacred the students, we felt like it was not safe to go home," he 
said in his Oct. 13 immigration hearing in Seattle. 
Penlon said other factors contributing to the Chinese emigration include a 
deteriorated economy in poorer provinces of China as well as growing concern 
over the status of Hong Kong when the British colony reverts to Chinese control 
in 1997. 
Because Hong Kong, adjacent to the mainland, has been a traditional smuggling 
corridor out of China, Penlon said more Chinese immigrants are trying to leave 
by that route while they can. 
Chinese smuggling routes were first laid in the late 19th Century after passage 
of the Chinese Exclusion Acts, which denied entry into the United States by 
Chinese who had been flooding into this country to help build railroads. 
Staging areas for Chinese smuggling include Hong Kong, Thailand, Vietnam, 
Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, according to a June 29 INS memorandum. 
There, immigrants receive phony passports and visas and are assigned an escort 
to accompany them to North America. 
Transit points identified in the memorandum include the Netherlands, the 
Dominican Republic, Belize, Guatemala and Mexico. Additionally, Nepal, Turkey, 
East Germany and Spain have at least once been associated with Chinese 
smuggling rings, the memorandum said. 
In recent years, the volume and sophistication of Chinese smuggling has 
increased dramatically with the social disruption caused by the wars in the 
Indochinese peninsula, the opening of China, the uncertainty over the futures 
of Hong Kong and Taiwan and the "economic seesaw" that periodically affects 
Chinese populations, the memorandum said. 
"Indeed, the syndicates smuggling ethnic Chinese have now forged links with 
other ethnic groups involved in drug trafficking, criminal activities and 
racketeering enterprises producing substantial illicit proceeds," Bruce 
Nicholl, INS senior agent in Washington, said in the memorandum. "These 
alliances also extend to 'legitimate' businesses which utilize the smuggled 
aliens as an indentured work force to reap huge profits." 
Typically, Nicholl said, an immigrant must work off his debt in a restaurant or 
other legitimate business at below-minimum wage. The businesses, he said, are 
almost always run by Chinese. INS investigators have even obtained contracts, 
written in Chinese, between an employer and an immigrant working under 
indentured conditions, he said. 
In New York, one employer under investigation bunked as many as a dozen 
immigrants in a single room, Nicholl said. "He would sleep them in shifts. The 
first shift would work eight hours and then sleep. The next shift would work 
eight hours. And then the next shift would work," he said. 
While immigration officials rely on intelligence reports to gain a general idea 
of how a smuggling network operates, they lack sufficient information to take 
action against them. That is the purpose of Operation Dragon. 
Unlike Latino smuggling rings, which are easier to infiltrate, the Chinese 
syndicates have a closed nature that makes them virtually impossible to 
penetrate, U.S. officials say. For that reason, they say there have been only a 
handful of arrests involving suspected Chinese smugglers. 
In one of the few successful infiltrations of a Chinese organization, an 
undercover federal probe in Buffalo, N.Y., last May smashed a smuggling ring 
that brought Chinese aliens from Canada by hiding them in car trunks. 
Twenty-five people were arrested, including two suspects who officials said ran 
the ring. 
But U.S. immigration officials say the odds that illegal immigrants will elude 
capture and blend into Chinese-American society are excellent. 
