IT'S A FAKE; 
ART: AN EXHIBIT AT POMONA COLLEGE GIVES VIEWERS THE CHANCE TO SEE MORE THAN TWO 
DOZEN CLEVER COPIES. 
Pretend you are a wealthy art collector. Before you are two medieval 
manuscripts, both painted on vellum, both showing centuries of wear. 
Unfortunately, one is a fake. 
How will you discern which manuscript dates back to medieval times and which 
was painted by a notorious Spanish forger in the 19th Century? 
You might start by honing your connoisseurship at Pomona College's Montgomery 
Gallery, where "Artful Deception: The Craft of the Forger" is on display 
through Dec. 2. The exhibit, which is traveling across the country, was 
organized by curators at the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore. 
At this unusual show, viewers get a glimpse of more than two dozen fakes -- 
from 16th-Century Russian icons to the "Mona Lisa" to ancient busts of Roman 
youths. In some cases, the fakes are paired with genuine works in the same 
style. Viewers are invited to study them, read about the actual artist's style 
and background, then choose which piece they think is authentic. Sliding open a 
panel reveals whether the viewer has a future in art scholarship. 
As compelling as the "whodunit" tests are the cloak-and-dagger tales that 
accompany the forgeries, many of which have been exhibited as genuine for 
years. 
For instance, the "Spanish forger" who faked the medieval manuscripts was a 
highly skilled and clever painter who went to great lengths to disguise his 
forgeries by using vellum that dated back to the Middle Ages, painting in the 
style of medieval illuminators and then "aging" his works. 
The forger, who art historians think was actually a Frenchman working in Paris 
during the Victorian era, went undetected in his own time. But 20th-Century art 
historians notice -- as Montgomery patrons may also -- that the forger was 
undone by his faces. To the contemporary eye, they smack of the cloying 
sweetness of the Victorian era and do not reflect the more somber, pious style 
of painters who worked in the Middle Ages. 
Copying important works of art is a practice that dates back to ancient Egypt, 
says Montgomery Gallery Director Marjorie L. Harth, who points out that not all 
fakes and forgeries were initially meant to deceive. 
The Romans, for instance, loved the classical Greek style and commissioned 
numerous copies of Greek art that were considered legitimate and highly 
desirable. 
Other artists were illicitly copied during their own lifetimes. Painter and 
wood engraver Albrecht Durer went to court in the early 16th Century to halt 
reproductions. On the other hand, Rubens and Rembrandt encouraged their 
students and assistants to copy their work as a way to learn the master's 
style. 
And Jean Baptiste Camille Corot (1796-1875) occasionally signed his students' 
works to help them professionally in their careers, thus muddying the waters 
for generations of art historians to come. As a result, says Harth, practically 
all Corots -- especially landscapes such as the one represented in the Pomona 
show -- have come under suspicion. 
The public's fascination with art and forgeries may be heightened by the 
millions of dollars that masterpieces command today on world markets, Harth 
says. A Van Gogh self-portrait in New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art was 
recently removed from display when its authenticity was questioned. Ditto the 
"Kouros," a classical Greek bust of a youth displayed by the J. Paul Getty 
Museum, which came under suspicion when a very similar sculpture known to be a 
fake appeared on the market. 
The Pomona show explains the high-tech tools today's art historian uses to 
detect fakes: X-rays, infrared photographs and pigment analysis. One work in 
the show, a supposed early 16th-Century "Venetian Renaissance" panel painting 
of St. George slaying the dragon, was revealed as a 19th-Century fake after the 
Walters Conservation Lab noticed some suspiciously heavy overpainting on the 
canvas. 
An X-ray revealed a late 16th-Century painting of the Last Supper underneath. 
Subsequent analysis showed that the scene of St. George and the dragon was 
painted over the earlier work in the 19th Century. The curators have removed 
several sections of the forgery to reveal the head of one of Christ's disciples 
and the small dog at Christ's feet, giving patrons a fascinating glimpse at a 
forgery exposed. 
In addition to technical tools, historians use their knowledge to match 
artistic styles and flourishes with the appropriate cultures and epochs. 
Harth calls it "the complicated, interrelated workings of eye and brain." 
Perception, he says, is determined by context, "by the conditions, physical and 
intellectual, under which we see the work." 
"Once you know which one is authentic, it will look better than it did, and the 
one labeled fake will look worse," Harth promises. 
Fakes provide fascinating reference points for art historians. Like a slightly 
warped mirror, they reflect a skewed view of artistic reality -- but as with 
any illusion, they draw the viewer in. 
"Fakes speak eloquently of fallibility and of gullibility," Harth says. "Fakes 
. . . teach us to understand and to value authenticity in art." 
Forgers often are unable to transcend the barriers of their own time. A bust of 
a king from ancient Egypt's Ptolemaic dynasty is revealed as a fake by the 
playful, naive and human expression on the face. Walters curators say this is 
greatly at odds with the work of ancient Egyptian stone carvers, who depicted 
their kings as men of strength and power -- austere, remote and on a plane 
above mere mortals. 
Other times, fakes give themselves away by sloppy inattention to detail. A 
"Gothic" ivory carving in the exhibit was revealed as a fake when scholars 
noticed that St. Catherine is seated in the center, with the apostles Peter and 
Paul to the sides. A true Gothic carver, pious and theologically schooled, 
would never have ranked a mere saint above the apostles. 
Cross-cultural faking is even more difficult than that which attempts to 
transcend epochs. A pink ceramic vessel, allegedly from 18th-Century China's 
Ching Dynasty, is revealed as a 19th-Century Western European imitation by its 
lack of subtlety and its inability to reproduce the two-dimensional composition 
of Asian art popular at that time. 
Often, however, forgers are artists in their own right and earn the grudging 
admiration of art historians for their clever, albeit misplaced, genius. 
Icilio Federico Joni (1866-1946) was a Sienese painter, restorer, art dealer 
and forger who specialized in Renaissance paintings. Joni, who often used 
panels that dated from the Renaissance to throw historians off the scent, was 
unmasked because he allowed too many paintings to trace their provenance, or 
ownership history, back to him. In addition, Joni gave all the characters in 
his paintings the same long, broad noses and elaborate halos. 
Then there was Reinhold Vasters (1827-1909), the nearly perfect forger. A 
master goldsmith from Aachen, Germany, Vasters forged jewelry and decorative 
works in Renaissance style but was never exposed during his lifetime. The 
forgeries came to light in the early 1980s, when the working drawings for his 
fakes were discovered in the storerooms of the Victoria and Albert Museum in 
London. Perhaps, say the Walters curators, he left documentation to salve his 
ego and assure himself that his talent -- and his ability to fool the experts 
of his time -- would one day be known to all. 
Forgeries aren't always aesthetically inferior, either. Of the two Sevres 
clocks on display at the gallery, Harth says several curators would argue that 
the fake is actually superior. 
So what, then, is wrong with fakes? 
The Walters curators say: "A discredited work of art can only distort and 
obscure our view of the past." 
Harth adds that a forgery blemishes the reputation of the real artist and, 
perhaps more dangerously, creates a false basis of information about the artist 
and the period in question with which to judge future works. 
What makes Dutch painter Jan Vermeer (1632-1675) great, Harth says, "is not 
only that he painted beautiful pictures but that he painted certain pictures in 
a certain way at a certain time in the history and development of art. In 
addition to the craftsmanship, technique and cleverness of the painting, it 
shows genuine creative achievement." 
