WHITE-COLLAR CRIMES BECOME A PRIORITY FOR COUNTY FBI AGENTS; 
LAW ENFORCEMENT: OF 10 SATELLITE OFFICES IN SEVEN COUNTIES, THE ONE IN VENTURA 
IS THE MOST POPULAR AMONG OPERATIVES. 
Two Ventura businesses had been swindled out of more than $16 million, and 
Naomi Jerez was on the run in Guatemala, when she was lured back to the country 
in 1986 and arrested for bank fraud by Ventura County agents of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation. 
In the case of John Stephen Wilson, the crime was industrial espionage. He was 
arrested by two undercover FBI agents at a Ventura restaurant in 1988, after he 
tried to sell them secrets about a new drug being developed by a Thousand Oaks 
company. 
And last year, the FBI's Ventura office moved into action again -- this time in 
a major defense fraud inquiry triggered by a tip from a worker at a Simi Valley 
defense plant who said his company was falsifying test data about missile 
parts. 
Those three cases -- among the most significant that federal agents have worked 
in Ventura County in recent years -- typify the complex white-collar crime 
investigations that have become top priority for the 10 agents in the FBI's 
Ventura office over the past decade. 
"Most citizens don't have an accurate perception of what the FBI does," said 
Gary Auer, head of the FBI's Ventura office. "Even those who are generally 
familiar with law enforcement perceive us as we were 15 to 20 years ago." 
At that time, Auer said, the FBI's priorities were less complicated, focusing 
on kidnapings, organized crime cases and the pursuit of bank robbers and others 
on the FBI's list of the 10 most-wanted fugitives. 
While the FBI still works such cases, the Ventura office has turned more of its 
attention toward white-collar cases such as defense fraud and bank failures in 
the past five years, Auer said. 
Five of Ventura County's investigative agents work exclusively on white-collar 
crimes. The other agents handle a variety of assignments ranging from bank 
robberies to assorted crimes on the area's military bases. 
The office also works counterintelligence cases, which typically include 
debriefing county residents after they meet officials from the Soviet Union to 
determine whether Soviet intelligence is trying to recruit Americans, Auer 
said. 
Hidden away in an office building across the street from a Ventura shopping 
complex, the Ventura County resident agency is, among operatives, the most 
popular of 10 similar satellite offices in the seven-county Central District of 
California, all of which report to the FBI's Los Angeles headquarters in 
Westwood. 
The list of FBI applicants waiting for a vacancy in Ventura exceeds that of any 
other of the branch offices that report to Los Angeles, Auer said. One benefit 
of the popularity is that the Ventura office has a higher concentration of 
veteran agents than any of the FBI's other area offices. 
The Ventura office's appeal stems from the fact that about 75 of the 300 agents 
assigned to the Westwood office live in Ventura County and would prefer not to 
make the commute anymore, Auer said. Many agents moved to the county in the 
1970s, when houses were cheaper than in Los Angeles County. 
Agent Bill Pemberton, 49, said he transferred from the Westwood office in 1982 
because of the commute from his home in Newbury Park and the hassle of 
traveling on the job in the Los Angeles area. Agents now working in Los Angeles 
often tell him they wish for a shot at the Ventura locale, he said. 
"They say, 'When are you going to retire so we can have a chance to take your 
place?' " Pemberton said. 
The Ventura office was opened in the early 1950s, when it was determined that 
the county was growing and so was crime, said Ventura County Deputy Dist. Atty. 
James S. Irving, who once worked for the FBI and headed the Ventura office. 
The office went through several transformations, moving from Ventura to the 
Seabee Base at Port Hueneme, then to Oxnard and back to Ventura during the 
following decades. It even shut down briefly in 1971, when a break-in at a 
similar regional office in Pennsylvania caused concern that small offices were 
not secure. 
After the office reopened, the staffing level stayed at three to five agents 
for years, Auer said. It wasn't until the mid-1980s that the Ventura office 
began to grow, as the FBI shifted its priorities to white-collar crime cases. 
Indeed, Auer said, he recently submitted a request to Los Angeles for more 
agents in Ventura. But he must compete with other regional FBI supervisors for 
a limited number of employees. The battle is fought by getting convictions on 
important cases, Auer said. 
"The office is considered a success if it brings home a few major-impact 
cases," Auer said. 
One such case is Agent Ted Bowler's continuing inquiry into the downfall of 
Westlake Thrift &amp; Loan and its parent company, United Community Bank of 
Thousand Oaks. 
Five people have been indicted and sentenced to prison terms already in what is 
now a two-year investigation, and more are targeted for prosecution in the 
large-scale fraud scheme, which was brought to the FBI's attention locally when 
California Highway Patrol officers in San Bernardino County complained to the 
Riverside district attorney. 
About 40 CHP officers had let Riverside businessman Walter Vladovich use their 
names on loan applications to his mortgage firm, Pioneer Acceptance Corp., so 
he could get money that was tied up and use it for another company that he 
owned, Leder Video. Vladovich told the officers that he needed access to the 
money to build his empire of 100 video stores, Bowler said. Vladovich 
guaranteed to make the $200 monthly payments on the loans and offered the 
officers $1,000 each in televisions and videocassette recorders for the use of 
their names. 
But in reality, Vladovich, working in consort with bank officials, submitted 
the loan packages, each requesting $5,350, to Westlake Thrift, telling the bank 
it was on behalf of people who were going to launch their own video store 
businesses, Bowler said. 
"It was an absolute classic case," said Bowler, whose 12 file cabinets full of 
Westlake Thrift documents are stashed throughout the Ventura office. "It's the 
kind of case an agent dreams of having." 
Bowler, 48, an affable man with an easy laugh, joined the FBI 21 years ago, 
assuming that he would spend most of his career fighting the Mafia in organized 
crime cases. But Bowler -- whose career has included interviewing Ku Klux Klan 
members in the South and working with Hollywood stars on copyright cases -- 
says he is now happy dealing instead with white-collar crime. 
"It's not fill in the blanks," Bowler said. "It becomes a real battle of wits." 
It was the Jerez case in the early 1980s that established Bowler as a lead 
investigator in savings and loan failures. 
Jerez sold people on a plan to transport apartment buildings from high-priced 
areas of Los Angeles -- where they were scheduled to be torn down and replaced 
with bigger buildings -- to South-Central Los Angeles for federally subsidized 
housing, Bowler said. 
She received $8.5 million from Hacienda Federal Savings and Loan in Oxnard, $8 
million from Financial Planning Consultants Inc. of Thousand Oaks and $6.5 
million from Orecal of Portland, Ore., Bowler said. 
As money rolled in, buildings stopped getting moved, Bowler said. But Jerez 
continued to lead an extravagant lifestyle, treating 40 business associates to 
a $1,000-a-plate dinner for President Ronald Reagan and flying people to San 
Francisco for business meetings. 
Her scam, which began in 1982, went well for a year and a half before officials 
caught on and she fled the country, Bowler said. 
Meanwhile, Hacienda Federal Savings and Loan was seized by the federal 
government. Financial Planning Consultants Inc. and Orecal went bankrupt. 
A promise from an undercover FBI agent that he could launder millions of 
dollars for Jerez lured her back to the United States, and she was arrested 
when she arrived to pick up some of the money. Convicted in 1985, Jerez is 
serving a 10-year sentence at Geiger Correctional Institute in Seattle, Wash., 
Bowler said. 
Another of the FBI's major cases in Ventura County was a defense fraud 
investigation that was led by Pemberton in 1987, after a former employee of the 
Simi Valley-based transducer products division of Genisco Technology Corp. 
contacted agents to tell them that transducers, which are used to guide 
missiles, were not being properly tested. 
An inside informant then came forward, feeding the FBI detailed information on 
the company, which was using an Atari computer to generate false data and 
presenting it to the government and Texas Instruments, Pemberton said. 
The transducers, cylinder-shaped devices about an inch long, help control the 
altitude of Hi-Speed Anti-RADAR Missiles, which are designed to go in and knock 
out enemy radar so that fighter pilots following them are in less danger of 
attack, Pemberton said. 
"It caused a critical weapons system to be in doubt," Pemberton said. 
Texas Instruments was forced to recall some of the missiles and have them 
retrofitted. Last year, Genisco's plant manager, production supervisor and a 
quality-control employee were convicted. Genisco Technology Corp., 
headquartered in La Mirada, was fined $750,000. The corporation is still in 
business, but the transducer division was sold, Auer said. 
Pemberton said he has worked defense fraud cases in Ventura that are as "good 
or better than most in Los Angeles." In addition, the working conditions are 
more relaxed in Ventura, because traveling throughout the county is easier, he 
said. 
The selection process for getting a spot in Ventura is based, in part, on 
expertise and seniority, Auer said. The result is an office of older white 
males, all with at least 15 years experience. 
Auer himself is a 19-year veteran of the FBI. His last position was as head of 
the Soviet counterintelligence squad in Los Angeles, where he was thrown into 
the national limelight during the Richard W. Miller espionage case. Miller, the 
first FBI agent ever found guilty of spying for the Soviets, was on Auer's 
squad. 
The trials in the Miller case revealed that it was only after Auer took over 
the Soviet squad that the FBI had begun a serious effort to fire Miller for 
gross incompetence. Nonetheless, the machinery did not move fast enough, and 
Miller remained an agent until minutes before his arrest as a spy in 1984. 
About a year after the second Miller trial -- the first ended in a hung jury -- 
Auer was transferred to Ventura. FBI officials said the transfer had nothing to 
do with the Miller case and was part of a usual rotation aimed at giving 
middle-management supervisors a broader background. 
In addition to Auer, two other agents in the office have supervisory 
backgrounds, and nine out of 10 live in Ventura County. 
The agents -- who earn between $55,000 and $60,000 a year -- are expected to be 
on duty 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The average workweek is 49 hours 
long, and all take home government cars in case they are called out in the 
middle of the night for an emergency. 
Agent Larry Dick, an 18-year FBI veteran who investigates bank robberies, 
carries a Sheriff's Department radio in his car so he can listen for robberies 
and respond quickly. 
Dick said he works the cases with the police and uses a network of informants 
to help in identifying bank robbers. He said he also relies on photographs 
taken during the robberies and on exploding dye packs, which are hidden in 
stacks of $20 bills. 
More than 60 of the office's 186 open cases are bank robberies. The office, 
which has joint investigative jurisdiction with local authorities on bank 
robberies, has a success rate of convicting between 85% and 90% of its cases 
per year, Auer said. 
In addition, the FBI works closely with local law enforcement agencies on 
drug-forfeiture cases and is sometimes called upon to investigate those 
agencies when there are allegations of civil-rights violations by police 
officers. 
The Ventura County resident agency has investigated about 40 civil-rights cases 
in the past five years, Auer said. Not one of those investigations has led to 
prosecution, he said. 
Recently, the office investigated a Ventura police officer who used a stun gun 
on an epileptic who had suffered a seizure and caused a minor traffic accident 
on June 23. The office also looked into the allegations of an Oxnard man who 
claimed that he and several other guests at a private party on June 15 were 
beaten by Oxnard police officers. 
Auer said it is sometimes an uneasy role for the FBI to be a peer of the police 
departments in most matters and to be their watchdog on civil-rights issues. 
"It would be natural for any law enforcement official to have a negative 
attitude toward the federal investigation of their agency or actions of one of 
their members," Auer said. "However, in the case of chiefs in this county, they 
recognize federal responsibilities and have been supportive of the 
investigations." 
Both Auer and local police officials said working relationships are smooth. 
"In a small office with 10 agents, we, the FBI, are not the solution to the 
crime problem in Ventura County," Auer said. "We see our mission here as a 
productive part of the overall law enforcement." 
