GUNMAN FROM EGYPT KILLS 4 IN SOUTHERN ISRAEL 
A uniformed gunman from Egypt shot and killed three Israeli soldiers and a bus 
driver in far southern Israel on Sunday, the bloodiest incident during a 
weekend of raids on the country's troops and frontiers. 
The soldiers were hit while riding in jeeps, and 23 civilian defense workers 
were wounded on the bus whose driver was slain. Eighteen of the wounded were 
released from hospitals shortly after the incident. The attack took place at 
dawn near Eilat, an Israeli resort on the Gulf of Aqaba. 
Defense Minister Moshe Arens indirectly blamed Egypt for lax control of the 
frontier. "Israel expects that Egypt will take all the necessary steps to 
retain the peace along its border with Israel and to prevent murderers coming 
from its territory," he said. 
Islamic Jihad, a Muslim extremist group, claimed responsibility for the attack 
in a statement issued in Jordan. In February, the same group, an affiliate of 
the Palestine Liberation Organization, claimed responsibility for killing nine 
Israeli tourists in a machine-gun and grenade attack on a tourist bus inside 
Egypt. 
"This morning, one of our units operating in Egypt dealt a blow to a Zionist 
bus at the crossing point between Palestine and Egypt," Sunday's Islamic Jihad 
statement said. 
Egyptian reports said the gunman was arrested and that Egypt will investigate. 
In Lebanon later in the day, a teen-age girl carrying a bag of explosives blew 
herself up when she tried to attack a group of Israeli soldiers inside the 
Israeli-controlled buffer zone that hugs Israel's northern frontier. The blast 
killed the girl and inflicted slight injuries on two Israeli soldiers and a 
Lebanese bystander, authorities said. 
Sunday's attacks came on the heels of an attempted beach landing in Israel by 
guerrillas from Lebanon. Four guerrillas died Saturday and a fifth swam to 
shore near Sidon in Lebanon after their boat was shot out of the water by an 
Israeli naval patrol. 
Israeli military officials were reluctant to link the raids. "There is no 
evidence of coordination at this point," army spokesman Moshe Fogel said. 
As is customary after cross-border incidents, the army chief of staff, Gen. Dan 
Shomron, visited the Eilat site after the shooting. His visit took place just a 
few hours before the government announced that he would be replaced in April by 
his deputy, Ehud Barak. Shomron will be completing his fourth year in the top 
army post, a normal term of duty. 
For the past several weeks, it had been Israel's frontier with Jordan that had 
produced bloodshed. Several attempts at infiltration were thwarted by Israeli 
troops, the most recent on Nov. 8, when a group of Jordanian militiamen were 
intercepted by Israeli soldiers. One Israeli and one Jordanian were killed 
during the shoot-out. 
Israeli officials attributed the increase in attacks from Jordan to rising 
Islamic fervor and an impassioned response to the October police killings of 
Palestinians at Jerusalem's Temple Mount. 
In Lebanon, meanwhile, Syria's assertion of control over Beirut and the 
expulsion of Lebanese militias from the capital toward the south have raised 
concern that attacks against Israel from the north will increase. A 
Lebanese-based group called the Syrian National Social Party took 
responsibility for Sunday's suicide attack by the teen-ager. The attempted 
bombing was meant to commemorate the 58th anniversary of the pro-Damascus 
group's founding, according to reports from Lebanon. 
Saturday's attempted sea attack was also made in commemoration of an 
anniversary -- the third year after a hang-glider attack from Lebanon into 
Israel in which a Palestinian guerrilla killed six Israeli soldiers. The 
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, headed by the 
Syrian-backed terrorist Ahmed Jibril, claimed responsibility for the aborted 
sea raid. 
The killings near Eilat highlighted the relatively relaxed vigilance along the 
border with Egypt, the only Arab country to have signed a peace treaty with 
Israel. 
Along parts of the border, the countries are separated only by easily traversed 
wire fence, in contrast to the heavily patrolled and mined border with Jordan 
and the closely watched frontier with Lebanon. The Lebanon border is protected 
by a militarized buffer zone up to 10 miles wide that is patrolled by the 
Israeli-backed, Christian-led South Lebanon Army. 
"The Egyptian border is at peace, and we act differently there than we do along 
our other borders," Israeli spokesman Fogel said. 
According to reports from Egypt, the gunman lay down in a ditch beside a road 
six miles northwest of Eilat. When the jeeps and bus, which were heading to a 
military base, passed at different intervals, he rose and fired a Soviet-made 
AK-47 rifle. An alerted Israeli army patrol appeared and began shooting as did 
a passenger from the bus. The gunman fled on foot toward Egypt, 300 yards away. 
He was wounded but escaped, reports said. 
Israel Radio said the gunman was a border guard. Cairo's Middle East News 
Agency reported that an army conscript was arrested in Egypt on suspicion of 
"opening fire on a number of Israeli vehicles carrying Israeli soldiers and 
workers." 
"It is a very regrettable incident, and we are certainly against such kinds of 
acts, and we shall investigate this affair in detail," said Egypt's foreign 
minister, Esmat Abdel Meguid. 
