ETHICS PANEL VOTES FOR REVIEW OF CHARGES AGAINST 5 SENATORS; 
LINCOLN S&amp;L: CRANSTON IS AMONG THOSE ACCUSED OF IMPROPERLY INTERVENING WITH 
FEDERAL REGULATORS. AN OUTSIDE COUNSEL IS HIRED TO STUDY ALLEGATIONS. 
The Senate Ethics Committee voted unanimously Friday to have an outside counsel 
review influence-peddling allegations against Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.) and 
four other senators in connection with the $2-billion failure of Lincoln 
Savings and Loan of Irvine. 
The committee voted also to have the special counsel investigate similar 
complaints against Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato (R-N.Y.) resulting from scandal at 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Robert S. Bennett, a Washington attorney who has specialized in white-collar 
crime, was hired to help the committee determine whether it should proceed with 
a preliminary inquiry, the first of three stages of investigation the panel 
could pursue. 
Cranston and Sens. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.), John McCain (R-Ariz.), John 
Glenn (D-Ohio) and Donald W. Riegle Jr. (D-Mich.) are accused of improperly 
intervening with federal regulators on behalf of Lincoln after receiving 
political contributions from its owner, Charles H. Keating Jr. 
D'Amato is accused of using improper influence in federal housing programs on 
behalf of political contributors and friends. 
Meanwhile, a member of the House Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee 
said that the panel has been informed that Keating plans to invoke the 5th 
Amendment right against self-incrimination when he is called to testify Tuesday 
about Lincoln's collapse and his dealings with the five senators. 
Rep. Richard H. Lehman (D-Sanger) said that fellow members of the committee had 
been told of Keating's intentions, but a spokesman for the Arizona businessman 
said he did not believe a final decision had been made. 
Bradley J. Boland, a spokesman for Lincoln's parent company, American 
Continental Corp., said that Keating had been urged by a number of advisers to 
decline to testify. He said that American Continental executives believe that 
the House hearing does not provide a fair forum. 
Keating, under FBI investigation on fraud and other allegations, has said in 
court documents that he expects to be indicted for his role in the Lincoln 
case. 
Cranston said that he did not think the Ethics Committee needed to hire an 
outside counsel because "as numerous legal precedents have shown, I did not 
violate any laws, ethical standards or rules of the Senate." 
But he said that the appointment of Bennett, brother of William J. Bennett, the 
top official in the Administration's war on drugs, "will further promote 
confidence in the Senate's process for reviewing the conduct of its members." 
Cranston and his colleagues have been accused by Common Cause, a political 
action lobby, of improperly helping Keating with federal regulators in 1987. 
Keating and his associates had contributed about $1.3 million to campaigns and 
other causes supported by the senators. 
McCain said in a statement: "I am confident that an investigation will 
vindicate my repeated statements that I never abused my office nor took actions 
that were improper." 
DeConcini said: "I welcome anything that will establish the facts and I will 
cooperate fully." 
Meanwhile, it was learned that DeConcini not only discussed Lincoln with 
federal regulators, he also telephoned the boss of California's top savings and 
loan regulator on behalf of Keating in April, 1988. 
At the time, Keating was trying to sell the Irvine firm before federal agents 
could seize it. William J. Crawford, California's savings and loan 
commissioner, had rejected the proposed deal, and Keating was seeking federal 
approval instead. 
In an interview Friday, Crawford said that DeConcini sought assurances from his 
boss, John K. Geoghegan, that Crawford would keep his objections to the sale 
quiet. 
Crawford said that Geoghegan, a member of Gov. George Deukmejian's cabinet, did 
not try to silence him and that he continued to oppose the transaction. The 
deal was rejected by federal regulators, too, and Lincoln was seized by the 
government last April 14. 
It will cost the federal government an estimated $2 billion to bail out 
Lincoln, making it the most expensive thrift failure ever. 
Staff writers Douglas Frantz in Washington, James Bates in Los Angeles and 
James S. Granelli in Orange County contributed to this story. 
