HOLLYWOOD PARK; 
OPENING DAY ATTRACTS ONLY 11,729 
As a result of recent renovation, new bricks and fresh paint were much in 
evidence for the start of Hollywood Park's 30-day fall-winter meeting. 
Unfortunately for the track, people were in shorter supply. 
Continuing a distressing trend for the Inglewood plant, only 11,729 fans showed 
up Wednesday, making it the smallest opening-day gathering in Hollywood Park 
history. The previous low was last year, when 14,980 turned out on a day when 
there was a promotional giveaway. 
This does not bode well for the remainder of the meeting, which concludes 
Christmas Eve and follows an Oak Tree meeting that had only small declines in 
on-track attendance and handle. 
Gary Boulanger, however, found absolutely nothing wrong with his first day at 
Hollywood Park. 
The recently arrived jockey scored his first stakes victory in Southern 
California when he rode Owiseone to an upset in the $75,825 Moccasin Stakes. 
The longest shot at 5-1 in a field reduced to four after four scratches, the 
2-year-old Smarten filly defeated 6-5 favorite Ten K by 1 1/2 lengths while 
covering the 6 1/2 furlongs in 1:16 3/5. 
This was the third consecutive win for Owiseone, purchased for $60,000 by 
trainer Terry Knight after she broke her maiden for $32,000 on the first try. 
In her initial start for Knight, Owiseone beat a Bay Meadows allowance field by 
nine lengths. 
Never far off the lead Wednesday, she moved ahead and drew clear in the final 
sixteenth to make it two for two with Boulanger aboard. 
Ten K, making her first start since being beaten by 17 lengths at 1-1 odds in 
the Del Mar Debutante, outfinished Dramatic Joy by a neck for second place. 
Bel's Starlet, who seemed unusually washy going to the gate, was last, another 
half-length back. A Wild Ride was scratched earlier in the afternoon, and 
Puppet Show, Nasers Pride and Interlope opted instead for an allowance race on 
today's program. 
"We were just real impressed with the way she broke her maiden," Knight said of 
Owiseone. "She didn't beat a lot, but she did it like a real seasoned horse 
that had a big future. 
"After we got her and started training her, we thought we had a nice prospect. 
She beat nobody in her first race for us, but she won as easy as a horse can. 
It really was what we were looking for because she'd been off almost two months 
after her maiden win, and we didn't want to have a race that was too tough on 
her. 
"She's got good natural, tactical speed and a good finish, as you saw today. 
They were all right together at the quarter-pole, and she outfinished them." 
Since making his local debut on Breeders' Cup day at Santa Anita, Boulanger has 
shown he belongs on this circuit, and it helps that his agent is Jerry Ingordo, 
Pat Valenzuela's longtime partner. 
The top rider at Longacres in Renton, Wash., last spring, Boulanger, who will 
turn 22 Sunday, had won 16 races in 17 days at Bay Meadows before Ingordo 
persuaded him to move again. 
"It feels fabulous, to say the least," he said after his first added-money 
success. "Everyone has been very responsive from the stables we've approached 
to giving us a shot. I have to give 90% of the credit to Jerry. He has a lot of 
connections, and I'm just the kid who goes out and works." 
Because he was able to work with an agent of Ingordo's longevity, Boulanger 
decided the time was right to try to compete with such riders as Eddie 
Delahoussaye, Chris McCarron, Gary Stevens and Laffit Pincay. 
"I had thought about coming here, but when I did I wanted to come in with an 
agent with a lot of power and a lot of pull," he said. "It was tough to leave 
(Bay Meadows) because we were on a really good roll and business was looking 
good. 
"But I came at a very opportune time with everybody out of town for the 
Breeders' Cup, and I was able to get into a number of barns a lot sooner." 
A Canadian, Boulanger didn't begin riding until he was almost 18 and he is 
well-traveled. Besides Washington, he has also ridden in Canada, Florida, 
Delaware, Ohio and New York. 
After Owiseone's romp up north last month, Boulanger felt confident about her 
chances in the Moccasin. 
"She'd done everything asked of her, and the only thing we were concerned about 
was the shipping," he said. "She's a 2-year-old and it was her first time on 
(this) track, but she did everything perfect." 
According to Knight, Owiseone will return to Bay Meadows, but the $500,000 
Hollywood Starlet at a mile on Dec. 3 is a definite consideration. 
Stevens had no excuses for Ten K, who looked ready to swallow her rivals at the 
quarter-pole. Instead, she was handed her second straight defeat after 
beginning her career with two imposing wins. 
"She came up empty the last eighth of a mile," Stevens said. "I lost a lot of 
ground, but she didn't fire the last quarter-mile like I felt she was going 
to." 
Ron McAnally, the leading trainer at Del Mar and Oak Tree, started off as if he 
might be in line for a hat trick. 
He doubled Wednesday, winning the second race with maiden Lori's Wonder and the 
ninth with the promising 2-year-old, Silver Ending. 
Making his first start on grass, the son of Silver Hawk, who also sired 
Hawkster, won easily and may be the horse to beat in the Hoist the Flag Stakes 
on Nov. 25. 
Silver Ending also completed a double for Stevens, the lone rider to get more 
than one victory. He also took the seventh with 11-1 shot Runaway Blues. 
Horse Racing Notes 
The on-track handle was $2,866,763, contrasting with $3,349,424 a year ago. The 
figure was the smallest for an opening day at Hollywood Park since $2,837,187 
was bet in 1971. The per-capita wagering, however, was a solid $244.42. . . . 
The Moccasin was trainer Terry Knight's first stakes win in Southern 
California. . . . Owiseone paid $12 and $4.40. There was no show betting 
because of the small field. . . . Sunday Silence's arthroscopic surgery to 
remove a chip from his knee is scheduled for 11 a.m. today and should take less 
than an hour to complete. 
