TV REVIEW; 
'NOVA' UNCOVERS THE DOUBTS ABOUT U.S. 'SMART' WEAPONS 
With the Bush Administration's new strategy of doubling U.S. military forces in 
the Persian Gulf in order to display an offensive stance toward Iraq, fresh 
attention is being focused on the heart of U.S. military might: The high-tech, 
"smart" weapons that were so much a part of the expensive military build-up 
during the '80s. 
Many Pentagon strategists consider this computerized arsenal the 
ace-in-the-hole against a less-developed power like Iraq, but as the ultimate 
test for these weapons may be fast approaching, doubts are emerging about them 
as well. 
The KCET/Nova co-production, "Killing Machines," (tonight at 8 on Channels 28 
and 15 and at 9 on Channel 50) raises the most sobering questions yet. 
During the height of the Cold War, tank-heavy Warsaw Pact armies compelled 
outmanned American-led NATO forces to digitize the battlefield, ushering in 
high-precision missiles, planes and tanks. Quality over quantity, as the 
military mantra went. 
But as with every technological development in weaponry (the report shows 
author Tom Clancy comparing the new machines to the repeater rifle of the 19th 
Century), arms trade expands, and your customer today may be your enemy 
tomorrow. 
Nowhere is this more stark than with Iraq, although "Machines" fails to track 
how Western Europe and the United States helped feed Saddam Hussein's own 
machine. It does, though, show how a Third World guerrilla force in 
Afghanistan, using a basic smart weapon like the Stinger anti-aircraft gun, 
blew the Soviet superpower out of the sky. Smarter, cheaper, more compact 
weapons have democratized military power: A superpower may no longer be so 
super. 
Producer Mitchell Koss strives for balance, but somehow the several critics of 
smart weapons -- including Adm. Eugene Carroll and defense consultant Donald 
Mayes -- come through louder, for several reasons. 
The weapons remain untested in a real war and may not work. Mock U.S.-Iraq 
battles staged in the Mojave Desert have Iraq winning. Footage shot on-board 
the high-tech U.S.S. Vincennes when it accidentally shot down an Iranian 
passenger plane dramatize the danger of looking at an enemy on a radar screen 
rather than with your own eyes. The human factor behind the machine may be our 
own worst enemy. 
