LAKERS CATCH WARRIORS A BIT SHORT, 106-95 
Maybe it is time to redefine these post-Kareem Lakers. Part Zelig, part 
quick-change artists, they apparently use whatever style they deem necessary 
for the occasion. 
Thursday night, against the Golden State Warriors, who can play either tall or 
small, the Lakers turned into rebounding demons en route to a 106-95 victory 
before 15,025 at the Oakland Coliseum Arena. 
This was not a Laker masterpiece, but it was a good example of their 
versatility. The Lakers outrebounded the Warriors, 69-34, taking advantage of 
their own 36.1% shooting in a backhanded way. 
The defeat for the Warriors came one game after they lost 7-foot Alton Lister 
with a torn right Achilles' tendon. 
When not crashing the boards, Lakers big and small were crashing to the floor 
for loose balls and outhustling the Warriors, who supposedly are quicker than 
most opponents with their small lineup and use Manute Bol's height to clog the 
middle. 
This also was proof that the Lakers do not always need exceptional performances 
from Magic Johnson or James Worthy to win, though both contributed. 
Johnson had his first triple-double of the season: 19 points, 10 rebounds and 
10 assists. Worthy overcame a third-quarter ankle strain to contribute 13 
points and 11 rebounds. But the standout on this night was power forward A.C. 
Green, who had 24 points and 16 rebounds. 
"This was probably the hardest we've played," guard Byron Scott said. "This is 
the way we'll have to play to be successful. Even though we're small, we are 
quick and we had a nose for the ball. 
"We had five guys going to the boards, and that's what we needed. The guards 
picked up the long rebounds. A.C. and Mychal (Thompson) were banging away 
inside. We wanted to make them pay for using the small lineup. But we played 
hard. You'll notice we got a lot of loose balls. We just beat them to (the 
loose balls)." 
Magic Johnson, in his 11th NBA season, said Thursday's rebounding performance, 
in which the Lakers held a 28-7 offensive advantage, was "the most impressive 
rebounding since I've been here." 
Johnson, usually not prone to overstatement, also said he feels the Lakers have 
rarely put in such a sustained effort. 
"That's probably one of the hardest second halves I've been involved with," 
Johnson said. "Everybody worked. Everybody. If we play hard, it does not matter 
what you shoot. You're going to win the game." 
It was a good thing, perhaps, the Lakers did not rely solely on their shooting. 
Johnson made only seven of 20 shots. Scott sank five of 19, Worthy five of 18. 
Of the starters, only Green did not suffer from cold shooting. He made seven of 
14 shots and 10 of 11 free-throw attempts. 
The Lakers needed to tap different resources to overcome the Warriors, who led 
by six points at halftime behind forward Chris Mullin's 25 points. But, in the 
second half, a tough defense and emphasis on rebounding quickly erased Golden 
State's lead. 
The Warriors were limited to 17 points in the third quarter and the Lakers held 
a six-point lead heading into the fourth quarter that would swell to 18 points 
in the late going. 
Mullin, after starting so strongly, was held to one free throw in the fourth 
quarter, and that came on a technical foul for illegal defense. Mullin finished 
with 30 points for the Warriors, who fell to 1-3. 
The Lakers improved to 3-1, two of the victories coming on the road. 
The turning point and the possession that best exemplified the Lakers' 
aggressive rebounding stance came with 4:53 left in the third quarter. The 
Lakers attempted four shots, Green and Cooper missing first, then Johnson 
missing two follow attempts. 
Somehow, Scott outmuscled taller Warriors for the ball, scored inside and was 
fouled. He made the free throw, and the Lakers had the lead, 68-65. They never 
relinquished it. 
They never stopped working, either. 
Another example of Laker persistance came with about 6 1/2 minutes left in the 
fourth quarter. 
Scott missed a jump shot. Johnson grabbed the long rebound, but missed the 
follow shot. Worthy grabbed Johnson's miss, but then missed from inside. A 
scramble for the loose ball ensued, Johnson finally emerging with it. With his 
back to the basket, Johnson flipped the ball into the basket, giving the Lakers 
a 94-81 lead. 
"In the second half, we came out more aggressive," Laker Coach Pat Riley said. 
"When we missed shots, we volleyballed the rebound. We have six or seven 
veterans who know each other and play together well." 
As Thompson, resident quipster described it, "Everyone played like their shorts 
were on fire." 
So far in the young season, the Lakers hold a 220-176 rebounding advantage over 
opponents. That should not come as too much of a surprise, since rebounding was 
never the strongest part of Abdul-Jabbar's game. 
"I never worried about our rebounding," Riley said. 
Laker Notes 
Magic Johnson said he will not appeal the $3,000 fine for his part in Tuesday 
night's pushing incident with the Phoenix Suns' Kevin Johnson. "I'm paying it 
and moving on," Johnson said. "The more I talk about it, the more frustrated I 
get." . . . Byron Scott, on being fined $500 for what he called "trying to 
break up" the fight: "The league thought I was trying to take a swing, but I 
saw it differently." 
The Lakers gave a physical examination Wednesday to Jawann Oldham, the 
32-year-old center coming off reconstructive surgery on his left knee, but 
General Manager Jerry West said Thursday the team has "put on hold" its efforts 
to sign the 7-footer. West is expected to meet with the Laker coaching staff 
this morning to make a decision. Reggie Turner, Oldham's agent, said several 
teams have inquired about his client, but Oldham's first choice is the Lakers. 
"Jawann has always wanted to play for the Lakers," Turner said. However, the 
examination showed that Oldham's left knee has not regained its strength, which 
may prompt the Lakers to pass. Turner said: "His physical went as expected. 
(The Lakers') projection of his knee strength was from a cybex machine, which 
doctors (for) Sacramento (Oldham's former team) and Seattle (which is 
interested) did not really use. But what everybody I've talked to agrees on is 
that the knee is sound. The Lakers only want him for a limited role, and he can 
play 10 to 15 minutes a game with no problem." 
In addition to the Lakers, the SuperSonics, the Suns and the Miami Heat 
reportedly have shown interest in Oldham, released by the Sacramento Kings last 
week. Since he has cleared waivers, Oldham can be signed for the NBA minimum of 
$110,000, but he may go to the highest bidder. One scenario is that the 
Warriors, who have probably lost center Alton Lister for the season after he 
ruptured his right Achilles' tendon Wednesday night against the Clippers, will 
acquire holdout center Steve Johnson from Minnesota, and the Timberwolves will 
sign Oldham for well above the league minimum. "A lot of things could happen," 
Turner said. 
Laker reserve center Mark McNamara has been bothered recently by bursitis in 
his left shoulder. "I can't move my head to the left very well," McNamara said, 
"but I can still play." 
