THE MALTA SUMMIT; 
GORBACHEV REFORMS STIR GLOBAL CHANGES; 
FOREIGN POLICY: PERESTROIKA, INTENDED TO CHANGE THE SOVIET UNION, IS PAYING 
DIVIDENDS ABROAD AS THE SPECTER OF THE COLD WAR RECEDES. 
When Mikhail S. Gorbachev assumed the leadership of the Soviet Union almost 
five years ago, he set out to transform the country and stem the collapse of 
its political and economic system. In the process, he has begun reshaping world 
politics as well. 
The reforms that Gorbachev undertook have dramatically altered the Soviet 
Union's relations with the West, turning what President Ronald Reagan called 
the "evil empire" into what President Bush now hails as a "partner for peace." 
Warming to the charismatic Soviet leader and his efforts to replace the 
totalitarian system that had existed since the time of the dictator Josef 
Stalin with political pluralism and a market economy, the West saw Gorbachev, 
as British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher put it first, as "a man we can do 
business with." 
The changes Gorbachev is attempting at home -- the Communist Party's 
progressive sharing of power, the freeing of the Soviet economy from rigid 
central planning, the opening to the outside world, the growing respect for 
human rights -- have fascinated the West and increasingly diminished its 
long-held perception of the "Soviet threat." 
With their growing resonance in other socialist countries, even in such 
formerly hard-line states as East Germany and Bulgaria, Gorbachev's reforms now 
promise to bring historic change to Europe and to East-West relations as a 
whole. 
Perestroika, begun as an effort to pull the Soviet Union out of two decades of 
political, economic and social stagnation, has brought Moscow more prestige and 
influence than its military might did. And what was an urgent necessity in 
terms of domestic policy has become an unexpected virtue in foreign affairs. 
Appraising their country's position in the world, Soviet leaders and foreign 
affairs specialists are able to argue that their reforms are creating a 
political watershed on the eve of the 21st Century, not only for their country 
and other socialist countries but virtually around the world. 
"We see that many countries and people in the world are responding actively and 
positively to perestroika," Alexander N. Yakovlev, a member of the Communist 
Party's ruling Politburo and one of Gorbachev's closest advisers, said recently 
on a visit to Tokyo. "It is tackling not only the problems of Soviet society; 
it is also looking for answers to the questions faced by the whole 
international community." 
As a result of these shifts, Gorbachev goes to his first summit meeting with 
President Bush off Malta this weekend with confidence that a new relationship 
is developing not only between the Soviet Union and the United States but 
between East and West, a relationship that Soviet officials see ending the Cold 
War and forming the basis of a new international order. 
"We are in one of the greatest moments of the 20th Century," Leonid N. 
Dobrokhotov, a senior official in the Communist Party's policy-making Central 
Committee, said in an interview. "A fundamental revolution in people's 
mentality has occurred. . . . Our relations with the United States will not -- 
cannot -- return to what they were for so many years. . . . And on that basis, 
we can honestly look forward to further changes in international relations." 
Tired of the Cold War years of nuclear threat and stalemate, the West has 
welcomed the changes in the Soviet Union's foreign policy under Gorbachev -- 
his substitution of a "balance of interests" for the old balance of power, the 
abandonment of confrontation in search of cooperation and the end of "class 
struggle" -- as the basis for Soviet actions around the world. 
"We can take pride in the fact that our new revolution acts as a locomotive of 
positive change in the world and has a favorable effect on world politics, 
warming the international climate," Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign 
minister, told a legislative committee reviewing the country's foreign policy 
this month. 
"Today, we see the signs of the consolidation of all mankind in response to the 
threats -- nuclear, economic and ecological -- to our civilization. This is the 
only way to our survival. The sooner this is understood, the greater our 
chances for salvation." 
Brought together as "new political thinking," the far-reaching changes in 
Soviet foreign policy have given Moscow considerable leverage on most 
international issues. Under Gorbachev, the Soviet Union generally takes the 
initiative, leaving the West to match it in pragmatism and willingness to 
rethink old positions. 
Georgy A. Arbatov, the veteran director of the Institute for the Study of the 
United States and Canada and an influential member of the party Central 
Committee, calls this the "Gorbachev challenge." 
"We take what we call our 'new political thinking' right to the people," 
Arbatov said. "We want them to see what we are proposing and to compare it to 
what has existed for so long, to what others are proposing. . . . And people 
have begun to see that we are not doomed to live under that modern sword of 
Damocles -- the threat of nuclear war." 
The term "new political thinking" is summed up by Yuri A. Krasin, rector of the 
party's Institute of Social Sciences, as starting from "an overall change in 
outlook on security, moving from the balance of forces to a balance of 
interests, from force and the threat of force to confidence and trust, from the 
projection of military power to sufficient defense." 
"What we have realized and are trying to get others to share," he told a 
military conference here not long ago, "is that no real security is obtainable 
in this age without a general agreement that is based on trust . . . but for 
trust to work, we need sweeping changes in international relations." 
Recalling the theory of an escalating thermonuclear conflict developed during 
the Cold War by the late American strategist Herman Kahn, Krasin proposed "a 
reverse model" of de-escalation, characterized by unilateral moves to signal 
good will and then by reciprocal and mutual measures. 
Andrei A. Kokoshin, a political scientist at the U.S.A. Institute here, said 
that in the searching reappraisal that came with Gorbachev's assumption of the 
leadership, the Soviet Union realized that the West's military strength, 
although growing, was not the greatest threat to Soviet national survival. 
A greater threat, particularly to the Soviet Union's posture as a great power, 
stemmed, he said, from the gap between its scientific-technical level and that 
of the West, and from its failure to improve living standards through economic 
development. 
'Cost Us a Lot' 
"Military parity (with the United States) was a key guarantee of national 
security, but it cost us a lot in sacrifice and expenditures," Kokoshin said. 
"It also left us vulnerable in other ways, some of them unforeseen, and today 
we attach priority to political means in ensuring our national security." 
Although the greatest impact of Moscow's foreign policy reorientation has been 
on Soviet-American relations and, more broadly, on the whole East-West 
relationship, Soviet officials quickly tick off other changes of considerable 
consequence in the past two years. Some examples: 
"In setting Eastern Europe 'free,' we also freed ourselves," a foreign policy 
adviser to Gorbachev said, asking not to be quoted by name. "The prestige of 
socialism is enhanced; no one talks any longer about 'satellites' or the 'Iron 
Curtain.' We are not burdened with their mistakes, nor they with ours. 
Recognizing the right of every nation to choose its political and economic 
system freely was not only the moral thing to do, it was the politically smart 
thing. . . . In the long run, we will be drawn together by natural interests, 
and that will be a far healthier and stronger basis for relations. As the 
confrontation with the West is reduced, our security is increased. Already we 
are planning the transformation of the Warsaw Pact into a political grouping to 
help us manage the transition away from confrontation." 
Western Europe, where Gorbachev regularly ranks in opinion polls as the world's 
most popular political figure, is rapidly adjusting its vision of the future to 
include a democratized Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Gorbachev, who visited 
Britain, Finland, France and West Germany before his current trip to Italy and 
the Vatican, has won considerable support for what he calls "the common 
European home," a new Europe no longer divided into armed camps but united 
through shared values and such goals as disarmament, economic cooperation and 
environmental protection. 
The long estrangement between China and the Soviet Union was ended with 
Gorbachev's trip to Beijing in May. The rapprochement reflected not only 
Moscow's acknowledgment that every socialist country had to find its own way 
but its willingness to resolve outstanding disputes with Beijing. The benefit 
to Moscow was great -- the further reduction of tension along the 4,600-mile 
Sino-Soviet border, allowing for a substantial reduction in the forces it had 
stationed there for more than 20 years, and the prospect of economic 
cooperation that would bring development to Siberia and the Soviet Far East. 
In the Third World, the Soviet Union is limiting its exposure to what it can 
afford, politically as well as economically. No longer does it preach 
Soviet-style socialism as the best course for development, and no longer does 
it offer to underwrite such efforts with military and economic assistance on 
the vast scale of the 1960s and 1970s. 
Soviet troops completed their withdrawal from Afghanistan in February, and 
after nine months, the Moscow-backed government of President Najibullah remains 
in place. Moscow assisted directly in the U.S. mediation effort that led to the 
recent elections in Namibia and the accompanying withdrawal of Cuban forces 
from Angola. And the Soviet Union continues to promote a political settlement 
of the conflict in Cambodia following the Vietnamese pullout there. 
"We have created some space for ourselves in which to maneuver," Andrei V. 
Nikiforov, the editor of the influential journal USA, said in an interview. 
"Gorbachev goes to Malta without nearly the problems he had pressing on him 18 
months ago when he met Reagan here, or even last year when he met Reagan and 
Bush in New York. Foreign policy no longer constricts us in the way it did for 
so many years. We have a new posture in the world today." 
