COMPUTER FILE / RICHARD O'REILLY: STANDARDS TO SET COMMON GROUND 
What a difference a year makes. Personal computing has undergone fundamental 
change, which was apparent at this year's Comdex trade show in Las Vegas, where 
hardware and software manufacturers competed for the attention of dealers and 
writers. 
At long last in the IBM-compatible arena of computing we have some real 
standards that define the common level of hardware and software that 
business-oriented and many home computer systems will have. 
They will be high-performance computers using the Intel 80386 microprocessor in 
either its low-cost SX variant or higher-cost DX option, equipped with at least 
1 megabyte of RAM operating memory -- and probably more -- a hard disk drive 
and a color VGA monitor. 
These computers will use the DOS operating system, along with Microsoft's 
Windows 3.0 graphical user interface software and various software programs 
that run with Windows. 
Less powerfully equipped computers will continue to be popular among the 
budget-conscious, of course, but the 386 color system with Windows has become 
the machine of choice because it enables a much easier and richer level of 
computing than DOS computer users have been used to. 
Last year at Comdex, Windows 3.0 was just a rumor, 386-based computers were 
still too expensive -- as was VGA color -- and OS/2, not DOS, was being touted 
as the PC operating system of the future. 
What changed? 
For one, prices of 386SX-based computers fell to the former levels of 80286 
machines. For another, prices of color VGA board and monitor combinations fell 
to little more than we once paid for green-screen monochrome systems. 
And Windows 3.0 was such an improvement over previous versions that software 
developers started focusing on programs for Windows instead of programs for 
OS/2. 
Uncertainty arising from the internal construction of these computers appears 
to have been resolved. 
Last year, there was an acrimonious debate between IBM and Compaq engineers 
over which one of their internal system designs was best -- microchannel 
architecture (MCA) at IBM or extended industry standard architecture (EISA) at 
Compaq. 
Guess what? Both are alive and doing quite well this year. Many manufacturers 
have followed Compaq's lead, offering their own EISA high-performance 
computers. Despite this, IBM's proprietary-design MCA machines are selling 
well. The most sales of all are still enjoyed by an older design, ISA -- or 
industry standard architecture -- that originated with the IBM PC/AT. Clearly, 
all three designs will continue to coexist in the marketplace (and in the 
office) with little problem. 
Another significant change was the way that more than a dozen manufacturers 
introduced so-called notebook-sized computers that were more alike than 
different. Portables have always been the least-standardized personal 
computers. 
The new notebook designs all use 386 chips, mostly the SX version; black and 
white VGA screens able to display 16 or 32 shades of gray; internal hard disks 
of at least 20-megabyte capacity and often 40 megabytes; a 3.5-inch floppy 
drive for 1.44-megabyte diskettes, and an internal modem. 
Suggested retail prices ranged from $2,995 for an AST model to Compaq's $6,499. 
Weights were in the six- to seven-pound range and listed battery life was 
typically about three hours. Most were black or dark gray. 
Keyboard layouts differed, as did screen contrasts and placement of drives and 
output ports, so buyers will want to shop carefully. 
There were also a couple of AC-powered, laptop portable color computers with 
brilliant VGA screens using an active matrix technology that is quite 
expensive. Toshiba showed a $9,000 model with a 286 microprocessor, while Sharp 
had a 386 color portable that probably will be priced at $12,000 to $13,000. It 
will be a long time before many of us have one of these on our desks because 
the cost of making color liquid crystal display screens is unlikely to fall 
very fast. 
Something else that remains expensive and thus not in wide use are optical disk 
drives that can re-record data again and again. 
In the software arena, William H. Gates III, the youthful founder and chairman 
of Microsoft, delivered the keynote address built around an elaborately 
produced video spoof of the "Twin Peaks" television show. His theme, 
"information at your fingertips," portrayed a world in which computer users 
need be concerned only with the words and numbers and images they want to 
appear in their documents, not the programs needed to put them there. 
Gates predicted that such software technology will be available during the 
1990s. But you can already buy software that achieves much of that goal for 
only $200. 
It is called New Wave, is published by Hewlett-Packard and runs with Windows 
3.0. 
For only $10, you can buy your own videotape of Gates' 45-minute Comdex 
presentation by calling Microsoft at (800) 541-1261. Tip: Watch what the little 
kid with glasses does with his glasses and watch what Gates does with his. It's 
nice to see a billionaire with a sense of humor, however subtle. 
For me, the hit of the show was neither PC- nor Mac-related. It was Video 
Toaster, a $1,595 board and companion software that turns an Amiga computer 
into a broadcast-quality video production machine with real-time image 
processing. I'll have more about it in a future column. 
Computer File welcomes readers' comments but regrets that the author cannot 
respond individually to letters. Write to Richard O'Reilly, Computer File, Los 
Angeles Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles, Calif. 90053. 
RICHARD O'REILLY is director of computer analysis for The Times. 
