ALWAYS PREPARING, WILL WE NEVER ACT?; 
PERSIAN GULF: AS STRENGTH BUILDS, SUPPORT EBBS. WE MAY MISS THE OPTIMUM MOMENT. 
Question: May I try to summarize your attitude on the gulf crisis in a few 
words? Without the capitulation of Saddam Hussein, the real choice is not 
between peace and war but between a war now and a war in the future, a war more 
destabilizing and catastrophic. 
Answer: I wouldn't put it in terms of capitulation of Iraq, but I would say 
that any settlement must keep in mind not only the immediate issue but the 
balance of power in the gulf after the United States leaves. And if Iraq 
remains in a militarily predominant position, then indeed there will be a war 
later, either between Arabs or between Arabs and Israel, or both. 
Q: With the decision to almost double the military force in the gulf, President 
Bush wanted to scare Saddam Hussein by saying we mean business, but the first 
effect has been a more scared American public opinion. Domestic support is 
weakening. 
A: The basic problem has been from the beginning to relate strength to time. At 
the very beginning we were relatively weak, but we had lots of time. As we 
build up our strength, we also lose support, because time goes by. One of the 
big decisions to be made is to pick the optimum mode in which strength and 
available time combine to produce the best negotiating positions, or, if that 
fails, the best military positions. And I am not sure that all of our military 
people understand the psychological element. 
Q: Why did the President suddenly make a decision of such an increase in 
forces? 
A: I can only speak as an outsider. My impression is that our military 
leadership, analyzing the issue in strictly military terms, has stated the 
force requirements that we have now seen publicly. They generate the force 
requirements by taking the worst-case scenario, and so they treat the Iraqi 
army as if it were the German army at the height of its power, and they want to 
allow for everything that could conceivably go wrong. 
Yet I can see what tempts a military commander into that direction, because if 
anything goes wrong, as it often does in war, they want to have the greatest 
degree of reassurance. The decision the President has to make is how much 
weight to give to the political, psychological, diplomatic factors to avoid 
being driven by purely technical considerations. 
Q: The choices seem to be only capitulation by Hussein or war. Is there a third 
option? 
A: The only effective diplomatic way out is one that changes the situation. We 
have to summarize what Saddam Hussein has done. He didn't just occupy Kuwait. 
He is changing the character of the whole country, expelling people, looting 
the entire infrastructure, moving in new people, so that with every passing 
month he is creating a fait accompli, which makes the whole diplomatic effort 
partly irrelevant. On top of it, he has undertaken an absolutely unprecedented 
use of hostages in taking thousands of them and keeping them near military 
targets. 
Now, if a man who has shown such ruthlessness emerges from this crisis with a 
strong military position, then we have lost, and we ought to be honest about 
this. Every diplomatic proposal that I have seen so far is in fact a defeat for 
the United Nations position; they would give him something and penalize him not 
at all. Every prominent outside visitor is a psychological success for him. 
Every time a leading outside figure calls for diplomacy without asking anything 
of Iraq, it is a success for Iraq. 
Q: Dr. Kissinger, from your words I arrived at the conclusion that war is 
inevitable there. 
A: No. Defeat is also possible. A diplomatic solution is also possible. If I 
had to predict what will happen, I would say there is a good chance of an 
unsatisfactory diplomatic solution in a face-saving way. 
Q: It seems to me that President Bush has not prepared this country enough for 
a war. 
A: Within the government there are different opinions, and those who are 
opposed to the military option always ask for more time for diplomacy, and 
those who favor the military option ask for time to build up forces, and the 
combination means the time for decision never arrives. And since the President 
has not been obliged to make the decision, he cannot very well prepare the 
American public for something that his advisers tell him doesn't have to be 
decided yet. 
Q: But it will come in January because there are certain deadlines, the 
weather, the spring. . . . 
A: Unless people know that a deadline of a sort comes in January, there will be 
a peace proposal from somewhere, which I expect . . . maybe from Saddam 
Hussein, maybe from the Soviets. I firmly expect a diplomatic phase. 
Q: What will happen when the United States proposes to the Security Council a 
resolution authorizing the use of military force in the gulf? 
A: Well, I would be astonished if we could get a resolution without any 
qualifications. There will be a debate. There will be two kinds of proposals: 
first, qualifications of the kind of force that can be used, some sort of 
limitations. Second, there will almost certainly be a proposal that before one 
decides, there should be a peace mission. I don't think there will be a clean 
resolution (authorizing use of force). 
