ELECTION '89; 
INCUMBENT'S PERFORMANCE GETS SPOTLIGHT IN ROLLING HILLS ESTATES 
In March, Rolling Hills Estates City Councilwoman Jacki McGuire was elected to 
fill out the unexpired term of veteran Councilman Jerome Belsky, who had been 
recalled the previous November in a bitter election. 
Now, as she seeks her first full four-year term in her own right in the Tuesday 
election, McGuire's performance in office is the major issue in the four-way 
race for two council seats. One seat is open because Mayor Nell Mirels -- who 
has been on the council since 1972 -- did not seek reelection. 
In addition to McGuire, a 43-year-old special education teacher in the Palos 
Verdes Peninsula Unified School District, candidates include Hirsh V. Marantz, 
57, an electronics engineer; Susan Seamans, a 48-year-old interior designer, 
and Ken Servis, 50, a USC chemistry professor and dean, who also is a city 
planning commissioner. 
Seamans and Servis contend that McGuire has been ineffective and disruptive and 
has refused to learn how to function as a councilwoman. "She has not listened 
and learned," Servis said. But Marantz admires McGuire, saying that she has 
been "trying to break through the good-old-boy system." 
For her part, McGuire said, "I've given the residents an active voice on the 
council, have stuck by the residents through thick and thin, despite the 
criticism and harassment." 
In addition to the council race, the city ballot includes two propositions 
relating to a utility users tax to raise money for the purchase of public open 
space. Proposition N would create a four-year, 5% tax. A companion measure, 
Proposition O, would allow the city to exceed its so-called Gann limit on tax 
revenues for the duration of the tax. Both must be approved for the tax to be 
collected, and approval of the utility tax itself requires a two-thirds vote. 
All of the candidates believe that open space preservation is a key city 
concern, but they differ on how to do it. McGuire, Seamans and Marantz support 
the utility tax. Servis opposes the tax, contending it will raise too little to 
be effective and that land may be kept open through zoning or easements from 
property owners. 
If McGuire is the leading issue in the council race, longevity of council 
service -- one bone of contention in the Belsky recall -- is a close second in 
the view of some candidates. Except for McGuire, the four current council 
members have shared the dais for more than a decade. Belsky served 12 years 
before being recalled. 
Although none of the longtime incumbents are on Tuesday's ballot, most of the 
candidates expressed a belief that the city needs more turnover in its 
leadership. 
"I believe in vital government," Seamans said. "If people stay too long, it 
gets tired." She said new leadership is needed, particularly in the areas of 
land use and open space preservation. 
Marantz said he advocates a two-term limit on council service and blamed what 
he termed unequal treatment of people by the council to officeholders becoming 
"entrenched." He contends that some people get approval of home modifications 
faster if they are supporters of a council member. 
McGuire also is continuing to advocate a two-term council limit, as she did in 
the special election. 
Both Seamans and Servis are banking on their name recognition and record of 
community service. Marantz is the self-admitted "underdog," saying he was 
prompted to run because of the longtime flap in his neighborhood over proposed 
expansion of the Peninsula Heritage School, which the council eventually turned 
down. 
Seamans was on the Palos Verdes Library District board from 1977 to 1985. 
Currently, she is president of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Coordinating Council. 
Servis, a planning commissioner for 11 years, said he has been effective in 
preserving the city's rural atmosphere. "I was instrumental in the neighborhood 
compatibility ordinance, which is the single most effective tool to protect the 
city," he said. That measure sets procedures to ensure that new homes fit into 
their neighborhood. 
McGuire argues that one of her strong suits has been making waves over 
conditional use permits, which she contends the city does not enforce quickly 
or stringently enough. For example, she has continually hammered at Chandler's 
Palos Verdes Sand &amp; Gravel Co. quarry to comply with noise and landscaping 
requirements. 
Some of her council colleagues have accused her of being anti-business and 
trying to rush an established timetable for the work, but she has sided with 
nearby residents, who contend they have lived with Chandler noise for too long. 
McGuire said residents "have to be watchdogs" in their own neighborhood, which 
should be the city's role. 
Critics of McGuire fault her on several counts, including her practice of 
abstaining on nearly all matters touching on the school district despite a city 
attorney's opinion that she has no conflict of interest as a district employee. 
(Mirels also is a school employee and does not abstain.) 
Seamans and Servis contend that by abstaining on such things as placing the 
utility tax on the ballot, McGuire is shirking her duty to participate in 
deciding critical issues. 
McGuire said identification of the closed Dapplegray Intermediate School site 
as a possible future open space acquisition prompted her abstention. "I abstain 
on issues where city money is going to my employer," she said. 
Servis also accused McGuire of knowingly conveying false information about a 
Chandler project to neighbors already unhappy with quarry operations. 
Specifically, he said, she took plans to the neighbors showing that light 
standards for a proposed golf driving range were 40 feet tall when she knew the 
Planning Commission had reduced them to 10 feet. 
McGuire said she took plans to the neighbors that showed the lights at 20 feet, 
and that she told them the commission had lowered them. Subsequently, residents 
made it clear they wanted no lights at all, and the golf range was shelved. 
McGuire sees that kind of activity as typical of the way she performs as a 
council member. 
"I become an active voice to inform (residents) of what is going on. They come 
up with their goals. I gather information for them and try to organize them so 
they can reach their goal," she said. 
THE CANDIDATES 
Hirsh V. Marantz 
Council challenger 
Age: 57 
Occupation: electronics engineer 
Jacki McGuire 
Council incumbent 
Age: 43 
Occupation: special education teacher 
Susan Seamans 
Council challenger 
Age: 48 
Occupation: interior designer 
Ken Servis 
Council challenger 
Age: 50 
Occupation: USC chemistry professor, dean 
