THOUSANDS DEMONSTRATE AGAINST SALES OF FURS; 
RETAILING: SOUTHLAND SHOPS ARE AMONG THE TARGETS OF ANIMAL RIGHTS GROUPS 
MARCHING IN 91 CITIES AROUND THE COUNTRY. 
Carrying coats streaked with red paint and coffins filled with fur, several 
thousand animal rights activists marched in 91 cities throughout the country in 
the fourth annual "Fur-Free Friday" to protest the killing of animals for 
apparel. 
About 2,500 demonstrators were led down New York's posh Fifth Avenue by 
game-show host Bob Barker, chanting "Fur is Murder" and "Don't Buy Fur." A 
smaller march targeted Beverly Hills furriers, and South Coast Plaza in Costa 
Mesa was the site of another peaceful demonstration. 
Barker, who resigned as host of the Miss USA pageant because winners were given 
furs as a part of their award, criticized the nation's fur farms as "animal 
concentration camps." 
Bob Buckler, executive director of the Fur Farm Animal Welfare Coalition, 
called the charge a "spurious allegation" and said "animals raised on American 
fur farms receive the highest standards of care of any farm animals in the 
world." 
About 75 demonstrators from five local animal rights groups picketed South 
Coast Plaza on Friday morning, christening the first official shopping day of 
the Christmas season. 
"It's the biggest mall in the area and the biggest shopping day of the year," 
said Ava Park, founder of Orange County People for Animals. "We want people to 
realize fur is an inappropriate gift to buy for someone you love. We support 
fake fur . . . real fur is beautiful and it belongs on animals." 
Miami saw the day's only anti-fur violence. Employees of Grove Cleaners &amp; 
Furriers in the fashionable neighborhood of Coconut Grove arrived at work 
Friday morning to find red and blue paint covering the store's front windows 
and graffiti marking a nearby van. 
An angry Alfonso Zequeira, the store's owner, lashed out at the vandalism: "I 
don't think that's right. They have a right to express themselves, but I don't 
think they should vandalize the store." 
A spokeswoman for the Animal Rights Foundation of Florida denied responsibility 
for the damage and blamed it on the furriers themselves. 
In Beverly Hills, about 150 demonstrators marched down trendy Wilshire 
Boulevard, Canon and Rodeo drives protesting more than 30 furriers, including 
Nieman Marcus, I. Magnin and Bijan. 
Marchers carried tape recorders broadcasting the cries of wounded animals and 
wore bloody fur coats tangled in leg-hold traps, "the most common traps used to 
kill animals," said Dana Stuchell, national director of the animal rights group 
Trans-Species Unlimited and coordinator of Fur-Free Friday. 
Sgt. Richard Westfall, watch commander of the Beverly Hills Police Department, 
said officers monitored the march, which was peaceful and orderly and didn't 
even snarl traffic. 
About 50 people dressed in black marched in San Francisco's Union Square, in 
the heart of the downtown shopping district. "Fur is torture, don't buy fur," 
they chanted, picking their way through crowds of shoppers and gingerly trying 
to keep from stepping on panhandlers sprawling on the sidewalks. 
And in Harrisburg, Pa., where about 75 people marched, protesters filled a 
black coffin with about $10,000 worth of mink, fox and rabbit furs. The furs 
were splashed with red paint to signify blood, and a nearby sign said, "Fur is 
murder." 
Times staff writer Mary Ann Galante in Orange County and Times wire services 
contributed to this report. 
