COMMENTARY; 
FREE AGENTS, FREE ADVICE 
When it comes to the pursuit of the free-agent ballplayer, Mike Port, the 
thesaurus-thumping vice president of the Angels, has always been a small-print 
kind of guy. 
In the winter of 1987, the uptown Dodgers made bold headlines by signing 
free-agent outfielder Kirk Gibson and, soon, the Dodgers owned new rings, 
Gibson owned a National League MVP trophy and Bill Mazeroski no longer owned 
the most dramatic home run in World Series history. 
Port signed Chili Davis. 
In the winter of 1988, upon instructions from Angel owner Gene Autry, Port 
threw millions at Nolan Ryan and Bruce Hurst -- and the free-agent pitchers 
threw them back, Ryan opting to stay in Texas and Hurst opting to play for 
someone other than Doug Rader. 
Port signed Claudell Washington. 
Now it is late 1989 and the free agents are out there again, bigger and better 
than ever. For the going rate of $3 million a year, the Angels could buy 
themselves the best leadoff man in baseball . . . or the American League's most 
valuable player . . . or the left-handed Roger Clemens. 
Could the Angels use any of these? 
You judge. 
Free agent: Rickey Henderson. 
Angel alternative: Devon White, the slugger in his own mind who hates to bat 
leadoff yet struck only 12 home runs this year; the leadoff man who hates to 
walk; the free swinger who still thinks a pitchout is a good pitch to pull. 
Free agent: Robin Yount. 
Angel alternative: Claudell Washington, the right fielder who appeared in only 
110 games and drove in 42 runs -- or 61 less than Yount. MVP material? 
Washington took himself out of a key late-season game in Kansas City because he 
"wasn't feeling well" and bailed on the team during its killer 4-11 trip to 
return home in early September. 
Free agent: Mark Langston. 
Angel alternative: Mike Witt. From 18-10 and 2.84 in 1986 to 9-15 and 5.47 in 
1989, Witt has steadily declined in each of his past four seasons. Last year, 
he led Angel pitchers only in home runs allowed (26), earned runs allowed (111) 
and exasperation. 
Could the Angels use any of these? Does Autry have $9 million handy? 
Angel hopes, however, should be tempered. As always. In this game, there's a 
very real chance the Angels could take the collar. 
We already know how they feel about Henderson, who, back in June, was 
considered too moody and too Rickey-oriented for proper team chemistry. So the 
Angels let him slip away to Oakland and the chemistry there wins a World 
Series. Rickey figures to stay an A. 
Yount has agreed in principle to the money being offered him in Milwaukee; he's 
waiting to see what personnel improvements the Brewers are willing to make. 
And Langston, deep down, wants to be a Dodger. He has eyes on L.A. and designs 
on remaining in the National League. But if not the Dodgers, there are always 
the Padres and the Yankees willing to up the ante into the stratosphere. 
It could be small-print time again in Anaheim. Is it any wonder that Port, 
after broadcasting last year's Ryan negotiations to anyone who would listen, 
won't even publicly acknowledge he's talking to Yount and Langston? Safer that 
way. Less risk of the public-relations trashing the Angels received last 
December after coming back with no Ryan and no Hurst. 
Thus, in the event of an Angel 0 for 3, we offer a low-risk, low-rent, 
low-maintenance suggestion. 
Mookie Wilson. 
For about $2 million a year less than Henderson, Wilson will bat leadoff for 
you and give you a .290 batting average and 20 steals. He'll also play the 
outfield better than Davis or Washington -- OK, no big deal -- but he'll also 
play with enthusiasm and play to win. Both those commodities were in short 
supply in Anaheim after Aug. 20. 
In his past four seasons, Wilson has been to the playoffs three times and the 
World Series once. He batted .289 -- and hit the ground ball of Bill Buckner's 
nightmares -- for the '86 World Series champion New York Mets. He batted .296 
for the '88 NL East champion Mets. And he batted .298 in 54 games with the '89 
AL East champion Toronto Blue Jays. 
On the down side, Wilson turns 34 in February, tends to fatigue from everyday 
use and doesn't have a strong arm. Then again, neither does Davis. And at 34, 
Wilson will still be younger than Washington and certainly more durable (Wilson 
appeared in 134 games in 1989). Wilson's addition to the Angels would enable 
Washington to shift back to fourth outfielder, the role he filled so ably with 
the Yankees. 
In short, Wilson is the perfect Mike Port free agent -- relatively inexpensive, 
slightly past his prime and still reasonably productive. 
He'd also represent another step forward in Doug Rader's program to de-ice the 
Angel clubhouse. He might not be Robin Yount, but he lends many of the same 
intangibles -- a veteran presence, a winning presence, a positive example for 
the younger players. 
The Angels already have tried a Cookie. 
How about a Mookie? 
