HEARTBREAK OF COHABITATION ENDS IN DIVORCE; 
COUPLES: COHABITATION IS NOT ALWAYS A TEST GROUND FOR A PERMANENT MARRIAGE, BUT 
A SPAWNING PLACE FOR QUICK DIVORCE. 
They met at a party in that corny, some-enchanted-evening, 
across-a-crowded-room kind of way, she recalls fondly, even now. 
Sixteen months later, they moved in together. Six months later, they married. 
Six years later, they separated and will divorce. 
"There might have been a better chance of us staying together if we had just 
gotten married," says Jane, a 27-year-old Baltimore County office manager who 
asked that her real name not be used. "The six months we lived together were 
pure heaven, and I had that to compare our marriage to. I knew different. I 
knew he was capable of more. 
"We lived together to find out if it would work, and it still didn't work. When 
you're living together, you try harder because it's easier (for your partner) 
to walk out. But once you get married, it's like all of a sudden, you relax." 
Living together before tying the knot, an increasingly common pattern that many 
assumed would boost the chances of succeeding at marriage, instead turns out to 
be a bane rather than a boon if what you want is a long-lasting marriage, 
recent research shows. 
Several studies have found that couples who live together first tend also to 
get divorced first. University of Wisconsin researchers report that 38% of 
couples who lived together before they married were divorced within 10 years, 
compared with 27% of couples who married without cohabiting first. 
The finding -- which follows a smaller, 1987 study that found an 80% higher 
divorce rate among couples who had lived together compared to those who hadn't 
-- surprised many experts who assumed that living together helped iron out 
potential marital problems and thus lessens the chances of divorce down the 
road. 
'Different Values' 
"I think people who cohabit have a different set of values, values that carry 
with (them) an ethic that relationships are breakable if they're not personally 
satisfying. So they're more likely to resort to a divorce," says Andrew 
Cherlin, a sociology professor at Johns Hopkins University who has collaborated 
on studies with the University of Wisconsin researchers. 
"People who don't cohabit have more traditional values than people who do. 
They're people who won't resort to divorce; they believe in the permanence of 
relationships." 
The Wisconsin researchers, Larry L. Bumpass and James Sweet, drew their 
conclusions from an analysis of the National Survey of Families and Households, 
which in 1987 and 1988 interviewed 13,017 people about marriage and 
cohabitation. 
"The findings were surprising," says Geoffrey Greif, an associate professor at 
the University of Maryland School of Social Work. "People had believed that 
living together prenuptially was a sort of protection against the old myth that 
you got a lot of surprises after you got married." 
But he and other experts say that it is not the act of living together 
prenuptially that somehow leads to an eventual divorce. Rather, they say, a 
different kind of person chooses to cohabit rather than marry -- and it's the 
kind of person perhaps more likely to call it quits than to stay in a 
less-than-satisfying marriage. 
"The study speaks to the fact that you have a different population of people 
who live together," says Greif. "They tend to be more independently minded, 
people who are, properly, self-protective, probably tend to believe they have a 
right to happiness. And when things are not going well, they're more likely to 
end the relationship." 
The findings, sociologists say, are further evidence of the evolving nature of 
marriage and relationships. Economics, feminism, changing sexual attitudes, 
increased emphasis on "me" versus "we" -- these have all contributed to an 
altered configuration of how we live, whom we live with and under what kind of 
circumstances. 
"With the increasing economic status of women, there's less reason to marry," 
Cherlin says. "Second, there is a greater acceptance of sex outside of 
marriage. And third, there are changing values -- there's an increased emphasis 
on personal satisfaction in intimate relationships, less emphasis on working 
together." 
While marriage is an institution being challenged by alternative arrangements, 
it is too early to sound the death knell, he says. 
"Despite the emphasis on personal satisfaction, we still believe in marriage. 
We still value the stability that formal marriage brings us, the public 
announcement that we want to stay together the rest of our lives. And most of 
us still think children should be raised in a marriage," he says. "Most people 
still want to get married, but most people won't condemn someone who isn't 
married." 
First Step 
And cohabiting increasingly is viewed as a natural first step in the direction 
of marriage. 
"For most people cohabitation is still more or less a trial marriage," Cherlin 
says. "About half of cohabiting relationships end in a year, either with the 
couple getting married or breaking up. It's not a lifelong relationship." 
Living together has most prominently become a part of divorce. When divorced 
people remarry today, nearly 60% of them will live together first, researchers 
have found. 
Carol, a 45-year-old Baltimore woman who asked that her name not be used, lived 
with her second husband before they married "because you don't see all the 
warts and scars in brief encounters over the weekend or overnight." 
They lived together for six months, married, but ended up divorcing four years 
later. Incidentally, she didn't live with her first husband before their 
marriage, which lasted 11 years. 
(There are no statistics yet available comparing the durability of second 
marriages that are preceded by cohabitation with those where the couple did not 
live together.) 
"I really don't have all the answers," Carol says of what effect living 
together had on their subsequent marriage. "We bought a house while we were 
living together, and the kids were in school, and it was kind of like you make 
all these financial commitments, how do you back out of it now? It was almost 
like it was too difficult to go backward. 
"You begin to make commitments, and you're moving in a certain track," she 
says, "and it's easier to keep on going that way rather than backpedal." 
