COUPLE CONVICTED OF PROSTITUTION ARRESTED IN NEWEST 'SEX CHURCH' 
A Canyon Country woman who claims to be the high priestess of an ancient 
Egyptian religion that worships by engaging in sex acts -- which led to her 
conviction on prostitution charges two months ago -- was arrested again Tuesday 
and accused of recruiting another woman to work in what police called a house 
of prostitution. 
Mary Ellen Tracy and her husband, Will Tracy, were arrested by Los Angeles 
police vice officers in a tiny, one-bedroom house in Silver Lake, the church's 
latest headquarters. Detective Alan Vanderpool said police would ask the 
district attorney's office to file charges of pandering, a felony, against the 
couple. 
Officers arrested the couple about 1 p.m. after a female undercover officer met 
the Tracys at the house to discuss the possibility of becoming a priestess in 
the Church of the Most High Goddess, which the Tracys describe as an ancient 
religion God ordered them to revive. Vanderpool said the couple acknowledged to 
the officer that sex acts were performed in the house and that men made 
donations to take part in them. 
The Tracys maintain the payments are "religious sacrifices" protected by the 
First Amendment. 
Mary Ellen Tracy, 47, was handcuffed and led away from the house on Griffith 
Park Boulevard wearing what has become her trademark costume during many 
appearances on television talk shows -- fishnet stockings, black high-heeled 
shoes and a strapless red sequined dress. 
The Tracys did not resist as police searched the house, which featured a large 
nude photograph of Mary Ellen Tracy on the wall. The only major pieces of 
furniture were a couch, a love seat and a bed covered with a furry red spread. 
Mary Ellen Tracy was sentenced to 90 days in jail after she was convicted Sept. 
8 of prostitution and operating a house of prostitution. Will Tracy was 
convicted of operating a house of prostitution and sentenced to 180 days in 
jail. 
The Tracys, who have been free on bail while appealing their convictions, said 
they were still practicing their religion. Four weeks ago, Mary Ellen Tracy 
told The Times: "I am still performing the rituals as they were prescribed by 
the goddess. I have not changed anything." 
Will Tracy, 51, said the couple made tape recordings of all conversations in 
the house to show that their actions were genuinely religious. Such recordings, 
he said, would prevent police from lying about the church in court. But on 
Tuesday, police made a recording of their own through a hidden microphone worn 
by the undercover officer. 
The Tracys' media appearances brought complaints that prompted the arrests 
Tuesday, Lt. Sam Dacus said. Many people who had heard them on broadcast shows 
called police, complaining that the Tracys' religious claims were offensive and 
asking why they were allowed to continue operating, he said. 
Vanderpool said police kept the house under surveillance and interviewed five 
men who were leaving the residence Oct. 24 and Nov. 7. They said they paid 
money to have sex with Mary Ellen Tracy. 
