REGIONAL OUTLOOK; 
DRINKING A TOAST TO EUROPE'S FUTURE; 
THE CENTERPIECE OF THE PARTY WILL BE THE SIGNING OF A PACT REDUCING 
CONVENTIONAL FORCES. WILL SUCH TREATIES BE PASSE IN THE NEW EUROPE'S FUTURE? 
It will be a coming-out party for the New Europe, and the guests are to leave 
most of their weapons at the door. 
Amid the splendor of a 34-nation summit meeting in Paris next week, members of 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact countries are to sign a 
historic treaty reducing the number of conventional forces -- tanks, artillery, 
and aircraft -- that both sides have stationed in Europe. 
The landmark accord formally recognizes the end of the Cold War-era threat 
posed by the military forces of the former Soviet Bloc, which has disintegrated 
in the wake of the recent changes in Soviet foreign policy. 
But the agreement comes amid political crosscurrents that raise serious 
questions about whether arms negotiations such as these have much of a future. 
Actual events -- such as the moves by the newly emerging East European 
democracies to expel remaining Soviet forces from their countries -- have been 
outpacing the negotiations. And with the Cold War over, there is less anxiety 
about war and, to some extent, less sense of urgency about traditional arms 
control efforts. 
The treaty limiting Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) provides for the Soviet 
Union and its former East European allies to slash their European arsenals by 
40% -- and for NATO to cut its European forces by 3% -- to comply with new 
equal arms ceilings on both sides of the now-fallen Iron Curtain. 
According to the agreement, most of the surplus equipment must be destroyed, 
and each side will be authorized to conduct on-site inspections to verify that 
the other is complying with the terms of the treaty. 
And together with the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) agreement expected 
early next year, the CFE pact represents a milestone from which to view both 
the record of arms control negotiations to date and their prospects reaching 
into the 21st Century. 
The Background 
Arms control has been central to U.S.-Soviet relations for more than a 
generation, and invariably has been controversial. 
The first U.S.-Soviet arms control treaty, in 1963, banned nuclear tests in the 
atmosphere, space and oceans. It succeeded in limiting radioactive 
contamination of the environment and demonstrated that the superpowers could 
begin to slow the arms race, if not stop it altogether. 
A decade later, in 1972, the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, known as 
SALT I, established ceilings on long-range nuclear missiles and bombers. But 
the limits that it set were higher than either side's actual arsenal, thereby 
legalizing a further arms buildup. 
A second strategic treaty in 1979, SALT II, called for minor reductions by the 
Soviet Union. But it contained a major loophole: Although the pact limited the 
number of missiles each side could have, it did not restrict the number of 
warheads each missile could carry. 
As a result, by taking advantage of new multiple-warhead technology, the 
superpowers were able during the 1980s to quadruple the number of strategic 
warheads they had targeted on one another atop essentially the same number of 
missiles. 
By contrast, the START accord now nearing completion is to be the first 
strategic arms treaty to actually reduce the total number of weapons that the 
two sides have amassed -- by 30% overall, with a 50% cut in the most 
threatening ballistic missile warheads. 
Negotiations to cut conventional weapons arsenals in Europe also have a 
checkered history. Talks between NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations achieved 
virtually nothing in 15 years before they were superseded by the CFE 
negotiations in 1988. 
Even the new CFE treaty, which provides for the largest negotiated arms 
reductions in world history, has drawn its share of criticism. Skeptics say it 
has taken far too long and in itself moved only marginally toward making the 
world a safer place. 
In some cases, the negotiations have been overtaken by events. Last February, 
for example, negotiators set manpower limits of 195,000 each for U.S. and 
Soviet troops in the central zone of Europe. 
But by July, those ceilings were obsolete. The new East European governments 
and the reunited Germany are forcing all Soviet forces out of the region by 
1994. As a result, the manpower limits were dropped out of the treaty; only 
weapons will be affected by the pact. 
Arms talks can also delay cuts that a country wants to make on its own. 
Soviet officials say part of the reason that Soviet President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev announced unilateral cuts of half a million troops in 1988 was that 
he feared that leaving such reductions to negotiations would actually delay 
their implementation. 
Similarly, U.S. officials speculate that if the United States had tried to 
negotiate the withdrawal of thousands of short-range nuclear warheads from 
Europe a decade ago rather than unilaterally bringing them home as it has, the 
weapons might still be there. 
The Debate 
How much can the world expect from arms control negotiations? Are they worth 
the effort? 
After studying the impact of arms-control talks over the past three decades, 
Harvard University professors Albert Carnesale and Richard Haass conclude that 
"what emerges above all is the modesty of what arms control has wrought. 
"If the history reveals anything, it is that arms control has proven neither as 
promising as some had hoped (in saving money and reducing tensions) nor as 
dangerous as others had feared (in lulling the Western public into accepting 
Soviet superiority)," they write. 
Kenneth L. Adelman, a former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency, gives an even harsher verdict. 
The big change in global security has come "not from arms negotiations, but 
from changes in the Soviet Union -- as we saw in the summer of 1989 when the 
Soviet threat ended," Adelman argues. "It had nothing to do with arms control." 
Supporters counter that Adelman expects too much of arms control. 
Jack Mendelsohn of the private Arms Control Assn. admits that the process has 
its shortcomings, but he notes that unilateral cuts do not provide for 
verification, for ensuring against reintroduction of forces, or for monitoring 
destruction of the weapons. 
Moreover, proponents argue that arms-control agreements too often are judged on 
their technical merits rather than their political significance in 
bridge-building between the superpowers. 
For example, the U.S.-Soviet INF treaty of 1987 -- to eliminate medium-range 
nuclear missiles -- was insignificant militarily. The Soviets reduced their 
arsenal by 1,667 warheads, or only about 5% of their stockpile. The United 
States cut was 429 warheads, less than 2%. 
"But the political significance of the INF agreement -- the improvement in the 
U.S.-Soviet relationship in the second half of the Ronald Reagan Administration 
-- far outweighed the technical problems related to the details of military 
doctrine," foreign policy specialist Joseph S. Nye Jr. wrote in Foreign Affairs 
magazine. 
Finally, the importance of arms-control mechanisms to limit proliferation to 
Third World nations -- and of U.S. and Soviet example-setting to spur the 
process -- will grow rather than diminish as East-West tensions abate. 
The Outlook 
The consensus is that despite its faults, arms-control efforts will continue -- 
but with a significant shift in their scope and direction. 
Last year, experts were forecasting another extended, wide-ranging strategic 
arms negotiation -- to be called START II -- that might seek to halve again the 
number of offensive nuclear warheads. 
Instead of the 8,000 to 9,000 warheads that would be permitted under START I, 
the talks would seek to set a limit of perhaps 4,000 warheads. And the 
loopholes and defects in the present agreement might be eliminated in the 
process. 
But key Administration officials now believe that the flaws in START I should 
be attacked first in narrower negotiations, and that the most destabilizing 
weapons -- land-based missiles with multiple warheads, most capable of surprise 
attack -- should get top priority. 
U.S. officials also want to focus on making nuclear arsenals more stable -- a 
goal that might be better served by agreement to ban multiple warheads on new 
missiles than by another drastic reduction in the number of U.S. and Soviet 
weapons. 
Another high U.S. priority will be talks to ensure who has physical control 
over nuclear weapons in times of crisis. Officials are especially concerned 
about how well Soviet nuclear weapons can be safeguarded from dissidents and 
terrorists during times of domestic unrest. 
A similar shift on the conventional arms control agenda may occur. 
Negotiators already are committed to follow-on talks to deal with the 
troop-levels issue, which has been excluded from the CFE treaty. But U.S. 
officials would prefer that any new negotiations emphasize new 
"confidence-building measures," such as including more visits by foreign 
observers to military maneuvers and reducing the size of the maneuvering forces 
(now 13,000 men) that may be subject to inspection visits. 
Washington also is likely to press for an "open skies" agreement that would 
permit inspection overflights by aircraft that are equipped with the most 
advanced electronic sensing gear. 
Finally, high on the new arms control agenda will be efforts to expand and 
intensify multinational cooperation to prevent further proliferation of 
chemical and nuclear weapon technology -- and delivery vehicles such as 
ballistic missiles -- by Third World nations. 
While Iraq is the main threat today, U.S. officials are only slightly less 
worried about nuclear war between Pakistan and India, North Korea's growing 
potential to build nuclear devices, and Iran's desire to match whatever Iraq 
does. 
Cutting Back on Conventional Arms 
HELICOPTERS 
NATO treaty cuts: -11% 
Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -44% 
Treaty limits: 2,000 
AIRCRAFT 
NATO treaty cuts: 0% 
Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -31% 
Treaty limits: 7,000 
TANKS 
NATO treaty cuts: -10% 
Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -46% 
Treaty limits: 20,000 
ARTILLERY 
NATO treaty cuts: 0% 
Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -37% 
Treaty limits: 20,000 
ARMORED VEHICLES 
NATO treaty cuts: 0% 
Warsaw Pact treaty cuts: -36% 
Treaty limits: 30,000 
Source: Arms Control Assn., NATO, U.S. Department of Defense 
