PLAYERS IN HEDGECOCK 'SOAP OPERA' 
TOM SHEPARD 
In any list of the casualties of the scandal that brought down Roger Hedgecock, 
political consultant Tom Shepard must rank near the top. He eventually pleaded 
guilty to a misdemeanor charge that he conspired with Hedgecock and former J. 
David &amp; Co. principals J. David (Jerry) Dominelli and Nancy Hoover Hunter 
to use his firm to funnel illegal contributions to Hedgecock's campaign. 
He was ordered to pay a $1,000 fine, do 200 hours of community service and was 
placed on three years' probation. 
Shepard lost his business, his savings and, for a time, his reputation. He has 
bounced back and has a new, thriving political consulting business. 
NANCY HOOVER HUNTER 
Former live-in companion to J. David (Jerry) Dominelli. For her role in the 
Hedgecock affair, she pleaded guilty to one felony count, which was later 
reduced to a misdemeanor. She was fined $10,000, ordered to complete 350 hours 
of community service and placed on probation for three years. 
As a result of her role in the $80-million scam by the J. David &amp; Co., 
Hoover Hunter was either convicted or pleaded guilty to several felony fraud 
and tax evasion counts. She is in federal prison serving a 10-year sentence. 
JERRY DOMINELLI 
The swindler pleaded guilty in March, 1985, to four felony counts of fraud and 
tax evasion stemming from the February, 1984, collapse of his J. David &amp; 
Co. investment firm, based in La Jolla. After admitting he had bilked investors 
of more than $80 million, Dominelli was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison 
and ordered to pay more than $2 million in back taxes. 
He suffered a stroke while in jail in San Diego in 1984 which left him partly 
paralyzed and severely impaired his ability to speak. 
WILLIAM L. TODD JR. 
As a Superior Court judge, Todd presided over Hedgecock's two felony trials. 
Hedgecock accused Todd of being biased against him and twice asked that he step 
down. In sentencing Hedgecock in 1985, Todd bluntly said he believed the former 
mayor was guilty. 
Todd was elevated to the 4th District Court of Appeal in 1986, but since last 
summer has been serving on special assignment to help relieve the San Diego 
Superior Court's backlog. 
Last week, Todd was picked to preside over a hearing scheduled for next week 
that had been ordered by the state Supreme Court to determine whether Hedgecock 
deserved a new trial. The court had found that Todd erred in some aspects of 
the case. Hedgecock's attorney said he intended to challenge Todd's selection. 
ARMANDO ACUNA 
