MUSIC REVIEW; 
THE CAMERATA HONORS SAINT 
Perhaps St. Cecilia listened and was touched by the celebration given in her 
honor Saturday night by the Irvine Camerata. The patron saint of music and 
musicians certainly could not have asked for a more refined remembrance than 
the understated gala led by Robert Hickok at the Irvine Barclay Theatre. 
Festivities revolved around music by Henry Purcell, with two of his four odes 
for the saint's day -- "Welcome to All the Pleasures" and "Hail! Bright 
Cecilia" -- as well as a birthday ode actually intended for Queen Mary -- "Come 
Ye Sons of Art." "Hail! Bright Cecilia" stood apart as the most ambitious and 
the most polished of the offerings. 
Here, the 20-member orchestra that had begun the program mired in tenuousness, 
with ragged entrances and little attention to chromaticisms, came together in 
the opening symphony in well-defined imitation and a bleatingly plaintive 
adagio. Dialogue between the strings and a trio formed by Alfred Lang, Karen 
Tkaczyk and Danielle Squyres on trumpets and timpani created attractively 
lively allegros. Continuous work by Malcolm Hamilton on harpsichord and Ian 
McKinnel on cello remained unerringly rhythmic, stylish and attentive 
throughout. 
Vocal soloists proved uneven in natural prowess, though not jarringly 
mismatched. Countertenors Drew Minter and Brian Asawa shone through pristine, 
elegant projection. Minter, especially, illuminated "Tis nature's voice" with 
unusually free tone and control of dynamics, vibrato and enunciation. He 
conveyed the text with sympathetic flexibility and formed a flawlessly matched 
blend with tenor Bruce Johnson for "In vain the am'rous flute and soft guitar." 
Earl Patriarco brought clear sonority and straightforward reading to "Wondrous 
machine" and outstripped his fellow baritone Bruce Bales in consistency of tone 
during register changes in "Let these among themselves contest." Soprano Linda 
Williams lent her small, unremarkable instrument to a bland "Thou tun'st this 
world below," which was nevertheless enlivened by oboists Joseph Stone and 
Laura Stone. 
The Camerata gave balanced and sensitive support to featured vocalists during 
Purcell's works but were given the spotlight primarily in Benjamin Britten's 
"Hymn to St. Cecilia." Under Hickok's economical direction, choristers shaped 
lines with precise accentuation and well-trained mastery of dynamics. In louder 
sections, balance fell to the male voices, but in lighter portions -- such as 
"I cannot grow" -- the choir reacted with busy, clipped clarity. 
