DARK SIDE OF CHILDBIRTH; 
WHAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN A BLESSED EVENT IN VICTORIA KARTER'S LIFE MAY HAVE CAUSED 
THE CONDITION THAT LED TO HER DEATH 
Late on a Friday afternoon in September, Victoria Karter walked into the Four 
Seasons Hotel, declined an offered fourth-floor room and took one instead on 
the 19th floor. 
A tall, dark-haired woman with an angular face, Karter, 33, carried a garment 
bag as well as a purse. She stayed in the room only an hour or so, but it was 
long enough to leave cigarettes snuffed out in ashtrays and to put a ring of 
lipstick around the neck of the Jack Daniels liquor bottle she brought with 
her. Long enough, too, to make a telephone call. 
The call was intended for Kathy Boone, the woman who had been Karter's friend 
for more than 20 years. But because Boone wasn't there, Karter talked to 
Virginia Rivera, Boone's mother and a woman who considered Karter a member of 
her own family. 
Karter told Rivera what she had been telling Boone since soon after the birth 
of her first child 4 1/2 months earlier: She wanted to commit suicide. 
"She told me that she wanted to talk to Kathy and she needed to tell her a few 
things before she would kill herself," Rivera said. "I said, 'Vicky, give me 
your number and I'll have Kathy call you. She should be here any moment.' " 
But Karter refused to say where she was. 
"She said, 'Mrs. Rivera, I'm so sick, I feel so sick.' At that moment it seemed 
like she dropped the phone. I kept calling her. I could hear noises. I thought 
maybe someone was there with her. I stayed on the phone the longest time. Then 
all of a sudden I didn't hear anything." 
Victoria Karter had walked out on the balcony of Room 1902 and jumped to her 
death. 
Gregory Owen Lee sits in the living room of his comfortable Newport Beach home, 
bouncing his daughter, Rachel, on his knee and then putting a bottle in her 
mouth. Periodically, he stops talking to fight back tears. 
A dark-haired, bespectacled businessman who chooses his words carefully, Lee 
says that both he and Karter had wanted children. "My personal point of view is 
. . . that's what life is all about, to have a family and raise kids." 
Lee, 35, thinks of himself as an "old-fashioned kind of guy" who wanted to 
marry just once, "settle down and live happily ever after. Unfortunately, 
happily ever after in my case was three years." 
Six months ago he was on top of the world. A husband and father-to-be. 
Today he is a widower, left to raise an infant daughter on his own. He tries to 
juggle his work schedule to spend as much time as possible with his child. He 
hopes he doesn't hear an old favorite song on the radio to make him burst into 
tears. 
"I know that despite the adversity that I'm facing right now, my primary focus 
has to be toward my baby," Lee says. 
"I'm sitting here right now and you see me and I'm pretty composed and I can 
talk to you about the incident. A few weeks ago, if you had seen me, I would be 
crying and . . . distraught about not knowing what's going to happen." 
Baby books and toys dot the house. There is other literature, too, explaining a 
condition Lee said he never heard of before Rachel's birth: postpartum 
depression. 
The official cause of Karter's death: Injuries sustained in a suicide jump. 
But her husband blames her death on postpartum depression, for which she was 
being treated at the time of her suicide and an illness Lee said he heard about 
for the first time when his wife was hospitalized at UCI Medical Center. 
That was almost three months after Rachel's birth in late April, a typically 
happy, blessed event for most women, but one that plunged Karter into despair. 
Doctors say that while most mothers get the "baby blues" after giving birth, 
the condition lasts only a short while. Postpartum depression, by contrast, 
strikes about 10% of new mothers and does not "cure itself." Postpartum 
depression typically requires psychiatric therapy and/or medication, including 
anti-depressants. 
An even more rare disorder is postpartum psychosis, from which sufferers may 
lose touch with reality, experts say. 
Postpartum disorders have been known for centuries, but only in the past 10 to 
15 years have they been studied in depth. Medical opinion is divided on whether 
the depression stems from a chemical imbalance after childbirth or if it is 
caused largely by existing emotional problems -- troubles that Lee said did not 
appear in Karter before giving birth. 
Psychiatrists say only a small minority of those who develop a full-fledged 
depression wind up killing themselves or their children. One doctor calls the 
number small but significant. 
Susan Hickman, a San Diego psychologist who has treated hundreds of women 
suffering from postpartum depression, said women who have depression but not 
psychosis kill themselves but not their children. She said the number of 
suicides is not known. 
In fact, the National Institute of Mental Health has no statistics on suicides 
linked to postpartum disorders. 
Kathy Boone and Vicky Karter met in 1968, 11-year-old junior high school 
students. Boone described her friend as happy and outgoing, an artist talented 
at drawing, a writer of poetry, a journalism student, "very creative." 
Boone's mother, Virginia Rivera, called Karter "an average, normal girl." She 
was at the Rivera house in Montebello so often as a child that Rivera "felt 
like she was our stepdaughter or adopted daughter." The death of her mother a 
year or so after Karter graduated from high school struck her hard, Rivera 
said. 
"It bothered her a lot that she didn't have her mother there for her. I told 
her whenever she needed someone, just call me, and she always did." 
Over the years, even after Karter went off to college at Cal State Long Beach 
and Boone married not long after high school, the friends remained close. 
Karter would bring boyfriends by to meet Boone's mother, but she kept waiting 
to meet the right one to marry. 
Karter and Lee met at a dance in Beverly Hills in 1985. After dating for two 
years, they married in Las Vegas on her 30th birthday, the first marriage for 
each. They held a party later for friends at the Newport Beach house that had 
been his and became theirs. She worked in the family office supply store in 
East Los Angeles. He worked at the office machine distribution company he had 
founded after graduating from USC in 1980. 
If there was one smudge on the picture, it was Karter's frequent concern with 
what other people would think, and her tendency to make mountains out of 
molehills, Boone said. 
"Vicky was the kind of person that would make everything into a major problem," 
she said. "When she was thinking of marrying Greg, she would wonder, should she 
do it, shouldn't she do it. . . . What if it didn't work out? What if she got 
divorced?" 
But the marriage was a happy one, Lee said. 
"I won't say we agreed on everything 100%, but we never had fights, yelling 
fights or anything like that. . . . We got along exceptionally well." 
And a little more than two years after their marriage, Karter became pregnant. 
"She seemed the happiest I've ever seen her," Boone remembered. 
But after Rachel's birth, Karter's attitude apparently changed. 
"I went with my kids to the hospital with balloons," Boone said. Karter "didn't 
seem like someone who had a baby. It didn't seem like a joyous thing to her." 
Boone recalled that one day, about a month after the birth, receiving an 
"hysterical" phone call from Karter. "She said she didn't know what to do. The 
baby cried a lot, had colic; Vicky wasn't prepared, I guess, for that. She was 
stuck in the house. She didn't know what to do." 
Lee said the newborn baby was in intensive care for three days for treatment of 
jaundice. When mother and daughter came home, Rachel cried seemingly around the 
clock for nearly three months, he said. But while his wife wasn't getting much 
sleep at all, he didn't see any "abnormal type problems." 
That changed in mid-July. 
First came a call from Karter's sister, Lee said, telling him that "she was 
very concerned for Vicky's safety and Vicky had expressed some thoughts of 
suicide to her." The next day came a call from Boone, saying she, too, was 
worried about Vicky. 
An alarmed Lee took Karter to UCI Medical Center, where she was hospitalized 
until the end of the month. Lee said doctors there diagnosed her condition as 
postpartum depression and prescribed the anti-depressant drug Pamelor, the 
trade name for a generic drug known as nortriptyline. (A medical center 
spokeswoman said that because of state and federal laws protecting the privacy 
of psychiatric patients, the hospital could neither confirm she had been a 
patient there, nor discuss her case.) 
When she came home from the hospital, Lee and Karter hired a nanny/housekeeper 
to help with Rachel. Lee, who attended Lamaze classes with his wife during her 
pregnancy and was in the delivery room during birth, said he also tried to help 
more with the baby. 
After about two weeks at home, in which Karter received lots of rest, Lee said, 
the medication seemed to take full effect, and "I was utterly amazed," Lee 
said. Normally an even-tempered person, after Rachel's birth Karter had swung 
into deep depression. Suddenly, "she was uncharacteristically too enthusiastic. 
. . . All of a sudden she's the most enthusiastic, energetic person I've ever 
met. And I'm thinking to myself, 'Wow, these drugs are working great. This is 
fantastic. It's a miracle.' " 
Boone saw the change, too. One day Karter telephoned her "and said she felt 
great . . . just felt wonderful. She had told me before that she felt she was 
walking around in a cloud, a fog, that she couldn't function. Then this one day 
she was wonderful, her head was clear, and for about three weeks she was like 
that, everything was fine." 
But before long Karter became depressed again. Lee said his wife told him she 
didn't understand what was happening, that she would go to the mall, see other 
women smiling happily as they pushed their babies in strollers. "And here I am, 
I've got a nice home and a nice husband and a nice baby, and yet I'm feeling 
weird," Lee remembered his wife saying. 
"And dumb me, I'm saying, 'Ah, things will pass, you're just getting back (to 
normal). Did you take your medicine?' " 
Boone said Karter told her that the doctors rejected her request to stop taking 
Pamelor when she was feeling better, but agreed to lower the dosage. Later it 
was increased again, but it didn't seem to help. (The doctor at the Santa Ana 
psychiatric offices of the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program whom Lee said 
treated his wife after she was discharged from the hospital, declined comment, 
referring inquiries to the facility's administrator, who did not return phone 
calls.) 
Karter told Boone in one of their almost daily telephone conversations that she 
just couldn't function. 
"She kept telling me she was a bad person and everyone would be better off 
without her," Boone recalled. Karter said that after she died her husband 
eventually "would find somebody else and that person would take care of the 
baby." 
Karter rejected Boone's advice to get away for a few days. She said she was 
afraid to leave the baby at home for fear people would think she wasn't a good 
mother. She was afraid to admit her thoughts of suicide to her doctors for fear 
she would be institutionalized for the rest of her life, which would bankrupt 
her husband, Boone said. 
On Sept. 19, a Wednesday, a woman who declined to give her name showed up at 
Newport Beach police headquarters at 8 p.m. with a disturbing tale. 
The woman said she had been at Cliff Drive Park in the Newport Heights section 
of Newport Beach a little earlier. While there she saw a woman with an infant. 
The woman seemed "despondent." The good Samaritan walked the woman to her car, 
copied her license plate number, and told police of her concern. 
Police traced the number to Karter and visited her and Lee at their home. After 
interviewing the husband and wife separately and together, police concluded 
Karter was no danger to herself or anyone else then, had resources she could 
turn to if she needed help, and left. 
Two days later, Karter told her housekeeper she was going out for a while. At 1 
p.m., she made a reservation for a room at the Four Seasons Hotel in Newport 
Beach. She showed up at 3:30 p.m. to check in. One hotel employee called her 
"pleasant." Another described her as "distant." 
Shortly after 4 p.m., Karter called Rivera to ask if Boone was there. Rivera 
said no, that her daughter was probably either still at her home in Cerritos or 
on her way to the Rivera house in Montebello. Karter said she'd try the 
Cerritos number. 
About 4:30, Karter called Rivera again, saying she hadn't been able to reach 
Boone. "I told her to leave her number where she was and I'd have Kathy call 
her," Rivera remembered. "She said she was going to kill herself. She said she 
didn't want anyone to know where she was, she didn't want anyone to stop her." 
Minutes after she heard the phone drop and her pleas to Karter go unanswered, 
Rivera's daughter arrived. 
Boone called Karter's housekeeper. She called Lee at one of his company's 
offices, in Moreno Valley. She called the Newport Beach police. 
Lee began frantically calling Newport Beach police. He also called the 
Sheriff's Department and California Highway Patrol. Then he drove home, where 
he made more phone calls. And waited. 
He called the Newport Beach police again, but found the dispatcher "evasive." 
He called the Costa Mesa police to see if they knew anything about his wife. He 
called Newport Beach again, talking to a dispatcher whom Lee said promised "to 
have detectives talk to me." 
"Not knowing is worse than knowing," Lee said, and for more than three hours he 
didn't know. About 8:30 that night, however, two detectives and a deputy 
coroner showed up at his house "and said they had information about my wife." 
He knew. 
