ELECTIONS; 
LONGEST BALLOT IN HISTORY AWAITS VOTERS 
Ventura County voters, peppered with last-minute appeals from candidates and 
special interest groups, will cast ballots today in the governor's race, pick a 
county supervisor and decide whether to raise sales taxes by half a cent to pay 
for transportation projects. 
Also on the ballot are more than a dozen federal, state and local races, 
including nine school board contests and City Council races in Camarillo, 
Fillmore, Moorpark, Oxnard, Port Hueneme, Santa Paula, Simi Valley and Thousand 
Oaks. 
Polls open today at 7 a.m. at 459 locations around the county and close at 8 
p.m. Elections officials predict that 59% of the county's 308,555 registered 
voters will cast ballots, a historic low for a gubernatorial race. 
The low-vote prediction is based on a three-decade trend of growing voter 
apathy. In this election, only 42% of the voting-age population in the county 
is expected to vote, said Richard Dean, county clerk and recorder. 
Of those casting ballots, election officials estimate that a record 22% of 
voters in the county, or 40,000 people, will mail or drop off absentee ballots 
rather than stand in a voting booth and wrestle with the longest ballot in the 
county's history. 
The final days of the campaign has brought a flurry of radio and television 
advertisements. In addition to the barrage of ads for the gubernatorial 
candidates and for 28 statewide ballot propositions, Rep. Robert J. Lagomarsino 
(R-Ventura) and his Democratic challenger Anita Perez Ferguson have multimedia 
campaigns to curry favor with voters. 
Most area candidates have focused on delivering their message through the mail. 
For example, county supervisorial candidates Vicky Howard and Bill Davis have 
sent mass mailings to woo potential voters in the 4th Supervisorial District 
that incorporates Moorpark and Simi Valley. 
Measure C, a countywide measure to add a half-cent sales tax for transportation 
projects, has picked up additional supporters and opponents in the last few 
days before the election. 
State Sens. Ed Davis (R-Santa Clarita) and Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara) 
issued a joint statement supporting the measure they say will improve air 
quality and relieve traffic congestion. Meanwhile, Assemblyman Tom McClintock 
(R-Thousand Oaks) announced his objection on the basis that it add more taxes 
to the overburdened taxpayer. 
Today's ballot presents voters with more choices than ever, Dean said. "It's 
the longest ballot we've ever had, about double the size of the ballot in 
June." 
Election officials attribute part of the increase in absentee voters to the 
increasing length and complexity of the ballot, especially the intimidating 
number of statewide ballot propositions. 
"It is a lot easier to ponder all these choices at home than to do it standing 
in an election booth," said Ruth P. Schepler, chief of the county's Elections 
Division. 
In addition, growing numbers of candidates, special-interest groups and 
political parties have supplied their supporters with applications for absentee 
ballots in an effort to get out their vote. 
For this election, the state and national Republican parties have sent out more 
absentee ballot applications than other groups, Schepler said. Other 
applications have come from a variety of groups, including Beer Drinkers of 
America, which is opposed to ballot initiatives that would increase alcohol 
taxes. 
One advantage to a big number of absentee ballots is that about 29,000 ballots 
will be tallied by 8:30 tonight, giving the public a strong indication of 
winners and losers. 
A disadvantage is that an anticipated 11,000 absentee ballots will be dropped 
off at the polls on election day, delaying the final results. Election 
officials have to check the signature of each absentee voter to the signature 
recorded on microfiche at the county. 
As a result, counting these ballots may not be completed for a week or more. 
"They could have an impact on close races," Dean said. He said the election 
officials are not promising final election results until Nov. 21 and will not 
alter its schedule to determine the winner of a particularly close race. 
Registered voters who do not know where to cast their vote may call the 
Elections Division for assistance at 654-2781 between 6:30 a.m. and 8 p.m. 
today. 
