CONSULTANT PAUL KAGAN, A MAN ABOUT THE MEDIA 
For Paul Kagan, the professional journey from media junkie to media guru began 
with a job as a movie usher in what he recalls as "a classy art house" in New 
York. 
Decades later, the firm he founded could be described in the same terms. The 
75-member Carmel company churns out nearly 30 newsletters on various aspects of 
the movie, television and cellular industries, and dispatches analysts to 
conduct seminars around the country. 
Kagan, 52, is scheduled to moderate a panel discussion this morning at the 
Western Cable Television Conference here on "Creating a Stable Environment for 
System Values." 
Paul Kagan Associates averages 15 phone calls a day from reporters tracking 
various media developments, especially in cable television. Not surprisingly, 
there are more than 1,000 citations to the firm in the Nexis database, which 
monitors major newspapers, wire services and magazines. 
"I did all different broadcast jobs," Kagan said in a recent interview. "I came 
to understand the value of investing in the business in the bull market of 
1967, and I realized that there wasn't that much understanding of value" of 
media properties. "My job is to determine value." 
Kagan's first big idea, during a brief tenure at E. F. Hutton, had to do with 
the future of cable television. 
"I was convinced from the beginning that cable was going to infiltrate society 
until people had as many channel choices as they could get," Kagan recalls. E. 
F. Hutton didn't agree, and Kagan left to establish his own firm in 1969. 
Kagan said that what he does is no mystery: "An analyst is an observer who 
understands a trend, and spots it and tells everybody what the trend is." 
During the 1980s, Kagan said, "we saw the era of mergers coming" and, he added, 
most of the companies he recommended rode the crest of buyouts and mergers. 
Now, he said, "the deal market has been murdered" by tough credit controls 
instituted in the wake of the savings and loan collapse and the junk bond 
scandals. But some major exceptions to this trend are in the entertainment 
industry. 
The Time-Warner merger, said Kagan, "cast the die for future conglomerization 
of media companies. Somebody will buy NBC from GE. Something is going to buy 
CBS. People will merge with the assets they like." For example, he said, in 
light of the impending acquisition of MCA by Matsushita, another natural 
marriage would be Mitsubishi and Paramount. Because of currency variations, 
particularly the value of the dollar, "American studios can be bought very 
cheaply" by foreign companies, Kagan said. "It's like buying an offshore 
manufacturing facility." 
Kagan also said he is not overly concerned with the impact of the recession on 
the cable industry. 
Premium services will be affected "because it is a discretionary buy," but he 
added that "pay (television) already has been in its own recession for several 
years." Basic cable, on the other hand, will be affected very little because 
"it's a good entertainment buy, like movies in the Depression -- dime-a-ticket 
escapism." 
