RELIGION; 
AMERICAN PRELATE RETIRES FROM VATICAN SERVICE; 
PAPACY: ARCHBISHOP MARCINKUS WILL SERVE AS PARISH PRIEST IN CHICAGO. FORMER 
BODYGUARD TO POPE, HE WAS PRESIDENT OF BANK ROCKED BY SCANDAL. 
After four decades abroad, Archbishop Paul C. Marcinkus, the best known -- and 
most controversial -- American prelate at the Vatican, has retired from papal 
service to return to his native Chicago as a parish priest. 
Built like a linebacker, his street Chicago accent and idiom unblunted by 40 
years of Vatican propriety, Marcinkus first drew international attention as the 
Pope's chief bodyguard and later as the hapless president of a Vatican bank 
rocked by monumental financial scandal. 
Marcinkus, the 6-foot, 4-inch son of a Lithuanian window cleaner in Cicero, 
Ill., said in a brief statement Tuesday that he would return to the United 
States "to make myself useful in whatever pastoral work I may be able to do, 
much like many priests of my diocese are doing." 
Pope John Paul II accepted the 68-year-old Marcinkus' resignation as deputy 
governor of Vatican City at his request, the Vatican announced Tuesday, and 
named him to an honorary post as a consultant to the city-state. 
In a statement, Chicago Cardinal Joseph Bernardin praised Marcinkus' "great 
dedication to the church and his personal integrity," saying "the door to his 
home diocese will always be open to him." 
Marcinkus, an avid sports fan who reminisced with gusto one recent night about 
his adventures trying to teach Italian boys to play baseball, retained his 
Vatican City post after resigning in March, 1989, as president of the Vatican 
bank, called the Institute for Religious Works, after 19 years. 
His presidency was marred by Italy's largest postwar banking scandal, which 
cost the Vatican $250 million in a 1984 goodwill settlement to creditors of the 
failed Banco Ambrosiano. The bank, which collapsed in 1982 with the 
still-unresolved disappearance of $1.3 billion, was Italy's largest private 
bank. The Vatican was a major shareholder. 
Two Italian bankers with whom Marcinkus dealt, Roberto Calvi and Michele 
Sindona, were convicted of fraud after their banks collapsed. Both died 
mysteriously -- Sindona in jail and Calvi hanging from Blackfriars Bridge in 
downtown London in 1982. 
Marcinkus has always staunchly denied any wrongdoing, and the Vatican has 
supported him, insisting while making the $250-million settlement that it bore 
no moral or legal blame for the Ambrosiano collapse. 
On foreign trips of Pope Paul VI and John Paul II, Marcinkus often ran 
broad-shouldered interference as unofficial chief bodyguard. In 1987, Italian 
prosecutors issued warrants for Marcinkus and two lay officials at the Vatican 
bank, accusing them of being accessories of Banco Ambrosiano's fraudulent 
bankruptcy. An Italian court ruled that Italian officials had no jurisdiction 
over the papal enclave, which is surrounded by Rome but recognized as a 
sovereign city-state. 
For nearly a year, Marcinkus made no secret that he was lobbying for 
retirement. As its acceptance was announced Tuesday, he told an Associated 
Press reporter: "I don't want to have sour grapes. I want to leave here on a 
happy note." 
