BUFFA IS AWARDED $25,000 OCTD CONTRACT FOR VIDEO; 
TRANSIT: THE CONTRACT FOR THE PRODUCTION WAS NOT COMPETITIVELY BID. IT ALSO 
STIPULATES THAT THE COSTA MESA MAYOR RAISE ANOTHER $50,000 ELSEWHERE. 
Costa Mesa Mayor Peter F. Buffa, co-founder of a private group that promotes 
high-technology rail transit, on Monday was awarded a $25,000 contract by the 
Orange County Transit District to produce a video promoting high-tech 
transportation. 
The OCTD board voted 4 to 0, with William E. Farris abstaining, to award the 
contract to Buffa, who owns a video production company. The contract, which was 
not competitively bid, carries the condition that Buffa must raise the 
remainder of the $75,000 production cost from other agencies in Orange and Los 
Angeles counties. 
San Juan Capistrano rancher Tom Rogers, a frequent critic of county 
transportation officials, criticized the contract as an example of government 
insiders' receiving favored treatment. 
Buffa could not be reached for comment. 
Board of Supervisors Chairman Don R. Roth is an OCTD member who also is 
chairman of the California-Nevada Super Speed Ground Transportation Commission, 
a bistate panel overseeing plans for a 200 m.p.h. magnetically levitated train 
between Las Vegas and Anaheim. 
Buffa has been a leading advocate of the train, and his video will include 
material about it, OCTD officials said. The video will also show light rail, 
monorail, people mover and automated highway systems. 
Last March, Buffa accompanied Roth on a 10-day trip to Europe to ride a maglev 
prototype and the French TGV. 
"I deplore it," Rogers said of the contract decision. "They should not be 
entering into a contractual agreement with people who may be a factor in future 
votes. . . . It's the height of arrogance, and it leads to the appearance of 
impropriety." 
Roth said he did not help Buffa secure the contract. 
"I was not at the last (OCTD) board meeting where they went into an in-depth 
discussion about this," Roth said. "I don't have any problem with putting out a 
video about all forms of transit." 
Buffa is a co-founder of Transportation Alternatives for Southern California, a 
private group based in Newport Beach that promotes high-technology rail 
transit. Buffa also is a member of the San Joaquin Hills Transportation 
Corridor Agency, which is exploring rail transit for the median of a toll road 
now being built between MacArthur Boulevard in Newport Beach and Interstate 5 
near San Juan Capistrano. 
Farris said he abstained because he had not seen backup materials supporting 
the video proposal. 
Last year, the Orange County Transportation Commission drew fire for hiring 
Newport Beach Councilman John C. Cox Jr. as a lobbyist for Measure M, the 
half-cent sales tax proposal that was defeated 12 months ago and that appears 
again on today's Orange County ballot. 
