TV SOAP STARS' SALUTE TO BROADWAY BENEFITS SANTA SUSANA TROUPE 
The Santa Susana Repertory Company had something of a topsy-turvy 1990. 
Embarking on its second year, the Simi Valley theater troupe found itself still 
without a home and looking for performing space on a production-to-production 
basis. 
Its artistic director, Lane Davies, left his role on the NBC daytime drama 
"Santa Barbara" and spent seven months traveling the world, so the company 
offered an abbreviated season of just two productions. 
Thus, it shouldn't surprise anyone that Santa Susana Repertory's year-end 
fund-raiser will lean toward the eclectic. "A Broadway Benefit" will feature 
more than a dozen soap-opera actors in an afternoon variety show that includes 
everything from Shakespeare to Cole Porter to Abbott and Costello. The show 
will be presented at Canoga Park High School. 
"It will be a loose and fun show," said Davies, having returned to Los Angeles. 
"People will certainly get to see daytime stars in a light they've never seen 
them in before." 
Frank Runyeon, who plays Michael on "Santa Barbara," will play classical piano. 
Joe Marinelli and Todd McKee, also of "Santa Barbara," will perform the famous 
comedy skit "Who's on First?" Terry Lester, who took over Davies' role as Mason 
Capwell on "Santa Barbara" and is a veteran of "The Young and the Restless," 
and Wally Kurth, from "Days of Our Lives," will sing show tunes. 
"Some of these people have done little or no singing," Davies said. "There will 
definitely be an improvisational feel to the day." 
The benefit will also include a silent auction of personal items from the 
actors and an autograph session. 
Santa Susana Repertory Company, which produced "Romeo and Juliet" earlier this 
year, will finish its season with "A Christmas Carol" at the Bellwood Shopping 
Center in Simi Valley beginning Nov. 30. The play will run weekends through 
Dec. 23. 
 "A Broadway Benefit" is at 1 p.m. Saturday at Canoga Park High School, 6850 
Topanga Canyon Blvd. Tickets are $25. Call (805) 582-9000. 
