STUDY FINDS SHARP RISE IN OZONE DAMAGE TO YOSEMITE PINE TREES 
The number of pine trees in Yosemite park damaged by ozone has increased 
fivefold in the last five years, according to a new study. 
The report says 29.7% of Yosemite's pines show mottling caused by damage from 
ozone, a colorless, odorless gas produced by auto and industrial emissions. A 
similar study in 1985 found 5.7% of the trees had suffered damage then, the 
National Park Service reported. 
Officials at Yosemite, which celebrated its 100th birthday as a national park 
Oct. 1, said they need to study the 1990 findings before they can comment on 
ways to alleviate the problem. 
A decade-old master plan for the park in the central Sierra Nevada calls for 
abolishing vehicle traffic by tourists into Yosemite Valley, their prime 
destination. 
No timetable has been announced to force tourists to switch to trams or buses 
and leave their cars above Yosemite Valley. National Park Service Director 
James Ridenour has promised that park maintenance facilities will be moved out 
of the valley, perhaps starting in the 1992 fiscal year. 
Ozone damage is widespread in the park, according to the 1990 study that Dan M. 
Duriscoe of Three Rivers, Calif., prepared for the Park Service. 
"Based on the results of this study, no area in the yellow pine zone can be 
said to be free of ozone pollution," Duriscoe wrote. 
"Jeffrey and ponderosa pine with visible ozone injury had poorer needle 
retention than uninjured trees," he said. "Of the 1,650 trees sampled, three 
were found with obvious severe ozone stress -- very thin crowns and chlorotic 
mottle on the current year's needles. If ozone concentrations continue at their 
present level or increase, these (trees) will die or will continue to exist in 
a state of decline." 
The effects of ozone in the Sierra Nevada were discovered in the 1970s at 
Sequoia National Park, 100 miles south of Yosemite and less than 150 miles 
north of Los Angeles. The Park Service has commissioned research to determine 
if ozone affects giant sequoias as it does pine trees. 
Diane Ewell, Sequoia's air quality specialist, said officials may start a 
system to warn visitors when the park's ozone is high, much like the smog stage 
alerts in the Los Angeles Basin. 
