LAGUNA TO STUDY HAZARDS AT HIRING LOT 
A blue pickup truck pulls off the road. The driver motions to a group of 30 
young men standing across the street. 
Cars whiz past. The men wait anxiously to cross the road and bargain for a 
day's wage, when suddenly two men bolt across the road -- into the path of a 
moving truck, which narrowly misses them. 
It is a scene, officials say, that is being repeated over and over as 
dayworkers gather on busy Laguna Canyon Road -- a knot of mostly young Latino 
men eager to do a day's work for meager wages. 
City officials say the scene along the winding road has become increasingly 
dangerous as crowds of job-hungry men compete for scarce work by darting across 
traffic to crowd around the employers in trucks and vans who pass by the lot 
looking for hired help. 
Already, two dayworkers have been struck by cars while trying to cross Laguna 
Canyon Road. More recently, a dayworker broke his leg when he was hit by a car 
near the hiring area. 
The car was heading south toward Laguna Beach when the man ran out in front of 
a crowd of dayworkers. 
"It was horrible. He was hit right in front of me," says Ben Willits, a Laguna 
Beach resident who was standing at a nearby bus stop. "The car just hit him and 
sent him flying like a rag doll." 
While none of the accidents has resulted in serious injuries, residents fear 
that someone will be killed if the city does not monitor the situation more 
closely. Spurred by complaints from residents and business owners on Laguna 
Canyon Road, city officials on Tuesday will discuss ways to reduce the dangers. 
Measures being considered include restricting pickups to one side of the road, 
posting a police officer or other city employee in the area and restricting 
workers and employers to one pickup spot. 
Council members say they have no plans to bar the workers from public streets 
and note that they have gone out of their way to find a suitable place for the 
workers to gather -- unlike other cities that have called in Immigration and 
Naturalization Service officials to round up those who may be in the country 
illegally. 
"Complex social issues can never be solved easily by ordinance," Mayor Robert 
F. Gentry says. "As long as I'm on the City Council, I will never go for that." 
Meanwhile, some local businessmen have criticized officials for relocating the 
dayworkers to the heavily traveled road that connects Laguna Beach to the San 
Diego Freeway. 
"It makes logical sense that you don't put them on one of the busiest streets 
in the county," says Joe Jaharaus, who owns Laguna Beach Lumber Co., across the 
street from the pickup site. "One of these days, there is going to be a major 
accident." 
Jaharaus says he has seen two dayworkers struck by cars and a collision between 
a van and a truck that was pulling into traffic after picking up a worker. 
"I can't tell you how many accidents we have had involving dayworkers," 
Jaharaus says. "People slamming into our gate. It's a very dangerous spot 
here." 
The dayworkers, mostly young Mexican men in their late teens and 20s, used to 
gather on Coast Highway in North Laguna. But when residents there complained, 
the city told the workers to move the pickup spot to a parking lot on Laguna 
Canyon Road. 
Nearly eight months ago, they asked the workers to move another 100 yards up 
the road because the lot was being used for Festival of the Arts parking in the 
summer. The workers now gather at two spots just south of El Toro Road. 
Laguna Canyon Road was picked "because we wanted them to be able to get off 
their bus and go to their place of work," Councilwoman Martha Collison says. 
"Also, this did not impact on a residential neighborhood because there were 
already some commercial businesses there." 
Gentry says he sympathizes with the dayworkers' plight and added that he sees 
them as a vital part of the local economy. 
"If I ever had to leave my country and risk a number of things, in some cases 
my life, to seek work to support my family, to me that is pretty impressive," 
he says. "It's not a negative thing. It's American capitalism at its finest." 
Leslie Herzog contributed to this report. 
