FIGHT FOR 'DOLPHIN-SAFE' TUNA FLARES UP AGAIN; 
ENVIRONMENT: GROUPS WILL RENEW PROTESTS AGAINST BUMBLE BEE SEAFOODS. BUT THE 
FIRM SAYS IT DOESN'T BUY FISH CAUGHT IN WAYS THAT HARM THE MAMMALS. 
In an angry parting of the ways, several environmental groups that have long 
lobbied for "dolphin-safe" tuna fishing methods plan to renew protests Friday 
against Bumble Bee Seafoods Inc. 
The groups claim that Bumble Bee's Thai parent company buys tuna caught in ways 
that harm the marine mammals, contrary to a promise Bumble Bee made last 
spring. 
Bumble Bee is one of three major U.S. tuna packers that announced in April that 
they would switch to buying only tuna caught in dolphin-safe ways. StarKist 
Seafood Co., an affiliate of H. J. Heinz Co., was first to take the pledge and 
was quickly followed by Bumble Bee and Van Kamp Seafood Co.'s Chicken of the 
Sea brand. 
The companies' promise extended not only to tuna sold in the United States but 
to international operations as well. Since then, Bumble Bee's cans have been 
labeled "caught with methods 100% safe to dolphins." 
But Earth Island Institute, one of the West Coast-based organizations that has 
long campaigned for that switch, says a recent incident capped more than seven 
months of dissatisfaction with Bumble Bee policies. Earth Island says one of 
its members has proof that Bumble Bee's parent company, Unicord Corp., last 
month accepted a shipment of tuna at a port in Thailand that was not 
dolphin-safe. 
Bumble Bee executives strongly deny the charges. 
"We believe that Earth Island is a well-intentioned group. But they are making 
statements that are irresponsible, and we take their actions very seriously," 
Mark A. Koob, president and chief operating officer of Bumble Bee, said 
Wednesday. 
Other environmental groups involved in the issue -- including Greenpeace and 
the Dolphin Coalition, a Washington-based umbrella group -- said they would 
take no position until they examine Earth Island's evidence. 
Earth Island has complained that Bumble Bee, unlike StarKist and Chicken of the 
Sea, refused to immediately end existing contracts with three boats using 
dolphin-endangering catch methods. 
"That was a bad start," said David Phillips, executive director of Earth 
Island. 
The group also objects to Unicord's admitted practice of buying fish that have 
been caught using small, coastal drift nets. Other environmental groups have 
not yet agreed that this is a dolphin-endangering fishing method and will 
discuss the issue at a Dec. 12 meeting of the Dolphin Coalition, in Washington. 
Use of nets 1.5 miles in length or less is currently allowed both in United 
Nations marine-resource law and the tuna-can labeling law that was signed by 
President Bush on Wednesday, with strong support from environmentalists. 
"StarKist and Chicken of the Sea have policies of not buying from drift nets, 
period," Phillips noted. 
But what seems to have pushed Earth Island to protest -- along with members of 
Friends of Animals, the Sea Shepherd Society and the Dolphin Connection -- is a 
report by Brenda Killian, associate Dolphin Project director at Earth Island. 
Killian, inspecting tuna canners in Thailand last month, said she was told by 
officials of Unicord that they had just accepted tuna from a boat named the 
Maya. Killian repoted that other buyers at the port had rejected the catch 
because it was not certified as dolphin-safe. 
"She saw a boat called the Maya offloading at a public dock also used by 
Unicord," replied Koob, of Bumble Bee. "The end buyer was Thai Overseas Food 
and Takong Food, Thai companies. Unicord, our parent, has no interest or 
financial support in either of these companies." 
"If Phillips has hard and fast evidence that Bumble Bee is cheating, then I 
suggest that the company stop," said Christopher Croft, director of the Dolphin 
Coalition. "That will be what we determine at the Dec. 12th meeting." 
