LEBANESE CEMENT TIES UNDER NEW PRESIDENT; 
MIDEAST: GEN. AOUN IS A HOLDOUT. HIS RABID SUPPORTERS STORM THE HOME OF A 
RELIGIOUS LEADER. 
Lebanese politicians began cementing alliances under a new government as Muslim 
Prime Minister Salim Hoss, head of one of two rival regimes, traveled to 
Syrian-controlled territory in the north to hand over his resignation to Rene 
Mouawad, a Maronite Christian elected and inaugurated Sunday as Lebanon's ninth 
president. 
Maj. Gen. Michel Aoun, Lebanon's tenacious military strongman and leader of a 
Christian government opposed to that of Hoss, continued Monday to denounce the 
Parliament's election of Mouawad. Although both Aoun and Mouawad are Christian, 
Mouawad is Syrian-supported, and the general has vowed to drive all Syrian 
troops from Lebanon. 
Mouawad paid a call on the Maronite Christian Patriarch Nasrallah Sfeir, who 
had been terrorized earlier in the day by rabid followers of Aoun because of 
Sfeir's support for the new president. The two met at the patriarch's summer 
residence in the north, where Sfeir fled after his headquarters in the 
Christian enclave was stormed. 
As Lebanese awaited Mouawad's appointment of a new prime minister and cabinet, 
Aoun, surrounded by loyal troops of the national army he commands, stood his 
ground at his presidential palace at Baabda, outside Beirut. 
"He's a brave man," a Nicosia-based diplomat said, "but he tried to do what was 
politically and militarily impossible" -- drive a Syrian army of 40,000 out of 
Lebanon. 
After 14 years of civil strife and a devastating six-month Christian-Muslim 
artillery war this year, Lebanese politicians finally gave in to outside 
pressure and agreed to a package of political reforms designed to dismantle 
Christian privileges. 
Equally important to other Mideast nations, which forced a truce on Lebanon 
through the Arab League, the fighting had threatened any hope of stability in 
the region, most recently as Iraq and Iran carried on their own conflict by 
proxy in Lebanon. 
But the 54-year-old Aoun -- who had said he was willing "to give peace a 
chance" when Lebanon's aged parliamentary deputies were summoned last month to 
Taif, Saudi Arabia, to work out accords -- is not satisfied. 
"We are not at confrontation with an elected president but will continue our 
campaign against the Syrian occupation," the general declared after Mouawad was 
elected Sunday by the Parliament at an abandoned military airfield under Syrian 
control on the north coast of Lebanon. "We are determined to thwart the 
conspiracy which is being hatched to eliminate what is left of Lebanon's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity." 
Syrian troops entered Lebanon in 1976 under an Arab League mandate and at the 
request of Christian President Suleiman Franjieh. The civil war was more than a 
year old, and Christian forces were hard-pressed by Palestinian fighters. Now 
the Syrians and their Muslim militia allies control 70% of the country. 
The Taif accord dealt primarily with political reform. A separate document 
pledges the Arab League to work for Syrian withdrawal, but not on a timetable 
tied to reform, as Aoun had demanded. 
On Monday, even Israel, which over the years has supported Lebanon's army in 
its struggle against the Syrians, joined the international chorus of support 
for Mouawad's election and the prospect of reform. 
"We can only hope that this election will bring more relaxation, stability and 
a new Lebanese framework based on today's reality and not on the dreams of the 
past," Uri Lubrani, Israel's coordinator for Lebanese policy, said in 
Jerusalem. "I hope this action will reduce the Syrian presence in Lebanon." 
Aoun called on his die-hard supporters to protest the developments, which he 
called constitutionally invalid, in "a civil manner," but hot-headed young 
Christians ran wild in the hours after Mouawad's election. 
Shortly after midnight, according to police accounts reported in the Lebanese 
press, about 100 protesters stormed the compound of the 68-year-old Patriarch 
Sfeir at Bkirki north of Beirut. 
"The rioters broke into the patriarch's bedroom, dragged him out of bed, forced 
him to kneel with two senior aides who rushed to help him and forced all of 
them to kiss posters of Aoun," a police spokesman said. ". . .They were 
hysterical." 
According to another account, portraits of Sfeir and Pope John Paul II were 
removed from the walls of the residence and replaced with pictures of the 
general. Other Aoun supporters reportedly broke into at least six other 
churches in the hours after midnight. They fired automatic rifles in the air, 
burned vehicle tires and rang the church bells, the police reported. 
Monday morning, caravans of youths cruised the streets of Christian East Beirut 
firing their rifles into the air. 
"There is no leader but Aoun!" they shouted. "Mouawad is a Syrian lackey!" 
A general strike shut down schools and commerce. 
The new president, speaking Sunday after his election, made it clear that he 
supports close relations between Lebanon and Syria, which he said are based on 
common interests and historical ties. 
BACKGROUND 
The Maronites are the leading Christian sect in Lebanon. They claim 1 million 
adherents there, plus more in Syria, Israel, the United States (where many 
emigrated) and elsewhere. Their leader is Patriarch Nasrallah Sfeir, 68, of 
Lebanon. The sect traces its origins to St. Maron, a monk who lived in northern 
Syria in the 5th Century. Centuries later, seeking to escape persecution by 
Muslim caliphs, sect members fled to the mountains of Lebanon, where many 
remain today. They allied themselves with the Crusaders and later formed ties 
with France. A massacre of Maronites by Druze Muslims in 1860 led to France's 
first intervention in Lebanon. The Maronite Church is allied with Rome but uses 
Eastern Antiochene rites. 
