THE AGONY OF DECEIT; 
KGB; THE INSIDE STORY BY CHRISTOPHER ANDREW AND OLEG GORDIEVSKY (HARPER 
COLLINS: $29.95; 776 PP.) 
After joining the KGB in 1962, Oleg Gordievsky grew disillusioned six years 
later when Soviet tanks clattered into Czechoslovakia, crushing the Prague 
Spring and its new brand of socialism that promised a human face. 
In fact, Gordievsky grew so disillusioned that he offered his services to the 
British Secret Intelligence Services, which apparently accepted them with 
alacrity. While on the SIS payroll, or perhaps only in its thrall, Gordievsky 
continued to rise in his own spy service, eventually achieving the rank of KGB 
resident (head of station) in London. 
In 1985, he was summoned back to Moscow for consultation. Suspecting that his 
treachery had been discovered, Gordievsky dissembled, stalled and eventually 
escaped back to London, leaving behind his wife and two small daughters. He has 
not seen them since. 
In 1987, he teamed with Cambridge historian Christopher Andrew to write a 
history of the KGB. They would concentrate on how the Russian spy agencies have 
viewed the world as a huge conspiracy aimed directly at the U.S.S.R. The result 
is "KGB: The Inside Story," a 776-page treatise that traces in often 
excruciating detail what Russian spies have done or tried to do from the time 
of Ivan the Terrible in 1565 to the present day. 
As they follow the KGB through its permutations from its birth as the Cheka in 
1917 to the various acronyms that followed -- OGPU, NKVD, MGB, MVD and, 
finally, KGB -- the historian and the ex-spy return again and again to the 
Soviet obsession with conspiracies, some of them real, many of them imaginary. 
It also is a history of constant intrigue, rampant paranoia, numbing fear and, 
were it not for the wholesale butchery, it frequently reads like the inner 
workings of the Soviet Ministry of Agriculture gone slightly mad. 
One of Gordievsky's own and quite understandable obsessions is with Kim Philby, 
the late MI6 star and Soviet agent who almost became chief of Britain's Secret 
Intelligence Service. Philby, of course, was the senior partner in the old-boy 
spy firm of Philby, MacLean, Burgess and Blunt. 
The authors rather breathlessly reveal that there is yet a fifth member of the 
old-boy spy firm that the KGB is said to have begun calling "The Magnificent 
Five" after watching Steve McQueen, Yul Brynner et al in "The Magnificent 
Seven." The firm's fifth member is none other than John Cairncross -- not 
exactly a household name in this country. 
But the authors assure us that he was a most excellent Soviet spy. "In less 
than a decade after leaving Cambridge, he served successively in the Foreign 
Office, the Treasury, the private office of a government minister . . . and 
SIS." 
For those who out of curiosity or even perversity follow the careers of British 
double agents, both real and imaginary, John Cairncross is a familiar name. 
Back in 1984, Chapman Pincher, in his book "Too Secret Too Long," devoted 
almost a dozen unflattering pages to Cairncross, charging him with most of the 
same treacherous deeds that Andrew and Gordievsky now accuse him of six years 
later. Cairncross, however, no longer denies anything, Pincher says. "He simply 
points out that he has never admitted having been a spy." 
For U.S. readers, Andrew and Gordievsky also offer a long list of Americans who 
have been charged, tried, convicted and even executed for having been Soviet 
agents. There are Alger Hiss and Whittaker Chambers, of course, although the 
authors note that their account of Chambers' "career is based on Allen 
Weinstein's 'Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case,' " a book that many Hiss 
partisans still dispute. 
The Rosenbergs, Ethel and Julius, are mentioned in a curiously sympathetic way. 
They "eloquently, even movingly, protested their innocence to the end. In 
April, they became the only Soviet spies in the west to be sentenced to death. 
. . . Both Julius and Ethel were dedicated, courageous Soviet agents, who 
believed that they could serve the future of their cause by denying their 
association with it." There is no footnote to this assertion, but it seems 
likely to be a tribute of sorts from Gordievsky. 
And then there is the curious case of Harry L. Hopkins, the man who was one of 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt's closest advisers and sometimes even lived in 
the White House. According to Gordievsky, all the Soviet authorities he 
discussed Hopkins with agreed that "Hopkins had been an agent of major 
significance." A Soviet agent, it should be noted. 
Upon reflection, Gordievsky finally decided that "Hopkins had been an 
unconscious rather than a conscious agent." In CIA parlance, that would be an 
unwitting rather than a witting agent. Unwitting agents often are none too 
bright, which is something no one ever accused Hopkins of being. However, after 
going through a rather tortuous analysis, the two authors finally agree that 
"In backing Stalin and the Soviet war effort, Hopkins acted from a 
determination to prevent a Nazi victory rather than from a secret commitment to 
the Communist cause." 
The Russians still think he was their agent. But then, so do many Republicans. 
Perhaps too much of the book is devoted to intramural infighting in the Russian 
spy bureaucracies. But there is also a measure of titillating gossip about 
cyanide guns concealed in cigarette packs, the history of the famous umbrellas 
purchased in Washington and transformed into Bulgarian assassination weapons, 
and about how the KGB recruits its agents. 
"KGB: The Inside Story" is essentially a long, long tale of deceit, treachery 
and politics by terrible means. In other words, it's about espionage. It's also 
a cautionary tale that in its final paragraph clearly states its warning: 
"Like every major modern state, Russia needs both a domestic security service 
and a foreign intelligence agency. For it to possess an intelligence community 
worthy of its citizens' respect, however, it will have to close down the KGB 
and start afresh." 
On second thought, it's more of a dream than a warning. 
BOOKMARK: For an excerpt from "KGB: The Inside Story," see the Opinion section, 
Page 2. 
