ESTANCIA NO. 1, BUT LOOK OUT FOR MATER DEI; 
BASKETBALL: MONARCH COACH INSISTS HE'S TELLING THE TRUTH WHEN HE SAYS MATER DEI 
IS REBUILDING, BUT OTHERS AREN'T BUYING IT. 
Gary McKnight has a confession to make. Over the past seven years, Mater Dei 
High School's basketball coach hasn't been truthful when evaluating teams 
before the season. 
McKnight has done his best to downgrade his teams' prospects, but results don't 
lie: Mater Dei has won six Southern Section championships and two state titles. 
"All those years, I lied," McKnight said. "This time, I'm telling the truth 
when I say this is a rebuilding year for us. This is the most inexperienced 
team I've ever had, with five sophomores and three juniors." 
But few are buying it. 
"McKnight's 12th man could start here right now," said Tim O'Brien, Estancia 
coach. "I know he's singing the blues, but when the season ends, he'll be on 
top." 
Of course, O'Brien is no George Washington himself. Even without Mater Dei's 
12th man, Estancia opens the 1990-91 season as the top-ranked team in The 
Times' preseason poll. Tustin is a close second, followed by Marina. But most 
coaches will keep a close watch on fourth-ranked Mater Dei. 
"Truthfully, I think Mater Dei is better than we are," said Tom McCluskey, 
Tustin coach. "We beat them by 10 points this summer, but I still remember 
playing against one of Gary's teams in the playoffs when I was at Fontana. 
"We had Sean Rooks (now at Arizona) at center, and I thought we had a good 
chance to beat them. We got dissected, losing by 32 points, and I learned to 
never underestimate their program again." 
The Times' top 10: 
1 ESTANCIA 
1989-90 Record: 21-10 
League: Pacific Coast 
Coach: Tim O'Brien 
Seven of the top eight players are returning, but more important, O'Brien is 
also back after an unsuccessful bid for the Christ College Irvine job last 
spring. The only missing ingredient is graduated guard Agustin Heredia, who 
scored 32 points in a 51-49 victory over Servite in the 3-AA title game. 
"We're so far ahead of the game with everybody back that it makes coaching a 
lot easier," O'Brien said. "This is a good group of high school players. I have 
16 seniors who have been with me for four years." 
Estancia's convincing run through the Newport-Mesa summer tournament -- it won 
every game by double figures -- had rival coaches wondering if anyone could 
beat the Eagles this season. 
O'Brien will have the luxury of using 10 players with no significant drop-off 
in quality, and he plans to press opponents into mistakes. It's an outstanding 
senior class, but Estancia's top player should be junior forward Matt 
Fuerbringer. 
"This is the first time I've seen a group together for four straight years," 
said O'Brien, whose Eagles move from the strong Sea View League to the weaker 
Pacific Coast. "I can see four or five players averaging 10 points a game. We 
have excellent balance." 
2 TUSTIN 
1989-90 Record: 20-8 
League: Sea View 
Coach: Tom McCluskey 
Four returning starters, including all-league selections David Beilstein, 
Thomas Clayton and Jentry Moore, lead the talented, experienced Tillers. 
Beilstein averaged 17.7 points and shot 67% as a junior and was a second-team, 
all-Division II selection. 
"This is the quickest and most experienced team I've had at Tustin," said 
McCluskey, the Tillers' fourth-year coach. "Our expectations are very high." 
Tustin had a 36-4 record over the summer, including victories over Marina (with 
Cherokee Parks) and Mater Dei (by 10). But McCluskey insists depth will be a 
problem because projected sixth man Rod Blake, a 6-4 forward, has moved to 
Chicago. 
"We have five good starters, but after that, we're hurting," he said. "We've 
never been in a situation where we were ranked among the top five teams in the 
county, so it's going to be interesting to see how the players respond. I'm 
sure if you asked them now, they'd tell you they're the No. 1 team in the 
county. I'd rather wait until we play a few games." 
MARINA 
1989-90 Record: 18-9 
League: Sunset 
Coach: Steve Popovich 
The mere presence of All-American center Cherokee Parks makes Marina a tall 
order for any opponent, but questions about mental toughness keep the Vikings 
from being ranked No. 1. 
Marina was inconsistent last season, struggling to an 8-7 nonleague record, 
excelling to a 9-1 Sunset League record and title, then showing little heart 
while losing to Cajon, 67-61, in the second round of the 5-A division playoffs. 
There are also questions about Parks' supporting cast. Forward Brant Shelor and 
guard Sean Haselrig are proven performers, but the lack of a true point guard 
could hurt. 
"Obviously, I like our inside game," Popovich said. "I also like our 
versatility. I can go with a big lineup or a smaller lineup if we're playing a 
real quick team." 
The return of forward Dennis Winners, who played volleyball as a junior, gives 
Popovich added board strength. "Our league is going to be every bit as tough as 
last year, so we needed another physical player who can pound inside," Popovich 
said. 
MATER DEI 
1989-90 Record: 34-1 
League: Angelus 
Coach: Gary McKnight 
A rebuilding year at Mater Dei? Hard to believe, but that's what McKnight has 
after losing most of a senior-oriented team that won the state Division I title 
last season. 
Gone are forwards Andy Karich (Santa Clara) and David Boyle (Holy Cross), 
center Derek Stone (Boise State), guards Jason Quinn (Southern California 
College) and Danny O'Neil (Oregon) and sixth man Paul Nolan (Redlands). 
The new kids on the block are sophomores DeJuan Matthews and Kamran Sufi, 
junior Reggie Geary and seniors J.J. Ballesteros, Jason Janeski and Mark 
Moneypenny. Moneypenny and Geary played in the waning moments of lopsided 
victories last season. 
Moneypenny, a 6-11 string bean of a center, has drawn interest from several 
Division I colleges. Geary is the team's best all-around athlete. 
McKnight, who brings a 227-19 record into his ninth season, is predicting early 
losses and has picked Santa Margarita to win the Angelus League title. Here's 
another prediction: Mater Dei will be the county's top-ranked team at the end 
of the season. 
OCEAN VIEW 
1989-90 Record: 16-11 
League: Sunset 
Coach: Jim Harris 
The prospects of a solid inside game with returning center Marcel TenBerge and 
an outstanding outside game with sharpshooting guard Ryan Martin should be 
enough for Ocean View to challenge Marina and Edison for the league title. 
TenBerge, who signed with Colorado State, broke his finger on Jan. 3 against 
Long Beach Poly and was never 100% afterward. "He's a relentless rebounder and 
has a nice touch inside, so we're expecting big things from Marcel," Harris 
said. 
In TenBerge's absence, Martin made 45 of 100 three-point attempts, and Jimmy 
Harris made 22 of 51 three-pointers. Harris, the coach's sophomore son, will 
play the point. 
"Our defense needs to improve, but we have three very good players, and our 
depth will be improved over the past couple of years," Harris said. 
CAPISTRANO VALLEY 
1989-90 Record: 18-9 
League: South Coast 
Coach: Mark Thornton 
A team concept returns to Capistrano Valley after the graduation of forward 
Scott McCorkle and guard Chris Kostoff, the top duo in the county last year. 
McCorkle averaged 24.4 points and Kostoff 20.1 in an unbalanced attack. 
McCorkle and Kostoff were such dominating players that Thornton resorted to 
practices in which they were not allowed to shoot in an effort to build their 
teammates' confidence. McCorkle's younger brother, Brett, is the only returnee 
from last season. 
"This year's team will be well-balanced, and all the players have the green 
light to shoot, unlike last year's team," Thornton said. 
Thornton predicts junior guard Tom Airey will be among the county's top 
shooters, but the Cougars' future largely depends on the play of sophomore 
point guard David Sedgwick. 
EDISON 
1989-90 Record: 20-9 
League: Sunset 
Coach: Jon Borchert 
Brandon Jessie, a 6-5 junior forward, will be overshadowed by Parks but should 
develop into one of the county's top players before he graduates. He averaged 
16.1 points as a sophomore and was named most valuable player in the Coast 
Christmas Classic. 
Last year's sixth man, Todd Smyser, moves into the starting lineup and will be 
joined by Dave Deck in the backcourt. Deck was the second player off the bench 
for Borchert last year, and Borchert said both guards are fine perimeter 
shooters. 
"I have high hopes for Smyser and Deck," Borchert said. "Offensively, we should 
be very good. The main focus of our practices has been rebounding and defense." 
MISSION VIEJO 
1989-90 Record: 19-7 
League: South Coast 
Coach: Bob Minier 
Mission Viejo figures to start slowly with five players participating in the 
football playoffs. Two returning players, guard Bill Denny and forward Mike 
Boucher, start at strong safety and wide receiver for the football team. 
Another football player, Rob Cullinan, will likely be the team's starting 
center. Cullinan is the team's tallest starter at 6-5, but Minier believes 
quickness will overcome size problems. 
"Mike Boucher has the ability to become one of the best players in the county," 
Minier said. "When he consistently plays both ends of the court and rebounds to 
the level of his potential, he's a tremendous player." 
ESPERANZA 
1989-90 Record: 16-11 
League: Empire 
Coach: Mark Hill 
The surprise team of the Empire last season, Esperanza should end Los Alamitos' 
reign as the best of a six-team league. 
Guards Joe Foss and Brett Evans and center Matt Thimgan, all starting their 
third varsity seasons, form the nucleus. 
Foss is one of the county's top players. He averaged 21.2 points and shot 56% 
from the field as a junior. He led Esperanza to a 30-5 summer record and was 
named most valuable player of the San Dimas and Ventura College tournaments. 
Matt Kordik, a 6-6 junior forward, also gives the Aztecs added rebounding 
strength. 
IRVINE 
1989-90 Record: 11-16 
League: South Coast 
Coach: Steve Keith 
Additional depth and the return of forward John Molle should help Irvine 
improve on last year's record. 
Molle signed with San Diego State in the fall. He averaged 20.9 points and 7.5 
rebounds and was the county's second-best free-throw shooter (89%). 
Point guard Brad Gramlich, who will be a co-captain with Molle, will team in 
the backcourt with Brian Boothroyd, who started as a sophomore last year. 
"Our team is more experienced and stronger than last year's," Keith said. 
Others to Watch: Canyon, Century, Foothill, Garden Grove, Los Alamitos, Santa 
Margarita, Servite, Sunny Hills and Western. 
PREP BASKETBALL '90-'91 
Previews of the races for the championship in the county's 11 boys' basketball 
leagues will begin with the Angelus League Dec. 9, and continue daily in The 
Times' Orange County edition. A preview of the county's small schools will end 
the series on Dec. 19. 
