O.C. ART REVIEW; 
SIGMUND FREUD ART COLLECTION: A DREAM AT UCI; 
LIKE ANY PASSIONATE ART COLLECTOR, THE FATHER OF PSYCHOANALYSIS WAS FUELED BY 
MOTIVES SO DEEP HE COULD NOT HAVE EXPLAINED THEM HIMSELF. 
In March, 1938, the Nazis marched into Vienna. By May they were rounding up 
Jews to scrub sidewalks with toothbrushes or to be packed off to the camps. At 
Berggasse 19, tension mounted as Sigmund Freud's family prepared to flee 
Austria. His daughter, Anna, was exercising guile worthy of Metternich to 
persuade the SS to give her father Unbedenklichkeitserklarung, the official 
document that would allow him to immigrate to England. 
The father of psychoanalysis was 82 and ailing. His rabid fondness for cigars 
had finally given him cancer of the mouth. His palate had been surgically 
removed and replaced with a prosthesis that caused him unremitting pain. With 
his life at stake, the old man still found time to worry about a matter others 
would have forgotten in such extremity: Would his art collection be saved? 
Freud started collecting in 1896, the year his father died. By the time the 
Nazis arrived, he had more than 2,000 small antique works -- Egyptian, 
Etruscan, Greek, Roman, Near-Eastern and Asian. They crammed his comfortable 
consulting room and office. For him they were powerful symbols of his work and 
treasured old friends. 
Touchingly, he kept rows of figures ever before him on his desk as a king might 
keep a council of elders -- or a boy rows of favorite model soldiers. 
Finally, on May 23, he could write to a friend that the collection had been 
released for a minimal levy of about $100. He was free. The beloved compendium 
was reassembled in the Freuds' new London digs at 20 Maresfield Gardens. 
Freud would have a year to be consoled by it before he died. 
Today, the stolid brick London house is the Freud Museum. The antiquities it 
contains were not his only artistic legacy. His grandson Lucien Freud still 
lives in London and is regarded among the world's leading figurative painters. 
A traveling exhibition of 65 works from Freud's collection is currently showing 
at UC Irvine (to Dec. 16). 
Put together by Freud Museum director Richard Wells and art historian Lynn 
Gamwell, it is a show that resonates well beyond its own modest proportions and 
should attract anyone interested in either art or psychology. 
Actually, it requires a considerable effort of ignorance to be interested in 
one and not the other. 
Many shrinks will admit their craft is more art than science. Most artists will 
readily confess that the end result of their labors is not so much the physical 
artwork as its emotional impact first on themselves, then on the viewer. 
Does a work of art really exist if no one sees it? Why does it exist when 
someone does see it? 
Because, I suppose, our minds are unruly cellars cluttered with remembered 
images -- images of things, feelings and events. When we see a work of art, the 
mind matches it up with those matrix images and we respond. In a way, we all 
have an art collection pre-existent in our heads. If we put together a real 
collection of objects, it is predictably the projection of our mindscape and 
our dreams. 
It's really all rather Freudian. 
Ironically, Freud's collection of archetypal objects tends to confirm the 
theories of his one-time follower Carl Jung. At this distance, disagreements in 
doctrine between members of the Freud circle do seem tiresomely petty. 
Freud had a classical education. Significantly, he did not collect primitive 
art, but art from civilizations he had studied. He had a pretty good eye, 
although he bought several fakes, such as a forged Chinese camel in Tang style 
and a bogus Egyptian New Kingdom wall relief on view here. 
The art critic Roger Fry claimed that Freud didn't understand the formal 
underpinnings of aesthetic pleasure. That probably proves that Fry didn't 
understand the profound emotional foundations of aesthetic pleasure. 
At his best, Freud found objects that carry emotional authenticity and -- aside 
from their powerful symbolic value -- objects with nuanced delicacy. 
There is a lovely freshness about a Greek Hellenistic Eros figure and great 
sensitivity of carving in an Egyptian Ptolemaic donation stele. Two tiny Roman 
Hellenistic heads concentrate ferocious emotion. 
But that's not the point. Like any passionate collector, Freud was fueled by 
motives so deep he could not have explained them himself. That's saying 
something, considering his claim to have been the only man to ever successfully 
psychoanalyze himself. 
As a youth, Freud admired and envied Heinrich Schliemann, the discoverer and 
excavator of ancient Troy. Schliemann gave reality to a city thought to exist 
only in legend. Freud gave reality to a part of the human mind believed equally 
fictional. 
In his practice, Freud saw himself as an archeologist of the mind unearthing 
lost fragments of memory and trying to fit them once again into a coherent 
whole. The archeological metaphor was so persuasive that psychotherapists use 
it to this day, furnishing their own offices with magical objects. Shamanism 
lives. 
Imagine how Freud must have regarded his little late-Egyptian bronze of Isis 
suckling the infant Horus. He would have known the mythical story of how Isis' 
husband Osiris was killed by a jealous brother, hacked into 14 pieces and 
scattered across the land. Isis found the dismembered pieces, put them back 
together, made Osiris the first mummy and coupled with it to produce the infant 
Horus. The child was raised in secret until he was old enough to avenge the 
father. 
Very Freudian. 
Freud adored his mother and envied his father. When he learned of the Greek 
myth of Oedipus, who unwittingly killed his father and married his mother, he 
decided his own impulse was universal and identified the most famous of his 
complexes. 
A Greek terra cotta Sphinx memorializes the moment when Oedipus outwits the 
winged lion-woman by answering her riddle. 
Many of his cherished objects bore directly on personal experiences, such as a 
falcon-headed figure that reminded him of a childhood dream. Janus-faced heads 
reflect his interest in human dualities, including his claim that we are 
fundamentally bisexual. His interest in the duality of instinct and reason 
reflect in one of the collection's most beautiful works, an Egyptian-Roman 
"Baboon of Thoth" -- the animal god of intellectual purity. 
Freud had mixed and sometimes conventional notions about women. The driving 
narcissism he claimed to find in them is embodied in a Roman bronze Venus 
admiring herself in a glass. The power he felt in them shows in figures of 
goddesses of aggression such as Athena and Artemis. 
Freud was certainly among the most influential half-dozen thinkers of the 
century. 
His ideas have been attacked, ridiculed, revised and revered until lesser 
people have declared us in a "Post-Freudian" era. 
Certainly, Freud did not get it all right. But his real achievement comes 
across in the extraordinary reverberations of his collection. 
Perhaps because we know these things were his, we are reminded they have 
meaning beyond their formal properties. They do what art is supposed to do and 
what Freud tried to revitalize in reality. They broadcast the unseen things 
which -- once grasped -- give life a profound vitality. 
