A COP'S BEST FRIEND DIES IN LINE OF DUTY 
Hawthorne Police Officer Dave Harris wept over the death of his partner 
Tuesday. 
Harris is a dog handler in one of Hawthorne's four canine units, and his German 
shepherd Urko was run over by a car driven by a robbery suspect fleeing police 
Tuesday night. 
The car, traveling about 60 m.p.h., struck the dog at the intersection of 130th 
Street and Hawthorne Boulevard, went out of control and crashed, authorities 
said Wednesday. 
The dog's back was broken and he died a short time later at Coast Animal 
Hospital in Hermosa Beach, police said. The suspect was not seriously injured 
and was arrested at the scene. 
Harris also was uninjured, but distraught. 
"He was much more than just a pet," Harris said Wednesday. "He's your partner, 
he's a friend, and you couldn't ask for anything more." 
Urko's death in the line of duty came on the same day the department held a 
memorial service for another one of its dogs, which died recently of cancer. 
In the ceremony on the front lawn of the police station on 126th Street, about 
100 mourners gathered to honor Iox, who had been with the department for more 
than seven years and had been retired in September because of his illness. 
About 20 canine handlers from police departments as far away as San Bernardino, 
along with their four-legged partners, lined the street that had been blocked 
off to traffic. Iox's handler, Officer Chet Wojciechowski, delivered a simple 
eulogy for a dog that understood only commands uttered in German. 
A similar ceremony is planned for Urko next Wednesday. 
"Dave . . . needs lots of support right now," Sgt. Rick Shindle, head of the 
Hawthorne canine unit, said of Harris. "That's what's nice about canine 
handlers from the other cities being here. They support each other. They know 
what it's like to lose a partner like that." 
Officers say the use of dogs in many departments has added a new element of 
camaraderie to a job in which officers must have confidence in the strength and 
ability of a partner. 
Harris, 33, a nine-year veteran of the department, said Urko died trying to 
protect him. 
The incident that took the dog's life began in Lakewood, when a 20-year-old 
suspect allegedly stole a car from a motorist at a gas station at gunpoint. The 
suspect led police on a chase through several cities. 
Harris and Urko, responding to a call for backup units, went to 130th Street 
and Hawthorne Boulevard. 
"Me and another guy and our partners blocked the streets with our cars," Harris 
said. "I saw the suspect coming at us real fast, and I saw that he wasn't going 
to stop. So I went back to my car to get my dog out of the way." 
When he opened his car door, Urko leaped out, he said. 
"He was all keyed up," Harris said. "He jumped out of the car looking for a bad 
guy, and when he realized there was no bad guy out there, he turned around to 
come back to me. And that's when he got hit." 
Harris said he was about 10 feet away from Urko when he was struck. 
"I ran over to my dog, and he just kind of looked up at me," Harris said, his 
voice breaking. "I went and got a blanket . . . and one of my partners took us 
to a 24-hour emergency clinic. 
"On the way there, he just kind of picked up his head and looked at me like he 
was saying goodby, and then he just flopped down." 
In the meantime, the police chase continued for another 10 blocks before the 
suspect lost control of the vehicle and it overturned, colliding with another 
car, police said. The second motorist was not injured, police said. 
Richard Garcia was booked on suspicion of robbery and causing injury or death 
to a police dog, a felony. 
