NEW HAVEN POLICE CHIEF'S TACTICS DRAW FIRE, PRAISE 
Police Chief Nicholas Pastore is trading in his force of drug-busting, 
doughnut-eating militiamen for what he calls social engineers. 
The new chief has banned leather driving gloves on police officers as too 
intimidating and has told the members of his force to steer drug users to 
treatment programs instead of jails. 
He has also told his officers to knock off the frequent coffee-and-doughnut 
runs during their breaks because it gives them a bad image with the public. 
"I want the police to be perceived as a helping-hand agency," said Pastore, who 
has been on the job for seven months. 
That perception can be bolstered if officers, among other things, help drug 
users rather than just arrest them, the new chief said. 
"We've tried the tanks, the helicopters, the big guns for many years. It 
doesn't work," Pastore, 52, said in a recent interview. "I don't subscribe to 
the philosophy that the more arrests you make, it's going to solve the crime 
problem." 
Arrests in New Haven, a city of 125,000 people, dropped sharply when Pastore 
discontinued sting operations to round up drug buyers. He has also stopped 
dispatching teams of officers into high-crime neighborhoods for round-the-clock 
arrests and disbanded the department's canine unit. 
Instead, he ordered about 20 more officers to walk beats, placed officers at 
high-visibility posts throughout downtown and made extensive community outreach 
efforts to end what he calls the "we-they mentality" in drug-infested 
neighborhoods. 
He also walks the streets of crime-plagued neighborhoods himself, frequently 
striking up conversations with known drug dealers. 
"When I'm seen in these neighborhoods, people realize this man cares," he said. 
His actions have brought praise from various members of the public and business 
community, but have put him at odds with the police department's union. 
A group of downtown merchants recently presented Pastore with a plaque for his 
efforts to increase police visibility. But Sgt. Louis G. Cavalier, the head of 
the police officers union, complained that the stepped-up presence has merely 
provided the community with a "false sense of security." 
Pastore has also won the confidence of at least one drug user's mother, who 
called him recently to say she needed to talk to someone she could trust. 
The chief believes marijuana use should be decriminalized, and he said his 
efforts to encourage addicts to seek treatment reflects his belief that the 
drug problem should be resolved by physicians, not lawyers. 
Such views earned him a prominent profile in the August issue of "High Times," 
a magazine devoted to marijuana smoking. 
Pastore said he didn't know the free-lance writer who spoke with him was doing 
the interview for High Times. But he added that he was accurately quoted and 
had no problems with the story. 
His comments in a newspaper interview that there would be fewer 
coffee-and-doughnut runs now that he was police chief ruffled some feathers in 
the department. Union officials accuse him of frequently entering restaurants 
and asking officers what they are doing. 
"There is the sense that the chief is on their backs constantly," Cavalier 
said. 
Pastore said he recalls only one such restaurant incident. He added that his 
doughnut policy is not an attack on his officers' work ethic but on the 
traditional concept of police work. 
"Police work should not be just doing what the dispatcher says, then in between 
going to Dunkin' Donuts," he said. 
He praises his officers, but dismisses the union's criticism. 
"The union doesn't care about the public," he said. "All they care about is 
what's good for them. "They have become a group of militant mercenaries." 
Pastore came into office with a mandate to shake up the department and move to 
a concept of community-based policing, in which officers are assigned to 
individual neighborhoods. Because of a tight city budget, the new program has 
gotten off to a slow start. 
First-term Mayor John Daniels, a friend since high school, bypassed nearly 20 
internal candidates in hiring Pastore, who had spent 18 years with the 
department before retiring in 1981. 
