CASOLO'S RELEASE PREDICTED; NOT YET, SALVADORAN JUDGE SAYS 
The lawyer for Jennifer Jean Casolo, imprisoned here on charges she aided 
leftist guerrillas, is working to have the American woman released, but the 
military court handling the case warned Tuesday that freedom may not come so 
quickly. 
Casolo, arrested by National Police last month when they uncovered an arms 
cache during a raid on her house, is charged with terrorism, possession of war 
weapons and related crimes. She maintains she is innocent. 
Casolo's attorney, Salvador Ibarra, said Tuesday he is confident that motions 
he filed on Monday to have the case dropped will be accepted by the court. 
"There is a very good chance she will be released," Ibarra said after meeting 
with the judge, Guillermo Romero Hernandez. Ibarra predicted Casolo could be 
out of jail by the end of the week. 
But Romero, apparently taken aback by Ibarra's assertions, said he is reviewing 
the case and has yet to make any ruling. 
"The case is still being processed," Romero said. 
What happens next in Casolo's case remains unclear. While Romero could free the 
28-year-old Thomaston, Conn., woman, the investigation could continue and a 
trial still could be held. 
In a writ filed Monday, Ibarra said the case against Casolo was without merit 
because there wasn't sufficient evidence to try her. 
Further, he argued, she should be released on a technicality. Ibarra said that 
under a state of emergency declared by the government last month, the 
applicable laws to charge Casolo did not exist at the time of her arrest. The 
state of emergency, imposed in response to a fierce guerrilla offensive 
launched Nov. 11, suspends numerous laws, and emergency legislation technically 
did not go into effect until after Casolo was jailed, Ibarra asserted. 
Police say they unearthed more than 20,000 rounds of ammunition, grenades and 
explosives in an underground tunnel in the back yard of a house Casolo rented 
in May. The weapons were being stockpiled for Farabundo Marti National 
Liberation Front rebels who are fighting to oust the U.S.-backed Salvadoran 
government, they said. 
Casolo, who coordinated tours for visiting delegations of church workers and 
congressional aides for a religious group called Christian Educational 
Seminars, is being held in the Ilopango Women's Prison. 
Early Tuesday, Ibarra had told a group of reporters that Casolo would be freed 
before the end of the day. The premature announcement led to speculation that 
Ibarra was trying to bring pressure onto authorities to force her release. 
But Ibarra insisted that the judge had promised to release Casolo, then backed 
out. 
"This case is a hot potato for the judge," Ibarra said. "He has the eyes of the 
world upon him, and he has to dispose of it before he gets burned." 
