NEWSMAKERS 
Whine Country: Votes were cast from New Jersey to California, and the winners 
were announced Monday in the National Whiner's Day poll. Included were "Today" 
show host Bryant Gumbel for his memos knocking his colleagues; former First 
Lady Nancy Reagan for her autobiography; Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C.) for his 
political antics, and televangelist wife and makeup queen Tammy Bakker for her 
wails about her and her husband's alleged mistreatment. But outpolling them all 
by an 8-1 margin was actress Zsa Zsa Gabor for her hyped Beverly Hills traffic 
case. Gabor was named the "Most Recognizable Whiner of 1989." 
No Noshing: Real life G-men (and women) are advised to pack a snack before a 
raid. Under a new General Accounting Office ruling, there will be no free 
coffee or doughnuts as the good guys stake out the bad guys. The ruling was 
issued after a January, 1986, task force of 3,150 FBI agents and New York City 
police and detectives met in a locked, drafty Brooklyn warehouse starting at 
3:30 a.m. for a super-secret raid on organized-crime suspects. To make life 
more comfy, the FBI asked the Salvation Army to supply coffee, doughnuts and 
portable toilets -- a service for which an FBI agent later turned in a $1,000 
bill. FBI accountants bucked the expense item to the GAO, which said two years 
later that the cash shouldn't have been paid for a non-emergency service. 
Tom's Retreat: NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw says he has bought an interest in a 
4,000-acre Montana ranch. Brokaw said he has been looking for Montana property 
since 1981, when he filmed a special there and became enchanted. He is honorary 
chairman of Friends of Montana, a program of the Nature Conservancy. 
Just Cause: Actor Paul Newman made one of the largest donations ever received 
by the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund -- $200,000 -- then promptly decided 
it was not enough and pledged another $50,000. "For 30 years I've lived in New 
York, and I feel I have an obligation to the well-being of the people who live 
there with me," he said. BETTIJANE LEVINE 
