SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE 
The Los Angeles Episcopal Diocese has defeated a resolution supportive of 
church blessings for faithful same-sex relationships. 
The proposal presented to delegates at last weekend's annual diocesan 
convention in Riverside avoided requesting specifically that ceremonies be held 
for committed gay and lesbian couples -- a much-debated issue opposed at the 
denominational level. 
The wording appeared to amount to the same thing, however, asking delegates to 
agree that the church "acts appropriately and for the good of the people of God 
when it upholds and celebrates, in the name of Jesus Christ, any two persons 
who are willing to make a lifelong covenant of fidelity and love with each 
other." 
Before the convention, Bishop Frederick H. Borsch of Los Angeles issued a 
statement saying that he lacked authority to sanction such blessings, but added 
that he has long worked toward that goal. "I believe that this blessing, 
together with support from the Christian community, can be strengthening for 
the couple, for their service and commitments, and for the larger society," 
Borsch said. 
Borsch said that Christians "of profound morality and deep compassion" stand on 
several sides of this question. 
The resolution was passed by the clergy, 91 to 55, in the bicameral convention, 
but lay delegates defeated the proposal in a standing vote by a 2-1 margin, 
according to a spokesman. Both "orders" of delegates needed to approve the 
resolution for it to be adopted. 
The Rev. George Regas, rector of All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena, early 
last month told his parishioners that he has decided to bless committed 
same-sex relationships at some future date despite the denomination's current 
opposition. 
Regas said Thursday that he has appointed a parish task force to "make our way 
together on the best way to do that blessing." Regas said he and the bishop 
have discussed his plans, but the matter was left unsettled. "The bishop is 
supportive," Regas said, "but he is also supportive of church policy that says 
we don't do that." 
Borsch was not available for comment, but a diocesan spokesman noted that 
Episcopal Bishop William Swing of San Francisco has also backed the idea of 
same-sex couple blessings, but disciplined a priest who performed one without 
diocesan authority. 
In other convention action, the diocese became the fourth to protest its 
denomination's decision to keep the July, 1991, triennial convention in Phoenix 
despite Arizona voters' decision not to honor Martin Luther King Jr. with a 
paid state holiday. 
The resolution "registering opposition" also petitioned Presiding Bishop Edmond 
Browning of the Episcopal Church to change the convention site. Browning, 
however, previously announced that the church will stay in Phoenix to support 
residents who are seeking adoption of the holiday. Anglican Archbishop Desmond 
Tutu of South Africa will speak in Phoenix in an anti-racism rally the day 
before the convention starts. 
Delegates also registered strong opposition to a military solution to the 
Persian Gulf crisis and defeated a resolution seeking "acknowledgement" of the 
traditionalist Episcopal Synod of America as a loyal body within the 
denomination. 
PILGRIMAGE 
Archbishop Roger M. Mahony will leave Los Angeles today with 180 Catholics on a 
six-day pilgrimage to Mexico City. On Sunday they will participate in the first 
observance of the feast day of Juan Diego, who is celebrated for reporting an 
apparition of the Virgin Mary in 1531 to the bishop and saying that she wanted 
a church to be built in her honor. Juan Diego was beatified by Pope John Paul 
II during his pastoral visit to Mexico this year. Mahony has been invited by 
Cardinal Ernesto Corripio Ahumada to concelebrate the feast day Mass with him 
and other prelates Sunday. 
DATES 
The Rev. Dumas A. Harshaw, president of the Los Angeles Council of Churches, 
will be the principal speaker at 4 p.m. Sunday in an Advent Ecumenical Worship 
Service at Eternal Promise Baptist Church in Los Angeles. Music will be 
provided by choruses from the host church and from Harshaw's Trinity Baptist 
Church. 
Edwin Bernbaum, author of the recently published "Sacred Mountains of the 
World," will lecture Sunday in Los Angeles on the lore and symbolism associated 
with certain peaks from the Andes and Himalayas to Mts. Sinai, Fuji, Olympus 
and Shasta. After the talk at 2 p.m. at the Natural History Museum of Los 
Angeles County, Bernbaum will sign copies of his illustrated book. Admission is 
$7. JOHN DART 
