BRASS SHINES, FURS FLY AT CENTER SHOW AND DINNER 
The Scene 
Dinner at the Center Club after a concert by the Canadian Brass. The quirky, 
irreverent quintet came to the Performing Arts Center on Wednesday, compliments 
of the Orange County Philharmonic Society, 40 of whose members sipped sauvignon 
blanc post-encore and dined beside the boughs of a silver-ribboned Christmas 
tree. 
Canadian Style 
The Brass perform an eclectic program -- ranging, for this Christmas show, from 
"Frosty the Snowman" to Kurt Weill to Vivaldi -- in anarchic formal wear: black 
tails and white gym shoes. The five virtuosi showed up at the party in sweaters 
and slacks and black leather shoes. Tuba player Charles Daellenbach wore a 
rumpled white T-shirt, untucked, with an unbuttoned black shirt over it. "This 
is my, um, Japanese look," he said with a sweet smile. All but trumpeter 
Frederic Mills and french horn player David Ohanian split before dinner. 
Reviews 
"They are just darling," said Floss Schumacher, en route to the private dining 
room. "What's great is how they establish their virtuosity," said Eva 
Schneider, "and then get into their shtick." Louis Gluck likewise raved, 
concluding: "When they go from Bach to Dixieland it sounds like the most 
natural thing in the world." For Cynthia Illingworth, the concert recalled 
family ties. "My father plays the trumpet, and he played in a little hometown 
band with my grandfather and uncle and my aunt, who played drums," she said. 
"So I've always liked this kind of music." 
Repast 
Salad of diced vegetables in apple-walnut vinaigrette, angel hair pasta with 
prawns, frozen key lime souffle. 
Also Seen 
Joannand Ed Halvajian, Susan and Robert Beechner, Bonnie and Roger Smith, 
Kazuko and Masahiko Arimoto, Grace and Mike Chitjian, Jane and Stan Grier, and 
Linda and Stephen Wagner, who mingled through the crowded room in their 
full-length fur coats (mink for him, silver fox for her). 
Quote 
Fred Schneider to the furry Wagners: "Is this like his-and-hers T-shirts?" 
PAMELA MARIN 
