INVESTIGATORS TRYING TO LEARN WHY TRUCK WAS ON TRACKS 
Federal investigators began to probe the charred and twisted wreckage Wednesday 
in their effort determine why a truck drove onto the tracks in front of a 
high-speed passenger train in a crash that killed three and injured at least 
55. 
Most officials agreed that heavy fog was a factor in Tuesday' accident, but 
reports still conflicted as to whether the grade-crossing signals and gates 
were working properly in the seconds before impact. 
The Santa Fe railroad cleared a path through the wreckage about 6:30 a.m. 
Wednesday, and the first freight train moved through about an hour and a half 
later. Amtrak passenger service was still being detoured around the crash site 
Wednesday, using nearby Southern Pacific railroad tracks. 
Officials said that although 24 of the injured had initially been listed in 
serious or critical condition, only nine remained hospitalized Wednesday 
afternoon. 
The San Joaquin County coroner's office Wednesday identified the locomotive 
engineer killed in the crash as Edward McMillan, 48, of Hayward and the fireman 
who died beside him as Michael G. Passarella, 41, of San Francisco. 
The coroner's office earlier had identified the third man who died as David 
Haskell, 47, of Anaheim, the driver of the truck laden with chocolate syrup 
that was hit broadside by the train. 
State Department of Motor Vehicle records show that Haskell had been cited for 
speeding three times in the last two years, but the California Highway Patrol 
said there was no indication that the truck was exceeding the speed limit as it 
approached the grade crossing where the accident occurred. 
National Transportation Safety Board investigators said late Wednesday that a 
"black box" recorder designed to compile data on the train's speed and control 
settings apparently was destroyed in the fire that swept through the locomotive 
after impact. The fire, fed by diesel oil from the locomotive's fuel tanks, 
burned for about 90 minutes before firefighters extinguished it. 
The investigators said they are attempting to determine whether an 
advance-warning device recovered from the locomotive had sounded an alarm in 
the seconds before the crash. 
Officials said the device should have alerted the engineer if the flashing 
lights, alarm bells and crossing gates were not functioning as they should have 
as Amtrak Train No. 708 -- the San Joaquin Flyer -- approached the rural grade 
crossing at 70 m.p.h. 
Amtrak spokesman Arthur Lloyd said Wednesday that preliminary inspections 
suggest that the lights, bells and gates at Mariposa Road were operating 
properly. He said the splintered gate arm found after the wreck indicates that 
the truck sheared off the already lowered barrier as the big rig rolled into 
the path of the train. 
"Evidently, the vehicle ignored the lights and went right in front of the 
train," Lloyd said. 
"The bottom line to crossing accidents is that in 99% of them, ultimately you 
find that the driver did not heed or obey warning signals," said Michael A. 
Martin, a Santa Fe railroad spokesman from Los Angeles. "We see situations 
where people abandon all common sense to save 30 seconds." 
However, Stockton trucker Leon Gritz, who said he was driving directly behind 
the truck that was hit, told California Highway Patrol investigators he did not 
see the flashing lights. He also said the crossing gates were not lowered as 
they should have been. 
Grits, who said he drives the route frequently, told reporters that the gates 
often lower too slowly to seal off the grade crossing before high-speed trains 
arrive there. 
Federal officials said that under current regulations, trains are permitted to 
pass through the crossing at up to 79 m.p.h., regardless of the weather or 
visibility. 
Lloyd said Wednesday that while the fog, which had cut visibility to an 
estimated 100 yards or less at the time of the accident, was not a factor in 
the operation of the train, "it could have been a very significant factor as 
far as the truck was concerned." 
