ORANGE COUNTY PERSPECTIVE; 
PARDON MY COMPUTER MESSAGE 
Common sense dictates that anyone using electronic mail be aware that computer 
messages could be read by third parties. To keep communication truly private, 
use the telephone, or better yet, say it in person. 
But Costa Mesa City Manager Allan L. Roeder and Police Chief David L. Snowden 
are justified in being concerned that computer messages exchanged on a variety 
of personal and professional subjects were made public. To their embarrassment, 
they found that a former city police lieutenant tapped their electronic mail 
and shared it with a city councilman, and that apparently included some 
off-color and sexist jokes -- inappropriate in any medium. 
Snowden subsequently asked the district attorney's office to determine if the 
actions of Lt. John A. Regan were legal. Deputy Dist. Atty. Wallace J. Wade 
concluded that Regan's responsibilities for the department made the issue 
sufficiently murky that he didn't think there were grounds for prosecution. 
Regan claimed he was monitoring Snowden's messages to see if he was misusing 
city property. 
Several members of the City Council, however, are upset at the invasion of 
computer privacy. 
The council will meet Monday to discuss the incident. It also will consider 
making the tapping of computer lines illegal. One councilman said he was 
concerned, for example, that disclosure of his exchanges with the city attorney 
on sensitive legal matters might harm the city's position in lawsuits. 
Costa Mesa is not alone in struggling with information privacy. Federal 
legislation extends constitutional guarantees against unreasonable search and 
seizure to those who use computers or cellular phones. But abuses are common. 
Also, many issues remain unclear, such as whether employees using a 
company-owned computer system can expect privacy. Companies or governmental 
agencies have a right to expect their computer systems to be used only for 
business. The best policy is to assure privacy to all. 
