SEC NAMES ENFORCEMENT CHIEF, CREATES NEW UNIT; 
SECURITIES: THE AGENCY WILL EXPAND ITS FOCUS. IT WILL NOW GO AFTER FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS THAT BILK INVESTORS. 
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission named a senior agency 
lawyer as its new enforcement chief Tuesday and announced the creation of a new 
unit to investigate stock sales by savings and loans and their parent 
companies. 
In appointing William G. McLucas to the second-most powerful post at the 
regulatory agency, SEC Chairman Richard C. Breeden praised him as the 
enforcement chief for the "decade of the '90s." 
Breeden left no doubt that the first priority for the new chief will be 
attacking stock fraud by financial institutions that bilk investors, a sharp 
expansion of the agency's normal concentration on Wall Street. He said the new 
unit would target financial fraud at savings and loans and banks. 
While Breeden did not mention specific cases, the SEC is investigating the sale 
of $200 million worth of junk bonds to 22,000 investors by American Continental 
Corp. through its Irvine-based thrift, Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan. 
In an interview, McLucas said the new unit will start out with a staff of 25 
and be expanded if the initial inquiries indicate a greater need. 
"We have a number of situations that we are concerned about and we are trying 
to identify the problems," McLucas said. "We intend to focus on the generic 
area of financial institutions -- thrifts and banks." 
He said investigators will concentrate on situations in which financial 
institution holding companies sell stock directly to investors through their 
branches without using underwriters to examine the deals for soundness and 
legality. That method was used by American Continental to market its bonds. 
Many investors have said they thought the bonds, now basically worthless, were 
federally insured investments. 
In congressional testimony last month, Breeden was sharply critical of the way 
thrift regulators handled the Lincoln Savings case, particularly the sale of 
bonds through Lincoln's branches. However, the thrift regulators in turn 
criticized the SEC for not moving to stop the bond sale. 
Before Breeden took the SEC helm in August, he was the chief White House 
architect of the rescue plan for the savings and loan industry, so he got a 
first-hand view of the problems there. 
"The commission's mandate to protect investors remains an essential element in 
preserving the integrity and efficiency of America's capital markets," Breeden 
said Tuesday. 
McLucas stressed that the commission will be "doing something to restore the 
confidence of the small investor and to make sure that confidence is retained 
in the market." 
Along with fraud at financial institutions, McLucas said he wants to increase 
the scrutiny of brokerage houses and the practice of account "churning," in 
which brokers earn excessive commissions by trading customers' holdings more 
often than necessary. 
McLucas, 39, has been one of three associate directors running the enforcement 
division since director Gary Lynch resigned last summer to go into private law 
practice. All three were top candidates for the post. The others, John Sturc 
and Joseph Goldstein, were also praised by Breeden. 
SEC insiders said McLucas got the nod because he had demonstrated strong 
management skills. He was given high marks for a four-month stint when he 
rescued the high-profile New York regional office from turmoil after its 
administrator left. 
"Bill has superb management skills, and he is well liked by the people who 
report to him," said Lynch, now in private practice in New York. "He has got 
the ability to organize and motivate a large staff." 
McLucas has been an enforcement attorney at the commission since 1977 and 
handled numerous high-profile cases. Among them were the conviction of Singer 
Co. Chairman Paul A. Bilzerian on securities and tax fraud charges and the 
guilty plea to securities violations of former Los Angeles brokerage executive 
Boyd L. Jefferies. 
