ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
STUART KARL TO TESTIFY PUBLICLY, JUDGE RULES 
Refusing to grant Stuart Karl "a private court," a judge ruled Wednesday that 
the one-time whiz kid of the video industry will have to testify in public 
about his stormy business relationship with Lorimar Telepictures Corp. 
Karl, who rapidly gained riches through the Jane Fonda workout videos but fell 
nearly as quickly into bankruptcy and political scandal, is expected to be a 
key witness in an ongoing legal malpractice trial in Orange County Superior 
Court. He may testify next month. 
Court Shannon and Gary Hunt, two of Karl's former associates in an Irvine-based 
video venture, are suing their ex-attorney, Michael Genovese of Newport Beach, 
for $2 million in malpractice damages. 
They claim that Genovese gave them bad advice about potential 
conflict-of-interest issues in their video business, triggering legal problems 
for the two businessmen and the loss of their jobs. 
Karl, Shannon and Hunt were all executives in an Irvine company called 
Karl-Lorimar Home Video, a division of Lorimar. But all three resigned in 
March, 1987, after Lorimar discovered that they also had financial interests in 
a Torrance company that was a supplier to Karl-Lorimar. 
Karl did not join in the lawsuit by Shannon and Hunt, nor did he attend 
Wednesday's hearing. He may, however, play a critical role in the issue's 
resolution by revealing key information about business dealings gone bad, 
lawyers in the case say. 
Lawyers for both Genovese and Karl asked Superior Court Judge Kazuharu Makino 
on Wednesday to allow Karl to testify in secret, with the court closed to the 
public and news media. 
To have Karl testify in public, they argued, would raise sensitive matters of 
attorney-client privilege and might put Karl at risk of divulging information 
that could be used against him in his pending legal battles with Lorimar. 
And George Genzmer, defending Genovese against the malpractice claim, also 
asserted that an open court would only produce more of the type of "bad 
publicity" that Shannon and Hunt cited in bringing their lawsuit. "We are 
simply trying to shut that down," Genzmer said. 
But Judge Makino said he saw no reason to give Karl "a private court" or to 
disregard "the right of the public to hear what goes on in court." 
It was only the latest legal turn against the 37-year-old Karl, who by his 
early 30s had forged his success in the video industry into a role as a 
Democratic Party activist and fund-raiser. 
In December, 1988, he was fined $60,000 and sentenced to three years' probation 
in U.S. District Court in Santa Ana after admitting to illegal campaign 
financing in funneling $185,000 to former presidential contender Gary Hart and 
other political candidates. 
And in July, as federal officials sought to auction his multimillion-dollar 
home in Newport Beach, Karl filed for bankruptcy protection against nearly $4 
million in delinquent taxes and other debts. His estate, in the Big Canyon area 
of the city, is set to be auctioned Jan. 5. ERIC LICHTBLAU 
