AST STOCK PRICE SOARS AFTER EARNINGS PREDICTION; 
COMPUTERS: IN THE MIDST OF THE ECONOMIC SLOWDOWN, THE COMPANY EXPECTS TO POST 
PROFITS OF $13.9 MILLION FOR ITS SECOND QUARTER, NEARLY DOUBLE THAT OF A YEAR 
EARLIER. 
Despite an economic slowdown that has hurt other computer companies, AST 
Research Inc. surprised Wall Street on Tuesday by forecasting a near doubling 
of its earnings for the quarter ending Dec. 31. 
Wall Street traders and investors, hungry for a hot company in the midst of a 
recession, sent AST's stock price soaring 20.8%, or $5.50 a share, to close at 
$32, its highest price of the year. The stock was the sixth most-actively 
traded issue in the over-the-counter market Tuesday. 
The personal-computer maker said it expects to post earnings of $13.9 million 
for its second quarter, up from $7.4 million a year earlier, a performance that 
analysts say is remarkable, given the poor state of the economy. 
AST attributed its higher earnings estimate to increased sales, especially 
overseas, higher profit margins and improved operating efficiencies. 
"The company's complete line of high-performance personal computers has 
attracted strong demand from our distributors, resellers and customers 
worldwide," said Safi U. Qureshey, AST co-chairman and chief executive. 
The company also authorized a 2-for-1 stock split effective Jan. 31. The 
company said the action is intended to attract a larger and more diverse group 
of shareholders and to increase trading volume of the stock. 
As of Dec. 17, AST had 13.9 million common shares outstanding. After the stock 
split, the company will have about 28 million shares outstanding. 
Candace King Weir, an analyst at C.L. King &amp; Associates, an Albany, N.Y., 
securities firm, said that AST is executing its strategy better than other 
computer firms and that Wall Street is gradually becoming aware of that. 
"The estimates are higher than I expected," said Weir, who estimates that AST 
will earn $48 million during its fiscal year ending June 30, 1991, up from 
$35.1 million a year earlier. She said she expects the company to continue to 
perform well in the quarter that begins Jan. 1. 
Just two years ago, AST was mired in a computer industry slowdown and had 
reported its first-ever quarterly loss of $8.9 million for the three months 
ending Dec. 31, 1988. The company had a reputation on Wall Street for technical 
excellence but also for not paying enough attention to its balance sheet. 
The company embarked on a program to strengthen its balance sheet, slashing 6% 
of its work force and trying to bring more financial discipline throughout the 
organization. 
AST officials say that those cost-cutting efforts begun two years ago have 
prepared the company better than some of its rivals for the current sluggish 
market. 
More recently, AST has unveiled a host of high-performance personal computer 
systems to take advantage of improvements in semiconductor technology and is 
targeting customers who were once the domain of the $30-billion minicomputer 
market. 
Mark Matheson, an analyst for the Newport Beach investment bank Cruttenden 
&amp; Co., said AST is attracting investor interest because of its strong 
earnings momentum and its aggressive pricing policies, which could draw 
bargain-conscious customers during tough economic times. 
AST recently announced plans to enter the notebook-computer market with two 
models priced between $2,500 and $3,300, less than half the price of some of 
its competitors. The machines have been well received in the trade press and on 
Wall Street. The company has also introduced a line of competitively priced, 
high-performance workstations. 
On Nov. 29, AST stock surged $1.50 to close at $27 after Daniel C. Benton, an 
analyst at Goldman Sachs &amp; Co. in New York, said in a research report that 
AST could sell 10,000 of its new notebook computers in the third quarter. 
AST has said it is planning to hire 100 additional employees at its Fountain 
Valley manufacturing plant during the next several months to keep up with 
demand for its full line of personal computers. 
For the first quarter ended Sept. 30, AST reported earnings of $11.4 million, 
up nearly fourfold from $2.9 million a year earlier. Revenue for the quarter 
rose 19% to $136.3 million, up from $114.5 million a year earlier. 
AST Stock Prices, 1990 
Better-than-expected news on earnings sent the stock price of AST up more than 
20% Tuesday among traders eager for a hot company in a recessionary economy. 
Jan: $14.38 
Dec: $32.00 
Source: Dow Jones News Service 
