CEAUSESCU BUNKER: HUB OF DREADED SECURITATE; 
ROMANIA: THE STRONGHOLD WAS WHERE THE DICTATOR'S CRACK FORCE WAS PREPARED TO 
MAKE ITS LAST STAND. 
Three levels below the basement of the Romanian Communist Party's Central 
Committee building, there is a bunker built strong enough to withstand a 
nuclear attack. One room of its command center contains a wall of Japanese- and 
American-made equipment. It has now been shot to pieces, its wiring and 
circuitry ripped loose. 
This was where Nicolae Ceausescu's Praetorian Guard, the fanatical presidential 
protection unit of the Securitate, was prepared to make its last stand in 
defense of its leader. 
It did not work out that way. 
The three levels of the bunker are now occupied by soldiers of the Romanian 
army and volunteers of the Civilian Guard. At midday Friday, on the uppermost 
level of the bunker, weary soldiers slept on rows of folding chairs or on the 
floors of interconnecting rooms. Some ate quietly from cans of food, their 
assault rifles close at hand, as they rested from their shifts of tense guard 
duty in the narrow-carpeted passageways, which are interrupted by hatchway 
doors 2 1/2 inches thick. 
The doors are painted battleship gray, labeled with coded letters and numbers, 
and each weighs 1,000 to 2,000 pounds. Each is closed by four massive hatch 
latches. The soldiers now on duty in this underground maze know that on the 
other side of these doors, a network of tunnels leads out into the city. There 
is only one other thing that soldiers know about those doors: that somewhere 
beyond them are dozens, perhaps hundreds, of trained and fanatical killers, 
Ceausescu's last gift to the Romanian people. 
The mood in the bunker is taut. The soldiers and their officers move cautiously 
and quietly and speak in low tones. They take no visitors to the lowest depths 
of the bunker. It is difficult to tell whether the tension arises from a sense 
of imminent danger, the strangeness of the setting or the experience of 
spending the last week in combat against a force of fighters whose lethal 
fanaticism seems a creation out of science fiction. 
The fear is shared by the provisional government that has taken over from 
Ceausescu. 
Silviu Brucan, the respected 73-year-old diplomat who is a member of the 11-man 
council at the top of the new National Salvation Front, warned Friday that the 
several hundred members of the Securitate who remain at large are planning a 
program of assassination against the new government. 
"They realize they have been beaten," Brucan said, "and we expect them to focus 
on the center, to decapitate the movement, to kill the leaders of our movement. 
Therefore, I have been traveling in Bucharest only in a tank for the last three 
days. I can tell you one thing -- every time I moved, the tank was shot at. 
They know I am inside." 
Although the shooting in central Bucharest seems to have stopped, the sniping 
has not. On Thursday night, a woman was brought to the city's main emergency 
hospital, wounded by a sniper. 
The soldiers who wait now in the Securitate's underground bunker are amazed and 
mystified by their opponents. A young army major and a 22-year-old Civilian 
Guard member (for the safety of their families, they asked that no other 
identification be used) told of the Securitate bunker and of the men they had 
been fighting. 
The Securitate fighters, they believe, were part of Ceausescu's crack 
presidential guard. In the first three days of the battle, when fighting went 
on across the palace square in front of the Communist Party Central Committee 
building, the Securitate fighters were wearing black jumpsuits with a red silk 
stripe down the right side. They wore black berets. They used submachine guns 
and high-powered rifles with infra-red sniper scopes. 
"They used Romanian-made, Soviet-model rifles," the major said. "They used 
small machine guns and other German, English or Italian weapons, all of the 
highest quality. They were very good shots. They shot only at the head." 
The tunnels these Securitate fighters used, the major said, have been explored 
only a short distance from the bunker. 
"We've blocked them off," he said, "to prevent them coming in. They can lock 
themselves in the tunnels." 
The two officers said they assume the tunnels are booby-trapped. 
"Also in the bunker is a bomb shelter," the major continued, "that we think 
could stand in a nuclear attack. It has a sophisticated air purification system 
and stores of food and water. There is a control room with instruments, 
communications equipment, covering one entire wall. There are telephones and 
televisions. At the moment they left, most of this equipment was destroyed. it 
was shot up, or ripped out. 
"We also found a special room for the decontamination of men and equipment. 
There is an office near this and a room for sleeping, with beds and toilets. 
This is at the center of the bunker, with easy access from several directions." 
Through the heaviest of the combat, last Friday, Saturday and Sunday, the 
officers said that the Securitate fighters sent men into the city in disguises, 
sometimes in army uniforms, to report on the positions of the army in the 
streets. They rigged up a loudspeaker and tape-playing device that broadcast 
sounds of heavy gunfire. When the soldiers in the streets moved and shifted 
their defenses to deal with what they thought was another battle, the 
Securitate fighters opened up on them. 
It is strange to most Romanians that the Securitate kept fighting long after 
Ceausescu fled the capital Dec. 22, and stranger still that some have continued 
to hold out even after his body, riddled by the bullets of a firing squad, was 
shown on national television. For most of the soldiers, as for the general 
population, it is the description of captured Securitate fighters that paints 
the eeriest picture of all. 
Not many, the major said, had been captured alive. Most apparently preferred to 
use their last bullets on themselves. Of the few that have been captured, he 
said, "some looked as though they had been drugged. They had no fear at all. 
Even if they were captured without arms, they attacked, they used anything they 
could pick up to fight with, even if they knew they could be shot immediately. 
"These captured terrorists have refused completely any food or water and 
refused to talk completely. They say nothing." 
All of them, they say, are large and muscular, like athletes or weightlifters, 
and in the few cases of hand-to-hand fighting, have demonstrated their skill in 
karate or some other martial-arts system. Just who they are, or how they have 
been trained, are subjects of intense speculation to the officers and soldiers 
who remark on how "strange" the Securitate men appear. 
"There are several opinions," the major said. "They do not look like 
intelligent men. They look like machines." 
He confirmed that many think the Securitate fighters are, in fact, orphans, 
raised from childhood to devote their lives to the defense of Ceausescu. This 
may be little more than fantasy -- there is not a single fact to support it -- 
but it is hard to find a Romanian who does not hold this belief. It is as 
prevalent among the soldiers who fought them as among the general population. 
Personnel at the city's main emergency hospital have stories that support the 
descriptions offered by the soldiers and are, in their way, equally bizarre. 
Dr. Andrei Firica, the director of the hospital, and another senior staff 
physician say that 12 men admitted with wounds ranging from critical to minor 
during the violence were suspected of being Securitate men. 
"It is possible that most of them were drugged," said the staff physician. 
"They were overexcited, and it required large doses of sedatives to calm them, 
to make them sleep. Almost all had been drinking as well. All were 
well-developed physically, strong and muscular. Some told us they were athletes 
or practiced high-performance sports." 
All but one denied being in the Securitate. One, however, identified himself as 
a major in the unit and said he was sorry only that he had failed in his duty 
and that he should have killed more people, Firica said. Among the group, two 
were of Asian or Asian-Romanian parentage. Four of them, the doctor said, 
appeared to be Arab. They spoke fluent, unaccented Romanian. Some carried as 
many as four differents sets of identification papers, all conflicting. 
"In general," the doctor said, "their comportment was very strange. The pupils 
of their eyes were dilated. They had a fixed look, their eyes staring. Whatever 
story they came in with, they stuck to . . . . Some of them had no reaction 
whatever to normal dosages of sedation. To make them sleep, they were given 
heavy sedatives." 
After that, they were handcuffed to their beds. The last of them was taken by 
the authorities from the hospital Wednesday morning. 
"There were two mysterious deaths -- two men, both with minimal wounds. One had 
a broken ankle, one had a bullet wound in the shoulder. We don't believe it was 
poison. We opened their mouths when examining them to check for that, for 
cyanide capsules. It wasn't that. We don't know why they died. It is a 
mystery." 
Since the revolution began, the hospital has treated 679 wounded, admitted 340, 
and received 116 dead. It was too overcrowded with emergency cases to perform 
autopsies on the dead Securitate men, so the mystery remains. 
The mystery of wht remains in the tunnels behind the steel doors leading out of 
the bunker under the Central Committee also lingers, and neither the soldiers 
nervously guarding them, nor a fragile government still moving about the city 
in tanks and armored cars, is sure what to do about them -- or how to clean 
them out. 
AUTHORITY CONSOLIDATED: Romania's new regime revokes Ceausescu policies. A21 
