ADOPTION BETRAYAL SHATTERS DREAMS; 
BABIES: A PROSPECTIVE PARENT SUPPORTED A COUPLE WHOSE CHILD SHE HOPED WOULD BE 
HERS, ONLY TO HAVE THEM DISAPPEAR. POLICE HAVE UNCOVERED A SERIES OF SIMILAR 
BROKEN PROMISES. 
Pregnant with her seventh child, Leanne Dees answered a classified ad in an 
Arkansas newspaper and, according to a Los Angeles woman, entered into a 
non-binding agreement to let her adopt the child. 
The excited adoptive mother-to-be, Debbie Freeman, brought Dees and her 
husband, Frankie, and their 1-year-old daughter to Van Nuys and paid $9,400 to 
support them for six months in a furnished apartment, she said. She said she 
took them shopping for food and clothes on Sundays and accompanied Leanne Dees 
on every visit to the doctor. 
But a month shy of the baby's due date, Freeman said, her hopes for adopting 
the child fell apart when she discovered that the Deeses were quietly 
negotiating for financial support with other people hoping to adopt the same 
child. When confronted with the accusation, the Deeses promptly cleared out of 
the apartment, Freeman and police said. 
"They were as sincere as can be," a dejected Freeman said last week. "I 
basically had a family to support for several months and then they 
disappeared." 
Los Angeles police are investigating the incident and trying to determine if 
other would-be adoptive parents gave the Deeses financial support in hopes that 
the newborn would be theirs. Police said they have uncovered a web of broken 
promises in which many people hoping to adopt a child have been misled 
emotionally, if not financially, by the Deeses. 
But police said there are few laws that specifically focus on adoption issues 
such as these. The Deeses have not been charged with any crime, and police said 
they may only face a misdemeanor violation of accepting money under false 
pretenses. 
Meanwhile, the baby boy Debbie Freeman thought would be hers was born Dec. 7 in 
Las Vegas as yet another couple hoping to adopt the child waited in the 
delivery room, according to the doctor who delivered the baby. But the Deeses, 
who police said have given up five previous babies for adoption, did not turn 
the child over to them either. The Deeses' exact whereabouts are not known. 
Those familiar with the case say the Freeman/Dees case is a rare example of 
what can go wrong in the world of private adoption. 
In California, private adoption is regulated by the state Department of Social 
Services and local children's services authorities. According to local 
attorneys who specialize in adoption cases, about 90% of adoptions in the state 
are handled privately. The attorneys say it has become the predominant method 
of adoption because it is faster than adoption through public agencies and 
allows adoptive parents and birth parents more freedom in choosing each other. 
Although adoptive parents cannot pay to receive a child, it is legal to provide 
birth parents with financial support -- considered an act of charity -- in the 
form of living, travel, legal and medical expenses. 
It is illegal in California to use newspaper advertising to seek or give up a 
baby for adoption. So residents of the state seeking to privately adopt 
children routinely advertise in newspapers in 36 other states where it is 
legal. 
It was into this process that Freeman, 39, a single West Los Angeles 
psychotherapist, stepped earlier this year. 
Freeman said she placed ads seeking a child to adopt in several newspapers 
across the country, including the Jonesboro Sun in Arkansas. About two weeks 
later, she said she received a call from Leanne Dees, who said she was pregnant 
and willing to give up the child. Dees, 27, her 37-year-old husband and their 
1-year-old daughter, who suffers from Downs syndrome, were in Las Vegas and had 
been told of the Jonesboro ad by relatives, Freeman said. 
After Freeman interviewed the Deeses in June and found them acceptable as birth 
parents, she brought them to Van Nuys, and the couple signed a letter of intent 
under which Freeman would be allowed to adopt the unborn child. The agreement 
was non-binding as required by law, meaning that the birth parents could back 
out at any time. 
Adoption attorneys say that was a risk Freeman and all adoptive parents have to 
take to get a child. They say that is why adoptive parents and their attorneys 
must carefully screen potential birth parents. 
"Screening for persons whose motives are not pure is essential," said Lynne 
Francis Mann, an attorney who did not handle the Freeman case. "There is so 
little protection for adopting parents. But there is a lot of protection for 
birth parents." 
But in screening the Deeses, Freeman and her attorney, Randi G. Barrow, did not 
come across anything that dissuaded them from pursuing the agreement. However, 
some warning signs about the couple -- passed among other attorneys in the 
adoption field -- never reached them. 
Stanley Michaelman, an attorney in Pearl River, N.Y., who specializes in 
adoptions, said the Deeses are known among many adoption attorneys in the East 
for answering adoption ads but not following through with promises. 
"I have been telling people this is a bad-news couple," Michaelman said of the 
Deeses. "They have been traveling all over the country. They call people and 
ask them to wire money and then they disappear." 
Freeman said she did not suspect the couple of any deception until Nov. 5, when 
Barrow got a call from Mann. Mann reported that she represented a couple 
looking to adopt a child and that they had been contacted by the Deeses about 
adopting Leanne's child. 
"The word leaked out," Freeman said. "Randi called the Deeses up and said, 
'What's going on?' They hung up on her. I went to the apartment. The security 
guard let me in and they had vanished. They had cleared out in less than two 
hours. I couldn't believe it." 
But the Deeses left behind a briefcase that contained a notebook with 11 names 
and phone numbers written in it, Freeman said. By calling the numbers, Freeman 
said, she discovered that they all belonged to people who were seeking to adopt 
babies and had placed ads in Arkansas newspapers. Freeman said the people she 
contacted all said they had begun to negotiate with the Deeses to give them 
financial aid. One Syracuse, N.Y., couple had already sent $200 to the couple 
for bus fare to New York. 
"Each one had been solicited money to begin adoption procedures," Freeman said. 
"You know, 'We need a place to live, can you send us some money, can you fly 
us?' It became very clear what was going on." 
Freeman called police and turned over the notebook. Although she recognized 
that the Deeses had the right to back out of the agreement, Freeman claimed 
that the record the couple had made of contacting other adoptive parents and 
taking money from at least one couple showed their intent to take Freeman's 
financial support but not turn over the child after its birth. 
"I don't think they ever intended to give me the baby," she said. 
Police Detective Mel Arnold said he retraced Freeman's steps and confirmed what 
she had found, including that a New York couple had sent the Deeses $200 for 
bus fare. "Most of these people really thought they were going to get the 
baby," he said. 
Arnold said he received a letter from one woman who gave no money to the Deeses 
but believed that the child Leanne was carrying would be hers to adopt. The 
woman, whom Arnold did not identify, was familiar with Freeman's plight and 
offered her condolences. 
"Please express to Debbie that she is in my prayers," the woman wrote. "I've 
waited a long time and it is still like a dream. Debbie's child is out there in 
the world somewhere. Don't give up." 
Although the disappointment of potential parents such as Freeman is traumatic, 
Arnold said that because the Deeses had a non-binding agreement, their actions 
may only be a minor violation. 
State law makes it a misdemeanor to receive financial considerations for an 
adoption agreement without the intent to honor it. But Diane Michaelson, 
chairwoman of the Academy of California Adoption Attorneys, said that as of 
Jan. 1, the law will be strengthened to make it a felony to abrogate an 
adoption agreement in that way a second time. 
Arnold said that the investigation of the Deeses is continuing and that he is 
attempting to locate other people who may have had dealings with the couple 
regarding adoptions. 
After a story on the Freeman case aired this week on the television program 
"Hard Copy," police learned from a Las Vegas doctor that Leanne Dees gave birth 
Dec. 7 to a boy. 
Dr. Richard Groom said in an interview that when the Deeses came to his office 
three weeks ago, they told him that they were willing to put the baby up for 
adoption. His office contacted a local couple looking to adopt a child and they 
were in the delivery room when the child was born. They had given no money to 
the Deeses. But last week, Leanne Dees left the hospital with the child and 
disappeared. 
"When she left the hospital, she told them the baby would be theirs," said 
Groom, who has not been paid for the delivery. "Apparently, she changed her 
mind or never intended to give up the baby." 
Arnold said Leanne Dees became aware of the publicity surrounding her and 
called him from Las Vegas on Thursday. She told the detective that she and her 
husband had named the baby Dalton and planned to keep him. 
Arnold said the woman refused to reveal her location, and he declined to 
discuss other aspects of the conversation. The detective said he will present 
the case to prosecutors for the possible filing of charges later this month. 
Meanwhile, Freeman says she is undaunted by the turmoil resulting from being so 
close to adopting a child and coming away with nothing. 
"More than ever, I want to adopt," she said. "It's a matter of getting on your 
feet again and starting over." 
