TODAY'S STATE LEGISLATORS ARE NO LAUGHING MATTER; 
UNFUNNY ACTS: POLITICS NOW TENDS TO BE GRIM STUFF, BUT IN CALIFORNIA'S PAST 
THERE WERE GAGSTERS WHOSE HUMOR HELPED SOLVE PROBLEMS. 
Fifteen years ago, Californians were treated to a radio commercial by Bill 
Bagley, the Republican candidate for state controller. 
"My opponent is 6 feet, 7 inches tall, obviously too tall to be state 
controller," Bagley said in the radio spot. Late on election night, Bagley 
received a telegram from the victor, Democrat Ken Cory: 
"Dear Bill, You are obviously too short to be state controller." 
The likelihood of this kind of whimsical exchange taking place in California 
today is about 1 in a zillion. Elective office is no longer temporary public 
service -- it is a deadly serious business, with every legislator presiding 
over a personal industry handling about a million dollars a year; the size of 
the enterprise is substantially higher for statewide officeholders. 
In the era of such somber politicians as George Deukmejian, John Van de Kamp, 
Pete Wilson, Alan Cranston, Tom Bradley, David Roberti, Leo McCarthy and Gray 
Davis, zany characters are as scarce as soft-shoe dancers. None of the above 
would dare kid around with solicitations to a campaign fund-raiser, as Cory 
once did. Cory's embossed invitations set the dinner price at $100, but added 
an asterisk after the amount. At the bottom of the come-on, in tiny type, the 
invitee was informed: "* Roquefort dressing, 25 cents extra." 
Although Gov. Deukmejian opens each speech with a joke supplied by his aides, 
he's hardly a natural funnyman. Among California's crop of high officeholders, 
Wilson tries hardest to be a humorist, with occasional success. He's developed 
a one-liner routine that includes a list of oxymorons -- those common phrases 
with built-in contradictions -- he says he developed to entertain himself while 
sitting in a near-empty Senate chamber. Wilson's list includes postal service, 
senatorial courtesy, House ethics and domestic harmony. Wilson's top priority 
nowadays is building a war chest for his 1990 gubernatorial campaign. 
Contemporary campaign fund-raisers are often priced at $1,000 a plate -- and 
dinner may not be included, let alone Roquefort dressing. The hors d'oeuvres 
are free, but those who want to drink will belly up to a "no-host" bar. And the 
entertainment won't be provided by Pat Paulsen and Jay Leno, but by windbags 
offering "testimonials" to the beneficiary. 
Back in the heyday of the California Legislature, politicians didn't take 
themselves as seriously. One day, Assemblyman Edwin L. Z'berg of Sacramento was 
making an impassioned plea on behalf of a bill. Toward noon, the hard-drinking 
presiding officer felt the need for refreshment and interrupted Z'berg in 
mid-sentence: "Mr. Z'berg, the Sacramento Bee (then an afternoon newspaper) has 
just gone to press." Z'berg sat down without finishing his sentence. 
That was the era of Speaker Jesse M. Unruh, when the California Legislature was 
held up as a model for the nation. Legislators also played partisan games back 
then, but they operated in an atmosphere of camaraderie that almost always 
produced solutions to major problems. In the past two decades, California has 
lost much of its political sense of humor, something that might help more than 
package after package of so-called political reforms. Skillful lawmakers like 
former Assembly Speaker Pro Tem John T. Knox of Richmond quit, simply because 
"it isn't any fun anymore." 
Unruh, enjoying the Speakership from 1961 to 1968, was a master of the quip and 
some of his observations have become part of the capital's permanent lore. It 
was Unruh, later state treasurer, who said, "Humility in the face of ability is 
hypocrisy." He justified a bizarre new political alliance by stating, "If I'd 
slain all my political enemies yesterday, I wouldn't have any friends today." 
And he paid tribute to the bargaining prowess of former Assemblywoman Pauline 
L. Davis of Portola this way: "With Pauline, a fair deal is when you give her a 
$30-million dam in her district and she tells you what a nice tie you're 
wearing." 
Some of the old hands, including Knox and Bagley, think there is a direct 
connection between the near-disappearance of humor from the political scene and 
failure of the system to solve problems. Humor helped create an environment in 
which compromise, not stalemate, was the likely outcome of conflict. 
Participants who have fun together can bridge partisan gaps more easily than 
those who treat politics as a life-or-death struggle between competing 
ideologies. 
During happier times, the Legislature had its share of members who 
unintentionally injected levity into the proceedings. There was Assemblyman Don 
Allen of Los Angeles, who gave a long speech one day in favor of a bill -- and 
then voted against it. His explanation to reporters: "I wasn't very 
convincing." (When he was a Los Angeles councilman, Allen would tell 
colleagues, "I'm with you -- all the way to the roll call.") Former Sen. 
Lawrence E. Walsh of Huntington Park held up a newspaper headline warning of 
"fiscal chaos," but he pronounced it "fiscal chose" -- as in gross. 
For more than two decades, the Capitol was kept amused by the antics of a 
single legislator, Charles W. (Jimmie) Meyers of San Francisco. According to 
legend, Meyers was first elected after a San Francisco political boss boasted 
in a bar that he was so powerful that "I can get anyone elected, even the next 
guy that walks into this bar." The next guy, supposedly, was Meyers. 
Among other things, Meyers was known as "the author of last resort." If 
sponsors couldn't get any one of the other 119 lawmakers to introduce their 
legislation, they would settle for Meyers. The result was that Meyers dropped 
hundreds of bills into the hopper just before the deadline. This inevitably 
produced a logjam of Meyers bills in the gate-keeping Ways and Means Committee. 
One year, the committee chairman told Meyers that all his bills would die 
except one -- and Meyers had to choose the lone survivor. After his tough 
decision, the committee designated the measure the Charles W. Meyers Janitorial 
Services Act. The bill was trashed on the Assembly floor. 
In today's deadpan political world, campaign managers rarely dare humor. 
Consultant Richie Ross violated the rule three years ago while running a 
low-budget campaign on behalf of then-Assemblyman Alister McAlister of San 
Jose, who was seeking the Democratic nomination for state controller. In an 
attempt to get some attention, Ross plastered the state with signs calling 
McAlister "Honest McHonest." For his efforts, Ross was criticized by California 
political writers for running the worst campaign of the year. 
The strait-laced McAlister did his bit to end the era of good feeling in 
Sacramento. Just after his election, he and other newcomers participated in an 
orientation program that included social functions as well as lectures. One 
lobbyist casually asked McAlister whether he preferred to be called Al or Mac. 
The response: "To you, I'm Mr. McAlister." 
