PERSPECTIVE ON THE PERSIAN GULF; 
DEFANG THE FUTURE SADDAM HUSSEINS; 
IRAQ IS A TEST CASE FOR HOW THE WORLD WILL DEAL -- OR NOT -- WITH POST-COLD WAR 
NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION. 
The long-range implications of the gulf crisis include several key factors 
seldom mentioned in the short-range rhetoric of diplomats and politicians. 
Saddam Hussein's savage rape of Kuwait, the seemingly chicken-hearted response 
of the Europeans and Japanese, and the emergence of knee-jerk anti-war protests 
in the United States can all be understood better if we analyze the long-term 
power shifts taking place, rather than focusing on the daily drama they 
provide. 
First, take the issue of oil. While all eyes focus on the price per barrel 
today, the gulf crisis could subtly change the long-term geo-economic 
competition among the United States, Europe and Japan. 
Until 1956, the predominant outside powers in the Middle East were Britain and 
France. When Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal, the French 
and British sought to regain control. The United States blocked their effort 
and took over as the dominant external influence in the region. But U.S. 
influence was itself frequently neutralized by that of the Soviet Union. Thus, 
by the 1970s, OPEC had gained enough strength to disrupt world oil supplies and 
send prices skyrocketing. This brought billions into the coffers of the Middle 
East nations and weakened the relative influence of all external powers. 
Had Middle Eastern nations not been able to play the superpowers off against 
one another, militarily and diplomatically, the history of the Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries might have been very different. The United States 
would have found more pliant regimes in the region, and oil prices would not 
have skyrocketed. 
Since the '70s, the most important change in the region has not been the rise 
of Saddam Hussein or his aggression, but the collapse of the countervailing 
Soviet influence in the region. This created a power vacuum into which Hussein 
adventured. 
The gigantic American military force now in the region would not have been 
possible if the Soviets were still a major factor. Today, they need U.S. aid 
more than the benefits they might derive from their Middle East commitments. 
The Middle East could, as some worst-case scenarios suggest, explode into holy 
war and pan-Arab nationalist frenzy. But the reverse is more likely. Hussein 
has splintered the cause of Arab unity. Even the Palestinians, his warmest 
supporters outside Iraq, seem to be having second thoughts. A more likely 
scenario is the further spread of Islamic fundamentalism as the spear point of 
resistance to external influences in the region. 
In the meantime, however, American influence is greater than ever. And this 
could give the United States a long-term edge in its hyper-competition with 
Europe and Japan, both of whom are far more dependent on Middle East oil than 
America. In effect, the United States stands with its foot on the hose line 
that carries energy to its chief competitors. 
Thus the major oil issue is not whether petroleum countries or companies get 
rich right now, but who will dominate oil policy long after Hussein is 
forgotten and what that will mean in the hypercompetition among the world's 
three biggest economic powers. 
The second factor in this great global game is financial. Ironically, the 
United States has turned to others to help finance the costs of this projection 
of military power. Neither the Europeans nor the Japanese relish the thought of 
Saddam Hussein directly or indirectly controlling world oil prices. With Kuwait 
in his pocket, and his military machine aimed directly at Saudi Arabia and the 
Gulf States, he could literally destroy the economies of Europe and Japan. Far 
better to enhance American influence, which is limited in any case, than to 
allow oil to be monopolized by an irresponsible thug and assassin with 
megalomaniac dreams of becoming the new Saladin. 
Thus, Europe and Japan must contribute to the American effort diplomatically 
and financially. But that aid can hardly be expected to be enthusiastic. A few 
votes in the United Nations. A few soldiers and sailors (except from Japan and 
Germany, which have legitimate reasons, constitutional or by treaty, for not 
sending boys to the gulf). And a few billion dollars of support for the 
U.N.-endorsed effort. (Japan's trivial $4-billion contribution is about the 
same as what Sony paid for Columbia Pictures.) 
In fact, if looked at myopically in terms of oil politics and regional 
competition, it makes sense for the Europeans and Japanese to rely on American 
forces in the gulf, while, at the same time, allowing the United States to 
bleed financially. For whatever competitive edge the United States might gain 
through increased influence in the Middle East could be offset if the military 
effort radically weakened U.S. finances. This would drive the dollar down and 
thus make oil cheaper for the Japanese and Europeans, since oil bills are paid 
in dollars. 
From a narrow point of view, the smartest Euro-Japanese policy is precisely the 
policy we have seen over the past few months. 
All this brings us, however, to the third -- and most important long-term 
issue. And that is the real reason why Saddam Hussein must be defanged. For the 
gulf crisis is not just about oil, as American doves insist. It is not just 
about money, either. 
Finally, it is not about Iraq or Hussein as such. It is about all the other 
Saddam Husseins the world will face in the next few turbulent decades. It is 
about the seepage of nuclear know-how, chemical and biological weapons, and the 
computerized missiles needed to deliver them into the hands of irresponsible, 
if not megalomaniac, leaders. 
It is about the possibility that break-away Soviet republics could capture 
nuclear weapons and use them in fanatic pursuit of "sovereignty." It is about 
the possibility of civil war in nu1668048225He is a test-case for how the world 
will -- or will not -- deal with proliferation nuclear, chemical and biological 
weapons in the post-Cold War era. 
No one knows exactly how soon Hussein will be able to detonate mushroom clouds 
in neighboring nations, or to send radioactive winds spreading over thousands 
of miles. But there can be little doubt that this man, who has spit in the face 
of international rules by using chemical weapons against his own population, 
who seized hostages and played cat and mouse with them, and who cavalierly 
accepted hundreds of thousands of casualties in his adventure against Iran, 
would be more than willing to use weapons of mass destruction. 
And this is what makes today's anti-war protests in the United States and 
elsewhere both myopic and ironic. Myopic because failure to neutralize 
Hussein's nuclear and chemical plants today sharply raises the likelihood of 
nuclear conflict tomorrow. Ironic because today's peace-loving anti-war 
activists, many of whom spent decades protesting U.S. nuclear politics, are 
shortsightedly increasing the risk of nuclear wars tomorrow. 
If Hussein is not denuclearized, and we fail to create new, far more rigorous 
and enforceable rules to control proliferation, the post-Cold-War world will 
make the Cold-War era look benign and peaceful by comparison. In the absence of 
anything better, the United Nations might well sanction unilateral military 
strikes, by individual nations, to eliminate nuclear or chemical facilities 
after a warning from the world community. 
If peace marchers want a less radioactive world, it is necessary to look beyond 
today's crisis to the ugly realities that Hussein merely symbolizes. 
And that third, nuclear, dimension of the gulf crisis is why Europe and Japan, 
as well as the poorest regions of the world, where most of tomorrow's conflicts 
will be fought, should not permit Hussein to keep the weapons with which he has 
threatened to scorch his neighbors. Whatever happens to oil, whatever happens 
to dollars, is less important, in the long run, than what happens to nuclear, 
chemical and biological weapons, and the hard-to-control knowledge on which 
they are based. 
That is the chief long-range lesson of the crisis in the gulf. 
