TO DWELL WITH IT: CLIPPERS BEATEN IN FINAL SECOND 
Lonely Street? No. Down near the end of Figueroa Street, it's Heartbreak Hotel. 
Better known as the Sports Arena, it turned cruel on the tenants again Tuesday 
night, as if the Clippers, though off to a good start at home, didn't have 
enough ulcer-makers to deal with. See: One-point loss to New York on tip-in of 
missed free throw with two seconds left, one-point loss to San Antonio when 
last-second three-point shot was ruled a two-pointer. 
This time, it was left to a few nemeses to decide a 112-111 victory for the 
Boston Celtics before 15,350, one Larry Joe Bird and a couple of referees. The 
latter are far more anonymous, but the Clippers, not for the first time, figure 
those officials created more problems than the guy who scored 27 points and the 
game-winning free throws. 
As if to add to the drama, there were two disputes that denied the Clippers 
(9-15) their sixth consecutive home victory. The first put Boston ahead, the 
second kept the Clippers down for good. 
Boston led, 110-109, when Reggie Lewis got two of his season-high 28 points, 21 
of which came in the second half, on two free throws with 10.3 seconds left. 
But when Charles Smith gave Kevin McHale and Robert Parish a head fake and made 
a fall-away 10-footer in the lane with 5.1 remaining, the Clippers were back 
ahead, 111-110. 
Timeout Boston. The Clippers called one, too. When play resumed, McHale, at 
mid-court, threw the ball in to Bird, who drove left along the perimeter and 
was greeted with a double-team by Smith and Benoit Benjamin about 20 feet from 
the basket. Bird went up for the jumper; Smith and Benjamin appeared to be 
stationary with their arms up. 
Foul, with two-tenths of a second to play. The crowd, which included a 
noticeable Celtic contingent, already reached a fevered pitch when Bird stepped 
to the line and waved his arms as if to say, "More." 
"One thing I've been able to do my whole basketball career is block the noise 
out," he said. "It's just like shooting by yourself." 
So Bird made both free throws. 
"What foul?" Smith pleaded afterward. "Everybody here knows it wasn't a foul. 
Larry said after the game I didn't foul him." 
Well, yes and no. 
"I told him he blocked the ball clean at the top," Bird said. "But he got me 
with a little body contact. They don't call it very often, but it's still a 
foul. I also told him he traveled on the play just before." 
The Clippers, making a good impression in their only national television 
appearance of 1989-90, called a timeout again. The first option was a lob under 
the basket to one of the big men. When Danny Manning stood with the ball at 
halfcourt and saw that route close, he went to the second choice, Ron Harper. 
Harper caught the ball a few feet in front of the Clipper bench, turned and 
fired. The ball swished, and players celebrated. Then they saw referee Mike 
Mathis, who had signaled game over before Harper even shot. 
There was no doubt in Harper's mind it should have counted. 
"Oh, yeah," he said. 
Coach Don Casey wasn't quite so emphatic. 
"That was close," Casey said. "If it was in Boston Garden, the timer may not 
have gone off as quick. . . . But that's one I can't argue." 
Smith finished with 33 points, 21 in the second half. That included one stretch 
in the fourth quarter when he scored 10 straight and 12 of 15 Clipper points in 
a span of 4:28. 
"Charles is developing an I-want-the-ball persona," Casey said after the 
Clippers lost to the Celtics for the 11th consecutive time. "He felt 
comfortable with McHale, and I thought he did an excellent job." 
That Smith's final basket was only the game-winner once removed is what will be 
remembered, however. It is another would-of, could-of loss, piling up as they 
are. 
"Again," Smith said, "a game was snatched from us." 
Clipper Notes 
It was the Clippers' second sellout of the season. . . . Gary Grant had one of 
his best shooting performances of the season, making 11 of 20 for 24 points. He 
also had 12 assists and only three turnovers. . . . Reggie Lewis led Boston 
(15-11) with a season-high 28 points. . . . Larry Bird, on his free-throw line 
theatrics in the waning seconds: "I don't call it egging them on. I think it's 
just getting them involved." 
Boston General Manager Jan Volk, who rarely accompanies the team on trips 
outside the Atlantic Division, had an informal meeting Tuesday with Leonard 
Armato, agent for Brian Shaw, to lay a foundation for talks that could bring 
Shaw back to the Celtics next season. Shaw has a two-year deal with Il 
Messaggero in Italy, but the second season includes an escape clause, and Shaw 
has said he would like to return to the NBA in 1990-91 under the right 
conditions. Shaw, from Richmond, Calif., and UC Santa Barbara, was in 
California for a Christmas vacation and was scheduled to fly back to Rome 
today. 
