SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S ENVIRONMENT AT THE CROSSROADS; 
WASTE: THE DISAPPEARING SPACES FOR TONS OF TRASH 
HEAD Landfills near capacity as alternative disposal methods are 
explored.Mounds of Garbage and More to ComeMen in "moon suits" have become a 
familiar sight in the back yards of a Westminster housing tract. Long before 
the 75 homes were built in the 1960s, acidic petroleum wastes were buried 
there. A black, coal-like substance eventually began oozing to the surface. It 
seeped into swimming pools and lawns and even appeared under an old carpet in 
one family's living room. The sludge, state health authorities say, is 
corrosive and may contain potentially cancer-causing chemicals. 
Gloria Delzeith, 47, who has lived at the Orange County tract since 1978, 
recalls returning home from the hospital in May after treatment for severe 
asthma, a condition she developed two years ago. Workers in special protective 
clothing came two weeks after her release from the hospital to sample the soil 
in her back yard. 
"When they dug over by the back fence, they had to back away," remembers 
Delzeith, an electronics inspector. "The odor was very intense. They didn't 
have their respirators on, but when they smelled it, they put them on." The 
white-suited workers warned Delzeith to stay out of her back yard. 
Her situation, as horrifying as it sounds, is not unique. Southern California 
is afloat in garbage, much of it toxic. As health officials try to grapple with 
old waste sites, sanitation officials are looking to build new dumps. The 
region's landfills are running out of room, and Southern Californians are 
continuing to generate mountains of garbage. Recycling may eventually reduce 
the flow, but not before more dumps are added or current sites expanded. 
Already, plans are under way to create three hazardous dumps in the desert, one 
on land proposed for national park status. Officials are also considering 
transporting household garbage by train to the desert, filling inland canyons 
with it, even shipping it to the South Pacific. 
Progress Slow 
The most troublesome part of the garbage picture is toxic waste. Hazardous 
dumps cost hundreds of millions of dollars and take decades to clean. State 
officials have identified 12,700 abandoned toxic waste sites in Southern 
California, 84 of them on state or federal Superfund cleanup lists. Progress 
toward cleaning them has been agonizingly slow, and many communities are 
growing impatient. Despite a tripling of cleanup staff and a doubling of funds, 
the Deukmejian Administration completed cleanups at only seven sites from July 
1, 1988, to June, 1989. Frustrated residents who live on abandoned petroleum 
wastes near the beach in Oxnard have taken to putting skulls and crossbones on 
their roofs to protest the government's sluggardly pace. Others, such as the 
neighbors of Riverside County's Stringfellow acid pits, are filing class action 
suits against chemical dumpers. 
In the meantime, communities near toxic dumps report nagging ailments they 
suspect may be related to hazardous substances buried there. Residents near 
Stringfellow, where solvents, acids and pesticides were dumped until 1972, 
complain of a bewildering array of health problems, including respiratory 
ailments, rashes, tumors, neurological disorders and learning disabilities in 
children. A family that lived in the Westminster tract moved a year ago because 
all five of the children were suffering from respiratory problems. Although 
state officials say the sludge poses immediate harm only if it is touched, 
residents of the Orange County community are frightened. Jerrel Haynie, 47, 
says his 23-year-old daughter suffers mysterious headaches and other pains. For 
years, he grew vegetables in his back yard. "We always ate a lot of the 
vegetables -- who knows?" said the engineer, his voice trailing off. Aside from 
health fears, Haynie worries about his pocketbook. "I've got almost $100,000 in 
equity in this house," he said. "It's my retirement. If I get stuck and can't 
get out, I don't know what I will do." 
To prevent such conflicts in the future, hazardous waste management officials 
want to take toxic garbage to the most remote reaches of the desert. A proposal 
to create a low-level radioactive waste dump in the eastern Mojave Desert's 
Ward Valley is expected to win formal state approval next year. 
Located between the Turtle Mountains to the east and the Old Woman Mountains to 
the west, the valley is largely untrampled desert, dotted by yuccas, barrel 
cactus, jack rabbits and rattlesnakes. All this would disappear. Two 
repositories for hazardous wastes have also been proposed in a region east of 
Barstow. Under one of the proposals, 450,000 tons of waste would be buried in 
concrete or steel silos in the secluded Hidden Valley in the Cady Mountains, a 
site proposed to become part of a new national park. Residents in the nearest 
town are furious. "This is an untouched valley, a natural place," said Melody 
Owings, 23, who lives in tiny Newberry Springs, 15 miles from the dump site. 
"There are so few places like this left, I just hate to see this one lost." 
So-called sanitary landfills aren't much more popular. Aside from their 
offensive appearance and odors, these repositories of household garbage pose 
dangers of their own. They contain hazardous materials from the paints and 
batteries that residents nonchalantly toss out with their household trash. Some 
landfills are leaking and threatening precious underground water. They also 
produce flammable gases, most notably methane. In 1983 and 1985, methane gas 
leaks from the Sheldon-Arleta landfill in the San Fernando Valley forced school 
closures. 
Despite such problems, the abundance of household trash is forcing officials to 
look for new dumping grounds. A coalition of San Gabriel Valley cities and the 
Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County are studying four proposals to 
transport trash by train from Los Angeles County to San Bernardino and 
Riverside counties. "It doesn't surprise me that they are trying to get away 
with this," said San Bernardino County Supervisor Jon Mikels, who represents a 
portion of the desert. "If you could solve a problem and have another county 
feel the impacts of that solution, wouldn't you do it?" The Riverside Board of 
Supervisors has been more receptive. The county's waste management director 
called a proposal to dump the waste in an old abandoned mine in the county 
"pretty attractive." The garbage would fill the mine, now an eyesore, and could 
be used for the county's trash too. 
If these plans falter, the trash could be dispatched to the Marshall Islands. 
The South Pacific nation has expressed interest in a proposal to use West Coast 
garbage to fill in reefs and provide footing for causeways connecting islands. 
"One person's garbage can in reality become another person's treasure," touts 
Admiralty Pacific, a company that wants to ship 35 billion pounds of West Coast 
garbage to the islands. Not surprisingly, environmentalists oppose the idea. 
Greenpeace contends that the plastic liners that would hold the garbage would 
inevitably leak, poisoning irreplaceable reefs. 
Because of such potential problems, incineration of garbage is gaining renewed 
interest. State prison officials have proposed putting a plant that would 
convert trash to electricity at a San Diego County prison. Eight-hundred 
inmates would be paid 50 cents an hour to sort through tons of garbage each 
day. Prison officials admit that the plan faces significant hurdles, however. 
When other such plants were proposed in the past, concerns about health dangers 
doomed them. Dioxins and lead come out of the stacks, and the emissions 
contribute to smog. 
Few of today's garbage problems were foreseen in 1961, the year Sam Yorty ran 
for mayor of Los Angeles and made the highly popular pledge to end curbside 
separation of trash. Homeowners at the time had to separate wet trash and place 
it on the curb one day for pickup, burnables on another day, glass and cans on 
still another. Three years after Yorty's pledge, on July 3, 1964, the era of 
combined collection began, providing the promised convenience to homeowners and 
businesses but laying the groundwork for today's crisis. The plan was 
considered environmentally safe, and other Southern California communities 
followed suit. 
Planners now are trying to turn back the clock. There is a consensus that 
Southern Californians at the very least will have to resume separating trash 
for recycling or composting. Under a new statute, signed by Gov. George 
Deukmejian in September, local governments will have to reduce garbage 25% by 
1995 and 50% by the year 2000, primarily though voluntary recycling, composting 
and reducing trash sources. Compulsory programs and higher costs for garbage 
disposal are likely to follow. Eventually, some state legislators would like to 
see fees levied against retailers or distributors of certain wasteful products, 
such as fast-food packaging. 
Several Southern California communities already have voluntary curbside 
recycling programs, but these are not likely to reduce garbage significantly in 
the near-term. In Riverside County, for example, $800,000 a year has been 
earmarked for recycling projects, "far short of what's needed to do the job 
right now," said the county's director of waste management. There are 15 
recycling programs in San Diego County, including an ongoing effort by San 
Diego to implement curbside recycling citywide. In those neighborhoods with 
recycling, more than 50% of the homeowners participate. A waste management firm 
has developed a coloring book called "Captain Recycle" to teach children the 
value of recycling. "Captain Recycle wants us all to have a clean, green and 
drug-free America," concludes the book. 
But the job is more than just to persuade homeowners to separate their trash. 
Government and sanitation officials must also find markets for the garbage. 
Paper mills, for instance, must convert to technology that will enable them to 
use recycled newspaper, which is now piling up at recycling centers. Uses for 
so-called "green waste" must also be found. In San Bernardino County, a 
consultant is studying how to grind up lawn cuttings, tree clippings and other 
plant material for mulch that could be used for erosion control. In Orange 
County, which generates more solid waste per person than any county in the 
country, officials are preparing a plan to compost plant wastes and sell it to 
golf courses, nurseries and cities. "It's a marketing issue," said Frank 
Bowerman, Orange County's director of waste management. "We've got to sell the 
idea before it works." 
REPORT CARD 
Average score: 5.3 
Three views on our progress, rated on a one to 10 scale 
 * Mark Murray, policy director for Californians Against Waste: "The writing 
has been on the wall in terms of the need for recycling and source reduction 
for a long time in Southern California, yet we haven't seen the region as a 
whole move very fast with programs to deal with the problem." Score: 3 
* John Gallagher, chairman of the California Waste Management Board: "There has 
been a certain level of indifference on the part of local governments and 
county planners in including the siting and location of landfills . . . They 
have not required enough attention to be paid to it by developers." Score: 5 
* Z. Harry Astor, a lobbyist for the southern district of the California Refuse 
Removal Council: "Part of the problem has been the so-called 'Not In My 
Backyard' syndrome, with people in various areas demanding restrictions on 
expansions of landfills. But I think industry has done a good job. Whenever it 
has been economically feasible, industry has engaged in recycling and source 
separation and has complied with the technological problems involving toxic 
waste disposal." Score: 8 
TURNING POINTS 
* 1990 -- San Bernardino County supervisors will decide whether to approve two 
proposed hazardous waste dumps, one in the secluded Hidden Valley in the Caddy 
Mountains and the other near the town of Ludlow. 
* 1995 -- New state law requires local governments to reduce their communities' 
garbage by 25%, primarily through recycling, composting and source reduction. 
* 1996 -- Unless more landfills are added or disposal of garbage declines, 
Southern California's dumps will be filled. 
* 1999 -- The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency expects to have cleaned up 
Fullerton's McColl Toxic Waste Dump, Orange County's worst hazardous landfill. 
* 2000 -- Communities must cut the amount of garbage they generate by 50% under 
new state law. 
VOICES 
"The first thing, you know, is it gives me a little money, and I like to help 
clean up the whole environmental schmear. If I get maybe a couple hundred 
pounds of paper, maybe I can save one big tree. Those are the main reasons. It 
doesn't make me rich; I barely get gas money out of it." 
 -- John Simon, 71, of South Pasadena, who each week collects newspapers and 
aluminum cans in his neighborhood and delivers them to a recycling center in 
Alhambra. 
"I think we should get hazard pay. We're out there dealing with hazardous 
materials day after day. I have seen stuff that is so foul that just by 
smelling it you get sick. I have seen dead animals in the can. You name it -- 
cats, dogs. I had one can with a dead rooster in it. People throw out a lot of 
hazardous materials that we are not supposed to take, but people get away with 
it. . . . It's just disgusting -- battery acid, car parts, roofing material. 
Skin rashes are very common among us, and so is eye irritation." 
 -- Jeffery Taylor, 31, Pasadena trash collector 
TECHNOLOGY'S PROMISE 
Although Southern California is quickly running out of room to bury its solid 
waste, here are some methods and technologies that can ease the problem: 
* SOURCE REDUCTION and RECYCLING -- These are two of the most practical and 
promising methods of reducing waste. Source reduction basically means 
manufacturing goods that last longer and making them with less toxic materials. 
More cities are requiring residents to recycle their newspapers, bottles and 
aluminum cans. Both methods will be required increasingly in years ahead. 
* COMPOSTING -- Composting is making a comeback. One third of all residential 
waste is yard waste or "green waste." Instead of burying it in a landfill, it 
is collected and composted by solid waste companies and local governments to 
make a type of fertilizer for public golf courses, highway median strips and 
schools. There is one drawback: Large acreage is required. 
* PYROLYSIS -- The chemical decomposition of a substance by heat is expected to 
play a role in waste management in the next five to 10 years. Waste such as 
tires, food, plastics and leaves are placed in a large container and closed. 
Air is pumped out to remove oxygen and replaced with an inert gas. The 
container is then heated, much like a pressure cooker. The waste does not burn, 
but the heat causes it to break down, generating gases such as methane and 
carbon monoxide which can be used as fuel. The solid residual material also can 
be used as a fuel. 
* REFUSE DERIVED FUEL -- RDF can be made from many types of solid waste. 
Unburnable waste such as cans and bottles are removed, leaving paper, plastic 
and other burnable waste that are compressed and cut into "fuel pellets" about 
the size of charcoal. RDF energy content is 27% less than coal but 37% higher 
than garbage. Air pollution emissions are comparable to those from burning 
coal. RDF can reduce solid waste volumes at landfills by about one third. 
* GAS RECOVERY -- Any time trash and garbage are buried, methane gas is formed. 
Methane is a potent "greenhouse" gas contributing to global warming. 
Increasingly, this gas is being tapped by pipe systems at landfills and used as 
fuel to generate electricity, or is burned off. When completely burned, methane 
is converted to water vapor and carbon dioxide, which is a less potent 
greenhouse gas. Burning also destroys small concentrations of air toxics, like 
vinyl chloride and benzene, which can cause cancer. 
* BIOMASS -- Waste is put into a closed container and water and bacteria are 
added to accelerate generation of methane gas. This technique was used to 
generate cooking gas 1,000 years ago by the Chinese. Today, it is a way of 
disposing of both solid waste and sewage sludge. 
LANDFILL CAPACITY 
* Southern California's landfill capacity has dropped sharply in just the last 
four years. 
* Capacity is expected to drop in the 90s. In one case, California Waste 
management Board estimates that Los Angeles County will run out of landfill 
space by 1994. 
* Unless capacity is added or the rate of waste generated declines, the Waste 
Management Board estimates Southern California will run out of capacity by 
1996. 
SOURCE:California Waste Management Board 
