WILSON, MOORPARK EDGE VALLEY, 89-83 
It was a classic Catch-22, but Valley College could define it as a problem 
catching 20. 
If the Valley defenders attempted to shut off Damian Wilson, No. 20 for 
Moorpark, he drove past them, and if Valley sagged, he hit from outside. 
The Valley players are on Christmas break, but Wilson took them back to school 
Saturday night with 18 points in the second half and 27 overall in an 89-83 
Moorpark victory at Moorpark. 
The game between Western State Conference foes was not counted as a conference 
contest because the teams play in different divisions. 
"As soon as we started hitting from the outside and then going inside, they 
couldn't stop us neither way," said Wilson, who has been ill and did not start. 
Moorpark trailed, 45-40, at halftime but ended the Monarchs' reign with an 
outside umbrella of Nate Hantgin, Sam Crawford and Wilson, who set up just 
beyond the three-point line. The outsiders took turns carrying the Moorpark 
offense. 
Crawford, who finished with 21 points and 11 assists, scored Moorpark's first 
seven points of the second half. 
A three-point shot by Crawford gave Moorpark its first lead, 54-53, at the 
14:55 mark. 
Hantgin soon followed with three consecutive three-point baskets within the 
space of a minute to push Moorpark's lead to 65-57. Hantgin scored a 
career-high 18 points and made five of eight three-point attempts. 
Wilson took control in the final 10 minutes, scoring 16 of Moorpark's final 22 
points. 
Moorpark (14-2) needed the second-half surge to overcome a strong Valley 
performance. 
Playing without Rick Garrick, who had injured his ankle the night before, 
Valley (9-7) remained in the game until the final seconds. 
"Without our leader and everything, I thought we did a good job," Valley Coach 
Jim Stephens said. "We played a pretty good ball team and ran out of gas." 
Valley's Tory Stephens led all scorers with 29 points and grabbed eight 
rebounds. 
Nathan Hall, Stephens' running mate at guard, made nine of 13 field goal 
attempts and scored 20. Russell Baldwin added 20 points and 13 rebounds. 
"Stephens had a great game," Moorpark Coach Al Nordquist said. "They played 
extremely well in the first half." 
Moorpark had difficulty getting out of the blocks and away from Valley center 
Art Kirksey's blocks -- four in the first half alone. 
Although the gym temperature was up to normal by game time, the maintenance 
crew had turned off the heat earlier in the week when Moorpark adjourned for 
Christmas break. 
Moorpark was a stone-cold 13 of 35 from the field and nine of 20 from the 
free-throw line before intermission. 
Valley, meanwhile, made 19 of 35 field-goal attempts and three of three free 
throws. 
Moorpark's Sean Doyle, starting at center in place of Aaron Smith who is home 
in Connecticut for Christmas, scored 12 points and grabbed 12 rebounds. 
