TENNIS; 
A LAST LOOK AT SOME GREAT MATCHES IN A MEMORABLE YEAR 
As professional tennis gets ready to move into the last decade of the 20th 
Century, it is time to say goodby to 1989, a year noteworthy for victories by 
two 17-year-olds in Paris and a West German named Boris. 
The most memorable matches of the year? Well, it's a crowded field, but here is 
a completely subjective list. In it, you will find outcomes that surprise, 
upset and shock, without which it wouldn't be much of a year. 
There are also turning points and ends, and that seems a fairly appropriate way 
to conclude a year, doesn't it? 
1. Michael Chang vs. Ivan Lendl 
June 5, fourth round, French Open 
Playing the fifth set with leg cramps so painful he had to stand during 
changeovers, Chang, 17, shocked the No. 1 player in the world and won the 
4-hour 36-minute match, 4-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3. Bud Collins of the Boston 
Globe and NBC-TV called it "the most colossal upset in the history of tennis." 
Said Lendl, when asked if he would have won if Chang hadn't had cramps: "That 
we will never know." 
2. Steffi Graf vs. Arantxa Sanchez 
June 10, final, French Open 
Nearly as stunning was the 7-6 (8-6), 3-6, 7-5 victory of the previously 
unheralded 17-year-old Sanchez over the seemingly invincible Graf. After match 
point, Sanchez tumbled onto the red clay of Roland Garros and when she got up, 
she said: "I have beaten the No. 1 player in the world." Graf, who served for 
the match at 5-3 in the third set and did not win a single point, found a plus 
in the defeat: "No more questions about the Grand Slam, I guess." 
3. Boris Becker vs. Ivan Lendl 
July 8, semifinal, Wimbledon 
A 76-minute rain delay gave Becker time to regroup from a one-set deficit in 
the fourth set when he was down two service breaks. Lendl led, 3-0, when the 
rains came, and he appeared well on his way to reaching the final of the 
tournament he craves more than any other. "I knew I was going to be out of 
these championships in about 15 minutes," Becker said. Instead, Lendl was out, 
hollow-eyed and winless for a 10th time. Reporters surrounded Lendl. How do you 
get over something like this? "Time," he said. 
4. Boris Becker vs. Andre Agassi 
July 21-22, Davis Cup, Munich 
Even by tension-wracked Davis Cup standards, this one was special, a 6-7 (7-4), 
6-7 (7-5), 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, 6-4 come-from-behind victory for Becker. The match 
was halted after four sets because it was past midnight, and by Davis Cup 
rules, it could be postponed until the next day if both sides so desired. 
Becker finished it the next day and said, "It is so much more than a Davis Cup 
semifinal for people in this country." Agassi leaped the net to congratulate 
Becker: "When you pour your heart and guts into (a match) you just feel such 
great emotion." 
5. Michael Chang vs. Stefan Edberg 
June 11, final, French Open 
Chang won, 6-1, 3-6, 4-6, 6-4, 6-2, to become the first American male to win 
the French Open since Tony Trabert in 1955. He also became the youngest man 
ever to win a Grand Slam event. Said Chang: "It's hard to really think about 
it. It just doesn't click in my head. It's definitely an achievement that will 
be with me the rest of my life." Edberg said that Chang should have been 
worried. "But he's young and probably doesn't think too much." 
6. Chris Evert vs. Zina Garrison 
Sept. 5, quarterfinal, U.S. Open 
It was the end of an era in women's tennis. Buoyed by a flashy victory over 
15-year-old Monica Seles in the previous round, Evert had high hopes. But her 
match with Garrison became her 113th and final one at her 19th and final U.S. 
Open. Garrison won, 7-6 (7-1), 6-2, and said she felt like a villain because 
Evert had announced that she was playing in her last major tournament. Said Ted 
Tinling, historian of women's tennis for more than 60 years: "Now, the sun has 
truly set." 
7. Thomas Muster vs. Yannick Noah 
March 31, semifinal, 
International Players Championship 
On the verge of a big breakthrough after forcing Lendl to go a tough four sets 
in an Australian Open semifinal, Muster made a furious comeback to defeat Noah, 
5-7, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-2, and earn the right to play Lendl in the final. It was 
a grand victory for the Austrian Muster, who got a massage and drank a beer 
with coach Ronnie Lietgeb. Then Muster went out for a sandwich but was involved 
in a freakish autombile accident when a driver, apparently drunk, rammed 
Muster's parked car and pushed it back into his knee. Muster suffered torn 
ligaments in his left knee. "It was a great moment for us," Lietgeb said. 
"Unfortunately, it was a very short celebration." 
8. Mats Wilander vs. Ramesh Krishnan 
Jan. 19, 2nd round, Australian Open 
This match marked the beginning of the end for Wilander, who came to Melbourne 
as the Australian Open's defending champion, as well as the No. 1-ranked player 
in the world. But after Wilander lost to Krishnan, 6-3, 6-7, 7-6, he saw Lendl 
replace him as No. 1. Wilander's explanation: "I just played terrible." He 
wouldn't play much better the rest of 1989 and closed out his most 
disappointing year at No. 12. But this match against Krishnan signaled the 
beginning of the slide. 
9. John McEnroe vs. Darren Cahill 
June 27, 1st round, Wimbledon 
On a gray, windy Tuesday on the finely manicured green lawn of Centre Court, 
John McEnroe had to struggle in the first match he played. McEnroe dropped the 
first two sets before his array of precision volleys put away the upstart 
Australian, 4-6, 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, 8-6. Afterward, McEnroe said: "I know I can win 
this tournament. I've done it before and I hope I can do it again." Not this 
year, he wouldn't. McEnroe lost to Edberg in the semifinals, 7-5, 7-6 (7-2), 
7-6 (7-5). "I did the best I could; it just wasn't good enough," McEnroe said 
of the match against Edberg. 
10. Aaron Krickstein vs. 
Brad Gilbert, Michael Chang 
Sept. 23-24, semifinal, final, 
Los Angeles Open 
Krickstein entered this tournament ranked No. 16 and finished the year No. 8, 
due in part to his victory at UCLA, where he became a champion of adversity. 
First, Krickstein faced seven match points and saved them all. He trailed 
Gilbert, 1-6, 2-5, and still won. Then Krickstein played hometown favorite 
Chang in the final, fell behind again, 2-6, 1-4, and again came back to win, 
2-6, 6-4, 6-2. Just after he put away a volley on match point, Krickstein 
yelled: "I did it." He surely did. 
Shot of the Year 
That would be the luckiest shot of the year, too, the one Becker hit against 
Derrick Rostagno in the second round of the U.S. Open. In the fourth set, 
Rostagno had match point against Becker and was already in position to win the 
match on an easy volley, but Becker's shot clipped the top of the net, and 
Rostagno could only swing wildly at it and miss. Becker eventually won in a 
fifth set and went on to take his first Grand Slam title other than Wimbledon. 
Quote of the Year 
From the quirky mind of the slow-talking, slow-walking, bearded Czechoslovak, 
Miloslav Mecir, who was asked at the Australian Open to expand about his 
feelings of urban areas, such as Melbourne, and nature: 
"I like nature more. I think each country has different nature. And the 
buildings, sometimes they're made of different architecture. But nature is 
something different. You cannot change it just like that. It has to be there 
for a long time." 
Oh. 
