IRS EXAMINING GIFTS, LOANS TO REAGANS; 
TAXES: THE INVESTIGATION SEEKS TO DETERMINE IF THE FORMER PRESIDENT AND HIS 
WIFE SHOULD BE ASSESSED FOR VARIOUS ITEMS, PARTICULARLY DRESSES FOR THE FORMER 
FIRST LADY. 
The Internal Revenue Service has been examining whether former President Ronald 
Reagan and his wife, Nancy, owe back taxes on gifts -- including dresses for 
Mrs. Reagan -- that they received while they were in the White House, according 
to sources familiar with the inquiry. 
The investigation, which began early this year, has been conducted by the IRS's 
Los Angeles field office because the Reagans were determined to be California 
taxpayers even while living in the White House, the sources said. 
Part of the IRS's information comes from M. Chris Blazakis, a free-lance 
journalist who previously worked for the designer Galanos, who lent dresses to 
Mrs. Reagan. Blazakis said that during the past year he has shared "detailed 
information with the IRS," which he said has launched a "comprehensive 
examination" of "far-reaching" issues involving the Reagans' possible tax 
liability. 
Blazakis is now writing a critical book about the Reagans. He said he was 
coming forward with the allegations to ensure that they are properly handled by 
federal authorities. 
The Reagans' tax lawyer, Los Angeles attorney Roy Miller, said he could not 
comment on a matter involving a client. The Reagans' spokesman, Mark Weinberg, 
said he knew nothing about an IRS inquiry and could not reach the Reagans for 
comment. A spokeswoman for the IRS also declined comment, citing privacy laws. 
Jill Brett, a spokeswoman for the National Archives, said IRS agents recently 
examined Reagan White House photographs at the archives and made some copies. 
She said this was done with the former President's permission. 
Documents seen by the Washington Post indicate that some IRS officials are 
treating the allegations seriously, have spent considerable amounts of time on 
the inquiry and have obtained permission from the Reagans to examine their tax 
records. The Post was shown these documents on condition that they not be 
further identified. Such cases are often resolved without court action in 
negotiated settlements with the IRS. 
Blazakis is a former executive vice president of Galanos Originals, a 
California firm headed by designer James Galanos. Time magazine quoted Blazakis 
as a source for its October, 1988, report that Nancy Reagan had borrowed dozens 
of expensive gowns from famous designers, along with jewelry and other 
accessories. 
The White House acknowledged at the time that the Reagans had not reported the 
gowns as loans on financial disclosure forms under the Ethics in Government 
Act, as Nancy Reagan had promised she would do in 1982, or declared their value 
as income on federal tax returns from 1982 through 1987. 
Several tax experts interviewed by the Post last year said the dresses, some of 
which were worth $20,000, should be regarded as interest-free loans, and 
therefore taxable income, to Nancy Reagan. 
But White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said last year that there was "no 
illegality" because the White House counsel's office had determined that there 
were no tax consequences from the transactions. Therefore, Fitzwater said, the 
Reagans did not need to amend their tax returns or financial disclosure 
statements. 
