CHARM OF 'A CHILD'S CHRISTMAS' SURVIVES PRODUCTION DABBLING 
Director Thomas F. Bradac has reworked the Grove TheatreCompany's annual 
production of Dylan Thomas' "A Child's Christmas in Wales," a holiday 
entertainment that many felt was already in fine working order. 
Gone this year (the production's fourth) is the turntable set of a Welsh pub 
and Thomas' Swansea home; Bradac decided the old look was too bulky, not 
"aesthetically satisfying." The chummy living room, with its familiar banquet 
table, remains to hold the central action as the poet recalls the bittersweet 
moments of his best Christmas, when he was young enough to appreciate 
everything at face value. 
Filling the stage with outsized presents wrapped in shiny foil paper and bold 
bows, Bradac and designer Gil Morales remind us that the season is tantamount 
to a fantasy world for children. The director may be having some fun as well: 
Do the surreal images also evoke the materialism of Christmas? The young 
Thomas, perkily played by Danny Oberbeck, certainly dwells on the gifts he is 
about to receive more than those he is about to give. 
Bradac also felt that Thomas' language, a mixture of poetic detail and diary 
prose (adapted for the stage by Jeremy Brooks and Adrian Mitchell), needed to 
be emphasized even more than in past years. And with Gary Bell employing his 
full baritone as the adult Thomas remembering when, all the lovely winter 
images ("irreligious snow," "ear-pinching air") do ring through. 
The changes, though, are not extreme. The singing of several traditional carols 
by the able cast is still the show's charming touchstone. This production is a 
bit more fanciful, even a tad precious. But in the end it summons the same 
feelings of earlier efforts -- the pleasures of Christmas minus most of the 
mawkish overcoating that too often smothers other holiday productions. 
The faults are pretty much the same as in previous efforts. Certain scenes -- 
especially involving Thomas and his innocently roguish pals -- seem 
overextended. There's a pressing "It's a Wonderful Life" sentimentality that 
bubbles up as Bradac and his cast linger, a little full of themselves. But as 
Christmas shows go, this one has been, and continues to be, remarkable -- a 
tour through a holiday landscape raised above the mundane by the guide's 
touching literary style. 
'A CHILD'S CHRISTMAS IN WALES' 
A Grove Theatre Co. production of Jeremy Brooks and Adrian Mitchell's play 
adapted from Dylan Thomas' writings. Directed by Thomas F. Bradac. With Gary 
Bell, Danny Oberbeck, Kay Berlet, Daniel Christaens, Lorraine Fusare, Marnie 
Crossen, Jim Schoonover, Larry Fisher, Elizabeth Mendoza, Laurie Freed, Bud 
Leslie, Robert Fass, Rick Tigert, Jeani Finnerty, Irma Lozano and Sean 
McDevitt. Sets by Gil Morales. Lighting by David M. Darwin. Musical direction 
by Chuck Estes. Costumes by Laura E. Deremer. Choreography by Libbey Coghlan. 
Through Dec. 24, Wednesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 7:30 p.m.; 
and Saturdays and Sundays at 3 p.m. at the Gem Theatre, 12852 Main St., Garden 
Grove. Tickets: $16 to $20. (714) 636-7213. 
