PREP SOCCER ROUNDUP; 
EL TORO GIRLS USE PENALTY KICKS TO ADVANCE TO FINAL OF IRVINE EVENT 
El Toro High School advanced to the final of the Irvine girls' soccer 
tournament by outscoring Mission Viejo, 7-6, on penalty kicks, breaking a 1-1 
tie after regulation play, Wednesday at Irvine High School. 
Traci Jensen had two saves in the sudden-death portion of penalty kicks. Kelly 
Thomson scored 36 minutes into the first half for El Toro (4-0) and Julie 
Fairbanks scored 20 minutes into the second half to tie the score for Mission 
Viejo (3-1). 
In an Irvine boys' soccer tournament semifinal: 
Saddleback 2, Woodbridge 1 -- George Guerrero scored both goals for Saddleback, 
including the winner with about four minutes remaining. Jason Szczuka scored in 
the second half to tie the score for Woodbridge. 
In nonleague girls' soccer: 
Sunny Hills 3, Brea-Olinda 0 -- Rhonda Partida scored twice and Stacy Thurber 
scored once for host Sunny Hills (4-0-0). 
Savanna 12, Brethren 0 -- Kim Wyer had five goals, tying her school record set 
last year, to lead host Savanna (5-1-1). 
In nonleague boys' soccer: 
Sunny Hills 6, Brea-Olinda 1 -- Jason Fichtelberg scored two goals and Enrico 
Pietrantonio, Matt Marino, Kenny Takaki and Conrad Rucker each added one for 
visiting Sunny Hills (2-1). 
Katella 4, Fullerton 0 -- Armando Orizaba scored two goals to lead the Knights 
(3-1) at Katella. Jose Figueroa and Rene Lugo also scored for Katella. 
Villa Park 1, Capistrano Valley 0 -- Joe Hernandez scored in the first half to 
lead host Villa Park (2-2). 
La Quinta 2, Santa Ana Valley 1 -- Tuan Dang and David Matlock each scored to 
lead host La Quinta (4-1). With the score tied, 1-1, Kenny Abadie dribbled past 
four defenders half the length of the field and crossed the ball to Matlock for 
the winning goal. 
Orange 2, Mission Viejo 1 -- Rogelio Marquez and Justin Zayas each scored in 
the second half to lead top-ranked Orange (2-0) to a come-from-behind victory 
at Orange. Doug Roberson scored for No. 8 Mission Viejo (1-1) in the first 
half. 
Santa Ana 2, Servite 0 -- Gus Plasencia and Jose Luis Ramirez scored for host 
Santa Ana (2-1). 
Estancia 3, Pacifica 1 -- Ivan Tavares, Raul Diaz and Carlos Aleazar scored 
goals for Estancia (1-1) at Pacifica. 
El Dorado 2, Valencia 1 -- Carlos Cedano scored twice to lead visiting El 
Dorado (1-2). 
