NEIGHBORHOOD EATERY: A CUT ABOVE THE USUAL DINER FARE 
Like hundreds of other '50s-style diners spawned during the past decade, 
Lyndy's Restaurant is a good place to get a juicy burger, fries and a Coke, 
along with a taste of nostalgia -- all for a fair price. 
But unlike most other culinary shrines to Marilyn, Elvis and James Dean, 
Lyndy's offers a menu replete with alternatives to the usual diner fare. 
If you're not in a mood for a burger, hot dog or milkshake, and didn't get 
enough of Thanksgiving dinner, Lyndy's dishes up a turkey-and-stuffing meal as 
good as any. Turkey being a house specialty, it's served any time of year, in 
the form of full dinners, sandwiches or pot pies -- and, of course, always with 
the sounds of Chuck Berry and Fats Domino on the side. 
Even if you walk in craving a burger with a slice of '50s flashback, be sure to 
peruse the daily specials. The revolving menu offers a wonderfully diverse 
selection of dishes, including red snapper, cabbage, enchiladas and potato 
pancakes. One can even order steak, shrimp and barbecue pork chops -- all in 
the same meal, and for less than $8. 
This also may be the only '50s diner where one can get a good Irish beer. Both 
Guinness stout and Harp ale (by the bottle) are always available. 
The quirky diversity of Lyndy's menu is representative of the evolution of the 
30-year-old adjunct eatery to the motel of the same name. 
Before undergoing the nostalgia face lift several years ago, Lyndy's had been a 
family restaurant/coffee shop, serving many of the items that appear as 
specials today. With the '50s-style overmake came an expanded menu of burgers, 
fries and shakes. 
And the burgers, by the way, are excellent. They start at $2.50, and any 
cheeseburger, bacon burger or other variation can be made a "Big Bopper" -- 
with another patty added -- for an extra $1. 
Don't be fooled by the red-sparkled upholstery and '50s artifacts that adorn 
the walls -- the atmosphere, refreshingly, is more relaxed and unpretentious 
than trendy. 
 Lyndy's Restaurant, 924 S. Beach Blvd. (at Ball Road), Anaheim. Open daily 
from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. (714) 761-0234. JOHN PENNER 
