OTHER COMMENTARY / EXCERPTS; 
THERE WILL BE A PRICE TO PAY, BUT BY NOW THIS WAR COULDN'T BE HELPED 
It is important to know where this war came from: a deadly combination of law 
and metaphor. In the longest view of American national interests, Manuel 
Noriega was at most an irritant. From the perspective of two years ago when 
this process started, his removal from office was worth not one American life. 
By this week, however, events had altered the calculation. At the end of the 
day, for better or worse, George Bush had no choice but to do what he did. Once 
the leader of Panama had declared his country to be in a state of war with the 
United States, once he encouraged his soldiers to harass and shoot Americans in 
Panama, the U.S. position was becoming untenable. We either had get rid of 
Noriega or get out of Panama. 
The way to do it was as part of a coup, like the failed October coup. Not for 
legal or face-saving reasons, but because that would have given us a base on 
which to build a new regime. In October, the United States could have joined 
one side of a divided Panamanian army. By Wednesday, it had to defeat the 
entire Panamanian Defense Force. 
Short-term victory is clearly at hand. But the long-term consequences of having 
done it this way will be damaging. Panama is important to us for its canal. 
That canal has to be defended by a Panamanian army. That Panamanian army has 
therefore to see its main mission as defending a vital U.S. interest. How to 
ask that of an army you have just flattened? 
Nonetheless, by Wednesday, it could not be helped. There was no other way. It 
is hard to believe in 1989, a year in which four totalitarian regimes, highly 
disciplined and institutionalized, have been overthrown without a single loss 
of life, that force still has its uses. It does. Unlike the alien puppet rulers 
imposed on Eastern Europe, tyrants that do not first lose faith in their own 
right to rule respond only to the gun. And since tyrants will always be with 
us, it will be important for the United States to retain its guns long after 
the Soviet empire is a memory. 
