HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL PLAYOFFS; 
GRANADA HILLS STEAMROLLERS TAFT 
A cup of coffee at the Cafe Granada costs a buck even, sales tax included. 
During Friday night's City Section 4-A Division quarterfinal, the folks at the 
snack bar were doing a brisk business doling out the java, and not merely 
because there was a November nip in the air. 
More likely, the customers in line needed a jolt of caffeine, for without it 
the game might have put most of them to sleep by the second quarter. 
Behind the record-setting performance of running back Brett Washington, Granada 
Hills hammered Taft, 34-6, at Granada Hills. Granada Hills (10-1) will play 
Carson, a 54-0 winner over El Camino Real, in the semifinals next Friday. 
On his first carry of the night, Washington scooted 58 yards for a touchdown, 
breaking three Highlander records in the process. Washington broke Khalid Ali's 
single-season mark for rushing touchdowns (18) and touchdowns in a season (20), 
as well as Ali's career rushing mark of 1,370 yards, all set in 1986. 
Washington, who finished with 237 yards in just 13 carries and scored three 
rushing touchdowns against the Toreadors, now has 21 rushing touchdowns and 23 
overall this season, as well as 1,554 rushing yards. 
For the fourth time in Washington's three seasons on the Highlander varsity, 
Taft Coach Tom Stevenson was left to admire the 6-foot, 225-pound fullback's 
handiwork. Stevenson announced after the game that he was not returning as 
coach next season. 
"I hope I never see you again," Stevenson told Washington with a pat on the 
back and a smile moments after the game. 
And it all started with Washington's first carry. Granada Hills led, 34-0, by 
halftime. 
Washington started the landslide with his 58-yard run with 8 minutes 43 seconds 
left in the first quarter on the Highlanders' second play. Taft (7-4) then 
fumbled the ensuing kickoff, with Kyron Motton recovering at the Toreador 30. 
Five plays later, quarterback Bryan Martin (nine of 14 passes for 154 yards and 
a touchdown) scored on a two-yard keeper. 
Taft made the Highlanders work, relatively speaking, for their next score. 
Granada Hills moved 51 yards in seven plays with Washington scoring on a 
pitch-out from 14 yards for a 20-0 lead. Yet Washington's Valley forge had only 
begun. 
After Martin connected with Earl Andrews on a quick-slant pattern for a 74-yard 
score and a 27-0 lead, Taft moved to the Highlander 14. 
Quarterback Jesse Menchaca, making his first appearance in two months, fumbled 
the snap, however, and Highlander linebacker Curt Hulshizer recovered at the 
16. 
Washington then took a pitch around left end and raced untouched for an 84-yard 
touchdown and a 34-0 halftime lead. 
Granada Hills amassed 325 yards in the first half and 418 overall. 
