DRIFTER JUDGED SANE IN KILLING OF MENTAL HEALTH THERAPIST 
A Santa Monica Superior Court jury found Monday that a delusion-plagued 
homeless man was legally sane at the time he stabbed his therapist to death in 
a county mental health clinic. 
Sentencing for David Scott Smith, 27, could come as early as today but most 
likely will be postponed until early next year, said Deputy Dist. Atty. Larry 
Diamond, who prosecuted the case. 
Smith faces 26 years to life in prison for the Feb. 21, 1989, stabbing of 
Robbyn Panitch, a 36-year-old psychiatric social worker. If he had been ruled 
insane at the time of the killing, he would have been committed to a state 
mental hospital. 
"I am pleased as punch," said a relieved Gloria Panitch, the victim's mother. 
She and her husband, Allan, maintained a front-row vigil inside the courtroom 
each day of the monthlong trial. 
The Panitches had said they feared Smith would be released in a couple of years 
if he were sent to a hospital. 
"It's a big relief (because) he'll be off the streets," Gloria Panitch said. 
"We won't have to worry about another killer out there." 
Ending 2 1/2 days of deliberation, the seven-man, five-woman jury determined 
that Smith was legally sane and could distinguish right from wrong when he 
repeatedly stabbed Panitch at a small, county-operated mental clinic in Santa 
Monica. 
The sanity verdict came in the second phase of Smith's trial. He was convicted 
of first-degree murder Dec. 4. 
Smith, a diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic, told authorities he believed he was 
killing the "Antichrist." The slaying outraged the county's mental health 
community and led to calls for better security for counselors who work with 
increasing numbers of mentally disturbed transients. 
Smith's public defender, Carol Clem, had argued that the "delusions and demons" 
that tormented Smith robbed him of any capacity to understand that his actions 
were morally wrong. Two court-appointed psychiatrists testified that Smith was 
legally insane when he killed Panitch. 
But several jurors said Smith's behavior before the murder as well as 
statements he made to police, indicated he understood society's rules but chose 
not to follow them. 
While the jurors said they did not dispute that Smith is a paranoid 
schizophrenic, they decided that his ability to understand rules -- for 
example, he followed terms of probation from an earlier crime and sought help 
from authorities before killing Panitch -- showed he could distinguish right 
from wrong. 
Several jurors, who asked not to be named out of fear of Smith, said they 
focused on one of his statements in particular: "I thought I could get away 
with it," he told detectives after he was arrested. 
But they said the verdict of sanity was not easy to reach because Smith is 
clearly mentally ill. One juror said the issue almost deadlocked the panel. 
"He's messed up," the foreman, a Santa Monica engineer, said. "You can't draw a 
hard line against him. You have to have compassion. That's what made it 
difficult." 
Clem was not available for comment. She had voiced concern that the jury would 
rule against Smith out of sympathy for the victim and her family. 
