ROLE MORE THAN SKIN-DEEP FOR DAVIDOVICH 
Lolita, light of my life, fire of my loins. My sin, my soul. Lo-lee-ta ... -- 
Vladimir Nabokov, in his novel "Lolita" 
Though the voluptuous body she flaunts on screen will never be mistaken for 
that of the skinny adolescent nymphet Nabokov immortalized in his classic love 
story, Lolita Davidovich inspires that same kind of passion. 
Playing the title role in "Blaze," the story of the fiery-eyed stripper who 
stirred scandal in the bayou when she stole the heart of eccentric Louisiana 
Gov. Earl Long in 1959, Davidovich is ablaze with a sensuous mix of sex and 
sweetness that is likely to weaken the knees of grown men while simultaneously 
drumming up respect for the profession of at least this one "exotic dancer." 
"Blaze Starr was such an anachronism, that was the exciting part for me," said 
Davidovich, the unknown Canadian actress who nabbed the role that had once been 
assigned to Melanie Griffith. "Despite the world of her work, she was such a 
lady, she had such a sweetness, it was wild. That was what I had to try to 
capture. She's so much more than a stripper. 
"Every stripper had a gimmick. Her specialty was her sense of humor and she was 
always talking when she was on stage. That's what burlesque was all about, 
dating all the way back to Aristophanes. They used puns and wisecracks. She did 
it in such a good-natured way that there was nothing seedy about it. And that 
lightness and festiveness was essentially what I had to grasp." 
Davidovich also had to grow into the role, physically, adding bulk to a figure 
that would look more at home on a ballet stage than on a strip-show runway. 
"I was 20 pounds heavier when I did the movie, but obviously I don't look 
anything like that," Davidovich said, gesturing to her once-again skinny body 
and conjuring up the image of Blaze Starr's celebrated 38DD chest. "That was 
wardrobe. Those were rented." 
So, how did an actress of such lithe proportions end up being picked for the 
title role of a movie that co-stars the quintessential leading man, Paul 
Newman? When Davidovich's selection was announced early this year, over several 
well-known candidates, the one-word chorus in Hollywood was, "Who?" 
Lolita (her real name) Davidovich was born in London, Ontario, Canada, to 
Yugoslav parents. She spoke nothing but Serbian until she entered kindergarten. 
She says she is 28; a short profile in next month's Vanity Fair lists her as 
27; someone close to the casting of "Blaze" insists she is at least 30. 
What is known for certain is that the auburn-haired actress could boast of 
nothing more than one-line-of-dialogue type roles in "The Big Town" and 
"Adventures in Babysitting" when she auditioned for "Blaze." When asked what 
she had done before landing this choice part, Davidovich replied, "nothing I 
care about." 
Melanie Griffith, fresh off her Oscar nomination for "Working Girl," was 
reportedly going to play Blaze, but had to drop out when she became pregnant. 
Vicki Thomas, the film's casting director, interviewed more than 600 women and 
director Ron Shelton auditioned another 100 or so before they settled on 
Lolita. Among the other actresses considered were established stars Diane Lane 
and Virginia Madsen. 
"It was a quality of openness and straightforwardness and good-heartedness that 
came through that was clearly not being faked," said Shelton, explaining why he 
chose Davidovich. "She doesn't have a rigorous set of acting ideologies that 
you could never get past. She's open to any suggestion and interpretation. And 
she brings a kind of enthusiasm and ebullience when she walks into a room and 
that's also something you can't fake." 
Shelton said that Newman's box-office name gave him the freedom to cast an 
unknown as his co-star. He called Davidovich's performance "extraordinary," 
saying "she pulled off something that was a lot harder than she knew, and she 
did it with panache." Her only difficulty throughout the long shoot, Shelton 
said, was mustering the bravado to project her voice with the requisite wry, 
sultry confidence during the stripping scenes. 
"It was a nightmare logistically," Shelton said. "We had 300 extras, and you 
shoot it without music, yet she had to have a physical rhythm to dance to. So 
we put a wireless click track in her ear to give her a beat, and we had all 
these sailors screaming in pantomime. For her to seem at ease in that surreal 
environment is a major trick. And to do it in the second week in her first 
major movie is even a bigger trick. It's a performance." 
Davidovich, who describes herself as "reserved and very private," said she had 
no qualms about taking on such a sexy role her first time out, nor about 
exposing so much of herself on screen. For one thing, she insisted, what you 
see is more movie magic than her own body. With all the body makeup, theatrical 
costumes, padding and props, she said it was easy to hide her inhibitions and 
just let the riotous stripper side of the character roar out. 
And besides, she said, "the next time the audience sees me, I'll be a demure 
Slavic peasant or something." 
