COLUMN ONE; 
MANILA'S COUP OF ERRORS; 
THE PHILIPPINE REVOLT BEGAN WITH A MISTAKE AND UNFOLDED IN A SERIES OF 
ACCIDENTS. IT NEARLY SUCCEEDED IN TOPPLING THE GOVERNMENT ANYWAY. 
The night was quiet in Tagaytay. On a mountaintop perch known as "the palace in 
the sky," tall microwave relay towers and radar, a critical military 
communications link to the south, silently scanned the nation's most strategic 
airspace. In the distance, far below, the lights of Manila twinkled. 
Suddenly explosions rocked the air. The towers were down. It was 11:45 p.m., 
Wednesday, Nov. 29, and a military mutiny that nearly toppled President Corazon 
Aquino and plunged her government into its worst crisis had begun. 
By the time the rebellion was over in the capital Thursday, at least 83 people 
had died and 581 were wounded. The nation's economy reeled. Bomb disposal 
squads combed luxury condos for booby traps. Aquino had assumed sweeping powers 
to censor radio and TV, and take over public utilities. Her aides would not 
rule out another coup attempt. 
It never should have unfolded as it did. 
The attack on Tagaytay gave Aquino's government 24 hours' warning of the coming 
coup. Capt. Jaime Junio, whose Scout Ranger commando team dynamited the 
complex, was captured and told all. And the government did almost nothing to 
prepare. 
In coordinated strikes, renegade commandos easily captured the army and marine 
headquarters, the air force headquarters, and two other key air bases. "They 
just walked in," armed forces spokesman Brig. Gen. Oscar Florendo conceded. 
But the rebels also erred in the revolt they code-named "7 Days and 7 Nights." 
Junio attacked a day too early. Mutineers could not air pre-recorded videotaped 
victory statements after a government TV executive sabotaged the transmitters. 
Rebel field officers lost touch in a radio frequency foul-up. And 
reinforcements never arrived when there were no pilots to fly the fighter 
planes they captured at a central Philippine air base. 
Moreover, the unlikely heroes were a former German stunt man and a Department 
of Tourism official in designer glasses who won the release of hundreds of 
foreigners trapped in an urban free-fire zone, while Aquino's government and 
the White House stood helplessly by. 
It was the sixth coup attempt against Aquino, and it was her worst nightmare. 
Every armed force and every political faction that had backed previous coups 
combined in a single effort, drawing with them young, reform-minded officers 
who had never before challenged the government. Now they joined to battle a 
government they charge is ineffective in solving the nation's problems, 
tolerant of corruption and lax in pressing the war against Communist 
insurgents. 
There are idealistic followers of renegade army Lt. Col. Gregorio (Gringo) 
Honasan, now a career coup plotter and a highly regarded military strategist. 
There were well-financed and heavily armed Marcos loyalists, followers of the 
late Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos and led by rebel Brig. Gen. Jose 
Zumel. And there were politicians. Even her own vice president, Salvador H. 
Laurel, called for her to resign while his deputy, Homobono Adaza, told 
reporters he wanted to be "spokesman for the junta and we can execute some 
people." 
And money was no problem. Mutinous troops lined up during lulls in the battle 
to collect $15 a day. Battalion commanders were paid $5,000, nearly a year's 
pay for most. One officer, captured south of the capital, carried $2,500 in 
"crisp, new bills," Florendo said. 
It was a harrowing week of death and destruction, of heroism and pain. At one 
point, pro-government Pvt. Robert Salvador fired his jeep-mounted 90-millimeter 
recoilless rifle at a rebel armored personnel carrier, toppling the vehicle and 
helping to stop a pre-dawn Sunday assault on armed forces headquarters at Camp 
Aguinaldo. 
"When I looked inside, I saw five persons. All dead. And one was my older 
brother, Roger," Salvador said in a flat voice. "If I didn't kill him, he might 
kill me or my companions. It hurts, but that's the way it is in war." 
Marines Came 
The battle began in earnest at 11 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 30, a full day after 
Junio's attack on the Tagaytay towers, an hour's drive south of Manila. A 
battalion of 750 marines suddenly appeared at the Villamor Air Base, in a south 
Manila suburb, home of the main Philippine air force aerial assault forces. 
"The airport police were not prepared for them and they took over in less than 
an hour," Florendo said. As mortars roared, Brig. Gen. Loven Abadia, commander 
of Villamor's main helicopter strike wing, looked up to see a .30-caliber 
machine gun aimed his way. He jumped from his first-floor window, sprinted 
across a field and climbed a fence to escape. 
A mile away, renegade army Scout Rangers occupied Ft. Bonifacio, headquarters 
for the army and marines, taking the entire army operations general staff 
hostage. Others captured Sangley Air Base, across Manila Bay, and its aging 
T-28 fighter-bombers and Sikorsky helicopters armed with rockets. Marines 
captured the government-run television Channel 4, the station that Aquino's 
military supporters used to bring her to power in the "people power" revolution 
of February, 1986. 
It was the first time since that revolt that a coup force had taken and held 
Channel 4. So confident were the rebels that one scrawled, "We'll miss you" on 
an office portrait of Aquino. But the station director, before he fled, had 
deliberately removed the "visual exciter," a five-watt crystal that permits 
transmission. 
Shortly after daybreak Friday, rebel pilots took off in three T-28s, called 
"Tora Toras" here. Swooping low over the city, they strafed Aquino's complex at 
Malacanang Palace, shattering windows in the press room. One fired a rocket, 
hitting a coconut tree and the justice secretary's car. Government F-5 jets 
flew overhead but did not fire at the attacker. 
Brig. Gen. Edgardo Abenina, a rebel ringleader, insisted that no one wanted to 
kill Aquino. "We just wanted to scare her," he said. 
Aquino was scared. Rebels controlled her top military bases. More important, 
they controlled the skies. And the head of military logistics at armed forces 
headquarters had gone over, taking huge stores of ammunition, trucks and fuel. 
A column of 500 rebel reinforcements was headed to Manila from northern Cagayan 
province. A ship had landed 400 rebels at Mactan Air Base, 350 miles south in 
Cebu province, capturing two fighter jets, six helicopter gunships and a C-130 
transport plane. Even though their pilots had fled, it effectively cut the 
country in half. 
Shortly after noon Friday, Aquino spoke to U.S. Ambassador Nicholas Platt by 
phone and accepted President Bush's offer of help. 
It arrived 45 minutes later in the form of three U.S. Air Force F-4 Phantom 
fighter jets. They joined a squadron of Philippine F-5's and roared over the 
Sangley Air Base. While the Phantoms provided cover, the government jets 
destroyed eight planes on the ground. The F-4 cover was maintained until 6 a.m. 
Saturday. 
Most agree that the air assault stopped the rebels cold. "The greatest crime is 
we had victory in our hands," Abenina said. A U.S. Embassy official did not 
disagree. "By 1 p.m. (Friday), they had the government." 
Hanging signs out front saying "Closed for Holiday," the embassy barred its 
gates and helicoptered in 100 heavily armed U.S. Marines, who took over the 
ballroom and set up positions in the neatly tended gardens. Two aircraft 
carriers, the Enterprise and Midway, were put on alert for possible evacuation 
of Americans. 
Retaking the skies gave Aquino the upper hand. In sometimes-fierce fighting, 
government troops retook all the Manila-area bases except Ft. Bonifacio by 
Saturday night. The column from Cagayan was stopped. Fierce fighting raged in 
and around Camp Aguinaldo, nerve center of the Philippine armed forces and the 
civilian Department of Defense, but the camp held. 
If Aquino's pilots ruled the air, they didn't always use it well. One F-5 
strafed government troops behind Aguinaldo, killing six with friendly fire. A 
Sikorsky helicopter, firing at rebels from too high and too far away, instead 
rocketed a house in the ritzy White Plains subdivision. 
As their losses mounted, the rebels turned to a fallback plan. Apparently 
unnoticed, they had scouted the Makati business district and had begun storing 
caches of arms, ammunition and food. 
Makati is the showcase of Aquino's administration, a square mile of 
steel-and-glass office towers, $300,000 condominiums, and five-star hotels, 
surrounded by the most exclusive subdivisions in Manila. 
That night, the battle of Makati began. More than 400 renegade Scout Rangers 
and several members of a civilian gun club took sniper positions on rooftops 
and behind walls. For four long days, they trapped more than 2,000 foreigners 
and Filipinos as they fired bazookas, grenade launchers and machine guns 
against government troops. 
Aquino Ultimatum 
Aquino had already declared the coup crushed, and Sunday she issued an 
ultimatum to the mutinous troops: "Surrender or die," she warned. They fought 
instead. 
Bullets riddled the Japanese and British embassies. Rebel snipers in black 
berets fired from the same building as the Australian Embassy. Fires blazed 
inside The Atrium, a swanky nine-story shopping mall and office complex. Red 
Cross ambulances and a group of nuns came under fire. Red tracer bullets filled 
the sky over Forbes Park, home of top politicians, diplomats and businessmen. 
"Wednesday night at 6 p.m., it sounded like the Tet offensive," said Galen 
Radke, a former U.S. Embassy military attache who was trapped in the Olympic 
Tower. "The amount of ammunition expended in this area was fantastic." 
Inside the area's three international hotels and a dozen apartment towers, 
people cowered in fear. In the Tuscany tower, Peggy Matheson, a Norwegian 
Embassy employee, hid in the basement after shots blasted her bedroom window. 
"It went behind my maid and it ended in my bed," she said. 
In the Blanco Central Apartments, Candy Lehmann, 33, stuffed a mattress against 
the shattered window and hid in the bathroom. For four days, she rationed her 
only food: a can of litchis and a can of tuna fish. 
"I didn't have a phone," she said later, still shaking from the ordeal. "I 
didn't have electricity. I didn't have radio or TV. I didn't have food. And 
there was bombing all around." 
In the Peninsula Hotel, staff closed the pool Saturday. Public rooms were shut 
Sunday. The bars closed Monday. At 6 a.m. Tuesday, with a firefight raging 
outside, the 620 guests were herded into a dining room without windows. They 
slept there that night, curling up on the carpet. 
"They fed us and gave us free beer the last couple of days," said Dr. Harry 
Richardson, a Canadian physician who had been at the Peninsula to speak at the 
Philippine Congress on Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. The conference was 
canceled. 
President Bush telephoned Aquino to check on trapped Americans. Japanese, West 
German, British and other officials also called, putting tremendous pressure on 
the beleaguered Philippine president. "I've never gotten so many calls," she 
told aides. 
Relief came from an unlikely source. Acting on his own, Rafael Alunan, 
Philippine Department of Tourism undersecretary in charge of public assistance, 
broadcast an appeal for an evacuation of tourists and his phone number on radio 
stations DZRH and DZMM at midnight Monday. 
"We are here to ensure the safety, comfort and convenience of tourists from the 
time they arrive to the time they leave," Alunan said, when asked to explain 
his role. "There were tourists trapped and it was our job to get them out." 
He repeated his radio appeal at 3 a.m., and again at 6 a.m. 
"Then someone called me probing," Alunan said. He called his friend and 
sky-diving instructor, Max Motchmann. The former German paratrooper and movie 
stunt man knew many of the rebel leaders from their parachute jumps together. 
Soon Motchmann got a call. 
Talking to rebel Lt. Col. Rafael Galvez by phone, Alunan and Motchmann arranged 
to send buses into Makati early Tuesday to evacuate the tourists. But the plan 
collapsed when heavy firing broke out. At 3:45 that afternoon, they tried 
another tack. 
Motchmann donned a seven-pound vest of body armor thick enough to stop machine 
gun bullets. Alunan shed his sport coat. Together with a national police 
colonel, they jogged nearly a mile through Makati's eerily deserted high-rise 
canyons, dashing for cover or dropping to the street as shots came their way. 
When they reached the rebel stronghold at the Inter-Continental Hotel, 
Motchmann offered packs of Hope and Marlboro cigarettes to Galvez and Maj. 
Abraham Puruggunan. As the fiercest fire fight yet blazed outside, they talked 
in the ballroom for nearly an hour. 
"No politics," said Motchmann. "Just sky-diving and how to get these people 
out." 
The agreement was simple. A cease-fire began at 2:30 a.m. Wednesday, although 
one rebel was shot to death two hours later as he stood behind the Twin Towers 
condominiums. His barefoot body still lay on the steps six hours later. 
By 7 a.m., the first buses filed slowly past the burned-out buses and 
shell-pocked fire engines that had barricaded fashionable Ayala Avenue. By the 
time Motchmann had checked each building that afternoon, only a few stragglers 
remained. 
"There was one Arab, but the maid was afraid to wake him up," Motchmann said. 
"Others were born again. They said they weren't afraid." 
It didn't matter. Government negotiators had stepped in. By midnight, the 
rebels had agreed to return to barracks. And shortly after dawn Thursday, they 
did, 418 renegade troops marching four-abreast in formation, singing and 
carrying their weapons along Ayala Avenue behind a waving Philippine flag. 
Many Questions 
For now, there are more questions than answers. The rebels are under guard at 
Ft. Bonifacio and no one says how or if they will be punished. President Aquino 
must try to repair her credibility at home and abroad. Her military is deeply 
divided. The economy faces a flight of foreign investment. And with up to half 
of the original rebels and most of their leaders still at large, another coup 
threatens. 
But the week of war in the Philippines had an especially bitter price for Pvt. 
Salvador, the 25-year-old government soldier who shot his own brother. 
"I couldn't do anything," he said, sitting on his mother's couch beside a 
twinkling Christmas tree. "He turned left. I turned right. I did my job. I had 
no idea my brother was inside (the vehicle)." 
