ONLY IN L.A. 
The DWP Board of Commissioners meets today but one member -- Mike Gage -- won't 
be there. The ex-deputy mayor, who will soon begin moonlighting as a 
reporter/commentator for KNBC, is in Marion, Iowa, attending a school for 
television reporters. 
Don't forget to smile at the camera, Mike! 
Back to you, Kelly and John. 
Take two aspirins and hold the anchovies: 
Joe Ortega of L.A. discovered to his surprise that, grouped with the hospitals 
in the Spanish-language Yellow pages for the San Gabriel Valley, is a 
high-calorie health-care alternative (see photo). 
A Hollywood Christmas Carol: 
Several years ago, Michael Attie says that his "peaceful meditations in a 
Japanese Zen temple were interrupted by a shocking telegram." His father had 
died and Attie inherited the family business, a lingerie shop on Hollywood 
Blvd. 
As Attie tells it, "My real desire in life was to become a priest and run a 
temple. . . . I've tried to convert the store into a sort of 'lingerie temple.' 
I am a lingerie monk." 
Each holiday season, he becomes a lingerie Santa. On Friday at 2 p.m., he'll 
hand out 100 free Christmas trees in front of his store, Playmates of 
Hollywood, at Hollywood and Wilcox. It really tugs at your G-strings, er, heart 
strings, doesn't it? 
Speaking of high-strung: 
John McEnroe, the scourge of tennis linesmen, tangled with some airlinesmen 
Wednesday. 
Flying from L.A. with his family and nanny, the Macs missed a connection in San 
Francisco, and he had words with two United Airlines agents. Some bumping 
apparently ensued on both sides, an airport policeman said. 
McEnroe was escorted to airport police headquarters for further talks, and 
released 45 minutes later with no charges filed. 
One last note about the old "pest farm" at Chavez Ravine, which we mentioned 
last week. The hospital for contagious-disease victims, which closed around 
1930, existed not on the present site of Dodger Stadium but in the area now 
occupied by the Naval and Marine Corps Reserve Center, writes Naval Cmdr. James 
Pettit. 
Sports were not unknown to the area prior to the Dodgers' arrival. Pettit 
enclosed an article written for a historical society that spoke of 19th-Century 
Angelenos attending bullfights and cockfights there "as well as bull- and 
bear-baitings for entertainment." 
Can't buy them love: 
The Lakewood Chamber of Commerce has reduced the price of its "I Lakewood" 
buttons from $1 to 50 cents apiece. 
miscelLAny: 
Uncle Milton Industries Inc. of Culver City is the world's largest seller of 
ant farms, having peddled more than 12 million since 1956. That works out to 
about 360 million ants, give or take a few escapees. 
