BUYING AND SELLING U.S. LICENSES TO POLLUTE AIR; 
ENVIRONMENT: THE PRESIDENT'S CLEAN AIR BILL WOULD MAKE SMOG CONTROL A PROFIT 
OPPORTUNITY RATHER THAN SIMPLY A REGULATORY BURDEN. 
Josh Margolis is pushing hard to close the deal. Working the telephone, he 
talks prices, wheedles a bit, pitching his product like a broker of pork 
bellies or penny stocks. 
Except the product Margolis peddles is more unusual than those -- it's a 
license to pollute the atmosphere. His firm, AER*X, brings together companies 
seeking to buy and sell government entitlements that allow them to dirty the 
air up to a point -- a valuable commodity in urban areas with strict limits on 
new sources of industrial emissions. 
So far, Margolis' matchmaking has been limited to a small class of polluters. 
But if the Bush Administration gets its way with a series of free-market 
proposals to clean up the nation's smog and acid rain, Margolis' 
Washington-based firm could be headed for the big time. 
The President's clean air bill proposes to radically restructure the way 
industrial polluters have been regulated for the past 20 years. Instead of the 
"thou shalt" system, in which industry is commanded how much to cut its 
emissions and exactly how to achieve those reductions, a system of incentives 
and deadlines would be substituted, allowing firms to select whatever methods 
they consider most cost-effective to meet general pollution goals. 
At the heart of the system would be something called the "emission reduction 
credit." Every ton of pollution that industry manages to cut beyond its 
assigned limit would become a marketable asset -- a credit -- to be banked for 
expansion at some later time or to be sold to the highest bidder. 
Rather than simply a regulatory burden, pollution control would become a profit 
opportunity. And that's where Margolis comes in. 
"It's amazing what you can achieve if you speak to a company's bottom line," 
Margolis said. "There's water in the desert if you give someone the incentive 
to find it." 
Take the Bush proposal on acid rain. It would set annual limits on emissions of 
acid-producing pollutants by the nation's dirtiest power plants, forcing 
substantial cutbacks. But each utility would be free to choose how to achieve 
the limits. 
Those located close to supplies of low-sulfur coal in Western states, for 
example, might choose to burn the cleaner fuels. Others might choose to install 
antipollution technology. A few might decide to buy credits from more efficient 
utilities. In each case, presumably, the utility would be guided by an 
overriding principle -- to attain the necessary pollution control at the lowest 
overall cost. 
Not everyone likes the notion of pollution as a property right or an asset, 
rather than a social evil to be vanquished. "It sends the wrong message," said 
Casey Padgett of Environmental Action. The patchwork of industry decisions that 
would result from such a system, he argued, could also complicate regulation. 
Moreover, some industry officials fear that companies would hoard their credits 
or charge exorbitant prices for them, freezing out new competitors and creating 
monopolies. 
A dirty generating plant, for example, might reduce its emissions not only 
enough to reach its limits but also to surpass them, earning credits that could 
be traded for cash. Across town, meanwhile, an industrial competitor, such as a 
power co-generation company that sells steam captured in electricity 
production, might decide to add another facility. 
That new facility -- even if it were state-of-the-art clean -- would still add 
small amounts of new pollutants to the atmosphere and so would be required to 
buy some credits from someone. 
But the utility sitting there with extra pollution credits might refuse to 
sell, on the theory that the better strategy is to keep out a low-cost 
competitor rather than add a bit of extra cash to one quarter's bottom line. 
"It could translate into a no-growth environmental bill because utilities won't 
sell those (credits)," warned John Foster, a lawyer for several power 
co-generation companies in the Northeast. 
Still, it is the marriage of profit and pollution control envisioned in the 
Bush bill that unites many traditionally warring parties in the clean-air 
debate and buoys prospects for its passage after 12 years of congressional 
stalemate and steadily worsening air quality. 
The free-market strategy appeals to conservative Republicans in the White House 
and Congress who want to "let industry do what industry does best -- create 
profits," said Robert Hahn, until recently senior staff economist for the 
President's Council of Economic Advisers and author of the free-market 
proposals. 
And for strong clean-air advocates like Dan Dudek, an economist with the 
Environmental Defense Fund, the plan offers a promising tool to "get more stuff 
out of the air sooner." 
Dudek, who advised White House drafters of the bill, said the old regulatory 
strategy ignores how companies operate in a competitive environment and how 
they limit their pollution costs by exploiting whatever natural business 
advantages they have, such as access to particular fuels or natural resources, 
or the idiosyncrasies of a particular state's utility rate regulation. 
The old system, Dudek argued, does little to encourage initiative or innovation 
on the part of companies. "Human beings don't like being told what to do, 
especially by bureaucrats at some distant location," he said. 
Dudek also makes the point that, by prescribing a specific piece of equipment 
to achieve a specific rate of plant emission, environmental laws have, up to 
now, removed the incentive to cut pollution beyond the prescribed level. 
By forcing companies to view pollution control purely as a business cost, he 
said, companies have less incentive to use it as a point of competitive 
advantage. 
"If we make firms take account of the atmosphere through the economic system, 
but leave them to do it, that will change behavior radically," said Dudek. "It 
gives them reason to think of environmental quality as a profit opportunity." 
The free-market ideas permeate the Bush bill. One provision is designed to cut 
smog-producing hydrocarbons by placing limits on the amount of gasoline vapors 
that escape into the air during smoggy summer months. 
Oil companies could use any mixture of fuels, including non-gasoline 
alternatives, so long as they achieved equivalent reductions of hydrocarbons. 
Another would expand the existing system of credits for extraordinary 
reductions in the six most common pollutants for which standards have been set 
by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
But perhaps the furthest-reaching provision is the proposed nationwide cap on 
acid-rain-causing sulfur dioxide at 1980 levels after the year 2000, the 
section of the Bush bill most dependent on the workings of a trading system. 
Under the proposal, 107 utilities -- chiefly in the Midwest and Southeast -- 
would be allowed to generate certain levels of sulfur dioxide every year based 
on the amount of electricity they generate. Utilities would own those 
"allowances" even if they closed a plant or slashed emissions below required 
levels, and they could sell them any time after 1995. 
After the year 2000, utilities in growing areas seeking to meet increased 
electricity demand would buy them from a utility located in a slower-growing 
area. 
Such free-market approaches to regulation have been discussed for years in 
academic circles. But they found little political support because of the innate 
distrust that environmentalists had of industry and the difficulties of 
monitoring corporate performance. 
But in 1976, the concept quietly slipped through the back door of government. 
That year Paul DeFalco, the EPA's top official in California, faced a crisis. 
Los Angeles was violating nearly every standard for pollution set by the EPA. 
But companies kept pressing to move into the area to set up new plants and 
facilities or expand ones that were already there. 
The solution: DeFalco required that every ton of new pollution put into the Los 
Angeles air would have to be offset by at least a ton of reductions somewhere 
else in the region. The responsibility to find and guarantee the offset fell to 
the new polluter. 
Other polluted cities picked up the offset concept, and it soon became a 
national regulation applied to new, large industries emitting at least 100 tons 
per year of the six most common pollutants. Variations on the same regulatory 
principle have been dubbed the "bubble" policy and pollution "netting." 
In every case, the right to pollute is a marketable commodity, and while the 
traffic is confined to large polluters of just six substances, Margolis stays 
busy serving as chief broker at AER*X, the only company that trades emissions 
credits nationwide. 
AER*X, with revenue now in excess of $1 million a year, reports its volume of 
brokered trades has been growing at more than 30% a year. It has already put 
together 50 deals since 1984, usually taking a 15% commission on each trade. 
A staff of eight, including engineers, economists and a public policy 
specialist, works out of offices in downtown Washington. Another two engineers 
run the company's branch in Santa Monica. 
AER*X attracts firms looking to buy and sell credits largely by word of mouth, 
supplemented by occasional ads in newspapers and trade journals. Once a 
potential client is identified, AER*X engineers examine the books and inspect 
plant technology to find a better way of controlling pollution. 
For sellers, it can result in more credits to offer. For buyers, it can mean 
fewer credits to pay for. "We have a real incentive to be pollution gold 
miners," said AER*X President John Palmisano. 
One of last year's clients was a large fiberglass products company in Southern 
California that cut its emissions of hydrocarbons by nearly 1,000 pounds per 
day -- a reduction of more than 50% -- by altering its manufacturing process. 
In search of a buyer, Margolis combed an official list of firms seeking to 
expand or open new facilities in the area and tapped the network of real estate 
developers, engineers and lawyers known to represent expansion-minded 
industries. 
The credits were finally sold to a sewage treatment plant for $1,250 a pound 
per day. 
Margolis was pursuing another California deal recently, cradling the phone in 
the crook of his neck as he scanned a large wall map of Los Angeles dotted by 
pastel flags-yellow for sellers, pink for buyers. 
"It's just a matter of getting these guys off the dime," he said. 
