MCELROY PONDERS HIS FOOTBALL FUTURE; 
RAIDERS: THREE VETERANS HAVE CLOUDY STATUS GOING INTO FINAL REGULAR-SEASON GAME 
SUNDAY AGAINST THE NEW YORK GIANTS. 
An era is passing before our eyes. 
Remember the 11th-hour deal in 1983, when Al Davis hornswoggled the New England 
Patriots out of Mike Haynes and paired him with Lester Hayes to form the finest 
cornerback tandem the game had ever seen? 
Hayes is gone and likely up to Chapter Eight in "Coach Davis and Other Geniuses 
I Have Known," his soon-to-be-published autobiography. 
Haynes departs Sunday in a rare on-the-field appearance. An injury to Russell 
Carter and a dearth of experienced cornerbacks means that at least he can go 
out with his cleats on. 
Now, remember 1982, their first season in Los Angeles, when rookies Marcus 
Allen and Vann McElroy tangled daily in camp? 
Allen may be playing his last Raider game Sunday. He wants out, and Davis 
wouldn't mind letting him out. 
McElroy? 
Let's just say the Raiders have had him in their cross-hairs since training 
camp, when he suffered a hip injury and wasn't allowed to practice until he 
signed an addendum to his contract, consenting to take about $10,000 less than 
was due him for any game he missed because of injury. 
After that, he tore a hamstring in Game 4. Eligible to return after Game 10, he 
was held out until Game 13, a saving to the club of another $30,000. 
McElroy now is on the kickoff team and plays sporadically on defense. 
Color another great Raider career silver, black and almost over. 
"I came into training camp, and, basically, I think the intention there was to 
replace me," McElroy said. 
"I had a minor injury there and I couldn't practice until I signed that 
particular deal. There was nothing I could do. I was on the 
physically-unable-to-perform list, and that's a list where you're kind of 
stuck. You're in limbo because you don't get paid. They can leave you on that 
for the rest of your life. 
"I was totally surprised. It's not like I hadn't done anything in the past." 
Maybe he shouldn't have been surprised. A two-time Pro Bowler, in 1983 and '84, 
and an alternate as late as '86, McElroy missed four games with injuries in 
'88. Davis had liked the speedier Eddie Anderson since the day in 1986 when he 
showed up with the strike team. 
When McElroy was injured this season, Anderson broke into the lineup 
spectacularly. He has five interceptions, two returned for touchdowns. 
On the other hand, he is no match for McElroy as a leader and coordinator. 
But then, the Raiders don't care. Strong safety Mike Harden now calls defensive 
signals. 
Thus, McElroy sat . . . and sat . . . and sat. 
"When I played this season, I was graded basically as the top defensive back," 
he said. "Everyone was saying, 'Man, you're back, you're playing Pro Bowl 
football, you're playing great.' All this stuff. 
"Then, all of a sudden, I get this partially torn hamstring, and nothing's ever 
said to me again. No one tells me anything. Then I come back in six weeks and 
I'm eligible. I'm ready to play, completely healthy, and, basically, the idea 
is, 'Well, we're just going to sort of leave you there.' 
"Nothing was ever said. I was never told anything really by anybody in that 
period of time. I would ask and ask and ask. 
"It's tough. You're in a situation when you've been elected captain. I was 
trying to fill a role here, too. I didn't want to develop an attitude, be a 
problem and start stirring up a bunch of trouble. 
"Basically, I just kind of sat back, made all the meetings, practiced hard, did 
all I was supposed to do, made them fully aware of the fact I was ready to 
play. 
"I don't want to get into a big controversy now. It's the last game of the 
season. It's a big game for this team. Let the focus be on the game we have to 
play. This is a huge game for this organization, in my opinion." 
The remarkable thing about this story is that the Raiders always prided 
themselves on taking care of their own. People who crossed them or held out, 
such as Allen; or sued them, such as Bill Lewis, did so at their own peril. 
But McElroy didn't. The minister's kid from Uvalde, Tex., remains the same 
leave-my-heart-on-your-doorstep performer he has always been. 
"This game has really been my life," McElroy said. "You just ask my wife. I 
live this game from morning till late at night. I go home and, if I'm not 
watching film, I'm thinking about different things in the game. During the 
season, I'm just so wrapped up. During the off-season, I work my butt off, just 
trying to be the type of player they expect me to be and have been. 
"When Art (Shell) was picked as head coach, man, I was so fired up because I 
felt the team was going to start in the direction of the old Raiders. Man, that 
was exciting! Just the little things he did right off the bat. It became fun. 
We started winning again in the Raider style. That was really hard. I was so 
excited for him. 
"I've had so much respect for the organization, for the people who have been 
here before us, for my teammates. 
"I mean, I'll go out there and I may not do it right every time, but if 
somebody's in a fight or somebody's going down, I'll be the first guy to be 
there at their backs. 
"I really don't think I'll be back. I'd like to be, but I just don't foresee 
it. If I'm going to be treated the way I've been treated, I don't want to be. 
"You look at a guy like Marcus Allen, who's given his life to this team. You 
look at guys like Matt Millen, Bill Pickel. Those are guys who really live and 
die this stuff. They've given nothing but their all to this team and this 
organization." 
McElroy has one more game to give his all to the Raiders. 
Then, we'll see where the shakeout takes them all -- Haynes, Allen, McElroy, 
the franchise. 
Raider Notes 
Defensive end Howie Long, who didn't start until the seventh game of the 
season, is the only Raider Pro Bowl selection, behind AFC starters Bruce Smith 
of Buffalo and Lee Williams of San Diego. Long has made the Pro Bowl six times 
since 1983, missing only last year when a calf injury cost him half the season. 
Said Long: "I'm most proud of the fact that I got it in my mind that I was just 
going to suck it up and do everything I possibly could do -- not necessarily 
pointed in the direction of the Pro Bowl, just to play." 
Coach Art Shell protested the passing-over of running back Bo Jackson, 
linebacker Greg Townsend and wide receiver Mervyn Fernandez. "I think if you 
take a guy like Bo, you put him up there with the rest of those guys that made 
it and you ask each player which guy would you rather have, I'm sure 99% would 
say Bo. . . . I've always felt that it was great when the coaches voted for the 
Pro Bowl (rather than the players, who do it now). The coaches around the 
league know the players better than the players do. That's my personal 
opinion." 
