JURY WEIGHING ISSUES IN RARE ZEBRA SKINS CASE; 
WILDLIFE: A SAFARI LEADER IS BEING TRIED FOR BRINGING THE HIDES TO THE UNITED 
STATES, WHERE THE SALE OF SUCH PELTS FROM THE THREATENED SPECIES IS ILLEGAL. 
A federal court jury in Los Angeles was asked to decide Wednesday whether a 
South African safari tour leader illegally imported nine skins from a rare and 
threatened species of zebra and tried to peddle them in Orange County. 
The prosecution contends that Wallace Charles Venter, 37, knew it was illegal 
to sell the Hartmann's Mountain Zebra skins in the United States and had 
written a letter to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service saying that the skins 
were not intended for sale. 
But in August and September, Venter placed two classified ads in the Orange 
County Register offering to sell zebra hides for up to $1,900, according to 
documents prepared by the prosecution. An anonymous reader called Fish &amp; 
Wildlife to complain, and Venter was arrested in September after he allegedly 
sold one of the skins to an undercover agent. 
Venter's attorney, Morton H. Boren, said Venter leads safari tours in South 
Africa and came to the United States "to see if he could drum up business." 
Boren said Venter did not sell the skin but was merely using it as collateral 
while he arranged the sale of other, legally imported skins. Venter thought 
that transaction was perfectly legal, Boren said. 
"The law is really confused," Boren said. "He honestly believed it was OK for 
him to use one or two of these skins for collateral. . . . If he was going to 
sell these skins illegally, he would just sell them and split." 
Venter is charged with importing nine skins for sale, selling one skin, and 
making a false statement to a government official, Boren said. 
The U.S. government considers the Hartmann's Mountain Zebra a "threatened" 
species, which means that it is likely to become an endangered species within 
the foreseeable future. 
Unlike the common black-and-white zebra, the Hartmann's zebra is brown and buff 
colored and has an unusual pattern of cross-bar stripes. At last count in 1985, 
there were only 7,000 of the animals left in Southwest Africa and neighboring 
Angola. 
Boren said Venter's zebra hides were taken with the approval of South African 
authorities as part of a drought cull. 
"The herd was too big for the water supply, so they captured and destroyed 40 
to 60 of them," Boren said. The skins were sold to a tannery, which sold them 
to a friend of Venter's, who asked Venter to bring them to the United States, 
he said. 
"And he thought, 'Well, if Americans can buy them there, when I'm in America 
why don't I see about taking orders for them in South Africa, with all the 
(proper) documents,' " Boren explained. 
Federal law forbids importing threatened species for commercial activities, 
including their sale, but it does allow tourists to bring the skins home for 
their own personal and non-commercial use. 
Assistant U.S. Atty. John S. Wiley Jr. would not comment on the case as the 
jury was deliberating Wednesday. 
But according to the prosecution's memorandum, Venter had begun trying to sell 
the skins even before they were brought to Los Angeles on Aug. 29. 
Dressed in his safari suit and speaking with a noticeable accent, Venter 
visited a Fish and Wildlife Service office and picked up information about 
wildlife-import regulations, and placed several calls to the department on Aug. 
1, the memo said. 
The first newspaper ad, which began appearing on Aug. 26, said, "African Games 
Skins, zebra, Springbok Etc. $50," followed by a Long Beach-area telephone 
number. The second ad offered "Zebra skins, $1,900," the memo said. 
On about Aug. 30, a 27-year-old Yorba Linda man called Venter and asked about 
buying the skins. 
"He had a real heavy accent, South African," said Donald K. Augustine, who was 
called to testify at the trial. "We joked about the problems over in South 
Africa. He was a nice man, he really was, considering . . . " 
Augustine said that Venter promised to bring the skins to his office in Orange 
for examination. Augustine said he had friends who had brought zebra skins back 
from safaris and had no idea that the skins Venter was selling belonged to a 
threatened species. 
"He had to know it was illegal," Augustine said in an interview Wednesday. 
"I asked him, 'Is this legal?' and he said 'Yeah.' I said, 'You've got 
permission?' He said, 'Yeah.' " 
But Venter never showed up for the appointment and Augustine dropped the matter 
until federal prosecutors found his telephone number among Venter's papers and 
called him to testify. 
When the skins arrived in Los Angeles, a customs inspector thought the shipment 
was unusual and asked for a notarized affidavit from Venter that they were for 
personal and not commercial use, the memo said. 
Venter did write a letter saying that the skins were purchased by a man named 
Sidowski, and that five would be used to decorate Sidowski's house and the 
other four would be used by Venter as a backdrop for photographs to promote his 
safari business, the prosecution's memo said. 
The letter added, "There is no intention of selling them." 
When customs officials opened the crate, they found the zebra skins as well as 
a stuffed Nile crocodile, which is an endangered species that is not permitted 
in this country under any circumstances, the memo said. 
The crocodile was seized, but prosecutors could not locate Sidowski and are not 
sure whether such a person exists, the memo said. 
The zebra skins were shown to the jury and introduced into evidence. In his 
closing statement, Boren said that the jury should not be swayed by their 
emotions toward killing wildlife, but should focus strictly on the legal issues 
involved. The case is being heard by U.S. District Court Judge William D. 
Keller. 
