MICHIGAN STATE TAKES ON NATIVES; 
ALOHA BOWL: NO. 22 SPARTANS FACE NO. 25 RAINBOWS IN HAWAII ON CHRISTMAS DAY. 
Michigan State's strength and Hawaii's speed make the Aloha Bowl a tossup, 
Spartan Coach George Perles said. 
No. 22 Michigan State (7-4) plays No. 25 Hawaii (9-2-1) Christmas Day (12:30 
p.m. PST, Ch. 7) in a game that pits a Big Ten Conference power against the 
wide-open offense and tenacious defense of a Western Athletic Conference 
contender. 
"We're a little bit bigger on the line than some of their people -- not all of 
them," Perles said. "They're a little quicker. So it's a wash." 
"That's why they're calling it an intriguing matchup," Hawaii Coach Bob Wagner 
said. 
The Spartans are seven-point favorites, but Perles said his team is not paying 
attention to oddsmakers. 
"If we don't win the football game, it's not going to be because of the 
weather, it's not going to be because of the time zone, it's not going to be 
because of distractions," Perles said. "It's going to be because the University 
of Hawaii is a better football team." 
Michigan State, making its fifth bowl appearance in six years, brings a 
seasoned team. Its losses were all to nationally ranked teams -- Notre Dame, 
Miami (Fla.), Michigan and Illinois. It lost those games by 21 points. 
All-American linebacker Percy Snow, winner of the Lombardi and Butkus awards, 
anchors the Michigan State defense. 
The Spartans allowed 13.6 points -- least in the Big Ten and sixth best in the 
nation. They ranked 11th in the nation in total defense, allowing 285.2 yards, 
and 11th against the rush with 100.8 yards. 
The Spartans are intimidating on offense as well, with All-American left tackle 
Bob Kula leading a line averaging 281 pounds. Behind them, tailback Blake Ezor 
averaged 124 yards, seventh best in the nation. 
Hawaii's "spread" offense, a run-and-shoot passing attack and option running 
game, should keep the Rainbows from having to run into the full force of 
Michigan State's stunt 4-3 defense. 
"I think we'll do all right because overall they're probably a bit larger than 
us, but I don't think they have the team speed or quickness we do," slot back 
Dane McArthur said. "It will be a real thinking game for our offense." 
The Rainbows, making their first bowl appearance, were fifth in the nation in 
scoring offense, with 38 points. They scored 60 points or more against three 
opponents and 56 in a rout of then-No. 18 Brigham Young. 
Garrett Gabriel finished 11th in the nation in passing efficiency. Running back 
Jamal Farmer, who won WAC newcomer and freshman of the year honors, set an NCAA 
record for most touchdowns by a freshman with 18. He gained 986 yards, 242 in 
Hawaii's season finale against Air Force. 
"It's like playing two teams," Perles said. "Normally a team that plays the 
option doesn't throw the ball well and vice versa. They do both, and that's why 
they have such an outstanding record." 
Hawaii led the WAC and was sixth in the nation in rushing defense, allowing an 
average of 96 yards. The Rainbows also led the WAC in total defense (320.2 
yards) and scoring defense (20.7 points). 
Although outsized by Michigan State's line, Hawaii's quickness could also be a 
factor on defense. 
"I think we can match up with our speed," rover back David Maeva said. "We have 
to use that to our advantage." 
Hawaii will be without All-WAC nose guard Dana Directo, who suffered a 
herniated disk in his back. 
