POP MUSIC; 
KENNY G GIVES LONG-WINDED PERFORMANCE AT AMPHITHEATRE 
"The world's greatest living saxophonist . . . Kenny G!" 
 Incredibly, that was singer Michael Bolton's description of his partner during 
Friday's opening program of the duo's eight-night run at Universal 
Amphitheatre. 
But if Bolton's characterization seemed effusive in the extreme, it was no more 
overblown than the performance itself, which started late and ran on, 
interminably, past midnight. 
Kenny G -- as he bills himself -- is clearly not an artist who has yet 
discovered the mature creative values of economy and conciseness. Every piece 
featured the same extended saxophone solos, variously on alto, tenor and 
soprano, all assembled from the same repetitious blues licks. 
With rare exception, the numbers all fell into similar patterns -- soft 
ensemble chording on the ballads, funk-driven rhythms on the tempo tunes -- and 
the soloing was interchangeable from one piece to another. 
G has discovered a growing fondness for the spotlight, and one that has 
flourished considerably since his last appearance in the area. Brief features 
for the members of his back-up ensemble were the only moments when the focus 
moved away from the saxophonist. And even then he appeared reluctant to leave 
center stage. 
Bassist Vail Johnson and guitarist John Raymond, for example, were obliged to 
share the opening part of their features via duets with G. Raymond's skills, 
modest at most, demanded no more space than they got. But Johnson, an 
explosively energetic performer, burst out of his exchanges with G into a 
colorful, stage-stalking, rhythm stomping solo that gave the saxophonist all 
the competition he could handle. A duet between drummer Bruce Carter and 
percussionist Ron Powell was too truncated to allow either performer to stretch 
out, and keyboardist Robert Damper had little opportunity to do anything other 
than solid support work. 
There was plenty of time, however, for G to stretch out. Twice he took 
long-winded solo excursions through the audience -- a pied piper with a 
portable microphone. Several numbers were dominated by the trickery of circular 
breathing techniques, which allowed him to hold notes and play patterns for 
seemingly impossible lengths of time. Others featured rapid-fire fingering that 
made his line sound as though it was being played by two instruments. 
But it was all circus stuff -- the kind of technical gimmickry most 
professional saxophonists learn early and quickly abandon in favor of richer 
forms of expression. Like the bar-walking saxophonists of the '50s and the 
heavy-metal lead guitarists who are his real models, G appeared more concerned 
with theater, with impression, with appearance, than with enriching the content 
of his music. 
Most of the program, in fact, had a prepackaged quality. G's exchanges with the 
audience -- overflowing with determinedly ingenuous nice guy smiles and "Oh 
wow, this is so fun!" and "I wish I could ask you all a bunch of questions, but 
I don't know what to say!" commentary -- sounded exactly like his remarks 
during last year's performances. 
Only Michael Bolton's opening set was different, enlarged no doubt due to his 
increased visibility as a solo artist. But his blue-eyed soul style -- 
especially on a classic like Otis Redding's "Sittin' on the Dock of the Bay" -- 
is an acquired taste, and one which requires almost complete ignorance of the 
more fruitful sources upon which it is based. 
Kenny G and Michael Bolton continue at the Amphitheatre tonight and Wednesday 
through Saturday. All performances except the final one are sold out. 
