COMEDY CHANNEL, HA! TO MERGE; 
CABLE TV: THE COMBINED EFFORT, WHICH WILL GO INTO EFFECT EARLY NEXT YEAR, WILL 
REACH 15 MILLION HOMES. 
Two all-comedy cable services that have battled each other since April Fool's 
Day said today they are ending their war of the chuckles and merging into a 
single cable network called Comedy TV. 
Home Box Office's The Comedy Channel, begun in November, 1989, and MTV 
Networks' HA! The Comedy Network, on the air since April 1, will start their 
merged service early next year, company officials said. 
Each is a 24-hour operation, and each has faced difficulties getting onto cable 
systems due to a shortage of available channels. 
They made it official less than than a month after two proposed rival cable 
services devoted to law -- In Court and American Courtroom Network -- also said 
they would merge into one service called American Courtroom Network. 
Time Warner Inc., which had hoped to launch one of the all-law networks, owns 
HBO. 
The Comedy Channel is seen in 8.5 million homes. HA!, whose parent company is 
owned by Viacom International Inc., is in 6.5 million homes. Their union will 
give the new service 15 million homes, they said. 
All-sports ESPN serves the most cable homes, 55.9 million, followed by Turner's 
Cable News Network, which serves 54.4 million. 
The advertiser-supported Comedy TV Network that will result from HA! and The 
Comedy Channel will be a 50-50 venture, with a programming lineup drawn from 
each network, the two companies said. 
Each network will continue its respective operations until the new service 
begins "in early 1991," HBO said. 
The president of the new network will be recruited from outside the two 
companies, and the new network will be staffed by HA! and The Comedy Channel 
employees. 
HBO Chairman Michael Fuchs, in a statement, said the merged comedy service "is 
not only a very positive move for both companies, but should have a salutary 
effect on the cable industry as a whole." 
About 12 new cable services plan start-ups in coming months, according to Erica 
Gruen, a cable analyst at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising. 
