THE BOOK TRADE: THE DECADE OF THE MASS-MARKET HARDCOVER 
The collective murmur at the end of this strange year and decade in publishing 
climbed straight out of Lewis Carroll. 
"Curiouser and curiouser," people throughout the industry were remarking. For 
the most part, their comments were not accompanied by optimistic smiles. 
The final few weeks of 1989 seemed to reflect the turbulence of the entire 10 
years. One publishing executive, heading off to a holiday party, wryly summed 
it up when he suggested that these days, you couldn't be too sure. What was 
billed as a festive gathering just might turn out to be another corporate 
beheading. 
Consider the infamous Halloween Massacre, where a roomful of E. P. Dutton 
editors and other employees learned that their jobs had been eliminated along 
with Dutton's entire adult trade (mainstream fiction and nonfiction) division. 
As fast as anyone in the room could say "trick or treat," the 137-year-old 
operation became an imprint within Penguin USA. 
At Random House, Robert L. Bernstein closed the year with the stunning 
announcement that he would leave the company he had headed for 23 years. 
Whether Bernstein's departure was entirely voluntary or was encouraged by the 
Newhouse family, which owns Random House, remained a matter of speculation. 
Within weeks, Alberto Vitale, president and chief executive of Bantam Doubleday 
Dell, was named to replace Bernstein. 
If Bernstein had been regarded, as one top executive from another house put it, 
as "a man of letters," Vitale was hailed as a money man -- "a guy," said this 
executive, "who can wield an ax and bring order into a situation of confusion." 
Money might be an unacceptable topic at refined dinner parties, but in the 
1980s, publishing was in a kind of revolution. And as Chairman Mao so 
succinctly reminded us, a revolution is not a dinner party. 
"Never forget that this is a business and not the Library of Congress," Stuart 
Applebaum, one of Vitale's former colleagues at Bantam Doubleday Dell, said. 
Just before Thanksgiving, Simon &amp; Schuster revealed that it would declare a 
$140-million pretax write-off -- translation: a hefty loss -- this year. Simon 
&amp; Schuster is this country's largest book publisher. 
Many in the industry said the year had been marked not only by 
disproportionately large advances but by record returns to publishers of unsold 
books. For books that were in the large-advance category, print runs that 
turned out to be excessive made these returns particularly painful. 
Coming as they did on the heels of a series of major corporate consolidations 
and takeovers, the events of late 1989 did seem to rattle what had until then 
been a general mood of confidence. 
"At the moment, I think they are all having the same kind of nausea," said 
Roger Straus, the head of Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, one of the few surviving 
independent publishing houses. Entering the 1990s, Straus said, publishing was 
"a dinner where everyone was attacked by the same ptomaine." 
In particular, Straus objected to what he called this decade's "auction fever," 
where "a handful of agents have fueled the greed of authors by telling them: 'I 
can get you $3 million for this book.' " But then, he added, "you have the 
publishers being stupid enough to say, 'Yeah, I'll give you that kind of 
money.' " 
Gigantic advances, said Applebaum, the vice president for publicity and 
promotion at Bantam Doubleday Dell, "are probably having a deleterious effect 
on book publishing, because basically they are not earning (the advances) back 
through sales and other revenues, thereby producing red ink, thereby further 
torpedoing profits at the publishing houses." 
One example that immediately came to the minds of several publishing executives 
was "My Turn," the acerbic best-selling autobiography by former First Lady 
Nancy Reagan. Though the book has garnered immense attention, it was 
commissioned by Random House with an advance widely reported to be in the 
$2-million range. "They're never going to get that back," a rival publisher 
said. 
At Houghton Mifflin, John Sterling, editor-in-chief of adult trade books, 
concurred, talking about a "fever that has gone bad" in publishing. 
"You have these two giant dark engines that have driven a lot of what is wrong 
in adult trade books," Sterling said. "Number 1 is the size of the advances. 
Number 2 is the size of advance shipments." 
If looking at this year in publishing also means looking at the decade, 
Sterling, for one, points out, it's important to note that for much of the last 
10 years, the publishing industry has benefited from a general upswing in the 
American economy. "We have not really had a serious downturn in the U.S. 
economy or in the publishing business in the last seven years," Sterling said. 
"So much of what has happened has depended on a healthy economy. That kind of 
healthy economy just did not happen in the 1970s." 
A positive environment for business in general has allowed book chains to 
introduce discount pricing as a daily event in book-selling and book-buying. In 
turn, publishers became more inventive in seeking out new marketing ventures. 
Once considered a rather rarefied commodity, the clothbound books of the 1980s 
were to be found on sale in drugstores, right alongside the mousse and 
conditioner, and in supermarkets, not far from the roast beef. 
Given the rising price of hair products and beef, moreover, discount-priced 
cloth books did not seem like much of an indulgence. 
The book jacket may carry a $20 price tag, but "people say, 'golly, I can get 
Stephen King for $12.56!' " Sterling said. 
Spurred largely by the book chains, the change in cloth pricing combined with 
more aggressive marketing by publishers to alter consumer buying patterns. 
Readers who once habitually waited for a title to appear in paperback now began 
rushing to buy it in cloth. One resulting trend of the last decade and the last 
year was a simultaneous softening of paperback sales and boosting of cloth-book 
consumption. 
"You learned to hook your customer," the vice president of one publishing house 
said. "You first trained people not to be able to wait for the paperback; then 
after a while they wanted to go for a higher quality." 
Ten years ago, she continued, cloth sales were simply seen in a different 
numerical light. "We went from a huge best seller being 75,000 copies to it 
being 1.2 million," she said. 
"At the beginning of the 1980s, you could not imagine first printings of 
500,000. The fact that there are any is absolutely amazing. The fact that 1.5 
million people walk into a bookstore and pay $20 -- and up -- for a hardcover 
book is mind-boggling." 
And "obviously," as Roger Straus noted in what might be the first lesson of The 
Economics of Publishing 101, "it is far more profitable to sell a $20 book than 
a $4.95 book." 
"The culture just moves too fast," said Sterling. "People used to wait for the 
paperback. Not any more." 
That appetite for instant literary gratification has been carefully nurtured by 
publishers who have applied new skills and sophistication to the art of 
creating and enhancing a market. 
"It used to be that publicity was looked upon as a kind of frivolous enterprise 
that you gave to the pretty, but ditzy, person who really didn't have a future 
on the editorial side," Applebaum, of Bantam Doubleday Dell, said. Now, he 
continued, along with eager and aggressive publicity departments, "you have 
whole new worlds of media coaching and strategic positioning which heretofore 
have not gone into this courtly business known as book publishing." 
But Applebaum was quick to add, "Really, you need that. Unlike other businesses 
that are akin to ours -- such as television, movies or recorded music -- 
publicity, which includes book reviews, is overwhelmingly the driving force 
behind book sales." 
Apologizing to Webster, one publisher cited "conglomeratization" and 
commercialism as the two hallmarks of the decade in publishing. Neither might 
bode well for the big houses, he conceded, but in their wake, he suggested, the 
smaller presses may begin to enjoy their long-awaited flowering. 
At North Point Press in Berkeley, however, editor-in-chief John Shoemaker was 
less sanguine. His house was born along with the decade, making its debut on 
Jan. 1, 1980, and although "our business has shown very steady growth," 
Shoemaker said that among the smaller presses, "I think all of us are fighting 
an uphill struggle to survive." 
After the initial surge of power from the bookselling chains, "the last six 
years of this decade have seen a tremendous growth in viable independent 
bookstores" that tend to be more receptive to the titles of small-press houses, 
Shoemaker said. 
"But I think that we publish too many titles in this country" -- about 40,000 
titles annually, by most reliable accounts -- "and we are all competing for a 
steadily shrinking number of buyers in the face of an increasingly illiterate 
society," Shoemaker said. 
"If we could sell one book to the number of people who attend a single Dallas 
Cowboys football game, we could be on the New York Times best-seller list for 
six months," Shoemaker said. "But that doesn't happen too often." 
Among the larger publishers, the excesses in advances and print runs surely 
will be corrected, many in publishing predicted. "It's gotten out of hand," 
said Roger Straus, for one, "and I think the hand is about to be tightened." 
But any constraints will definitely affect the reader, he predicted. "The 
reader will have fewer books of some quality than he has," Straus said, citing 
"belles lettres, essays, biography and experimental novels" as genres that may 
feel the pinch. 
Still, not everyone in publishing was humming dirges as the year and the decade 
came to an end. The climate was cold, Stuart Applebaum said, and "it is not 
going to improve dramatically in the near future." But "there's nothing wrong 
with publishing presently that could not be cured by more consumers going into 
bookstores and buying books." 
