ART BREAKS OUT FROM BEHIND BARS; 
EXHIBIT: PRINTS AND POETRY BY PRISON INMATES WILL BE ON DISPLAY AT CAL STATE 
NORTHRIDGE. 
The image is simple -- a woman's face on a black background. Touches of red and 
gold highlight the crude visage. Perhaps the most striking aspect of the 
monotype is the artist's signature: 
Leslie Van Houten. 
The former Manson family member is one of several dozen prison inmates whose 
art and poetry will be on display at Cal State Northridge beginning Monday. 
A variety of styles are included in the exhibit, "Perimeters: Prints and 
Poetry," which also features pieces by prison art teachers. The quality of the 
work varies -- from amateurish to sophisticated. 
But with a show such as this, the attraction goes beyond mere color and line, 
or words put to paper. This art arrives imbued with powerful social context. 
"It's coming from a prison," said Louise Lewis, director of CSUN's art 
galleries. "On a very basic level, there's an element of curiosity. What kind 
of art will we get?" 
Several of the works follow an expected theme. Shattered images of violence and 
iron bars fill Q. Langston's hand-tinted lithograph. Wallace W. Williams' poem, 
"The Front," is an angry litany: 
 I saw him thru his fist in the air as he talked 
 about how many heads he busted and seemed proud of. 
 I saw him push the little guys around. 
 I saw him curse guards. 
 I saw him do a thousand push-ups a day. 
 Similarly predictable sadness and desperation cloud a junkie's lament by Megan 
Silva Gaiduk: 
 I know I love you 
 because 
 I habitually let you fix first 
 I insist you do more 'cause you're bigger 
 . . . 
 I fret about your weight while mine dwindles 
 . . . 
 and I know you love me 
 because 
 you allow me to do these things. 
 But such themes do not hold true for every print or poem. Some works have 
color and joy and figures drawn with soft lines. 
C. McDonald creates human figures from swirling colors, set against blocks of 
pale red and turquoise. Joe Shaver's linocut, "Indian Signs," is constructed of 
basic reds, whites and maroons. Enrique Roquigo draws faces beneath brightly 
colored hats. 
"I know the expectation is to see grotesque, gruesome stuff," said Jim Carlson, 
a state corrections official. "We have some angry people inside the 
institutions, just like there are angry people on the street. But we also have 
a full range of people inside. A lot of the inmates' work reflects 
sensitivity." 
Carlson manages the Arts-in-Corrections program, which employs art teachers in 
21 California prisons. Some 9,000 inmates regularly attend art workshops and 
classes, and the resulting work has shown at galleries across the state. 
More important to prison officials, the program appears to have a 
rehabilitative effect. A 1983 study showed that inmates with behavior problems 
were far less likely to commit rules infractions while working in the arts. A 
1987 study showed that parolees who had participated in Arts-in-Corrections 
were significantly less likely to be recidivists. 
"The whole artistic process helps them in thinking through situations. It 
raises their self-esteem," Carlson said. He also believes that the art can 
teach a thing or two to people on the outside. 
"Not to diminish the crimes, but the art allows us to view inmates 
differently," he said. "It speaks to the potential of some of the people in 
institutions." 
Program officials approached Lewis last fall to ask if CSUN would be host to an 
exhibit. There had been numerous inmate shows in Southern California recently, 
at such places as UC Riverside and Los Angeles City Hall. 
Lewis was immediately taken with the idea. The concept has inspired her to 
think about art and notoriety. 
"I wonder what the Keating 5 would produce?" she asked. 
 "Perimeters: Prints and Poetry" will show Monday through Feb. 16. CSUN design 
faculty will exhibit accompanying pieces that explore various forms of media 
and communication. The gallery, 18111 Nordhoff St., Northridge, will be closed 
Dec. 22 to Jan. 2 for university holidays and will open Jan. 7 to 27 by 
appointment only. Hours are 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesdays through Fridays, and 
noon to 4 p.m. Mondays and Saturdays. Call (818) 885-2156. 
