CRISIS IN THE PERSIAN GULF; 
NATO ASKED TO SEND WARPLANES TO TURKEY; 
ALLIES: THE REQUEST OPENS THE WAY FOR BUILDUP ON A POSSIBLE SECOND FRONT 
AGAINST IRAQ. 
The Turkish government has asked its NATO allies to send air units to bases 
near the Turkish border with Iraq, opening the way for a foreign military 
buildup on a potential second front against Baghdad if the Persian Gulf crisis 
turns to war. 
"There is some communication between the Turkish military and NATO military on 
this subject, and these contacts continue," said Turkish Foreign Ministry 
spokesman Murat Sungar. "There has been no decision by NATO yet." 
The Turkish request involves air units from the United States, Belgium, Italy 
and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization members. If the units are put in 
place, Iraq would perceive that any attack on Turkey would be an attack on 
NATO, a Turkish official said. 
"The concept is not the force in itself," a senior Turkish official said. "It 
is not offensive. It shows NATO solidarity. The main idea is to deter potential 
aggression." 
Turkish President Turgut Ozal has publicly ruled out a Turkish second front 
against Iraq. But the request for NATO planes sent a message to Iraqi President 
Saddam Hussein that his interview broadcast on Turkish television Wednesday, in 
which he appealed for compromise, was falling on deaf ears. 
Turkey has taken a strong position against Iraq in the gulf crisis, cutting 
Iraq's oil pipelines, imposing a strict air embargo and deploying extra troops 
along the Iraqi border, tying down nearly 10 Iraqi divisions. Parliament voted 
war powers to the government in September to allow the Cabinet to accept new 
foreign troops in Turkey or to deploy Turkish troops abroad. 
Inviting foreign warplanes could either be preparation for attack or merely a 
ploy to keep Hussein guessing, but Turkish officials said the proposal is sure 
to unleash a storm of domestic protest. 
Two Cabinet ministers and the chief of the Turkish general staff have resigned 
since August, partly as a result of rifts with President Ozal and his 
single-handed conduct of a staunchly pro-American policy in the gulf crisis. 
The senior Turkish official said most of any NATO air units sent would be based 
at the big NATO base at Incirlik, where a squadron of U.S. F-15 fighters 
arrived unexpectedly earlier this week. Up to 48 U.S. combat planes are based 
at Incirlik under a longstanding U.S.-Turkish military agreement that provides 
for use of the base for training and defensive purposes only. 
"The configuration of the new force is still under discussion in Brussels, but 
my assumption is that it will mainly be air support," said a senior NATO 
diplomat. He dismissed Turkish newspaper reports that NATO ground units would 
be brought into Turkey as well. 
