SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
THE BATTLE OVER BERYLLIUM; 
ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIONS TO THE USE OF BERYLLIUM FUEL COULD DEAL ANOTHER BLOW 
TO THE EMBATTLED STAR WARS PROGRAM.; 
MISSILES: THE TOXIC SUBSTANCE IS BEING TESTED AS FUEL FOR ROCKETS IN THE 'STAR 
WARS' DEFENSE PROGRAM. CRITICS ARE CONCERNED THAT A LAUNCH FAILURE COULD POSE A 
SERIOUS HEALTH THREAT. 
The Pentagon is testing beryllium, a highly toxic substance linked to cancer 
and lung disease, as a fuel for space-based interceptor missiles that would be 
deployed under the "Star Wars" missile defense program. 
Although beryllium previously has been rejected as a rocket fuel, partly 
because of health concerns, military officials said its use in Star Wars would 
pose fewer risks because the interceptor missiles would be fired in space after 
being carried into orbit by other rockets. 
Even so, critics contend that the new fuel would pose a serious health hazard 
if one of the ground launches fails, causing the interceptor missiles to 
explode and releasing a poisonous cloud of beryllium oxide above the launch 
site. 
Environmental objections to use of beryllium fuel could deal another blow to 
the embattled Star Wars program, said retired Rear Adm. Eugene J. Carroll Jr., 
deputy director of the Center for Defense Information, a Washington-based 
watchdog group. 
"You've got the potential of bringing a whole new element of objection" to Star 
Wars, said Carroll, an outspoken opponent of the program, known officially as 
the Strategic Defense Initiative. 
The huge booster rockets that would carry the beryllium-powered interceptors 
into space probably would be launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in Santa 
Barbara County or Cape Canaveral in Florida. 
Test firings of beryllium rocket motors have already been conducted at a 
Morton-Thiokol installation at Elkton, Md. Additional tests are expected to 
begin within the next two years in a specially designed $4.5-million chamber at 
the Air Force Astronautics Laboratory at Edwards Air Force Base near Lancaster, 
military officials said. 
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization has chosen a 
beryllium-hydrogen compound called beryllium hydride as the leading candidate 
to fuel space-based interceptors, said Walt Dyer, SDIO program manager for 
interceptor components. 
A lightweight and exceptionally durable metal that is used in a number of 
industrial products, beryllium causes a serious lung disease known as 
berylliosis in chronically exposed workers and is a suspected cancer-causing 
substance. 
Aside from beryllium hydride, alternative candidate fuels are beryllium alone 
-- which is not as efficient as beryllium hydride -- and powdered aluminum, 
which is much less toxic than beryllium. 
Under one facet of the Star Wars missile defense program, initiated by former 
President Ronald Reagan, hundreds, perhaps thousands, of interceptors would be 
placed in permanent orbit to shoot down enemy missiles. 
Although the Pentagon is proceeding with testing of beryllium fuel, the future 
of Star Wars appears uncertain. SDI was a priority of the Reagan 
Administration, but this year the program received reduced funding of $3.7 
billion from an increasingly skeptical Congress. 
Faced with growing pressure to cut the military budget, Defense Secretary Dick 
Cheney said recently that the program must continue to explore defensive 
technologies at least until 1994, when the President is scheduled to decide 
whether to deploy a missile shield. 
Beryllium hydride's major asset is its high efficiency. Dyer said the amount 
needed as a missile propellant would weigh 40% less than other potential fuels. 
Nonetheless, he said, several hundred pounds of beryllium fuel could be 
contained in the interceptors boosted into space in a single launch. 
Dyer said that the Pentagon's SDIO unit has not decided how many launches would 
be needed to put the entire defensive shield into orbit or how many 
interceptors would be included in each launch. The total number of space-based 
interceptors is classified as a military secret. 
Independent authorities, however, estimate that scores of booster rocket 
launches would be necessary if the program is carried out. 
The propellant weight reduction would be "extremely important . . . since there 
would be lots of these space-based interceptors," Dyer said. He said the weight 
issue "has been the driving consideration" in making beryllium hydride the 
military's first choice for interceptors. 
In a recent interview, Dyer said public safety would not be jeopardized by the 
use of beryllium. 
Beryllium hydride fuel would be fired only in space, Dyer said, and it will not 
be selected unless studies show that areas around a launch site would not be 
endangered by a toxic cloud should the booster rocket explode or catch fire 
during launch. 
The Pentagon will evaluate worst-case accident scenarios to "determine over 
what area the cloud would land and . . . be sure that that is an unpopulated 
area," Dyer said. "We believe that we can safely utilize these fuels." 
Under Air Force rules, all launches at Vandenberg are conducted when winds are 
blowing out to sea. Air Force officials also plot a "toxic hazard corridor" 
before each launch to define the area that could be exposed to falling debris 
or toxic vapors in a rocket explosion, base spokesman Gary Morey said. A launch 
is postponed if the corridor includes populated inland areas. 
Data provided by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shows that 
5% to 10% of unmanned civilian and military launches fail. 
The four major rocket families -- Titan, Delta, Atlas-Centaur and Scout -- have 
a combined success rate of 92.6%, with 38 failures in 517 launches since 1960, 
according to NASA. The failures ranged from rockets that deviated from their 
designated courses to launches that blew up. 
Members of two Washington-based scientific and environmental groups said the 
use of beryllium fuel on the scale contemplated by the military would be 
extremely dangerous, given the probability of a launch failure. 
"It's quite likely that in the process of deploying space-based interceptors, 
you're going to have at least one launch vehicle failure that could result in 
the release of significant amounts of beryllium," said John E. Pike, associate 
director for space policy of the American Federation of Scientists. 
"Given the probability of a launch failure," he said, "it's an unacceptable 
risk." 
Added Jim Werner, an environmental engineer for the Natural Resources Defense 
Council, an environmental group: "The benefits of this program, it seems to me, 
are dubious at best but the risks are very real." 
Studies by the military of the hazard posed by beryllium fuel to people located 
on and off the base after a launch failure are yet to be completed. Lompoc, a 
community of more than 30,000 residents, is about 10 miles from the base's 
launch areas, although some homes are closer. 
Safety guidelines set by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists, a leading occupational safety group, indicate that under conditions 
of chronic exposure, beryllium is more harmful at low concentrations than many 
better-known poisons, including other toxic rocket fuels. 
The group's occupational limit for airborne beryllium is 100 times stricter 
than for arsenic; 50 times more stringent than for hydrazine, a common liquid 
rocket fuel, and about 25 times more stringent than for methyl isocyanate, the 
poison gas that killed more than 3,400 people in Bhopal, India, five years ago. 
These comparisons, however, apply to routine low-level exposures on the job. 
Most beryllium illness has resulted from such repeated exposures. Some toxic 
gases would be more likely than beryllium to cause severe illness or death in a 
single large dose such as might occur in a catastrophic rocket launch accident. 
Berylliosis, the disease caused by beryllium exposure, causes the lungs to 
become more rigid, impairing breathing and, in extreme cases, resulting in 
suffocation. Victims may suffer heart failure from the stress of pumping blood 
through lungs that have lost their normal elasticity. 
How Space-Based Interceptors Would Work 
A tiny, rocket-propelled missile hurtles toward a Soviet ICBM in this artist's 
conception of a space-based interceptor as defined by Martin-Marietta. Under 
the space-based interceptor theory, carrier vehicles (CVs) would house a 
quantity of the interceptor missiles. A tracking system alerts the CV that a 
missile is approaching and interceptors are fired. The missile, which might be 
powered by beryllium hydride, would maneuver to physically collide with the 
ICBM. The interceptor would have no warhead, but would use the tremendous 
velocity of the collision to destroy the enemy missile. 
Alan C. Miller reported from Washington and Myron Levin from Chatsworth. 
