THE REHABILITATION OF EUGENE FODOR; 
AFTER A BOUT WITH DRUGS AND A TRESPASSING ARREST, THE 'COWBOY VIOLINIST' 
REGAINS CONTROL OF HIS LIFE AND CONTINUES HIS CONCERT CAREER 
"Would you mind taking your shoes off?" Eugene Fodor inquires of a visitor 
ushered into the violinist's Upper West Side Manhattan apartment. "I have a 
white rug." 
He is relaxed and looks remarkably fit in black jeans, a Western silver belt 
and T-shirt, despite a wide-open window to the 27-degree temperature outside. 
At 39, he could easily pass for at least 10 years younger. 
He is ready to talk about events leading up to his arrest on July 27 in a 
vacant hotel room on Martha's Vineyard when he was charged with breaking and 
entering and possession of a controlled substance, cocaine. He says he had 
money to pay for the room, but because it was late at night with no hotel clerk 
on duty and desperately needing to "crash," he broke in. 
Fodor is luckier than most. A Massachusetts court dropped the drug charge, 
citing him only for trespassing, a misdemeanor, on condition he enter a drug 
rehabilitation program. He did, and his slate is clean. 
His situation is a far cry from what it was in 1974 when he returned from 
Moscow after winning the silver medal (actually a tie with two other 
contestants) in the International Tchaikovsky Competition. The gold medal was 
not awarded, so it could be said in truth no one bested him. 
Before that, he had won first prize in the International Paganini, the 
Merriwether Post and the Young Musicians Foundation of Los Angeles 
competitions, after study with Jascha Heifetz, Joseph Szigeti and Josef 
Gingold, among others. 
While his win didn't place him in the same league with Van Cliburn's triumph in 
Moscow, Fodor still was something of a hero and was met at the Denver airport 
(Turkey Creek, Colo., was his home) by his parents, his girlfriend and his 
horse. He took to posing in jeans with his shirt open to the waist. 
The media loved it. He was dubbed the "Cowboy Violinist," and made the 
television national newscasts, going on to appear on "The Tonight Show" (14 
times) and play at the White House. He signed a contract with RCA Records. Most 
of the major American orchestras and concert series wanted him. He was a Golden 
Boy, but many serious musicians and critics were irritated. He admits the image 
may have hurt him, and says he tried to shed it, but, "I guess it's (fouled 
up)." 
As time went on, however, and he was not so young anymore, the aura of success 
began to fade. He made the somewhat naive discovery that the music business was 
not an altruistic one, but one dominated, he says, by an exclusive troika of 
conductors, orchestra and artist managers. Disillusioned, he became 
increasingly frustrated and unhappy. 
His reputation in the business then: He was not maturing as an artist, and was 
only interested in the virtuoso display pieces of such as Paganini and 
Sarasate, not the great repertory works of Beethoven, Brahms or Sibelius. Fodor 
insists that he had these big works under his belt, and indeed played them, but 
that the stories were an excuse by his manager, Harold Shaw, of his own 
"mismanagement and greed." 
The violinist claims he preferred to do smaller festivals for less money, which 
would give him an opportunity to grow and explore other repertory, but that 
Shaw was interested in dollars and cents. 
"When I first appeared on the Great Performers Series at Lincoln Center in 
1974, his coercion bordered on rage that I played the virtuoso stuff and not 
the Bach, Prokofiev and Beethoven I wanted. I tried to get out of my contract 
three years before it was up, but he wouldn't let me go." 
Shaw, who was Fodor's manager for eight years, would not accept phone calls. He 
stated through a spokeswoman that he would have no comment on Fodor. 
Fodor also contends that the horse-at-the-airport idea was that of the 
publicity firm hired by Shaw, Gurtman &amp; Murtha. 
"I don't remember whose idea the horse was," James Murtha commented, "but let's 
face it, Eugene was a cowboy and liked to show it off. He would come to an 
interview in cowboy shirt, Levi's and boots. And he was quick to pull out 
pictures of his horse. We tried to counter the image with appearances at 
conservative festivals like Caramoor (where) we would have no press if it 
weren't for that image. If he were just a regular classical artist they 
wouldn't have cared less. Also, there was some resentment when we said he won 
top prize at the Tchaikovsky, which he did, but technically it was a tie for 
second. 
"The whole thing is very unfortunate. The concert business in America is dying 
today. Only about 10% of the audience are committed serious music lovers. When 
once a university would have 60 events a season, now they have only six, and 
among those they want pop attractions. 
"Eugene could have bridged the gap had he expanded his repertory. He still 
could bring people in, and if they liked him, they just might be curious enough 
to go, say, to the Cleveland Orchestra for a concert, even without a soloist." 
Fodor maintains he was not suffering burnout, that his love of music was a deep 
and renewing experience and always had been. Because of politics, he says, many 
good people are ignored. Since 1982, he has been managed by Vincent Wagner of 
the Hillyer International Agency. 
As for his recording career, after four years and six records Fodor was dropped 
by RCA. That this happened was not entirely Fodor's fault. Since RCA had struck 
gold with Van Cliburn, RCA over the years often signed up the latest boy wonder 
or contest winner, and when the Cliburn lightening did not strike Fodor, the 
record label let him go. Efforts to reach RCA officials over the holidays were 
unsuccessful. 
In the meantime Fodor's personal life was being affected. He was divorced from 
his wife, a former Denver resident who now lives in Washington with their three 
children, a boy, 5, and two girls, 8 and 9. In February of this year Fodor said 
that he began to experiment with cocaine on social occasions but that the habit 
soon escalated. What about heroin? "I don't remember if I tried it. It was 
mostly other drugs, but chiefly cocaine." 
His friends began to notice a physical change, particularly weight loss. One 
who hadn't seen him in a number of months was shocked at his skeletal 
appearance. Fodor knew he was in trouble, and tried to get help. He even went 
to a few meetings of a rehabilitation program, but as he puts it, "I couldn't 
get a grip on myself." 
"The day I was arrested, I never felt so alone in my life. I called both my 
parents, and while they knew I had a problem, they both were shocked. We 
believed in discipline at home, particularly my father." He has not tried to 
blame them for anything, and says he bears no resentment. 
His mother, Antoinette Fodor, says she and her husband, Eugene Fodor Sr., 
visited their son a month before the arrest and were distressed by his 
appearance. They knew something was wrong but had no idea it might involve 
drugs. 
She reminisces with some pride: "When he was little, he begged for the violin 
when he saw his older brother John playing. We didn't know it then, but he had 
a genius IQ. He was an overactive child. By the time he was 11 or 12 he told us 
he was going to be a star. Of course the discipline was more than ordinary, it 
had to be. The worst punishment we could give him for not practicing was to 
take the violin away from him. After a while, he would practice five or six 
hours a day without being told to. 
"We tried to even things out with recreation. He learned to scuba dive and took 
boxing lessons, since the other kids taunted him about being a sissy. 
"We don't see each other too often but we keep in touch by telephone. When he 
was arrested we didn't come back to see him because that was a lot to spend for 
airfare, but he knew we supported him." 
The musician entered what he prefers to call a "recovery program" at Conifer 
Park Facility near Schenectady, N.Y., which offers a 12-step plan described as 
a "lifetime process" based not on a religious (he says he has no religion) but 
a spiritual way of life, "a fellowship of humanity and caring, which is the 
most profound I've ever witnessed." 
"I was at the facility for 28 days. I attended 90 meetings after I got out. Now 
I go a couple of times a week. Only last night I spoke at one. Our experiences 
give strength and hope. We have telephone therapy all the time, discussing 
getting better. You stay clean one day at a time. It is an open-ended 
treatment. 
"I'm living a completely normal life now, and the desire to use cocaine has 
been lifted. If I saw drugs being used at a party, I would probably object to 
it and leave." 
He has a girlfriend who, he says, has been very supportive. He has no plans for 
marriage at this time. 
The music business has been supportive of him, and no engagements have been 
canceled because of his arrest. His first concert was in Peekskill, N.Y., and 
he played 11 other dates since he left Conifer Park, the most important of 
which was a solo recital without even an accompanist on Martha's Vineyard. 
"I wanted to face my demons there," he explains. "When I was arrested I was 
treated with utmost dignity. The audience gave me strength, and I wanted to 
give something back in gratitude for the clean life I have now. The proceeds of 
that night went to a drug rehab program on the island. 
"I've appeared at a couple of schools in Texas on behalf of rehab, and when I 
do one of my artist-in-residence appearances, I always speak for the last 10 
minutes on the dangers of drugs." 
His manager, Wagner, admits there were problems after the arrest. "Of course it 
was a detriment for a while. People were not sure of his availability because 
of the mandatory drug sentencing laws in Massachusetts. Since a wire service 
story, which was positive, however, and the '20/20' television program (Dec. 
15), things have begun to break, really in the last few weeks. 
"Eugene always wanted to play the big pieces, and we try for him, but when 
someone like Riccardo Muti asks for the Paganini, as he did a couple of years 
ago, you do it. At that same time he performed the Beethoven with the Beethoven 
Society in Carnegie Hall, but he wasn't even reviewed. He played Mozart with 
Lukas Foss and the Brooklyn Philharmonic, and it was beautiful. I think some 
people are envious that he could do the virtuoso pieces so easily, and that's 
why stories go around. His fee has remained consistent the last few years, in 
the $7,000-$10,000 category." 
Fodor speaks of the future. "I have orchestral dates with the Warsaw 
Philharmonic and one in Sofia, a festival in Switzerland and concerts in 
England and France. In the States, I have orchestra dates in Phoenix, Denver, 
Sioux City, Burlington, Vt., and others I don't want to comment on until 
contracts are signed. There have even been some nibbles from recording firms. 
"I lift weights, ride my bicycle and am otherwise physically back to normal. 
And I'll tell you one thing, I'm not afraid." 
