DROP IN ALCOHOL-RELATED DEATHS INDICATE CAMPAIGN IS PAYING OFF 
Is it all worth it? 
The long nights patrolling the streets and highways, filling the backs of 
police cars with drunk driving suspects, the education programs in schools and 
workplaces, the speeches, the warnings, the discussions, the designated-driver 
plans, the sobriety checkpoints, the stiffer penalties, and the litany that 
accompanies the campaign against drunk driving. 
Has it helped? 
The answer may lie in a single statistic, provided by the California Highway 
Patrol: In 1988, there were 134 alcohol-related traffic deaths in Orange 
County, 32 fewer than in 1987. 
And, according to the state Bureau of Criminal Justice Statistics, the number 
of deaths in 1989 may drop still further. Only 47 alcohol-related traffic 
fatalities were reported in Orange County in the first six months of this year. 
What makes this single statistic even more significant is that the number of 
alcohol-related traffic deaths in the county was pretty consistent throughout 
most of the '80s. For example, between 1983 and 1987, the number went no higher 
than 166 (1987) and no lower than 151 (1984). Therefore, the sudden drop in 
deaths would appear to mean that the message of "Don't Drive Drunk" is finally 
getting through. 
"I think people certainly have become more aware of the problem," said Janet 
Cater, the director of the Orange County chapter of Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving. 
"Over the years, the message has been getting out there," she said. "Our 
chapter has done a lot of proactive preventive programs. We kicked off our 
designated-driver program in 1986; we've had increased speaking time at the 
high schools; we've broadened the base of our newsletter. And we started our 
community recognition dinner in 1987, where we honor the top officers from each 
police department who have the highest number of arrests and convictions. I 
think that encourages law enforcement to pay more attention to drunk drivers. 
"The prevention is paying off, and we're delighted about it." 
So is the California Highway Patrol, whose officers are noticing that drunk 
driving has become less of a laughing matter in the public. 
"It used to be if somebody told you they'd been arrested for drunk driving, 
people might laugh," CHP spokeswoman Officer Angel Johnson said. "Now the 
message is getting across that people don't like it. They don't want it 
anymore. More people are becoming aware that it's not a joke, that it's a 
potentially dangerous situation." 
Increasing the visibility of law enforcement activities such as sobriety 
checkpoints also help, Johnson said. 
"Over the holidays, particularly, we put more people on the road just looking 
for (drunk) drivers," she said. "And the courts are helping. The penalties are 
becoming much stiffer, and people are taking notice of that, too. People know 
that we're out there and that we're more conscious and aware of them." PATRICK 
MOTT 
