BIG DISNEYLAND PARTY MAY LURE MORE TOURISTS 
It's Disneyland's 35th birthday in 1990 and, if past years are any indication, 
Orange County's entire tourism industry will be celebrating. 
That's because the Anaheim theme park is planning a yearlong birthday bash with 
millions of dollars in giveaways. And the last two times Disneyland has partied 
in a big way -- for its 25th and 30th birthdays -- some of the park's magic 
rubbed off on virtually all of Orange County's tourist spots. 
"It definitely will help the whole community," said Craig Jacobs, sales 
director of the Hyatt Regency Alicante in Garden Grove. "Whenever Disney has a 
new major attraction or promotion, it impacts the whole (area). There's just an 
influx of people." 
"Visitors coming to Disneyland spend a week and not just a day," agreed Cheryl 
Ryan, managing director of the Laguna Beach Chamber of Commerce. "And they 
definitely expand into other areas of the county." 
In other words, as Disneyland goes, so goes the rest of Orange County's tourism 
industry -- hotels, motels, restaurants, transportation firms and entertainment 
spots. 
That, in fact, was one reason why 1989 generally was viewed as a so-so year for 
the tourism business, with only slight gains, say those in the industry. By 
delaying the opening of its much-heralded Splash Mountain at least six months 
until mid-July, Disneyland put a damper on local tourism. (Disneyland postponed 
opening the ride while technical glitches and design flaws were corrected.) 
Uncertainty over the economy had an impact, as well, causing some people to be 
more hesitant about making long-range plans and keeping others from spending as 
much as they might have otherwise. Whirl-a-Round Tours in Newport Beach, for 
example, found that corporate clients who had spent freely in the past on 
special events "cut down considerably on the budget they were willing to spend 
-- or canceled entirely," said Barbara Sloate, the firm's president. 
Also, cool, overcast weather along the coastline this year discouraged tourists 
from flocking to the beaches early in the summer. By year's end, Newport Beach 
-- one of the county's most popular seaside leisure spots -- expects to have 
seen about 10 million sunbathers -- or roughly the same number as last year, 
according to the city. 
To be sure, there were those who reported impressive tourism increases this 
year. For many of them, the numbers were the result of a bigger interest in 
Orange County from foreign tourists -- notably travelers from Japan, Australia, 
Korea, western Canada and Mexico. 
The Ritz-Carlton in Dana Point, for example, had record revenue of $50 million 
in 1989 -- a year when foreign travelers, especially from the Pacific Rim, 
increased by at least 20%, said Henry E. Schielein, vice president and general 
manager. 
South Coast Plaza saw "heavy increases" in international shoppers this year, 
said mall spokesman Werner Escher. Of the 18 million shoppers who patronized 
the Costa Mesa shopping center this year, the percentage of customers who 
traveled from outside Southern California climbed to more than 20% from the 
15.1% recorded in 1988. 
Santa Ana-based Roberts Holiday Lines saw a 20% increase in the number of 
people who booked its charter buses this year, said Dennis Ardecki, sales 
manager. While Ardecki said that international tourism in general seemed to be 
down, "we did some Korean business we hadn't done before. That helped." 
So what's the net result? 
By year's end, an estimated 35 million people will have visited Orange County 
this year -- up only slightly from the 34.62 million who came here last year, 
according to the Anaheim Visitor &amp; Convention Bureau. Convention attendance 
also increased a bit -- 1,062,347 conventioneers visited the county in 1989, up 
from 1,026,728 in the prior year, bureau officials said. 
With the unimpressive results in 1989, tourism industry experts can't help but 
look forward to next year with optimism. 
There should be, after all, a new passenger terminal at John Wayne Airport in 
September -- all the better to lure more travelers. The Anaheim Convention 
Center will be modernizing as well as undergoing a $30-million expansion to add 
300,000 square feet of exhibit space and a parking structure. 
And, of course, there's Disneyland. 
For the park itself -- which saw basically flat attendance of about 13 million 
this year -- the hoopla of the "35 Years of Magic" birthday celebration is 
expected to make more than a mere dent. 
"We hope it will be a record year," said Jack Lindquist, executive vice 
president for the park, who believes a weak dollar overseas can only help add 
to the influx of international travelers. 
The park's 30th and 25th birthday celebrations translated into several 
additional percentage points in turnstile tallies, said Bob Roth, park 
spokesman. 
Knott's Berry Farm, the Buena Park amusement park, expects to benefit from 
Disneyland's bash -- and also will add a $5-million roller coaster called the 
Boomerang by next summer. "We welcome whatever Disneyland does to bring 
tourists to Southern California," said Knott's spokesman Stuart Zanville. 
ORANGE COUNTY TOURISM 
ANNUAL VISITORS: 
1988: 34.62 million 
1989: 35 million 
TOURIST SPENDING: 
1988: $5.3 billion 
1989: $5.5 billion 
CONVENTION ATTENDANCE: 
1988: 1,026,728 at 284 meetings and conventions 
1989: 1,062,347 at 326 meetings and conventions 
TOURIST PROFILE:* 
Where they come from: 
West: 54% 
North Central: 12% 
South: 8% 
Northeast: 7% 
Foreign: 19% 
Travelers with kids: 43% 
Median household income: $39,800 
Median age: 36.8 years 
Most visited spots in order of popularity: 
Disneyland 
Knott's Berry Farm 
Universal Studios 
San Diego Zoo and Sea World 
Queen Mary and Movieland Wax Museum 
Beaches 
Mission San Juan Capistrano 
All 1989 figures are estimates 
* 1988 figures 
Source: Anaheim Visitor &amp; Convention Bureau 
