MOVIES OF THE WEEK 
The whimsical and poignant 1985 Back to the Future (NBC Sunday at 8 p.m.) finds 
small-town youth Michael J. Fox accidentally sent back in time 30 years, where, 
to his chagrin, he discovers his mother is crazy about him rather than his own 
father. 
The Witches of Eastwick (ABC Sunday at 9 p.m.) was a popular success even 
though it turned the John Updike novel upside down and inside out. Jack 
Nicholson is a joy as a devil of a fellow who materializes in a staid New 
England community in which three single women (Cher, Susan Sarandon and 
Michelle Pfeiffer) pine for some male company. 
Call Me (Channel 13 Monday at 8 p.m.) is an ambitious but flawed 1988 
lady-in-distress thriller about a young Manhattan photographer/reporter 
(Patricia Charbonneau), plagued by both an obscene phone caller and a drug 
gang. 
Olivia Newton-John makes her dramatic debut on TV in the contemporary fairy 
tale A Mom for Christmas (NBC Monday at 9 p.m.). 
In Leo McCarey's durably sentimental The Bells of St. Mary's (Channel 11 
Tuesday at8 p.m.), an authentic Yuletide treat, priest Bing Crosby skirmishes 
with Ingrid Bergman's doughty mother superior, who is determined to build a new 
parish school. Warning: It's been colorized. 
The 1989 Fletch Lives (CBS Tuesday at 9 p.m.) is the ultimate comedy of 
condescension, a movie with a hero whose every other line of dialogue is a 
snide wisecrack, directed at a fool. Starring Chevy Chase, who created Fletch 
in the 1985 movie of the same name. 
Drawing from personal experience, writer Bo Goldman contributed a script to the 
1982 Shoot the Moon (Channel 5 Wednesday at 8 p.m.) that made it one of the 
year's best, an exceedingly painful and persuasive account of the breakup of a 
marriage. Directed by Alan Parker and starring Albert Finney and Diane Keaton. 
In the 1982 Diner (Channel 5 Thursday at 8 p.m.), Barry Levinson rescues our 
memories of the late '50s and early '60s from the high gloss that TV has put on 
those years and lets them stand tender and real. The film's title comes from a 
Baltimore hangout where recent high school grads Steve Guttenberg, Mickey 
Rourke, Kevin Bacon and Daniel Stern are beginning to feel an edge of 
desperation. 
Christmas in Connecticut (Channel 5 Saturday at 8 p.m.) is a warm wartime 
romantic comedy that holds up quite well. Barbara Stanwyck plays a newspaper 
cooking columnist who takes a soldier (Dennis Morgan) home for Christmas dinner 
on orders of her boss (Charles Coburn) -- the only hitch is that she can't 
cook. 
Fanny and Alexander (Channel 28 Saturday at 9 p.m.), Ingmar Bergman's great 
1983 farewell to the screen, may begin at a glorious Christmas gathering, but 
this turn-of-the-century test-of-the-spirit saga centers on two children, a 
brother and sister, whose happy existence is swiftly terminated when their 
widowed mother re-marries. 
