YAKIMA REBEL STANDS GROUND FOR FISHING RIGHTS; 
INDIANS: DAVID SOHAPPY BELIEVES IN TRADITION AND AN 1855 TREATY GUARANTEEING AN 
UNLIMITED SALMON AND STEELHEAD HARVEST. 
The old fishing platform sags, held up by ropes, a few rotting boards and 
perhaps the ghosts of fishermen who lived at a time when Indians pulled as many 
salmon as they wanted from the Columbia River. 
David Sohappy, a Yakima religious leader and rebel, believes that is a right 
worth fighting for. 
"I want to go fishing whenever I feel like it. With no strings attached 
whatsoever," Sohappy says. 
It is an idea as dated as the old-fashioned platform, long since supplanted by 
powerboats. But for Sohappy, there is no compromising his belief that Indians 
have the right to fish when and where they want, guaranteed by the Yakima 
Nation's Treaty of 1855. 
After 20 months in prison, suffering a stroke and being threatened with 
eviction from his ramshackle home, he still refuses to give up. 
In 1984, U.S. District Judge George Boldt of Tacoma issued a ruling limiting 
Indian rights to half the harvestable salmon and steelhead in the Puget Sound 
region. That decision arose, in part, from protests Sohappy and other Indian 
began in 1968 over state restrictions on their fishing. 
For all the fuss he has created, Sohappy rarely fishes. He prefers to spend his 
time watching soap operas and TV news. A frail 65-year-old man with one arm 
crippled by the stroke, he speaks barely above a mumble and leans on an old 
golf putter to walk. 
"I speak softly but carry a big stick," he joked, brandishing the putter. 
In the latest chapter of this rebel's saga, Sen. Brock Adams (D-Wash.) and Sen. 
Daniel Inouye (D-Hawaii), are asking the government to stop eviction efforts 
against Sohappy. 
The government argues that the Cooks Landing fishing site where Sohappy lives 
with his wife and some of his seven children is supposed to be a river access 
point for all Indians, not a private home. 
Sohappy built a long house -- a communal dwelling that also serves as a church 
-- on this spit of land on the shore of the mile-wide Columbia, east of 
Vancouver, Wash., in the early 1960s. 
The long house stands as a protest to the flooding of more than 40 Indian homes 
and 37 of their fishing spots with construction of Bonneville Dam in 1937. The 
government agreed in 1945 to replace those homes and fishing sites, but little 
progress has been made. 
Sohappy says he has a historic right to live and fish on the river and he will 
never leave the home to which he returned to after his release from prison in 
May, 1988. 
"Move out and let them win? No way!" he said. "We still own the land." Sohappy, 
a leader of the Indian feather religion, speaks of dire consequences for whites 
who harass Indians. 
"They're just asking for trouble," he said. "People have told them to leave us 
alone. If they don't, nature will step in and make you spend millions of 
dollars on weather-related things." 
The 365-page Department of the Interior appropriations bill contains one 
paragraph directing Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan to reconsider the eviction 
issue. The bill awaits President Bush's signature. 
Sohappy and his son, David Jr., were arrested by federal and state wildlife 
authorities in an undercover operation called "Salmonscam" in 1981 and 1982. 
They were accused of selling 317 fish out of season. 
The Sohappys were convicted in federal court in Los Angeles in 1983 and 
sentenced to five years in prison. They served 20 months each and remain on 
probation. 
A Yakima Tribal Court jury in 1987 acquitted them of tribal poaching charges. 
That trial, labeled "Tradition on Trial," won international attention from 
human rights groups. 
Some members were angry when the tribe prosecuted Sohappy, tribal prosecutor 
Jack Fiander said. Others were glad a violator of tribal fishing laws was on 
trial. 
The tribe for 25 years has set fishing seasons for its members and rules for 
equipment, Fiander said. They prosecuted Sohappy to protect tribal authority in 
such matters, he said. 
"David Sohappy, like any human being, is neither all good nor all bad," Fiander 
said. "Sometimes, he was both." 
