'89 ENCORES; 
ON THIS LAST DAY OF THE YEAR, AND OF THE 1980S, THE VIEW STAFF PAYS A RETURN 
VISIT TO SOME OF THE PEOPLE WHO MADE NEWS IN 1989.; 
A SPIRITUAL CAUSE 
Last July, Tenzin Gyatso, His Holiness the Dalai Lama of Tibet, spent three 
weeks in Los Angeles, conducting an initiation ritual to advanced Buddhist 
meditation, generally delighting audiences with his warmth and humor, and 
speaking about the cause of his people. 
(Tibet was invaded and occupied by China in 1950 and since has been partially 
absorbed by that country, with another part occupied and declared an autonomous 
region by China. As the spiritual and temporal leader of Tibet, the Dalai Lama 
has been living in exile in India since 1959.) 
In December, despite the strong protests of the Chinese government, the Dalai 
Lama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo. He traveled with a small 
entourage of his supporters and staff to Norway, where he was honored for his 
nonviolent crusade for human rights, freedom and peace -- for Tibet and for the 
planet. 
Michelle Bohana, human rights director for the International Campaign for 
Tibet, was here with the Dalai Lama's delegation last July -- the subject of a 
July 20 story in View -- and was one of the few who attended the ceremonies in 
Oslo. 
It is too early to judge the effects of his receiving the prize, Bohana said 
from her office in Washington. 
"It elevates His Holiness, quite rightfully, to the status of a world 
statesperson, and that has to have an effect on Beijing or they wouldn't have 
responded with so much vehemence. The immediate effect in Lhasa (capital of 
Tibet) is an increase in repressive tactics. There have been more arrests. But 
in the long term, it's going to be positive. I personally think it's the best 
thing to have happened to Tibet in 40 years." 
Just as the Dalai Lama visibly charmed and moved so many people in Los Angeles, 
so did he affect the Norwegians and the gathering assembled there for the award 
ceremonies, she said: 
"The Norwegians treated His Holiness with a respect that bordered on 
reverence." 
It was, in short, a great celebration. 
"You know, in Buddhism there is a teaching about rejoicing," Bohana said. "When 
something wonderful happens, you're allowed the opportunity to rejoice. We 
don't have cause to celebrate very often," she said of people who have been 
involved in the Tibetan cause. "After 40 years we were able to rejoice, and we 
came away inspired and renewed." KATHLEEN HENDRIX 
