SEAU SHOWS WHAT'S INSIDE REALLY COUNTS 
His metamorphosis from misplaced linebacker to Pro Bowl alternate has been lost 
in the rubble of another season to forget. 
A few more victories, an attention-getting playoff berth, and instead of laying 
low, Junior Seau might be taking a bow today. 
You remember Junior Seau, the bitter, sullen, mistake-prone Junior Seau. He was 
the woe-is-me first-round pick who grudgingly signed a $4.525-million contract 
to play for his hometown Chargers. 
He began his National Football League career in a pout. Early in the season he 
had more penalties than he did tackles. The fans in San Diego Jack Murphy 
Stadium booed him, and then the opposition ran right by him. 
"How low is low?" Seau said. 
Disaster, however, eventually gave way to gradual improvement: A proper read 
here, a tackle there. 
"Accepting my role as an inside linebacker was the big thing," Seau said. "No 
more glory. It was hard to get rid of the glory years on the outside. It was 
hard to let go." 
Junior Seau's pursuit of glory has been relentless. It drove him hard at USC, 
where he piled up 19 sacks as a junior. It pushed him to train and work harder 
than most any other draft-eligible player, and prompted his draft-day value to 
rise dramatically. 
Glory suits Junior Seau. It makes him happy. Makes him cocky. And in an 
appealing boys-will-be-boys way, it makes him unbearable. 
"He's giving me a ration of grief, because he's playing out of position and 
he's in his first year and he's selected to be an alternate to the Pro Bowl," 
linebacker Gary Plummer said. "He's telling me he's gotten what I've been 
trying to get for the last eight years. 
"So I go over and get two glasses of water and throw them on him to cool him 
down." 
A glorious shower. An inspiring affirmation of what defensive coordinator Ron 
Lynn has been trying to tell him for the past four months: "There is glory to 
be found as an inside linebacker. 
"He can be a glamour player, the glamour player in the league where there are 
no glamour players," Lynn said. "Who do you talk about when you talk about 
inside linebackers? (Miami's) John Offerdahl? (Detroit's) Chris Spielman? 
(Chicago's) Mike Singletary? 
"This guy can be all those guys and much, much more. He also has the ability 
when all else is said and done to get into our four-down linemen scheme and 
rush the passer. He offers the best of both worlds." 
However, none of it has happened as quickly as Seau had planned. By his 
calculations, he was on his way into the Hall of Fame as soon as he donned the 
shoulder pads for the first time. 
"He expected to play like Superman," Lynn said. "But you take (Seattle's) 
Cortez Kennedy and (Tampa's) Keith McCants, and tell me who has had the most 
impact on their team? I don't think it's even close. Junior is light years 
ahead of both of those guys because he's played more plays." 
Seau has been in the team's starting lineup since the second game of the 
season. And although he's been standing on the sideline in third-down 
situations, he's No. 2 in tackles with 73. 
"On third downs I'm sitting on the pines just looking at the guys go at it," he 
said. "It's frustrating. I never dropped back in coverage in college. It's 
coming together, but they're schooling me and I have to accept my role." 
His role, while presently that of a youngster in training, will change. As Lynn 
envisions it, Seau will play here, there and everywhere -- the way Denver has 
used Karl Mecklenberg in the past. 
"I think Junior can be the dominant guy in the league at his position," Lynn 
said. "I don't see any one else on the horizon. Name another inside linebacker. 
(Buffalo's) Shane Conlan? Shane Conlan can't carry this guy's helmet." 
That's all well and good, but Seau knows how well he played as an outside 
linebacker. His forte was rushing the passer, and here he is 15 games into his 
NFL career and he has yet to record a sack. 
It's no fun playing inside. No one notices. There is no glory. 
"Inside linebackers don't have as high a profile as outside linebackers," he 
said. "On the outside you get sacks. One sack a game, and you're considered a 
dominant player. 
"You get nine tackles a game as an inside linebacker, and you're just a good 
player. You don't get money nowadays for tackles. You don't get the prestige. 
You don't get the respect outside guys get." 
Before the draft, Seau met with the Chargers' coaching staff and said he 
welcomed the opportunity to play inside. After being selected, however, he 
began to balk at making the position change. After saying all the right things, 
everything went wrong. 
When contract negotiations stalled and then turned ugly, he became more 
irritated at the prospect of playing inside linebacker. By his own estimation, 
he had the most talent to offer at outside linebacker. 
"I was a lost kid at that time. Very confused," he said. "You can feel yourself 
falling off track and I fell off track. I lost my morals and values on what got 
me here. 
"Then I went out and played against the Raiders in the final preseason game and 
I wasn't ready. I got in the fight and everything happened so quickly. I 
couldn't grasp what happened. And what happened was Junior Seau was immature 
and ran away. He wanted to find a rock and just hide behind it." 
The Chargers, however, stuck with Seau. They played him. They reminded him they 
were going to play him at inside linebacker, like it or not. And when he 
struggled, they continued to stay with him. 
"It's gonna take time. He would be involved in a lot more things on a lot more 
downs if he was in a position to handle it," Lynn said. "He isn't going to beat 
people by running by them like he did in college. He isn't going to be getting 
big stiffs at left tackle like he did in college. 
"He's become more patient and more disciplined. His first response to anything 
was to go at a 100-m.p.h. tempo. 
"It's like the first time you pick up a baseball bat. You're going to swing as 
hard as you can to hit the ball as far as you can. It takes some time to learn 
the timing is more important than brute strength. Junior can still be the great 
home run hitter, but being more efficient, he will be better." 
With his size -- 6-foot-3, 243 pounds -- Seau brings something special to the 
middle of the field. He's built like Chip Banks and runs like Anthony Miller. 
And when he's on target, he hits like Lee Williams and Leslie O'Neal -- 
combined. 
"You couldn't draw an athlete more perfectly," Lynn said. "He's a big man, and 
there are very few guys playing where he's playing that have the speed he has. 
"He made a play (against Denver) on a screen pass that got the attention of all 
his teammates. He was on the wrong side of the field, standing in the wrong 
place and yet he responds athletically and runs all the way across the field to 
stop a guy for a two-yard gain. You see something like that, and you realize 
he's not even scratching the surface." 
Williams recalled the same play. "Just unbelievable," he said. "I'm talking a 
great athlete here. It wouldn't be far-fetched to say what you have here is a 
potential superstar." 
Seau doesn't turn 22 until January, and he still hasn't experienced his first 
NFL training camp. He's as green as he is talented. 
"Junior's got the kind of raw physical ability, that regardless if you put him 
at free safety, he would make some great plays," linebacker Billy Ray Smith 
said. "I kind of gained a new appreciation for him, because he's got that 
natural ability, but he didn't rest on it." 
Smith, like Seau, was the fifth player selected in the first round of the 
draft. And like Seau, Smith was asked to make the switch from outside 
linebacker to the inside. 
"It's like a different game inside," Smith said. "To be head up on the tight 
end or on the line of scrimmage looking in, you really only have to worry about 
guys coming at you from one side. 
"You move to the inside and it's kind of like the difference between 
tic-tac-toe and 3-D tic-tac-toe. It adds another dimension that you have to 
worry about." 
Smith stayed inside for three years -- a lifetime for an impatient Seau. 
"It's so different," Seau said. "When I was lining up at the beginning of the 
year, I was looking at half of the field. This was my half of the field. I 
wasn't looking at everybody who was participating in the game; just the people 
in my half. That's how I dealt with it. I had to simplify the defense." 
In the middle of the field, it's Times Square on New Year's Eve. If you make 
one wrong move, "you can't recover," Seau said. "On the outside, you can still 
make a mistake and your speed and athletic ability can bail you out of 
trouble." 
Plummer, who perennially leads the team in tackles from his inside position, 
has provided a steady example for Seau. Plummer also has grown to respect his 
understudy. 
"I've really been amazed at his progress," Plummer said. "I've seen guys come 
and go and these guys played inside linebacker in college. 
"So what Junior has done without any previous experience amazes me even more. 
If he continues to improve like he has, there is no doubt in my mind he'll be 
an All-Pro some day." 
Seau, the embryonic superstar, still has the first sack to record, the first 
interception to grab, the first fumble to recover. And already, he's come so 
far. 
"No question in our mind," Lynn said, "we've got a gem here." 
