COLUMN ONE; 
NEGATIVE NEWS AND LITTLE ELSE; 
BY FOCUSING ON CRIME, POVERTY AND ABERRANT BEHAVIOR, NEWSPAPERS FAIL TO GIVE A 
COMPLETE PORTRAIT OF ETHNIC MINORITIES. 
Jesse B. Semple -- "Simple" to his friends -- lived in Harlem, where he often 
shared with his friend Boyd his wry, homespun observations on the pains and 
frustrations of life in a racist society. 
"The only time colored folks is front page news," Semple once said, "is when 
there's been a lynching or a boycott or a whole bunch of us have been butchered 
or is arrested." 
Writer Langston Hughes created the fictional character of "Simple" 48 years 
ago. But there was nothing fictional about Simple's commentary on the American 
press, and despite substantial improvement in recent years, many journalists of 
all colors offer disquietingly similar criticisms of their profession today. 
Overt racism in the press is rare now, and some newspapers -- most notably USA 
Today, others in the Gannett and Knight-Ridder chains and the Seattle Times -- 
have even tried as a matter of formal policy to include people of color in the 
mainstream of their daily coverage. But minority journalists (and many of their 
white colleagues and supervisors) say the overwhelming majority of press 
coverage still emphasizes the pathology of minority behavior -- drugs, gangs, 
crime, violence, poverty, illiteracy -- almost to the exclusion of normal, 
everyday life. 
To some extent, of course, the same criticism can be made of press coverage of 
whites. News, as defined by the people who write, edit, publish and broadcast 
it, is about the unusual, the aberrant -- about triumphs and tragedies, 
underachievers and overachievers; it's about the extremes of life, not "normal, 
everyday" life. 
But the press covers a much broader range of white life than of minority life, 
and critics say the narrow, distorted view of ethnic minorities presented in 
the press strongly influences how whites -- and such white-run institutions as 
the police, the courts and the school system -- perceive and treat minorities. 
The press thus plays a major role in perpetuating the ethnic stereotypes -- and 
fueling the prejudices and ethnic conflicts -- that increasingly polarize our 
increasingly multicultural society. 
Times interviews with more than 175 reporters, editors and publishers from more 
than 30 newspapers nationwide over the past four months produced a wide range 
of criticisms of how the press portrays African-Americans, Latinos, 
Asian-Americans and Native Americans. Among these were: Harmful stereotyping. 
Ignorance of cultural differences. Use of racially biased or insensitive 
language. Unfair comparisons between different ethnic groups. A double standard 
in the coverage of minority politicians. Failure to photograph or quote 
minorities. Anointing unrepresentative and sometimes irresponsible minority 
"spokesmen." Automatically lumping together all Latinos or, in particular, all 
Asian-Americans as a single community, without recognizing the substantial 
differences in culture and language among the varied elements of those 
communities. 
But no complaint about press coverage was voiced as frequently by minorities 
(or acknowledged as readily by many whites) as the overwhelmingly negative 
nature of most stories on people of color -- especially blacks and Latinos -- 
and the concomitant absence of people of color from the mainstream of daily 
news coverage. 
TV News 
Although local television news (with its emphasis on crime and violence) and 
network news (with its emphasis on public policy) are especially susceptible to 
these charges, most newspapers aren't much better, the critics say. And yet, 
only by covering all aspects of minority life can the press give whites a 
"rounded picture" of society -- and give minorities themselves a sense of 
belonging to that society, says A. Stephen Montiel, a Latino, who is president 
of the Institute for Journalism Education in Oakland. 
Occasionally, newspapers do provide this "rounded picture" by including 
minorities in their mainstream coverage. USA Today quoted and pictured blacks 
in a routine story in August on doctor-patient relations. The Seattle Times 
quoted and pictured an Asian-American couple in a September story on a slowdown 
in the Seattle housing market. The Miami Herald included Hispanics in a story 
on Christmas shopping -- and illustrated the story with a drawing that showed 
people of varying ethnic backgrounds. But these are exceptions. As far as the 
press is concerned, "We don't exist" in the mainstream of life in this country, 
says Craig Matsuda, assistant View section editor at the Los Angeles Times. 
Indeed, if all one knew about real-life blacks and Latinos in particular was 
what one read in the newspaper or saw on television news -- and in our still 
largely segregated society, that's where most whites do get most of their 
information about blacks and Latinos -- one would scarcely be aware that there 
is a large and growing middle class in both cultures, going to work, getting 
married, having children, paying taxes, going on vacation and buying books and 
VCRs and microwave ovens. 
Only 15% of the poor people in the United States are black, but one would not 
know that from most press coverage. Nor would one know that most violent 
criminals, drug-users, prostitutes, drunks, illiterates, high school dropouts, 
juvenile delinquents, jobless and poor people in this country are neither black 
nor Latino but white. Or that the vast majority of blacks and Latinos are none 
of the above. 
Despite vigorous efforts, even the Detroit Free Press -- with several 
high-ranking black editors and a city population that's more than 70% black -- 
doesn't do as good a job as it should covering blacks as "normal, everyday 
human beings," concedes the paper's white publisher, Neal Shine. 
Thus, while the paper's lifestyle section is officially called "The Way We 
Live," many blacks call it "The Way They Live." 
The Free Press has a much better reputation than most for covering blacks, but, 
"When I'm out in the community covering something, and folks say, 'Well, you 
work for a racist paper,' it's hard for me to defend" the paper, says Constance 
Prater, chief of the city-county bureau for the Free Press and president of the 
Detroit chapter of the National Assn. of Black Journalists. 
Blacks at other papers make almost identical comments about their communities 
and their papers. 
Blacks are the largest minority group in the United States, and they have 
generally been the victims of the worst bigotry here -- enslaved, lynched, once 
officially classified by the U.S. Supreme Court as non-citizens -- so it's not 
surprising that when the press thinks of minorities at all, there's a "historic 
tendency" to think almost exclusively of blacks, in the words of Leonard 
Downie, a white, who is managing editor of the Washington Post. 
Thus, a New York Times "American Voices" story last month, based on interviews 
nationwide about the crisis in the Persian Gulf, included a photograph of seven 
whites and one black but no photos of any other minorities. The story included 
interviews with 20 "Americans . . . of all walks of life;" not one had an 
identifiably Latino or Asian-American surname. 
That same day, a joint study by the National Commission on Working Women and 
Women in Film showed that there are about five times as many black characters 
as Latino, Asian-American and Native American characters combined in prime-time 
television. The study said there are as many extraterrestrial aliens in 
prime-time television as there are Latinos and Asian-Americans combined. 
"For a long time," says Gerald Garcia, publisher of the Knoxville Journal in 
Tennessee, "the only minority group that anyone (in the press) . . . had any 
conscious level about were blacks." 
There is some evidence that this is changing, however slowly -- especially in 
cities like Miami, Los Angeles, Chicago and San Francisco and in the Southwest, 
where there are large and rapidly growing Latino and/or Asian-American 
populations. But the largely negative press portrayals of blacks and Latinos 
may be changing even more slowly. 
No minority journalist interviewed for this story suggested that these negative 
portrayals -- or the absence of minorities from mainstream press coverage -- 
are the product of a conscious, racist decision by white editors and reporters. 
In fact, even the most caustic critics of the press acknowledge that most white 
journalists mean well; it's not the intent but the results that trigger 
widespread criticism -- and those results stem largely from ignorance, 
insensitivity, the absence of minority journalists from most newsrooms and, 
more important, the absence of minorities from most editors' offices (which 
will be the subject of Thursday's story in this series). 
"It's not so much some overt racist plot," says Janet Clayton, a black, who is 
assistant editorial page editor of the Los Angeles Times. "It has to do with, 
obviously, who runs newspapers . . . what the values are of those people, the 
world that they live in. We all bring to the table what . . . our life 
experience is." 
Journalists who have had little exposure to minorities or who have known them 
only in certain roles tend not to include them in their "everyday thinking," 
Clayton says, and "if they're not there in your mind, then they tend not be 
part of your natural news-gathering process." 
Newspapers routinely publish engagement notices ("all of them white"), 
obituaries ("all of them white") and stories on young, middle-class couples 
struggling to buy their first homes ("all of them white"), says Ben Johnson, a 
black, who is assistant managing editor of the St. Petersburg Times in Florida. 
This coverage of white America, Johnson says, gives readers "some sense of 
normalcy." 
But, he says, that same coverage also gives the impression that "people of 
color don't buy houses . . . die . . . get married." 
Johnson concedes that he may be exaggerating a bit in this characterization of 
press coverage, but he and others insist that the general, if unwitting message 
of the white press is that non-white people don't do these "normal" things, 
don't lead normal lives. 
A few newspapers have recently begun trying to correct this imbalance, actively 
urging social organizations, funeral homes and others in minority communities 
to send them newsworthy information. But such requests are still relatively 
rare. The result: Coverage of minorites continues to be skewed to the negative 
and the sensational. 
The double standard implicit in such coverage is not nearly as blatant as it 
once was. After all, in our own generation newspapers still routinely 
identified black crime suspects (but not white crime suspects) by race. Most 
responsible papers now do that only if it is relevant, and even then they often 
agonize over it -- as the New York Times did this year in making discussion of 
that subject the lead item in three issues of "Winners &amp; Sinners," its 
in-house critique of Times coverage. 
The discussion was triggered by the failure of the Times to include a racial 
description of a suspect in a shooting. Mentioning race in a skimpy description 
-- "black male" -- would be unfair, but since the paper had identified the 
suspect as "an unkempt man in his early 30's, about 6 feet tall and 180 pounds, 
with a moustache and beard," the question was raised, "Can we justify leaving 
out an element that narrows the field by a huge fraction? The omission itself, 
however kindly meant, might well seem patronizing -- as if we assume that a 
whole segment of the human race should feel stigmatized because one of its 
number committed a crime." 
Crime Suspects 
Careful consideration of the racial identification of criminal suspects is but 
one example of how the media has changed of late. As recently as the late 1960s 
-- and probably the 1970s in many cities -- virtually any reporter covering the 
police beat knew that if there was a murder in the ghetto or barrio, editors 
would automatically dismiss it as unworthy of publication -- a "misdemeanor 
homicide" in their lexicon. Now the most enlightened editors struggle to decide 
which is the worst journalistic sin -- publishing a story on a minority murder 
and contributing to the stereotype of minority communities as violence-prone or 
not publishing such a story and contributing to the perception that they regard 
minority lives as worth less than white lives. 
But the perception remains that white editors value white lives more highly 
than minority lives, that "black-on-black violence is not much of an issue 
until whites are involved," in the words of Bill Sing, an Asian-American who is 
an assistant business editor at the Los Angeles Times. 
This may help explain why most violent crimes in which blacks are the victims 
still receive far less press attention than do cases in which whites are the 
victims. 
The press swarmed all over the rape and beating of a white woman jogging in 
Central Park last year; even the Los Angeles Times, 2,500 miles away, put the 
story on Page 1 six times. The murder of a Utah tourist in a New York subway 
station this year also received massive press attention. 
But two days after the rape in Central Park, a black, off-duty mailman was 
gunned down in Harlem; about a week later, a black woman, the mother of four, 
was raped and sodomized at knifepoint, then hurled from the roof of a building, 
down an open air shaft, three stories to the ground, suffering severe injuries. 
Neither of these stories generally received more than passing notice in the 
news columns of New York's daily newspapers. 
Journalist Critics 
Minority journalists who criticize the press say they are not asking for 
special treatment -- for a kinder, gentler journalism -- only for a more 
comprehensive and comprehending journalism. 
"I am the last person in the world who will ever say that the Free Press can or 
should ignore the negative," says Jacqueline Thomas, associate editor and 
deputy editorial page editor of the Detroit Free Press. 
Some problems may even have been ignored by the paper for too long, she says. 
But Thomas, a black, seems uncomfortable with the current boycott of the Free 
Press by a relatively small group of blacks angry over its "negative" coverage 
of the city and Mayor Coleman Young, a black. 
Some black anger is "justified," Thomas says, because, "We don't do a good 
enough job in reflecting those things that make Detroit a place some of us want 
to live in." Thomas says she has "no doubt," however, that much of the 
criticism of the paper stems from "a fundamental misunderstanding about what 
our role is." 
Some blacks want the paper to be "supportive of black leadership," she says, 
but "I didn't become a journalist to become a cheerleader for anybody." 
Hiawatha Bray, a black reporter at the Lexington Herald-Leader in Kentucky, 
says much the same thing. But he also says blacks must share responsibility for 
the negative coverage they receive. 
"I get worried and very annoyed that black people would rather sit around 
complaining about how terrible the media is than saying, 'Well, gee, maybe we 
better stop our kids from participating in drive-by shootings,' " he says. 
Blacks and Latinos do commit a disproportionate share of the nation's crimes 
and are present in disproportionate numbers on many other indices of social 
pathology. Minority journalists who criticize the press don't deny these bleak 
statistics, but they point out that much of this pathological behavior stems in 
large measure from historic patterns of discrimination, segregation and 
exclusion. 
Moreover, pathology is only part of the story, and yet that's what gets the 
emphasis in the press. 
Most press coverage of minorities in a positive context involves an even 
narrower range of activity -- sports and entertainment, says John Funabiki, 
director of the Center for Integration and Improvement of Journalism, based at 
San Francisco State University. 
Otherwise, says Felix Gutierrez, vice president of the Gannett Foundation, 
minority coverage "too often . . . still falls into the predictable categories 
. . . We're either beset by problems . . . or we're causing problems for the 
white society . . . The other category of coverage where we're defined as a 
people are the 'zoo stories' -- Chinese New Year, Cinco de Mayo, black history 
month -- basically where they come out and see us in our cultural garb . . . 
out of the context of our normal daily living." 
Covering those stories would be perfectly appropriate, minority journalists 
say, if their "normal," middle-class existence were covered too. 
But the press "doesn't cover middle-class people, period," says Milton Coleman, 
assistant managing editor in charge of local news coverage at the Washington 
Post. "Most of us in this newsroom are middle-class; in so many ways, the lives 
we lead outside the newsroom are rarely covered in the pages of the newspaper 
because we tend to lean more toward covering policy . . . poverty . . . foreign 
affairs. 
"We're slow, for instance, to get on to covering day care as an issue even 
though after 3 o'clock or 3:30, the phones in this newsroom ring off the hook 
-- and it's not sources, it's kids calling their parents." 
But the problem is "more acute" in minority communities, particularly black 
communities, says Coleman, who's black. 
"In this town, so much of what we would generally regard as news -- the bad 
things -- happen to be about blacks," he says. "But a lot of the other news 
that often gets into the paper about the mainstream or hotsy-totsy people -- 
there aren't a lot of blacks, sometimes, in that news. 
"The national news world is a very white world in a lot of ways," Coleman says. 
Whites still occupy most of the powerful and visible positions in our society 
-- President, governor, senator, cabinet member, district attorney, Wall Street 
tycoon, corporate board chairman, network executive, movie mogul, newspaper 
publisher. 
"Most of the big news that the press covers is still made by whites," Coleman 
says. "If one reads the news pages . . . and tries to get a sense of the 
community, you get a distorted sense of the black community." 
Similar distortions are evident in coverage of other minority communities. 
Interestingly, while African-Americans and Latinos object to the preponderantly 
negative coverage the press give them, Asian-Americans object mostly to 
coverage that depicts them as a "model minority," largely devoid of the 
problems besetting other minorities. But some Asian-Americans also share their 
fellow minorities' complaint that the press sensationalizes much of what it 
covers in minority communities -- the conflict between Korean greengrocers and 
black customers in several cities being a prime example. 
Some critics say the press may occasionally try to overcompensate for its 
essentially negative portrayal of blacks and Latinos by being too soft on 
prominent members of those ethnic groups who deserve critical scrutiny. Both 
the Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times came in for that criticism in 
their early coverage of Mayors Marion Barry and Tom Bradley, respectively. 
But many minorities say the white press has occasionally been too tough on 
minority politicians, holding them to a stricter standard than white 
politicians. Some minorities argue that there's a conspiracy in the white 
establishment -- the press included -- to discredit prominent black 
politicians. 
Conspiracy, double standard or not, complaints about the misportrayal of 
minorities in general and the resultant, pervasive public misperception of them 
is not a simple matter of sensitivity over ethnic image -- or of academic 
journalistic criticism. 
The portrayal of many minorities in the press creates a misleading and 
destructive public impression -- even more destructive, in many ways, than that 
cited in 1968 by the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders (popularly 
known as the Kerner Commission). 
"By failing to portray the Negro as a matter of routine and in the context of 
the total society, the news media have, we believe, contributed to the 
black-white schism in this country," the commission said. 
"If what the white American reads in the newspapers or sees on television 
conditions his expectation of what is ordinary and normal in the larger 
society, he will neither understand nor accept the black American." 
Indeed, as Marilyn Gist of the University of Washington asks in a study on the 
negative portrayal of minorities in the press, "To what extent do biased 
journalistic practices contribute to police practices in the war on drugs or 
gangs . . . . To what extent are the higher rates of incarceration among 
African-Americans a function of subtle racism among judges and juries -- racism 
perpetuated by media bias?" 
Last year, in Boston, Charles Stuart told police that a black man had murdered 
his pregnant wife and shot him. The media jumped on the story, largley ignoring 
striking inconsistencies in Stuart's story, and publicly identified several 
black suspects taken into custody. 
Police conducted a massive, invasive search of black neighborhoods and then let 
it be known that they thought they had a strong case against one of the 
suspects. A Massachussets state senator later said, "I'm positive that (the 
suspect) . . . would have been charged, convicted and sent to prison for the 
rest of his natural life" had it not been for one slight hitch: Ten weeks after 
Stuart's wife was murdered, Stuart apparently leaped to his death from a bridge 
over Boston Harbor after learning that he had become the prime suspect in the 
case. 
Media Blamed 
Although Boston editors vigorously defend their coverage of the Stuart case, 
many others were critical of it and blamed the media -- in that specific case 
and in general minority coverage over the years -- for having contributed to a 
climate in which police and public alike automatically assumed the guilt of a 
black man in the murder of a white. 
"The Boston media, including good television stations and a good newspaper, 
allowed themselves to be duped by stereotypes of who crime victims and 
perpetrators are," says Tom Morgan, a reporter for the New York Times and 
president of the National Assn. of Black Journalists. 
"This is a continuing pattern throughout the country," Morgan says. "The media 
are too quick to jump to negative conclusions when it comes to minorities." 
Of course, the press is quick to jump to negative conclusions when it comes to 
almost everyone, as virtually every politician of any color would be quick to 
point out. Hence former Vice President Spiro Agnew's characterization of the 
press as "nattering nabobs of negativism," an epithet not noticeably inspired 
by an abiding sympathy for the plight of the disadvantaged in our society. 
But Les Payne, assistant managing editor of Newsday in New York, says media 
stereotyping of minorities -- especially young black males -- contributes 
significantly to the way society treats them, especially in the criminal 
justice system and on the street. 
Whites who killed 16-year-old Yusuf Hawkins in the Bensonhurst section of 
Brooklyn last year noticed only one thing about their target -- "he was black," 
Payne says. 
"He could have been Jamal Payne -- my son." 
Only one of the seven men ultimately charged in the slaying of Hawkins was held 
without bail as soon as he was arrested, much as the white defendants in 
another widely publicized murder of a black in New York -- the Howard Beach 
case -- were allowed to remain free on bail, even after they were convicted, 
pending their appeal. But in the Central Park jogger case, all eight black 
defendants were denied bail at their arraignment. 
Media stereotypes must share the blame for this inequity, Payne and others say. 
The media's portrayal of minorities may affect minorities' perceptions of 
themselves in a way that may be equally damaging. 
Most people's self-image derives in part from how they see themselves portrayed 
in the press, and the negative portrayal of many minorities by the press may be 
psychologically destructive, Gist says, in transmitting "strong signals . . . 
to developing minority youth about what they can (and cannot) become." 
As David Lawrence, the white publisher of the Miami Herald puts it, "If we show 
readers only white folks as bankers . . . or chefs, no wonder minorities grow 
up thinking they can't be those things." 
The frustrations and failures engendered by these press messages may help 
explain not only the pathology of some minority behavior but the resultant 
racial tensions that are growing in many segments of our ever more pluralistic 
society. 
The most notorious racial incidents in recent years -- the Central Park jogger 
case, Bensonhurst, Howard Beach, Tawana Brawley, the black boycott of Korean 
grocers -- all seem to have happened in New York. That's because the national 
media are headquartered in New York. But there have been equally volatile 
instances of racial conflict in virtually every major American city, and unless 
significant progress is made toward multicultural understanding and tolerance, 
critics say the conflict seems likely to increase as minority populations 
continue to increase. 
Minorities now make up about 25% of the nation's population, and the number is 
climbing rapidly; since 1980, the percentage of blacks in the population has 
grown at twice the rate of whites, the percentage of Latinos has grown at 
almost six times the rate of whites and the percentage of Asian-Americans has 
grown at more than 10 times the rate of whites. Over the next decade, 87% of 
the nation's population growth will be among minorities. 
"Minorities" are already a majority in such major cities as New York, Chicago, 
Washington, Detroit, Cleveland, Miami, San Francisco and Los Angeles. 
That's one reason why there are now more than 250 black, Spanish-language and 
various Asian-language newspapers published in the United States -- most of 
them providing, among other things, just the kind of mainstream and generally 
upbeat coverage of their communities that the white press eschews. 
Many minority journalists see this inexorable growth of minority population as 
the ultimate answer to the problem of indifferent or insensitive press 
coverage. 
In the 1960s and early 1970s, they say, minorities -- and some enlightened 
whites -- urged the press to give more (and more evenhanded) coverage to 
minorities because such coverage was the morally and ethically correct thing to 
do. 
With a few notable exceptions, not much really changed. 
Then a new argument was mounted, not a moral argument but a journalistic 
argument: Better minority coverage would make for better -- i.e., more 
complete, more sensitive and more diverse newspapers. 
Again, with a few notable exceptions, not much really changed. 
But now, newspaper readership is declining and minority population is 
increasing, and the advocates of pluralism in the news columns are mounting a 
financial argument: Cover minorities better because they're not going to be in 
the minority much longer, and if you don't cover them, they won't read your 
papers or patronize your advertisers and you're going to be out of business, 
scratching your bald head, wondering what you did wrong. 
This is not a new argument, but the new realities of the marketplace have 
persuaded more publishers and top editors to listen to it this time. 
When the argument was first made, in the mid-1970s, newspapers were "fascinated 
with upscale readers" and blinded by the stereotype that said minority readers 
didn't read or buy, says Jay Harris, a black, who is vice president of 
operations for Knight-Ridder newspapers. 
A few years ago, Charles Erickson tried to persuade the publisher of a 
newspaper in a heavily Latino market to subscribe to his Hispanic Link News 
Service, which provides news and commentary on Latino issues. 
"Our people wouldn't buy it," the publisher told Erickson. "They're all 
illiterate." 
Another publisher, Otis Chandler of the Los Angeles Times -- now chairman of 
the executive committee of the Times Mirror Board of Directors -- stirred 
considerable controversy in 1978 when he said in an interview that the black 
and Latino markets didn't have the purchasing power that Times advertisers 
required and, further, that it was difficult to get those groups to read the 
paper because "it's not their kind of newspaper. It's too big, it's too stuffy 
-- if you will, it's too complicated." 
Chandler concedes he "shouldn't have used the word . . . 'complicated,' " but 
he says he was "agonizing over the paper's inadequate coverage of minorities 
and was groping for explanations." He says he did not mean to imply that 
"blacks and Latinos are not smart enough to read The Times." 
Nevertheless, Frank del Olmo, deputy editorial page editor of The Times, says 
he still hears complaints in the Latino community about Chandler's remarks and, 
as Joyce Sherwood and Peter Johnson of The Times editorial library assisted 
with the research for this series. 
Harris says, until relatively recently, most newspapers did think that low 
education levels and/or language barriers rendered most minorities unlikely 
readers -- and unlikely consumers for their advertisers. So little effort was 
made to cover them as news subjects -- except when their deeds (say, as 
athletes) or misdeeds (say, as gang members) made them unavoidably "newsworthy" 
by the standard, white journalist's definition of that term. 
"There's a dirty little secret in all newspapers -- the advertisers we cater to 
are not thrilled when you sign up a bunch of readers in some poverty area for 
home delivery," says Joseph Lelyveld, managing editor of the New York Times. 
Lelyveld, a white, says he doesn't know if that attitude "seeped into the 
newsroom," but he leaves the impression that it is a distinct possibility, 
particularly from the late 1970s into the early and mid-1980s. "There was a 
time when this paper could have been accused of abandoning certain kinds of 
readers," he says. "We had bumpy times . . . in which it seems to me there was 
a kind of weariness with poverty issues, city issues. We didn't seem 
particulary committed to coverage of minorities, especially in our own . . . 
area. 
"We used to give more coverage to Zimbabwe than the Bronx." 
The civil rights movement and urban riots of the 1960s sparked widespread 
journalistic concern about minority coverage -- coverage of blacks in 
particular -- that led to a greater sensitivity and commitment which lasted 
into the 1970s. But during the Reagan/Bush years, a corporate, bottom-line 
mentality began to take hold at even the best of newspapers, and the revolution 
"lost its edge," in the words of Ernest Holsendolph, a black, who is about to 
begin writing a business column at the Atlanta Journal and Constitution after 
serving as city editor of the paper for a year. 
Even when minorities are covered, they are often covered strictly as 
minorities, not as part of the mainstream. 
William H. Gray III (D.-Pa.), majority whip of the U.S. House of 
Representatives, has long been praised by the press for his political skills 
and his grasp of a wide variety of issues, but he, too, was "ghettoized" in 
this fashion. Most stories on Gray in the New York Times, Washington Post and 
Philadelphia Inquirer early in his congressional career involved black politics 
or South Africa, according to a study by Linda Williams of the Joan Shorenstein 
Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy. 
"Apparently, his views were not deemed newsworthy when the subject was not 
blacks," Williams concluded. 
Moreover, Gray's race was often noted in articles that "had nothing to do with 
the subject of race (especially articles on the budget process) . . . . Gray 
was so often referred to as the 'black Budget Committee Chairman' that a 
(foreign visitor) . . . might well have wondered if the U.S. House of 
Representatives had a white budget chairman and a black budget chairman," 
Williams said. 
Similarly, the Los Angeles Times, Washington Post and Chicago Tribune have all 
referred to August Wilson as a "black playwright;" The Times called him "one of 
the nation's leading black playwrights." But after winning two Pulitzer Prizes, 
hasn't Wilson earned the right to be called "one of the nation's leading 
playwrights," period? After all, no one writes of David Mamet as "one of the 
nation's leading white playwrights." Doesn't describing Wilson as (merely) a 
"black playwright" implicitly diminish his achievement? 
Lynn Duke, a Washington Post reporter recently assigned to write about race as 
a regular beat, says this "labeling" makes blacks "appear to be not part of the 
broader society but a special-interest group." 
"The label 'black politician,' 'black writer,' 'black activist' . . . tends 
automatically to separate that writer, that politician, that activist from the 
purview of mainstream concerns and makes it a smaller, separate and therefore 
not as important an issue for the society at-large. . . ." 
Joyce Sherwood and Peter Johnson of The Times editorial library assisted with 
the research for this series. 
THE GROWING MINORITY IN THE NATION'S METROPOLITAN AREAS AND CITIES 
Minority population in the nation's major cities and metropolitan areas has 
increased enormously over the past decade. Population for metropolitan areas is 
shown on top of the following graphs. 
CHICAGO CITY, 1990 
White: 36.5% 
Black: 41.1 
Hispanic: 17.9 
Asian and other: 4.5 
CLEVELAND CITY, 1990 
White: 46.2% 
Black: 47.7 
Hispanic: 3.9 
Asian and other: 2.5 
DETROIT CITY, 1990 
White: 21.4% 
Black: 73.6 
Hispanic: 3.1 
Asian and other: 1.9 
LOS ANGELES CITY, 1990 
White: 41.5% 
Black: 15.1 
Hispanic: 33.2 
Asian and other: 10.2 
MIAMI CITY, 1990 
White: 13.1% 
Black: 24.4 
Hispanic: 61.4 
Asian and other: 1.1 
NEW YORK CITY, 1990 
White: 46.2% 
Black: 24.3 
Hispanic: 23.4 
Asian and other: 6.1 
SAN FRANSISCO CITY, 1990 
White: 44.8% 
Black: 11.5 
Hispanic: 14.8 
Asian and other: 28.9 
SEATTLE CITY, 1990 
White: 71.6% 
Black: 11.1 
Hispanic: 3.3 
Asian and other: 14.0 
WASHINGTON D.C., 1990 
White: 25.8% 
Black: 68.5 
Hispanic: 3.5 
Asian and other: 2.2 
Source: National Planning Corp. and U.S. Bureau of the Census 
