AMERICAN ALBUM: BUSINESS IS BUBBLING AGAIN AS LITHIUM-WATER DRINKERS SWEAR BY 
ITS HEALING POWERS. 
People are once again bringing their hopes, dreams and illnesses to this little 
community, seeking fulfillment and cure in the spring water that long ago was 
medicine and thirst-quencher for Cherokees. 
The water, laden with minerals and generations of lore, reputedly can treat 
manic-depression, alcoholism, heart trouble and kidney problems. It also has 
been hailed as an aphrodisiac, leading to its nickname of "love water." 
Such claims helped overcome a slightly alkaline taste and created a boom in 
bottled lithium water over a century ago. The only lithium springs in the 
United States spawned a resort, including a golf course and the sumptuous 
Sweetwater Park Hotel, that drew the rich and ill in droves. 
Hard times soon hit. The hotel burned down in 1912. The federal Food and Drug 
Administration banned the extravagant advertising claims. Public enthusiasm for 
lithia water began to wane, and by the 1940s bottling ceased. 
But business is bubbling again here. In 1983, history aficionado Gleda James, 
along with other investors, bought the springs and resumed bottling. Mineral 
water sales -- now the fastest growing segment in the beverage industry -- were 
taking off and the Lithia Springs Water Co., benefiting from the legacy of 
those legendary claims, took off even faster. The company will double its sales 
to over a million gallons this year. 
Recently, James received a purchase order from the Philippines. And a Tokyo 
department store is displaying the water. Closer to home, the water company 
provides its product, gratis, to the Georgia Legislature, thus putting claims 
of the water's soothing powers to a severe test. 
The springs now are part of a rustic complex on a 5-acre plot about 20 miles 
west of Atlanta that also contains a small museum detailing the water's 
history, a little herb garden and a huge rock formation with Indian carvings. 
James and her partners also hope to restore the resort. 
Tourists and locals alike make their way here -- sometimes to buy the water as 
part of their effort to cure illnesses doctors are having little success 
treating, and sometimes to simply reassure themselves that the springs, like 
their memories, still exist. 
Martha Fain, visiting here recently from nearby Powder Springs, Ga., sipped 
some of the water and said: "It tastes like I remember it tasting as a child." 
The water, which flows through a rock formation into a 40-foot-deep basin, 
contains potassium, calcium, magnesium and manganese. But its distinctive 
ingredient is lithium, a light metal. 
In Sacramento, Gen Baugher said the lithium water has improved her kidney 
function and helped relieve her son's manic-depression. The water is not sold 
in California stores, but for years she has had the water shipped by the 
truckload, adding: "It's very valuable to us." 
Physicians used to hail lithium water as a healer's delight. A Congress of 
Physicians at Lithia Springs in 1887 produced a report recommending the water 
to treat, among other conditions, kidney stones, jaundice, rheumatism, 
headaches, typhoid fever, indigestion, eczema, dropsy and "diseases of delicate 
women." 
Doctors today are likely to recommend it only if you are thirsty. But lithium 
pills are prescribed for depression, and it follows, say some lithium-water 
drinkers, that the water must have some of the same properties. 
James and her son Greg, who helps operate the bottling company, are careful not 
to make claims about the water curing illnesses or putting fizz into one's sex 
life. However, they do relate stories that have been told to them by customers 
like Baugher. 
James recalled one man who "gets five gallons of water at a time. When he 
bought the first bottles, he said he had heard it was good for the prostate and 
for impotency. He said he was going to give it the acid test. He's been coming 
back for five years now." 
Jared Huburt Irwin, a 74-year-old resident of Douglasville, Ga., first drank 
lithium water as a young Army mule driver back in 1934 because it "cooled your 
thirst and gave me energy. While the other boys were drinking whiskey, I drank 
the water." 
Now ill with diabetes and bed-ridden after having a leg amputated, Irwin had 
been unable to get any of the water for a while. The other day, friends 
supplied him with some, considerably brightening his outlook. "I'm hoping it'll 
make me better," he told a visitor. "I think it will." 
Not everyone takes to the water so hopefully. 
Yvette Alexander said it reminded her of water with baking soda in it. But she 
smiled when she was reminded of the water's reputed aphrodisiac qualities. 
Preparing to drive with her friend Zack Nauth from Atlanta to Baton Rouge, La., 
Alexander said: "I'll let you know what Zack does on the way home." 
