JERRY HULSE'S TRAVEL TIPS 
Although old Hawaii with its grass shacks is but a melancholy memory, it's 
still possible to escape the pressure cooker by jetting to remote spots on 
these islands. I used to have a romance going with the legendary Waiohai, the 
little resort at Poipu -- on the island of Kauai. This was before the 
developers trashed it and replaced it with a major hotel. Still, there are 
pockets in paradise. A new 144-page guide, "The Islands of Hawaii," contains 
information on accommodations, activities, entertainment, tours. Clues to 
hideaways on Oahu, Maui, Kauai, Molokai, Lanai and the Big Island. For a free 
copy, telephone toll-free (800) 356-3377. 
New York Inns: More than 100 country inns/B&amp;Bs spread across New York state 
are named in a new guide with listings by region. Takes in areas from Albion to 
Windham. A map in the centerfold to assist motorists. At the back of the guide 
there's a listing of tourist agencies that offer additional information on 
accommodations, activities, attractions. Sells for $2. Contact Branys, P.O. Box 
862, Canandaigua, N.Y. 14424. 
Bahamas Hideaway: Shauna Pickett-Gordon of Los Angeles took our advice and 
vacationed at Nettie Symonette's Casuarinas Hotel in the Bahamas. "Just 
returned after 10 days. Can't imagine spending money on Las Vegas-style resorts 
in Nassau and missing the real Bahamas. Nettie and her family made us feel 
welcome in a special way, recommending places to dine, offering advice on 
tours. The hotel has both regular and housekeeping units. Nettie grows her own 
vegetables, herbs. The hotel's Round House Restaurant serves a variety of 
native dishes at reasonable prices -- about 60% of what you'd pay in the casino 
hotels in Nassau. The other restaurant, Albion's, serves 
conch-snapper-grouper-beans 'n' rice specialties. Nettie's was a real treat." 
Casuarinas Hotel, P.O. Box N4016, Nassau, Bahamas. 
Cancun: The Hotel Cancun Beach Club in Mexico has come up with a post-holiday 
package. Four days, three nights: $302, including taxes. Includes a junior 
suite for two, daily breakfast/dinner, unlimited drinks, free tennis. Offer is 
good through Jan. 25. After this you get the same deal through April 15 for 
$346. 
Contact your travel agent or Hotel Cancun Beach Club, Cancun, Mexico. 
Mediterranean Escape: "A sea view from every apartment" is promised when you 
book holiday space with The French Experience, specialists providing vacation 
rentals throughout France. One-bedroom apartments along the Provencal coast 
between St. Tropez and Le Lavandou are priced from $455 to $725 a week, 
mid-April till mid-September. (Two-week minimums required July/August.) In 
Paris, The French Experience books studio/one-bedroom apartments on both the 
Left and Right banks of the Seine. Six-night rentals from $534. The French 
Experience, 370 Lexington Ave., New York 10017. 
Heart's Hideaway: A note from C.D. of Redondo Beach: "A couple of years ago you 
wrote about a romantic Italian village south of Naples and a resort that's 
built into a cliff. Do you still have the address?" Write to Hotel San Pietro, 
84017 Positano, Italy. Overlooks the Tyrhenian Sea on the Amalfi Drive. Only a 
short hydrofoil ride from Capri. Rooms are cleverly hidden among the ledges of 
a cliff that drops straight away to the sea. No two alike. Great spot for 
honeymooners. So is Positano. I rate it among my favorite places in Europe. 
This is also the village that enchanted John Steinbeck. 
San Francisco: Following October's big shake, San Francisco is back wooing 
vacationers. Particularly in Japantown. A new folder describes Japanese shops, 
restaurants, hotels. Eighteen categories ranging from art galleries to travel 
services. Imported items include furniture, folk crafts, jewelry, books, tapes, 
toys. Hotels include the 125-room Kyoto Inn and the 218-room Miyako. Both 
Western and Japanese accommodations. For a free copy of the Japantown folder, 
send a stamped, self-addressed envelope to the Japan Center, 1520 Webster St., 
San Francisco 94115. 
Reader Recommendations 
California -- Elena Allen, Laguna Hills: "Village Inn Bed &amp; Breakfast, 407 
El Camino Real, Arroyo Grande 93420. Rates: $85/$125. Best B&amp;B I've ever 
stayed in. Great food, wonderful hospitality." 
California -- John McTaggart, Rancho Palos Verdes: "The Kaleidoscope Inn, 130 
E. Dana St., Nipomo, Calif. 93444. This place has a special charm. Ideal for 
people who are planning to stay in the Santa Maria/San Luis Obispo area. Rates: 
$65/$70." 
California -- Jack D. Whitehead, San Marino: "Just returned from an outstanding 
weekend at John Gardiner's Rancho Valencia Resort, the fabulous tennis ranch 
that opened last July at Rancho Santa Fe. Beautifully landscaped, lovely 
cottages in Spanish architecture and Southwest decor. Food deliciously 
prepared. We loved it! Daily rates start at $295 for two, which includes 
breakfast, court time. Rancho Valencia Resort, P.O. Box 9126, Rancho Santa Fe 
92067. Telephone toll-free (800) 548-3664." 
New York -- B. Davidson, Santa Monica: "The Salisbury Hotel, West 57th Street 
between 6th and 7th avenues. Across from Carnegie Hall and the Russian Tea 
Room. Occupied a suite with two king-size beds. Could easily have accommodated 
six people. The price for seniors: $125 per night. Moderately priced 
breakfasts." 
Hawaii -- Betsy and Mike Germaine, Sherman Oaks: High praise for a condominium 
complex called KulaKane, 3741 Lower Honoapiilani Road, Lahaina, Maui 96761. 
"Stayed in an ocean-front unit for only $95 a night. Magnificent sunsets. Near 
two golf courses and a mile from the main resort area of Kaanapali. We can't 
rave enough." 
Thailand -- Walt and Carole Kilmanas, Redondo Beach: "A great tour guide for 
area around Chiang Mai in Northern Thailand. Good English, college student, 
very knowledgeable, great sense of humor. Loves to answer questions. Write to 
Maew Soiphet, Northlands Travel Center, 104/1 Changklan Road, Chiang Mai 50000 
Thailand." 
England -- Robert E. Neu, Los Angeles: Enjoyed Freda Beaumont's Uplands Farm, 
Werneth Low, Gee Cross, Hyde, Cheshire SK14 3AG. "A good halfway point between 
the Lake District and the Cotswolds. A huge, rambling stone farmhouse built in 
1760, with huge feather beds and comforters and a bigger fireplace than the 
Ahwahnee Hotel. Jammed to the rafters with old paintings, lamps, fabrics. Not 
sterile, not perfect, but like a home. I went away thinking that this was the 
life people led hundreds of years ago and maybe it wasn't so bad." 
England -- Karl Keever, Santa Barbara: A delightful B&amp;B -- the Langdale 
House, Malton, North Yorkshire, 16 miles east of York. A small market town. 
Excellent accommodations, some with private baths. Rates: 12/14 per person per 
night." 
England -- Gregory Miller, Los Angeles: "A wonderful B&amp;B with sweeping 
views of the Cotswolds. Contact Mrs. S. Adams, The Gables, Ganborough Road, 
Longborough, Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire GL56 ORE, England. Rates: 12.50 
per night." 
England -- Donald G. Devalois, Los Angeles: "Enjoyed a monthlong vacation in a 
private home at Goring on Thames (40 miles west of London). Accommodations for 
two or three persons. Rates: $600 U.S. per person per month, plus $50 for 
utilities. Contact Angela Pick, 1233 6th St., Santa Monica 90403." 
England -- M. L. Grey, Laguna Hills: "Superb six-day tour of the English Lake 
District, $1,125 U.S. per person, including accommodations at an English 
country-house hotel, all meals, five days of personal guidance in a private 
van. Owner/guides John Goldsmith and Thelma Moore can be reached c/o Land of 
Lakes Tours, the Birches, Cornbirthwaite Road, Windermere, Cumbria LA2 31DG, 
England. A class act." 
