DEATHS OF 12 AT TIJUANA RITE BLAMED ON GAS 
Coroner's officials said Friday that 12 people who died during a nightlong 
religious ceremony in a closed, four-room house asphyxiated from carbon 
monoxide poisoning caused by a butane-gas lantern used for light. 
Victor Vazquez, a deputy district attorney here, said the windows and doors of 
the small house in Colonia Mariano Matamoros on the southeastern edge of the 
city were shut tight, keeping fresh air from getting inside. There apparently 
were no vents in the house that would have allowed the gas to escape. 
"It was definitely an accident," Vazquez said of the Thursday-morning incident. 
As the lantern continued to burn, people began falling asleep, a symptom of 
carbon monoxide poisoning, officials said. Not everyone in the house died; five 
victims were found unconscious and hospitalized. A sixth survivor -- who was 
said to have escaped sometime during the ceremony -- was taken to the hospital 
later Thursday and was in serious condition. Three remained comatose Friday. 
Many of the dead and injured are related. Among the dead were two mothers, each 
of whom perished along with her two children. Also killed were a husband and 
wife. 
Mexican authorities have now ruled out a fruit punch found at the house as a 
source of the deaths. The group drank the fruit punch, which one survivor said 
led to screaming, and officials at first believed the beverage was contaminated 
with an industrial solvent or alcohol. 
The all-night religious ritual apparently played a role in the deaths. On 
several occasions Wednesday night, people tried to enter the house but were 
turned away by the group's spiritual leader, Federico Padres Mexia, or others 
who were participating in the religious ceremony that included chanting and 
standing or sitting inside a circle delineated by a rope with 13 knots that was 
laid on the floor. Mexia, 61, is now in a coma. 
A survivor, Alfredo Osuna Hernandez, 22, said the group was engaged in a 
"cleansing" ritual that began early Wednesday night. Asked why no one left to 
seek help, Osuna said, "It is very damaging to leave the circle." 
The daughter of one of the victims, Ana Faviola Miranda Juarez, 19, who entered 
the house early Thursday morning, said it smelled strongly of gas. She didn't 
disturb the apparently slumbering occupants, who included her mother, because 
she felt the ritual was still under way, and said some of the people were 
snoring. 
Her mother, Gloria Miranda Juarez, 45, owned the home and lived there with 
Mexia. She was among the dead. 
News of the deaths continued to consume Tijuana and its media on Friday. Some 
relatives of the victims were furious over Mexican newspaper reports 
characterizing the deaths as a result of some satanic rite. 
Several family members who gathered outside a public hospital, awaiting word on 
their loved ones, said that their relatives were staunch Roman Catholics, and 
that some had gone to Mass on Wednesday to celebrate the religious holiday of 
Our Lady of Guadalupe. 
Jesus Moreno, 23, whose sister died and whose mother is comatose, said his 
mother recited the rosary every night and blessed her children. "The man who 
ran the tortilla shop told my mother our whole family was under a spell of bad 
luck," Moreno said. 
His mother thought that perhaps he was right, because of the family's lack of 
jobs and money. Out of curiosity, Moreno said, his mother went to the house. 
On Friday, a picture of Mexia began to emerge, painted by those who live in the 
Colonia Mariano Matamoros shantytown, home to many migrants from the interior 
of Mexico, and by those in the Riverside County town of Sun City, where Mexia 
had a home. He also lived briefly in Encinitas. 
Mexia, a husky, 5-foot-8, 180-pound man, moved in with Gloria Miranda in July, 
according to neighbors. She had first moved into the house a few months before. 
The home, with its brown stucco walls, pitched roof, glass windows and 
beach-ball-size satellite dish bolted above the front door, stood out from the 
others in the dusty, teeming hillside community, where most houses are little 
more than shacks with tar-paper walls and corrugated metal roofs. 
Soon after Mexia moved in, word spread that he was a spiritual leader who, 
often through mediums, conducted religious cleansing rituals at the house, 
where he was building a chapel in the yard because God was coming, a neighbor 
said. 
"He said God was coming down because he (Mexia) had asked him to," said Isabel 
Mendez, 30, who lives nearby. "He said it was going to make this community very 
famous, and lots of reporters were going to arrive, and lots of hotels would be 
built." 
Another neighbor, Daria Machado, 26, a mother of two, said there always seemed 
to be a lot of people at Mexia's house, and the religious ceremonies took place 
often, though not necessarily late into the night. It was common to see cars 
with California licenses parked around the house, she said. 
"They would go inside, and you wouldn't see them anymore," Machado said. "The 
house is very closed up with curtains on the windows so you couldn't see much." 
Mexia became friendly with Rafael Corchado Meraz, 37, who operated La Costena, 
a neighborhood tortilla shop. 
Corchado, an American citizen who lived in Tijuana, became one of Mexia's 
strongest supporters, sometimes urging his customers and his workers to attend 
the rituals, which several of them did. After finishing his tortilla 
deliveries, Corchado would frequently go to Mexia's house and spend the rest of 
the day there. 
He told people in the neighborhood that the prayer meetings with Mexia would 
cure them of their bad luck, which kept them unemployed. 
That message resounded loud and clear in a barrio where people are poor and 
many had traveled a long distance from the interior of Mexico to look for jobs. 
Corchado went to the house Wednesday night. He was among those found dead. 
"He would ask me if I wanted to go," said Jorge Reyes Castro, 18, who worked at 
the tortilla factory. "He said they would cure people there, and that they were 
going to see God. He said everyone would sit in a chair and close their eyes, 
and then their body would be like asleep. And that they would sleep three to 
four hours and talk to God." 
Rosa Oralia Valenzuela, 18, was among those waiting Friday outside the 
intensive care unit at the hospital to learn the condition of their brothers, 
sisters or parents. 
Oralia, whose two sisters-in-law died and whose father-in-law was in a coma, 
said she had attended a few of Mexia's sessions. 
At the first meeting, she said, she was introduced to a woman named Conchita 
who Mexia said was a medium through whom God would speak. Oralia said Conchita 
sat in an armchair and stood up as each person went up to her. 
Conchita would have the people lift their arms, turn over their palms and 
describe their problems. Oralia said she was reluctant to tell the medium 
anything. "So she looked at me and said, 'Here is the key to luck.' I looked 
down, and I saw she had pressed nothing into my hand," Conchita said. 
On Wednesday night, when the deadly carbon monoxide episode began, Mexia had 
told people that a particularly powerful medium from nearby Rosarito Beach 
would be coming to the session. It's not known whether the medium arrived. 
Neighbors of Mexia's in Sun City, a community of about 11,000 east of Lake 
Elsinore, said Mexia moved into a beige, Spanish-style stucco house in a new 
subdivision about two years ago from Encinitas. The house in the 28000 block of 
Calle Gaviota has been for sale for a year. It was first offered at $120,000, 
but is now on the market at $93,500. 
They knew him to be a concrete mason who did some work on his driveway and who 
at times also helped other neighbors with their concrete work. 
One neighbor, who declined to be identified, said Mexia told him that his wife 
had moved to Mexico City and that he was now living in Tijuana with another 
woman at a house he had built for about $8,000. 
Shirley Hosking, who lives next door to Mexia's house in Sun City, described 
him as a quiet person, who told her landlord that "he had died and went to 
heaven twice, and that God gave him a book." 
She said he was living in the house with a woman named Martha who she thought 
was his wife, but she apparently moved out last summer with the help of family 
members. 
"He was kind of weird in odd ways," Hosking said. "He had a car with a dead 
battery, and every day he jumped it." She said she had loaned him a battery 
charger and he had it for three to four months. He used it only to start his 
car, and not to charge the battery. 
Mexia also once lived in Encinitas. A former neighbor in the 700 block of 
Snapdragon Street recalled that Mexia had a heart condition and was retired. He 
didn't seem particularly religious, at least compared to his wife, Martha, said 
Berta Smith. 
"Martha was a good friend of mine. She come up every day for coffee. She did 
(housecleaning) work in Solana Beach and Del Mar," Smith said. "They moved to 
Sun City, and we were sorry to see them go." 
Found inside the house in Tijuana were three psalmbooks, said Jaime Sam Fierro, 
a commander of the Baja California judicial police. Two of the books showed 
they were from El Templo de Mediodia -- the Midday Church -- and were dated 
1980. 
The third book was entitled "Oraciones Dadas al Sexto Sello" -- Prayers Given 
to the Sixth Seal -- which refers to apocalyptic visions of God's judgment in 
the Book of Revelation. 
Dr. Gustavo Salazar, head pathologist in the Tijuana coroner's office, said the 
conclusion of carbon monoxide poisoning was based on preliminary results of six 
autopsies conducted Friday. 
Internal organs and tissues of the dead, including livers, stomachs, lungs and 
intestines, are being turned over to the San Diego County medical examiner's 
office for more detailed toxicology tests, Vazquez said. The Americans will try 
to confirm the carbon monoxide poisoning through blood tests. 
A spokesman for the San Diego County medical examiner said his office had 
agreed to help the Mexicans. He said that, depending on the laboratory work 
done in Tijuana, it could take several days or even a few weeks to get the 
results of toxicology tests. 
The list of the dead: 
Maria Dora Hernandez Peraza, 38, and her two daughters, Blanca Sarabia 
Hernandez, 20, and Maribel Sarabia Hernandez, 15. 
Elodia Mondragon Jimenez, 30, and her children, Jesus Eduardo Peralta 
Mondragon, 15, and Monica Lizette Peralta Mondragon, 11. 
Fidel Coronel Franco, 65, and his wife, Benita Rosales Villalpando, believed to 
be 45. 
Consuelo Moreno Ponce, 14. 
Rafael Corchado Meraz, 37. 
Margarita Ramos de Osuna, 20. 
and Gloria Miranda Juarez, 45. 
Those hospitalized: 
Mexia. 
Consuelo Ponce Ramirez, 35. 
Juan Jose Sarabia, 42. 
Alfredo Osuna Hernandez, 22, husband of Blanca Sarabia Hernandez, and their 
daughter, Ana Karen Osuna, 8 months. 
Moises Merida Gonzalez, 32, who apparently walked out of the ceremony before 
police discovered the bodies and the injured participants. 
Times staff writers Laurie Becklund in Tijuana; H.G. Reza, Armando Acuna, and 
G. Jeanette Avent in San Diego, and Dave Lesher in Sun City contributed to this 
report. 
