NEWS ANALYSIS; 
ON HIS DAY OF NOBEL RECOGNITION, SOVIETS SEE GORBACHEV AS AN OPTION; 
REFORMS: DOMESTIC ISSUES DEMAND NEARLY ALL HIS ENERGY, AND THEIR SIZE AND 
NUMBER DIMINISH HIS STATURE INTERNATIONALLY. 
This was to be President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's day of glory as he received the 
Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of the dramatic way in which his reforms of 
the Soviet Union have changed the world. 
But instead of receiving the prize in Oslo and outlining his vision of a 
peaceful new world order in his Nobel address, Gorbachev will be presiding 
today over a meeting of the Soviet Communist Party's Central Committee on what 
can be done to reverse the country's economic disintegration. 
Gorbachev, feeling that his priorities now lie at home, has sent a deputy 
foreign minister to collect the award and promised to deliver his Nobel address 
next spring in the Norwegian capital. 
Yet, the inevitability of this decision may mark Gorbachev's eclipse on the 
international scene -- not because he will not be in Oslo today, but because he 
must be in Moscow to deal with the Soviet Union's mounting political and 
economic problems. 
Not only do the domestic crises here demand virtually all of Gorbachev's 
energy, but their sheer size and number diminish his stature internationally. 
For the Soviet Union, as for most countries, domestic and foreign policies have 
become interlocked, strength or weakness in one affecting the other, and the 
acute, multiple crises that Gorbachev faces at home seem certain, as a result, 
to have a major international impact. 
"Gorbachev cannot be the actor on the international stage that he was a year or 
two ago -- not if he is to work his way through his country's current 
problems," a senior official of the European Community commented during a visit 
here. 
"His energies are finite . . . and he must direct them at the most immediate 
need. Moreover, if he is in trouble at home, he will have fewer partners 
abroad." 
The boldness with which Gorbachev could maneuver as the leader of a superpower 
has been reduced by his country's need for foreign assistance, even emergency 
deliveries of food to get through the winter. As a prominent Soviet political 
commentator put it this weekend, "It's difficult to be tough in arms 
negotiations when you're begging for food." 
With Soviet conservatives grumbling about the "loss" of Eastern Europe and 
weakened defenses, questions also arise about the strength of Gorbachev's 
political support -- will he have backing for further arms reductions, for 
cooperation with Washington to resolve regional conflicts, for developing the 
"new international order" that he seeks for Europe and elsewhere? 
And that ultimate question of whether he will survive is asked increasingly 
against a much different background. Gorbachev is no longer perceived here as a 
political necessity or as the only option. He could be gone tomorrow, or next 
month, and the grieving here would be short. 
Hailing Gorbachev for the achievements since he came to power nearly six years 
ago, Alexander Lyubimov, a commentator on the iconoclastic weekend television 
program Vzglyad, acknowledged that he has brought tremendous changes both to 
the Soviet Union and the world as a whole but that he has lost vital momentum. 
"What the president is missing is support -- peace inside the country requires 
the efforts of everybody just as Gorbachev's peace did in the world arena," 
Lyubimov said. "There is no such consensus in our ranks. He is alone." 
Gorbachev's predicament stems directly from three intertwined crises that now 
grip the Soviet Union and that affect its international posture: 
* The Soviet economy, once the second largest in the world, is disintegrating 
at an ever-faster rate. Its farms produced a good harvest this year, but its 
wholesale and retail networks cannot deliver the food to consumers. Transport 
has broken down across the country, the ruble buys less and less, waiting times 
for some everyday necessities now run into weeks. About half of the consumer 
goods produced now reach buyers through the black market, according to 
government officials. 
The Soviet economic system, founded on state ownership of all the means of 
production, central planning and government management, is being dismantled 
faster than the new system -- based on free enterprise and the market forces of 
supply and demand -- can develop as a replacement. 
As a whole, the economy has shrunk by nearly 2% this year, according to 
official statistics, and perhaps as much as 10%. Foreign trade is down 12%, 
unemployment is up sharply and inflation has been measured at roughly 80% 
annually when free-market prices are taken into account. 
* Most of the country's 15 constituent republics, and parts of them as well, 
are moving rapidly toward some form of independence, putting the continued 
existence of the Soviet Union as a state in question. 
Although national self-development is the republics' proclaimed goal, the 
country's economic decline is a powerful motive -- a desire to escape the 
coming collapse. Yet the independence of any, even the Baltic republics of 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, could pose a major dilemma for the international 
community in terms of the political recognition and economic assistance they 
would need. 
For Gorbachev, holding the country together is also vital for any resolution of 
the economic crisis. Because of the interdependence built up through decades of 
central planning, the country is discovering that it either works as an 
economic whole -- or not at all. 
* The Soviet Union's new political system, which had been Gorbachev's brightest 
domestic achievement with its glasnost, or openness, and democratization, has 
been unable to cope with the economic crisis and growing nationalism. Instead 
of mobilizing the country's 290 million people, it has led to a quarrelsome 
fragmentation. 
Gorbachev, asking for greater powers in an effort to lead the country through 
the crises, has been branded an autocrat and a dictator, although he had given 
up even greater authority when the Communist Party abandoned its monopoly on 
political power. 
And conservatives and radicals alike speculate happily on his replacement, 
whether through a military coup d'etat that installs an apparatchik 
administration or through "a coalition of progressive forces." Soviet political 
commentators similarly talk about the emergence of the "post-Gorbachev 
generation" of leaders. 
A fourth crisis must be added to these three -- a crisis of confidence, which 
has been growing for the past year and a half and which seems to sap the Soviet 
will to pursue the hard course of political and economic reform that the nation 
chose under Gorbachev. 
"Of everything we have gone through, the present food shortage is the most 
soul-destroying -- standing in line for an hour and a half and not knowing 
whether there will be anything at the end to feed your family," a chemical 
engineer and political activist, Natalya Rubin, remarked over the weekend. 
"It's only natural to blame Gorbachev -- he's in power, isn't he? -- everybody 
says that if he had been paying attention to what was going on at home instead 
of visiting Rome and Paris and Washington and New York and New Delhi and London 
and Havana, things would not have gone so badly wrong." 
Until now, these domestic crises have had only a limited impact on foreign 
policy, according to both diplomats and Soviet political analysts, but that 
appears to be changing with the accelerating disintegration of the Soviet 
economy. 
"The economy has become key, if it was not before," a senior political 
commentator, normally a Gorbachev supporter, said over the weekend. "We cannot 
pose as a superpower while we are worried about feeding our cities this winter. 
We cannot venture forth as the Soviet Union when half our republics are 
declaring independence because they do not want to go down with us. And we 
cannot do deals while we are politically divided over where we are headed." 
