THIS SECOND-ROUND DRAFT SELECTION IS REALLY A FIRST-RATE PLAYER; 
RAIDERS: PASS-RUSH SPECIALIST AARON WALLACE WAS IRATE WHEN HE WASN'T DRAFTED 
HIGHER, BUT NOW HE IS GLAD TO BE IN L.A. 
When Raider rookie Aaron Wallace recorded his ninth sack of the season last 
Saturday in Minnesota, his mind raced back to April, when he stormed out of his 
house in Dallas after being bypassed in the NFL draft's first round. He headed 
for the border, car stereo blasting, in indignation. What border? What 
difference? 
The Raiders, who took Wallace in the second round with the 37th pick, had to 
flag him down via car phone. The other choice was Highway Patrol. 
Foolish child. Wallace was so much younger then. To think he made such a stink 
about a few pegs -- OK, a lot of dollars -- on a draft ladder. But what's 
first-round draft money, really, if you have to spend it as a New England 
Patriot? 
Seven months after Wallace carved out a new Chisholm Trail on the Texas 
landscape with his tire tracks, he has come to realize that there is life after 
draft day. 
Listen to Wallace in late December: 
"I can't think of anyone else I'd like to play for at this point," he said. "I 
would have done my best anywhere I went. When I found out I was in the second 
round, I was upset, but when I found out I was coming to the Raiders, 
everything didn't seem so bad. It's just the mystique. It's hard to explain. I 
guess it's Mr. Davis, Art Shell, the organization. I'm just really happy to be 
here." 
Wallace was flattered when owner Al Davis took an immediate interest in him 
during his first days at camp, when Wallace was still brooding over his draft 
selection -- "I'd read and heard that I was going to be as high as a top-10 
pick." 
Wallace said "Mr. Davis" made him feel as though he belonged. "He told me he 
thought I was going to be a great player," Wallace said. "I had just got here 
and wasn't too confident how good I could really be in the pros. One thing he 
always tells me: 'Make me proud of you.' I try to come out here and do it." 
Davis is unique, of course, in that he attends every Raider practice and isn't 
afraid to offer on-the-field advice. Players who don't call him "Mister" 
sometimes refer to him as "Coach." 
Wallace said he knew it was serious business when he walked into camp. 
"Football is their game, from what I can tell," he said. "I mean, the man 
(Davis) doesn't have to be out here. A lot of owners probably aren't. But he's 
out there every day offering his advice, telling you what to watch for." 
Wallace didn't know what he was in for. The Raiders are on the brink of winning 
their first division title in five seasons, and Wallace is in the thick of it. 
His nine sacks are remarkable in that he's only a part-time player, a so-called 
pass-rush specialist. Wallace calls himself "a-third-and-long guy." 
He's rubbing elbows and learning the trade from such defensive line luminaries 
as Howie Long, Greg Townsend and Bob Golic, who marvel at Wallace's speed and 
quickness at 6-feet-3 and 235 pounds. Long said Wallace can chase down anything 
with a heartbeat. They believe he's only scratching the surface. 
"I get in there and I want to do the things they do, like the rip techniques," 
Wallace said. "But they say my biggest asset is speed. I guess they see 
something that I have, something that could be great, I guess, the way they 
act." 
With one game remaining, Wallace has a chance to join some elite company among 
pass rushers. The NFL record for sacks by a rookie is 12 1/2, set by San 
Diego's Leslie O'Neal in 1986. The San Francisco 49ers' Charles Haley had 12 
sacks as a rookie in the same season. 
"I had no idea what the record was," Wallace said. "I had no idea I was that 
close." 
Wallace had three sacks in an exhibition game against the Chicago Bears last 
summer, so the record is not out of reach in Sunday's regular-season finale 
against the Chargers at the Coliseum. 
Raider Coach Art Shell said Wallace reminds him of a young Townsend, who burst 
upon the scene in 1983 with 10 1/2 sacks as a rookie. Townsend was considered a 
pass-rush specialist at first, too, but eventually developed into a menacing 
full-time player. 
Wallace presently serves as Townsend's backup. And heir apparent? 
"Eventually, yeah," Shell said. "He's going to be a big man. He's still young. 
By the time he's finished, he'll probably be a 250-pounder. When Greg Townsend 
got here, he was a 230-pounder." 
Townsend acknowledges some similarities between himself and Wallace but 
disavows others. 
"Aaron is much faster than I was," Townsend said. "Plus, he was picked higher, 
too (Townsend was a fourth-round choice). Aaron has raw talent, as I did as a 
rookie. I played on pure hustle, and some of the things I was just born with. 
By the same token, Aaron is unique. If you see him out there on the field, when 
he gets his sacks, he very seldom makes contact with the (blocker). I was all 
physical. Aaron is more finesse. I think he has a magnet, because when the 
quarterback gets close, he just jumps on the guy." 
Townsend and Wallace also share a disdain for being labeled one-dimensional 
players. 
"I had this crazy attitude about being a pass-rush specialist," Townsend said. 
"I hate that title." 
But Wallace was drafted strictly as a pass rusher, for now. In his Texas 
A&amp;M career, he recorded a school-record 42 sacks. His nickname has been 
"Sackman" since high school. 
"Go back and check his college record," Shell said. "The guy was a pass rusher. 
He was a sack guy. With the kind of speed he has, and the kind of quickness he 
has, there's no doubt in our minds the guy will be a good pass rusher in this 
league." 
