OVERPOWERING DEFENSE DROPS MATER DEI BY 7 
Long Beach Poly High School, using a tenacious defense and a patient passing 
game, reduced Mater Dei to just another basketball team Saturday night in the 
championship game of the Tournament of Champions at Ocean View High. 
Poly made key free throws down the stretch and defeated Mater Dei, 54-47, in 
front of 1,200 fans. It marked the first time Mater Dei had lost in the finals 
of this tournament after winning four titles. 
Mater Dei (8-1) made only 20 of 57 shots and was never really in the game after 
watching an early 5-0 lead. Poly scored 11 consecutive points to take an 11-5 
lead and Mater Dei never recovered. 
Poly (6-1) opened a 40-28 lead in the third quarter and then made eight free 
throws in the last period to win its third tournament championship and first 
since 1976. 
Center Willie McGinest, one of the most sought-after football recruits in the 
nation, dominated play in the middle, blocking five shots and getting seven 
rebounds. McGinest was named the tournament's most valuable player despite 
scoring only seven points in the final. 
Mater Dei had its chances as Poly committed 23 turnovers, but the Monarchs 
failed to capitalize. Guard David Boyle scored 16 points for Mater Dei, but 
missed eight three-point shots. 
"We had problems getting our inside game going, and you can't live and die with 
the outside shot," said Gary McKnight, Mater Dei coach. "We came down time and 
time again and didn't get a shot off. 
"Poly's defense and pressure was the difference. We just didn't get the ball in 
the hole. I thought Poly got better and better as the tourney went on." 
Poly forward Roderick Hannibal didn't have any problems finding the range in 
the first half. He made his first seven shots, including a three-pointer at the 
halftime buzzer, and had 18 points in the first half. Hannibal led all scorers 
with 22 points. 
"That guy killed us in the first half," McKnight said. "I saw Poly play last 
summer, and I thought they were one of the best teams I saw. They're back to 
playing (Coach Ron) Palmer-style basketball." 
In the third place game: 
Capistrano Valley 71, Ocean View 54 -- Capistrano Valley used a fullcourt press 
in the third quarter to outscore Ocean View, 20-5, and then breezed to the 
victory. 
Capistrano Valley (7-1) made 15 of 29 shots in the second half. Forward Scott 
McCorkle led all scorers with 33 points, including 22 in the second half. Ocean 
View (6-2) committed 19 turnovers in losing its second consecutive game. 
In the fifth place game: 
Morningside 68, Brea-Olinda 59 -- Keith Walker scored 35 points and finished 
with 162 points in four tournament games. 
Walker averaged 41 points a game against some of the top teams in Southern 
California and broke Capistrano Valley forward Scott McCorkle's tournament 
record of 132 points set last season. 
In the consolation championship: 
Muir 76, Los Alamitos 70 -- Guard Philip Turner scored 27 points for Muir while 
center Robert Conlisk had 22 points for Los Alamitos (6-2). 
