NORTON SIMON ON LIST OF BOGUS REMBRANDTS; 
ART: PANEL OF EXPERTS, IN THIRD OF FIVE REPORTS, SAYS ABOUT 50 PAINTINGS BY THE 
DUTCH MASTER WERE REALLY THE WORK OF OTHERS. 
A research panel says about 50 paintings attributed to 17th-Century Dutch 
master Rembrandt van Rijn are works of other artists -- including a 1636 
portrait in the collection of the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena. 
The Norton Simon Museum acquired the portrait, which the panel attributes to 
Rembrandt contemporary Carel Fabritius, for about $3.8 million in 1969. If sold 
as a genuine Rembrandt, the painting would probably bring more than $10 million 
today. But as the work of Fabritius, who is known as a Rembrandt imitator, the 
painting's value would drop to about one-tenth of that. 
But the Simon museum rejects the panel's assessment of its painting and has no 
plans to change the attribution, according to Vickie Rogers, director of 
program planning. "We do not endorse the methods of the Rembrandt Research 
Group. Rembrandt attributions have been debated for 300 years, and this is just 
the latest chapter in that discussion. History will decide," Rogers said. 
The portrait will remain on view along with the museum's two other Rembrandt 
paintings, "Titus" and "Picture of a Bearded Man in Wide-brimmed Hat," Rogers 
said. 
The Rembrandt Research Group, which is looking at all 500 to 600 works 
attributed to the artist, published its third of five volumes today. Of 100 
paintings examined in Volume 3, "about 50% are not genuine Rembrandts," said 
panel member Jozua Bruin. Also questioned was the 1635 "Landscape with 
Carriage," owned by the Wallace Collection in London. 
"The outcome of Volume 3 reflects the 50% score in the first two volumes," 
Bruin said. In those volumes, roughly 100 paintings were branded as wrongly 
attributed to Rembrandt. 
The third volume, in which Rembrandt's monumental "Night Watch" has gotten the 
stamp of approval, was published today. The first and second volumes were 
published in 1982 and 1986 respectively. 
Most of the falsely attributed works probably were painted by Rembrandt 
students or paid assistants in his workshop, according to Bruin. 
The panel, which is subsidized by the Dutch government, began its work 21 years 
ago. It scrutinizes each work with a close analysis of the paint, the cloth or 
wood on which it is painted, and ultimately, the painting style, according to 
Bruin. 
