TREND WATCH 
A roundup of business developments spotted by other publications. 
Medium of the Moment: Heritage Media Corp. is shifting its emphasis to in-store 
advertising from network television. Heritage, which owns TV and radio stations 
throughout the country, also holds 51% of POP Radio, which provides in-store 
programming for retailers that sounds like live radio, is targeted to shoppers' 
tastes and offers more store-specific advertising. If Heritage eventually buys 
POP Radio in a planned merger, it will be the dominant in-store advertising 
company and well on its way to deriving 60% of its revenue from that business. 
Why the shift? Because TV advertising is becoming less effective and in-store 
advertising is the medium of the moment. Dallas Morning News 
IBMphasis: A survey by Computer Intelligence, a market research company, 
reveals that IBM still is the most popular PC with both large and small 
businesses. When asked about PC purchase plans, 3,000 of the 13,064 firms 
surveyed plan to buy at least one in the next year, and a significant 48% are 
leaning toward IBM. Apple, Compaq, Zenith and NCR each garnered less than 10% 
of the votes, while the remaining 28% of those planning to buy will go with 
other vendors, none of whom were mentioned by more than 2% of the respondents. 
Industries that will add the biggest numbers of PCs include medicine, 
education, government and manufacturing. Digital Review 
East Bloc Business: One company tackling the obstacles to investment in Eastern 
Europe is McDonald's Canada, which has succeeded in erecting Golden Arches in 
the Soviet Union. Other companies interested in the Eastern Bloc would do well 
to look at McDonald's strategy, which included investing nearly $55 million in 
a food preparation center outside Moscow. Local farmers were recruited to 
supply milk, apples and meat, and McDonald's went so far as to introduce 
farmers to the potatoes that it wants grown. In case you'd like to make 
reservations, Big Mac makes its Moscow debut early next year. (London) Daily 
Telegraph 
Aluminum on the Rise: Aluminum ingot prices may soon turn around if alumina 
shortages continue as predicted. The price of alumina, the main ingredient in 
aluminum, is expected to rise as much as 45% in 1990, from $275 to $400 a ton, 
because of shortages precipitated by high aluminum production levels in the 
past two years. The rising alumina prices could cause some aluminum smelters to 
close, which is expected to cause an increase in aluminum ingot prices. 
Financial Times, Purchasing World 
E-I-E-I-O: Biotechnology experts recently talked with a group of Wisconsin 
farmers to tell them what is on the horizon. What's next? Try 
fresh-from-the-cow cholesterol-free milk; a hormone that develops bigger, 
leaner pigs; a test that will tell which cows and bulls will come up with the 
most productive offspring, and development of tougher, higher-yield crops. The 
next trick is to reassure consumers of the safety of these products. Milwaukee 
Journal 
