PANAMA OPERATION HURT BY CRITICAL INTELLIGENCE GAPS 
At H-hour, 1 a.m. Wednesday, a team of 20 Navy SEAL commandos stole onto 
Paitilla airfield intent on disabling the airplanes that Panamanian dictator 
Manuel A. Noriega was expected to use to flee the massive American onslaught. 
According to intelligence reports, the airfield was lightly defended. 
But instead of the expected cakewalk, the SEALs encountered three armored 
personnel carriers full of heavily armed and well-trained troops. A "hellacious 
fire-fight" ensued. Carrying only light machine guns and demolitions for the 
aircraft, half the SEAL team was killed or wounded. 
And evacuation of the casualties was hampered because the SEALS had set their 
radios to a different coded frequency than the one used by the pilots of the 
Medevac helicopters. Eventually, the airport was secured, cutting off one 
escape route for Noriega and closing down an airfield that could be used to 
reinforce the Panama Defense Forces. 
The battle of Paitilla field illustrates a set of basic problems and failures 
that marred what otherwise appears to have been a meticulously planned and 
crisply executed assault, perhaps the most ambitious joint U.S. military 
operation since World War II: 
 -- Repeatedly, U.S. units with critical missions were hampered or frustrated 
entirely by poor intelligence. 
 -- At the field command level, at least, U.S. commanders underestimated both 
the strength and the determination of the enemy. 
 -- Despite massive force, U.S. troops were not prepared for the violence, 
looting and anarchy that erupted in Panama City after the invasion. 
"Our military objectives were limited, perhaps too limited," a senior 
Administration official said at week's end. "They did not include political 
realities. To paraphrase (Prussian military strategist Karl von) Clausewitz, 
politics is war by other means. If you ignore the political objectives, then 
you're not pursuing the war properly." 
Divide, Destroy 
About 22,500 U.S. troops, coming from a total of a dozen different military 
bases in the United States and Panama, mounted separate actions across Panama 
to divide and destroy Noriega's forces. Despite the complexity of the 
operation, the initial assault appears to have been carried out with surprising 
precision, considering its scope and the distance many American units had to 
travel. 
Paratroop drops were performed with precision; early targets quickly seized. 
Administration officials portrayed the massive military operation as 
brilliantly conceived and masterfully executed. The Panamanian military was 
quickly neutralized, Noriega was driven into hiding and a government 
democratically elected last May was installed before sunrise. There appear to 
have been few of the snafus that marred recent U.S. military operations in 
Iran, Grenada, Beirut and the Persian Gulf. 
But according to many government and private analysts, the invasion suffered 
major flaws. Critics inside and outside the government listed a catalogue of 
American mistakes and miscalculations: 
 -- U.S. planners failed to anticipate the civil anarchy that would follow the 
"decapitation" of Panama's government and armed forces and now express surprise 
that they are involved in what the senior U.S. commander in Panama on Friday 
called a "real war." 
 -- They misjudged the quality and persistence of continuing resistance from 
remaining elements of the Panama Defense Forces and Noriega's so-called Dignity 
Battalions of young urban vigilantes. 
 -- American officials failed because of faulty intelligence to capture Noriega 
at the outset of the operation. They neglected to anticipate that the wily 
fugitive would be able to direct a campaign of sniping and terror that has no 
end in sight. 
 -- They failed to prepare for the still-uncounted civilian casualties, 
thousands of refugees and the ill will created by the demolition of the 
civilian neighborhood surrounding Noriega's Panama City headquarters and action 
in other poor residential areas. The U.S. military brought little food and few 
medical supplies to aid wounded and displaced civilians. 
 -- And the U.S. military now appears to have bought itself months of 
unexpected occupation duty as the United States tries to restore order and 
build a government amid a restive population in a country where, at least in 
the capital city, the situation has been reduced to chaos. 
Admiral's View 
"I think our emphasis was mainly on war fighting and we didn't give proper 
consideration to the relationship with the civilian population and to the 
political aspects," said Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., the recently retired 
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
The Panamanian people feel more threatened since the Americans arrived than 
they did when Noriega still held power, an Administration official said. 
"In other words, we have so far failed in our political objectives because we 
still have to prove to Panamanians that we are better than the guy we 
replaced," this official said. "We still can't offer them more security, and 
therefore our strategy is, in part, failing." 
Military analysts called the plan a classic large-scale operation designed to 
divide, decapitate and dismember Noriega's 15,000-member defense forces. It 
was, analysts said, a brute-force approach designed to compensate for the 
Pentagon's unwillingness to run the risk that it might have neither the 
intelligence nor the skill to snatch Noriega. 
Once Noriega's power base was "neutralized," the military planners assumed 
Noriega himself would quickly tire of the fugitive life and surrender -- or be 
betrayed -- to U.S. forces. 
"That's pretty wishful thinking to think you're going to smoke him out like 
that," one former special operations officer said. "If we didn't have the 
intelligence on exactly where he was, we have done a poor job on penetrating 
his circle." 
But some military analysts believe that the strength of Operation Just Cause -- 
its reliance on overwhelming firepower -- also dictated some of its worst 
shortcomings. When the Pentagon chose to mass a multipronged assault with 
traditional military objectives, it assured that U.S. troops, bedeviled by 
communications problems of their own, would be left picking up after a 
shattered political and economic infrastructure amid armed chaos. 
Narrow Definition 
The military's narrow definition of its job also contributed to the apparent 
contradiction between the ground commanders' rosy assessment of the operation 
and the chaos and resistance that made a mockery of their words. 
Military officials said the military plan put into effect Wednesday had been in 
the works for 18 months, constantly updated and reworked. Gen. Colin L. Powell, 
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, extensively modified the scheme after he 
took office two days before a group of mutinous Panamanian officers 
unsuccessfully tried to topple Noriega on Oct. 3. 
The Pentagon had undercover commando teams from the Army's Delta Force and the 
Navy SEALS on the ground in Panama continuously after Oct. 3, tracking 
Noriega's movements and relaying intelligence about arms depots and the 
political reliability of units of the PDF, U.S. sources said. 
Their surveillance of Noriega was spotty. He often eluded them by moving 
constantly from safe house to safe house in Panama City, and, according to one 
report, using a double to throw trackers off his scent. 
During this time, President Bush considered a limited commando operation to 
kidnap Noriega, but it was never tried because the Pentagon never had enough of 
a specialty team in place or adequate intelligence about his whereabouts to 
pull it off, military officials said. 
Then, earlier this month, Noriega declared war on the United States, and last 
week an American Marine officer was killed and a Navy officer and his wife were 
beaten and harassed by PDF troops. 
Bush ordered the Pentagon to move on Sunday. On Monday, planes began ferrying 
troops and equipment into Panama from bases around the United States. H-hour 
was set for 1 a.m. Wednesday. 
Among the first objectives of the plan was to collar Noriega -- and in that 
critical assignment the military failed. 
Escape Downplayed 
Administration officials tried to play down the importance of Noriega's escape, 
portraying the deposed dictator as merely a nuisance "dashing around the 
country," in Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's words. But by the end of the week, 
the intelligence failure came back to haunt the generals, who concluded that 
Noriega was directing resistance from an undetermined hiding place. 
By Wednesday afternoon, U.S. officials began referring to the remaining U.S. 
operations in Panama as "mopping up." That quickly proved embarrassingly 
over-optimistic. 
Resistance to the invaders, at first described as sporadic and unorganized, 
grew in scope and sophistication. Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, the four-star 
commander of the U.S. Southern Command in Panama, said Friday that attacks on 
U.S. troops appeared to be "centrally controlled." He ordered 2,000 
reinforcements flown in from the United States -- and not military police, but 
fresh combat troops. 
"This looks like a little bit more than mopping up," one U.S. Marine in Panama 
said Saturday. "Hell, this is rock 'n' roll." 
Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
said, "No plan ever survives contact with the enemy, and you've got to take it 
the way it comes once you engage in combat." 
According to all early accounts, the troops performed crisply on the ground. 
Air drops went off with precision, with none of the bumbling and collisions 
that marked the failed Iran hostage rescue mission in 1979 and the Grenada 
invasion of 1983. 
With isolated exceptions, communications and coordination between units was 
described as excellent. The terrain had been well mapped out and targets 
effectively identified, although of course the United States had the advantage 
of a long and important military presence in Panama. 
Major Panama Defense Forces installations were taken in the first hours of the 
assault, numerous Noriega escape routes were sealed off, and Special Forces 
troops liberated Panamanian prisons, all according to plan. 
Precision Planning 
The movement of the massive U.S. force was planned with equal precision, said 
senior Pentagon officials: Air Force transports leaving Ft. Bragg, N.C., were 
escorted past Cuba by fighters and airborne jamming and surveillance craft. 
They dropped 4,500 paratroopers on target and on precise schedule after flying 
distances of up to 3,500 miles. 
But several analysts said that the elaborate planning left out some of the 
smallest and cheapest details of such an operation, including civil affairs 
specialists and special operations units trained in "psychological operations." 
Only a small contingent of these forces, trained in winning the hearts and 
minds of local populations, was included in the operation, officials said. 
"The worst part of it is that I don't see that kind of thinking going on even 
now," said Nestor Sanchez, a former top Pentagon official with long experience 
in Panama. "It's been a Pentagon military operation. Where's the civilian side 
of it?" 
Similarly, one knowledgeable source said that the Pentagon's plan did not 
include the use of a special electronic warfare plane that is designed to jam 
the signal of radio and television transmitters. Several military experts said 
that seizure or destruction of the means of communications should be one of the 
first objectives of a military operation. 
As a result, a key Panama City radio station continued for at least a day into 
the invasion to broadcast messages from Noriega, leading some of the population 
to believe he was still in control. 
In addition, officials said military engineering units were limited to those 
trained strictly in combat engineering jobs. Civil engineers who might have 
helped repair damaged civilian neighborhoods stayed home. 
The Pentagon's heavy firepower approach to the mission also failed to 
anticipate an effective form of modern warfare -- hostage taking. 
As Air Force C-130s and C-141s arrived in waves into U.S. air bases Tuesday 
night, no troops were used to bolster security at the U.S. Embassy. Nor were 
hotels and residential areas full of vulnerable Americans given any special 
protection. 
Pentagon officials maintained that taking such steps would have been a costly 
diversion of troops from their main objectives. They added that such moves 
might have compromised the secrecy of the mission, although the noisy 
preinvasion buildup tipped off virtually everyone in Panama to what was about 
to occur. 
One knowledgeable Army official said the prospect of hostage-taking was a 
deliberately low-priority question: U.S. forces believed that crushing 
Noriega's major fighting units would eliminate resistance. 
"People were always confident we could do the military operation," an Army 
officer based at the U.S. Southern Command in Panama said Saturday. "What came 
afterward is what we worried about." 
Times staff writer Robin Wright contributed to this story. 
PANAMA UPDATE 
The Fighting 
Two thousand fresh American troops were airlifted to Panama, bringing the total 
number of U.S. forces there to more than 25,000, according to the Pentagon. 
U.S. military commanders in the field reported "significant progress" in ending 
resistance and restoring order in Panama City, despite continued clashes with 
irregular forces loyal to fugitive Gen. Manuel A. Noriega. 
Hostages 
CBS News reported that pro-Noriega forces had released Jon Meyersohn, a CBS 
producer, and GTE Corp. executive Doug Mullen, an American businessman not 
previously identified as a hostage. "They're both well and were well treated," 
CBS spokesman Tom Goodman said. Meyersohn was abducted Wednesday. Goodman said 
he did not know when Mullen was seized. 
United Nations 
The United States, Britain and France joined together to veto a U.N. Security 
Council resolution condemning U.S. military intervention in Panama and 
demanding the immediate withdrawal of U.S. troops. The resolution, calling the 
intervention "a flagrant violation of international law," was supported by the 
Soviet Union, China and Nonaligned nations. 
Casualties 
U.S. officials reported that, since "Operation Just Cause" began early 
Wednesday, 25 American servicemen and two civilians have been killed, 238 have 
been wounded, and one serviceman is missing. U.S. figures on Panamanian 
casualties were 139 dead and 95 wounded, with 2,250 PDF troops being held 
prisoner. 
