SECRET POLICE, CEAUSESCU'S IRON GRIP LED TO VIOLENCE; 
NEWS ANALYSIS 
For all but the last two weeks of this year, Communist Eastern Europe passed 
through one of the most remarkable political transformations in modern history, 
a massive upheaval that was accomplished with hardly a shot fired. 
The peaceful nature of the process was all the more remarkable for the fact 
that Communists in Poland, Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia 
had either been installed or held onto power through four decades by either 
outright violence or systematic coercion. 
The Czechoslovaks, who waited until almost the last, could not resist bathing 
themselves in Vaclav Havel's praise for their "gentle revolution" -- an idea 
that probably gave the cautious Czechoslovaks more credit than they deserved 
but nevertheless managed to stand as a characterization for the whole year. 
And then Romania happened. 
There was no gentleness here. The ferocity of the fight that drove Nicolae 
Ceausescu into flight Friday and continued until his execution Monday was on a 
scale familiar to Beirut, not Eastern Europe. 
The assistant health minister said Tuesday that confirmed casualties, for the 
whole country, stood at 746 dead and about 1,800 wounded. Most of the deaths 
are believed to have occurred in Bucharest, not the western city of Timisoara, 
where the revolution against Ceausescu's rule began. The early estimates of 
casualties in the tens of thousands were exaggerated, but were apparently an 
outgrowth of the vicious battle put up by Ceausescu's secret police unit, the 
Securitate. 
Why was the Romanian revolution so bloody while the rest of Eastern Europe 
displaced the Communist monopoly on power so peacefully? 
The two main reasons, as evident now as the rubble and blown-out buildings 
around Bucharest's Palace Square, are the Securitate and the iron grip with 
which Ceausescu held the country. 
Ordinary people in Romania, not a veteran band of dissidents, started the 
demonstrations against the regime in a way similar to the street protests weeks 
earlier in East Germany and Czechoslovakia. The difference here was in the 
government response. The Ceausescu government believed, from the beginning, 
that raw force was the only reliable means of forestalling a collapse of the 
regime. 
Compromise Doomed 
In a way, Ceausescu was right. From the earliest changes in the East Bloc this 
year, which occurred in Poland, it was evident that once the Communists began 
to compromise with the opposition, they were finished. It was a principle 
enunciated by the 19th-Century political theorist Alexis de Tocqueville that no 
time is so dangerous for a repressive government than the moment when it begins 
to liberalize. 
Ceausescu may not have been a devoted reader of De Tocqueville, but he took it 
as a matter of faith that no compromise was possible. In the last decade of his 
rule, when his regime became harshest, no quarter was ever given to the few 
dissidents in the country. Most of the best-known dissidents, such as Doina 
Cornea, a Cluj University professor, were watched incessantly or kept under 
house arrest. Lesser-known "subversives" were dealt with even more harshly. 
When the demonstrations began in Timisoara on Dec. 16, the Securitate began to 
move into place. On Dec. 17, they began to act. Demonstrators -- the exact 
number remains unclear -- were shot down in the town square. That day and the 
next, 47 soldiers of the regular Romanian army were publicly executed by the 
Securitate for refusing to fire on the unarmed protesters. 
Fired on Crowds 
That action was an indication of what was about to come. 
Beginning last Thursday, as the protest spread for the first time to Bucharest, 
the ruthlessness of the Securitate became even more evident, and Romania's 
struggle began to look more like a coup attempt in a Third World country. 
On the other hand, what happened in Romania seemed even more irrational. 
Last Thursday night, the Securitate fired on crowds of thousands in the Palace 
Square. It has never been clear how many died, but doctors estimated the number 
to be at least several hundred. 
During the early morning hours, trucks were sent to the square to pick up the 
bodies, and the blood was washed off the cobblestones with fire hoses. 
Romanians knew, by now, the price they would have to pay for Ceausescu's 
overthrow. And they were willing to pay it. 
Doctors at one hospital told of one young man who came in with one eye forced 
out of its socket by the full blast of a high-pressure fire hose. The doctors 
were forced to remove the eye. The young man then went back into the streets 
and was on the square when the firing started. 
On Friday, Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, flew by helicopter from the 
roof of the Central Committee building on the Palace Square. By that stage, the 
army had gone over to the side of the people, its commanders refusing to issue 
orders to shoot into the crowd. But the Securitate was just getting warmed up. 
By Friday night, a raging toe-to-toe battle began in the heart of the city 
between the Securitate and the army. In a scene that seemed absurdist in its 
juxtaposition of frightful violence and carnival celebration, thousands of 
Romanians watched, cheering, from the square and the surrounding streets as the 
army and the Securitate traded hundreds of thousands of rounds of fire. 
Arms in Tunnels 
The Securitate used a network of tunnels that linked their headquarters, which 
faced the Central Committee building across the square, with at least a dozen 
large buildings in the vicinity. The new government says the tunnels were 
outfitted with weapons, ammunition and communications gear. 
No one is sure how many Securitate forces were involved in the battle, which 
raged in similar fashion in five other major cities, but the total strength of 
the Securitate is estimated at about 700,000. Not all of them, of course, were 
trained as a military defense force. Some were simply eavesdroppers and 
informers. 
Through Friday night, scores of Romanians were hit by Securitate fire. Many 
were killed by shots to the head, indicating that the Securitate men were 
skilled marksmen using rifles equipped with infrared telescopic sights. 
Witnesses looking on from the 19th floor of the Inter-Continental Hotel, about 
three blocks away, could see Securitate men jump up, spray machine-gun bullets 
onto the square below, then duck out of sight as the army poured heavy fire 
into the window. Presumably, the Securitate gunmen would then move to another 
location, possibly even a different building. 
Remarkably, the Securitate did not give up, even though it seemed clear they 
were fighting for a lost cause. The provisional government announced that the 
Ceausescus had been captured and were in custody but -- perhaps not believing 
the reports -- the Securitate continued to fight the hit-and-run war, 
apparently aiming to inflict as much damage as possible. It was as though 
Nicolae Ceausescu had left behind him a sort of living booby trap. 
A few Securitate men turned up at the city's hospitals with wounds, and doctors 
said most of them had come with pistols hidden in their bandages and appeared 
to be drugged. Most had to be heavily sedated before they could be treated. 
Indeed, it may be some time before the mystery of the Securitate is fully 
revealed. The government has given a deadline of 5 p.m. local time today for 
those still at large to surrender. Those who do not, the government said, will 
face summary trials and executions -- the same fate as Nicolae and Elena 
Ceausescu. 
It seems likely, however, that many of them have escaped through their network 
of tunnels and by now are moving unnoticed through the crowds in the streets. 
Some may be discovered in the days to come, and some undoubtedly will manage to 
escape across the borders to neighboring countries. It is possible that they 
managed to destroy records and Securitate rosters that might have been used to 
identify them. 
The effort to bring them to justice could occupy Romanians for months. But what 
happened here in the last two weeks will be remembered by the Romanian people 
for decades. 
