'WRECK JUNIOR'; 
NOEL HARRISON TAKES ANOTHER STEP TOWARD ESTABLISHING A SEPARATE IDENTITY FROM 
HIS FAMOUS FATHER, REX ('WRECK SENIOR') HARRISON 
Noel Harrison is convinced he has a psychic connection with Jacques Brel. 
"When I first saw him perform -- I was in my teens in a bar in Belgium -- he 
absolutely blew me away," recalled the actor-singer. "Years later, I had the 
idea for a show. Then I had the dream." Harrison's semi-prophetic vision, an 
imagined encounter between the two men, eventually led to his creation of 
"Adieu, Jacques. . . !" (at Theatre/Theater in Hollywood), a one-man tribute to 
the life, music and influence of the late Belgian singer and songwriter. 
It's not the first time the actor, 55, has called on a creative alliance with 
Brel. Arriving in the United States in 1965, Harrison (who sang the 
Oscar-winning "Windmills of Your Mind" for the film "The Thomas Crown Affair") 
followed up his Top-40 recording of "A Young Girl" with a translation of Brel's 
"Marieke" -- one of the 17 songs in this show. "It didn't do anything," he 
noted dryly. "So I sort of left the whole singing side of my life and did 'The 
Girl From U.N.C.L.E.' " 
The 1966 spy series with Stefanie Powers marked what he refers to as "my days 
as a starlet, a TV celebrity -- and all that entails." It also coincided with 
the end of his first marriage and the start of a 19-year union with his second 
wife, Margaret. "We were both running away from L.A.," he said of their 
subsequent exodus. "Partly, it was a lack of privacy. Also, I didn't like being 
a celebrity, didn't feel like I'd done anything to deserve the recognition I 
was getting." 
Wanting to live in the country, the couple sampled Spain and Maine before 
settling for 10 years in Nova Scotia, where Harrison built a home, worked in 
the woods, learned beekeeping and occasionally ventured into the arts world to 
host a Canadian TV series on songwriters or "tour in some play." The 
actor is candid: "I did it for the money then. I do what I do now because I 
love it. Of course, some of the acting I did before, I loved, too. 'Poor 
Richard' by Jean Kerr. And 'Camelot.' Ah. But that's out of my life now -- 
doing musical comedy." 
Harrison, born in London and raised in England, France and Switzerland, does 
not shy away from the subject of his famous father, Rex Harrison. Actually, 
it's hard to avoid. Fifteen years ago, Harrison accepted an offer to play Henry 
Higgins in a Boston staging of "My Fair Lady" and has done "probably 15 
productions" since, three in the past year. If the earlier part of his life -- 
as an international club singer and English ski champion -- staved off 
comparisons to his father (that is, "not having to be whom I refer to as 'Wreck 
Junior' "), stepping into the famous role made them inevitable. 
So why do it? 
"At the time, I had no work; I'd just had these new kids -- twins -- and they 
offered me a lot of money to do it," the father of five said with a shrug. "I 
thought, 'How can I turn it down?' I called Wreck Senior and told him they'd 
offered me this job. He said, 'Why not? Everyone else is doing it.' " 
The younger Harrison hastens to add that it's not as uncomplicated as it 
sounds: "He does have a proprietary sense about the part, and even a 
proprietary sense about being an actor. He never wanted me to be an actor. And 
when I started, I didn't, either." 
Still, doesn't it feel like the "My Fair Lady" offers come for the wrong 
reasons? 
"Of course," he said lightly. "They're asking me because it's good publicity, 
name value, curiosity bringing people in. It's my father's part; that's why I 
hope never to do it again. I see Frank Sinatra Jr. doing his dad's songs and 
think, 'Poor guy.' And then I come on stage as Henry Higgins and hear people 
saying, 'Oh, he looks like his father.' They're not paying attention to the 
play, only to the family resemblance. . . . So I do the best job I can, try to 
make it my own." He laughed ruefully. "But you can't." 
Harrison's new-found professional transition -- marked by his move to Los 
Angeles six months ago -- coincides with a personal transition: the end of his 
second marriage. "We just started to go in different directions about the way 
we wanted to live our lives," he said. "When we actually broke up, I was in 
Montreal doing 'Jacques.' It's been nice doing the play, because everything I 
feel can go into it, find a place to hide. So the show is part of wanting to 
rebuild my career, make a living, send my kids to college -- all those normal 
things." 
So far, so good. "It's an absolutely ecstatic time," he said, citing the 
positive reviews that have rolled in -- not one mentioning his father. "The 
wonderful thing about the last two weeks is that people have been coming out of 
the woodwork that I haven't seen in 25 years. I always wanted to be an artist, 
but my art was in my singing. I always wanted to be a writer, and now I'm 
writing a play." 
Autobiographical? "Of course," he said with a grin. "It's about a man coming to 
terms with his masculinity. One side of him is the raconteur; the other is a 
shy, nervous man not quite sure about his relationships with all the women in 
his life -- from his mother on down. You know, when I do 'Jacques,' it's always 
cathartic for me. I cannot go by the line, 'When you're clever and slick, it's 
a mortal sin' without thinking, 'Am I being slick?' There are lines I 
deliberately wrote into this play so that I'd have to confront my own risk and 
passion." 
He downplays any such nobility in his earlier days. "It's like when I used to 
ski, and people would say, 'How do you do that?' Well, if I were really being 
brave, I'd be winning. I was just doing enough to have fun and get away with 
it. That's the way I saw myself then." For "Jacques," though, risk has been an 
energizing factor -- as was the prospect of putting himself on the line in this 
high-profile town. "Bad reviews wouldn't have stopped me," Harrison said 
firmly. "Maybe they'd put me in the toilet. So what? I'd just do something 
else." 
 "Adieu, Jacques...!" plays Thursdays and Fridays at 8 p.m. at Theatre/Theater, 
1713 Cahuenga Blvd., Hollywood, through Dec. 22. Tickets are $13. For 
information call (213) 871-0210. 
