2 WOMEN DIE WHEN HIT BY TRAIN AT DEPOT 
As more than two dozen commuters watched in horror, two women died after they 
were struck Wednesday by a freight train as one tried to rescue the other, who 
had stumbled while crossing the tracks at the Del Mar Amtrak station. 
Usha Waney, 47, of La Jolla fell as she rushed to cross the tracks after 
hearing a warning signal at a nearby road crossing and mistakenly thought it 
marked the arrival of her Los Angeles-bound passenger train. She was killed 
instantly when the 2,000-ton train hit her. 
Roberta Halpern, 44, of Encinitas died of her injuries in a hospital Wednesday 
afternoon. She and her husband were frantically trying to pull Waney from the 
train's path when the women were struck. 
Waney was among half a dozen people who began running toward the tiny red-brick 
depot from a parking lot on the west side of the tracks about 6:35 a.m. when 
they heard the crossing bells warning of a coming train, San Diego County 
sheriff's deputies said. 
Waney, a clothing designer on a business trip to Gardena, tripped while 
carrying her loaded briefcase across the tracks at an unauthorized but heavily 
used shortcut, less than 6 feet from the platform area, witnesses said. 
Then she rose briefly to her knees as Halpern and her husband, Lee Kaiser -- 
who were among the group rushing from the parking lot -- dashed back to the 
tracks to help. 
"She was crouched there on the tracks, and they ran out to help her," Deputy 
Carlos Medina said. "But they only got her halfway off. The train just came by 
and cut her in two." 
Witnesses say that Halpern fell toward the train as she attempted to assist 
Waney, while Kaiser fell away from the tracks. 
Joel Volsky, a 43-year-old Del Mar real estate agent who stood on the platform, 
said several commuters witnessed the split-second drama but were frozen by the 
rush of the oncoming train. 
"We all saw her fall," he said of Waney, who only recently had expressed 
concern to her husband about the dangerous crossing. "You wanted to dash out 
and help her, but the train was coming. You just froze, you just froze." 
Waney's body was pulled beneath the braking locomotive, which hit Halpern 
before coming to a stop about 150 yards up the tracks. 
Halpern was flown by Life Flight helicopter to Scripps Memorial Hospital in La 
Jolla, where she died about 4:40 p.m. of massive internal and head injuries. 
Kaiser was not seriously injured. 
Volsky recalled watching Waney fall as the lumbering train struck. 
"The lady who was killed was wearing a white blouse and blue pants," he said. 
"When she fell under the train, the white blouse turned to red from her blood. 
It was just terrible." 
The train dragged parts of Waney's mutilated body across a 100-yard section of 
track -- scattering her shoes, purse, clothing and papers from her briefcase -- 
as witnesses dressed in business suits cried out and turned their heads in 
horror, he said. 
Moments later, the air was filled with the victim's blood-spattered papers, 
apparel samples and the sound of the big engine's brakes. The briefcase was 
sliced in two by the wheels of the train. 
"All you could hear were the horrible screams from people on the platform," 
Volsky recalled. "After the woman was hit, people got down on the platform and 
started to pray instead of doing anything to help her. Those screams are still 
in my mind." 
Allan Royster of Poway, who also stood on the platform, said of Waney: "I will 
never forget her face. She realized it was too late but the other people stuck 
right by her. . . . They were trying to help her." 
The accident delayed northbound rail traffic for three hours and the next 
southbound train for 30 minutes, authorities said. Northbound-bound commuters 
at the scene were taken to their destinations by bus. 
The deaths of Waney and Halpern were the fifth and sixth involving trains and 
people on foot in San Diego County since early October. 
On Oct. 5, a Carlsbad grocery clerk was killed by an Amtrak train as he carried 
a bicycle along a trestle near Basilone Road in the North County. 
On Oct. 13, a woman was struck in Encinitas by another passenger train as she 
sat on the tracks smoking a cigarette. Eight days later, two migrant workers 
were killed by an Amtrak train in Leucadia as they reportedly sat on the tracks 
playing cards. 
Mike Martin, a spokesman for the Santa Fe Railway in San Bernardino, said that 
the company's freight train had just rounded a blind curve just south of the 
depot at about 45 m.p.h. when the engineer saw a woman on the tracks about 250 
yards ahead and blew his whistle. 
"You've got four powerful locomotives and 43 freight cars traveling down those 
tracks -- the whole train weighs more than 2,670 tons," he said. "The engineer 
tried to stop the train -- did the best he could. 
"But you've got steel wheels on a steel rail. You can't stop a train like that 
on a dime. Still, he's very upset about what happened." 
A cabdriver who was parked at the station said he heard no train whistle before 
the accident. "I didn't hear any whistles at all. I'm sure of it," said the 
driver, who identified himself only as Greg. 
"You knew it was a freight train coming, though. It had this heavy rumble. 
There's no mistaking a freight train." 
Martin said the one freight train running daily between San Diego and Barstow 
usually makes its run during the night, but a recent renovation project had 
forced the trains to run during the day. 
The $45-million LOSSAN Rail Corridor Rehabilitation Project is in the fourth 
and final phase of a four-year plan to replace worn tracks in San Diego and 
Orange counties, he said. 
"The crews do their work at night, when the passenger trains aren't running," 
Martin said. "As a result, we've had to run the freight trains when we had the 
best window of time. This one was running about 13 minutes in front of a 
northbound passenger train. 
"It's tragic, there's no doubt about it. But this is a main rail line that's 
been open for 108 years. And trains run up and down it 24 hours a day. People 
just shouldn't be surprised that there are trains on that line. So, no, we 
don't plan any scheduling changes because of this incident." 
The danger at the tiny depot, which overlooks the ocean in downtown Del Mar, 
lies instead at an unsanctioned track crossing used by scores of passengers 
each day to reach the station from a private parking lot nearby, Martin said. 
(There is also a parking lot next to the depot on the east side of the tracks.) 
"It's a crossing right in front of the depot that sits on the end of a long 
fence," he said. "People use it out of convenience to get from the private 
parking lot to the public depot." 
Several regular train commuters said the crossing is used by scores of 
passengers each morning, many of whom park their cars and must run to the depot 
when they hear the whistle of the approaching northbound trains. 
"I hate that crossing," said one train traveler. "I've seen dozens of people 
run a foot race to get across the tracks in time. Because they know, if they 
don't make it, you can't get on the train. 
"If they just put a door on the west side, people wouldn't have to rush." 
Volsky added: "It really scares me because I knew I had just crossed the tracks 
at that crossing only 10 minutes before. We all do it. And now this happens." 
Santa Fe's Martin said rail passengers who use the informal crossing do so at 
their own risk: "It's like speeding on the freeway -- you're not supposed to do 
it, but people so it all the time. 
"But this thing is not a public crossing in any way, shape or form. If people 
are going to use it, good luck to them. The present alternative is to walk 
around to the nearest crossing just south of the platform. That is still the 
safest thing to do." 
John King, owner of the adjacent Seagrove Parking, acknowledged that the 
crossing is extremely dangerous. 
"It's not our crossing," he said. "We just have a bicycle rack there for people 
to use. We don't tell them to use it, so it's not our problem. It belongs to 
the railroad or the city of Del Mar. 
"I think someone should put a fence up there, or this is going to happen 
again." 
Del Mar Councilman Rod Franklin said the sticky issue remains as to who bears 
responsibility for the crossing. "Obviously, this issue is going to go to court 
someday soon," he said, "and the question is going to come up: 'Who created 
this path?' 
"The answer is the people who used it day after day rather than walking around 
to the official crossing. The city owns the sidewalk people are supposed to 
use. I just can't answer the question of liability. 
"It's just something two lawyers and a jury are going to have to hash out 
sometime." 
Critics have long claimed that something needs to be done to protect 
pedestrians along the rail corridor -- which now sees 16 passenger trains and 
one freight each day, a number that may rise to 26 by 1992. 
Officials, however, have resisted proposals to fence off the 44-mile stretch 
between Oceanside and San Diego. 
The Del Mar station was the site of an accident in the mid-1970s when a train 
struck a bus that had stalled on the tracks in the fog. The bus driver and a 
small girl were killed. 
But there will be an eventual solution for the Del Mar station, officials say. 
The depot, built in 1906, is scheduled to be closed and replaced within the 
next couple of years when a commuter rail station is built along the tracks 
north of Del Mar in Solana Beach. 
On Wednesday, Waney, a production manager for San Diego-based Beeba's 
Creations, was to have taken the 6:49 a.m. Amtrak train on her way to Gardena 
to inspect a production facility there, according to a company official. 
Linda Maskovich, a corporate officer, said Waney had worked for Beeba's for 
more than 13 years and had coordinated international and domestic production of 
the firm's sportswear garments. 
Her husband, Hashu, who is also employed at the firm, said late Wednesday that 
his wife had recently mentioned the crossing as a dangerous place. 
Maskovich added: "We all thought that depot was such a pretty place with its 
ocean view." 
She said Waney apparently did not know the couple who tried to save her life. 
"They were strangers who were all crossing the track at the same time," she 
said. 
"This woman just jumped out in front of an oncoming train to try and save 
Usha's life. It's just unbelievable." 
Halpern's organs were being removed Wednesday night, a hospital spokeswoman 
said. Halpern, who had a Ph.D, was a researcher at the Regional Cancer Center 
in La Jolla, Deputy Coroner William Leard said. 
