SOUTHERN SECTION HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL PREVIEWS; 
TRI-VALLEY LEAGUE 
Moorpark 
COACH: Tim Bednar, 1st season 
LAST SEASON: 7-14; fifth in league at 3-7 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Bednar heralds his young squad as "a bunch of excellent 
athletes." Experience, however, is lacking. Senior point guard Brian Lester 
(5-10), "my coach on the floor," Bednar said, and senior forward Robert 
Hernandez (6-3), quarterback on the football team, have the most games under 
their belts. Lester started last year, Hernandez was a reserve. "He'll 
rebound," Bednar said of Hernandez. "And he's faster than heck." Senior forward 
Mike Granderson (6-3) also moves from backup to starting duty. Sophomore 
forward Jodie Kitt (6-2) might be one of the league's surprises. "He can get up 
the court and he can get over the rim and dunk," Bednar said. Junior guard Kim 
Kira (6-1), a starter on last season's junior varsity, is the team's 
best-conditioned athlete. Senior guard Chris Boyer (5-10), also moves to the 
varsity. "Kira and Lester and Boyer can shoot," Bednar said. So can senior 
off-guard Manuel Garcia (5-9). 
OUTLOOK: "We're going to run the ball," Bednar said. "Every day we work on 
getting the ball up the court as fast as possible." Laker-like performances, 
however, might be slow in coming. "I don't have a lot of tall people, so my big 
players are going to have to play a lot of the time," Bednar said. 
Oak Park 
COACH: Steve Goldstein, 5th season 
LAST SEASON: 8-16; fourth in league at 4-6. 
PLAYERS TO WATCH: Senior center Ben Feick (6-6), who averaged 10 points and 
eight rebounds as a forward last season, is the Eagles' only returner. "All the 
rest are up from the junior varsity," Goldstein said. That squad was 7-13 last 
season. Senior guard Josh Atkinson (6-1), who averaged 21 points a game, is the 
best of the newcomers. "He thinks he can shoot from anywhere," Goldstein said. 
"If he can, we'll find out." Senior forward Shawn Carson (6-3) scored 16 points 
a game last season. Senior forward Mike Greenspan (6-1), a transfer from Taft, 
is a "smooth left-hander," Goldstein said. Senior Kevin Fong (5-8), another 
good ballhandler, will start at point guard. Senior forward Dan Vigil (6-1) is 
strong inside and will fill in at forward and center. Senior Mike De vine (6-0) 
will back up at forward and guard. Sophomore guard Eric Pryor (5-10) moves to 
the varsity from the frosh-soph team. Senior center Rick Chase (6-2) is playing 
his first season of basketball. Oak Park has only nine players on the varsity. 
"That'll make it better," Goldstein said. "Everyone will get more playing 
time." 
OUTLOOK: Goldstein will juggle offensive lineups and employ frequent 
substitution. "I've never carried a squad this small, but we'll see how it 
goes," he said. If the Eagles' outside game improves, so too will their chances 
of a playoff berth. 
