ANAHEIM-LAS VEGAS HIGH-SPEED TRAIN LINE FACES DELAY 
The proposed Anaheim-Las Vegas high-speed magnetic levitation train line will 
be subject to delays that will put off its completion at least two more years, 
to 1999, it was revealed here this week. 
But that was not all the unsettling news delivered at a meeting of the 
California-Nevada Super Speed Train Commission. 
As representatives of Bechtel Corp., which was designated in August as the 
franchisee to build the project, addressed the commission, it became clear that 
many of the line's specifications -- including routes, stops and ridership -- 
are far from complete. 
Bechtel's project manager, Tom A. Marlow II, also revealed that German 
certification of the maglev technology to be used will not occur until April or 
May. It had been expected last September. 
Marlow said that German transportation firms involved in testing the maglev 
train developed by the Trans-Rapid International scientific group have been 
distracted by German reunification and by ambitious plans for a $58-billion 
modernization of the railroads in the former East Germany. Consequently, they 
have put off meetings with Bechtel until early next year. 
Magnetic levitation uses electromagnetic force to lift trains above a fixed 
guideway and propel them at speeds up to 300 m.p.h. The technology has been 
slow in coming on line, and there are suggestions that the force levels may 
raise health concerns. 
Although Marlow and other Bechtel officials emphasized their company's 
dedication to the Anaheim-Las Vegas project, they said that, in addition to the 
technology, many key operational details will not be settled until the end of 
1992. 
Marlow said that the final route of the proposed line has not been determined. 
While the train will stop in Anaheim, it may continue to other Southern 
California points to connect with other transportation systems or to attract 
investors. 
He said the same is true with the site of the Las Vegas terminus. Clark County 
supervisors have sought to locate the train station in Las Vegas near McCarran 
International Airport, off the Strip. But Marlow said it may be better to 
terminate the route at a downtown station. 
Marlow explained that Bechtel is also closely watching plans for a commuter 
rail network in five Southern California urban counties. Officials hope to 
begin operating it by the end of 1992. 
"Inter-modal links for our trains are very important," said Marlow. "They will 
impact our business substantially. We've got to find some investors, and they 
will want to know, first of all, that the riders will be there." 
Bechtel plans to commission an independent ridership study that will examine 
alternative routes and show would-be investors that the project is financially 
feasible. That should begin next spring, he said. 
At the outset of Monday's meetings, Marlow alarmed commissioners by telling 
them that Bechtel did not wish to enter into a final franchise agreement until 
after the completion of all feasibility studies, about two years away. 
In the afternoon, he yielded to commission objections to the delay, saying 
Bechtel would propose the terms of such an agreement, setting forth its 
obligations, by the commission's next meeting, Feb. 15. 
Several commissioners expressed concern that so many details of the project 
remain up in the air. 
"We're still selling the sizzle of this project, but we don't know what the 
steak is," said former Ontario Mayor Howard J. Snider. 
"We don't know the route," he explained. "It has not been identified precisely. 
We're talking about new time frames. When people ask us where we're going, what 
are we going to say?" 
Another commissioner, Rolfe G. Arnhym, executive vice president of the Palm 
Springs Chamber of Commerce, said he was concerned at the message coming out of 
the meeting, which he characterized as one of uncertainty. 
Bechtel's manager of corporate communications, Rick Laubscher, responded that 
his company feels that when anyone questions the progress of the project, "Our 
answer is going to be, 'Yes, we're moving forward.' " 
Commission Chairman Don Roth, an Orange County supervisor who has long been an 
optimist about the project, said the delays "put our commission in somewhat of 
a precarious position." 
Roth said the commission may have to seek further public funds to keep itself 
going, or perhaps solicit private grants from foundations or businesses other 
than Bechtel. 
