COLUMN ONE; 
WHY DOES THE RACIAL GAP EXIST?; 
THE HIGH DEATH RATE OF BLACK INFANTS CAN'T BE FULLY EXPLAINED BY INCOME AND 
SOCIAL CLASS. ONE RESEARCHER SUSPECTS REPRODUCTIVE PROBLEMS ARE PASSED BETWEEN 
GENERATIONS. 
Objectivity is paramount, the scientist was saying. At least, that's what she 
had been taught. Speak to the moral implications of your work and you risk 
leaving the impression that you are no longer neutral. 
But then there is the notion of a Good German, she went on. They knew what was 
happening but kept silent -- either out of fear of the consequences of speaking 
out, or out of misguided patriotism. 
"I just didn't want to be a Good German," the scientist concluded simply. "So 
either you turn your back on the research and you work in something else, or 
you have to at some point say, 'This is wrong.' " 
Christiane Hale is in many ways an outsider -- a Northerner repotted in the 
soil of the Deep South, an erstwhile expatriate, part epidemiologist, part 
historian, part social psychologist, an academic researcher with an undisguised 
point of view. 
That geography, physical and psychic, defines her professional perspective. She 
has observed the U.S. public health system from abroad, and tracked patterns of 
disease and death among blacks and whites through the prism of American social 
history. 
All of which has brought Hale to a chilling and controversial hypothesis in the 
attempt to unravel one of the more troubling puzzles in public health -- why it 
is that black babies born in the United States are twice as likely as whites to 
die by age 1. 
The racial gap, Hale and some others believe, cannot entirely be traced to 
racial differences in income and social class. Even middle-class black women, 
it seems, are twice as likely as whites to give birth to dangerously 
underweight babies. 
Instead, they have begun to suspect that long-term poverty may have exacted a 
deep, physical toll -- subtle but significant damage to the reproductive health 
of black women, which they believe can be passed from one generation to the 
next. 
Precisely how that might occur is unclear. But Hale and others suspect that 
women whose growth was stunted in childhood or in the womb as a result of 
poverty may suffer internal organ damage that years later can place their own 
babies at risk. 
That theory, still unproven, is one of several that have surfaced recently as 
researchers have explored the racial difference in infant death, a key reason 
why the overall U.S. infant death rate is among the worst in the industrialized 
world. 
If proven, Hale believes the idea of an intergenerational health effect of 
poverty could serve as a powerful indictment of the treatment of blacks in the 
United States -- evidence that the effects of racism extend beyond 
psychological scars to long-term physiological damage. 
Other scientists are cautious about the theory. 
Some believe the racial gap in infant death can be traced entirely to social 
and economic factors. If some of the difference appears unaccounted for, they 
say it is because they have not yet identified certain subtle, social 
variables. 
Just because a white woman and a black woman have college degrees does not mean 
they have the same socioeconomic status, researchers note. A middle-class black 
woman may have grown up poor and may get worse health care than her white 
counterparts. 
"The racial disparity seems to imply biological variation," said Dr. Woodie 
Kessel of the National Institutes of Health. "But it's not clear to me that it 
really isn't a reflection of other things that are more difficult to measure." 
Other researchers fear the notion of biological factors in infant death could 
be taken as a racist one. Even if those biological differences came from social 
rather than genetic roots, they fear the idea might seem to imply inferiority. 
Similarly, some worry that the concept could be willfully misconstrued to 
justify neglecting health and social welfare programs. If the racial gap in 
infant death is biological, people might argue, why invest tax revenue in 
trying to remedy social causes? 
Finally, biological factors may be relatively insignificant. 
"It's quite possible (that such factors exist)," said Dr. Paul Wise, an 
assistant professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. "The question to 
me is not so much do they exist but their relevance. How important are they?" 
Hale, for one, intends to find out. 
On a recent morning on the campus of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, a 
chill wind sent bundled-up students scudding along the sidewalks. Inside the 
overheated building that houses the School of Public Health, secretaries 
battled static cling. 
Hale bustled into her office in a bomber jacket and long skirt. She wore 
running shoes to cushion her heel bones, broken two months earlier when the 
48-year-old, tenured professor of epidemiology fell off her garage roof while 
trying to break into her locked house. 
A small, bumblebee of a woman with reddish-brown hair and a laugh that bubbles 
upward in arpeggios, Hale speaks in the kind of mellifluous, modulated voice 
that might be heard doing commentary on National Public Radio. 
To understand black infant death, she was saying that one must understand two 
aspects of the black experience: First, the peculiar intensity of poverty among 
black Americans; second, the region where blacks traditionally lived. 
No group of poor whites, except perhaps in Appalachia, experienced comparable 
poverty and social isolation, Hale contended. And until the middle of this 
century, most blacks lived in a handful of Southern states with little or no 
commitment to the poor. 
"One of the reasons we haven't done much about (infant mortality), I believe, 
is that it is seen as a problem of the poor," she said. "As a society, we have 
never been able to decide whether the poor are also deserving. . . . 
"I see it as very consistent in a country that includes among its founding 
fathers the Puritans. One of their fundamental beliefs was that if God loves 
you, you aren't poor; and if you're poor, you have done something wrong in the 
eyes of God." 
The theory that Hale and others are exploring is just one of several being 
offered to help explain the racial disparity in infant death. 
Much of the racial gap is clearly traceable to income and class. Black mothers 
have less money and less schooling than whites. Income and education influence 
diet, behavior and access to health care -- which, in turn, can determine one's 
risk of having a baby die. 
But some researchers like Hale believe something else may be at work. For even 
when they take income and class into account, they still find differences in 
the average birth weights of black and white infants, and in the rates at which 
they die. 
For that reason, they are looking for other possible factors. 
In Atlanta, researchers at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and at several 
black colleges are investigating whether subtle differences in the experiences 
of middle-class blacks and whites might help account for differences in birth 
weight and infant death. 
One factor being considered is psychological stress. Stress has been linked, 
directly or indirectly, to problems in childbearing. Some researchers suspect 
that black women experience more stress than whites -- from financial and 
domestic pressures, perhaps from racism. 
They are also looking at degrees of social support among the middle-class 
blacks and whites they are studying, and at differences in income and financial 
stability between black and white women ostensibly of the same social class. 
Finally, they are examining how blacks and whites use the health care system. 
Some of the researchers suspect that middle-class blacks may turn to a doctor 
less readily than do whites, who have grown up with good access to affordable 
health care. 
"It's not just money," said Bruce Wade, a Spelman College sociologist working 
on the study. "It's the way social class impacts people's attitudes -- how 
likely you are to go to a doctor, how you treat a person once a pregnancy 
occurs. 
"The effects of social class are sometimes very devastating, and it's sometimes 
things that we're not readily aware of. The idea that once a group is educated 
and brought into higher socioeconomic status, all the problems will be resolved 
-- that may not be the case." 
In other words, black and white women of seemingly similar income and education 
may in fact experience life quite differently, since social class reflects not 
only money and schooling but family history, attitudes and expectations. 
The new hypotheses are disturbing not only for what they suggest about 
long-term harm done by discrimination. They also call into question 
conventional wisdom about what it might take to eliminate the racial gap in 
infant death. 
While most researchers stress unequivocally the importance of prenatal care, 
they say even universal access to care cannot alone close the gap. It will take 
much more -- for example, a concerted attack on poverty -- to erase the effects 
of decades of deprivation, they say. 
"The gap between ethnic groups is going to be reduced or eliminated by 
addressing the issues of poverty and how poverty affects child health," said 
Dr. Irvin Emanuel, a professor of epidemiology and pediatrics at the University 
of Washington. 
"If we want healthy babies, we have to have healthy children who grow up to be 
healthy adults who will have healthy babies. . . . We have to take care of our 
people. And in my view, it will take more than just one generation." 
The racial gap in infant mortality in the United States is not new. It has 
existed as long as statistics have been kept. While the black and white rates 
declined steadily over much of this century, the gap between them persisted and 
even gradually widened. 
As a result, a black baby born in 1987, the latest year for which national 
statistics exist, had less chance of surviving to age 1 than a white baby born 
in 1970 -- well before the spread of new technology made it possible to keep 
many premature babies alive. 
Now some experts fear the black-white gap will grow even wider in the 1990s. 
They cite the spread of illegal drug use among inner-city black women and the 
disproportionately high rate at which black babies are born infected with the 
AIDS virus. 
As Hale tells it, she became interested in infant death in the mid-1960s while 
working in the health care system of Labrador, Canada. It was there that she 
recognized the infant mortality rate for what it was -- a telling measure of a 
society's well-being. 
Returning to the United States in 1967, she moved to Montgomery, Ala., and 
began accumulating degrees in history, epidemiology, social psychology and 
demography. During the next 10 years, she waded into statistics, an 
epidemiologist's stock in trade. 
Assigned to calculate so-called standard mortality ratios for an introductory 
epidemiology course, Hale chose to compare white and black rates of infant 
death. What she found, she recalls, were two radically different sets of 
numbers. 
The white numbers were low, the black numbers were high. Yet Hale found it was 
common practice in epidemiology to blur the difference between the races by 
reporting one overall average rate of infant death. 
"It's two different rates and it's bad science to pool them," Hale said 
recently. "So let's just own up to the fact that the infant mortality rate in 
this country among blacks is slightly better than that of Central and South 
American countries." 
In the early 1980s, some researchers began to suspect that income and class 
might not explain the entire racial gap, a discovery that Hale believes was 
made possible in part by the evolution of the epidemiologist's tools. 
For one thing, the federal government began linking birth and death 
certificates in cases of infant death. Infant death researchers could now 
estimate parents' socioeconomic status using information, such as education 
level, recorded on birth certificates. 
At the same time, statisticians developed a method of analyzing data that made 
it possible to control for socioeconomic factors. Controlling for education and 
income, researchers still found that black babies were still more likely than 
whites to die. 
In the mid-1980s, federal researchers studying babies born in 1980 found that 
blacks at every education level were more likely to have underweight babies. 
Even among college-educated black women, the rate was twice as high as that of 
comparable whites. 
When researchers then looked for factors that might explain that difference -- 
the mother's marital status, medical care, age, place of residence -- they 
could not fully explain the difference in the size of black and white college 
women's babies. 
Finally, they compared the pregnancies of college-educated blacks to those of 
high-school educated whites. According to Carol J.R. Hogue, of the CDC's 
division of reproductive health, the black women were 60% more likely than the 
whites to have an infant die. 
In Seattle, meanwhile, Emanuel, who is considered an expert on birth defects, 
was approaching the issue from a different angle. He had been exploring the 
relationship between a woman's stature and her ability to bear a healthy child. 
Emanuel found that smaller women are more likely to have underweight babies. 
From studies throughout the world, it seemed women born underweight were more 
likely to give birth to an underweight child. 
Emanuel came to suspect that women whose own growth was stunted in the womb or 
in childhood -- perhaps by poor nutrition, bad maternal health or inadequate 
care -- suffered long-term damage to their reproductive health that could echo 
into the next generation. 
" . . . If the overall size of a baby is compromised," Emanuel said, "then it's 
not hard to imagine that growth and development of internal organs become 
compromised." 
Hale and Emanuel began running into each other at scientific meetings in the 
early 1980s. Emanuel explained his findings to Hale, she recalls. She describes 
the discovery as "just like a big light coming on. . . . It just made so much 
sense to me." 
In 1989, they published a paper on the subject, fusing Hale's historical and 
Emanuel's biological perspectives. The question they posed was: What in the 
lives of American black women "is apparently so hazardous to fetal and infant 
health?" 
The answer lies in the mother's childhood and in the environment in which her 
pregnancies occur, they suggested. They cited numerous studies linking an 
infant's birth weight to its mother's birth weight and stature, and to her 
parents' social class. 
"A reasonable interpretation . . . is that a mother's own childhood family 
conditions affect her reproductive outcomes and the effect is greatest among 
families in which few economic resources have to be shared by many people," 
they wrote. 
That theory and others like it have been received with interest and caution. 
Dr. Arthur Kohrman, professor of pediatrics at the University of Chicago and 
director of La Rabida Children's Hospital, believes there is clearly a 
biological factor in the racial differences in birth weight and infant death. 
Perhaps in some women the uterus is unusually sensitive to the early onset of 
labor, he speculated. Perhaps for some biological reason, hormonal or 
neurological, they advance to full-blown labor more easily than other women. 
But scientists have been cautious about discussing biological factors, Kohrman 
contended. 
"I don't want some guy saying, 'Well, if it's all biological, why are we 
putting all this money into these (social and health) programs?' " he said. 
"And in the current political climate, that's not such a far-fetched thing." 
More important, said Wise of Harvard, is the question of significance. 
While biological factors are possible, their role would probably pale by 
comparison to social and economic factors, he said. It seems more likely that 
certain social factors -- like poverty, education and family dislocation -- are 
echoing from one generation into the next. 
"I can't tell you what proportion (of the racial gap) is due to poverty, what 
proportion is due to medical care, what proportion to smoking, or to 
generational effects," said Dr. Woodie Kessel of the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development. 
"They're sort of mixed in together," he said. "The issue is not to explain the 
difference but to do something about the difference." 
In May, 1989, Hale and Emanuel were married. She took a sabbatical and moved to 
Seattle to be with him. There, she worked as a visiting professor and as a 
consultant to the county health department. 
Back in Birmingham this fall, Hale mused about what comes next. 
To test the intergenerational hypothesis, Hale would like to help set up a 
study tracking the birth weights of black families over generations, to see 
whether those families that have been in the middle class the longest indeed 
have the better birth weights. 
It would also be useful to study births and infant death among Appalachian 
whites, she said. There, too, one might find additional evidence for an 
intergenerational effect of poverty on reproductive health, if it exists. 
At the same time, Hale and Emanuel have called for research into the biological 
mechanisms by which poverty translates into poor health -- specifically, how 
experiences in the womb and in childhood in one generation "are linked to 
health hazards in the next." 
"If you are as conscious as we are of the statistics on childhood poverty, one 
has the impression of a time bomb waiting to go off," she said. "Poverty has 
become a female experience, a child experience. One in four kids live in 
poverty. 
"What are we going to do? This is the labor force," she wondered, half sad, 
half angry. Then she continued -- unconstrained by academic etiquette: "We have 
screwed up our future labor supply. It's the dumbest thing a country could do." 
INFANT MORTALITY RATES 
A look at infant mortality rates per 1,000 live births among blacks and white 
in the United States, California and Los Angeles County. The numbers in each 
category are the latest statistics available. 
UNITED STATES 
Whites: 
1980: 11.0 
1981: 10.5 
1982: 10.1 
1983: 9.7 
1984: 9.4 
1985: 9.3 
1986: 8.9 
1987: 8.6 
Blacks: 
1980: 21.4 
1981: 20.0 
1982: 19.6 
1983: 19.2 
1984: 18.4 
1985: 18.2 
1986: 18.0 
1987: 17.9 
Source: National Center for Health Statistics 
CALIFORNIA 
Whites: 
1980: 10.5 
1981: 9.8 
1982: 9.8 
1983: 9.3 
1984: 9.0 
1985: 9.1 
1986: 8.5 
1987: 8.6 
1988: 8.1 
Blacks: 
1980: 19.1 
1981: 16.7 
1982: 16.7 
1983: 17.3 
1984: 16.4 
1985: 16.2 
1986: 16.2 
1987: 16.1 
1988: 15.8 
Source: California Dept. of Health Services 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY 
Whites: 
1980: 12.8 
1981: 13.8 
1982: 12.2 
1983: 10.0 
1984: 11.0 
1985: 11.8 
1986: 11.3 
1987: 11.2 
1988: 8.8 
1989: 7.4 
Blacks: 
1980: 21.0 
1981: 17.7 
1982: 18.7 
1983: 19.0 
1984: 17.3 
1985: 18.2 
1986: 17.7 
1987: 18.4 
1988: 21.1 
1989: 20.8 
Note: In Los Angeles County, infant mortality figures for whites do not include 
Latinos. The Latino in the county is generally slightly lower than the rate for 
non-Latino whites. 
* Figures for 1988 and 1989 are preliminary 
