PANEL OKS $2 BILLION PROJECT FOR CHATSWORTH; 
PORTER RANCH: THE PLAN SENT TO THE CITY COUNCIL CONTAINS SOME BUT NOT ALL THE 
CONCESSIONS SOUGHT BY MAYOR BRADLEY. 
Los Angeles City Councilman Hal Bernson steered a $2-billion development 
proposal for the Porter Ranch area through a key council committee Tuesday 
after conceding some -- but not all -- of the changes Mayor Tom Bradley said 
were needed to avoid the mayor's veto. 
The Planning and Land Use Committee voted 2 to 1 to send the proposal -- which 
would be the largest single project in the city's history -- to the full 
council after Bernson inserted changes providing for some "low- or 
moderate-income" housing in the development. 
But he said he would not go along with two other major recommendations by 
Bradley, reducing office parking and integrating neighborhood stores into 
residential areas instead of segregating them in a commercial area. 
Bernson said his changes to the 1,300-acre proposal for the hills north of the 
Simi Valley Freeway in Chatsworth "address the questions that were raised by 
the mayor . . ." 
But it was unknown whether the slightly modified project would satisfy the 
mayor. Bradley aide Jane Blumenfeld said she could not comment without more 
time to review Bernson's changes. 
Bernson said he expects the development could be considered in January by the 
full council, where it will require 10 votes for passage because of the mayor's 
objections. 
At a news conference Friday, Bradley outlined 10 recommendations that included 
allocating 20% of the project's housing to low- or moderate-income families, 
spreading out the project's neighborhood-oriented retail stores into its 
residential area and cutting its office parking in half to encourage 
ride-sharing and use of public transit. He wanted environmental measures such 
as tree planting, recycling, composting and use of reclaimed water. Bradley 
also urged some form of transit system within the project and asked for two 
school sites to be set aside instead of one. 
Bernson said Tuesday that "some of his suggestions have merit and should be 
incorporated, while others are already included . . . ." 
The proposal by Beverly Hills developer Nathan Shapell is for 2,195 
single-family houses, 1,200 townhouses and a commercial complex of nearly 6 
million square feet, including 10-story office buildings and a regional mall 
the size of the Northridge Fashion Center. 
Bernson proposed Tuesday that 20% of the housing in the townhouse area of the 
project -- and not the single-family estate area -- "be made available to 
persons and families of low and/or moderate income." 
Bernson said a transit system was already conceptually included in the 
proposal, but he inserted a requirement that plans for a privately funded 
transportation system be submitted to city officials before much of the 
commercial development could be built. 
But Bernson would not reduce office parking, saying Porter Ranch would not be a 
"highly urbanized" area with access to mass transportation. 
Bernson said he would not put small commercial centers into the residential 
areas, saying that would create undesireable "mini-malls." 
Bernson included some provisions for use of reclaimed water and tree planting. 
But he said the project should not be singled out for environmental programs 
that would eventually be imposed citywide. 
Bernson agreed to require the Porter Ranch developer to set aside a junior high 
school in addition to the elementary site already in the plan. 
Bernson and Councilman Michael Woo voted for the proposal. Councilman Robert 
Farrell voted against it. 
