MEDICINE RESEARCH; 
BONE-MARROW TRANSPLANT TO BE TESTED AGAINST AIDS 
Medical researchers in Los Angeles County intend to begin testing bone-marrow 
transplantation as a treatment for some AIDS patients, in light of a case in 
which a man appeared to have been purged of the AIDS virus after physicians 
replaced his bone marrow. 
A team of transplant specialists at City of Hope National Medical Center in 
Duarte is among several groups nationwide that plan to test the experimental 
procedure on a small number of patients with AIDS-related lymphomas, or tumors 
of the lymph nodes. 
The procedure, which entails eradicating an impaired immune system in hopes of 
cultivating a new one, is considered extraordinarily risky, however. Several 
dozen previous attempts at treating AIDS patients with similar transplants have 
produced disappointing results. 
"I think we have to be very circumspect in how we proceed with the treatment 
using bone-marrow transplantation," said Dr. Ronald Mitsuyasu of UCLA, who has 
tried the technique. "We don't want to kill the patient in the process of 
trying to help them." 
The plan to test the procedure at centers in California, Washington, Minnesota 
and Maryland was fueled in part by a report from Johns Hopkins University in 
Baltimore, where researchers believe that they purged an AIDS patient of the 
human immunodeficiency virus. 
The case, reported at the International AIDS Conference in Montreal last June 
and published Wednesday in Annals of Internal Medicine, involved a 41-year-old 
man whose defective bone marrow was replaced by researchers with marrow taken 
from a healthy sister. 
The man, who was also treated with the anti-viral drug AZT, died of cancer 47 
days after the operation. Researchers found no traces of the virus in his body 
either while he lived or in an autopsy performed after his death from his 
AIDS-related lymphoma. 
"It's an exciting case, but it's just one," said Dr. William Burns, a member of 
the team involved in the work. "It's probably a year before we know if this is 
going to be something important for treating AIDS or not." 
Other experts in AIDS treatment raised similar reservations. 
"It's going to take patients living a lot longer to see if we really have been 
able to render that patient free of the (consequences) of the AIDS virus," said 
Dr. Stephen J. Forman of City of Hope, whose team helped to analyze the Johns 
Hopkins case. "It may be that the AIDS virus may still be in the body and the 
AZT is preventing it from infecting the cells." 
"My concern is that there will be a misinterpretation that we're dealing with a 
cure for AIDS, which this certainly is not," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director 
of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 
At least initially, the four medical centers intending to test the procedure 
plan to use it only on patients with AIDS-related lymphomas and leukemia. The 
reason is that patients with those conditions, even in the absence of AIDS, are 
sometimes treated with bone-marrow transplants. 
The procedure used by the Hopkins group involves exposing the patient to high 
doses of chemotherapy and radiation. The purpose is to eliminate cancerous 
cells from the patient's body and knock out the AIDS-impaired immune system to 
make way for transplanted marrow. 
They then inject into the patient's blood stream about a quart of bone-marrow 
cells drawn from the hip bone of a sibling donor. Those cells make their way 
into the patient's bone marrow and begin to grow, generating new, healthy, 
immune-system cells. 
At the same time, the patient is treated with intravenous AZT, a drug that has 
been proven to block replication of the AIDS virus. The AZT is intended to 
prevent any virus remaining in the body from infecting the new immune system 
cells. 
Bone-marrow transplantation, which costs up to $200,000, is fraught with 
complications even when used in more traditional ways, such as against 
leukemia. As many as one-third of all patients die within the first year alone 
from the procedure itself, researchers said. 
The complications include a condition called graft-versus-host disease, in 
which cells in the transplanted marrow attack the patient's tissues. That 
condition can increase the patient's susceptibility to infection -- already a 
problem in AIDS patients. 
The Johns Hopkins patient died from a relapse of his cancer, despite high doses 
of chemotherapy and radiation. Forman of City of Hope said that illustrates the 
fact that cancer cells are sometimes stronger than chemotherapy and radiation. 
In other words, the therapy appeared to work against the AIDS virus, but failed 
to conquer the patient's AIDS-related cancer. 
Fauci said he had recently tested bone-marrow transplantation, without 
chemotherapy and radiation but with AZT, on 16 AIDS patients whose donors were 
identical twins. Marrow donated by identical twins is less likely to be 
rejected by the patient. 
"We have found that apparently there is no lasting impact on the clinical 
course of the patient," Fauci said in a telephone interview. "Some do well, 
some died, some have transient improvements. . . . Our experience is that the 
effects are only transient." 
Mitsuyasu, an assistant professor of medicine at UCLA's AIDS Research Center, 
said UCLA had been conducting a study of bone-marrow transplantation in AIDS 
patients since 1983. But he said the university had tried the procedure on only 
three patients so far. 
"We've always had enthusiasm for our study," Mitsuyasu said. "It's just that we 
want to select our patients carefully. . . . It's a very aggressive treatment 
with a fairly high morbidity and mortality rate compared to other treatments." 
He said the procedure has other worrisome implications. 
"The cost problem becomes a factor," he said. "We're talking on the order of 
$100,000 to $200,000 for a typical bone-marrow transplant. And that obviously 
is going to put a strain on the patient as well as the health care system." 
