CALIFORNIA &amp; CO.: YOU'LL FIND WELFARE IN THEM THAR HILLS 
Welfare saps initiative, right? Generation after generation, it creates a 
culture of dependence. 
Sure. Doubters need only look to the minerals mining industry, a business so 
addicted to government handouts that it apparently can barely lift a shovel 
without taxpayer help. 
California is having a second great gold rush. It's a leader in boron and 
gypsum too, producing $3 billion a year in non-fuel minerals overall and 
ranking second only to Arizona. But the interesting thing about minerals mining 
is how perfectly its checkered history recapitulates much of what ails American 
business. 
Here was a mighty industry built on dazzling natural abundance and unbridled 
domestic growth. It was blessed with sweetheart legislation and enjoyed a 
degree of worldwide pre-eminence. But it resisted innovation, relying instead 
on its ability to extract private profit at public expense, especially by 
ignoring the cost of the environmental degradation that it had a habit of 
leaving behind. 
Times got tough in the early 1980s, and the industry was brutally restructured. 
The result, nowadays, is a scaled-down but profitable $30-billion-a-year 
business that seems to lack the will -- and possibly the wherewithal -- to 
invest in its own future. 
That's a shame. In California, tougher environmental rules and lower-grade ores 
will increasingly demand higher technology, but the minerals and metals 
companies aren't likely to have it. 
"Expenditures for internal and contracted R&amp;D declined from $133.5 million 
in 1980 to $22.5 million in 1988," says the startling new report of a special 
panel commissioned by the National Research Council, which advises the 
government on such things. By contrast, federal spending on mining research -- 
excluding safety -- was $86 million in fiscal 1989. Ray Beebe, vice chairman of 
the panel and an astute senior vice president at Homestake Mining Co. in San 
Francisco, adds: "Much of the technology in use today was already on the shelf 
in the late 1950s." 
Take gold. California's 1989 output was $367 million, second only to Nevada's. 
Our gold boom has been abetted by U.S. Bureau of Mines research into "heap 
leaching" -- soaking pulverized rock in cyanide to extract the ore. The 
technique is so cheap that it can pay to mine 20 tons of rock for one ounce of 
gold, and it was developed partly at taxpayer expense when gold was cheap. But 
the U.S. gold mining industry probably spends less than $7 million of its own 
on research and development annually. 
What's the solution? More public assistance, of course. The study panel 
recommends greater cooperation between government, universities and mining 
companies to make the technological leaps the industry so badly needs. 
But the panel didn't flatly recommend the most obvious thing of all: that 
mining companies spend more on research. 
Given the industry's history, that omission is perhaps less than startling. 
Corporate welfare is practically second nature to these folks. Much of American 
minerals mining occurs on federal land, and thanks to a classic government 
giveaway, mining interests pay Uncle Sam nothing for the ores they extract. 
The mining law of 1872, drafted and guided through Congress by mining industry 
mouthpiece and Nevada Sen. William Morris Stewart, lets miners reap minerals on 
federal lands for free. Not only that; if a miner or mining concern really 
likes a tract, they can buy it, for $5 an acre or less. 
Traditionally, miners took the ore and left behind a mess, but when the land is 
worth keeping, they take it. Reviewing 20 such deals since 1970, the General 
Accounting Office found that the government got less than $4,500 for lands 
valued in 1988 at $13.8 million to $47.9 million. Predictable horror stories 
include the giveaway of federal lands in suburban Phoenix and Las Vegas and 
next to ski resorts. 
In 1985, miners paid $170 for 34 federal acres near Sonora, Calif., in Gold 
Country; local realtors figured the land was worth perhaps $510,000. Since 
1872, a combined area larger than Connecticut has been ceded this way 
nationwide. 
U.S. land and mineral giveaways have historically characterized settlement of 
the West, but by now the government gets decently paid for oil, gas, coal and 
timber from its -- our -- land. Nor does it routinely cede title without 
charge. 
Gold, copper, gypsum and other such minerals remain the great exception. Nobody 
seems to know what proportion of mining revenue is drawn from federal lands -- 
a group lobbying to change the law guesses $4 billion a year -- but even the 
American Mining Congress, the trade and lobbying group, admits that most known 
metallic mineral reserves in the West are on U.S. property, which is vast. The 
U.S. government owns nearly half of California, for example. 
An 8%-royalty plan died in Congress last year but is likely to be revived soon. 
Aghast, the industry says that exacting payment for the minerals will hurt the 
competitiveness of U.S. mining companies and that tampering with the law will 
let environmentalists change it somehow so they can tie the miners up in 
litigation. 
No property owner in his right mind would buy that. Anyone who finds gold in my 
back yard is going to pay me for it, and California, among other states, 
agrees. You want to mine state property? You pay the state. 
The miners are right about one thing: Like environmental regulations, 
government royalty or leasing requirements will raise the lowest level of ore 
the companies can profitably mine -- at least until new technologies come 
along. 
But these are unlikely, considering the sorry state of the industry's knowledge 
infrastructure. California's only full four-year mining program is at UC 
Berkeley, where undergraduate enrollment in the field is a dismal 14. Mike 
Hood, a Berkeley mining professor who looked into this, says enrollment at the 
six major Western mining colleges is down 80% since the 1970s. 
Will the U.S. cavalry ride to the rescue? Hardly. Those pesky federal deficits 
are still with us; Bureau of Mines staffing is off 20% since 1980, and its 
research spending is way down. 
But before you get mad at the miners -- and we're not talking about the odd 
grizzled prospector here, although they're also to blame -- remember that the 
industry isn't unusually greedy in all this. 
Subsidy-addicted farmers aren't much different. Nor are holders of broadcasting 
licenses. Much of the middle class gets its goodies, too. Where is it written 
in stone that home mortgage interest must be tax deductible? 
Hood says prior advances in technology helped mining bounce back from its 1980s 
depression. But he worries that "in the event of another downturn, there won't 
be any R&amp;D to implement to save the industry again." 
Could there be a larger message in all this? Gee, let's hope not. 
