ON JAN. 1, IT WILL EITHER BE COLORADO NO.1 -- OR CHOAS 
This was the college football season in which Colorado grieved, Notre Dame 
misbehaved, Miami arrived late and Michigan lost early. Dennis Erickson took 
over the Hurricanes, Bo Schembechler opted to quit coaching and Lou Holtz 
babbled nonsense. Their various private sentiments and public posturing were 
diverting. Now comes the purpose in all of this: which team will be No. 1? 
Raised at a dinner table, it's a query that can make glasses jump with the 
force of an argumentative fist. Perfectly respectable citizens are suddenly 
struck by paroxysms of feeling that turn their faces the shades of school 
colors. The national champion will be determined by the major bowl games on 
Jan. 1, and there are a good handful of teams with equally justifiable claims, 
all feeling the weight of a ring or seeing the outline of a trophy. 
"It's out in front of you. That ring is closer," Erickson said. 
Matters may be particularly contentious this New Year's Day. In an uncommon 
mess of a year, only No. 1 Colorado went undefeated. The Buffaloes (11-0) will 
meet defending national champion No. 4 Notre Dame (11-1) in the Orange Bowl, 
and a Colorado victory would make everything simple. But a loss would let in 
No. 2 Miami (10-1), which will go against Alabama in the Sugar Bowl, and also 
No. 3 Michigan, which makes its case against Southern California in the Rose 
Bowl. 
The right circumstances could occasion the first split news-agency polls since 
1978, when Alabama won No. 1 in the Associated Press but USC took the United 
Press International coaches' vote on the basis of an earlier defeat of the 
Crimson Tide. The similar possibilities this year raise a secondary argument, 
between those who favor a playoff system and those who enjoy the intriguing 
ambiguities of polls and bowls. 
"The only thing that spells instant national championship is if Colorado wins," 
Michigan defensive back Tripp Welborne said. "So to me, whatever comes, comes. 
That's why it's mythical, that's what makes it interesting." 
Each team has merits and drawbacks. Michigan was the pre-season No. 1, only to 
lose its opener to Notre Dame, which took over the top place for 11 weeks. 
Miami lost in midseason to archrival Florida State, and the team of the 1980s 
had a confidence crisis. Then the Hurricanes upset the Fighting Irish in the 
last game of the season, breaking their winning streak at 23 games. 
All the while, Colorado's record grew steadily. The Buffaloes played on 
swelling emotion, dedicating the year to late quarterback Sal Aunese, who died 
of cancer this fall. But their season has to be viewed with some incredulity, 
accomplished under such strange circumstances, and in the weak Big Eight as 
Oklahoma was injury-prone and scandal-troubled and Nebraska was rebuilding. The 
Buffaloes are No. 1 for the first time ever. 
"We didn't really earn number one," offensive lineman Joe Garten said. "We 
earned number two. Notre Dame was number one and they just gave it to us." 
The ranking could be merely on loan. The Buffaloes have never played for a 
national championship, and their sense of purpose may fail them, replaced by 
nerves. The last time they were unbeaten was 1923. This is only their second 
outright Big Eight title, and their first appearance in the Orange since Jan. 
1, 1977. Their school's 11 championships all came in something more appropriate 
for the locale, skiing. 
"We realize it's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity," Coach Bill McCartney said. 
"We couldn't expect to have this good fortune again. It wasn't realistic." 
And yet they set 43 school records. Sophomore quarterback Darian Hagan operated 
their option offense with aplomb, only the sixth player in NCAA history to gain 
1,000 yards both passing (1,002) and rushing (1,004). They dashed off 83 plays 
for 20 yards or more. For every easy rout over a lowly team, they pulled off a 
convincing victory against the likes of Texas (27-6), Illinois (38-7) and 
Washington (45-28). 
Some observers wonder if the memorializing of Aunese wasn't a bit much: His 
locker was glassed in and places reserved for him at team meals. Nebraska 
players intimated they were milking his death. Garten called the suggestion 
"disgusting," and it may have only redoubled the Buffaloes' determination. 
There is little question they play with genuine conviction, which Notre Dame's 
Holtz considers their scariest quality. 
"A sense of purpose takes you to a higher level," Holtz said. "I don't question 
that. It's impressive to an outsider." 
If Colorado has the most emotion, Miami has the best timing. The Hurricanes 
lost their purpose for a while under first-year coach Erickson and his 
first-year starter at quarterback, Craig Erickson. The loss to Florida State, 
with Erickson sidelined by a broken thumb, turned them temporarily into a 
fractious team. On his return Erickson made a public scene of yelling at his 
receivers, who criticized him equally. When they weren't arguing, they were 
questioning the new staff or their self-esteem. 
"We walked around like zombies," offensive lineman Mike Sullivan said. 
But the Hurricanes have played for the national championship in one form or 
another every year since 1986. Dennis Erickson promised them they would have a 
say in the '89 title race, appealing to their bedrock of confidence. One 
victory re-established them, the climactic 27-10 defeat of the Irish. 
"You could see it was still workable," defensive back Charles Pharms said. 
They received considerable assistance in the rankings when they soared from No. 
7 to No. 2, helped also when then-unbeaten and No. 2 Alabama fell to Auburn in 
its last regular-season game. It put them in the best position a team with one 
loss could ask for, and their Sugar Bowl game against Alabama is arguably an 
easier task than Colorado faces in Notre Dame. They have ironed out problems 
with Dennis Erickson's new one-back offense, and Craig Erickson has regained 
his composure, although he has been persistently troubled by interceptions 
(13). 
Their season may be summed up by one remark. "Everything that needed to happen 
did," Sullivan said. "Luck factors into any national championship. Someone gave 
us a hell of a nice gift. I'd like to think it's an omen." 
No team got more assistance in the polls than Michigan (10-1), inexplicably 
ranked ahead of Notre Dame despite its 24-19 loss to the Irish Sept. 16. That 
means the Wolverines could win their first national championship ever under 
Schembechler, who will retire immediately after the Rose Bowl game and be 
full-time athletic director. It would take the following: Miami must lose to 
Alabama and Colorado to Notre Dame, but not by much. The Wolverines must 
demolish the Trojans. 
Those events, plus sentiment for Schembechler, could swing votes their way. But 
the route is too circuitous for Schembechler to place much emphasis on it. 
Their first priority must be to defeat USC, no mean feat in light of their 
dreadful 2-7 history in the Rose under Schembechler. He publicly insists he is 
content with a Big Ten title. 
"We've already won a championship; this is icing," he said. "This is not a 
crusade." 
The Wolverines are not without solid arguments in their favor, however. The 
loss to the Irish came on two flukish kickoff returns for touchdowns by Raghib 
"Rocket" Ismail of 89 and 92 yards. They were forced to go with freshman 
quarterback Elvis Grbac when starter Michael Taylor was injured early. Since 
then they have won 10 straight games, which no other team but Colorado has been 
able to do. 
"It would be fitting and nice, but it's not necessary for us to feel 
accomplished," Welborne said. "Things don't turn out sometimes. But this could, 
easily." 
While Miami and Michigan benefited from a fortunate convergence of 
circumstances, Notre Dame couldn't have lost at a worse time. Nothing drops a 
team so heavily as a late-season defeat. When the Hurricanes simply crushed the 
Irish, their self-conviction was severely undermined. How will they grapple 
with a loss for the first time in two years, and particularly the notion that 
the title could be beyond their grasp? Even if they defeat the Buffaloes, No. 1 
could swing to the Hurricanes, and Holtz has told them plainly their prospects 
are not good. 
"We know we must have help along the way," linebacker Donn Grimm said. 
The loss to Miami may have been inevitable when viewed in the context of an 
absolute trial of a season. Perhaps no colossus of a team could have survived 
the Notre Dame schedule of eight bowl teams and the numerous controversies. 
They lost players to disciplinary actions and were criticized for an unsightly 
pre-game brawl with USC. 
Holtz acknowledged, "I don't believe we'll get a lot of sentimental votes." 
Against Miami they were uninspired. The offense led by option-oriented Tony 
Rice, normally so machine-like, did not score a touchdown. A single play was 
particularly emblematic: On third and 42 from his 7-yard line, Erickson 
completed a bomb for a first down that resulted in a demoralizing scoring 
drive. 
"It took time to set in," Grimm said. "We were not accustomed at all to losing. 
Not until we saw the consequence of it, dropping in the polls, did we accept 
it. It was like a nightmare. You hoped you'd wake up and it hadn't happened." 
But Notre Dame is not a team that yields easily. The Irish have the added 
advantage that the burden of proof is on Colorado. "I don't believe we've got a 
very good chance for the national championship," Holtz said, but then added 
with typical obfuscation: "If we lose." 
