HIGH SCHOOLS GET CHANCE TO SEE IF THEIR PROGRAMS MADE THE GRADE; 
EDUCATION: SCHOOL OFFICIALS' REACTION TO 'REPORT CARDS' ARE AS VARIED AS THE 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS. 
High school administrators across the South Bay are poring over their own 
report cards following the release last week of the statewide annual 
Performance Report for California Schools. 
As with students, their reactions vary with their grades. 
"It really reflects we do have a strong academic program going," said Nancy 
Mahr, spokeswoman for the Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District, which 
turned in a generally strong showing. "All three of our schools appear to be 
doing very well." 
At Hawthorne High, which registered elevated dropout rates, low statewide test 
scores and other problems, officials focused on the future. Said Principal Ken 
Crowe: "In the coming years, you'll be able to see a dramatic improvement." 
Issued last Monday, the state report shows an array of results ranging from 
solidly above-average showings by high schools on the affluent Palos Verdes 
Peninsula to mixed performances in lower income areas like Inglewood. 
The report has been issued annually since 1983 by the state Department of 
Education as part of an effort to help high schools identify their problems and 
gauge their progress in solving them. It takes 40 measures of school 
performance, including dropout rates, course enrollments, test scores, 
attendance rates and extracurricular activities. 
Many South Bay administrators said they were pleased with results showing that 
more students in the region are taking tougher classes, including those 
required for college admission and advanced placement. 
Across California, according to the state report cards, about 37% -- or 59,000 
-- more students are taking advanced mathematics than in 1983-84; 53% -- or 
34,000 -- more are taking chemistry, and 63% -- or 16,000 -- more are taking 
physics. 
Tougher entrance requirements by UC and Cal State campuses is one factor that 
has been cited to help explain the increases. Torrance school officials said 
students there are showing avid interest in taking Advanced Placement exams to 
earn college credits. 
"We had a young man last year who took 13 of them, and he passed every one," 
said John Schmitt, principal at South High School in the Torrance Unified 
School District. "It's a popular program. We have it in every department, and 
we have a staff that encourages kids to participate." 
El Segundo High School Principal William Watkins said his school showed large 
enrollments in advanced classes because it has consistently imposed tough core 
course requirements on students. "We've never allowed our requirements over the 
years to diminish," Watkins said. "We feel we are on the right track." 
But Watkins and other South Bay high school administrators expressed concern 
about continuing problems evident in the report, particularly the 1987-88 
dropout rate. 
Leuzinger High School Principal Sonja Davis, whose school's 11.9% rate far 
exceeded the state average of 7.9%, said she expects improvement from dropout 
prevention programs that were implemented after data for the state report was 
compiled. Davis acknowledged, however, that improvement won't come easily. 
"We have to look at what we have to offer youngsters," Davis said of students 
at her school, which is located in Lawndale. "So many students see no relation 
between what they're doing in school and their lives and future." 
Administrators also said they were paying close attention to student test 
scores in the state report, which listed recent results from the California 
Assessment Program test, an academic proficiency exam administered to students 
statewide, and the Scholastic Aptitude Test, an exam used by many colleges and 
universities to evaluate applicants. 
Jerry Klein, vice principal of Mira Costa High School, said he was "satisfied, 
but not comfortable" with test scores showing that his school was well above 
the state average but in the bottom half of schools with similar socioeconomic 
profiles. 
The school, which is in Manhattan Beach, is grouped in so-called "band" 
comparisons with schools in more affluent parts of the state, such as Beverly 
Hills or the Palos Verdes Peninsula. 
Klein was one of several school officials who pointed out that parents should 
consider other categories measured in the report -- such as enrollments in 
advanced classes -- as carefully as test scores. 
"Unfortunately, some in the community think (test scores) are the be-all and 
end-all, and that's not necessarily true," he said. 
That view was shared by Paul Possemato, associate superintendent for 
instruction for the Los Angeles Unified School District. 
Possemato said that although test scores are an important indicator, they 
cannot be relied upon completely -- especially at schools in which English is a 
second language for a significant number of students. 
"It is possible that for these students the subtleties of the language are 
difficult to discern in a timed test," he said. Possemato said he also was 
pleased with advanced course enrollment gains of several of his district's 
South Bay schools. He said Gardena High School, for instance, showed 
outstanding progress in enrollment for chemistry courses and very good gains 
for three-year math programs, advanced math programs, and three-year science 
programs. 
Speaking about the entire school district, however, Possemato said the bad news 
in the state report card was that blacks and Latinos were poorly represented in 
the advanced courses. 
Faced with this and other information, several South Bay school officials 
indicated that the report will help them in their efforts to improve their 
programs. 
"We don't look too bad. We're not at the top but we're not at the bottom 
either," said Inglewood High School Principal Lawrence Freeman. "I will never 
be satisfied. . . . We should really be doing better than we are." 
Copies of reports on individual high schools can be obtained by writing to the 
Program Evaluation/Research Unit, State Department of Education, 721 Capitol 
Mall, Sacramento, Calif., 95814, or by calling (916) 323-6116. 
SOUTH BAY REPORTS: J6 
