CHURCH PLAN FOR TRANSIENTS IN REDONDO BEACH SHELVED; 
HOMELESS: CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS SIMPLY DECLINED TO VOTE ON THE ISSUE. 
Invite the homeless to Redondo Beach? Feed and clothe them in a city park? For 
free? 
"We might as well have Hanoi Jane and Martin Sheen just bus 'em on in from 
downtown L.A.," City Councilman Terry Ward privately scoffed when the idea 
first emerged two weeks ago. 
But when the request -- made by a church and blessed by the city's 
fundamentalist Christian mayor -- came to a hearing Tuesday night, it was with 
a kinder, gentler attitude that council members turned it away. 
After a lengthy discussion, they simply declined to bring it up for a vote. 
"I don't think the city of Redondo Beach acts with malice," explained 
Councilman Stevan Colin, whose district includes the park where Hope 
Chapel-Redondo Beach wanted to set up a temporary aid station for transients. 
When constituents phoned City Hall to offer their opinion, Colin said, "almost 
every caller (opposing the idea) started out by saying, 'I don't want you to 
misunderstand me -- it's not that I don't want to help the homeless. It's just 
that I don't think we should do it in a city park.' " 
At issue was a request from Hope Chapel's Haven of Hope Ministry to set up a 
45-day food and clothing distribution program in Dominguez Park, in central 
Redondo Beach. The 17-acre park is the home of the South Redondo Little League. 
The program, which would be run out of a church-owned trailer, would also draw 
transients for a head-count that would help gauge the extent of homelessness in 
the affluent beach cities of the South Bay. 
The Rev. Bill Gross said public land was needed because the church itself is 
homeless: Hope Chapel-Redondo Beach is so new that it has no church property 
and holds Sunday services in a high school cafeteria. He added, however, that 
part of the reason his church came to the city was that homelessness "is not 
just a church problem." 
The request -- which put yet another suburban community on the spot in dealing 
with Los Angeles County's reputation as the nation's homeless capital -- 
prompted a flood of emotional debate. 
Some, like Ward, compared the reaction to the furor that erupted earlier this 
year when Malibu's honorary mayor, actor Martin Sheen, declared that exclusive 
seaside enclave a sanctuary for the disenfranchised. Other council members 
expressed fears that such involvement could create the sort of tensions that 
have arisen recently in Santa Monica, where liberal policies toward the 
homeless have placed a strain on social services and spawned political 
backlash. 
Local advocates for the homeless mentally ill backed the idea, claiming that 
the beach cities are lacking in services for the disenfranchised, even though 
local outreach workers report there are at least half a dozen homeless people 
in every Redondo Beach park. 
But park officials argued that the plan would draw transients to a city where 
street people are seldom seen, and several members of the clergy expressed 
concern that it would duplicate free lunch programs already being offered in 
Redondo Beach by local churches and the Salvation Army. 
Residents living around the park also complained that the program would make it 
impossible for their children to play safely there. 
The sole backer on the council was Mayor Brad Parton, a frequent Hope Chapel 
congregant. 
"If this isn't something our city can jump on . . . then our idea of government 
is pretty mixed up," Parton told his colleagues. 
But the request did not come to a vote. Instead, the council asked that Hope 
Chapel be added to the city's referral list of local social service agencies. 
