FULL VERDICT IN HUNTER CASE IS QUESTIONABLE; 
JUSTICE: THREE JURORS DOUBT THE GROUP CAN REACH A A FULL VERDICT ON 197 COUNTS 
AGAINST NANCY HOOVER HUNTER. THE JUDGE GAVE THE GROUP THE AFTERNOON OFF, BUT 
ORDERED THEM BACK TO DELIBERATIONS ON MONDAY. 
Jurors in Nancy Hoover Hunter's federal tax evasion and fraud trial indicated 
Friday that they had reached partial verdicts but were "unable to render a 
complete verdict in the case." 
At a late-morning hearing, three of the 12 jurors told U. S. Judge Earl B. 
Gilliam they did not feel the panel could reach a full verdict on the 197 
counts against Hunter. 
But, because nine jurors indicated there was at least a chance that a complete 
verdict can be reached, Gilliam ordered the panel to return Monday morning for 
further deliberations -- though he gave them all of Friday afternoon off. 
In a "situation of debate," Gilliam said, "sometimes a mind will become clearer 
after a rest period." 
The judge did not ask the panel to reveal what verdicts it had reached. 
The charges against Hunter stem from her role as a top executive in the La 
Jolla investment firm J. David &amp; Co. from 1979 to 1984, when its checks 
began to bounce and nervous investors forced the firm into bankruptcy. 
In all, investors lost about $80 million in the J. David affair, a giant Ponzi 
scheme in which prosecutors allege that Hunter played an active role. Hunter's 
defense lawyers have contended throughout the eight-month trial that she was 
blinded by her love for the founder of the firm, J. David (Jerry) Dominelli, 
and was unaware of any illegal activities. 
Dominelli pleaded guilty in 1985 to four counts of fraud and tax evasion in 
connection with the investment firm's Ponzi scheme and is serving a 20-year 
sentence in federal prison. 
Jurors in Hunter's case had embarked Friday morning upon their 14th day of 
deliberations when they sent Gilliam a note saying they had reached partial 
verdicts but saw no chance of reaching a full verdict. The judge sent them back 
for more talks, but they sent him another note an hour or so later saying they 
remained "unable" to decide more. 
In open court, before a crowd of spectators and reporters that spilled out of 
the courtroom and into the hall, Gilliam then asked each of the 12 whether a 
complete verdict was possible. 
Three said no. One of the three, Dorothy Andre, 62, of San Diego, said, "I 
don't think we'll ever come to any kind of decision. Not this jury." 
Andre was the juror who last week wrote Gilliam a note asking to be replaced by 
one of the two alternate jurors, saying she never realized that "having to 
decide someone's fate" could cause her "such worry, anxiety and concern." The 
judge did not, however, order her off the panel. 
The nine jurors who told Gilliam on Friday that they thought the panel might be 
able to reach a verdict appeared unconvinced that the group actually would 
reach unanimous agreement. "I feel it remains remote," said foreman Russell S. 
Litchfield, 66, of El Cajon. 
The Hunter case is believed to be the longest-running criminal trial in the 
history of the San Diego federal court. The trial began March 28. 
