PRE-WAR TOUGH GUY FROM CHICAGO; 
NELSON ALGREN A LIFE ON THE WILD SIDE BY BETTINA DREW (G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS: 
$27.95; 416 PP.) 
Nice people didn't like Nelson Algren. The Chicago-bred author of "The Man With 
the Golden Arm," "A Walk on the Wild Side" and a number of immortal short 
stories about America's dispossessed behaved too much like his fictional 
characters for comfort. 
What can you do about a major writer who -- this fine biography tells us -- 
liked the poor, did his fieldwork in low-rent bars and "walked and talked with 
a sort of pre-war style, tough but not mean, when by now it should have been 
the other way around"? Or who believed that "literature is made upon any 
occasion when a challenge is put to the legal apparatus by conscience in touch 
with humanity"? 
Algren, who passionately craved success, wasn't willing to buy it at any price. 
The result was that, still at his peak, he became a "non-person" in American 
literature, a Nelson Who? everywhere except in Europe, where readers idolized 
him. 
Early in his abused childhood, Algren grasped the gut-connection between 
winners and cheaters. He preferred honest crooks to the respectably corrupt, 
and he didn't go out of his way to conceal his feelings. "A p.r. guy he 
wasn't," one of his friends is quoted in Bettina Drew's sympathetic but 
level-headed biography. 
Incorruptibly honest but naively convinced nobody could outsmart him, Algren 
was easy pickings for on-the-con Hollywood producers (like Otto Preminger, who 
did the film version of Algren's "The Man With The Golden Arm") and whores with 
hearts of lead. Algren was like J.D. Salinger's Holden Caulfield with his 
impossibly high standards for adults. Disillusionment was in the cards, and 
Algren -- a compulsive gambler -- played poker with his life like a man 
possessed of honesty like a fever. 
Algren's sense of kinship between his own and other people's pain was formed in 
the Great Depression. Jewish working-class in origin, Nelson Algren Abraham 
(his real name) was an ordinary boy of the Chicago streets with an 
extraordinary view of his own possibilities. He was viciously knocked about by 
his German non-Jewish mother Goldie, who took out on him her rage at marrying a 
simple garage mechanic who couldn't even add up the bills nobody paid. 
Nelson's dad was a loser's loser. Trapped, Nelson went upwardly mobile in two 
seemingly contradictory directions: to college, and into the lower depths of 
"pool halls, bowling alleys, tenement houses" and brothels of Chicago's 
northwest side. "Even at 17," his biographer writes, "he seemed to know his way 
around the underworld without fear." 
Like many "wild boys of the road," Algren hoboed all over America, ending up in 
a Texas jail for stealing . . . a typewriter, what else? With his eyes, ears 
and a notebook, he soaked up a Depression-era country of back streets and 
shadowy alleys "where relationships meant nothing, where money was more 
important than life, and life was so cheap as to be valueless . . . (a) world 
of outcast people with its own customs and values." The horror fascinated him. 
The repressed violence beneath the smooth skin excited his creative lust. 
Algren, this boxcar sociologist, instinctively understood, from his own family 
cruelties, how America was governed. If the fix was in -- and it always was -- 
there were only two classes: wardens and prisoners, powerful and powerless. 
Like so many writers of his period, he sided unequivocally with the scum of the 
earth. 
It was normal to be a left-wing writer in the '30s -- in Chicago, his best 
literary friend, Richard Wright, was a Communist, and James T. Farrell a 
Trotskyist. What sat Algren apart was that he refused, all through his fat 
years, to abandon either his friends or his principles when America was 
offering a bounty on leftists. 
In 1949, Algren's "The Man With The Golden Arm" was an instant smash. Suddenly 
he became world-famous. Even in Chicago, where his previous novel "Never Come 
Morning" was removed from public-library shelves at the order of a grafting 
mayor, he was appointed temporary hero, mainly because he was making money for 
the first time. He also became gossip-worthy as "Lewis Brogan," the American 
heir of Simone de Beauvoir's best-selling novel "La Mandarine." Beauvoir, who'd 
fallen in love with Algren and his dry, perverse humor -- he showed her a 
police lineup and the electric chair on their first date -- called him "my 
beloved husband." But her long-time liaison with Jean-Paul Sartre took 
precedence, which hurt Algren. Although endowed with a "European" sensibility, 
Algren never caught on that Beauvoir's idea of a "contingent love" simply meant 
high-class husband-swapping. 
A chronic loser at the track and poker table, Algren also was suicidally slow 
to grasp changes in literary and political fashion in an America growing scared 
and suburbanized in the '50s. The FBI, which kept an active file on Algren, 
denied him a passport. Despite strong recommendations from Ernest Hemingway and 
Carl Sandburg, he was refused a Guggenheim. 
Worst of all, many critics, themselves ex-radicals, blasted Algren because of 
his bias toward the destitute and oppressed. Norman Podhoretz couldn't fathom 
why Algren "finds bums so much more interesting and stirring than other 
people." Leslie Fiedler called him a "museum piece." Literary academia loathed 
Algren as one of the "destroyers of the social order." The "conservatism of the 
'fifties," Drew notes, was making him "seem more like a freak than a serious 
novelist." 
Nelson Algren became a pawn in the larger dispute "that exiled the whole 
urban-sociological tradition from the hall of fame of American letters," Drew 
quotes one of Algren's few academic defenders. Perhaps most important, the 
writer's human base dissolved under his feet. The Poles and other Chicago 
ethnics Algren doted on moved elsewhere, leaving him stranded in the old 
neighborhood now full of Latin-Americans whose language he was simply getting 
too old to learn. A way of life -- at every level -- was being lost. 
Marginalized, unable to get an advance for a new novel, he fought back by 
moving to New Jersey to research a book about black boxer Rubin (Hurricane) 
Carter, jailed for a double murder Algren believed he didn't commit. But life, 
or women, or the critics had beat some of the stuffing out of him. He never won 
The Big One again. 
Algren died in 1974. "I speak only for those who leaped or fell," he once said 
in a poem, "losers being the only ones left with something to say and no one to 
say it." One example: Because of his experience in America's drug world, out of 
which he drew The Golden Arm's "Frankie Machine," Algren decided that 
"narcotics constituted a medical problem, not a police matter." 
I'd like to think that Algren, who loved putting on sober folks with his loud, 
checked jackets and wide, Day-Glo ties -- the uniform of "a short-odds bettor 
at the two-dollar window of a downstate Midwest racetrack" -- would finally be 
acceptable today. 
But with those clothes, that manner, these views, I wonder. 
