ART ; 
ITALO SCANGA'S WORKS OFFER VISIONS OF DREAMLIKE IMAGES 
Euro-style is the buzzword these days in the fashion and design magazines. 
Copywriters are applying it to anything that looks sleek, glamorous and 
worldly, whether it's a leather jacket or an end table. 
"Euro-style" conjures up a continent of wealthy, impossibly sophisticated types 
who've seen it all and, frankly, are rather bored with it. You can imagine them 
murmuring veiled insults to each other in fashionably stark apartments while 
chain smoking and picking idly at cuisine minceur. 
As it happens, much important contemporary European art tends to come across as 
more secretive, spare, unlovable and coldly theoretical than the American 
variety. But some sophisticated European artists are mining a different vein of 
experience -- the peasant basis of modern-day culture. Artists such as 
Magdalena Abakanowicz and Mario Merz, well-versed in the ins and outs of 
contemporary art, are finding new ways to express such themes as closeness to 
the earth, religious ritual, and the burden of political oppression. 
Italo Scanga, whose paintings and sculpture from the past few years are at the 
Art Institute of Southern California through Jan. 2, was born in Italy in 1932 
and immigrated to the United States in 1947. Scanga has taught and exhibited 
widely in this country, and he has been on the faculty at UC San Diego for more 
than a decade, yet his work is still flavored with memories of his native 
region of Calabria -- where popular belief in magic thrived for centuries 
alongside a devout Catholicism. 
His wooden figures standing on low carts are descendants of the images used in 
church processions at festival time. His use of junk objects and vivid 
patterning, and his deliberate primitivizing of the figure also hark back to 
other times and places untouched by the hard-edged consumer values of America 
in the '80s. 
At the same time, however, Scanga's work reflects the curse of late 
20th-Century artists: the awful weight of all the historically important styles 
that have come and gone during the past few centuries. He is a latter-day 
troubadour singing an optimistic song of man and his place in the world as well 
as a painfully self-aware artist whose vision is shaped by the ironies of 
contemporary urban life. 
In his "Figure With Plow and Lion," a small metal object is attached with wires 
to a tall stick figure with no feet or hands, and whose body is painted in a 
decorative pattern of bright colors. This stick person stands on a low table 
patterned with animal and human figures along with a real tea kettle and a 
crudely shaped spatter-painted head of a lion. The significance of the 
miniature plow and the lion are not entirely clear, but these items give the 
simple, home-made figure an aura of myth. Perhaps he is the brave spirit of the 
fields, or the emblem of farmers in a town whose civic symbol is the lion. 
(Traditionally, the lion is a symbol of St. Mark, one of the four Evangelists.) 
A more polemical tone infuses "Troubled World (Awl)," in which a globe (labeled 
with the word hunger) is balanced on a large rod-shaped tool. The tool (too big 
to be an awl, unless there's an industrial-size variety) rests in turn on an 
upended pitchfork with a splayed wooden handle that looks like a pair of 
miniature legs. This entire balancing act is perched on a tree trunk whose 
chopped-off limbs have been crudely covered with swipes of black paint. 
The piece offers a set of symbols for farming, nature, man and the world at 
large, and it calls attention to the precariousness of humankind's 
interconnectedness. 
Scanga's work seems less interesting when it gets more arty. In "Red Figure 
With Banjo," he builds up the figure with an array of wooden pieces suggesting 
the way Cubist painters shattered the figure into volleys of arcs and straight 
lines. He echoes generations of modernist art-scavengers by recycling a 
fragment of wooden frame as the figure's arms. 
The musical theme harks back to a favorite Cubist subject, and the real banjo 
and guitar in the piece suggest the Cubists' use of bits of real wallpaper or 
newspaper as foils for their painted abstractions. Even the vibrant patterning 
that covers both figure and instruments owes more to Abstract Expressionism and 
Fauvism than to peasant art. Ultimately, however, the piece seems rather cold 
and contrived, lacking the warmth and funky oddity of some of Scanga's homelier 
sculptures. 
His loosely brushed paintings are full of glancing references to nature -- 
skies and mountains, birds and trees and gourds -- and also colorful passages 
of dots or speckles. Human beings only rarely wander into this fairy tale 
paradise. 
In "Untitled (Woman with Urn)," the peasant woman with a basket on her head is 
a collaged photograph of a painting from another era. In "Untitled (Mandolin 
and Vase with Figure)" the figure is a wispy white painted nude, as 
insubstantial as a ghost. Such images, with their lack of logical space or 
proportion, operate almost like dream memories. The main n problem in work of 
this kind is offering too much cute, folklorish imagery without delivering the 
emotional goods. 
Although Scanga does not quite stoop to formula, his combinations of images 
sometimes suggest a dream told so many times that it no longer has its original 
magical power. One wonders whether he has not journeyed -- geographically and 
psychically -- so far from his original themes that they no longer seem 
immediate and compelling. 
Next week: a look at Imre Bukta, a Hungarian artist (in "The New Art of 
Hungary" at the Modern Museum of Art, through Feb. 18) who paints his 
countryside with a brilliant mixture of irony and affection. 
 Work by Italo Scanga remains through Jan. 2 at the Art Institute of Southern 
California, 2222 Laguna Canyon Road, Laguna Beach. Gallery hours are 8 a.m. to 
5 p.m. Mondays through Thursdays, 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Fridays and 11 a.m. to 3 
p.m. Saturdays. Admission is free. Information: (714) 497-3309. 
