TRABUCO HILLS BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT; 
PATIENCE AND EXECUTION DO THE TRICK IN LOS ALAMITOS VICTORY 
Robert Conlisk's 23 points led Los Alamitos High School to an 82-67 victory 
over league rival El Dorado for the championship in the Trabuco Hills 
basketball tournament Saturday at Trabuco Hills High School. 
Conlisk, who made 10 of 14 shots from the field, was named the tournament's 
most valuable player. 
"The kids played real hard and we were more intense," Los Alamitos Coach Steve 
Brooks said. 
"We were patient on offense, we executed and got the good shots, and our 
defense limited El Dorado's shots." 
As a result, Los Alamitos, leading by six at the end of the first quarter, 
outscored El Dorado 24-17 in the second quarter and never looked back. 
Los Alamitos' Steve Sargeant, who scored 18 points, made the all-tournament 
team, as did El Dorado's Mike Bradich. 
Los Alamitos is 4-0; El Dorado is 4-1. 
Trabuco Hills 67, Mission Viejo 64 -- Trabuco Hills, which took an early 8-0 
lead and never trailed, contained a Mission Viejo fourth-quarter rally for 
third place. 
Eric Cramer's field goal with one minute remaining brought Mission Viejo to 
within, 61-60, but six consecutive free throws by Trabuco Hills ensured the 
victory. 
Mission Viejo Coach Bob Minier said his team lacked focus in the first half, 
but got aggressive in the second half. Cramer was the rallying force, scoring 
all 22 of his points in the second half. 
Beau Hossler and Randy Kriech paced Trabuco Hills with 24 and 15 points, 
respectively. 
"Our goal was to hold (Hossler and Kriech) to 30, it would have made a 
difference," Minier said. 
Trabuco Hills is 3-3, Mission Viejo is 2-2. 
University 76, Fullerton 73 -- Brian Smith's 27 points led University for 
seventh place. Fullerton's Rene Arias scored 14 of his 25 points in the fourth 
quarter. Four of his five field goals in the last quarter were three-pointers, 
but it wasn't enough. 
Foothill 68, Rancho Buena Vista 57 -- Mark Wilkinson's 27 points led Foothill 
(2-3) to fifth place. BOB BORSUM 
