HUNTER DEFENSE REVEALS APPEAL STRATEGY IN COURT PAPERS URGING CLIENT'S RELEASE 
Nancy Hoover Hunter, convicted earlier this week of federal tax evasion, has 14 
"solid" grounds for appeal, including the fact that her widely publicized trial 
was not moved out of San Diego, her lawyers argued in legal papers filed 
Thursday. 
Urging a federal appeals court to release Hunter from jail pending formal 
sentencing, the lawyers argued that the "strength" of her appeal was just one 
of the reasons Hunter is no more of a risk to flee than she was before 
conviction Monday. 
The lawyers also claimed that it was "unfounded" to suggest that Hunter would 
flee, because she had been under indictment for more than three years but had 
not sought to leave the country permanently and sending her to jail during the 
holiday season is "cruel and smacks of punishment." 
"If Ms. Hunter were a flight risk, she would have departed . . . long before 
now," attorneys Robert Brewer and Richard Marmaro said in the brief, filed with 
the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco. 
The brief, in which the lawyers asked that Hunter be able to await her Feb. 20 
sentencing at home, essentially recounted the factors that failed to convince 
U.S. District Judge Earl B. Gilliam that Hunter was not a flight risk. Gilliam 
sent Hunter to jail without bail immediately after her conviction on four of 
197 counts. 
However, the papers identified, apparently for the first time, the issues 
Hunter's defense team plans to attack when they file an appeal. 
Besides trial publicity, most of the 13 other grounds centered on errors that 
Gilliam, who presided over Hunter's eight-month trial, purportedly made, the 
attorneys said in the papers. 
The case against Hunter stemmed from her role as a top executive in the La 
Jolla investment firm J. David &amp; Co. from 1979 to 1984, when its checks 
began to bounce and nervous investors forced the firm to file for protection 
under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. 
In all, investors lost about $80 million in the J. David affair, a giant Ponzi 
scheme in which prosecutors alleged that Hunter played an active role. The 
defense lawyers said Hunter was blinded by her love for the firm's founder, J. 
David (Jerry) Dominelli, and was unaware of any illegal activities. 
The jury that convicted Hunter of the tax evasion counts also acquitted her of 
one other tax-related charge but deadlocked on the 192 counts that centered on 
her alleged involvement with the Ponzi scheme, a pyramid in which money from 
new investors is used to pay off earlier investors. 
The trial, which began March 28, is believed to be the longest-running criminal 
case in the history of the San Diego federal court. Hunter faces up to 20 years 
in prison, or five years on each of the counts. 
Gilliam, Hunter's defense team said, could have moved the case out of San Diego 
to ensure a fair trial. And he could have sequestered the jury, should have 
dismissed a juror whom they said had outside contact during the trial, and 
should not have re-read jury instructions halfway through the panel's 
deliberations, the defense contended. 
In addition, the lawyers maintained, Gilliam was too harsh in not allowing them 
to ask witnesses about certain issues, including Hunter's relationship with 
Dominelli. 
The lawyers detailed several other technical mistakes they said Gilliam made 
and contended they brought up the "strength" of Hunter's appeal only because an 
appeals court may consider that in deciding whether someone is a flight risk. 
The attorneys also said that Hunter's conviction did not by itself make her so 
untrustworthy as to be kept locked up until her Feb. 20 sentencing. And the 
conviction was one of only two factors Gilliam discussed when ordering her to 
jail, they said. 
The other reason was Gilliam's statement that Hunter lied when she testified in 
October that she was innocent of related state charges, though she had entered 
a guilty plea in 1986. 
When Hunter said she agreed to the plea bargain because she didn't know if she 
had the energy to go through two trials, that wasn't lying, the lawyers said. 
Calling plea bargains a "fact of life in the judicial system," the attorneys 
said it was "difficult to understand" why Gilliam "refuses to accept the 
notion" that people sometimes plead guilty "to offenses they did not commit in 
order to end a case on relatively favorable terms." 
The 1986 deal -- in which Hunter admitted that she funneled money, allegedly J. 
David funds, to Roger Hedgecock's successful 1983 campaign for San Diego mayor 
-- brought Hunter fines and probation, but no jail time. 
