HOWARD ROSENBERG: A VIEW FROM THE HOTEL: REPORTING THE PANAMA CONFLICT 
ABC's Peter Jennings called it "hotel reporting." 
We got it from China last June when many Western journalists, their freedom of 
movement severely restricted in Beijing, were forced to observe the crackdown 
of pro-reform dissidents from their hotel rooms overlooking Tian An Men Square. 
And now, as Jennings noted Wednesday morning, it was happening again. 
Just as journalists were trapped in their hotels during some of the violence in 
China, so were many initially forced to report by phone from their rooms in the 
besieged Marriott Hotel during the first hours of the upheaval in Panama as 
U.S. forces moved against Panamanian dictator Manuel A. Noriega. 
Whether it was NBC's Ed Rabel, CBS' Juan Vasquez or ABC's Juan Quinones (who at 
one point reported hiding under his bed with his producer), these limited, but 
unique eyewitness accounts were, in effect, radio on television. 
Although some journalists may have been able to leave the hotel Tuesday night, 
many stayed, fearing they'd be in even greater danger on the streets. But 
tension was also high inside the hotel. 
Speaking from his room by phone to Dan Rather several times late Tuesday night, 
Vasquez obviously felt in peril. His speech was halting and barely above a 
whisper, and he seemed to want to get off the phone as soon as possible. 
For emotion, however, nothing topped New York Times reporter Lindsey Gruson on 
the phone with Rather, his voice full of emotion as he described having a gun 
put to his head, and then to his teeth by threatening Panamanians who had taken 
him from his hotel room and held him hostage part of Tuesday night. 
Not all of the hotel "reporters" were professional journalists. 
On the line with NBC Wednesday morning and sounding very scared was Roger 
Sizemore, who was identified as a California businessman. He spoke from his 
room at the Marriott. 
Sizemore asked Tom Brokaw and Bryant Gumbel if they knew if it was safe for him 
to go to the lobby. It was amazing -- an American in Panama asking Americans in 
New York for information about Panama that could determine his fate. Gumbel 
told him that NBC reporter Rabel was able to leave the hotel safely Wednesday 
morning, but that he couldn't say if Sizemore should try to leave. 
Then Gumbel asked Sizemore if it was safe for him to go to the window and look 
out. "I'd rather not," he said. He didn't have to elaborate. 
Twice Sizemore left the phone to respond to what he said was "someone at the 
door." After the second time, he returned and said abruptly: "We gotta go." Go 
where? And why? There was no more information, for the conversation had ended. 
United States television is available in some Panama hotels, and NBC's John 
Chancellor noted the strange irony: People trapped in their hotels in Panama 
were complaining about that to U.S. networks who possibly were being watched by 
the very Panamanians who were responsible for those people being trapped. 
Although other news organizations also complained that the hotel was 
unprotected, it was NBC that seemed almost to be making the Marriott its cause 
Wednesday morning. Gumbel and his soon-to-be "Today" co-host Deborah Norville 
repeatedly asked why the hotel hadn't been secured by the invading U.S. troops, 
given the number of Americans known to be staying there. 
However, there were surely many other hotels in Panama housing Americans, and 
they probably were in danger, too. Hence the Marriott was singled out for 
special emphasis on TV, it seemed, only because so many of the American media 
were staying there. That put it under the TV spotlight. 
"It's about time we do get some protection," ABC reporter Quinones said 
Wednesday morning. His frustration was understandable. Yet it seemed that 
through television, pressure was being put on U.S. forces to come to the rescue 
of a specific hotel. 
Media first, others second? 
