'UNO MAS' IS TOO MUCH FOR DURAN; 
FIGHT: SUGAR RAY LEONARD WINS UNANIMOUS DECISION WITH BOXING CLINIC THAT 
OUTCLASSES OPPONENT AND DRAWS BOOS FROM CROWD. 
Sugar Ray Leonard took Roberto Duran to school Thursday night, boxing him silly 
and winning one of the easiest decisions of his career. 
Leonard won by scores of 119-109, 116-111 and 120-110 on the judges' cards. It 
was a one-sided, almost boring bout that left a sellout crowd of 16,305 booing 
at the finish. It was difficult to tell if they were booing the bout or Duran, 
who raised his hands as a victor at the final bell and was lifted into the air 
by cornermen. 
But at the postfight news conference, Duran really wore out his welcome, 
claiming he won the fight. 
"I thought I won, I thought I outpointed him," he said, to several hundred 
disbelieving reporters. 
"No mas!" someone yelled. 
Perhaps Duran and his people were just happy he made it to the finish on his 
feet. 
It's difficult to describe Leonard's 36th career victory in praiseworthy 
fashion, since he fought a guy who couldn't counterpunch, jab, get in a 
straight right, or even, on two occasions, find his own corner. 
This was not the Duran of the 1970s. No snarls or sneers. He was almost 
submissive. He fought with an impassive face. 
At Montreal in 1980, Duran savagely assaulted Leonard. Punches came from 
everywhere. 
On Thursday night, Roberto Duran wasn't even a pest. 
Those looking to wake up the echoes from Montreal didn't even get a pantomime. 
Leonard will earn a minimum of $15 million for what was one of the easiest 
victories of his $100-million career. Duran gets at least $7.6 million. 
Leonard, who spent his time between rounds under a beige blanket in his corner, 
secure from the 60-degree air, set the tone for a mismatch in the first round. 
Leonard started out with constant lateral movement, Duran watching . . . as he 
would for all 12 rounds. Duran tried a lunging right hand midway through the 
round and Leonard blocked it. Then Leonard tagged Duran with a hard left jab, 
and rattled him with a left-right combination. Next were two long lead rights 
that landed on Duran's head, followed by two body shots. Leonard, who started 
Round 1 cautiously, quickly sized up his opponent. He finished the round freely 
hitting the Panamanian about the head and body, plainly the aggressor. 
That's how it went for 10 rounds -- Leonard boxing superbly, Duran failing to 
do much of anything. At times, Leonard was in such control that he appeared to 
be trying to goad Duran into quitting again, as he had in Leonard-Duran II, in 
New Orleans. 
He stuck out his chin for Duran, who didn't even try to hit it, and faked a 
bolo punch several times. When Duran bought it, Leonard hit him with the jab. 
Duran (85-8-0) did most of his damage in the 11th round, when he landed a right 
hand that opened a cut above Leonard's left eye and sent blood streaming down 
Leonard's face. 
Leonard (36-1-1) finished the fight with an aerobics workout after bleeding 
from the mouth earlier in the bout. 
Leonard thus retained his World Boxing Council super-middleweight championship. 
There was a premature announcement Thursday morning that Duran's WBC 
middleweight championship might be at stake, too, since Leonard weighed in at 
160 and Duran 158, under the middleweight limit. 
The fight was contracted for at 162 pounds. Duran's people protested wildly at 
the suggestion Duran's middleweight title was going up for grabs, with good 
reason, as it turned out. 
Duran, who lost 34 of 36 rounds on three Times scorecards, really landed only 
two telling punches. One was a right hand midway through the second round that 
caught Leonard flush, but the impact came at the end of the punch. 
Then came the 11th-round right hand. 
Early in the third round, the pattern had been set. Leonard, all but 
unchallenged, operated with sharpness, far more so than he showed last June in 
the draw with Thomas Hearns. 
Duran couldn't even counter over Leonard's frequent jabs. Leonard barely needed 
to keep his right hand up to protect himself. Once, in the sixth, Leonard 
tripped over his feet, was wide open, and Duran couldn't get off a punch. 
Leonard was hitting Duran so effectively at the end of the third round that 
Duran couldn't find his corner at the bell. He went to the wrong one after the 
eighth, too. 
There were no knockdowns, but Leonard seemed on the verge of sending Duran to 
the canvas halfway through the sixth. Leonard hurt Duran in the corner with a 
big left hook, then hit him again seconds later with a straight right and a 
left hook. Then came two more long rights that landed flush on Duran's face. 
Leonard was making faces at Duran again as the round ended, but this time, as 
the bell rang, instead of getting a glare in return, Duran turned his gaze to 
the floor as the trudged back to his corner. 
Seconds before the end of the seventh, Leonard missed wildly with a right hand, 
leaving himself wide open, and Duran only looked at the opportunity, never 
moving his fists. 
The boos began midway through the ninth, a quiet round for both fighters. There 
wasn't a real punch thrown for a minute and a half. 
Duran's last chance, Round 12, went by without a challenge from the man once 
known as "Manos de Piedra" (Hands of Stone). Leonard ran and Duran watched, 
despite his pleading cornermen motioning for him to attack. 
On the undercard, Olympic champions Ray Mercer and Andrew Maynard plodded to 
uninspired, eight-round decisions. Heavyweight Mercer (210) raised his record 
to 12-0 with a split decision over former cruiserweight champion Ossie Ocasio 
(227), but he looked years away from being ready for Mike Tyson. 
Maynard, the light-heavyweight gold medalist in 1988, went to 9-0 with a 
unanimous decision over Mike DeVito. 
Heavyweight Tommy Morrison, another projected Tyson opponent, looked more 
promising than Mercer in his six-rounder. The aggressive, left-hooking Morrison 
knocked Canadian journeyman Ken Lakusta down three times and went to 21-0 with 
a decision. 
