INSTITUTE HELPS PEOPLE MAKE CHOICES, CHANGES IN A VOLATILE MARKET; 
CAREERS: A COMPUTER MATCHES A CLIENT'S STRENGTHS, INTERESTS AND PERSONALITIES 
WITH JOBS. 
In an era when many businesses are in crisis, people need to protect themselves 
careerwise -- whether you're an aerospace engineer in a threatened company, a 
career woman who has hit the corporate glass ceiling or a student trying to 
decide among a bewildering smorgasbord of college majors what field to pursue. 
The Warner Center-based Success Training Institute specializes in helping 
people like these make career choices and changes. The institute was founded in 
1979 by Mary Anne Rust, who said she abandoned a master of fine arts degree 
program in sculpture to become a clinical psychologist because she preferred 
working with live people. She has spent the last decade developing a 
computerized system that matches a client's strengths, interests and 
personalities with careers designed to grow with the changing times. 
Two factors distinguish Rust's program, testing and a service that analyzes the 
ever-changing job market. 
Testing covers five interest and personality areas and includes Rust's 
custom-designed "Leisure Time" test. The results of these tests are integrated 
into her copyrighted Blueprint for Career Success, which highlights a client's 
talents and self-defeating patterns and ways to overcome them. The client's 
overall quality of life is considered in the Creative Leisure Section, which 
balances work choices against a person's physical, cultural, social and 
spiritual needs, she said. 
The second service is the career-related Data Bases, which is updated every six 
months to add new technologies and delete glutted or low-paying fields. Rust 
analyzes consumer trends, where companies are moving and what companies are 
coming up by studying more than 20 publications and consulting experts in a 
variety of fields. 
Roger Sward, director and president of Behaviordyne, a major test publisher, 
said Rust "covers all areas of personality needed to make a tight 
recommendation and really integrates test results. She measures interests, 
personality and aptitude against real schools, courses and companies, and tries 
to weed out jobs that won't be here in five years." 
"The market should not be the determinant," said Pamela Paduano, career 
counselor at Career Prep Enterprises in Brea. "If you're the best, you'll 
succeed." 
Rust's writer/director husband, John, said some clients even bring in their 
children who are 16 and older for a career blueprint. Rust has two reports that 
can locate, from 428 undergraduate majors and 500 graduate school majors, the 
course of study most closely allied to a student's interests and aptitudes. She 
also shows them how to get college loans. "The best schools are affordable by 
anybody. There are even loans for living expenses," Rust said. 
The Blueprint's Creative Leisure Section balances the pressures of school and 
grades with a student's most relaxing electives and extracurricular activities. 
Rust said she shares the concerns of a number of experts who believe that the 
economy may be on the brink of a recession. Her company's strength, she said, 
is in developing an integrated, computerized system to change the databases on 
a moment's notice if a whole industry should go down. For example, five years 
ago, in anticipation of a soft real estate market, she said she began moving 
real estate salespeople into such growing fields as telecommunications. 
Recent Rust clients have included a 60-year-old aerospace engineer who needed 
help in a shrinking industry. Rust suggested that he update his appearance to 
offset any possible age discrimination and advised him to get additional 
training in biomedical engineering, which he could eventually do part time or 
on contract. "She knew which companies weren't good or didn't support my 
aptitudes," the engineer said. 
Rust charges $1,100 for a comprehensive Blueprint, testing and counseling 
sessions. The entire process takes three to four weeks. 
Christine Thranow, career counselor at Flintridge Sacred Heart Academy and 
former dean of students at Loyola Marymount University, sampled the tests at 
Rust's request and found that they help clients focus and eliminate guessing. 
"I'm just in awe of how she pinpointed facets of my personality," said Denise 
Rucinski, a 30-year-old journalism major who found her public relations job 
unchallenging. Her Success Blueprint showed that she might be better suited for 
sales work. Rucinski has subsequently found a sales position with a 
telecommunications firm. 
"Something was missing, but I wasn't able to recognize what. Dr. Rust's 
experience in clinical psychology was extremely helpful," she said. 
"We look for well-paying jobs with a good future in the client's interest 
range, as well as the future financial situation of our clients," Rust said. 
"By revealing talents and capabilities within myself, the testing renewed by 
self-confidence," said Janice Dunn, founder of Adept Consumer Testing and a 
Rust client. 
Through Rust's counseling, Dunn discovered that she was in the right business 
with the wrong partner. Now Dunn has a new partner, Mark Tobias, and together 
they run Adept, a market research company with offices in Encino and Beverly 
Hills. 
Rust urges working people to track Financial World's and Business Week's 
quarterly reviews the way many people do baseball scores to find out how 
financially solid companies and industries are, and to see if their careers are 
becoming obsolete. Getting additional training is another survival technique, 
she said. 
