BARGAINS DRAW SEASON'S SHOPPERS TO SWAPS 
With their overflowing shopping cart parked next to them, Beverly Tanner and 
her daughter took a break from a heavy day of Christmas shopping at the Orange 
County Marketplace. The Tanners had launched their shopping assault at 6 a.m. 
and by lunchtime had bought gifts for the whole family. 
"I saved at least $40 on T-shirts and I finished my Christmas shopping today," 
Tanner said while resting at a picnic table. "Now we are looking for stocking 
stuffers." 
The Tanner family was among 50,000 to 60,000 shoppers who flocked to the 
Marketplace at the Orange County Fairgrounds in Costa Mesa on Sunday, 
preferring the outdoor swap meet to the indoor malls. 
Tanner said she made the 25-mile trip from Whittier to Costa Mesa because of 
the selection of merchandise. "I like the variety of homemade crafts, T-shirts, 
jackets, toys and tennis shoes," she said. "I was buying four T-shirts for 
$10." 
There are at least three local indoor swap meets and four outdoor swap meets to 
choose from in Orange County. Many shoppers on Sunday said they prefer swap 
meets to malls because they like the more freewheeling atmosphere and the 
one-on-one contact with the store owners. But most of all, they like the 
prices. 
"I came (to the Marketplace) because I wanted to save money," Jill Perkinson 
said. "I probably saved a few hundred dollars." 
Among the gifts Perkinson bought were lace tablecloths, tennis shoes and 
perfumes. Sitting at the snack bar having lunch, Perkinson was not only 
overwhelmed with bags but also had packages on hold at various stores. She said 
she would have to make several trips to her car. 
Although many customers and merchants extol the bargain prices, there are 
better reasons to shop at the swap meet, said Bob Teller, president of Tel Phil 
Enterprises, which runs the operation. 
Shoppers can find great deals anywhere if they really shop for them, he said. 
The main difference between the malls and the swap meets is the relaxed 
atmosphere, the freedom of space and the friendliness of the people, he added. 
Instead of simply shopping for bargains, Teller said, people should go to swap 
meets for the fun of it. 
"Come here and just stroll around," he said. "It's a great place to people 
watch." 
The swap meets, which are clustered in the central and northern areas of the 
county, range in size from 100 vendors at the smaller indoor meets to 1,200 
stalls at the Marketplace. 
A newcomer to the market is the Orange County Indoor Swap Meet in Santa Ana, 
which opened two months ago and has about 540 vendors. 
The indoor swap meet draws shoppers who don't want to brave the sun or risk 
rain. And it appeals to those who don't want to walk miles for a gift. The 
newly remodeled building is small enough that a shopper can stroll down every 
aisle, yet large enough to offer items ranging from clothes, food and plants to 
jewelry, posters and pets. 
Holly Earles, owner of 20th Century, a hair accessory store, said her business 
goes up 25% to 30% during the holidays. 
Leaving the indoor swap meet carrying stuffed bags of Christmas gifts were Al 
and Rachel Cervantes. This was their third and last visit to the swap meet 
before Christmas, they said. 
"We shopped here because it's more convenient. It's not so crowded and we saved 
maybe $50," Rachel Cervantes said. 
The couple said that until this experience they had always shopped in the 
malls, but now there was no turning back. 
"We're coming back next year," Rachel Cervantes said. 
Holiday Hours at O.C. Swap Meets 
Cypress Swap Meet: 9200 Valley View St. Saturday and Sunday, 6:30 a.m. to 5 
p.m., weekdays, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
Anaheim Swap Meet: 1520 N. Lemon St. Saturday and Sunday, 6 a.m. to 3 p.m. 
Orange Swap Meet: 291 N. State College Blvd. Saturday and Sunday, 6 a.m. to 
6:30 p.m. 
Orange County Indoor Swap Meet: 3731 Warner Ave., Santa Ana. Saturday and 
Sunday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., weekdays, noon to 8 p.m. 
Orange County Market Place: Fair Drive at the Orange County Fair Grounds, Costa 
Mesa. Saturday and Sunday, 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., weekdays, 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Santa Ana Indoor Swap Meet: 3412 Westminster Ave., Saturday and Sunday, 9 a.m. 
to 9 p.m.,weekdays, 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Open Christmas day from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. 
Stanton Indoor Swap Meet: 10401 Beach Blvd. Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 6 
p.m., weekdays, noon to 8 p.m. 
Source: Swap meets listed. 
