STORYTELLERS: NEW IN JANUARY 
Old traditions, and expectations, die hard, or so it seems. In the eight weeks 
since our daughter was born (so many pink outfits, so little time), we have 
learned some stark lessons about girls and boys, even though there was a 
rumored truce in the war between the sexes. Hah. Girls still get clothes and 
cuddly toys; boys get Fisher-Price Activity Centers and similar paraphernalia, 
designed to develop the brains they will so clearly need as they forge careers. 
So it was with particular interest that I cracked the binding on Erica Jong's 
latest, Any Woman's Blues (Harper &amp; Row: $18.95; 384 pp.), which promises a 
look at women in the 1990s -- a happy glimpse, according to the blurbs, a light 
at the end of the sex-, drug-, and alcohol-sodden tunnel. An answer to the 
question, not of what women want, but of how to get it. Good Housekeeping may 
tout the new traditionalist (a polite euphemism for moms who can afford to stop 
working and find happiness at home), but surely Jong would have something 
smarter to say about the modern woman. 
Uh-huh. Jong deftly plays both ends against the middle (which is one of the few 
sexual positions her heroine doesn't attempt) in this X-rated morality tale. 
Leila Sand is a wine-guzzling, dope-smoking painter obsessed with a younger 
man, Darton, whom she calls Dart for all the obviously phallic reasons. He, of 
course, loves the living daylights out of her and then leaves her lonely. But 
the author knows that a whole novel about Leila after she straightens up would 
be, well, dull as dry toast. So she strategically places her heroine's 
enlightenment at the back of the book, after hundreds of voyeuristic pages that 
describe all the despicable behaviors she has to leave behind. The key to 
feminine happiness is still the love of a good man, and the way to get that man 
is to clean up one's act a bit -- having read all the dirty parts first -- 
which sounds like the 1950s as much as the 1990s. 
At least Judith Michael's A Ruling Passion (Poseidon Press: $19.95; 574 pp.) is 
unabashed about its old-style values. Valerie Sterling is your basic 
directionless socialite when her husband's private plane goes down, killing him 
and leaving Valerie and three other passengers stranded at an isolated, icy 
lake. But she gamely sets off in her sable coat, matching sable hat and 
cashmere scarf and saves everyone's life, only to learn that her dear, departed 
husband managed to squander her millions before he died. The fur's about all 
she has left. 
Faced with the cruel specter of poverty, Valerie digs deep within herself and 
finds the drive she has always lacked -- which propels her right into the arms 
of an ex-flame, and right into an investigation of his ex-wife's television 
ministry. It's an idyllic, if idealized, scenario, based on the delightful 
double-whammy notion that a good woman always gets a second chance in life and 
justice ultimately prevails -- which certainly will be news to the women out 
there who are trying to rewrite their personal histories. 
First novelist Teresa de Luca does a much better job with a similarly hackneyed 
story in A Distant Thunder (William Morrow: $19.95; 512 pp.). It's still the 
same old story, a fight for love and glory, a case of do or die, but this time 
done with some energy. Dolly Carrasquez, like so many other romantic heroines, 
suffers from severe myopia where men are concerned. She looks right past 
British journalist Jack Curtis and runs off to Spain to wed a soldier. Soon 
widowed, thanks to the Spanish Civil War, she turns to a radical worker -- but 
the reader knows that Jack has not forgotten her in Spain, and eventually the 
second wrong beau does what a friend of mine calls the mortal-coil shuffle-off, 
leaving Dolly free to do the right thing. It's a painless way to learn some 
Spanish Civil War history. 
So there it is. What moral can I extract for a baby girl? That love conquers 
all, a decent, if impractical sentiment that will get her nowhere with her 
creditors or co-workers? That women are doomed to dumbness until they're well 
into their 30s? Thanks, but no thanks. This is not the kind of bedtime stories 
she should hear. Think I'll go out and buy her some boy-toys instead. 
