WAR WAGED ON CHURCHES CUTS TO A PEOPLE'S SOUL; 
EL SALVADOR: THE PEOPLE RICH AND STRONG ONLY IN FAITH, THE 'TORTURABLES,' ARE 
DOUBLY VICTIMS AS THE ARMY VIOLATES THEM WITH CRIMES OF SACRILEGE. 
The nation's name in English is The Savior. Its capital is Holy Savior. At the 
highest point visible from the city, a great statue of the shepherd Christ 
looks down upon those who are faithful and those who aren't with a whiteness 
that may well shine the last light visible on the mountain after curfew. 
This government cannot issue a decree without stamping it in the name of the 
Savior; and no association could seem more appropriate to this man of sorrows, 
because nowhere else on Earth could he live so intimately in the company of 
martyrs. 
On Sunday last, Maryknoll Father Ronald Hennessey distributed Communion in 
Cristo Salvador parish to the smallest and uneasiest congregation he had lately 
seen. Father Hennessey had left on the floor the litter of hymn sheets and 
mimeographed images of murdered churchpersons where the soldiers had thrown 
them on the Saturday night a week before, when they had commandeered the keys, 
then chose to make their entry with more vehement emphasis by shooting away the 
lock. 
Father Octavio Ortiz was killed by an army tank in January, 1979, and has his 
memorial in Cristo Salvador; his father still worships there. The 
black-and-white drawings of his head were still intact on the wall. But the 
portraits of the four American churchwomen murdered in 1980 had been tossed to 
the floor. There were the marks of boot soles on them. Father Ortiz's image had 
been done a special grace. It is a practice for soldiers to leave bullet holes 
in the portrait of a Catholic martyr of too recent standing. 
"I find this one of the more hopeful things in Salvador," a Protestant church 
worker said. "They recognize the power of the people on these walls, and they 
shoot them all over again." 
The congregants of Cristo Salvador chant the ritual as Catholics have since the 
Catacombs. But their words are often strangers to the liturgy of tradition. The 
Credo begins with the ancient invocation of a Father Almighty but then departs 
to affirm that he has charged us all to build a new Earth and justice and love. 
These are not amendments projected by rebels in the church but ratified by the 
hierarchy of a church that has raised itself in rebellion against the secular 
order. Therein lies this church's crime against this state. 
Graham Greene once divided Latin America into classes of the torturable and the 
non-torturable. When guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation 
Front held the alleys of San Salvador Norte, the army rained them with rockets. 
The torturable class lives there. When the FMLN briefly occupied part of the 
Sheraton, the army spared its surroundings. The non-torturable class lives 
there. The treason of the archdiocese of San Salvador is its identification 
with the torturable class and its gospel of Christ the worker and king at once 
grand and humbly born. 
And so men in uniform could come into Cristo Salvador, kick over the pine table 
that serves as its altar and mingle the wafers and the chalice in the rubble on 
the floor. Last week, soldiers distributed leaflets echoing the pronouncement 
of Josef Stalin's forgotten Leagues of Militant Godless with identification of 
local Catholic church workers as "enemies of the people." The rhetoric of 
anti-communism in extremis is a plagiarism of what used to be the rhetoric of 
communism. 
What must it mean to kill a priest or a nun if you are the child of a mother 
for whom the church was the only present hope in time of trouble? Very little, 
apparently. And yet the worst of medieval despots would have dared any infamy 
except laying violent hands on a priest and thereby making certain the fires of 
hell. But El Salvador is settled in the age of reason, where, troublesome 
though the conquest of conscience may occasionally be, triumphs over 
superstition come easily. 
Official Salvador prefers, of course, to assign reproaches in the name of 
Christ to the category of alien subversions. That mind-set accounts for the 
hatred of the Jesuits, whose history is one of invariable harassment as enemy 
agents by revolutions and counterrevolutions alike. But it hardly explains the 
murders of Archbishop Oscar Romero and Father Ortiz, or the treatment of the 40 
or so native Salvadoran Catholics and Protestant church workers who had been 
rounded up, held without show of warrant and released without charges in the 
last two weeks. 
The foreigners' lot is generally the gentler alternative of deportation. But 
even this comparative kindness may well have been thrown into jeopardy by the 
arrest of Jennifer Jean Casolo of Christian Educational Seminars after police 
unearthed a cache of ammunition, explosives and bayonets in the back yard of 
the house she had moved into two months ago. 
The contraband had been removed when a visitor to Casolo's rental arrived 
Sunday afternoon; but there was about the greased rags remaining beside the 
diggings an air of the authentic that could scarcely have been contrived by a 
police force whose skills with frame-ups can only be minimal because it is so 
seldom pressed with overmuch need to bother mounting them. 
Before his departure, the visitor lingered to look at the piles of Casolo's 
books that the raiding party had heaped on the floor. Here were Scott 
Fitzgerald and William Faulkner and two Graham Greenes and not one of the 
tracts that young revolutionaries used to devotedly collect and infrequently 
read. This was a library suitable for a Sarah Lawrence freshman, circa 1962. It 
also included two novels by Barbara Pym. Does a young woman who reads Pym plant 
AK-47s and M-16 rounds alongside the silver bells and cockle shells of her 
garden's growth? To answer "yes" or even "maybe" seemed too close an 
encroachment on the borders of paranoia. But, then, if paranoia is your thing, 
Salvador is the place to indulge it. 
