NEWSMAKERS 
* Way to San Jose: Imelda Marcos, the former Philippine First Lady, showed up 
at a dinner party in San Jose, Calif. In a restaurant owned by her former 
palace caterer, Del Garcia, Marcos quaffed champagne and dined on Swedish 
meatballs. After dinner, she joked, "They found in my closet many shoes, but at 
least it wasn't skeletons. They (the shoes) are a symbol of how much the 
Filipinos love me." Marcos, charged with investing $168 million worth of stolen 
funds in the U.S., is scheduled for trial in February. 
* Kitty Kelley Christmas: The unauthorized biographer of Jackie, Frank, Liz and 
soon Nancy has sent out her holiday greetings. The card shows a fortuneteller 
with a Nancy-like woman. The book will reveal "all your deepest secrets," the 
seer says to her cowering client. Inside, the Nancy look-alike, seen near a 
tree decorated with dollar bills, is wearing a button that reads, "Just Say 
Dough." 
* Raisa in the Sun?: Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev won a weeklong island 
vacation for two from the Paris Fashion Designers Assn., a reward for his 
"elegant style of living and working." But he was not able to accept in person. 
At the group's awards banquet Monday night in Paris, adviser Vladimir 
Federovski stood in. He said Gorbachev was "very touched." He didn't say what 
Raisa and Mikhail will do with the prize, which includes a trip to the chic 
Indian Ocean island of Mauritius. 
* Christmas Bush: This year's White House Christmas card depicts the 
snow-covered presidential mansion draped in greenery, with a wreath and red bow 
at the Truman Balcony. The message inside reads: "The President and Mrs. Bush 
extend their warmest wishes that Christmas and the New Year will hold much 
happiness and peace for you and those you love." The official White House tree 
is decorated with 80 soft dolls, each representing a character from books. The 
likes of Mary Poppins, Babar, the Mad Hatter and the Tin Man highlight Barbara 
Bush's commitment to literacy. 
