LOVE IN BLACK &amp; WHITE; 
THE LAST RACIAL TABOO 
LAST JULY, AFTER Liz Farnsworth became engaged to Richard Cooper, 40, a 
University of San Francisco admissions officer, she called her mother in 
Minnesota. At 35, Liz hadn't worried about getting her parents' approval in 
years, but as she dialed their number, she became more and more nervous. And 
with good reason. Her mother's reaction to the news was something short of 
jubilation. "She was pretty sad," Liz recalls. Her mother told her, point 
blank, that she felt Liz was making a mistake. Liz's father wouldn't even come 
to the phone. 
It took the Farnsworths several days to come to terms with the fact that their 
white daughter was going to marry a black man. But after a few parent-daughter 
phone conversations in which the topic of weddings was studiously avoided, 
Liz's mother finally popped the question: What kind of bridal gown was Liz 
planning to wear? 
To Liz, it was a sign of acceptance, if not approval. "I think she finally 
realized that it was really going to happen." Liz could continue planning her 
January wedding, with one less weight on her heart. But she still has a 
recurring nightmare that the wedding pictures will show her walking down an 
aisle that is also a line of demarcation: blacks on one side, whites on the 
other. 
No one said breaking a social taboo would be easy. Despite the combined efforts 
of the civil-rights movement and the sexual revolution, intimate relationships 
between blacks and whites are still considered unacceptable -- or shocking or 
disgusting -- by many people in this country. In many ways, Liz and Richard's 
trials are just beginning. Fortunately for them, the road they have chosen is 
no longer unmarked or untrod. In the short time since 1967, when "Guess Who's 
Coming to Dinner" hit American movie screens and the U.S. Supreme Court struck 
down laws barring interracial marriage (then on the books in 16 states), 
interracial relationships have increased dramatically in number and visibility. 
In many major American cities, especially on the West Coast, it is not unusual 
to see almost as many interracial couples as intra-racial ones. 
According to the Census Bureau, the cumulative number of interracial marriages 
has tripled from 310,000 in 1970 to 956,000 in 1988, accounting for almost 2% 
of marriages in the United States. While Japanese, Chinese and Native Americans 
in the United States marry outside their race at rates of between 40% and 70%, 
nationally only 3.6% of black males marry non-blacks. For black women, the rate 
is still lower, just 1.2%. And the interracial marriage rate for whites is less 
than 1%. These statistics reflect a country where social barriers and 
segregation affect blacks more than any other ethnic or racial group. While 
intercultural relationships of all kinds can bring about the disapproval of 
family, friends and society, black-white couples bear the brunt of this racism. 
Still, during the past two decades, black-white marriages have more than 
tripled from 65,000 in 1970 to 218,000 in 1988. They are most common in Western 
states, where 16% of all black men and 4% of black women are married to 
non-blacks, according to a recent study by the UCLA psychology department and 
Afro-American Studies Center. Black interracial marriages accounted for 20% to 
25% of all interracial marriages in the region. 
Numbers and percentages aside, black-white relationships are visibly 
increasing, even in the commercial mass media, hardly the vanguard of social 
change. This season, "True Colors," a comedy about a black man who marries a 
white woman and forms an interracial "Brady Bunch," debuted on Fox Television. 
In the second episode of "True Colors," the couple were shown together in bed. 
"That wouldn't have happened 10 years ago," says a Fox producer. On Lifetime 
cable's "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd," the title character's boyfriend, 
and the father of her unborn child, is black. And next year, Michelle Pfeiffer 
will star in "Love Field," a movie in which she portrays a woman who falls in 
love with a black man. Hollywood has come a long way since the late 1960s, when 
Petula Clark created a furor by touching Harry Belafonte's arm during a 
television special. 
Unfortunately, the new images of harmony radiating from our TV sets are not 
always reflected in the real world, where societal approval of biracial 
marriages has not spread nearly as fast as the practice. "It's clear that 
interracial, intercultural marriages are on the rise," says Nancy Brown, a 
co-founder and president of Multiracial Americans of Southern California, a 
3-year old, Los Angeles-based family support group. "It is fairly common, and 
it's here to stay. It's not a fad or a trend." At the same time, she says, 
"Black-white relationships still remain the ultimate taboo." 
At a time when racism seems to be gaining strength rather than waning, many 
people are profoundly uncomfortable, even outraged, when blacks and whites 
unite in the ultimate forms of human intimacy -- marriage, sex and having a 
family. And the expression of their outrage often takes chillingly familiar 
forms. The set of "True Colors" is rumored to be under guard because of racist 
death threats. Last October, all hell broke loose when Cable Guide, the monthly 
cable listings magazine that is distributed to about 12 million subscribers 
nationwide, put on its cover a photo of a shirtless Willie Gault, the black Los 
Angeles Raiders wide receiver, clutching a football in one arm and the leg of 
white actress Jamie Lee Curtis in the other. 
Editor Jay Gissen was flooded with more than 1,000 hate letters and thousands 
more phone calls from subscribers, most of them white, furious at seeing the 
black man and the white woman in a sexually suggestive pose. "I didn't do this 
cover to be provocative," Gissen says. "I was completely taken by surprise at 
the number of calls and letters, the intensity of the anger and the meanness of 
them." One caller said: "You're going to make my daughter think it's OK to date 
a black man." Another, the mayor of a small town in Massachusetts, threatened 
to cancel his subscription. 
"Why should physical contact between a black person and a white person be so 
astounding?" asks Gissen. "If Willie had more clothes on and they were giving 
each other a high five, we wouldn't have gotten so many letters." 
THERE IS NO DOUBT that, even as we head into the 21st Century, intimate contact 
between black men and white women is considered especially threatening. Such 
irrational fear reflects remnants of a peculiarly American historical 
stereotype of black men as oversexed, physically threatening beasts bent on 
ravishing white girls and women. At one time, in the South, a black man or boy 
could be lynched for just looking at a white woman. Many were. In Mississippi 
in 1955, Emmett Till, a 14-year-old boy, was shot and dumped in a river for 
whistling at a white woman. Today, for many whites, every black man, from 
Willie Gault to Philadelphia Mayor Wilson Goode, is a potential Willie Horton, 
the Massachusetts convict who raped a white woman while on a prison furlough 
and became the symbol of liberal criminal-coddling during the 1988 presidential 
campaign. Social myth tells us a black woman who dates a white man is moving 
into a better, safer world, but a white woman who dates a black man is in all 
probability being sexually brutalized. 
Pascal Giacomini, a 37-year-old French artist and sculptor, is aware of that 
distinction in his marriage to Haitian Carine Fabius, 34, who runs a 
Haitian-art gallery from their West Hollywood home. 
"If a white man gets a black lady, he's considered lucky because it's exotic," 
says Giacomini, who has been married to Fabius for two years. "It's socially 
much more acceptable if the lady is black. People say, 'Wow, what a beautiful 
girl! She's black, but so what.' But the other way, the reaction is, 'What is 
she doing with that black guy?' Nobody feels threatened by the woman. (The 
perception is that) it's the black man who is going to rape the white girl, not 
the black woman who is going to rape the white man." 
"During my upbringing in Atlanta, it was not uncommon for a white man to talk 
about his 'Sweet Georgia Brown,' " says Alex J. Norman, 59, a black associate 
professor in the Graduate School of Social Welfare at UCLA, who's been married 
to Margie Norman, 54, a white UCLA dental school administrator and free-lance 
writer, for 15 years. "When I was in graduate school at Atlanta University, 
(black) girls from AU were dating (white) guys from Georgia Tech, but the 
reverse was not allowed." 
While Alex was dating Margie, for example, a white man told her that she had 
ruined her chances of ever marrying a white man because she was somehow 
tainted. It was the not the first time Alex had heard such things. The 
stereotype of black men as sexually insatiable and over-endowed is well known. 
During a military tour of duty in Japan in the early 1950s, Alex recalls, white 
American GIs told Japanese women that black men had tails. "That was the way 
white men were 'protecting' Japanese women from us," he says. "It's insecurity 
and fear of competition. It's a protective device, because black men are no 
more sexually powerful than anybody else, although there are some black men who 
like to perpetuate the myth." 
DESPITE THE LABYRINTH of lies and misconceptions that surround relationships 
between black men and white women, they are four times more common than those 
between white men and black women. And this difference has created an 
ever-widening rift between black men and black women. Markita Cooper, for 
example, looks forward to her brother Richard's wedding to Liz Farnsworth, but 
she finds herself torn by her loyalty to him, her genuine fondness for his 
fiancee and her own acute feelings of rejection and cultural alienation. 
"Generally, I came to terms with interracial dating a long time ago," says the 
33-year-old San Francisco attorney, who, in fact, dated whites when she was in 
law school. "I decided people should be able to love or like whomever they want 
to. But I've always felt that for black men and white women, there was 
something more political to it, like there was some status to having 
European-looking women. 
"The unsettling part is that in my personal, one-to-one relationship with Liz, 
I like her," Cooper says. "There's nothing about her I dislike. But there's 
part of me that wishes my brother could have found someone who looks like me." 
Among minorities, black women are the most conservative in their attitudes 
toward interracial marriage, according to a 1989 UCLA survey of marital 
attitudes among Southern Californians. M. Belinda Tucker, acting director of 
the Afro-American Studies Center, and Claudia Mitchell-Kernan, vice chancellor 
and dean of graduate programs, found that when blacks, Asians, Latinos and 
whites were asked, "Would you marry someone of another race?" black women and 
white women were the most likely to answer no. Black men, however, were the 
most likely to answer yes. "The males in general have far more positive 
attitudes and are far more accepting of interracial marriage," says 
Mitchell-Kernan, whose white husband of 22 years, Keith Kernan, is also a 
professor at UCLA. 
The reasons are complex. The researchers found that, in general, women are more 
likely to select a mate on the basis of ambition and earning standards; men are 
more likely to choose a mate for her appearance, and black women are found 
wanting because they do not meet the currently universally valued European 
standard of beauty. As the study puts it, "Earnings potential as a standard of 
mate selection is simply more colorblind than is physical attractiveness, 
which, in American society, continues to display a Eurocentric bias." The study 
concluded that marital options have diminished for black women: "If current 
patterns prevail, 30% of the black women born in the 1950s will not marry." 
Black women, traditionally the primary caretakers of the family, often see 
interracial marriage as a threat to the race, according to black psychologist 
Gwen Goldsby Grant. They want to marry black men and create economically stable 
black families, Grant says. Some black women who date white men do so, they 
say, because they can't find black men who are economically stable and /or 
willing to marry. 
Black-white relationships are a hot and frequent topic among the 850,000 
readers of Essence, a black women's magazine. During the past five years, four 
of the 10 articles that received the greatest reader response concerned 
biracial relationships. "It's the kind of controversial issue on which everyone 
has an opinion they feel strongly about, and everyone wants their opinion 
heard," says editor Stephanie Stokes Oliver. 
A letter in the magazine's "Between Us" health column last month addressed the 
common complaint that successful black men are turning their backs on black 
women. "I am one of many pretty, educated and lonely black women," the woman 
wrote. "My last three mates have left me for white women. After all our 
struggles, why do black men still prefer white women?" 
Grant, who writes the column, responded: "African-American men who reject black 
women and exclusively prefer white women have been indoctrinated to believe 
that the white woman is the epitome of beauty and sensuality. Black men date 
white women for many other reasons," Grant continued, "some of which are rooted 
in negative stereotypes regarding sisters. Some brothers say they date white 
women because black women are too domineering, sexually inhibited, 
materialistic and lacking in sophistication." 
Cheryl Lindsey, a 28-year-old Los Angeles marketing representative for a 
car-rental firm, agrees. "It's hard not to generalize, but in conversations 
with black men, they think that black women are hard on them," she says. "It's 
true I expect a lot, but I give a lot in return. The black woman is now raised 
to be more independent and to take the initiative, and that's intimidating. So, 
white women are a little easier." 
Practically every black man in America has felt the razor-edged sting of an old 
putdown by black women that goes: "The first thing a black man does when he 
gets a little success is buy a Cadillac. The second thing he does is get a 
white woman to put in it." The stereotype endures: On their latest album, "Fear 
of a Black Planet," Public Enemy sings pointedly about a black "Mr. Successful" 
who "only wants blue eyes and blond hair." "There's a big perception that (for 
black men) the American Dream is not just a house and a car but also 'the 
Man's' woman," Oliver says. 
Feeling the pinch of a well-publicized national shortage of educated, 
financially stable single black men, single black women more than ever 
disapprove of black men who date or marry white women. "Black women are saying, 
'I am college educated. I've got a nice job. I want a man to meet me at the 
pass so we can ride off in the sunset. And he's riding off with a blonde,' " 
Grant says. "It's a personal affront even if you don't know the guy." 
"I have single black women friends who spend a lot of time on their own," says 
Markita Cooper, "and we are all smart, attractive and bright. Even though, 
intellectually, I don't have a problem with (black men dating whites), I wince 
when I see it because I don't see any black men, or any white men for that 
matter, knocking down my door," she says. "It seems that everybody wants 
somebody other than us. It sounds so stupid, but yes, on some level I feel 
rejected." 
WITH SUCH RESENTMENT and hostility emanating from so many sources, it's not 
surprising that a common denominator of interracial relationships is secrecy. 
Sharon Richardson, 35, and her husband, Richard, 29, met at a Pomona aluminum 
treating plant where he now is the plant manager and she was a clerk. She grew 
close to his parents and sister, but fearful of her middle-class, conservative 
family's reaction, they kept their relationship a secret, putting off marriage 
plans and living together, under the guise of just being friends, for four 
years. They finally made it official last year, in a wedding attended only by 
their two best friends, another biracial couple. Once the Richardsons worked up 
the courage to tell Sharon's parents, it was more than a year before the 
couples began visiting each other's homes. Having a black son-in-law "was a 
thing they never thought would happen to them, and they didn't know how to deal 
with it," Sharon says. 
Her younger sister, however, still hasn't accepted it. "It probably has a lot 
to do with her daughters," Sharon says. "She doesn't want them thinking that's 
(marrying outside one's race) the right thing to do." 
The Richardsons say that early in their relationship, its clandestine nature 
brought them closer, uniting them in a "you-and-me-against-the-world" attitude. 
But many interracial couples say that societal censure, whether condemnation 
from family or disapproving stares from strangers, is a constant strain. 
"Most of the problems tend to come from outside (the relationships)," says 
Nancy Brown of Multiracial Americans of Southern California, whose husband, 
Roosevelt, is black. "They (the relationships) are filled with other people's 
perceptions that these types of relationships are negative and cannot succeed. 
For black people, it can be seen as a betrayal of one's people -- if a person 
of color is dating or marrying someone who is Caucasian, they're doing it to 
raise their status. For whites, the stereotype is that 'she (or he) wasn't good 
enough for anyone in his or her race.' To even consider marrying someone of 
another race makes people wonder what's wrong with you. It's just seen as a 
step down." 
Liz Farnsworth and Richard Cooper had to deal with these issues when they told 
her parents of their engagement. Richard's own middle-class upbringing, posh 
prep school education and Harvard College degree helped to ease much of the 
parental anxiety, which was as much about class as race. 
Liz's mother fretted over her daughter's leaving the secure (and white) 
surroundings of suburban Minneapolis, where she has spent most of her life, and 
the possibility of her living in a black neighborhood in San Francisco. "He's a 
very nice man," Mary Jean Farnsworth says of her future son-in-law. "But I 
would prefer that he were white, as I'm sure Richard's parents would prefer 
that Liz were black." 
Mary Jean's perception of blacks comes from largely negative media reports of 
increasing racial tensions in major cities around the country. "I think it's 
worse now than ever," she says, "and the reason why is some of these characters 
are in gangs. I suppose there are a lot of white ones, too, but I am just 
afraid of gangs." 
"Naturally, at first you have to get used to the idea," Liz's father, Gaylord, 
says. "I don't think society is any more accepting of interracial marriage, and 
I'm not sure whose fault it is, the whites or the blacks. I guess we just don't 
trust each other, and isn't it a shame after all these years?" 
Liz understands her parents' reservations. "Their main concern is: 'Are we 
going to have the strength to put up with all the stuff we are going to have to 
put up with?' " she says. It was also a primary consideration at Richard's 
parents' home in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, where Liz was warmly embraced and the 
marriage heartily blessed. "My feelings are very mixed," says Richard's mother, 
Carolyn, a recently retired school administrator. "I am very fond of Liz. I 
think she has the ability to overcome any of the encounters she may have. But 
my real concern is if she will be able to take as many as may occur." During a 
22-year marriage she describes as "reasonably comfortable and happy," Claudia 
Mitchell-Kernan and her husband, Keith, have heard and experienced most of the 
encounters Richard's mother fears. Claudia still recalls walking with Keith on 
a street in Berkeley in the early 1960s and being stopped by a black Muslim, 
who said: "Sister, do you know who you are with?" 
A few years later, on their way from Berkeley to Harvard in 1969, the couple 
was detained in a Chicago department store when security guards thought they 
were behaving suspiciously. The Kernans filed a lawsuit charging harassment and 
false arrest and eventually reached a settlement with the store. Cambridge 
wasn't any better. Within a week of arriving to take up their new teaching 
positions at Harvard, the manager of a women's clothing store in Harvard Square 
refused to allow Claudia to open a charge account after it had been offered by 
a store clerk. Humiliated, Claudia ran out of the store in tears. Keith rushed 
in and got into a shouting match with the manager, who called the police. 
Yet the most disturbing incidents, Claudia and Keith agree, have involved 
negative attitudes from young people, especially black students. Recently, a 
group of black students at UCLA printed snide remarks about Claudia's choice of 
mate in the black student newspaper, NOMMO. While attacking the integrity of 
another black faculty member, the student barb concluded: "And we could have 
some things to say about Claudia Mitchell-Kernan. But who knows if she can take 
a joke, since she is married to one?" More angry than hurt, especially by the 
fact that the students signed the comments with the pseudonyms "Sue Me" and 
"Lily White," she decided simply to ignore it. 
Sometimes the heckling is impossible to ignore. Shira Maguen, a 17-year-old 
white senior at Westlake School in West Hollywood, was walking down the street 
in Venice with a black friend, and a white man walked up to him and said, "Why 
don't you stick to someone your own color?" Maguen, who has dated blacks and 
Asians, was not entirely surprised. "I was sort of expecting it," she says, 
"because it's like from the time you're young, you're taught that you're going 
to marry someone like you. I would not have a problem marrying somebody of a 
different race, if the person were right. But the adults in my life wouldn't be 
as willing to accept that." 
Many disapproving parents and friends of interracial couples claim that they 
only have the pairs' best interests at heart. "It's not that I'm prejudiced," 
they say. "It's just that marriage is hard enough without borrowing trouble." 
That is certainly true, and no one knows it better than the couple. No one 
enters an interracial relationship thinking that it will make life easier. 
"My feeling has always been that interracial marriage is not for everybody," 
says author Shelby Steele, who is married to a white woman. Steele, an English 
professor at San Jose State University, is the author of "The Content of Our 
Character," a best-selling collection of essays on race in which he argues that 
many blacks use race as an excuse for underachievement. "It's nothing that 
anybody can reasonably advocate or denounce. But you have to have a sense of 
yourself that you are secure in. I've always had an attitude that this is one 
thing I would let go through other people's nervous systems, not mine. But if 
you are the kind of person forever attentive to what other people think about 
you, it's going to be more difficult." 
"The looks I get are absolutely incredible," says Alex Norman. "It used to be 
the looks I would get from white men. Now it's looks of hostility from black 
women." 
Sometimes it's more than looks. Recently, when Norman was asked to speak before 
a Los Angeles group of black women at a Martin Luther King Day breakfast next 
January, one member of the group declared: "Oh, no, not Alex Norman. He is 
married to a white woman." The objection was overruled. 
The racism is not always so overt. Interracial couples can sometimes feel 
invisible. "We walk into a restaurant, and the hostess looks at me and says, 
'Table for one?' " says a white Pasadena woman who lives with a black man. "As 
if she couldn't conceive of us being a couple." 
Reactions from well-meaning liberals can be just as annoying. "My sister thinks 
it's the coolest thing that I'm dating a black man," she adds. "She thinks 
we're special, and seems to think that each and every thing that happens to us 
can only be explained in racial terms, which is pretty insulting." 
Despite all the obstacles and day-to-day pressures, according to the UCLA 
study, interracial marriages, many of which are second marriages, have a high 
success rate, a testimony perhaps to the amount of thought and commitment it 
takes to form and maintain such a relationship. Perhaps the most difficult 
thing interracial couples face is the fact that people often see them as 
something other than people who love each other. No one wants to be a walking, 
talking political statement, no matter what the response. Interracial couples, 
like any other couples, simply make certain choices because they love each 
other. 
"I always used to think white guys were the most boring men on the planet, and 
here I am married to one," Carine Fabius says. "I don't know how it happened. I 
met this guy and he treated me nice, and I didn't have to support him. He was 
kind and loving and supportive, and the color of his skin didn't matter. To 
have a whole race of people put pressure on men and women who marry outside 
their race is really screwed. It's not selling out. It's not anything. It's 
just following your heart." 
WHEN Richard Walden and Rosanne Katon-Walden were married seven years ago, 
Richard, who is Jewish, wanted to move into a nice black neighborhood, where he 
thought their future children would fare better. But when they went with 
Richard's parents to look at a house in Baldwin Hills, three black men came out 
of a neighboring home, folded their arms across their chests and stood watching 
them with unwelcoming glares that said to Rosanne, "Don't move this white guy 
on our block." 
Richard, a 43-year-old civil-rights lawyer with extensive credentials in the 
black community, wanted to stay anyway. He's not a stranger to racism: As a 
child, a cross was burned on the lawn of his family's Culver City home. 
"They'll get used to me," he said. Rosanne, 36, thought not. "I said I didn't 
need this tension." They moved to a multiracial mid-Wilshire neighborhood 
instead. 
For many interracial couples, choosing where to live is the most important 
decision they can make. Most tend to gravitate toward integrated middle-class 
neighborhoods, where, presumably, educated, liberal neighbors will be more 
accepting. Many will even relocate to cities known for their live-and-let-live 
attitudes, even if it means moving across the country. According to 
Mitchell-Kernan and Tucker's UCLA study, in cities with high interracial 
marriage rates, such as Seattle, San Francisco, Denver, Minneapolis and Los 
Angeles, most interracial couples are from elsewhere, usually the Northeast and 
North Central regions of the country. 
"Movement away from home base removes some of the pressure," says 
Mitchell-Kernan. "When you're at your home base, the strength of social control 
is highest, the (influence of) people you grew up with, your family. There's a 
whole range of negative feedback you can get, whereas if you're living in 
California and call your mother in Chicago and say, 'I'm getting married,' all 
she can do is fly out and smile." 
Claudia and Keith's own experience fits the pattern of her research. She is 
from Gary, Ind. Her husband is from a small town in northern Wisconsin. They 
met and married while they were graduate students at Berkeley. Except for their 
brief stint teaching at Harvard University, the couple has found California 
academia a comfortable haven during their 26 years together. "My preference is 
that I live on the West Coast, either around Seattle or between San Francisco 
and San Diego," Keith says. 
Dwayne and Kirene Walker have found that location makes a world of difference. 
The Walkers, who were married in Denver in 1986 after meeting in Orange County, 
moved to Seattle almost two years ago when Dwayne, a product manager for a 
software company, took a job there. Dwayne, 29, is black and grew up in 
Compton. Kirene, 31, is Latino and was raised in Kansas before moving to Orange 
County. Though they never had any serious race-related problems in Southern 
California, both say they were always aware of people's stares and glares. In 
Seattle, they never give it much thought, especially since interracial couples 
seem more the rule than the exception. In at least two nightclubs they 
frequent, they say, 95% of the black men are usually with non-black women. "I 
feel very comfortable in Seattle," Kirene says. 
There is no doubt that money plays a key role in interracial relationships. It 
costs money to have options, to relocate, to pick and choose among 
neighborhoods. "Money can't buy love," Kirene says, "but in an interracial 
relationship, it helps. If we were poor, we would have more of a problem." It 
is not surprising that, statistically, the lower a person's socio-economic 
status, the less likely a person is to marry outside of his race. 
Recently, a white student at UCLA came to Keith Kernan for counsel about his 
relationship with another student, who is black. The student said they were 
having trouble with their parents, and seeing that Keith and Claudia appeared 
happy together, he asked Keith's advice. 
"My advice was to be prepared for some hassles and some constraints on your 
life style," the professor told the student. "My feeling is if you love 
somebody, to hell with what other people think," he says. "But you have to have 
the resources to be able to avoid the hassles." 
For couples like Keith and Claudia, avoiding hassles means being able to choose 
where they live and working in liberal university settings. But even in a 
friendly environment, Dwayne Walker says, he is vaguely uneasy about society's 
discomfort with his marriage. "I don't talk about it," he says, "and no one has 
to say anything. I just feel it. And deep down, it bothers me a lot. Just 
because a black man has fallen in love and married someone outside the race 
doesn't mean he has abandoned the race. You don't stop being black just because 
you marry someone who isn't." 
In this society, no one is taught to be prepared for a life in an interracial 
relationship, so no matter how ideal the situation, there are still moments of 
insecurity, confusion and isolation. One of Liz Farnsworth's first race-based 
"encounters" came at a surprise retirement party for Richard's mother at his 
parents' home. When Liz walked into the party, she was completely unprepared 
for the sharp pangs of isolation she instantly felt by being the only white 
person present. "That was very overwhelming to me," she recalls. "I've never 
been in a room where I was the only white person. I hadn't even thought about 
it. No one looked like me, not even my daughter (an Indian baby she adopted 
last year), and that was very shocking. I just wanted to back away out of the 
door." 
Her fiancee is accustomed to such situations, having attended predominantly 
white schools. But he expects to have to cope with another kind of isolation. 
"I'm going to give up a certain amount of credibility in the black community, 
and that's going to hurt," Richard says. "I'm not going to be judged for who I 
am, but for who I am with. But if you are in love with someone, then you have 
to do it. The price is in the eyes of the beholder. If you want something bad 
enough, no matter what it is, and in this case the prize is love, then you'll 
pay the price for it." 
WHAT ABOUT the children?" is always one of the first questions concerned 
relatives and friends ask. To ensure that people would recognize their daughter 
as a person of color, Rosanne and Richard named her Jamaica Kate, after 
Rosanne's native country and Richard's mother. Still, when Jamaica Walden was 
born 6 years ago, her skin was very light, so light that no one would believe 
she was Rosanne's child. "That isn't your baby, is it?" asked a woman at the 
hospital. There was even some hesitancy at home. "My husband's family was a 
little more ready to have a black baby than my family was to have a white 
baby," she recalls. 
Though Jamaica has grown to look more like her mother, the family has been 
accosted on the street about her racial makeup. When Jamaica was almost 4, a 
man in a grocery store on the Upper West Side of New York called the little 
girl a "half-white bitch." Jamaica turned to her mother and said, "Mommy, 
what's his problem?" 
Racial identity is a hurdle many people cannot overcome. "I don't want to marry 
out of my race because I want to have a black child," says Cheryl Lindsey, who 
admits that a former relationship with a white man was one of the most 
comfortable, nonstressful relationships she's had. "The child is very 
important, and (in interracial marriages) they don't know if they are black or 
white. They are really confused." 
That confusion may abate if interracial marriages continue to increase. As the 
nation moves closer to a so-called "browning of America" through immigration 
and intermarriage of different races and nationalities, multiracial children 
will be the norm and the sheer number of interracial marriages will in all 
likelihood reduce the prejudice against them. The growth of organizations such 
as the 200-member Multiracial Americans of Southern California, one of 50 such 
support groups for multiracial people nationally, suggests that interracial 
marriage is here to stay. 
"It's like an equation," says founder Nancy Brown. "Interracial marriage that 
works equals multiracial children at ease with their mixed identity, which 
equals more people in the world who can deal with this diversity." 
Pascal Giacomini isn't so optimistic. "I don't see black people's condition 
improving, and the economics are going to get in the middle, between blacks and 
others, and that's going to create a trench between whites and blacks." 
Rosanne Katon-Walden, an actress and stand-up comedian, uses humor about her 
multiracial family to bridge the gap. In one of her comedy routines, she gives 
a fictionalized account of how she met her husband: "I met my husband when he 
registered me to vote," she says. "He was part of Temple Beth Israel's Youth 
Volunteer Corps, whose mandate was to penetrate the inner-city ghettos of 
America and give the people political voice, and get laid. This political 
penetration resulted in 350-odd dinner dates, 14 marriages, five brown babies 
and a white Black Muslim named Isadora X." 
"Sometimes it will take the audience a few minutes to get going because nobody 
wants to talk about race," she says. "But my act is about the culture clash and 
just how funny it is. I like it because it's dangerous humor. And the one thing 
about dangerous humor is when you get it right, you laugh and you learn." 
