NO HONG KONG HAVEN FOR VIETNAM'S BOAT PEOPLE; 
REFUGEES: DESPITE ANGRY INTERNATIONAL REACTION, HONG KONG OFFICIALS PLAN TO 
CONTINUE SHIPPING VIET REFUGEES BACK TO VIETNAM. 
The pathetic sounds of women and children wailing and crying, being led out of 
a Vietnamese detention center by police in riot gear, greeted Hong Kong 
residents on morning newscasts less than two weeks ago. 
Earlier that morning, 51 terrified inmates from the Phoenix House detention 
center were bundled into caged trucks, driven under heavy guard to the airport 
and placed on a flight to Hanoi. More than half were women and children. 
Hong Kong decision-makers, after bickering and soul-searching, had taken the 
first and most difficult step in clearing the colony's prison-like camps of 
44,000 "boat people," and it had been carried out without a hitch. 
While much of the world condemned the forced expulsion of refugees -- in 
Washington, White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater called the act 
"unacceptable" -- the hard-nosed approach was applauded in the seething streets 
of Hong Kong, where people are busily preparing for Christmas and Chinese New 
Year. A recent poll in downtown Hong Kong showed that 90% support forcible 
repatriation. 
For the Vietnamese roused from their beds at 3 a.m. on Dec. 12, this wasn't the 
way a treacherous journey across the South China Sea was supposed to have 
ended. 
Like most of the other 50,000 asylum-seekers languishing in Hong Kong's 
detention centers, the next stop was expected to be Canada, the United States 
or one of the other major resettlement countries. Many had sold all their 
belongings in Vietnam to finance the trip to Hong Kong. 
Despite the miserable conditions of the detention centers, inmates who have 
spent several months sleeping on wooden boards in a warehouse-like hut with 
hundreds of other boat people say they would rather live in the camps 
indefinitely than return to Vietnam. Indeed, one makeshift poster seen from a 
window at Phoenix House read: "We would rather die than return to Vietnam." 
The repatriation was timed to deter further arrivals when the current monsoon 
season ends in March. Only 600 boat people went home voluntarily last year; 
30,000 have sought refuge in Hong Kong this year. The 405-square-mile colony is 
home to almost half of the 90,000 boat people in Southeast Asia. 
Pirate attacks, austere conditions in the camps and the threat of being sent 
back has failed to stem the human tide of people into Hong Kong harbor. 
Hong Kong's appointed legislators are clearly suffering a bad case of 
compassion fatigue. Overwhelmed by the swelling ranks of boat people, members 
of the policy-making Legislative Council said they are no longer willing to 
approve more funds for the construction of new camps. Some have even suggested 
that Hong Kong abandon its asylum policy. What is clear is that 14 years after 
the end of the Vietnam War, Hong Kong is beginning to close the gates to 
Vietnamese refugees. 
After heated debate in the British House of Commons last week on repatriation, 
further expulsions are expected to continue until the camps are cleared. No 
amount of shouting or crying -- from the Vietnamese or foreign critics -- is 
expected to halt the process. For one thing, the Chinese, who resume 
sovereignty over the colony in 1997, have made clear that they want every 
Vietnamese out of Hong Kong by then. 
As part of preparations to move larger numbers, Hong Kong officials have been 
in London shopping for huge ferries that can be refitted as giant floating 
prisons. 
Critics say that by sending people back unwillingly, British and Hong Kong 
officials unilaterally abandoned a pledge -- made at a U.N.-sponsored 
conference on Indochinese refugees in Geneva in June -- to give voluntary 
repatriation more time to work. 
There are also grave doubts about Hong Kong's system of determining whether the 
boat people are genuine refugees or merely migrants seeking a higher standard 
of living. The colony's immigration officers -- using a controversial procedure 
introduced in June, 1988 -- tend to screen out applicants without a thorough 
investigation into their motives for leaving Vietnam. 
"The screening of asylum-seekers is so inadequate that there is a danger that 
individuals at risk of human-rights violations could be sent back to Vietnam," 
said an Amnesty International study team. 
For ethnic Chinese, the majority population here, forcibly repatriating people 
back to a communist regime is no worse than the treatment given to the 
thousands of Chinese nationals -- many of whom have relatives in the colony -- 
who sneak into Hong Kong each year. Up to 90 illegal immigrants from China are 
unceremoniously sent back each day. Even illegal immigrant mothers caught 
visiting their husbands and children living in colony are immediately 
repatriated. 
What worries refugee officials is that other Southeast Asian countries will 
follow Hong Kong's lead and begin sending boat people back to Vietnam -- or 
worse, turning boatloads of Vietnamese back to sea. In recent months, Thailand, 
Malaysia and Taiwan have forcibly towed boat people from their shores, exposing 
them to the danger of pirate attacks and drowning. 
The decision to repatriate such a small group was clearly a trial balloon 
designed to test international reaction and ultimately the willingness of the 
Vietnam government to honor its promise of not punishing returnees. As part of 
a secret agreement with Vietnam, Britain says it has secured rights to monitor 
the treatment of those sent back. 
Although the government of Vietnam has assured Britain it will not punish 
anyone, Vietnamese law stipulates that a person who leaves the country without 
permission commits a criminal offense. Quyen Vuong, 24, who lived in Orange 
County for a time after she fled Vietnam in 1981 with her family, has spent 
long hours helping boat people amid the corrugated tin and barbed wire of Hong 
Kong's camps. Now a student in Hong Kong, she says it is unreasonable to assume 
that the returnees will not be subjected to harsh treatment back home. "The 
local authorities can make their life unbearable. The stigma for those who left 
will stay with them forever." 
