PEOPLE: PALISADES HIGH REGAINS CROWN IN SCHOLASTIC TEST 
After dominating the Los Angeles Unified School District's academic decathlon 
in the early 1980s, Palisades High School had been unsuccessful in recapturing 
the title for a number of years. But this year, Palisades regained the title, 
scoring 44,981 out of a possible 60,000 points and edging out defending 
champions El Camino Real High School. In March, the nine-member team will 
travel to UC Riverside for the statewide competition. 
Space exploration is the theme for this year's decathlon. Categories include 
math, history, science, economics, speech and fine arts. 
In addition to juggling difficult class schedules, team members spent countless 
hours outside of the classroom preparing for the competition. "All this 
studying has helped me learn to budget my time," said Neal Kaplan, who won a 
$750 scholarship for being one of the top-scoring students. Several other 
students received scholarships ranging from $500 to $1,000 for their 
performances in the decathlon. 
Part of the preparation was learning to work as a team. "In the beginning, we 
really didn't know each other but now we've gotten to be friends," said Ritu 
Batra. 
The team is coached by English literature teacher Rose Gilbert and speech, 
debate and English teacher, Donald Walz. The team's captain is David Elashoff. 
Representing Palisades in the state competition will be seniors Kaplan, 
Elashoff, Amir Berjis, Robert Brombach, Matthew Gelbart, Eddy Kup, Thatbiti 
Sabahive, Lesley Young and junior Batra. 
The Westside Jewish Community Center celebrated its 10th anniversary with a 
special tribute to Saran Kirschbaum. Kirschbaum, president of the Westside 
center from 1980 to 1983, assisted in the creation of an adult day center for 
seniors. The center helps elderly individuals with the tasks of daily living. 
She is president of the HUD senior adult housing project in Los Angeles. 
Linda Lucks will join the staff of Los Angeles City Councilwoman Ruth Galanter 
as the Venice area field deputy. Lucks, a Venice resident, is a member of the 
board of directors of Crenshaw Consortium Inc. and is past president of the 
board of directors of the Westside Women's Health Center in Santa Monica. 
Loyola Law School Professor Christopher May has been awarded the Alpha Sigma Nu 
Book Award in the sciences category for his book, "In the Name of War: Judicial 
Review and War Powers Since 1918." Alpha Sigma Nu, the honor society of Jesuit 
colleges and universities throughout the United States, sponsors this annual 
book competition. May joined Loyola Law School in 1973 and is the James P. 
Bradley professor of constitutional law. 
Santa Monica resident Donna Krupkin Whitney has been honored with the 
Outstanding Young Alumna Award by the Emma Willard School in Troy, N.Y. 
Whitney, a 1970 graduate of the Emma Willard School, is an assistant clinical 
professor at UCLA in the Pain Management Center. 
Santa Monica High School English teacher Carol Jago has been appointed to the 
National Council of Teachers of English. 
She will serve as a member of the Commission on Literature, an advisory body 
that identifies and reports on current key issues in the teaching of 
literature. 
Kay Briski has been named executive director of the Venice Area Chamber of 
Commerce. Since 1984, Briski has directed the Culver City Convention and 
Visitors Bureau. 
Items for People can be mailed to People, Los Angeles Times, Suite 200, 1717 
4th St., Santa Monica 90401. CHRISTINA V. GODBEY 
