ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: ANAHEIM; 
TEEN MOMS NURTURE EDUCATION 
About 20 teen-age mothers brought their diaper bags, strollers and babies to 
Gilbert High School on Friday for the continuation school's annual baby 
celebration. 
In the past two years, there have been about 40 births to students at the 
school. "These girls have a tough enough time," said Shirley Wood, who teaches 
the Pregnant Girl Program. "They need a positive experience. We say, 'Hey, 
you're OK and we love your children.' " 
Unlike state and nationwide trends, teen birth rates are slightly on the rise 
in Orange County, according to 1988 statistics, the most recent available. 
In Anaheim, it's "epidemic," Wood said. The Anaheim Union High School District 
has had no formal family life curriculum since 1969 when a lawsuit was brought 
against the district. Its birth rate for 15- to 17-year-olds is second only to 
Santa Ana Unified in Orange County. 
"It's an acceptable thing, not a disgrace like it used to be," Wood said. "It's 
an in thing for a lot of them." 
One girl at the celebration said she got pregnant to please a former boyfriend. 
Another said she wanted to spite her divorcing mother. "I wanted something," 
she said. "My mom took my dad away. She can't take my son away." 
Cuddling her 9-month-old daughter, Brittany, Tamara Henley, 18, said she was 
ready for the responsibilities of marriage, family and work, and plans to enter 
Cypress College next fall. She and her husband, Tom, 20, a mechanic, live in an 
apartment a few blocks from the school and plan to buy a home in March. 
A minority of the girls in Wood's program are working, and a few receive 
welfare. But most are living at home with their parents, who are frequently 
single mothers themselves, Wood said. 
At continuation school, the girls study at their own pace, completing their 
required schoolwork on a contract basis and also taking electives in pregnancy, 
child care and development and parenting. 
The babies cooed, cried and toddled around a twinkling Christmas tree in the 
school registration area, as the mothers chatted with teachers and each other 
while students passed by in between classes. Wood said it appeared that the 
young mothers had benefited from her classes because the babies looked 
"healthy, well-nourished and clean." 
The young mothers' academic skills vary widely, but in general, they perform 
better academically than average students, said Jerry Kill, director of 
alternative education. "They're more serious about getting an education," he 
said. 
Becky Stewart, 19, who is eight months pregnant, arrived with her 2-year-old 
son, Mitchell. Stewart, a grocery store worker who lives with her mother, has 
attended night school for three years and hopes to graduate by June. "If you 
want something for your kids," she said, "you need an education." LYNN SMITH 
