4 DIE IN FREEWAY COLLISION WITH TANKER 
Four people were killed when a Chevrolet Blazer slammed into a jackknifed 
gasoline tanker on the San Bernardino Freeway in Claremont late Wednesday, 
causing a fiery explosion that left authorities with few leads Thursday as to 
the victims' identities. 
A 36-year-old Glendora woman, whose name was not released, was believed to be 
at the wheel of the Blazer when it hit the twin tanker, authorities said. The 
three other victims also were riding in the vehicle, police said. 
It will be several days before a comparison of dental records can be made to 
confirm the identities of the four people who were trapped in the flaming 
vehicle, Los Angeles County coroner's spokesman Bob Dambacher said. 
The tanker driver, Linzell Washington, 52, of La Puente, was uninjured in the 
crash, which occurred at 11:25 p.m. Wednesday. The inferno closed the freeway 
in both directions for several hours. 
Washington told CHP officers that he was driving westbound at about 55 m.p.h. 
when the tanker's brakes locked and spun the rig out of control, stopping about 
200 feet east of Indian Hill Boulevard, CHP spokesman Dennis Paulson said. 
The spin-out left the tanker jackknifed, straddling three lanes of the freeway, 
with the cab's headlights pointed northeast. Paulson theorized that the driver 
of the oncoming Blazer "could have been distracted by the headlights" of the 
tanker. 
Washington had left his cab to check on the damage when the Blazer struck the 
rear tank of the rig. 
The spectacular fire that followed left authorities with few leads in trying to 
determine the victims' identities. The identification of the 36-year-old 
Glendora woman could only be described as "tentative." 
Firefighters needed an hour to extinguish the blaze. Officials estimated the 
tanker had been carrying 20,000 gallons of gasoline. 
Both directions of the freeway were closed between Indian Hill Boulevard in 
Claremont and Central Avenue in Montclair until 4:30 a.m., when eastbound lanes 
were opened. The westbound lanes were opened at 6:45 a.m. 
A CHP spokeswoman said it is believed that the other three victims were two 
teen-age boys and a child about 10 years of age. The younger child's sex was 
unknown, the spokesman said. 
Dambacher, however, indicated that the victims included the Glendora woman, an 
adult male and a teen-age boy and girl. 
