2 OJAI MEN RECEIVE AWARDS FOR HEROISM; 
GOOD SAMARITANS: TIM DONOGHUE AND BOB LEMON ARE HONORED FOR RISKING THEIR LIVES 
TO RESCUE THREE VICTIMS OF A FIERY CRASH. 
More than 10 months after their dramatic rescue of three people after a fiery 
crash on California 33, two men have been honored by the Carnegie Hero Fund 
Commission, officials from the Pittsburgh, Pa.-based commission announced 
Thursday. 
Tim Donoghue and Bob Lemon, both of Ojai, were among 16 people nationwide to 
receive the Carnegie Medal for heroism and awards of $2,500 each. The awards 
honor people who have risked -- or lost -- their lives to save others. 
Lemon, a fire safety engineer, was not available for comment Thursday. 
But Donoghue says it still helps him to talk about the frightening sight that 
the two men came upon at 3 a.m. on Feb. 5 on deserted California 33 and the 
events that followed. 
They were driving to Los Angeles International Airport, where Lemon was 
scheduled to take an early-morning flight, when they saw what appeared to be a 
small brush fire on the roadside ahead, Donoghue said. 
As they drew closer, Donoghue and Lemon saw that the flames were coming from a 
car and that a man with a bloody face was standing beside it, waving them down. 
"It was kind of a grotesque, Stephen King-movie kind of thing," said Donoghue, 
44. 
When they pulled over, the two men discovered that a 19-year-old woman was 
trapped inside the burning car, her leg pinned between the passenger seat and 
the door. 
Donoghue said he rushed to a telephone a few blocks away to call for assistance 
while Lemon helped the injured driver. When Donoghue returned, he reached into 
the burning car to try to pull the woman out. 
"I remember I was kind of concerned wondering whether the whole car would go 
up" in flames, Donoghue said. "It was kind of engulfed. But I saw she was a 
normal-sized girl and I'm kind of a big-sized person, so I said, 'I should be 
able to do this.' " 
His first attempt was unsuccessful, said the 180-pound Donoghue. "It was real 
hot, and the dashboard was dripping on her jeans and sweater," Donoghue said. 
On his second attempt, he was able to free the woman with Lemon's help. 
Seconds later, they discovered a third victim, a man who had been thrown 
through the windshield and was lying a few yards in front of the car. The man 
regained consciousness, became delirious and ran up the road. Both rescuers had 
to restrain him until paramedics arrived. 
The three victims -- Denise Reid, now 20; Dennis Honey, 20, and John Brown, 18 
-- had been returning from Disneyland when Honey fell asleep at the wheel. Now 
fully recovered, the three have kept in contact with their rescuers. Reid and 
Honey, of Ojai, are expecting a baby any day, both said. Brown is a college 
student in Orange County. 
"I think they really deserve it," Reid said. "They definitely saved my life." 
The men have also been honored by the Ventura County Board of Supervisors, the 
county's Peace Officers Assn. and a state firefighters organization. 
Donoghue, who works for a Ventura car dealership, said he has received training 
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and that Lemon is a trained CPR instructor. He 
called the two-minute rescue "one of the most extraordinary experiences in my 
life." 
"I feel there is a God, and he wanted us to be there and do what we did," 
Donoghue said. "I don't remember being afraid." 
Honey said he will always be grateful to Donoghue and Lemon. "The way I look at 
it," he said, "there's nothing that could repay what they gave us." 
