BLACKS CONSIDERING BOYCOTT OF STATION 
Members of the black community are talking about a boycott against XHRM-FM 
(92.5), making thinly disguised accusations of racism against the Mexican 
owners who last month booted black entrepreneur Willie Morrow from his 
controlling role with the radio station. 
For almost 10 years, Morrow represented the Mexican-based station in San Diego, 
paying a monthly fee to the Mexican owners, Radio Moderna Mexicana. He 
programmed specifically to the black community, primarily playing contemporary 
rhythm and blues, rap and funk music. 
Last month, Radio Moderna Mexicana dropped Morrow and took control of the 
station after Morrow failed to pay his monthly fee for two months. Morrow said 
he didn't pay because the owners didn't help him through financial hardships 
caused by equipment problems. 
The owners switched the music format to a contemporary-hits format and dropped 
several of the programs, including a Sunday Gospel show, that were geared to a 
black audience. XHRM was the only station in San Diego specifically targeting 
the black community. 
In a Nov. 20 article in the San Diego Union, station owner Luis Rivas Kaloyan 
was quoted as saying: "Willie Morrow programmed to a very narrow audience -- 
black people. We don't want a black station; we want a good station that 
appeals to everybody. We had to step in and save the reputation of the 
station." 
Some members of the black community viewed Kaloyan's words, oft-repeated in the 
San Diego Monitor News, the weekly paper Morrow publishes, as borderline 
racist. 
"If the Union quoted him accurately, this guy has no respect for the feelings 
of the black community," said Harold Brown, head of the Black Economic 
Development Task Force. "I think it sends one hell of a message to the black 
community." 
Kaloyan, who said he has been misquoted and misinterpreted, said his problem 
was solely with Morrow, not the black community. He says Morrow programmed the 
station to the black community to further his political power in the community 
and to promote his line of hair-care products. 
Morrow, Kaloyan says, consistently represented himself as the owner of the 
Mexican-based station, which was particularly galling to Kaloyan and his 
family, which owns the station. He accuses Morrow and his compatriots of 
purposely misquoting him and spreading false stories. 
"The only issue here is we got rid of the guy" because he didn't meet financial 
obligations, Kaloyan said. 
On Tuesday, Kaloyan issued a press release detailing his longstanding problems 
with Morrow, including charges of bounced checks and misappropriating 
promotional merchandise. 
"The quality of the management and staffing has been a continuous problem over 
the years," Kaloyan wrote. "Some merchandise was wrongly sold by Mr. Morrow and 
(his company) for their personal gain. There were also indications of illegal 
activities." 
Reached Wednesday, Morrow denied any wrongdoing and said the monthly payment of 
$55,000 was made every month until October. 
"I'm not going to say I never bounced a check," Morrow said. "I'm not going to 
say anything to that one way or another." 
He reiterated his position that equipment problems, specifically damage to the 
station antenna caused by a storm, ruined the station's cash flow. 
Kaloyan said the station's programming under Morrow's leadership was too 
narrowly focused, which limited the station's success. 
"The black community is only 7% of San Diego," he said. "To have a successful 
business you can't just identify the station to the black market. You have to 
consider the Hispanic and white listeners too." 
The station's new "Power" format, Kaloyan said, includes many of the "urban" 
hits that were a staple of XHRM's old format. Stations carrying similar formats 
are among the ratings leaders in such major markets as New York and Los 
Angeles. 
"We're not trying to get away from our responsibility to the black community," 
Kaloyan said, adding that he is attempting to talk to black leaders to smooth 
over differences. 
It might not be easy to appease some of Morrow's fellow black leaders, who see 
this as another in a long list of recent slaps endured by blacks in San Diego, 
including the 1987 decision by voters to revoke a city decision to rename 
Market Street after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
The Black Economic Development Task Force's Brown said leaders in the black 
community are discussing what actions against XHRM might be appropriate, 
including a boycott against advertisers or a civil-rights march. 
In a story in the Monitor News, the Rev. George Stevens, an aide to Rep. Jim 
Bates (D-San Diego), called for members of the community to turn off the 
station. He stopped far short of accusing the station owners of having racially 
oriented motives for switching the station format, but he said their decision 
"does have a negative impact on the African-American community." 
He wants an agreement that would reinstate Morrow, as well as the old 
programming format. Brown also said Morrow should be reinstated. 
Morrow said he is not involved in any of the community efforts against XHRM. 
But the Nov. 30 edition of the Monitor News devoted its front page to Kaloyan's 
quote from the Union, reproduced in large bold print below a cartoon depicting 
two men in sombreros, one accepting money from a black and the other speaking 
into a microphone. Several articles have been devoted to the subject as well. 
On Page 2 of the same edition, Editor Richard (Tip) Calvin wrote, "Stop 
listening to, stop advertising on a station that does not believe that Black is 
Beautiful." 
The cover of the Dec. 7 Monitor carried the banner headline, "Advertisers 
Supports (sic) negative racial slur: Community Outraged." 
The Monitor is "trying its best to be neutral," Morrow said. "But it's tough 
when someone makes statements like that." 
Paul Menard, formerly the Harrigan half of the popular morning radio team of 
Charlie and Harrigan, was hired by Kaloyan to be XHRM's new general manager at 
the beginning of December. He left a week later to return to a traffic 
reporting service, although he says he left on cordial terms with Kaloyan. 
"For some reason it (the switch in formats) was perceived as them abandoning 
the black community," Menard said. "From my close conversations with Luis, I 
can say that definitely was not the plan. 
"To try to make this a racial issue . . . does not hold any water or any kind 
of validity." 
