LEONA HELMSLEY GETS 4 YEARS AND $7-MILLION FINE 
Leona Helmsley, the self-proclaimed queen of a luxury hotel chain, was 
sentenced Tuesday to four years in federal prison and fined $7.1 million by a 
judge who said her criminal tax offenses were the product of "naked greed." 
The judge imposed the sentence after Helmsley, 69, tearfully begged for mercy. 
U.S. District Judge John M. Walker Jr. told Helmsley that she had "an arrogant 
belief that she was above the law." He noted that her crime wasn't motivated by 
financial need and said that, since her conviction, she had shown no remorse. 
Helmsley and two employees were convicted in August on 33 felony counts related 
to evasion of $1.2 million in federal income taxes, including Helmsley's 
diversion of funds from the real estate and hotel companies that she and her 
husband controlled in order to pay for lavish personal expenditures. 
Helmsley's trial drew intense media interest. She became a symbol of 
upper-class abuse of privilege when a former housekeeper testified that Mrs. 
Helmsley had once snapped at her: "We don't pay taxes; the little people pay 
taxes." 
In addition, Walker sentenced Helmsley to three years of probation, including 
750 hours of community service at Hale House, a home for infants born addicted 
to drugs. The judge ordered her to pay the federal taxes she owes, plus 
penalties and interest, and $469,000 in New York state taxes. 
The judge allowed her to remain free on bail pending an appeal, with the amount 
of bail to be determined later. Should her appeals fail and she be sent to 
prison, she would be eligible for parole after serving a year and three months. 
As she and her husband, Harry, 80, left the courthouse Tuesday, members of a 
crowd that had gathered outside shouted "Whore!" "The queen is dead!" and 
"Bitch, you should have got a thousand years!" 
Attracted by what promised to be one of the great courtroom scenes of the year, 
scores of would-be spectators had stood in line for over an hour to get inside. 
Mrs. Helmsley, renowned from magazine ads in which she appeared as the 
perfectionist queen of the Helmsley Hotels chain, attended court in a 
long-sleeved black mock turtleneck dress with a drop waist and loose pleats. 
When the judge asked her if she had anything to say, she stood but had trouble 
getting her words out because of sobs. She said: "I'm more humiliated and 
shamed than anybody could ever imagine that I have been found guilty of a 
serious crime." 
Helmsley said that, because of the case's extensive publicity, she and her 
husband had been virtual prisoners in their home for three years, unable to 
leave because they might be attacked or jeered. She said her life was "a 
nightmare." 
She referred to her continuing grief for her son, who died in 1982, and then 
spoke of Harry, who has been judged mentally incompetent and whom she has been 
taking care of. 
"I beg you, please don't let me lose Harry too," Helmsley said. "Our whole life 
has been work and each other. We have nothing else." 
She ended her statement by saying: "I'm sorry. I'm sorry." 
Harry Helmsley, the founder of a New York real estate and hotel empire 
estimated to be worth $5 billion, had been indicted along with his wife. But he 
was later judged unfit to stand trial because of failing memory and didn't 
appear at all in court during the trial. 
Harry Helmsley attended Tuesday's sentencing flanked by three bodyguards. He 
appeared thoughtful and attentive. But afterward he showed no sign of having 
fully understood the proceedings. When a friend offered support and told him 
soothingly that his wife was unlikely to begin her sentence "for years and 
years," until the appeals process is exhausted, Helmsley laughed and repeated 
"years and years." 
After the sentencing, Mrs. Helmsley turned to friends in the courtroom, 
including television personality Barbara Walters, and said: "See what they've 
done to me?" 
Helmsley's attorney, Gerald Feffer, acknowledged that she deserved to be 
punished for her crimes. But he noted in court that his client will soon turn 
70 and said she has already been severely punished by the humiliation and abuse 
she has suffered at the hands of the press and public. 
Feffer said Helmsley had received death threats, as well as voluminous hate 
mail, much of it obscene and anti-Semitic. He said her position and notoriety 
mean that she would be a target of physical abuse in prison. 
Feffer had asked the judge to sentence her to perform community service at Hale 
House. Feffer told the judge that, if he felt that punishment wasn't severe 
enough, he could also sentence Helmsley to live in Harlem, in one of Hale 
House's residential facilities for mothers recovering from addiction. This, 
Feffer said, would place her in "an environment that will humble her on a daily 
basis." 
When he pronounced sentence, Judge Walker said that in making up his mind he 
had focused only on her crimes, ignoring Helmsley's "vilification" in the 
press, as well as testimony that she was sometimes cold-hearted and vindictive 
in her treatment of employees. 
In addition to paying for renovation of the 28-room Helmsley mansion in 
Greenwich, Conn., company funds were used by Mrs. Helmsley to pay for a new 
swimming pool and a $130,000 indoor/outdoor stereo system at the estate. 
According to testimony in the trial, she used company funds to pay credit card 
bills for underwear and other clothing from department stores, a $45,000 silver 
clock specially designed in the shape of the Helmsley Building in New York, and 
a leg waxing. The Helmsleys failed to disclose the money as personal income, as 
tax laws require. 
The trial included testimony about her blithely firing household employees at 
Christmastime for petty infractions and demanding cash kickbacks from firms 
that supplied liquor to the Helmsley hotels. But, in arguing for a lenient 
sentence, her lawyer presented letters from several other Helmsley employees 
for whom Mrs. Helmsley had gone out of her way to assure adequate medical 
treatment, including two who had AIDS. 
Helmsley, born Leona Mindy Rosenthal, came from a modest background, the 
daughter of a Brooklyn hat maker. She had had several careers before she met 
and married Harry Helmsley, including being a showroom model, cigarette vendor 
and, later, a successful Manhattan real estate broker. It was a second marriage 
for both. 
Both Mrs. Helmsley and her husband still face similar tax charges in New York 
state court. They have pleaded not guilty, and a ruling is expected on whether 
Harry Helmsley is mentally competent to stand trial on the state charges. 
Several Helmsley hotels in New York face loss of their liquor licenses because 
of Mrs. Helmsley's felony conviction. State action on the subject is pending. 
Judge Walker told the defendants that their attempts to cheat the government 
"undermines the system of voluntary compliance" on which the nation's tax 
system depends. He said that the sentences should send a message to anyone 
thinking of falsifying a tax return that, "if you do it and you're caught, you 
will go to prison." 
The two employees who had been convicted with her also were sentenced Tuesday 
to prison terms and fines. They were convicted of helping Mrs. Helmsley cheat 
the government through false tax returns, although the wrongdoing resulted in 
little direct financial gain to the employees. 
Joseph V. Licari, 53, the chief financial officer of Helmsley Enterprises Inc., 
was sentenced to 30 months in prison, three years of probation and a $75,000 
fine. Frank J. Turco, 47, who was vice president and chief of financial 
services for Helmsley Hotels Inc., was sentenced to 24 months in prison, three 
years of probation and a $50,000 fine. Their lawyers said they don't intend to 
appeal, and the two are to begin their sentences on Jan. 16. 
Turco has already pleaded guilty to state charges, and Licari is expected to do 
so today. 
