GOING TO DEFENSE OF RAMS' PREVENT; 
NFL PLAYOFFS: BEND-BUT-DON'T-BREAK DRIVES FANS CRAZY, BUT ROBINSON DOESN'T HAVE 
THE PERSONNEL FOR ANYTHING ELSE. 
"Prevent defense" may have become the quiche of our time. Real men don't play 
it. Philadelphia Eagle Coach Buddy Ryan wouldn't be caught dead in a zone. 
"I only use it with two plays left in the game," Ryan said this week. "I've 
never been much of a prevent guy. Prevent defense prevents you from winning." 
That said, there is one defensive unit that still dabbles in it occasionally on 
weekends -- Ryan's opponent this Sunday, as a matter of fact. You may have 
caught their act last Sunday in New England, sewing up the last wild-card 
playoff spot. Piece of cake, really. The Rams, protecting a four-point lead, 
dropped into their zone, called off the pass rush, dished out yards like 
peanuts, then stopped the Patriots three times inside their five-yard line, the 
last stand coming as the clock, the regular season and a few Ram loyalists 
expired in unison. 
No one ever said prevent defense was easy to stomach, the axiom being: Thou 
shalt surrender everything but game-winning touchdowns. 
"I don't give a . . . what Buddy Ryan says," Ram defensive coordinator Fritz 
Shurmur said in defense of his strategies. "It caused us to win last week. The 
bottom line is this: Do you in fact win or lose the game? Obviously, if it 
works out that you lose the game, then it's the wrong choice. But if you're 
going to say because they got 95 yards on you, it was wrong, that's bull. They 
didn't get the last four." 
If Shurmur seems a bit testy, it's only because he is a bit testy. He has taken 
enough shots about his defense in recent weeks to warrant a bulletproof vest. 
The Rams enter Sunday's playoff game in Philadelphia with the league's 
21st-ranked defense, 28th -- and last -- against the pass. 
"Before, we had great defenses and we never won," cornerback LeRoy Irvin 
theorized. "So, maybe since we have such a lousy defense, maybe we'll pull it 
out." 
The defense wasn't lousy by design, of course. The Rams planned a more 
aggressive style this year until a half dozen or so key players started 
checking in for surgery. 
Coach John Robinson commends Ryan's attacking style, wishing he had the 
beef-eating front four -- Reggie White, Jerome Brown, Clyde Simmons and Mike 
Pitts -- that Ryan has to rush the quarterback on every down. 
Who wouldn't hate prevent defense? 
"I'm sure he hates it," Robinson said of Ryan. "He's got four guys that can 
come in and get you." 
By contrast, because of serious injuries to the defensive front, the Rams may 
introduce the league's first all-linebacker pass-rush this weekend. Meet the 
Leansome Foursome -- Kevin Greene, Brett Faryniarz, Fred Strickland and George 
Bethune. 
Against New England, Bethune learned to play defensive end in 25 quick steps, 
all leading to the huddle. 
Coach Marv Goux basically diagramed a three-point stance in the dirt for 
Bethune and shoved the rookie onto the field for the Patriots' final drive. 
"And people are screaming, 'Why didn't you blitz?' " Shurmur said. "We were 
playing a guy at left defensive end the whole series who had never had lined up 
a down in practice, George Bethune. And if I called a blitz, and he took the 
wrong gap, and they got more time to throw the ball, now how smart was that?" 
The Ram defense had been reduced to this: "George," Shurmur told Bethune, 
"we've got no other defensive left ends. You've got to put your hand on the 
ground and line up outside the guy." 
Shurmur added: "You've got to throw all those factors in 25 seconds and make a 
call." 
Robinson thinks that prevent defense gets a bad rap. 
"I think the god of prevent defense is not getting a fair shake up there," he 
said. 
Yet, the Rams wouldn't be taking such preventive tacts had the first-team 
defense shown up this season. Instead, they've had to work around some sizable 
roadblocks: 
 -- Larry Kelm and Strickland. Out of the lineup because of assorted injuries, 
the Rams' projected starters as inside linebackers didn't start a game together 
until Week 10. 
 -- On Nov. 19, starting left end Doug Reed twisted an ankle against Phoenix. 
He was supposed to be out two weeks until a crack was found in the ankle, 
whereupon Reed was shipped to injured reserved. Update: Reed still walks with a 
limp and would be eligible to return only if the Rams advance to the Super 
Bowl. 
 -- On Nov. 26, cornerback Cliff Hicks strained his right knee against New 
Orleans. He missed the next game against Dallas, then played sparingly in the 
final three games. Update: Hicks underwent reconstructive knee surgery 
Wednesday. 
 -- On Dec. 3, starting right end Mike Piel dislocated his left elbow against 
Dallas. Update: He's going to try to return this week, playing with a brace. 
 -- On Dec. 11, first-round draft pick Bill Hawkins, finally playing well after 
a rough start, suffered left knee-ligament damage against San Francisco. 
Update: Hawkins underwent arthroscopic surgery and could return only if the 
Rams went on world tour in March, Robinson quips. 
 -- On Dec. 17, safety Anthony Newman broke his left elbow in the team's rout 
of the New York Jets. In the locker room afterward, Newman vowed to return 
quickly. Update: Newman was placed on injured reserve Dec. 21. 
As stop-gap measures, the Rams recently signed Sean Smith, a former Chicago 
Bear defensive end who had been unemployed, and recalled rookie linebacker 
Brian Smith from injured reserve, moving him to defensive end. Linebacker Mark 
Messner, released from the developmental squad at one point this year, was also 
recalled and placed on active duty. 
In fact, the two Smiths and Messner formed the Rams' defensive front during one 
series against New England. 
Shurmur said: "There were a hell of a lot of weeks here when they weren't on 
the roster, or even in this town. Our best accomplishment was coaching George 
Bethune into getting ready in 25 seconds, between plays on the sideline. It was 
a great clinic." 
Still, this week the opposing coach was indirectly taking swipes at the Rams' 
manhood, saying that prevent defense prevents you from winning. 
"I feel pretty good," Shurmur countered. "We've won six out of seven. A lot of 
guys can sit here until 5 in the morning and come up with grand schemes, but 
what we get paid for is what happens on Sunday. That's what the game is all 
about. It's sure not about statistics." 
And this, Buddy, is for you: Shurmur says zone defense is far more difficult to 
teach than man-to-man. 
"The easiest way to play defense is to have four guys up front that will come 
and completely dominate the line of scrimmage," Shurmur said, "where there's no 
pressure on the cover guys and no pressure on your calls. Where the pressure 
comes on your calls is when the ball goes down the field, and they're going to 
make the play or you're going to make the play." 
The challenge this week is containing Eagle quarterback Randall Cunningham, the 
most elusive open-field runner since Manuel Noriega. An impossible task for the 
porous Rams? 
Maybe not. Shurmur guesses that a controlled zone defense might be the best way 
to keep Cunningham in check. It just so happens, that's what the Rams play. Or 
haven't you noticed? 
"I'm not sure patience isn't a pretty good attribute," Shurmur said. "And if 
you don't have any, you'd better not be messing around with zone defense." 
Mess around -- the Rams? 
Ram Notes 
More bad news for the Ram defense, and not just for this weekend. Third-year 
cornerback Clifford Hicks underwent surgery Wednesday to repair anterior 
cruciate damage in his right knee. It was a major reconstructive operation, and 
Hicks is expected to be out at least eight months. Hicks injured the knee 
against New Orleans on Nov. 26 but returned to play sparingly in the team's 
last three games. "Obviously, he's gone for a long period of time," Coach John 
Robinson said. "Whether he's back next year, I don't know." Robinson added that 
Hicks' future in the league will probably be at safety, a position that 
requires less speed than cornerback. Hicks won the starting right corner 
position over LeRoy Irvin before his injury against the Saints. Hicks started 
six games in all, making 22 tackles and two interceptions. 
