SOUTHERN SECTION FOOTBALL FINALS; 
QUARTZ HILL SEEKS TO ESTABLISH ITS IDENTITY AGAINST LOYOLA 
A question asked this week concerning tonight's Southern Section Division I 
football championship game between Loyola and Quartz Hill high schools: "Where 
is Quartz Hill?" 
Prep football fans are familiar with tradition-rich Loyola, but one news 
release called its opponent Coltz Hill. 
For the record, Quartz Hill is located in the Antelope Valley, about 70 miles 
north of downtown Los Angeles. The best-known player to come out of the school 
is former USC running back Aaron Emanuel. 
The Rebels compete in the Golden League and enter tonight's 7:30 game at 
Anaheim Stadium with an 11-2 record. 
Quartz Hill, making its first championship appearance, has outscored its 
opponents, 110-40, in the playoffs, including last week's 37-7 dismantling of 
Santa Ana Mater Dei. 
Loyola is 131-38-4 in the last 15 years under Coach Steve Grady, but the Cubs 
are playing in the title game for the first time since 1975. After opening the 
playoffs with an easy 42-14 victory over Long Beach Jordan, Loyola relied on 
defense in beating Fontana, 10-7, and Canyon Country Canyon, 10-3. 
Loyola is led on defense by senior linebacker Drew Casani, the defensive player 
of the year in the Angelus League. 
Casani will have his hands full trying to stop a potent Quartz Hill running 
game spearheaded by junior Erik Thomas, who has gained 1,394 yards and scored 
17 touchdowns, and senior David Nelson, with 917 yards and 12 touchdowns. 
A look at the rest of the Southern Section championship games: 
Division II 
PARAMOUNT (13-0) vs. 
CAPISTRANO VALLEY (11-2) 
At Santa Ana Stadium 
Saturday at 7:30 p.m. 
This may be the best matchup of the weekend. Paramount, which has the section's 
longest winning streak at 21 games, is going for its third consecutive 
championship. The Pirates lost most of their top players from last season to 
graduation, but Coach Ken Sutch overcame that. Running back Leon Neal has been 
the key offensive player in playoff victories over Rio Mesa, Pasadena Muir and 
El Toro. 
Capistrano Valley finished third in the South Coast League this season behind 
Mission Viejo and El Toro, but rebounded in the playoffs and defeated Mission 
Viejo, 26-24, in the semifinals. The Cougars' leaders are quarterback Tony 
Solliday and receiver Dave Poltl. 
Division III 
SANTA FE SPRINGS ST. PAUL (8-3-2) 
vs. ANAHEIM ESPERANZA (13-0) 
At Cerritos College 
Saturday at 7:30 p.m. 
St. Paul's drop from Division I to Division III this year helped the Swordsmen. 
After struggling in nonconference losses to Loyola, Fontana and Serra, St. Paul 
turned things around, won the Mission League and hasn't lost in seven weeks. 
The offensive leaders are quarterback Albert Borunda, who has passed for 1,200 
yards, and running back Carlos Ramos, who has rushed for 850 yards. 
Esperanza, making its first appearance in the finals in six years, is the 
division's top-seeded team. The Aztecs are coming off a 38-35 victory over Hart 
in which Reid Pullen scored on a seven-yard pass from Keith McDonald with three 
seconds remaining. 
Division IV 
BALDWIN PARK (10-2-1) vs. 
RIVERSIDE ARLINGTON (10-3) 
At Riverside Ramona HS 
Saturday at 7:30 p.m. 
Neither team was expected to make it to the finals after failing to win league 
titles. Baldwin Park finished second in the Sierra League, and Arlington was 
third in the Ivy League. 
In Arlington's ride to the championship, the Lions had to defeat second-seeded 
Nogales in the quarterfinals and third-seeded Glendora in the semifinals. 
Baldwin Park's key was a 21-7 upset of top-seeded Canyon Springs in the 
quarterfinals. Baldwin Park beat previously undefeated Santa Margarita, 13-7, 
last week. 
Division V 
NORCO (12-1) vs. 
ETIWANDA (12-0) 
At Citrus College 
Tonight at 7:30 
Etiwanda has a distinct advantage tonight because it didn't have to play last 
week. The school's scheduled semifinal game against El Centro Central was 
canceled because it had used an academically ineligible player during the 
playoffs. Etiwanda received an automatic bye and was charged with a home game. 
Norco beat Palm Desert, 36-28. 
Both schools are playing in the finals for the first time. Top-seeded Etiwanda 
is led by running back William Taukieaho, the Hacienda League player of the 
year. Norco linebacker Shay Muirbrook is equally as talented on defense. 
Division VI 
TUSTIN (13-0) vs. 
FULLERTON SUNNY HILLS (10-3) 
At Orange Coast College 
Tonight at 7:30 
Tustin hasn't played in a football championship game since 1948, when it 
defeated Vista, 20-13. This season has been one to remember, however. The 
Tillers went undefeated and are seeded No. 1 in the division. Tustin is coached 
by Marijon Ancich, the winningest active coach in the section. 
Sunny Hills lost three of its first five games before turning things around in 
midseason to win the Freeway League. It beat Savanna, Newport Harbor and 
Valencia in the playoffs. 
Division VII 
LOMPOC (12-1) vs. 
ARROYO GRANDE (11-1) 
At Cal Poly San Luis Obispo 
Tonight at 7:30 
The biggest worry tonight is whether the stadium at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo is 
big enough to handle the expected crowd of 10,000. The game is a battle between 
Northern League rivals. Lompoc defeated Arroyo Grande, 35-24, in the 
regular-season finale on Nov. 9 to win the league title. 
Arroyo Grande has been impressive in the playoffs, stunning top-seeded Serra, 
31-0, last week to end the Cavaliers' 24-game winning streak. Lompoc, led by 
All-American running back Napolean Kaufman, is returning to the finals after 
losing to Serra in last year's championship game 
Division VIII 
PALOS VERDES (8-5) at 
TEMECULA VALLEY (10-3) 
Saturday at 7:30 p.m. 
After starting the season 3-0, Palos Verdes lost five of its next six games, 
including a four-game losing streak in which the team was shut out twice. The 
Sea Kings finished third in the Ocean League but have been impressive in the 
playoffs with victories over Santa Paula, Bloomington and top-seeded Cabrillo. 
Palos Verdes hasn't won a football title since 1965. 
Temecula Valley, which beat Palos Verdes' rivals Rolling Hills, West Torrance 
and Morningside in the playoffs, is led by multipurpose running back Ronnie 
Long, who has scored 20 touchdowns, rushed for 907 yards and caught 32 passes. 
The Bears are in the finals for the first time since the school opened six 
years ago. 
Division IX 
WHITTIER CHRISTIAN (12-0) vs 
TEHACHAPI (12-1) 
At Bakersfield College 
Saturday at 7:30 p.m. 
These are two of the most dominant schools in lower-division football. 
Tehachapi is making its fourth consecutive trip to the finals and seventh since 
1980. Whittier Christian won sectional championships in 1979, '83 and '84. The 
game was originally scheduled at Tehachapi High but was moved to Bakersfield 
when Whittier Christian administrators convinced the Southern Section that it 
would need a bigger stadium for all of its fans. 
Both teams are hungry for a title, because Tehachapi lost to Carpinteria in 
last year's championship game and Whittier Christian was eliminated in the 
quarterfinals by Bishop. 
Division X 
MALIBU CAMP KILPATRICK (9-3-1) 
vs. VAN NUYS MONTCLAIR PREP (9-3) 
At Valley College 
Tonight at 7:30 
Two teams that each have won eight consecutive games meet for the first time in 
the first Division X title game. Both teams won easily in the semifinals, 
Montclair Prep defeating Village Christian, 34-0, and Camp Kilpatrick beating 
Mammoth, 52-20. 
Montclair Prep is led by Eliel Swinton, who has gained 1,716 yards. Camp 
Kilpatrick's threat is Michael Black, who has rushed for 1,969 yards and 25 
touchdowns. 
