NBA ROUNDUP; 
EXPANSION TEAMS LOSE LIKE VETERANS 
The new boys on the NBA block don't seem to understand. Expansion teams are 
supposed to be dreadful. They are composed of the dregs, the leftovers. 
What they are expected to do is pay big money for a franchise, but not become 
competitive for at least two or three years. 
A prime example was last year's Miami Heat. They were what expansion is all 
about. They lost their first 17 games and won only four of their first 42. 
Somebody forgot to inform the Minnesota Timberwolves and the Orlando Magic. 
They are doing much more than just winning an occasional game. They are "in" 
just about every game. 
Orlando has already beaten the New York Knicks and the Lakers, among others. 
The Timberwolves have played in tough luck. 
They have won only five of 19 games. But, they have lost four games by three or 
fewer points and every loss but one has been decided in the last quarter or in 
overtime. 
The Timberwolves turned in a typical game Tuesday night at Indianapolis. They 
built a 12-point lead in the third quarter against the Central Division leader 
and finally lost in a wild overtime battle, 113-112. 
In the end, the sharpshooting of Chuck Person and Reggie Miller was too much 
for Minnesota to overcome. Person, after missing a three-point shot with seven 
seconds left in the extra period, put in the rebound of his own miss to score 
the decisive points. 
Pooh Richardson's three-pointer with 1.8 seconds remaining left the 
Timberwolves short again. 
The Timberwolves may be even better when Steve Johnson, who recently ended his 
holdout, gets in shape. 
Milwaukee 106, Orlando 103 -- The Magic also played a big game on the road and 
dropped a tough one, falling to 8-12. 
Jay Humphries made two free throws with six seconds remaining at Milwaukee to 
hold off the Magic. Jerry Reynold's three-pointer at the buzzer that would have 
sent the game into overtime, bounced off the back rim. 
Paul Pressey led the Bucks with 20 points and sank a jumper and two free throws 
in the last 39 seconds. 
The Bucks held a 12-point lead in the third quarter, but Reggie Theus led the 
late surge by Orlando, getting nine of his 23 points in the last quarter. 
Reynolds led both teams with 26 points. 
Chicago 105, Dallas 97 -- The Bulls are fortunate. Whatever they need -- -- 
rebounding, scoring, defense or playmaking -- -- they have one player who can 
provide it -- -- Michael Jordan. 
When point guard John Paxson went out in the third quarter with a leg injury, 
Jordan became the playmaker at Chicago. 
Jordan, handling the ball, scored 21 of his 41 points in the fourth quarter to 
enable the Bulls to hold off the closing rush of the Mavericks. 
Detroit 121, Denver 108 -- It was probably the most impressive performance by 
the NBA champions this season. 
They spotted the Nuggets, who had won all nine home games, a 16-point lead in 
the second quarter, then won going away.. 
Joe Dumars led the comeback. After Denver went ahead, 50-34, Dumars scored 10 
of the Pistons' next 14 points. With the Nuggets going scoreless for almost six 
minutes, the lead was only two at halftime. 
It became a rout when the Pistons hit their first seven shots in the fourth 
quarter. 
Atlanta 102, San Antonio 94 -- David Robinson was in foul trouble early and, 
despite a valiant effort, the Spurs couldn't stop the Hawks' hot streak at 
Atlanta. 
The Spurs led most of the way, but Moses Malone and Glenn Rivers took control 
in the last quarter. Malone had 24 points and nine rebounds. Robinson had 14 
points and nine rebounds in just 30 minutes. 
New Jersey 97, Philadelphia 82 -- Dennis Hopson scored 14 of his 24 points in a 
40-17 second-half run at East Rutherford, N.J., that carried the Nets to 
victory. 
Charles Barkley, finally recovered from a virus, had 33 points and 17 rebounds 
to keep the 76ers from being routed. 
Houston 105, Phoenix -- Akeem Olajuwon came out of a mild slump at Houston and 
the Rockets ended a four-game losing streak. 
Olajuwon had 25 points and 20 rebounds and blocked nine shots. It was the big 
center's third game this season in which he had at least 20 rebounds. 
Golden State 118, Sacramento 103 -- Last Friday night at Oakland, the Warriors 
built a 13-point lead on the Kings, then blew the game. 
In this game at Sacramento, the Warriors built a lead and expanded it. They 
went on to win their first road game after nine defeats. DAN HAFNER 
