MIT RESEARCHERS IDENTIFY 'MASTER BUILDER' GENE; 
SCIENCE: THE GENE CONTROLS THE BODY'S DISEASE-FIGHTING PROCESS. THE DISCOVERY 
HAS NO IMMEDIATE MEDICAL APPLICATION, BUT COULD LEAD TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
DRUGS THAT WOULD FINE-TUNE THE IMMUNE SYSTEM. 
Molecular biologists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology report that 
they have isolated and identified the "master builder" gene that controls the 
disease-fighting process, marshaling its forces like a general preparing to 
repel an enemy invasion. 
The discovery, reported in today's Cell journal, should provide fundamental new 
insights into how the immune system functions, according to pathologist Michael 
Lieber of Stanford University. "I would think it would be one of the top 10 . . 
. discoveries in immunology," Lieber said. 
"It is a remarkable technical achievement, an extremely elegant piece of 
science," added molecular immunologist Frederick Alt of Columbia University in 
New York City. "We now have in hand the tools to dissect the system that is 
involved in the assembly of antibody genes. We'll make a tremendous amount of 
progress in the next year." 
The discovery of how this process is controlled has no immediate medical 
application, but the finding could eventually lead to the development of drugs 
that would fine-tune the immune system. Even further off, it might lead to ways 
to repair the ravages of the immune system caused by the AIDS virus. 
Over a lifetime, a human encounters literally tens of thousands of different 
infectious bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites. Most of the time, these 
encounters are benign because humans have evolved a remarkable immune mechanism 
that, at any given time, posts more than 100,000 unique sentries to identify 
the invaders and sound the warning call for their destruction. 
Surprisingly, the body's genetic repertoire does not have a set of genes that 
serve as blueprints for each of these sentries, called B cells. Instead, it has 
a small library of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) fragments that are constantly 
being chopped up, shuffled and recombined to produce millions of different B 
cells over the course of a lifetime. 
Defects in the gene may be responsible for some of the genetic diseases that 
produce a non-functioning immune system, such as that suffered by David, the 
"bubble boy" in Houston who spent all of his short life in a plastic-enclosed, 
sterile environment. 
Defects might also lead to the formation of tumors of the immune system. 
Some biologists believe that a similar shuffling and recombining process may 
play a role in the differentiation of unspecialized cells in the early embryo 
into specialized cells in various organs, particularly in the brain and nervous 
and sensory systems. The gene that has been identified could be used as a probe 
to locate such genes in other systems. 
Biologists have long puzzled over the riddle of how the body could generate the 
large number of individual antibody-secreting cells that are known to exist in 
the immune system. Immunologist Susumu Tonegawa of Japan solved that in the 
early 1980s by demonstrating that a small genetic library could be constantly 
reshuffled and recombined to produce the necessary number of antibodies -- a 
feat for which he won the 1989 Nobel Prize for Medicine. 
"Since then, we have learned surprisingly little" about how the body achieves 
this rearrangement, said molecular biologist David Baltimore of MIT's Whitehead 
Institute for Biomedical Research, the leader of the team that isolated the 
gene. "This is the first step toward finding a chemical basis of diversity." 
Baltimore and two graduate students, David G. Schatz and Marjorie A. Oettinger, 
isolated the gene from human white blood cells. They were able to prove the 
gene's function by inserting it into cultured skin cells, which -- like all 
cells in the body other than immune cells -- cannot normally carry out the 
shuffling and recombination process. 
After the gene was inserted, the skin cells were able to do so, Oettinger said 
in a telephone interview. 
The researchers still do not know precisely how the gene functions, however. In 
fact, there are two possibilities. 
One is that the gene codes for an enzyme called recombinase. That enzyme, 
Lieber said, is a "molecular surgeon" that actually carries out the cutting and 
recombining process. 
Alternatively, the gene could operate at the genetic level, orchestrating the 
entire recombination process by turning on and off the genes for recombinase 
and other components of the system. 
For a variety of reasons, the MIT group believes that the gene is the blueprint 
for the recombinase, Oettinger said. But either way, she said, "It is going to 
teach us a lot more about the basic science of the immune system." 
