DEMISE OF WESTLAKE THRIFT CITED AS CLASSIC BANK FRAUD; 
SAVINGS AND LOANS: INVESTIGATION INTO RISE AND FALL OF LENDING INSTITUTION 
UNCOVERS LARGE-SCALE FRAUD SCHEME INVOLVING MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN BOGUS LOANS. 
The first years of the 1980s were a boom time for Westlake Thrift &amp; Loan of 
Westlake Village as it grew into a company of more than 100 employees with 
almost $100 million in assets. 
Automobile loans were a company specialty. The word was out that Westlake 
Thrift virtually wanted to corner the car-loan market in Ventura County, and it 
almost succeeded. 
"They grew by taking a lot of low-quality loans. They were writing $64 million 
in auto loans a year," one government official said. "An 18-year-old kid with 
no credit could finance a new Cadillac through Westlake, and every car dealer 
in the county knew it." 
But something was drastically wrong. In July, 1988, Westlake Thrift went out of 
business. Federal regulators gave no reason for the collapse, and the exact 
nature of the company's many problems was not initially disclosed. 
What also was not disclosed at the time was that much more than questionable 
banking practices was involved in both the rise and fall of Westlake Thrift. 
An FBI investigation already was well under way into allegations that at least 
one bank official was part of a large-scale fraud scheme involving millions of 
dollars in bogus loans -- some of them written to people who never existed. 
Last week, the story of Westlake Thrift's demise became clearer as the 
financial institution's former president, Steven Smith, 46, of Thousand Oaks, 
pleaded guilty in federal court in Los Angeles to charges of conspiracy, fraud 
and misapplication of bank funds. 
Even as Smith was entering his guilty pleas, the FBI and the U.S. attorney's 
office in Los Angeles were pressing forward with their inquiry into Westlake 
Thrift, as well as the activities of some officials of the thrift's parent 
company, United Community Bank of Thousand Oaks. 
It is too early to say where the investigation will lead, officials said. 
Already, however, court documents and interviews provide a detailed account of 
what went wrong. 
In sketching the anatomy of a thrift and loan collapse, federal officials begin 
the story with Walter Vladovich, 55, a Riverside businessman who allegedly set 
out in the mid-1980s to build the largest chain of video stores in the nation. 
Vladovich, the lead defendant in a 26-count federal bank fraud indictment 
returned earlier this month, has pleaded not guilty to all charges that he 
conspired with Smith and others to set up the phony loan scheme. He is awaiting 
trial in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles. 
But, according to Assistant U.S. Atty. David C. Scheper, Vladovich and Smith 
were the central figures in a fraudulent scheme in which $4 million in loans 
from Westlake Thrift were channeled into a Riverside company called Leader 
Video. 
A variety of sources said Vladovich, who also owned a mortgage firm called 
Pioneer Acceptance Corp. of Riverside, allegedly began his fraudulent 
activities in 1984 with a banker named Henry Schneider, vice president of First 
United Thrift &amp; Loan of San Francisco. 
Vladovich is accused of submitting false loan packages to Schneider for video 
store franchises that supposedly were going to be operated by some of his own 
employees and others. 
"At first, he sold some legitimate stores, then he coerced employees to submit 
paper work that they were buying the stores," one source told The Times. 
"Schneider helped him get 38 or 40 loans in all. Vladovich was the one actually 
making the payments and keeping the money." 
The arrangement between Vladovich and Schneider allegedly lasted about a year. 
Scheper said Vladovich received about $550,000 in loans and paid $15,000 in 
bribes to Schneider. Scheper said Schneider has agreed to plead guilty to three 
counts of conspiracy and fraud. 
First United ultimately was absorbed by a larger bank, however, and the loans 
to Vladovich were stopped in 1985. About that time, sources said, Schneider 
introduced Vladovich to Westlake Thrift officials. 
After meeting Smith, who then was a vice president of Westlake Thrift, 
Vladovich allegedly came up with a different scheme that involved obtaining 
$5,000 loan packages through Pioneer Acceptance. 
The loan packages were submitted to Westlake Thrift on behalf of people who 
supposedly were going to buy 48 video movies and video equipment with which to 
launch their own video store businesses -- a tiny inventory that alone would 
have warned off serious investors. 
In fact, according to federal officials, Vladovich initially enlisted 
applicants for the loans by telling them that he would give them $1,000 in 
video equipment for the use of their names and would make the actual 
$200-a-month loan payments. 
In exchange, officials said, Vladovich kept the $5,000 loans from Westlake. 
As one source described it: "What Vladovich told customers was: 'I'm trying to 
go public on the New York Stock Exchange. To do that, I need 100 stores. I'm a 
wealthy man. I've got enough money to do it myself, but it's tied up. If you 
fill out the loan application, you won't have any problems. I'll make the 
payments for you and give you $1,000 worth of video equipment.' " 
According to Scheper, Vladovich and his sales people processed more than 800 
loans worth about $4 million. He allegedly used some of the money to pay 
himself a $1,800-a-month salary and to cover his business operating expenses. 
"In the beginning, the loan applicants were real people," one source said. 
"Some of the first people Vladovich contacted were California Highway Patrol 
officers in the San Bernardino area. He made a pitch to about 35 of them and 
got them signed up for the free video stuff. 
"The problem was that the highway patrol people were asking too many 
questions," the source added. "They also were too demanding in terms of the 
kinds of free TVs and VCRs that they wanted." 
From the start, a variety of sources said, Vladovich put heavy pressure on his 
sales staff to write an increasing number of loan applications. The pressure 
allegedly increased when Vladovich needed additional funding for another 
business venture, a novelty company called Bric-a-Brac. 
"The salesmen had signed up members of their families by this point, and 
Vladovich was making the payments for them," one source said. "They started 
going to shopping malls and getting names from shoppers. It reached the point 
where they would make up Social Security numbers and submit the loans for 
fictitious people." 
Westlake Thrift, meanwhile, still was enjoying its boom period. Smith was in 
charge of the loan deals with Vladovich, and everything still looked good on 
paper. 
"It's not exactly clear when Smith knew these were bad loan packages," a source 
said. "By 1986, however, he knew that Vladovich was making the payments. In 
early 1987, he demanded a meeting, and Vladovich said he wasn't buying the 48 
movies that were supposed to be part of the deal. 
"Smith told him that if he missed a payment, the loans would be cut off. 
Vladovich said that if he did, they would go down together, and Westlake would 
lose more than $1 million in outstanding loans," a source added. 
Despite that confrontation, the indictment filed in U.S. District Court shows 
that the loan arrangement continued through the first half of 1987. Smith, 
however, began to distance himself from Vladovich, no longer personally signing 
the checks to Pioneer Acceptance. 
By this time, state banking regulators had begun to look at other questionable 
loan practices by Westlake Thrift. And, in July, 1987, a Westlake Thrift 
official named Chet Adams gained access to the Vladovich files and blew the 
whistle internally to other bank officers. 
Not only had the FBI investigation into criminal fraud begun, but the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corp. was beginning an inquiry of its own that eventually led 
to the forced closure of the firm. 
Smith's relationship with Vladovich effectively was ended. But the banker 
continued on a course that was destined to add to his problems. In late 1987, 
according to the indictment, he compounded his troubles by misappropriating 
$24,500 in bank funds, allegedly giving $5,000 to a female acquaintance in 
Orange County. 
While Vladovich still faces trial, and Smith and the others indicted so far 
have not been sentenced, the guilty pleas by Smith and Vladovich's former sales 
force already have led some law enforcement agencies to view the investigation 
of Westlake Thrift as "a classic takedown" in a bank fraud case. 
"Bank failure cases, particularly those resulting from fraud, are enormously 
difficult to investigate and prosecute," said Gary Auer, special agent in 
charge of the FBI's Ventura office. 
"This case is a classic example of the kind of fraud that has taken place 
throughout the country," Auer said. "It shows that this is not just something 
that happens to people in other places, but can take place right here." 
