KIROV DEBUT FOR REV. MOON'S PRIMA BALLERINA; 
BALLET: RELIGIOUS LEADER SAYS HIS DAUGHTER-IN-LAW'S PERFORMANCE IN 'GISELLE' IN 
LENINGRAD WILL BE AN 'IMPORTANT MOMENT' IN HIS RELATIONS WITH THE SOVIETS. 
The daughter-in-law of vehement anti-communist South Korean religious leader 
Sun Myung Moon is scheduled to make her debut Friday night in Leningrad with 
the famed Kirov Ballet company. The performance may represent the most visible 
effort to date by the Rev. Moon and his Unification Church to use the 
international dance community to extend his religious and political influence. 
Moon's interest in the arts goes back at least two decades, but Friday's 
scheduled performance by Korean-American Julia Hoon Sook Moon promises to be a 
major turning point in the artistic and political fortunes of the controversial 
religious leader, his church and the dancer herself. 
Moon, who plans to attend his daughter-in-law's performances on Friday and 
Sunday, has called the event an "important moment" in his personal quest to 
improve relations with the Soviet Union. 
Moon and the church are taking other steps in this direction: 
* Officials of the Unification Church have directed the unheralded career of 
Julia Moon. They have paid some of the world's top dancers to coach and perform 
with her since 1984, when she was chosen to marry Moon's dead son, who, 
according to church doctrine, could not enter heaven unmarried. 
* Within months of the marriage, Moon founded the Universal Ballet Company in 
Seoul, where his daughter-in-law is now principal ballerina. 
* Two years ago, Moon and Julia Moon's father, Bo Hi Pak, a longtime friend and 
top aide to the religious leader, established the Universal Ballet Foundation 
in Washington. From its complex in Washington, the foundation functions as a 
kind of central casting office for the Seoul dance company, and there are plans 
to establish a ballet school. 
* Moon and Pak are renovating the Manhattan Center Opera House in New York as a 
theater for future performances of the Universal Ballet Company. 
* And, along with the Universal Ballet in Seoul, Pak and Moon run the Little 
Angels Children's Folk Ballet, which was also founded by Moon more than 30 
years ago. The group began touring the United States in the early 1960s, and 
Pak used its performances to make contacts with influential Americans such as 
former President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Harry S. Truman. 
Relatively little is known about the internal operations of Moon's dance 
interests in Korea, the United States and, now, the Soviet Union. It is also 
unclear exactly how the various dance pursuits fit within Moon's broader 
political and religious goals of establishing a worldwide, unified church and 
state with himself as its spiritual and governmental head. 
But a congressional subcommittee that investigated the Korean influence-buying 
scandal of the mid-1970s concluded that "Moon made it clear that the Little 
Angels (Children's Folk Ballet) . . . and other seemingly philanthropic 
projects were, in reality, geared to his ambitious and carefully thought-out 
plans for winning control and influence over other political and secular 
institutions." 
And now, with Julia Moon and the Kirov, Moon is looking beyond his traditional 
North American and Asian bases of influence to the newly opening Soviet Bloc. 
To announce Julia Moon's debut a group called the World Media Assn. took out a 
full-page ad in the Dec. 3 New York Times featuring a picture of Moon and a 
recent question-answer interview that he gave to a Soviet journalist. Moon 
called the performance a landmark in his daughter-in-law's career and "an 
important moment in the development of my personal contact with the Soviet 
Union." 
"I want to assure the people of the Soviet Union that Rev. Moon is your 
friend," he said. "My movement in 130 countries is your friend as well." 
Julia Moon, 24, virtually unknown outside a narrow circle within the dance 
world, is scheduled to make her Kirov debut Friday in "Giselle," which is to 
ballet what "Hamlet" is to theater. She's unknown to Andris Liepa, the Bolshoi 
Ballet star who will dance opposite her as a Kirov guest. She's unknown to 
Kirov artistic director Oleg Vinogradov, who invited her to perform without 
ever meeting her. 
And she's unknown to her husband, already dead when the Rev. Moon performed the 
marriage ceremony in 1984 with the ballerina and his son, who had been killed 
at age 17 in a car accident. 
Until the announcement of her Kirov debut, few had ever heard the name Julia 
Hoon Sook Pak Moon -- except those who have coached and partnered her. But the 
dancer -- American in speech and manner and reserved to the point of shyness, 
according to those who have worked with her -- has since childhood quietly 
dedicated herself to the study of ballet. 
Julia Moon grew up largely in MacLean, Va., just outside Washington. It is 
there and in New York that her father oversees affairs of the Unification 
Church. 
She began her ballet training in Korea at the Sun Hwa Art School, then in 
London at the Royal Ballet School. She went to Monaco to learn from the Russian 
teacher Marika Besobrasova, then became a company member at the Washington 
Ballet. 
She has been partnered by such internationally known danseurs as Fernando 
Bujones, Kevin McKenzie, Ross Stretton, the late Patrick Bissell and Gregory 
Osborne. 
Osborne spoke positively about Moon, mentioning "her serene quality." He said 
that he danced "Giselle" with her and that her "best moments come in the second 
act." 
Julia Moon would not be interviewed, despite repeated requests. But talks with 
those who have worked and performed with her indicate that five years ago 
everything in her life and career changed. 
"The company was on an Asian tour," recalled Mary Day, who had accepted her 
into the Washington Ballet two years earlier in 1982. "Hoon Sook received a 
phone call from Korea, summoning her there for a family emergency . . . to 
marry Rev. Moon's 17-year-old son . . . who had just been killed in an auto 
crash. 
"We were nonplussed at what happened," said Day, recounting the church tenets 
as explained to her by the new bride: one must be married to ascend to heaven. 
"Hoon Sook returned to us briefly, and then left again for Korea." 
"Julia is very modest," said Roy Tobias by phone from Seoul, where he serves as 
Universal Ballet's artistic director, "and lacks confidence in herself. The 
Kirov invitation, though, is just part of a whole series of exchanges that her 
father, Dr. Pak, is trying to negotiate now. If all goes as planned, we'll be 
having members of the Kirov as guest artists in February." 
Last summer, according to Pak's spokeswoman Caroline Betancourt, Pak sent a 
video of his daughter's dancing to Vinogradov when the Kirov played in New 
York. The Kirov director visited Seoul last October, and the two met for the 
first time and finalized plans for the Kirov's Korean tour in 1991. Vinogradov 
also approved Julia Moon's appearance as a guest dancer in Leningrad. 
It was in New York last summer that Liepa, Moon's partner-to-be at the Kirov, 
met Vinogradov. "We discussed my coming to Leningrad," Liepa said by phone from 
Moscow, where his mother lives. "When he asked if I would like to do 'Giselle' 
with a Korean ballerina, I agreed." 
The blond dancer, son of the late Maris Liepa, is under contract with American 
Ballet Theatre. He said he still has not met Moon but "was told (by those at 
ABT who knew her) that she is a very nice person and a beautiful girl." 
Skeptical observers in the dance world find the prospect of Julia Moon dancing 
at the Kirov bizarre, especially in this major role. 
"Completely mystifying," said Georgina Parkinson, ABT ballet mistress, who had 
been hired in 1986 to coach Moon and others at the Universal Ballet Company in 
Seoul. 
"I went there many times and simply cannot imagine how this whole thing came 
about. Julia is lovely, positively lovely. She's had the benefit of everything 
money could buy, in the way of training. But I don't think she could ever 
become a dancer for the world market." 
Nor does ballet mistress Gloria Fokine, who was also employed by the small 
troupe and paid $20,000 for three months' work. "In any major company she would 
be a member of the corps de ballet," said the Cuban-born niece of choreographer 
Michel Fokine. "Maybe prima ballerina in (the boondocks of) Vladivostok. Her 
line is OK, but she doesn't have a strong technique and leaves a lot to be 
desired in the acting department." 
Parkinson, who has also staged "Les Sylphides" in Seoul ("for a very nice fee") 
is among several others imported from ABT to enhance Universal Ballet. In fact, 
most of Moon's stellar partners listed in her biography appeared with the 
Universal Ballet Company. None would reveal fees but Parkinson said that "it 
takes big bait to go all the way to Korea." 
"Most people are agog at the physical beauty (of the Universal Ballet's 
facility)," Fokine said. "The theater itself is fabulous -- a fortune must have 
gone into it. In fact, the whole complex -- which includes several school 
buildings (for art, music and dance integrated with academics) and lush gardens 
is quite something. All that white marble, it's dazzling." 
Fokine was disturbed, however, by the atmosphere at the Seoul facility -- 
which, to her, reflected the cult nature long ascribed to Moon's Unification 
Church. 
She did not accept further teaching offers in Seoul "because it was just too 
scary, and I'm talking about a mind-control cult . . . where brainwashing is 
accomplished through a regimen of little sleep and skimpy diets. Before each 
performance someone at the loudspeaker calls the company to prayer. They all 
congregate, hold hands and pray." 
Except for the outsiders, Fokine said that most of the teachers are "Moonies." 
Moon encourages his followers to call him "Father" and heed his directives "no 
matter what." Fokine also said that "most of this is kept quiet to the point of 
denial. They've even taken the Rev. Moon's name out of the program." 
The church rejects its reputation as a cult. But currently the Supreme Court is 
hearing a damages trial against the Unification Church for allegedly having 
used trickery and brainwashing to recruit two young members. 
The church has amassed great wealth through double tithing of its members and 
enormous profits from its real estate and media holdings -- the Pak-overseen 
News World Communications, a holding company that owns the Washington Times, 
Noticias del Mundo (which was sold in Los Angeles) and other newspapers. In 
1985, the French newspaper Le Monde estimated the church's worldwide annual 
profits at about $700 million. 
The church has a worldwide membership of 2 million to 3 million and a budget 
estimated by church officials at between $50 million and $100 million in the 
United States. Church officials say there are 55,000 members in the States. 
In 1984, Moon served an 11-month prison sentence in the United States for 
income tax evasion. 
Neither Moon nor Pak was available for comment to The Times. 
"I can't seem to locate any of them," said Caroline Betancourt, their public 
relations officer at Universal Artists Management. And they are elusive through 
other channels. A secretary in Pak's New York office said she "has worked here 
for four months without ever seeing or speaking on the phone to him." 
One who did comment on the relationship between the church and the dance 
academy was Jeffrey Benson, spokesman for the Universal Ballet Foundation. He 
denied any connection. "No church doctrines are taught here," he said. "We are 
not affiliated. Our only goal is to train dancers for the highest artistic 
attainment." 
