CONFUSION DURING TALK WITH DISPATCHER MAY HAVE LEAD TO SLAYING BY S.D. OFFICER 
Police maintained Friday that the girlfriend of a man shot and killed by police 
a day earlier in South San Diego had told a dispatcher that the man was armed. 
But Lori Crosson said in a televised interview that, because she was trying to 
talk to the dispatcher and her irate boyfriend at the same time, the operator 
misunderstood her about whether her boyfriend had a weapon or gun. 
Richard W. Cross Jr. was shot by Paul Wright, 39, a 13-year police veteran, 
police said Friday. It was the first time the name of the officer who killed 
Cross was revealed. 
Also on Friday, police identified the officer who shot and killed a suspect 
during a drug raid Wednesday as Detective Don Watkins, 38, also a 13-year 
veteran. That victim, who reportedly was slain while reaching for a gun, has 
not been identified. 
In the Cross slaying, a police emergency operator called Crosson when her 
number appeared on the dispatcher's screen after a "911 hang-up" -- an 
emergency call where the caller hangs up instead of making a complaint, Lt. Dan 
Berglund said. 
The operator asked Crosson if she had called 911, if the man was hitting her, 
if the man had a weapon, and if he had a gun. Crosson's response was yes to all 
the questions, Berglund said. Crosson replied no when asked if she could talk 
at the time. 
Crosson was crying and a man was heard yelling in the background, Berglund 
said. "You could hear this guy yelling, 'I know who you're talking to,' " the 
voice said. 
The dispatch went out as a domestic disturbance, and Cross was reported to have 
a gun, Berglund said. 
Wright and other officers then approached the apartment in the 2200 block of 
Palm Avenue, announced they were police, and pushed open the door Berglund 
said. Cross turned toward the door and Wright fired a single shot, striking 
Cross in the arm and chest. 
"At that time, the officer realized (Cross) was unarmed and immediately started 
to render first aid," he said. 
"The woman called 911, asked for an ambulance and said the police had just shot 
her husband -- she referred to him as her husband -- and said it was an 
accident," Berglund said. "That was her initial statement." 
The only weapon found in the apartment was a knife, he said. 
"The Buck knife was found in a clothes basket, lying right on top of it, which 
was lying next to (Cross') right leg," Berglund said. "He could have had it and 
dropped it, I don't know." 
But Crosson discredited the knife as Cross' weapon in the televised interview, 
saying the police might as well bring up her kitchen knife. 
