NEA DISASTER RELIEF PACKAGE FOR THE BAY AREA; 
THE ARTS: AN EMERGENCY MATCHING GRANT IS DESIGNED TO HELP ARTISTS AND ARTS 
FACILITIES RECOVER FROM THE RAVAGES OF THE OCT. 17 EARTHQUAKE. 
San Francisco artists and arts institutions will share $550,000 in National 
Endowment for the Arts emergency funds in a matching-grant program announced 
Wednesday that will also include more than $1.6 million in private 
earthquake-relief monies. 
The unusual endowment grant is part of a total of $947,000 in emergency 
disaster relief grants announced by the agency. The rest of the money is 
earmarked for arts centers in South Carolina, Puerto Rico and the Virgin 
Islands that were damaged by Hurricane Hugo. 
"Despite assistance from federal, state and city agencies, the arts community 
in the Bay Area remains without significant resources for recouping its losses 
and beginning the recovery process," said endowment Chairman John E. Frohnmayer 
in announcing the emergency package. 
The endowment disaster relief package includes a proviso that $3 in non-federal 
money must be raised for every dollar of federal support. The provision -- the 
endowment's standard matching-grant criterion -- is intended to significantly 
increase the overall arts assistance. 
In San Francisco, the federal arts disaster funds will be administered by the 
San Francisco Foundation, a private group that established the Bay Area Arts 
Recovery Fund in the wake of the October temblor. The Oct. 17 quake devastated 
many older buildings in the Bay Area that housed studio and living spaces for 
hundreds of artists, musicians and performers. 
Major contributions have already been received from a foundation operated by 
the owners of the Mervyn's and Target department store chains, the City of San 
Francisco and several local foundations. Christine Elbel, coordinator of the 
arts recovery fund, said the California Arts Council is also helping to raise 
money and that arts officials hope to be able to distribute a total of $2.2 
million, beginning sometime next month. 
Elbel said three major areas for arts assistance have been targeted: the 
American Contemporary Theater in San Francisco; Santa Cruz County, the 
epicenter of the quake; the rest of the Bay Area, including San Francisco and 
Oakland. The American Contemporary Theater sustained $1 million in operating 
losses because of major structural damage to its theater, forcing the company 
to move all productions in its next two seasons to alternate quarters. The 
temblor occurred just as ACT was preparing for the sold-out final weeks of 
"Right Mind," by writer-producer-director George Coates. 
Elbel said the bulk of the new federal and private money will be channeled to 
individual artists and performers and to small and mid-sized arts 
organizations. Large, established Bay Area arts institutions -- including the 
region's major museums, the San Francisco Opera and other major arts centers -- 
apparently have the greatest ability to raise their own recovery funds, she 
said. 
Margie O'Driscoll, liaison for the arts to San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos, said 
the overall earthquake relief package "is really quite a fantastic gesture." 
O'Driscoll said the funds would play an especially important role in helping 
individual artists and performers who have difficulty meeting rigid criteria 
for Small Business Administration loans. 
Endowment funds earmarked in several categories for arts centers hurt by 
Hurricane Hugo include $200,000 would be earmarked for the City of Charleston, 
S.C., office of cultural affairs, and $100,000 for the South Carolina Arts 
Commission. Smaller amounts were earmarked for arts centers in Puerto Rico and 
the Virgin Islands. 
