WATER BOARD FINALLY HAS SOLUTION TO HUGE TOXIC SPILL; 
POLLUTION: A MILES-LONG CHEMICAL MESS UNDERNEATH IRVINE WILL BE CLEANED UP BY A 
STATE-OF-THE-ART SYSTEM. BUT THE COUNTY AND THE MARINE CORPS ARE STILL ARGUING 
OVER THE BILL. 
A $1.1-million system to remove a huge underground chemical spill was unveiled 
Friday by county water officials after five years of frustration, negotiation 
and costly investigations. 
The first of its kind in the nation, the ground-water cleanup system will pump 
out 1 million gallons of contaminated water a day from underneath Irvine and 
cleanse it of trichloroethylene, or TCE, a suspected cancer-causing chemical. 
The project -- which has pitted local water officials against the U.S. Marine 
Corps -- has been one of the most contentious and longest-running efforts to 
resolve a water-pollution problem in Orange County history. 
William Mills, general manager of the Orange County Water District, which has 
overseen the project, said he is relieved that the area's water supply is 
finally being protected, especially during California's long drought. 
But the water agency and state environmental agencies remain convinced that the 
money should have come from the Marine Corps, not from county water users and 
the city of Irvine. The Marines, however, remain unconvinced that their base in 
El Toro, which is on the federal Superfund list of the nation's worst toxic 
sites, is the sole source of the chemical. 
The underground spill -- which apparently stretches for three miles and is the 
largest every pinpointed in the county -- has been moving toward nearby wells 
that provide drinking water. 
The project is one of six innovative systems that the OCWD will launch by 1992 
to clean up millions of gallons of Orange County ground water contaminated by a 
variety of sources, ranging from old agricultural runoff to industrial 
chemicals. 
The new facility unveiled Friday in an orange grove near the corner of Irvine 
Center Drive and Jeffrey Road is pumping out the contaminated water and 
stopping it from spreading. The water will be used to irrigate Irvine 
landscaping and crops. 
The water is being removed by a well, then routed through a system using a 
technology called rotary aeration that spins the water and removes the TCE. Air 
is then blown through the system, and subjected to an ultraviolet and oxidizing 
process that converts the TCE to carbon dioxide and water. 
No other plant in the United States combines these water- and air-purifying 
technologies, according to William Salomons, a consultant for Ecolo-Flo, the 
system's designer. The new technology will probably soon be used throughout the 
nation to clean up polluted water, he added. 
Originally, the water agency planned last year to use the TCE-tainted water for 
agricultural fields without removing the chemical because it posed minimal risk 
to residents. But the Irvine City Council was adamant about removing the 
pollutant first, and the city provided OCWD $450,000 in capital and $30,000 in 
annual operating expenses. 
No mention was made during Friday's ceremony about the long conflict between 
the Marine Corps and water officials, but speakers did allude vaguely to the 
years of roadblocks. 
The cleanup project has been "subject to a lot of sources of frustration," said 
Jerry Thibeault, executive officer of the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality 
Control Board, the arm of state government responsible for enforcing 
water-pollution laws. 
"This effort to identify a responsible party has been and will continue to be a 
pretty slow process," he said. 
In 1985, OCWD discovered the chemical in two Irvine wells that provide 
irrigation water for crops. The wells are next to the El Toro Marine Corps Air 
Station, and the water quality board issued a cleanup order to the Marines. 
But several years of negotiations failed to persuade the Marine Corps to clean 
it up, so the OCWD board decided to act because it feared that the spill 
jeopardized millions of dollars' worth of Orange County's drinkable water. 
Marine Corps officials agree that the chemical leaked from the air station, but 
they maintain that there is inadequate proof that all the TCE under Irvine 
seeped from their base. TCE is a solvent that was widely used for cleaning 
engine parts until it was discovered to be a carcinogen. 
Marine Col. Jack Wagner said Friday that the resolution is now in the hands of 
the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
