FORAY FOR PANAMA'S DEMOCRACY WOUNDS CONSTITUTION HERE; 
PANAMA: ONLY CONGRESS HAS THE POWER 'TO DECLARE WAR.' BUT MOST MEMBERS WEREN'T 
EVEN INFORMED UNTIL THE ACTION HAD BEGUN. 
The Bush Administration's invasion of Panama on Wednesday morning was illegal, 
unwarranted and cynical. 
Despite the applause from Democrats and Republicans alike, some basic facts 
need to be remembered. 
The United States has a Constitution, and that Constitution gives Congress the 
sole power "to declare war" and "make rules concerning captures on land and 
water." Congress did not declare war against Panama -- most members weren't 
even informed until after the invasion had begun. 
As a justification for the invasion, Bush cited Gen. Manuel A. Noriega's 
declaration that "a state of war" exists between Panama and the United States. 
But Bush himself declined to ask Congress to declare war; he just went ahead 
and invaded on his own. This is not how our constitutional system was designed 
to work. 
Bush said another reason for the invasion -- and it was an invasion, despite 
the euphemisms floating around Washington -- was the "imminent danger to 35,000 
American citizens" in Panama. This was hardly demonstrated by the facts. A U.S. 
Marine was killed over the weekend by Panamanian forces, but the official U.S. 
version of the incident is dubious. The Marine, the Administration said, was 
unarmed and somehow got lost near Panamanian military headquarters. The 
Panamanians said the Marine, with three other American officers, was armed and 
had opened fire. 
In any event, that particular incident does not demonstrate that 35,000 
Americans are in "imminent danger." But it gave the Administration a pretext 
for an invasion that had been planned for at least three months, as CIA 
Director William H. Webster acknowledged in a conversation with Rep. Henry J. 
Hyde (R-Ill.). (Eager to come up with a better rationale, Bush later added that 
the Administration had received an unidentified and unconfirmed intelligence 
report alleging that Noriega was considering launching an urban commando 
assault on American citizens in Panama.) 
Bush also claimed that he wanted to "protect the integrity of the Panama Canal 
Treaty" when, in fact, he wanted to subvert it. Under the treaty, Panama is to 
appoint the canal commissioner, but the appointment has previously been made by 
Washington. Bush clearly did not want Noriega to be able to install someone 
hostile to the United States, so he circumvented the problem by getting rid of 
Noriega. You can bet the new president of Panama will appoint a commissioner 
more to Washington's liking. 
Hypocrisy rules the Bush Administration. While it condemns Noriega's 
dictatorship, it cozies up to the dictators in China who killed thousand of 
students in Beijing's Tian An Men Square in June. Why the double standard? 
Noriega is no saint. But there is no lack of unsavory governments in the world. 
Does the United States have a right to invade them all? Who conferred that 
right on our government? 
The obsession with Noriega is particularly ironic, because he carried 
Washington's water for 30 years. He was paid by the CIA -- during the time that 
George Bush was its director -- to finger leftists in Central America. One U.S. 
Administration after another winked at his excesses. But when Noriega was no 
longer needed, it became politically expedient for the U.S. government to 
overthrow him. 
For Bush, as for Ronald Reagan before him, Noriega represented an easy target, 
a foreign devil to oppose forcefully and thus score domestic political points. 
Bush's political need for a foreign-policy triumph has been especially acute 
because critics have branded him timid. The invasion was his answer, a handy 
way to flex his muscles. 
While this is Bush's blunder, it is also the Democrats'. They allowed the 
Administration to dilute the ban against assassinating foreign leaders, they 
banged the drums for intervention, they permitted Bush to bypass constitutional 
channels and they supported him after the fact. Within hours of the invasion, 
Sen. Christopher Dodd (D-Conn.) was on television pledging Democratic support 
for the President. 
Most Democrats share the blame for this illegal invasion, which has needlessly 
cost the lives of American soldiers and Panamanian civilians. And it has 
exacted a greater toll, for it has struck another blow against democratic, 
constitutional government in the United States. 
