HIS DREAM HOME BECOMES THEIR NIGHTMARE AND A RALLYING POINT; 
DEVELOPMENT: NEIGHBORS OBJECT TO ITS SIZE AND ARCHITECTURE. THEY'RE PRESSING 
CITY TO DECLARE MIRACLE MILE NORTH AREA A HISTORICAL PRESERVATION ZONE. 
To Jack Alpan, the towering structure being built at the northwest corner of 
South Poinsettia Place and 2nd Street represents his dream home, the fruits of 
more than two decades of work as a dentist. 
To his future neighbors in the Miracle Mile North area, the structure 
represents something much more ominous: a threat to the architectural character 
of their quiet, tree-lined neighborhood and the unwelcome intrusion of big-city 
development into their lives. 
"It's a monstrosity," said neighbor Judie Feldstein of the three-story 
structure that is twice the size of most of the homes on the street. 
"Look down the block, to the right and to the left, and you see the same types 
of beautiful homes. That's why we all live here, because we love the 
neighborhood. But this is ruining it," Feldstein said. 
The house is far from finished, yet neighbors say it exemplifies the need to 
protect the neat rows of Spanish/Mediterranean and English Tudor-style homes 
from developers insensitive to the community's wishes. 
Neighbors three years ago began a drive to do just that, before Alpan ever 
entered the picture. His house has galvanized their efforts. 
Feldstein, for example, said that as soon as she got wind of Alpan's plans more 
than a year ago, she joined the Rancho Park La Brea Neighborhood Assn., a group 
that is helping lead the drive to preserve the area by having the city declare 
it a historical preservation overlay zone. 
Cultural affairs officials have supported their efforts, as has Zev 
Yaroslavsky, councilman for the area. They say the area is unique in that it 
has kept its architectural style intact since the 1920s, when the first of the 
modest stucco and red-tile roof homes were built. 
In all, more than 90% of the 500 homes are of the same architectural stylings 
in the area, which is bounded by Beverly Boulevard on the north, 3rd Street on 
the south, La Brea on the east and Gardner on the west. 
If the preservation zone is approved by city planners and the City Council, 
which is expected by early February, it will be only the fourth such zone in 
the city. The city Planning Commission has set a Jan. 18 final vote on the 
issue. If approval is granted, a neighborhood-based review board would be 
established to screen all proposals for building and remodeling and to make 
sure they conform to the area's architectural style in both shape and size. 
Although advisory in nature, the group's recommendations to city planning and 
cultural heritage officials responsible for approving such projects "will carry 
a lot of weight," said Michael Davies, a hearing examiner for the Planning 
Commission. 
The five-member advisory board also could help prevent architecturally or 
historically significant buildings from being demolished. One member would be 
selected by the mayor, another by the City Council, two by the city Cultural 
Heritage Commission, and an at-large member would be chosen by the first four 
members, according to city law. 
Since 1979, when city officials approved the concept, preservation zones have 
been established in Angeleno Heights in Echo Park, South Carthay in the 
Wilshire District and Melrose Hill in Hollywood, Davies said. 
Yaroslavsky, who lives in the Miracle Mile North neighborhood, helped persuade 
the City Council to spend $15,000 in March, 1987, to study whether a 
preservation zone was warranted for the area. In March, 1988, the Cultural 
Heritage Commission gave its approval. 
Although the campaign has progressed slowly, the Alpan home "has become a 
rallying point, because it's such an abuse of living in a neighborhood," said 
Ronnie Gootkin, president of the La Brea neighborhood group. 
"It's obnoxious, and the neighbors are upset," Gootkin said. "They don't want 
to see this practice flourish." 
Yaroslavsky agreed, calling the house "an outrage." 
"It is an example of how one house improperly designed and insensitive to the 
neighborhood can be a degradation of the whole block," he said. 
"It only takes one to screw things up, and we've had that one," Yaroslavsky 
said. "We don't want another one." 
Alpan and his wife say they can't understand why their future neighbors are so 
upset. 
"Apparently they can't learn to accept beauty that is not in keeping with their 
own viewpoint of beauty," said Alpan's wife, Jenny. 
Alpan says he has been dreaming of building the home during more than 20 years 
he has toiled as a dentist in downtown Los Angeles. He says he had no idea he 
had caused so much controversy, and that his neighbors have been curious but 
not confrontational. 
"I am not happy making my neighbors unhappy," Alpan said last week. "I spent 
two years on this -- it's my design, and I think it's beautiful. So, when they 
say it isn't, it hurts me." 
Alpan agrees with the concept of protecting the neighborhood through the use of 
the advisory board, but says it is too late to make the rules apply to him 
since city planners approved the project and he has spent "a fortune" on it. 
Besides, Alpan says, the home will be a showcase of the Mediterranean style 
that dominates the area, and will fit the neighborhood quite well. It's just 
that it will be more than twice the size of the other homes. 
And that's what has some neighbors upset. 
Frieda Kahan, who has lived in the house immediately to the north of Alpan's 
for 17 years, said she doesn't care about the house's architecture but is 
bothered by its size. The Alpan home, she said, takes up nearly the entire plot 
of land it is built on and crowds her home. What's more, the three-story 
structure blocks her sunlight, she said. 
The sheer height of the house and its massive attic has prompted neighbors to 
speculate that Alpan will build a third floor of living space in violation of 
his city-approved building plan. Alpan has denied that he plans to use the 
third floor as a dental clinic or a playroom for his two children. 
And although he can't do anything about the size of the house, Yaroslavsky said 
he will at least make sure Alpan keeps to the city-approved plan. 
"The whole block is lying in wait," the councilman said. "He's going to have 
the most scrutinized house in America over the next few years." 
Meanwhile, Yaroslavsky predicts other communities will make use of the 
preservation zone concept. 
"There will be more such preservation zones in the future, I assure you, 
because there is a greater sense in the city about preserving the richness of 
our past," Yaroslavsky said. "And this is the best tool to preserve 
historically and architecturally significant neighborhoods without emasculating 
homeowners' rights." 
Preservation status could conceivably raise the real estate value of 
Yaroslavsky's own home -- and hence benefit him personally. But he said the 
city attorney's office has told him there is no conflict of interest, and he is 
only doing what is best for his constituents. 
"The neighborhood shouldn't be penalized just because I live there," he said. 
