FAST ACTION REQUIRED TO LIFT STAINS FROM DELICATE LINEN; 
HOLIDAYS: CLEANING HEIRLOOM CLOTHS IS NOT A PROJECT FOR THE DO-IT-YOURSELFER, 
BUT SOME PRECAUTIONS CAN HELP MINIMIZE THE DAMAGE. 
When you bring out those heirloom linen tablecloths and napkins for holiday 
entertaining, be sure to watch out for such hazards as melted candle wax, 
spilled wine and grease, and damage to delicate cutwork. 
"When you have an accident, except for wine spills, less is more," advises Liz 
Barbatelli of Linens Limited, a national specialized laundry care service. 
"Most of the time, too many operations and cleaning agents are tried in the 
home, which only make the situation more difficult." 
A survey done by the company indicated that the holidays are the No. 1 period 
for linen usage, with 71.4% of the respondents saying they always use fine 
linens for the Christmas and Hanukkah holidays, and 80.4% saying they use fine 
linens frequently during this time. 
Of those polled, 68.4% said they always use fine table linens for Thanksgiving 
and 76.8% said they use them frequently or always. 
Although cleaning stains from fine linens is not a project for the 
do-it-yourselfer, Barbatelli offers the following precautions for linen owners 
should damage occur: 
* Candle wax. Allow it to harden. Do not scrape, as this will damage the 
fabric. Dyes in some candle wax will penetrate and stain the fibers. Both can 
be removed only through professional laundering because the chemicals required 
to remove stains and wax are available only to commercial operations. Water 
will not stop the stain action. 
* Spilled wine. Soak tablecloths or napkins immediately in cold water; this 
releases the stain so it will not set. Have the linen professionally laundered 
as soon as possible. 
* Grease. This is the toughest of all stains so don't try to treat it at home. 
Grease-stained fabric must be handled by trained professionals and the 
procedure involves boiling the fabric in copper kettles. 
* Damaged cutwork. Items such as tablecloths, napkins and runners with cutwork 
usually are family heirlooms and may require professional repair and 
restoration. Remove any damaged items immediately to avoid additional tearing. 
"Linens require care and cleaning unlike any other fabric -- hand care, 
stretching, blocking and air drying all preserve the fibers and restore the 
fabric's original size, shape and beauty," said Barbatelli. 
"Providing linens the proper care as soon as possible is the best hedge against 
permanent stains and damage." 
