COMBAT IN PANAMA; 
LEGALITY OF U.S. INVASION SPURS DEBATE 
The Bush Administration stressed four legal justifications Wednesday for its 
invasion of Panama: the protection of American lives, the defense of the Panama 
Canal, the backing of the nation's "democratically elected" officials and the 
pursuit of an indicted U.S. drug criminal -- namely, Manuel A. Noriega. 
International law experts said the first reason is the strongest and the last 
the weakest. 
"I think they can make a much more plausible case for this than the invasion of 
Grenada (in 1983) or the Dominican Republic in the '60s," said American 
University law professor Robert K. Goldman. 
Because thousands of Americans are scattered around Panama and Noriega's troops 
have shown a willingness to harass and even kill them, President Bush had 
reason to use military force to protect them, Goldman said. 
By contrast, the Reagan Administration justified its invasion of Grenada by 
pointing to the danger faced by a small group of American medical students, a 
rationale that was rebutted by international law bodies. Critics noted that the 
students could have been evacuated without U.S. troops overthrowing Grenada's 
government. 
Under the norms of international law, nations are justified in using military 
force abroad to defend their citizens from hostile military action. But the 
response also must be limited to the amount of force necessary to protect the 
citizens. 
The classic example of such a military move, law experts said, was the 1976 
Israel raid on the Ugandan air base of Entebbe. Landing there, Israel commandos 
rescued their citizens who had been held hostage and then left, without 
attacking Ugandan dictator Idi Amin. 
Several law experts, while agreeing on the need to defend American lives in 
Panama, questioned whether a full-scale invasion is justified under 
international law. 
"When you have the killing of a Marine and the beating of the Navy man, some 
response was certainly called for," said USC law professor Edwin Smith. 
"Whether it rises to the level of a threat to U.S. sovereign interests is 
another question." 
Columbia University professor Oscar Schachter said U.S. officials must show 
that the attacks on Americans were more than isolated incidents. 
"I think they need to make a much stronger factual case than they have made so 
far," Schachter said. "If you have one man killed, you are not justified in 
bombing cities or killing lots of others. But if you can show a pattern of 
attacks, then you have a much stronger case. I don't think we know enough at 
this point to make a judgment." 
Noriega and his few remaining allies would be hard-pressed to argue against the 
U.S. invasion in an international legal body such as the United Nations, the 
experts said, because he declared last weekend that his forces were in "a state 
of war" with the United States. 
"That was his biggest blunder," Goldman said. "He badly overplayed his hand." 
Justice Department officials made it clear that they still see the pursuit of 
Noriega as a criminal case. 
Staking out a new legal position last month, Justice Department lawyers said 
that U.S. military personnel can track down and apprehend drug traffickers 
abroad. In the past, U.S. law was understood to restrict the military from 
engaging in criminal law enforcement. But under their new interpretation, 
Administration lawyers said, that limitation applies only within the United 
States and not beyond its borders. 
International law experts scoffed at that justification for the invasion. 
"Can you imagine," Goldman asked, "how we would react if another nation 
asserted the right to have its military engage in surreptitious kidnapings of 
Americans in this country?" 
Times staff writer Ronald J. Ostrow contributed to this report. 
