COLUMN ONE; 
TRYING TO SAVE THE BABIES; 
A WASHINGTON CLINIC SEEKS TO HELP REDUCE THE U.S. INFANT MORTALITY RATE. ACCESS 
IS GUARANTEED FOR ALL WOMEN AND INFANTS. 
A 17-year-old girl sits in a child's chair in a house a few miles from the 
Capitol. A 5-month-old boy lies in her lap. SWEET, reads the confetti-patterned 
sweat shirt pulled over his chubby chest. A tear rolls down the girl's cheek. 
She lost her first baby at age 16, she is telling a visitor. She was unhappy, 
neglecting meals, five months pregnant. Newly arrived from El Salvador, she had 
no family and no doctor. Alone at home one day, she realized she had had a 
miscarriage. 
Call an ambulance, a neighbor insisted. The girl balked: I had no money. How 
would I pay? She spent three days in a hospital where no one spoke Spanish. 
Don't cry, the baby's father kept saying. You'll have another baby. 
A year ago, Andrea Diaz was pregnant again. This time, she learned of a clinic 
for poor Latino women, one of a number of programs that have sprung up recently 
as the District of Columbia has grappled with an infant death rate more than 
twice the national average. 
Andrea began going regularly to the townhouse on Columbia Road, descending into 
the little waiting room hung with Gauguin prints, where other Spanish-speaking 
women gathered, some pregnant, some not, their bundled and snow-suited babies 
in tow. 
Social workers comforted and supported Andrea. Nurse-midwives guided her 
through her pregnancy. She learned about health, nutrition, breast feeding and 
parenthood. She met other pregnant Salvadoran teen-agers. And last summer, she 
gave birth to a son. 
The clinic, known as Mary's Center, is founded on principles that many say 
could be the key to reducing infant death in the United States, a country where 
the infant death rate has gone from one of the best in the developed world in 
the 1950s to one of the worst. 
These principles already form the foundation of maternal and child health 
programs in more than a dozen foreign countries. Such countries have reduced 
their infant mortality rates in recent decades from well above that of the 
United States to well below. 
Those tenets include guaranteed access for all women and infants to maternity 
and pediatric care, reduction of the obstacles often involved in getting care, 
aggressive outreach and public education, and easy access to related services 
such as drug abuse treatment. 
So far, the new programs appear to have made little or no dent in Washington's 
statistics -- testimony to the complex nature of the problem, experts say. But 
they say the approach, if sustained and expanded, has a good chance of making a 
difference in the long run. 
Since 1987, the District of Columbia has made maternity care free to any woman 
with a family income below $20,000. A city policy (not always followed) 
promises no more than a two-week wait for an initial appointment at a city-run 
clinic. 
At Mary's Center, a private, nonprofit agency receiving some government 
support, the entire staff is bilingual. Nurse-midwives are on 24-hour call. 
Nurses visit all new mothers at home. The clinic also offers family planning, 
educational programs, turkeys at Thanksgiving. 
The city is also arranging for a range of drug treatment opportunities for 
pregnant addicts. If all goes as planned, there will be many programs -- from 
outpatient to long-term residential -- treating pregnant users, a group long 
excluded from treatment programs. 
Finally, the district has dispatched a street-smart single parent, Twana 
Fortune, to roam the city's poorest wards in a red and gold "mobile maternity 
van," chauffeuring women to and from clinics, checking on new mothers and 
promoting prenatal and pediatric care. 
"It's empowering people to do the right thing," Fortune said recently. "I have 
not talked to anyone in my life that said they wanted a baby with health 
problems. Everybody wants a healthy baby. So it's a matter of leading them to 
the water. They're already thirsty." 
Washington is not the only area of the country attempting to reduce infant 
death, though it has been doing it longer than most and has more programs. 
Other states and cities are also experimenting with various forms of outreach, 
home visiting and easing of access to care. 
For the most part, however, such programs have been piecemeal -- one run by a 
city, another by a state, another by a private foundation. Unlike in Western 
Europe, Scandinavia and Asia, there has been no national commitment in the 
United States to tackle the problem nationwide. 
As a result, most efforts have been financially hamstrung. 
In the District of Columbia, for example, just one clinic has evening hours. 
And it has them only once a week. Tight budgets forced all the other clinics to 
abandon the program -- even though it had hiked attendance at one facility by 
30%. 
One of two outreach vans, a 1969 camper used for prenatal exams, broke down 
within months of the program's inception. It remains unrepaired and unreplaced, 
while the other carts around a $600 mobile telephone that the district cannot 
afford to operate. 
Maria Gomez, the executive director of Mary's Center, estimates that the clinic 
turns away 10 needy women every day. Funded by federal, local and private 
money, the clinic lacks the funding, space and manpower to expand beyond 18 
deliveries a month. 
"Programs rise and fall," said Joan Paddock Maxwell, president of the Better 
Babies Project, a much-admired program of outreach to pregnant women in poor 
areas of Washington that came to an abrupt halt last summer after its federal, 
local and private funding ran out. 
Meanwhile, she said, private foundations that agree to fund pilot projects are 
unwilling to fund programs on an ongoing basis. 
The problem, experts say, is one of priorities. 
"We know what to do. We just lack the will to get it done," said Jennifer L. 
Howse, president of the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. "Because 
children are not a high enough priority on the national agenda. Babies don't 
vote. Babies don't lobby." 
There is little disagreement among experts about what might be done about 
infant mortality in the United States, where some experts believe that up to a 
third of the 40,000 infant deaths a year could be prevented simply by making 
sure that all women got care. 
Look to Western Europe, Scandinavia and Asia, they say. Countries like Japan 
have cut their infant death rates to as low as half the U.S. rate by 
aggressively promoting maternity and infant care and making it easily and 
widely available. 
The first step, experts say, is "universal access" to care for all pregnant 
women and infants. Guaranteeing care to the 500,000 U.S. women without 
maternity coverage who give birth each year could reduce by 15% the rate at 
which babies are born underweight. 
Next, experts say agencies must eliminate the obstacles that lower-income women 
face in getting care -- the paperwork, prerequisites, inconvenient hours, 
inconvenient locations, delays and inhospitality that discourage people from 
going in. 
But even that is not enough, many say. Health workers must bring in women 
through aggressive outreach, home visiting and public education -- approaches 
that have been proven, when well executed, to help women make use of available 
services and to improve the outcome of pregnancies. 
Finally, studies suggest that infant death would drop 10% if no one smoked 
during pregnancy, and another 10% if all women not wanting to become pregnant 
used contraceptives. Giving pregnant drug addicts priority in drug treatment 
would also help. 
But the hardest part to address may be social and psychological. 
"If you have women in extremes of poverty, regularly beaten up by their 
boyfriends, with lousy nutrition, prenatal care will help but it's not the 
answer," said Sarah Brown of the Institute of Medicine in Washington. 
"One of the major phenomena that must be overcome for so many women is the lack 
of self-esteem, the lack of concept of a meaningful future," said Dr. Reed 
Tuckson, a former Washington public health commissioner who is now a March of 
Dimes senior vice president. 
"If you don't believe you're valuable and important, if your self-esteem is 
low, then you're not going to act in your own self-interest." 
Week after week, they go before Ellen Farrior -- newly pregnant, sick to their 
stomachs, abandoned by the father of their child. The task facing Farrior, a 
social worker at Mary's Center, is to begin to repair the fissures left by 
lives in flux. 
The initial interview runs about 75 minutes. Farrior pieces together the 
outline of a life -- a woman, barely literate, from a tiny Central American 
village, overwhelmed by the United States; or perhaps an educated woman, in a 
destructive relationship, equally vulnerable. 
"It's not what you say. It's how you listen," Farrior explained recently. "You 
take them seriously. It seems to me that only when what's going on in their 
lives matters to someone other than themselves . . . well, that's the first 
step." 
There is a common thread: The women all feel like victims. Farrior sees her 
role as helping them regain control of their lives. She has a pivotal six 
months, perhaps seven, to stand alongside them, support them, help them begin 
to make decisions. 
Farrior might invite a pregnant teen-ager's parents to come in. Respect your 
daughter's decisions, she might urge the parents. She tries to involve the 
baby's father, figuring it is more difficult to abandon a companion and a child 
when you've gone through a pregnancy. 
There are other stories of the human component in good maternity care. 
During a recent home visit, Carol Koontz and Margaret Haggerty, the center's 
nurses, found a 3-day-old infant with a near-fatal case of jaundice. The mother 
was depressed, the father frightened. The family spoke only Spanish and had no 
car to get to a hospital. 
Koontz and Haggerty drove them immediately to an emergency room. The hospital 
was being renovated and just finding the entrance was a challenge. The nurses 
then served as translators and provided the infant's medical history. The baby 
was treated and lived. 
Another pregnant patient turned out to be functionally deaf. A Salvadoran 
immigrant, she had never received help. The center's staff scoured Washington 
for a reduced-rate hearing aid, then raised $326 at a sidewalk bake sale to buy 
it for the woman. 
Could such a system be replicated on a broad scale by a city government in 
Washington or other cities? 
Dr. Marlene N. Kelley, head of ambulatory health care for the district, is 
pessimistic. Large bureaucracies lack the intimacy and flexibility of small 
clinics, she suggested. And they are tangled in a web of constraints governing 
hiring, firing and budgets. 
To enter the city-run clinic at Benning Heights near a pocket of Southeast 
Washington known as Little Beirut (for the gunfire), go past the "Drug Free 
Zone" sign, enter through the steel doors and walk past the armed security 
guard into the waiting room. 
A monthly visit might take hours, most of which is spent waiting. According to 
the schedule, patients are allotted 10 to 15 minutes with Dr. Cleveland Emanuel 
Smith, the 66-year-old obstetrician-gynecologist and former Howard University 
professor on staff. 
"We don't have an ideal situation in the clinic," Smith conceded one morning, a 
small man in a concrete office. "You can't really compare it to private 
practice. But it's better than no prenatal care at all." 
On that morning, Patricia Mosby, an unemployed, single mother pregnant with her 
third child, arrived by foot for her monthly visit. She had missed a 7:15 a.m. 
appointment for a sonogram the day before -- unable, she said, to find anyone 
to watch her children. 
Mosby, 34, had first called the clinic for prenatal care in her second 
trimester of pregnancy. She had a vaginal infection, she told the clerk. The 
clerk gave her an appointment one month away -- violating the city's two-week 
policy for maternity care. 
"The clerks are not medically trained," Smith explained wearily, when asked 
about the incident. "Their minds are not connected to the importance of these 
things. The accountability is kind of . . ." His voice tapered off. 
To try to change it, he said, is to fritter away valuable time. 
"Here, because of our location and patient population, we've had people (on 
staff) who take an attitude that they can say and do anything to these 
patients," he said. "I think some staff's attitude is, 'Why put out for these 
people?' " 
Kelley, the ambulatory health chief, said one big problem is funding. Public 
health staff has been shrinking for years. There are just eight visiting nurses 
for the entire district. Now the department faces a wave of early retirements 
forced by the city's deficit. 
Like everything else, the two-week policy hurts other areas, Kelley said. For 
example, it might take two months for an appointment to get birth control. In 
the meantime, the woman could become pregnant -- and be guaranteed a prenatal 
appointment within two weeks. 
Wanda Harris was living in a shelter when she was first pregnant with Shadawn. 
By the time the baby arrived, Harris had moved into public housing in Little 
Beirut. Shadawn, born at 4 pounds 10 ounces, had health problems requiring 
frequent medical attention. 
So on a recent morning, Harris and Shadawn piled into the district's "Mom van." 
Twana Fortune drove them 20 minutes across town to D.C. General Hospital, then 
returned three hours later after a few other trips to drive them back. 
What would she do without the van? Harris, who has four children, was asked. 
She sounded bemused. "Miss a lot of appointments, I know that," she said. "It's 
often too cold to wait for the bus. And cabs aren't dependable where I live 
at." 
Fortune, 33, who works for the district, understands adversity. She was one of 
11 children raised in a Southeast Washington project. She dropped out of school 
after seventh grade, was pregnant at 15 and had lost two babies by age 18. 
But she also understands opportunity. She had the chance to see other ways to 
live -- growing up in the shadow of the Capitol, moving out of the projects at 
age 12, and now living down the street from an upscale neighborhood where 
apartments sell for $200,000. 
"You have to expose people to different things," said Fortune, who is struck by 
how little some of her passengers know of the city beyond their immediate 
neighborhoods. "If you don't, what choices do they have?" 
These days, Fortune maneuvers the maternity van through the toughest and 
grimmest reaches of the city. She bounds through the littered hallways of 
public housing projects, chats with women in glass-strewn parking lots and is 
saddened by what she finds. 
"Broken people," is how she put it. "People that I think want to do better, 
that don't know how to do better. People that, I think, are caught in 
circumstances where it might be easier to just lie there than to try to do 
better." 
No miracles are being worked by the District of Columbia's programs. The infant 
mortality rate last year was 23.1 deaths per 1,000 live births -- higher than 
that of any state in the country and among the half a dozen U.S. cities with 
the worst rates. 
The infant death rate in Washington did drop from 21 deaths per 1,000 live 
births in 1986 to 19.6 deaths in 1987. But, city officials say, the emergence 
of the crack cocaine epidemic reversed that progress: The rate jumped to 23.2 
in 1988. 
"Unfortunately, crack is just a symptom," said Dr. John H. Niles, an 
obstetrician-gynecologist who heads the D.C. Medical Society. Until poverty 
itself is addressed, he said, attempts to reduce infant death will have only 
limited success. 
That is a view shared by former health commissioner Tuckson. 
"It's like planting seeds in concrete," Tuckson said. "You have to till the 
soil first." 
WHAT OTHER COUNTRIES DO 
 Elements of maternal and child health care policies in some of the countries 
with infant death rates below that of the United States: 
JAPAN 
* Early reporting of all pregnancies to health officials, triggering immediate 
access to maternal and child health services. 
* Free and unlimited health exams for all pregnant women, infants and young 
children. 
* Health guidance classes held in about 850 health centers. 
* Home visit guidance by public health nurses and midwives for pregnant women, 
newborns and premature infants. 
* Family planning and genetic counseling available to all potential parents. 
* Few teen-age mothers and few unmarried mothers. 
SWEDEN 
* Free prenatal and pediatric care through the national health service. 
* One year of paid maternity leave for all working women. 
* Paid parental leave if a child is ill. 
* Parenting classes for all parents. 
* Contraceptives and abortion counseling and services provided free of charge. 
* Mandatory sex education, beginning in primary school. 
FRANCE 
* Free or fully reimbursed prenatal care and delivery for all women. 
* Financial incentives to attend prenatal care. 
* Maternal and child health clinics staffed by doctors, midwives, nurses and 
social workers provide free care, screening, immunizations and health 
education. 
* Home visits by midwives and nursery nurses. 
* Sixteen to eighteen weeks of paid maternity leave. 
* "Home helpers" for women in danger of hospitalization if they do not rest. 
* Family allowances paid by the government. 
