MASTERMIND OF DRUG RING IS CONVICTED; 
COURTS: PROSECUTORS ESTIMATED THAT THE MARIJUANA THAT A CYPRESS MAN IMPORTED 
DURING A FOUR-YEAR PERIOD TOPPED THE 34-TON MARK AND WAS WORTH MORE THAN $100 
MILLION. 
A Cypress man who masterminded one of the world's biggest marijuana-trafficking 
rings was convicted in federal court Thursday of arranging to smuggle at least 
34 tons of the drug by boat from Southeast Asia. 
William E. Uhler, 40, was convicted of federal charges stemming from the drug 
smuggling business that he operated from bases in Hawaii and Orange County 
between 1984 and 1988. Some of the marijuana he imported was seized by 
authorities before it came into the country, but authorities believe most of 
the drugs he smuggled entered the United States. 
Prosecutors estimated that the marijuana he imported during that four-year 
period was worth more than $100 million. 
They said Uhler ran a sophisticated smuggling operation that included a 
flotilla of vessels, including an 80-foot oil supply ship that secretly 
offloaded its illegal cargo to smaller boats in mid-ocean to avoid detection. 
John Zienter, who heads the Los Angeles office of the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, said he has a "gut feeling" that Uhler was actually in business 
for a decade and imported about $500 million worth of marijuana. It was "one of 
the most significant marijuana rings active in the world," he said. 
Zienter said the battle against marijuana has taken a back seat to the widely 
publicized war on cocaine in recent years. But he said that the DEA is cracking 
down again on marijuana trafficking and that Uhler's conviction is a major step 
in that campaign. 
He also cited several major marijuana rings indicted in Reno, Seattle and San 
Francisco in the last six to eight months. 
"Unfortunately, we have such limited resources we have allowed (marijuana 
enforcement) to slip," Zienter said. "Because of that, in recent years the 
problem has gotten worse. All enforcement has been forced to concentrate on 
cocaine to the neglect of drugs that are serious problems, too. But we are 
readjusting our procedures and we're back on track." 
After a six-week trial and 3 1/2 days of deliberations, jurors in U.S. District 
Court in Los Angeles convicted Uhler on Thursday on 16 counts of 
drug-trafficking, conspiracy, and tax fraud, as well as a charge that carries a 
maximum term of life in prison without parole: conducting a continuing criminal 
enterprise. U.S. District Judge Consuelo Marshall scheduled sentencing for 
March 5. 
Uhler, who moved to Orange County in 1987 from Maui, Hawaii, was acquitted of 
one count of interstate travel in aid of drug trafficking. 
Defense attorney A. Brent Carruth admitted that Uhler arranged to import a 
boatload of marijuana in 1985. But Carruth said Uhler had second thoughts and 
tried to back out of the deal. Carruth was unavailable Thursday to discuss the 
verdict. 
Twelve other defendants were indicted with Uhler last April. Six are facing 
trial in February. They allegedly helped Uhler import the marijuana or enabled 
him to conceal the millions he made from the deals by creating false tax 
returns and letting him list property -- including an ocean-view home in Maui 
-- in their names. 
The others are Eugene LaForce, 54, of Cave Junction, Ore., who is considered 
Uhler's partner; Uhler's mother-in-law, Dovie Marie Briggs, 57, of Cypress; 
Tustin attorney Neil C. Pearson, 50; Terry P. Dee, 47, and his wife, Jeanne 
Dee, 35, both of Seal Beach, and Martin E. Levine, 40, of San Francisco and New 
York. 
Michael Tzouanakis, 36, of Costa Mesa and Dennis Tobin, 33, of Morro Bay 
pleaded guilty. Walter M. Hillinger, 57, of Hawaii was dismissed from the case, 
and Walter M. Ulrich, 39, of Sunset Beach is serving a 15-year prison term in 
Thailand. Two other Orange County men connected with the case are fugitives. 
Court documents describe how the huge boatloads of marijuana came to the United 
States: Seven tons of marijuana sailed from Thailand in June, 1985, on the Lady 
Fame, an 80-foot oil supply vessel, which transferred the shipment to two 
smaller boats off Hawaii, the documents said. Prosecutors said Uhler and his 
cohorts went to great lengths to conceal the Lady Fame's ownership, registering 
it under a fictitious partnership that included names from the obituary columns 
of an Orange County newspaper. 
The Lady Fame was supposed to have carried yet another multi-ton shipment of 
marijuana from Thailand, but Uhler began to suspect that law enforcement was 
watching the boat, the court records said. He had the vessel and the unwitting 
crew remain in Southeast Asia as a decoy and had the drugs loaded onto another 
boat for shipment, court documents said. After the marijuana was transferred 
onto two smaller boats off Hawaii, records said, the crew sank the larger 
vessel. 
In May, 1987, Uhler and his co-workers smuggled 11 tons of marijuana from 
Thailand to a point between Hawaii and Tahiti, where it was loaded onto another 
vessel, the Natalie Rose, and carried to the West Coast, court documents said. 
A second 11-ton shipment being smuggled by Uhler was seized by Thai officials 
in the Gulf of Thailand, the records said. 
Another five tons of marijuana was on its way to the West Coast in November, 
1988, but a Coast Guard cutter intercepted the boat off Hawaii. To avoid 
seizure, authorities said, the boat's captain set the marijuana on fire and 
abandoned ship. He and his crew were rescued and arrested. 
