PANEL OFFERS LITTLE DIRECTION ON DRAMATURGS 
The title of the second Dramatists' Guild symposium Tuesday at Theatre West was 
"How to Use a Dramaturg." But get a few dramaturgs together and the discussion 
is likely to gravitate to the question of what they actually do. 
Few people know. In the first place, as panelist Grant Moran, a film and 
television writer with a long history of dramaturging, pointed out, the word 
itself, inherited from the German, is off-putting. All those hard consonants. 
In the second, it "gives you a variety of functions," said Stephen Weeks, 
literary co-manager of the Los Angeles Theatre Center. So many, that they're 
nebulous at best. 
Moderator Peter Stone, president of the guild, tried to anchor the job 
description. He cited one that viewed the dramaturg as the person who 
"champions the text . . . represents and sometimes justifies the writer to the 
director." It never got more specific. 
The dramaturgs, it emerged, see themselves as everything -- from hand-holders 
to the playwright (Moran and Susan Vaneta Moran who co-directs the Women's 
Project at LATC and once served there as dramaturg) to liaison officer, adviser 
and peacemaker, but always a job that's "intimate," "sensitive," "complex," 
"reactive" and never, never, that of a rewriter. 
That is the sympathetic view. 
Things got tougher when Stone mentioned knottier issues. What does a dramaturg 
do if a theater or director alters a script in a major way without a writer's 
permission? Where is the dramaturg's allegiance then? 
The answers were less satisfying. Moran merely asserted it was an improper 
thing for a theater to do. Another panelist suggested that "firing the director 
is an option" (to which Stone retorted: "Well, it's a drastic solution, but 
popular with playwrights."). 
Fundamentally, though, Stone did keep the session focused on the nuts and bolts 
of a dramaturg's work, outlining the differences between literary managers 
(more focused on sniffing out good plays) and dramaturgs (the hands-on players 
who work one-to-one with playwrights on new writing). 
Jose Cruz Gonzalez, project director for South Coast Repertory's Hispanic 
Playwrights Project and director of the comedy group, "Latins Anonymous" (now 
at LATC), and Armando Molina, a member of "Latins Anonymous" and some-time 
dramaturg, showed that working improvisationally is yet still another ballgame. 
Actors and director/dramaturg doing the writing together is a kind of elaborate 
buddy system predicated on everyone's willingness to give and take. 
As a whole, though, the emphasis by the panel was on presenting too saintly an 
image of the dramaturg as a benevolent, non-interfering, enlightened friend in 
court -- a view Tuesday's small audience did not refute, but seemed to keep at 
arm's length during a brief question-and-answer period. 
In the end, a droll image of the dramaturg as seat belt emerged -- protective 
for the playwright on his or her wild ride, but its enforcement often resisted 
by directors. 
If the word dramaturg creates a gathering storm in some playwrights' minds, let 
them ponder a coming new breed of middleman known as the psychoturg or drama 
therapist. No confusion over those job descriptions. A subject, Stone said, for 
the next symposium. 
