BOOK REVIEW; 
REIGNING CAT AND DOG IN MURDER MYSTERY; 
WISH YOU WERE HERE, BY RITA MAE BROWN AND SNEAKY PIE BROWN. BANTAM BOOKS, 
$18.95, 256 PAGES 
Rita Mae Brown's agenda isn't hidden, but it sure is mysterious. She's capable 
of writing books like "Songs to a Handsome Woman" and that literary landmark, 
"Ruby Fruit Jungle," but she obviously has neither the temperament nor the 
inclination to become any kind of morose successor to Radclyffe Hall. Brown is 
not even like Florence King, that quirky female genius who went from radical 
lesbianism in her earlier books to right-wing gun-slinging in her later ones. 
And to throw in just one last literary reference, you remember that man who 
declared "a separate peace"? Well, it's as if Rita Mae Brown has written and 
signed off on her own separate Declaration of Independence. She'll write about 
lesbianism when she feels like it, or the Civil War when she feels like it, or 
take the time to write an excellent book on the Writing Life ("Starting From 
Scratch"), or in this case, just kick back and let her cat -- Sneaky Pie Brown 
-- write a murder mystery. 
In a time and place where writers are gnawing their fingernails to the nub 
about reputation and money and careers and God only knows what else, this 
reckless behavior is both baffling and refreshing. 
To get the clue on Sneaky Pie, or "Mrs. Murphy," as she names herself, you have 
to go back in time to Rudyard Kipling, who let animals talk in his "Jungle 
Books," and then back forward in time to the work of animal trainer Vicki 
Hearne, who knows for sure that animals are far smarter than humans. Mrs. 
Murphy is the pet tiger cat of a nice young woman named Harry, the postmistress 
of the town of Crozet, Va. Mrs. Murphy shares house and bed space with a nice 
Welsh corgi, Tee Tucker, and this amiable dog-and-cat team do everything they 
can to cheer up their owner, Harry, that nice woman who's going through a hard 
divorce from a man named Fair, who's not very "fair" at all. 
The plot of this novel is rambunctious and wacky. A paving contractor gets a 
cemetery post card, and within a few days, ends up squished in his own cement 
mixer. A Yankee woman named Maude Bly Modena, who makes an extremely good 
living in a store that packs and ships parcels, gets a cemetery post card, and 
soon after ends up squashed by a train. The sheriff of Crozet is just dense 
enough that Harry-the-Postmistress decides to help him find the murderer. Of 
course, from Mrs. Murphy and Tee Tucker's point of view, they're the ones who 
do all the detecting. 
There's a much more serious subplot. The mayor's daughter is getting married, 
but because the mayor's son has earlier married a black woman and left town in 
disgrace, he's not going to be invited. The mayor's wife is a tiresome social 
climber and won't allow it. Will justice be done? Will the son, and his lovely 
black wife be invited back home for a reconciliation? Yes ma'am, just as sure 
as that intrepid cat and dog will find out who squished the contractor in the 
cement mixer and who squashed the Yankee lady on the railroad track. 
This carefree canvass is really just a place for Rita Mae Brown -- who, 
remember, has declared independence from the rest of us -- to air certain of 
her own views on the human, feline and canine condition. Harry-the-Postmistress 
has a best friend, who notices, while watching Harry and her almost-ex-husband, 
that he's playing that favorite ex-husband-game, "Starve the Wife." Do it long 
enough, the friend observes, and the wife will lose her nerve and courage. 
Since husbands don't think wives do anything anyway, they won't feel guilt 
about not paying alimony, just rage that somebody somewhere has stopped ironing 
their shirts. 
On the subject of psychopaths, serial killers and the like, Harry's cat and dog 
have many a philosophical discussion. When a "sick" human being is born, why 
not kill it off right away, weed out the litter, so to speak, so that adult 
human beings who are cracked to begin with won't grow up to kill, kill and kill 
again? For that matter, why kill at all, unless for food? And while they're on 
the subject, why are human beings so incredibly dumb? They can't see, they 
can't hear, they can't smell anything at all. Mrs. Murphy and Tee Tucker wash 
their collective paws of the human race, and you can see, at some level, Rita 
Mae Brown does too. Independence is her great thing. And animals, and nature, 
and a few friends. Not a bad agenda, come to think of it. 
Next: John Wilkes reviews "Language and Species" by Derek Bickerton (University 
of Chicago Press). 
