HUBRIS IS THE SIN OF ANGELS -- IT'S NOT A FEDERAL CRIME; 
ECONOMY: IGNORE THE HYSTERIA -- MICHAEL MILKEN'S JUNK BONDS ARE NOT BEHIND THE 
S&amp;L CRISIS, THE LEVEL OF CORPORATE DEBT AND ALL OTHER FISCAL EVILS. 
Michael Milken's 10-year prison sentence can best be understood in two parts -- 
as possibly a two-year sentence for the felonies he was actually convicted of, 
and an eight-year sentence for a new federal offense called "being a symbol of 
greed." 
Milken's official crimes were, basically, falsifying records to accommodate 
punters such as Ivan F. Boesky, who were cheating their own clients and the 
government. Milken apparently didn't benefit personally from his offenses, but 
they are still depressingly sleazy, and punishment was clearly called for. But 
by any previous standard, including all the other "insider trading" cases, 
Milken's sentence is wildly disproportionate to his crimes, many times more 
severe than those meted out to people literally bringing home suitcases full of 
money from their illicit activities. 
Milken inspired as much envy and enmity as awe and admiration. He was the 
symbol of the go-go '80s, the "junk-bond" king, the financier of the company 
takeover revolution, the man who made $500 million a year terrorizing the 
old-boy network in the executive suites and "white shoe" investment banks. Now, 
with his junk-bond empire tottering, recession looming and U.S. financial 
institutions in serious trouble, Federal Judge Kimba M. Wood apparently decided 
she couldn't ignore the drumbeats for a heavy sentence -- confirming the old 
adage that judges read newspapers. It is as if all the regrets for the excesses 
of the '80s can somehow be exorcised by heaping the blame on Milken's head. 
America is now either in a recession or slipping into one. The recession might 
be short and mild, but some economists fear it may be quite bad. Shaky 
conditions in American lending institutions -- savings and loans, banks and 
insurance companies -- could cause a credit crunch that would push a weakening 
economy over the edge into a deep depression. Financial institutions are shaky 
because they lent too much and not too wisely. Since unwise credit extension is 
practically synonymous with junk bonds, Milken stands guilty of wrecking the 
economy -- Q.E.D. 
It is helpful, as always, to look at the data. And, devil-theorists and 
drumbeaters notwithstanding, the case against junk bonds is far from proved. 
To begin with, junk bonds have almost nothing to do with the S&amp;L crisis. 
Savings and loans got into trouble by investing in real estate -- the business 
they know best. Nationwide, only about 1% of S&amp;L assets are invested in 
junk bonds. Of the 3,000-odd S&amp;Ls in the country, only about 160 ever owned 
any junk bonds at all. Just 11 savings and loans, including a couple of the 
noisiest failures, owned 70% of all the junk bonds owned by the industry, and 
that was a total of only about $9 billion. 
The asset problems of the commercial banking system, again, have almost nothing 
to do with junk bonds. Commercial banks plunged into the real-estate market 
themselves about 1985, just as real-estate returns were dropping because of 
overbuilding. In the last several years, about 70% of all commercial loans made 
by banks have been for real estate. With office vacancy rates nationwide 
hovering around 20%, and retail space grossly overbuilt, commercial real-estate 
delinquencies are soaring. Banks are responding by curtailing lending to all 
their customers, including sound businesses. That is a worrisome development, 
but it has nothing to do with Milken or junk bonds. 
But what about American businesses? Aren't they bogged down with debt because 
of junk bonds? The answer is, not really. Total corporate debt service is about 
20% of cash flows, up from 16% in 1980. Corporate debt dropped sharply in the 
1970s, when interest rates shot into the double digits -- it was just too 
expensive to borrow. The total effect of the "debt mania" of the 1980s has been 
to bring corporate debt ratios back to about the level that prevailed in the 
mid-1970s. 
More important, research at Morgan Stanley shows that almost all debt growth 
for several years has been in so-called non-cyclical industries -- like 
services and food and tobacco manufacturing -- industries whose cash flows are 
relatively stable during recessions. Cyclical industries, like heavy 
manufacturing, have been steadily reducing their debt and have relatively low 
debt-to-cash-flow ratios. Some companies, of course, such as Robert Campeau's 
department stores, have stumbled badly from taking on too much debt, and others 
will fail in the future, but it is simply not true that corporate America as a 
whole is wildly overleveraged. 
Were junk bonds a rip-off of investors? Again, not really. Over the long term, 
junk bonds have underperformed stocks by a couple of percentage points. Total 
returns, including all defaults, have been about the same as for higher-grade 
bonds. Returns, that is, are considerably lower than Milken and his legions of 
loyalists hoped, but not out of line with those of other financial instruments. 
The boring point is that, overall, the markets did a respectable job in pricing 
junk bonds. 
Finally, only a small percentage of junk bonds -- probably well under 15% -- 
were used to finance hostile takeovers. The vast majority were issued simply to 
finance corporate growth. Company treasurers chose junk bonds, not because of 
any magical spells weaved by Milken, but simply because they offered the 
best-priced credit in town. 
At the same time, the benefits of junk bonds have been real. At the beginning 
of the 1980s, the stock market was grossly underpriced -- the Dow-Jones average 
had not moved for almost 15 years. Banks generally refused to make long-term 
loans to businesses, and the bond market was open only to a chosen few. That 
was the credit gap that Milken filled with his junk bonds -- and it was 
Milken's "junk" that put companies like MCI Communications Corp. and Turner 
Broadcasting System Inc. on the path to growth. 
The early waves of hostile takeovers, in addition, were a necessary corrective 
to slothful and pampered big-company executives. The chairman of Unocal Corp., 
typically, had a grand piano in his corporate jet. Takeovers and the threat of 
takeovers pared corporate staffs, scrapped the palatial offices and tied 
executive compensation more closely to performance. 
A good idea became gross excess by 1986, as legions of pin-striped 
business-school graduates armed with personal computers turned corporate 
finance into a high-stakes casino. Milken, by all accounts, played the casino 
with both arrogance and abandon. Such market excesses have a way of flaming out 
on their own, and this one did: bringing down lots of overpaid yuppies, Milken, 
his employer, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and, at least temporarily, the junk 
bond empire he created. 
The late excesses of the junk bond market are a conventional story of hubris 
bringing down the mighty. But hubris has never, until now, been a federal 
crime. 
