ARE THERE RULES JUST FOR US?; 
PANAMA: DOES ANY NATION HAVE THE RIGHT TO DECIDE UNILATERALLY TO DISPATCH ITS 
FORCES TO REMOVE A FOREIGN LEADER, HOWEVER ODIOUS? 
Under what circumstances, if any, does one nation have the right to decide who 
should govern in another -- and to use its military force to strip power from 
an undesirable foreign leader? 
This is the heart of the matter in Panama, because the four reasons initially 
advanced by the White House to justify U.S. military intervention really boil 
down to one -- the determination to remove Gen. Manuel A. Noriega from office. 
It is specious to suggest that American armed forces can bring democracy to 
Panama (Administration reason No. 1). It will take much more than the removal 
of a strongman and his cronies to build the institutions and habits that make 
democracy possible. In any case, there is simply no provision in international 
law that allows one nation to dispatch troops to another with the mission of 
imposing democracy. 
It is equally spurious to argue that the threat to American lives in Panama 
(Administration reason No. 2) was great enough to warrant the use of 24,000 
troops, the deaths and injuries of hundreds of people and the breakup of the 
structure of the local armed forces and police. At least until last weekend, 
American citizens lived and worked in Panama without intolerable risk. The 
isolated incidents that occurred then, and that are now being used to justify 
U.S. military action, were more a result than a cause of Washington's 
determination to oust Noriega from power. In any case, there were obviously 
many other ways, short of armed force, to reduce or remove the risks to those 
U.S. citizens. 
It is ludicrous to contend that the integrity of the Panama Canal treaties can 
be preserved (Administration reason No. 3) by grossly violating its central 
provisions concerning the use of force. The United States cannot credibly argue 
that there was a threat to the canal's functioning requiring the destruction of 
the Panama Defense Forces. Indeed, when the dust settles, Washington will no 
doubt understand that its action will greatly complicate U.S. relations not 
only with Panama, but also with all countries in which the United States wishes 
to maintain military and naval bases. 
These three reasons, then, are fundamentally pretexts, offered to bolster the 
political and legal case of the United States for undertaking an action 
motivated by one goal -- to remove Noriega from power. Undeniably, the general 
is an unsavory character. His regime in Panama was guilty of substantial 
human-rights violations; he cynically disrupted last May's electoral process 
when it appeared his chosen candidate might lose. 
There is also little question that he has been involved in thoroughly 
reprehensible activities, probably including drug trafficking. In a checkered 
career marked, above all, by rank opportunism, Noriega almost certainly added 
the narcotics network to his long line of funders, which also included, at 
various times, the CIA and the Cuban government. Understandably, Noriega has 
few admirers in the world. 
But the question remains: Does any nation have the right to decide unilaterally 
-- without invitation from a lawful and internationally recognized government 
and without approval in advance by any constituted international organization 
-- to send in its forces to remove a foreign leader, however loathsome? 
The Bush Administration can label its military action in Panama "Operation Just 
Cause." But we must ask ourselves whether any cause, however just, is 
sufficient to warrant the use of massive military force, unless it is in 
response to a direct and immediate threat to the nation's vital security 
interests, or to protect the lives and safety of its citizens who cannot 
otherwise be shielded. A century ago, nations used military force for a wide 
variety of purposes -- to collect debts, secure tribute, punish those who 
mistreated its citizens. But the world has evolved a great deal since the era 
when the Panama Canal itself was constructed, and nations today have 
established international norms that severely curtail the use of violence. 
Where do we stand? What rules of international conduct do we espouse? Do we 
think there is one set of rules for other nations and another for the United 
States -- or one set of rules for other regions and another that applies to the 
Western Hemisphere? These are the questions Latin Americans are asking and that 
history will pose. They are the issues we ourselves must confront. 
