THE SEX THAT PERESTROIKA HAS FORGOTTEN; 
WOMEN: FALSELY HERALDED AS THE HOME OF THE LIBERATED FEMALE, THE SOVIET UNION 
IS MOVING BACKWARD IN POLITICS AS WELL AS IN PERSONAL LIFE. 
The camera scans the Congress of People's Deputies, where a brand new political 
system is being created. It is a sea of male faces. On the brink of the next 
decade and a new millennium, the world's freshest democracy turns out to be the 
same old men's club. 
Where are the women of the Soviet Union, if not here in the corridors of power? 
They are 53% of the population and a mere 5% of this new elected body. "The 
women are in the kitchen," says Stas Borevich, a 23-year-old linguistics 
student from the Urals. Like most Muscovites, he hasn't much noticed the 
absence of women in the new government. 
Under the old regime, there was a 30% quota for women in the Communist Party, 
but none sat in the ruling Politburo; fewer than a dozen served on the 
307-member Central Committee. The old propaganda cranked out to the West, 
depicting women practicing medicine and driving steamrollers, contended that 
the Soviet Union was the place where women were "liberated" first. But as any 
visitor here can see, and as Francine du Plessix Gray has documented in her 
book "Soviet Women: Walking the Tightrope," the alleged progress was a myth. 
Soviet women have had an equal opportunity to work at many traditionally male 
jobs, particularly since so many Soviet men died during World War II. Women 
were needed to fill out the factory production lines and some of the 
professions, including medicine. But doctors aren't treated with the same 
status and income here as they are in the United States; in medicine and 
elsewhere, Soviet women have remained stuck in the lowest-paying jobs in a 
culture that doesn't seem to value their contributions equally with men's. 
"Have you ever seen a woman in our official (Soviet) delegations?" asks Vera 
Soboleva, head of the international department of the Soviet Women's Committee, 
an officially sanctioned organization with 3 million members. She observes that 
this dearth of women hasn't changed under perestroika; a typical recent 
example, she says, was the official all-male delegation of 26 Soviets visiting 
the United States to study marketing. 
Soviet women didn't rise to positions of real economic or political power 
before glasnost and perestroika -- and there's no evidence that they are rising 
now. In fact, there's every reason to believe that Soviet women are losing 
ground in the changing system here. It's uncertain what will replace the few 
supports they had under the old system: state-sponsored day-care for children, 
health care, assured jobs. These were hopelessly inadequate under the old 
Soviet regime, but they were better than the looming void. 
Many Soviets, men and women alike, are skeptical that the new political system 
will actually produce anything better, so it's not surprising that those who 
face the greatest political obstacles aren't trying to participate. "Women have 
never been serious policy-makers here," says Natalia Gevvorkyan, a 33-year-old 
reporter for Moscow News. "We still do not have any formal feminist movement. 
Most of the women here do not see how to change their lives for the better." 
All this makes the United States look like a feminist haven, even though 
American feminists are quite rightly discouraged these days. The American 
feminist faces the loss of abortion rights under the Supreme Court, the 
backlash against affirmative-action laws and the political indifference to 
President Bush's veto of the Family and Medical Leave Act. That legislation 
would have eased the burden on working women by guaranteeing men and women 
unpaid time off to contend with births, adoptions or family medical 
emergencies. 
Yet the American women's movement, however disheartened it may seem today, has 
produced significant and lasting cultural changes that don't exist in the 
Soviet Union. An estimated 92% of adult Soviet women work for wages, taking 
care of their children and, often, their aging parents, in a culture that 
discourages men from helping at home. 
Soviet women also wait in line for an estimated family average of 2 1/2 hours 
each day to buy food and other staples. "We don't have things that are 
absolutely necessary for women -- Tampax, medicine," Ms. Gevvorkyan observes. 
Finding birth-control devices or pills is very difficult. In 1987, there were 
115 abortions for every 100 live births in the Soviet Union; often both 
abortions and births were without anesthesia, according to feminist publisher 
Tatyana Mamonova, who recently was a visiting scholar at the City University of 
New York. 
Without a culture that supports women's basic needs, it's not surprising that 
the few Soviet women who have gotten elected to office have worked to 
ingratiate themselves with the dominant male power structure rather than to 
challenge its priorities. They "sometimes are very shy to present women's 
issues," Soboleva observes. 
Indeed, Svetlanta Goriatchev, a deputy to Russian Republic President Boris N. 
Yeltsin and therefore one of the highest-ranking women in the new political 
order, doesn't follow the feminist line. As Soboleva and others fight for 
access to birth control, Goriatchev is actively pushing for Russian mothers to 
have more babies. While feminists are worrying about who will pay for day-care 
centers and how women will survive in the less protective market economy, 
Goriatchev is advocating the popular fantasy that women should return to the 
home. 
"The child-care system doesn't make the life of the mother easier. The best 
possibility would be to remain home in the first year," she says, disregarding 
the fact that most Soviet women aren't economically able to do so. 
Even Gevvorkyan, who aspires to be a foreign correspondent and assumes her 
editors will never select a woman for such a post, declares: "I am not a 
feminist." 
If anything, young women here are heading in the opposite direction -- holding 
up the 1950s suburban American ideal. They dream of staying home, dependent on 
their new capitalistic, presumably affluent husbands. "There is a huge movement 
among Soviet women to show how fragile they are. It's partly because things 
have been so tough here," explains Irene Stevenson, an American woman who is 
working as a translator at TASS, the official Soviet news agency. 
At a contest in the Baltic Sea region to select "the best wife" in the area, 
Stevenson reports, contestants were asked, among other things, "If a volcano 
was exploding, what hairstyle would you wear?" While that might be an extreme 
example, there is much evidence of a feminine -- rather than a feminist -- 
movement here. "Traveling in the Soviet Union, one is immediately struck by the 
passionate interest evidenced by the generation under 45 in traditional 
domestic rituals -- cooking, sewing, embroidery -- which their grandmothers 
never had the time (or the permission) to indulge in," writes Du Plessix Gray. 
Understandably, Soviet women are exhausted -- even more than America's 
superwomen, who at least have supermarkets and high-tech gadgets to help them 
juggle their double lives. "Many see how their mothers lived and don't want to 
follow their example," concludes Vera Soboleva of the Soviet Women's Committee. 
But the dilemma is that in order to improve their lives significantly, they 
need to take on still another time-consuming and thankless job -- that of 
fighting for the kind of political leverage needed to secure greater economic, 
cultural and political standing for women in Soviet society. 
"Some women think only about their everyday needs," Soboleva laments. "They 
don't understand that if we don't change thinking on a general global level, 
their everyday needs will never be changed." 
