DRIVERS GET THEIR 2 CENTS IN AS NICKEL-A-GALLON TAX HIKE TAKES EFFECT; 
LEVIES: SOME MOTORISTS FILLED THEIR TANKS BEFORE THE PRICES WENT UP AT 
MIDNIGHT, BUT OTHERS WERE CAUGHT UNPREPARED. 
Some were angry, some resigned. But whether they liked it or not, all the 
motorists queued up at service stations across Southern California on Saturday 
began paying the new federal excise tax, which added 5 cents to every gallon of 
gas sold. 
"The government already takes out so much in taxes," said Tiffany Lee, 22, a 
model, who filled her Hyundai Sonata at an Arco Station in Los Angeles' 
Koreatown. "It doesn't seem fair that they're going after more tax money. This 
much more we have to pay? With the economy so slow, it makes you think there's 
something wrong with George Bush." 
The new tax brings the national average of unleaded regular gas at self-service 
stations to $1.41 a gallon, according to the American Automobile Assn. 
While pumping unleaded gas priced at $1.45 per gallon, a 33-year-old municipal 
bond trader from Pasadena also lamented the uneasy state of the nation's 
economy, saying that her husband had just been laid off. 
"He's an investment banker, and his future job prospects look pretty (bad) 
right now," said the woman, who asked not to be identified. To augment the 
household income, she had to go back to work last week at a downtown brokerage 
firm after several months off. 
The price hike will squeeze her family's single income all the more, the woman 
said. 
"I'm not happy with the tax, but what else can the government do?" she asked. 
"With the budget deficit so high, you can cut back, cut back, cut back, only so 
much. It's ridiculous to think you can balance it without raising taxes." 
The tax is estimated to generate $5 billion a year, half of which will go 
toward road and public transportation improvements. Half will be used to 
whittle down the nation's $250-billion budget deficit. 
Many Ventura County motorists were not fazed by the tax hike, saying that 
they've learned to live with the steeper gasoline prices. Several people 
filling their tanks at a Shell station in mid-town Ventura said they could 
envision gas prices going to $2 a gallon. 
"I'll just keep driving," said Nigel Thornell, 46, a medical lab specialist 
from Santa Barbara. "There isn't much choice." 
Fernando Gamua, manager of Seaward Mobil in Ventura, said people initially were 
annoyed by a nickel-a-gallon state tax increase in August and since have 
accepted the escalating costs. 
Still, motorists lined up Friday night at Argett Chevron in Ventura to fill up 
their tanks before the price hike took effect at midnight, said Josh Nudd, a 
station attendant. 
On Saturday, "Some people were kind of upset and wished they'd come in last 
night," Nudd said. 
Pedra Salcedo, a housekeeper in Santa Ana who commutes every day from jobs in 
Newport Beach and Corona del Mar, said she fills up her small pickup twice a 
week, spending from $20 to $25. 
"One day it's $10; another day it takes $12," she said. 
In Chatsworth, Kim Oswald, 28, said she went to five gas stations looking for 
the lowest price before stopping at an Arco station. The price for regular 
leaded gas: $1.27. 
"Some of us are barely making it as it is," Oswald said as she filled up a 
well-worn Pontiac Bonneville. 
More than the extra 5 cents per gallon, motorists seemed to be dismayed at 
having no say over Congress' action to increase taxes in its budget agreement. 
Some were upset that President Bush has not been held accountable to his 
campaign promises of no new taxes. 
"Everything he promised he was going to do, he hasn't followed through on," 
said the Pasadena bond broker. "I'm not happy with him at all. And I'm a 
Republican." 
Times staff writers Christopher Pummer, Kevin Johnson and Amy Louise Kazmin 
also contributed to this story. 
