SPECIAL REPORT: SEEKING A NEW WORLD; 
CASE STUDY / EMIGRATION; 
THIRD WORLD WOES FORCING A NEW EXODUS; 
AROUND THE GLOBE, LEAVING HOME IS THE ONLY RESPONSE TO PROBLEMS SEEMINGLY TOO 
NUMEROUS TO OVERCOME. 
Ahmed Fakhr, a career military officer who risked his life for Egypt in three 
wars, sat back in his chair and paused. The words were clearly difficult. 
"Fifteen years ago, I used to tell my two boys, if you leave this country and 
go work abroad, you are betraying your national cause. Stay here. Develop 
Egypt. The government paid for your health care, for your education. Stay 
here." 
Fakhr sighed, then shrugged. "Today, I am preparing my two boys to emigrate," 
he said. "It's a question of the resources available, and the population." 
In Egypt, a country overwhelmed by a million new mouths every nine months, 
leaving has long been a response to an economy unable to keep up with an 
exploding population. But its desperation is reaching new heights, and similar 
despair is evident in many other countries. 
Like a global game of musical chairs, the world is witnessing the uprooting of 
tens of millions of people as factors once unique to countries like Egypt -- 
economic misery, uncontrolled growth and limited space -- spur an unprecedented 
human exodus. 
"This is likely to be the biggest movement of humanity in world history," said 
Doris Meissner, former commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service. "All corners of the globe will be affected, directly and because of 
the rippling-down effect." 
The list seems endless: Soviet Jews to Israel. Vietnamese to Hong Kong and Hong 
Kong Chinese to Australia, Bolivia, Canada, Belize or Singapore. Moroccans, 
Tunisians and Algerians to France, Spain and Italy. Burmese to Thailand; 
Mozambicans to Malawi. Afghans to Pakistan and Iran. East Europeans to West 
Europe. Filipinos and Gypsies to any place that will take them. 
The United States is hardly exempt. Although only a few of the vast numbers who 
want to emigrate there make it, the total still is enough to change the 
American complexion. In the 21st Century, white descendants of European 
settlers will become a minority -- reflecting the effects of immigration and 
higher birthrates among blacks and Latinos. 
The change in other countries will be just as dramatic. Birth control in the 
West and Japan is creating aging societies and shortages of younger laborers, 
while developing nations produce more people than they can ever hope to 
accommodate, further fueling emigration. 
But the two countervailing trends are unlikely to neatly cancel each other out. 
Indeed, the world's widening demographic imbalance and the momentous flow of 
humanity will be among the most divisive and destabilizing issues of the 21st 
Century. 
Immigration already is emerging as a powerful political issue, contributing to 
resurgent racism and nativism, providing a tempting target for right-wing 
movements and producing a sharper international division between North and 
South. 
Although it cannot be calibrated precisely, emigration appears to be growing 
exponentially. 
"In the past 10 years, since 1980, we've seen at least a doubling of the pool 
of people seeking access to other countries," said David Simcox, director of 
the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington. "And that's a conservative 
estimate." 
Many specialists predict that emigration could double again by 2000, especially 
with political upheavals worldwide. 
The Soviet empire's possible collapse could trigger a massive exodus. More than 
500,000 Soviets left this year after exit permit requirements were scrapped; 
between 7 million and 20 million are expected to leave in the 1990s. One 
million have applied for U.S. residence -- more than the total number of Soviet 
emigres bound for all destinations since World War II. 
In South Africa, the anticipated end of apartheid has led thousands of whites 
to apply for the British citizenship of their ancestors. As Hong Kong nears the 
1997 transfer of sovereignty from Britain to China, 1,000 already are leaving 
weekly. 
Closer to home, 22% of Mexicans who participated in a 1989 Times Mirror poll 
said they were likely to move to the United States -- a figure comparable to 
the number of North Africans and East Europeans who would like to get into 
Western Europe. 
The new human wave underscores a shift from previous eras. In the postwar 
period, most emigrants sought refuge from political oppression or conflicts; 
today, the main motive is economic, often the byproduct of population growth. 
But doors are rapidly closing in front of them as the world runs out of 
inhabitable frontiers. Many industrialized nations no longer want the 
developing world's demographic overflow -- the largely unskilled workers once 
welcomed to foster industrialization. Australia and Canada, which once 
encouraged immigration, have begun to limit refugees and unskilled laborers, 
particularly Southeast Asians, in favor of skilled immigrants. 
And the asylum once offered to those living under totalitarian rule is being 
curtailed as ideologies like apartheid and communism are waning. Nicaraguans 
who fled the Somoza dictatorship in the 1970s or the Marxist Sandinista rule in 
the 1980s now want to escape the economic mess that was inherited -- and 
remains unsolved -- by Managua's new democracy. But no country is eager to take 
them. 
"For all the free flow of information, the tremendous flow of capital, the 
great mobility because of transportation, borders are more impenetrable than 
they've ever been for people," Meissner said. "It's a paradox between the 
rigidity of the state in physical terms and a world where everything else is 
opening up." 
In France, home to 4.5 million immigrants, Jean-Marie Le Pen's right-wing 
National Front has become a credible political force by calling for limits on 
immigration. Likewise, Italy's Lombard League, Austria's Freedom Party and 
Germany's neo-Nazi National Alternative Party are stimulating new waves of 
nativism through anti-immigration campaigns. 
"The spillover of the demographic explosion is no longer going to be confined 
to the cantons and the bush," said Saad Eddin Ibrahim, an Egyptian sociologist. 
"The spillover will go north (to the developed world) and will create tension 
and the emergence of racism and all kinds of chauvinisms in the world." 
Immigrants already are feeling the pressures. Vietnamese in Czechoslovakia have 
complained publicly about increasing assaults and racial insults. Street 
protests erupted in Hong Kong against the government's policy of offering 
asylum to Vietnamese "boat people" -- despite their restriction to detention 
camps. And North Africans in France went on the rampage in a housing project in 
Lyon to protest police harassment of immigrants. 
In addition to the North-South fault line, tension over immigration is playing 
out between East and West. Once an escape route for East Bloc refugees, Austria 
has deployed army patrols along the border in response to domestic protests 
against an influx of Romanians seeking escape from economic hardships. It also 
reintroduced visa requirements. 
The wave of nativism is ironic, because some major political and economic 
powers are facing unprecedented population decreases and will need infusions of 
labor. Indeed, several European countries and Japan have birthrates so low they 
may be unable to maintain their economic superiority. 
Before reunification, West Germany's average birthrate was only 1.4 child per 
couple, well below the 2.1 average that sustains a population without growth. 
Italy's rate is only 1.3, lowest in the world. 
Japan faces the same crisis. Its birthrate dropped from 3.1 per couple after 
World War II to 1.6 today. It also has the longest life expectancy -- and fewer 
workers to support an increasing population of pensioners. 
The developed world -- including Europe, North America and Japan -- accounts 
for 23% of the world population. By 2000, it will generate only 6% of world 
population growth. In contrast, Africa, which contains 12% of the world's 
people, will provide 23% of the growth by 2000. 
Most of the developed world, however, is reluctant to balance its population 
shortfall with new immigrants -- and the accompanying alien cultures, religions 
and higher birthrates that could erode the dominant social fabric. Rather than 
take more immigrants, France introduced welfare and tax incentives to existing 
citizens who have more children. Italy is attempting to lure emigrants back 
from Latin America. 
Ahmed Fakhr's sons -- Hossam, 31, and Haten, 33 -- are among the fortunate few 
who have options. Both are multilingual and college-educated; they have skills 
that open doors. Hossam is a U.N. translator; Haten has worked for U.S. 
companies in Cairo. 
For others, the outlook is bleak. Fakhr, for one, predicts that efforts to 
erect legal barriers to new immigration in many countries will fuel resentment 
and possible strife. 
"The moment these people find that it's their survival," he said, " . . . 
they'll use violence and force." 
