JUSTICES GRAPPLE WITH 1ST 'RIGHT-TO-DIE' CASE; 
SUPREME COURT: CONSERVATIVES DOUBT CONSTITUTION APPLIES. MISSOURI DECISION 
COULD UNDERCUT STATE RULINGS. 
For the first time, the Supreme Court grappled Wednesday with a disturbing 
question that thousands of family members, doctors and nurses face each year: 
Under what conditions can a profoundly ill or comatose person be allowed to 
die? 
Since a 1983 auto accident, Nancy Beth Cruzan has lain unconscious and been fed 
through a surgically inserted tube. Her parents are asking that the tube be 
removed and that their daughter, now 32 years old, be allowed to die. 
Attorneys for Missouri have sought to block her death, asserting the state's 
"unqualified interest . . . in preserving life." 
During an unusually philosophical and wide-ranging argument, the justices 
peppered both sides with questions and, as usual, provided only clues as to how 
they would decide the issue. 
The court's conservative members, who frown on newly minted constitutional 
rights, expressed doubts that the Constitution gives persons an unquestioned 
"right to die." 
However, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the fifth and pivotal member of the 
conservative majority, appeared to be seeking a narrower ruling that would 
balance the interests of parents and the state through a court proceeding. 
In several comments, O'Connor suggested that even though Cruzan's parents 
deserve a chance to speak for the wishes of their unconscious daughter, a judge 
should make the final decision on whether terminating her treatment reflects 
the "best interest" of the patient. 
The Cruzan case has attracted intense interest because her family's plight is 
both tragic and, as a result of medical advances, relatively common. 
Cruzan's life was saved by the quick action of paramedics and emergency room 
doctors, but she suffered irreparable brain damage from the car crash. Like 
about 10,000 Americans, she is characterized as being in a "persistent 
vegetative state," with no hope of recovery. 
Moreover, studies have estimated that of the 1.3 million persons who die each 
year in medical centers, 70% expire after a decision is made either to halt or 
not to undertake extraordinary treatment. 
Beginning with the 1976 case of Karen Ann Quinlan in New Jersey, state courts 
across the nation have declared that the Constitution provides a right to be 
free from unwanted medical care. Typically, these rulings have relied on high 
court statements about a "right to privacy" in matters such as birth control, 
marriage and abortion. 
The Supreme Court has never addressed the issue of whether a person has a right 
to die. A broadly written decision in the Cruzan case, if fashioned by the high 
court's conservatives, could undercut all those state court rulings. 
However, a narrow decision could be limited only to Missouri. That state's 
Supreme Court, in breaking with other state courts, said that the young woman 
cannot be allowed to die unless her parents could furnish "clear and convincing 
evidence" that she wishes all treatment to end. 
Nancy Cruzan once had told friends that she would not like to exist on 
life-sustaining equipment in a hospital but the Missouri court said that 
evidence was not enough. Citing the same "right-to-life" philosophy that was at 
issue in the Missouri abortion case before the high court in the last term, the 
state judges said that they prefer to "err on the side of life" and keep the 
comatose woman alive. 
On Wednesday, a lawyer for the Cruzans told the Supreme Court that state 
officials have intervened in the tragedy and blocked the wishes of the young 
woman and her family. 
"The question is whether the state is going to decide this, or the person's 
family is going to make the decision," said William Colby, a lawyer from Kansas 
City. 
Missouri Assistant Atty. Gen. Robert Presson countered: "This is not a 
situation of the state intruding into someone's privacy. The question is: How 
do you decide for someone who can't decide for herself?" 
The Bush Administration's top courtroom lawyer, Kenneth W. Starr, urged the 
justices to avoid a clear ruling on whether the Constitution creates a "right 
to die." Rather, he said, the court should give the states "wide latitude" to 
make their own policies in this area. 
Despite obvious disagreement among the justices, they appeared to be in accord 
on some points. The conservative members of the court -- Chief Justice William 
H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia -- seemed to agree that a suffering or 
terminally ill patient has a right to die if she had earlier stated -- perhaps 
in writing -- her wish not to have extraordinary medical treatment. 
At the same time, the court's liberals did not object to the notion that the 
state could use a judicial proceeding to make sure that the decision to end 
medical treatment was in the "best interest" of the unconscious patient. 
Throughout the argument, O'Connor kept probing for a middle ground, asking if 
the Constitution requires the state to let the nearest relative decide whether 
an unconscious patient can be allowed to die. 
If the relatives need not make the decision alone, the state could create a 
judicial forum to hear evidence and decide whether a patient's medical 
treatment or food can be removed. 
Left unmentioned Wednesday was the fact that a judge had considered Nancy 
Cruzan's plight during a trial. After hearing testimony from her family, her 
friends and a series of medical experts, Judge Charles Teel Jr. said that the 
young woman had no hope of recovery and would have wanted to die. In May, 1987, 
he issued an order allowing her feeding tube to be removed. 
But the state Supreme Court, on a 4-3 vote, ignored the judge's conclusions and 
overruled his order. 
The Supreme Court likely will issue a ruling in the case (Cruzan vs. Missouri 
Dept. of Health, 88-1503) in the spring. 
