JURY SEES TAPE OF BROWN AFTER DEPROGRAMMING; 
COURTS: DEFENSE LAWYERS IN THE KIDNAPING CASE ATTEMPT TO SHOW THAT THE ALLEGED 
VICTIM WAS LAUGHING ABOUT HER PARENTS' DEPROGRAMMING ATTEMPT, AND NOT MENTALLY 
SHAKEN AS SHE INSISTS. 
Defense attorneys, trying to impeach Ginger Brown's testimony that she was 
terrorized and feared for her life during a five-day deprogramming attempt last 
year, showed a videotape Monday of the woman giggling, laughing and joking 
about the experience hours after she was released by her parents. 
The video was taped by fellow members of Great Among the Nations, who had a 
practice of taping virtually every one of their group meetings and who taped 
Brown as she talked to the group about her experience. 
Brown was ordered to turn over about 20 hours of tapes to defense lawyers two 
weeks ago. Excerpts were shown to the jury Monday, with the defense hoping her 
comments and general demeanor would belie her characterization to jurors of the 
deprogramming effort, in which she said she was beaten and verbally abused. 
Although the audio was of poor quality, Brown could be heard laughing about the 
ordeal and talking about how she coped during the five days, partly by 
recalling old jokes between her and her friends about deprogrammers. 
That scene brought a smile to Ginger Brown as she sat on the witness stand, 
watching the video monitor. 
The tape also showed the group's leader, Benjamin Altschul, encouraging Brown 
to seek the prosecution of her parents and others involved in the abduction. 
"I want you to prosecute," Altschul said to Brown. "I'll be very disappointed 
if you don't. What is your intent?" 
"To prosecute everybody, totally," Brown answered Altschul. 
Altschul then emphasized the need to get publicity about the bruises Brown said 
she suffered during her capture from an Encinitas parking lot and later during 
the deprogramming effort in Escondido. 
"Every bruise will go on TV," Altschul said. "Every bruise. We need to take 
pictures of these bruises and put them on TV. The public needs to know." 
The next scene showed Altschul saying, "I want $100,000 for this," apparently 
alluding to the prospect of a civil lawsuit against Ginger Brown's parents and 
others. Such a lawsuit was later filed. 
And, in comments that were contrary to her own courtroom testimony Monday, 
Brown said on the tape that her abductors made her the offer of spending six 
months at a home in the San Francisco area where she could rest and "do 
research." 
Brown had testified early Monday that, while she was held captive, she was 
given only two options: to disavow her allegiance to Great Among the Nations or 
to be admitted to a psychiatric facility near San Francisco for a six-month 
stay. 
Prosecutor Gary Rempel objected to the showing of the video excerpts, 
complaining that they were out of context and, as a result, could not be used 
to impeach the testimony of Brown, who is the chief witness against the five 
defendants: her parents, Earle and Dorothy Brown; her sister, Holly Brown; Hank 
Erler, at whose mother's home the deprogramming effort transpired, and Cliff 
Daniels, a self-described cult deprogrammer. 
Superior Court Judge David B. Moon Jr. told the jury to disregard some parts of 
the tape -- including Altschul's mention of $100,000, and a reference by Brown 
that she found Erler attractive. 
Herb Weston, Holly Brown's attorney, who introduced the tape after it was 
surrendered by Brown 10 days ago for review by defense attorneys, said the 
tapes showed Ginger Brown mocking the deprogramming effort. 
"It's not so important what she said, but, by the laughing, the whole thing was 
a joke to her," he said outside the courtroom. "The jury is not getting the 
whole story." 
During his cross-examination of Brown, Weston asked her why she didn't call 911 
for police when she had access to a telephone. Brown said she believed the 
phone that she hid under her bed was a cellular phone and that police would 
only be able to track it to Los Angeles. Only now, in court, did she realize it 
was a cordless home phone, Brown said. 
