INVESTMENT OVERSEAS BY U.S. FIRMS RISING 
With all the clamor about foreign investors buying up America, a gradual and 
steady rise in U.S. investment overseas is passing almost unnoticed. 
But economists say U.S. companies are increasing their foreign investments, 
particularly in Europe where the growth opportunities look too good to miss. 
"Europe is a dynamic growth area," said Conference Board consultant James 
Greene. He said European investments are especially attractive in light of the 
European Community's plan to establish a single market by 1992. 
Ford Motor Co.'s acquisition of Britain's Jaguar PLC and General Motors' 
purchase of a 50% stake in Saab-Scania of Sweden are just "the tip of the 
iceberg," said Stephen Cooney, an international investment director at the 
National Assn. of Manufacturers. 
Economists say the accelerated rise of U.S. investment abroad should calm some 
concerns about increasing foreign ownership of American assets. Those concerns 
rose to a fever-pitch recently when the Mitsubishi Estate Co. acquired a 
controlling stake in New York's landmark Rockefeller Center. 
So far this year, American companies have worked out plans to establish 220 
manufacturing projects overseas, up from 180 projects in 1988, Greene said. He 
added that he expects the rising trend to continue for four to five years. 
U.S. direct investment abroad rose by $25.01 billion in the first nine months 
of 1988 to $351.91 billion, after rising by $18.9 billion in all of 1988, 
according to Commerce Department estimates. 
In the same period, foreign direct investment in the United States grew faster, 
as it has for most of the decade. Foreign investment rose by $22.65 billion to 
$350.15 billion after surging $58.44 billion last year. 
Economists attribute the heavy investment flows both in and out of the United 
States to the globalization of manufacturing and other industries. 
Commerce Department economists said U.S. companies plan to spend $48.9 billion 
for plant and equipment at their overseas affiliates, up from $42.6 billion 
last year. Their outlays are expected to rise further in the new year, to $49.9 
billion. 
"The underlying trend is definitely up," although the data is volatile, 
reflecting fluctuating exchange rates and accounting factors, said Cooney at 
the National Assn. of Manufacturers. 
In the past, the driving force behind U.S. investment abroad was the cheap 
foreign labor, said William Archey, an international economist at the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce. But that is no longer the case. "The cost of labor is no 
longer a factor for overseas investment," he said. 
The main reason American companies want to invest overseas today is to 
manufacture goods for foreign markets at a competitive cost, even if the 
start-up expenses are high. 
"American companies will allocate more dollars abroad," as some 200 American 
manufacturers have enough cash to make the expensive overseas investment, 
Greene said. 
The rise in foreign investment, however, could spell trouble for the weak 
domestic manufacturing sector. Economists worry that there could be a repeat of 
the damage caused in the 1960s and 1970s when the domestic sector was hurt by 
the surge of U.S. investment overseas. 
"That is quite true, especially in the chemical and electronics industries," 
Greene said. 
"It is devastating for unions," he said, but added that "workers will not 
suffer much, as the service industry will absorb workers (who are pushed out of 
the manufacturing sector)," he added. 
As U.S. firms prepare to increase their presence in big markets in Europe and 
Asia, Japan's barriers to foreign investment are coming under renewed 
criticism. 
"Japan is a big market, but we cannot invest there," Archey said. He pointed to 
two kinds of obstacles: unique Japanese business practices, such as the 
multilayered distribution system that discriminates against outsiders, and the 
exceptionally high cost of conducting business in Japan. 
Business practices could change over the years, but the cost of doing business 
in Japan is expected to stay high because a much stronger dollar would 
devastate American exporters. 
