ORANGE COUNTY 1990 THE YEAR IN REVIEW; 
YEAR IN REVIEW / HIGH-TECH HIGHS AND LOWS; 
EARLY PROMISE FADED WITH ECONOMY 
The year started out full of promise for many of Orange County's high 
technology companies, but with few exceptions, the second half was a time of 
retrenchment, restructuring, layoffs and in several cases bankruptcy. As the 
economy soured in the wake of the Iraqi invation of Kuwait on Aug. 2, many 
companies cut back on capital spending, and the technology sector suffered. 
Mergers 
Archive Corp., maker of computer storage backup systems in Costa Mesa, 
succeeded in acquiring its archrival, Cipher Data Products in San Diego, for 
$121 million. Archive merged Cipher's operations into its own, laid off 3% of 
the combined work force, and reported a profit for its fiscal year. 
Bankruptcies 
Charles Missler, a self-proclaimed turnaround artist, took his Phoenix Group 
International into bankruptcy proceedings in November after the company failed 
to obtain financing and execute on a highly publicized deal to sell 6 million 
computers in the Soviet Union. 
Layoffs 
Parker Bertea Aerospace, a parts subsidiary of Parker Hannifin Corp. in 
Cleveland, quietly laid off 391 people in Irvine because of a downturn in 
defense spending. The cuts reduced Parker Bertea's local employment to 3,000. 
Patents 
Gilbert P. Hyatt, a workaholic inventor in La Habra, won two basic patents on 
computer technology after a 20-year battle with patent examiners. One of the 
patents, which may establish Hyatt as the father of the microprocessor, could 
enable Hyatt to collect millions of dollars in royalties from the world's 
biggest semiconductor companies. 
Regulation 
In March, Diceon Electronics Inc. in Irvine settled charges that it violated 
environmental laws by dumping toxic wastes into the Los Angeles sewer system. 
Under the agreement, Diceon agreed to pay a $600,000 fine and was placed on 
three years' probation. 
Expansion 
Toshiba America Information Systems, the Irvine-based subsidiary of Toshiba 
Corp., announced plans to triple its U.S. employment and double its work force 
in Irvine by 1992 as part of an accelerated plan to make its products in the 
United States. 
Relocation 
PacTel Cellular, the car phone subsidiary of Pacific Telesis Corp., said in 
November it would move its headquarters from Irvine to San Francisco as part of 
a corporate restructuring. The company said 128 jobs would be transferred as a 
result. 
Proxy Battle 
Martin E. Tash, chairman of a New York publishing firm, led a stockholder 
revolt against Gradco Systems Inc. and its chief executive, Keith B. Stewart, 
alleging that the copier firm's top officers were benefiting from certain 
transactions at shareholder expense. The Tash group successfully unseated 
Stewart and took over Gradco in October after a three-month battle. 
A Losing Stock . . . 
Western Digital Corp. 
Prospects looked promising during the first half of 1990. The company's stock 
price climbed to nearly $15 a share on rumors that it had won a contract to 
build notebook computers for IBM Corp. But the stock began to slide as the 
rumor didn't materialize. It fell below $5 a share after the company announced 
lower earnings forecasts and said it would close down a computer board 
manufacturing plant in Puerto Rico. 
Western Digital Corp. 
Closing price: $4.50 
*indicates a partial period 
. . . And A Winner 
AST Research Inc. 
Its fortunes in the computer industry rose despite the onset of a national 
recession. Buoyed by its penetration of the high-end personal computer market, 
aggressive pricing and an overseas expansion, it is one of the few computer 
companies that consistently outperformed Wall Street's earnings expectations 
last year. The stock rose steadily through the year from just over $10 to 
nearly $34 by late December. 
AST Research Inc. 
Closing price: $33.62 
*indicates a partial period 
Source: The companies and the Los Angeles Times files. 
Los Angeles Times 
