DESPITE ADVANCES, STEREOTYPES STILL USED BY MEDIA 
Even the most severe critics of the nation's news media concede that there is 
now much greater sensitivity in the portrayal of minorities. 
But ethnic stereotypes continue to appear. 
A Los Angeles Times story last year described a Chinese poker player as 
"inscrutable" and as a "classically serene Asian," for example, and a Times 
fashion layout showed a Latino model, wearing a Latino designer's clothes -- 
walking alongside a graffiti-scarred wall. 
"Do all Latinos live surrounded by graffiti?" asks Alan Acosta, assistant 
hiring editor at The Times. 
Racially insensitive and offensive language contributing to harmful stereotypes 
also remains common: 
* The New York Times, Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, Time and Newsweek -- 
among others -- have used the words "invade" or "invasion" when speaking of the 
influx of Asian-American immigrants or Asian-American business acquisitions in 
this country; Asian-Americans say this invokes damaging images and memories of 
World War II. 
* The Los Angeles Times, Boston Globe, Washington Post, Philadelphia Inquirer 
and Chicago Tribune, among others, have used the word "aliens" to describe 
immigrants who are here illegally; Latinos say this word makes them seem 
inhuman -- strange outcasts from another world. They would rather be called 
"illegal immigrants" or "undocumented workers." 
* When a woman jogger was beaten and raped in Central Park last year, the New 
York Times and Washington Post (among others) called her black attackers a 
"wolf pack," but these papers used no such bestial imagery to describe the 
whites who murdered blacks in Howard Beach and Bensonhurst. 
* Television sports commentators, in particular, speak of white athletes as 
being "smart" or "brainy" or as having worked hard; black athletes are often 
described as "natural" or "pure" athletes, "gifted" with great speed or 
strength or jumping ability. These formulations ignore the "natural" physical 
abilities of many white athletes and the demonstrated intelligence of many 
black athletes -- as well as the hours and years of practice many black 
athletes put in developing their skills. 
Andrea Ford, a black reporter at the Los Angeles Times, recalls that when 
Bishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984, a white 
colleague at the Detroit Free Press, where she then worked, wrote a caption for 
a photograph of Tutu dancing in celebration. 
The caption said Tutu "broke into a jig." 
Ford says she tried to explain that "jig" was a derogatory term for "black" and 
that it was both ignorant and insulting to suggest that a native of a country 
with the rich folk dance traditions of Africa would break into an Irish dance. 
Her arguments initially were rejected, Ford says, and she had to appeal to a 
higher-ranking editor before prevailing. 
