TOP AIDS DRUG REGULATOR TO STEP DOWN; 
HEALTH: THE FDA'S DR. ELLEN COOPER ASKS FOR A JOB WITH LESS PRESSURE. EVEN 
CRITICS FEAR HER DEPARTURE WILL SLOW THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW TREATMENTS. 
Trapped in the cross-fire between scientists, drug companies and certain AIDS 
activists, Dr. Ellen Cooper, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's top AIDS 
drug regulator, has requested a transfer to a less-pressured post within the 
agency. 
Cooper refused to comment on the move Friday, but friends, associates and an 
FDA spokesman confirmed her decision to step down. Many said her departure from 
her post as director of the FDA's Division of Anti-Viral Drug Products in 
Bethesda, Md., a job she has held for three years, would be a severe blow to 
attempts to rapidly develop and license effective AIDS treatments. 
"She told me: 'I've had it. I've quit,' " said Dr. Donald Abrams, deputy 
director of the AIDS Program at San Francisco General Hospital and a member of 
the FDA's anti-viral drug advisory committee. "I told her to take a week off. 
She said she needed a lot more than a week." 
Abrams called Cooper's decision "a real loss," adding: "Anybody who takes that 
position is going to be under a lot of pressure and scrutiny." 
FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit said Cooper had asked to be relieved of her post in a 
letter delivered Thursday to Dr. Carl Peck, director of the FDA's Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research. 
Cooper and the FDA had come under sharp attack this week from Martin Delaney, 
executive director of the San Francisco-based AIDS activist group Project 
Inform, for her handling of a Project Inform-led initiative to expedite the 
licensing of the experimental AIDS medications DDI and DDC. Some scientists at 
the National Institutes of Health also have privately criticized Cooper's 
handling of the situation. 
But many AIDS activists, including some who have crossed swords with Cooper in 
the past, came to her defense as word of her decision circulated. In addition, 
they flooded her office with phone calls asking her to stay on. 
"We are heavily lobbying her to reconsider," said Mark Harrington, a member of 
the treatment and data committee of ACT UP/New York, a gay activist group. 
"There is no one who could replace her. She has evolved so much over the past 
two years. Her departure would be a huge disaster for AIDS drug development." 
"We've spent three years developing a working relationship with her," said 
David Barr, assistant director of public policy for Gay Men's Health Crisis, a 
New York AIDS services organization. "This would slow everything down 
terribly." 
Cooper, a 40-year-old pediatrician and mother of four, has a bachelor's degree 
in political science from Swarthmore College, a medical degree from Case 
Western Reserve University and a master's degree in public health from Johns 
Hopkins University. 
In a 1987 interview, she acknowledged that attacks by AIDS activists "bother me 
on a certain level" but added: "I understand the human need to have a scapegoat 
in frustrating circumstances." 
The latest attack on Cooper and the FDA was made by Project Inform's Delaney, 
who on Wednesday accused the agency of taking "an extremely hard line" on 
expedited licensing of DDI, made by Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., and DDC, made by 
Hoffman-LaRoche Inc. 
"If the FDA's current views prevail, there will be no new AIDS drugs for a long 
time to come," Delaney warned. 
But Harrington said the battle over licensing DDI and DDC "is a stupid 
skirmish," especially because both drugs are already available through 
compassionate-use programs to certain patients who fail to benefit from AZT, 
the leading drug available to AIDS patients. 
