TALE OF BIRDS OF PREY AND THEIR PREDATORS; 
PEREGRINE FALCONS ENDANGERED, AND SOME SAY HIGHLY MARKETABLE 
Early this year a Montana forest ranger found an ailing bald eagle by the side 
of a road and took it to Jeff McPartlin, who was known for rehabilitating 
raptors -- birds of prey. 
The eagle had ingested some poison, but McPartlin nursed it and two weeks later 
released it at the headquarters of the Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and 
Parks along the Missouri River near Great Falls. 
Margaret Adams, an Audubon Society official, said she once took an injured 
great horned owl to McPartlin. 
"It took Jeff about 15 minutes to figure out its hips were dislocated," Adams 
said. "He popped them back into place, and it was released within 24 hours." 
That view of McPartlin as a benefactor of birds conflicts sharply with opinions 
of some members of the North American Falconers Assn. (NAFA), who make up about 
two-thirds of the 2,700 falconers -- people who hunt with birds -- in the 
United States. 
One, Steve Sherrod of Bartlesville, Okla., called McPartlin "a traitor to the 
very sport we all love." 
That was after McPartlin was kicked out of NAFA for working undercover for the 
United States Fish and Wildlife Service in "Operation Falcon," which exposed 
illegal trafficking of birds several years ago. 
McPartlin also raises peregrine falcons, a species whose days seemed numbered 
in 1969 when there were 60 nesting pairs in the contiguous 48 states and the 
Fish and Wildlife Service listed it as endangered -- one step from nature's 
Death Row, a victim of the pesticide DDT. 
No longer, it was feared, would people marvel at the high-speed dives and 
mid-air kills of nature's swiftest creature -- a spectacle older than 
Christianity. 
Through the efforts of biologists, countless volunteers and financial 
contributors -- all revolving around the Peregrine Fund Inc. of Boise, Ida. -- 
more than 3,000 peregrines have been bred in captivity to restock the wild, and 
now experts see what signals a major comeback in the annals of conservation. 
But a close look at the shadowy community of falconry also reveals a dark side, 
with links to the Middle East, where falconry traditions run hot and deep. Even 
in the United States, falconers guard their turf against rigid government 
regulation with the tenacity of their birds. 
For example: 
 -- Critics claim that the Peregrine Fund's leaders got the bird listed as 
endangered to acquire a corner on the market and now want peregrine falcons 
down-listed to cash in. 
 -- Fish and Wildlife Service documents show that the Peregrine Fund, although 
supported by public funds and purporting to operate within the framework of the 
Endangered Species Act, has (a) given birds to its directors, (b) exchanged 
birds with one breeder who sells birds to Arabs and who was once convicted of 
illegal trafficking and (c) received donations from Arabs for assisting in 
their breeding programs. 
 -- One Peregrine Fund director, Frank Bond, who recently ran for governor of 
New Mexico and lost, used his influence to retrieve one of his own unregistered 
-- i.e., illegal -- birds that was seized in Operation Falcon. 
 -- Outside biologists and breeders question the Peregrine Fund's motives and 
methods, particularly the practice of replacing the extinct eastern peregrine 
with a stronger hybrid that would be more marketable, should the peregrine come 
off the endangered list. 
 -- Hari Har Singh Khalsa, a falcon breeder in New Mexico, continues to make 
accusations. The Peregrine Fund's defenders say he is motivated by greed. 
Khalsa admits he is "ruthless." 
 -- The North American Falconers Assn. attempts to control publicity about its 
activities to the extent of trying to kill articles it says will be critical. 
 -- Before the FWS hired McPartlin to go undercover, it knew he had once been 
convicted on an illegal falcon-trafficking violation. 
In the falconry game, nobody seems to come off clean. 
If this seems as if it's a lot of fuss over a bird smaller than a chicken, 
consider that the peregrine is a special bird with a special fascination, and 
implications about abuse of the Endangered Species Act are serious. 
Maurice LeFranc, who specializes in birds of prey for the endangered species 
group of the private and nonprofit National Wildlife Federation, says talk of 
down-listing the peregrine from endangered is premature. 
Others say there are plenty of peregrines, which have been protected by law 
since Congress passed the Endangered Species Act in 1973. 
Without the endangered listing, U.S. falconers could trap peregrines in the 
wild for their personal use. As it is, only captive-bred birds from breeding 
stock in captivity before 1977 may be used, and there are strict regulations on 
their sale under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). 
The Fish and Wildlife Service has appointed a recovery team of five experts to 
study the comeback and make a recommendation. Le-Franc says the service is 
lowering its original recovery goals toward an arbitrary judgment that will 
make itself look good. 
"The Fish and Wildlife Service seems to be in a hurry to look at several 
species to down-list," he said. 
The Peregrine Fund was started in 1970 by Dr. Tom Cade when he was teaching 
ornithology at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y. The project to restore the 
sub-species Falco peregrinus was later expanded to facilities at Ft. Collins, 
Colo., and Santa Cruz, where Brian Walton heads the Predatory Bird Research 
Group. 
Seven years ago, the Ft. Collins facility moved into permanent headquarters at 
Boise as the World Center for Birds of Prey. More than 3,000 of the birds have 
been bred in captivity and released in cities or in the wild of half the 
states. 
"Of the total number of birds we have released, in cities or on cliffs or 
towers, about 83% have made it to independence," says Bill Burnham, president 
of the Peregrine Fund and director of the center. 
The level of success has been about the same, city or country. To peregrines, a 
skyscraper is just a man-made cliff, the street below a canyon, and if there is 
a plentiful food supply of pigeons and there are no great horned owls or golden 
eagles -- peregrines' natural predators -- so much the better. 
DDT and its residue, metabolite DDE, that experts say killed birds outright or 
caused eggshells so thin they would shatter in nests, have long been banished 
in the United States. The birds are reproducing in the wild again. Some say the 
crisis is passing. 
And some falconers claim there never was a crisis. 
ARABS AND ADVERSARIES 
McPartlin was the kingpin of the Fish and Wildlife Service's "Operation Falcon" 
sting that climaxed in 1984. 
The sweep led to 68 convictions in the United States, most on misdemeanor 
charges, and resulted in three years of jail time, $501,071 in fines, 1,615 
hours of community service and 78 1/2 years probation. Seven other indictments 
are pending for fugitives who fled the country. The Royal Embassy of Saudi 
Arabia paid its fine with a letter of credit for $150,000 to the U.S. 
Department of Justice. 
McPartlin said 35 NAFA members were convicted. Williston Shor of Mill Valley, 
Calif., editor of Hawk Chalk, the North American Falconers Assn.'s newsletter, 
said there were 27 convictions of NAFA members "that I might call serious . . . 
(and) more than 20 . . . were expelled from NAFA and told that if they were 
good boys they could reapply for membership after either a year or expiration 
of their probation, whichever came last." 
Feelings toward McPartlin were so bitter -- and remain so -- that federal 
agents issued him a bulletproof vest and guarded his house, where the Fish and 
Wildlife Service kept 106 confiscated falcons for several months. 
McPartlin says he never wore the bulletproof vest, but he thinks the 1985 
triple murder of a family named McKay in a house near his might have been meant 
for him. Authorities say it was simply a burglarly gone bad. 
Frank Beebe of Vancouver, Canada, has been called "the father of falconry" on 
the continent. He helped to form NAFA many years ago -- then was drummed out of 
it when Fish and Wildlife Service agents arrested him for robbing raptor nests 
and trying to smuggle birds across the border into the United States. 
Beebe called the charges "totally false" and blamed Cade and colleague Jim 
Weaver, who managed the Cornell program, for setting him up. Beebe later wrote 
a booklet, "The Myth of the Vanishing Peregrine" and still claims that Cade and 
Weaver created the peregrine crisis for their own gain. 
"It was a fraud," Beebe repeated recently. "Peregrines are not now, were not 
then and never were endangered. . . . The endangered listing made peregrines 
million-dollar birds." 
The case against DDT, he said, was supported by comparing normal eggshells to 
the thickness of old eggs in museums and other collections, which he said had 
to be thicker than normal to survive the original removal of their contents. 
Lloyd Kiff disagrees. He is head of the Western Foundation for Vertebrate 
Zoology in Los Angeles and has the world's largest collection of birds' eggs -- 
about 800,000, including hundreds of peregrine eggs. 
"There are no thin-shelled eggs from before (the introduction of DDT in) 1947," 
Kiff said. "(Saying there was no crisis is) a ridiculous assertion." 
Kiff called the Peregrine Fund people "the heroes of our time." 
The Peregrine Fund receives $345,000 of its annual budget of $1.5 million from 
the Fish and Wildlife Service. One FWS source said that for all the good it 
does for endangered species, its money would be better spent elsewhere, but 
that U.S. Senator James McClure (R-Ida.) keeps it coming to Boise. 
Oil-rich Arabs, who have received help from Peregrine Fund personnel in setting 
up their own breeding operations, also have contributed, along with several 
state fish and wildlife departments, including California's. The rest of the 
funding comes from many private individuals and corporations. 
More than that, Khalsa said, the Peregrine Fund has given birds to Arabs with 
an unofficial understanding that a handsome donation would return -- 
tantamount, he implies, to selling birds raised by a research facility 
supported by public funds. 
Khalsa, a former Cornell University student, was born Alan Howell Parrot in New 
England. At 22 he converted to the Sikh religion, changed his name and started 
wearing a turban. 
Burnham denied Khalsa's accusation that birds went to Arabs for money but 
confirmed that Arabs have made contributions in amounts up to $20,000. 
If there is no evidence that the Peregrine Fund is doing business with Arabs 
directly, Khalsa said, they are at least laundering the birds through private 
breeders, such as Steve Baptiste of Reno, Nev. As a result of Operation Falcon, 
Baptiste and former partner David Jamieson were fined $25,000 each and Baptiste 
was put on five years' probation, which expired a year ago, for illegal 
transactions. 
Jamieson now works for Khalsa, who bought Jamieson's breeding farm. 
The Middle East falcon market went on hold with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait Aug. 
2. Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein is believed to be a falconer, and Saudi Arabian 
falconers commonly have taken their birds to Iraq to hunt houbara bustards, a 
falcon's favorite desert prey. 
But Fish and Wildlife Service documents obtained through the Freedom of 
Information Act show exchanges of endangered peregrines between the Peregrine 
Fund and Baptiste as recently as June of '89, and sales by Baptiste to Arabs. 
Considering Baptiste's breeding ranch is owned by Dan Brimm of La Jolla, a 
heavy donor and former Peregrine Fund director, the Peregrine Fund's judgment 
in not keeping Baptiste at arm's length would seem questionable. 
"I don't necessarily disagree," Burnham said. 
In the early '80s, the Peregrine Fund's Cade tried to get permission to support 
his operations by selling birds to Arabs but was refused by the FWS, under a 
condition of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act prohibiting their commercial use. In 
November of 1981, Cade and 11 others -- among them Baptiste -- signed a 
statement of intent with the North American Raptor Breeders' Assn. "to obtain 
necessary changes in federal regulations to permit the sale of captive 
raptors." 
The law was changed in August of '83. 
Later, the progressive recovery of the peregrine drove down the falcon market 
from the boom years of the late '70s and early '80s. Peregrines now can be had 
for as little as $400. 
INSIDE TRADING 
McPartlin and Khalsa claim that the Peregrine Fund has given birds to some of 
its own directors and others in return for favors or services. 
"It's an old-boys' club," Khalsa said. 
Records show that, among Peregrine Fund directors and donors, Robert Berry and 
Dan Konkel of Sheridan, Wyo., each received two birds from the fund since 1988 
and Bond, of New Mexico, got one from Baptiste. 
During Operation Falcon in '84, an unbanded -- i.e., non-registered -- 
gyrfalcon, a large arctic bird owned by Bond, was seized at Baptiste's facility 
near Reno and placed in McPartlin's care at Great Falls along with 105 other 
confiscated birds that McPartlin described as "some of the most unkempt 
creatures I've ever seen." 
According to a Fish and Wildlife Service communication, Bond exerted pressure 
in Washington to get the bird back, and a few months later it was returned to 
Burnham at the Peregrine Fund's former facility in Colorado. 
Burnham said some birds have been given to Peregrine Fund directors -- 
primarily those who donated the use of their personal birds to help start the 
project, and in many cases birds too old to be useful for breeding. 
Recent transactions with Baptiste, Burnham said, were "essentially at the 
request of the state of Nevada. The birds we sent him were anatums (a peregrine 
sub-species) that were released in downtown Las Vegas on a building. The ones 
he sent us were non-anatums. We released those back East." 
The three sub-species of North American peregrines are anatums, Peale's and 
tundra. Only the anatums were considered endangered, but the FWS grouped all 
sub-species as endangered under the act's "look-alike" clause because it 
believed even some experts can't tell one sub-species from another. 
SUPERBIRDS 
Some say the Peregrine Fund is tampering too much with nature. When experts 
decided that anatum peregrines had been wiped out east of the Mississippi, a 
hybrid sub-species of Peale's and Spanish peregrines produced by artificial 
insemination was used for reintroduction -- in effect, some scientists say, 
replacing apples with oranges, when more "apples" were still available in the 
West. 
But the Peregrine Fund said the eastern and western birds were too different. 
Critics say they used that as an excuse to create a superior, more marketable 
bird from test tubes. 
Sherry Teresa, an associate wildlife biologist specializing in endangered 
species with the California Department of Fish and Game, said: "They don't 
breed that way in the wild. It's just for falconers to have these superbirds . 
. . like (breeding) a grizzly bear with a polar bear." 
Former Peregrine Fund director Dan Brimm said: "I'm a little uneasy with it 
myself." 
Dean Amadon, chairman emeritus of ornithology at the American Museum of Natural 
History in New York and author of "Eagles, Hawks and Falcons of the World," 
said: "I would favor taking something as close as you could, but . . . I don't 
think any harm has been done by mixing up these birds. The important thing is 
we're getting 'em back." 
Clayton White, a professor of zoology at Brigham Young University, is both a 
director of the Peregrine Fund and a member of the FWS-appointed recovery team. 
"The Peregrine Fund has created some problems because it has, by default, more 
or less monopolized the breeding and turning loose of peregrines," White said. 
"Private breeders want to be able to sell their product. (But) the Peregrine 
Fund makes no money on this." 
Burnham said that 90% of the peregrines bred at Boise are anatums. 
Besides, says Berry, president of the North American Raptor Breeders' Assn., 
non-endangered species, such as gyrfalcons, are plentiful in Canada and Alaska. 
"We've created an artificial market for something that is common," he said. 
"There will never be any profit in the sale of falcons." 
THE FEDS 
The Montana license plates on McPartlin's mud-splattered pickup truck read 
"PERE GYR," the mark of a dedicated falconer. 
But he has been repeatedly discredited in Hawk Chalk, the NAFA newsletter, 
which has cited his '72 conviction for transporting two gyrfalcons across state 
lines without proper permits. McPartlin says the violation was inadvertent, 
although he pleaded guilty and paid a fine of $200. 
Shor said: "He was convicted (by NAFA) of lying on his application for 
membership." 
NAFA claims that McPartlin approached the Fish and Wildlife Service, offering 
to entrap and snitch on falconers. 
"Absolutely not," says Nando Mauldin, who was then special agent in charge of 
special operations for the FWS. 
Mauldin says that in 1977, aware of McPartlin's arrest record, he and agent 
Dave Kirkland went to Montana to recruit McPartlin. They paid him $2,000 a 
month. Afterward, McPartlin received several awards and commendations, 
including the prestigious Chevron Conservation Award, plus a $15,000 bonus from 
the FWS in ceremonies at Washington, D.C. His wife received $5,000. 
But he has been blacklisted by falconers' organizations nationwide. 
NAFA also has accused McPartlin of trying to arrange to have two 
falconer-breeders killed. That accusation arose from a curbside conversation on 
June 28, 1984, between McPartlin and Marcus Ciesielski, a West German who with 
his brother Lothar was reputed to be a major falcon smuggler. 
McPartlin tells it this way: "The night before takedown, I was with another 
(FWS) federal agent, John Gavitt, sitting on a curb in front of a motel in 
Great Falls with Marcus Ciesielski a few hours before his arrest. 
"I said, 'Marcus, (David) Jamieson is really causing me trouble . . . turning 
me in to the feds.' 
"He said, 'Oh, maybe we help. Maybe many broken bones and six months in 
hospital will work.' 
"I said, 'Well, it's both Jamieson and (Steve) Baptiste, and I don't think 
(that) will do it.' 
"And he looked at me calmly and said, 'Well, then we terminate them.' 
"I said, 'What will it cost?' 
"He said, 'You are a friend of my father. Maybe a little bit of money for the 
airplane and one female gyrfalcon.' 
" 'How will you do it?' 
" 'We have a man who comes over from Ankara, Turkey, and Interpol can't catch 
him.' 
"The whole purpose of that conversation was to determine the ability of the 
Ciesielskis to pull a hit on McPartlin, once it was learned that I was acting 
as an undercover federal agent." 
Operation Falcon was climaxed the next day with coordinated raids by U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service and Canadian Wildlife Service agents on suspected illegal 
falcon traffickers in the two countries. 
McPartlin had tried to "sting" falconers by selling them birds he had removed 
from the wild legally, under a special permit he had been issued by the FWS. 
Canadian journalist Paul McKay spent a year researching the operation, then 
wrote an award-winning report in Whig-Standard magazine two years ago and 
published a book expanding the story: "The Pilgrim and the Cowboy." 
McKay's view is that many honest and innocent falcon fanciers were hurt in the 
sting. His treatment was not kind to McPartlin or Khalsa. 
NAFA's Shor said: "I examined the Operation Falcon data and concluded it was a 
fraud." 
The National Wildlife Federation's LeFranc disagrees. 
"That's what the falconry people would like everyone to think," he said. "They 
argue that if the market wasn't there, they wouldn't have done anything 
illegal." 
Dave McMullen, the FWS' assistant regional director for law enforcement on the 
West Coast, based in Portland, Ore., said that illegal trafficking of falcons 
has dropped off since Operation Falcon. 
"We have no information of any money going back to the Peregrine Fund for the 
sale of falcons . . . laundered or otherwise . . . from illegal birds," he 
said. 
McMullen also said: "I don't know why (NAFA) kicked (McPartlin) out. I don't 
think NAFA condones illegal activity . . . (or why it) punishes somebody that 
reports it. I don't understand why they're so obsessed." 
A P.R. PROBLEM 
McPartlin now lives in a small house on two acres of the rolling prairies of 
Montana. He keeps several falcons and flies them in the surrounding fields. 
At the kitchen table he refers to his log of Operation Falcon and says that of 
63 contacts made, he initiated only six, and that 56 of the contacts were NAFA 
members. He said there are 1,200 taped conversations to support his 
allegations. 
Elsewhere, Shor referred to his own records and provided details of a survey of 
NAFA members indicating that 26 were approached first by McPartlin, who offered 
illegal deals to several. 
Either way, NAFA felt the damage was done. Jim Weaver then-president of NAFA, 
wrote in Hawk Chalk in April of '85: ". . . we have a monumental public 
relations problem." 
Writer Stephen J. Bodio of Magdalena, N.M., resigned from NAFA in '85 after 
Weaver asked him to kill his book, "A Rage of Falcons," and an excerpt that was 
to appear in the Smithsonian magazine. Bodio refused -- but said Weaver did 
persuade a photographer to withdraw his photos for the excerpt. 
Bodio said NAFA had "finally succumbed to the paranoia I have been arguing 
against for 10 years. . . . As long as we act as though we have something to 
hide, the public will assume that we do." 
Who is paranoid? McPartlin? NAFA? Everybody in falconry? 
In his account of Operation Falcon, McKay wrote that Khalsa was a government 
informant and was "universally loathed" afterward for his "treacherous ethics . 
. . (and) double-crosses." 
McPartlin was the government's only undercover operative. Khalsa's involvement 
was limited to snitching on two bird smugglers -- McKay's "Pilgrim and the 
Cowboy," Glen Luckman and McPartlin, respectively. 
Khalsa admits his mission in life is not to make friends. 
"I have worked very hard to put my competition out of business," Khalsa said. 
"Every one of my competitors is terrified of me. I am ruthless. I don't care if 
they hate me. If you were pulling a big scam and I was yelling about it, you'd 
hate me, too. 
"I am also totally honest. I never sold my soul to the Peregrine Fund to get 
birds." 
Six years ago, Operation Falcon found no wrongdoing in the Peregrine Fund. 
Burnham of the Peregrine Fund said: "They would have loved to get us for 
something." 
He said that during Operation Falcon he got a call from McPartlin but refused 
to become involved with him. 
Berry said he also shied away from McPartlin. 
"I never returned the calls," he said. "I was totally convinced he was 
marketing birds (illegally). I never dreamed he was a federal agent. (Other) 
guys got sucked in by him." 
One source suggested that the FWS laid off the Peregrine Fund because it feared 
being embarrassed by its own heavy financial support of the organization. 
Washington columnist Jack Anderson reported in 1976 that the CIA, attempting to 
curry favor with Middle East oil interests, had trapped falcons in Alaska to 
give to Arabs. That operation was not linked to the Peregrine Fund. 
But David Ellis, who heads the FWS' Captive Propagation Unit at the Patuxent 
Wildlife Research Center in Laurel, Md., said: "There have been a lot of 
interesting things done. I have been really concerned. I think there should be 
an audit, and the audit should be made public." 
Until a few years ago, Ellis was based in Arizona, where his 11-year study 
disputed a FWS finding and showed that peregrines there were thriving and 
didn't need a listing, contrary to what the Peregrine Fund was saying. The 
Arizona Game and Fish Department announced Nov. 6 the discovery of 10 more 
breeding pairs and a total of 42 territories of the state with reproducing 
peregrines. 
And James C. Bednarz of the Hawk Mountain Sanctuary Assn. in Pennsylvania 
questions the effect of captive-breeding programs, noting that population 
increases have occurred in 17 of 30 global regions surveyed without the aid of 
reintroduction, and that a ban on pesticides may be making more of a 
difference. 
Tom Smylie, a FWS raptor expert in Albuquerque, N.M., conceded that in running 
the Peregrine Fund, Cade might have "stepped on some toes, and there are still 
some hard feelings -- but he saved a species . . . one of the few endangered 
species that has been saved." 
FALCON FUTURES 
Brian Walton, the Santa Cruz researcher, is concerned that if the FWS 
down-lists the peregrine, California may follow suit. 
"The peregrine is making a great recovery in several areas of the United 
States," Walton said. "But we still have the pesticide problem in many areas." 
If the bird is to be down-listed, it could cost the Peregrine Fund its federal 
funding. Burnham said the center would try to carry on, without its most 
glamorous bird. 
"When the Peregrine Fund was created, there was no intention of us existing 
beyond recovery of the peregrine falcon," Burnham said. "There are a limited 
amount of resources that now need to be directed toward other species that need 
it." 
A major "Maya Project" is under way to study tropical raptors in Guatemala and 
Belize. Peregrine Fund biologist Willard Heck spends much of every year on the 
island of Mauritius off the east coast of Africa, working to save the rare 
Mauritius kestrel. 
Those and more than 40 other troubled species have been brought to Boise for 
study and breeding in buildings apart from the peregrines. There are malevolent 
looking black African eagles, American bald eagles, golden eagles, elf owls and 
Fiji and aplomado falcons. The facility conducts about 3,000 people through on 
tours each year. 
The peregrines are isolated in a shed similar to a cellblock. They flash their 
lethal talons as they swoop to the barred windows in the doors. They eyeball 
strangers fiercely. 
Especially during nesting time, scientists such as Heck and Cal Sandfort, the 
technical associate for raptor propagation, put in long hours for low salaries, 
watching over the various species via an array of TV monitors and through slits 
in doors. 
Although some claim the Peregrine Fund has ulterior motives to down-list the 
bird, Heck differs. 
"That's the way the Endangered Species Act works," he says. "A lot of 
protectionists are using the act to protect things in many directions. For 
example, to use the spotted owl to protect an old-growth forest, in my mind, is 
not the way it was meant to work. 
"You put things on (the list) when it's needed, but you're also obligated to 
take things off when it's not needed." 
The Peregrine Fund continues to release 200-300 birds a year. 
Burnham said: "There's no way in the world everybody's going to like us. But 
when you look at the whole record, it's pretty good." 
