PSYCHIATRIC WARD TREATS WOMEN ONLY; 
HEALTH: ADMINISTRATORS DESCRIBE THE UNIT AS A HAVEN FOR RAPE VICTIMS AND OTHERS 
WITH GENDER-RELATED PROBLEMS. CRITICS SAY IT'S A MARKETING GIMMICK. 
A private psychiatric hospital in Thousand Oaks has opened the county's first 
ward exclusively for women, a controversial new wing staffed primarily by women 
and designed to tackle gender-related problems. 
Although Charter Hospital administrators describe the third-floor unit as a 
haven for rape victims and women who suffer from depression or eating 
disorders, the hospital's critics and competitors dismiss it as little more 
than a clever marketing gimmick. 
Moreover, some psychiatric experts emphasize that women, even those brutalized 
by members of the opposite sex, should be hospitalized with men. To isolate 
women, they argue, only makes it more difficult for them to re-enter a society 
filled with men. 
Charter's directors agree that mixed groups may be helpful during the latter 
stages of therapy; however, they stress that initially some women need to move 
slowly in a secure environment. Eighty percent of the patients in the unit, 
which has operated for less than three months, have been victims of physical or 
sexual abuse. 
"There are a lot of women out there suffering and I want to provide a safe 
place for them where they can come together and work together," said Dr. Uzma 
Khalid, the unit's founder. 
Located near Westlake High School, Charter is one of four private psychiatric 
hospitals in Ventura County. The nine-month-old hospital reserves 21 of its 80 
beds for women. Treatment costs about $825 a day. 
Since the unit opened in early October, about 30 women have been counseled 
there. A usual course of treatment lasts about four weeks, with patients 
attending group therapy sessions that include psychodrama role-playing and 
other techniques. 
On a recent autumn afternoon, patients gathered in one of the day rooms for a 
therapy session aimed at encouraging them to talk about painful experiences. 
Eleven women sat stiffly in a circle, some shaking their feet in nervous 
tension. 
"When I was a child I was very lonely," one woman began. In soft, soothing 
tones, the therapist pried, pushing the woman to recall being molested by her 
brother. Eventually the woman grew angry and started to cry. Someone passed her 
a box of tissues. 
"I thought if I told anyone they'd think I was dirty," she said. 
"So did I," another woman agreed softly. "I can relate," added a third. 
Although the patients' conditions range from depression to bulimia, the 
experiences that lead to problems are often similar because the women are 
struggling in a male-dominated society, said Pary R. Banki, a Westlake Village 
therapist who conducted the session that afternoon. 
Banki supports conducting group therapy sessions exclusively with women to 
allow patients to share their common experiences. 
For example, when Joanne, 41, entered Charter after she lost a baby in her 
sixth month of pregnancy, she said that talking with other women who had lost 
children gave her great comfort. The miscarriage, Joanne's second, catapulted 
her into a severe depression and eventually into Charter Hospital in October, 
where she became one of the first patients at the women's unit. 
"Men aren't always the right people to be discussing these things with," said 
Joanne, who asked that her real name not be used. "A man doesn't know what it's 
like to be pregnant and having a baby growing inside of you." 
The unit's critics, including other private psychiatric hospitals in the 
county, contend that in the real world women and men must interact and should 
be forced to do so in therapy. That is the approach used at Vista Del Mar 
Hospital in Ventura. 
"We haven't seen enough of a need to develop a special program all around" 
women, said Lynn Matthews, the hospital's director of marketing. 
Fran Rogoff, clinical program coordinator at Pacific Shores Hospital in Oxnard, 
echoed those sentiments. She said most women's issues, such as sexual abuse or 
domestic violence, also involve men and should be dealt with among men who may 
not pose the same threat. 
Charter's administrators do not dispute the need for its patients to have 
therapy in groups that include men later in their recovery. But some women, 
particularly those who have been victims of male aggression, want or even need 
to be in an all-female environment. 
"There's a need for women on a daily basis not to have to confront men and 
reawaken the hurts and pains that will make it difficult," said Susan Anderson, 
the unit's nurse manager. Some women, she said, are simply not comfortable 
discussing their experiences in front of men. 
Khalid referred to national studies to underscore the need for a women-only 
unit. Statistics show that one in four women suffer from depression compared to 
one in 10 men. Furthermore, women are more often the victims of rape and 
incest, she said. 
But Dr. Ron Thurston, president-elect of the Southern California Psychiatric 
Assn., fails to see the need for a women-only unit. "I hope people go to 
hospitals for better reasons than for being women," he said. 
Specialized units of this type are often little more than marketing tools, he 
said. 
Although Thurston stressed that he was not referring specifically to Charter, 
he pointed out that public psychiatric clinics never need to advertise because 
they are overpopulated. 
"The distortion is that we have mentally ill people sleeping under bridges 
while certain sectors of health care are advertising for services for women's 
needs," he said. 
Five years ago, Ventura County had no private psychiatric hospital. Today, at 
least four are competing for people's insurance dollars, Thurston said. That 
competition forces private hospitals to tailor programs to interest specific 
types of people. 
"The commercial hospitals do direct advertising on the radio to people with 
insurance money to spend," Thurston said. 
Pine Grove Hospital in Canoga Park opened the San Fernando Valley's first 
women's unit almost two years ago. The 14-bed unit charges about $1,000 a day 
and offers programs similar to those provided by Charter. 
Pine Grove patients "get exactly what we're marketing," said Donna Burns, 
program director and founder of the hospital's women's program. "It was my goal 
to develop a women's program for women who would never come into a hospital 
environment because of the stigma." 
Like Charter, the unit employs an all-female nursing staff with male therapists 
available for those patients who request them. 
"We believe that there should be a healthy balance, but we want to make sure 
that the nursing staff is female so they can come out at night in their pajamas 
and feel OK," Burns said. 
Governmental and private agencies that monitor psychiatry do not keep data on 
the number of women's units throughout the country, but those in the profession 
believe that hospitals began specializing care toward women about five years 
ago. 
The trend seems to parallel the evolution of women's roles, which now include 
careers as well as primary responsibility for children and aging parents. It 
also comes at a time when medicine in general has become more specialized, 
often focusing on individual areas of study. 
"Part of the advantage of grouping patients at all is having patients with 
common problems together," said Dr. Nada Logan, chairwoman of the American 
Psychiatric Assn.'s committee on women and director of psychiatric education at 
the University of Chicago. 
"There are certain kinds of symptoms, disorders and stresses that are much more 
common in one gender than in another," Logan said. "Depression is very common 
in women. Eating disorders are much more common in women than men. Women still 
bear the vast majority of responsibility for care of dependent persons in 
families, be they children or be they elderly. That's an enormous life demand." 
If specialized programs can make psychiatry more "user friendly," more people 
may feel comfortable asking for help, said Joel Yager, a professor in the 
department of psychiatry and biobehavioral sciences at UCLA's School of 
Medicine. 
"If, in fact, it attracts and provides good service to people who need it . . . 
then that's a benefit," Yager said. "If there are women who for whatever 
prejudices believe they'll be more comfortable" in an all-women's unit, 
"they're more likely to go." 
