CINEFILE 
Bette Midler and Cher will pool their thespian and musical talents to topline 
Heritage Entertainment's "Angry Housewives." The musical comedy -- which ran on 
stage for over five years in its hometown of Seattle and played at Los Angeles' 
Odyssey Theatre last year -- concerns four fed-up women who transform their 
lives by forming a punk rock band. A.M. Collins, who wrote the book (her 
partner, Chad Henry, wrote the music and lyrics), has penned the first-draft 
screenplay. The film is currently being developed at Disney's Touchstone Films. 
. Riding the crest of the huge success of "Uncle Buck," John Candy may do three 
pictures in 1990. First up is "Delirious," an MGM comedy written by Fred 
Freeman &amp; Lawrence J. Cohen ("Start the Revolution Without Me") and 
directed by Tom Mankiewicz ("Dragnet"), in which Candy stars as a soap opera 
writer. Candy will follow this by co-starring with Dan Aykroyd in an untitled 
Warner Bros. comedy written by Aykroyd. Meanwhile, the search continues for a 
director for "On the Air," the Candy-Rick Moranis comedy for Imagine Films. . . 
. 
Howard Zieff will direct Columbia Pictures' "I Married an Ax Murderer," a 
comedy written by Robbie Fox. . . . Morgan Creek has decided to develop a 
sequel to its successful baseball comedy, "Major League." . . . Corky Nemec, 
Emmy-nominated for "My First Name Is Steven," joins Charlton Heston, Peter 
Boyle, Jack Palance and Tim Matheson in the sci-fier "Solar Crisis," the first 
film for the Japan America Picture Co. Richard Sarafian directs. . . . 
Screenwriter Jere Cunningham will make his directorial debut for New Line 
Cinema in early 1990 with his original script "Centurion." The "Predator"-like 
action tale has elite army robots hunting down a Special Forces squad. . . . 
More comic-book heroes are headed for the big screen. New Line has acquired the 
rights to both the Mask from Dark Horse Comics and Ghostrider from Marvel. . . 
. Meanwhile, Warner Bros. and Silver Pictures are developing "Richie Rich" with 
Fred Savage of TV's "The Wonder Years" attached as the poor little rich boy. 
KIRK HONEYCUTT 
