THE GOSPEL OF GAY, ACCORDING TO HARRY HAY 
It's not just the tasteful double strand of pearls around his neck or the 
single cascading earring that sets Harry Hay apart from your average 
78-year-old activist. It's his controversial theories on the nature of gay men, 
his demand that gays eschew "hetero-assimilation," his imperious demeanor and, 
most important, his only recently acknowledged place as father of the modern 
gay movement. 
Hay is well known in the gay community, but has never sought the limelight 
outside of it. That may change now that he is the subject of a new, aptly named 
biography, "The Trouble With Harry Hay" (Alyson). 
A lifelong Angeleno, Hay lives with John Burnside, his lover of 28 years, in an 
overstuffed cottage off Melrose Avenue near the Paramount Pictures studios. 
Recently, he sat at a book-covered table in the book-filled dining room of his 
book-crammed home doing what he does best: holding forth. 
He spoke about his theory of "gay consciousness" -- that gays are 
non-competitive, spiritually evolved beings who wrongly attempt assimilation 
into "hetero society," a phrase that sounds an awful lot like an epithet on his 
lips. (Don't even ask what he thinks of the Washington, D.C., men who filed 
suit last month to get a marriage license.) 
"All hetero boys are hopelessly competitive with each other," said Hay. 
"Competition is the way of life. But we gay people are not competitors. We want 
to share with one another. We're not the slightest bit interested in winning. 
This is not our way. And as I've always said, when we imitate heteros, we 
usually do it badly. We either overdo or underdo. Mostly, we overdo." With a 
coy shrug and a flick of his pearls, he drives the point home. 
"I think that's ridiculous," said David Thomas, a gay professor who is chairman 
of the politics department at UC Santa Cruz. "I know and Harry knows plenty of 
homosexuals who are competitive. Harry's way of thinking is very seductive, in 
some ways attractive and in some ways dangerous. It's basically a mythical way 
of thinking. But it can slide into a game of 'gayer than thou' because if 
somebody comes along and identifies homosexuals who are competitive, he says, 
'Well, they're not really gay.' " 
"This is a very controversial issue," said Martin Duberman, a gay professor at 
City University of New York who specializes in gay and lesbian history. "I 
think Harry would be hard put to demonstrate that the same gay personality type 
repeats itself across history. 
"Part of me strongly believes that gays are in fact different. I don't believe 
gays are different biologically, but they . . . identify with qualities which 
in our either/or society have been parceled out only to women. I think gay men 
do identify with being nurturing and supportive. As a group, they are less 
aggressive and competitive than straight men, but there are plenty of gay men 
who are at least as aggressive as straight men. 
"Harry has always had a tendency to infuriate people," said Duberman. "That 
kind of strong, confident personality is always likely to produce sparks. He 
has always been an admirable figure and an essential figure in our history. 
Without him, the movement would probably have gotten started later and 
differently. To have that kind of pioneering spirit, that willingness to get up 
essentially all alone and confront what was then a consensus view of 
homosexuality as pathology, takes extraordinary courage and will." 
Even Thomas, who disagrees with some of Hay's most closely held beliefs, is 
laudatory: "Harry is the most original and interesting figure that the American 
political gay movement has created. He should be better known." 
Hay's indefatigable political activism and in-your-face theories on the 
importance of gays make his life story entertainingly readable. In the 1930s he 
was introduced to Marxism and agitprop theater by his then lover, left-wing 
organizer Will Geer (the late actor who portrayed Grandpa on "The Waltons"). In 
the 1940s, he taught classes in Marxism. In 1950, he co-founded the country's 
first gay political organization, the Mattachine Society, for which he has 
earned his place in modern gay history. 
The Mattachine, named for a secret European all-male society of the 15th 
Century, was structurally modeled after the Communist Party's cells and secret 
fraternal orders. It had a pyramid structure, with discussion groups at the 
bottom and the small circle of founders at the top. Hay's biographer, Stuart 
Timmons, describes it as "an underground resistance." 
One of the Mattachine founders told Timmons that "Harry is the first person I 
know who said that gays are a minority -- an oppressed minority. This was the 
heart and core of the Mattachine movement and all subsequent gay movements." 
In 1952, the group took on as a cause the entrapment arrest of one of its 
members, who was accused of soliciting sex with a policeman. It set up the 
Citizens Committee to Outlaw Entrapment to raise funds for the defense and to 
educate Angelenos about the Police Department's harassment of gays. When the 
trial resulted in a hung jury and the judge dismissed the charges, the 
Mattachine Society declared it the first time an admitted homosexual had been 
freed after being charged with vagrancy and lewdness. 
After being ousted from the Mattachine Society in a complicated power struggle 
over political approaches, Hay spent the '60s in a kind of withdrawal, then 
returned to politics in the '70s with a move to New Mexico and involvement in 
Native American causes. 
On the verge of the '80s, Hay co-founded the Radical Faeries, a gay spiritual 
group that has worldwide chapters that meet once every year or two for woodsy 
retreats, in which participants are urged to "tear off the ugly green frog skin 
of conformity and find the beautiful fairy prince underneath." The group is a 
New Age synthesis of the spiritual and political, and is the wing of the gay 
movement that most closely expresses Hay's theory of gay pacifism. 
A conversation with Hay is a challenge. His manner is a combination of 
aristocratic kindness and didacticism mixed with outrage and italicized 
condescension if he thinks he's been asked a particularly stupid question. One 
question that set him off during a recent interview was this: "How could you 
have been so active in the Communist Party in the 1940s when it was so 
fervently anti-homosexual?" 
The fist pounds the table. The voice rises. 
"That is the silliest statement I have ever heard," he huffs. "The point is 
that homosexuality doesn't even exist then! The point is you're not getting the 
point! As far as society is concerned, I am a hetero who performs nasty acts 
with men! This is what I'm told. This is all I know. I have a predilection to 
love men and this is dirty, this is awful, this is terrible and nowhere in the 
world is this accepted, nowhere! So I am fighting oppression (as a Communist), 
recognizing that I am an oppressed person. I know it and feel it, but I don't 
have the words for it at that moment." 
Timmons said one of his greatest challenges in writing the book was coming to 
grips with the apparent contradiction of Hay's dedication to the Communist 
Party and the party's condemnation of homosexuality. 
"A lot of younger people have felt that this is a glaring contradiction and I 
struggled a lot when I was writing this," said Timmons, 33. "It's really hard 
to understand how underground the whole gay scene was and how there really was 
not that kind of identity and community and culture that we have so taken for 
granted today." It's not just that the Communist Party hated homosexuality, 
Timmons explained; the whole world hated it. Homosexuality was thought to be an 
arrested stage of heterosexuality, undesirable and curable. 
"The positive gay identity is something we discovered in the 1950s," said Hay. 
"This is what the Mattachine Society did. It doesn't exist until that time. 
When this guy (Timmons) tried to to ask me what the gay lifestyle was in 1929, 
I said, 'Honey, we didn't have a lifestyle in 1929!' That is a stupid statement 
because that's not a concept we even had yet." 
Said Timmons: "Many of the members of Harry's generation share the same 
frustration. Harry gets a little louder or upset. Young gay people and younger 
people in general suddenly think they know it all about the way it was and the 
way it should have been. The enormous pain and suffering and struggle of 
building (a movement) from the ground up just gets wiped out with one remark. 
As far as the Communist Party went, it was the place where many gays had the 
best chance of finding people who could look at them maybe some day as an 
oppressed group. They really did feel hopeful there, and more comfortable than 
they could have felt almost anywhere else." 
Until the 1960s, it was not at all unusual for gay men to marry, hoping to 
effect a "cure." Hay tried marriage after receiving what he calls "tragic 
advice" from a therapist, who told him his sexual past could be shut like a 
book and the future, opened like a new one. It wasn't to be. 
His wife, Anita, entered the marriage knowing he was gay, but believing that 
Hay could change. Marriage for Hay was misery. He lead a double life, cruising 
the parks and other homosexual haunts, and then in 1950, fell madly in love 
with the man with whom he would make history: Rudi Gernreich with whom he would 
co-found the Mattachine Society. (Fifteen years later, Gernreich would become 
famous as the designer of the topless bathing suit. In keeping with the 
Mattachine's code of semi-secrecy, Gernreich's critical role in its founding 
was not revealed publicly until after his death in 1985.) 
When Hay, father of two girls, finally ended his marriage in 1951 on grounds of 
extreme cruelty, and began to live an openly gay life, his family was deeply 
wounded by a two-pronged shame: divorce and homosexuality. Anita died of cancer 
in 1983. One daughter does not speak to Hay; his relationship with the other is 
cordial but distant. 
"Harry totally went against the grain of society," said Timmons. "The big, 
distinguishing feature of Harry Hay is that he has encouraged people to be more 
gay, and in that way, to be more themselves. He has stopped all the 
accommodationist compromises that most civil rights-oriented activists will 
encourage. Therein lies his true, unique contribution." 
Eventually, Hay was expelled by members of the Mattachine Society for the "sin" 
that would alienate his friends and fellow activists over and over: his 
irascible imperiousness. The same thing would eventually happen with the 
Radical Faeries, although Hay is now nearly untouchable as the elder statesman 
of the movement. 
These days, Hay's age may protect him somewhat from the attitudes that lead, 
for example, to Timmons' being chased and vilified by three men on the streets 
of Seattle during their book tour over Thanksgiving. 
Last summer, on a plane flying from Charlotte to Asheville in North Carolina, 
Hay was glared at by a trio of conservatively dressed families, which is about 
the most threatening thing that happens to him. 
"All I was wearing was just a simple string of false pearls, as you can see," 
said Hay. "On my way back from the head, one of the mothers stopped me and 
said, 'Why do you wear that?' and I said, 'Well, because I like it!' And I 
scooted past her back to my seat." 
He isn't optimistic for the civil rights of gays. 
"We know that gays are visible," he said. "We have busted out and we are all 
over the place. How safe are we? We have the word of the Honorable Supreme 
Court Justice Byron White, who in 1986 said that under the U.S. Constitution, 
homosexuals have no rights. (White wrote the majority opinion in a case that 
upheld a Georgia law outlawing acts of sodomy.) It hadn't been said openly that 
blatantly before. 
"So consequently, I would say we were less safe in '86 than we were in 1950 
before that statement was made. Back in the days when we were in the woodwork, 
you didn't know we were there. We were suffering, it was awful, but at least we 
were safe." 
