APPEAL COURT REFUSES TO FREE HUNTER FROM JAIL; 
CONVICTED: J. DAVID INVESTMENT SCANDAL FIGURE WILL REMAIN BEHIND BARS UNTIL HER 
FEBRUARY SENTENCING. 
Nancy Hoover Hunter, convicted earlier this month in San Diego federal court of 
four counts of tax evasion, must remain in jail pending formal sentencing in 
February, a federal appeals court has affirmed. 
Hunter failed to convince the court that there was no risk she would flee 
should she be freed on bail, a three-judge panel of the U.S. 9th Circuit Court 
of Appeals said in a three-sentence ruling issued late Tuesday in San 
Francisco. 
U.S. District Judge Earl B. Gilliam ordered Hunter to await sentencing at the 
federal Metropolitan Correctional Center in downtown San Diego immediately 
after she was found guilty Dec. 11 of the four counts of tax evasion. 
The jury that convicted Hunter of those four counts also acquitted her of 
another tax-related charge but deadlocked on 192 other counts that centered on 
her role as a top executive in the La Jolla investment firm J. David Co. from 
1979 to 1984. 
In all, investors lost about $80 million in the J. David affair, a giant Ponzi 
scheme in which prosecutors alleged that Hunter played a key role. The 192 
counts stemmed from Hunter's alleged involvement in the Ponzi scheme, a pyramid 
in which money from new investors is used to pay off earlier investors. 
Hunter's defense lawyers contended she was blinded by her love for the firm's 
founder, J. David (Jerry) Dominelli, and was unaware of any illegal activities. 
Dominelli pleaded guilty in 1985 to four counts of fraud and tax evasion in 
connection with the Ponzi scheme and is serving a 20-year sentence in federal 
prison. 
Hunter's trial, which began March 28, is believed to be the longest-running 
criminal case in the history of the San Diego federal court. Hunter, 51, a 
former Del Mar mayor, faces up to 20 years in prison, or five years on each of 
the counts, and is due to be sentenced Feb. 20. 
Her lawyers, Richard Marmaro of Los Angeles and Robert Brewer of San Diego, had 
urged the federal appeals court to release Hunter on bail pending sentencing, 
saying she had given no indication she would flee while under indictment for 
three years and during an eight-month trial. 
Sending her to jail without bail, the lawyers said, was "cruel and smacks of 
punishment." 
The appellate judges were unconvinced, however, saying only that they backed 
Gilliam's move because Hunter had failed to show by "clear and convincing 
evidence" that she was not a flight risk. 
The ruling was signed by Judges Cecil F. Poole, Dorothy W. Nelson and Edward 
Leavy. There was no indication who wrote the short order. 
Hunter faces retrial on the 192 counts, also due to begin Feb. 20. After that 
trial is over, she faces a separate, 56-count indictment charging her with 
conspiracy and using the mails to sell unregistered securities. 
Gilliam has imposed a gag order on lawyers involved in the case that prevents 
them from discussing it with reporters. 
