SAN DIEGO AT LARGE: UP AGAINST A BERLIN WALL IN SEARCH FOR THE FACTS 
Christmas comes to San Diego. Or: Ich bin ein consumer. 
 Suddenly Santa is everywhere. 
In Mission Beach, Santa rides a 10-speed and wears cutoffs. In Encinitas, Santa 
appears at a Ralphs store and gets a Brie break every hour. 
In Del Mar, Santa rides a red Kawasaki. He's a land appraiser delivering 
presents to real estate firms. 
I am at May Co. in Mission Valley. I have come to check on sales for a 
late-starting novelty: 1-ounce chunks of the Berlin Wall, $10 each, complete 
with tiny pouch and declaration of authenticity. 
The store is thick with shoppers. I hear the rocks before I see them. 
"Look, Gloria, there they are," Amy Sherwood, 76, who lives in Santee, says to 
her friend and neighbor Gloria Atkinson, 63. "It's a rock of history." 
Sherwood and Atkinson look but do not buy. Sherwood drifts off to inspect a 
Euroshaver with vibrating twin blades for her grandson, a Carlsbad contractor. 
That's common. What was once the coldest symbol of a divided Europe is now a 
come-hither item, luring shoppers who end up buying ties and bulky-knit 
sweaters and ski goggles. 
Marydell McQuillen, 37, office manager for a computer firm in Kearny Mesa, buys 
a rock for her husband. She bought one last week for her brother-in-law. 
"It's truly for the person who has everything," she explains. 
I ask a clerk how many rocks have been sold. I have bumbled into Checkpoint 
Charlie. 
"You'll have to talk to corporate headquarters in Los Angeles." 
I sneak away and ask another clerk. This time I do not offer name, rank and 
affiliation. 
"Sales are good." 
"Who's buying the rocks?" 
"Mostly just average people." 
The clerk thereby fulfills the first rule of Christmas retailing: Give the 
reporter what he wants. 
Keep Reading . . . 
Here's some more. 
* Sagon Penn has changed his name, resumed his martial arts career and broken 
up with the woman who gave birth to his child. 
He also danced briefly with a male go-go group at Saxx, a nightclub in 
Southeast San Diego. G-strings only. 
* I said a Bush Light. 
The Volunteer Project, a nonprofit group that recruits and trains volunteers 
for social service projects throughout San Diego, has received a Point of Light 
award for community service from the President. 
* Libertarians don't win many elections, but they do have fun. 
Take Dennis Thompson, owner of a San Diego computer firm who is running for 
governor as a Libertarian. 
Thompson doesn't like Atty. Gen. John Van de Kamp's proposal to tax candy. So 
he sent Van de Kamp a box of sourball candies to show his displeasure. No 
response yet. 
"I'll probably hear from his dentist," Thompson said. 
Supremacy and 1st Amendment 
The Oregon chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union is considering a 
request from Fallbrook white supremacist Tom Metzger for legal help in a damage 
suit filed against him in Portland. 
The suit claims Metzger's rhetoric incited three skinheads to beat an Ethiopian 
man to death in 1988. Metzger says the suit has a "chilling effect" on his 
First Amendment rights. 
The suit was filed by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith in New York 
and the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Ala. 
Stevie Remington, executive director of the Oregon ACLU, says her group 
probably won't represent Metzger but might file a "friend of the court" brief 
in his behalf. 
Remington is chagrined that news of Metzger's request leaked to Portland's 
Oregonian newspaper. She remembers how support for the ACLU nationwide dropped 
after it represented Nazis in Skokie, Ill. 
"We could take a hit again just like Skokie," Remington said. "But that 
shouldn't deter us: our client is the First Amendment, not Mr. Metzger." 
