MUSIC AND DANCE NEWS: DANCE RECLAIMS SPACE ON PBS' SCHEDULE 
Dance enthusiasts who worried when PBS preempted the first two programs of this 
season's "Dance in America" series need not despair, said Jac Venza, executive 
producer of "Great Performances," the umbrella for PBS cultural programming. 
Fans will be able to see works by Nijinsky, Fosse and Balanchine beginning in 
January. 
Venza says that Nijinsky's "Sacre du Printemps" has been re-scheduled for Jan. 
12. The one-hour program, titled "The Search for Nijinsky's 'Rite of Spring,' " 
blends dance and documentary. The dance part shows the Joffrey Ballet's 
reconstruction of the work's famed choreography, once thought to be totally 
lost. The documentary includes interviews of Dame Marie Rambert (who assisted 
Nijinsky and appeared in it herself) and composer Igor Stravinsky. 
Explaining the preemptions, Venza said, "Part of programming means trying to 
put things where they'll do best." "Rite of Spring" and Nureyev's "Cinderella" 
were both originally scheduled for the holiday season -- ultimately poor 
programming decisions, he said. 
Nureyev's "Cinderella," a re-broadcast, was preempted in favor of a new program 
more appropriate for Christmas, Venza said. "Live From Lincoln Center: a 
Classical Jazz Christmas With Wynton Marsalis" replaced "Cinderella" on Dec. 
22. 
"Rite of Spring" was to air Thanksgiving weekend during sweeps month. Since 
holidays are a time for family viewing, even staunch dance lovers probably 
wouldn't watch a special interest show, Venza said. Replacing the ballet with 
"An Evening With Alan Jay Lerner," was also a way to "protect it" from being 
overlooked during the sweeps. 
"These programs already have a remarkablely low audience," Venza said. "If we 
put them on when the networks are blockbusting with new shows -- it's just not 
the time to put on special interest programming." 
The "Dance in America" season will continue with "The American Indian Dance 
Theater" on Feb. 2 followed by "Bob Fosse: Steam Heat" on Feb. 23. The three 
remaining programs, "Dancing for Mr. B: Six Balanchine Ballerinas, "The Margot 
Fonteyn Story" and "A Tudor Evening" do not have firm air dates. 
MUSIC NOTES: Leonard Bernstein and Michael Tilson Thomas will be artistic 
directors for the first Pacific Music Festival to be held in Sapporo, Japan, 
June 26-July 13, 1990. The festival will include performances by the London 
Symphony Orchestra, led by its president Bernstein and principal conductor, 
Thomas; the Japan Philharmonic Symphony Orchestra under Akio Watanabe; the 
Sapporo Symphony Orchestra, and the Pacific Music Festival Orchestra, a group 
consisting of 115 young musicians from the Pacific region. Organizers hope the 
event will help stimulate interest in the music and culture of the Pacific 
region. . . . KPSC (88.5-FM) Palm Springs officially signed on the air Dec. 1, 
bringing classical music to the desert as the the fourth public radio station 
in the USC Radio network, the entertainment and media group of the university. 
A newly constructed transmitter and antenna in the Little San Bernardino 
Mountains will broadcast 24-hour classical music, news and information to most 
of the Coachella Valley. . . . The Pasadena Symphony will present 
Shostakovich's Symphony No. 7, Opus 60 ("Leningrad") at 8:30 p.m. Jan. 13 in 
the Pasadena Civic Auditorium as the fifth installment of music director Jorge 
Mester's Shostakovich cycle. . . . The Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra has been 
awarded a $50,000 challenge grant from the California Arts Council to present 
and promote a five program festival commemorating the 200th anniversary of the 
death of Mozart in 1991. The Chamber Orchestra is one of 11 large budget 
organizations in the state to receive an award. 
PEOPLE: Zarin Mehta will succeed Edward Gordon's 22-year tenure as executive 
director and chief operating officer of the Ravinia Festival. Mehta, brother of 
conductor Zubin Mehta, has been managing director of the Montreal Symphony 
Orchestra since 1981. 
