PERU ARTIFACTS SEIZED IN RAIDS ARE GOING HOME 
In a show of force and moral resolve, U.S. Customs officers on Friday delivered 
a load of Peruvian artifacts valued at $1 million to Los Angeles International 
Airport for return to Peru. Six large crates containing 123 ceramic, stone, 
fiber and metal objects were to be flown Friday night to Lima and received by 
Alan Garcia, president of Peru. 
All the objects were seized March 30, 1988, in customs raids on eight Southern 
California dealers and collectors. The raids yielded about 1,300 objects, but 
fewer than 10% of the artifacts have been designated for repatriation after 18 
months of delays, investigations and two trials. 
Among the most valuable pieces in the shipment -- some of which were unpacked 
and displayed during a Friday press conference -- are a ceremonial pair of 
Moche Indian ear spools made of gold, with inlaid turquoise and shell, and a 
unique ceramic sculpture known as "Suicide Man," which depicts a man slitting 
his own throat. 
These two objects and a few others are thought to have come from Sipan, the 
site of an important archeological dig in northern Peru that has been compared 
to King Tut's tomb in Egypt. Looters discovered a rich tomb in Sipan late in 
1986, and archeologists subsequently have located other graves nearby. 
Some of the rare pre-Columbian artifacts were inspected at the airport by 
George C. Roberts, a Los Angeles businessman and representative of Peru who was 
to travel to Lima with the shipment. 
"These are too valuable to be in private collections," Roberts said excitedly, 
as he unwrapped a carved stone drinking cup, a cat effigy and some "stirrup 
cups," ceramic sculptures of human or animal forms whose curved handles 
resemble equestrian stirrups. 
"We are proud of the part U.S. Customs has been able to play in returning such 
important artifacts to Peru, where they rightfully belong," said customs 
spokesman Joseph Charles, reading from a prepared statement issued by Carol 
Hallet, U.S. commissioner of customs. 
He said the action "should send a strong message to collectors of illegal 
archeological remnants, wherever they may be, that smuggling of stolen 
artifacts will not be tolerated in the United States." 
Return of the 123 objects is a symbolic victory for an impoverished country 
whose cultural patrimony has been plundered for hundreds of years. Repatriation 
has become a cause celebre since the Sipan looting. 
The customs raids were the culmination of extensive detective work focusing on 
Southern California dealers and collectors suspected of being involved in an 
international smuggling ring. Customs officers seized about 500 objects from 
Santa Barbara dealer David Swetnam and about 330 pieces from Benjamin Johnson, 
a retired conservator at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, who lives in 
Santa Monica and maintains a large art collection. 
Smaller numbers of artifacts were seized from Santa Monica dealer Larry Wendt 
and collectors Orman K. Gaspar of Montecito; George H. Gelsebach, Encino; 
Ronald T. Stanman, Los Angeles; Charles Craig, Santa Barbara, and Murray 
Gell-Mann, a Caltech professor who won a Nobel Prize for physics in 1969 and 
lives in Pasadena. 
Most of the objects to be returned to Peru were forfeited after the raids; a 
few are being repatriated as the result of legal proceedings. 
Only Swetnam and Johnson have gone to trial. 
Swetnam was convicted of fraudulent customs declarations and is currently 
serving a six-month sentence at the federal prison camp in Boron, Calif., but 
he only had to give up nine items. 
Johnson was sued civilly by Peru in a U.S. court for the return of objects 
found in his possession. But U.S. District Judge William P. Gray ruled that 
Peru failed to prove that the pieces seized from Johnson had actually come from 
Peru and that they had been exported after 1929, the effective date of a 
Peruvian law claiming that the government owns all Peruvian pre-Columbian 
artifacts. All of the objects seized from Johnson were then returned to him. 
Peru planned to appeal the Johnson case, but that appeal was denied Thursday, 
Roberts said. As a result, Peru will initiate extradition procedures for 
Swetnam, Johnson and others involved in the raids, Roberts said. 
Roberts estimated that about $50 million worth of Peruvian artifacts were 
returned to the U.S. owners from the customs raids and are currently on the 
market. 
"But this repatriation is the beginning of a whole new era," he said. 
