SOVIETS CONFESS THEIR MISBEHAVIOR; WILL WE?; 
LAW: AMERICA HAS LOTS OF INTERVENTIONIST OFFENSES TO RECANT, BUT THAT REQUIRES 
A MEASURE OF HUMILITY. 
Humility is a rare virtue in international politics. Voluntary admissions of 
illegal conduct in the global arena are practically unknown. Yet in recent 
weeks the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact have acted with extraordinary 
humility to acknowledge some of their unlawful behavior during the Cold War. 
Such actions test America's own commitment to the rule of international law. 
On his return from the Malta summit, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev 
gathered the embattled leadership of the Warsaw Pact in Moscow. The Soviet 
government issued a unilateral declaration that called the invasion of 
Czechoslovakia by Soviet Bloc troops in 1968 both "unfounded" and "erroneous." 
Then Gorbachev joined with leaders from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany and 
Poland (which participated in the invasion) to admit that their actions were 
"an interference in (the) internal affairs of Czechoslovakia and should be 
condemned." 
The Brezhnev doctrine, which originated as Moscow's legal justification for the 
invasion, is dead. For two decades, this notorious doctrine sought to justify 
Soviet intervention in socialist countries to preserve Communist rule. The 
declarations in Moscow were not merely words of contrition that bury the 
Brezhnev doctrine; the deeds of the Warsaw Pact also reflect a new era of 
nonintervention. In late October, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. 
Shevardnadze appeared before the Supreme Soviet and owned up to two other 
illegal acts. He cited United Nations condemnations of the Soviet war in 
Afghanistan and asked, "what other evidence did we need to realize that we had 
set ourselves against all humanity, violated norms of behavior, ignored 
universal human values?" (Unfortunately, the continued flow of Soviet and U.S. 
arms to warring parties in Afghanistan long after Soviet troops have withdrawn 
leaves this particular example of aggression unresolved.) And he conceded that 
the Krasnoyarsk radar installation "the size of an Egyptian pyramid" was "a 
clear violation" of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the United States. 
This statement contradicted years of official Soviet denials of the illegality 
of the radar. At a time when differing interpretations of the ABM Treaty 
continue to threaten the success of strategic arms control talks, the Soviet 
admission takes one issue off the table. 
Such testimony reminds us that the law of nations is no fiction; it is a 
driving force behind the revolutionary changes occurring in the old socialist 
bloc. The standards erected by international law increasingly help define the 
credibility of both old and new political leaders there. That some officials 
are courageous enough to expose and admit illegal behavior fortunately defies 
historical precedent. 
The U.S. government frequently condemns the illegal conduct of other nations. 
But humility is not Washington's strong suit. Neither the Bush Administration 
nor Congress is likely to acknowledge any illegal conduct by the United States 
during or after the Cold War. Nonetheless, there are some examples worth 
considering. 
During the Vietnam War, the United States carpet-bombed parts of Cambodia, a 
country against which it was not at war. The devastating bombing campaign, kept 
secret from Congress and the American public for years by the Nixon 
Administration, remains obscured by a public record of hopelessly flawed 
legalistic excuses. 
Some of the covert actions undertaken with U.S. help in Latin America 
challenged international norms. These acts included assistance in overthrowing 
governments in Guatemala and Chile, mining harbors and bombing economic targets 
in Nicaragua and trying to assassinate political leaders. After the aborted 
Oct. 3 coup in Panama, the Bush Administration resurrected such follies with 
its reported plans to topple Manuel Noriega and with a loosened interpretation 
of the ban on assassinations. 
The right to counter-intervene against Soviet Bloc interventions in the Third 
World dominated the political rhetoric of the 1980s. But the Bush 
Administration eventually will have to scrap the Reagan doctrine in favor of a 
more enlightened policy on the use of military force. As the post-Cold War 
world transforms the threats confronting the United States, Washington must 
conceive a much different doctrine on both the use and non-use of force in the 
1990s. That task requires that unqualified allegiance for "freedom fighters" 
yield to more humble considerations about the legality of intervening in 
regional disputes. 
The Soviet Union has not yet eclipsed the United States as the traditional 
guardian of international law. But restoring credibility to the rule of law in 
a new world order may require an occasional act of humility even by our 
leaders. 
