LIMITS ON MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS URGED; 
SHUTTLE: A WHITE HOUSE PANEL RECOMMENDS DEVELOPMENT OF ROBOT VEHICLES. IT SAYS 
THE ODDS MAKE ANOTHER FATAL LAUNCH DISASTER LIKELY. 
Warning that another space shuttle disaster is likely in the next several 
years, a White House panel Monday recommended swift development of an 
alternative launch vehicle and stringent new limits on manned flights to reduce 
the risk to human life. 
The experts' report said the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is 
counting too much on the shuttle, the centerpiece of the U.S. space program, 
despite the fact that it is too expensive, too risky and not necessary for many 
goals of space exploration. 
The shuttle should be launched, the panel of experts concluded, only when human 
involvement is essential, and NASA should spend several billion dollars to 
develop an unmanned launch vehicle. 
With the aid of hindsight, the panel said, it was inappropriate to send seven 
crew members on the Challenger mission in 1986. All seven were killed when the 
shuttle exploded shortly after blastoff. 
NASA Director Richard H. Truly, responding to the recommendations of the 
12-member Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, said he 
would take the recommendations seriously. But he added: "You can't have a 
risk-free space program. It's a risky business. We're not taking undue risk 
with human life." 
The committee resisted calls for a radical restructuring of NASA, but it said 
the agency has been "trying to do too much," given the time and money 
available. 
"America's civil space program is at a crossroads," said committee Chairman 
Norman Augustine, chief executive officer of Martin Marietta Corp. "NASA is 
neither as troubled as some would suggest, but not nearly as good as it will 
have to be to carry out the kind of space program that we recommend." 
The committee said it recognized that the United States must depend on the 
space shuttle through the end of the century. However, it strongly urged the 
space agency to improve the shuttle's reliability while using it only when 
essential to put humans into orbit. 
"The statistical evidence indicates that we are likely to lose another space 
shuttle in the next several years," the panel said in its unanimous report. 
"This would seem to be the weak link of the civil space program -- unpleasant 
to recognize, involving all the uncertainties of statistics, and difficult to 
resolve." 
Augustine put it more bluntly at a news conference. 
"It would not be at all surprising to us that we would lose at least another 
shuttle before the space station is in orbit," Augustine said. "Because of 
that, I think we need to prepare ourselves both emotionally and in terms of 
hardware and infrastructure." 
He added that the panel was concerned "that the space shuttle may be the thin 
reed that supports our entire civilian space program." 
The review was prompted in part by the embarrassing defects in the long-awaited 
Hubble Space Telescope. The panel, appointed by Vice President Dan Quayle, made 
wide-ranging recommendations for a future space program: 
 -- Major emphasis on basic scientific research, including missions to take 
environmental measurements, a longer-range mission to put astronauts on Mars 
and the development of a modified space station to serve as a life-science 
laboratory and a base for planetary travel. 
 -- Development of a heavy-lift launch vehicle that could take over much of the 
cargo delivery work now scheduled to be done by the space shuttle when work 
starts on the space station in 1995. 
 -- A major overhaul of the design of the space station to reduce its cost and 
complexity, taking all the time needed to do the job right. 
 -- Increased funding for the agency at the rate of 10% more than inflation 
each year. 
 -- A plan to exclude some NASA employees from federal Civil Service hiring, 
firing and pay limits to give the agency greater flexibility in recruiting and 
retaining top rocket scientists and other space specialists. 
 -- A number of management changes, including changing how NASA operates its 
centers around the country in order to avoid counterproductive competition. 
In its discussion of the shuttle, the committee said the spacecraft would be 
absolutely essential to the U.S. space program for the next decade or more. 
"The space shuttle differs in important ways from unmanned vehicles," the 
report said. "On the positive side, it provides the flexibility and capability 
attendant to human presence, and it permits the recovery of costly launch 
vehicle hardware. 
"On the negative side, it tends to be complex, with relatively limited margins; 
it has not realized the promised cost savings, and should it fail 
catastrophically, it takes with it a substantial portion of the nation's future 
manned launch capability and, potentially, several human lives." 
While limiting future manned flights to missions that must have a human 
presence, the experts said, the agency also must "take those steps needed to 
enhance the shuttle's reliability, minimize wear and tear, and enhance launch 
schedule predictability." 
"We further conclude that NASA should proceed immediately to phase some of the 
burden being carried by the space shuttle to a new, unmanned . . . launch 
vehicle that offers increased payload capacity and (can be made) wherever 
practicable from existing components to save time and costs. 
"The resulting reduced demand for the shuttle will help relieve the schedule 
pressures which have contributed to some of the problems the program has 
encountered." 
Quayle, who heads the National Space Council, said the panel would meet again 
in six months to determine what progress NASA had made on the recommendations. 
