A WAY WITH WORDS PAYS OFF FOR DOCTORS 
Barry Alpert is learning that the gift of gab can be as critical to his medical 
practice as his skill with a scalpel. 
Doctors say that poor communication with patients is a leading cause of missed 
diagnoses. Lawyers say that the problem is cited in many malpractice lawsuits. 
"A lot of malpractice cases go away simply because they like the doctor," said 
Pittsburgh attorney Edwin H. Beachler III. 
Alpert, a cardiologist at West Penn Hospital in Pittsburgh, said he can't 
evaluate his own communications skills. But he said patients have come to him 
after having difficulty dealing with other doctors. 
He said he suspects that some of his own former patients may have the same 
complaint about him. 
Alpert is not alone. Roughly 80% of 300 doctors surveyed nationwide by the 
pharmaceutical division of Miles Inc. regard effective communication with 
patients as "extremely important." Only one-third said they communicate "very 
well." 
"A lot of physicians are exceptionally sensitive about their relationships with 
their patients," Alpert said. They don't want to be told how to conduct their 
practices. 
In an effort to improve his abilities, Alpert took part in a seminar offered by 
Miles at West Penn earlier this year. The four-hour program has been presented 
this year at two dozen hospitals, medical schools and health maintenance 
organizations around the country. 
Vaughn Keller, who led the Pittsburgh session, told doctors part of the problem 
stems from differences in background. 
Physicians are trained to rely on a rigorous decision-making process in making 
a diagnosis, Keller said. Patients, on the other hand, rarely get right to the 
point with physicians, said J. Gregory Carroll, a corporate training specialist 
at Miles, a West Haven, Conn., company. 
"A patient may start by telling a story about lower back pain and may be 
warming up to something they're not ready to talk about," Carroll said. "The 
patient may wait till the end of the interview, when he has his hand on the 
door knob, to say, 'Oh, by the way, doctor, should I be worried about this 
swelling . . . . ' " 
Doctors need to be able to recognize when a patient is hedging and should try 
to draw out relevant "pieces of the clinical puzzle," he said. 
"It's not just an educational gap. It's really two different world views," 
Keller said. 
Terminology can be a problem, too. 
Keller urged seminar participants to encourage their patients to be more open 
about medical problems and said doctors should give specific instructions for 
medication, exercise, therapy and other treatment. 
The extra effort Keller and Carroll prescribe can have benefits for doctors. 
Several attorneys said better relations can reduce a physician's chance of 
being sued for malpractice. 
"The doctors who don't get sued are the ones who take the time to explain, 
'this could happen or this could happen' and give their patients what we call 
informed consent," said Beachler. 
"Without exaggeration, in half if not three-quarters of these cases, one of the 
complaints these people have is they don't like the way they were treated." 
A typical patient's hospital stay might involve seeing four or five doctors. 
"Sometimes, you feel like you're on a conveyor belt," said Pittsburgh attorney 
John C. Conti, who represents physicians. 
In the last decade, many medical schools added courses designed to teach 
students how to conduct efficient discussions with patients. 
"It's one of those things that people used to say, 'Well, you pick it up," said 
Dr. Stanley K. Dorst, who teaches a required course, introduction to patient 
care, at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. 
Dorst disagrees that communication is "part of the art of medicine" and can't 
be taught. "It's a skill and you need to practice it." 
