FILM IN THE EIGHTIES; 
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ART; 
COLORIZATION, KID STUFF, CORPORATE TAKEOVERS: A DECADE WHEN OLD WAYS OF MAKING 
MOVIES DIED 
Which image best symbolizes Hollywood in the 1980s? The memory nominates 
several candidates: 
The bug-eyed latex runt that Steven Spielberg turned into a lovable alien pup 
in "E.T.," the decade's greatest enchantment and the industry's greatest 
box-office performer. 
Francis Ford Coppola, the Wunderkind director of the 1970s, standing humbly in 
the midst of his neon-washed Las Vegas set for "One From the Heart," telling a 
few hundred hastily gathered reporters that his great experiment -- Zoetrope 
Studios -- was on the brink of bankruptcy. 
Humphrey Bogart and Claude Rains looking spiffy in their computer-dyed dinner 
suits in the colorized "Casablanca," a version of the black-and-white classic 
that turned seedy Morocco into Mardi Gras and made us wish Ilsa had been played 
by Carmen Miranda. 
Pope John Paul II reminding an audience of Hollywood leaders of their their 
moral responsibilities in the world at the precise moment when some of them 
were busy running David Puttnam -- the only studio chief to have actually 
raised a moral issue during the decade -- out of town. 
Any scene from "Leonard Part VI," arguably the worst major-studio movie ever 
made, which was only made because its creator and star -- comedian and regional 
Coca-Cola bottler Bill Cosby -- was important to Coke-owned Columbia Pictures. 
Snow White bopping with home-video buff Rob Lowe in the desperate opening 
number of this year's Oscar telecast, and the subsequent legal hoohaw when 
Disney threatened to sue the embarrassed Motion Picture Academy for copyright 
infringement. 
Zsa Zsa Gabor, the septuagenarian poster girl for graceless aging, hiking her 
skirt for the cameras during her trial for smacking an uppity Beverly Hills 
cop, and the subsequent announcement that she'll be getting her own TV show 
next year. 
While all of these things say something about the decade and the business, none 
captures its essence quite as well as that of a toothless Leo the Lion being 
driven from his Culver City lair where, during Hollywood's Golden Age, he 
reigned over the shiniest kingdom of them all. 
Leo didn't roar during the '80s. He was knocked out and vivisected by the 
financial Frankenstein, Kirk Kerkorian, then sold off, organ by organ, to the 
highest bidders. During the decade, the home of Andy Hardy and Dorothy Gale was 
variously owned by MGM/UA, Ted Turner, Lorimar Telepictures and Warner Bros., 
and is about to become the home of Sony subsidiary Columbia Pictures. 
When Turner bought MGM, he made a rousing speech to the studio's employees 
about restoring the studio to its previous greatness and revealed that the 
effect of "Gone With the Wind" had been so great on him that he stuck a son 
with the name Rhett. Before the staff's eyes were dry, Turner had sold the lot 
to Lorimar Telepictures and made off with his real prize, the MGM library, 
which contained all those great black-and-white classics. 
"I think they look better in color, pal, and they're my movies," said Turner, 
on one of the many occasions when he told critics of colorization to lump it. 
The greed that governed Hollywood in the '80s was not mitigated by many great 
movies. The last American masterpiece, according to no less an authority than 
Steven Spielberg, was "The Godfather Part II," released 15 years ago. Spielberg 
himself shares the blame for the intellectual slump in film production. He and 
George Lucas, starting in the mid-70s, were so skillful at reviving the 
childhood thrill of the matinee adventure that they encouraged a decade of bad 
imitations and convinced Hollywood decision makers that the only audience worth 
wooing was the one in puberty. 
The '80s in Hollywood were dedicated to people with the ability to count to 
$200 million. Blockbuster fever, the three-year flu contracted by every new 
major-studio head, resulted in a rash of big, wart-like celluloid bumps. 
"Raise the Titanic" cost more than $40 million to make, grossed less than $7 
million at the box office, and had the band playing "Nearer My God to Thee" on 
the stern of Lew Grade's Rank Organization. 
"Ishtar," a buddy road comedy commissioned by Columbia's Guy McElwaine, was the 
decade's quintessential major-studio misstep. The film teamed three of the best 
known high-salaried perfectionists in the business -- $5-million actors Warren 
Beatty and Dustin Hoffman and $2-million writer-director Elaine May. 
The announcement that Columbia was making something called "Ishtar" in North 
Africa with Beatty, Hoffman and May struck some people as the financial 
equivalent of sticking your hand in a running Cuisinart, and the skepticism was 
warranted. "Ishtar" went over schedule, over budget, missed its Christmas 
release date by five months and grossed a fraction of a budget estimated to 
have come in north of $50 million. 
"Ishtar" was not the worst big-budget movie of the '80s, or close to it. Nor 
was Michael Cimino's "Heaven's Gate," the runaway Western that brought ruin to 
United Artists and gave UA production chief Steven Bach the rare opportunity to 
exploit his own incompetence. (Bach wrote the best-selling book "Final Cut," 
explaining how he let Cimino overshoot his budget by $30 million.) 
The worst big-budget movie of the '80s was Columbia's "Leonard Part VI," a spy 
fantasy in which retired sleuth Bill Cosby outwitted some mad farm animals who 
were threatening to steal government secrets. Do you suppose this one looked 
good on paper? 
Cosby, who came up with the concept and produced the film, added a bizarre 
marketing footnote to the whole saga when he went on national TV just days 
before the movie opened and advised people to stay away. 
Among the other excesses of the '80s were these truly awful movies: 
"Rhinestone," a romantic comedy starring Sylvester Stallone as a goofy New York 
cab driver (so far, so good) who falls in love with Dolly Parton (whoops) and 
ends up winning a country-Western singing contest (yikes). Stallone did his own 
singing. 
"Can't Stop the Music," Allan Carr's 1980 Village People musical extravaganza, 
co-starred Olympic decathlon champ Bruce Jenner and was directed by Nancy 
Walker, who did better work in the decade portraying the paper-towel savant 
Rosie on those absorbing Bounty TV commercials. 
And "Howard the Duck," a movie of such waddling ineptitude that the title 
became an instant reference for other failures. (Universal had barely recovered 
from the "Howard" disgrace when critics began dubbing the studio's third "Jaws" 
sequel "Jaws the Duck.") 
The blockbuster mentality bred a revolving-door system of studio management, 
with insecure chief executives trying to hustle up megahits before their 
three-year contracts were half up. Scripts were developed by a new generation 
of production executives, baby boomers raised on laugh-track sitcoms and 
disease-of-the-week TV movies. 
To them, a social conscience meant watching "Saturday Night Live," a show that 
has indirectly led to more bad big-screen performances than the Ziegfeld 
Follies (thanks, guys, for Bill Murray in "The Razor's Edge"). 
Overall, the decade was a black hole for serious film makers. Deals made by one 
studio chief were routinely scuttled by the next. Films started under one 
executive were completed under another and shipped off to regional-release 
hell. ("Sorry, we opened it in Tupelo and nobody wanted to see it.") 
The studios that dominated the marketplace, not surprisingly, produced the 
decade's star executives. Michael Eisner and Barry Diller had a good run at 
Paramount, then went off to other glories -- Eisner to work his own magic over 
Disney's kingdom, Diller to run Fox for Rupert Murdoch. 
Eisner brought Jeffrey Katzenberg along from Paramount to chair the studio's 
production operations, and though few films of greatness emerged, Disney went 
from a virtual non-player to a position of leadership almost overnight. At the 
beginning of the decade, Disney's animation department was almost moribund, and 
the studio leaders couldn't bring themselves to make mainstream movies with 
violence and dirty words, even though they had created Touchstone Films with 
that in mind. 
Eisner and Katzenberg had no such reluctance, and when Bette Midler hit a high 
C with the decade's noisiest big-screen orgasm in "Down and Out in Beverly 
Hills," it was clear that a new day had dawned on Dopey Drive. 
If Eisner was chief executive of the decade, Steven Spielberg was the top 
producer. Spreading his creative pollen over several studios, Spielberg 
produced five of the decade's 10 highest-grossing pictures; three for Paramount 
(the "Raiders" trilogy) and two for Universal ("E.T." and "Back to the 
Future"). He also produced several pictures for Warner Bros., including the 
hits "The Color Purple" and "Gremlins." 
Spielberg directed most of those films, as well, and was inadvertently caught 
up in the decade's biggest Oscar controversy. Although he won the Directors 
Guild of America award for "The Color Purple" in 1986, he didn't even get a 
nomination from the directors branch of the academy. The film, meanwhile, 
received 11 Oscar nominations, including one for best picture. 
The Academy Awards show suffered a Nielsen ratings slump in the '80s, partly 
because of the general audience fragmentation due to the advent of cable and 
home video. But the event continued to be criticized for the bloat of its 
antiquated variety-show format, a flaw magnified by the academy's decision to 
shift venues from the relatively cozy Pavilion to the cavernous 6,000-seat 
Shrine Auditorium. 
Massive traffic jams got the first Shrine Oscar show off to a dismal start in 
1988 and this year's telecast, produced by Allan Carr, prompted an ad hoc group 
of high-profile industry people to write a letter to Academy president Richard 
Kahn complaining that the event had been a professional embarrassment. Hey, the 
decade was a professional embarrassment. 
Next March, the Oscars move back to the Pavilion. 
Despite the poor overall quality of movies, the business entered a new boom 
period. The home-video industry, far from the threat it was perceived to be by 
studio chiefs in the late '70s, actually promoted moviegoing. The convenience 
of video rentals created a renewed interest in movies among older viewers and 
broadened the horizons, if not the tastes, of younger ones. 
The audience demographics changed dramatically from one end of the decade to 
the other. It began with kids going one way and their parents another; it ended 
in a frenzy of familial togetherness. Family movies are back. 
Box-office figures are always distorted, and in the current self-congratulatory 
orgy over toppling records, it is worth noting that most of the records were 
brought on by rising ticket prices. The average cost of a ticket rose from 
$2.69 in 1980 to about $4.40 at the end of 1989. That is a 65% increase in 
prices, compared to about a 10% increase in actual admissions. 
In terms of real movie watching, however, the decade saw enormous change. The 
sales and rentals of videocassette movies, a business that didn't exist barely 
10 years ago, surpassed theatrical revenues in the mid-'80s. When all the math 
is in for 1989, the video industry is expected to outgross the theatrical 
playoff of movies by $11 billion to $5 billion. 
When you combine the two movie-driven businesses, and take into account the 
erosion in prime-time network TV viewing, the motion-picture industry appears 
stronger than at anytime since the late '40s. 
One thing that the mammoth video revolution proved was that nobody knows how 
big the next revolution will be. The long writers strike of 1988 -- which, in 
part, was about Hollywood's future -- confused members of the guild and the 
public, who had trouble understanding the victories claimed by both sides. 
Clearly, management and the industry guilds are jockeying for shares in future 
revenues from ancillary markets. 
There was certainly no revolution regarding women and minorities in film during 
the '80s. Amy Heckerling ends the decade on a high note, having scored a 
$100-million hit with her thinking-baby comedy "Look Who's Talking." But the 
number of women who directed major-studio movies was fewer than a dozen, and 
the number of black directors -- of either sex -- totaled even less. Dawn 
Steel, at Columbia, was the only woman to run a studio; no black did. 
Entering the last decade of its first century, Hollywood has some serious 
issues to address. At the top of the list is the inevitable globalization of 
its resources and outlook. With everything that's imminent -- the social and 
cultural waves that will sweep over the world from Eastern Europe and from the 
Pacific -- who is going to set Hollywood's agenda? 
During the '80s, the creative voices were mostly stilled. The power shifted 
from studio heads to agents and producers, squeezing all but the most facile 
writers and directors out and creating an environment where deals were more 
important than films. Flying in the face of global trends and migration 
patterns, even those in its own community, Hollywood became more insular than 
ever. Once a window opening onto the world, it is now more a window opening 
onto "Saturday Night Live." 
Despite an occasional "Gandhi" or "The Last Emperor," both of which were made 
outside the major-studio system, few films with worldly themes were made. The 
farther American film makers went, the closer to home they got. The outer-space 
adventure "Outland" was a virtual remake of "High Noon," with the Frontier 
Ethic in full bloom. The "Star Wars" films were also reset Westerns; the "Star 
Trek" films were U.S. TV reunions. "E.T." was "Lassie Come Home." 
For the moment, the rest of the world still looks upon Hollywood as the capital 
of invention, but it is an appreciation of style rather than of substance. In 
some ways, Hollywood enters the '90s where Detroit entered the '70s: full of 
self-confidence and commitments to short-term goals and domestic impulses. 
Soon, we'll learn whether the industry will change its outlook or, like some 
gas-guzzling, 4,000-pound Detroit sedan, get blown off the road. 
