AS DEMOCRACY APPEARS, RANKS OF WOMEN DROP IN HALLS OF GOVERNMENT; 
EASTERN EUROPE: THE FEMALES IN THE COMMUNIST REGIMES WERE MOSTLY SHOWPIECES. 
THERE ARE STRONG FORCES HOLDING THEM BACK. 
Ranks of women members were a showpiece in the sham parliaments of Communist 
regimes. Then democracy came to Eastern Europe, and most of the women were 
gone. 
A survey by the Inter-Parliamentary Council in Geneva found that all 
parliaments in the former Soviet Bloc have fewer women members than before 
Communist parties fell from power last year. 
The sharpest decline was in Romania, where women made up 34% of dictator 
Nicolae Ceausescu's rubber-stamp assembly. After the May elections, only 4% of 
the legislators are women. 
"While, under Ceausescu, there were quotas for skirts in the parliament . . . 
that didn't reflect political reality," said Cristina Popescu, a feminist and 
editor of the newspaper Romania Libera. "Now, what you see is what you've got." 
New issues may galvanize women -- Poland is on the verge of outlawing abortion, 
legal since 1956 -- but there is virtually no tradition of real power for them 
in either the Communist system or the former opposition movements. 
Strong forces are holding women back. 
To them falls most of the exhausting daily grind of finding a family's food, 
clothing and small pleasures in shortage-plagued economies. 
Social custom causes women to marry early, have children immediately and dote 
on them. The Roman Catholic Church, predominant in Poland and strong elsewhere, 
encourages a traditional family model and has considerable political influence. 
Women have virtually no organizations they can use as a basis for political 
power. 
The search for equality on which Western women, men and institutions embarked 
25 years ago found no mirror in the Communist world. 
Communist leaders often dismissed "women's lib" as a foible of indulged, 
immoral capitalists. Opposition groups did not welcome women to their 
leaderships or pursue women's issues in the battle against communism. 
Little sensitivity to women's equality is evident in the new democracies. 
Government commissions and public forums usually are men-only, and assumptions 
about women are rampant. A Western diplomat recalls repeatedly explaining that 
she was not making an error in Polish when she identified herself as a 
secretarz of her embassy, not a secretarka on the clerical staff. 
Those few women in the East who would call themselves feminists are only 
beginning to look at the way schoolbooks stereotype male and female roles. 
Suggestions that advertisements seeking Western investors should be addressed 
to "executives" and not "businessmen" are greeted with blank stares. 
"The word feminist was ridiculed, the media made fun of Western women and I 
didn't believe there were other women who believed as I did," said Hanna 
Jankowska, who helped found Poland's fledgling ProFemina group after meeting 
like-minded women at a small rally against the anti-abortion law. 
Jankowska and others blame the fake equality of the Communist system. Now that 
it has crumbled, women are likely to retreat rather than jump at new 
possibilities, they predict. 
"Women did not fight for emancipation; it was given to them with the new 
socialist system," she said. "Many people connect the two. 
"For many women, the practical effect of this emancipation is they have to go 
to work. They have two shifts -- at work and then for the home. They are very 
tired and would prefer to stay home." 
After Bulgaria's elections in June, women made up 3.5% of the parliament, down 
from 21%. The Hungarian parliament is 7% female, down from 21% before free 
elections. 
Poland's parliament, chosen partly by democratic elections, is 12% women, 
compared to 20% when the Communist Party picked all candidates. 
"The situation in most of the post-Communist countries is more or less the 
same," said Izabela Nowacka of the Polish League of Women, a Communist-aligned 
organization now seeking an independent identity. 
"A certain number of seats were allotted to women in Parliament and it was due 
to this (Communist) system that women were allowed to enter government 
institutions, but not the women who had something to say." 
The Communists also had quotas for farmers, steelworkers and miners. Their 
elimination in Poland also reduced working-class participation in Parliament, 
where 83% of members now have university educations, compared with 60% 
previously. 
No women have positions of power in Solidarity, which was born in 1980 during a 
Gdansk shipyard strike that started over the firing of a female crane operator. 
Even in the textile center of Lodz, where the vast majority of mill workers are 
women, Solidarity always has been led by men. 
When Solidarity was banned in 1981 and thousands of members were interned under 
martial law, women played important, but supporting, roles. 
They helped activist husbands, made placards and distributed literature. Their 
highest representation was in the underground press, where many wrote under 
male pseudonyms. 
Only two women were among the 57 participants in talks between Solidarity and 
the Communists that laid the groundwork for the transfer of power in 1989. Just 
one woman minister, in charge of culture, serves in the new government. 
The anti-abortion campaign, a product of Solidarity's close alignment with the 
church, conservative nationalism and all things anti-Communist, has roused some 
women. 
"For the first time in postwar Poland, women became aware that their rights are 
in danger," Jankowska said. "We are at the very beginning of organizing women 
in this country. It is a difficult task, but this abortion issue has awakened 
women." 
Generally, however, there is little optimism for substantially increased 
involvement or professional advancement by this generation of women in Eastern 
Europe. 
Winners of Polish parliament seats "were very much connected with the church 
and the traditional model of family," said Dr. Zofia Kuratowska, deputy senate 
speaker and one of the few ranking women in Solidarity. 
She said the spring elections probably will produce an even more conservative 
assembly after a battle among fledgling parties in which women have little 
place. 
Kuratowska noted that women made up only about 10% of candidates in the May 
local elections. Municipal contests often are a starting point for political 
activists. 
Worn down by work, shopping and child care, women appear likely to succumb to 
the widespread Eastern European attitude that the authorities will do whatever 
they want in the end. 
Activists say many women already have retreated into their private lives, 
tuning out the political system. 
