A TOUGH CHALLENGE IN 'MORNING'; 
TELEVISION: NEW PRODUCER IS TRYING TO ROUSE CBS' EARLY-DAY SHOW OUT OF THE NO. 
3 SPOT IN THE RATINGS. 
Erik Sorenson recently became the second executive producer that "CBS This 
Morning" has had since its debut Nov. 30 two years ago. He has what some 
consider the morning version of "Mission Impossible." 
Like its previous incarnations, the two-hour program remains a distant third in 
ratings against NBC's "Today" and ABC's "Good Morning America." Like his 
predecessors on past and current CBS morning shows, Sorenson is expected to 
change that. 
"I don't think it's impossible," says Sorenson, 33, a former vice president of 
KCBS-TV in Los Angeles. "I think it's tough, though." 
Recent Nielsens contained a ray of hope for the CBS reveille team of Harry 
Smith and Kathleen Sullivan. The ratings were up two-tenths of a point from 
those of the previous November. 
To improve on that, Sorenson, plans some changes: a different musical 
arrangement of the show's theme music; more ratings-boosting travel, and what 
he calls "more visual variety." 
He is also trying to get "name" contributors on various topics, among them 
Chicago-based movie critic Gene Siskel, best-known from the syndicated "Siskel 
&amp; Ebert" film review series. He has also hired two new full-time staffers, 
features reporter Wayne Freedman and, from KCBS, entertainment reporter Steve 
Kmetko. 
And, in a move that got his show some publicity last week, he hired CBS Sports 
reporter Greg Gumbel, the brother of "Today" co-host Bryant Gumbel, to do 
sports segments. 
But Sorenson doesn't think his show will get a swarm of disaffected "Today" 
viewers next month when Jane Pauley yields her co-host chair there to Deborah 
Norville. 
He theorizes that ABC's "Good Morning America" would be the chief beneficiary 
of any "Today" viewer defection simply because it has been on since 1975 and, 
like its NBC rival, is a place of relative stability. 
Asked if Sullivan and Smith will continue as anchors all next year on "CBS This 
Morning," Sorenson immediately replied, "Yes." 
