RIGHT-TO-DIE CONTROVERSY 
In response to "Make Life Worth Living," by Bill Bolte (Commentary, Dec. 8): 
Bully for Bill! He has guts and spunk! He enjoys life, and I admire him 
tremendously. He is severely disabled and yet will not give up and makes a real 
life for himself; he makes the best of what he has and is happy doing it. But . 
. . 
The message came across to me that he feels we should maintain the ethic of 
prolonging life at all costs. He implies that he believes society should 
intervene to prevent one from having life end when he or she personally feels 
the proper time has come. Bill may not have intended this message, but I 
certainly got it. In my opinion this point of view, which is widely held by 
many well-meaning sincere people, is cruel and intrusive. 
When the subject is young or depressed or in pain, then surely counseling, 
assistance and advice should be made available. However, there are many of us 
who advocate that ultimately an individual's personal decision should be 
respected when he or she wants to die. 
There are many who argue that "euthanasia" is what Hitler practiced on the 
Jews, his political enemies and also the aged and infirm. Therefore, we should 
have nothing to do with it. You can make any interpretation of a word that you 
like, but the right- to-die movement is not advocating Hitler's interpretation 
of the word. Neither Dr. Jack Kevorkian, nor his act of kindness to 
(Alzheimer's disease patient) Janet Adkins, is in the Hitler category. But Bill 
says he fears that people like Dr. Kevorkian, or even I, advocate legislation 
that might end up by executing people like himself. Bill, we are advocating the 
right to choose to die, not the right to choose to kill. 
Whatever your own convictions may be about our creation, you must surely agree 
that it did not originally include protracted dying in nursing homes and 
"modern" life-support in hospitals. 
I am in excellent health and will be 75 in two months. But I am convinced that 
death is as natural as birth, and both should be helped when the patient is 
desirous of the help. 
C. DESMOND PENGELLEY, La Mesa 
