LOCAL GIVERS ON TARGET WITH UNITED WAY 
Despite a soft economy and disruptions caused by the Persian Gulf crisis, 
Ventura County is bucking a nationwide trend and meeting United Way's 1990-91 
fund-raising goal, agency officials reported Tuesday. 
Spearheaded by 3,000 volunteers who spread the word in companies and 
organizations across the county, United Way of Ventura County thus far has 
managed to avoid serious money-raising problems that have confronted its 
national parent and some of the 64 local agencies it helps support, officials 
said. 
"At this point, we're on target" in a countywide campaign to raise more than $6 
million, said Colleen Hunter, executive director of the county United Way. The 
goal would be a 10% increase over the $5.6 million contributed last year. 
As of Tuesday, the drive had raised $3.7 million since it was officially 
launched Sept. 1. The campaign ends Dec. 31, but money received after that will 
be recorded as part of the 1990-91 campaign, Hunter said. 
The county group's success contrasts with the experience of its parent, United 
Way of America. "Things are certainly a little tighter this year," said Tony De 
Cristofaro, United Way of America's chief spokesman, in a telephone interview 
from Alexandria, Va. 
De Cristofaro said contributions to this year's $3 billion U.S. drive are up 
only 4.8% over a year ago. This, he said, falls significantly short of the 
projected increase of 6.8%. 
"We're raising more money than last year, but unless things improve, there's a 
good chance it won't be enough to keep up with inflation," he said. 
"I know you're not supposed to say the R word, but many communities in this 
country are going through a recession. That means some folks who used to 
support United Way now are depending on it for food, shelter and other 
services." 
In addition, De Cristofaro said, the deployment of hundreds of thousands of 
military personnel to the Middle East has made it virtually impossible to seek 
contributions from them. "Normally, they're among our major supporters," he 
said. 
Locally, the business downturn is blamed for the failure of several United Way 
agencies to reach their independent fund-raising targets. 
The Oxnard Corps of the Salvation Army has reported a sharp decrease in the 
number of families volunteering to help the needy in its Adopt-A-Family 
Christmas program. 
Similar difficulties in obtaining public support have been experienced by two 
other Oxnard charity services, run by Food Share Inc. and Mary Star of the Sea 
Church. And Fillmore Voluntary Services, which feeds the hungry year-round, 
said this year's donations are down about 30%. 
Hunter said two groups -- the county's thousands of federal employees and 
aerospace-defense workers -- have been major factors in the success of the 
countywide campaign. 
"Some of the aerospace and defense companies have had serious layoffs. But in 
many cases, the people still on the payroll have made up for this by increasing 
their per-capita contributions," she said. As a result, contributions from 
aerospace and defense workers have so far exceeded projections by $52,000, 
Hunter said. 
For example, she cited Contel Federal Systems in Westlake Village, whose 
employees and managers have pledged more than $43,000. "That's less than they 
gave last year, but employment at the plant is off significantly. Their 
per-capita contributions are up." 
Hunter said Ventura County employees of Teledyne Electronics in Westlake 
Village and Exxon have also increased individual giving after seeing some of 
their fellow workers laid off. 
Thus far, Hunter said, the thousands of federal employees at Navy installations 
at Point Mugu, Port Hueneme and elsewhere in the county have given more than 
was expected even though hundreds of military personnel have shipped out in 
support of Operation Desert Shield. 
The federal workers have given $855,000 to United Way -- $55,000 above their 
goal and nearly $100,000 more than last year, Hunter reported. 
Workers at the county's biggest private employer, GTE California, have not yet 
completed their 1990-91 campaign, but the corporation already has given United 
Way a $65,000 gift, Hunter said. "Their workers are usually No. 1 in the county 
and we expect them to repeat again this year." 
About 76% of all United Way of Ventura County contributions are made through 
payroll deductions, Hunter said. 
Angela Light, the county agency's campaign director, said she was gratified by 
the results thus far, but noted that "our increases were even higher -- 15% to 
22% annually -- in the early 1980s." In those days, she said, Ventura County 
led the nation in fund-raising among counties its size. 
Still, Hunter said, county residents this year "have been very, very generous. 
They know some people are having a tough time. We've found that those who are 
still employed want to share with others." 
