DEMOCRATS PREDICT DEFEAT OF VETO ON CHINA STUDENTS 
House Democrats angry about the Bush Administration's overtures to China 
predicted Tuesday that there will be strong bipartisan support when Congress 
tries to override President Bush's veto of a bill aiding Chinese students in 
this country. 
"I think we have enough to override," said California Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-San 
Francisco). "We feel the President's actions this weekend are such a slap in 
the face to the forces of democracy and such an encouragement of a tyrannical 
regime that it is making our job easier." 
Pelosi said she has received assurances from House and Senate leaders, 
including House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, that Congress would make consideration 
of the veto override its first order of business when it reconvenes in January. 
The vetoed bill, sponsored by Pelosi, would allow Chinese students to remain in 
the United States indefinitely if they fear retaliation at home. Bush contended 
he could accomplish the same thing by executive order. 
The bill passed Congress overwhelmingly last month. Pelosi said at a news 
conference that she was gaining commitments from Democrats and Republicans to 
support an override, predicting a strong bipartisan majority. 
Democratic leaders made clear their strong disagreement with Bush's decision to 
send National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State 
Lawrence S. Eagleburger to Beijing over the weekend for the first high-level 
meetings with Chinese leaders since the crackdown in Tian An Men Square in 
June. 
Rep. Sam Gejdenson (D-Conn.), chairman of the House Foreign Affairs 
subcommittee on international economic policy and trade, called the trip "an 
outrage . . . a disaster." 
He scheduled a hearing today on the trip and said Eagleburger was invited to 
testify. 
"The butchers of Beijing have been consolidating their power, increasing 
tyranny in China, and the Administration then goes and sends two of its top 
people to China," Gejdenson said. 
"What kind of message is this to those in the East Bloc who want to use 
military force to crush the democratic movements?" he asked. "Is this a 
statement by the Administration that it has one standard for human rights in 
Eastern Europe, and another standard for human rights in Asia?" 
Bush gained support, however, from Rep. Jim Leach (R-Iowa), who called the 
criticism premature and said the trip was "a risky but thoughtful consultation" 
that could lead to moderation by China. 
"If China significantly moderates over the course of the next year, Bush will 
be vindicated," Leach said. "If not, the Administration runs the danger of 
being perceived as helping to legitimize a less than legitimate regime in 
Beijing." 
Zhao Haiching, chairman of the National Committee on Chinese Student Affairs, 
met with Pelosi, later telling reporters the visit will strengthen the 
hard-liners in Beijing and encourage a "slide into darkness." 
Zhao said thousands of young people are being jailed and tortured in China and 
that the government has begun a new round of suppression against intellectuals. 
In the United States, he said, some Chinese students who have demonstrated 
against their government have been intimidated and harassed by Chinese 
authorities. He said the Chinese government has warned students that if they 
persist, they will be regarded as counterrevolutionaries and punished when they 
return to China. 
