COUNTERPUNCH: IS AN ACTOR'S COURAGE ALWAYS TO BE CONDEMNED? 
If the theme of Kenneth Turan's article on actors departing from their "star" 
roles ("Paul, This Isn't You," Calendar, Dec. 2) was valid, we never would have 
had Garbo in "Ninotchka," Marlon Brando in "The Godfather" or Humphrey Bogart 
in "The Treasure of Sierra Madre." I don't know whether any of these actors 
were trying to "stretch," but certainly nothing in their previous work would 
have prepared an audience for those magnificent performances. And I could cite 
many more examples. 
It is true we have always had two kinds of stars: those whose performances came 
from the exploitation of their personas (I'm not using the word exploitation 
pejoratively) and those whose work falls into the general category of 
"character" acting. From Mae West to Paul Muni. 
But to use this as a stick to beat actors who can bridge both is, to me, 
arrogant. To go after Paul Newman is just silly. 
When you analyze Newman's work over the years, there is an astonishing range in 
it. When the first shot of him appeared in "The Sting," no exposition was 
necessary. The character was so complete, you knew the whole pre-picture life 
of the man. This was true of him in "The Verdict" and in Robert Rossen's "The 
Hustler." 
I pick these movies because on the surface, they are all con men. Yet can 
anyone say that the characterizations are similar? Of course not. They are 
three different people. Paul Newman's best work has always been "character" 
acting. "Somebody Up There Likes Me," "Hud," "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof." Newman 
"stretched" a long time before Turan became aware of it. 
I also disagree with Turan about Newman's performance in "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge." 
I think he is superb. One of the hardest kinds of acting is to reveal the inner 
life of a character without using words or situations that label the person. 
The underlying level of fear, almost terror, that lay beneath that smug, 
self-satisfied, middle-class man is, to me, extraordinary acting. 
But that's not the most upsetting thing in Turan's article. There is a tone in 
it that seems to want to settle, like so much else today, for what is easily 
identifiable. "Just give us your blue eyes, baby." "Why don't you just take 
your overbloated salaries and stop trying to do 'good' things?" 
The fact that Turan is historically wrong about movie acting only adds to his 
condescension. Is there anything in Katharine Hepburn's "persona" performance 
in "Stage Door" to prepare us for the magnificence of her "character" work in 
"Long Day's Journey Into Night" or "The African Queen"? How would Turan 
classify Spencer Tracy, James Mason, Bette Davis, Ingrid Bergman or Robin 
Williams? 
There is real harm in this kind of criticism, illustrated by what happened last 
year to Michelle Pfeiffer. Pfeiffer came to New York to appear in "Twelfth 
Night." The production and she were torn to shreds by critics. I saw it and 
thought she was wonderful. When one considers that it was her first 
Shakespearean performance, it bordered on the miraculous. The point is, I doubt 
if she'll try the theater again, much less Shakespeare, and that's my loss. We 
all lose by it. 
For me, all good acting has human revelation in it. The actor has nothing to 
use but him or herself. Come, come, Mr. Turan. It's not your face, heart, soul 
and body up there. It's theirs. Since when is courage something to be 
condemned? You don't even pay for your admission. If you want safety and 
security when you reach into your box of popcorn, you've always got all those 
sequels to look forward to. 
