GUITARIST FEELS GOOD ABOUT MEAT PUPPETS' SOUND BUT LESS SO ABOUT THEIR STATURE; 
ROCK: CURT KIRKWOOD IS CONCERNED THAT THE BAND HAS BEEN LEFT BEHIND WHILE OTHER 
ALTERNATIVE-ROCK BANDS ARE BEING SNAPPED UP BY MAJOR LABELS. 
If anyone cares to drape the mantle of a rock guitar hero over Curt Kirkwood's 
shoulders, he isn't about to shrug it off with false modesty. 
Kirkwood's hot, varied guitar work is all over "Monsters," the new album by his 
band, the Meat Puppets. Sometimes, Kirkwood sandblasts a song with molten, 
metallic sound. Elsewhere, his multiple guitar lines form an elegant 
embroidery, full of light, glistening motion. 
Speaking over the phone recently from his home in Tempe, Ariz., where the Meat 
Puppets were getting ready for a tour that brings them to the Coach House in 
San Juan Capistrano on Sunday and to Bogart's in Long Beach on Monday, Kirkwood 
sounded like a six-string Muhammad Ali as he offered a self-assessment of his 
guitar credentials. 
"I think nobody can do it better now," he said. "I don't see any point in being 
modest about it. There isn't anybody around who does the stuff I do." 
But Kirkwood, 30, is willing to cut the other Meat Puppets -- drummer Derrick 
Bostrom and bassist Cris Kirkwood (Curt's younger brother) -- in on the credit. 
"The guitar playing is good, but it is in the context of the band that it's 
good," he said. "Because of these guys, I've been able to go out on a limb" as 
a songwriter and performer. 
A simple, impressionistic joyfulness animates a good deal of the Meat Puppets' 
music. It is there on "Monsters" with songs like "Light," which revels in the 
sheer dazzle of visual phenomena, and "Touchdown King," in which Kirkwood sings 
about a glowing figure who seems to be a cross between a gridiron hero and the 
winged god Mercury. Kirkwood said it wouldn't be off base to take the ebullient 
"Touchdown King" as an evocation of the feeling he gets when the Meat Puppets 
play. 
"It's about a different kind of football," he said of the song. "If you're 
going to approach it from the way we play on stage, it's more like Flubber 
football. That's the substance they would put on their shoes (in the Walt 
Disney movies) and it would make them bounce real high." 
The Meat Puppets came to Orange County to put the bounce into "Monsters," 
recording the album last spring at For The Record Studio in Orange. Kirkwood 
said the band liked the rates, as well as the recording approach of Eric 
O'Brien Garten, the engineer who runs the studio. 
"I've spent quite a bit of time in Orange County the past 10 years," Kirkwood 
said. "My dad and his family live there. I go to Disneyland quite a bit when I 
can." 
If Kirkwood is happy with the way he and the Meat Puppets sound these days, he 
is a good deal less content with the band's current station in the music 
business. 
Formed in 1980, the Meat Puppets had emerged by 1985 as one of the most 
acclaimed bands on the alternative rock scene that sprang up in the early '80s 
with college radio as the main media outlet and small, independent record 
labels as the sole suppliers. The band was praised for songs that took on a 
desert-pastoral cast, with lyrical imagery and a spacious sound that evoked the 
natural wonder of their home territory in Arizona. 
To go with that, the Meat Puppets developed a creaky but warm and 
innocent-sounding vocal harmony and an improvisational playing style that drew 
comparisons to the Grateful Dead. The Meat Puppets combined these lighter, more 
rustic elements with a penchant for turning into a power rock band that could 
crank out guitar onslaughts recalling the likes of Jimi Hendrix, ZZ Top and Led 
Zeppelin. 
But a funny thing has happened to the independent-alternative rock scene over 
the past few years: Much of it has gone big time, with major labels snapping up 
bands that came up through the independent ranks. Frequently, the independent 
labels themselves have been snapped up in mergers and partnership deals. 
The Meat Puppets, who have put out all of their albums since 1981 on the 
independent SST label, have watched such peers from the alternative scene as 
Husker Du , the Replacements and Sonic Youth sign deals with major labels. The 
major label connection almost invariably means that a band gets more time and 
money to record, and it can also bring more promotional firepower and radio 
exposure to bear in a band's behalf. It is a connection that so far has eluded 
the Meat Puppets. 
It was apparent from talking to Kirkwood that the band's continued existence as 
outsiders has left him with a tangle of uncertain feelings, ranging from pride 
about the band's ability to go on making its own style of music, to 
bewilderment that the Meat Puppets haven't been brought onto the big label fast 
track. 
Kirkwood said it was easier to have a clear idea of the Meat Puppets' audience 
and the band's place in the scheme of things in early days, when the 
independent rock scene was a world apart from the mass marketing world of the 
major labels, and anything beyond a cult following seemed out of the question. 
"We just had more of a sense of where we were at and felt more comfortable," he 
said. "We didn't realize that the majors would usurp the whole little scene we 
had. These people with money stepped in and started taking all our peers away 
and made it much bigger than it was press-wise and record-wise, and we weren't 
included in that. 
"There are very few bands that have had the kind of critical and cult success 
we have that are as unsuccessful in finance and record sales as we are. It's 
one of the premier dichotomies in rock 'n' roll. We still have to play these 
long tours in these cheesy RVs that fall apart. That 'Monster' album cost less 
than $10,000 to make. It's a technical masterpiece for that amount of money." 
Kirkwood said that "Monsters" had a chance of being picked up for distribution 
and promotion by a major label, but that SST vetoed the idea. 
"The album is doing well, SST is doing a good job, but I think it would be 
something more special than it is" with a big label's muscle behind it, 
Kirkwood said. "It wound up costing the Meat Puppets an awful lot of money and 
publicity. I think it hurt the record in the long run. I don't blame the people 
at SST for thinking they could do a good job (without a major label's help), 
but on a certain level, reality has to step in." 
SST spokesman Ron Coleman said that the company's business philosophy calls for 
steering clear of alliances with major labels. "You're not an independent label 
when you hook up with a major label, because the major label holds your purse 
strings. We're an independent label. That's the beginning and end of it, and 
that's how we're always going to be." 
Even if the Meat Puppets feel adrift in the music business right now, Kirkwood 
insists that the band has not lost any of its creative zest. 
"Rock 'n' roll is an all-consuming passion. It's a monster that demands that I 
do it," he said. "Anybody who plays guitar like I play, whether they're famous 
or not, is going to have a blast." 
 The Meat Puppets and Das Damen play Sunday at 8 p.m. at the Coach House, 33157 
Camino Capistrano, San Juan Capistrano. Tickets: $13.50. Information: (714) 
496-8930. The Meat Puppets, The Big F and the Pivot Foots play Monday starting 
at 9:30 p.m. at Bogart's in the Marina Pacifica Mall, 6288 E. Pacific Coast 
Highway in Long Beach. Tickets: $12.50. Information: (213) 594-8975. 
