12 TIJUANA SECT MEMBERS DIE IN A RELIGIOUS RITUAL 
Twelve people, including three children, were found dead Thursday inside a 
small house, apparently poisoned or asphyxiated during what authorities 
described as a nightlong religious ceremony gone awry. 
Five others, including a baby girl, were taken to a clinic, where three were 
reported in comas and listed in critical condition. 
Authorities said the victims were all members of a religious sect headed by a 
charismatic Tijuana resident who was among those in a coma late Thursday. The 
sect leader was identified as Federico Padres Mejia or Mexia, who lived in the 
two-room house where the deaths occurred. 
Police had not determined a cause of death by late Thursday but continued to 
insist that neither mass murder nor suicide was to blame -- even though some 
family members feared otherwise. Instead, police speculated that the group 
either drank a fruit punch that was mistakenly tainted with an industrial 
solvent or were asphyxiated by a leaking butane tank. 
The oldest victim, according to police, was Fidel Coronel Franco, 77. The 
youngest victim was an 11-year-old girl. 
Autopsies and chemical tests on the food and drink found in the house are 
scheduled to begin today. 
Shortly after regaining consciousness, a survivor, Alfredo Osuna Hernandez, 22, 
said the group was participating in a religious "cleansing" ritual. He said the 
ritual involved a coin and the possibility of "good luck." 
Osuna, a native of the state of Sinaloa who said he had been in Tijuana for 
four months, said he had hoped to find a job through the ceremony. 
The participants, he said, were told that it would be harmful to leave the 
rope-delineated circle in the front room. At about 9 p.m., he said, worshipers 
began to drink the punch. 
Soon thereafter, he said, there were shouts of distress. 
"They began to scream in pain," said Osuna, who had attended several previous 
sessions with the leader he knew as Don Federico. "They screamed in a very ugly 
way." 
Osuna said he only took a sip of the punch. He doesn't know what caused the 
illness, he said. 
Also at the session, he said, were his brother, Felipe, 23, and his 
sister-in-law, Margarita Ramos Saucedo. She was among those listed as dead. 
Felipe's condition was unknown. 
The small, two-room house where the deaths occurred is located in a poor 
section of the El Florido barrio known as Mariano Matamoros on the city's 
southeastern outskirts. Police said neighbors there told them the sect began 
its praying ritual at about 6 p.m. Wednesday. Four hours later, Felipe Osuna 
Hernandez, 24, went to the house to check on his mother, Margarita Ramos Osuna, 
and his 5-month-old sister, Ana Karin, police said. 
"They wouldn't let him in. They told him Jesus Christ was about to come," Jose 
S. Camacho, one of the first policemen on the scene, said. 
Sometime early that same evening, Ana Saviola Miranda Juarez, 19, the daughter 
of the woman who owns the house and who lived with Mejia, went to her mother's 
house. She found her mother, Gloria Miranda Juarez, and a group of people 
inside. 
When she returned an hour later, Mejia wouldn't let her in, she said. Mejia 
told her that a spiritual ritual had begun and that two men already were in a 
trance. She left and spent the night in a pickup truck outside the house. 
Shortly after midnight, she said, "I heard them praying loudly and I heard a 
man scream that the devil was not going to exist anymore. I also heard Federico 
yelling, 'Don't be afraid! Don't be afraid!' 
"I could hear people crying and baying like dogs. It was terrible." 
The screaming stopped at about 3 a.m. 
The young woman tried to get into the house at about 7 a.m. Thursday but the 
doors and windows were locked, she said. A workman that her mother had hired 
came by and he broke a window and let the young woman in. 
"Right away, I smelled a strong order of gas," she said. The group appeared to 
be sleeping, she said, because she heard some of them snoring, and she thought 
the ritual was still going on. The baby girl was in her mother's arms, crying, 
she said. 
The young woman and the workman left, but before they did, they drank from the 
punch, she said. Her mother was among those who died. 
The younger Miranda was held at the police station late Thursday and police 
were considering filing charges against her for failing to help the baby. 
At about 10 a.m., Osuna returned, looking for his mother. 
He looked in the window and saw bodies in the front room. His mother was among 
the dead, and his baby sister was in a coma. 
"I opened the door and they were all thrown about the floor and on chairs," 
said Camacho, the police officer. "They looked as if they were drunk. They 
looked like they were sleeping off a party." 
Another officer who was among the first to arrive, Arturo Luis Torres, said 
"inside the room there was a very strong smell of acid. It was so strong it 
almost caused me to be nauseated. I had to leave the room." 
Inside the front room of the adobe-colored house police found a thin rope 
knotted in several places and laid in a circle roughly bordering the 
circumference of the room. There was also a painting of Our Lady of Guadalupe 
on a cardboard box flanked by two candles. 
Wednesday, Dec. 12, is Mexico's Fiesta of Our Lady of Guadalupe, a national 
religious holiday. Police, however, said they did not know whether the ritual 
had any connection to the holiday. 
Almost all of the victims were inside the circle, but they were not holding 
hands. Some had blood coming from their noses and others bore traces of vomit. 
There were no signs of violence, police said. Some of the victims reportedly 
had a purplish discoloration of the skin. 
In the kitchen, the only other room in the house, police found seven glasses 
with remnants of what authorities believe might be tainted punch. There was 
also a pot of chicken and salsa and another pot of rice soup. 
There were no drugs found in the house and all of the victims were fully 
clothed, police said. They found a handgun in one woman's purse. 
Police Cmdr. Jaime Sam Fierro said Mejia had lived in the house for several 
months with Gloria Mirada Juarez. 
He said Mejia claimed to be a spiritual leader who could contact the dead and 
cure the sick. The young Miranda woman said Mejia had been conducting rituals 
at the house daily for about a month. 
The rituals, she said, usually lasted two to three hours. 
She said Mejia spoke English well and claimed to have a temple in Los Angeles, 
where he also performed spiritual rituals. He also said he had a home in Sun 
City, she said. 
One neighbor, Noeimi Gomez, 19, who lives across the road from the house, said 
she was awakened at about 2 a.m. Thursday morning by sect members knocking hard 
on the walls of the home. 
"He (the sect leader) and the others never bothered anybody," said Gomez. 
Times staff writer Armando Acuna in San Diego contributed to this report. 
