SURROGATE IN CUSTODY CASE SUES HER DOCTOR, HOSPITAL 
Surrogate mother Anna L. Johnson has filed a $5-million lawsuit alleging that 
the doctor who implanted her with a couple's embryo, as well as those who 
arranged her surrogacy contract, were negligent and caused her severe emotional 
distress, Johnson's attorney said Saturday. 
"No doctor should ever have permitted her to be a surrogate," attorney Richard 
C. Gilbert said. "She is one of the last people on earth who should be a 
surrogate." 
Gilbert alleges that Johnson was completely unprepared for surrogacy, that she 
had undergone "less than an hour" of psychological counseling and that her 
doctor was aware of her four previous miscarriages and stillbirths when he 
implanted her with the embryo. 
The civil suit was filed Friday in Orange County Superior Court. None of those 
named were available Saturday for comment. 
However, the baby's father, Mark Calvert, who is not named in the suit, said 
Saturday that Johnson had misrepresented herself and withheld key information 
during the screening. 
Calvert said he and his wife, Crispina, would never have contracted with 
Johnson if they had been aware of her medical and personal history. 
"Anna Johnson got herself into this situation by not being candid, and for her 
to allege that any other individual was a participant in her omissions is 
ludicrous," Calvert said. 
After she was impregnated with a baby boy created from the Calverts' egg and 
sperm, Johnson said she had become bonded to the child and sued to keep the 
baby. In October, Orange County Superior Court Judge Richard N. Parslow Jr. 
ruled that the Calverts are the only legitimate parents and awarded them sole 
custody. Gilbert has vowed to appeal. 
Johnson's lawsuit names Dr. Ricardo Asch and his Center for Reproductive Health 
in Garden Grove, where the implant was performed, as well as William Handle, 
owner of the Center for Surrogacy Parenting in Beverly Hills, who allegedly 
referred the Calverts to Asch, Gilbert said. 
The suit accuses Asch of "battery" in performing the procedure when Johnson was 
not fully informed of her legal situation and thus unable to give her informed 
consent. 
Asch was out of the country Saturday. Calvert, however, said that Johnson had 
falsely stated that she had been screened and accepted as a surrogate by Handle 
and that she had failed to report her miscarriages, which would have 
disqualified her. 
"If Dr. Asch had been aware of one miscarriage or stillbirth, he would not have 
done the procedure," Calvert said. 
Also named in the suit is Wendy Leitner, who allegedly "was selected by William 
Handle, purportedly to act as Anna Johnson's attorney in the surrogacy 
contract," Gilbert said. 
Although Johnson spoke with Leitner on the telephone, "Anna Johnson has never 
met Wendy Leitner, never hired her and never paid her any money," Gilbert said. 
Leitner was chosen and paid $300 by the Calverts, he added. 
The suit accuses Leitner of legal malpractice because "she failed to properly 
advise Anna about the legal ramifications of this (surrogacy) contract," 
Gilbert said. "Anna was led to believe she had the right to change her mind and 
keep the baby." 
Also named is UCI Medical Center in Orange, where Johnson was hospitalized 
during her pregnancy. Gilbert alleged that the hospital failed to hand over to 
Johnson court papers related to her suit, which were served on her while she 
was a patient for two days, until the hospital's own attorneys could review 
them. 
He also alleged that hospital officials refused to allow Johnson telephone 
contact with her attorneys. 
UCI Medical Center officials were unavailable Saturday. 
