DEFENSIBLE, BUT ONLY TO A DEGREE; 
PANAMA: NORIEGA'S STATE OF WAR COULD NOT BE TOLERATED VERY LONG IF THE CANAL'S 
NEUTRALITY WERE TRULY TO BE PROTECTED. STILL, THE LEGAL CASE IS FAR FROM SOUND. 
There will be much hand-wringing in the coming days over the legality of the 
United States, intervention in Panama. The legal gymnastics once again will 
frustrate those who, for example, wanted international lawyers to shut up 
during the Grenada invasion in 1983. But there is every reason to weigh the 
political expediency of such actions against the legal defenses erected by 
government officials. 
Four justifications have been offered by the Bush Administration to legitimize 
this extraordinary operation. They are: to protect American lives, to defend 
democracy in Panama, to apprehend the indicted drug trafficker Manuel A. 
Noriega and to protect the integrity of the Panama Canal Treaty. Secretary of 
State James A. Baker III described the action as fully in accord with 
international law. He stressed the inherent right of self-defense under the 
United Nations Charter. 
The facts of the Panama action are still too sketchy to reach any definitive 
opinions, but it appears even at this early stage that none of these 
justifications are free of criticism under international law. 
The first justification, to defend American lives, is premised on hundreds of 
cases of harassment during the last two years, the murder of a U.S. Marine over 
the weekend, and an intelligence report about a planned urban commando attack 
on U.S. citizens. As threatening as these actions are, the Administration will 
be hard- pressed to prove that a full-scale invasion of Panama and the 
installation of a new government there were essential for the defense of 
American lives. Other alternatives short of invasion (such as evacuating all 
Americans to U.S. bases) could have been more proportional responses to the 
threats posed by Noriega's soldiers. 
The second justification, to defend democracy in Panama, has enormous popular 
appeal and moral legitimacy. But most international law scholars agree that the 
U.N. Charter does not endorse the unilateral use of military force to install 
democracy any more than it does to promote other forms of government. Perhaps 
someday operations to promote democracy will be launched with the approval of 
relevant multilateral bodies, but that day has not yet arrived. 
The pursuit of Noriega, which frames the third justification, is premised on an 
undisclosed set of legal claims. The Office of Legal Counsel of the Justice 
Department has issued three opinions this year that attempt to establish the 
legality of seizing Noriega or taking actions that might lead to his death. 
These opinions remain classified and therefore are shielded from the critical 
scrutiny of legal scholars. 
We can glean, though, from press accounts and congressional testimony, that the 
Justice Department is reaching its opinions on the basis of what might be 
possible under narrow readings of federal law, but unacceptable under 
international law. Until these opinions are released to the public (as were 
similar opinions from the Office of Legal Counsel during the Iran-Contra 
investigations), the Administration's justification will ring hollow for 
international lawyers. 
The final justification may offer the best case under international law. The 
United States exercises a panoply of rights and obligations in Panama as an 
operator and guarantor of the security of the Panama Canal. The U.S. Southern 
Command in Panama is authorized to use military force to meet the danger 
resulting from an armed attack or other actions that threaten the security of 
the canal. U.S. forces also are authorized to guarantee the security of 
themselves, their dependents and their civilian components. If the canal's 
operations are interfered with, the United States can use military force to 
reopen the canal or restore its operations. 
Last Friday, Panama's National Assembly, hand-picked by Noriega, approved a 
resolution stating: "The Republic of Panama is declared to be in a state of war 
while the aggression (of U.S. economic sanctions) lasts." The Panama Canal 
Treaty prohibits Panama from adopting or enforcing any law or decree or taking 
any action that purports to interfere with the exercise by the United States of 
its rights under the treaty or related agreements. 
There are plenty of provisions in the Panama Canal treaties that prohibit any 
American intervention in the internal affairs of Panama or any action against 
the territorial integrity or political independence of Panama. But other 
provisions stress the neutrality of the Panama Canal and the obligation of each 
party to ensure that neutrality. Noriega's state of war could not be tolerated 
very long if the canal's neutrality were truly to be protected. 
Nonetheless, the treaties do not grant carte blanche for U.S. interventions on 
the scale currently under way. The coming days will be critical in establishing 
a lasting legal foundation for this politically momentous action. 
