SPANISH BOOKS FOR YOUNG FEATURED AT NEW CENTER 
Although American children have enjoyed a smorgasbord of literary offerings, 
from Dr. Seuss to Roald Dahl, Spanish-speaking youngsters have been starved for 
books, or sometimes force-fed a diet of political propaganda under the guise of 
children's literature, a north San Diego County educator contends. 
Although the situation has improved, American educators have not recognized the 
growing collection of quality children's books written in Spanish, said Isabel 
Schon, professor of reading education and library science at Cal State San 
Marcos. 
Today, Schon will unveil a literary center that she believes is the largest 
contemporary collection of its kind in the world. The Center for the Study of 
Books in Spanish for Children and Adolescents, on the Cal State San Marcos 
campus, will show educators the types of quality Spanish-language children's 
books that are available, she said. 
The center, which will be open to the public, features more than 5,000 
children's books in Spanish and books in English about Latino cultures. 
Schon said the center, which will have a bilingual staff, will encourage 
reading among children who speak only Spanish. 
"No country in the world compares to America in the quality and quantity of 
children's books in English," she said. "In the Spanish-speaking world, one has 
to be much more selective." 
Although quality Spanish-language books do exist, Schon said, teachers and 
librarians often buy translations of popular English children's books because 
it is easier than looking for good original texts. 
"In the States, an overwhelming majority of teachers and librarians say they 
prefer to buy the translations because they know the books, and it's easier to 
read the translation of something, but they ignore the beautiful and authentic 
literature of the Spanish-speaking world," she said. 
She hopes the center, with its bibliographies and lists of Spanish-language 
publishers, will persuade teachers and librarians otherwise. 
The center also has a collection of English books on Latino culture, which 
Schon called another much-needed resource. 
"I can count them on my hands the number of good books about Hispanic children 
in English," she said, adding that many such books often give the "tourist 
view" of life south of the border. 
Meanwhile, school librarians have been slow to recognize the need for 
Spanish-language books, Schon said. 
"School librarians seem to have more negative attitudes against books in 
Spanish being in either the library or the classroom," she said, citing a 
survey of nearly 500 teachers, librarians and administrators in Southern 
California. 
"These (librarians) are not professionally trained people, and I want to 
believe it's an attitude of ignorance and these people . . . do not have the 
understanding and awareness needed," Schon said. 
"All research shows that (Spanish-speaking students) are going to be better 
readers and students if they start to read in the language they know and 
understand," she said. 
"If we give them the books in Spanish, after three years they transfer to 
English, and in six years they are reading like their peers," Schon said. 
Several educators interviewed in San Diego County support Schon's position and 
have plans to take advantage of the center. 
"We have many students in San Diego that are coming to school with Spanish as 
their first language, and it's very important that we have quality materials in 
literature and language arts available to teach," said Rosalia Salinas, 
director of the statewide California Language Minority project. 
"When students come, if they come at an early age, we need to develop their 
reading and writing skills in the language they already speak." 
Kathleen Lindemann, who teaches second-graders who speak limited English at San 
Marcos Elementary School, plans to take her students to the center on field 
trips, since it is within walking distance of the school. 
"I want to (take) them over there and have them feel that college is within 
their realm," Lindemann said. 
