ERMA BOMBECK: CHRISTMAS BY THE BOOK? HARDLY 
Last year, someone gave me Martha Stewart's Christmas book for holiday 
entertaining. That's about as cruel as someone offering to set up a deck chair 
for me on the Titanic. 
We're talking about a woman who decorates a tree with homemade gingerbread 
cookies brushed with softly beaten egg whites and then painted with gold leaf. 
One year, I hung six fake birds on a tree outside my window. It rained, and 
they looked like their intestines were unraveling. 
As I leafed through the book recently, I must say it was seductive. It made 
everything seem so warm and fuzzy and possible. Maybe -- just maybe -- if I 
started early enough, I could pull off a Martha Stewart Christmas. 
I figure I'll start by making my own potpourri by gathering together 
tellicherry peppercorns, orrisroot powder, bayberry bark, senna pods, lemon 
verbena and rose hips. I could do that if I had any idea of what I just said. 
What the heck: I'll buy a bag at Hallmark and spend the time making homemade 
delicacies. I just have to figure out how many jars I need for onion chutney 
and how far ahead to make the crackers for the soups. I don't believe I said 
that. 
On the other hand, if I really want to knock the socks off guests, I'll forgo 
the homemade wreaths and concentrate on the gingerbread mansion on Page 109. 
Yes! Let's see, all Martha lists for that is a recipe for gingerbread (piece of 
cake), another recipe for icing and an architectural drawing course! Give me a 
break, Martha. 
Who among us has not dreamed of making our own wrapping paper? Let's see, for 
that I assemble lots of plain brown paper, metallic paint, brushes, surgical 
gloves and a degree in fine arts. 
I leaf to the cooking section to see if perhaps there is something different to 
dazzle my holiday guests besides the traditional turkey and ham. There it is, 
all right: cassoulet. Cassoulet lists 22 ingredients, including such staples as 
six 5-pound ducks, two cups of fresh duck fat, 16 pounds of Great Northern 
beans and six pounds of garlic sausage. It serves 100 (I had only 63 at my 
wedding) and takes three days to process. The oven is your problem. 
OK, so maybe I won't have a Martha Stewart Christmas, but at least the pictures 
got me in the mood. I saw the book the other day at a bookstore. When no one 
was looking, I moved it from the "Entertaining" shelf to a table stacked with 
fiction. 
