GOOD -- AND GOOD FOR YOU; 
FOUR CHEFS SHOW YOU HOW TO MAKE HOLIDAY MEALS WITH LOTS OF FLAVOR AND VERY 
LITTLE FAT.; 
IS THIS ANY TIME TO BE THINKING LIGHT?; 
HOLIDAYS: FOUR RENOWNED L.A. CHEFS SAY 'YES' WITH FANTASTIC LOW-FAT FEASTS. 
A magnificent crown roast. Creamy mounds of mashed potatoes. Aromatic mincemeat 
pie perfumed with spices. This is the time of year when tables sag beneath the 
weight of sumptuous feasts. It is the time of generous holiday dinners, when we 
expect -- and want -- food to taste especially rich. This is not the time to 
even think about lean or light or low-fat fare. Or is it? 
Is it possible to get through the holidays without wreaking havoc on your diet? 
Can eating right be every bit as delicious as eating wrong? The Times asked 
four well-known restaurant chefs to develop holiday menus using a minimum of 
fat. We suspected that even the experts would find it difficult to create a 
harmonious balance between food that is good for you and food that tastes 
wonderful. 
We were wrong. 
"Menus like these are great examples of how you can have wonderful, flavorful 
food that just happens to be healthy," said Evelyn Tribole, the registered 
dietitian who helped develop the market basket of limited fats. "It shows that 
low fat doesn't mean you have to choose between alfalfa sprouts and chocolate 
cream pie at the Christmas dinner table." 
Take Patrick Clark of Bice Ristorante. "We spare no amounts of butter," Clark 
says of the Christmas dinner he cooks for his wife and four children. Though 
the restaurant features dishes such as cheese-stuffed ravioli in walnut sauce 
and scallops in a lobster-saffron broth, the Clark Christmas table reflects 
Southern hospitality at its finest: roast beef, ham and turkey, plus chestnut 
and oyster stuffing and sweet potatoes. "It's very ethnic, hearty, hefty food," 
Clark says, "and a lot of it." 
But Clark had no trouble coming up with a wonderful holiday menu that 
restricted the fat to 30%. His menu reflects his affection for lavish food, and 
you'd never know that the thick, smoky celery root soup is made with no cream 
(rice is the trick) and just a single strip of bacon. You couldn't feel 
deprived after feasting on pheasant, couscous with pumpkin and pine nuts and a 
wonderful warm pear compote. Less than 30% fat? Nobody would ever know it. 
When Tony Di Lembo of Indigo reminisces about Christmas at home, he remembers 
how well his family ate. "When I was a kid, we had a traditional non-meat day 
before Christmas Day," he says. He recalls eating some "pretty weird stuff." 
The Christmas menu in his Italian home often centered entirely around fish: an 
octopus salad or eels sauced with olive oil, garlic and perhaps some fresh 
tomato. "My grandmother used to buy live eels and she would keep them alive. 
I'd peer over the sink and see these live eels swishing around." 
With this background, it's not surprising that Di Lembo had no trouble coming 
up with a festive holiday menu that is only around 30% fat. His salad is tossed 
with walnuts and just enough Roquefort to torque up the flavors; there's a 
simple, but far from ordinary grilled breast of chicken served with a zesty 
cranberry-pear chutney and a truly spicy corn-and-wild-rice salad. By dessert 
time, you're grateful for the cool simplicity of the fresh-squeezed orange 
juice gelatin. 
Unlike Clark and Di Lembo, brothers Toribio and Javier Prado of Cha Cha Cha and 
Prado Restaurant were raised vegetarian; they learned early to appreciate the 
advantage of eating light -- even at Christmastime. "We ate mostly grains and 
pasta and a lot of fruit and nuts," says Toribio. 
Their menu of low-fat party foods is notable not only for its good taste but 
also for its extraordinary eye appeal; this is very pretty food. It starts with 
a spectacular salad made of colorful grilled vegetables and goes on to Cornish 
hens served with a sauce made of papaya, pineapple, cranberries and herbs. The 
side dish, a colorful counterpoint of rice and beans, adds substance. For 
dessert there is a fruit "flan" flavored with vanilla and colored with 
pomegranate juice. Their menu is less than 25% fat -- but this is entirely 
festive food. 
THE PRADO'S 
HOLIDAY MENU 
Grilled Vegetable Salad 
Cornish Hens With Papaya and Cranberry Sauce 
Moros y Cristianos 
Fresh vegetables 
Toribio's Caramel Pomegranate-Tangerine "Flan" 
GRILLED VEGETABLE 
SALAD 
1/2 head romaine lettuce 
1/2 bunch spinach 
1/2 head Boston lettuce 
1 small head radicchio 
1 sweet red pepper 
5 large asparagus 
2 medium zucchini 
3 yellow squash 
1 ear corn 
1 bunch green onions 
1/4 cup olive oil 
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 
2 tablespoons lemon juice 
Salt, pepper 
Cut romaine, spinach, Boston lettuce and radicchio into fine shreds. Place in 
bowl and set aside. 
Grill red pepper, asparagus, zucchini, squash, corn and green onions until 
slightly charred but not burnt. Let vegetables cool slightly. Dice finely, then 
add to salad greens in bowl. 
Combine olive oil, vinegar and lemon juice. Season to taste with salt and 
pepper. Pour over salad and toss gently, mixing just until vegetables and salad 
greens are moist. Makes 6 servings. 
MOROS Y CRISTIANOS 
1 cup dried black beans 
2 tablespoons butter 
1/2 cup finely chopped onion 
1/4 cup finely chopped green pepper 
1 teaspoon finely chopped garlic 
1 1/2 cups long-grain rice 
1 1/2 teaspoons salt 
Freshly ground mixed whole peppercorns 
3 bay leaves 
Place beans in colander and rinse under cold water until water runs clear. 
Transfer beans to 3- or 4-quart saucepan. Add 7 cups water and bring to boil 
over high heat. Reduce heat to low and simmer, partially covered, 2 1/2 to 3 
hours, or until beans are tender. Add more boiling water, if needed to prevent 
scorching. 
Drain beans in colander. Mash 2 tablespoons beans to fine paste. Set paste 
aside. 
Melt butter in skillet over medium heat. Add onion, green pepper and garlic. 
Saute 5 minutes or until vegetables are tender. Do not brown. Stir in bean 
paste, then add beans and reduce heat to low. Simmer 10 minutes, uncovered. 
Return bean mixture to saucepan and add rice, salt, pepper to taste, bay leaves 
and 2 cups water. Bring to boil, stirring constantly. Reduce heat to low, cover 
and simmer 20 to 25 minutes, until rice is tender and all liquid has been 
absorbed. Adjust seasonings if necessary. Makes 6 cups. 
CORNISH HENS WITH 
PAPAYA AND 
CRANBERRY SAUCE 
6 Cornish hens 
1 papaya or mango, peeled and sliced 
5 ounces peeled fresh pineapple, chopped 
1 teaspoon minced garlic 
1/2 cup fresh cranberries 
1/2 bunch chopped fresh thyme leaves 
1/2 teaspoon paprika 
Dash cayenne pepper 
Freshly ground mixed whole peppercorns 
3/4 cup chicken stock 
Brown hens slightly in non-stick skillet. Transfer to rack in roasting pan and 
bake at 325 degrees 1 hour or until juices run clear. Remove hens from oven and 
carefully remove bones, leaving birds whole. Set birds aside. 
Saute papaya, pineapple, garlic and cranberries in non-stick skillet until 
tender. Add thyme, paprika, cayenne and pepper mix to taste. Stir in chicken 
stock and simmer until sauce is thickened, about 5 to 10 minutes. Pour warm 
sauce over hens and serve immediately. Makes 6 servings. 
TORIBIO'S CARAMEL 
POMEGRANATE- 
TANGERINE 
FLAN 
2 cups sugar 
Grated zest of 1 lemon 
1 envelope unflavored gelatin 
1 cup fresh pomegranate juice 
2 cups tangerine juice 
1 vanilla bean 
Make caramel sauce by slowly melting 1 3/4 cups sugar and 2 tablespoons water 
in saucepan. When mixture is smooth and caramel colored, stir in lemon zest. 
Pour small amount of mixture into 6 ramekins, just enough to cover bottoms. 
Soften gelatin in 2 tablespoons water. Combine 1/2 gelatin mixture, pomegranate 
juice and remaining 1/4 cup sugar. Bring to boil. Cool slightly, then divide 
mixture equally among ramekins. Chill until almost set. 
Bring tangerine juice, remaining 1/2 gelatin mixture and vanilla bean to boil. 
Continue to boil until mixture is reduced by half. Cool slightly, then divide 
equally between ramekins. Refrigerate overnight. 
Invert desserts onto serving plates. Makes 6 servings. 
TONY DI LEMBO'S 
HOLIDAY MENU 
Tossed lettuces with toasted walnuts, crumbled Roquefort and balsamic 
vinaigrette 
Grilled, Herbed Breast of Chicken With Cranberry-Pear Chutney 
Corn and Wild Rice Salad 
Fresh-Squeezed Orange Juice Gelatin 
HERBED CHICKEN 
BREAST WITH 
CRANBERRY-PEAR 
CHUTNEY 
2 tablespoons olive oil 
2 garlic cloves, minced 
Fresh rosemary 
Fresh thyme or sage 
Black pepper 
4 (1/2-pound) chicken breasts, skinned 
Cranberry-Pear Chutney 
Puree olive oil, garlic, rosemary, thyme and pepper to taste in blender until 
smooth. Spread mixture over both sides of chicken breasts. Refrigerate at least 
2 hours or overnight. 
Grill or broil chicken until cooked through, but still moist. Serve with 
Cranberry-Pear Chutney. Makes 4 servings. 
Cranberry-Pear Chutney 
2 firm pears 
1/2 cup sugar 
1/2 cup water 
5 ounces fresh cranberries, rinsed and drained 
1/2 cinnamon stick or 1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/4 teaspoon grated orange zest 
Peel pears and cut into 1/2-inch cubes. Do not core. Bring sugar and water to 
boil. Add pears, cranberries, cinnamon and orange zest. Return to boil, then 
reduce heat and simmer 12 minutes, stirring frequently. 
Mash small amount berries and pears on side of pan with fork. Stir mixture, 
then cool in pan to room temperature. Serve warm, at room temperature or 
chilled. Makes 4 servings. 
CORN AND WILD RICE 
SALAD 
3/4 cup wild rice 
Salt 
1 (10-ounce) package frozen whole kernel corn, thawed 
1 sweet red pepper, diced 
1 medium red onion, diced 
2 canned chipotle chiles, minced 
2 teaspoons sauce reserved from chipotle chiles, about 
1/4 cup cilantro leaves, chopped 
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil 
Pepper 
Add rice to 2 quarts boiling salted water. Return to boil, then reduce heat and 
simmer 50 minutes, covered, until tender. About 5 minutes before end of cooking 
time, add corn and red pepper. Drain in colander. 
Transfer mixture to large bowl and add red onion, chipotle chiles and sauce, 
cilantro and olive oil. Toss well. Season to taste with salt and pepper. May be 
served warm or at room temperature. Makes about 5 cups. 
FRESH-SQUEEZED 
ORANGE 
JUICE GELATIN 
2 cups fresh-squeezed orange juice, at room temperature 
1 package unflavored gelatin 
Mint leaves 
Place 1/4 cup juice in small saucepan. Sprinkle gelatin over juice and let 
stand until softened. Do not stir. 
Heat mixture, stirring, just until gelatin dissolves. Do not boil. Remove from 
heat and stir in remaining juice. 
Pour into 9-inch baking pan and refrigerate until chilled. Cut into 1-inch 
cubes and serve in chilled glasses garnished with mint leaves. Makes 4 
servings. 
PATRICK CLARK'S 
HOLIDAY MENU 
Smoky Celery Root Soup 
Roasted Pheasants with Madeira, Sweet Potatoes and Apples 
Couscous With Pumpkin and Pine Nuts 
Warm Pear Compote With Almonds and Rosemary 
SMOKY CELERY ROOT 
SOUP 
1 slice bacon, diced 
1 small onion, diced 
1 leek, white part only, diced 
1/3 cup long-grain rice 
3 large celery roots, peeled and diced 
1 to 1 1/2 quarts defatted chicken stock 
Bouquet garni 
1/2 cup milk 
Salt, pepper 
Sour cream, optional 
Saute bacon until crisp. Remove bacon. Add onion and leek to fat in pan and 
cook until tender. Add rice, celery roots, 1 quart chicken stock, bacon and 
bouquet garni. Bring to boil, then reduce heat and simmer, covered, until rice 
and celery roots are tender, about 20 to 25 minutes. 
Puree mixture in blender and strain. Return to boil, then stir in milk and 
season to taste with salt and pepper. Stir in remaining stock, if thinner soup 
is desired. Serve hot topped with dollop of sour cream. Makes 6 to 8 generous 
servings. 
Note: Sour cream will affect fat content of menu. 
CLAY POT ROASTED 
PHEASANTS WITH 
MADEIRA, SWEET 
POTATOES AND 
APPLES 
3 large sweet potatoes (yam variety) 
2 female pheasants, cleaned and trussed for roasting 
Salt, pepper 
3 shallots, sliced 
1 carrot, sliced 
1 clove garlic, crushed 
1/2 cup Madeira 
4 Granny Smith apples, peeled and cored 
Fresh thyme 
Lemon juice 
1 tablespoon diet margarine 
Place sweet potatoes on baking sheet and bake at 400 degrees until 3/4 done, 
about 30 minutes. Let cool, then peel and set aside. Soak clay pot according to 
manufacturer's instructions, about 15 minutes. 
Season pheasants to taste with salt and pepper inside and out. Place shallots, 
carrot and garlic in bottom of clay pot. Place birds on top and pour Madeira 
over. Add 1 sprig thyme and cover. Place in cold oven, then turn oven to 400 
degrees and bake 35 minutes. 
Using small melon baller, remove as many perfect apple and potato balls as 
possible. Sprinkle apples with small amount lemon juice to prevent browning. 
Set aside. 
Remove birds from pot and let stand about 10 minutes. Cover with foil and keep 
warm. 
Melt margarine in non-stick skillet and saute apple balls until just tender. 
Add sweet potatoes and heat through. 
Untruss birds and carve into halves. Place on platter surrounded by potatoes 
and apples. Pour sauce left in clay pot over. Garnish with chervil and 
additional sprigs thyme, if desired. Makes 4 servings. 
COUSCOUS WITH 
PUMPKIN 
1 1/2 cups peeled pumpkin or squash, cut into 1/2-inch dice 
1 medium onion, diced 
1 tablespoon olive oil 
2 cups defatted chicken stock 
Leaves of 1 sprig fresh thyme 
Dash ground cinnamon 
1 (10-ounce) package quick-cooking couscous 
Salt, pepper 
1/2 cup pine nuts, toasted 
Steam or boil pumpkin until tender-crisp. Set aside. 
Saute onion in olive oil in non-stick pan over low heat until just tender. Add 
to stock in saucepan. Bring onion and stock to boil. Add thyme, cinnamon and 
couscous. Stir, cover and remove from heat. Let stand 5 to 7 minutes or until 
liquid is absorbed. 
Fluff with fork and season to taste with salt and pepper. Stir in pumpkin and 
pine nuts. Serve immediately. Makes 8 cups. 
WARM PEAR COMPOTE 
WITH ALMONDS 
AND ROSEMARY 
1 cup sugar 
Juice of 1 lemon 
1 teaspoon butter 
1 1/4 pounds pears, peeled and diced 
1 sprig rosemary, or to taste 
6 whole almonds, shelled, toasted and chopped 
Heat sugar, lemon juice and butter in saucepan over medium heat until sugar 
melts and is caramel-colored, stirring occasionally. Stir in pears and 
rosemary. Simmer, covered, 15 minutes. Let cool slightly, then sprinkle with 
chopped almonds. Makes 4 servings. 
