PLAN TO RESCUE CENTRAL AMERICAN CHILDREN MIRED IN RED TAPE, DISCORD 
Gary Bennett considers himself a lifesaver, trying to rescue babies from 
poverty and disease in Central America. 
Carol Bogart, who paid Bennett more than $5,000 for a little girl he never 
delivered, sees him as a false hero. 
"I'm angry," said Bogart, 40, of Denver. "I'm angry about what she went 
through, and her mother. Who knows what that woman thinks or believes?" 
After almost two years, Bennett has not completed a single adoption, and the 
state has shut down his agency because he allegedly violated adoption rules. 
Bennett concedes that he bit off "more than I could chew" and says he counted 
too much on friends who liked the idea but couldn't help carry it out. His good 
intentions, he says, were thwarted by red tape, lack of money and naivete. 
"The only reason that I started this was the children . . . not for me, but for 
these people, so their babies won't die." 
Bennett first took an interest in the Miskito Indians in 1984 after he left his 
$83,000-a-year air-conditioning repair business in suburban Ft. Worth and 
"sought a thrill" training Nicaraguan Contras. A friend invited him to see the 
Miskito Coast, a 225-mile-long strip of jungle along the Honduras and Nicaragua 
coast with poverty so bad "you're not human if you can ignore it." 
He said he began taking food and arranging aid shipments to the Miskitos in 
1985. He sought help from the federal government and obtained medical visas for 
four sick, malnourished children. 
"There are four children who will have good lives because of him," said David 
Sowders. Sowders and his wife, Denise, became foster parents of abandoned twins 
Bennett brought from a military hospital on the Honduras border in 1985. 
"The nurse came to Gary and said 'Would you please do what you can for these 
kids?' and so Gary went, found their father and got permission to bring them 
out on medical visa," said Sowders, a Dallas Times Herald editor. 
The Sowderses paid for the twins' medical care and are in the process of 
adopting them. Bennett helped them look in Nicaragua for the twins' father to 
get him to relinquish custody. 
Bennett, a 42-year-old divorced father of four, became the foster parent of 
another of the four children, a Nicaraguan girl named Angie, now 3. He recently 
received the final custody relinquishment documents from the girl's father, and 
said that the adoption is in its final stages. 
The fourth child is with another Dallas couple, Bennett said. 
Because of his work with the four children, friends urged him to start an 
adoption agency, and in late 1987 he got a provisional license from the Texas 
Department of Human Services for the nonprofit Mosquitia Coast Child Find Inc. 
The provisional license gave the agency six months to prove itself by 
completing an adoption in order to get a regular, biennial license. The state 
twice extended the license but in September refused another because Bennett had 
failed to place a child with permanent, adoptive parents and apparently had 
bent regulations, Human Services officials said. 
Carol Bogart was one of about 75 people who contacted the agency seeking 
children, Bennett says now, though at one point he told state officials that 
"thousands" had called him. Fewer than 10 people were interviewed by social 
workers connected with the agency, Bennett said. 
Bogart, who already had a 4-year-old son, Michael, paid $5,200 in adoption 
deposits and fees and $2,000 to an agency that was to evaluate her suitability. 
In return, Bennett promised he would bring her a little girl in November, 1988. 
Then he said he was certain it would be December. 
"The rest of December came and went," she said. "I was calling them 
frantically, constantly. . . . They said, 'No question, you will have this baby 
for Christmas.' " In the months that followed, "They were still stringing me 
along and sending me the pictures. I was worried about what was happening to 
her, what kind of shape she was in, and was she being taken care of properly. 
"You get so hooked into it that you just can barely stand to give it up. I 
couldn't invest myself emotionally in it anymore. And Michael was just having a 
terrible time. He had been waiting for a baby sister for months." 
Bennett said the adoption fell through when his assistant and girlfriend, Pat 
Nealy, was jailed for a day in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, because of questions over 
the nationality of the the little girl, Kyla Sue. A travel document Nealy and 
Bennett obtained for the girl showed that she was born in Nicaragua. But in an 
affidavit relinquishing parental rights, the girl's mother said the child was 
born in Tegucigalpa. 
Bogart accused Bennett of trying to circumvent stricter Honduran adoption laws 
by passing Kyla Sue off as Nicaraguan. 
The Department of Human Services investigated her claim last summer, but could 
not validate it. But the department said Mosquitia Coast failed to meet several 
regulations, including providing records and properly training staff. 
The state had criticized Bennett earlier for bringing the four children into 
the United States on medical visas when he intended to have them adopted. 
Bennett says his problems are political. "Our State Department says one thing 
and what they actually do is another. I'm just one man. We haven't placed any. 
We're just banging our heads against the wall." 
Case records show that the most serious state allegations against Mosquitia 
Coast involved its inability to retain a professional social worker and Bennett 
and Nealy's competence to counsel parents giving up their children. 
Donna Parrish, the Human Services licensing official assigned to Bennett's 
agency, declined to discuss Bennett's qualifications, but said: "Child-placing 
is very complicated. It's very difficult for professionals to become involved 
in it and go through it in the way that it needs to be done, let alone someone 
with no background it." 
The final report on the agency indicates two families withdrew applications 
they had filed with Mosquitia Coast as it went out of business, and several 
other families were referred to other agencies. 
Bogart's is the only complaint on file with Human Services. Bennett said he 
will return her money. 
Kyla Sue and three other children are at a "safe house" in Tegucigalpa, he 
said. They are his foster children in the government's eyes, but can't leave 
because adoptive parents must be lined up for each child, he said, adding that 
he hesitates to look for permanent homes for them because he doesn't want to 
appear to be operating an illegal adoption service. 
Sowders believes Bennett will be better off taking help to the Miskito than 
bringing children out. "I saw firsthand how hard it is to get one tiny thing 
done," he said. "It took more resources and help than he had available." 
