X MARKS SUNS' SPOT IN TRADE WITH SEATTLE; 
PRO BASKETBALL: MCDANIEL TO PHOENIX. SUPERSONICS GET EDDIE JOHNSON, TWO NO. 1 
PICKS. 
The Phoenix Suns acquired high-scoring and temperamental forward Xavier 
McDaniel from the Seattle SuperSonics on Friday for swingman Eddie Johnson and 
two first-round draft picks. 
The trade between the two struggling teams might be one that allows the Suns to 
challenge for the NBA title this year and it might help Seattle build for the 
future. 
Phoenix (8-7) has lost three in a row, while the SuperSonics (5-10) ended a 
six-game losing streak with a 105-103 victory over Miami on Thursday night. 
"We feel we need this type of player," Coach Cotton Fitzsimmons said of 
McDaniel before the Suns beat New Jersey, 129-110, Friday night. "He's tough, 
physical and an outstanding offensive rebounder, which is an area we need help 
with." 
The SuperSonics also said they were happy with the trade. 
"Eddie Johnson is instant offense," club President Bob Whitsitt said. "He is 
one of the league's best pure shooters. And this will allow (Coach) K.C. Jones 
to reposition some of our players to their more natural roles." 
When the SuperSonics lost, 106-100, Friday night in Orlando, Derrick McKey 
started at small forward and Shawn Kemp at power forward. McKey played power 
forward last season and also has played that role this season. 
"Xavier has definitely been a big plus for the Sonics' organization," Whitsitt 
added. "On the basketball court, we're giving up offense and getting offense 
plus two No. 1 picks in return. But in the community, X has been wonderful for 
us and we wish him the very best." 
In return for McDaniel, 27, the SuperSonics will receive the Suns' first-round 
draft pick in 1991 and a first-round choice in either 1993 or 1994. 
The Suns have two picks in 1993 and will give Seattle the better one if it is 
not a lottery pick. If it is, then the SuperSonics will get the Suns' top 
choice in 1994. 
McDaniel was leading Seattle in scoring with a 21.8-point average. The 6-foot-8 
forward has averaged 20.6 points in his six-year pro career. He was an All-Star 
in 1988. 
Johnson, a nine-year pro, has been the Suns' top player off the bench in recent 
years. He averaged 16.9 points last season after averaging 21.5 and earning the 
NBA's sixth-man award in 1988-89. 
This season, he has averaged 13.5 points in 15 games, but has not been asked to 
score as much. 
Johnson, 31, learned about the trade 75 minutes before the Suns took the court 
against the Nets. 
"I've known it was coming," said Johnson, who sat in his Suns' uniform 
answering questions. "You can tell. People act differently. 
"I've been sensing it over the past week. Once we started struggling, I knew 
something was going to happen." 
Johnson said he expected that either he, Tim Perry or Kenny Battle would be 
traded. 
"This gives me new life and a chance to go show what I can do," Johnson said. 
"My role changed here from last year in the playoffs to now. I wasn't asked to 
score, so I tried to work on my defense." 
With McDaniel, the Suns will probably start a front line of McDaniel, Tom 
Chambers (6-10) and Mark West (6-10) along with Jeff Hornacek and Kevin Johnson 
at the guards. Chambers had played with McDaniel at Seattle before signing with 
the Suns as a free agent. 
