CHAGALL POSTERS CELEBRATE HIS ART; 
THE UNIVERSITY OF JUDAISM DISPLAYS ITS LITHOGRAPH COLLECTION FROM ONE OF THE 
MASTERS OF 20TH CENTURY 
The University of Judaism in Bel-Air is celebrating the holidays with a 
symphony of images -- free-flying angels, clowns, musicians, animals -- 
depicted in the posters of Marc Chagall. 
An exhibit of 22 lithographic posters designed by the artist and produced in 
conjunction with two French printers will run at the university art gallery 
through Jan. 27. 
Most of the lithographs were produced in the 1960s for Chagall exhibits in 
Europe. Several promoted the opening performances of operas for which Chagall 
also designed interiors and costumes. One work, titled "The Tribe of Gad," is 
based on a study of his renowned stained glass windows in Jerusalem 
representing the 12 tribes of Israel. 
James Jacobson, chairman of the University's Fine Arts Council, said the show 
represents a cross-section of the artist's considerable body of poster work. 
The Chagall posters have been in the university's private collection for three 
years, Jacobson said, but this is the first time they have been on public 
display. They are for sale, with prices averaging about $1,500. 
The artist collaborated on the lithographs with Fernand Mourlot and Charles 
Sorlier, two eminent Parisian printers whose names also appear on the works. 
Chagall prepared the designs, sometimes using details from his painting or 
sketches. The design was then reproduced on zinc and stone engraving plates. In 
the collaborations with Mourlot, Chagall actually took part in the printing, 
physically pulling the lithographs off the plates, Jacobson said. The artist 
supervised Sorlier's work, but was not involved in the printing to the same 
extent, Jacobson said. In most cases, hundreds of posters were printed based on 
a design. 
Chagall's name has been in the news recently along with several other 
20th-Century masters as the result of federal and local investigations into the 
sale of forgeries by private dealers and galleries. Some of the forgeries 
included supposed Chagall graphics. 
The posters at the university exhibit were donated from the private collection 
of a Los Angeles-area doctor three years ago, Jacobson said. Although he said 
the risk of forgery can never be completely ruled out, he said officials "have 
good reason to believe" the works are genuine. 
Some of the more striking works on display have roots in Chagall's love of 
music and grew out of his projects in set design and decoration at opera houses 
around the world. The opera posters are a swirl of color and serene floating 
figures that populated Chagall's artistic universe, evoking the content of the 
operas while remaining distinctly personal. 
A poster for Bizet's "Carmen" at the Metropolitan Opera in New York in 1966 
includes a portrayal of Sir Rudolf Bing, the opera director who commissioned 
the work, as one of the central characters. There is a poster for a 1967 Met 
production of Mozart's "The Magic Flute" with sets and costumes by Chagall. 
A poster for a 1964 Paris production of "Romeo and Juliet" is based on the 
artist's preliminary sketches for the ceiling of the Paris Opera. The ceiling 
design was commissioned by writer Andre Malraux, then Minister of Culture, and 
executed by Chagall as a gift to the city of Paris. 
Among the others, a 1963 lithograph has significance for the present day as 
change sweeps Chagall's native Russia. The poster, entitled "Revolution," was 
commissioned for a French government-sponsored exhibition of socially relevant 
artwork entitled "Painters as Witnesses of their Times." Chagall based the 
poster on a 1937 sketch depicting his vision of the aftermath of the Russian 
Revolution. 
In a poem about that time, Chagall wrote: "Russia was covered with ice. Lenin 
had turned it upside down, the way I turn my paintings." 
 The Chagall exhibit at the Platt Gallery, University of Judaism, 15600 
Mulholland Drive, in Bel-Air, is open from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through 
Thursday and 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Friday. The gallery is also open weekends during 
concerts at the university. For information call (213) 476-9777. 
