BUSH DETERMINED NOT TO DELAY GULF ATTACK; 
MILITARY: HE WILL MOVE QUICKLY AFTER JAN. 15 IF IRAQ BALKS. GIS WILL BE 
INOCULATED AGAINST GERM WARFARE. 
President Bush, after weighing the political and military consequences of 
further delay, has decided that the United States should move quickly to launch 
a massive military attack on Iraqi forces if Iraq fails to withdraw from Kuwait 
by the U.N.-imposed deadline of Jan. 15, senior government officials said 
Thursday. 
Neither congressional nor public sentiment on the issue of launching a military 
offensive will make any difference in Bush's determination to proceed, because 
he believes that delaying an attack much beyond the deadline would increase the 
number of American casualties, two officials involved with Bush in Persian Gulf 
strategy said. 
"He's thought about all that, and he's comfortable with his decision," one 
official confided. "He said he's prepared to take whatever the consequences may 
be, including if it's an unpopular war and makes him a one-term President." 
In an indication of stepped-up preparations for war, Administration officials 
said the military is planning to begin inoculating some American troops in 
Saudi Arabia against biological weapons. 
The officials declined to say how many troops will receive the vaccinations or 
when the program will begin. Biological weapons differ from chemical weapons in 
that they are based on viral agents or other living organisms. 
Although Iraq has denied possessing the deadly toxins, U.S. intelligence 
agencies divulged in September that Baghdad has an active biological weapons 
program and is thought to have stockpiled significant quantities of germ 
agents, possibly including anthrax and botulism. 
Pentagon officials have been concerned for some time that U.S. drug firms are 
not able to produce vaccines in sufficient quantities to provide protection for 
all U.S. troops and allied forces that could be exposed to biological agents. 
In discussing the timetable for possible military action, the senior officials 
said Bush realizes that a war with President Saddam Hussein's million-man army 
could last at least a month and probably cause tens of thousands of Iraqi 
casualties and perhaps thousands of American lives. 
But they said the President and his aides believe that the American public will 
support a war as long as the United States scores a decisive victory and the 
number of American casualties is relatively low. 
The disclosures by the officials come in the face of growing sentiment in 
Congress, especially among Democrats, to delay any military offensive for 
several months or even longer beyond the Jan. 15 deadline in hopes that 
economic sanctions, imposed by the United Nations against Iraq soon after its 
Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait, ultimately will force the Iraqis to withdraw. 
On Thursday, 110 House Democrats, led by California Rep. George Miller 
(D-Martinez), sent Bush a letter urging him to allow more time for the 
sanctions to work. 
Recent newspaper reports have suggested that the White House is preparing to 
put off any attack against Iraqi troops and installations because of warnings 
by top U.S. military strategists that American troops will not be fully 
prepared for war by the Jan. 15 deadline. 
Several military officials have told reporters that the United States will not 
be ready for war until about mid-February because the full deployment of troops 
and equipment assigned to the Persian Gulf region will not be in place until 
then. 
Similar views from military officials were passed on to Bush by Defense 
Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, during a closed-door briefing after their recent visit to U.S. forces in 
the gulf. 
On Thursday, however, senior U.S. officials contradicted that view, saying Bush 
believes that he already has given sanctions enough time and has no interest in 
delaying a military showdown after the deadline. 
Although one official said Bush realizes that a decision to attack soon after 
Jan. 15 would be contrary to the U.S. tradition of exhausting all means of 
negotiations for a peaceful settlement before going to war, another official 
said: "I think the President can make a pretty good case that he has exhausted 
all rational efforts to settle this diplomatically and he has been rebuffed." 
And the President dismissed those reports in a brief exchange with several 
reporters who saw him in a White House hallway during a one-day interruption 
from his holiday vacation at Camp David. 
Questioned about his session with Powell and Cheney, Bush said: "I'm not going 
to tell you what they said, but I'm going to tell you, don't believe these 
reports you're reading." 
Asked if a compromise might yet be reached with Hussein, Bush declared: "That's 
the problem. Everybody wants me to compromise. There's not going to be a 
compromise with this man." 
As the Jan. 15 deadline draws nearer, Bush, Cheney and other U.S. officials -- 
in what appears to be a concerted effort to prepare the American public for war 
-- have stepped up their threats to launch a devastating attack on Iraq if it 
does not withdraw from Kuwait. 
But not until Thursday did officials -- who agreed to be interviewed on 
condition that they not be identified -- disclose that Bush is prepared to 
order an attack sooner rather than later after the deadline. 
"If war comes, it will be long before mid-February," one official declared. 
"The longer the U.S. waits to attack, the more U.S. lives will be lost." 
Said another official: "You must remember that the President's position is that 
this will not be another Vietnam, there will not be a slow escalation while 
Americans die." 
The officials said Bush assumes that the American public will be mainly 
concerned about the number of U.S. casualties, not the tens of thousands of 
Iraqis who stand to die or be maimed in a massive air assault, and that even 
the killing of thousands of civilians -- including women and children -- 
probably would not undermine American support for the war effort. 
"He has to count on the American people being behind him or he wouldn't do it," 
one of the officials said. "Many congressmen are worried about this war, and a 
lot of people still don't really understand the stakes involved, but our sense 
is that Americans will fall in behind the President and expect him to make the 
call." 
On the other hand, said the official, it will be important for the United 
States to defeat Hussein's forces quickly and decisively because "if the war is 
extended over a long period of time -- with all the television coverage and 
watching people get blown up -- it could cause us serious problems." 
Bush told reporters that he does not believe Hussein has gotten the message 
"that we are serious and our allies are serious" about carrying out the U.N. 
resolution demanding Iraq's withdrawal. 
Referring to Hussein's threats to meet any military attack with a deadly 
counterattack, Bush said: "I read the comments he makes about war, and I find 
it difficult to believe that he believes what will happen to him. I still am 
hopeful he will get the message and get out of Kuwait by the 15th of January 
totally without conditions." 
Dismissing as "fully fallacious" an Israeli newspaper's report that Secretary 
of State James A. Baker III will meet with Hussein in Baghdad on Jan. 9, Bush 
said: "There's nothing going on on that front. When there's any news on that, 
I'll be putting it out myself. I am staying directly in touch." 
Other sources said that, while no U.S.-Iraqi peace negotiations are under way, 
both the United States and Iraq have been exploring the possibility of a 
Baker-Hussein meeting in Baghdad between Jan. 5 and Jan. 8. 
The U.S. position so far has been that it would not agree to scheduling such a 
session for later than Jan. 3 and that, in any event, Baker's mission would not 
be to negotiate but rather to reaffirm the demand that Iraq withdraw 
unconditionally from Kuwait. 
The 110 House members who joined an earlier call by Senate Armed Services 
Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) to give sanctions longer to work told Bush 
that the U.N. resolution authorizing military action "must not be interpreted 
as an authorization for the use of American forces in an offensive capacity 
against Iraq." 
"We note that most of the nations that voted for the resolution made no 
simultaneous commitment of troops, materials or money to support military 
action in the gulf," the lawmakers said in their letter to Bush. 
Times correspondent John M. Broder contributed to this story. 
