ASIAN-AMERICANS CHAFE AGAINST STEREOTYPE OF 'MODEL CITIZEN' 
At first, it might seem a curious complaint: 
The image of the Asian-American as a "model minority" has been "a favorite 
theme of American journalism now for 15 years, if not longer," says William 
Wong, associate editor of the Oakland Tribune. "There doesn't seem to be a lot 
of effort made by media to cover . . . the underbelly, the downside of the 
Asian-American experience." 
Blacks and Latinos frequently criticize the media for paying too much attention 
to the underbelly of their communities. Why would anyone object to being 
depicted the way Asian-Americans are widely depicted in the media -- as 
industrious and intelligent, enterprising and polite, with good values and 
strong families, equally successful as children in school and as adults in 
business and medicine and science and engineering and. . . ? 
The answer, Wong says, is that stereotyping, whether negative or positive, is 
"a psychological noose. . . . It denies our individuality." 
All stereotypes are inevitably "caricatures," says Helen Zia, managing editor 
of Ms. magazine; caricature "keeps people in ignorance" -- and ignorance may 
breed neglect and resentment. Or worse. 
Asian-Americans are successful -- even wealthy? They are polite -- even 
passive? Hmmm. Sounds as if they would make good targets for a mugging. 
Bingo. 
As the New York Times pointed out in October, there is a "growing and 
disturbing trend of subway attacks against people of Japanese, Chinese, Korean, 
Filipino and Vietnamese descent." 
Moreover: 
* Poverty rates among Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese families in the United 
States are much higher than for whites, but because Asian-Americans are 
generally perceived as being successful, they often find it difficult to obtain 
necessary social services and may be denied access to affirmative-action 
programs. 
* Asian-Americans who do poorly in school or need psychotherapy or fail in 
business may find their shortcomings especially difficult to accept, and 
especially embarrassing. After all, as Asian-Americans, they are supposed to 
excel. When they do not, they are "doubly burdened," says Diane Wong, executive 
director of the Asian American Journalists Assn.; already outsiders as Asians 
in America, they now feel isolated from their own community. 
* Some Asian-Americans students, feeling isolated from their peers by the 
"model minority" myth, may deliberately minimize their intelligence in an 
effort to fit in and win acceptance. 
Zia says the media may be reluctant to probe beyond the "model minority" myth 
because "people don't want to hear about yet another minority with problems." 
Criticized for presenting too much "bad news," journalists may subconsciously 
see the Asian-American story as "good news" -- a chance to write about success 
rather than failure. 
Language and culture barriers also inhibit the presentation of a more complete 
picture. 
Most journalists "don't have the background to know what questions to ask," Zia 
says. 
K. W. Lee, editor of the English-language edition of Korea Times in Los 
Angeles, says that when he was assigned to write about the civil rights 
movement for the Charleston Gazette in the 1960s, he realized he could not do 
so intelligently unless he learned more about blacks. 
"I lived with them," he said. "I read their literature." 
Most white journalists have not done that kind of homework on Asian-Americans, 
Lee says. 
Handicapped by ignorance and uncertainty, people often fall back on 
stereotypes. Hence the "model minority." 
Writer Frank Chin calls the "model minority" portrayal of Asian-Americans "the 
racism of love," but its effects are more often the former than the latter. 
Just as some anti-Semitic behavior has stemmed from a portrayal of Jews as 
having an "unnatural" advantage over non-Jews -- a special "cunning" or a 
"gift" for making money -- so Asian-Americans worry that whites who think that 
they have a special advantage or special skills will mistreat them. 
Already this mistreatment has taken the form of quota systems at prestigious 
colleges, and beatings and shootings in several cities. A recent poll showed 
that more than twice as many Americans think the security of the United States 
is threatened more by the economic power of Japan than by the military power of 
the Soviet Union. 
No wonder. On two successive days late last month, Page 1 headlines in the New 
York Times said: "Japanese Portables Threaten American Lead in Computers" and 
"Japanese Expected to Take Over Another Major Hollywood Studio." 
Though still less than 3% of the U.S. population, Asian-Americans are the 
fastest-growing ethnic group in the country. They provided more than 40% of all 
immigrants in the past decade, during which time their population increased 
almost 80%. That growth -- combined with the burgeoning economic strength of 
Japan, the purchase of many U.S. businesses by the Japanese and the success of 
many Asian-Americans in traditional American enterprises -- has alarmed some 
whites. To them, Asian-Americans are "alien usurpers," taking jobs and college 
positions from the "true-blue Americans" to whom they "rightfully belong." 
In 1982, Ronald Ebens, a former Detroit auto worker, clubbed Vincent Chin to 
death outside a suburban Detroit nightclub after -- according to some reports 
-- mistaking Chin, a Chinese-American, for a Japanese, yelling racist remarks 
at him and blaming people "like him" for the recession in the U.S. auto 
industry. 
Ebens, who denied making racist remarks and insisted that Chin provoked the 
attack, pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was sentenced to three years' 
probation and fined $3,700. The Asian-American community was outraged by his 
light sentence and by his subsequent acquittal on charges of violating Chin's 
civil rights. Asian-Americans were also angry over what they perceived as a 
dangerous omen -- scapegoating, a common element in racist behavior -- and they 
have been equally alarmed by manifestations of that behavior elsewhere. 
A gunman killed five children from Southeast Asia at a Stockton elementary 
school. White and Vietnamese fishermen have clashed in California and Texas. 
Blacks have boycotted Korean greengrocers in several cities. 
No one is suggesting that if the Stockton gunman had read three insightful 
stories about Asian-Americans in his local newspaper, he would have become a 
social worker instead of a mass murderer. But critics do say the press could 
help alleviate rather than exacerbate racial tensions if they provided more 
enlightened reporting, rather than simply perpetuating stereotypes. 
The New York Times has published several stories examining the stereotype and 
related issues, and a few other publications have done stories here and there 
-- USA Today, on Page 1, last month, for example. 
Leonard Downie, managing editor of the Washington Post, illustrates the problem 
when he tries to explain why most of the media do not provide more and better 
coverage of Asian-Americans: 
"These are just quiet people who come here, go to work and go to school and do 
a good job and don't ask for coverage and don't make themselves very visible in 
the community." 
So what kinds of stories might the media do about Asian-Americans? 
Like blacks, Latinos and American Indians, Asian-American journalists say the 
media should work harder to include them in the routine, daily news coverage 
and not do stories on them only when it is a specifically Asian-American 
subject. Asian-Americans say journalists should also distinguish among the 
many, different communities -- Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, Korean, Filipino, 
Cambodian -- rather than lumping them all together as Asian-American. 
Perhaps more important, Asian-American journalists say, the media should do 
more stories that do not just say "what" in potentially divisive terms but tell 
"why" in potentially enlightening terms: 
* Why do Asian-Americans have a higher average household income than any other 
group? Answer: In part because most live in urban centers in California, Hawaii 
and New York, where salaries are higher, and because many have more than one 
job and live in families that have multiple wage-earners. 
* Why do some Korean merchants seem cold and hostile, refusing to directly 
place a customer's change directly in the hand -- a charge that helped trigger 
the black boycott of Korean greengrocers in New York early this year. Answer: 
"In the Confucian-steeped Korean culture, a smile is reserved for family 
members and close friends," says C. Connie Kang, assistant metropolitan editor 
of the San Francisco Examiner. "Expressions such as 'thank you' and 'excuse me' 
are used sparingly," and strangers do not generally touch each other, not even 
to return change in a business transaction. 
* Why have Asian-Americans generally been more successful in the United States 
than many blacks and Latinos? Answer: Multiple explanations, among them a 
longstanding reverence of and opportunity for education in Asian societies, and 
the likelihood that immigrants from Asia are among the better-educated, more 
successful members of their native societies. Their decision to emigrate is a 
process of self-selection, completely different from the enforced migration and 
slavery of blacks or the flight from poverty of many Latinos. 
For all the stories about boycotts and quotas and takeovers, "The press is not 
sophisticated about immigration," says Rodolfo Acuna, a professor of Chicano 
studies at Cal State Northridge. 
Indeed, John Ogbu, an anthropologist at UC Berkeley, says there is an important 
distinction between the immigrant experience of "voluntary minorities," such as 
many Asians, Cubans and certain Central and South Americans ("those who have 
more or less chosen to move . . . in the belief that this change will lead to 
an improvement in their economic well-being or to greater political freedom") 
and "involuntary minorities," such as most blacks, Latinos and American Indians 
("people initially brought into the United States through slavery, conquests or 
colonization"). 
"Involuntary minorities" may perceive the "social, political and economic 
barriers against them as part of an undeserved oppression," Ogbu says, and many 
may adopt "survival strategies" that incorporate distrust of and rebellion 
against white institutions and behavior patterns. 
Ogbu explained his theory in the journal Daedalus this year, but there has been 
little such analysis in the mainstream press. 
In covering the conflict between Korean greengrocers and black customers, for 
example, the media often failed to point out that many of the Koreans who 
opened those stores may have been among the "most confident, the most 
enterprising . . . the bravest Koreans," says John Lee, a Korean reporter at 
the Los Angeles Times. 
In fact, 75% of the Korean greengrocers in New York had college degrees before 
coming here, and to them, becoming a shopkeeper is not an entrepreneurial dream 
come true but "dashed dreams, a step downward in status," as Ronald Takaki, 
professor of ethnic studies at UC Berkeley, wrote in the New York Times last 
summer. 
The frequent failure of the media to point out such information leads to unfair 
comparisons between Koreans and blacks as ghetto businessmen and contributes to 
escalating racial tensions. 
Wong is also concerned that this has enabled "nefarious demagogues" and 
"self-serving politicians" to invoke the "Asians made it; why can't blacks?" 
argument to "put down . . . African-Americans and Latinos" and to "dismantle 
affirmative-action programs" for these minorities. 
Wong says the "yawning ignorance" of most white journalists about Asian culture 
and about "the complexities and diversity in the fast-changing Asian-American 
community" is largely responsible for making this possible. 
