SAN DIEGO AT LARGE / ANTHONY PERRY: LAWYERS, LAWYERS, EVERYWHERE AND NOT A DROP 
OF INK . . . 
At every turn in the Broderick case, there are lawyers. 
Betty Broderick used to complain that newspapers were afraid to publish 
anything about her bitter divorce for fear of being sued. She was furious when 
her ex-husband, a lawyer, convinced a judge to seal the official record. 
After Broderick was charged with murdering her ex-husband and his new wife, 
prosecutors sought a gag order against her and others in the case. 
And now the latest legal twist. 
Dennis Clausen, an award-winning author and creative writing professor at the 
University of San Diego, has decided not to sign with Simon &amp; Schuster to 
write a nonfiction book about the Broderick case. 
The major reason: Clausen could not get the assurance he wanted that the 
publishing house would protect him if the book prompted lawsuits. 
Clausen had pitched Simon &amp; Schuster on a "serious, thoughtful" look at the 
Broderick case as "a metaphor for a nation's values and a symbol of much that 
went wrong with human relationships in the 1980s." 
Simon &amp; Schuster sent the contracts to the Del Mar-based literary agency 
Waterside Productions. On Sunday, Clausen bowed out. 
"I was concerned that the attention to legal details would make me write 
defensively," Clausen said, "and I'd end up with a book with very little 
spirit." 
Clausen, 46, won the Edgar Award for mystery fiction in 1982 for his 
best-selling "Ghost Lover," a thinking man's novel of revenge and murder in the 
rural Midwest. 
His free-lance writing includes comedy screenplays and a computer software 
manual. He had envisioned telling the Broderick story in the manner of Truman 
Capote's "In Cold Blood," a mix of detailed reporting and novelistic flair. 
On Monday, he happened to read the latest edition of the book "Fatal Vision." A 
newly added epilogue convinced him he had made the right decision. 
It was author Joe McGinniss' account of his three years in court fighting a 
lawsuit filed by convicted murderer Jeffrey MacDonald. 
Newspaper Strike Chatter 
Strike one and you're out. 
* Senior editors and non-editorial department managers at the Union-Tribune are 
said to have pleaded with publisher Helen Copley and editor-in-chief Herb Klein 
to avert a threatened strike by Newspaper Guild members. 
* Reporters are taking home their files and phone lists so they can't be used 
by replacements hired as strike-breakers. Elected officials are being asked not 
to talk to strike-breakers. 
The first to pledge support were Rep. Jim Bates (D-San Diego) and state 
Sen.-elect Lucy Killea (D-San Diego). 
* Guild members are handing out flyers warning would-be replacements: "Those 
crossing picket lines to replace us will be deemed SCABS and treated as such." 
* As the Guild sees it, the major obstacle to a compromise settlement is the 
disingenuous style of King &amp; Ballow, the Tennessee law firm hired to 
represent the company. 
The National Labor Relations Board has accused K&amp;B of two dozen counts of 
illegal negotiating tactics during U-T bargaining. 
One U-T employee says the K&amp;B style is captured in William Kennedy's novel 
"The Ink Truck," a comic-tragic tale of a fictional newspaper strike in Albany. 
In it, an angry columnist talks of Stanley, the company's lawyer-negotiator: 
"Stanley says our 57th proposal is unacceptable without changes. He refuses to 
specify which changes. Hinted even with changes he wouldn't like it." 
An Odoriferous Idea 
Some men have their names on libraries or dams or great halls of learning. 
Others have to settle for less imposing edifices. 
Jim Dragna, the attorney representing the city in litigation with the 
Environmental Protection Agency, told federal Judge Rudi Brewster during 
Monday's court session that officials are considering names for the proposed 
$2.6-billion sewage system. 
"There has been some discussion of naming the system the Judge Brewster 
(sewage) system," Dragna said. 
Brewster groaned. Dragna then assured him he was joking. 
