ORANGE COUNTY 1990; 
MATURING METROPOLIS LOOKS AHEAD; 
OUTLOOK: ORANGE COUNTY IS COMING OF AGE ON THE EVE OF THE 1990S, BUT IT FACES 
NEW RESPONSIBILITIES. 
Orange County stands on the brink of the 1990s like an adolescent coping with 
new-found size and muscle. 
The county, more than ever, is bigger, brassier and bolder, the rich kid on the 
block. No longer content to be a bedroom community, it has become an economic 
force in national and foreign marketplaces, emerging as a leading center for 
high-technology and biomedical research and design. 
But at home the county is betwixt and between. Sociologists, politicians and 
civic leaders say the '90s can be the decade when Orange County comes to terms 
with its phenomenal growth and strides toward its prime. 
"Everything in the '90s relates to maturing," Claudette Shaw, president of the 
Laguna Art Museum, said. "We've been a promising, unruly adolescent, but it's 
time to grow up." 
However, traffic, homelessness, deteriorating roads and sewers, unaffordable 
housing, trash and polluted air loom as stumbling blocks for a county viewed by 
many as unwilling to grapple with the growing pains that are eroding the 
quality of life. 
The urban tensions that plague older metropolises will manifest themselves here 
in the '90s as the county becomes more ethnically diverse, as the gap between 
rich and poor widens, the population gets grayer and the last vestiges of 
suburban life disappear, experts say. It is the price the county will pay for 
its transformation from a string of independent towns to an urban center of 
commerce, arts, finance, sports and cutting-edge research and scholarship. 
"Orange County, once and for all, will finally become a great metropolis in its 
own right, not just a suburban extension of Los Angeles," predicted UCLA 
professor Allen Scott, a noted economic geographer who studies Orange County 
trends and life styles. "It will be a dynamic place to live in the '90s." 
For the 2.6 million people who will live, work and play here by the turn of the 
century, it promises to be a decade of remarkable change -- toll roads opening, 
the coming of professional basketball or hockey, an expanded arts scene, 
increased political clout, new communities, revitalized older cities and 
clusters of shiny new office towers. But there is a flip side to the future -- 
waiting lists, unaffordable housing, government regulations, ethnic friction 
and traffic, traffic, traffic. 
"It's lucky that Orange Countians like to drive and love their automobiles, 
because they are going to spend a lot of time behind the wheel," said Jeremy 
Anwyl, an Irvine-based automobile consultant. "Lots of people will probably 
spend as much time in their cars as they do at home." 
It's a depressing scenario, one that has increasing numbers of Orange Countians 
daydreaming about less-congested ZIP codes. But Marty Elkins of Tustin isn't 
ready to jump ship -- not yet anyway. 
"It's a new decade. Let's think positive," said Elkins, a salesman. "Maybe 
things will turn around. They can't get worse. Besides, I'm curious about how 
things are going to turn out." 
The prospects are enticing. 
At long last, the $310-million expansion of John Wayne Airport will be finished 
with its gleaming new passenger terminal, parking towers and even a proposed 
monorail system to whisk business travelers to key employment centers. But even 
before officials snip the ribbons on the stunning additions, the facility will 
be outdated, unable to meet the county's soaring demand for air travel. So the 
search will continue for a second regional airport, possibly in the canyons and 
hills behind coastal San Clemente. 
Sports fans can anticipate a new arena to lure a professional basketball or 
hockey team, if Anaheim and Santa Ana -- acting like feuding cousins -- ever 
decide which of them will build it. 
Art lovers will be able to wander the halls of the Newport Harbor Art Museum's 
new $50-million home -- a potential lightning rod for artisans who have long 
complained about the dismal gallery scene locally. 
The county will be more powerful politically as it gains a probable sixth seat 
in Congress. A high-speed train, which some are nicknaming the "Gamblers' 
Express," might link Anaheim with Las Vegas. Hikers and mountain bikers will 
rejoice at the prospect of half a dozen new regional county parks spread across 
19,000 acres of canyons, ridges and coastal wetlands. 
But for each acre preserved, two will be plowed under. 
Earthmovers and jackhammers will continue transforming South County ranchland 
into housing tracts. Three, possibly four new cities may spring up in 
Saddleback Valley and there is talk in the backcountry of forming a canyon 
community to protect Modjeska, Silverado and Trabuco canyons from overzealous 
developers. 
Thousands of people will settle in whitewashed communities clustered along the 
Foothill Tollway, the county's first toll road, which will link Tustin with 
Rancho Santa Margarita and its "downtown of the future." Envisioned by planners 
as the main shopping district for residents in the county's rapidly growing 
eastern and southern foothills, the Town Center will join specialty stores, 
offices, movie theaters, parks and a central library through a network of 
pedestrian walkways and bike paths. 
"It will be the kind of place where you would want to spend a Saturday," said 
Donald Moe, a Santa Margarita Co. executive. 
But while change and growth may be most striking in the south, planners point 
with pride to rebuilding the downtowns -- and images -- of cities in older 
corners of the county in the '90s. Huntington Beach expects to blossom into a 
tourism and shopping mecca for the west county as it adds four major hotels to 
the city's waterfront and a glitzy shopping pavilion at its rebuilt pier. 
Capitalizing on its freeway-close access, Brea is expected to be a magnet for 
relocating corporations and North County consumers flocking to rejuvenated 
retail districts on Brea Boulevard and Imperial Highway. 
Anaheim is bullish on plans for $4-billion worth of high-rise office 
construction in the Platinum Triangle, a 200-acre swath of prime real estate at 
the confluence of the Orange, Garden Grove and Santa Ana freeways. 
Technological advances will give thousands of county workers the freedom to 
boot up their workday from home or a neighborhood office rather than commuting 
bumper to bumper to corporate headquarters. Telecommuting -- using personal 
computers, fax machines and telephones -- will become an affordable option. 
But the push-button advances of the '90s won't improve everything. 
Count on waiting in line for everything from traffic signals to housing. 
Securing a slip for a 35-foot sailboat in Newport Harbor may take five years. 
There's no wait yet for Angel baseball season tickets, but should pitcher Mark 
Langston, the team's newly acquired $16-million man, help bring club owner Gene 
Autry a World Series, that could change. Several thousand people are reportedly 
waiting for word about the first offering -- still two years away -- of 
million-dollar homes and lots overlooking the Pacific in the ritzy Irvine Coast 
development south of Corona del Mar. 
The wait will also be long for affordable housing. In the midst of one of the 
nation's wealthiest counties, where the median income is $41,181 -- and 
climbing -- affordable housing for the middle- and low-income population will 
have become just a pipe dream. Waiting up to three years for federally 
subsidized housing in one county program is common today. 
"We have 8,000 people on our waiting list, and it's growing," said Sandra 
McClymonds, executive director of the Orange County Housing Authority. "And 
there is no reason to believe that the demand will lessen." 
Lines at soup kitchens and temporary shelters may also lengthen. The ranks of 
the county's homeless, numbering between 5,000 and 10,000 today, could double 
by the end of the decade when a median-priced home is expected to top $500,000. 
Squeezed by some of the nation's highest living costs, a growing class of 
disadvantaged -- the "underemployed" -- may swamp the already overwhelmed and 
underfunded public agencies to seek assistance. 
"A husband and wife, both working 40 hours a week, earning slightly above 
minimum wage, with a family, can't survive now in Orange County," said Scott 
Mather, chairman of the Orange County Homeless Task Force. "How can we expect 
them to survive the '90s without some help?" 
Part of the problem is the prevailing attitude in a county where spending and 
consuming is often pursued with Olympic-like fervor, experts say. More 
attention has been paid to accumulating wealth than sharing it, a mind-set 
private planning consultant Al Bell hopes will end in the '90s. 
"It will be a decade when we invest more of our energy and time in people," 
said Bell of the Planning Center, a Newport Beach-based firm. "This county must 
-- and will -- confront the whole array of social issues that attend an 
affluent community with immense depths of poverty. Contending with those issues 
can be as leading-edge as designing a new housing development or computer parts 
or roadway. 
"That's part of growing up. That's part of our responsibility." 
Government will reach into the lives of Orange Countians in new ways. New air 
quality regulations may spell the end for drive-through windows at fast-food 
outlets as idling autos are targeted as major polluters. 
By the year 2000, all cities in California must divert 50% of their garbage 
from existing landfills. That's a tall order for a county which annually 
generates a hefty two tons of solid waste for every man, woman and child -- by 
far the highest per-capita ratio of any county in the nation. Mandatory 
curbside recycling -- currently a voluntary program in a half dozen cities -- 
will be in place countywide by the late '90s. 
"Hopefully, our live-it-up, throw-it-away life style will give way to a more 
frugal way of thinking," said Frank Bowerman, director and chief engineer of 
the county's waste management program. "We have got to turn the corner and 
confront this problem." 
But government so far has been stumped by the transportation crisis. Don't look 
for any quick fixes. 
Average freeway speeds during rush hour are expected to drop from 25 m.p.h. to 
18 m.p.h. during the '90s. Even more disturbing is Caltrans' prediction that 
stop-and-go conditions during peak commute periods will triple, lasting up to 
three hours. 
Thus, traffic increasingly will dominate peoples' lives. Congestion will factor 
into nearly every decision from where to live and work to where to shop and 
recreate. The automobile will remain king of the road, despite promising 
proposals to build light-rail transit or overhead monorails to transport 
commuters. The number of registered vehicles in the county by 1999 could jump 
by nearly half a million. 
Opening a 7.3-mile portion of the Foothill Tollway in 1994 will deliver some 
relief. So will the completion near the end of the decade of the county's 
second toll road, the 15-mile-long San Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor, 
stretching from Newport Beach to San Juan Capistrano. 
Sections of the Santa Ana Freeway through Tustin, Santa Ana and Anaheim may 
also be widened during the '90s. But transportation planners say it won't be 
nearly enough, and that worries Bob Winslow, a Fullerton resident who commutes 
50 miles a day to Los Angeles. 
"I like what Orange County is becoming culturally. I enjoy the recreation 
opportunities, having a football and baseball team close by and all the 
amenities of a big city," he said. "But what scares me most is the threat to my 
access, the fear that I won't be able to drive anywhere because of gridlock." 
Coping with congestion will remain a full-time preoccupation. Cellular phones 
in county cars and trucks will likely triple to 300,000 during the decade as 
more and more motorists conduct business behind the wheel to make up for lost 
office time. In addition, sales of high-quality, expensive car stereos are 
expected to be brisk as drivers seek to drown out traffic. 
"Orange County is one of the most lucrative car stereo markets in the world," 
smiled Jim Holland, a Huntington Beach stereo installer. "People spend $2,000 
or $3,000 without batting an eye. They want to escape the traffic." 
No wonder. It is going to be more crowded -- everywhere. Another 262,000 people 
are expected to settle here by 1999. 
Many of the new arrivals will speak different languages or come from foreign 
lands. Minorities will make up 35% percent of the population by the turn of the 
century. One out of five county residents will be Latino. 
"The ethnic mix of Orange County will only accelerate," Cal State Fullerton 
sociologist Myron Orleans said. "The salad bowl of race and culture that we are 
becoming can be one of our strengths in the '90s. Minorities will bring a 
cultural diversity that has been lacking in this county for so long." 
But absorbing immigrants and minorities into mainstream Orange County won't be 
easy. 
Without extensive job and language training, steady, upwardly mobile employment 
may be out of reach for many. Highly skilled labor will be in demand in the 
'90s to fill the 250,000 new jobs in the county as the region remains a 
manufacturing center of computer chips, medical equipment and aerospace parts. 
Complicating the business equation is a predicted downturn in defense spending, 
which will force many Orange County companies to retool and prompt workers to 
learn trades or wind up unemployed. 
But the challenges are not insurmountable, some argue. 
"Educating the next generation is critical," said Father Jaime Soto, vicar of 
the Latino community in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orange. "We are seeing in 
the disappearance of the blue-collar job market in Orange County. And unless 
the current generation of Latino children get educated, they will not find a 
niche in this county. We need to wake up to what is happening." 
The same may be said about county residents in general who complain in growing 
numbers about density, crime and pollution, but so far have not solved the 
problems. 
Some, like Peter Morrison, a RAND Corp. demographer, are optimistic about the 
'90s in Orange County. Unlike their neighbors in Los Angeles, Morrison 
believes, Orange Countians will act before it is too late. 
"Many of the people living in Orange County moved there because of the promise 
of a better life, and they are unlikely to let it go without a fight," Morrison 
said. "I think the '90s is a crossroads decade for the county -- a time when 
people will fight back and recapture what they've worked so hard to create." 
Agenda for the 1990s 
Today: 
Orange County is growing up, but is it mature enough to handle the 
responsibilities, problems 
and power that come with 
bigger size? A1 
How will a more urbanized Orange County tackle transportation, family, 
medicine, crime and education? B1 
Everything you need to know about the coming decade. An almanac. B2 
* Monday: The local economy is expected to keep growing, although at a slower 
pace. D1 
* Tuesday: With new professional teams and an arena on the way, it will be a 
bountiful era for sports fans. C1 
* Wednesday: What the decade holds for the theater, art, 
music, dance and other 
entertainment. F1 
* Thursday: A day in the high-tech dominated life of an upscale Orange County 
family 10 years from now. N1 
Agenda for the 1990s 
Today: 
Orange County is growing up, but is it mature enough to handle the 
responsibilities, problems 
and power that come with bigger 
size? A1 
How will a more urbanized Orange County tackle transportation, family, 
medicine, crime and education? B1 
Everything you need to know about the coming decade. An almanac. B2 
* Monday: The local economy is expected to keep growing, although at a slower 
pace. D1 
* Tuesday: With new professional teams and an arena on the way, it will be a 
bountiful era for sports fans. C1 
* Wednesday: What the decade holds for the theater, art, music, dance and other 
forms of expression and entertainment. F1 
* Thursday: A day in the high-tech dominated life of an upscale Orange County 
family 10 years from now. N1 
1990 Orange County 
A decade of growing up awaits Orange County in the 1990s. It will be more 
urban, ethnically diverse and crowded 
Population 
While the population of the county is predicted to near 2.6 million by the year 
2000, the Latino and Asian communities are expected to continue to grow during 
the first half of the decade, chipping away at the predominance of the 
non-Latinos whites. 
1970: 1.4 (in millions) 
1980: 1.9 
1990: 2.3 
2000: 2.6 
Ethic Breakdown 
1980 
Black: 1.3%, 24, 411 
Asian/ Other: 5.7%, 111,261 
Latino: 14.8%, 286,339 
Non-Latino whites: 78.2%, 1, 510,698 
Total: 1,932,709 
1984 
Black: 1.2%, 29,686 
Asian/Other: 6.5%, 164,352 
Latino: 22.1%, 552,056 
Non-Latino whites: 70.2%, 1, 754,078 
Total: 2,500,172 
Top Issues 
As identified by an informal survey of community leaders. 
Transportation 
Affordable Housing 
Air Quality 
Health Care 
Public Education 
County Hot Spots 
Anaheim: Home of pro sports teams, tourism and convention trade and proposed 
terminus of high-speed train from Las Vegas. 
Santa Ana: County seat is also hub of the county's burgeoning Latino 
population. 
Saddleback Valley: Fastest-developing county sector; where experts believe as 
many as three new incorporated cities will emerge in the 1990s. 
Irvine-Newport Beach-Costa Mesa: Shopping, business and cultural core of the 
county. 
Huntington Beach: With a redeveloped downtown and beachfront, this area is 
expected to become a magnet for tourism and shopping. 
