15 SITES STUDIED FOR SCHOOL FOR EXPELLED STUDENTS; 
EDUCATION: DISTRICT OFFICIALS MAKE ANNOUNCEMENT AFTER WOODLAND HILLS RESIDENTS 
PROTEST SUGGESTION THAT PROBLEM STUDENTS BE SENT TO NOW-CLOSED HUGHES JUNIOR 
HIGH. 
Los Angeles school officials said Wednesday they are studying about 15 
locations throughout the city, including a Woodland Hills site that roused 
neighbors' fears, to house special classes for the growing number of students 
expelled from regular schools for violence, or possessing drugs or weapons. 
Los Angeles Unified School District officials suggested earlier this week that 
about 30 expelled students be sent to two classrooms at the former Hughes 
Junior High School in Woodland Hills, now used as office space for district 
administrators. 
The suggestion drew complaints from nearby residents who said they feared that 
the students would increase crime in the west San Fernando Valley neighborhood. 
City Councilwoman Joy Picus, who lives about a block from the school site, said 
she is adamantly opposed to the proposal. 
"We moved to Woodlands Hills because it has a very low crime rate," said 
Melinda Harrison, a real estate agent who lives in a cul-de-sac that faces the 
school. "It's a frightening thought. These students were expelled for criminal 
offenses." 
Barry Mostovoy, administrative consultant for school operations, said the 
Hughes school is only one of about 15 closed campuses and administrative 
offices being considered for use by the Los Angeles County Office of Education, 
which operates special schools and assists local districts. 
Despite news reports that Hughes was the only site under consideration, other 
unnamed sites are also possibilities, he said. "Hughes was just one name that 
popped out" during a school board discussion Monday night, he said. 
Mostovoy, who declined to name the sites, said they are divided about evenly 
between the San Fernando Valley and the rest of the school district. 
The county office now operates 14 community day centers, where expelled 
students can earn high school diplomas while receiving special attention in 
smaller-than-average classes. But the Los Angeles district has used up its 
allotted number of seats in the county program and the centers are full. 
With a tough new expulsion policy this year, Los Angeles school officials 
expect to boot out more than 200 students by June, almost five times the 41 
students expelled in the 1988-89 school year. 
Unlike previous years, when most students classified as "expelled" were simply 
transferred to other schools, students caught carrying weapons are now removed 
from the system entirely. They can apply for readmission after two semesters. 
West Valley school board member Julie Korenstein, who pushed for increasing 
expulsions in the district, said the district must also do its share to find 
other schools for them. 
"I don't want them wandering the streets," Korenstein said. "It is also more 
cost-effective to find them a place in school rather than a place in the 
juvenile justice system or prison." 
However, Korenstein said she opposes the Hughes site because it is at the 
western edge of the county, too far for most students to travel. 
Picus, who is in Houston attending a meeting of the League of Cities, is 
"absolutely opposed to this use of the school," said her aide, Jackie Brainard. 
Picus believes the school would "bring in kids with severe behavioral problems 
and would have an extremely negative impact on a quiet, peaceful neighborhood," 
Brainard said. 
Her office received about 25 "really emotional" phone calls from local 
residents opposed to the proposal, Brainard said. 
Bob Gross, president of the Woodland Hills Homeowners Organization, said he 
received about seven phone calls from residents opposed to use of the Hughes 
site. 
"There is a fear in the area that all of a sudden they are going to be robbed, 
raped and murdered and that all kinds of bad things are going to happen to 
them," Gross said. 
Nonetheless, he said, the Hughes campus should be given serious consideration. 
"We can't just abandon these youths," Gross said. "There has to be a program 
offered and available to help the kids that want help, or else they will be out 
there on the streets doing things we would rather not have them do. Whether 
Hughes Junior High is an appropriate campus for that, though, remains to be 
seen." 
Gross said he is asking the district for more information about what provisions 
will be made for student transportation, security and after-school activities. 
He said the homeowners board will discuss the issue at its meeting tonight. 
